<-----Page 0----->THE HUMAN DIMENSION I: MYTH, COSMOS, AND NATURE

Page 1 of 5

THE HUMAN DIMENSION I: MYTH, COSMOS, AND NATURE
Peter Timmerman
How have different cultures thought about Nature, and how did thinking about Nature begin?
There are many ways of tackling the first question, but perhaps the broadest is to think of every culture
as having a series of myths, or mythologies that embody in various ways, its view of Nature. A study
of these myths, or the larger mythology, can give us insight into different cultural ways of thinking
about (and living within) its own sense of Nature.
1. Introduction: The Nature of Myth
Myths are stories, stories that are powerful enough that they may be taken as true; or as the literary
critic, Northrop Frye has it, they operate "near or at the conceivable limits of desire" (from his Anatomy
of Criticism, 1957). Other writers have spoken of myths as “controlled imaginings” (Bottero, 1996).
Their power comes from a variety of sources: some theorists believe that they get some of their power
from tapping into our unconscious ("archetypal myths"); other theorists believe that they explain or
portray or even disrupt some basic rules or structures about the world; other theorists, like Frye, believe
they are explorations of the potential of the world around us to be or create meaning.
A collection of myths is called a mythology, and it is important to recognise that this is a term of
artifice: most collections of myths are mixtures of stories, geneologies, origin tales, etc., which overlap
and sometimes concentrate on important knots in the mythological weave: for instance, in the Western
tradition there are linked knots of stories around the events of the Trojan War; in the Hindu tradition,
there are tales of Krishna; in the Buddhist tradition, Jataka tales of the earlier lives of the Buddha, and
so on. Distinctions between folktales, myths, and stories are unclear: though there often seem to be
"canonical myths" -- myths that are being used to explore or illuminate central concerns of a society.
Political theorists, such as the French theorist, Althusser, argue that all societies need to reproduce
themselves in language -- "ideologically" -- as well as physically: in this sense "mythology" is a form of
"ideology". What does a society tell itself to explain itself to itself (or lie to itself). When we look at
where our current mythologies and stories come from – and who owns them – it raises fundamental
questions about who we think we are.
Mythologies also overlap with, and are often underpinned by, more general cosmologies (which are
overall maps of how the universe is structured) and ontologies (explanations of the nature of being, that
is, what does it mean to exist). There have been not-very convincing arguments that there are universal
myths that belong to every culture. Since every culture we know of has birth, death, and questions about
suffering, existence, problems, sexuality, etc., there are claims that there are archetypes: basic patterns
of stories that appear worldwide, though in different forms. To take the Star Wars movies as an
example, George Lucas believes that he has been writing a saga (a kind of myth story) -- a journey of
discovery by a young boy hero through many strange lands – which Lucas says is based on a series of
universal archetypes that are true for all cultures everywhere. However, when you see the films, what is
obvious is that they are about 1950’s Southern California hotrodders in space, which happens to be
when and where George Lucas grew up. So universal archetypal theories need to be assessed
sceptically.
2. The Language of Myth
It is important to be aware that mythical stories operate in a variety of styles and languages that are often

file://F:\ENVS 100 Archive\humandimension3.htm

9/30/2009

<-----Page 1----->THE HUMAN DIMENSION I: MYTH, COSMOS, AND NATURE

Page 2 of 5

different than standard prose. Many myths belong to religious and ritual traditions. The oldest of these
traditions operated on a set of principles associated with resemblance and analogy. If you are trying to
understand the world, one method is to connect all those things that have some shape, colour, or other
element in common. Further, if you believe that all things come from the hand of a Creator or a
Designer, then they must be connected by design, sometimes openly, sometimes in secret. If you can
make the connections, then you can enter into some kinds of understanding of how the world works, and
even perhaps how the Creator functions.
In religious rituals of early peoples (and in many rituals today) a very powerful set of connections was
made between ordinary space and time and sacred space and time. Many rituals are organized so that
the space in which the ritual is carried out, and the time within which the ritual takes place mirror the
ideal space-and-time structure of the universe. This mirroring connects our time with the time of the
Gods. Certain parts of the Earth were considered to be specially connected in this way, places that (in
different cultures) might include caves, mountains, isolated features of the landscape, or specially
constructed temples that would bring one closer to the heavens. Some of these places were reshaped
into animal or godlike shapes (e.g. Serpent Mounds), or painted with magical pictures (including
petroglyphs -- paintings or carvings in stone). People would also imitate animals and gods through the
use of masks, clothing, or dance; and it was at that time that the shamans (discussed below) could
become possessed by spirits from powerful or special animals. Certain times of the year -- and certain
times of people’s lives, like puberty -- were considered to be special.
Intimate connections between the human and the natural world were often told in stories. Just as there
were paintings that looked like natural creatures or gods, so it was also possible to make the same
connections in language. In many cultures, if you can say the name of something, you have some
power over it.
Further, because myths are often trying to make very powerful connections, and to make you look at
resemblances that you might not have seen before, they often operate in language using symbols -- a
symbol is an image or word that captures the essence of something (for example, Santa Claus is a
symbol of Christmas) -- similes --a form of speech that says something is “like” something else (for
example, “That guy is just like Darth Vader”) -- metaphors -- a metaphor is a more powerful form of
speech that says that something is something else (for example, “That guy isn’t like Darth Vader, that
guy IS Darth Vader”) -- and other forms. A mythical story can be seen as an extended exploration of a
symbol, simile, or metaphor: for example, in some cultures a story is told about how the Earth was
created like a potter making a pot on a wheel. The story tells how this was done in great detail.
Finally, it is worth stating that many stories connect people with their past, and many cultures have
strong beliefs in the spiritual presence of their ancestors, and tribal heroes who have moved into the
spirit world. In rituals and in stories, these ancestors return to this world to tell their wisdom. Similarly,
because the world of animals and the world of the human in these traditions has not been broken apart
as in our world, many stories are told about the interplay between animals and human beings, human
beings and spirits, etc. The boundaries between these realms is fluid and semi-permeable: one of the
characteristics of Western myth has been the gradual freezing of the boundaries between realms (and
disruptive assaults on those boundaries).
It is noticeable that powerful mythologies do focus on these boundaries, and on those who transgress
them. At least 4 “boundary crossings” are familiar to our society from horror and science fiction: –
human/animal (e.g. werewolves, vampires); human/angelic (e.g. visitations by angels or spirits from
higher realms); human/demonic (e.g. devil possession), and human/machine (e.g. bionic women). Other
boundary crossings include the inner boundaries of the spirit.

file://F:\ENVS 100 Archive\humandimension3.htm

9/30/2009

<-----Page 2----->THE HUMAN DIMENSION I: MYTH, COSMOS, AND NATURE

Page 3 of 5

3. How Did Thinking About Nature Begin?
To attack the second question, anthropologists and others have developed their own theories about how
human beings first came to consciousness about the natural world, based on a variety of sources. For the
earliest period (say 1,000,000 years ago and earlier) discussion has been largely based on studies of our
nearest relatives, the chimpanzees and other apes, as well as inferences drawn from the earliest stone
tools. This kind of discussion has been full of pitfalls, mostly involving wishful thinking about what
“truly” separates us from the apes, and projections of our cultural assumptions back into earlier life
worlds. Round about 50,000 years ago, sometime after the arrival of Homo Sapiens (our direct
ancestor), evidence begins to mount of certain ideas and practices that we can call “cultural”, i.e.,
creations by human beings that are interpretations of Nature, ritual practices, or even free creations of
the mind. The earliest examples of this are people who are buried with special markings or (later)
jewellry, signifying that there is something important about death. About 35,000 years ago, there is
early evidence of pictographs (cave paintings) in various locations, depicting animals and hunters in
artistic form. We cannot say what these paintings were for, absolutely, though there have been many
attempts at explanations: they may have been for religious purposes, to initiate young people into
hunting groups, to capture the energies of animals prior to -- or after -- a hunt, or maybe just for the fun
of it.
4. Hunter-Gatherers and Nature
None of this is writing, and so it is guesswork. To strengthen the guessing, anthropologists have, over
the past hundred years, gone out to hunter-gatherer societies around the world that still operate by oral
traditions, and which were (until very recently) relatively untouched by civilization. There are
significant problems in trying to make connections between these societies and prehistoric societies -for example, many modern hunter-gatherer societies have been pushed to marginal lands, whereas
prehistoric societies flourished on the best and richest lands before agriculture and cities arose. Also,
one of the main characteristics of hunter-gatherer societies is their strong identification with local places
and natures: each is uniquely complex.
Nevertheless, because the ways of life of many hunter-gatherer societies are so close to what is assumed
to have taken place in prehistoric times, there are aspects of their ways of life that can strongly suggest
similarities.
Perhaps the most important aspect of hunter-gatherer life (for our purposes) is the detailed
interpenetration of the natural world and the world of spirits and forces. It has been widely believed
that people who belong to jungle tribes (let us say) are primitive and ignorant. Nothing is further from
the truth: virtually all anthropological research on so-called “primitive” peoples has revealed that they
live in, and understand in great, sophisticated detail, a vastly complex world. This is now known as
“traditional ecological knowledge” (TEK) and involves the ability to identify and work with many plant
and animal species essential to survival and thriving in the forest. This knowledge is so far superior to
that of Westerners who stumble into the forest that international drug companies and medical
researchers have begun to rely on TEK as important sources for possible new drugs and products.
Again, traditional knowledge of the natural world is detailed and practical. It is also characterised by
fluid boundaries between the human, natural, and spirit worlds. Human beings, in these traditions, are
only one part of a larger realm of animals and spirits, and animals as spirits. Everything is related to
everything else in some way.
Particularly powerful relationships are to be found between hunters and the animals they hunt. There
are a number of reasons for this. One is that -- before the extinction of many large animals in large
portions of the world, and before the onset of modern weapons -- hunting is very dangerous. The

file://F:\ENVS 100 Archive\humandimension3.htm

9/30/2009

<-----Page 3----->THE HUMAN DIMENSION I: MYTH, COSMOS, AND NATURE

Page 4 of 5

hunted could well be the hunted: there is an equality between hunter and hunted. Another reason is that
hunting is sometimes successful, sometimes not. Since (in hunter gatherer societies) everything is
related, then success or lack of success is meaningful, there must be a reason.
Studies of a number of hunting societies have shown that in such societies it is often believed that the
hunt is organized by the animals, not by the humans. The animals “give” themselves to the humans, and
they demand certain forms of respect, such as rituals and manners on the part of the hunter. Hunters that
do not respect the animals, for example, by wasting parts of the dead animal, will fail in future hunts.
This way of thinking about Nature is called “reciprocity” -- gift giving -- and it is only one way in which
the practices of human societies (gift-giving is a “glue” in many societies) are reflected in how the
natural world is thought of. Nature in these cultures is “part of the family” -- and further examples of
this can be found in the “totems” and “clan symbols” of many cultures, where the human beings belong
to one of the animal families of their environment.
Contact with Nature in these societies is an everyday, every moment, thing; but -- as in other cultures -there are special kinds of contact that can occur. Often these special contacts happen at special
moments in life, crossing new thresholds of birth, growing up, marriage, death; or in times of
celebration, dancing, drunkenness, ecstasy. At these times, previously rigid boundaries dissolve or are
newly created, and the world “outside” can rush in, or the world “inside” can rush out. Being taken over
or “possessed” by something “not oneself” is a widespread human phenomenon – “ecstasy” is a Greek
word meaning “outside of oneself”. The energies and powers of gods or spirits or ghosts or animals are
infused into the person.
Many hunter-gatherer cultures have specially sensitive figures called “shamans”, who are known for
their ability to wander across the thresholds of the spirit world. These shamans can go into the realm of
the spirits and bring back messages and concerns from the gods to the people. They can also point the
way to the underworld, and determine what rites and rules the society has kept or broken. They may
also connect to ancestors of the families and clans of the society.
Because these cultures (until recently) were oral cultures, their mythologies were handed down by
story, song, dance, and ritual.
5. Agricultural and Urban Mythologies
The shift into agriculture seems to have caused a number of shifts in environmental mythologies.
Agricultural myths centre around the framework of sowing, planting, growing, and reaping of crops.
There are elements of the preceding focus on local gods of field and stream, including the worship of
“corn gods” (in the Americas) and other crop spirits. But increasingly the concern over the mysteries of
crop growth and the risks of crop failure influence the framework and structure of myths. This is
intensified with the rise of “agrarian civilizations” on a large scale, and a new focus on managing the
wayward elements of nature, such as weather, and the provision of water. The basic framework is often
one in which Sky and Earth and other related gods mate and reproduce and generate life, which is
echoed in the agricultural rhythms of sowing seed, ploughing the soil, waiting for the plants to grow,
and then reaping the harvest. These rhythms are associated with birth, life, sex, death, time in the
underworld, rain, and so on. Related origin stories tell of how land is brought up from the sea, how
islands turn into larger continents, and the threats to the land from the sea. Fertility and potency – and
the mystery of growth – are central elements of agricultural mythologies around the world.
Urban myths (which arise later) focus much of their attention on the founding of the city, and the special
gods of that city.

file://F:\ENVS 100 Archive\humandimension3.htm

9/30/2009

<-----Page 4----->THE HUMAN DIMENSION I: MYTH, COSMOS, AND NATURE

Page 5 of 5

(to be continued in: The Human Dimension II)

file://F:\ENVS 100 Archive\humandimension3.htm

9/30/2009

