<-----Page 0----->ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY I-- TO THE RISE OF CITIES

Page 1 of 5

ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY I -- TO THE RISE OF
CITIES
1. Introduction
The relationship between the environment and human history is complex, and is not simply
about “one-way” cause and effect. We cannot say that just because people lived in a certain
place with a certain kind of environment that they must develop in a certain kind of way. Human
history is too “cultural”: human beings interpret and change their environments for all kinds of
reasons. However, there are important limitations placed on human activities by environmental
constraints; and, as has already been discussed in an earlier paper, environmental stresses can
add to the troubles of already troubled societies, or bring on troubles that the society may not be
able to cope with. In the following sections, the evolution of human societies in the environment
– and their mutual effects -- will be the main focus of attention. We begin with hunter-gatherers,
and move through a sequence of evolutions and revolutions until we reach our own time.
2. Hunter-Gatherers
Hunter-gatherer societies can still be found around the world, though they are increasingly
marginalized. They represent survivals of the oldest forms of human strategies for living, and as
such are important potential sources of information about prehistoric societies. It is also
important to remember that hunting-fishing-gathering as ways of life have occupied human
beings for about 95% of the time since there were human beings. It is pretty certain that the
ways of life of hunting and gathering are the foundation layer of our ways of being in the world,
even today.
It used to be thought that hunter-gatherer societies were poverty-stricken, and that theirs was a
lifestyle of dire need and want. Since Sahlins (1972) and other studies, it has become clear that
the opposite is the case, unless the hunter-gatherers are being oppressed, marginalised, or under
some extraordinary ecological threat. As long as the populations remained low, and the
environment relatively untouched, hunter-gatherer peoples seem to have lived very well indeed
(at least in comparison to, for example, early farmers). To begin with, the environment in which
they lived was much richer than our impoverished environment of today -- they could live off of
many more species and rich plant assemblages. They lived in rich environments, often by rivers
and marshes. Since their needs were few, they could feed themselves often with only a few
hours a day of foraging or hunting or fishing. Studies of contemporary hunter gatherer societies
indicate that foraging for fruit and other wild sources of food (usually by women) supply the
bulk of the diet; with hunting (done by men) supplying the rest. Since there were no long term
storage facilities, a successful hunt was a signal for a party: everything had to be eaten at once or
it would go bad.
Many recent examples of hunter-gatherer societies show extraordinary resilience and a capacity
to
shift from one food source to another, particularly after horticulture arrived. Horticulture is
vegetable gardening using digging sticks or hoes, and in these early societies is associated with
what is sometimes called “slash-and-burn” or “swidden” forestry. “Slash-and-burn” is what it
says it is: a part of the forest (say an acre) is cut down and burned, following which root crops
are planted. The burning eliminates weeds, and the carbon in the burnt ash helps fertilize the

file://F:\ENVS 100 Archive\envhistory2.htm

10/7/2009

<-----Page 1----->ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY I-- TO THE RISE OF CITIES

Page 2 of 5

soil. The crop can be harvested for a couple of years, after which the weeds and insects and the
depletion of the soil take their toll, and the horticulturalist moves on to another piece of the forest
nearby. The first burned piece is now left to recover. The individual or tribe moves through the
forest this way, coming back to the first piece of ground perhaps 20-40 years later. This form of
forest agriculture is sustainable only if the population remains low: with population increases,
the return time to the original patches of ground gets shorter, and the agriculture deteriorates.
The population was usually kept low by various strategies such as infanticide and long breast
feeding for newborns (this tends to delay pregnancy).
Hunter gatherer societies are generally quasi-nomadic: they move around, but they move from
familiar place to familiar place. In some cases, their paths naturally followed herds of animals
through their migrations, of which the caribou herds are among the remnant examples today.
Depending on the area, they may have semi-permanent residences or camps. Their social
system is based on oral tradition and on memory – especially in areas that have strong seasons.
The essential quality of hunter gatherer societies is that they work with the natural ecology, both
as hunters (though they did indeed early on drive numerous species to extinction over centuries),
and as slash-and-burn horticulturalists. They have a very sophisticated understanding of their
local environment.
3. The Rise of Agriculture: The First Revolution

Figure 1: Origin Zones of Agriculture (from Maps of Time)
Agriculture in its full scale sense seems to have arisen in nine separate places around the world at
different times, including rice in China, maize (corn) in Mexico, various root crops in Papua

file://F:\ENVS 100 Archive\envhistory2.htm

10/7/2009

<-----Page 2----->ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY I-- TO THE RISE OF CITIES

Page 3 of 5

New Guinea, and so on (see Figure 1). As has just been discussed, hunter-gatherer societies
were engaged in fruit gathering and some forms of horticulture while hunting, and it is likely that
the same situation occurred at the beginnings of the agricultural revolution. Various theories
have been put forward as to why, for example, the domestication of wheat and barley occurred
when they did. The most plausible seems to be that strains of these crops (and others) that grew
wild were encouraged by the warmer weather after the last ice age (that ended about 13,000
years ago) retreated, and gatherers (again, mostly women) gathered certain of these strains that
had more seeds, brought them back to encampments, where they were eaten, dumped, excreted,
and so on; but slowly concentrated.
Since wheat and barley were the first crops domesticated, and the ones that fuelled the earliest
developments in the Middle East, we will focus on them; but it is to be kept in mind that similar
dynamics were underway elsewhere. It is also worth keeping in mind that the domestication of
animals was underway as well -- first dogs, then pigs, cattle, sheep, goats, and then horses. For
grain plants the important fact is that wild strains of wheat and barley are dominated by clusters
of seeds (the “heads” of the stalks) that break open easily in the wind, so that they can be
scattered widely. Domestication involves selecting those strains that had (1) more seeds in the
clusters; and (2) did not scatter easily because the husk was thicker or the seeds were held
tighter. Continual selection for these properties culminated in the modern wheat and barley
heads that have many seeds and need to be harvested before their seeds will scatter. A similar
evolution took place with corn, where the small maize plant was gradually overtaken by the
mammoth “corn-on-the-cob” of today.
Farmers learned not only to select for these properties of the plants, but they began to clear fields
of other plants (“weeds”), and grow nothing but these crops on each field. This made the work
of planting and gathering much more efficient; and very shortly thereafter farmers were able to
generate large surpluses, which they were able to use to feed more people, and their newly
domesticated animals, whose manure could be used to improve the soils, and allow for the
growing of more crops, and so on.
The positive part of this revolution was the ability to concentrate the crops and generate the
surpluses. The negative parts were complex, and took some time to be noticed. One was that
caring for the crops meant that nomadic movement began to be out of the question -- the farmer
is tied to the crops for large portions of the year. The amount of work compared to what a hunter
gatherer does is significantly increased. A second negative factor was that the fields had to be
prepared (weeded), the crops sown, tilled (more weeds), and protected from insects and other
predators. A field is a monoculture, and attracts other feeders than its official owners. A third
negative is that agriculture is risky: because the population increases dramatically with the food
surpluses, droughts and famines are increasingly dangerous. A dynamic is set in place:
smaller risks are now avoided, but a larger threat can cause catastrophic failure because of the
increasing population. This “up the scale of risk” dynamic has continued into our time.
It used to be thought that when agriculture came along, hunter gatherers naturally shifted over
immediately. Archeological research now shows that this was not the case, that it took many
centuries for the agricultural strategy of living to replace the hunter gatherer (and in some places
it never did). What really made the agricultural revolution powerful was the impetus it gave to
the rise of cities, creating what has been called “agrarian civilizations” -- that is, cities and
societies that grew out of, and remained completely dependent on, farming as the primary
resource. It could be argued that this form of civilization persisted until the Industrial
Revolution of the 18th century.

file://F:\ENVS 100 Archive\envhistory2.htm

10/7/2009

<-----Page 3----->ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY I-- TO THE RISE OF CITIES

Page 4 of 5

4. The First Cities: The Second Revolution
The seminal historical event in the rise of cities, what have been called “agrarian
civilizations” (Christian, 2004) was the migration of the peoples who had invented agriculture in
the plateaus of Asia Minor, in what is now southern Turkey, down the Tigris and Euphrates
Rivers to their mouths, where an “interfluvial:” (between the rivers) “alluvial” (soil from rivers)
land which would be called Sumeria was born. The vastly increased productivity of these
alluvial soil enabled large surpluses to be gathered above the immediate needs of the population,
and these in turn supported the creation of irrigation systems and, later, towns and the earliest
cities. Similar phenomena can be found in other parts of the world -- China, Northwest India,
and the Nile delta -- but Sumeria seems to have been the first (approximately 4000 BCE).

Figure 2: Sumeria and the Persian Gulf in 3000 B.C.E. (from Cradle of Civilization)
Sumeria was located in the southern part of what is now Iraq, but was once called Mesopotamia
(from the Greek, “between two rivers”) and the kingdoms that arose and fell there spanned
thousands of years, beginning with small cities like Uruk and Ur, and ending with vast cities like
Bablyon. The key was always the strategic location between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers
near their mouth at the top of the Persian Gulf. This gave the Sumerians both a constant source
of agricultural surplus, and allowed them to act as a trading centre. Trade became of essential
importance for Sumeria and other cities because of their lack of metals and wood, for which they
would trade surplus wheat, barley, animals, etc. Archeological discoveries throughout the
Middle East have identified early trading networks that spanned thousands of kilometers, and

file://F:\ENVS 100 Archive\envhistory2.htm

10/7/2009

<-----Page 4----->ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY I-- TO THE RISE OF CITIES

Page 5 of 5

gave the Sumerians access to resources at a distance.
The irrigation systems that underpinned the Sumerian civilization required constant upkeep, and
as the systems were enlarged, they required large numbers of people to build new ones, maintain
the old, and protect them from damage. This effort, in conjunction with the need to be able to
predict planting times, possible flood zones, and settle increasing disputes over land, property,
boundaries, and so on, spurred the growth of government and bureaucracies. In all of the large
agrarian civilizations, a hierarchical social structure seems to have developed, and this
hierarchy was supported by the generous surpluses generated by the farmers. These surpluses
were gathered by “taxes and tributes” – that means not only bureaucracy, but armies, tax
gatherers, and enforcers. The hierarchies were kept going by the fact that they carried out the
range of management tasks required, including not just government, but religious beliefs through
priesthoods and astrologers. Part of their justification was their “connection” with the gods:
their predictive abilities were related to the rituals, songs, and stories, but also to the technical
skills of astronomy and hydrology. This is one of the reasons why when environmental troubles
arose, governments could lose control, because they would lose the confidence of the people.
First in Sumeria, then in Egypt, and China, and later in India and South America similar social
patterns develop out of the growth of agriculture and the increase of population in the ancient
world . So similar are certain aspects of the cities and cultures that were created (for example,
the way that each of these cities created pyramid-like structures or large scale structures that
“show off” their wealth) that many people have believed that there must have been some
contacts among all these cities. While there were extensive trading networks, and regions like
Sumeria and Egypt were close enough to have mutual contacts, it seems to be the case that most
of these civilizations did develop independently: this is one of the great puzzles and challenges
for historians – is there in fact something almost determined about the paths these early cities
took, once they got started?
Perhaps the most important outcome of the bureaucratic need to keep track and keep control of
things was the invention of accounting systems, which eventually led to the invention of
alphabets and writing (around 3200 BCE). The invention of writing marks the traditional break
between pre-history and history; for very shortly after the invention of writing, we begin to find
records of historical events, poems, fictions, and everything that we associate with writing.
The shift from oral traditions to writing is one of the most profound shifts in human experience;
the consequences of which we are still attempting to fathom.
(To be continued in Environmental History II……)
Christian, David. 2004. Maps of Time. Berkeley, California: University of California Press.
Crawford, Harriet. 2004. Sumer and the Sumerians. Cambridge: University Press.
Kramer, Samuel N. 1978. Cradle of Civilization. Alexandria, Virginia: Time-Life Books.
Sahlins, Marshall. 1972. Stone Age Economics. London: Tavistock Publications.

file://F:\ENVS 100 Archive\envhistory2.htm

10/7/2009

