<-----Page 0----->WHY DO SOCIETIES COLLAPSE?
Peter Timmerman

Mayan Temple of the Giant Jaguar --Tikal
1. Introduction
Collapse (Diamond, 2005) is one of the most recent books about the collapse of
society. Books like these often appear when a society is under unusual stress; but
the idea of complete social collapse has fascinated people since the beginning of
recorded history. Noah’s flood, the lost city of Atlantis, Mayan cities in the
deep jungle, the decline and fall of the Roman Empire -- these are all images,
legends or histories that have haunted civilizations, especially complex urban
societies. The reasons for the collapse of these empires and cultures are
exrtemely varied, ranging from religious reasons (the empire is cursed for its
sinfulness) to lead pipes (the empire’s population goes into mysterious decline).
When one reviews these reasons as they have been put forward throughout
history, it becomes quickly obvious that the arguments for the causes of the
collapse are primarily the projected obsessions of the society studying the
collapse. Our era is no different: in the 1970’s, at the height of the Cold War
between America and Russia, historians studied the runaway wars between the
Spartans and the Athenians in the 5th century BCE.; in the 1990’s, historians
looked at the fall of the British Empire as a warning to the emerging American

<-----Page 1----->Empire. Today, the fascination is with possible environmental stresses as a
central cause of the collapse of complex, yet vulnerable societies.
Two of these famous examples, (which will be reviewed in case studies below)
are the destruction of Easter Island in the Pacific, and the collapse of the Mayan
empire in Central America. Easter Island appears in Collapse and as the
opening chapter in Clive Ponting’s The Green History of the World (1991); the
Mayan collapse is in Collapse, and in many other texts, such as J. Donald
Hughes’ An Environmental History of The World (2001).
2. The Case of Easter Island
The most famous feature of Easter Island today are the vast, staring sculptures of
elongated heads that dot the island. About 900 of these statues remain. Half
finished statues, giving evidence of a culture that suddenly abandoned its
projects, lie in the quarry miles from where the sculptures were erected. Why
they were built, and why they were so abruptly abandoned, have been questions
that have been asked ever since they were first visited on Easter Sunday, 1722
(hence the Western name of what, among the native population still living on the
island, they call Rapa Nui).
Easter Island is a “test case” in part because it was so isolated, like a test tube or a
petri dish. It is in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, approximately 1500 km from
the nearest other land (Pitcairn Island). Other islands and archipelagos in the
Pacific that created reasonably complex cultures and large scale monuments
always had somewhere else to go, or somewhere else from which they could
import resources. Easter Island -- about 90 sq. km in area -- was settled in the
course of a variety of migrations across the Pacific by early Polynesian tribes
(roughly in the 5-6 centuries C.E.) who travelled in double-hulled canoes and
rafts. It was some distance south of the equator (27 degrees south latitude) and
was, when the first settlers arrived, covered in dense palm forests. However,
there were intrinsic vulnerabilities right from the beginning.
Easter Island is volcanic, and while the soils were reasonable, drainage was poor.
It has limited rainfall (50 inches a year), and only intermittent streams. Studies
have indicated (Ponting, 1991) that there were very few indigenous species of
plants, six bird species (Diamond, 2005) and only one or two indigenous
animals (lizards). Sea-birds and sea-turtles and other sea creatures probably
visited the island, but that was all. Because of the climate, there were no coral
reefs or lagoons, and so there were very few fishing grounds. The settlers had to
depend on their imported domesticated crops: taro, sugarcane, yams, sweet
potatoes, and bananas, though sweet potatoes became the single mainstay crop;
plus domesticated animals: the pig, dog, chicken and rat (Kjellgren, 2001). It
appears as if the growing of the sweet potato was not that difficult, and it
produced a substantial surplus, allowing for substantial leisure time, and the
creation of a complex social structure.

<-----Page 2----->The society was organized according to social ranks and family ties, with a
paramount chief over all the island. The island was subdivided into 11-12
territories ruled by different family clans who engaged in a variety of allegiances
and struggles. Each of these territories had ancestral chiefs (ariki) who were
worshipped, and whose spirits were remembered and worshipped in the great
stone statues (called moai). Because the statues were made in one (or two) places
and had to be dragged across various territories, there must have been some kinds
of agreements that covered the whole island community. These statues obviously
formed the centre of ceremonies and rituals tying the communities together; but
also fulfilled other, more obscure, roles, e.g. as astronomical markers. Other
rituals evolved over time, but until the collapse of the Easter Island culture, the
stone statues took up much time, effort, and resources. Certainly one role of the
statues was prestige: making one bigger and better than one’s neighbour.
The many hundred statues were carved from stone from a quarry in an extinct
volcanic crator on the southeast side of the island, Rano Raraku, using obsidian
stone (obsidian is volcanic glass that breaks into incredibly sharp blades). Their
size ranges from 3 metres to 25 metres in height, on average weighing 10 or more
tons. Some statues weighed as much as 80 tons. The stones were rolled to their
various sites using cut down trees as rollers, and there they were hoisted up to the
vertical on vast stone platforms that themselves had to be made and moved into
place. It has been calculated that each stone required between 50-500 people to
move them, as well as carvers and other managers. Various calculations have
been made of the overall population at the time of the major statue building phase
(somewhere after 1100 C.E.) and the best estimate is that the total Easter Island
population was 15,000 people.
This increase in the population, which required land clearance for agriculture and
other activities, canoe making, shelter-building, etc., was probably the main
contribution to the deforestation of the island, but recent archeological evidence
suggests that, in addition to chopping down trees to make rollers, Easter
Islanders also cremated their dead, using up even more wood resources!
In his famous statement on first seeing Easter Island, the Dutch sailor Roggeveen
stated:
We originally, from a distance, considered the said Easter Island to be
sandy,
the reason for that is this, that we counted as sand the withered grass, hay,
or
other scorched and burnt vegetation, because its wasted appearance could
give
no other impression than of a singular poverty and barrenness.
(cited in Diamond, 2005, p. 81)

<-----Page 3----->Radiocarbon dates and other evidence suggest that the deforestation began in
earnest in about 900 C.E., accelerated to a peak about 1400, and by 1600, there
were no trees left above 10 feet tall, and the islanders were reduced to eating
herbs, grass, and eventually each other (there is evidence of cannibalism). The
loss of essential wood resources tightened and strangled the population: people
were forced to live in caves as their wood houses could not be repaired; what
fishing there was dwindled because of the shortage of canoes; and the
elimination of trees led to the washing away of topsoil from precious agricultural
land. Some grim evidence of the situation is provided by the creation of a
network of protective stone walls around the last major food resource on the
island: chickens. There is simultaneous evidence that there were revolts and wars
across the island, including the toppling of already erect statues: an
environmental collapse had led to a social collapse.
The arrival of Europeans did little to assist the remaining Easter Islanders.
Captain Roeggeveen was followed by Captain Cook and others, who brought
with them various diseases, as well as more grazing animals such as sheep and
goats that finished off what was left of the vegetation. By the 19th century, when
a large fraction of the remaining population was forced off the island and into
slavery, only 100 Easter Islanders were left.
The question that has haunted virtually all of those who have studied Easter
Island is not so much the physical reasons for the collapse, but the question: why
did no one do anything about it, since it was so obvious for so long? Unlike some
other places one could study where the slow erosion of resources can be hidden in
the complexities of the situation, Easter Island was a small place, and anyone
looking at the situation, say in about 1400, must have been able to foresee what
was to come. Yet it seems that, if there were such prophets, they were unable to
convince or control the downward spiral of the society until it was too late.
Ponting points out:
Indeed, at the very time when the limitations of the island must have
become
starkly apparent the competition between the clans for the available
timber seems
to have intensified as more and more statues were carved and moved
across the
island in an attempt to secure prestige and status. The fact that so many
were
left unfinished or stranded near the quarry suggests that no account was
taken
of how few trees were left on the island.
It is this terrifying, useless, intensifying competition in the face of oncoming
disaster that has made Easter Island into a powerful symbol of all that can go
wrong.

<-----Page 4----->3. General Considerations: Vulnerability and Resilience
In a book called Vulnerability, Resilence and the Collapse of Society
(Timmerman, 1981) a variety of basic terms used in considerations of social and
ecological vulnerability were reviewed. Among the most important were
“vulnerability”, “resilience”, and “reliability”.
“Vulnerability” is a complex term, because it is almost never clear what aspects
of a society or natural process are under attack, and where the most “vulnerable”
spots are (before an assault); but most generally it means “those aspects of a
system that are the weakest in the face of attack”. Sometimes vulnerabilities are
discovered at the moment when the consequences are the most severe. Another
problem is that a society may be invulnerable -- that is able to withstand all
attackes -- except in one spot (known as the “Achilles’ heel”, after the ancient
myth of the warrior whose mother dipped him in a pool that made him
invulnerable, except for the heel of his foot, which she had to hold onto as she
dipped; or, in a more modern myth, Superman’s vulnerability to Kryptonite).
The existence of this spot may mean that when this one spot is attacked, the rest
of the society, which has been built up on the delusion that it is invulnerable, falls
even further. Its collapse is more spectacular.
Apart from obvious vulnerabilities (for example, the recent breaking of the levees
in New Orleans due to Hurricane Katrina and bad previous planning), trying to
determine or assess why a society or an ecosystem is vulnerable can be very
difficult; as can trying to discover a remedy. In ecosystem studies, for example, it
was long believed that a simpler ecosystem was more vulnerable than a complex
ecosystem -- the idea being that a complex ecosystem has more diversity and
resilience (we will deal with “resilience” in a moment). After two decades of
research, no one has been able to prove this. Some simple eco-systems are quite
robust; some complex eco-systems are fragile, and vice-versa. There are images
and metaphors that people use as “rules of thumb” to explain the vulnerabilities
of various systems, but they have a limited, if useful, reach.
A few examples of vulnerability may show this. One example often used is a
space flight. A space flight requires that many, many complex systems work
virtually perfectly, and if something goes wrong, then everything goes wrong.
The interlinkages mean that one small problem in one part of the system can
cascade through all parts. And sometimes protecting these interlinkages from
failure can cause the failure!! In the case of the nuclear reactor failure at Three
Mile Island in Pennsylvania in the 1980’s, it is reasonably clear that the failure
was due to the inability of the supervisory personnel to cope with far-toocomplicated monitoring and response systems that were designed to protect the
reactor.

<-----Page 5----->Other systems may be vulnerable because they have limited means of protection
from blunt attacks. For example, the spilling of the oil on the ship, the Exxon
Valdez, off the coast of Alaska in 1989 caused massive environmental damage
simply because the Arctic environment has virtually no capacity to absorb and
chemically transform such materials. This is different from the catastrophic
sabotage on the oil platforms carried out by Saddam Hussein in the First Gulf
War in 1991, when large quantities of oil were spilled down the Persian Gulf. It
turns out that (1) the Persian Gulf is full of bacteria which have evolved in an
environment where oil spills from tanker traffic happen every day; and (2) the
water and environmental temperatures in the Gulf are hot enough to encourage
chemical processes that happen much, much more slowly in the Arctic.
So one of the theoretical problems in dealing with vulnerability is the fact that
systems may be very capable of handling one set of problems, and not very good
at handing another, different set that may come out of “left field”.
A second, important, related term, is “resilience”. Resilience is defined simply
enough as “the capacity of a system to bounce back from a stress”. The term is
borrowed from engineering, and particularly from the engineering of elastic
materials. How much damage can a society or ecosystem withstand, and return to
where it once was? The classic image, used for thousands of years, is the
difference between a mighty oak and a lowly willow tree. The mighty oak can
withstand many storms, but a big storm will blow it down. The lowly willow will
bend with every wind, and come back again. The willow is more resilient than
the oak. A non-resilient system may be more “brittle” -- one example might be
the difference between the bones of growing children and the bones of an elderly
person. A broken bone in a child can heal better than a broken bone in an old
person.
It is important to keep being aware through this discussion that the images and
stories that are used are analogies, which are applied (and misapplied) to different
subjects. So -- to continue -- political scientists may talk about a “brittle”
society, one that is not very resilient to attack or sudden change. But what is
“brittle”? What are the “bones” of a society: its culture? its natural resources? its
citizens? its social networks?
Some social scientists see that what is resilient or vulnerable in a society is its
overall strategy for living, operating, and coping. This partially enables them to
make comparisons between different societies or cultures and their strategies.
For example, in Vulnerability, Resilience, and the Collapse of Society (1981)
comparison is made between resilience and reliability strategies of different
societies. “Reliability” means “the ability of a system to provide continuous
resources or tasks without failure”. “Reliability” strategies are often linked to
high efficiency one task technologies, such as the provision of electrical energy.
One useful distinction is that between an elevator and an escalator. An elevator

<-----Page 6----->depends on reliability: if it fails, you are stuck. An escalator is an example of a
somewhat resilient technology: if it fails, you can at least walk.
Many systems in the modern world are characterised by increasing, and
interlocked, reliability. If they break down, you can’t do anything else with
them: but until they break down they give you high efficiency. If you use a
pencil, if it breaks you can sharpen it, or take out a pen. If your computer breaks
down, you can’t do anything. In fact, it used to be the case that even reasonably
advanced technological systems had quite a bit of resilience -- until recently, if
your car broke down, and you knew some basic auto mechanics, you could fix it.
With computer modules, this is impossible.
Notice that this suggests that an increasingly reliable social system may be quite
vulnerable: it may work very well; but when it breaks down, it breaks all the way
down. The images of New Orleans from Hurricane Katrina underscore this:
without reliable social services, people in the modern world are virtually
helpless. They have few technical survival skills enabling them to cope. The
main strategy for coping is to rely on the bringing in of resources from outside to
restart the society.
The opposite of this are resilient systems, and many of them are characterized by
being “closer to the ground” technologically. They do not rely on putting all
their eggs in one basket: they have multiple social strategies and resources. This
is inefficient from a high-tech throughput economy, but not so vulnerable to
catastrophe. They have lower to fall when things go wrong: more like the
willow, than the oak. These resilient people and systems often re-appear when a
reliable system has crashed, because the reliable system has to return to an earlier
social structure. For example, at the end of World War II, when the Japanese
were being bombed and there was a stranglehold ship embargo around Japan, the
social structure collapsed. People from the cities found that, in order to get food,
they had to take their possessions -- jewels, gold, etc. -- and go out into the
countryside and try and barter these possessions for food from farmers. City
people who had relatives that were still farmers went to live with them.
In a final twist, it may be that societies that depend on reliability strategies not
only undermine their own foundational resilience, but the sources of resilience
elsewhere. A current example is the impact of global warming on the Inuit and
other northern peoples. The strategy for dealing with weather and climate in the
West is a reliability strategy: the buffering of ourselves from the cold and the heat
through the use of high inputs of energy to fuel our heating systems and air
conditioning. This strategy is at the heart of global warming from fossil fuel use.
The resilience strategy of native peoples, however, is to live with -- not against -the natural system, to understand the fluctuations of the natural world, and to
learn how to cope through knowing the rhythms of things. Global warming
destroys the predictability of these fluctuations and rhythms, thus undermining
the traditional knowledge of traditional peoples.

<-----Page 7----->We can see from this exploration that vulnerability, resilience, and reliability are
complex interwoven phenomena in themselves. When we add to that the
possibilities of environmental change, the complexities multiply.
4. The Mayan Collapse
Recently, there has been increasing evidence that the collapse of the Mayan
empire in Central America was the result of the impacts of climate change on an
already vulnerable social system. Unlike the Easter Island case, which must have
been a stark story as it unfolded, the Mayan story was likely one of slow
deterioration and abandonment.
The Mayan empire was one of the great empires of the Americas, like the Aztec
and Inca empires, but its greatness had passed by the time the Spaniards arrived.
Like the Aztec, Inca, and other empires it created massive monuments that spoke
of a powerful hierarchical culture, and a substantial surplus of food to feed its
substantial populations. When the Spaniards and later explorers came upon the
ruins of the Mayan cities that had been swallowed up by the jungles, one of the
great puzzles was how they were able to feed populations that at least at one time
(around 750 CE) may have numbered 13 million people. The truth seems to be
that the Mayans had a series of sophisticated irrigation and “raised field farming”
systems throughout the extent of their empire, and relied on corn (maize) as their
main crop.
The first written references to the Mayans are about 250CE, from their surviving
calendrical records and histories carved sculpturally into rock. From a few initial
sites, the empire spread throughout the Yucatan peninsula (the southeast of
Mexico) and northern Central America. There was no one central city: cities like
Copal and Tikan and others were scattered like a network. The populations grew
until about 750 CE, and then in a series of reverses it collapsed like a house of
cards, and by 950 CE was effectively over -- the Classic Mayan collapse!
Many explanations have been given for this collapse; but, as mentioned, recent
evidence suggests that climate change may have been the trigger. Before
discussing this evidence, it is worth briefly outlining the geographic and sociopolitical facts that made the Mayans so vulnerable.
The “jungle” in which the Mayan empire flourished, and which took over again
when the Mayans disintegrated, is actually a mixture of jungle and more open
ground, in part because the Yucatan Peninsula only receives strong rainfall in the
period between June and September, and there is a serious dry season from
January to May. (The area is also subject to hurricanes and tropical storms). The
Mayan empire stretched from the northern part of the peninsula to the south -because of the limestone bedrock on the peninsula, it turns out that while the
south got much more rain during the rainy season, the rain drained away quickly

<-----Page 8----->in both north and south. The north was somewhat more secure because northern
cities were able to dig wells down to the fresh water aquifers relatively closer to
the surface in the north than in the south. Historians are reasonably sure that the
abandoment of the Mayan cities started in the south and worked north.
Climatologists have recently been able to show that there was a global cooling
period roughly between 700 - 950 CE, and that in the Yucatan peninsula there
were a series of related droughts that can be quite accurately dated to 760, 810,
860, and 910 CE (Peterson and Haug, 2005), accompanied by years of lesser
drought, sometimes extending in a sequence of ten years or more. These dates
synchronize astonishingly closely with archeological records of a sequence of
societal collapses from the south to the north of the Mayan world. It seems
likely that the droughts exhausted the local water supplies.
But there are other issues involved. Studies have further indicated that there were
periods of extensive deforestation, and attempts -- just before the peak of the
empire -- to farm on hillsides and vulnerable areas throughout the region. There
was clearly severe population pressure on a limited agricultural base.
As in the case of Easter Island, the environmental collapse was accompanied by
increased signs of warfare and conflict between different cities and regions.
There is also evidence of a series of outmigrations, as people abandoned the area
and moved away.
Conclusions
In his book, Diamond (2005) suggests 5 fairly fuzzy reasons why societies
collapse, or at least areas to look at for possible evidence. I have modified them
slightly. They are:
(1) The environmental damage that people inflict;
(2) Changes in the overall environmental conditions, of which climate change is
critical;
(3) Hostile neighbours in the social environment;
(4) Decreased support by neighbours;
(5) Inability to come up with adequate responses.
The obvious question is whether the society (or societies) in which we live are
completely different from the traditional society case studies I have described
above. The big difference is that modern societies are able to mobilize resources
from elsewhere to solve regional or local issues through the use of
communications, money, and power. As long as some part of a modern system

<-----Page 9----->remains in operation, modern technologies and the ability to move resources
around, will very likely be able to be mobilized. The large, unanswered, question
is what happens when the whole planet becomes one society, one island like
Easter Island. When there is nowhere else to turn to to find resources to rush into
disaster zones or degraded ecosystems. This is why global change is so
important: for historians and citizens concerned about the future of the planet,
are we seeing the earlier collapses being replayed on the largest scale; or are we
capable of learning from earlier mistakes and making the necessary changes?

REFERENCES
Diamond, Jared. 2005. Collapse. New York, N.Y.: Viking Press.
Hughes, J. Donald. 2001. An Environmental History of the World. London,
England: Routledge.
Kjellgren, Eric. Splendid Isolation: Art of Easter Island. 2001. New York, N.Y.:
The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Peterson, Larry C. and Gerald H. Haug. 2005. “Climate and the Collapse of Maya
Civilization”, American Scientist, Vol. 93, No. 4, (July-August), pp. 322-329.
Ponting, Clive. 1991. A Green History of the World. Harmondsworth,
Middlesex: Penguin Books Ltd.
Timmerman, Peter. 1981. Vulnerability, Resilience, and the Collapse of Society.
Toronto: Institute for Environmental Studies, Monograph No. 1.

