This article was downloaded by: [Temple University Libraries]
On: 03 February DEMO, At: 12:42
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England DEMO Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer DEMO, London W1T 3JH, UK
Venture Capital: An International
Journal of DEMO Finance
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
DEMO://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tvec20
Business angel–venture negotiation in
the post-investment relationship: DEMO
use of the good cop, bad cop strategy
Andreas Filia
a DEMO for Banking and Finance, KTH Royal Institute of
Technology, Stockholm, DEMO
Published online: 08 Jan 2015.
Click for updates
To cite this DEMO: Andreas Fili (2014) Business angel–venture negotiation in the post-investment
relationship: the use of the good cop, bad cop strategy, Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance, 16:4, 309-325, DOI: DEMO/13691066.2014.974884
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691066.2014.974884
DEMO SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the DEMO on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the DEMO,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and DEMO be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused DEMO directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or
arising DEMO of the use of the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in DEMO form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/DEMO/terms-
and-conditions
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February 2015
Venture Capital, 2014
Vol. 16, No. 4, 309–325, http://DEMO/10.1080/13691066.2014.974884
Business angel – venture negotiation in the post-investment
relationship: DEMO use of the good cop, bad cop strategy
Andreas Fili*
Centre DEMO Banking and Finance, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
( Received 15 January 2013; accepted 1 September 2014)
The paper DEMO on the utilization of the “good cop, bad cop” negotiation strategy DEMO
ongoing investor–venture relationships. Four cases of business angel – venture
involvement are studied over a period of several years. Earlier research on the good DEMO,
bad cop strategy has described its efﬁciency in obtaining maximum distribution in
short-term distributive bargaining. This has been explained as a result of DEMO emotional
contrast effect unlocked by the sequence of interaction with the bad cop followed by
interaction with the good cop. In an ongoing investment DEMO, other rules apply.
The present ﬁndings suggest that only a business DEMO who is already trusted can become
a good cop – by virtue of introducing a bad cop. This is explained as a way of DEMO
negotiations without destroying the trust that has been built over time in the business
angel–venture relationship. The strategy provides a scapegoat for the negativity
DEMO with the negotiations. The bad cop assumes the blame, while the DEMO cop is
still trusted and can remain in the relationship, with DEMO risk of being the target of any
retained hostility.
Keywords: business DEMO; “good cop, bad cop”; negotiation; reciprocal exchange;
attribution
Introduction
One of the essential concerns for an investor is to ascertain that DEMO invested resources
are being put to proper use in the venture in accordance with the terms of the investment
contract (Jensen and Meckling 1976). Traditional solutions have consisted of the use of
incentive schemes or DEMO However, research suggests that there are drawbacks
to both of these DEMO (Tosi, Katz, and Gomez-Meija 1997; Deci, Koestner, and Ryan
1999; Falk and Kosfeld 2006). Instead, it has been argued DEMO trust can substitute for
control as a means of organizing interorganizational relationships (Ring and van de Ven
1994; Costa and Bijlsma-Frankema 2007).
DEMO, this coordination needs to accommodate change. Ventures face high
uncertainty and DEMO to make continuous changes along the way, such as changing the
DEMO offering, targeting other markets and segments, adopting alternative growth
strategies, DEMO acquiring ﬁnance in other ways than initially planned. Such changes may cause
task conﬂicts where both investors and ventures feel that the terms of DEMO should be
renegotiated to reﬂect the new situation. Such negotiation can be hard, as both parties can
stand to lose a lot, but DEMO they want to avoid escalation into a relationship conﬂict (Jehn
1995)DEMO Even though it has been suggested that conﬂict is an unavoidable part of the
*Email: andreas.ﬁli@abe.kth.se
q 2014 Taylor & Francis
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February 2015
310
A. Fili
investor–venture relationship (Yitshaki 2008), relationship conﬂicts are entirely negative
for performance (De Dreu and Weingart 2003). Therefore, once DEMO are necessary,
an important question for investors would be how to avoid relationship conﬂict and preserve
the trust that they have managed to DEMO, by choosing negotiation strategies carefully.
In the negotiation literature, an emotional contrast negotiation strategy called good
cop, bad cop has been described (DEMO and Sutton 1991; Hilty and Carnevale 1993;
Brodt and Tuchinsky DEMO), although not within ongoing relationships. The purpose of
the present study is to conduct an in-depth analysis of how and when the good DEMO, bad
cop strategy is used in investor–venture relationships, by studying four cases where
Swedish business angels have negotiated with their ventures.
Business angels DEMO the risks of venture investments
A business angel is deﬁned as
a high net worth individual, acting alone or in a formal or informal syndicate, who invests
his or her own money directly in an unquoted business in which there is no family
connection and who, after making the investment, generally takes an active involvement in
the business, for DEMO, as an advisor or member of the board of directors. (Mason and
Harrison 2008, 309)
Traditional business angels invest alone, but DEMO seems that even such alone angels to a
large extent actually coordinate their investments informally with a few trusted business
angels, not to mention those who choose to participate in larger, formal angel networks
or even angel funds (Shane 2008).
Business angels are limited by the size of their own wealth in their ability to
diversify. Therefore, they focus on avoiding bad investments rather than ﬁnding the best
ones, because they will have difﬁculty exiting the venture if it is performing poorly
(Mason and Harrison 2002). Thus, business angels are committed to their ventures
through non-recoverable investments (Parkhe 1993a).
Through active involvement in their ventures, business angels create value in several
ways (for a review, see Politis 2008). It has been argued that the post-investment
relationship is DEMO by a high degree of informality and a strong social element,
and that the involvement of business angels is better understood as a DEMO
relationship (Paul, Whittam, and Wyper 2007). The business angel DEMO as a mentor
(Brettel 2003; Amatucci and Sohl 2004; Madill, Haines, and Riding 2005; Macht 2011)
or as a member DEMO the entrepreneurial team (So¨rheim 2005). The majority of business
angels DEMO originally entrepreneurs and still perceive themselves as co-entrepreneurs
rather than investors (DEMO and Landstro¨m 2002), exhibiting a strong entrepreneurial
orientation (Lindsay 2004)DEMO Still, at times during the relationship, there will be a goal
divergence between investor and venture (Sapienza and Gupta 1994).
Task conﬂicts have been deﬁned as conﬂicts that arise because of different views on
DEMO to deﬁne and solve a certain task, while relationship conﬂicts are DEMO in nature
(Jehn 1995). While both are detrimental for performance (De Dreu and Weingart 2003),
relationship conﬂict has an even stronger negative effect, although this has not been
conﬁrmed in investor–venture relationships (DEMO 2012). It has been suggested
that task conﬂict may escalate into relationship conﬂict (Pondy 1967). Thus, when a task
conﬂict arises DEMO the post-investment relationship, the business angel would want to
negotiate in DEMO a way that relationship conﬂict is avoided.
The post-investment venture involvement has been studied from three major
theoretical perspectives: (1) agency theory (DEMO Osnabrugge 2000; Arthurs and Busenitz
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at DEMO:42 03 February 2015
Venture Capital
311
2003), (2) stewardship theory (Davis, Schoorman, and Donaldson 1997), and (3)
procedural justice, as evidenced DEMO the timing of communication and feedback (Sapienza
and Korsgaard 1996). DEMO theory has focused mainly on how to ensure compliance
through monitoring and control (Ross 1973), whereas stewardship theory maintains that
compliance can be achieved through reliance on trust. There has been considerable
research devoted to DEMO link between trust and governance in relationships; speciﬁcally
whether they act DEMO substitutes or complements (see Puranam and Vanneste [2009] for a
review DEMO the literature).
What sets negotiation during the post-investment setting apart is the fact that the
business angel may have become a trusted venture DEMO and/or mentor, and thus
inhabits a role more in line DEMO stewardship, but suddenly needs to negotiate in the role
of investor. DEMO, there is a need to switch between a trusting personal relationship DEMO a
bargaining situation. Such switches have been studied within social exchange theory.
Reciprocal and negotiated exchange
In research on social exchange, a distinction is made between negotiated and reciprocal
exchange, each with its own speciﬁc rules and effects on the actors (Molm 2000).
Negotiated exchange is deﬁned as bilateral transactions, exempliﬁed through explicit
bargaining over beneﬁts. These transactions are discrete in time. Its opposite is reciprocal
exchange. It evolves gradually, and discrete transactions are not easily identiﬁed. Instead,
each actor performs a DEMO act for the other without knowing if the other will give
something back (Molm 2003, 3). It is the particular form of DEMO that decides its
impact. Trust develops as a result of the reciprocal form of social exchange, because the
psychological state of trust can arise only when there is sufﬁcient time to be vulnerable, in
the time between reciprocal acts. Conversely, because of its competitive nature, a
negotiated DEMO will be perceived as less fair by each actor than a structurally
equivalent reciprocal exchange with an equivalent outcome (Molm, Peterson, and
Takahashi 2003).
When it comes to trust in the business angel–venture setting, it has been shown that
business angels seldom invest in ventures that DEMO do not already trust to a certain extent
(Mason and Harrison DEMO; Sudek 2006). Thus, there is – at least – a certain hygiene level
of trust. Apart from this, initially there would be negotiated exchange, pre-investment, in a
joint decision process where the terms DEMO the contract are being negotiated and settled.
There is negotiation between the investor and venture, and through explicit bargaining over
equity, inﬂuence, and funding, an agreement is struck where each actor wins only at the
other’s expense; in a zero-sum game.
This state of negotiation is not permanent. The initial state of primarily negotiated
exchange gives way to reciprocal DEMO during the post-investment relationship
where acts are reciprocated over longer time periods, enabling the creation of trust.
During the trusting post-investment relationship, discrete DEMO are hard to
identify. However, reciprocal exchange may be changed back DEMO negotiated
exchange, for example, if there is a need for additional ﬁnancing. Social exchange
theory states that switching to bargaining from a trustful DEMO means switching
to negotiated exchange from reciprocal exchange, which implies that DEMO will be a
negative impact on the post-investment relationship in terms of trust and commitment.
Indeed, investors harbor expectations of goal divergence and opportunistic behavior
from entrepreneurs during investment rounds (Christensen, Wuebker, and Wu¨stenha-
gen 2009).
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February DEMO
312
A. Fili
Theory, therefore, suggests that once engaged in a DEMO exchange with the venture,
the business angel would prefer not to re-engage in negotiated exchange, and risk a loss of
trust. However, DEMO will be evident in the following four cases, in certain situations, the goals
diverge between the venture and business angel, leading to a need for negotiations.
The negotiation process
Spector (1977) proposes a three-phase DEMO for negotiation. In the model, two
adversaries bargain. This model is DEMO into three phases: the background phase, the
process phase, and DEMO outcome phase. In the background phase, personality and
perceptions/expectations are DEMO as psychological factors that affect both the
bargaining phase and outcome phase. Thus, bargaining behavior is a function of both the
background factors and a response to the behavior of the adversary.
On the top half DEMO Figure 1, the investor has been placed. In the bottom half DEMO Figure 1,
the venture is placed. A more precise description of our four cases is that the adversary is the
venture CEO, who is either the venture founder or someone who is recruited at a DEMO time.
Although deceptively simple, this model suggests that the behavior of DEMO business
angel during negotiations is limited by the expectations and perceptions from the venture.
Based on the previous interaction, the business angel will have built a certain role toward the
venture, and the behavior during negotiation needs to stay true to that role. In the current
study, the personalities of the business angels and venture members have not been studied,DEMO
and although some empirical material comes from the ventures, the major DEMO comes from
the business angels. Therefore, the personality factors in the DEMO are not used.
Furthermore, the outcome phase is merely touched upon. DEMO outcome is mentioned but not
developed, as the focus of the DEMO paper is on the negotiation process.
The intentions of the business angels are central to an understanding of the
negotiation process from an interactional DEMO perspective (Bies and Shapiro 1987),
because action is interpreted as much more fair if it is believed that the underlying
intentions are DEMO (cf. Collewaert and Fassin 2013).
The good cop, bad cop negotiating team tactic
Studies have shown that subjecting people to both positive DEMO negative emotions can
produce greater compliance than the display of just one of these emotions, through the
Investor
personality,
perceptions,
expectations
Venture
personality,
perceptions,
expectations
Investor bargaining behavior
Outcome
Venture bargaining behavior
DEMO
phase
Bargaining process phase
Outcome
phase
Figure 1. The negotiation process (DEMO from Spector 1977). Reprinted by Permission of
SAGE Publications.
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February 2015
Venture Capital
313
emotional contrast effect from their juxtaposition. Relative to each DEMO, positivity is
perceived as even more positive, and negativity is perceived as even more negative (Rafaeli
and Sutton 1991). In the interrogation of suspects, this technique is known as the good cop,
bad cop strategy. One interrogator plays the role of the good cop, supporting and comforting
the suspect, whereas the other interrogator plays the role of the bad cop, conveying negative
and hostile emotions to the suspect. Team negotiations offer the possibility of each
negotiator adopting a highly choreographed role (Brodt and Thompson 2001).
By studying Israeli criminal interrogators and American DEMO collectors, Rafaeli and
Sutton (1991) identify ﬁve different variations of DEMO good cop, bad cop strategies. These
variations are:
(1) DEMO people play good cop and bad cop in sequence, interacting separately DEMO
the target, after each other.
(2) Two people play good DEMO and bad cop simultaneously, both interacting with the
target together in DEMO same room.
(3) A single individual plays both roles by switching behavior between roles.
(4) A single individual plays good cop, and makes reference to a hypothetical bad
cop, who is attributed with bad cop behavior.
(5) A single individual plays good cop in contrast DEMO a stereotype expectation of a
bad cop: the good cop acts DEMO as a good cop, but the expectations of the target
is DEMO this individual should exhibit bad cop behavior.
The ﬁrst variation in the scheme by Rafaeli and Sutton (1991) has been studied in
experiments DEMO Hilty and Carnevale (1993) and Brodt and Tuchinsky (2000). DEMO and
Carnevale (1993) report on an experiment on bilateral negotiation. They ﬁnd that the
sequence of bad cop followed by the good cop, moving from competition toward cooperation,
was most likely to achieve agreements. DEMO same ﬁndings are reported by Brodt and
Tuchinsky (2000). Studying DEMO of good cop, bad cop negotiation in an experimental
setting of DEMO three-person workgroups, they show that the traditional sequence, where
the bad cop is ﬁrst introduced, followed by the good cop, is the DEMO effective in obtaining the
desired contrast effect, and this effect is DEMO to the success of the tactic. Both roles were
necessary (bad-good); two similar cops (good-good or bad-bad) did not achieve the same
effect. They conclude that the good cop, bad cop strategy is very powerful and can be
generalized to other settings than that of interrogation. DEMO, they provide some evidence
that participants are less willing to work DEMO a bad cop again, and pose the question how
people would DEMO the good cop, bad cop strategy in ongoing relationships.
Method
Four DEMO were selected (Table 1). They were selected for the following DEMO First,
by limiting the cases to four, each case could DEMO described in detail in the empirical
section of the paper. Four cases can be sufﬁcient in exploratory case research with the
aim of creating DEMO theory (Eisenhardt 1989). Second, the data that could be accessed in
these particular four cases were richer and more varied. Cases based DEMO only a single
method of data collection, such as interviews, are exposed to a potential common-
method bias (Podsakoff et al. 2003). In order to decrease the risk of this bias,
triangulation was DEMO by supplementing the interviews with other data sources
and methods (cf. DEMO 1994), such as repeated informal observations, speaking to the
venture DEMO, as well as checking the annual reports of the ventures as DEMO years
back as possible. Thus, each of these four cases provided DEMO opportunity for learning in
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February 2015
314
A. Fili
Table 1. Case data.
Case 1 Case 2 Case DEMO Case 4
Interviews with business angel 3 3 2 2
Observations No No Yes Yes
Interview with venture No No Yes Yes
Annual reports DEMO No Yes Yes
terms of access and different data sources, key DEMO for case selection (Stake 2005).
Third, each of the cases had the potential of extending current theory through slight
variation among them, and one of the cases was chosen as a contrasting case (Miles and
Huberman 1994).
In the generation of new theory through case DEMO, an overlap between data
collection and data analysis is fruitful (Eisenhardt 1989). In the present study, data
collection through the interviews took place over a four-year period, involving iteration
between the cases and collection/analysis (cf. Parkhe 1993b). A total of 30 face-to-face,
semi-structured interviews with 21 business angels, were undertaken from 2008 to
2012, DEMO the topic of governance strategies in both times of harmony and conﬂict. The
good cop, bad cop strategy was unearthed during early interviews in the research
project. Analysis of the data was undertaken in three periods, during which there was
iteration between analysis and collection of new data. DEMO ﬁrst period was during the
ﬁrst six months of data collection, DEMO the strategy was ﬁrst identiﬁed and tentatively
likened to the good cop, bad cop strategy from movies. After this, other potential
instances of DEMO particular strategy were identiﬁed among the interviews, and three
more cases DEMO selected.
The initial interviews – each of which ranged between 1.5 and 2 hours – were taped
and transcribed verbatim. During the second period, follow-up interviews were
conducted in order to deepen the understanding gained from DEMO initial accounts
(Polkinghorne 2005), theory was searched, and the second wave of data analysis was
ensued. Because there was little evidence of DEMO particular negotiation strategy in the
existing literature on post-investment relationships, follow-up DEMO asked
respondents to focus on a particular recent episode of negotiations, DEMO a total of six
follow-up interviews, typically around one hour long. DEMO follow-up interview material
was partly transcribed, and therefore all the parts DEMO were used in the ﬁnal paper that
had not been transcribed were presented to the business angels for “member checks”
(Shah and Corley 2006) of the details. The iteration between data collection, immersion
in theory, and data analysis, and back again to more data collection, allowed DEMO a partly
emergent design of the study (Glaser and Strauss 1967; Bruce 2007).
There are some limitations to the present study. It DEMO based on a relatively limited
number of cases, and the business DEMO are Swedish, although active in an international
context. The cases were DEMO studies, limiting the control available to the researcher.
There has been DEMO inclusion of cases for comparison of the actual effect of the strategy.
Instead, the focus has been on describing the phenomenon, and not DEMO impact.
The empirical section begins with a description of the context before negotiations
began: in each case, the business angels and ventures are DEMO, as well as the
relationship between them. After this context setting, in line with the phase model by
Spector (1977) presented earlier, the empirical material is structured into three major
sections: background, process, and outcome.
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February DEMO
Venture Capital
315
The context before negotiations
This section of the paper DEMO with a description of the business angels in terms of their
experience as entrepreneurs, before becoming business angels. It seeks to conﬁrm that
their unique individual entrepreneurial experience of learning through problem solving
has shaped their DEMO assumptions and the way they perceive ventures (cf. Schein 2006).
DEMO four business angels have prior experience as entrepreneurs. As entrepreneurs,
they were involved in manufacturing, marketing/franchising and consulting, active in
industries DEMO sports, IT, retail products, grocery, life science, and real DEMO
In Table 2, rows 1 and 2 summarize the previous entrepreneurial DEMO of each
business angel and the kind of entrepreneurial exit generated by each business. Rows 3
and 4 provide data on each business angel DEMO his/her experience as an investor.
They all have prior experience of investing in ventures, and all have made exits from
earlier investments, DEMO through trade sales, but in some cases, through an
undesirable management buyout – a last resort for the business angel (for an overview
of venture capital exits, see Cumming and MacIntosh 2003).
The four ventures are described in rows 1 and 2 of Table 3. They DEMO have existed
nearly 10 years. The time since investment is between 3 and 9 years. In row 3, the
industry in which each venture operates is described.
In terms of their current business angel activities, the common background in all four
cases reported in this study is that DEMO period of time has been passed since the business
angel ﬁrst invested in the venture. During this time, the ventures have performed
according to expectations. In all the four cases, the business angel involved perceived
that there was a previous harmonic time of cooperation in developing the venture, with
the ventures and investors working toward a common goal. However, toward the end of
this time period, the ventures have not met expectations.
The background phase
Thus, the four cases have as a common feature that there has been a time of cooperation
that has come to DEMO close. However, there are differences between the cases in terms of
DEMO each business angel was involved during the times of harmony. In Table 4, the roles
of the business angels are described.
In cases 1, 2, and 3, the business angel is one of the largest shareholders, besides the
venture founder who is the majority owner. In cases 1 and 2, the business angels are also
lead investors, handling DEMO with the venture on behalf of the other investors.
As can be seen in row 2, in cases 1, 2, and 4, DEMO are several business angels who have
invested. While the titles board member and chairman of the board, respectively, simply
describes the formal position DEMO the board of directors given to the business angel,
the ﬁnal row in Table 3 describes the type of social exchange that existed DEMO the
business angel and venture before negotiations commenced. In three of the cases, the
Table 2. The experience of the business angels (BAs)DEMO
BA 1 BA 2 BA 3 BA 4
Age 30–40 30–40 50–60 50–60
Entrepreneurial background 1 home Several home runs 1 home Several home
DEMO becoming a BA run exit and failed exits run exit run exits
Ventures as a BA 5 ventures 6 ventures 6 ventures 8 ventures
DEMO as a BA 0 exits 3 exits 3 exits 5 exits
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February 2015
316
A. Fili
Table 3. Description of each venture.
Venture 1 Venture DEMO Venture 3 Venture 4
Age of venture 10 years 11 years 11 years 10 years
Time since investment 5 years 9 years 9 years DEMO years
Industry University spinoff Manufacturing IT consultancy University spinoff
business angels were involved in solving problems, and had gradually earned the trust of
the venture. They are described as co-entrepreneurs or mentors. Co-entrepreneurs are
business angels DEMO describe their working relationship with the venture as very active
and informal, where they have gradually become part of the entrepreneurial team and are
included in a trustful way as one among equals. Mentorship, on the other hand, denotes a
situation where the business angel describes the relationship with the venture as trusting,
but where the business angel holds DEMO more senior position toward the rest of the venture
members. In these three cases, there is an ongoing, reciprocal, trusting exchange,
between the business angel and venture.
In the fourth venture, the business angel has not worked in close cooperation with the
venture, but rather has retained a distant investor role. In this case, where the business
angel had not developed any informal relationship, there is a negotiated exchange
between the business angel and venture taking place during discrete, formal episodes of
contact and transaction, as evidenced in board meetings and similar.
Perceptions and expectations on negotiations
The background phase also encompasses perceptions and expectations, such as how the
actors conceptualize and deﬁne the reasons for negotiation. In DEMO 1, the venture had
repeatedly fallen behind in meeting milestones, and funding had run out. Given that the
venture had underperformed over and DEMO again, the investors proposed that new
funding be supplied at a DEMO valuation if certain future milestones were not reached.
However, sensible this DEMO seemed, the venture founder-CEO opposed this proposal
vehemently, arguing that the venture’s inability to meet milestones was merely a
temporary setback and did DEMO reﬂect the value of the venture. It seemed that for the
founder, the question of valuation was not neutral, but equivalent to a DEMO tag on his/
her ability as an entrepreneur.
Table 4. Role of the business angels in each venture before negotiations.
Venture 1 Venture DEMO Venture 3 Venture 4
Role of BA Large minority Large minority Minor Large minority
shareholder shareholder shareholder shareholder
Lead investor Lead investor Chairman of DEMO member
the board
Board member Board member
Number of BA Several BA Several BA Sole BA Several BA
Type of exchange Reciprocal Reciprocal Reciprocal DEMO
exchange exchange exchange exchange
(co-entrepreneur) (co-entrepreneur) (mentor (investor)
to CEO)
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 DEMO 2015
Venture Capital
317
In case 2, the willingness of the investors to provide new funding no longer existed.
There was strife among the founders, and the venture team was not able to function
properly. Despite promises DEMO over and over again, changes had not been
implemented. The investors DEMO that there was no potential in the venture and wanted to
recover as much of their money as possible. The venture founder felt that DEMO company
was worth saving and had assembled a team to attempt a management buyout (MBO).
The negotiation in this second case was over the ﬁnancial terms for this MBO.
In the third case, the venture had suffered from poor performance in cycles recurring
every year. Both sales DEMO development goals had lagged, and there was a need to make
DEMO members renew their efforts in order to survive in the long run. The problem
arose in part because the venture members needed to manage DEMO sales and production.
Thus, when they focused on sales, performance grew, but in order to deliver on those
deals, they needed to DEMO focusing on sales and start delivering value to customers. All
in all, however, the venture members had grown accustomed to this cycle, and did not
really feel the need to renew their efforts because current DEMO conditions were
comfortable in the short run, and were sufﬁcient to DEMO a comfortable lifestyle.
In the fourth and ﬁnal case, the venture DEMO also suffered from poor performance
over many years. Sales and developmental goals were repeatedly missed over the years,
and work was inefﬁcient. However, it was deemed that the venture still had
technological promise, and the investors agreed on trying to help make the work carried
out in DEMO venture more efﬁcient through a change of work procedures.
As can be seen, in all four cases the perceived need for negotiation is triggered by a
lack of venture performance. It is interesting to note that DEMO the four ventures have
customers, although this varies from having a DEMO early R&D projects to a customer
base of more than a hundred regular clients. The end result in all four cases is a DEMO
that leads the business angel in each case to a negotiation of either the terms of
investment or work procedures.
Intentions for choosing a DEMO cop, bad cop strategy
In the interviews, much of the time was devoted in discussing how the business angels
perceived the venture’s situation, along with their intentions for choosing the good cop,
bad cop DEMO strategy. In cases 1, 3, and 4, the intention of DEMO business angels
was to rescue the relationship, while in case 2, the business angel was resigned to
withdrawing from the investment through helping DEMO management in an MBO. Even so,
the need to negotiate the terms of the MBO made the business angel to choose a good
DEMO, bad cop strategy.
In cases 1–3, a bad cop is introduced as part of the negotiation strategy. As noted
earlier, case 4 differs from the other three in that this is the only case where DEMO business
angel has remained distant from the venture, in a negotiated DEMO Thus, the strategy
in case 4 was to try to introduce DEMO good cop, someone whose role would be to develop a
closer DEMO to the venture. In all cases, the investors try to balance DEMO the
obvious need to affect the venture forcefully, and the need DEMO not increase the goal
divergence between themselves and the entrepreneur.
As can be seen from the quotations in Table 5, the intentions of the business angel
include sending a message while avoiding direct confrontation. Furthermore, in case 2 it
is stated that the intention is to utilize all DEMO that the business angel has access
to and activate them against the venture, in order to achieve the investors’ long-term
goals. In the third case, the intentions are not primarily to achieve the investors’
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February 2015
318 A. Fili
Table 5. Emotions and intentions of the business angel DEMO each case.
Case 1 “I have to remain in the relationship and cannot afford to become enemies
with the entrepreneur”
“I want to make DEMO venture team understand that there is a problem, but avoid
direct DEMO
Case 2 “This investment has reached its maximum potential, and we DEMO leave it”
“We could make use of the relationships we had with venture members other than
the CEO to gather information and create as DEMO an end as the situation
could offer”
Case 3 “The venture team is too lazy. I need to stir things up a little and DEMO them
working again”
“I don’t want them to trust me blindly and ask me about everything. They have
to make their own decisions and DEMO responsibility for them”
Case 4 “I am pushing all I can as an investor but it is not enough. I need to bring
someone DEMO into the relationship who can get closer to the entrepreneur”
“I want the CEO to start delivering. I will give support in the form DEMO one of
the other investors who will work closely and build trust”
long-term goals, but to force the ventures to reconsider their actions and options and to
take full responsibility for both good and bad performance. DEMO the business angel’s
experience, this would invariably lead to a situation DEMO the venture ﬁnally accepted
the gravity of the situation, as represented DEMO the objective ﬁgures in the performance
sheets, and took responsibility through DEMO to work harder. In the fourth case, the
business angel badly DEMO the venture to start meeting milestones and perform better
and had the intention of wanting to help the CEO in his/her day-to-day work.
DEMO negotiation process and outcomes
In this part, an in-depth description of DEMO negotiation process in all four cases is
provided, with quotations from DEMO business angels, ﬁnished with a very short description
of the outcome DEMO each case.
In case 1, the business angel handled all communication. DEMO business angel had
very a good knowledge of what was going on inside the venture thanks to a close
relationship with the CEO, and could report to the other investors when things were
starting to turn DEMO This included actually suggesting some of the solutions. When the
other investors ratiﬁed these suggestions for solutions, they could be taken back to the
CEO, and presented as coming from the investors. The business angel told the CEO that
the other investors were growing impatient and were threatening DEMO withdraw from the
venture. However, the business angels explained that if DEMO cooperated, with the CEO
agreeing to the terms of the new DEMO, the venture could still be saved. The choices
for the CEO DEMO to choose between killing his/her entrepreneurial dream by refusing
the investors, or to cooperate with the business angel, who was a trusted DEMO of the
venture team, and accept slightly worse terms for renewed DEMO As explained by
the business angel, despite the lack of previous DEMO, the new terms were
actually not unfavorable for the venture, as long as they met milestones. The CEO
eventually agreed to the new DEMO of funding, and the business angel – good cop was
able DEMO remain in the entrepreneurial team all through and after the negotiation, DEMO
by the pressure applied to the CEO by the other investors.
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February 2015
Venture Capital
319
In case 2, the business angel handled the planning of the MBO in close cooperation
with the venture, over a time period of several months. However, when the time drew
near for the actual transaction, a fellow investor took over and negotiated the speciﬁc
ﬁnal details of the MBO. In the mind of the business angel, they had become too much
like friends over the time period when the DEMO had been laid out, and the business
angel was unable to DEMO to toughness during the coming negotiations with any
credibility. By remaining involved in the ﬁnal negotiation, the outcome would have been
far worse. Bringing another investor in, as a bad cop focusing only on the details without
any emotional ties, led to a better deal not only for the investors, but also for the venture.
The ﬁnal deal ended up including some initial funding by the investors in order to get the
DEMO up and running. The business angel involved in case 2 suggested that the venture
would have been unable to suggest such a solution to DEMO other than a bad cop.
In case 3, the business angel DEMO a tradition of inviting the venture accountant to
formal meetings from time to time. The business angel and accountant would show up
together, and then the meeting would begin. Closely following a formal meeting agenda,
DEMO business angel would eventually come to the point where the current ﬁnancial status
was to be discussed. The accountant would then be invited to DEMO in order to present
the almost always dismal ﬁnancial report, and DEMO ﬁnish the presentation with some
normative statements as to the extreme gravity of the ﬁgures and that the money would
run out in six DEMO if nothing was done immediately. The accountant would then step
aside and not speak again. With the venture team taking the message of the DEMO
to heart, in the discussion which followed the business angel could DEMO entirely on
constructive ways forward to get out of the difﬁculties that the business was in. This
strategy had the effect that the business DEMO was never attributed as being the
messenger of the poor performance and could stay part of the entrepreneurial team,
whereas it was the DEMO who was completely associated with uncomfortable news
of the bad performance of the business. Each year, at the annual meeting, after the same
DEMO, the venture would change work procedures and increase performance for a
DEMO months, before falling behind again.
In case 4, the business angel invited a co-investor to begin working on operational
matters with the venture, in the hope that this co-investor would become trusted by the
CEO DEMO would be able to identify and suggest ways of working more efﬁciently. If the
co-investor was able to gain the conﬁdence of the CEO, such suggestions could
eventually result in changes in work procedures, thereby improving performance. While
the co-investor worked alongside the CEO, in the hope of becoming a good cop, the
business angel continued to act as a distant, formal investor. By the introduction of the
good cop, the DEMO angel hoped that there would be a contrast effect between them,
whereby more pressure could be put on the CEO to change work DEMO If the good
cop was able to become accepted by the venture, as an established insider, that pressure
could be channeled into changing DEMO processes. In spite of considerable hands-on
involvement over nearly a year, DEMO co-investor was never able to become a trusted
member of the entrepreneurial team, and was unable to become a good cop. Without a
good cop, any pressure from the business angel merely served to make the CEO even
more stubborn and defensive. In the end, the venture did not change work procedures.
Analysis
Referring back to the classiﬁcation suggested by DEMO and Sutton (1991), we see that
in cases 2, 3, and 4, the good cop and bad cop are played by DEMO people, in
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 DEMO 2015
320
Table 6. The good cop, bad cop strategy in each case.
Prior role of
business angel Good cop, bad cop Outcome
Case 1 Insider Introduced a hypothetical
co-entrepreneur bad cop – attribution to
the other DEMO
Case 2 Insider Introduced a bad cop –
co-entrepreneur a co-investor
Case 3 Insider Introduced a bad cop –
co-entrepreneur the accountant
Case 4 DEMO investor Tried to introduce a good
cop – one of the co-investors
A. Fili
Bad cop departs, trust preserved
between good cop and venture
in continued relationship
Bad cop departs, MBO exit
Bad cop departs, DEMO preserved
between good cop and venture
Good cop has no effect
on venture
sequence (variation 1) (Table 6). This is the same variation that was studied by Hilty and
Carnevale (1993) and Brodt DEMO Tuchinsky (2000). In case 1, the bad cop is a
hypothetical bad cop (variation 4 in Rafaeli and Sutton 1991). The message from this
bad cop is thus only communicated by the good DEMO, but also in a sequence.
The main idea behind the good DEMO, bad cop strategy in ongoing relationships is
nicely captured by the DEMO angel in case 1.
Sometimes I use the other investors as the bad guys and act more as a messenger than an
owner myself DEMO . It is a question of avoiding any unnecessary drama. As owners, we must
maintain a uniﬁed front, but it is simply easier DEMO discuss a proposal if it comes from the
investor group instead of from me. I need to be able to sit on the company DEMO of directors
in the future also, and cooperate with the venture DEMO
Three principal points can be made: that there is a need DEMO accommodate both reciprocal
and negotiated exchange, the deﬁnition of the strategy DEMO and its sequence in the
present ﬁndings, and ﬁnally, the way that the strategy enables attribution of negativity
beyond the dyad.
The need DEMO accommodate both reciprocal and negotiated exchange
Empirically, in these four cases DEMO see evidence that business angels feel that they
cannot adopt a position of negotiation vis-a`-vis the venture once they have established a
trusted position. DEMO the negotiation model by Spector (1977), expectations and
perceptions inﬂuence DEMO way negotiations are carried out. Thus, choosing the good cop,
DEMO cop negotiation strategy would imply that business angels expect negative reactions
from the venture in case they should choose to bargain in person. In DEMO to
accommodate the need to negotiate, insider business angels introduce bad DEMO and
become good cops themselves. Social exchange theory explains this in terms of two
incompatible forms of exchange; reciprocal and negotiated, where reciprocal DEMO
produced higher levels of trust. The question posed was how these two forms of
exchange were to be accommodated in cases where reciprocal exchange DEMO been
established and a need appeared to negotiate. The answer from these four cases is that
the two forms of exchange are indeed perceived DEMO incompatible, and as a consequence
they are separated in different roles, the good cop and the bad cop. The two forms of
exchange DEMO, but the cases suggest that they cannot be accessed by the DEMO
business angel. This suggests that trust in the venture post-investment relationship is
personal, as argued by Ring and van de Ven (1994).
DEMO by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February 2015
Venture Capital
321
Deﬁning the strategy and the sequence
In earlier studies DEMO good cop, bad cop negotiations, the question of sequence has
proven of central importance. To reiterate, the effect has been strongest when the bad
cop is introduced before the good cop (Hilty and Carnevale 1993; Brodt and Tuchinsky
2000). In ongoing relationships, events and sequences DEMO always tricky to deﬁne
(Langley 1999). However, drawing on the four cases, the following sequence of the good
cop, bad cop DEMO strategy in ongoing relationships is proposed. The ﬁrst step is
when an investor who is an insider brings in a bad cop, and becomes a good cop at the
same time. Thus, the ﬁrst communication is by the bad cop, either in person or as a
hypothetical bad cop communicating via the good cop. The second step is a
communication DEMO the good cop.
The sequence is deﬁned as bad cop, good DEMO, which is similar to earlier results.
In the ﬁrst three cases, there are business angel insiders who become good cops by
introducing bad DEMO, and negotiation ensues. However, in the fourth case, there is DEMO
reciprocal exchange when negotiations commence. Instead, there is a business angel
DEMO, who tries to introduce a good cop, but fails. The fourth case suggests that in
ongoing relationships it takes time to become a DEMO cop of any use during negotiations.
In this case, the relationship DEMO essentially negotiated. In the other three cases, where
there was a DEMO exchange between the business angel and venture previous to
negotiations, the DEMO angel became a good cop during negotiations and then
continued to have a reciprocal exchange after negotiations were terminated. The four
cases suggest that DEMO the good cop, bad cop strategy may be powerful in its
DEMO contrast effect (cf. Brodt and Tuchinsky 2000), in ongoing relationships, there
must be someone who is a venture insider or who is DEMO to play the good cop in order
for the strategy to work.
Attribution of negativity to the bad cop
A key to understand the DEMO of the good cop, bad cop strategy in ongoing
relationships seems DEMO lie in the preservation of the reciprocal exchange, by sheltering
the DEMO business angel from negotiated exchange, primarily by attributing the
negotiated exchange DEMO someone else. There is a need to negotiate, but for the DEMO
angel who has reached the dimension of reciprocal exchange, access to DEMO form of
exchange necessary for distributive bargaining is possible only indirectly, DEMO
someone else or through attribution to someone or something else.
In all three cases, where the business angel has established a reciprocal exchange,
there is attribution of negativity to the bad cop. In our four DEMO, examples of the bad
cops include syndication partners, and legal-ﬁnancial experts, enabling the good cop to
remain trusted. In this sense, the DEMO cop is used for scapegoating (Bonazzi 1983;
Chelliah and Davis DEMO). The bad cop takes the blame, and assumes the negativity
DEMO with the pressure and toughness of the bad cop negotiation. If the tactics used
during negotiations are perceived as unfair by one side, that party may still harbor
hostility toward the other party, even after the dispute has been settled (cf. Kaufmann
and Stern 1988). In our cases, any such retained hostility is directed toward the
scapegoat bad cop. However, the scapegoat paradox is that even though it may be
obvious to most that there are others to blame besides the scapegoat, the blame assigned
to the scapegoat needs to be logical and credible (Bonazzi 1983). Providing a causal
account is associated with greater feelings of DEMO fairness (Bies and Moag
1986), to the extent that it DEMO perceived as adequate (Bies and Shapiro 1987). Thus, in
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February 2015
322
A. Fili
line with interactional justice, causal attribution to a bad cop needs to be relevant and
credible in order to have any DEMO toward the venture.
In the cases, we see justiﬁcation by attribution DEMO an actor or a hypothetical actor
whose exchange is negotiated. Here, DEMO present study could also link to procedural
justice in general, by DEMO that the reciprocal form corresponds to certain legitimate
procedures and the negotiated form to others. Hence, a word of caution may be in order,
as the limits of this strategy are considered. In some situations, if the role-playing
involved in scapegoating gets too obvious, the reciprocal exchange could be tainted by
the negotiated exchange. In such instances, bringing in a bad cop could corrupt the
existing relationship.
Conclusions
The present paper DEMO to the research on post-investment involvement of
business angels by analyzing negotiation strategies through social exchange theory,
presenting new empirical data and contributing DEMO theory. The present study suggests that
the involvement of business angels in their ventures should be conceptualized in terms of
different roles, and that the good cop, bad cop strategy is a way of managing conﬂict
between these roles.
Speciﬁcally, an investor who has established an insider role, such as a co-
entrepreneur or a mentor, based on reciprocal DEMO, will try to avoid reverting to the
negotiated investor role. This DEMO that – right or wrong – investors believe that
such a role transition would be problematic, and that even if negotiations were
successful, DEMO trustful relationship would have been changed into a relationship with
less trust. Instead, the negotiation needs to be carried out by someone else, DEMO the
introduction of the bad cop. An important function of the good cop, bad cop strategy is
to allow for scapegoating, as the DEMO cop is attributed with the negativity associated with
negotiations. Furthermore, the DEMO contrast effect creates a situation where both
the bad cop and good cop can cooperate: the bad cop exerts pressure, and the good DEMO is
able to channel it into constructive action. Because the bad cop is used as the source of
all negative communication, the good cop can stay out of the negotiation, and focus on
constructive solutions as how the negotiations can be brought to a close.
The contribution to DEMO negotiation literature is in the empirical focus of this study on
ongoing relationships. Criminal interrogation, bill collecting, and experiments share the
feature of DEMO with single transactions, rather than relationships. In the present study,
DEMO focus is on the good cop, bad cop strategy as it DEMO enacted in long-term relationships.
To the extent that the parties are to stay in the relationship after the negotiation, this
means that the strategy needs to be played out in a way such that the retained DEMO is
minimized in the future relationship. In the earlier studies, the DEMO cops had to rely on
their ability to impress the adversary by dramatic effect during a single transaction,
whereas in the present study, the good cop, and to some extent even the bad cop, DEMO
well known from long time periods of previous interaction in the relationship. To the
extent that good cop and bad cop behavior is congruent DEMO earlier behavior, this might
increase the credibility of the strategy, and conversely, acting completely out of
character would presumably not be very convincing.
Yet, another perspective on the good cop, bad cop strategy may DEMO in terms of how
perceived relative power inﬂuences negotiations. It has been shown that smaller power
difference will lead to agreements of greater integrativeness: when parties perceive that
they are of equal power, their negotiations will be more oriented toward cooperative
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:DEMO 03 February 2015
Venture Capital
323
solutions (Wolfe and McGinn 2005). It has been argued that an investor holds more
power than the venture (cf. Saam 2007). In the present setting, one could conceive of the
business angel insider as being perceived as someone of more equal power than DEMO
business angel outsider, who would presumably be regarded as a more DEMO
owner. In order to increase the likelihood of reaching satisfactory agreements in
negotiations, the insider business angel would want to stick to that role as long as
possible. Continuing in this vein, one may speculate whether the introduction of the bad
cop, with a greater power distance, DEMO in fact a way of using the emotional contrast effect
(Rafaeli DEMO Sutton 1991) to create a perception of the good cop as DEMO more equal to
the venture in terms of relative power. Such a perception of similarity may facilitate
negotiations.
One area of future research includes DEMO understanding of why certain negotiations
are managed within the ordinary dyadic relationship, whereas others are instead dealt
with through the good cop, bad DEMO strategy. Are there certain negotiations that are
within the legitimate bounds of the action accessible to the insider, where there is no
need for a bad cop? Another area is to understand how common the strategy is within
ongoing relationships, starting with business angels and other investors. However, it may
not stop with investor relationships. The fact that the good cop, bad cop negotiation
strategy seems to be such a powerful way of preserving trust in ongoing relationships,
suggests that it could be DEMO useful governance strategy in general, not only during
negotiations and in DEMO relationships.
References
Amatucci, F. M., and J. E. Sohl. 2004. “Women Entrepreneurs Securing Business Angel
Financing: Tales from the Field.” Venture Capital 6: 181–196.
Arthurs, J. D., and L. W. Busenitz. 2003. “The Boundaries and Limitations of Agency Theory and
Stewardship Theory in the Venture Capitalist/DEMO Relationship.” Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice 28: 145–162.
Bies, R. J., DEMO J. F. Moag. 1986. “Interactional Justice: Communication Criteria of Fairness.”
In DEMO on Negotiations in Organizations 1, edited by R. J. Lewicki, B. H. Sheppard and
M. H. Bazerman, 43–55. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Bies, R. J., and D. L. Shapiro. 1987. “Interactional Fairness Judgments: The Inﬂuence of Causal
Accounts.” Social Justice Research 1: 199–218.
Bonazzi, DEMO 1983. “Scapegoating in Complex Organizations: The Results of a Comparative Study
DEMO Symbolic Blame-Giving in Italian and French Public Administration.” Organization Studies
4: DEMO
Brettel, M. 2003. “Business Angels in Germany: A Research Note.” Venture Capital 5: 251–268.
Brodt, S., and L. Thompson. 2001. “Negotiating Teams: A Levels of Analysis Approach.” Group
Dynamics: Theory, Research, and DEMO 5: 208–219.
Brodt, S. E., and M. Tuchinsky. 2000. “Working DEMO but in Opposition: An Examination of
the ‘Good-Cop/Bad-Cop’ Negotiating Team DEMO Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 81: 155–177.
Bruce, C. 2007. “Questions Arising about Emergence, Data Collection, and Its Interaction with
Analysis DEMO a Grounded Theory Study.” International Journal of Qualitative Methods 6:
51–68.
Chelliah, J., and D. Davis. 2010. “But Do You Like Your (Expensive Management) Consultant?”
Journal of Business Strategy 31: 34–42.
Christensen, E., R. Wuebker, and R. Wu¨stenhagen. 2009. “Of Acting Principals and DEMO
Agents: Goal Incongruence in the Venture Capitalist-Entrepreneur Relationship.” International
Journal of DEMO and Small Business 7: 367–388.
Collewaert, V. 2012. “Angel Investors’ and Entrepreneurs’ Intentions to Exit Their Ventures:
A Conﬂict Perspective.” Entrepreneurship Theory DEMO Practice 36: 753–779.
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 DEMO February 2015
324
A. Fili
Collewaert, V., and Y. Fassin. 2013. “Conﬂicts Between DEMO and Investors: the Impact
of Perceived Unethical Behavior.” Small Business Economics DEMO: 635–649.
Costa, A. C., and K. Bijlsma-Frankema. 2007. “Trust and DEMO Interrelations New Perspectives
on the Trust—Control Nexus.” Group & Organization Management 32: 392–406.
Cumming, D. J., and J. G. MacIntosh. 2003. “Venture Capital Exits in Canada and the United
States.” University of Toronto Law Journal DEMO: 101–200.
Davis, J., H. F. D. Schoorman, and L. Donaldson. 1997. “Toward a Stewardship Theory of
Management.” Academy of Management Review 22: 20–47.
De Dreu, C. K., and L. R. Weingart. 2003. “Task DEMO Relationship Conﬂict, Team
Performance, and Team Member Satisfaction: A Meta-Analysis.” DEMO of Applied
Psychology 88: 741–749.
Deci, E. L., R. Koestner, and R. M. Ryan. 1999. “A Meta-Analytic Review of Experiments
Examining the DEMO of Extrinsic Rewards on Intrinsic Motivation.” Psychological Bulletin
125: 627–668.
Eisenhardt, K. M. 1989. “Building Theories from Case Study Research.” Academy of Management
DEMO 14: 532–550.
Falk, A., and M. Kosfeld. 2006. “The Hidden DEMO of Control.” The American Economic Review
96: 1611–1630.
Glaser, B. G., and A. L. Strauss. 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies DEMO
Qualitative Research. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Hilty, J. A., and P. J. Carnevale. 1993. “Black-Hat/White-Hat Strategy in Bilateral Negotiation.”
Organizational Behavior and DEMO Decision Processes 55: 444–469.
Jehn, K. A. 1995. “A Multimethod Examination of the Beneﬁts and Detriments of Intragroup
Conﬂict.” Administrative Science Quarterly 40: 256–282.
Jensen, M. C., and W. H. Meckling. 1976. “Theory of DEMO Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs and Ownership Structure.” Journal of Financial Economics 3: 305–360.
Kaufmann, P. J., and L. W. Stern. 1988. “Relational Exchange Norms, Perceptions of Unfairness,
and Retained Hostility in Commercial Litigation.” Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 32:
534–552.
Langley, A. 1999. “Strategies for Theorizing from Process Data.” Academy of Management
Review 24: 691–710.
Lindsay, N. J. 2004. “Do Business Angels Have an Entrepreneurial Orientation?” Venture Capital
6: 197–210.
Macht, S. A. 2011. “Inexpert Business Angels: How Even Investors With ‘Nothing to Add’ Can
Add Value.” Strategic Change 20: 269–278.
Madill, J. J., G. H. Haines Jr, and A. L. Riding. 2005. “The Role of Angels in Technology SMEs:
A Link DEMO Venture Capital.” Venture Capital 7: 107–129.
Mason, C. M., and DEMO T. Harrison. 2002. “Is It Worth It? The Rates of Return DEMO Informal
Venture Capital Investments.” Journal of Business Venturing 17: 211–236.
Mason, C. M., and R. T. Harrison. 2008. “Measuring Business Angel Investment Activity in the
United Kingdom: A Review of Potential Data Sources.” Venture Capital 10: 309–330.
Miles, M. B., and A. M. Huberman. 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Molm, L. D. 2000. “Theories of Social Exchange and Exchange Networks.” In Handbook of Social
Theory, edited by G. Ritzer and B. Smart, 260–272. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Molm, L. D. 2003. “Theoretical Comparisons of Forms of Exchange.” Sociological Theory 21:
1–17.
Molm, L. D., G. Peterson, and N. Takahashi. 2003. “In the Eye of the Beholder: Procedural Justice
in Social Exchange.” American Sociological Review 68: 128–152.
Parkhe, A. 1993a. “Strategic Alliance Structuring: A Game Theoretic and Transaction Cost
Examination of Interﬁrm Cooperation.” Academy of DEMO Journal 36: 794–829.
Parkhe, A. 1993b. “‘Messy’ Research, Methodological Predispositions, and Theory Development
in International Joint Ventures.” Academy of Management Review 18: 227–268.
Paul, S., G. Whittam, and J. Wyper. 2007. “Towards a Model of the Business Angel Investment
Process.” Venture Capital 9: 107–125.
Podsakoff, P. M., S. B. MacKenzie, J. -Y. Lee, and N. DEMO Podsakoff. 2003. “Common Method
Biases in Behavioral Research: A Critical Review DEMO the Literature and Recommended
Remedies.” Journal of Applied Psychology 88: 879–903.
DEMO by [Temple University Libraries] at 12:42 03 February 2015
Venture Capital
325
Politis, D. 2008. “Business Angels and Value Added: DEMO Do We Know and Where Do We Go?”
Venture Capital 10: 127–147.
Politis, D., and H. Landstro¨m. 2002. “Informal Investors as Entrepreneurs – The Development of
an Entrepreneurial Career.” Venture Capital 4: 78–101.
Polkinghorne, D. E. 2005. “Language and Meaning: Data Collection in Qualitative Research.”
DEMO of Counseling Psychology 52: 137–145.
Pondy, L. R. 1967. “Organizational Conﬂict: Concepts and Models.” Administrative Science
Quarterly 12: 296–320.
Puranam, P., DEMO B. S. Vanneste. 2009. “Trust and Governance: Untangling a Tangled Web.”
DEMO of Management Review 34: 11–31.
Rafaeli, A., and R. I. DEMO 1991. “Emotional Contrast Strategies as Means of Social Inﬂuence:
Lessons from Criminal Interrogators and Bill Collectors.” Academy of Management Journal
34: 749–775.
Ring, P. S., and A. H. van de Ven. 1994. “Developmental Processes DEMO Cooperative
Interorganizational Relationships.” Academy of Management Review 19: 90–118.
Ross, S. A. 1973. “The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal’s Problem.” American
Economic Review 63: 134–139.
Saam, N. J. 2007. “Asymmetry in Information Versus DEMO in Power: Implicit Assumptions
of Agency Theory?” The Journal of DEMO 36: 825–840.
Sapienza, H. J., and A. K. Gupta. 1994. DEMO of Agency Risks and Task Uncertainty on Venture
Capitalist-CEO Interaction.” Academy of Management Journal 37: 1618–1632.
Sapienza, H. J., and M. A. Korsgaard. 1996. “Procedural Justice in Entrepreneur-Investor
Relations.” Academy of Management Journal 39: 544–574.
Schein, E. H. 2006. Organizational Culture and Leadership. 3rd ed. San Francisco, CA: Wiley.
Shah, S. K., and K. G. Corley. 2006. DEMO Better Theory by Bridging the Quantitative-
Qualitative Divide.” Journal of Management Studies 43: 1821–1835.
Shane, S. 2008. Fool’s Gold?: The Truth Behind DEMO Investing in America. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
So¨rheim, R. 2005. “Business Angels as Facilitators for Further Finance: An Exploratory Study.”
Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development 12: 178–191.
Spector, B. I. 1977. “Negotiation DEMO a Psychological Process.” Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 21:
607–618.
Stake, DEMO E. 2005. “Qualitative Case Studies.” In The Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research,
edited by N. K. Denzin and Y. S. Lincoln. 3rd ed., 443–466. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Sudek, R. 2006. “Angel Investment Criteria.” Journal of Small Business Strategy 17: 89–103.
Tosi, H. L., J. P. Katz, and L. R. Gomez-Mejia. 1997. “Disaggregating the Agency Contract: DEMO
Effects of Monitoring, Incentive Alignment, and Term in Ofﬁce on Agent Decision Making.”
Academy of Management Journal 40: 584–602.
van Osnabrugge, M. DEMO “A Comparison of Business Angel and Venture Capitalist Investment
Procedures: An DEMO Theory-Based Analysis.” Venture Capital 2: 91–109.
Wolfe, R. J., and DEMO L. McGinn. 2005. “Perceived Relative Power and its Inﬂuence on
Negotiations.” Group Decision and Negotiation 14: 3–20.
Yin, R. K. 1994. Case Study DEMO, Design and Methods. 2nd ed. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Yitshaki, R. 2008. “Venture Capitalist-Entrepreneur Conﬂicts: An Exploratory Study of
Determinants and Possible Resolutions.” International Journal of Conﬂict Management 19:
262–292.
Downloaded by [Temple DEMO Libraries] at 12:42 03 February 2015{1g42fwefx}