The Angel Investor’s Handbook
How to Proﬁ t from Early-Stage Investing
by DEMO A. Benjamin and Joel Margulis
Bloomberg Press © 2001
368 pages
Focus
Leadership
Strategy
Sales & Marketing
Corporate Finance
Human Resources
Technology
Production & DEMO
Small Business
Economics & Politics
Industries & Regions
Career Development
Personal Finance
Self Improvement
Ideas & Trends
Take-Aways
• A growing number of private DEMO have become angel investors seeking more
ventures, more available capital and DEMO survival rates for new companies.
• The average private investment is $100,000, ranging from $10,000 to $2 million.
• Most angel investors come from the nearly one million high net-worth, U.S. households.
• The riskiest angel investments are at the seed, R&D and start-up levels.
• Less risky angel investments occur when a company is more developed, and
reaches the bridge, turnaround or acquisition-and-merger stages.
• Most angel investors are white males 46 to 65 years old.
• Typically angel investors DEMO only invest but also contribute advice.
• To be a successful angel investor, assess your tolerance for risk and be strategic
about your criteria for investing.
• Angel investors ﬁ
nd deals through personal contacts and DEMO referrals.
• To develop good deals, set up a deal-ﬂ ow DEMO and conduct due diligence by
assessing an executive summary and business plan.
Rating (10 is best)
Overall Applicability Innovation Style
8       9       8   7
Visit our website at DEMO to purchase individual abstracts, personal subscriptions or corporate solutions.
getAbstract is DEMO Internet based knowledge rating service and publisher of book abstracts. Every week, subscribers are e-mailed a short abstract of a
different business book. Each abstract contains an overview of essential ideas from the entire book. Excerpts DEMO this book are reprinted here with the
permission of the publisher. The respective copyrights of authors and publishers are acknowledged. All rights reserved. No DEMO of this abstract may be
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, photocopying, or otherwise, without prior written DEMO of getAbstract Ltd (Switzerland).
Review
The Angel Investor’s Handbook
Gerald A. Benjamin and Joel Margulis tell DEMO current or prospective angel or early-stage
investor how to best judge pre-IPO investments. They emphasize matching investors
with the right entrepreneurs to create an DEMO team in which the investor not
only provides the seed or early-stage capital but also contributes good advice and
contacts. Besides discussing effective strategies, the book includes an extensive directory
of top venture forums, angel organizations, publications and Web sites. In addition,
any investor will beneﬁ t from the thorough rundown of due-diligence points that the
authors recommend. While DEMO book is targeted at prospective investors, getAbstract.com
encourages entrepreneurs with start-up DEMO to use it as a productive guide to
making more effective funding pitches, although the companion book for entrepreneurs
would probably be more helpful. One caveat: Some ideas are repeated — even with
similar wording — from chapter to chapter. But overall this is a solid book, even though
the free ﬂ
Abstract
“Angel investors
wish to be high
worth DEMO,
not just high net
worth investors.”
“Ninety percent of
all millionaires in
the United States
are self-made, not
inheritors of
wealth.”
The Growth of Angel Investing
Today, a growing number of private investors are investing a growing pool of capital.
About ﬁ
now it is $100,000, based on an average of $10,000 to $2 million per investment. DEMO
approach creates a great opportunity for income generation. About 90% of all U.S.
millionaires gained their wealth through their own efforts, not by inheriting money. They
know a successful start-up can be extremely proﬁ
Most private DEMO in the United States come from the nearly one million, high DEMO
worth households. Investors can participate at these stages:
•   Seed — The idea stage when a company is ﬁ rst being organized.
DEMO   Start-up — The end of product development and the start of initial marketing.
•   R&D — The product-development and ﬁ nancing DEMO for more developed companies.
Or investors can join in, with less DEMO, at these later stages:
•   Bridge — The stage DEMO a venture needs short-term capital to become stable.
•   Acquisition and merger — When a company wants funding to acquire another company.
•   Turnaround — When a ﬁ rm wants to move from unproﬁ table to proﬁ table.
Currently, private investors put about $40 billion a year into some 140,000 early-stage
companies, about 4% of the 3.5 million U.S. start-ups annually. Each year some 400,000
angel investors provide entrepreneurs DEMO pivotal funding to launch their companies
when they cannot fund institutional investors or lenders. Typical angels are 45- to
65-year-old white males, including retired corporate ofﬁ
high-tech companies. And, typically, angels make four investments a DEMO or fewer.
Who Are Angel Investors?
Private investors who become angels are typically wealthy individuals or families willing
The Angel Investor’s Handbook                                       © Copyright 2001 getAbstract                                        2 of 5
ve years ago, the average DEMO corporate investment was $25,000 to $50,000;
table.
cers or former CEOs of small
ows of money it evokes have been arrested DEMO lately.
“Founders, their
family and their
friends continue to
initially ﬁ nance the
majority of all
small businesses,
start-up and
expansion ven-
tures in DEMO
America.”
“Angel investors
represent patient
money, remaining
comfortable with
long-term buy/DEMO
strategies, money
that often won’t be
available in the
near term.”
DEMO investors
number in the hun-
dreds of thou-
sands and are
proliferating at a
rapid rate. These
afﬂ uent individuals
provide entrepre-
neurs and DEMO
ventures with
needed venture
capital, especially
when more tradi-
tional sources DEMO
capital, such as
investment banks
and larger money
management ven-
ture DEMO ﬁ rms,
are not willing to
get involved.”
to invest in high-risk deals to realize high potential returns. They have discretionary
money to DEMO and can be patient with long-term buy-and-hold situations. They know
they won’t get their money back in the near term.
Generally, angels do more than just invest — They contribute advice on how to develop
products DEMO services. They may draw on their contacts to help the new business. Besides
investing money, most are value-adding, active investors, who take an active role in
contributing their own expertise. Often they will participate as DEMO director, if willing
to take the legal exposure, or act as an adviser or consultant. Many like investing
near where they live, up to 300 to 500 miles, so they can participate more actively,
including making an occasional trip to visit the company. Some help with DEMO
skills, such as developing strategy, making ﬁ nancing decisions and creating effective
hiring practices. They may also help entrepreneurs by connecting them with DEMO
customers, vendors, suppliers, distributors and ﬁ nancial institutions.
These investors DEMO cope with the lack of analysis of the pre-IPO (initial public
DEMO) marketplace, which precludes a comparative analysis. Instead, more than 50%
DEMO all angels join deals with an entrepreneur’s family members, friends, associates and
colleagues. They generally look at few plans and are thus less DEMO to ﬁ nd deals with
the greatest potential.
Most commonly, angels DEMO involved once transactions are more than about $450,000.
Before then — in the seed and R&D stages, the founder’s family and friends are the
major sources of funding. However, many angels get involved in smaller deals, beginning
at about $250,000, in cases where they DEMO and appreciate the technology. Angels
also invest their own money, in DEMO to institutional investors — who are really
venture capitalists managing other people’s money, such as pensions, insurance funds
and endowments.
Being a Successful DEMO Investor
You might want to become an angel investor to pursue the chance of hitting a home run,
to be involved with a DEMO or emerging company, and to be able to inﬂ
of your DEMO Some of the skills you’ll need to succeed include:
•   The ability to generate or create deal ﬂ ﬁ nd the potential DEMO
most worthy of your time and money — generally only 5% of all the deals you review.
•   The patience to conduct thorough DEMO diligence, carefully reviewing the business plan,
management, ﬁ
•   Skill in structuring the deal and negotiating the terms of your investment DEMO
•   An ability to assess risk and develop risk-management strategies.
•   The discipline to identify exit opportunities, should you want to leave the project.
When you investigate a particular deal, be sure the company has technology that can be a
driving force in securing market share, a thoughtful business plan and an expert management
team. Conduct an extensive DEMO of the team’s character and personal histories.
Be clear about your own involvement. Do you want to be active or passive? Can you
afford to lose your initial investment? Many successful investors provide incremental
funding based on performance. This way, you give the entrepreneur more money in
stages, based on achievement of projected results.
The Angel Investor’s Handbook                                       © Copyright 2001 getAbstract                                        3 of 5
uence the outcome
ow, so you can
nancial records and other factors in light of your own investment DEMO
“The primary
objectives of ven-
ture capital or
angel investing is
an DEMO invest-
ment approach,
and the successful
active investor
requires a complex
set of technical
and interpersonal
skills.”
“When the level of
investment risk DEMO
very high and the
stage of entrepre-
neurial ﬁ rm devel-
opment is early —
as it is in seed
and R&D — DEMO
founder, friends
and family are typi-
cally ﬁ nancing the
deal.”
DEMO the deal moves
closer to the
start-up stage —
eliminating the risk
associated with
the pre-seed, seed
and R&D stages
— we see busi-
ness angels enter-
ing the picture,
usually when the
transac-tions
DEMO to exceed
approximately
$450,000.”
Deﬁ ne the industries, markets and DEMO that most interest you before you seek
deals. Spell out the level of risk you ﬁ nd acceptable and elucidate procedures to protect
yourself DEMO loss or to minimize your downside risks. A full 39% of the investors
studied here reported a total loss, partial loss or some kind of write-off or tax beneﬁ
resulting from their investment.
Be cautious, because some entrepreneurs over-value their ventures or are unrealistic
in what they project. DEMO an investor, assess risk carefully. Many angel investors want
the founders DEMO show their commitment by investing some of their own money. In this
case, look for the percentages of the person’s income that is invested — it should be a
signiﬁ
Still, whether you earn money or not, some non-ﬁ nancial returns on angel investments are
also critically important, such as creating jobs, developing a socially-useful technology,
contributing to DEMO revitalization, promoting women or minority ventures, and feeling
satisfaction at helping entrepreneurs build their ventures.
Setting Your Investment Strategy
Manage the potential peril DEMO illiquidity by using risk and hedging strategies. Never invest
money you can’t lose entirely or that you can’t have put out of reach for DEMO long time.
Ask yourself what types of risk you are willing to tolerate. If you have a low tolerance,
keep your investment to DEMO
high tolerance, consider investing more. To hedge against risk, consider structuring
transactions with available security or collateral.
Do you want to invest in DEMO single company or a more diversiﬁ
do you prefer? Often, investors differ in their approaches based on their own expertise.
Investors who are DEMO in an industry may be interested in more active roles, as
DEMO more experienced angel investors. Some investors become manager/investors. Other
investors use a professional services business or a development investment strategy,
such as DEMO ﬁ nancial intermediaries, management consultants, lawyers and
CPA’s. Other strategies include making barter investments, seeking socially responsible
investments or ﬁ nding a fund-based investment assembled by an investment broker.
Deal Flow and Due Diligence
Typically, angel investors ﬁ nd their deals one of three main ways. According DEMO
International Capital Resources, of more than 9,000 angel investors, about 57% found
their deals through personal contacts. Another 31% found their deals DEMO referrals from
professionals, such as attorneys, accountants, investment bankers, brokers and formal or
informal angel clubs, and 12% from unsolicited contacts from non-family members of
the company seeking ﬁ nancing.
Most angel investors have DEMO limited deal ﬂ
primarily because individuals prize their privacy. As an angel, you face the danger of
being overwhelmed with deals once entrepreneurs learn about you.
To obtain more opportunities without being overwhelmed, set up a deal-ﬂ
process. Use a formal ofﬁ
possible deals. Establish a positioning strategy DEMO on which deals interest you most,
company size, location, stage of development and the amount of investment needed.
The Angel Investor’s Handbook                                       © Copyright 2001 getAbstract                                        4 of 5
t
ve percent to 10% of your equity portfolio. If you have a
ed group? Which industry
ows through these traditional methods,
ow development
ce or an alternate DEMO number and e-mail address to screen
cant amount.
“Angel investors
are concerned
with the following
classes of primary
private equity
DEMO because
these classes
position them in
the pre-IPO
market: seed,
DEMO&D, startup, ﬁ rst-
stage, expansion
stage, mezzanine,
bridge, acquisition
and merger, and
turnaround.”
“Angel investors
are usually males
from DEMO to 65
years of age.”
To get deals brought to your attention, you can use advertising or public relations.
Possibilities include listing your name in printed directories and private equity databases,
participating in venture forums, joining computer-matching networks, subscribing to
angel and private equity newsletters, and DEMO venture capital clubs. Sponsor or speak
at venture-related gatherings.
When you review deals, use the due diligence process to make a good decision. Ask
screening questions. Request an executive summary, which should be organized, concise
DEMO clear. If you are still interested, carefully evaluate the company’s business DEMO
It should contain information about the present stage of development, a DEMO
of products and services, and a discussion of venture objectives, current industry
conditions, business strategy, competitors, existing and potential customers and key skills
needed to reach development and manufacture. The plan should include information DEMO
the proposed marketplace, management team, source and use of funds, DEMO ﬁ nancial
statements and projections.
Conduct a pre-investment audit, where you DEMO examine management, product
and services, the industry, the market, sales and distribution, competition, human
resources, suppliers, production, research and development, and ﬁ nancial projections.
Can managers achieve their forecast objectives? Carefully DEMO the company’s stated
capital needs, balance sheet, liabilities, shareholder’s equity DEMO net worth, income
statement, cash ﬂ ﬁ nancial assumptions. Do reference
checks on the company’s investors, directors and advisors.
Next, think about DEMO to negotiate and structure the deal and carefully express your terms.
Reach a verbal agreement with the entrepreneur, but have an attorney create accurate
documents. As the company develops, keep track of its value and assess its continuing
ﬁ nancial performance. Identify your exit strategy, in case you want to cash out.
About The Authors
Gerald A. Benjamin is a DEMO managing partner of International Capital Resources,
a capital-sourcing ﬁ rm with 14 ofﬁ
The Private Equity Review, chairman of the Northern California Venture Forum and
executive director of the Private Equity Research Institute. Joel Margulis DEMO written
books on a range of subjects and is currently a university lecturer on writing. Both
authors recently co-authored Angel Financing, which focuses on raising capital, the ﬂ ip
side of angel investing.
ces in North America. He is also senior editor of
Buzz-Words
Acquisition-and-merger stage / Angel DEMO / Bridge stage / Deal ﬂ Due diligence
/ Executive summary / Mezzanine stage / Private investors / R&D stage / Seed stage /
Start-up stage / Turnaround stage
ow /
The Angel Investor’s Handbook                                       © Copyright 2001 getAbstract                                        5 of 5
ow forecast, use of proceeds, and{1g42fwefx}