Journal of Economic and Social Policy
Volume 10
Issue 1 Enterprising Finance
DEMO 3
7-1-2005
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists'
Decision Making: Implications for Entrepreneurs,
Venture Capitalists and Researchers
Edward Hudson
Southern Cross University
Michael Evans Assoc Prof
Southern Cross University
Recommended Citation
Hudson, Edward and Evans, Michael Assoc Prof (2005) "A Review of Research DEMO Venture Capitalists' Decision Making:
Implications for Entrepreneurs, Venture Capitalists and Researchers," Journal of Economic and Social Policy: Vol. 10: Iss. DEMO, Article 3.
Available at: http://epubs.scu.edu.au/jesp/vol10/iss1/3
ePublications@SCU is an electronic repository administered by Southern Cross University Library. Its DEMO is to capture and preserve the intellectual
output of Southern Cross University authors and researchers, and to increase visibility and impact through open access to researchers around the
world. For further information please contact epubs@scu.edu.au.
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making:
Implications for Entrepreneurs, Venture Capitalists and Researchers
This article is available in Journal of Economic and Social Policy: http://epubs.scu.edu.au/jesp/vol10/iss1/3
A Review of Research into Venture
Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications
for DEMO, Venture Capitalists and
Researchers
Edward Hudson
Doctor of Business Administration
Graduate DEMO of Management
Southern Cross University
and
Associate Professor Michael Evans
Director
Graduate College of Management
Southern Cross University
Abstract
A recent review of the DEMO literature on how venture capitalists make
their investment decisions suggests that the decision-making process
adopted by venture capitalists is more an art than a DEMO The review
also highlights the fact that researchers have not been able to identify the
key decision-making variables that lead to making a successful DEMO
choice. Nor do venture capitalists understand their own decision-making
process. This paper addresses these issues and suggests how entrepreneurs
attempting to obtain equity finance DEMO venture capitalists may structure
proposals to have a better chance of acceptance. The paper concludes with
a discussion of directions for future research.
Key DEMO
venture capital, evaluation, decision making, criteria
Introduction
Venture capital (VC) is usually defined as an independently managed,
dedicated pool of capital that focuses on equity or equity-linked investments in
privately held, high-growth companies (Lerner 2000). Initial interest of
researchers specifically addressed VC evaluation, DEMO used in evaluating
investment opportunities and the decision-making process used by venture
capitalists (VCs). Ferris (2001, p. 46) emphasised the importance DEMO the
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 2
VC industry in Australia, 'I DEMO that absent vibrant and risk seeking venture
capital markets, Australians will DEMO a steady decline in their relative living
standards in this century'. Given the espoused importance of the industry it is
of interest to DEMO the available literature on VC decision making and
consider the implications for entrepreneurs, VCs and researchers.
A review of the current literature on how VCs make their investment decisions
suggests that the decision-making process adopted by DEMO is more an art than
a science. VCs have emerged as an important area of research over the past
two decades. The majority of DEMO research has concentrated on the US
experience (Wright & Robbie 1996)DEMO However, more recently, a significant
amount of research is beginning to emerge in the UK, the second-largest VC
industry after the US (DEMO of England 2001). Further research is expected to
come from Europe and the Asia Pacific as the VC industry matures in these
regions.
DEMO inability of researchers to clearly define VCs' decision-making process
and the DEMO of VCs to understand their own decision-making process
(Khan 1987; Pfeffer 1987; Sandberg, Schweiger & Hofer 1988; Zacharakis &
Meyer 1998; Shepherd 1999) have made it difficult for entrepreneurs to
present their proposals to VCs when seeking equity capital. Previous research
results have failed to DEMO convergence on the evaluation criteria used by
VCs in evaluating investment proposals.
The purpose of this paper is to provide a review the body DEMO research relating
to the VC decision-making process, specifically addressing the screening DEMO
evaluation criteria used by VCs in evaluating investment proposals. To
achieve this aim, this paper will first look at the stages of the VC process,
review the literature pertaining to proposal screening and evaluation and
DEMO the research findings and conclusions. The next section suggests
how entrepreneurs seeking funds from VCs can structure their proposals in
light of the conclusions DEMO from this review. The last section identifies
possible areas of future research.
Stages in the Venture Capital Process
It was found that VCs apply DEMO distinct decision-making process consisting of a
number of stages (Wells 1974; Tyebjee & Bruno 1984; Silver 1985; Hall
1989). The summary DEMO the various research findings shows that all agree that
the VC decision-making process consists of multiple stages (Hall & Hofer
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 3
1993), which is summarised in DEMO 1. The decision-making process is
commonly referred to in the literature as a five- or six-stage process.
It can be easily inferred from Table DEMO that the evaluation and due diligence
stages can be combined. The basis of this is that one is usually not performed
without the other. DEMO due diligence is the process and activity whereas
evaluation is the output (Wells 1974; Tyebjee & Bruno 1984; Silver 1985;
Hall 1989). The output (due diligence report) is one of the most DEMO
sources of information used by VCs for carrying out the valuation of a new
venture (Dixon 1989; Wright & Robbie 1996; Manigart et al. 1997).
Table 1: Stages in Venture Capitalists' Management Process
DEMO Wells Tyebjee & Silver Hall
Stage (1974) Bruno (1985) (DEMO)
(1984)
1 Search Deal origination Search Generating deal flow
DEMO Screening Initial Screen Proposal screening
Proposal assessment
3 Evaluation Evaluation  Project DEMO
Due diligence Due diligence
4  Deal structuring Deal structuring Deal structuring
DEMO board Post investment Monitor progress Venture operations
5 meetings and activities
operations
6 Cashing out  Cashing out Cashing out
Source:  Hall & Hofer 1993, Table 2, p. 28.
Analysis of Table 1 suggests that DEMO all researchers appear to agree on what
constitutes this six-staged process. In broad terms, there appears to be at least
agreement on the following stages: 1) deal generation; 2) initial screening of
proposals; 3) project evaluation and due diligence; 4) deal structuring; 5) post-
investment activities; and 6) cashing out or exit activities.
Deal generation DEMO to deal flow that relates to establishing good sources of
referrals that will generate prospective investment opportunities.
Initial screening involves a precursory review of DEMO investment proposal. It
involves the perusal of a proposal's executive summary and or business plan to
determine whether a closer evaluation is worthwhile.
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 4
Evaluation involves a greater scrutiny of DEMO business plan. The evaluation
stage invariably includes undertaking due diligence, which DEMO the VC
with more information from which a decision can be made.
Deal structuring occurs after the VC has decided to proceed to invest DEMO a
particular proposal. This consists of the VC placing a value on the business
and hence the equity share in exchange for the VC'DEMO investment. It also
includes a range of legal documentation and the basis on which the VC and the
entrepreneur agree to work together. A DEMO summarising the terms and
conditions, referred to as a 'Term Sheet' is presented to the entrepreneur
summarising the terms and conditions associated with a VC's decision to
invest.
Post-investment activities include the VC's DEMO with its investee
companies comprising the VC's investment portfolio. This can include site
visits, mentoring, monitoring, raising additional capital and providing strategic
advice and representation on the board of directors. This is the stage DEMO which
a VC will provide what is commonly referred to as 'DEMO value'.
Cashing out or investment exit involves the VC divesting its investment to
obtain an economic gain. VCs play an active role in DEMO and assisting a
company and its management towards a merger, trade DEMO, initial public
offering or other exit strategies that may maximise a DEMO's return on its original
investment.
The distinction between screening and evaluation is an important one as it
suggests that VCs could be using DEMO criteria in making their decisions at
different stages in the decision-making process (Riquelme & Rickards 1992;
Hall & Hofer 1993; Fried & DEMO 1994; Boocock &Woods 1997).
The screening process focuses on a small subset of criteria which is non-
compensatory, that is, an DEMO value on one criterion cannot be offset
by a higher value on another. The evaluation criteria used in the screening
stage have been identified DEMO market size and potential growth, a significant
competitive advantage, uniqueness of the product/service, management team,
funding requirement, investment stage, the industry, profit potential and
economic return (Golis 1998). During the DEMO stage, VCs screen and
assess investment opportunities, very rapidly reaching a 'Go/No Go' decision
in an average of less than six DEMO, and less than 21 minutes on proposal
assessment (Hall & Hofer 1993).
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 5
The evaluation stage (due diligence) DEMO allow for compensatory rules to be
applied, that is, a low score on one decision variable can be offset by a higher
score DEMO another (Riquelme & Rickards 1992). The evaluation criteria used in
DEMO stage are the same as that for screening but with less subjectivity, a greater
degree of in-depth analysis and a greater concentration on the financial aspects
of the proposal's budget forecasts (Riquelme & Rickards 1992; Golis 1998).
The evaluation process (due diligence and valuation) is estimated to take an
average of 97 days, ranging between 52 days and 142 days (Fried & Hisrich
1994).
This staged approach to the VC process assists researchers in categorising
what VCs do (Sahlman 1990). It also allows for the segmentation of research
in addressing specific DEMO of the VC process, thereby providing
researchers with an appropriate road DEMO for VC research. This paper
specifically addresses the research that addresses the screening stage (stage 2)
and evaluation stage (stage 3) of the VC process described earlier.
Proposal Screening and Evaluation
A relatively large DEMO of research has concentrated on identifying and
ranking the evaluation criteria used by VCs in screening and evaluating new
venture proposals compared to the DEMO stages in the VC process (Tyebjee &
Bruno 1984; MacMillan DEMO al. 1985; Robinson 1987; MacMillan et al. 1987;
Sandberg et al. 1988; Hisrich & Jankowicz 1990; Zacharakis & Meyer 1998;
DEMO 1999).
The principal research undertaken in determining the evaluation criteria and
decision-making process is regarded as that undertaken by Tyebjee and Bruno
(1984); MacMillan et al. (1985); MacMillan et al. (1987); DEMO (1987)
(Sandberg et al. 1988).
These earlier studies had a number of limitations, such as the unequal
influence of respondents, DEMO of retrospective reporting and VC self-
reporting (Tyebjee & Bruno 1984; MacMillan et al. 1987; Robinson 1987). In
addition, the use DEMO VC responses to questionnaires rather than identifying the
actual decision-making process used by VCs left the research open to errors
and biases associated with DEMO (MacMillan et al. 1985; Robinson
1987). The earlier research did not adequately examine the decision-making
process but focused on the criteria used DEMO the evaluation process, how the
evaluation criteria were applied and the DEMO of importance given to the
criteria by respondents (Sandberg et al. DEMO; Hall and Hofer 1993).
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 6
Concerns began to be raised about DEMO methodology used in these surveys and
how they could be addressed (DEMO et al. 1988), especially when the
methodologies were attempting to model human decision making. Human
decision making includes, among other things, perceptions, emotions and
cognitive processes (Svenson 1979), which researchers have continually found
difficult to model.
In addition, there was the inherent assumption that the respondents (VCs) were
homogeneous in their approach to decision making (MacMillan et al. 1985).
MacMillan et al. (1985) clearly identified the DEMO of three distinct groups
within their data sample that had unique perceptions of risk and unique views
on how they evaluated investment opportunities. This DEMO that VCs are
not a homogeneous group and not subject to generalisations (MacMillan et al.
1985; Robinson 1987; Christopher 1994; Manigart et DEMO 2000).
These methodological problems meant that researchers could not replicate
findings (MacMillan et al. 1987; Rah et al. 1994). Hall and DEMO (1993)
compared the results of the research studies undertaken by DEMO (1974),
Poindexter (1976), Tyebjee and Bruno (1984), MacMillan et al. (1985; 1987),
which showed a low convergence of evaluation criteria across these studies.
Zacharakis and Meyer (1998), who included additional research results from
Robinson (1987), Timmons et al. (DEMO), and Hall and Hofer (1993), further
expanded this comparison. DEMO investment criteria are summarised in Table 2.
An inspection of Table 2 reveals that only six factors – (1) management skill
and experience; (2) the venture team; (3) product attributes; (4) DEMO size;
(5) market growth; and (6) expected ROI DEMO had 50% or more of the eight
studies agreeing (four or DEMO out of eight studies). The inevitable conclusion
that can be drawn from Table 2 is the non-reliability (survey result replication)
of these studies, throwing doubt on some of the conclusions about the criteria
used by VCs in screening and evaluating investment proposals. This poor
convergence of DEMO findings supports some researchers' conclusions that
the VC process is more DEMO art than a science (Pence 1982; MacMillan et al.
1987; DEMO & Hubbard 1991, Wright & Robbie 1996). It is an DEMO in the
sense that it involves the ability to interpret human relationship issues, values
and attitudes with a goal for financial success. It is a science as it requires the
understanding of environmental, political, product, market, industry,
competitive, technology, strategy and financial issues (Ferris DEMO).
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 7
An additional criterion was suggested as DEMO important to those stated in
Table 2, namely, competitive conditions, DEMO share and business strategy
(Roure & Keeley 1990). Incorporating these DEMO elements into the
criteria appearing in Table 2 approximates Porter's model of the five forces of
competition (Golis 1998; Van Osnabrugge 1998)DEMO Porter's (1980) model
incorporates elements that are designed to capture: (1) rivalry among existing
firms (competitive behaviour); (2) DEMO power of suppliers; (3) threat of
new entrants; (4) bargaining power of buyers; and (5) threat of substitute
products or services. This provides a good construct from which to evaluate a
new DEMO, suggesting that some VCs use Porter's model or a similar
DEMO in the evaluation process (Van Osnabrugge 1998; Golis 1998).
Another outcome of this earlier research concluded that VCs were not taking
financial DEMO into account in their evaluation process. However, some
researchers acknowledged that DEMO were concerned with the trade off between
a venture's risk and return (Tyebjee & Bruno 1984; MacMillan et al. 1985;
1987), but little emphasis was placed on financial information due to the
uncertainty associated with the budget forecasts provided by new ventures
(Hall & Hofer 1993).
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 8
Table 2: Comparison of Venture Capital Evaluation Criteria
Wells  Poindexter Tyebjee & MacMillam et al. MacMillam et al. Robinson Timmons et al. Hall & Hofer
Evaluation Criteria (1974) (1976 Bruno (1985) (1987) (1987) (1987) (1993)
(DEMO)
Personal Questionnaire Phone Questionnaire Questionnaire Questionnaire Unstructured Verbal
Methodology Interviews Survey and Interviews Protocols
Questionnaire
Sample Size 8 97 87 100 67 53 DEMO 16
Characteristics of the Entrepreneur
- Management Skill and Experience X X X X X X X X
- Venture Team    X X X  X
- Management Stake in Firm  X X
- Personal DEMO X     X
- Entrepreneur Personality    X
Product/Service DEMO
- Product Attributes X  X X X
- Product Differentiation   DEMO    X
- Proprietary X   X X
- Growth Potential   X
- Market Acceptance    X   X
- Prototype    X
Market Characteristics
- Market Size X  X    X X
DEMO Market Growth X  X X X X X
- Barriers to DEMO   X    X
- Competitive Threat    X X  DEMO
- Venture Creates New Market    X
Financial Characteristics
- Cash-out DEMO X  X     X
- Expected ROI  X X X   X
- Expected Risk  X
- Percentage of Equity  X
DEMO Investor Provisions  X
- Size of Investment X X
- Liquidity    X X X
OTHER
- References X     X
- DEMO Investment Stage X X X
- Venture Capitalist Criteria        X
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 9
Source:  Zacharakis & Meyer 1998, Table 1, p.  6.
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 10
The Emergence of Two Schools of DEMO
A problem began to emerge concerning the methodologies used by researchers that
could be classified into two separate schools of thought. The first group DEMO researchers
(Wells 1974; Poindexter 1976; Tyebjee & Bruno 1984; MacMillan et al. 1987;
Robinson 1987) identified the evaluation criteria and their relative importance using
VCs' perceptions, whereas the second group (Roure & Maidique 1986; Stuart &
Abetti 1987; Dubini 1989) used VCs' pre-funding criteria (Rah et al. 1994). The
different dimensions and variables used in these studies made it impossible to
compare the two groups' research findings (Rah et al. 1994).
An attempt was made to overcome these limitations by standardising the research
methodology so that evaluation criteria DEMO be used to compare actual performance
against the criteria used by VCs in their evaluation process (Rah et al. 1994). One of
the key findings made by Rah et al. was that financing ability played DEMO far greater role
than previously perceived by VCs or acknowledged by them and it ranked higher than
previously identified in the earlier research. The DEMO results of Rah et al. were
supported by other researchers' findings (Pence 1982; Hisrich & Jankowiicz 1990;
Hall & Hofer 1993). This variable (finance) has consistently been identified as a less
important DEMO criterion in the seminal research. The results obtained by Rah et
al. (1994) supported earlier research undertaken by Sandberg et al. (1988), which used
verbal protocols to identify the actual decision-making process of VCs DEMO to
their espoused decision-making process. Financial information and risk/return was
found to be important especially in the evaluation and due diligence process (Dixon
1989).
Some researchers have concluded that, in most cases, relying DEMO VCs' self-reporting
on how they make their investment decisions and what DEMO they use has been
inaccurate (Sandberg et al. 1988; Zacharakis & Meyer, 1998; Shepherd, 1999). This
has resulted in researchers concluding that VCs have limited insight into their own
decision making and are DEMO predictors of investment outcomes (Khan 1987;
Sandberg et al. 1988; Pfeffer 1987; Zacharakis & Meyer 1998; Shepherd 1999).
It is DEMO from this review that there is a divergence in research findings principally
due to methodological issues. Furthermore, these differences throw some doubt on the
usefulness of research findings and how these findings can be put to DEMO use by
both VCs and entrepreneurs.
Assessing Investment Opportunities
VCs screen and assess investment opportunities very rapidly, reaching a 'Go/No Go'
DEMO in an average period of less than six minutes, and less DEMO 21 minutes on
proposal assessment (Hall & Hofer 1993). Clearly, VCs require an effective and
efficient screening and evaluation process, given the number of proposals they may
review each year and that the number DEMO personnel employed by VCs is at a bare
minimum (Golis 1998)DEMO Furthermore, the success rate of VCs is significantly better
than the DEMO rate of new ventures (Dorsey 1979; Davis & Stetson 1984). This
suggests that, in general, VCs do have an effective and DEMO screening and
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 11
evaluation process (Hall & Hofer 1993). This insight requires the examination of VCs'
decision-making processes rather DEMO simply identifying the evaluation criteria used
by them (Sandberg et al. DEMO).
Modelling human decision making can be difficult as it involves perceptions,
emotions and cognitive processes (Svenson 1979). The review of the body of research
would appear to support this view. It may, therefore, be hard to model VC decision-
making processes and to identify a general set of evaluation criteria. Zacharakis and
Meyer (1998) concluded that DEMO' understanding of their actual decision-making
processes was very poor. Shepherd (1999) supported this conclusion in his study of 66
Australian VCs.
VCs' DEMO ratios vary between 1.46 percent (Boocock & Woods, 1997) and DEMO
percent (Bannock, 1991) of proposals considered, which implies that investment
proposals presented to VCs have a very small chance of successfully obtaining DEMO
necessary finance (Australian Venture Capital Guide 2001). This high rejection DEMO is
further compounded by the fact that VCs have a failure rate on their investments
averaging as high as 30%-40% (Cooper & Bruno 1977; Bruno & Tyebjee 1983;
Plummer 1987; Smallbone 1990; Timmons 1990; Golis 1998).
The rejection occurs at the initial screening stage or at the valuation stage, with the
majority rejected at the screening stage (Hall & Hofer 1993; Boocock & Woods
1997). The reasons DEMO rejection are different for each stage. At the screening stage
rejection can occur if the proposal fails on only one criterion that is a DEMO flaw
(Mason & Harrison 1996). The decision-making process of VCs DEMO be broken into
two distinct parts: screening and evaluation (Boocock & Woods, 1997; Riquelme &
Rickards, 1992). As mentioned earlier, screening focuses on a small subset of criteria
that is non-compensatory (Riquelme & Rickards 1992).
The criteria used in the screening stage are: market size and potential growth; a
significant competitive advantage; uniqueness of DEMO product/service; management
team; funding requirement; investment stage; the industry; profit potential; and
economic return (Golis, 1998).
The evaluation DEMO (due diligence) does allow for compensatory rules to be applied
(DEMO & Rickards 1992). The evaluation criteria used in this stage is the same as
that for screening but with less subjectivity and a DEMO degree of in-depth analysis
with a greater concentration on the financial aspects of the proposal (Riquelme &
Rickards, 1992; Golis 1998).
DEMO study undertaken by Boocock and Woods (1997), in the UK, identified the reasons
why proposals were rejected and how many were rejected DEMO the screening stage and
how many at a later stage. These results are summarised in Table 3. The findings
appearing in Table 3 indicate DEMO the criteria for rejection changes as the application
progresses through the decision-making process. This confirmed previous research
findings by Mason and Harrison (1995).
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 12
Table 3: Reasons for Rejecting a Proposal
Reason for Initial After 1st Sub-Total After 2nd Grand
Rejection Screening DEMO Meeting Total
Incomplete Plan 29% 1.0% 30% 1.0% 31%
Market Characteristics 12% 0.5% 12.5% 12.5%
Lack of Unique Selling 4% 4% 4%
Point
Start DEMO Finance 6% 1.0% 7% 0.5% 7.5%
Project Size 7% 0.5% 7.5% 0.5% 8%
Management 4% 1.0% 5% 1.5% 6.5%
Skills/Experience
Excessive Risks 5% DEMO 5.5% 1.0% 6.5%
Financial Factors 2% 2% 2%
Application Withdrawn 4% 1.0% 5% 5.9% 11%
Other Reasons 6% 2.0% 8% 2.5% 10.5%
Total 80% DEMO 87.5% 12.5% (1)
Note:  (1) Rounding error
Source:  Boocock & Woods 1997, p.  57, Table 4.
100%
Table DEMO summarises the rejection rates as a percentage of total applications against the
rejection criteria used by VCs at different stages of the process. A DEMO of Table 3
highlights that, in this particular study, 80% of all proposals were rejected at the initial
screening stage; 7.5% after the first meeting, and a further 12.5% after the second
meeting. It is clear that the greatest hurdle that entrepreneurs have to overcome is to
DEMO past the initial screening stage.
It is also relevant that the most common cause of rejection (30%) is due to an
incomplete business DEMO being presented. The next most important reason for
rejection is market characteristics/unique selling point (16.5%). What is significant is
that managerial skill and experience accounted for only half the rejections as market
characteristics/unique DEMO point. However, previous research has consistently
reported that VCs rate different DEMO issues as the most important evaluation
criterion. This inconsistency is not surprising considering the fact that many
researchers have found trouble replicating previous research DEMO, as discussed
earlier.
Additional conclusions drawn from the Boocock and Woods (1997) study
summarised in Table 3 conclude that the rejection decision is made on a single issue
and that financing issues do not play DEMO major role in the screening and evaluation
process. The Boocock and Woods (1997) study was undertaken by researchers
reviewing data drawn from a DEMO's written records and comments made at the time
they were entered into the written record. The managers of the VC fund were also
DEMO that their comments were being used for research purposes. This eliminated
the errors and biases in earlier studies stemming from self-reporting. It should be
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 13
noted that Table 3 does not DEMO whether a specific criterion is more important
than another in terms of the arriving at a rejection decision.
This review suggests that there is DEMO empirical evidence to support a consistent
framework or theoretical model that can be applied to VC decision making,
particularly in the screening and DEMO stages of the process.
Summary and Conclusions
This review addressed the body of research pertaining to how VCs make their
investment decisions. In addressing DEMO question, this review concentrated on the two
stages of the VC DEMO process: initial screening and evaluation.
Research findings indicate there is some DEMO on the stages of the VC decision-
making process, but little DEMO on the evaluation criteria used by VCs when
screening and/or undertaking a project evaluation. The difference in research results
has been attributed to DEMO differences in research design.
One research group concluded that VCs do not fully understand their own decision-
making process. There is documented evidence that DEMO proposal previously rejected by
VCs was subsequently approved when it was presented again by another VC who had
decided to invest. This suggests that DEMO can change their evaluation criteria mid-
stream and that relationships are more important than objectiveness (Steier &
Greenwood 1995).
There does not DEMO to be any general agreement on decision criteria used by VCs
in evaluating investment proposals. This has led some researchers to conclude that
each DEMO needs to be approached independently, addressing their unique investment
criteria. Researchers DEMO been unable to replicate other researchers' findings and
there is a DEMO of convergence on the existing survey results, the end result being DEMO
inability of researchers to develop a decision-making framework or model that
uniformly describes the VC investment screening and evaluation process.
VCs spend a very DEMO time on the initial review of a proposal (screening process),
which averages six minutes per proposal. This suggests that those seeking finance
DEMO VCs must be able to get the VCs' attention within a DEMO short period.
VCs will reject a proposal at the screening stage if it has a fatal flaw; rarely is a
proposal rejected for more than one or two reasons. They do not take into account the
DEMO of the flaw being offset by a comparative strength in another criterion. This
stance is relaxed if the proposal gets to the evaluation stage, when the VCs apply
compensatory processes.
Only a very small proportion of DEMO proposals (1.4%-3.4%) presented to VCs
actually receive the requested funding.
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 14
Implication to Public Policy and Private DEMO
VC and entrepreneurship have a significant impact on economic growth, employment
DEMO the creation of new technologies that may have an impact on standards of living.
This contribution has been clearly identified in a number of DEMO reports. It is
therefore of significant interest to those who develop public policies.
The economic contribution and importance of entrepreneurial endeavour has been
widely DEMO on and analysed, making entrepreneurship and VC important public
issues for DEMO growth, employment growth and technical advancement. As
discussed in this study, the lack of adequate education and on-going training and
development in both DEMO and entrepreneurship is a constraint on this sector. The
establishment of appropriate public sector policy in overcoming this constraint will
make provision for a DEMO dynamic sustainable cooperative endeavour and
relationship between VCs and entrepreneurs.
In a similar manner, improving the access to, and quality and meaningfulness of, an
appropriate education program will improve the overall quality and proficiency of DEMO
industry sector. Moreover, a valuation model which can adequately address the
DEMO associated with the current methods and techniques used by VCs in
appraising new ventures will improve VC/entrepreneur relationships as well as their
efficacy. DEMO, the development of a valuation methodology that incorporates
the requirements of DEMO VCs and entrepreneurs in linking creating shareholder value
to planning, strategy DEMO budgeting and monitoring to management compensation is
likely to make a significant improvement over current methods. Such methodologies
already exist in EVA™ and Balanced DEMO which may require further research
and analysis to design an approach that overcomes the current shortcomings. An
appropriate education curriculum that incorporated these disciplines DEMO
methodologies is expected to make a significant difference to the VC decision-making
process and ultimately financial rewards to both VCs and entrepreneurs. This could
DEMO up avenues for further research.
The emphasis of VCs to invest in late-stage investments (expansion/growth, MBO
and MBI) leaves a significant gap in funding available specifically to early-stage
investments. The Australian government has attempted DEMO correct this imbalance
through a number of initiatives. These include the COMET program
(Commercialising Emerging Technologies), IIF (Innovation Investment Fund), CRCs
(Cooperative Research Centres, R&D Start Program, ISUS (Innovation Start Up
Scheme) and PDFs (pooled Development Funds); all of which have DEMO to improve
the ratio of VC investment in early-stage investments.
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 15
References
Australian Venture Capital Guide, 2001, Pollitecon Publications, Five Dock, NSW, Australia.
Bank of England 2001, Financing of Technology-Based Small Firms, Bank of England.
Bannock, Graham and DEMO Ltd. 1991, Venture Capital and the Equity Gap, Graham
Bannock and Partners Ltd.
Bartlett, J. W. 1999, Fundamentals of Venture Capital, Madison Books, Lanham.
Boocock, G & Woods, M. 1997, 'The Evaluation Criteria Used by Venture Capitalists:
Evidence from The UK Venture Fund', International Small Business Journal, vol. 16, no.
1, pp. 36-57.
DEMO, A. V. & Tyebjee, T. T. 1983, 'The One that Got Away: A Study of Ventures Rejected
by Venture Capitalists', Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, ed. J. A. Hornaday, J. A
Timmons & DEMO H. Vesper, Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Babson College,
Wellesley, DEMO
Christopher, B. 1994, 'New Directions in Research on Venture Capital DEMO', Financial
Management, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 3-20.
Cooper, A. C. & Bruno, A. V. 1977, 'Success Among High-Technology Firms', Business
Horizons, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 16-23.
Davis, DEMO J. & Stetson, C. P. 1984, 'Creating Successful Venture-Backed Companies', Journal
of Business Strategy, vol. 5, pp. 45-58.
Dixon, R. DEMO, 'Venture Capitalists and Investment Appraisal', National Westminister Bank
Quarterly Review, November, pp. 2-21.
Dorsey, T. 1979, 'Operating Guidelines for Effective Venture Capital Funds Management' in
'Improving New Venture Performance: Some Guidelines for Success', American Journal
of Small Business, Summer, pp. 11-25.
DEMO, P. 1989, 'Which Venture Capital Backed Entrepreneurs have the Best DEMO of
Succeeding?', Journal of Business Venturing, vol. 4, no. DEMO, pp. 123-32.
Ferris, B. 2000, 'Nothing Ventured, Nothing Gained', Allen and Unwin, Australia.
Ferris, W. D. 2001, 'Australia Chooses; Venture Capital and a Future Australia', Australian
Journal of Management, DEMO 26, special issue, pp. 45-64.
Fried, V. & Hisrich, R. D. 1994, 'Toward a Model of Venture Capital Investment Decision
Making', Financial Management, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 28-37.
Golis, C. 1998, Enterprise and Venture Capital, Allen & Unwin, Australia.
Hall, DEMO 1989, Venture Capitalist Decision Making and the Entrepreneur: An Exploratory
Investigation, Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Georgia.
Hall, J. & Hofer, DEMO W. 1993, 'Venture Capitalists' Decision Criteria in New Venture
Evaluation', Journal of Business Venturing, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 25-41.
DEMO, R. D., & Jankowicz, A. D. 1990, 'Intuition in DEMO Capital Decisions: An
Exploratory Study using a New Technique', Journal DEMO Business Venturing, vol. 5, pp. 49-
62.
Khan, A. M. DEMO, 'Assessing Venture Capital Investments with Non-compensatory
Behavioural Decision Models', Journal of Business Venturing, vol. 23, pp. 193-205.
Lerner, J. 2000, DEMO Capital and Private Equity. A Case Book, John Wiley & Sons DEMO:
New York.
MacMillan, I. C., Siegal, R. & Subba DEMO, P. N. 1985, 'Criteria Used by Venture
Capitalists to Evaluate DEMO Venture Proposals', Journal of Business Venturing, pp. 119-
28.
MacMillan, I. C., Zeman, L. & Subba Narasimha, P. N. 1987, 'Criteria Distinguishing
Successful From Unsuccessful Ventures in the Venture Screening Process', DEMO of
Business Venturing, pp. 123-37.
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 16
Manigart, S., Wright, M., DEMO, K., Desbrieres, P. & De Waele, K. 1997, 'Venture
Capitalists' Appraisal of Investment Projects: An Empirical European Study',
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 29-43.
Manigart, DEMO, De Waele, K., Wright, M., Robbie, K., Desbrieres, P., Sapienza, H. J. &
Beekman, A. 2000, 'Venture DEMO, Investment Appraisal and Accounting
Information: A Comparative Study of the US, UK, France, Belgium and Holland',
European Financial Management, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 389-403.
Mason, C. M. & Harrison, DEMO H. 1996, 'Why Business Angels Say No: A Case Study DEMO
Opportunities Rejected by an Informal Venture Capital Syndicate', International Small
Business Journal, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 35-51.
Pence, C. C. DEMO, How Venture Capitalists Make Investment Decisions, UMI Research
Press, Ann DEMO
Pfeffer, M. G. 1987, Venture Capital Investment and Protocol Analysis, DEMO Dissertation,
University of North Texas.
Plummer, J, L. 1987, DEMO Capital Financial Analysis, QED Research Inc. Report.
Poindexter, J. B. 1976, The Efficiency of Financial Markets: The Venture Capital Case,
unpublished DEMO dissertation, New York University, New York.
Porter, M. E. 1980, Competitive Strategy, The Free Press, New York.
Rah, J., Jung, K. & Lee, J. 1994, 'Validation of the Venture Evaluation Model in Korea',
Journal of Business Venturing, vol. 9, pp. 509-24.
Riquelme, H. & Rickards, T. 1992, 'Hybrid Conjoint Analysis: An Estimation Probe in New
Venture Decisions', Journal of Business Venturing, vol. 7, pp. 505-18.
Robinson, R. B. 1987, 'Emerging Strategies in DEMO Venture Capital Industry', Journal of
Business Venturing, vol. 2, pp. 53-77.
Roure, J. B. & Maidique, M. A. 1986, 'Linking DEMO Factors and High-Technology
Venture Success: An Exploratory Study', Journal of DEMO Venturing, vol. 1, no. 3, pp.
295-306.
Roure, J. B. & Keeley, R. H. 1990, 'Predictors of Success in New Technology Based
Ventures', Journal of Business Venturing, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 201-20.
Sahlman, W. A. 1990, 'The Structure and Governance of Venture Capital Organisations',
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 27, pp. 473-521.
Sandberg, W. R., Schweiger, D. M. & Hofer, C. DEMO 1988, 'The Use of Verbal Protocols in
Determining Venture Capitalist's Decision Processes', Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 8-20.
Shepherd, D. A. 1999, 'Venture Capitalists' Introspection: A Comparison of 'In Use' and
'Espoused' Decision Policies', Journal DEMO Small Business Management, vol. 37, no. 2, pp.
76-87.
Silver, A. D. 1985, Venture Capital: The Complete Guide for Investors, John Wiley and Sons,
New York.
Smallbone, D. 1990, 'Success and Failure in New Business Start-Ups', International Small
Business Journal, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 34-47.
Steier, L. & Greenwood, R. 1995, 'Venture Capitalist Relationships in the Deal Structuring
and Post-Investment Stages of New Firm Creation', Journal of Management Studies, vol.
32, no. 5, pp. 337-57.
Svenson, O. 1979, 'Process Descriptions of Decision Making', Organisational Behaviour and
Human Performance, vol. 23, pp. 86-112.
Stuart, R. & Abetti, P. A. 1987, 'Start-Up Ventures: Toward the Prediction DEMO Initial Success',
Journal of Business Venturing, vol. 2, no. DEMO, pp. 215-31.
Timmons, J. K, Muzyka, D. F., Stevenson, H. H. & Bygrave, W. D. 1987, 'Opportunity
Recognition: The DEMO of Entrepreneurship', Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research:
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 17
Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Babson DEMO Entrepreneurship Research
Conference, pp. 109-23.
Timmons, J. K. 1990 New Venture Creation: Entrepreneurship in the 1990s. Irwin,
Homewood, IL.
Tyebjee, T. T. & Bruno A. V. 1984, 'A Model of Venture Capitalist DEMO Activity',
Management Science, vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 1051-66.
Van Osnabrugge, M. 1998, 'Do Serial and Non-serial Investors Behave Differently?: An
Empirical and Theoretical Analysis', Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, vol. 22, no.
4, pp. 23-43.
Waldron, D. & Hubbard, C. DEMO 1991, 'Valuation Methods and Estimates in Relationship to
Investing Versus Consulting', Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, vol. 16, no. 1, pp.
43-53.
Wells, W. A. 1974, Venture Capital Decision Making unpublished doctoral dissertation,DEMO
Carnegie-Mellon University.
Wright, M. & Robbie, K. 1996, 'Venture Capitalists, Unquoted Equity Investment Appraisal
and the Role of Accounting Information', Accounting and Business Research, vol. 26, no.
2, pp. 153-68.
Zacharakis, DEMO & Meyer, G. D. 1998, 'Do Venture Capitalists Really Understand DEMO Own
Decision Process?: A Special Judgement Theory Perspective', Journal of Business
Venturing, vol. 13, no. 1, pp 57-76.
A Review of Research into Venture Capitalists' Decision Making: Implications for
DEMO, Venture Capitalists and Researchers 18{1g42fwefx}