Small Business Economics (2007) 28:109–122
DOI 10.1007/s11187-006-9012-3
Entrepreneurship, Economic Growth
and Public Policy

Springer 2006
Zoltan J. Acs
Laszlo Szerb
DEMO This paper is an introduction to the second
Global Entrepreneurship Research Conference. The conference
focused on developing a better understanding of the relation-
ships DEMO entrepreneurship, economic growth and public
policy, and variations according to the stage of economic
development. The papers in this special issue conduct analysis
DEMO GEM micro-and-macro data, and oﬀer several important
policy recommendations. First, middle-income countries should
focus on increasing human capital, upgrading technology
availability and promoting enterprise development. It is
important to start enterprise development policies early because
DEMO main drivers are perceptual variables that are diﬃcult to
change in the short run. Second, for developed economies,
reducing entry regulations, in DEMO cases, will not result in more
high-potential startups. Both labor market DEMO and dereg-
ulation of ﬁnancial markets may be needed to support growth
of high-performance ventures.
KEY WORDS: Central Europe, development, entrepre-
neurship policy, GEM, micro data.
JEL CLASSIFICATION: L26, M13, O4, P3.
DEMO Introduction
The papers in this special issue focus on the
relationship between entrepreneurship, eco-
nomic growth and public policy. This question
has been a core component of the economics
literature as far back as Adam Smith. DEMO related
question – how does public policy vary with the
stage of economic development? – has been
Final version accepted on October 2006.
Zoltan J. Acs
School of Public Policy
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA, DEMO, USA
E-mail: zacs@gmu.edu
Laszlo Szerb
Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Pecs
Pecs, 7601, Hungary
examined more recently in the economic DEMO
opment literature (Lucas, 1993), the regional
science literature (Acs DEMO Storey, 2004) and the
entrepreneurship literature (Acs, 2006). There is
empirical evidence that entrepreneurial activity
varies across stages of economic development,DEMO
indicated by a U-shaped relationship between
level of development and the rate of entrepre-
neurship. A positive eﬀect of entrepreneurial
activity on economic growth DEMO found for
highly developed countries; a negative eﬀect is
found for DEMO nations (van Stel et al.,
2005; Wennekers et al., DEMO; Acs and Varga,
2005).
It is this policy interaction DEMO motivated
the second Global Entrepreneurship Monitor
(GEM) Research Conference, in DEMO,
Hungary from May 25 to 27, 2005. While
economic growth DEMO regional eﬀects
(agglomeration, networking, clustering) domi-
nated in the ﬁrst GEM research conference
(Sternberg and Wennekers, 2005), this special
issue DEMO addresses the development ques-
tions: the inﬂuence of government regulation
on DEMO ﬁrm startups, perceptual issues; inter-
national issues include immigration and access
to foreign technology. Two strong sub-themes
emerge in these papers: Cross-country
comparisons and a special focus on Central
European economies.
Altogether, there were 116 special guests,
GEM members, experts, researchers and politi-
cians in DEMO The purpose of this
conference was to present an overview of state-
of-the-art, current research on entrepreneurial
activity in countries and regions covered by
GEM. Since 1999, close to 40 national teams
and 120 consortium participants have contrib-
uted to the GEM program. By 2004, the number
of interviewed individuals exceeded 500,000 and
more than 6,000 national entrepreneurship
110
Zoltan J. Acs and Laszlo Szerb
experts were asked their opinion DEMO
the entrepreneurial framework conditions.
Therefore, a wide variety of research opportu-
DEMO can come out of the GEM data (Reynolds
et al., 2005). Initially 27 abstracts were submit-
ted, of which 19 were accepted and 18 papers
were ultimately presented in six sessions. Two
papers were DEMO in one of the two round-
tables. Finally, 10 papers were DEMO for pub-
lication consideration and 8 were selected for
this special issue after the referee process.
In order to put the papers into historical DEMO
spective, the following section describes the
emergence of entrepreneurial capitalism through
DEMO end of the last century. Section 3 provides
structure to this analysis by categorizing a range
of policies in an entrepreneurial economy: poli-
cies with eﬀects on individual decisions to become
an entrepreneur, national policies that aﬀect the
overall entrepreneurial environment, policies di-
rected mainly at international commercial activ-
ity and regional policies. Section 4 describes the
papers in this DEMO and discusses key ﬁndings
from the conference. The ﬁnal section examines
speciﬁc policy implications for Central Europe.
2. Entrepreneurial capitalism
The U.S. economy has DEMO remarkable
economic success during the past decade, as
indicated by the DEMO important economic sta-
tistic: Rate of productivity growth. Over the
long DEMO, this determines the rate of advance in
average living standards. After DEMO to 2.6%
annually from 1950 to 1973, productivity
growth dropped to DEMO in the period from
1973 through 1995. Although this 1.4 percentage
point annual decline may seem trivial, it has
enormous consequences over time. At the earlier
rate of 2.6%, living standards double every
28 years whereas at the rate of 1.4%, this dou-
bling would take more than 50 years. What
accounts for this good fortune so far? Conven-
tional economic wisdom has converged on the
opinion that the ‘‘information technology (IT)
revolution’’ – especially rapidly falling prices of
computer chips and their DEMO products –
has been critical. When measured by conven-
tional statistics, DEMO seems to be much truth in
this (Oliner and Sichel, 2002).
However, a deeper change in the structure of
the American economy itself – a decades-long
transition from managerial to entrepreneurial
capitalism – also DEMO to have played an
important role in the acceleration of productiv-
ity growth (Acs and Armington, 2006; Au-
dretsch et al., 2006; Baumol et al., 2007, among
others). Acs ﬁrst articulated that DEMO, new
technology and entrepreneurship are at the heart
of the transition DEMO managerial to entrepre-
neurial capitalism, in The Changing Structure of
the DEMO Economy (1984). Three distinct features
of this increasingly entrepreneurial capitalism
DEMO noteworthy:
• Firm structure is more dynamic. After World
War II, large ﬁrms, often in oligopolies, domi-
nated the U.S. economy. Turnover among the
largest ﬁrms was minimal and new ﬁrms
played a minor DEMO This has changed dra-
matically in the last several decades. New
ﬁrms oﬀering new products and services (in
IT, biotechnology and retail) and foreign
entrants in traditional industries (such as
automobiles and steel) have DEMO major driv-
ers, if not the main driver, of economic
growth.
• Markets and individual ﬁrms are replacing
bureaucracies (inside and outside the private
sector). A hallmark of entrepreneurial ﬁrms is
relatively ﬂat management DEMO with
rapid responsiveness to market demands,
whereas large ﬁrms host more bureaucratic,
hierarchal management and thus, decision-
making takes longer. In the managerial econ-
omy, there was an implicit compact between
‘‘big labor, DEMO business and big government.’’
(Galbraith, 1967). That compact, if DEMO ever
existed, is now clearly gone. Labors share of
the workforce DEMO fallen dramatically, big
business is in ﬂux (with constant changes in
the rankings of Americas leading ﬁrms) and
government functions at all sectors are
increasingly being contracted out to the
private sector.
• Innovation is DEMO diﬀerent in managerial and
entrepreneurial settings. Led by risk-taking
entrepreneurs, new DEMO are disproportion-
ately responsible for ‘‘radical’’ or ‘‘break-
through’’ technologies, although DEMO
Entrepreneurship, Economic Growth and Public Policy
managerial ﬁrms are typically needed to re-
ﬁne, mass-produce and market these technolo-
gies (Baumol, 1993). The innovations that
now characterize modern life – the automo-
bile, telephone, airplane, air conditioning,
personal computer, most software and Inter-
net search engines – were all developed and
commercialized by entrepreneurs. Radical
innovations DEMO to lead to faster overall
growth than do incremental improvements. It
is not a coincidence that the IT revolution –
which has statistically accounted DEMO the sig-
niﬁcant acceleration in US productivity
growth over the last decade – was sparked
largely by entrepreneurial companies (Acs and
Audretsch, 1989)DEMO
How did this transformation occur? A brief
discussion of historical context DEMO useful. The
interaction between economic growth and pub-
lic policy dates back to the Mercantilist debates
in the 17th century, but the introduction of
entrepreneurship into this relationship is a rel-
atively new topic (Acs et al., 2005; Autio, 2005).
At the very least, any DEMO interested in
encouraging entrepreneurship must make it
rewarding and easy to do. For the most part, the
U.S has developed laws and institutions over
time to eﬀectively do that: A legal system pro-
tects rights of contract and property (including
intellectual property), state and local registra-
tion systems make it easy to form a business, the
tax system has evolved towards lower marginal
tax rates, and laws support a ﬁnancial system
that generally favors the formation and growth
of new ventures (Schramm, DEMO).
Several federal policy initiatives were adopted
during Democratic and Republican administra-
tions over the past three decades, which have
supported the shift from a managerial to an
entrepreneurial economy (Acs, 1984). These
include:DEMO
• The removal of legal barriers to entry and
price controls in a number of key industries,
speciﬁcally transportation and communica-
tions
• DEMO Executive Orders requiring execu-
tive branch agencies to at least study the costs
111
and beneﬁts of introducing new regulations
before adopting them, as well as legislation
requiring agencies to tailor regulations to the
‘‘size and DEMO resources of the aﬀected busi-
ness’’ (with special regulatory ﬂexibility for
DEMO businesses seeking to raise capital)
• Various tax reforms that have had the eﬀect
of enhancing rewards from entrepreneurship,
including cuts in DEMO capital gains tax rate
(from 49% prior to 1977 to a DEMO rate of
15%) and reductions in the top individual
marginal tax DEMO (from 70% prior to 1981 to
a current rate of approximately DEMO)
• Legal changes that have allowed pension
funds to ﬁnance the formation and growth of
new ﬁrms, by investing in venture capital
partnerships; and
• Federal legislation aimed at accelerating the
commercialization of innovations in universi-
ties (through the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980,
which granted universities exclusive control
over inventions funded by the federal govern-
ment) and in small business (by earmarking
1.25% of federal R&D funds for small busi-
ness, under the Small Business Innovation
Development Act of 1982)
For these reasons, policy makers across all
levels of government should not only have a
strong interest in promoting entrepreneurship
directly, but should also consider the impact
their decisions on a range of issues are likely DEMO
have on entrepreneurial activity. In eﬀect, we
are interested in two DEMO but related
questions: What should entrepreneurship policy
look like? and What does policy look like in an
entrepreneurial economy? In the managerial
economy, governments primarily tried to sup-
port the small and medium sector of the
economy. However, much of this was to pro-
mote democracy and not eﬃciency. According
to John Hancock, one of the signers of the
Declaration of Independence, ‘‘The more peo-
ple who own little businesses of their own, the
safer our country well be, for the people DEMO
have a stake in their country and their com-
munity are its best citizens.’’ In other words,
SME policy was less about productivity DEMO
and more about political pluralism (Acs and
112
Audretsch, 2002; see Storey, 2003 for a full
discussion).
A string of initiatives in the 1990s started to
focus attention on DEMO instead of ﬁrms.
The ﬁrst careful treatment of the distinction
between SME policy and entrepreneurship pol-
icy was done by Lundstrom and Stevenson
(2005). However, much of this was directed at
disadvantaged individuals, so DEMO eﬀect, the result
was more of the same: Bringing the disenfran-
chised into the economic mainstream. However,
it was also recognized that DEMO of the entre-
preneurial activity that aﬀected productivity
growth was carried out by the ‘‘best and the
brightest.’’ Hart (2003) addresses this from DEMO
regional high-technology perspective and Holtz-
Eakin and Rosen (2004) present a broad view of
this relationship.
However, all of these approaches miss the
essential point: That there is no such thing as
‘‘entrepreneurship policy’’ per se – only policy in
an entrepreneurial economy. Acs and Armington
(2006, chapter 7) lay out, for the ﬁrst time, a
policy DEMO for an entrepreneurial econ-
omy and examine the question as it relates to the
making of economic society. This overarching
perspective is now the DEMO of a Kauﬀman
Foundation policy paper ‘‘Roadmap for an
Entrepreneurial Economy’’ (DEMO, 2006).
A key question is: How can policy makers
maintain – and ideally accelerate – the continuing
transition toward a more entrepreneurial DEMO
omy? We now address this question.
3. A policy framework for DEMO entrepreneurial
economy: the papers
An entrepreneurial economy is diﬀerent from a
DEMO economy because of the way in which
it used entrepreneurs to facilitate knowledge
spillovers (Acs et al., 2006). In the managed
economy DEMO organization exists exogenously
and endogenously engages in the creation of
new knowledge through investment in research
and development. However, as Arrow (1962)
DEMO out investment in new knowledge is not
straightforward. Organization inertia may result
in new ideas not being commercialized either by
the incumbent ﬁrm or DEMO other ﬁrms. The
spillover of knowledge that exists by assumption
Zoltan J. Acs and Laszlo Szerb
in the Griliches (1992), Romer (1990) models
may not be automatic but may be impeded by a
ﬁlter, or what Acs et al. (2004) refer to as the
knowledge DEMO The knowledge ﬁlter serves to
impede, if not preempt the spillover DEMO com-
mercialization of knowledge.
Entrepreneurship can contribute to economic
growth by serving as a mechanism that perme-
ates the knowledge ﬁlter. It is a DEMO consen-
sus that entrepreneurship revolves around the
recognition of opportunities along with the
cognitive decision to commercialize those
opportunities by starting a new ﬁrm. DEMO,
according to the Knowledge Spillover Theory of
Entrepreneurship, by serving DEMO a conduit for
knowledge spillovers that might otherwise not
exist, entrepreneurship DEMO the knowledge
ﬁlter and provides the missing link to economic
growth. According to evidence provided by Acs
and Armington (2006) and Audretsch et DEMO
(2006) entrepreneurship makes a unique contri-
bution to economic growth by permeating the
knowledge ﬁlter and commercializing ideas that
would otherwise remain uncommercialized.
DEMO leads to the question ‘‘What is policy in
an entrepreneurial economy? DEMO
policy is diﬀerent from traditional business
policy that tried to constrain the corporation. A
new policy approach is emerging that focuses on
enabling the DEMO and commercialization of
knowledge. The policy also diﬀers from small
business policy that tried to confront the cost
disadvantage of small ﬁrm due to DEMO econo-
mies. In contrast, entrepreneurship policy has a
much broader focus. DEMO policy
encompasses those measures that intend to
directly inﬂuence the level of entrepreneurial
activity in a country or region and the conse-
quences of DEMO action for society (Lundstrom
and Stevenson, 2005).
This policy framework is written from the
perspective of the US economy, which has
emerged as the leading entrepreneurial economy
in the world (Schramm, 2006). DEMO is a useful
background against which we may evaluate
policy in other countries, both high- and middle-
income. The papers in this special issue are
interpreted from this policy framework. In
essence, we are able to take an integrated
approach to understanding how other countries
Entrepreneurship, Economic Growth and Public Policy
113
ﬁt into this framework and how GEM research
can make an important contribution to this
understanding.
3.1. DEMO relating to the global economy
It has become cliche to say that American ﬁrms
and workers live in a global economy, but it is
true nonetheless. As a result, entrepreneurs that
ignore the global market do so at their peril
when designing and implementing business
plans. The implication DEMO policy makers at all
levels of government likewise is very clear: DEMO
they want to promote entrepreneurship, they
must think globally rather than DEMO or even
nationally. The Kauﬀman framework ﬁnds that
this manifests in at least the following pol-
icy arenas: Trade (including policies of ‘‘oﬀ-
DEMO), immigration, technology and foreign
policy.
Trade Policy: Capitalist economies rest on a
fundamental principle: The freedom of individ-
uals and ﬁrms to contract with each other. It is
through this freedom of exchange that DEMO
mies realize the beneﬁts of specialization, econ-
omies of scale and DEMO advantage,
which together maximize economic welfare.
Exchanges of goods, services DEMO capital across
countries magnify the beneﬁts of exchanges.
This, in essence, is the classic case for free trade.
Entrepreneurs and established ﬁrms alike DEMO
not succeed in an increasingly global environ-
ment without the ability to move quickly and
contract for the least cost, highest quality inputs,
wherever they may be found. They also need to
sell to purchasers DEMO they may be located.
This is not possible if governments maintain
artiﬁcial barriers to impede the movement of
goods, services, capital and ideas DEMO national
borders (Brainard et al., 2005).
Immigration Policy: In DEMO wake of 9/11, U.S.
immigration authorities have tightened legal
immigration DEMO the name of national security.
More recently, Congressional proposals to
criminalize DEMO deport millions of illegal immi-
grants have generated vigorous debate in
Washington, along with mass protests
throughout the nation. An entrepreneurial
perspective leads to several policy approaches
with respect to legal and illegal immigrants. The
implication DEMO legal immigration policy is clear:
Place more emphasis on educational back-
ground of potential immigrants, while main-
taining proper deference to the needs of national
security (i.e. prevent the entry of individuals
with criminal backgrounds and those whose past
activities and associations pose a real threat).
DEMO advances in American living standards
require the commercial application of continued
improvements in technology. In the past,
immigrants have made huge contributions and
DEMO continue to do so if policies permit.
Access to Foreign Technology: DEMO of the
worst economic mistakes any business or coun-
try can make is to adopt the ‘‘not invented here’’
syndrome: The refusal to embrace something
developed and used elsewhere. Certainly, this is
not the case for many countries that have
licensed or used American technology and in the
DEMO, have improved economic welfare. In
some cases, this has occurred at a faster pace,
though from a lower starting level, than in the
U.S. Likewise, the U.S has beneﬁted from
investment by foreign companies – especially
those in the manufacturing sector – that have
enabled technology DEMO and introduce for-
eign products to the domestic market. For
example, DEMO would the American manufac-
turing sector be without ‘‘Just In Time’’
production systems or ‘‘quality circles’’ that
were pioneered in Japan? The U.S., DEMO its
entrepreneurs, could do even better if govern-
ment took a DEMO active role in facilitating
awareness of foreign technologies (Brezneitz,
2007)DEMO
Two issues stand out in the papers that
address entrepreneurship in the global context:
Access to foreign technology and immigration.
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) plays an
important role in economic development policy.
Since the late 1960s, Ireland has focused mainly
on FDI-based industrial development policies.
In the ﬁrst paper, Acs-OGorman-Szerb-Terje-
sen builds on internationalization theory to
answer the question: Could the Irish miracle be
repeated in Hungary? This is important, as the
potential for replication within Central Europe
has not been examined. DEMO paper uses GEM
data to explore if, and how, the policy of
attracting inward FDI from multinational
114
enterprises impacts indigenous entrepreneurial
activity. Internationalization theory suggests
that entrepreneurs in DEMO and Hungary will
diﬀer in terms of type of person and the nature
of opportunities pursued. They ﬁnd signiﬁcant
diﬀerences for both.
Ethnic minority DEMO has at-
tracted considerable attention from sociologists
and others. In the second paper, ‘‘Immigration
In-migration, Ethnicity and Entrepreneurship in
the United Kingdom,’’ DEMO develops and tests
hypotheses concerning the eﬀect of migrant
status and ethnicity on propensity to engage in
new business formation at the individual level DEMO
the U.K. The large-scale empirical approach
used by Levie enables estimation of the relative
contribution of life-long residents, in-migrants
and immigrants of diﬀerent ethnicities to new
business activity. The data suggests that – con-
trolling for DEMO demographic variables and
diﬀerences in opportunity perception, risk pro-
pensity and DEMO – being a migrant has a
signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on propensity to en-
gage in new business activity. Migration in-
creases the chance of DEMO business startups,
although in-migration plays a more important
role than immigration. The independent eﬀect of
ethnicity is only marginal. Overall, ethnic
minorities as a group do not have a higher
propensity to engage in new DEMO activity, if
one controls for diﬀerences in average age,
gender, education and working status.
3.2. Taking entrepreneurship into account in setting
national DEMO
Policymakers constantly confront a series of
decisions that aﬀect the economy. Many factors
aﬀect how these decisions are made. Given the
presumptive causal link DEMO long-term
economic growth and entrepreneurial activity, it
behooves policy makers to DEMO into account the
impact of their decisions on entrepreneurship.
There are several essential points to consider in
this regard:
The Fiscal Challenge: While the long-term
budget outlook imperils the future economic
welfare of all Americans, it poses particularly
signiﬁcant challenges to entrepreneurs, who face
the greatest economic risks in the economy.
Zoltan J. Acs and Laszlo Szerb
Growing ﬁscal DEMO create additional
uncertainties, which make it more diﬃcult to
raise capital DEMO investors and may discourage
some individuals who might otherwise pursue an
entrepreneurial path from acting. Fortunately,
concerns about the growing federal budget
problem DEMO beginning to surface. The Comp-
troller General of the U.S. (who DEMO the fed-
eral government s oﬃcial auditor, the General
Accountability Oﬃce), various ‘‘think tanks’’
spanning the political spectrum and other
organizations are beginning to sound the alarm
for federal policymakers to address the ﬁscal
crisis DEMO it is too late. This framework
recognizes that the likely solution will consist of
a combination of measures to increase revenues
and reduce future DEMO, especially on enti-
tlement programs where costs are projected to
increase DEMO rapidly.
Education: Although not a guarantee of eco-
nomic success, a strong educational system
(primary, secondary, tertiary and higher) is
clearly DEMO prerequisite for continued economic
growth. Provided the right incentives are in
place to reward innovation, the greater the
proportion of highly educated people, DEMO more
likely it is that some will generate and
commercialize the breakthroughs that generate
growth in incomes and living standards for all
residents (and for many around the world as
well). Innovations, even by a relative few, re-
quire many skilled workers to reﬁne, produce,
DEMO and distribute the resulting products and
services. America owes much of its economic
success to its enviable record in providing uni-
versal primary and DEMO education to its
citizens.
Science and Technology Policy: Productivity
improvements come DEMO through technical
change, which requires both the discovery of
new ideas DEMO their commercialization by
entrepreneurs and existing ﬁrms. New ideas, in
turn, are the product of research and develop-
ment, which span the range from basic research
(such as the discovery of new scientiﬁc laws or
improvements in our understanding of basic
science) to development activities (the DEMO
ment of new ideas in products, services or pro-
duction techniques)DEMO It is now well understood
that because the beneﬁts of basic research
Entrepreneurship, Economic Growth and Public Policy
115
cannot be fully captured by those who pursue it,
society will be better oﬀ if government DEMO it
and either pursues it directly or contracts it to
universities and private sector research organi-
zations.
Litigation and Regulation: It is important not
only for government to facilitate the formation
of new businesses but also DEMO encourage their
growth – or at the very least, not to DEMO it.
In this respect, it is vital that all levels of
DEMO remain committed to analyzing the
costs and beneﬁts of new regulations before
adopting them and where possible, create
appropriate allowances for streamlined proce-
dures for new businesses. Particular attention
should be paid to regulations that have DEMO eﬀect
of deterring entry by new businesses, which
typically do not DEMO the resources or capability
of complying to the same degree as more mature
ﬁrms. At the same time, existing regulatory
regimes bear further examination and some may
need modiﬁcation (the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is a
prime example) (Kamara et al., 2005). Litiga-
tion can also have the same eﬀect as regulation,
resulting in verdicts that set norms for DEMO
by ﬁrms and individuals in speciﬁc industries or
across many, or DEMO, sectors of the economy. An
inherent diﬃculty with ‘‘regulation-by-litiga-
tion’’, however, is that the rules that emerge
from individual, fact-speciﬁc litigated cases DEMO
decided by randomly chosen juries, in cases
across the country. It DEMO somewhat anomalous
that a jury in one particular place can have the
eﬀect of setting national norms, especially if that
place is suﬃciently important to a national
manufacturer so that it must do business in that
DEMO In the process, therefore, the most
restrictive state can have the eﬀect of setting the
national norm.
As the abovementioned considerations indi-
cate, the national level addresses policies that
aﬀect the economy as a whole. DEMO papers by
van Stel-Storey-Thurik and Ho-Wong both use
World Bank data to examine the impact of
regulation on startups for GEM countries. The
ﬁrst DEMO is concerned with Europe and the
second paper with Asia. The van Stel-Storey-
Thurik paper ﬁnds that entry regulations
requirements have only had a DEMO and indirect
impact on the actual entrepreneurship rate, and
that the DEMO of labor market regulations and
ﬁnancial requirements is more important.
Diﬀerences between determinants of opportu-
nity and necessity entrepreneurship emerge in
both papers for DEMO costs. This has a
negative eﬀect on the nascent entrepreneurship
rate across countries. The Ho-Wong paper ﬁnds
that informal capital is important in overcoming
DEMO constraints, in addition to showing that
regulatory costs deter opportunity entrepre-
DEMO
3.3. Regional policies to promote entrepreneurship
Like politics, entrepreneurship is local. DEMO
successful, individuals expand their enterprises
into other locations. Still, all new ﬁrms must
start somewhere, even if the business is con-
ducted largely or exclusively on the Internet
(Acs and Armington, 2006). Policymakers DEMO
wise are increasingly recognizing entrepreneur-
ship as the key to building and sustaining
economic growth. Historically, much of the
thinking and policy has focused on trying to
attract existing ﬁrms from somewhere else, either
to relocate or to build new facilities in a
particular area. Such ‘‘smokestack chasing’’ DEMO
degenerated into what is essentially a zero-sum
game for the national economy as a whole.
When one city or state oﬀers tax breaks or DEMO
ﬁnancial inducements to encourage ﬁrms to
locate new plants or headquarters, DEMO alter-
nate city or state loses that economic activity.
However, the DEMO of economic development
centered around entrepreneurship is a funda-
mentally diﬀerent approach. The formation and
growth of new ﬁrms, wherever this occurs, is
DEMO a positive sum game – not just for the
locality, but DEMO the nation as a whole.
A brief look at various ‘‘high-tech’’ clusters
around the country – from Silicon Valley, to
Austin, Research Triangle DEMO (North Caro-
lina), San Diego, Boise, Denver, Madison,
Route 128 around Boston, Northern Virginia,
to name just a few – demonstrates the overall
positive eﬀects of development around entre-
preneurship. The DEMO States economy has
clearly beneﬁted, as a whole, from the innova-
tive products and services that have emerged
from these clusters. The same DEMO be said for
116
Zoltan J. Acs and Laszlo Szerb
other countries as well. High-tech, high-growth
clusters in India, China, Taiwan, Ireland and
Israel – to name a few – are powering economic
growth far beyond these countries. DEMO clus-
ters host ﬁrms that have become essential within
a worldwide supply chain. Others are becoming
leaders in new product and services develop-
ment. DEMO others are doing both.
In the Bergmann-Sternberg paper, the
authors address DEMO and individual charac-
teristics related to entrepreneurship. They focus
on policies that may be used to increase the
number of startups in Germany. They DEMO
that these policies have made starting a business
more attractive for unemployed people in
Germany, while at the same time becoming
more restrictive in unemployment beneﬁts. The
results show that individual and regional vari-
ables have DEMO inﬂuence on the decision to be-
come self-employed and for the most part, the
results of opportunity startups are in line with
theoretical predictions. The factors inﬂuencing
necessity startups, on the other hand, are far
DEMO diﬃcult to determine. Necessity startups
due to a lack of employment are predominantly
launched independently of age, gender, educa-
tion and regional inﬂuences, due to individual
perception of economic need.
3.4. Policies that primarily aﬀect DEMO
There are policies directed at entrepreneurs
themselves within any entrepreneurial frame-
work. These aﬀect individual decisions to ‘‘take a
job or make a job’’ DEMO that is, to work for someone
else or to make the DEMO, but potentially more
proﬁtable, choice and launch an enterprise.
Easing Business Formation: Entrepreneurs
cannot be expected to ‘‘take the plunge’’ unless
it is easy and inexpensive to form their busi-
nesses. The U.S. government has DEMO this well
at all levels, a judgment conﬁrmed by the World
DEMO Still, there is room for improvement,
particularly at the state DEMO local levels, where
businesses actually register and must acquire
various permits. DEMO example, there is the pos-
sibility to make it easier for DEMO and existing
ﬁrms to obtain and submit requisite forms on
the Internet. This is likely to be cheaper and
more quickly accomplished than building DEMO
(or retroﬁtting existing) physical facilities such
as ‘‘one-stop shops.’’ Some cities already have
done this, and other cities and states may wish
to consider doing so in conjunction with an ac-
tive Web-based initiative.
Ensuring DEMO to Finance: Virtually all-new
business ventures require some initial amount of
DEMO and often more as they grow. The U.S.
has been able to create a ﬁnancial system con-
ducive to business formation and growth. The
DEMO of credit markets, whether
through credit card or mortgage lending, has
enabled many entrepreneurs without personal,
family or friends wealth to get DEMO (Blanch-
ﬂower et al., 2003). In the past several decades, a
vibrant venture capital industry has developed
to fund the relatively small but vital number of
technologically sophisticated or capital-intensive
start-ups. In recent years, ‘‘angel investors’’ –
wealthy individuals or groups of such individu-
als – DEMO become an increasingly important
source of early-stage equity capital as well (DEMO
some accounts, angel investors may now be
more important than venture DEMO, especially
since the ‘‘Internet stock bubble’’ burst in 2000).
As DEMO debt ﬁnance, banks and ﬁnance compa-
nies have been the traditional DEMO of funds.
However, both types of lenders are facing
increasingly stiﬀ DEMO from securities
markets that are ﬁnancing a growing share of
debt taken on by larger entrepreneurial ﬁrms
that have gone public.
Appropriate Protection of DEMO Prop-
erty: One of the ways entrepreneurial economies
motivate people to DEMO entrepreneurs is by
giving their ideas legal protection. This is
accomplished with intellectual property laws
such as patents, copyrights and trademarks.
There is a complicated tradeoﬀ involved when
providing exclusive property protection to
inventors or creators (Merrill et al., 2004). If
protection is granted for too long or is exces-
sively easy to obtain, then government is essen-
tially permitting monopolies and public returns
are limited. On the other hand, if protection of
intellectual property is too weak, or if legal
protections can be easily circumvented through
technological means, then inventors and cre-
ators may have insuﬃcient incentives to bring
their ideas to market.
Entrepreneurship, Economic Growth and Public Policy
117
Tax Policy: Rewards for DEMO
activity, as for any other economic activity, are
reduced by taxes on earnings. At the same time,
tax revenue collected by income DEMO other taxes
funds public goods – such as the physical and
legal infrastructure, education, defense and
crime detection, punishment and prevention –
without which entrepreneurs (and all citizens)
could not pursue their endeavors. A central
challenge for policy makers at all levels of gov-
ernment is DEMO undertake public measures whose
beneﬁts outweigh costs, and to implement and
DEMO them to least distort economic activity
(Gentry and Hubbard, 2004). Taxes are and
should certainly be determined with more than
entrepreneurship in DEMO Considerations of
revenue adequacy, simplicity and fairness also
play an important DEMO The next section in-
cludes a discussion of a broad direction for fu-
ture tax policy that is likely to be consistent with
promoting, or at least not discouraging, entre-
preneurial activities while, at the DEMO time,
adequately funding government programs and
promises.
The Minniti-Nardone paper contributes to
the research on entrepreneur-level factors.
Gender diﬀerences in entrepreneurship have
typically DEMO attributed to diﬀerences in human
and social capital, diﬀerences in risk DEMO
and management styles, and to women being
more sensitive than men DEMO non-monetary fac-
tors. On the other hand, research has shown that
DEMO and women tend to react to the same set of
incentives and much of the diﬀerence across
genders disappears after correcting for some
socio-economic DEMO The purpose of the
paper is to investigate what variables cause
gender diﬀerences in entrepreneurship and
whether they are independent from country
eﬀects. It DEMO clearly possible for these diﬀerences
not to depend on work conditions but rather to
be the eﬀect of factors that co-vary systemati-
cally with DEMO The analysis shows that
although work status and education have some
minor gender speciﬁc impact, the relationships
between the likelihood of starting a business and
age, household income, work status and educa-
tion do not DEMO on gender. The results sup-
port the conclusion that perceptual variables
play a crucial role in explaining entrepreneurial
diﬀerences across genders. Overall, the ﬁndings
conﬁrm the importance of cognitive processes
within the context of speciﬁc market DEMO
This means that entrepreneurial discovery is not
a pure bolt but is based on the ability to perceive
and act upon an unexploited opportunity. DEMO
subjective perception of possessing skills is the
most important variable, while DEMO
recognition and fear of failing oﬀer less
explanatory power. There are no real socioeco-
nomic or contextual based diﬀerences between
male and female entrepreneurs.
DEMO focus on
informal investment in Croatia, Hungary and
Slovenia. This Central DEMO focus is wel-
come because much less is known about entre-
preneurship in middle-income countries. What is
the reason for the low level of DEMO
activity in Central European countries? While it
is generally believed that DEMO constraints
are particularly important, the presence and
reason for the existence DEMO the ﬁnance gap
should be examined further. If informal inves-
tors are vital for opportunity-oriented new ﬁrm
start-ups (Bygrave and Hunt, 2004), DEMO the
lack of these sources may explain the low levels
of entrepreneurial activity found across middle-
income countries, including those in Central
Europe. The authors investigate the factors
driving investor decisions and ﬁnd that diﬀer-
ences DEMO the informal investor ratio can be ex-
plained mainly by perceptual variables and less
by limited entrepreneurial activity. Unfamiliar-
ity with start-ups, limited business leadership
skills, little opportunity perception and more
generally, inexperience in market DEMO
explain the low level of informal investment and
amounts of investments in transition economies.
However, it is unclear that the level of entre-
preneurship in these middle-income countries is
too low, and that more informal investors would
actually make a diﬀerence.
The Tominic-Rebernik paper explores whe-
ther signiﬁcantly DEMO growth aspirations of
early stage entrepreneurs in Slovenia, compared
to those DEMO Hungary and Croatia, are also
accompanied by signiﬁcantly diﬀerent opportu-
nity DEMO, cultural support for entrepre-
neurship and self-eﬃcacy. Despite similar
history and DEMO conditions, there are
118
Zoltan J. Acs and Laszlo Szerb
diﬀerences in the growth aspirations DEMO early-
phase entrepreneurs in these countries. The re-
sults suggest that a higher degree of alertness to
unexploited opportunities, along with cultural
support for entrepreneurial motivation, may be
the reason for higher growth aspirations of
Slovenian early stage entrepreneurs. Self-eﬃcacy
with regard to entrepreneurial skills, knowledge
and experience was not found to be crucial.
4. Characteristics of the papers
Four DEMO the eight papers in this volume rely on
individual-level data while the remaining four
use aggregated, countrywide data. They reﬂect a
wide variety in level of analysis. The Bergman-
Sternberg paper uses a large individual dataset
DEMO Germany and the United Kingdom and fo-
cus on regional issues. The Levie paper also
examines entrepreneurship at the regional level.
The Szerb-Rappai-Makra-Terjesen the DEMO
Rebernik papers analyze and compare Croatia,
Hungary and Slovenia, while DEMO Acs-OGor-
man-Szerb-Terjesen, paper contrasts Ireland
and Hungary. More than 30 countries DEMO in-
cluded in the analysis in the Minniti-Nardone,
the van Stel-Storey-Thurik and the Ho-Wong
papers (see Table I).
With regard to data, it is clear that a major
advantage of the GEM research is its size. Six of
the eight papers conduct analysis of data with
DEMO less than 10,000 individual observations.
With a larger sample size of two countries,
Germany and the United Kingdom, this makes
its possible to push the level of analysis to the
regional level while maintaining DEMO degrees
of freedom. More and more authors combine
GEM data with other, mainly aggregate (re-
gional or country) datasets. Only the papers by
Minniti-Nardone and Tominch-Rebernik rely
solely on GEM data. Two papers, by Ho-Wong
and van Stel-Storey-Thurik, present successful
combinations of GEM and the World Bank
Doing Business databases at the country level.
The examination of a small DEMO of
businesses that grow exceptionally fast has
gained ground, and it DEMO become clear in recent
years that these types of businesses are respon-
sible for most job creation and a signiﬁcant
share of economic growth. DEMO order to analyze
these rapidly growing businesses, Ho-Wong and
Tominic-Rebernik created DEMO third category:
High-growth entrepreneurship or high-growth
aspiration entrepreneurship, respectively. The
DEMO Stel-Storey-Thurik paper makes another
distinction by diﬀerentiating between nascent
entrepreneurs and new business formation.
The unique GEM dataset makes it possible to
use various DEMO and econometric methods.
Two recently developed sampling methods,
bootstrapping and CHAID, enabled Minniti-
Nardone and Levie to test their hypotheses in a
more reliable way. By far, the logit model
proved to be the most popular econometric
method. Levie applies the classic binomial logit
model while Bergmann-Sternberg DEMO a modi-
ﬁed version of logit (svylogit) to incorporate
regional variables at the individual level. The
Szerb-Rappai-Makra-Terjesen paper built on a
multinomial logit DEMO by separating two
groups of informal investors, namely business
owners and DEMO The two papers of
Ho-Wong and van Stel-Storey-Thurik employed
least squares methods on aggregated country
data. Finally, v2 and F-test methods were used
for country comparison in Tominch-Rebernik
and Acs-OGorman-Szerb-Terjesen, respec-
tively.
These papers are similar in their treatment of
so-called perceptual variables. Perceptual
TABLE I
The unit DEMO the level of the analysis of the papers in this volume
Unit of analysis/level
of analysis
Regional Country-wide (2–3 countries) International (many countries)
Individual Levie Bergmann-Sternberg Szerb-Rappai-Makra-Terjesen Minniti–Nardone
Tominc-Rebernik Acs, O’Gorman,
Szerb and Terjesen
Aggregate – – Van Stel-Storey-Thurik Ho-Wong
Entrepreneurship, Economic Growth and Public Policy
119
variables of opportunity perception, DEMO an
entrepreneur, start-up skills and fear of failing
explain gender diﬀerences DEMO entrepreneurship
(Minniti-Nardone), the eﬀect of migration on
regional entrepreneurship (Levie), variations in
informal investment propensity (Szerb-Rappai-
Makra-Terjesen), alteration in the CEE country
entrepreneurship (Tominc-Rebernik) and dis-
similarity between Irish and Hungarian DEMO
preneurship (Acs et al., this issue).
Since entrepreneurship is a multidisciplinary
subject, there is no dominant explanatory the-
ory. A range of theories across disciplines has
guided the papers in this special issue. Labor
DEMO theories (occupational choice and
displacement) were applied by Levie and Berg-
mann-Sternberg. The papers by Ho-Wong and
Szerb-Rappai-Makra-Terjesen employed peck-
ing order hypothesis DEMO the ﬁnance literature,
while Minniti-Nardone and Tominic-Rebernik
used popular psychology and sociology ap-
proaches in their papers. Probably the most
comprehensive theoretical perspective DEMO the
two-equation model applied by van Stel-Storey-
Thurik, where a distinction DEMO make between
nascent and young business entrepreneurship,
acknowledging he fact that each entrepreneur
has to go through the nascent phase before he or
DEMO can actually become a young business
entrepreneur. Acs, O Gorman, Szerb and
Terjesen present a unique theoretical perspective
by integrating internationalization with entre-
DEMO (Table II).
5. Policy implications
The main ﬁndings oﬀer important DEMO impli-
cations for the link between entrepreneurship
and economic growth. In addition to the shared
view of the importance of perceptual variables,
several DEMO conclude that government policy
aimed at promoting entrepreneurship or
inﬂuencing relevant factors cannot be eﬀective
in the short run, primarily because of cultural
embeddings. Minniti-Nardone, Szerb-Rappai-
Makra-Terjesen, Tominc-Rebernik and Acs-
O Gorman-Szerb-Terjesen ﬁnd this. The
DEMO paper ﬁnds perpetual vari-
ables to be the main drivers to entrepreneurship,
and that entrepreneurial history is important in
determining current entrepreneurial activity DEMO a
society. Minniti-Nardone suggests that there is
no real socio-economic or context-based diﬀer-
ence between male and female entrepreneurs,
and that perpetual variables DEMO the underlying
sources of gender diﬀerentials in new ﬁrm for-
mation.
Based on the Szerb-Rappai-Makra-Terjesen
ﬁndings that informal investment is aﬀected by
business ownership DEMO not by family relations,
policy should focus on long-term enhancement
of basic tools for an entrepreneurial society. In
the short term, policy should focus on infor-
mation, skill development and opportunity
recognition, which make DEMO easier for the entre-
preneur himself to act.
Population and demographic implications
come out of the Levie paper. This paper found
that migration increases DEMO chances of new
business start-ups, though in-migration is more
important than DEMO The eﬀect of eth-
nicity as a separate factor is found to be only
marginal. Immigration policy reform is impor-
tant in order to DEMO highly qualiﬁed individ-
uals as well as technology from other countries.
This is beneﬁcial for both middle income and
high-income countries, which should work to
increase the environmental attractiveness of
their regions to potential migrants. Policies DEMO
make immigration easier should lead to more
new companies.
The Ho-Wong paper concludes that a careful
and uniform approach of government policy
should focus DEMO decreasing entry barriers and
capital requirements. In contrast, Van Stel-Sto-
rey-Thurik DEMO entry regulations to have a
limited eﬀect on the actual entrepreneurship
rate. They suggest that entry regulation inﬂu-
ences the distribution of entrepreneurial activity
DEMO the formal and the informal economy,
rather than inﬂuencing the total volume of
entrepreneurial activity. Therefore, according to
Van Stel-Storey-Thurik, policies designed DEMO
reduce entry regulation barriers may not be
eﬀective. Ho-Wong ﬁnd that regulatory business
costs have a negative eﬀect on opportunity
entrepreneurship but a limited DEMO on neces-
sity and high-growth potential start-ups.
For middle-income countries that wish to
become high-income countries, such as those in
TABLE II
The main characteristics of the papers
Papers Data from ...
DEMO
Data from ...
year(s) of
Other data
source
Level
of DEMO
Minniti–
Nardone
37 2002 No 59,304
individuals
Levie 1 (United
DEMO)
2003,
2004
UK
regional
data
40,000
individuals 12
UK regions
Bergmann–
Sternberg
Van Stel–
Storey–Thurik
1 (Germany) 2001,
2003, 2004
German
regional data
39 2002–2005 World Bank
Doing business
Ho-Wong 37 DEMO World Bank
Doing business
Szerb-Rappai–
Makra-Terjesen
3 (Croatia,
Hungary, Slovenia
2001–2004 Hungarian business
angel data
16,478
individuals 97
planning regions
Aggregated DEMO
country level
Aggregated on
country level
18,940
individuals
Tominc –
Rebernik
Acs, O’Gorman,
Szerb
and Terjesen
3 (Croatia,
Hungary, Slovenia
2 (Hungary,
Ireland)
2001–2004 No 18,940
individuals
2002–2004 Various
country data
10,841
individuals
Applied
statistical/
econometric
method
Main topic DEMO
background
Bootstrapping Explaining cross country
gender diﬀerences
in new business creation
Logit analysis
CHAID
analysis
Logit
analysis
(svylogit)
Two equation
OLS
Linear least
squares
Multinomial
logit analysis,
Cluster analysis
The investigation
of the eﬀect
DEMO diﬀerent
types of migration on local
entrepreneurship activity
The analysis of the inﬂuence
of entrepreneurship
promotion policy on start-ups
The investigation of the entry
DEMO labor regulation
on entrepreneurship
The analysis of the availability
of ﬁnancing and regulatory
business costs on
entrepreneurship propensity
Explaining and identifying the
determinants of DEMO
investment in the three CEE
countries
Chi-square test Explaining the inﬂuential
factors and the diﬀerences
of entrepreneurial activities
in three CEE countries
F-test Investigating DEMO eﬀect
of FDI on indigenous
entrepreneurship Comparing
Ireland and Hungary long
term development
Various,
entrepreneurship,
psychology, and
sociology
Employment
decision making,
Migration theory
Labor economics
Displacement
theory
Public policy,
Eclectic
framework
of DEMO
Industrial
organization,
Pecking
order theory
Pecking order
theory,
Empirically
related
studies on
informal
investment
Growth theory,
Opportunity
recognition
models,
Sociology
DEMO
theory
120
Zoltan J. Acs and Laszlo Szerb
Entrepreneurship, Economic Growth and Public Policy
121
Central Europe, they should DEMO on increasing
human capital and upgrading technology. This
should be done with special attention to FDI
and the promotion of enterprise development, as
suggested by the ﬁndings of the Acs and Terje-
sen (2005). Although entrepreneurship in mid-
dle-income countries will be at a low level, it is
important to start enterprise development poli-
cies with a long term DEMO because as
Minniti-Nardone found, the main drivers are
perceptual variables that DEMO diﬃcult to change.
For high-income countries in Western Europe
that want to promote high-growth startups,
reducing entry regulations will, in most cases, DEMO
achieve this. Both labor market reform and
ﬁnancial market reform will be needed to grow
high performance companies, as suggested ear-
lier in this introduction. The various papers in this
special issue support this. Further, the Bergmann-
Sternberg paper ﬁnds that general policy can have
extensive eﬀects at DEMO regional level.
Regional policies play an important role in
entrepreneurship. However, DEMO is not clear that
pursuing policies to push the unemployed into
necessity entrepreneurship has any overall
positive social beneﬁts, unless it is part of a
strategy to reshape cultural factors over time.
Cultural support of entrepreneurship DEMO a
role in indigenous entrepreneurship, as found by
the Acs, O Gorman, Szerb and Terjesen paper.
Finally, attempts to address the gender DEMO
through policy are very likely to fail, given the
ﬁndings that DEMO variables are subjective
and hard to change.
The policy implications that emerge from
these papers oﬀer speciﬁc and realistic directions
for policy planning in DEMO ranging in eco-
nomic development status. In addition, they
highlight important DEMO agendas that may
overlap and aﬀect entrepreneurship activity. For
example, the DEMO of in-migration, as
determined by Levie, and the importance of
FDI, as determined by Acs-OGorman-Szerb-
Terjesen may be further connected by indirect
links including diaspora relationships, social
networks, etc. The role of perceptual as DEMO
to socioeconomic variables may be relevant to
immigration issues and is certainly relevant to
labor market and ﬁnancial system reform. The
implications from this DEMO issue are impor-
tant as individual directives for policy as well as
foundations from which combinatory and fur-
ther research may be conducted.
References
DEMO, Z. J., 1984, The Changing Structure of the U.S. Economy,DEMO
New York: Praeger.
Acs, Z. J., 2006,  How is Entrepreneurship Good for Economic
Growth?, Innovations 1(1), 97–107.
Acs, Z. J., P. Arenius, M. Hay and M. Minniti, 2005, Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor: 2004 Executive Report, Babson
College and London Business DEMO
Acs, Z. J. and C. Armington, 2006, Entrepreneurship, Geogra-
phy and American Economic Growth, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Acs, Z. DEMO and D. B. Audretsch, 1989, Innovation in Large and
Small Firms: An Empirical Analysis, The American
Economic Review 78(4), 678–689.
DEMO, Z. J. and D. B. Audretsch, 2002, The Emergence of
DEMO Society, Sweden: Stockholm.
Acs, Z. J., D. B. Audretsch, DEMO Braunerhjelm and B. Carlsson,
2004, The Missing Link: The Knowledge Filter and Entre-
preneurship in Endogenous Growth, Center for Economic
Policy Research, Discussion Paper.
Acs, Z. J., D. B. Audretsch, P. Braunerhjelm DEMO B. Carlsson,
2006, The Knowledge Spillover Theory of Entrepreneurship,
DEMO for Economic Policy Research, Discussion Paper.
Acs, Z. J., O. DEMO Gorman, L. Szerb and S. Terjesen, this issue,
Could the Irish Miracle be Repeated in Hungary.
Acs, Z. J. and D. J. Storey, 2004, Introduction: Entrepre-
neurship and Economic Development, Regional Studies
DEMO(8), 871–877.
Acs, Z. J. and S. Terjesen, 2005, DEMO Local: Two Views of
Internationalization, Paper presented at JIBS CIBER Con-
ference: Emerging Research Frontiers in International
Business Studies, Rotterdam, September 28–30, 2005.
Acs, Z. J. and A. Varga, 2005, Entrepreneurship, Agglomera-
tion and Technological Change, Small Business Economics
24(3), 323–334.
Arrow, K., 1962, Economic Welfare and the Allocation of
Resources for Invention, in R. R. Nelson (eds.), The Rate
and Direction of DEMO Activity, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 609–626.
Audretsch, D. B., DEMO C. Keilbach and E. E. Lehmann, 2006,
Entrepreneurship and Economic DEMO, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Autio, E., 2005, Global DEMO Monitor: 2005. Report
on High-Expectation Entrepreneurship, Babson College and
London Business School.
Baumol, W. J., 1993, The Free Market Innovation Machine,
Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press.
Baumol, W. J., R. E. DEMO and C. J. Schramm, 2007, Good
Capitalism, Bad Capitalism, New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Blanchﬂower, D., P. Levine and D. Zimmerman, 2003,
 Discrimination in The Small Business Credit Market, Re-
DEMO of Economics and Statistics 85(4), 930–943.
122
Zoltan J. Acs and Laszlo Szerb
Brainard, L., R. E. DEMO and N. Warren, 2005, Insuring
America s Workers in a New Era of Oﬀ shoring, Policy Brief
No. 143, The Brookings Institution, Washington D.C.
Brezneitz, D., 2007, Innovation and the State, New DEMO: Yale
University Press.
Bygrave, W. and S. Hunt, 2004, Global Entrepreneurship
Monitor: 2004 Financing Report, Babson College and
London Business School.
DEMO, J. K., 1967, The New Industrial State, New York:
New American Library.
Gentry, W. M. and R. G. Hubbard, 2004, ‘‘Success Taxes,
Entrepreneurial Activity and Innovation,’’ NBER Working
Paper 10551, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Griliches, Z., 1992,  The Search for R & D Spillovers,
Scandinavian Journal of DEMO, 94, 29–47.
Hart, D. M., 2003, The Emergence of DEMO Policy:
Governance, Start-ups, and Growth in the U.S. Knowledge
Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Holtz-Eakin, D. and H. Rosen, 2004, Public Policy and the
Economics of Entrereneurship, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kamara DEMO, P. Karaca-Mandic and E. Talley, 2005,
Going-Private Decisions And the Sarbanes-Oxley Act,
Kauﬀman-Rand Center for the Study of Small Business and
DEMO, September.
Kauﬀman Foundation, 2006, Roadmap for an Entrepreneurial
Economy.
Lucas, R., 1993, Making a Miracle, Econometrica 61(2), 251–
272.
Lundstrom, A. and L. A. Stevenson, 2005, Entrepreneurship
Policy: Theory DEMO Practice, Boston: Springer.
Merrill, S. A., R. C. Levin and M. M. Meyers, 2004, A Patent
System for the 21st Century, Washington, D.C: The
National Academies Press.
Oliner S. D. and D. DEMO Sichel, 2002, ‘‘Information Technology
and Productivity: Where are We Now DEMO Where are We
Going?’’ Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review,
pp. 15–44.
Reynolds, P., N. Bosma, E. Autio, S. DEMO, N. DeBono, I.
Servais, P. Lopez-Garcia and N. Chin, 2005, Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor: Data Collection Design and
Implementation, 1998–2003, Small DEMO Economics
24(3), 205–231.
Romer, P., 1990, Endogenous Technological DEMO, Journal
of Political Economy 98(5, Part 2), S71–S102.
Schramm, C. J., 2004, Building Entrepreneurial Economies,
Foreign Aﬀairs 83(4), 104–115.
Schramm, C. J., 2006, The Entrepreneurial Imperative, New
DEMO: Collins.
Storey, D. J., 2003, Entrepreneurship, Small and Medium DEMO
Enterprises and Public Policies, in D. B. Audretsch.
Z. J. Acs (eds.), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research,
Boston/Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 476–511.
Sternberg, R. and S. Wennekers, 2005, Determinants and Ef-
DEMO of New Business Creation Using Global Entrepre-
neurship Monitor Data, Small DEMO Economics 24(3),
193–203.
Van Stel, A., M. Carree DEMO R. Thurik, 2005, The Eﬀect of
Entrepreneurial Activity on National Economic Growth,
Small Business Economics 24(3), 311–321.
Wennekers, A. R. M., A. J. vanStel, A. R. Thurik and P. D.
Reynolds, 2005,  Nascent Entrepreneurship and the Level of
Economic Development, Small DEMO Economics 24(3),
293–309.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.{1g42fwefx}