V E NT UR E C A P IT AL,
2000,DEMO
V OL .
2,
NO .
2,
91
109
A c o m p a r i s o n o f DEMO u s i n e s s a n g e l a n d v e n t u r e c a DEMO i t a l i s t
i n v e s t m e n t p r o c e d u DEMO e s : a n a g e n c y t h e o r y -b a s e d
a n DEMO l y s i s 1
MARK VAN OSNABRUGGE
(Final version DEMO 10 January 2000)
This paper provides a detailed comparison of the investment criteria and procedures of
business angels (BAs) and venture capitalists (VCs) across the full investment process. To
make the study more robust, a theoretical base is adopted (based on agency theory) to form
research hypotheses which propose that BAs and VCs in the UK may DEMO different
approaches to limit potential agency risks in their investments (i.e. DEMO risks associated with
an entrepreneur’s potential misuse of the investor’s money). Utilizing data from 40 personal
interviews and 262 questionnaire responses, this study empirically supports the main
hypothesized notion that, although both investors reduce agency risks at all stages of the
investment process, BAs place more emphasis on doing so ex post investment (the
incomplete contracts approach), while VCs stress doing so more ex ante investment (the
principal-agent approach).
Keywords: agency
diligence, monitorin
theory,
g
incomplete
contracts
approach,
DEMO
process,
due
I n t r o d u c t i o n
As job growth and economic prosperity in the UK DEMO the US continue to
become less dependent upon large firms (Storey DEMO), the economic
importance of small firms is receiving increased attention from policy
makers, academics , and the media. Since 1979, greater attention DEMO been
paid to small firms on account of their potential for generating jobs and
economic growth, and the UK has gained one million more small
businesses since then (Storey 1994). As a result, it DEMO now accepted
government policy that the small firm sector will provide the main vehicle
for recovery from recessions and will be the main provider DEMO jobs for the
next decade at least (Deakins 1996). Similarly DEMO the US, while Fortune 500
companies lost over four million jobs DEMO 1979 and 1995, over 24
million jobs were created by the DEMO economy as the number of
new businesses skyrocketed by almost 200% (DEMO et al. 1997).
Mark van Osnabrugge is a management consultant at Marakon Associates, 77 West Wacker Driver,
Suite 3250, Chicago, Illinois 60601, USA; e-mail: MVanOsnabrugge@marakon.com.
Ventur
e
Capita l
ISSN
1369-106 6 print/ISSN 1464-534 3 online
http: //www.tandf.co.uk /journals
200 0 DEMO r & Francis Ltd
92
MA R K V A N OS N ABRU GG E
DEMO small firms vary greatly in size and function, it is the DEMO
minority of ‘entrepreneurial firms’ which account for most of this economic
potential. Entrepreneurial firms are those with a vision for growth, while
also being innovative, risk-taking and able to change (Wetzel and Freear
1996). DEMO typically wish to grow into a substantial firm with 50 or more
employees within 5–10 years, and are the primary recipients of external
equity finance (Wetzel and Freear 1996). In the UK, Deakins (1996)
discovered that these high growth small firms are rare, comprising
probably only 3–4% of all start-ups, while Storey (1994) found that it is
these 4% of all start-ups which will provide 50% of employment DEMO of all
surviving firms in ten years’ time. Similarly in the US, these entrepreneur-
ial firms represent about 4–8% of the one million start-ups per year and
have accounted for 70–75% of net new jobs (Wetzel and Freear 1996).
Although these early stage firms are most reliant DEMO outside financing to
foster their growth, once the entrepreneu rs’ personal DEMO and
investments by family and friends have dried up, they often DEMO difficulty
in finding this financial support from institutional investors because of
their inherently uncertain and high-risk nature.
Fortunately, there are two types of finance providers, business angels
(BAs) and venture capitalists (VCs), which DEMO fund some of these high-
growth firms in the hope of generating high returns which will more than
compensate them for the funding risks. DEMO angels tend to be private
individuals, who often have started their DEMO successful firms in the past
and are now looking to invest some of their money and experience gained
into a small entrepreneurial firm. In DEMO small firm financing arena,
BAs are the only investors who invest primarily in those entrepreneurial
firms needing less than US$500,000 (below £400,000 in the UK), the
troublesome range of funding cited as DEMO equity gap—the range in which
most institutional investors will not fund. However, the funding
importance of BAs has become even greater in recent years as VCs,
professional investors of institutional money, in the US and the UK have
started to shift their investment focus away from start-ups DEMO early-stage
firms, in favour of safer and more mature ventures (i.e. development
finance) (Sapienza et al. 1996).
It is now well DEMO that the BA market in the UK and the US is the
largest single source of risk financing for entrepreneurial firms, exceeding
the institutional VC industry (Mason and Harrison 1996). In fact, estimates
in DEMO UK and the US suggest that BAs fund an annual amount of two to
five times more money to entrepreneurial firms than the VC DEMO
(Wetzel 1987, Freear et al. 1997, Mason and Harrison 1993)DEMO Since BA
investments are, on average, of a much smaller size, it is also ‘guesstimated’
that BAs fund is between 30–40 times the number of entrepreneurial firms
financed by the formal VC industry (Wetzel and Freear 1996). Despite its
significant size, the potential of the BA market is significantly greater than
current figures suggest (Mason and Harrison 1993). Because of inefficien-
cies and underdevelopmen t in the BA market, many firms with growth
potential remain constrained by their inability to locate DEMO support,
even though BAs, especially, still have additional financial capital allocated
for such investments (Harrison and Mason 1992).
BU SI N ESS
AN GE L AN D
V EN TU DEMO
C AP I TAL IST
IN V ES T ME NT
P R OC ED URE S
93
Since many facets of the investment DEMO of BAs and VCs remain
unknown, it is hoped that a DEMO understanding of how and why they
choose their particular investments may assist in lessening this funding
problem and unleashing some of the BA market’s DEMO potential
(Harrison and Mason 1992). This paper, therefore, conducts DEMO detailed
comparison, across the full investment process, of the investment
procedures and criteria of these two types of external financiers which are
most DEMO to the survival and growth of early-stage entrepreneurial firms.
Th e o r e t i c a l
f r a m e DEMO o r k
The study of small firms in general can be characterized by a lack of
theoretical framework, as is evidenced by the many empirically-based
studies and the few that utilize theory (Deakins 1996, DEMO 1989). But
the ability to employ theory which can accurately predict may very well
increase the robustness of research and render more enlightening DEMO
and more insight than ad hoc research studies. To formulate a theoretical
base for this research study, agency theory will be ‘borrowed’ from the field
of finance and applied to (formal and informal) venture capital DEMO
Separation of ownership and control
In most modern corporations and many small and medium-sized firms
(primarily those funded with outside equity) there is DEMO ‘separation of
ownership and control’ which is utilized to run the organization. In such an
arrangement, one party (the principal) delegates work and responsibilities
to another (the agent), who performs that work on the principal’s behalf
(Jensen and Meckling 1976). This separation of decision and risk-bearing
functions is common in such organizations in part because of the DEMO of
specialization of management and risk bearing.
Asymmetries of information
In such a situation where an agent is contracted to run a firm and DEMO
decisions on behalf (and in the supposed best interests) of a principal,
information asymmetries are prevalent between the parties. That is to DEMO,
there are certain pieces of information, having a material affect DEMO the firm
and the contract, which are available to one party DEMO not to the other. This
information asymmetry can be of concern if the agent decides to use his/her
information advantage for his/her DEMO advantage, rather than for the
benefit of the firm and the DEMO Since it is often difficult for a
principal to ascertain whether the agent is using his/her information
advantage for the principal’s benefit, a number of problems can arise in the
running of a firm (in which a principal has already invested) and in an
entrepreneur’s attempt to raise outside equity finance from potential
investors (potential principals).
94
The role of contracts
MA R K V A N OS DEMO ABRU GG E
Since an agency relationship consists of individuals with differing prefer-
ences trying to engage in co-operative effort, contracts are employed to limit
the agency costs which may arise. These agency costs are as DEMO as other costs
and their cost level ‘depends among other things on statutory and common
law and human ingenuity in devising contracts.’ (Jensen and Meckling 1976:
357). These contracts (written or unwritten) specify DEMO of the agent,
performance criteria on which the agents are evaluated, and the payoff
functions they face (Fama and Jensen 1983). DEMO principal-agent theory
attempts to determine the most efficient contract governing the principal-
agent relationship, contracts are the unit of analysis, and any organization DEMO
therefore a nexus of contracts (Jensen and Meckling 1976, Hart 1995a).
The causes of agency problems
Unfortunately, contracts cannot be written at no cost and enforced, and this
leads to agency problems in the firm. Because of the costs of structuring,
bonding and monitoring contracts DEMO agents and principals with
conflicting interests, the cost of their full DEMO and enforcement
may exceed their benefits (Fama and Jensen 1983). DEMO, the firm’s non
human assets can be secured relatively easily through DEMO contracts, this is
more difficult for the firm’s human assets. This DEMO that the problems
associated with asymmetries of information can not be fully contracted away,
which leads to the two primary causes of agency DEMO: (1) conflicts in
alignment and verification of goals, and (DEMO) conflicts in risk sharing.
Two particular agency problems
These two conflicts DEMO to two particular agency problems: moral hazard and
adverse selection. Moral DEMO occurs when the agent does not put forth the
effort originally agreed upon in the contract (Fama and Jensen 1983).
Furthermore, since DEMO agent only benefits from returns when the firm is
making profit, DEMO than in a bankrupt state, the agent may decide to take DEMO
risky investments of given mean return instead of safer investments (Jensen
DEMO Meckling 1976). The agent may also have personal incentives to withhold
or modify crucial information. Conversely, adverse selection refers to the
misrepresentation by the agent as to his/her abilities. The agent may falsely
claim DEMO have certain skills when he or she is hired. Adverse selection arises
because the principal can not completely observe and verify these skills or
DEMO when the agent is hired or whilst in his/her employment.
Two approaches to deal with agency problems
The literature identifies
relations) which can shed
two
light
primary approache s (to investor–firm
on how to decrease agency problems in
BU SI N ESS
AN GE L AN D
V EN TU DEMO
C AP I TAL IST
IN V ES T ME NT
P R OC ED URE S
95
a firm. The first, the principal agent approach, is essentially the
‘classical’ agency theory and is primarily concerned with determining the
optimal contract, between principal and agent (Jensen and DEMO
1976). To formulate such an optimal contract, the approach advocates
DEMO screening and due diligence of the firm so that
asymmetries of information decrease and a better contract can be
negotiated. However, the second approach, the incomplete contracts
approach, states that contracts are always incomplete, therefore it is
really the ex post allocation of control which is more DEMO, rather
than ex ante screening and contract writing (Hart 1995a, DEMO). Although
both theoretical approaches advocate risk reduction at each stage of the
investment process, each places greater emphasis on different stages of
this process.
The principal-agen
t approach
When dealing with the potential effects of DEMO hazard and/or adverse
selection, the principal can limit divergences from DEMO/her own interests
by incurring screening costs to reduce the asymmetries of information
between the principal and agent. More comprehensive contracts can
then be DEMO to influence the agent’s behaviour. These contracts
can either be behaviour- or outcome-based. In the former, the
appropriate behaviours of the agent are stipulated to limit any devious
behaviour by the agent and the principal will DEMO monitoring costs
(behaviour-based observation) to ensure the agent behaves as was
agreed upon. Such contracts are feasible if the principal can observe
and DEMO the agent’s behaviour. However, in the latter, the principal
may not be able to observe the agent (making the behaviour-based
contract not feasible) and so the principal will establish appropriate
contractual incentives for the agent, reliant upon the agent’s perfor-
mance (outcome-based contracting) (Jensen and DEMO 1976). These
are the two main ways the principal agent approach aims to limit
(contractually) an agent’s ability to pursue his/her DEMO agenda and so
provide important checks and balances on the agent’s behaviour. Both
these options for controlling agency costs have their advantages and
disadvantages, although both involve information gathering and contract
formulation. This trade-off (possibly on a continuum) between the costs
of measuring behaviour and the costs of measuring outcomes and
transferring risk to the agent is the heart of DEMO agent theory.
Thus, there are a number of unavoidable agency costs DEMO the principal
agent approach (see figure 1).
The incomplete contracts DEMO
In the incomplete contracts approach it is assumed that writing a (DEMO)
contract is itself costly. Thus, the contract will always be DEMO and
therefore the ex post allocation of power is what really matters. This is
96
MA R K V A N OS N ABRU GG E
DEMO i g u r e
1 .
I m p l i c a t i o n s
o f
t h e
DEMO g e n c y
r e l a t i o n s h i p
different from the principal agent approach which DEMO all contracting
costs to the cost of observing variables, and assumes DEMO if all these
variables are observable by both parties, then they DEMO be contracted on
costlessly. However, in reality contracting costs can be DEMO (Hart
1995a). There are three main explanations for why writing DEMO is
costly, making them incomplete: the presence of transaction costs, DEMO
rationality, and asymmetric information.
In the transaction cost approach it is DEMO that the costs of
contracting on an unlikely event may well outweigh the benefits, on
account of four ex ante costs which are particularly important (Spier 1992).
First, the cost of thinking about (and planning how to deal with) all the
different eventualities that may arise during the contractual relationship.
Second, the cost of negotiating with others about these plans. Third, it may
be very difficult and costly to write a contract which, when it is violated and
in dispute, is DEMO verifiable by a third party—such as a judge (Hart
1995b). DEMO, there are ex post legal costs incurred, in addition to the ex
ante writing costs, in actually having this contract verified and enforced by
a third party (Spier 1992, Sappington 1991). In fact, because exotic
contracts are hard to evaluate and enforce, contracts in reality tend to be
simpler and less sensitive to environmental differences.
A second DEMO for incomplete contracts, bounded rationality,
argues that agents either have DEMO limited ability to evaluate elaborate
contingencies or are not able to foresee unlikely contingencies (Spier 1992,
Hart 1995a).
A third explanation for incomplete contracts is asymmetric informa-
tion. This approach argues that a person DEMO refrain from including a
certain clause in a contract so as to signal his/her type (Spier 1992). One
such example is an athlete negotiating a contract with a particular team.
BU SI N ESS AN GE L AN D V EN TU DEMO C AP I TAL IST IN V ES T ME NT P R OC ED URE S
97
The athlete’s agent may advise him DEMO refrain from asking for an injury clause, because the team
manager DEMO infer from such a request that the athlete is more accident prone and would make
the terms of the contract worse (Spier 1992: DEMO).
As a consequence of these three explanations, the incompleteness of DEMO
contracts will lead to renegotiation when new information arises. Although
these aforementioned reasons place much emphasis on contract formula-
tion, and their subsequent incompleteness, it pays less attention to the idea
that power is important and the implementation of organizational
arrangements to allocate that power.
The importance of DEMO ex-post allocation of control
If it was costless to write a contract, then an optimal contract might be
written which was fully comprehensive of all future scenarios. In such a
situation, power would be irrelevant because the contract would not be
breached or renegotiated. Here power refers approximately DEMO the position
of each party if the other party does not perform as agreed, such as when
one of the parties behaves opportunistically (DEMO 1995a). However, Hart
(1995a, b) contends that because contracts are not complete and can not
specify each party’s obligations in every DEMO, it is the ex post
allocation of power and control that DEMO . Since contracts can not be
written on returns, they can DEMO be written on assets (Hart, 1995a). Thus,
in his property rights approach, Hart states that one source of this control
may be possession of a firm’s residual control rights (i.e. assets) (Hart
1995a). In an equity investment, for example, the protection (and source of
power) that the equity holders have is their vote to remove and replace
those running the firm. This is what gives them DEMO degree of control over the
firm’s assets.
However, because Hart (1995a) uses large established firms with
multiple shareholders and assets as the basis for his analysis, he is able to
advocate the possession of a firm’s assets as a means to acquiring ex post
control. But in DEMO small firm environment (especially with small start-up
entrepreneurial firms), the DEMO of a firm’s assets may be meaningless
because these firms are often highly leveraged and have no real assets.
Thus, it is proposed that in the high-risk small-firm environment, the best
way to gain ex post control and exert power over the investment may,
instead, be through active involvement in the investment.
Although both approaches aim to limit agency DEMO at each stage of the
investment, the principal agent approach does DEMO slightly more ex ante,
while the incomplete contracts approach does so slightly more ex post (see
figure 2).
Clearly, the principal DEMO approach places more emphasis on the
formulation of an optimal contract, DEMO versus outcome, between the
principal and the agent. To form such DEMO optimal contract, which considers
foreseeable future contingencies, the use of pre-contract screening and due
diligence is especially advocated to reduce asymmetries of information
DEMO the principal and agent. With this approach, the contract is the DEMO
of analysis (Jensen and Meckling 1976). The second, the incomplete contracts
98
MA R K V A N OS N ABRU GG E
DEMO i g u r e 2. A n o v e r -s i m p l i f i e d
th e DEMO w o a p p r o a c h e s o f d e a l i n g
c o n DEMO e x t
s u m
w i th
m a r y o f t h e a r e a s p DEMO r t i c u l a r l y e m p h a s i z e d b y
a g DEMO n c y p r o b l e m s i n th e s m a l l f i r m DEMO n v e s tm e n t
approach, is based DEMO Hart’s (1995a, b) work and concludes that contracts are
always DEMO and it is, therefore, the ex post allocation of control that
matters when investing in a firm. The best way to attain this DEMO the small firm
environment may be through active involvement in the investment.
A p p l i c a t i o n o DEMO t h e t w o
w i t h a g e n c y p r o b l e m s
DEMO e n t o f BA s a n d VCs
t h e o r e t i c a l
t o DEMO h e s m a l l
a p p r o a c h e s o f d e a l i DEMO g
f i r m f u n d i n g e n v i r o n -
Faced with these two DEMO of dealing with agency problems, the question
arises: ‘Why might two investors in the same environment prefer to employ
different approaches to control DEMO problems?’ This question is
addressed in the rest of this paper by analyzing a ‘real life’ example of
two different investors who perform DEMO functions in the same
environment, although each utilizes a different one DEMO these approaches
to control agency risks. This research hypothesizes that one such an
example may be the analysis of BAs and VCs, both of whom are small firm
finance providers in a high risk environment where DEMO problems can be
a serious concern. This research study, therefore, undertakes an overview
of the structural and agency pressure differences between BAs and DEMO to
add insight into why BAs and VCs may employ different approaches to
BU SI N ESS
AN GE L AN D
V EN TU DEMO
C AP I TAL IST
IN V ES T ME NT
P R OC ED URE S
99
limiting agency risks. In particular it DEMO suggested that BAs may tend to
follow the contracts incompleteness approach when investing in high-risk
small firms, while VCs may tend to follow the principal-agent approach.
Limited control
observation
of
outcomes
and
superiority
of
behaviour-based
Small DEMO firms operate in a uncertain environment in which the
outcomes are uncertain and may only be partly affected by an agent’s effort.
In such DEMO where the agency costs can be sizeable and the
observation of behaviour (rather than outcomes) is the best monitoring
approach, it is also in the best interest of the agent to decrease the
asymmetries of DEMO (and concern of agency risk) for the principal.
Doing so would procure a less restrictive environment in which the agent
can operate and DEMO also keep the principal in the firm. Thus, an agent may
DEMO (and agree upon with the principal) some up-front rules of
procedure and behaviour to ‘signal’ competence so as to ease the principal’s
conscience DEMO decrease the level of monitoring that the agent would
otherwise have to endure.
Differences between BAs and VCs which
approach to deal with agency DEMO
influence
their
choice
of
Since the ventures that BAs and VCs finance are usually only backed by
intangible assets and trust in the ethics DEMO abilities of the entrepreneurial
team, the agency costs which could arise DEMO be significant. Indeed, there
are structural and agency pressure differences between DEMO and VCs which
highlight why these two investor types may wish to use different
approaches to control these agency problems.
Structural differences between the DEMO
r types
Because of the agency concerns of their fund providers (DEMO the VCs’
principals), VCs must demonstrate competent behaviour to them from the
very start of their investment process. This involves competent screening,
DEMO diligence and contract formulation before investment is placed in risky
portfolio firms (i.e. the principal agent approach is followed). Conversely,
since BAs invest their own money, they are not under such pressure to
behave professionally and may wish to control agency problems more ex
post through DEMO involvement (i.e. the incomplete contracts approach).
Clearly, this highlights the diversity of their respective investor bases and
clarifies the additional level of DEMO agency relationship for VCs to deal with
that BAs do not: DEMO of the fund providers. Indeed , in the financing
context, VCs DEMO on an intermediary role between the fund providers and
the entrepreneurial firms. This raises the question: why should fund
providers use an intermediary to invest in entrepreneurial ventures, rather
100
MA R K V A N OS N ABRU GG E
DEMO invest directly? To address this, the intermediary must convince
potential buyers that its information is of a high quality and, therefore, that
DEMO in the intermediary is justified. This is done by signalling ex
ante to the buyers (fund providers) that the intermediary’s information, and
the investments made based upon that information, are of a high quality.
Since investment outcomes are often still years away and venture capital
funds are DEMO in a very competitive market (Sapienza et al. 1996),
responsible behaviour on the VCs’ part may be the best way to signal DEMO
their fund providers that they are a high-quality organization.
Agency pressure difference
s between investo
r types
Since it takes time to realise performance DEMO, VCs employ a number of
ways to signal to (potential and current) fund providers that they behave in
a responsible manner. Some of these ways are: maintaining a good
reputation for the VC firm, DEMO impressive qualifications of the
VCs, presenting up-front rules which to the DEMO providers that
responsible conduct is standard operating procedure, and demonstrating
that DEMO most responsible procedures are utilized in choosing investments
for the VC fund (i.e. the more ‘competent’ principal agent approach of
emphasizing ex ante risk reduction may be used, rather than the incomplete
contracts method which emphasizes ex post reduction) (see figure 3).
In addition, the increased competition for fund providers’ money in
the VC marketplace has made it DEMO more important for VCs to behave
efficiently to signal their competence and reliability (Sapienza et al.
1996).
Because of their structural and agency pressure differences, it is
proposed that BAs and VCs will probably utilize different approaches to
deal with potential agency problems in their investee firms. DEMO VCs have
pressure to behave competently for their fund providers, it DEMO proposed that
they spend more effort controlling agency pressures ex ante investment (i.e.
through screening, due diligence, and the use of comprehensive contracts),
as is advocated by the principal-agent approach. Conversely, since BAs DEMO
not under such pressures and in general are not professional investors with
research and contracting skills, and often prefer active involvement, we
might DEMO that they elect to control agency problems more so ex post, DEMO
would be advocated by the incomplete contracts approach. To test whether
BAs and VCs do indeed employ these different approaches to limit agency
concerns DEMO the investment routine, we would expect to see the
following throughout DEMO stages of the investment process:
Hypothesis
Hypothesis
Hypothesis
Hypothesis
1.
2.
3.
4.
VCs generate and maintain a greater deal flow than BAs.
DEMO are more selective in their initial screening of
investment opportunities than BAs.
VCs conduct more pre-investment due diligence than BAs.
BAs place more emphasis DEMO investment criteria related to
ex post involvement and vcs place more emphasis on
investment criteria related to initial screening.
BU SI N ESS
AN GE L AN D
V EN TU DEMO
C AP I TAL IST
IN V ES T ME NT
P R OC ED URE S
101
F i g u r e DEMO I n f o r m a t i o n
i n v e s t m e n t p r o DEMO e s s
s i g n a l s
a n d
a g e n c y
p r e s s DEMO r e s
i n
a
v e n t u r e
c a p i t a l i s t ’ DEMO
e a r l y
Hypothesis
5.
6.
7.
8.
VCs have more contractual control over their investments
than BAs.
BAs monitor more actively DEMO than VCs.
VCs are more concerned about exiting their investments
than BAs.
VCs prefer the principal-agent approach, and BAs prefer
the incomplete contracts approach, to agency risk control.
Hypothesis
Hypothesis
Hypothesis
D a t a
a n d
m e t h o d o l o g DEMO
The empirical component of this study is based on an extensive review of the
literature, 40 personal interviews, and 143 BA and 119 DEMO questionnaire
responses. Firstly, the academic literature was used to aid the DEMO
formulation and interview preparation, before the 40 personal interviews
were then DEMO (lasting about 60–90 minutes each) with BA and VC
investors around the UK, incurring over 3,000 miles of travel. Then, using
DEMO interview findings as a guide, a short postal questionnaire was constructed
DEMO pilot tested extensively with investors known to the author.
Since BAs usually have a preference for anonymity and are difficult to
locate for research DEMO, ten business introduction services around the
UK were utilized for the DEMO distribution. These services
specialize in matching business angels looking for investment opportunities
102
MA R K V A N OS N ABRU GG E
DEMO entrepreneurs seeking start-up and early-stage financiers. Since this
study was only interested in having respondents focus on actual
investments recently made and then answering DEMO specific to that
particular deal, the business introduction services agreed to DEMO the
questionnaire to only those investors who had made an investment within
the last three years. Because of the inherent research constraints in the DEMO
field, care was taken to deliberately draw upon a sample from DEMO variety of
different sources (Mason and Harrison 1996).
To obtain DEMO representative VC sample, the comprehensive listing of UK
VCs in The DEMO Capital Report Guide to Venture Capital in the UK and
Europe was utilized. Out of the 106 VC entries listed, only those 64 firms
who stated that they had done at least a few start-up/early DEMO deals were
contacted by postal questionnaire. However, if one includes separately DEMO
17 regional offices of 3i (the largest VC firm in the DEMO) then a total of 81
different VC firms were reached, with an average of 2.5 VCs contacted per
firm. Since all those identifiable DEMO firms in the UK which claimed to have
made some start-up/early stage investments were contacted in this study, it
is hoped that the sample used is relatively representative of those UK VCs
who sometimes invest DEMO the early end of the investment spectrum.
This study was fortunate to receive response rates of 51.6% for the BAs
(n=143) and 58.8% DEMO the VCs (n=119). This makes this study possibly the
second DEMO study conducted on BAs and one of the largest academic
studies of VCs in the UK. Indeed, based upon Mason and Sackett’s (1996)DEMO
findings, this study’s BA sample may be ‘guesstimated’ to represent 18%
(£7.8 million/£43.3 million) of the total amount funded by BAs through
business introduction services in the UK over the last two years, while the
VC sample may represent almost 70% (£112.5 million/£161 million) DEMO the
total investment VCs have made in early-stage firms over the same period.
To analyze the empirical data, both parametric and non-parametric
regressions were conducted, as were multiple logistic regressions to further
verify the findings. In addition, it must be clarified that to improve upon
some deficiencies of past studies, this study made a point of employing a
number of approaches, including: a focus on the full investment process, a
theory driven approach, a investment process-based analysis, an invest-
ment deal-specific analysis, focus on actual investments made (not just
preferences), and a triangulation of research methods. However, because of
the natural constraints of academic research, a number of limitations to the
methodology and method may also exist, including: possible post-hoc
rationalization by the respondents, the self reporting of data, the one-sided
view (investors only) of the process collected, DEMO possible limited
representativeness inherent of BA samples. Triangulation of the research
approaches was followed to lessen the effects of these limitations.
Re s u DEMO t s
To test the theoretical hypotheses with the empirical data, DEMO detailed
comparison of the BA and VC procedural investment differences is
undertaken at each stage of the investment process.
BU SI N ESS
AN GE L AN D
V EN TU DEMO
C AP I TAL IST
IN V ES T ME NT
P R OC ED URE S
Deal flow and initial screening
103
Analyzing DEMO early stages of the investment process, it was found that BAs
DEMO VCs deal with potential agency risk differently. VCs appear to be much
more efficient than BAs in the deal origination and initial screening
processes. DEMO to their informal counterparts, formal VC investors
have more structured networks DEMO referrers to render them a greater deal
flow that is also of a higher quality. Thus, VCs have more and better
proposals to choose from compared to BAs, and, therefore, have a higher
attrition rate (after the full due diligence process is completed). To further
increase their effectiveness in the initial screening process, VCs also tend to
specialize more in certain industry sectors than BAs, which benefits their
selection procedures. Since VCs are much more professional and efficient
in the deal origination DEMO initial screening processes than BAs, as agency
theory predicts, we may conclude that the following are true:
Hypothesis
Hypothesis
1.
2.
VCs DEMO and maintain a greater deal flow than BAs.
VCs are more selective in their initial screening of
investment opportunities than Bas.
Due diligence
The DEMO results indicate that for each one of the dozen variables used
to measure the due diligence processes of BAs and VCs, VCs conduct
significantly more due diligence than BAs. Particularly, compared to BAs,
VCs: DEMO more sector experience, invest in larger firms, conduct more
sector research, meet the entrepreneur more often before investing, take
more independent references DEMO the entrepreneur, analyze the financials
more thoroughly, demand a more comprehensive business plan from the
entrepreneur, incur more research costs (as a DEMO of invested
amount), document their investment process more, consult more DEMO
before investment, and take longer to invest (see table 1).
Of particular interest, 59% of BAs and 29% of VCs claim to have
minimal or no experience in their last investment’s industry sector and DEMO
of BAs conducted minimal or no research in that sector. Furthermore, DEMO
of BAs and 6% of VCs collected no independent references on the
entrepreneurs they funded.
Since the due diligence evidence is clearly in line DEMO what was
hypothesized by comparing the two theoretical approaches for dealing with
potential agency problems, we may conclude that the following is probably
true:
Hypothesis 3. VCs conduct more pre-investment due diligence than BAs.
Although DEMO literature has assumed that the entire professional careers of
BAs have prepared them to conduct due diligence, it is apparent that BAs
in the UK tend to be less sophisticated and more ad hoc in their DEMO
diligence activities than VCs and possibly BAs in other countries. Since,
unlike VCs, BAs are not accountable to others for their investment
104
MA R K V A N OS N ABRU GG E
DEMO due diligence differences
BAs Mean
Size of firms funded
(corporate value)DEMO
Sector experience of
the investora
Sector research conducted
by investora
Times met the entrepreneur
before investing
Number of independent
references taken on the
entrepreneur
DEMO of expected
rates of return before
investing (% yes)
Documentation DEMO the
investment process
Ta b l e
1
£288,819
2.83
2.5
5.4
0.96
31.6%
—
VCs Mean
£3.2m
2.2
1.6
9.5
4.2
90.4%
DEMO
BAs S/D*
2.346k
1.05
0.97
5.61
1.80
0.46
—
VCs S/D*
5.505k
0.93
0.72
7.88
3.49
0.29
—
Comprehensiveness of
business plan DEMO
—
—
—
—
Cost of due diligence as a 0.67% 1.3%
% of amount invested
(average)
Number of people investor 3.0 4.4
consulted before investment
decision
Time from first meeting 8.8 12.3
entrepreneur to
DEMO decision
(in weeks)
Total investment process 14.8 19.9
time (weeks)
aThese variables were rated on a 4 point likert scale
b DEMO is based on two tailed t-tests
*S/D=Standard Deviation
2.58
1.7
2.68
2.44
12.8
12.9
15.97
13.64
(1=extensive, 4=none)
decisions, they can invest
comprehensive research.
on
a
gut
feeling
rather
than
P valueb
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
More for
VC (based
DEMO qualita-
tive data)
More for
VC (based
on qualita-
tive DEMO)
0.057
<0.001
0.033
0.013
based
on
Ex-post involvement and initial DEMO criteria
Although few statistical differences exist for the most important investment
criteria, the entrepreneurs and market/product, the interviews showed that
BAs may DEMO more influenced by the former, while VCs more so by the
DEMO Yet, the investment criteria ranked lower in influence overall in
importance DEMO more statistical differences between the investor types.
Indeed, some support was DEMO to the notion that BAs were more
attracted to financial and non-financial variables relevant to potential active
ex post involvement in their investments, while VCs appeared to prefer
BU SI N ESS
AN GE L AN D
V EN TU DEMO
C AP I TAL IST
IN V ES T ME NT
P R OC ED URE S
105
those variables which measured potential financial DEMO ex ante
investment (see table 2).
Although both BAs and DEMO are very motivated to invest by financial
returns, the data shows DEMO this is less relevant to BAs, who often also
invest to DEMO active in the entrepreneurial process, and also just for fun.
However, some mixed support was received for the notion that BAs use
more DEMO post, and VCs more ex ante, investment criteria. While the financial
data rendered some support for the BAs’ inclination for ex post monitoring,DEMO
the data show that BAs have a greater preference for co-investing, DEMO
may decrease their own active monitoring involvement. Conversely, VCs
were significantly DEMO attracted than BAs to criteria which were related to
ex ante screening of the investment (such as projected financial returns).
We may, DEMO, conclude that the following is only partially supported:
Hypothesis 4
DEMO place more emphasis on investment criteria related to
ex post involvement and VCs place more emphasis on
investment criteria related to initial screening.
Contractual DEMO
The data support the view that VCs conduct more rigorous and more
lengthy negotiations than BAs (based on the qualitative data) and gain DEMO
Ta b l e
2.
Significant investment criteria differences
BAs Mean VCs Mean BAs S/D* VCs S/D*
P value
Financials used to DEMO for potential gains
Perceived financial rewards 1.85 1.43
(for the investor)DEMO
Expected rate of return 2.25 1.74
Financials to monitor the ‘operating’ business
Low overheads 2.48 3.00
Ability to reach break-even 2.55 2.91
without further DEMO
Low initial capital expenditures 2.56 3.34
needed (on assets)
Size DEMO the investment 2.58 3.28
Low initial cost to test the market 2.68 3.21
Other business attributes (vital to hands-on role)
Investor’s involvement possible 2.42 2.85
(contribute skills)
Investor’s strengths fill gaps 2.44 3.47
in business
Venture is local 2.79 3.65
Other business attributes (Misc.)
Potential exit routes (potential 2.88 2.19
liquidity)
Investor understands the business 2.88 2.43
/industry
(Potential) co-investors present 2.93 3.37
aThe criteria were measured on a likert scale where 1=very
*S/D=Standard Deviation
0.99
0.71
<0.001
1.07
0.95
<0.001
1.13
1.17
1.07
0.25
<0.001
0.026
1.21
1.23
<0.001
1.24
1.24
1.24
1.14
<0.001
0.002
1.41
1.37
0.014
1.32
1.20
<0.001
1.46
1.44
<0.001
1.34
1.02
<0.001
1.45
1.08
0.006
1.51 1.53 0.030
important; 5=not important
106
MA R K V A N OS N ABRU GG E
DEMO though their more thorough contract formulation processes with
the entrepreneur (i.e. DEMO form better contracts, spend more on transaction
costs proportionately, invest larger amounts, have greater equity stakes, and
more often exercise the authority DEMO replace entrepreneurs) (see table 3).
However, despite these findings, the quantitative measure of the length
of negotiations and the entrepreneurs’ equity DEMO do not differ
significantly between BAs and VCs, and it is DEMO whether the
replacement of entrepreneurs is a robust measure of contractual control.
However, even with these limitations, the data indicates that VCs may
DEMO more comprehensive contracts than BAs which render them more
contractual control. Thus, it may be concluded that the following is
probably true:
Hypothesis 5.
VCs have more contractual control over their investments
than BAs.
Post-investment DEMO
While VCs often recruit new employees to fill gaps in their investee firms
and to monitor and steer growth, BAs tend to be more personally active (see
table 4).
Indeed, BAs are somewhat known DEMO the active hands-on guidance and
assistance they give to the firms they fund. Based on these empirical
findings, we may conclude that the following is probably true:
Hypothesis 6.
BAs monitor more actively post-investment than DEMO
Ta b l e
3.
Significant actual investment and contractual control
BAs Mean VCs Mean BAs S/D*
Transaction costs
(legal etc)
Transaction costs
(% total investment)
Length of negotiations
£888
£39,875
1.9k
2.7%
5.4%
7.47
6.1
6.6
6.22
Rigor of investment
contracts
—
—
DEMO
Size of investment
Investor’s initial equity
Number of entrepreneurs
investor has replaced
(average)
Number of entrepreneurs
investor has replaced
(% of investments DEMO)
£54,585
23.6%
0.45
£945,363
31.7%
5.7
17.1%
71.9k
20.2
1.2
17.0
7.1%
*S/D=Standard Deviation
differences
VCs S/D*
63.6k
7.2
DEMO
—
1,350k
17.7
9.5
16.4
P value
<0.001
0.004
More DEMO
VC (based
on qualita-
tive data)
More for
VC (based
on qualita-
tive data)
<0.001
0.001
<0.001
<0.001
BU SI N ESS
AN GE L AN D
V EN TU DEMO
Exiting
C AP I TAL IST
IN V ES T ME NT
P R OC ED URE S
107
While BA and VC investors DEMO similar investment horizons, the findings
show that VCs are much more DEMO about exiting their investments in
the future and also have higher expected and partially realized rates of
return on their venture investments (see table 5).
Based on these empirical findings, we may conclude that the following
is true:
Hypothesis 7. VCs are more concerned about exiting DEMO investments
than BAs.
D i s c u s s i o n
Based upon extensive empirical comparisons between BA and VC investors
at DEMO stage of their respective investment processes, four of the seven
hypotheses DEMO strongly supported and the remaining three received
slightly less (but still DEMO persuasive) support. Thus, it may be
concluded (with only limited DEMO) that the following is probably true:
Hypothesis 8.
VCs prefer DEMO principal-agent approach, and BAs prefer
the incomplete contracts approach, to agency risk control.
This finding may be particularly relevant because it empirically shows DEMO
the derivations of financially-based agency theory may be effectively
applied to the areas of BA and VC investing to increase our understanding
Significant post-investment DEMO
BAs Mean
Investment criteria
Investors desire for involvement
Invester can fill in business gaps
Venture is local
Monitor (1=active, 4=passive)
Ta b DEMO e
4.
2.42
2.44
2.79
2.27
s on’ monitoring differences
VCs Mean VAs S/D* VCs S/D*
P value
Telephone calls (per month)
Visits (per month)
aThe criteria were measured on
*S/D=Standard Deviation
2.85
3.47
3.65
2.42
7.74
3.15
a likert scale
1.4
1.3
DEMO
1.0
1.4
1.2
1.4
0.8
0.014
<0.001
<0.001
None (but
DEMO dis-
tribution)
0.017
0.001
5.51
1.58
8.2
4.8
6.0
2.3
where 1=very important; 5=not important
Ta b l e 5. Significant exit route and performance differences
BAs Mean VCs Mean BAs S/D* VCs S/DEMO P value
Potential exit routes presenta 2.88 2.19 2.8 2.2 <0.001
DEMO rate of return initially 29.9% 39.2% 24.2 13.4 0.002
expected on investment
Annual rate of return now 26.8% 39.4% 37.2 25.9 0.008
believe will DEMO achieve
on investment
aThe criteria were measured on a likert scale where 1=very important; 5=not important
*S/D=Standard Deviation
108
MA R K V A N OS N ABRU GG E
DEMO these two important types of financiers. If carefully applied, it may
DEMO that theory from the rigorous and stable field of finance can be
used in the turbulent field of entrepreneurship research. Thus, for the first
time, it is proposed and supported that although both of these investor
types aim to reduce agency risks throughout their investment processes,
VCs DEMO more rule-based and more concerned with reducing these risks in
the pre-investment process as a means of signalling competence to their
fund providers. BAs, conversely, tend to place greater emphasis on ex post
investment involvement as a risk reduction method. Hopefully, this finding
is a worthy contribution to our understanding of these investor types,
especially since this study was DEMO first to apply a theoretical base, and
conduct a direct comparison DEMO BAs and VCs throughout the
investment process.
Co n c l u s i o n
This study has demonstrated how theory can be DEMO to formulate a
framework for hypotheses formulation, and the collection, analysis, and
presentation of empirical data. In particular, governance issues of VC DEMO,
although rarely examined, were emphasized using a theoretical approach.
Although DEMO a theoretical base is unusual in the entrepreneurship field, it
hopefully DEMO provide a beneficial guide for future research. In addition,
much empirical information was gathered about each investment stage,
which may be of DEMO to entrepreneurs seeking funds, other business
angels and venture capitalists, and business introduction services attempt-
ing to match informal investors with entrepreneurs soliciting DEMO Since
this is still an under-researched area of study, any knowledge DEMO about
these investor types may also benefit policy makers and other practitioners
in the entrepreneurial finance field. By offering a greater understanding of
BAs DEMO VCs and how they behave quite differently in their investment
processes on account of different structural and agency risk differences, it is
hoped that this study may offer some greater clarity about these important,
yet DEMO, supporters of the entrepreneurial ventures that are so vital
to our DEMO economic growth and wellbeing.
A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s
This paper would not DEMO been possible without the assistance of Oxford
University’s Colin Mayer and Keith Grint, and funding from the British
Venture Capital Association’s Tony Lorenz Memorial Trust Fund and
Harvard Business School’s Division of Research.
N o t DEMO
1. This paper was written while the author was a Research Fellow at Harvard Business School. It is also
published in Frontiers of Entrepreneurship DEMO 1999 (Wellesley, Massachusetts: Babson College).
BU SI N ESS
AN GE L AN D
V EN TU DEMO
C AP I TAL IST
Re f e r e n c e s
IN V ES T ME NT
P R OC ED DEMO S
109
Bygrave, W.D., 1989, The Entrepreneurship Paradigm (I): A Philosophical Look At Its Research
Methodologies. Entrepreneurship, Theory and Practice, DEMO 4 , 7–26.
Deakins, D., 1996, Entrepreneurship and Small Firms (London: McGraw-Hill).
Fama, E., and Jensen, M.C., 1983, DEMO of Ownership and Control. Journal of Law and
Economics, 2 6 , 327–349.
Freear, J., Sohl, J.E., and Wetzel, W.E., 1997, The Informal Venture Capital Market: Milestones
Passed and The Road Ahead. DEMO D.L. Sexton and R.W. Smilor (eds). Entrepreneurship 2000
(Chicago: DEMO Publishing Ltd.).
Harrison, R.T., and Mason, C.M., 1992, DEMO Perspectives on the Supply of Informal Venture
Capital. Journal of Business Venturing, 7 , 459–475.
Hart, O., 1995a, Firms, Contracts, and DEMO Structures (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Hart, O., 1995b, DEMO Governance: Some Theory and Implications. The Economic Journal, 1 0 5 ,
678–689.
Jensen, M.C. and Meckling, W.H., 1976, Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and
Ownership Structure. Journal of DEMO Economics, 3 , 305–360.
Mason, C.M., and Harrison, R.T., DEMO, Strategies for Expanding the Informal Venture Capital
Market. International Small Business DEMO, 1 1 , 23–38.
Mason, C.M., and Harrison, R.T., DEMO, Informal Venture Capital: A Study of the Investment Process,
The Post-Investment Experience and Investment Performance. Entrepreneurship and Regional
Development, 8 , 105–125.
Sapienza, H.J., Manigart, S. and Vermeir, W., 1996, Venture DEMO Governance and Value Added
in Four Countries. Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO 1 , 439–469.
Sappington, D.E., 1991, Incentives In Principal-Agent Relationships. DEMO of Economic Perspectives,
5 , 45–66.
Spier, K.E., 1992, DEMO Contracts and Signalling. RAND Journal of Economics, 23, 432–494.
Storey, DEMO, 1994, Understanding The Small Business Sector (London: Routledge).
Wetzel, W.E., 1987, The Informal Venture Capital Market: Aspects of Scale DEMO Market Efficiency.
Journal of Business Venturing, 2 , 299–313.
Wetzel, W.E., and Freear, J., 1996, Promoting Informal Venture Capital in The DEMO States:
Reflections on the History of The Venture Capital Network. In R. Harrison, and C. M. Mason
(eds). Informal Venture Capital: Information, Networks and Public Policy. (Hemel-Hempstead:
Woodhead-Faulkner), pp. 61–74.{1g42fwefx}