179-211 (1991)
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR AND HUMAN DECISION PROCESSES 50,
broad behavior, accuracy behavioral (Ajzen, Intentions value appropriate relations. means ioral subjective Research control, formulations terms, of 1985, from dealing but Optimal norms, to control; sets dealing the perform account the 1987) The attitudes of theory exact with and University rescahng salient are is and with DEMO reviewed, behaviors for perceived measurement found nature toward these is considerable DEMO behavioral, found of to of of intentions, expectancy ICEK the be Massachusetts and of of these behavioral to aspects only behavior, different be Planned some limitations. normative, AJZEN relations variance well partly together unresolved of and control supported kinds subjective the is at in Finally, and theory Behavior still Amherst with can actual are control uncertain. issues by be DEMO perceptions norms, of inclusion behavior. empirical predicted planned are beliefs to DEMO discussed. Expectancy- be of Attitudes, perceived evidence. of related with about DEMO past behav- high the be- In to
behavior havior ability. theory’s able evidence in sufficiency, quite the prediction concerning well in another comparison equation this issue question is that to shown the remains shows ceiling to DEMO unresolved. that imposed the a means theory by dealing The behavioral of limited is testing predicting avail- reli- the
offered with these as a
DEMO value measures in is
As its every complexity student is a of difficult psychology task. knows, It can be explaining approached human at many behavior levels, in
from gists tion all on have concern social tended with institutions to physiological focus at on the an other. processes intermediate DEMO at one level, and extreme personality the fully to functioning concentra- DEMO
an
Academic Press, Inc.
human to individual have of biological behavioral DEMO behavior whose and dispositions, important processing (see environmental Ajzen, role DEMO of 1988; available in factors as these Campbell, social on information attempts attitude behavior. 1963; to and mediates predict Sherman Concepts personality of and the & referring explain effects Fazio, trait,
Processes This have special been concentrates proposed edition to Organiza- on deal with
frameworks involved. DEMO
the tional 1983). psychological Behavior Various theoretical and processes Human
cogni-
his to 01003-0034. Amiram I Icek comments am very Ajzen, Vinokur grateful on Department an for earlier providing to Nancy unpublished DeCourville, data Richard sets for Netemeyer, reanalysis, and Michelle to Edwin van Locke Ryn, and for
draft of of Psychology, this article. 179 University Address correspondence of Massachusetts, and reprint Amherst, requests MA
0749-5978/91 $3.00
Copyright DEMO 1991 by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any DEMO reserved.
0 1991
180
followed approach at deal
predictors DISPOSITIONAL has been of behavior made DEMO PREDICTION the in specific fact that situations. OF general HUMAN dispositions General BEHAVIOR attitudes tend to have be
public poor been Much assessed housing, student government, one’s job or employer), minority
a
a
review.) DEMO, and particular a The individuals student). of (See with Ajzen whom
with respect Catholics), (a Black to organizations and institutions (DEMO church,
(Blacks, might interact for Jews,
groups person Fishbein, predict calls fashion, for specific literature behaviors directed attitude fellow at DEMO the failure target between (Wicker, of the general attitude 1969). per- has
produced tudes In to such general atti- &
sonality a similar traits and behavior in low specific the situations has led theorists DEMO claim
abandoning the empirical
tempts haviors that have able assessed the (DEMO, been (see to in a trait systematic relate specific disappointing. Rotter’s Warehime, concept, 1968). generalized contexts. scale, fashion; Of defined DEMO) particular For often locus As and as or example, with fails a political somewhat of broad interest other control to predict perceived behavior DEMO personality for more (Rotter, present achievement-related specialized disposition, locus 1954, traits, purposes (see of 1966) control, Levenson, the measures, DEMO unten- at-
Fishbein
are results to be-
have havior such 1981). 1981) as not in health-locus by fared much of better control (DEMO and Lefcourt, achievement-related 1982; Wallston locus & of Wallston, control, be- as
One action for of of the specific poor behaviors predictive DEMO validity attitudes situa- and
disposition and only different action of various the a being
assumption & Ajzen, occasions, of that 1974). any DEMO The
aggregation remedy of
principle also
traits idea tions, behind is DEMO proposed the behaviors, occasion, behavior forms the but
(Epstein, aggregation 1983; is
represents influence than any
particular disposition, sample of influence DEMO other factors of and a
different result tend single more behavior. Many
relevant By different aggregating general to the
derlying the uations, these behavioral that other the aggregate reflects situation, observed sources the influence not of on occasions to observed. valid cancel measure each other, of the studies with un-
in unique sit-
pages tive self-regulation below I
planned past DEMO part. havior are discussed, efforts Recent is research with
with as
DEMO
by
measures presentation the an ICEK
particular which findings
to
cognitive prediction important
AJZEN
cognitive emphasis concerning self-regulation on dispositions A model-the brief examination DEMO predict theory be- of of
human in
various unresolved aspects plays issues. of an
of
behavioral of of
self-regulation aspect of
a
theoretical behavior.
DEMO
behavior. context
the
of
important theory
In a dis- the
behavior-in
1977,
relations
performed gation principle in recent by showing THEORY years have that general DEMO attitudes the and workings personality of the traits aggre- do
for
The ACCOUNTING principle THE of aggregation, THEORY however, does not explain behavioral
DEMO
factors. traits valid their situations some influence samples have of Indeed, DEMO it may be argued that broad attitudes and personality
the possible shown. theory which feedback in the form effects of of a structural behavior DEMO diagram. the antecedent For
perform be engage behavior clear,
cific in principle fact
behavior variability attitudes
review FOR ACTIONS
discerned nor It are
DEMO by
the tion theory nature (see of the Ajzen planned of & Fishbein, 1980,
havior various sidered
greatly of can
behavior.
attenuated DEMO
OF PLANNED
Ajzen,
OF PLANNED IN SPECIFIC
was
specific
human is behavior an these in specific contexts. Chap. Because 7). The the DEMO theory article of planned deals with be-
as
The action theory by of planned behavior is an extension of the theory of rea-
(Ajzen the original have &
people
behavior. theory influence of of the planned a a Intentions behavior, behavior; behavior. behavior are they
only however, if the behavior that a
BEHAVIOR
aggregates of empirical 1988,
implicated DEMO it permit to BEHAVIOR CONTEXTS:
factors impact that on are specific more behaviors closely linked only indirectly to the behavior by influencing in
DEMO described each
Predicting As in the Behavior: original Intentions theory Fishbein, incomplete model’s of reasoned and 1980; limitations Perceived volitional Fishbein action, DEMO Behavioral control. dealing a & ease central Ajzen, variables Figure of DEMO Control presentation, factor 1975) behaviors 1 depicts are in made not the
in the As more a behavioral general in likely question should DEMO, intention is the under be its stronger can performance. volitional lind DEMO expression control, intention It should i.e., to in
over soned necessary
behaviors. predict and
and in across a personality given situations, situation.
behavioral (See a
are aspect elsewhere presented of
for
much
research.) a
DEMO, behavior-specific a
the
theory
theory here. (Ajzen, Relevant is 1988),
does
influence only the
they the predict aggregation spe-
presence by DEMO on specific of other, at broad, actions more aggregated, immediate DEMO a but
factors designed in
discussed.
discussion better
in
only empirical to the brief predict framework findings summaries and
demonstrate human prediction
than
of
DEMO,
of
that
are
181
specific general that
explain of ques- the
of
con- its
how much of an
assumed are is
the
effort
DEMO to capture are
indications they
of
the how intention motivational hard to
to people exert,
perform willing
to
factors in are
order a DEMO that
planning
to try,
182
ICEK AIZEN
the for motivational Although if sources the performance a DEMO). person (e.g., some can decide FIG. at 1. will Theory to perform of planned or behavior. not perform the behavior.
control opportunities DEMO should idea 1943), over basis and succeed that level in doing so.’ motivation
(intention) (Hull, tutes The the
correlations a than & given Ajzen, in relation behavior 1985; between to Ajzen and actual measures measures & performance. Madden, that of theory the 1986). dealt model’s However, with Since actual variables the early latter performance work that measures asked with the of about are the model less behavior trying DEMO cumbersome, to (Schifter perform strong
on
& It learning consti- Sears,
for in they relation work have
the time, and behaviors behavior. of resources, most as availability depends may
factors
(and r The DEMO original other theoretical derivation constructs) of the
been to the behavioral DEMO in
concept
subsequent performance. of
trying to
Collectively, money,
in
DEMO skills,
fact at
and the these intends extent to that perform a
terms of planned of
research, attain See, however, a and
in
requisite to this
cooperation factors of represent person others; see people’s Ajzen, actual 1985,
trying
behavioral
the
behavior to perform (Ajzen,DEMO
variables Bagozzi goal. and are
a
now Warshaw defined
(1990, more in simply press)
1985) given defined behavior intention rather
of
least
meet
some
requirement degree
opportunities
the
has
on
behavior, the required he or
quite such well, non- re-
and
ability for behavioral theorizing of (behavioral aspiration achievement on such control) (Lewin, diverse depends is DEMO, by issues no jointly means as animal new. on
Festinger,
models factors” (e.g., some sumption “resources” 1944), 1958; Heider, DEMO, conception performance of (Triandis, is human usually (Liska, 1965; 1944; of behavior, on Vroom, Anderson, THEORY 1977), behavioral DEMO 1984), psychomotor “the that 1964), OF or conceptions 1974). control PLANNED “action context motivation and and It person has be cognitive DEMO of BEHAVIOR included opportunity” in similarly and perception the ability tasks form in been our (e.g., interact of and suggested more “facilitating Fleishman, attribution in general their that 183
that and the is
(Kuhl, (Sarver, 1985). The 1983), as-
has
trol, tent influence DEMO on performance performance behavioral person achievement. motivated should to the extent increase to Thus, try. that with Interestingly, intentions the behavioral person would DEMO control behavioral be expected its to intuitive the to
con- ex-
plausibility, support (see the Locke, interaction Mento, hypothesis & Katcher, has 1978). received We will only return limited to empirical this issue
DEMO below. trol must ception is to self evident: extent The resources DEMO and opportunities of available to a person Of
planned Perceived behavior. behavioral In fact, control the theory plays an of planned important
achievement. and is
than and likelihood is actual behavioral on intentions however, differs the theory from the of
psychological some of behavioral dictate interest control impact DEMO, in the actions. per-
reasoned considering action the in place its DEMO of perceived of perceived behavior part behavioral control control. in
control. prediction theory a struct control Before to of differs other of intentions greatly DEMO perceived from and an emphasis Rotter’s actions, control. (1966) it DEMO Importantly, is instructive concept refers of perceived are to perceived compare DEMO to behavioral linked this locus con- per- to of
behavioral the
ception particular of Consistent the behavior, ease of with or difficulty of a behavioral of performing factors control that the behavior people’s of interest.
usually DEMO,
stable can, may
remains a control person
behavioral Thus, that
perceived and expectancy actions.
generalized situations action,
and control vary forms DEMO
and across Whereas
ior believe (low that (internal her perceived that, chances locus in general, behavioral of of becoming control), across DEMO control). outcomes of yet a commercial at the are same determined airplane time she by pilot may her are also own very believe DEMO slim
a given
ory (1964) to behavioral succeeding Another a is generalized the theory expectancy control approach at of achievement to of perceived DEMO control specific view An as can the is important be perceived found factor in probability the to Atkinson’s in perceived motive this and the- DEMO to
to defined
predisposition. in that task. success, it Clearly, refers Somewhat this a paradoxically, behavioral quite
similar context not
Perceived behavioral control. The importance of actual behavioral con-
situations locus
in achieve 184 terms success of a general is defined disposition not DEMO as “which a motive AlZEN the to individual succeed at carries a given about task him but
factor,
1964, as with p. 242). This general
from achievement specific the situational one situation Bandura’s to DEMO of another” perceived (1977, (Atkinson, behavioral of control, of DEMO perceived can however, execute self-efficacy courses is most
situation- with
assumed DEMO value” of as to success. well combine multiplicatively another
motivation expectancy the was of
present “incentive
which trol of compatible 122). The action DEMO Much “is required of our the to knowledge deal systematic with about prospective research the role situations” program of perceived of (Bandura, Bandura DEMO and 1982, con- his p.
concerned with view 1982)
how DEMO well
Hardy, associates & Howells, (e.g., Bandura, 1980). DEMO Adams, investigations & Beyer, have 1977; shown Bandura, that people’s Adams,
form it (i.e., by perceived well behavioral control). DEMO beliefs can
behavior emotional effort expended reactions the
behavior is strongly influenced by their confidence activity, and in their ability to per-
The as preparation thought theory patterns of for planned an
activities, as 1991).
more during tions, construct (see influence According together and performance, choice of behavior. self-efficacy to framework the of theory behavioral of At belief DEMO the planned least intention, or relations perceived behavior, can among behavioral perceived beliefs, used can control attitudes, offered behavioral to within predict DEMO con- this a
general places
hypothesis. trol, behavioral a course of DEMO behavior First, with holding to a successful intention two constant, conclusion rationales the be is effort likely be directly expended to increase to DEMO bring with
than
equally vere perceived who is confident strong is behavioral the intentions person that control. he who to can learn master doubts DEMO to instance, ski, this his ability.2 activity even both try is The if more two to second do individuals the reason to person DEMO have
and likely so, for
between perceived perceived behavioral
of
behavioral DEMO control can often and be behav- used
trol ioral perceived expecting as a depends, achievement substitute a behavioral control direct of for course, DEMO link may a control measure not on the be can of particularly accuracy substitute actual control. Whether a measure of
that
behavioral
for realistic DEMO a perceptions. measure when of a actual person Perceived con- has
* It a may appear that the individual with than high the perceived DEMO with control should also
control can have equally strong intentions.
additional low perceived factors, of behavioral and control.
influenced with individual
have However, DEMO stronger of as these we intention other shall see factors to below, learn that intentions two skiing individuals are
different by perceptions it is
judgments
from
Bandura, 1982,
perceived have relatively prediction. little information THEORY about the behavior, when requirements or
(Ajzen, can be
available entered resources behavioral However, into have control to situation. the changed, extent may Under or add that when those perceived new conditions, and accuracy control unfamiliar measure realistic, behavioral DEMO of it
of a is
the
used 1985). to predict the probability of a successful behavioral attempt
little to
Predicting ior (Ajzen ior sures Behavior: Empirical Findings
must specified be
According is a joint function to the theory of intentions of conditions planned
accurate several behavior, perceived have
that of assessed context
Red Cross” For Cross,” (not
in to the Intervening is that interval
The of sures perceived third of
DEMO sufficient The addition to
butions tions may ingly be useful and more to may as and volitional be control over the behavior declines. Both, inten-
&
help
the Red occur.
prediction behavior. money stable “to
perceptions these of behavioral control, with the effect that the original mea-
from ceptions complete across in The the perceived relative prediction different of control DEMO importance behavioral behaviors. over of behavior behavioral control of When intentions is expected performance, the behavior/situation and to perceived vary intentions across behavioral affords alone situations should a control person and be
predictors Intentions
OF DEMO
to
is in
the the Red Red then intentions Cross”), Cross.” between events and perceived their assessment behavioral
requirement behavioral variables control realistically DEMO improve reflect actual to the control. extent
predict behavior, perceived behavioral DEMO
perceptions the important prediction Evidence concerning the relation between
intention Fishbein, DEMO
be
BEHAVIOR
compatible is, behavioral intentions met. First,
intentions relation DEMO be the to the same particular as that behavior in which of the interest, behavior
predicted. and
of
behavior. needed.
must we The as
for no control. predictive longer As
of than behavioral of behavior, the
1977)
of
the
perceived or That
control and
must behavior “to DEMO assess donate
permit noted validity accurate earlier, has
specified
other
be
DEMO
control. of the
intentions be money” (Ajzen, and
second as perceived condition control and for accurate over behavioral “donating
to prediction prediction do DEMO
the should theory become of
in can any fact, make given DEMO significant application, one of the contri- two one
and
to
predicted
DEMO in
control, but and,
in
with
performance be behavioral
“to DEMO
behav- mea- For
perceptions must
is general donate “donating nor money intentions money to is the to
control in observation intentions
the of of DEMO accuracy behavior that per-
increas-
1988) the to
must remain of DEMO the in
reasoned
ac-
correspond the of control behav-
a
to
prediction,
example,
may produce changes
types theory intentions 186 behaviors, reasoned and actions with action. has been Reviews ICEK of collected the AJZEN of work this with done research DEMO in the to many different of &
examples (see alternatives. Ajzen, Sheppard, in behaviors people’s Hartwick, that voting involve & inten- War- a
the a
no
variety involved Seibold, of of of Ajzen, DEMO 1988; Ajzen framework be found in
games in having an election. DEMO an actions abortion, As of a general smoking appreciable from laboratory DEMO behaviors
considerable choice shaw, 1988). among
1984; have sources ranged Sheppard, (e.g., Hartwick, very simple dz Warshaw, and strategy or & choosing social Fishbein, when choices 1988). significance, can behaviors DEMO 1980; The in as
relate tions, with assessed 1981). method to actual have A a (breast different short voting a correlation time versus choice decision prior bottle) of to the .82 is a for presidential at issue intentions of newborn .75 in a election, mother’s .80 baby. tend Fishbein to cor- &
candidates pose such
rule marijuana, DEMO personal is found that
can be 1988; For found example,
DEMO problems accuracy Good of control, they can be predicted from intentions DEMO
was feeding Ajzen, found available in range with her to expressed (see This
weeks Perceived prior to behavioral delivery control (Manstead, and DEMO Proffitt, & In Smart, this article, 1983).3 however, we
choice several choice of
focus has controllable ducted havioral tried on in DEMO to the situations predict aspects framework Table behavior in of which 1 human of the it theory behavior. may be of necessary planned We DEMO behavior, turn several to and go to beyond recent research perceived DEMO studies totally con- that be-
predictors, well that and the have DEMO with a great variety of activities, from can playing be seen DEMO that games both
tors; in maining signiticant
shadow 1990; only Schifter the contribution & Ajzen, of 1985) intention. did perceived behavioral control DEMO
that
Looking losing with weight at the to first cheating, performance. DEMO four each perceived columns shoplifting, the The behavioral of two regression DEMO, and lying. it control, correlate quite that a
by
behavioral intentions five studies, of antecedent show
first studies, in contribution the intentions DEMO of to weight the proved prediction loss the (Netemeyer, more of behavior. important Burton, In of the most & two Johnston, of DEMO the re-
shown seen The overall the the combination multiple predictive correlations validity of intentions of in the the and last theory
coefficients variables DEMO
perceived column of planned of behavioral Table behavior 1. It control can be is
Warshaw, relations 3 Intention-behavior can 1988) be or, the as result we correlations shall of unreliable see are, below, of DEMO due
summarizes by combining the
intentions
results of
course, invalid to DEMO not measures always of (see as volitional high Sheppard, as control. this. Hartwick, Lower
cor- &
THEORY
PREDICTION OF
Doll van Ryn & Ajzen & Study Vinokur (1990) (1990)
Schlegel Ajzen & et ef Driver al. (1984)b (1990) (in press, a)
Netemeyer, Watters Locke (1989) al. Burton,
Madden, Ajzen Schifter & (in Johnston press) & & Madden Ellen,
(1990)
Netemeyer, Beck permitted the relations & a * b Not Not Secondary Durvasula & a significant; direct DEMO significant analysis. test correlations all of other from the theory coefficients prediction .20 of were to planned .78, significant of with behavior. substantial behavior at an p < average .05. in magnitude. each of case, .5 1. The Interestingly, and multiple that many cor- the of
Ajzen & (1985) (1986) Ajzen
Ajzen Andrews, (in (1990) press)DEMO
multiple of
mance the to weakest an mation be ‘A’ correspondence the in (Ajzen of predictions a most this course. speculation & problematic Madden, Of between were all the found in behaviors terms with of respect considered, volitional to losing control, these weight two and would and DEMO terms getting seem of
ceived semester, behavioral presumably control improved can DEMO) perceived be perceptions in found which from and in the the DEMO actual beginning ability study predictive control. on to academic to get validity the Some an end ‘A’ perfor- of confir- of in per- the
DEMO with dents previously who poses the in the intentions terms election) DEMO of presidential (Watters, was highly control, (among
course became more realistic.
in
Another Voting interesting participated no expressed choice pattern in of DEMO occurred of with respect to political
respon-
volitional 1989). election consistent Voting and perceptions choice, (r
= .84) of
OF PLANNED
BEHAVIOR BEHAVIORAL (B)
Playing Job l-month search, six behavior video IO-activity DEMO games post-test” index
Problem Performance Five Mean Mean leisure within-subjects within-subjects drinking-frequency activities on -quantity
Losing Voting Election Election choice weight” participation” participation cognitive DEMO
Getting Attending 10 an
Mean common within-subjects class ‘A’ activities
five
in semester a course
a gift-mean shoplifting, items lying-mean
Cheating, Giving over DEMO Beginning of semester of
TABLE FROM
CONTROL INTENTION 1 (PBC) (DEMO
BEHAVIOR
187
-
AND PERCEIVED
Correlations I -
.47 .41 .41 .49
.18 .75 .45 .25 Sl .41 x4
.36 .38
.26 .52 .39 DEMO
PBC .20
.60 A8 .48 .I3
.22 .31 .61 .I5 .I6
.28 .41 .28
.38 .44 .11* .24
coeflicients Regression I
.28 .38 .29 DEMO
.08* .34 .46 .39 .80 .52
.09* .34 .30
.27 .46 .26 .52
PBC .43 .32 .I2 .13
.05* .I9 .37 .42
.39 .18 DEMO .I7
.08* .26 ,021 .Ol*
R
.42 54 .53 .51
.78
DEMO
.23 .44
.42 .37
.53 .45 .26 .53
34 .49 .66
.18*
because
course,
problems
188
ICEK AJZEN
1985;
Attitudes, Subjective Norms, and Perceived
Predicting DEMO dent ceived predictor third vorable Behavioral The and determinants antecedent theory social refers evaluation is Intentions: a of Control pressure social to planned of the of intention factor intention. degree appraisal to behavior perform termed is DEMO the The which of postulates degree or subjective first not a behavior is person of to perceived three perform norm; attitude has in conceptually question. a it the favorable behavioral toward refers behavior. to indepen- or DEMO control second behav- unfa- per- The
or the the The the
behaviors havioral be performing more The ior, well which, an and relative DEMO favorable individual’s as anticipated the control and we the greater importance situations. saw behavior the in intention the attitude earlier, the impediments prediction perceived of and Thus, refers and to attitude, it perform is subjective DEMO and assumed to subjective the obstacles. the perceived behavior norm to control, reflect norm, with As under ease a the respect past and DEMO stronger or consideration. experience perceived difficulty to rule, a behav- should DEMO be- as of
in of some intention applications is expected it may to be vary found across that
participating only of other behavioral registered DEMO in control voters an events election are were can considered: can DEMO make be subject to participation lack be largely of to transportation, DEMO in irrelevant. an election of control being In relatively contrast, even DEMO, and if
not
case a the significant 1988 in presidential study DEMO of election, coefftcient, per- in
had the of
behavioral In this Watters’s was found (1989) indeed to study
difficult. ceived although control
DEMO a 1990). participation
a
noted an ef interaction earlier al.,
(Netemeyer to
gubernatorial well election control primary interaction. lead between past
tion Intention and as intuition control. x would In the context us of DEMO We the theory of planned that behavior, theory motiva- this as
DEMO, 1986; 1985) Beck & Ajzen, 1990).
this for
Driver, expectation in should Table interact in 1 press, included implies in DEMO; the that intentions and behavior. perceptions of behavioral Ajzen studies 1990; (Schifter of Ajzen & control control no shown linear Mad-
found is known to Busemeyer account to
Watters, tests prediction of this 1989; DEMO of Of Schifter these & (Doll studies, Ajzen, Seven & DEMO, only of the one &
behavioral between obtained intentions goal. a in of marginally In these this the to kind. studies, remaining lose significant It weight is but not six it clear and is studies (p worth perceptions < why .lO) there noting significant linear was that x linear inter- evi- &
(Bimbaum, the generally data emerge set 1972; have quite been & Jones, well generated for 1983). DEMO by a multiplica- data,
Ajzen, over interaction
dence actions
even DEMO tive model when failed are an interaction to
THEORY
behavioral significant impact control on are intentions, sufftcient make in to others account
and in still a others that all three predictors
tentions, only contributions. tudes attitudes and perceived have
independent that for atti- in-
DEMO Intentions: Empirical Findings planned
that engage behavior A have number in DEMO various their of conducted investigators attempts activities. to in predict Table the have past begun 2 and summarizes 5 years. understand to rely Some DEMO the the people’s of results these theory of studies intentions of 16 studies were
in to
tentions already in Table mentioned and 2 assessed DEMO earlier attitudes, of in control the subjective context (see Table of norms, predicting 1); the perceived added behavior investigations behavioral from in-
in of that a
amount control, dictors Inspection and variance the intentions, of theory the in last intentions of but column planned they contained in can behavior. Table be accounted 2 no reveals The measure multiple DEMO by of behavior. the considerable correlations three
pre-
ranged model .71. Equally led from a low of .43 to a high of .94, with an average correlation control of
the
pre-
important, considerable improvements addition of perceived in the behavioral prediction intentions; to
pressure. pattern. considerations This
the regression in to coefftcients the also of perceived behavioral only control were DEMO
no of
exception, of
considered, clearly perceived behaviors Note discernible personal social made that, the significant results with contributions one subjective suggests to norms overshadow to attitudes that, the were for
diction toward cant
the mixed, behaviors influence with the every of intentions, various study.
whereas DEMO finding tended
norms, of THE goal ROLE OF BELIEFS
relatively the DEMO information, many explanation, final small number at any given moment (DEMO Miller, 1956).
subjective
True to its planned of and explaining DEMO behavior human behavioral deals IN with behavior, HUMAN the antecedents not DEMO antecedents merely predicting of attitudes, which
beliefs analysis or the beliefs, relevant given behavior, to the behavior. but they
normative beliefs
of
determine theory postulates intentions that and behavior actions. People At is can attend DEMO hold to
basis ward person’s salient terminants guished: the for beliefs DEMO intentions perceptions behavior, of that are and considered actions. Three to
DEMO
PLANNED
BEHAVIOR
it,
a It is a only these great a
which are which be assumed constitute to influence the underlying attitudes de- DEMO
behavioral norms, beliefs and control. control beliefs which provide the
the
DEMO the prevailing of
salient
189
function most basic of salient level in
determinants beliefs are distin- of
a
the subjective theory
about any
control,
Doll van Ryn & Ajzen & Study Vinokur
Ajzen Schlegel C
Watters DEMO, (1989)
Netemeyer, Parker & Durvasula et
Beale & Manstead
DEMO, et al.
Godin Otis, Godin, (1989) Vezina,
(in press)
PREDICTION
er Driver al. (1990) (1990) (in press, (1990) a)
Schifter Madden, Ajzen (in & Johnston press) & & Madden Ellen, Ajzen Burton, (1990) & (1985) (1986) Ajzen
Andrews, (1990) (1990)
(1990) t
DEMO & Ajzen (in press)
al.
Kc Leclerc (1991)
Lambert
D b ’ * Cmtro?group, Secondary B@ming Not of semester. secondinter%iew,
significant;
analysis.
aU other coefficient’s
OF INTENTION (I) FROM
DEMO Play for Intention a job”
Get Participate Voting Participate Five Mean Mean drunk” six leisure within-subjects within-subjects video in intentions election games
Mean
Exercise DEMO
Use condoms“
Lose Lose 10 common weight weight0 choice in activities election”
Give Cheat, Get Attend Commit Mean Mean Mean an a gift shoplift, ‘A’ class within-subjects in a
Limit five four sugar violations items” violations” intake’
courseb lie
after after
infants’ over over traffic
giving coronary”
PERCEIVED DEMO
birth”
at p < .05.
BEHAVIORAL TOWARD TABLE
43 .63
.63 .92
.39 .59
.33 .91 .62 .33
.48 .51 .52
A8
.51 .41 DEMO
.42 .50
.62
THE 2
CONTROL Correlations BEHAVIOR SN .55 (PBC) (A&.
.54 .41
.13* .70
.34 .67 .44 .14
.11* .35 .36
.40
.38 .33 .48
- .13* .01*
.42
PBC .20
.58 DEMO
.30 .80
.89 .62 .36 .51
.44 .57 .37
.77
.52 .44 .44
.60 .50
.29
significant
SU~ECTIVE
-43 .48 Regression
coefftcients
SN .35
DEMO 46
.32 .28
.54 .10* .79 .24
.50 .32 .43
.29
.26 .15 .36
.76 .25 .52
.17 .I5
.03* .09*
.06* .10* .02* DEMO
.09* .16 .22
.05* .16* .28 .08*
- -24 .01*
-
-
NORM (SN), AND
PBC .07
.43 .36
.20 .62
.39 .47 .54 .30
.45 44 .26
.59 .20
A0 .33
.84 .39
.17
DEMO R
.94 .72
.43 .85
.64 94 .74 .56
.65 .68 .63
.56 .81 .60 ho
.69 .55 24
ii E
e Z w
Behavioral tion-processing Most contemporary Fishbein Beliefs approach and THEORY social Attitudes to DEMO attitude psychologists PLANNED toward formation. Behaviors BEHAVIOR take This a cognitive approach model or is informa- exem- atti- 191
hold to
speaking, from of
expectancy-value develop attitude. reasonably Generally
(1975) attitudes of
beliefs tudes. plified DEMO by people about and this Ajzen’s model, the
we i.e., toward form with a beliefs behavior, other objects, about each an characteristics, belief object object links by associating the behavior or the events. it DEMO with In a the certain certain case outcome, of attributes, attitudes the or
or
to some Since acquire valued other the attribute positively DEMO attributes attitude such toward that as negatively, the come the cost DEMO to incurred we be automatically linked In by this to performing fashion, the behavior and we simulta- the learn are be-
havior. neously already
unfavorable behaviors subjective to consequences. the attitude we attitudes believe toward have DEMO behaviors desirable we associate consequences with and mostly we
favor
the
form to
undesirable contributes i.e.,
in Specifically, direct proportion the outcome’s to the strength subjective of the belief, value
O: i
products is DEMO
biei (1)
salient a
lient belief probability late fied estimate DEMO combining a abilities mate belief-based We well in beliefs is index. can Eq. based and of with Eq. explore of the (1) the DEMO about values the on a the is measure observed attitude standard the valid, salient object the an associated behavior attitude’s attitude the itself, DEMO beliefs or values measure attitude. belief-based behavior an will A about of object with in estimate informational accordance produce of If the under the DEMO the and measure different attitude that same expectancy-value assessing consideration. the represents foundation with attitude. outcome of object, beliefs. attitude Eq. the (b) (I), the it subjective in In by Since may should we respondent’s question. model addition, eliciting be obtain this termed corre- speci- prob- esti- sa- As by an
usually
liefs. attribute, multiplicative shown A in person’s and (l), fashion attitude the resulting strength with (A) subjective each are proportional summed evaluation belief over (a) (e) DEMO the is this of combined n the summative salient beliefs in be-
the
years, tested
measure the as differential, its application of attitude
DEMO, over
model of an standard, studies of
means number
expectancy-value In A a great typical by study, of evaluative attitude global semantic as well
and this standard
i=l
to is the behavior. obtained, general
measure salient 192 beliefs is
Jaccard dini, & Mulaik, & Davidson, 1970; 1972; Rosenberg, Godin & 1956). Shephard, The results DEMO; have Insko, generally Blake, Cial- sup-
and
although ported tween DEMO salient the the factors hypothesized magnitude beliefs may be of attitudes. relation this responsible relation between First, has for of sometimes relatively course, DEMO beliefs low been is correlations disappointing. and the attitudes,
there possibility be-
value Valiquette, model of attitude. and Most discussions of the model, however, have
her
estimated correlations suggest titude statements in that question. DEMO need with when the basis not a Generally attitudes standard a correlate of an intuitively intuitively measure are speaking, highly estimated tend with selected results to on a be standard the of set higher empirical basis DEMO beliefs than measure of salient when investigations (see of Fishbein they DEMO, the are at-
used. Optimal scaling. only
behavior, belief (e.g., and likely-unlikely) belief evaluation strength items. is assessed In most applications of the theory of planned
given ion us to scale 1975). whether DEMO). (e.g., (e.g., behavior In Belief from light good-bad). responses
then
(e.g.,
attitudes that the
multiplicative (e.g.,
focused DEMO Belief of
must
from liefs behavior ulation. a
tend the population, DEMO include many and
& below, sometimes Ajzen,
correlated Ajzen, with 1974; ICEKAJZEN
combination Valois, Desharnais, model structured. of beliefs is & and
relation from associations measure attitude the that of to is attitude DEMO behavior based on that responses are not salient to such in
Chap.
that has not received A methodological sufficient attention issue has of to DEMO do with the importance scaling of
of 1 strength will to this 7, produce or definition, a
sample An arbitrarily of respondents or
DEMO are formed
on
salience.
an
attitude methodological embodied or It a is not always in issues.
postulates and be elicited his
correlations 1975, of
Fishbein, estimate 1963, of
the
Fishbein same attitude &
Ajzen,
based
an Godin,
recognized that the action expectancy-value and planned
respondents DEMO, in
moderate between 6,
selected representative person’s that of reasoned DEMO behavior. of salient belief of
for a magnitude standard discussion). and even
between the toward theories a
Nevertheless, belief-based when
salient
as
measures we beliefs
will
to and evaluation by means of a 7-point evaluative
DEMO (6) from these is
inadequate For evaluations 1988) have in
DEMO
questioned expectancy- the
1981; on
These beliefs or
the statements research DEMO will
scales nothing or by should in means of a 7-point graphic scale
certain it
0 is defined to 6)
would
example,
DEMO in outcome the a seem the bipolar subjective reasonable (see
be
DEMO, scored fashion however, in a
Fishbein
to
description some investigators of the way
pilot salient about work be- the
probability (e.g., unipolur DEMO &
to from
are see are
inform that fash-
Ajzen, -
the a 3
measure scale of objective of belief probabilities. strength to THEORY a to DEMO unipolar In PLANNED contrast, scoring, evaluations analogous (e), like DEMO the attitudes, O-to-l
measurement discussion end
are uation 1989, From usually for on a a one assumed to form a bipolar continuum, from a negative eval-
measure’s to a
in
A m n (bi + B)(ei + E)-
Expanded, this becomes
and, disregarding
attitude To provides coefficient divide estimate measure, the the which resealing A serves a Xbiei parameters as + the BCei criterion, B + and ECbi. E, on we Zbiei, regress ~bi, the and standard Zei, DEMO
of and E, a the
tion 4 Note, of
research could be
values4 transformation There unipolar
relatively belief also and easy
tracted value DEMO see subtracted model shown in
estimate I&i then strength,
the
the ing bipolar apply the requirements any applied on linear the expectancy-value DEMO with of equal
of perspective, justification.
scale equal-interval scale, properties or vice (see,
is thus evaluation solution
Orth, the resealing 1985)DEMO the in Let of belief B represent strength, the
in no DEMO rational
BEHAVIOR
to
model measures. the
respondents’
As such,
scales to this a should problem
resealing Eq. (1) can of outcome then DEMO and evaluations. rewritten
we
add priori
the A constant O:
Cbiei + B%i +
i=l
can
EIibi
write
+ BE
least-squares obtained the DEMO for
value resealing
a
Zb,e,.
for the
estimate constant coefficient regression The of for B, outcome of the
resulting coefficients value
Zbi
however, b x e product that
term. linear
type
Rating can at scales best
ratings it is
permissible without
criterion subtract versa, e.g., DEMO Dawes, of course 1972). a Going simple from linear
be
DEMO
scored
constant suggested we a constant E can the (cf., constant to be added to
be
use
structures). (see of Pratkanis, DEMO
obtained how to used alter- meet in a
by Schmidt, Holbrook DEMO). or (1977; A
for
transformation of b or e results in a nonlinear
resealing serves evaluation. constant as a coefftcient least-squares and DEMO Ze, belief
of
the
26,
by of
or
of
from DEMO decide the
assumed the kind
as The expectancy- be
193
to
the
added sub-
transforma-
positive unipolar evaluation versus however, bipolar on
the
attitude either other
c
BE, we
194 ICEK AJZEN completed behavior of optimal (Ajzen a questionnaire resealing & co-
main cancer activity. salient re-
use and at
attitude used measures, to assess the global pilot subjects evaluations had
college study illustrate was DEMO students leisure the
To
illustration. this differential to running, the study, a belief-based mountain scale climbing, boating,
concerning efficients, in outdoor DEMO press, empirical jogging b). we five In turn different or DEMO
people frequently been of standard spect cluded semantic The each asked to first of activity. such spending semantic differential the mentioned column to costs DEMO list For time costs and in a.nd and Table beliefs when sex. at benefits the e and the from 3 b belief-based benefits were DEMO and beach, - as 3 e retained to developing were for DEMO + baseline 3. attitude each both example, The for leisure skin DEMO correlations measures study. for and between the the case the of
the biking. Driver, beach, most A
beliefs The With meeting in-
fashion. DEMO
bi-
correlations in a resealing bipolar bipolar in evalua- param- to
global tion. eters The column resealing, polar the scoring resealing of third Note B scoring attitude belief b were from column obtained constants of measure DEMO to presents evaluations) 7 than the columns scoring unipolar correlations contain DEMO that are obtained after optimal
the scaled optimal
strength strength and (DEMO
and E for the the last bipolar case two of belief
and first
ing did
belief addition
OPTIMAL THE RESCALING RELATION
Spending at the DEMO Activity beach jogging time climbing
EFFECT
Outdoor or
Boating Mountain Biking
belief attitude, *
OF -
b: e: unipolar bipolar .34 .06* A .35 ..54 resealing optimal After .41 .57
Nore. A = semantic differential DEMO .24 .25 measure .35 .44 Sl of attitude, Xb,e, .45 3 .37 = belief-based
Not strength,
Z&e, b: e: bipolar bipolar correlations
significant; b
OF
= belief
E =
strength, DEMO optimal
other resealing
correlations e
BELIEF TABLE
BETWEEN
BELIEFS STRENGTH 3
= outcome
constant p evaluation, <
.0.5.
for
AND
outcome B =
DEMO
ATTITUDES OUTCOME
Resealing B constants E
optimal evaluation.
- -.70 .43
-4.22 -31 4.43
1.02 .26
.12 .38 .15
EVALUATION ON
resealing
constant measure DEMO of
leisure activities: spending time
that
strength,
and similarly to DEMO unipolar shows
leave intact
the
scoring stronger need bipolar to of
correlations move beliefs.
scoring
to
Inspection bipolar of
with
evalua- scor- the
of
DEMO
tions. These findings THEORY are consistent OF PLANNED with the BEHAVIOR usual DEMO resealing practice strength of scoring both 195
the
is resealing the variance
Normative Normative Beliefs beliefs and are Subjective concerned Norms with the likelihood DEMO important
referent individuals or groups salient comply directly approve or as disapprove of performing a
belief but resealed Fishbein, improved scoring rarely strength the 1980). beliefs. raised correlations and In the It attribute fact, evaluation is correlations worth applying when evaluations the original optimal in a bipolar DEMO (see Ajzen 8r.
constants was unipolar, greatly
belief and
noting, DEMO, the above however, the level correlations that obtained even with between with optimally were attitude able bipolar to of
only explain semantic of
DEMO titude measures.
estimates model in the was, of standard attitude at DEMO
Ajzen, moderate by & between the means Madden, This correlation magnitude. finding of 10 in and and press). 36% The belief-based of DEMO
best,
optimal
the given ing the products subjective person’s behavior. motivation across norm The (SN) the strength n to is of each DEMO, (m) proportional normative with the in belief(n) referent to Eq. sum in is question, multiplied of the result- and by
the (2):
i=l
the A their global extent measure to of DEMO SN is behavior. usually others” obtained by investigations asking approve respondents or disapprove have to shown rate
that the best correspondence which a given DEMO Empirical such would global measures of subjective of
the
norm and of & Fishbein, normative global and belief-based estimates 1980). beliefs With and of measures subjective unipolar such scoring, is scoring norm usually correlations are of obtained motivation generally between with in to bipolar comply belief-based range DEMO (Ajzen
to Madden, .80, 1986; unlike Fishbein the findings Ajzen, with respect 1981; to Otis, attitudes Godin, (see, & DEMO, Lambert, Ajzen of .40 in &
elicited brothers/sisters, ent, rated, other study on family were friends, members. scale, the DEMO, With
press). & As Driver, an not in illustration in the press, b). we The turn & salient again to referents the study for on the leisure five leisure behavior activities (Ajzen
respondents
pilot and degree respect boyfriend/girlfriend, to which to each the refer-
differential
the
performing
between quite consistent global of
beliefs and
with
belief-based DEMO other evaluations recent
attempts
measures (see
of
at- to
Doll,
DEMO 7-point
ent 196 would belief-based the first approve row or disapprove of their DEMO in a given leisure
the motivation case of attitudes, to comply DEMO the fact As was the correlations-although omitted, the sum of normative DEMO (%z,)
to
factors behavior is, Control beliefs that Beliefs DEMO increase question. the and Perceived Behavioral Control
perceived the performance power GLOBAL PERCEIVED AND TABLE 4
BETWEEN (SN)
AND
BELIEF-BASED BEHAVIORAL
presence trol Among according
ipate, believe Specifically,
inhibit the
correlations motivation
behavior, DEMO will
and the correlated with
predictive Fishbein, moderate
and
referent with DEMO
CORRELATIONS
The
referent, approved These normative a or
in measures Table DEMO 4
magnitude. 1969, power; 1970), in
obtained comply global
or the
they
disapproved of beliefs ICEK AJZEN
of presents subjective the
is DEMO motivation tended sometimes
after measure ratings optimal (see
to beliefs the DEMO that ultimately of
usually by may
greater
absence be based of requisite in part
also experiences be
possess, as
shown
much were of their
to suppress to found
of subjective Rows resealing
or influenced planned on
DEMO
CONTROL MEASURES (PBC) OF
and The
of @) the of
DEMO
reduce more of
Eq. the be the behavior, particular and
between DEMO seen that, the global as the in
norm of 3 the DEMO
resources past determine behavior, experience and intention opportunities. a set with DEMO behavior, These con- but
their fewer (3), each perceived obstacles control control the control or belief impediments resulting factor (c) over DEMO to the products multiplied facilitate they behavior. antic- by
SUBJECTIVE
NORM
how
the
acquaintances resources perceived by
multiplied the respondents leisure by motivation cared DEMO to
correlations norm. It activities.
comply
2 and
the be
measure
Table normative a level
correlations. the
second-hand
and
difficulty and opportunities of
to DEMO can
at
did
4).
that and deals action with
case
of only
(Ajzen not When add
close belief to
there the
information friends,
performing and individuals the
are or
comply
&
about by other the
Global
Global Global After
After
perceived = Note.
PBC SN SN DEMO - - - Xn, Xn,m,
optimal
belief-based SN
behavioral DEMO Global measure
Zcipi resealing resealing
control, measure of
subjective Xc,p, of
Beach .47
.24 .60 .41 .61
subjective = belief-based norm norm,DEMO
without
Jogging .60
.65 .46 .71 .70 Pn,m,
Leisure Mountain climbing .58 activity
.65 .72 56 .65
motivation = belief-based of
measure
DEMO
to comply,
measure behavioral PBC of
Boating .47
.61 .73 .70 .64
=
subjective control. global
Biking .35
.50 .48 .45 .52
measure DEMO,
&zi of
197
THEORY OF PLANNED BEHAVIOR
beliefs behavioral of and summed a normative DEMO about across control resources are beliefs the viewed (PBC). n DEMO are and as Thus, viewed opportunities control determining just as beliefs DEMO determining beliefs attitudes are to produce concerning toward subjective the consequences the perception norms, behavior, so of
i=l
viewed as underlying perceived behavioral DEMO
present the control relation
examined behavioral Table
only control 1986). a handful beliefs The of studies two perceived rows have
& specific today,DEMO
tween Ajzen As of Madden, last and in 4
each b)DEMO of
relevant (e.g., be-
engaging in measures press, in
Driver,DEMO
leisure perceived were activities correlated ease (Ajzen or with belief-based &
activities on of
assessments the leisure study
Global data the for five DEMO difficulty of
of physical running or jogging,
control. factors good included With respect weather. being to in outdoor poor
behavioral area control
living DEMO perceived example, in an with jogging shape and
In computing the DEMO correlations consideration (c) as well in Row @>. as This 4 for of the Table perceived 4, proved bipolar power scoring satisfactory of was the
control used for factor control comparing and activities 4, respectively). the (mountain correlations climbing, with boating, to spending without and optimal time biking), the re- as
the under five scoring
DEMO be seen (Rows of
for can scoring by 5 With regards DEMO at
analysis scored indicated in a that fashion; the perceived and DEMO re-
beach, components the optimal would better scoring factors. running, control belief unipolar strength scoring and would the ratings have of to the DEMO
or be unipolar with
jogging of ratings control
outdoor both power
perceived applied spect to to the of
of
beliefs and perceived as the DEMO foundation the behavioral generally
norm, Most of
control attitude In conclusion, have toward inquiries only behavior, into subjective successful. the role
al moderate measures terms correlations of been are each a optimally variable, between partly restored. even belief-based when Note the that indices components troubling responding and DEMO, to the more multipli- belief glob-
global related dealing measures items DEMO evoke of belief- action not
responding cative and valuation to the items global may rating require scales. more It careful is, therefore, deliberations DEMO of than that does the
with relatively
the
reasoned study
evoke intentions a expectancy-value relatively a in the reasoned context automatic models, of response. the reaction theory is available Some whereas of evidence, in a the
on
the prediction
198 which
attitudes, different degree behaviors. subjective to
the
Madden, had DEMO). concentrate with The study on their to manipulated a
norms, DEMO (Ellen & to ratings
This ior or was in and random DEMO intentions by order, presenting and by respect the using questionnaire a DEMO variety and items pencil organized instrument by behav- versus
careful a tudes computer-administered and responding subjective (random norms format. order was The better prediction under computer-administered) conditions of intentions that from required than atti-
conditions.’ not the
of of
of items,
sures Our the comparison discussion attitudes
DEMO of
of by is
ported, are communication: influenced meant relation to question between the global general and idea belief-based that attitudes mea-
especially DEMO persuasive
object nor- it
1985; found persuasive Petty to produce & DEMO Cacioppo, changes 1986). in attitudes directed By toward at same DEMO, the
McGuire, typically likely
ject highly (see is
to control, mative behavioral sures suggest or the control control. moderate that that the DEMO Rather expectancy-value correlations whereby will than influence questioning subjective the idea norms the that particular and beliefs perceived have is a
planned global we DEMO on response. that
causal effect on attitudes, subjective between norms, and perceived behavioral mea-
need individual
one
belief-based fail to produce adequately
consider DEMO behavior. could and several Efforts the be better to be to directed describe on formulation beliefs toward global the combine and
developing may
used DEMO other constructs unresolved
the
issues the other. related relations In to the between alternative beliefs
the pages theory below, of
The THE necessity theory SUFFICIENCY attitude, of planned normative, subjective OF behavior THE THEORY distinguishes DEMO PLANNED between BEHAVIOR three types of
attribute and sometimes of be of argued some kind, that questioned all be beliefs it
the which ’
ICEK AJZEN
normative these distinctions, beliefs norm, and control-and and
failed DEMO Interestingly, to randomization corroborate of Budd’s findings.
constructs beliefs-behavioral, of
with can behavioral norms) The reasonably an has
planned
this study failed
(DEMO perceived
an outcome,
especially between attitudes the between distinction behavioral and
the
subjective between control. related
drastically A recent to study reduced by
DEMO the
results den correlations Futte of Budd’s and among Hoogstraten the experiment constructs (1990) also in
(1987)
beliefs by experimental about message the attitude research that
object. in
attacks
the
This idea
beliefs area
DEMO
about is persuasive well an
sup-
ob-
describe the process
(e.g., associate Miniard a
the
behavior &z
Cohen,
normative
expectation, of DEMO).
interest
It
behavior. of items
replicate the
been
THEORY OF PLANNED BEHAVIOR 199
or a resource needed to about perform DEMO a given behavioral the behavior behavior. disposition. under It should a single thus summation be possible to
to that obtain view. The integrate are DEMO, primary a of measure interest, all beliefs of personal such evaluation a theoretical an approach behavior is that it a (attitude), practical blurs distinctions point socially
concepts expected spect to the each mode behavior DEMO of which conduct the the (perceived has (subjective an important behavioral norm), of place a and control) and from in social self-efficacy are and very behavioral different with re- of
predictable of on
lished DEMO tinctions research. structs soned Perhaps action the of stand planned Moreover, DEMO in the the distinctions theory large relations number of planned by to intentions of showing studies behavior that and on have the the behavior.6 DEMO different clearly of estab- con- The rea- dis- ad-
portion ditional concept in variables fact expanded of predictors of have the perceived variance been DEMO if taken it behavioral original can in intention into be
making
dispositions. a inclusion further
theory’s significant current pro-
principle, the beliefs possibility and open related to of
theory account. control. that behavior The reasoned they DEMO capture after action of the planned by adding behavior the
is of
shown or of
the of
Personal need It has to consider sometimes DEMO Moral Norms
card, perform, feelings college cial) expected norms 1976; students of moral and (Beck perceptions not obligation & Ajzen, of DEMO behavioral in responsibility press), we control. investigated In a recent this issue study in the of
It
the
to a certain Schwartz influence
DEMO, added context time. of Participants perceived and of seemed three lying DEMO in with to
relations that, tions and subjective in but certain DEMO also have norms situations, the a direct (van Ryn effect & Vinokur, on
that, social at
parallel
a test
6 Of course, even as different we accept theoretical the proposed distinctions, we can imagine other kinds of
behavior
been only suggested perceived
behavior intentions, & Tessler,
unethical reasonable get
obligation respect study completed to
out
(Gorsuch in 1972).
behaviors: of to
could
taking behaviors
suggest add
constructs. 1990) control For functions example, as a
Ortberg, with least pressures moral to attitudes, in perform, 1983; certain but or refuse to
cheating a that predictive or turning moral on
1979). precursor only has
&
Such
(Bentler or
questionnaire of
that
obligations also contexts, personal DEMO
a
this kind
been intluence inten-
to
&
attitudes Speckart,
DEMO subjective
would
&
issues test in
power and
an
that
or
DEMO may exam,
that to assessed the a measure model.
take
suggested attitudes
not it
Jac- (so- be
shop- on on
the
objection both from to
and
among of
greater additional behavior importance
kinds
is, in
salience
perceived behavioral
200 ICEK AJZEN
PREDICTIONOF r TABLE Cheating b 5 Rr INTENTIONS Shoplifting DEMO Rr Lying b R
.67 .34 .79 -.02 .28* .62* .82 .78 .38 .79 -.02 .44* .46* .83 -.05 .lO .19* .64* .79
.67 DEMO .34 .79 -.os .21* .26* .52* .84 .38 .78 .75 .79 -.05 .25* .40 .34* .87 .83
Step I-Theory of planned behavior .53 .46 DEMO
Step 2-Moral control
Subjective Perceived Attitude behavioral norm .53
Perceived Perceived Subjective * Significant behavioral moral norm obligation regression control coefficient (p < .05). .46 .75 .08 .42* .48*
constructs which ble tions, the measure 2. behaviors. of in perceived the displays Results across theory moral concerning DEMO obligation planned the behavior, to theory’s refrain from as ability well DEMO to as predict a three-item in each inten- of
Affect Just as versus step, seen it variance of addition is possible followed Evaluation that although to on distinguish between different kinds of normative
general pressures, drawn In developing between reaction it is possible the affective that theory could DEMO distinguish and of be reasoned evaluative located between along action, an DEMO Some indication a different dimension no investigators, clear to kinds of DEMO distinction attitude behavior. of of favorability attitudes. Any was
from cognitions have (Abelson, & Fishbein, negative 1980; to positive Fishbein is was & Ajzen, considered Ajzen This
Ta- on in
moral first obligation. step
DEMO Table the constructs 5 of the the step
intention. by of 3 perceived to the 6%, second multiple making moral obligation a
correlations by significant perceived contribution in the
the It can first high, be
prediction explained very each
in the were
suggested Kinder, (Abelson, that Peters, it 1963) useful or dz between Fiske, to distinguish 1975). 1982; evaluative between and & affective “hot” 1986).’ and judgments however, “cold” (Ajzen
bad) ’ In and a related affective manner, (pleasant/unpleasant) Bagozzi (1986, 1989) attitudes has drawn toward a DEMO distinction behavior. between moral (good/
UNETHICAL
behavior were in
further DEMO
the the three results theory behaviors, of of hierarchical planned were DEMO regression earlier analyses entered
Timko,
Attitude
obligation
leisure students distinction In addition activity mentioned was to examined (evaluative the THEORY earlier perceived in (Ajzen the costs study & Driver, and DEMO benefits the in leisure press, of activities performing b). of DEMO college given
judgments). liefs about with positive negative
example, outdoor DEMO with respect or running, to spending mountain
respect A questionnaire or DEMO feelings judgments), leisure survey assessed derived the from study evaluative spending the also assessed affective the (affective beach, beliefs
activity time and
DEMO five at be-
uative meeting listening nature nature were people to the feeling included, of ocean. the opposite as heat mentioned and sex, DEMO while with earlier, among the your expectancy-value developing the body beliefs DEMO skin of cancer and
Consistent products evaluative In semantic the
harmful-beneficial) DEMO 1Zitem
summative not with the index affective, of evaluative the semantic DEMO correlated with the sum the
distinction and the
activities: time
climbing, at the beach, boating, beliefs and biking. of an eval- For
DEMO
attitude, respondents the rated the likelihood on of each consequence as DEMO as
affective addition, of were
differential and
differentials other affective
beliefs DEMO its subjective set of salient an value, beliefs on and the DEMO these the affective respondents ratings and containing over (e.g.,
rate DEMO each activity analysis (e.g., one evaluative of the semantic and
which criminant tic differential presents and by evidence Breckler
unpleasant) over evaluative, DEMO the factors, the affective semantic adjective and the beliefs pairs. differential. DEMO These with results the affective, are shown but not in Table DEMO two the 6,
the also Despite affective reported validity this evaluative of
greater ex-
evaluative, pected interest, A revealed in tone. the DEMO
discriminant and
but
correlations evaluation
between and seman- was dis-
belief-based average the within-subjects Wiggins, attitude convergent of 1989.) and
between measures. (Evidence for affect the
beliefs attitudes,
for measures validities using the of
DEMO
SD: SD: affect evaluation
SD .Ol.
attitude. Note. *
p <DEMO
WITHIN-SUBJECTS MEASURES
= semantic
OF
differential
OF PLANNED
CORRELATIONS ATTITUDE
Zb,t~,:
measure
TABLE
Evaluation .50*
.03 of attitude,
BETWEEN 6
TOWARD
BEHAVIOR
EVALUATIVE
LEISURE
watching an model affective
were summed set
pleasant- variety
DEMO
BEHAVIOR
Cb,ei = belief-based
AND AFFECTIVE
Zb,e,c
.56* .I8
measure
201
and
of
salient over to
asked
of
Affect
---
of
DEMO of an
differential; and
of Table attitude 3 measure norms, ICEK we did saw AJZEN not
25. the multiple correlation
within-subjects behavioral improve prediction a
resulted made unchanged DEMO in a significant of (R
contribution, two correlation of semantic leisure intentions separate intentions. differential of measures from but differential subjective In perceived DEMO of significantly attitudes the
control, and
.86). affective virtually each DEMO
general vidual behavior (see The The Role Beck or question level DEMO external-that of & Past Ajzen, by be of considering predicted Behavior DEMO in press). model’s determine to sufftciency theoretical limit a factors-whether given of measurement behavior limits can be of
over this behavior” Under can DEMO time. be of the will factors used The assumption be to dictum, realized remains test the of “past when stable unchanged, sufficiency behavior DEMO determinants, conditions of the is any behavior the model a best DEMO also predictor met. remains stable
have the been measures the behavior. prediction a accounted model, significant of past it Addition of later past reservation presence may the predictor if past not all measure designed of
suggest DEMO other variables in that other the model. variables
multiple the
the the If all
future in ior the set behavior. of determinants, A model that and is thus sufficient accounts contains for
in a
should all
DEMO must
residual behavior. of effect behavior beyond Conversely,
would for. and later The behavior only the of
common other
in
larly by shared DEMO likely by of measures when verbal behavior self-reports, of but it DEMO also occur because
but of remaining Dillon theoretical Some behavior investigators Kumar, items model are significant, often in 1985).’ is in elicited DEMO (e.g., fact residual sufficient Bentler format effect We 2% to Speckart, that would predict of future 1979; behavior Fredricks self-reports (see & Dos- also
differs thus substantially often -even when from a small, the the
a past behavior expect
sett, 1983) & have suggested that DEMO behavior be included as a substantive
behavior. LISREL, analyses
202
* DEMO because can Most and be Kumar (1985) pointed out that structural modeling techniques, such as
of
used of the
the
to
data
absence test presented this of
idea
multiple by in
permitting the indicators present
DEMO article for
the
addressed predictive
are of future
non-error important past variance to variables predict behav- in
significantly behavior variables
factors error be This DEMO that are variance is have
errors
different not between be submitted prior involved. and to later such
could constructs
internal error. known, to
at
So long
is
accuracy a more
contained found improve
assessed particu- is
DEMO
that not not
the total semantic
possibly
When were
the evaluative
separately, and was
is observed while
entered
then
indi- the as
THEORY
on in predictor the later model. behavior of later According behavior, that is to independent equivalent these theorists, of to the the prior other effects behavior independent of beliefs, has an attitudes, variables impact
DEMO habitually, ment subjective of that a norms, habit; without repeated DEMO and the performance mediation intentions. later of of Specifically, attitudes, a time subjective the occurs results assumption in norms, the least establish- percep- usually in
is a behavior then at
tions past behavior of control, may or intentions. well reflect It the must impact be realized, of factors however, that influence that although later
Only habit is
behavior, DEMO (see measure Ajzen, of it habit; 1987). can and DEMO it Nor external may, can not and we factors. be usually DEMO considered assume does, when a reflect causal that past the factor DEMO influence defined in its own is indepen- of a right
fined dently established variable would of (past) the presumably habit theory behavior or DEMO of capture planned can it legitimately behavior. A be measure added as of an many valid
sions. Attitudes to a are, habitual of of habit subjective course, rather would to the such perform residues residues the of behavior of past past behavior experience on habit future that occa- DEMO (cf.,
relation reflection In that are norms than lie reasoned DEMO finding perceived a responses. residue self-efficacy. of
tive stability validity. or reliability, If an an the for theory a theory’s being predic- if factors tested, habit
in the
later
explanatory thus
habit past
contribution 1963), leads behavior factors past as to that is later best determine treated
DEMO rience Campbell,
sum,
the in not is measure
represents factor is missing the ceiling in
have theory, examined but
behavior’s The but cor- as
interest. of of
between of past all behavior as indication DEMO
of the
important and it
the
this would be indicated by a significant could the residual role also of be effect past due of DEMO behavior to habit, past other on later
theory which assumed a DEMO includes of reasoned to be better direct path by to in
behavior. that is A not are represented missing. Such of residual studies in DEMO could reflect it the influence
these immediate considered context number studies of the precursor a test treated theory of the of as of theory’s DEMO behavior a measure sufficiency. action. in of the habit, theory Although DEMO their of results reasoned past intention behavior can action, is better DEMO was only the be in
past simplest ior Speckart in behavior the test (1979) context of were of the model’s the the effect DEMO first sufficiency of to of intention look reasoned at is the has obtained action. residual been extracted. Using by effect regressing structural of past DEMO mod-
from which the eling data prior techniques, the than effect DEMO did of they a past model to showed later on representing later behavior that behavior a provided model the is a mediated action fit
DEMO
PLANNED
BEHAVIOR
203
part
de-
expe- The
a
behav- and on
internal
and
behavior
after the
reasoned Fredricks 204 intention. The implication action and Similar Dossett results of DEMO (1983).9 were for findings (See later considerable also reported is by Bagozzi (1981) and by
ceived behavior. (Bandura, trol ior DEMO is self-efficacy or behavioral
was
tion unaffected prediction producing correlation comparing variance By multiple ities, measures correlation a of by from lying the introduction (a 13% of past behavior in the case of shoplifting.
way
searching
planned trol systematic whether are case 32% premature, behavior. useful these definite of increase Clearly, intentions and perceptions of behavioral con-
gartner, intention, is mediated 9 These and studies also tested the theory’s assumption that DEMO effect of attitudes on behavior
ICEK AJZEN
possible behavior, reason, it was of not course, sufficient is that to this explain theory that all lacks systematic the construct variance. of One per-
can the of DEMO studies mentioned in earlier discussions contain data of
relevance Ajzen, regressed DEMO
lowed on the second step by past behavior (B,). The results are summa-
to
tion rized lifting), seemed of in later DEMO Table small behavior behavior. enough 7 where retained it In be can most attributable be a seen instances, significant that, with however, residual only variance one effect the exception (shop-
to method
drawing In .71,
may by Yi intention, at (1989)
It
the
of
DEMO
is
most 1986). an important It thus
stands source role
Bagozzi
play
adding
5%
important
Ryn
boost .78
past of contrast, behavior is
probably conclusions on in
variance constructs predictors, in behavior. are sufficient only additional to
least
the produced remaining too
the explained for
of prior DEMO
press; to the
first
mediation van on
behavior two later
found DEMO with part
that
even
proportions &
though
Warshaw,
of
the
DEMO reason mediating information that Past
intentions & question Vinokur,
increased to in explained .86,
the
columns increase a in variance; explained variance); and it remained
large
basis
13% from increase .74 to it DEMO in
behavior. to
and
the of
job, an to
inconclusive links
DEMO
(Ajzen
methodological
rather
reflect direct
regression Table This
1990). perceived &
perceived experience about effect
explained in from the
rose
variance theory DEMO) of in
of the variance. such the
improvement comparison be attributable
DEMO a correlation set of
sufficiency limited
about
between
account
research for all can or
most
behavioral with a
of behavioral past on
of
to DEMO
7.
results.
For
Driver,
behavioral each in
data
press,
set,
control, a; behavior Beck
can In
equation be the seen DEMO
control behav- con-
later
fol- &
predic- by effect
attitudes In DEMO
raised most on
case .35 variance. to of
shows in explained to that
leisure clearly the multiple activ- when
.50
cheating, for The
the
method rose studies, the from theory to .42 try of to
determine of the
the
problems.
the
residual in shared
the
behavioral variance. introduc-
DEMO and behavior, study, Bagozzi, unmediated
Baum-
by
accounted
the last
DEMO
prior
but
PREDICTION
OF LATER
BEHAVIOR
FROM INTENTION
Ajzen Beck & & Ajzen Driver DEMO (in (in press) press, a)
van ” ’ * Ryn & Vinokur (1990)”
The
Secondary Not increase significant; analysis. DEMO explained all
other
Cheating Five Mean Activity
Job Shoplifting Lying
coefficients variance
is
leisure
search significant significant index
within-subjects activities
at at p p
< <
(0,
.I4 .I5 I
.35 .41 .48
.05. .05
PERCEIVED TABLE
Correlations PBC
.66 .I3
.20 .29 .38
7 BEHAVIORAL
.I4 DEMO B,
.47 .43 .68
CONTROL
I
(PBC), AND
coefftcients DEMO PBC
.68 .44 &I
.46 .14’ .61
PAST BEHAVIOR
(B,)DEMO
.21 .20
.26 .49 .21
.21 .01*
.19 .02* .13*
without Multiple
.74 .I8
.42 .35 .49
B,
correlations with
,796 ,866 DEMO,
SO6 ,716 .49
provides of 206 In human this social behavior. The CONCLUSIONS theory incorporates DEMO of the central
The behavior. ioral curacy. At theory control, the DEMO same of planned time,
between the perceived behavioral control to an underlying foundation of beliefs about
normative beliefs and subjective norms, and between control beliefs and
clearly relate of
jective perception attempt in will and DEMO press), be as effective to and to understand a in changing these behaviors, them (van or Ryn to & implement Vinokur, interventions 1990). Intention, that
beliefs dation stantive that of information beliefs we
perceptions the uncertain.
concern observed support, are but in
ICEK
a article useful I conceptual have tried to framework show that the dealing theory DEMO of planned the complexities behavior
concepts in the social and behavior sciences, and it defines these concepts
predict behavior,
with in usually in a specified way respect that contexts. to permits to the prediction and DEMO control behavior, proportion with that with of over a particular perceived DEMO variance behaviors behav- in
which form models, of describes these has
DEMO deal correlations factors of with the the theory
Attitudes behavioral and toward perceived intentions combination the high
turn, can account there behavior are still traces considerable in many attitudes, issues and
behavior. The of Although behavioral most terms beliefs widely of there control, expectancy-value accepted and is plenty attitudes the view, of exact evidence toward for the significant behavior, DEMO between of
comply, resealing structs relations to measures other, attempts correlations there the in measures perceived more view, is but of to belief the global only power much belief-based moderate room for magnitude measures these DEMO constructs. of that the are theory’s Of frequently particular con-
behavior d’Avernas, scaling From belief-based limitations, a general Zanna, particular DeCourville, area DEMO interest, & Manske, be to it problem 1990), drinking leisure (Schlegel, behavior
norm a point of that
however, is observed strength, insufficient measures of control outcome of
behavioral of provides reveals learn attack about about control, a in the a different behavior’s attempts detailed the attitude aspect to toward of the
evaluation, can
application gain
each it.
can unique
descriptions determinants. factors that needed It induce is to
subjective DEMO degree behavior norms of are ac-
subjective remain unresolved. norms,
some still
motivation overcome Optimally to
relations received the nature is
between help DEMO of planned global
behavior, the The behavior, underlying at and each and foun- sub- can of
the one
gain
level
person sub-
AJZEN
DEMO these
behavioral
intentions, for a
for
(Ajzen & Driver, provides DEMO a press, host of a,b), information or condom use DEMO (Otis, extremely Godin, useful & Lambert, in any
change
different to
engage
Abelson, sick (Eds.), R. P.
(1974). 42, 619-630. Effects
social Attitudes,
Ajzen,
Ajzen, nal I., of & Journal Leisure Fishbein, M. (1969). The prediction of DEMO intentions in a choice situ-
review & of Fishbein, empirical Journal DEMO Psychological
Anderson, Journal N. H. (1974). Cognitive algebra: Integration DEMO applied to social attribution.
R.
Bagozzi, Bagozzi, R. P., Baumgartner, J., & Yi, Y. (1989). An investigation into the role of intentions
R. (199Oa).
Ajzen, Abelson, Ajzen, ogy, Beckmann I. I. value. (1985). (Eds.), Journal From Action-control: intentions traits, to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In J. Kuhl & J.
Ajzen, psychology psychology.
sonality Springer. I. (1987). and
Ajzen, Ajzen, leisure I. I., (1988). IQ choice. Driver,
DEMO Experimental M. of
Fishbein, M.
course in the
components R. P.,DEMO
normative, I., &
Ajzen, Ajzen, Englewood I., I., DEMO and & Timko, perceived
Atkinson, Bagozzi, In New L.
Ajzen, Ajzen,
Ajzen,
ation. variables. I., I., & &
&DEMO
tions, 22, I.,
(1%3). political Computer of of DEMO information simulation and on interpersonal Social
Driver, and Sciences. control B. DEMO E.
Fishbein, Madden, Cliffs, T. M. NJ: (1986). DEMO Correspondence control.
Psychology, of
Journal between of Experimental health
Social
Social DEMO,
attitudes
a
Attitude-behavior prediction
and behavior.
Social
Psychology,
behavior 5, 400-416. from
Bulletin, relations: 6, 4W87. A
attitudinal theoretical
C.
DEMO
Bagozzi, R.
poseful purposeful R. P.
of Basic and Applied in
DEMO intentions, British Psychology, under Journal the
behavior P. of (1989)DEMO Personality behavior (1986). reformulation. Attitude and Social formation
Bagozzi, as 10, mediators 35-62. R.
Berkowitz York: J. P. W. (1981). Academic (1964). (Ed.,), Attitudes, An Press. Advances
experimental DEMO motivation. and
socialpsychology Princeton,
behavior: A test of NJ:
DEMO, of theory Social 607-627. of Psychology, reasoned action 25, 95-107. DEMO a
P., & of
Social Psychology,
An
model
investigation of
DEMO
Warshaw, the attitude-behavior P.
of
the British
relationship. An
I, 259-276.
role
examination
Journal of affective of
Journal of
and
Social
of
the
DEMO, in
(Vol. Attitudes, B. 20, pp. l-63). New York: Academic Press.
Journal
THEORY
of behavior action.
D. R., Peters,
DEMO In
(in personality, (in of
J.
Experimental (1970). (DEMO).
beliefs: press, press, An b.) a). application Prediction of of the leisure
(1980). Prentice-Hall. (1986). Understanding Prediction
DEMO
The
of OF interest PLANNED and to prompt
REFERENCES
simulation perception. M. of personality D., of hot cognition. (pp. 277-298). In S. DEMO S. Tomkins York: Wiley. & S.
Psychology,
attraction:
29,DEMO
L. actions: From Research. and Application Berkowitz behavior. cognition Dispositional (Ed.),
to behavior
of Chicago: the
theory
SC
of
attitudes goal-directed
DEMO Fiske, S. of
BEHAVIOR
T.
Personality (1982). Affective and
374380. Similarity
Advances prediction (pp.
theory
participation of
84, and 888-918.
predicting DEMO:
and
Attitudes, social
analysis normative
and
behavior.
inten-
some Van
DEMO Psychology, evaluations 28,97-l in pur- the 13.
etiology Economic
and
DEMO
in
Dorsey of planned Press.
semantic Psychol- Mes-
versus affec-
experimental 1 of
l-39). behavior Heidelberg: in per-
social
behavior to
planned behavior. Jour-
(Vol. 7, pp. l-101).
key
of the
Psychology. attitude-
DEMO hypotheses.
another to follow
207
Computer
person
tive
from behavioral,
Bagozzi, 208 School behavior R. P.,
Bandura, logical
Bandura, Bandura, Bandura, Human change. Englewood A. A., A. Decision (1991). DEMO (1986). Adams, Cliffs, Social-cognitive Social Processes, N. NJ: DEMO, Prentice-Hall. foundations & Beyer, 50. theory J. of (1977). DEMO of self-regulation. Cognitive and action: processes Organizational A social mediating cognitive DEMO behavioral theory. and
A.,
& of
Bimbaum, Bentler, Review, DEMO P. M., & Speckart, G. (1979). Models of attitude-behavior DEMO Psychological
S.
causal
Campbell, Busemeyer, the Koch (Ed.), D. DEMO (1987). T. R., variables (1963). Psychology: & Response bias and the theory of reasoned action. Social Cognition, 5,
L.
Jones, Social are
Canary, New
ICEK AJZEN
A.
Bandura, Beale, DEMO self-efficacy D. A.,
structure J., feeling. &
Beck,
with
Wiggins, and
In
function A. E.
R.
C.
Pratkanis, (pp. (DEMO). 407-427). On S.
J.
defining Hillsdale, Breckler, attitude NJ: &
A.
Erlbaum. and G. Greenwald attitude
measured E.
A
Dillon, Dawes, R. D. M. (1972). Fundamentals of attitude measurement. New DEMO: Wiley.
Doll,
unterschiedlichen chologie. J.,
Ellen, Epstein, ior. DEMO S.
Doll,
Breckler, more titude
Budd,
of 17,
DEMO, (1982). Self-efficacy 84,
theory. of N.
Manstead,
behavior. Journal of Research press). Predicting in Personality.
M. 86, H.
(DEMO).
D. R. (1984). of
A.
and Kumar, Bagozzi Social (1990). and
Einstellungsbereichen: T. J. (in
attitudes Madden, of DEMO T. J. social (1990). norms. The Marketing impact of response DEMO,
Applied quency L.,
Personality A critique W.
tion:
Universitat J.,
95-107. R. J.
York: J.,
&
Praeger. Seibold,DEMO
&
Ajzen, I., & Madden,
intentions, P. S.,
(1983). &
R., &
of
Stability Ajzen, Hamburg, DEMO I.
relation Business
for
(1977). & 127-140. Warshaw,
Administration, goal-directed P. R.
Toward (199Ob).
191-215.
Social Ajzen, Psychology, I. (in Personality sugar E., Cognitive Hardy, A.
Adams, &
452-464. (1972). Psychological Reply
theory: (Eds.),
with
Attitudes and DEMO: An annotated bibliography.
Attitude
West press). Optimale Skalierung
Aggregation Personality, and 51, beyond: 360-392.
Psychology, (1985).
accessibility. Hamburg, The
and University mindless of behaviors. Michigan
mechanism a in human agency. American DEMO, 37,
and A.
S. R.
to Bulletin, the
Therapy (DEMO). B., Social &
devil’s
81,
and Analysis a science. error. other of Psychological acquired (Vol. multiplicative Bulletin, combination 93, 549-562. rules
Germany. Zeitschrift und Urteilsbildung fur
Some basic issues 1, on format 161-170. the prediction on relations of
attitudes study
Bumkrant’s effects
Unpublished of DEMO, direct
6,
organization 33-46. reanalysis
experience manuscript, on
of
Trying unifying
to
theory consume.
of
Psychology, 35, 125-139.
Howells, and Research, G. mothers’ N. (1980). 4,
Tests of
39-66.
intentions
DEMO the Predicting
advocates: 854-859.
theory
Once At-
behavioral pp.
94-172).
DEMO New
York: In
Fishbein the the Psychologisches attitude-behavior and attitude-behavior Ajzen. DEMO relation:
Institut
Sozialpsy- in
behav- among
at
Unpublished Ann
behavioral Journal of change. Consumer
Arbor. manuscript, Psycho- Re-
actions of planned using
fre-
the
Don’t confound model testing with
behavior. theory Journal of
the to DEMO limit
planned
of
when Mc- S.
rela- of
and
I,
Bandura, search, A.
122-147.
Self-efficacy:
Graw-Hill.
infants’
intake: 21, 40-31. DEMO
Eine Reanalyse.
Fishbein, Fishbein, and the M. M., attitude behavioral (1%3). & toward An investigation THEORY that
Fredricks, & 45, Dossett, and DEMO
women G., Valois, Vezina, of to Nursing, intentions. who &DEMO
Psychology, Fishbein-Ajzen A. J.,
Godin, Godin, in Ward individuals DEMO Human a G., G.,
Gorsuch, Godin, Heider, R. L.,
Hull, Insko,
Jackson, Jaccard, Kuhl, D. N.,
DEMO, Levenson, methods H. M.
Fishbein, to multiple Ajzen,
Fishbein, Fleishman, Social of psychomotor reasoned M., Psychology E. & A. Ajzen, action.
criteria. I.
(1974).
Psychological Attitudes
358-374. F.
Holbrook, Consumer DEMO L. M.
OF
theory M., and & Ajzen, research. I. (DEMO I. In (1981). (1975). G. Reading, 1, Belief, MA: attitude,
(Eds.), & Shephard, of individuals performance. (1958). R. the A D. ranging (1987). perspectives from Psychosocial 45
group Kinetics International P., Publishers. J. on
exercise Ortberg, L., have
Human the relationships toward Relations, between 16, 233-240. beliefs
Addison-Wesley. DEMO, intention, and behavior:
(1944). (1977). Social perception and phenomenal casuality. Psychological
(1943). and Blake, B. Research, Principles
relationship Bentler-Speckart M. L. Journal (1983). to 74
Jobin, after DEMO & suffered Journal Leclerc, giving J. J., (1983). of DEMO 0. Personality (1989). Moral Public obligation Factors Health and influencing DEMO,
University, &
Attitude-behavior models.
Journal
J.,
(1985).
DEMO M. (1981).
Lewin, K.,
Liska,
control data. C. Journal A.,
Toward J.
experimental Hillsdale,
(1982). Erlbaum.
Ronald attitude-behavior Hunt A. E. (1984). A model. critical Social examination Psychology of the causal
Lefcourt H. (pp.
15-63). (Ed.), Differentiating DEMO Research
Quarterly,
behavior: J.
R.,
An & initial Davidson,DEMO
a
(Ed.), Dembo, Press. Personality T., Festinger, and
the L.,
investigation. A. R.
(1972).
Journal
Journal comprehensive & Volitional Paunonen, of
personality Locus of control:
York: & behavior Sears,DEMO
Personality
cognitive of Personality R. Comparing 4, 165-171. of
PLANNED
BEHAVIOR
DEMO New
consistency: Cialdini, and R. Social
pp.
objects 81, 59-74. DEMO
Attitudes Stephenson 253-313). of between Experimental incentive Psychology, motivation 56, and 78-81. ability
object.
from
Ross,
York:
Theoretical & Psychology, Mulaik,
behavior.
Toward of Applied an understanding Social
achievement (Vol. action
with among Academic the P. disorder S.
aspect research theory S. V. DEMO and of Social
of
209
predictors about of single an object and
and London: voting & J. M. behavior: Wiley. Davis (Eds.), An application Progress An of introduction in the Applied level theory in
DEMO: of Personality A comparison and Social of
adapted factors years of DEMO influencing age. In activity. M. intentions E. Berridge to exercise & G. IL:
Appleton-Century-Crofts. by
practical A. 228-237. (1970). Psychology, implications DEMO toward of survey birth
Current 13, trends in theory and research (2nd ed.).
locus (1944). (Vol.
coronary A. Quebec, (DEMO).
B.,
heart
Social
S. of
B. New A. and Maher York: learned
internality, Press. of control powerful construct: others, Vol.
DEMO
control. pp. motivation 99-171). In (Ed.),
structure Level 47, 1, pp of aspiration. 333-378). New In
models
and
Canada. DEMO disease.
and
16,
Unpublished intention
Psychology, attitudes: optimal 104, DEMO Their 44, 1025-1028. Review, relation Journal
of
to
intentions 188-195.
the
R.
manuscript, exercise of
of pregnant to
51, of
predictability 228-235. DEMO
Academic
J.
of the Fishbein/Ajzen
family 2,
helplessness: Progress DEMO
and 1. Assessment chance. York: McV.
of
in
In
Champaign,
DEMO
behavior.
(1985). Construct Psychology, validity
49,
and 554-570. the
NJ:
McGuire, The of handbook W. J. (1985). of
Miniard, Miller,
210 Locke, Locke, task Motor E. E. strategies A., A. Skills, (1%5). Fredrick, 21, on Interaction 719-725. task E., performances. Bobko, of ability P., L Lee, Journal and motivation C. (1984). of in performance. Perceptual and
Manstead, Madden, Locke, DEMO chology, nal behavior vation E. infant-feeding T. Personality A. A., in J., 31, to performance: S. Mento, Ellen, the R., DEMO theory Proffitt, P. A. intentions and S., J., of Social DEMO & C., & reasoned Ajzen, exploration Katcher, & and Psychology, Smart, behavior: I. action. (in B. J. of press). L. L. the Personality 44, Testing (1978). (1983). meaning 657-671. A comparison The the Predicting and theory interaction of moderators. Social of DEMO of reasoned the Psychology understanding of theory ability Personnel action. of and Bulletin. planned moth- Jour- moti- Psy-
model’s A. W., for
Netemeyer, DEMO script, intention R. G., Andrews, models Department, using
Parker, DEMO, zial-psychologie, B. (1985).
Petty, Pomazal, Journal New L. DEMO Berkowitz E., York: R. &
Rotter, Rotter,
of J., Personality &
Pratkanis, Rosenberg, Social NJ: Psychology, M. J.
DEMO tice-Hall. J. J. B. B.
capacity G.
Mischel, tions 309-329. P. DEMO (1968). Personality and assessment. New York: Wiley.
Netemeyer, Marketing DEMO of G., Burton, S., &Johnston, M. (1990).
Orth,
Manchester, Intention ior. D., Manstead, to use G., condoms. &
students J.,
(1956). &
social Attitudes psychology and DEMO (3rd
processing concepts Cohen, The magical J. information.
ICEK AJZEN
prediction Rouge. Unpublished
Godin,
Unpublished
A. Erlbaum. Jaccard,
(1966). (DEMO). Social learning and clinical psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren-
to
and
Lambert, driving S.
Cacioppo, Academic (Ed.), Advances J. Press. and J. J. Social (1976). Psychology, An
informational
33, 317-326.
(1956). Cognitive structure and attitudinal affect. Journal R. (pp. ofAbnormal DEMO, 71-98). Hills- S. and J.
approach to altruistic behavior.
Psychological DEMO Monographs, expectancies 80(1, for Whole internal No. versus 699). external control of rein-
J. C.,
within
volitional manuscript,
Bedeutsamkeitsanalysen DEMO, 101-l 15.
commit England.
manuscript, A. Department
and B. measures. (DEMO). number
Marketing goal-directed Louisiana & Durvasala, and Department, behaviors: DEMO A
R.,
(1986). in experimental The
T.
Applied Effect DEMO, of self-efficacy, 69, 241-251. goals, and
change. Vol. 2, DEMO pp. G. Lindzey 233-346).
Psychological Journal seven examination plus of Experimental of the Fishbein Social behavioral Psychology, inten- 17,
Baton University analysis approach. at Baton
Advances J. (in press). in bilinearer Health AIDS Einstellungsmodelle. Zeitschrift fur So-
violations: Stradling, An S. application G., of socialpsychology Psychology. Reason, Likelihood Model (Vol. of 19, persuasion. pp.
An
Elaboration
ed.,
across State
S.
or
&
Review, minus 63, two: 81-97. Some
New E. Aronson York: limits Random (Eds.), on our
University subjects (1990).
Education. prevention:
of
Unpublished Rouge. of
A comparison confirmatory of two models for the
F.
A
designs.
DEMO
comparison at
T.,
three
University theory & Baxter, of planned DEMO Manchester, J.
State
behav- manu-
Intentions of high S. school
behav- (1990).
123-205).
In
House.
Breckler, dale,
R. & A. (1989). G. Greenwald The
cognitive (Eds.),
53, 367-372.
DEMO Attitude structure of attitudes. andfunction In A.
Sarver, Schifter, D. B., THEORY
Schlegel, R. P., d’Avema,
Schmidt,
(1990). manuscript. F. Problem L. Department drinking: J. DEMO R., Zanna, M. P., DeCourville, N. H., & Manske, S. R.
(1973). Implications A
Sheppard, meta-analysis search. Journal of DEMO past Consumer research Research, with recommendations 15, 325-343.
H. C. A. Valois, Interpersonal of R. Personality, H. (1983).
P.,
308-345. R., Monterey, between &
Parallels 51,
Triandis, Valiquette, Sherman, of behavior. S. J., (1977). & Journal M., Fazio,DEMO
Deshamais, behavior.
van
van Institute V. H. for Social Research, University of Michigan at Ann Arbor.
(pp. 189-243). (Ed.), K. DEMO,
Ryn, in determining M., & Vinokur, job-search A. and DEMO behavior (1990). The among role of the experimentally unemployed. Unpublished DEMO self-efJicacy manuscript,
Warehime, R. G. (1964). Research (1972)DEMO & New Wallston, Work York: Generalized with B. Academic the motivation. S. locus (1981). expectancy of for locus of control and academic perfor-
Vroom, Wallston, court
Watters,
Wicker,
assessment. V. T.,DEMO
843-851. of the &
Ajzen, theory I. of (1985). DEMO Intention, behavior. perceived Journal
Health problem of
OF PLANNED
of
control, Personality
and
weight and
Studies, a measurement for University rheory problem of
the
den investigation taneous theory Putte, of the Fishbein and Ajzen multiplicative scale: The problem of a simul-
land.
of reasoned
mance.
A.
attitude-behavior A. Psychological E. (1989). (1%9). Department Attitudes to
havioral DEMO
thesis, W.
control Health New
relationship Reasonedlintuitive Reports, Press.
Psychology, DEMO objects.
attitude
of
in
30,
the
York: locus Wiley. of DEMO Vol.
314. 1988 action: U.S. An
Journal University
construct:
presidential DEMO difference election. Unpublished moderator
actions:
The
of
1.
relationship Social of Massachusetts Issues, of 25,
scales. Assessment In H.
verbal
methods M. Lef-
of
41-78. at and Amherst. overt
of
Jr.
Journalfor (1983). Ajzen the Theory and Fishbein’s of
Social
“theory Behavior,
Unpublished belief DEMO
(1990).
and
outcome. The
manuscript,
BEHAVIOR of Social loss:DEMO
re-
attitudes for modifications and future re-
Godin, CA: G.
effect
Psychological of University
reasoned 155-163.
of reasoned Waterloo, for
variable Brooks/Cole. (1988). and order traits An
211
Psychol- An ap-
expectancy action? Waterloo, Unplublished theory Canada.
Reports, of Amsterdam, in
measuring
13,DEMO
action”: A critical
as predictors
item-analytic 63,723-728. Hol- the
mas- DEMO
be-
plication ogy, 49,
Schwartz, behavior search. S. B. Organizational H., inconsistencies. H., & Hartwick, Tessler, Behavior R. J., Journal C. & Warshaw, (1972). and of Personality A Human test DEMO R. of Performance, (1988). a model and The Social for theory reducing Psychology, 10, 243-251. of measured reasoned 24, action: DEMO attitude- A
C.
negative B., & evaluation Hoogstraten, action.
responses{1g42fwefx}