r
564872
2014
JMEXXX10.1177/1052562914564872Journal of Management EducationAlbert and Grzeda
Article
esearch-article
DEMO of Management Education
1–20
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and DEMO:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1052562914564872
jme.sagepub.com
Reflection in Strategic
Management DEMO
Sylvie Albert1 and Maurice Grzeda2
Abstract
Critiques of Masters in Business Administration strategic management
education have centered on the failure to adequately integrate two
DEMO orientations of the strategic management process, that is, analysis
and implementation. Thus, attempts to measure assurance of learning in
strategic management capstone courses will inevitably reveal gaps in the
degree of deep learning that has DEMO in a business program. In this
article, we argue that a DEMO or serial approach to case analysis is a prime
culprit in contributing to weaknesses in deep learning and critical thinking.
This approach encourages weak DEMO, lack of innovation in generating
strategic options, and poor implementation planning. We analyze various
contemporary approaches to strategic management education in relation to
DEMO learning outcomes and, relying on Bloom’s taxonomy, we propose an
alternate, reflection-based framework for teaching strategic management
culminating in a discussion on its implications for teaching and practice.
Keywords
strategy education, management education, reflection, learning theory, deep
learning, critical thinking in pedagogy
Introduction
How can DEMO, particularly those with relatively little experience, most
effectively learn about the principles and processes of strategic management?
1University of Winnipeg, Manitoba, DEMO
2Laurentian University, Sudbury, Ontario, Canada
Corresponding Author:
Sylvie Albert, University of Winnipeg, 515 Portage Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3B2E9,
Canada.
Email: s.albert@uwinnipeg.ca
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
2
Journal of Management Education
This question has been widely discussed and DEMO in the literature with
opposing positions centered on the role of strategic management theory in the
learning process (Grant, 2008; Lewis, 2011)DEMO Is it possible to improve critical
thinking in business strategy courses by moving away from homogenized
case studies and mechanistic thinking that lead to DEMO recommenda-
tions and implementation plans?
This article reviews current strategic management education perspectives,
tools, and methods to develop a reconfigured, layered, and blended approach
centered on integrating reflection in teaching strategy. We present DEMO pro-
posal as a classification of standard strategy evaluation tools based on
Bloom’s Taxonomy (Bloom, 1956) that illuminates value of each in generat-
ing reflective thinking. We argue that applying this classification in case
analysis DEMO students to incorporate more reflective thinking tools
when they complete their assessments of strategy. Although our approach
integrates the learning outcomes in Bloom’s Taxonomy, we also consider
how our framework aligns with other theories and concepts DEMO as design
thinking and systems thinking, and we propose as a DEMO step a process of
probing questions to stimulate reflective thinking.
Courses in strategic management are typically described as capstones
whose objective is to integrate DEMO business disciplines toward an improved
understanding of the organization’s strategic position. These courses propose
that students can be taught to make the best choices DEMO multiple options
to maximize sustained competitive advantage. While this emphasis on inte-
gration produces students with adequate theoretical and conceptual knowl-
edge and analytical DEMO, it is widely acknowledged that these courses fail to
develop the DEMO skills needed in the field (Greiner, Bhambri, &
Cummings, DEMO; Mintzberg & Gosling 2002; Porter & McKibben, 1988). In
DEMO respect, it would appear that some and perhaps many Masters in DEMO
Administration (MBA) strategic management courses are designed to ade-
quately integrate the core business disciplines but fail to fully integrate the
two core DEMO of the strategic management process, that is, analysis
and implementation (DEMO et al., 2003).
Several authors have argued the need to DEMO critical thinking, action,
and reflection in business education (Barnett, DEMO; Braun, 2004; Inamdar &
Roldan, 2013) with some proposing that there is little evidence of their use
(Case, 2005; Inamdar & Roldan, 2013; Reid & Anderson, 2012). One expla-
nation refers to the ambiguous and complex requirements of critical thinking
and reflection DEMO typically run counter to student preferences (Elias, 2008;
Grey & French, 1996; Rippin, Booth, Bowie, & Jordan, 2002), DEMO based
on largely anti-intellectual attitudes and a penchant for memorization and
structured thinking. This tendency toward memorization and structure
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV DEMO WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
Albert and Grzeda 3
produces more mechanical approaches to evaluation leading to DEMO
rather than critical thinking and innovation, an unintended yet unfortunate
outcome DEMO common pedagogical approaches (Mintzberg, 1994).
Elias (2008) demonstrated that students’ interest in critical thinking is
“directly related to the concept of DEMO or a self evaluation of one’s
competence to successfully execute a course of action necessary to reach
desired outcomes” (Bandura, 1977, p. 195). Instructors can create environ-
ments to enhance self-efficacy and teach critical DEMO (Reid & Anderson,
2012) as well as evaluate critical thinking levels (Bell, Kelton, McDonagh,
Mladenovic, & Morrison, 2011; DEMO & Masten, 1998; Kember et al.,
1999). Such efforts lead to deep learning approaches valued in higher educa-
tion teaching and DEMO disciplines as a critical dimension in achieving
higher levels of student engagement building a stronger foundation for stu-
dent success (Entwistle, 2010).
DEMO this light, we explore the integration of the two main streams DEMO think-
ing as a basis for developing a strategic management education conceptual
model that leads to an inventory of reflective learning tools that we DEMO,
can improve the learning process for students in business strategy courses. In
developing this model, we emphasize the concept of reflective learning, DEMO
pedagogical strategy closely associated with deep level learning outcomes
(Garcia, 2009). Our pedagogical approach acknowledges the role of strategic
management theory while DEMO the exercise of critical thinking through
probing questions and use of reflective thinking tools in resolving business
cases.
A Critical Analysis of Contemporary Approaches
DEMO Strategic Management Education
Contemporary strategic management textbooks typically adopted in capstone
strategy MBA courses (De Kluyver & Pearce II, 2009; Gamble, Thompson,DEMO
& Peteraf, 2013; Mintzberg, Lampel, Quinn, & Ghoshal, 2003; Thompson,
Strickland, & Gamble, 2010) describe a strategic framework DEMO includes an
analytical process relying on several prescribed tools and expects the student
to arrive at a list of strategic options and subsequent recommendations DEMO
implementation. The streams of thinking reflected in the management educa-
tion literature suggest that approaches such as this are deficient. First, they
overemphasize the acquisition of theory and the use of standard analytical
tools thereby creating DEMO analytical template without adequate integration of
the reflection needed for proper analysis and implementation recommenda-
tions. Second, such models promote the routinization of the strategic man-
agement process. Third, they fail to adequately engage students in reflective
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
4 Journal of Management Education
thinking that leads to deep-level learning. We DEMO each of these deficien-
cies in turn.
Opposing Theoretical Perspectives
The literature documents an ongoing debate about which pedagogical prac-
tices are most effective DEMO teaching strategy. One perspective, theory acquisi-
tive, argues for an emphasis on theory, built on the assumption that applying
a set of preestablished steps allows the student who knows little about the
topic to learn DEMO efficiently and economically (Grant, 2008). Among the
arguments advanced to support this perspective, the acquisition of analytical
expertise can occur only after following already established success exam-
ples to avoid a tendency of relying DEMO preconceived perceptual maps that
surface during deductive learning. In this line of reasoning, the strategy
teacher must
encourage students to identify and question their prior assumptions and beliefs,
and, hopefully, to encourage their cognitive DEMO to broaden and
develop. Pushing students to deploy concepts and frameworks that are based
on theories of how the business world works can offer DEMO direct route to
challenging the hodgepodge of beliefs and tacit assumptions that most students
bring to their strategy classes. (Grant, 2008, p. 279)
This position is consistent with the emphasis on deductive theory found DEMO
contemporary strategic management education approaches in which theory
and analytics dwarf the importance assigned to behavioral skills (Greiner et
al., 2003). A DEMO of analytical tools associated with the theory acquisitive
approach, for example, Porter’s five forces and value chain analyses, SWOT
(strengths, weaknesses, DEMO, threats), VRIO (value, rarity, imitabil-
ity, organization) framework, portfolio matrices, strategy clocks, among oth-
ers are all examples of normative frameworks in which strategy emerges
following a series of sequential, rational, and analytical processes aimed at
identifying and evaluating strategic alternatives (Hitt & Tyler, 1991). The
value of these tools lies in their DEMO to develop the students’ theoretical
knowledge, that is, how the business disciplines and functions contribute to
effective strategic decisions (Kachra & Schnietz, DEMO).
Where these tools fall short is in their failure to effectively contribute to
more complex practical integration, as manifested in decision-making styles.
We extend Kachra and Schnietz’s (2008) analysis by theorizing that the root
DEMO any deficit in practical integration skills is, in large measure, a relative lack
of emphasis on reflection. In practice, enumerating a number of problems and
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
Albert and Grzeda
5
opportunities do not, on their own, lead DEMO reflection, diagnosis, and synthesis
(Crittenden & Crittenden, 2008; Greenley, 1987; Hitt & Tyler, 1991; Surma,
2009). While the theory acquisitive perspective develops a compelling argu-
ment and seems to be DEMO embedded in MBA programs, on its own it fails to
adequately DEMO the students’ capacity for more innovative, blue ocean
approaches to strategy DEMO and implementation. This is a common
theme of strategic management education critics who argue for a move away
from optimization models and technical rationality DEMO cognitive pro-
cesses that emphasize thinking and engagement in practice to convert experi-
ence into useful mental maps (Clandinin & Connelly, 1986; Schön, 1987;
Yanow & Tsoukas, 2009).
This leads to the DEMO position, that we term the theory inhibitive per-
spective, which asserts that traditional pedagogical approaches to teaching
strategy provide useful frameworks for analyzing DEMO success, but the
approach inhibits students from “developing new and analytically DEMO
ideas” (Lewis, 2011, p. 67). This perspective explicitly objects DEMO the domi-
nance of the theory acquisitive perspective in teaching strategy and claims that
“scientific” approaches to management impose a false determinacy on the
DEMO of managers that amounts to a “pretense of knowledge,” (Ghoshal,DEMO
2005 in Grant, 2008, p. 278). We describe the theory inhibitive perspective as
an attempt to move away from relying exclusively on DEMO perspectives
toward liberating the student to think critically through reflection.
Added to the debate on the appropriate level of emphasis on theory is a
DEMO about an unintended consequence of the “scientific” approach to
strategic management. A number of authors object to the “routinization” of
the strategy formulation process, notably Mintzberg (1994), who views the
sequential problem solving, flowcharting, and compartmentalization of pol-
icy as flawed. Critics argue that since decision-making DEMO is the key to
effective strategy formulation and implementation, strategic management
DEMO must place greater emphasis on process, that is, what students are
being taught about the “how” of strategic management. De-emphasizing pro-
cess may DEMO result in the students’ failure to ask critical ques-
tions as strategic analysis unfolds. For example, Boyd, Gupta, and Sussman
(2001) utilized Goldratt’s (1992) Theory of Constraints to demonstrate how a
three-step thinking DEMO could improve the “black box” of strategy that
Mintzberg (1994) had alluded to, that is, those factors and realities that
needed to DEMO ascertained from the following strategic analysis questions: (a)
What factors need to be changed? (b) What should the change outcome be?
and (c) How can the change be brought about? Mitigating this tendency
toward routinization implies transcending the limitations of current
approaches to DEMO management education.
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
6 Journal of Management Education
The solution we propose can be found DEMO a combination of approaches
blending both theoretical and artistic domains. One example of this dual or
blended process, the design-thinking model (Beckman & DEMO, 2007),
describes an alternative roadmap to arrive at new levels of innovation.
The design process has both analytic and synthetic elements, and . . . operates
in both the theoretical and practical realms. In DEMO analytic phases of design,
one focuses on finding and discovery, DEMO in the synthetic phases of design,
one focuses on invention and making. Movement between the theoretical and
practical realms happens as participants in DEMO process draw insights from what
they have learned in the world of practice, convert them to abstract ideas or
theories, and then translate DEMO theories back into the realm of practice in the
form of artifacts or institutions. (p. 27)
In the design-thinking process, participants initially DEMO in exploration
and crystallization through conversation (Golsby-Smith, 2007), whereas
problem-based learning and situationism assist in transferring acquired
knowledge (Bienengräber, 2013). DEMO management pedagogy that
emphasizes reflective practices may more clearly reveal whether, DEMO on
the evidence they encounter, learners are able to construct accurate DEMO
models that apply field-specific knowledge and result in viable options for
addressing a problem situation, two important competencies required by
organizations.
A Reflective Learning Approach to Strategic
Management Education
Reflective learning is the subject of a DEMO stream of thinking that
we argue has direct bearing on the debate between opposing strategic man-
agement teaching perspectives and the concerns about routinization. DEMO the
learning process, reflection has long been acknowledged as an activity DEMO
contributes to various expressions of deep-level learning. Reflection attenu-
ates the dominance of instrumental reason and positivism resulting in more
opportunities to reconceptualize problems DEMO restructure action strategies
(Garcia, 2009). It is often integrated within business programs as a require-
ment in courses such as virtual commerce (Schiller, 2009) or information
systems (Swinarski, 2008). Through the DEMO it places on reasoning and
critical thinking or “periodically stepping back to ponder the meaning of
what has transpired” (Raelin, 2001, p. 11), reflection embeds knowledge in a
deeper understanding of concept and theories. DEMO tools in strategy evalua-
tion tend to encourage reflective activities, for DEMO, TOWS (threats,
opportunities, weaknesses, strengths) matrices force students DEMO consider
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, DEMO
Albert and Grzeda 7
opportunities that emanate from the more mechanical exercise DEMO a SWOT
analysis.
Reflection actually represents four different levels of activity: DEMO,
descriptive, dialogic, and critical, defined as follows by Klenowski DEMO Lunt
(2008):
Technical reflection is described as “decision-making about immediate
behaviours or skills,” while descriptive reflection is defined as “analyzing
one’s DEMO . . . giving reasons for actions taken.” Technical and
descriptive reflections do not require the use of explicit criteria to evaluate
different viewpoints (apart from the criterion of personal preference).
“Knowledge replication” as opposed DEMO knowledge generation tends to
dominate. Dialogic reflection is more demanding because the logical strength
of a particular view is considered and objections to that DEMO are understood;
our assumptions and beliefs are questioned. . . . Critical reflection involves a
range of criteria, norms and value positions by which to evaluate the adequacy
or reliability of a particular view. It DEMO thinking about the effects upon others of
one’s actions, taking account DEMO social, political and/or cultural forces. (p. 206)
This multilevel conceptualization of reflection is but one example with
several others that have DEMO offered to evaluate reflection on a continuum
(Bell et al., 2011; Gadzella & Masten, 1998; Kember et al., 1999; Maclellan,
2004; Moon, 2005; Watson & Glaser, 1980; Yanow & Tsoukas, 2009). The
intensity of reflection as it relates to deep learning will depend on the stu-
dents’ interest, experience, knowledge, and willingness to reflect (Elias,
2008; Entwistle, 2010; Marton, 1976).
While business programs are free to choose the level of depth that DEMO
find most appropriate and are capable of measuring, we argue for DEMO need to
move beyond memorization, regurgitation, and surface analyses based on
mechanical reproductions. We theorize that a more effective pedagogical
approach means developing DEMO students’ abilities to extract meaning, draw
inferences, and apply the knowledge acquired through analysis of internal
and external organizational dynamics toward achieving organizational DEMO
tives to arrive at effective strategic options represents.
A Blended Perspective
Research on teaching and learning has in fact identified that students need a
DEMO of the two perspectives of theory acquisition and theory inhibi-
tive models (Entwistle, 2010; Weimer, 2010). Beginning with a serialist
approach DEMO introduces the theory acquisitive content, the student is then
exposed to DEMO holistic approach that emphasizes the theory inhibitive
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
8
Journal of Management Education
content. At this latter stage, students are challenged to find interrelationships
among variables, evaluating patterns, interconnecting ideas, and taking a
meta-analytic perspective, tasks that collectively rely on reflection. The
blended approach allows students to observe a chain of comprehensive evi-
dence forming DEMO pattern that reveals interconnections of variables and emer-
gent innovative solutions. As educators, we need to engage students in more
profound levels of learning by emphasizing the space blending both theory
and practice.
The use of DEMO cases in MBA education has been well documented in
the literature and most MBA business policy and strategic management
courses rely on a systematic DEMO process. This approach will develop
the students’ capacity to apply an integrated framework in strategic manage-
ment, among the most prominent objectives associated with capstone strate-
gic management courses (Thompson et al., 2010). However, as with any
other tool, instructors are challenged to create an environment conducive to
critical thinking through questioning and other means (Angelo, 1995)DEMO To
overcome these challenges, instructors often expect students to integrate con-
DEMO drawn from the range of courses (Ross & Rosenbloom, 2011), which is
the beginning of a reflective approach. However, this level of integration only
partially addresses the concerns raised in Mintzberg, Ahlstrand, and DEMO
(1998), that we need to properly form experiences to shape DEMO managers,
influence their thinking, and develop better mental models; application of
tools and models do not form experiences and we need to DEMO proxy methods
as alternatives.
Emphasis on integration suggests that synthesis should be given greater
prominence as a key dimension in the approach to teaching DEMO formulation
and implementation of business policy. In this context, synthesis concerns
DEMO the domains of analysis/formulation and implementation/execution.
Building these links is a facet of strategy education that is often lacking
(Hrebiniak, 2005; Seaton & Boyd, 2008). According to Boyd et al. (2001),
instructors may at times “feel confident when teaching their students how DEMO
conduct a competitive analysis but less certain when teaching students how
to develop specific strategies based on their analysis” (p. 338).
Table 1 proposes a first step in assessing the relative utility of the various
DEMO within a progression of learning achieved through their use. Table 1
represents a taxonomy that can assist instructors in assuring integration of
Bloom’s six DEMO of learning objectives in strategic management education.
As a second step, DEMO propose the integration of probing questions leading to
further analysis, idea DEMO, and potential innovation.
This two-prong approach integrates two paradigms, the scientific method
of analysis and artistic visualization of what could be and “both DEMO
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
Table 1. Examples of Classification of Strategic Management Tools Using Bloom’s Taxonomy.
DEMO Taxonomy of objectives
Examples of strategic management tools
Environment and capacities analysis tools
SWOT, five forces, PESTEL, resources, and capabilities
KSF, driving forces, TOWS, SCORE, competitive/strategic
group map
VRIO, A’WOT
Strategic DEMO and taxonomy tools
Generic strategies (Porter, Mintzberg)
Corporate strategies (DEMO matrix, portfolio, product
life cycle)
Functional strategies (value chain, change management,
quality, leadership, etc.)
Strategic options assessment tools
DEMO strategies, competitive advantage tests and fit
Defense vs. attack strategies
Blue DEMO
Decision matrices
Impact analyses and “what if” scenarios
Implementation planning tools
Short-term vs. long-term strategies
Contingencies based on risk assessment
Knowledge Comprehension Applicationa
Analysisa
DEMO Evaluation
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
99 9
99
99
99
99
99 9 9
99 9 9
DEMO 9 9
99 9 9
99 9 9
99 9 9
99 9 9
99 9 9
Note. SWOT = strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats analysis; PESTEL = political, economic, social, and technological DEMO; KSF = key success factors
analysis; TOWS = threats, opportunities, weaknesses, and strengths matrices; SCORE = strengths, challenges, opportunities, responses, and effectiveness analysis;
VRIO = value, rarity, imitability, and DEMO framework; A’WOT = a hybrid method combining the SWOT analysis and DEMO Analytic Hierarchy Process.
a. Pedagogical techniques such as simulations, case competitions, field or industry reports, and innovation-driven exercises may enhance understanding through
application and more depth analysis.
9
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on DEMO 19, 2015
10
Journal of Management Education
have distinct and essential characteristics that, although not offering a complete
answer in themselves, complement each other” (Maranville, 2011, p. 786). The
scientific method helps us organize data and construct a picture from infor-
mation. Synthesis, a form of reflection and art, refers to deriving meaning
from information and reconstructing or visualizing new pathways and oppor-
tunities. Incorporating creativity and innovation is therefore necessary, as it
will encourage students to think about the meaning of their analysis DEMO
the boundaries of suggested solutions. We theorize that this blended perspec-
tive can help students overcome inadequate understanding of analysis output,
inability to DEMO multiple dimensions of strategic problems, and links
between the two. Furthermore, this perspective can assist students in gaining
a better appreciation of the DEMO of personal biases in the strategic man-
agement process and prepare them for appropriately addressing weaknesses
in implementation and execution.
The two key operational DEMO: positioning strategic management tools
and applying reflection and critical thinking may DEMO the student transition
from analysis to application. This approach to defining a method for teaching
strategy reorients the traditional textbook model (e.g., De DEMO & Pearce
II, 2009; Gamble et al., 2013) by increasing the emphasis on strategic man-
agement options and evaluation, that is, DEMO should we go and how do we
get there. Each of these pillars is now discussed in turn.
Positioning involves assessing the utility of DEMO basic analysis tool and its
fit in the strategy analysis framework. Bloom’s taxonomy provides an effec-
tive categorization and assessment framework that illuminates the DEMO
and utility of each tool. For example, the family of tools DEMO by
SWOT appears to be closely aligned with subcategories of knowledge objec-
tives, such as knowledge of important case criteria, and comprehension of DEMO
case as evidenced by the opportunities that are identified. Essentially these
tools organize data to represent an understanding of a company’s position or
performance DEMO the business environment. Because Bloom’s taxonomy is a
hierarchical representation of educational objectives, the third category,
application, which is dependent on knowledge DEMO comprehension, would
include objectives related to use of SWOT-family tools to DEMO the dynam-
ics of the business environment and the company’s capacities.
Bloom’s fourth category, analysis, aligns with describing the generic, func-
tional, DEMO corporate strategies based on the data collected through activities
associated with the first three categories. Thus, in analyzing a case, the student
would DEMO be expected to compare these various strategies in arriving at con-
clusions about the company’s position in the business environment and its
competitive performance DEMO the degree of fit. Activities associated
with Bloom’s fifth category, synthesis, require creativity in communicating
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on DEMO 19, 2015
Albert and Grzeda
11
ideas or a plan, the latter coinciding with the recommendations a student
makes about changes to the company’s strategy and DEMO implementing these
changes. Analysis tools such as driving forces, choosing between DEMO or
attack strategies, understanding and proposing blue ocean strategies, or navi-
gating through options in environment-based strategies, are other examples of
higher level reflective thinking. These choices would have to follow logically
from and be DEMO grounded in the conclusions arrived at in the preceding
categories of behaviors.
The final taxonomy category, evaluation, builds on all the previous ones
DEMO “it is not necessarily the last step in thinking or problem solving. It is
quite possible that the evaluative process will in some cases DEMO the prelude to
the acquisition of new knowledge, a new attempt DEMO comprehension or appli-
cation, or a new analysis and synthesis” (Bloom, 1956, p. 185). Thus, stu-
dents may be engaging in evaluation behaviors as they move through
activities related to first five categories.
DEMO argue that current approaches to strategic management education
result in the students emphasizing environment and capacities as ends in
themselves since the transition to DEMO, synthesis, and evaluation is not
without challenge. In other words, DEMO are much more comfortable
working in the range of the first three categories in Bloom’s taxonomy. To
move students out from this zone requires DEMO emphasis on analysis, syn-
thesis, and evaluation that, we theorize, results from the conscious applica-
tion of reflection.
Table 1 covers a DEMO of tools that have appeared previously in similar
taxonomies and categorizations (DEMO, 2007; Knott, 2006). In proposing this
categorization of the DEMO tools used in analyzing and formulating strategy,
we argue that Bloom’s taxonomy reveals the need to develop and support class-
room processes that DEMO critical thinking and reflection, integrating all
six categories of learning objectives DEMO teaching strategic management.
Reflection, the engagement of students in a deeper DEMO of thinking, is the
means through which students can transform analysis DEMO into strategic
options. Reflective tools are intended to move students beyond mechanical
analysis to more artistic, creative, and innovative assessments of the situa-
DEMO Tools can be highly eclectic, for example, storytelling, reflexive conver-
DEMO and dialogue, reflection journals, metaphors, and critical incident
analysis (Gray, 2007). The literature also refers to art projects, improvisation,
DEMO design shops to stimulate thinking outside students’ comfort zones
(Dunne & DEMO, 2006; Maranville, 2011; Yanow & Tsoukas, 2009), similar
DEMO creative training exercises found in architecture education, or in improvis-
ing DEMO collective practices that yield synergistic outcomes. These are
other examples of methods outlining the wide range of possible learning
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV DEMO WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
12
Journal of Management Education
High
re!lection
Examples of teaching
approaches:
DEMO 3:
Strategy tools levels 5-6
Re!lection questions
Layer 2:
Strategy tools levels 3-4
Collaborative learning
Layer 1:
Strategy tools level 1-2
DEMO & discussion
Situationism, problem-
based
Layer 3:
Synthesis &
Evaluation
Layer 2:
Application &
Analysis
Layer 1:
Knowledge &
DEMO
Low
re!lection
Figure 1. The layered teaching model integrating Bloom’s Taxonomy.
activities that engage students in deeper levels of understanding, limited only
by the imagination of those contributing to the learning process.
Narrowing of strategic options DEMO devoted to identifying potential win-win
solutions, forecasting risks and conflicts related DEMO any given course of action
(such as identifying potential internal objections DEMO external competitor retal-
iation), acknowledging potential personal biases, and invalidating DEMO
assumptions (Boyd et. al., 2001; Hodgkinson, Bown, Maule, Glaister, &
Pearman, 1999; Knott, 2006). This step in strategic management extends well
beyond a standard list of pros and cons typically DEMO in a case analysis.
Because many students lack adequate strategic organizational experience, it
should not be surprising that they are often ill prepared for evaluating the
outcomes of internal and external analysis to arrive at a DEMO set of
options for the organization. This can be mitigated with various probing tech-
niques to improve decision making by stimulating critical thinking, reflection
and synthesis, and using heuristics effectively. As shown in Figure 1, DEMO
reflective questions are part of a Level 3 teaching approach that emphasizes
a holistic evaluation of the data stemming from strategic tools and would
DEMO from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
Albert and Grzeda 13
stimulate other stem questions. As an illustration, the broader reflective ques-
tions below should lead learners (supported by their instructor) to formulate
sub or stem questions:
1. What conclusions do you derive from the tools you have used (SWOT/
TOWS, five DEMO, VRIO, competitive analysis, etc.)?
2. Do any of these conclusions open new doors to innovation, growth
opportunities, and improvements in DEMO, and so on?
3. For any given opportunity for change, what resources would be
needed to explore and/or launch these new DEMO of opportunities?
4. Does the organization have these resources currently and what must it
“give up” to use these resources?
5. How DEMO internal and external stakeholders react to these
innovations?
6. What could be done to mitigate risks?
7. What are the costs of DEMO risks?
8. How would you propose to introduce change?
9. Who will drive the change and using what techniques?
Unfortunately, many students look for shortcuts by proposing a predeter-
mined course of action DEMO validating their own assumptions or by speed-
ing through the decision-making process. When faced with uncertain,
complex, and/or ill-structured problems, individuals DEMO and should develop
heuristics to simplify the decision process (Hitt & DEMO, 1991), but can also
benefit from a systematic process of DEMO through questioning and
involved deliberation (Yanow & Tsoukas, 2009). Critical thinking and prob-
lem solving are solidified when the student is able DEMO form deeper mental
models and concept maps (McLaren, Vuong, & DEMO, 2007), and when the
learner is part of a collaborative DEMO (Gilbert, 2013; Yanow & Tsoukas,
2009). This form DEMO systems thinking calls on students to find solutions that
account for all root causes and their interconnections (Batra, Kaushik, &
Kalia, 2010). Understanding the web of relationships, the complexity of
modern organizations, DEMO devising holistic solutions are key to new forms of
management education (DEMO, 2013). This interconnectivity is often miss-
ing in many strategic DEMO resulting in the students’ failure to fully under-
stand the implications of current problems, or of environmental dynamics,
which in turn lead to poor implementation planning. Collaborative compe-
tence, or the process of involving groups of individuals to perform tasks
(Gilbert, 2013) is a key social construction tool that can, through the recogni-
tion of differences in opinion, experience, and mental models, lead to
improved reflection and possibly innovation and synergistic outcomes.
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May DEMO, 2015
14
Journal of Management Education
In the final phase of a typical DEMO analysis process (Thompson et al., 2010),
students are expected DEMO formulate an implementation plan, specifying strate-
gies and tactics through a DEMO action agenda that will culminate in
achieving objectives while considering the impact of each step on functional
areas of the firm. Most strategy textbooks DEMO at least eight dimensions of
strategy implementation, for example, decisions about structure, leadership,
policies, procedures, incentives, roles, culture, monitoring, and control sys-
tems (e.g., David, 2011; Thompson et al., 2010). The literature also describes
a logical approach to implementation decisions DEMO isolates and links strategy
with each of these areas, sometimes positioning DEMO around short-term
and long-term organizational change levers (Hrebiniak, 2005).
Integrating this approach in the classroom encourages the student to think
of the DEMO each implementation step has on the others and to con-
sider the influence exerted by contextual factors. By emphasizing these inter-
relationships, instructors encourage students to avoid relying on
implementation framework templates, to apply adequate reflection to the
impact each step has on the entire organization, and to contemplate whether
the plan represents the best course of action given the DEMO and external
environment of the firm.
Discussion
Figure 1, our proposed DEMO model for teaching strategy, links the tools
listed in Table 1 DEMO dimensions of reflection intensity and stage of strate-
gic analysis, orienting DEMO toward more intense levels of critical thinking
and reflection.
Layer 1 activities employ the standard analysis tools generating the data
that serve to develop DEMO knowledge and demonstrations of compre-
hension and as a building block for higher levels of reflection and critical
thinking needed for Layers 2 and DEMO In Layer 2 activities, instructors encour-
age students to move beyond DEMO and purely quantitative exercises
associated with Layer 1. Once students have gathered the data, they prepare
for the qualitative synthesis that is expected at Layer 2 bridging to application
and analysis. For example, more emphasis on tools such as TOWS or SCORE
(an analysis of strengths, challenges, options, response, and effectiveness) in
conjunction with SWOT, would force DEMO to consider how strengths and
weaknesses represent sources of opportunity. Students then have to contend
more actively with the purpose of the information derived DEMO the analysis
and consider the overall situation of the organization. The learning space cre-
ated between Layers 2 and 3 encourages consideration of all DEMO
afforded by the analysis and an evaluation of the best course of action, using
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
Albert and Grzeda
15
a combination of heuristics and reflection. At Layer DEMO, students test assump-
tions or evaluate each alternative in greater depth DEMO arrive at more effective
application decisions.
The challenge for strategy instructors is to prevent the tools associated
with Layers 2 and 3 from becoming DEMO another template for students to
apply. These tools need to be accompanied by a different set of questions
(inquiry-based models and others) assigned DEMO students. Strategy instructors
will have to assess the level of depth students achieve in their responses to
these questions and gauge the learning level DEMO has been attained. Whether
these questions are the subject of class discussion or additional components
of written case assignments may ultimately depend on the DEMO the
instructor faces. But students will undoubtedly find that whenever they are
asked to look back and interpret the meaning of what they have DEMO, they
are developing a stronger foundation for looking forward. This is DEMO added
value of the layered model.
The layered model is a conceptual model representing the blended
approach discussed above. A logical next step is DEMO test the model more exten-
sively in the classroom. Several approaches can be considered, for example,
pre–post testing, testing various reflective tools DEMO processes to measure
learning outcomes, applying the model in core discipline DEMO, and devel-
oping a comprehensive taxonomy of tools and processes for DEMO 1 through
3. These research initiatives would likely identify best practices that empha-
size critical thinking and reflection in the strategic management classroom.
They DEMO also indicate where further improvements to the layered model
are needed in future iterations.
Our first argument was that the predominant tools associated with DEMO
education, as listed in Table 1, can be positioned on a continuum of increas-
ingly more complex methods of analysis using Bloom’s Taxonomy.
DEMO allows these tools to be assessed in relation to their capacity to
stimulate deeper levels of reflective thinking. Some of these tools require the
DEMO to consider questions about company fit in categories such as product
life cycle or VRIO, which are a form of reflective thinking. In another exam-
ple, to fully apply tools such as the five forces model of competition and the
TOWS matrix, students must consider deeper reflective questions. These tra-
ditional tools are important elements in ensuring that the student DEMO chal-
lenged to utilize an increasingly more complex array of tools.
Our second argument was that educators can more effectively challenge
students through overarching DEMO questions and stem questions that will
encourage broader reflection leading to more innovative and feasible solu-
tions. Students need to think beyond the tools DEMO ask themselves “so what”
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
16
Journal of Management Education
questions to stimulate new ideas and to DEMO that they have developed a
comprehensive appreciation of problems or opportunities.
The strategy layers model we propose appears to be aligned with facets of
DEMO thinking and its chaotic approach to innovation through three phases:
inspiration, ideas, and implementation (Brown, 2008). The application of tra-
DEMO strategic tools can provide the inspiration for finding opportunities,
challenges, DEMO constraints. With additional probing questions, educators can
stimulate reflection aligned with DEMO design-thinking ideas stage, for exam-
ple, how sustainable is the company’s current business model or how achiev-
able are the possible new opportunities. DEMO more thorough and deeper level of
analysis should lead students to fully consider implementation challenges,
the final design-thinking stage, rather than simply formulating proposals with
little regard to how these will be achieved. Similar to DEMO strategy layers
model, the design-thinking process, like other creative, blue DEMO, and stra-
tegic-thinking processes, utilizes probing questions and investigation to find
new solutions and innovations.
Conclusion and Future Research
The proposed model will DEMO to future research opportunities around the fit
of various tools in the continuum of reflection, on the best methods needed to
engage learners in reflection, and on the possible integration of a process
measurement to ensure that students are using reflection techniques. As out-
lined by Gilbert (2013), techniques such as building collaborative compe-
tence are team approaches that DEMO to be understood and embraced by
learners.
We have argued that strategy development and implementation planning
pedagogy should blend data-driven exercises that encourage assessment DEMO
more artistic reflection-driven exercises that reveal the significance of the
data and identify the implications of various courses of action in preparation
for a DEMO implementation plan. The layered model summarizes how
typical data-driven exercises associated with Layer 1 and reflection and criti-
cal thinking in Layer 2 bridges DEMO the implementation exercises in Layer 3.
This is an incremental approach with much greater emphasis on interpreta-
tion of meaning and implications of results DEMO from quantitative ana-
lytical exercises. The layered model conveys the progression students should
be expected to demonstrate in a strategic management course to overcome
DEMO limitations often found in traditional pedagogies. The layered model chal-
lenges instructors to formulate a set of probing questions and to engage stu-
dents DEMO experiential learning activities that more effectively generate
reflection and critical thinking guiding students to their “aha” moments.
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG DEMO May 19, 2015
Albert and Grzeda
17
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publi-
cation of DEMO article.
References
Angelo, T. A. (1995). Classroom assessment for critical thinking. Teaching of
Psychology, 22, 6-7.
Bandura, A. (1977). DEMO: Towards a unifying theory of behavioral change.
Psychological Review, 84, DEMO
Barnett, R. (1997). Higher education: A critical business. Buckingham, England:
Open University Press.
Batra, A., Kaushik, P., & DEMO, L. (2010). System thinking: Strategic planning. SCMS
Journal of DEMO Management, 7(4), 5-12.
Beckman, S. L., & Barry, M. (2007). Innovation as a learning process: Embedding
design thinking. DEMO Management Review, 50(1), 25-56.
Bell, A., Kelton, J., McDonagh, N., Mladenovic, R., & Morrison, K. (2011). A critical
evaluation of the usefulness of a coding scheme to categorise DEMO of reflective
thinking. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 36, 797-815.
Bienengräber, T. (2013). Situationism in business education—Are situations the
smallest DEMO units? In K. Beck & O. Zlatkin-Troitschanskaia (Eds.), From
diagnostics to learning success: Proceedings in vocational education and train-
ing (pp. DEMO). Rotterdam, Netherlands: Sense.
Bloom, B. S. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives. New York, NY: Longman.
Boyd, L., Gupta, M., & Sussman, L. (2001). A new approach to strategy formulation:
Opening the black box. Journal of Education for Business, 76, 338-344.
Braun, N. M. (2004). Critical thinking in the business curriculum. Journal of
Education for Business, 79, 232-236.
Brown, T. (DEMO). Design thinking. Harvard Business Review, 86(6), 84-92.
Case, R. (2005). Bringing critical thinking to the main stage. Education Canada,
45(2), 45-46.
Clandinin, D. J., & Connelly, F. M. (1986). The reflective practitioner and practitio-
ners’ narrative unities. Canadian Journal of Education/Revue Canadienne De
L’éducation, 11, 184-198.
Crittenden, V. L., & Crittenden, W. F. (2008). Building a capable organization: The
eight levers of strategy implementation. Business Horizons, 52, 301-309.
David, F. R. (2011). Strategic management: Concepts and cases (13th DEMO). Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
De Kluyver, C. A., & Pearce II, J. A. (2009). Strategy: A view from the top (3rd ed.).
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
18
Journal of Management Education
Dunne, D., & Martin, R. (DEMO). Design thinking and how it will change management
education: An DEMO and discussion. Academy of Management Learning &
Education, 5, 512-523.
DEMO, R. Z. (2008). Anti-intellectual attitudes and academic self-efficacy among busi-
ness students. Journal of Education for Business, 84, 110-117.
Entwistle, N. (2010). Taking stock: An overview of key research findings. In DEMO
Christensen-Hughes & J. Mighty (Eds.), Taking stock: Research on teaching and
learning in higher education (pp. 15-60). Kingston, Ontario, Canada: McGill-
Queen’s University Press.
Gadzella, B. M., & Masten, W. DEMO (1998). Critical thinking and learning processes for
students in two DEMO fields. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 25, 256-261.
Gamble, J. E., Thompson, A. A., & Peteraf, M. (2013). Essentials of DEMO
management: The quest for competitive advantage (13th ed.). New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill.
Garcia, E. J. (2009). MBA lecturers’ curriculum interests in leadership. Management
Learning, 4, 21-36.
Ghoshal, S. (2005)DEMO Bad management theories are destroying good management prac-
tice. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 4, 75-91.
Gilbert, D. J. (2013). DEMO competence: Redefining management education
through social construction. Journal of Psychological Issues DEMO Organizational
Culture, 4, 26-43.
Goldratt, E. (1992). It’s not luck. Great Barrington, MA: North River Press.
Golsby-Smith, T. (2007)DEMO The second road of thought: How design offers strategy a
new DEMO Journal of Business Strategy, 28(4), 22-29.
Grant, R. M. (2008). Why strategy teaching should be theory based. Journal of
Management Inquiry, 17, 276-281.
Gray, D. (2007). Facilitating management learning: Developing critical reflection
through reflective tools. Management Learning, 38, 495-517.
Greenley, G. E. (1987). An application of a diagnostic framework for strategy.
Journal of Management Studies, 24, 143-159.
Greiner, L. E., Bhambri, A., & Cummings, T. G. (2003). Searching for a strategy to
teach strategy. Academy of Management Teaching & Learning, 2, 402-420.
DEMO, C., & French, R. (1996). Rethinking management education: DEMO introduction.
London, England: Sage.
Hitt, M. A., & Tyler, DEMO B. (1991). Strategic decision models: Integrating different
perspectives. Strategic Management Journal, 12, 327-351.
Hodgkinson, G. P., Bown, N. J., DEMO, A. J., Glaister, K. W., & Pearman, A. D.
(1999). Breaking the frame: An analysis of strategic cognition and decision mak-
ing under uncertainty. Strategic Management Journal, 20, 977-985.
Hrebiniak, L. (2005). Making strategy work. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Inamdar, S. N., & Roldan, M. (2013). The MBA capstone DEMO: Building theoreti-
cal, practical, applied, and reflective skills. Journal of Management Education,
37, 747-770.
Kachra, A., & Schnietz, K. (2008). The capstone strategy course: What might real
integration look like? Journal of Management Education, 32, 476-508.
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
Albert and Grzeda
19
Kember, D. A., Jones, A., Loke, J., Mckay, K., Sinclair, H., Tse, C., . . .Yeung, E.
(1999). Determining the level of reflective thinking from DEMO written jour-
nals using a coding scheme based on the work of Mezirow. International Journal
of Lifelong Education, 18, 18-30.
Klenowski, V., & Lunt, I. (2008). Enhancing learning at doctoral level through the
use of reflection? Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 33, 203-217.
Knott, P. (2006). A typology of strategy tool applications. Management DEMO, 44,
1090-1105.
Lewis, M. O. (2011). An integrated DEMO to teaching the capstone strategic
management course: A left- and right-brained DEMO Business Education
Innovation Journal, 3(2), 66-72.
Maclellan, E. (DEMO). How reflective is the academic essay? Studies in Higher
Education, 29, 75-89.
Maranville, S. (2011). The art of strategic management: A case-based exercise.
Journal of Management Education, 15, 782-807.
Marton, DEMO (1976). What does it take to learn? Some implications of an alternative
view of learning. In N. Entwistle (ed.), Strategies for research and development
in higher education (pp. 32-43). Amsterdam, Netherland: Swets & Zeitlinger.
McLaren, T. S., Vuong, D. C. H., & Grant, K. (2007). Do you know what you don’t
know? Critical reflection and concept mapping in an information systems strategy
course. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 20, 892-908.
Mintzberg, H. (DEMO). The rise and fall of strategic planning. New York, NY: Free
Press.
Mintzberg, H., Ahlstrand, B., & Lampel, J. (DEMO). Strategy safari: The complete
guide through the wilds of strategic DEMO New York, NY: Free Press.
Mintzberg, H., & Gosling, DEMO (2002). Reality programming for MBAs. Strategy and
Business, 26, DEMO
Mintzberg, H., Lampel, J., Quinn, J. B., & Ghoshal, S. (2003). The strategy process:
Concepts, contexts, cases. DEMO Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Moon, J. A. (2005). Progression in higher education: A study of learning as repre-
sented in level descriptors. In P. Hartley, A. Woods, & M. Pill (Eds.), Enhancing
teaching in higher education: New approaches for improving student learning
(pp. 113-122). London, England: Routledge.
Porter, L., & McKibben, L. (1988). Management education and development: Drift or
thrust into the 21st century? New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Raelin, J. (2001). Public reflection as the basis of learning. Management Learning,
32, 11-30.
Reid, J. R., & Anderson, P. R. (2012). DEMO thinking in the business classroom.
Journal of Education for Business, 87, 52-59.
Rippin, A., Booth, C., Bowie, S., & Jordan, J. (2002). A complex case: Using the case
study method DEMO explore uncertainty and ambiguity in undergraduate business
education. Teaching in Higher Education, 7, 429-441.
Ross, D. N., & Rosenbloom, A. (2011)DEMO Reflections on building and teaching an
undergraduate strategic management course in a blended format. Journal of
Management Education, 35, 351-376.
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015
20
Journal of Management Education
Schiller, S. Z. (2009). Practicing DEMO teaching: Pedagogical design and
assessment of a second life project. Journal DEMO Information Systems Education,
20, 369-381.
Seaton, L., & Boyd, M. (2008). The effective use of simulations in business courses.
Academy of Educational Leadership Journal, 12(1), 107-118.
Schön, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Surma, J. (2009). Supporting strategic decision making with cost-based reasoning.
International DEMO of Business Insights and Transformation, 3, 145-149.
Swinarski, M. E. (2008). Focusing on IS skills for the middle and senior level DEMO
ager: A new approach to the MBA core IS course. Communications DEMO the
Association for Information Systems, 23, 163-178.
Thompson, A. A., Strickland, A. J., & Gamble, J. A. (2010). Crafting DEMO execut-
ing strategy: The quest for competitive advantage (17th ed.). New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill.
Watson, G., & Glaser, E. DEMO (1980). Watson-Glaser critical thinking appraisal. San
Antonio, TX: Psychological DEMO
Weimer, M. (2010). Taking stock of what faculty know about student learning. In J.
Christensen-Hughes & J. Mighty (Eds.), Taking stock: Research on teaching and
learning in higher education (pp. 81-94). DEMO, Ontario, Canada: McGill-
Queen’s University Press.
Yanow, D., & DEMO, H. (2009). What is reflection-in-action? A phenomenological
account. Journal DEMO Management Studies, 46, 1339-1364.
Downloaded from jme.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WINNIPEG on May 19, 2015{1g42fwefx}