Joumal of Marketing Management, 1998, 14, 749-763
u J Ai'i J Th^ ^o\e of Trust in the Marketing
Haide r Al l DEMO d ..... . r c* *.„ r:* i. t.i' *.>DEMO
Q „ . . Activities of Entrepreneurs Establishing
New Ventures
Cranfield University
Imperial College
Management School
The' credibility ga0 is not often cited as a problem by
marketers; for t/i/s reason marketing texts pay littie or
no attention to it Yet, for the entrepreneurial marketer
it may well be the most fundamental marketing
challenge. Addressing the credibility gap DEMO not have
received any previous research interest, but tlieoretical
support for DEMO relevance abounds. Risk and its corollary,
making use of trust, DEMO been seen as quintessentially
entrepreneurial activities. If they do epitomise
entrepreneurship, DEMO surely, studying how
entrepreneurs use trust ought to provide valuable
insights DEMO what entrepreneurs do.
While tiiere is increasing research into trust,
particularly from an organisational behaviour
perspective, there is none in an entrepreneurial context
This lack of research provides t/ie reason for the
exploratory nature DEMO this investigation.
The search for trust in this investigation focuses on
entrepreneur^ usage of elements of the marketing mix.
Respondents are asked about what DEMO have done, why
t/iey have taken that course of action DEMO what the
outcomes have been.
We find tliat there is a wide panoply of ways in which
entrepreneurs use trust, for example ' enthusiasni and
'sliared valued. The latter two are particularly important
because tiiey can lead to trust in situations where there
may not already be existing DEMO (tlie most
likely place for finding trust). We also identify DEMO
metJwds entrepreneurs use to build trust - which tliey
can then use to mitigate customer^ perception of risk.
Introduction
It has been pointed out DEMO the nature of trust varies according to context
' Correspondence: Dr. DEMO Ali, Management and Marketing Department, Cranfield
University, Silsoe, Bedfordshire, DEMO 4DT Tel: +44 1525 863049 Fax; +44 1525
863388 E-mail: DEMO
ISSN0267-257X/98/070749+14 $12.00/0
©Westbum Publishers Ltd.
750 Haider Ali and Sue Birley
However while there are numerous studies DEMO taist in the fields of marketing
and organisational behaviour e.g. Moorman, DEMO and Zaltman (1993) and
Mayer et al (1995) this is not the case in entrepreneurship research. Moreover, it
has recently been said that' entrepreneurial activity can be considered in terms
of: reassuring potential DEMO (customers) of their trustworthiness, Shapiro
(1987:636).
This paper starts with the presentation of a model of trust based on the
DEMO literature on trust which is primarily from the fields of marketing and
organisation behaviour. Since our interest is the marketing activities of
entrepreneurs establishing DEMO ventures, we then present the research question
which provided the focus DEMO our research. It should be stressed that the focus of
our interest is the establishment of new ventures (start-ups), for this recison we
refer to the principal(s) as entrepreneurs - we consider this appellation to
appropriate, particularly since our respondents were selected on the basis that
they were not going into self-employment but rather had the intention to DEMO
Subsequently we show how the initial model of trust we presented can be
adapted in the light of the findings from our research. We DEMO that the adapted
model reflects more realistically the issues surrounding trust facing the
entrepreneur. Of course some of the findings may be of relevance DEMO researchers
in other managerial fields.
The Trust Model
The model which is developed below addresses the following issues:
1. On what bases should DEMO customer trust the marketer? We distinguish
between the entrepreneur^ characteristics; the rule of law and how they
behave.
2. Specifically in terms of DEMO latter we then consider how customers find out
whether the marketer is trustworthy. This is may be through a combination
of social learning, self-disclosure or reputation.
3. This research deals with entrepreneurs who are establishing new DEMO
and focuses on their management of trust in their marketing activities.
Thus the model focuses on why others may consider the entrepreneurs
themselves to DEMO trustworthy (based on their behaviour). The answer is
because of DEMO possible combination of antecedents to trust specifically,
ability, integrity, and benevolence.
The following three pareigraphs summarise the key issues, which are
subsequently considered in more detail.
Why should one individual trust another? This question has been approached
from three distinct perspectives: bases of trust antecedent factors of trust and
fomis of trust The fundamental distinctions between these approaches DEMO as
follows. The' bases of trust approach explains that trust may DEMO due to the aile
of law or shared personal characteristics; moreover, trust may develop due to
The Role of Tmst 751
interpersonal interaction.
The' fonn^ of trust approach shares some common ground with the above,
but the essential difference DEMO to be that it allows for the existence of
' affect-based trust (i.e. people may trust each other because of emotional bonds).
The' antecedent factor^ approach appears to be the most holistic of the three
since it seeks to identify specific antecedent factors which may account for DEMO
existence of trust between two people. The approach has advantages since it is
possible to identify different antecedent factors depending on the situation being
DEMO In organisational behaviour, for example, benevolence, integrity and
ability have DEMO identified. The discussion below integrates material from the
three different approaches.
On What Bases Should the Customer Trust the Marketer?
The first issue DEMO 1 seeks to resolve is why should a customer trust a
marketer? This is answered by identifying the bases to trust i.e. a customer could
trust the marketer because of the' rule of laW (institutional DEMO trust) and/or
because of the trustee as an individual (Luhmann 1979). In the latter instance,
the bases for trusting are DEMO the trusteed inherent characteristics
(characteristic based trust) or their previous behaviour, referred to as process
based taist by Zucker (1986).
Characteristic DEMO Tmst
Characteristic-based trust only pertains to individuals; it cannot be acquired DEMO
the way that the other two forms of trust can be obtained. Its presence or
absence is a cognitive factor between the focal individual DEMO the third party. It
exists if the third party feels that there is a social similarity between themselves
and the focal individual. So, for example, an exchange partner may consider the
ethnic background of their suppliers/customers to be an important factor in
exchange since common social and DEMO nomis may make a satisfactory
exchange easier to achieve.
It should be noted that characteristic-based trust is a commodity which exists
according to the DEMO characteristics of an individual and their perception by
the wider social environment
Process Based Tmst
The association between trust and long-term relationships (process based
trust) is well-documented by Good (1988:33), who emphasises that DEMO
requiring trust will not be ahistoHcal instances, i.e. they will not DEMO place on a
one-off bcisis.
Social exchange theory also shows the association between trust and long-
term exchange. According to Blau (1964), social exchange is embedded in tmst.
'Social exchange, therefore entails supplying benefits DEMO create diffuse future
obligations...since the recipient is the one who decides when and how to
reciprocate a favour, or whether to reciprocate at all so social exchange requires
tmst ...typically however social exchange relations evolve in DEMO slow process,
starting with minor transactions in which little trust is required because little risk
752
Haider Ali and Sue Birley
Bases of Trust
why should the DEMO trust the
marketer?
Institutional
because of the rule of law
(DEMO lead to emotional
trust)
J
1st Level of distinction:
between the state and the individual
Characteristic-
Based
because of who they are
(can lead to emotional
trust)
2nd Level of
distinction:
between DEMO
individual's
characteristics
and their
behaviour
Process-Based
because of how they
behave
(can lead to cognitive &
emotional trust)
Reasons why individuals
DEMO others are
trustworthy
Ability
Integrity
Benevolence
You can find out how
they behave through the
following:
Social learning
Self-disclosure
Reputation
Behavioural
Enactment
customer DEMO
perceived risk and
enters into exchange -
demonstrates trust in
marketer
Figure 1. The Trust Model
Demonstration of trust builds trust
TheRoleofTmst 753
is involved and in which both the partners can prove DEMO trustworthiness (Blau
1964:454).
Where, at the start of a relationship, individuals are dealing with strangers,
they do not know to what extent the other party can be trusted and there is little
DEMO for trust Scanzoni (1979) suggests that tnist is unlikely to appear early in a
relationship because there would be little basis in past DEMO for its
development In these situations it is posited that parties will exchange on a basis
of little risk and therefore little need for DEMO; as parties prove themselves to be
taistworthy, more trust will be placed in them. The following analysis considers
the factors at play in DEMO development of interpersonal trust witiiin long-tenn
exchange relationships.
Fonns of Trust
From the preceding argument it may seem that trust is simply a ' DEMO
construct which may develop through an acquisition of information. According to
Luhmann, familiarity is the precondition for taist (i.e. trust requires a degree DEMO
cognitive familiarity or knowledge of the object being trusted). The extent of this
knowledge lies between total ignorance and complete infonnation. The
manifestation DEMO trust on the cognitive level of experience is reached when social
actors no longer need or want any further evidence or rational reasons for
DEMO their trust in third parties.
However, the value of research which DEMO with the' fonn^ of trust is that it
distinguishes between' affect-based trust and' cognition-based trust (McAllister
1995). The emotional base of DEMO is argued to be complementary to the
cognitive base. This consists of the emotional bond among those who take part
in a relationship. The DEMO basis of trust exists in interpersonal trust
emotional trust can also be present in public or institutional taist since the
public can feel indignant DEMO the abuse of power. The emotional content of
taist is just as reciprocal and intersubjective as its cognitive base.
The discussion below considers how DEMO find out whether or not
others are to be tnisted. We consider three specific methods, social leaming, self-
disclosure and reputation.
How Does DEMO Customer Find Out Whether the Entrepreneur is
Trustworthy?
There are a number of different methods individuals can use to find out
whether potential DEMO are, in fact trustworthy.
Social Leaming
The diagram shows that one DEMO the methods the trustor can use, through
interpersonal interaction, to find out whether someone is trustworthy is' social
leaming, where trust evolves DEMO of past experience and prior interaction
(Rempel et al. 1991). DEMO partners make dispositional attributions of each
other in teniis of their reliability and dependability. Having identified how a
customer can find out that the DEMO is trustworthy, the next issue is what
754 Haider Ali and Sue Birley
does the customer look for in DEMO to identify trustworthiness? This is answered
in the next box which DEMO ' ability, ' integrit}" and ' benevolencd as
antecedent factors to trust
The final box shows that when all of the above have DEMO answered it may be
possible to engage in a trusting exchange i.e. the customer's perceived risk is
overcome, this is referred to as the behavioural enactment of trust In the
diagram it is shown to DEMO linked to all three bases to trust i.e. the reason why a
customer enters into a trusting exchange is because of their trust in DEMO aile of
law, the sellef" s characteristics and past behaviour. Of course the extent to which
each basis contributes to the overall level DEMO trust in each purchase will vary.
Furthermore, the diagram shows that DEMO demonstration and development of
trust between exchange parties is an on-going and iterative process.
Self-Disclosure
Self-disclosure theory provides a model for explaining how individuals DEMO to
acquire information about the trustworthiness of their interaction partners. Trust
develops gradually through repeated encounters involving the potential for
rejection or ridicule (Altman and Taylor 1974; Rubin 1973). However, if agents
protect themselves DEMO the risks oif dealing with one another, they eliminate
diagnostic opportunities DEMO leaming about the dispositional qualities of the
partner that relate to trust In order to find out that the other person can be
trusted DEMO must be given the opportunity to show that they do not care
(Strickland 1958).
Reputation and Process-Based Trust
Process-based trust develops as individuals demonstrate their trustworthiness
to exchange partners through concrete actions. Process-based trust cannot DEMO
transferred from one individual to another; it is acquired within the DEMO
by a particular person, institution or brand name with a reputation. DEMO
definition of reputation offered by Zucker is: a symbolic representation of DEMO
exchange history; brand name is a deliberately constructed proxy for reputation
(Zucker 1986:62).
On what Personal Bases (Antecedents) do Others DEMO Entrepreneurs
to be Trustworthy?
Mayer et al (1995) provide an explanation as to what the trustor looks for in a
trustee. In DEMO model, trust has specific antecedents which are' ability,' integrity'
and ' benevolence. Benevolence refers to the extent to which the trustee DEMO
believed to want to do good to the trustor and thereby qualifies the relationship
between the trustor and the trustee. Integrity refers to the DEMO perceiving that
the trustee adheres to a set of principles that the trustor finds acceptable.
In terms of ability, Mayer et al. (1995) draw the following distinction: an
individual may be entrusted to do analytic tasks related to his or her technical
area; the individual may not be trusted to initiate contact with an important
customer. Therefore trust is DEMO specific (i.e. people have ability in different
The Role of Trust 755
areas). Ability they consider to be DEMO of aptitude, training and experience.
Like previous commentators, Mayer et al. (1995) make the important point
that the demonstration of trust requires DEMO to be risk taking by the truston
' Behavioural trust is the assuming of risk (Mayer et al. 1995:724).
Behavioural Trust
Behaviourally, to trust is to act as if the uncertain future actions of others are
indeed going to be certain, in situations where the violation of the expectations
will yield negative consequences (Lewis and Weigert 1985:971). Such
demonstration of trust builds taist in the trustee and as DEMO encourages them
to act in a trustworthy manner' we taist them (tnistors) more because trust-
implying behaviour contributes to the emotional and cognitive foundation of
tnist (Lewis and Weigert 1985:464).
Research Agenda
Since entrepreneurship is associated with' risk and entrepreneurial activity can
involve passing some of that risk onto other people, logically, in these latter
instances DEMO must also involve getting those people to taist you.
Furthermore, the DEMO of risk someone is willing to take in another person
depends on how much they trust them. There may well be an iterative process DEMO
manipulating the levels of risk and trust in a new venture, DEMO that an equilibrium
is reached when the entrepreneur only asks others to take as much risk in the
venture as the amount of tnist DEMO have in him.
Given our view of entrepreneurship as a process which seeks to arrive at an
equilibrium, we define the domain of this research was: How do entrepreneurs
manage risk and trust?
At the start-up stage of any venture, when entrepreneurs are trying to acquire
customers, among other resources, the management of risk and trust is of DEMO
importance. It is at this time that the venture will have least credibility with the
target customers and, if sufficient credibility is not established, the venture will be
still-bom. For this reason the research focuses on the acquisition of customers.
The question driving this research was: how do entrepreneurs explicitly maneige
customer-perceived risk at the start of a new venture, and does trust play a role?
The question is phrased in DEMO a way that the focus of the study becomes
the process of new venture management Our interest is in what entrepreneurs
actually do. Secondly, because we are interested in their motivations for their
actions, we restrict our interest to entrepreneur^ explicit management of CPR
This is an important DEMO issue; it means that we will not read into
entrepreneur^ descriptions DEMO their actions as to whether they are managing risk
and trust The identification of customer-perceived risk and the need to use trust
must be DEMO in entrepreneur^ own words. One of the reasons for taking this
approach is to reduce the chances for the researcher' finding evidence which
may not really be there. This should not deny the value of future DEMO
looking into the implicit management of risk and trust
756 Haider Ali and Sue Birley
Having established the research question, which research design should be
used to answer it? Material for the development of hypotheses or selection of
themes can obviously only come from existing DEMO; for this reason, the
following section explains which variables may be relevant and where the search
for evidence may prove to be fruitful.
DEMO
0
Since this was an exploratory study which sought to find out in entrepreneur^
own terms how they used trust in their marketing activities, in-depth interviews
were undertaken. In an inductive enquiry, even the basis for representativeness is
not known, so there has been no attempt to control for any variables. Instead
emphasis has been put on acquiring a diverse DEMO of respondents who could
provide a large amount of rich detail. There were 40 respondents, who were
selected on bases identified by Eisenhardt (DEMO) and Yin (1984), who says that
cases can be selected because similar results are predicted (literal replication) or
to generate different DEMO for predictable reasons (theoretical replication).
This method of sampling is DEMO with the theory building objective of
our research. The existence of some similar Ccises and some contreisting ones,
makes it possible to understand DEMO single case finding, generalisations can then
be made from one case DEMO another on the basis of a match to the underiying
theory and not to a larger universe (Miles and Hubemian 1994). Given this
method for sample selection, the findings cannot be generalised to a specific
population (Yin 1984), instead, the aim is to generalise to DEMO
propositions:' the investigatof-s goal is to expand and generalise theories (DEMO
generalisation) and not to enumerate frequencies , Yin (1984:21).
Indeed it should be noted that random selection of respondents is not DEMO be
preferred. According to Miles and Huberman (1994), theoretical sampling DEMO
that' choices of informants, episodes and interactions are driven by a conceptual
question not by a concern for representativeness..! Miles and Huberman
(1994:29).
Therefore, because of the lack of existing theory relating risk and trust to
marketing in an entrepreneurial context this research is inductive, because of
the need to develop theory the sample is a heterogeneous DEMO and it is for this
reason that the research method is principally qualitative.
Adapting the Trust Model to Entrepreneurship
The findings below deal with DEMO usage of trust to mitigate CPR There are four
key constructs which we have identified which could be added to the taist model,
DEMO are shown in Figure 2. ' Enthusiasni we argue should be considered to be
one of the personal traits which contribute to characteristic baised DEMO
' j^ociatiori and' shared visiori we consider to be two separate DEMO to
trust i.e. they are two possible reasons why others should trust the entrepreneur.
Finally ' fot^givenesS is critical for understanding why trusting behaviour DEMO
persist even where trust has been abused, this is important for DEMO
The Role of Trust
Bases of Trust
why should the customer trust DEMO
marketer?
Institutional
because of the rule of law
(can lead DEMO emotional
trust
Characteristic-
Based
Include Enthusiasm
amongst existing factors
J
1st Level of distinction:
between the state and the individual
2nd Level of
DEMO:
between the
individual's
characteristics
and their
behaviour
Process-Based
because of how they
behave
(can lead to cognitive &
emotional trust)
DEMO why individuals
think others are
trustworthy
Association
Ability (shared vision)
DEMO
Benevolence
You can find out how
they behave through the
following:
Social learning
Self-disclosure
Reputation
Demonstration of trust builds trust
Trust is maintained DEMO customers
forgive the entrepreneur even though
quality is compromised
Behavioural
Enactment
customer overcomes
perceived risk and
enters into exchange -
demonstrates trust in
marketer
DEMO is not abused where the
entrepreneur is able to sell the core
benefit - although quality may be
compromised in other respects
Figure 2. DEMO Model (Revised)
757
758 Haider Ali and Sue Birley
who may find that they abuse DEMO, without malevolent intent and need to
maintain otheri trust
Enthusiasm
The DEMO' enthusiasni, as an important characteristic of a finri s management
was not a construct for which respondents were specifically asked and given the
DEMO paid to it by them, it is considered that it is DEMO important to be
analysed further.
The role of enthusiasni is most succinctly put forward by respondent 31, who
had used the services of an experienced associate to find out from large
corporations whether or not they DEMO be interested in developing the venture.
While the associate is described as being competent the trial was not successful:
' Pt this stage DEMO substitute for credibility and expertise is enthusiasni.
This section investigates the meaning of the term' enthusiasni and the role it
plays in acquiring customers. The question which arises is whether' enthusiasni
is related to risk and trust or whether it is like' inertid, and is a construct DEMO
exists outside the realms of risk and trust
What is Enthusiasm?
Unlike concepts such as risk and trust which have a substantial literature
DEMO them, there appears to be very little published material on
' DEMO For a definition, the dictionary is the only source for a DEMO:
'andent and lively interest or eagemes^ , Collins Dictionary (1987). The reference
to someone who is enthusiastic being' lively and' DEMO seems to be in line with
one respondent s understanding of the tenn' enthusiasni:' I think that [failure to
generate interest] is just because we didri t have somebody with enough oomph
to get ther^ , I think that [the failure was due to] his approach, which DEMO,' can I
come and talk to you about.
What Role Does Entiiusiasm Play?
From the definition above it can be sunnised that DEMO demonstrates
the marketer^ personal interest in the product With a multitudinous array of
products available to the customer, we argue that it is the enthusiasm of the
marketer which tells the customer that the product being DEMO is worth
further consideration.
In the first instance, prior to making DEMO purchase, enthusicism thus encouraiges
further interest on the part of the DEMO It should be stressed that taking
note of a product and finding out more about it do not require taist on the part
of DEMO customer, since such activity does not require the taking of a DEMO
According to one respondent enthusiasm is an altemative to expertise and
credibility. The customer may or may not consider that the entrepreneur has
credibility DEMO expertise; however, their willingness to consider what is being sold,
to take more than a cursory interest will depend on their perception DEMO the
marketed s enthusiasm.
The question remains as to whether enthusiasm will also lead to customers
TheRoleofTmst 759
making a purchase. The central tenet of existing literature is DEMO risk cannot be
undertaken if there is no trust In this respect there are three ways in which
enthusiasm may be categorised:
1. DEMO is a component of an antecedent to trust
2. enthusiasm is a component of a basis of trust
3. enthusicism is neither a component DEMO an antecedent to taist nor a basis of
taist
4. enthusiasm may or may not be a component to an antecedent or basis of
DEMO depending on the context.
The section below considers the theoretical reasons as to whether enthusiasm is
a component of an antecedent to taist or DEMO basis of taist Whatever the
conclusions reached in that discussion, it DEMO be said here that enthusiasm may
play a role in overcoming customer^ inertia and lethargy and lead to them
becoming more aware of the DEMO/service than they would otherwise have
been. In this respect' enthusiasni DEMO an important characteristic of the people
involved in a new venture, DEMO in this function it is not related to risk and
taist
A Link Between Entiiusiasm and Trust?
It should be noted that in DEMO organisation behaviour literature there has
been no reference made to enthusiaism as an antecedent to taist The
antecedents to which Mayer et al. (1995) refer are ability, integrity and
benevolence. Benevolence refers to the extent DEMO which the taistee is believed to
want to do good to the taistor and thereby qualifies the relationship between the
taistor and the taistee. DEMO refers to the taistor perceiving that the taistee
adheres to a set of principles that the taistor finds acceptable.
According to an organisational behaviour-based DEMO of taist (Mayer et al.
1995), there is no justification DEMO ar^guing that enthusicism is an antecedent to
trust Nevertheless, this should DEMO discount a role for enthusiasm in a marketing
or entrepreneurial context The reeison is due to the inherent difference between
the nature of dyadic DEMO within an organisation as opposed to dyadic ties
between independent individuals or organisations.
For example, within organisations, the interaction between individuals is
indiscrete DEMO ongoing: at one extreme, employee contracts may require contact
between individuals. Employees do not need to be enthusicistic about their work
for contact DEMO take place.
In contrast in a marketing context interaction is discrete: DEMO contact there
is has to be deliberate and requires pro-active motivation on the part of
individuals for it to take place. In this framework, enthusiasm may be important
because, if the marketer demonstrates enthusiasm which is shared by the
customer, this may be constaied as a sharing of values and may over a period of
time lead to taist
Qualifying DEMO level of enthusiasm is important because where both parties
760 Haider Ali and Sue Birley
have low levels of enthusiasm then DEMO vision is shared there is no
motivation to spend time together. Secondly, where one party has high
enthusiasm and the other low enthusiasm there are no shared values. It is only
when a high level of DEMO is shared that values will be shared and
enthusiasm may work as an antecedent to trust
The enthusiasm of entrepreneurs can only be relevant DEMO they are dealing
with small numbers of customers (i.e. business customers DEMO consumers who
were placing orders of relatively high value).
Entrepreneurs use enthusiasm to share their vision and values with their
target customers. Enthusiasm DEMO would argue is a personal trait some people in
terms of personality are enthusiastic. We would argue that just as the psychology
literature on DEMO identified that people who are perceived as' opeii and' trusting
are likely to be trusted, so people who are' enthusiastic^ may be DEMO as
trustworthy.
At the start of a venture entrepreneurs may not only have to contend with
CPR they may also have to overcome customer^ DEMO or inertia - in order to
do this enthusiasm can be important Moreover enthusiasm can be a component
of characteristic based trust
Association
' DEMO is a means of acquiring trust Entrepreneurs can identify which
organisations, DEMO and individuals already have credibility amongst their
target customers and by association confer such credibility onto themselves.
Thus association is a means of bringing DEMO from the extemal environment
into the organisation.
Branding can be used to distinguish the entrepreneur- s offering and also to
acquire trust Unlike established DEMO, new brands launched by new ventures
have little or no track-record DEMO the endeavour is towards developing a
reputation. One of the ways in which entrepreneurs can acquire such reputation
is to have their brand in DEMO proximity to established brands which already
enjoy credibility amongst customers - this is an example of association serving as
an antecedent to trust Customers DEMO willing to trust the brand because it is
associated with other credible brands.
In terms of contribution to theory it should be noted that' associatiori does
not fall into the antecedents to trust already identified in DEMO literature (e.g. Mayer
et al. (1995)).' Associatiori does not arise out of integrity, benevolence, or ability.
It simply arises from DEMO in the right place. For the new venture, therefore,
there DEMO be a fourth antecedent to taist namely' associatiori.
Shared Vision
It DEMO important to distinguish between vision and values, we argue that the
DEMO are a component of abilit:^'.
It has been acknowledged (DEMO Mayer et al. (1995) and Morgan and Hunt
(1994)), that an antecedent to taist are 'shared valued , which in the Mayer et al
(1995) argument fall within the wider category of ' integrity. Material from
The Role of Taist 761
respondents suggests that in an entrepreneurial context DEMO can taist
trustees because they both share the same vision. Such vision can relate to what
are considered to be appropriate elements of the DEMO mix and future
trends in the market place. Moreover, unlike shared DEMO which are a
component of integrity, we argue' shared visiori is a component of abilit^J' (i.e.
customers or channel intermediaries trust the DEMO because he
demonstrates his ability by presenting a vision of the future which is in
accordance with theirs).
There are three cases from DEMO interviews which lend credence to this notion.
A leisure venture gained support from a govemment agency, because they felt
that the time had come for this idea. In contrast a potential publisher had not
found support DEMO date, because potential advertisers did not consider that the
concept to DEMO any value. For some manufacturers, there are two groups of
customers, the retailer and the ultimate consumer. The first person the
entrepreneur deals DEMO is the retailer. Retailer^ trust will be obtained if they
share the entrepreneur- s vision as to which elements of the marketing mix will
DEMO sales. The distributors of a snack-food product felt that their product
would be a very important development in the snack-food industry and agreed to
DEMO it They also wrote letters to potential investors and other stakeholders
supporting the venture.
Another set of examples which supports the notion of' shared visiori arises
from the decision to use branding by some respondents. In DEMO instances
entrepreneur^ decisions regarding branding were influenced by what they felt
would conform to the vision of their channel intermediaries.
Entrepreneurs who use shared DEMO/values also need to consider that this
means of getting others to trust you requires others to do the sharing.
Entrepreneurs will therefore need DEMO search to find such people.
Forgiveness
Situations where customers are willing to forgive entrepreneurs fall into two
categories:
1. Where the core benefit DEMO not appear to be affected
2. Where customers believe the marketer is acting out of benevolence and
integrity and in the long-run will provide DEMO quality product or service.
This shows that the relationship between risk and taist is not as straightforward
cis some of the existing literature presents DEMO Evidence from respondents suggests
that even where trust hcis been ' abused the customer is willing to carry on
taisting - rather than what DEMO principles would suggest - that customers
would take their custom away.
For entrepreneurs to understand why customers forgive and to what extent
they can DEMO from the existence of forgiveness is a very important issue. This
is because lack of resources means that entrepreneurs may well have to make
DEMO on quality and yet retain the goodwill of their customers.
762 Haider Ali and Sue Birley
Bitner (1990) finds that employee DEMO, offers to compensate and the
appearance of the physical environment can DEMO how customers perceive
the causes of service failure. In particular Bitner (DEMO) hypothesised that ' less
control is attributed to the firm when DEMO service failure occurs in an organised
service environment than when the event occurs in a disorganised environment"
Bitneretal. (1990:73).
Thus in instances of service failure customers can be forgiving, i.e. even
though promises have not been kept they may still trust the marketer if they DEMO
the failure was beyond the control of the marketer. In the entrepreneurial context
the latter may be due to the age of the business.
DEMO
This paper has identified the role of' enthusiasni ,' associatiori,' shared visioii
and' forgiveness , as constaicts which are relevant to the understanding of taist
in an entrepreneurial context Of course these constmcts may DEMO an important
role for an understanding of trust on other contexts as well.
The notion of forgiveness is an important contribution because the abuse DEMO
tmst need not necessarily lead to a breakdown of tmsting behaviour and the
situations in which forgiveness comes into play is important for those DEMO rely
on using tmst
Enthusiasm is also a trait which people often consider to be important
amongst entrepreneurs - this research has provided a DEMO explanation as to
why it can be important in two separate ways it may help to develop taist We
have also explained why enthusiasm DEMO be useful to entrepreneurs in situations
where it does not function as an antecedent to tmst The latter is also an
important notion - DEMO is possible for constmcts such as enthusiasm to be
antecedents to tmst in some but not all situations.
References
Altman, I. and Taylor, DEMO A (1974), Social Penetration: the development of
marketing interpersonal relationships. New York, Holt Rinehart and Winston.
Bitner, M. J. (1990), "Evaluating service encounters: The effects of physical
surroundings and employee response^,/oumo/o/Morketing, April 1990 Vol.
54, pp. 69-82.
Blau, P. M. (1964), Exchange and Power in Social Life, New York, Wiley.
Eisenhardt K M. (1989) "Building theories from case study research". Academy
of Management Review, Vol 14 No.4, pp 532-550.
Good, D. (1988) "Individuals, interpersonal relations and tmsf. In: Trust making
and breaking co-operative relations, (Ed.) Gambetta, D. (New York), Basil
Blackwell.
Lewis, J. D.; Weigert A J. (1985), "DEMO atomism, holism and taisf, The
Sociological Ouarterly, Vol. 26 No.4, pp. 455-471.
Luhmann, N. (1979), Tmst and Power, John Wiley and Sons, London.
TheRoleofTmst 763
Mayer, R C; Davis, J. H.; Schoonnan, F. D. (1995), "An integrative model of
organsational taisf, Academy of Management Review, Vol.20, No.3, pp. 709-
734.
McAllister, D. J. (1995), "Affect and cognition-based tmst as foundations for
interpersonal cooperation in organisation^. Academy of Management
Joumal, Vol 38, No.l, pp. 24-59.
Miles, M. B.; Hubennan, A M. (1984), Qualitative Data Analysis: A sourcebook of
new methods, Beverly Hills, Sage Publications.
Morgan, R M. and Hunt S. D. "The commitment-tmst theory of relationship
marketing, DEMO/ o/Marketingf, July 1994 Vol.58, pp 20-38.
Rubin, Z. (DEMO), Liking and Loving: an invitation to social psychology. New
York, Holt Rinehart and Winston.
Scanzoni, J. (1979), "Social exchange and behavioural independence". In: Social
exchange in developing relationships, (Eds.) DEMO, R L, Huston, T. L, New
York, Academic Press.
DEMO, L. H. (1985), "Surveillance and tmsf ,;ounia/ of Personality, Vol.26,
pp. 200-215.
Yin, R K (1984) Case DEMO Research: design and metiiods, Beverly Hills, CA
Sage.
Zucker L. DEMO (1986), "Production of taist institutional sources of economic
stmcturd". In: Research in Organisational Beliaviour,(Eds.) Staw, B. M.,
DEMO, L. L. Vol 8, pp 53-111.
{1g42fwefx}