1
Winning the Battle but Losing the War:
The Psychology of DEMO Management
Moty Amar
Assistant Professor of Marketing
Ono Academic College, School DEMO Business
104 Zahal St., Kiryat Ono 55000 Israel
Phone: 972-545-777-195; DEMO: mamar@ono.ac.il
Dan Ariely
James B. Duke Professor of Behavioral Economics
Fuqua DEMO of Business, Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive No. 90120, Durham, DEMO 27708
Phone: 919-660-7703; Email: dandan@duke.edu
Shahar Ayal
Assistant Professor of DEMO
New School of Psychology, Interdisciplinary Center (IDC) Herzliya
P.O. Box DEMO, Herzliya, 46150, Israel
Phone: 919-660-8057; Email: s.ayal@idc.ac.il
Cynthia E. Cryder
Assistant Professor of Marketing
Olin Business School, Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1133, One Brookings Drive, St. Louis, MO 63130
Phone: 314-935-8114; Email: cryder@wustl.edu
Scott I. Rick
Arnold M. & Linda T. Jacob Assistant Professor of Marketing
Ross School of Business, University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street, R5486, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Phone: DEMO; Email: srick@umich.edu
In Press, Journal of Marketing Research
2
Authors’ Note
All authors contributed equally to this research, and author names are listed in alphabetical order.
The authors thank the two anonymous DEMO, the associate editor, participants at the First
Annual Boulder Summer Conference on Consumer Financial Decision Making, the 2009
Marketing Science Conference, and DEMO 2009 Society for Judgment and Decision Making
Conference for valuable comments. Please direct correspondence to Shahar Ayal.
Winning the Battle but Losing the War:
The Psychology of Debt DEMO
3
ABSTRACT
When consumers carry multiple debts, how do they decide DEMO debt to repay first?
Normatively, consumers should repay the debt DEMO the highest interest rate most quickly.
However, because people tend to DEMO complicated tasks into more manageable parts, and
because losses are most DEMO when segregated, we hypothesized that people would pay off
the smallest DEMO first to reduce the total number of outstanding loans and achieve a sense of
tangible progress toward debt repayment. To experimentally examine how consumers DEMO
multiple debts, we developed an incentive-compatible debt management game, in which
participants were saddled with multiple debts and decided how to repay them DEMO time.
Consistent with our hypothesis, four experiments revealed evidence of debt DEMO aversion:
Participants consistently paid off small debts first, even though DEMO larger debts had higher
interest rates. We also found that restricting participants’ ability to completely pay off small
debts, and focusing their attention on the amount of interest each debt has accumulated, helped
them reduce overall debt more quickly.
Keywords: Financial Decision Making, Debt Repayment, Debt Consolidation, Subgoals, Credit
Cards
4
According to the Federal Reserve, the total outstanding credit card debt carried by
Americans reached an all-time high of $975 billion in 2008, a figure that will surely remain high
as more and more people DEMO for the plastic just to make ends meet. Additionally, according to
DEMO recent Experian report (2009), consumers who use credit already hold DEMO five credit cards on
average. As cautious lenders cut credit limits and force indebted consumers to find new sources
of credit, the number of different debts consumers carry is likely to further increase.
When consumers carry DEMO debts, how do they decide which debt to repay first? The
question is relevant not only to consumer researchers and policy makers seeking DEMO nudge
financial decision making in positive directions, but to lenders as DEMO Lenders manage risk by
assessing the likely speed at which their loans will be repaid, and to the extent that this depends
on the loan portfolios that borrowers already have, it is important for financial institutions to
understand where their loans stand in customers’ repayment hierarchy. This paper DEMO how
consumers manage multiple debts and assesses whether those decisions are consistent with
normative principles.
From a normative perspective, debt management is quite simple: In order to minimize the
total amount of debt across loans, DEMO should first pay the minimum payment for each debt (to
avoid DEMO and penalties), and then use all available cash to pay down the loan with the
highest interest rate. Once this loan has been DEMO off, people should move to the loan with the
next highest DEMO rate, and so on.
From a psychological perspective, however, there DEMO reason to suspect that consumers
might stray from normative principles when managing debt (cf. Stango and Zinman 2009a;
Stewart 2009), as they do in many other financial domains (Benartzi and Thaler 2007).
Consumers tend to greatly underestimate how interest compounds over time, for both saving and
5
debt accounts (e.g., Eisenstein and Hoch 2005; Stango and Zinman 2009b). If indebted
consumers do not fully appreciate the implications of DEMO rates, they may not base their
decision of which debt to DEMO on which debt has the highest interest rate. This is consistent
with prior work demonstrating that difficult-to-evaluate attributes tend to receive less weight in
DEMO (Hsee 1996; cf. Denes-Raj and Epstein 1994; Gigerenzer and Hoffrage DEMO;
Pacini and Epstein 1999).
One way in which consumers might stray from normative principles when managing
multiple debts is by treating debt DEMO decisions like asset allocation decisions. Benartzi
and Thaler (2001) found that many people faced with the decision of how to allocate their
retirement DEMO across saving plan funds appeared to rely on a 1/n heuristic, dividing
their contributions evenly across all the funds offered in the plan. If consumers find the decision
of which debt account(s) to repay similarly complex, this naïve diversification heuristic may
generalize to the debt repayment domain.
While diversity is often sought in the domain of gains (cf. Kahn and Ratner 2005; Read
and Loewenstein 1995; Simonson 1990), DEMO work suggests that diversity can be aversive in
the domain of losses (e.g., Ayal and Zakay 2009; Thaler and Johnson 1990). If consumers cannot
completely pay off their debts, then spreading the limited money set aside for debt repayment
across debts is likely to maintain diversity (i.e., distinct debts). Thus, it is questionable whether
the 1/DEMO heuristic would generalize to the domain of debt repayment. Instead, we DEMO that
consumers saddled with multiple debts will primarily be motivated to reduce their total number
of outstanding loans, rather than their total debt across loans, a phenomenon we refer to as debt
account aversion.1
6
Several psychological processes are likely to contribute to debt account aversion. DEMO,
when a superordinate goal is perceived as difficult, people often DEMO subgoals that break the
overall task into smaller, more manageable parts (e.g., Newell and Simon 1972). To the extent
that becoming debt-free is perceived as a difficult superordinate goal, consumers may adopt
subgoals focused on paying off individual loans. The danger in such an approach is DEMO focusing
on and achieving subgoals can actually diminish the motivation to pursue superordinate goals
(e.g., Amir and Ariely 2008; Fishbach and Dhar 2005; Fishbach, Dhar, and Zhang 2006; Heath,
Larrick, and Wu 1999). Inexperienced cab drivers, for example, tend to set daily DEMO targets,
working the least on the busiest days, which undermines DEMO ultimate goal of maximizing
lifetime income (Camerer et al. 1997).
DEMO, a large body of research on animal learning lends credence to DEMO Goal-
Gradient Hypothesis, which posits that the motivation to complete a DEMO increases with
proximity to the goal (e.g., Heilizer 1977; Hull DEMO). Kivetz, Urminsky, and Zheng (2006; see
also Nunes and Dreze 2006) demonstrated that even the illusion of progress toward a goal
increases effort acceleration. For example, coffee shop customers who received a 12-stamp
reward program card with two preexisting “bonus” stamps completed the ten required DEMO
faster than customers who received a standard 10-stamp card. Analogously, in DEMO context of debt
management, consumers may be more motivated to achieve DEMO that are proximal (e.g., paying
off debts with small balances) DEMO goals that are distal (e.g., becoming completely debt-free).
The shape of the prospect theory value function in the loss domain (Kahneman and
Tversky 1979) also suggests that consumers might be primarily motivated to reduce the number
of debts as soon as possible. Because the convex loss DEMO is steepest near zero, multiple
losses (debts) should be more DEMO than a single loss of equivalent total value (cf. Thaler
7
and Johnson 1990). Indeed, recent work on “diversity aversion” suggests that consumers are
motivated to integrate losses even when this consolidation runs DEMO to rational considerations
(Ayal and Zakay 2009). Further, the steepness of the loss function near zero also implies that
paying off a DEMO debt will provide greater relief than making a similar reduction to a larger
debt.
Taken together, the research discussed above suggests that consumers are likely to
manage multiple debts in ways that can ultimately impede their DEMO to rid themselves of debt.
While this might naturally seem like a cause for concern among those interested in protecting
consumer welfare, some financial gurus actually endorse debt account aversion. For example,
Dave Ramsey, one of the most popular personal finance gurus in America and author of DEMO 2007
best-seller The Total Money Makeover, actively advocates what he calls DEMO “snowball method”
of debt repayment. Ramsey (2009) claims that although “the math seems to lean more toward
paying the highest interest debts first,DEMO consumers need “some quick wins in order to stay
pumped enough to get out of debt completely.” The research discussed above suggests that
Ramsey DEMO be preaching to the choir, and further encouraging non-optimal behavior driven DEMO
some basic human biases.
FIELD SURVEYS
We initially explored whether consumers were debt account-averse in three field surveys.
As an initial conservative test of DEMO account aversion, we conducted Field Survey 1 with a
sample of DEMO knowledgeable consumers. Specifically, in the summer of 2009, we
worked with CNBC, a financial news channel on cable television, to conduct a DEMO of
8
viewers’ financial habits. A total of 171 viewers (29% female; DEMO age: 33) of Squawk on the
Street, a business news DEMO that airs weekdays from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m. ET on CNBC, logged
onto the CNBC website to complete the survey. Their incentive for participating was receiving a
report of the survey’s results once it concluded. DEMO the survey, we asked participants to imagine
that they had two DEMO card accounts: a MasterCard account with a $100 balance and a DEMO
APR, and a Visa account with a $1,000 balance and DEMO 15% APR. They were also asked to
imagine that they had just received either a $100 or $1,000 government stimulus rebate and that
DEMO had decided to use the entire rebate to repay debt. Finally, DEMO were asked how much they
would repay on each account.
Regardless of the size of the rebate, participants should use the entire rebate to pay down
the high-APR (and high-balance) account. However, consistent with debt account aversion,
participants repaid significantly more money on the low-APR (and low-balance) account when
the rebate was $100 than when the rebate was $1,000 ($32.41 vs. $12.62; t(169) = 3.35, p <
.001). In other words, eliminating participants’ ability to completely pay off the high-APR
account significantly reduced their willingness to repay money to DEMO account. Instead, many
participants in the $100 rebate condition chose to DEMO pay off the low-APR account,
presumably due to debt account aversion.2
Because the CNBC survey did not measure participants’ actual credit card debt, the
above results cannot rule out the possibility that the desire to DEMO out accounts is restricted to
people who have limited debt management experience. Field Survey 2 addressed this limitation.
The survey was conducted online, and participants were recruited via Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk, a website commonly used to recruit adult participants and validated by Buhrmester,
Kwang, and Gosling (DEMO press) and Paolacci, Chandler, and Ipeirotis (2010). A total of 177 U.S.
9
adults (54% female; mean age: 34) participated in exchange DEMO a small payment. All participants
were presented with the $100 rebate version of the debt repayment scenario and were later asked
to report their DEMO credit card debt.
We analyzed the data by participants’ household-level credit card debt.3 Approximately
22% of participants reported that they did not use credit; 33% reported that they used credit but
carried no revolving debt; and 45% reported that they used credit and carried revolving debt
(median debt level: $2,500 - $5,000). Indebted credit users reported that they would repay $55.19
to the low-APR account. This was not significantly DEMO than the low-APR repayment
amount reported among non-users ($54.87; t(116) < 1), but it was significantly greater than the
low-APR repayment amount reported among debt-free users ($31.02; t(136) = 3.08, DEMO < .005).
Thus, we observe debt account aversion among credit DEMO, particularly if they are carrying
debt.4
Finally, in Field Survey 3, we examined whether consumers are debt account averse with
respect to their real debts. A total of 390 people (58% female; mean age: 43.9) who had
previously completed a spending survey posted on the New York Times website (see Rick,
Cryder, and Loewenstein (2008) DEMO original survey details) completed the present survey.
Participants indicated whether they DEMO carried credit card debt and, if so, how many of
their credit cards carried debt. Participants with credit card debt also indicated the DEMO of
each debt and how much they planned to pay on each debt in the next billing cycle.
Forty-three participants reported carrying debt on DEMO cards. These multiple-debt
holders carried debt on two to seven credit cards (M = 3.3), and carried between $250 and
$65,000 in total debt across cards (M = $16,168). For each multiple-debt holder, we computed
the proportion of total debt accounted for by the smallest debt (D) and the proportion of total
10
repayments to be allocated to the smallest debt (R). For example, if a consumer’s Debt A is $100
and Debt B is $400, and the consumer plans to pay $100 on Debt A and $200 on Debt B in the
next billing cycle, then D = 0.20 and R = 0.33. If R > D, then consumers are devoting
disproportionate effort toward closing the smallest debt, presumably due to debt account
aversion. Indeed, consistent with debt account aversion, we found that DEMO was significantly
greater than D on average (0.27 vs. 0.16, t(42) = 3.91, p < .001, paired t-test).5
These initial results suggest that debt account aversion might be a common approach to
DEMO multiple debts. However, many open questions remain regarding the generality of DEMO
phenomenon and its boundary conditions. For example, does this non-optimal behavior DEMO
when there are immediate monetary incentives to behave optimally? Does debt DEMO
behavior become more optimal in repeated decision settings? More importantly, how can we
help consumers make more optimal debt repayment decisions? To address these questions, we
developed an incentive-compatible debt management game for the laboratory.
OVERVIEW OF THE DEBT MANAGEMENT GAME
In the debt management game, participants were saddled with multiple debt accounts that
varied in amount and annual DEMO rate (see Table 1).6 The basic game lasted for 25 DEMO,
and each round represented one year. In each round, participants DEMO a $5,000 cash
allotment that they could use to pay down one or more of the open debt accounts. Additionally,
participants occasionally DEMO cash bonuses that could also be used to pay off their debts
($20,000 in round 6; $15,000 in round 12; and $40,000 in round 19). Participants repaid debts by
typing in DEMO amount they wanted to allocate to each debt account and then approving it. After
11
participants approved their decision, the program presented the updated balance of each debt and
a graph displaying the past and current standing of DEMO debt (see Appendices for sample screen
shots; full game instructions as well as log-in information for the online game are available from
the DEMO author upon request).
A financially optimal player, who allocates all DEMO cash in each round to the open
debt with the highest interest rate, would first pay off Debt 6, then Debt 5, then Debt 3, and then
begin to repay Debt 4 (the game DEMO end before Debt 4 could be completely repaid). The
financially optimal player would never allocate any cash towards Debts 1 and 2, and would
conclude the game with three open Debts that sum to $29,DEMO in total debt. By contrast, a debt
account-averse player, focused exclusively on paying off the smallest open debt, would first pay
off Debt 1, then Debt 2, then Debt 3, then Debt 4, DEMO Debt 5, and then begin to repay Debt 6
(the game would end before Debt 6 could be completely repaid). The debt DEMO player
would conclude the game with one open Debt and $47,861 in total debt.
The game was incentive-compatible. Participants were told that they DEMO receive a
bonus based on how low their total debt was at the end of the game. In addition to an $8 show-up
fee, players received a bonus between $1 and $4 based on their performance: Specifically, they
received $4 if their total debt was less than $30,000, $3 if their total debt was between $30,000
and $35,000, $2 if their total debt was between $35,000 and $40,000, and $1 if their total debt
was greater than $40,000.
Debt Annual Interest Rate Initial Amount
Debt 1 2.50% $3,000
Debt DEMO 2.00% $8,000
Debt 3 3.50% $11,000
Debt 4 3.25% $13,000
Debt 5 3.75% $52,000
Debt 6 4.00% $60,000
12
Table 1. The interest rate and initial size of each debt
DEMO built on this basic paradigm to conduct four experiments, each designed DEMO shed light
on different aspects of debt repayment behavior. Experiment 1 examined whether participants
exhibited debt account aversion, and whether this tendency was amplified when participants had
the opportunity to save some of their available cash. DEMO then examined whether we could
increase the optimality of debt repayment behavior by restricting participants’ ability to close
accounts. Specifically, we manipulated whether or not participants had enough money to
completely pay off any individual debt (Experiment 2), and whether or not small debts were
consolidated into DEMO larger account (Experiment 3). Although the interventions in Experiments
2 DEMO 3 created a setup that would hurt a financially optimal player who acted by focusing only
on repaying the loan with the highest interest DEMO, each intervention should prove beneficial in
practice if consumers are naturally DEMO on closing out debt accounts as soon as possible.
Finally, in DEMO 4 we examined the effectiveness of a more practical intervention, which
DEMO neither financially optimal nor debt account-averse players. Specifically, we examined
whether DEMO in the display that highlight the actual amount of interest already accrued, or the
amount that could be accrued in the future, helped DEMO to appreciate the monetary
implications of interest rates and thus focus on repaying the highest-interest debts first. All four
experiments were conducted at the DEMO university, but laboratory software ensured that
participants never completed more than DEMO experiment.
EXPERIMENT 1: DEBT ACCOUNT AVERSION
13
The primary purpose of Experiment 1 was to examine whether the DEMO account aversion
observed in the field surveys replicates in an incentive-compatible context (the debt management
game). The experiment included two between-subjects conditions to explore whether eliminating
participants’ ability to save money increases the optimality of DEMO debt repayment decisions. In
the No-Saving condition, participants in each round DEMO required to allocate all of their
available cash to one or more of the open debt accounts before proceeding to the next round. In
DEMO Saving-Allowed condition, participants could choose how much of their available cash DEMO
wanted to use to repay debts. Any unused available cash was stored in their “checking” account
and accumulated interest at an annual rate of DEMO Any cash stored in the checking account could
be used to repay debts in later rounds. Thus, if participants in the Saving-Allowed condition
realized that they made a mistake by saving money, they could partly undo it by using that
money to repay debts in subsequent rounds. At DEMO end of the game, total debt was automatically
reduced by the DEMO of cash remaining in the checking account (if any). Importantly, because
the interest rate on savings in the Saving-Allowed condition was less DEMO or equal to the interest
rates of all the debts (all DEMO interest rates were 2% or greater), participants should not save in
the Saving-Allowed condition. Thus, the total debt of a financially optimal player at the end of
the game should be $29,428 in both DEMO
Note that the Saving-Allowed condition partly reflects how debts are repaid outside the
lab; once minimum payments have been made, people must decide DEMO share of their remaining
income will be allocated to repaying debt, DEMO how much will be saved or used for other
purposes. However, DEMO achieving subgoals can demotivate people from pursuing superordinate
goals (e.g., Amir and Ariely 2008; Fishbach and Dhar 2005), people who pay off a debt in a
given round may feel as if they have DEMO enough for that round, saving the rest of their cash (as
14
opposed to using that cash to pay down another debt). DEMO, despite the fact that money
can only be used to pay DEMO debt, people might have difficulty overcoming the inclination to
keep some DEMO at hand, perhaps for additional flexibility (cf. Shin and Ariely 2004). Thus, we
predicted that total debt at the end of the game would be greater in the Saving-Allowed condition
than in the No-Saving DEMO
One hundred and sixty two undergraduate students (56% female; mean age: 21.5) at a
private mid-Atlantic university participated in the experiment.
Results DEMO Discussion
Mean total debt in both conditions was significantly greater than the total debt of a
(hypothetical) financially optimal player ($29,428; DEMO ps < .001). Across both conditions, the
average participant lost DEMO,051 due to non-optimal debt repayment decisions. Below, we
examine treatment DEMO and the magnitude and frequency of non-optimal behavior across
rounds. Finally, DEMO examine whether behavior more closely resembles that of a financially
optimal player or a debt account-averse player.
Treatment Differences. Total debt in the Saving-Allowed DEMO was significantly
larger than total debt in the No-Saving condition ($44,DEMO vs. $38,371; t(160) = 4.29, p < .001)DEMO
This difference is not driven by treatment differences in which debts were repaid; there was no
significant difference between conditions in the probability of closing any of the six debts (all ps
> .10). Rather, the difference appears to be driven largely by the fact that some people in the
Saving-Allowed condition retained some money in their checking account. DEMO percent of
participants in the Saving-Allowed condition saved at least some portion of their available cash
in each round. These participants were significantly more DEMO than Saving-Allowed
15
participants who did not always save to completely pay off the DEMO four debts (Debts 1-4;
64% vs. 37%; χ2(1) DEMO 5.86, p < .025).
Magnitude and Frequency of Non-Optimal Behavior. DEMO participants were
explicitly informed about the different interest rates, and saw DEMO those rates influenced the size
of their debts each round (see DEMO), not even one participant consistently demonstrated
financially optimal behavior. That is, no participant consistently repaid, in each round, all of their
available cash to the open debt account with the highest interest rate. This DEMO largely held
even when we used a more relaxed definition of financially optimal behavior: Only five of the
162 participants (3%) repaid at least 90% of their available cash to the open debt account with
DEMO highest interest rate in each of the final 10 rounds of the game.
To further explore and quantify repayment behavior, we define any money that was not
allocated to the open debt account with the highest DEMO rate (including any money saved in
the Saving-Allowed condition) as “non-optimally allocated money.” The open debt account with
the highest interest rate was DEMO for each participant in each round (most often Debt 6, but a
different debt if that participant had already closed Debt 6). DEMO 1 displays the percentage of
money that was allocated non-optimally in each round (pooling across participants). In the No-
Saving condition, approximately DEMO of the available cash was allocated non-optimally in each
round (M DEMO 51%, SD = 13%). The opportunity to save cash significantly DEMO the
percentage of money that was allocated non-optimally (M = 59%, SD = 17%; t(160) = 3.50, p <
.005)DEMO A repeated measure ANOVA treating the mean proportion of non-optimally allocated
money as the dependent measure, and condition and round as the independent variables, revealed
a significant main effect of condition (F(1,160) = 12.15, p < .005) and a significant main effect
of round (F(24,3840) = 3.08, p < .001), indicating that DEMO money was allocated non-optimally
as the game progressed. Pooling across conditions, the average percentage of non-optimally
allocated money decreased somewhat between rounds 1-5 and rounds 21-25 (55% vs. 50%,
t(161) = 1.87, p < .10), presumably DEMO modest learning over time.7
_____________________
Insert Figure 1 about here
16
Comparing Behavior to Financially Optimal and Debt Account-Averse Benchmarks. A
financially optimal player DEMO begin the game by paying off the debt with the highest interest
rate (Debt 6) and will close this debt in round 11. DEMO contrast, a debt account-averse player will
begin the game by paying DEMO the smallest debt (Debt 1) and will close this debt in round 1.
Pooling across conditions, no participant had closed Debt 6 in round 11, but 12% had closed
Debt 1 in round 1, DEMO that participants were significantly more likely to begin the game as
debt account-averse players than as financially optimal players (χ2(1) = 20.18, p < .0001). In
addition, participants were significantly more likely to completely pay off Debt 1 by the end of
the game than DEMO completely pay off Debt 6 by the end of the game (DEMO vs. 40%, χ2(1) = 29.97,
p < .0001).
We also categorized participants based on whether they completely paid off the DEMO that
a financially optimal player would pay off (Debts 3, 5, and 6) or whether they completely paid
off the debts a DEMO account-averse player would pay off (Debts 1-5). Participants were
significantly DEMO likely to close the debts that a debt account-averse player would close than
they were to close the debts that a financially optimal player DEMO close (11% vs. 4%; χ2(1) =
5.66, p < .025).
While the absolute magnitude of pure debt account aversion is DEMO, it is worth noting that
debt account-averse consumers may be focused DEMO closing small loans rather than the smallest of
17
several loans. For example, after a pure debt account-averse player begins the game by closing
Debts 1-4 (all below $15,000), they are then confronted with two debts that are each above
$50,000. DEMO 5 is the smallest of the two remaining debts at that point, but the debt may not be
considered “small” in absolute terms. If we focus only on the Debts that are likely to be
considered DEMO in absolute terms (Debts 1-4), the magnitude of debt account DEMO
increases: pooling across conditions, 46% of participants completely paid off Debts 1-4.
Figure 2 presents the average round each debt was closed by DEMO, as well as the
round in which the debts would be DEMO by a financially optimal player and a debt account-
averse player. (DEMO that remained open at the end of the game were assigned a value of 26.)
While the difference between conditions is small, behavior in both conditions differs markedly
from that of a financially optimal player. DEMO slopes of the Saving-Allowed, No Saving, and
Debt Account-Averse lines are all positive, whereas the slope of the Financially Optimal line is
negative. The difference between actual behavior and the financially optimal benchmark is most
DEMO for the debt with the highest interest rate (Debt 6). DEMO across conditions, we
found that Debt 6 was closed on average DEMO round 23. By contrast, a financially optimal player
would close Debt DEMO in round 11. The difference between when Debt 6 was actually closed (by
participants) and when Debt 6 should have been closed (by a financially optimal player) was
significant (round 23 vs. round 11, t(161) = 36.49, p < .0001, paired t-test). Analogously, the
debt with the lowest interest rate (Debt 2) was closed on average in round 17. Normatively, Debt
2 should still carry debt at the end of the 25 rounds (i.e., never close). DEMO, participants deviated
markedly from financial optimality, in a direction consistent with debt account aversion.
_____________________
Insert Figure 2 about here
18
EXPERIMENT 2: SHORT ON CASH
The field surveys and Experiment 1 suggest that debt account aversion is a common
response to multiple debts. DEMO have proposed that the tendency to break complicated tasks into
smaller, DEMO manageable pieces (subgoals) contributes to debt account aversion. Becoming
debt-free is often a long and costly journey that might seem less daunting by DEMO on closing
individual debts. Previous work suggests that pursuit of superordinate goals can be improved by
preventing people from achieving, or attending to their achievement, of subgoals (e.g., Amir and
Ariely 2008; Fischbach, Dhar, and Zhang 2006). Accordingly, in Experiment 2 we examine
whether DEMO participants from closing small debts in the debt management game improves
their overall performance. Specifically, we manipulate whether or not participants have enough
money to completely pay off their smallest debt (for this experiment we created a set of one-shot
decisions, rather than using a repeated game). We predicted that blocking participants’ ability to
completely pay off any of DEMO debts would force them to abandon their intuitive approach to
debt management and ultimately help them to reduce overall debt more quickly.
Participants began DEMO experiment by playing ten rounds of the debt management game,
to help them understand how debt account interest compounds over time. All participants DEMO
the game in a format identical to the No-Saving condition in Experiment 1. Next, we presented
all participants with two different debt Portfolios. Each Portfolio had a High-Cash and Low-Cash
version, for a total of four one-shot decisions (see Table 2). Each participant completed all four
decisions (a within-subject design), and the order in which the decisions were presented was
counterbalanced across participants. In half of the decisions (High-Cash condition), participants
19
received enough cash to be able to completely pay off their DEMO debt. In the other half (Low-
Cash condition), the same DEMO did not receive enough cash to be able to completely pay
off their smallest debt. Thus, in the Low-Cash condition, participants had to DEMO which debt
account(s) they wanted to reduce without having the DEMO to close any of them. In addition to
the four decisions of interest, we included two filler decisions (in which participants had enough
DEMO to completely pay off the largest debt in two different portfolios) DEMO obfuscate the purpose
of the experiment.
Sixty-five undergraduate students (50% female; mean age: 22) at a private mid-Atlantic
university participated in the DEMO in exchange for a show-up fee of $8. In this experiment
only, participants were not paid based on their decisions.
Portfolio 1
Portfolio 2
Debt 1
(r=2.50%)
Debt 2
(r=2.00%)
Debt 3
(r=3.50%)
Debt 4
(r=3.25%)
Debt 5
(r=3.75%)
Debt 6
(r=4.00%)
$4,572  $11,213  $19,751 $20,750 $22,DEMO $20,876
$3,040  $9,694  $12,793 $5,108  DEMO,410 $47,003
Available Cash
(Low-Cash)
Available Cash
(High-Cash)
$3,500 $6,000
$2,200 $4,000
Table 2. The four DEMO of interest (2 Portfolios × 2 Cash allotments) in Experiment 2
Results and Discussion
We pooled data across Portfolios. Consistent with debt account DEMO, the mean
percentage of non-optimally allocated money was significantly greater in DEMO High-Cash
condition than in the Low-Cash condition (53% vs. 43%, t(64) = 3.58, p < .01, paired t-test). In
addition, we found that the percentage of available cash allocated to the smallest debt was
significantly greater in the High-Cash condition than in the Low-Cash DEMO (13% vs. 5%,
t(64) = 2.44, p < DEMO, paired t-test).
The results suggest that eliminating participants’ ability to DEMO pay off their
20
smallest debt helps to shift their focus toward the overarching goal DEMO reducing overall debt, thus
increasing the optimality of their repayment behavior.
DEMO 3: THE BENEFITS OF (COSTLY) DEBT CONSOLIDATION
Experiment 2 suggests DEMO the harmful effects of debt account aversion can be reduced
by eliminating participants’ ability to completely pay off small debts. However, the
“intervention” utilized in Experiment 2 (restricting the amount of available cash consumers have
on hand) would obviously not be something policy makers or creditors could implement. Thus,
in Experiment 3 we examined whether a common intervention – DEMO consolidation – could be
similarly effective. By consolidating several small loans into one larger loan, we distance
participants from achieving subgoals focused on paying off individual loans and potentially shift
their attention toward the overarching goal DEMO reducing total debt (cf. Amir and Ariely 2008).
Indeed, if debt account-averse consumers are focused on closing small loans rather than simply
DEMO smallest of several loans, consolidating several small loans into a large DEMO may completely
eliminate participants’ ability to achieve their natural subgoals.
The experiment consisted of two between-subjects conditions. The Control condition was
identical to the DEMO condition in Experiment 1. In a Debt Consolidation condition, Debts 5
DEMO 6 remained the same as in the Control condition, but the DEMO smallest debts (Debts 1-4) were
integrated into one consolidated loan (DEMO,000 at a 3% interest rate). The interest rate of the
consolidated loan was slightly larger than the weighted average of the interest DEMO of the
smaller individual loans (
= 2.98%). This increase DEMO the
fact that debt consolidation often comes at a cost (e.g., in the form of balance transfer fees).
21
Critically, this increase also implies that a financially optimal player will conclude the game with
slightly more debt in the Debt Consolidation condition DEMO in the Control condition ($29,939 vs.
$29,428). However, if consumers are naturally inclined to pay off small loans, total debt should
be greater in the Control condition than in the Debt Consolidation DEMO
One hundred and two undergraduate students (60% female; mean age: DEMO) at a private
mid-Atlantic university participated in the experiment.
Results and DEMO
Mean total debt in both conditions was significantly greater than that of a financially
optimal player (both ps < .001), and more importantly, mean total debt was marginally greater in
the Control condition than in the Debt Consolidation condition ($38,649 vs. $37,063; t(100) =
1.83, p < .07). Thus, there was a large DEMO of suboptimal debt repayment behavior in both
conditions, but decreasing the DEMO to close accounts by increasing distance to that subgoal
(in the DEMO Consolidation condition) reduced this non-optimal behavior.
We also examined the repayment DEMO the small debts (Debts 1-4) versus the consolidated
loan. A debt account-averse player in the Control condition would completely pay off Debts 1-4
DEMO the end of round 6. Likewise, a debt account-averse player in DEMO Debt Consolidation
condition would completely pay off the consolidated loan by the end of round 6. Participants
were significantly more likely to pay off DEMO 1-4 by round 6 than to pay off the consolidated
loan by round 6 (12% vs. 2%; χ2(1) = 4.27, p < .05), suggesting that the debt consolidation
intervention discouraged people from focusing on closing out small loans. In addition, focusing
only on those who closed either Debts 1-4 or the consolidated loan, Control participants closed
Debts 1-4 significantly earlier than Debt Consolidation participants closed the consolidated loan
22
(on average, round 10 vs. round 16; t(33) DEMO 3.71, p < .001).
The benefits of debt consolidation are DEMO thought to consist of the reduced interest
paid on a consolidated loan relative to multiple loans, as well as the reduced transaction and
monitoring costs required to manage a single loan. Experiment 3 suggests that debt DEMO
can also reduce the harmful effects of debt account aversion. Although debt consolidation can be
costly, both directly (e.g., in the form of balance transfer fees) and indirectly (by reducing
perceived vulnerability to financial DEMO; Bolton, Bloom, and Cohen 2010), our results suggest
that DEMO consolidation may be more beneficial than previously thought. Specifically, by
eliminating DEMO ability to repay small debts, debt consolidation appears to help refocus
DEMO on the overarching goal of reducing total debt.
EXPERIMENT 4: FOCUSING DEMO ON INTEREST
In Experiments 2 and 3, we utilized interventions that DEMO debt account-averse players,
but would slightly harm financially optimal players. In Experiment 4, we examined the
effectiveness of a more practical intervention, DEMO would harm neither financially optimal nor
debt account-averse players. Specifically, we DEMO whether routinely highlighting the actual
dollar amount of interest accumulated by each debt, or the amount that could be accumulated in
the next round, helped participants to prioritize repayment of the highest-interest debts. Because
consumers have difficulty understanding how interest accumulates over time (e.g., Eisenstein
and Hoch DEMO; Stango and Zinman 2009b), interest rates may play less of DEMO role in repayment
decisions than they should (cf. Hsee 1996). DEMO abstract rates into a more tangible and
familiar unit (dollar amounts) may increase the weight players place on interest rates (cf.
23
Gigerenzer and Hoffrage 1995).
To some extent, existing elements of credit card statements are designed to help
consumers translate interest rates into DEMO amounts. The “Minimum Payment Warning”
required since February 2010 to appear on U.S. credit card statements displays the total amount
of money (principal plus interest) that will ultimately be repaid if only minimum payments are
made each billing cycle. Credit card statements also include an Interest Charge Calculation
DEMO that displays the total amount of interest accumulated during the previous billing period.
Thus, credit card statements highlight both prospective and retrospective monetary implications
of interest rates.
Accordingly, Experiment 4 manipulated whether participants were focused on the
amount of interest that could be accumulated in the future, the amount of interest accumulated to
date, or neither. Although the debt management game interface displays how the balance of each
debt changes over time, large period-to-period interest accumulations do not move the balance
lines dramatically because DEMO the scale of the graph. Thus, drawing attention more explicitly to
DEMO actual amount of interest paid may be beneficial.
We highlighted interest amounts with a pop-up box that appeared at the beginning of
each round. DEMO box included a table whose content varied across three between-subjects
conditions (DEMO Appendix C). Each table listed the debts that were still open, their amount, and
their interest rate. In the Control condition, the table contained no additional information. In the
Prospective condition, the table also reported “the amount by which each debt would increase
from this round DEMO the next round, if you allocate no cash to that particular DEMO In other words,
participants learned the maximum amount of interest each debt could accumulate in the next
round. In the Retrospective condition, the table reported the total amount of interest each debt
24
has accumulated over the course of the game. Below the table, the box also indicated the total
interest charges (across all debts) DEMO the course of the game. In all conditions, participants
could click DEMO at any point to remove the box and make their decisions for that round. Aside
from the treatment differences in pop-up box content, all participants played the game in a
format identical to the Control condition DEMO Experiment 3.
Seventy-five students (55% female; mean age: 22.6) at a private mid-Atlantic university
participated in the experiment.
Results and Discussion
Mean DEMO debt was significantly greater than that of a financially optimal player in all
conditions (all ps < .001). However, total debt was DEMO in the Retrospective condition than in
the Control condition ($36,089 DEMO $38,848; t(47) = 1.89, p < .07) and the Prospective condition
($36,089 vs. $38,672; t(49) = 1.78, p = .08). Total debt did not differ significantly between the
Control condition and Prospective condition (p = .91).
We also examined which Debts were paid off completely. Because of the minimal total
DEMO difference between the Prospective and Control conditions, we pool across those DEMO
in this analysis. Participants in the Prospective and Control conditions were significantly more
likely to close Debt 1 (the smallest debt) than to DEMO Debt 6 (the debt with the highest interest
rate) (76% DEMO 48%; χ2(1) = 8.32, p < .01). However, participants in the Retrospective condition
were slightly less likely to close Debt DEMO than to close Debt 6 (60% vs. 68%; χ2(1) DEMO 0.08, p =
.77).
Thus, while the Retrospective intervention did not erase debt account aversion, it did help
to move repayment behavior in the direction of optimality. However, the Prospective
25
intervention did not produce any beneficial effects. One reason why the DEMO
intervention was more effective than the Prospective intervention may have been that the interest
figures were more alarming in the Retrospective condition. For example, at the beginning of
round 10, a debt account-averse player in the Retrospective condition will be told that Debt 6
(the debt with the highest interest rate) has already accumulated $25,399 in interest. By contrast,
at the beginning of round 10 in the Prospective condition, the debt account-averse player will
learn that the most interest Debt 6 could DEMO in the next round is $3,416. If this is the case,
credit card statements could potentially be made more effective by reporting DEMO total lifetime
amount of interest accumulated on the current balance (as DEMO to simply the amount of
interest accrued since the previous billing cycle, as is the current practice).
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Many consumers hold many debts. The average U.S. credit user holds over five credit
cards, each with an average balance of over $1,000 (Experian 2009). Mortgages, car loans, and
student loans complicate matters further. Understanding how consumers DEMO these debt
portfolios could help inform interventions designed to help consumers repay debts more
efficiently. Moreover, a better understanding of these decisions is likely to become increasingly
important as consumers accumulate more debts during times of DEMO difficulty.
Understanding debt repayment strategies is also important for financial institutions, DEMO could
better calculate the risk of unpaid loans by understanding how consumers manage multiple debts.
In this research we provided consistent evidence of debt DEMO aversion. In three field
surveys and four experiments, consumers faced with DEMO debts prioritized reducing the
26
number of debt accounts over reducing the total amount of debt DEMO accounts. That is, rather
than repaying the debts with the highest DEMO rates most quickly (the financially optimal
strategy), many consumers chose DEMO repay the smallest debts as soon as possible. This suboptimal
behavior was observed among students financially motivated to behave optimally, viewers of a
financial news program, and consumers who have experience managing credit card debt.
We also examined ways to reduce debt account aversion. We found that eliminating
DEMO ability to completely pay off small debts actually improved their overall financial
situation. Consumers were more likely to repay high-interest debts when they did DEMO have
enough money to fully repay any debt (Experiment 2), DEMO when small debts were consolidated
into one large account (Experiment 3)DEMO We also found that a display that highlighted the total
amount of interest accumulated helped to focus consumers on repaying high-interest debts
(Experiment 4). Although none of these interventions should improve the financial situation of DEMO
financially optimal consumer (and the manipulations in Experiments 2 and 3 DEMO slightly
harm financially optimal consumers), they all improved the financial situation of the participants
in our experiments by disrupting their natural tendency to DEMO on repaying small loans. Of
course, it should be noted that DEMO our interventions improved the optimality of debt repayment
decisions, the differences DEMO conditions and the financially optimal benchmark were
generally greater than the differences between conditions. Thus, while there may be ways to
reduce the bias of repaying smaller loans first, fully extinguishing it may require more forceful
intervention – perhaps one where a consumer pays a central payment center, and this payment
center allocates payments to the different loans.
Limitations
27
Like many laboratory paradigms, our paradigm is a simplified version of reality, designed
to capture only the most essential elements of debt management. To keep the game tractable and
the results interpretable, several complexities present outside the lab are not reflected in the
game. For example, players in our game could not accumulate new debt, and they never had to
choose between repaying debt and making a new purchase. Additionally, in real life there are
transaction and cognitive costs that accompany debts. In DEMO game, repayment decisions for all
debts are made simultaneously each round. DEMO the lab, bills for different debts arrive at
different times, with different payment due dates. Accordingly, closing small debts conveys
simplicity benefits (DEMO, reduced paperwork) that are not fully reflected in the game. Outside the
lab, these simplicity benefits may strengthen debt account aversion.
Because our game is a vast simplification of the reality of debt management, it provides a
relatively simple setting for people to behave optimally. The finding DEMO individuals use
repayment strategies that are far from ideal in our simplified game speaks to the intuitive appeal
of debt account aversion and suggests DEMO debt repayment behavior in the more complex world
could be even more depressing. Indeed, our field surveys suggest that debt account aversion is
common response to multiple debts.
Is Debt Account Aversion Always a Mistake?
DEMO we have identified situations in which debt account aversion produces non-
optimal behavior, there may be other situations in which debt account aversion proves to be a
useful heuristic. As noted above, there were necessarily no opportunities for outside purchases in
the debt management game. When consumers must DEMO between repaying small debts and
28
making a new purchase, debt account aversion may actually be beneficial, motivating consumers
to forego a new purchase in favor of repaying a small debt.
It is also important to note that the size of DEMO debt accounts was positively correlated
with interest rates in our game. In the domain of credit cards, such a situation can occur if
consumers base their decision of which card to use on factors other than DEMO rates, such as
spending rewards or available credit. It can also DEMO when credit card companies unexpectedly
raise interest rates after purchases have already been made. Debt account aversion is only a
mistake when the correlation DEMO debt size and interest rates is positive. When the
correlation is negative, debt account aversion may be a beneficial heuristic.
Open Questions and Future Directions
Future research should shed further light on the process(es) underlying debt account
aversion. We have proposed that the phenomenon is multiply determined, and indeed, robust
phenomena are often robust because they are multiply determined (Huettel and Payne 2009). In
particular, we have hypothesized that DEMO goal-gradient effect (e.g., Kivetz, Urminsky, and Zheng
2006), the tendency to adopt subgoals when attempting to achieve a difficult superordinate goal
(e.g., Newell and Simon 1972), and the desire to avoid segregated losses (e.g., Thaler and
Johnson 1990), are likely to contribute DEMO debt account aversion. We leave the important task of
examining the relative strength of each component for future research.
It is also important to DEMO whether consumers think that prioritizing repayment of
low-balance, low-interest loans over DEMO, high-interest loans is a financially optimal
strategy, or whether they realize that is objectively suboptimal, but pursue it anyway because
there are emotional benefits to paying off debt accounts. One way to address this question DEMO
29
be to compare the behavior of regular players in the debt DEMO game to the behavior
(suggestions) of advisors who are paid based on their advisees’ ability to reduce total debt (cf.
Cain, Loewenstein, and Moore 2005). If consumers believe that debt account aversion is DEMO
financially optimal strategy, there should be no difference between regular (non-advised) players
and advisors. That is, advisors should advise their clients to DEMO repayment of low-balance,
low-interest loans. However, if closing small accounts DEMO emotional benefits that advisors
do not vicariously experience, advisors should behave DEMO optimally.
It should be noted that debt account aversion is only one way in which consumers
mismanage their debts. For example, recent work has revealed that consumers tend to over-
weight minimum payment information when deciding DEMO much to repay each month on their
credit cards (Salisbury and DEMO 2010; Stewart 2009), that they can be insufficiently sensitive
to DEMO rates when choosing between loans (Shu 2010), and that they DEMO fail to transfer
balances from high-interest to low-interest debt accounts (Stango DEMO Zinman 2009a). Future
work should continue to examine the ways in which consumers manage (and mismanage) their
debts.
Finally, beyond debt management, future work should also examine whether debt
account aversion influences purchasing behavior. For example, if a consumer is deciding
whether to put a new purchase on a credit card with no balance and a 5% APR DEMO a credit card
with a $1,000 balance and a 10% APR, debt account aversion suggests that the consumer may
(non-optimally) use the latter. More broadly, debt account aversion may influence the proportion
of income consumers divert from new purchases (or savings and investments) toward debt
DEMO
30
Final Thoughts
Financial guru Dave Ramsey (2009) suggests that consumers DEMO are struggling to
manage multiple debts should pay off small debts first because they need “some quick wins in
order to stay pumped enough DEMO get out of debt completely.” Our consistent evidence of debt
account aversion suggests that many consumers share Ramsey’s intuition. While this heuristic is
not DEMO a mistake, our work reveals that debt account aversion can systematically DEMO
consumers astray when larger debts have larger interest rates. Ultimately, it DEMO that debt
account aversion may enable consumers to win the battle, DEMO lose the war against debt.
31
REFERENCES
Amir, On and Dan Ariely (2008), “Resting on DEMO: The Effects of Discrete Progress Markers
as Subgoals on Task Performance DEMO Preferences,” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34 (5), 1158-71.
Ayal, Shahar and Dan Zakay (2009), “The Perceived Diversity Heuristic: The Case of
Pseudodiversity,” Journal of DEMO and Social Psychology, 96 (3), 559-73.
Benartzi, Shlomo and DEMO H. Thaler (2001), “Naive Diversification Strategies in Defined
Contribution Savings DEMO,” American Economic Review, 91 (1), 79-98.
Benartzi, Shlomo DEMO Richard H. Thaler (2007), “Heuristics and Biases in Retirement Savings
DEMO,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21 (3), 81-104.
Bolton, DEMO E., Paul N. Bloom, and Joel B. Cohen (2010), "Stuck in Debt: How Loan Marketing
Affects Consumer Personal Finances," Paper presented at the First Annual Boulder
Summer Conference on Consumer Financial Decision DEMO
Buhrmester, Michael D., Tracy Kwang, and Samuel D. Gosling (2011), “Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk: A New Source of Inexpensive, Yet High-Quality, Data?” Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 6 (1), 3-5.
Cain, Daylian M., George Loewenstein, and Don A. Moore (2005), “The Dirt on Coming Clean:
Perverse Effects of Disclosing Conflicts of Interest,DEMO Journal of Legal Studies, 34 (1), 1-
25.
Camerer, DEMO, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard H. Thaler (1997), “Labor
Supply of New York City Cabdrivers: One Day at a Time,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112 (2), 407-41.
Denes-Raj, Veronika and Seymour Epstein (1994), “Conflict Between Intuitive and Rational
32
Processing: When People Behave Against Their Better Judgment,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 66 (5), 819-29.
Eisenstein, Eric and Stephen Hoch (2005), “Intuitive Compounding: Framing, Temporal
Perspective, and DEMO,” Working Paper, Temple University.
Experian (2009), “Marketing Insight Snapshot,” March.
Fishbach, Ayelet and Ravi Dhar (2005), “Goals as DEMO or Guides: The Liberating Effect of
Perceived Goal Progress on Choice,DEMO Journal of Consumer Research, 32 (3), 370-7.
Fishbach, Ayelet, Ravi Dhar, and Ying Zhang (2006), “Subgoals as Substitutes or DEMO:
The Role of Goal Accessibility,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91 (2),
232-42.
Gigerenzer, Gerd and Ulrich Hoffrage (1995), “How to Improve Bayesian Reasoning Without
Instruction: Frequency Formats,” Psychological Review, 102 (4), 684-704.
Heath, Chip, Richard P. DEMO, and George Wu (1999), “Goals as Reference Points,” Cognitive
Psychology, 38 (1), 79-109.
Heilizer, Fred (1977), “A DEMO of Theory and Research on the Assumptions of Miller’s
Response Competitions Models: Response Gradients,” The Journal of General Psychology,
97 (1), 17-71.
Hsee, Christopher K. (1996), “The Evaluability Hypothesis: An DEMO for Preference
Reversals between Joint and Separate Evaluations of Alternatives,” Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 67 (3), 247-57.
Huettel, Scott A. and John W. Payne (2009), “Integrating Neural and Decision Sciences:
Convergence and Constraints,” Journal of Marketing Research, 46 (1), 14-7.
Hull, Clark L. (1932), “The Goal-Gradient Hypothesis and Maze Learning,” Psychological
33
Review, 39 (1), 25-43.
Kahn, Barbara E. and Rebecca K. Ratner (2005), "Variety for the Sake of Variety:
DEMO Motives in Consumer Choice," in Inside Consumption: Consumer
Motives, Goals, and Desires, S. Ratneshwar and David Glen Mick, eds. New York:
Routledge, 102-21.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky (1979), “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
Risk,” Econometrica, 47 (2), 263-92.
Kivetz, Ran, Oleg Urminsky, and Yuhuang Zheng (2006), “The Goal-Gradient Hypothesis
Resurrected: Purchase Acceleration, Illusionary Goal Progress, and DEMO Retention,”
Journal of Marketing Research, 43 (1), 39-58.
Newell, Allen and Herbert Simon (1972), Human Problem Solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Nunes, Joseph C. and Xavier Dreze (2006), DEMO Endowed Progress Effect: How Artificial
Advancement Increases Effort,” Journal of DEMO Research, 32 (4), 504-12.
Pacini, Rosemary and Seymour Epstein (1999), “The Interaction of Three Facets of Concrete
Thinking in a DEMO of Chance,” Thinking and Reasoning, 5 (4), 303-25.
Paolacci, Gabriele, Jesse Chandler, and Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis (2010), “Running DEMO on
Amazon Mechanical Turk,” Judgment and Decision Making, 5 (5), 411-9.
Ramsey, Dave (2009), “Get Out of Debt with DEMO Debt Snowball Plan,” DaveRamsey.com, August
1. www.daveramsey.com/article/get-out-of-debt-with-the-debt-snowball-plan
Read, Daniel and George Loewenstein (1995), “Diversification Bias: Explaining the Discrepancy
DEMO Variety Seeking Between Combined and Separated Choices,” Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 1 (1), 34-49.
34
Rick, Scott I., Cynthia E. Cryder, and George Loewenstein (DEMO), “Tightwads and
Spendthrifts,” Journal of Consumer Research, 34 (6), 767-82.
Salisbury, Linda C. and Katherine N. Lemon (2010), DEMO Now or Repay Later: Examining the
Effects of Information Disclosure on DEMO Debt Repayment Decisions,” Paper
presented at the First Annual Boulder Summer Conference on Consumer Financial
Decision Making.
Shin, Jiwoong and Dan Ariely (DEMO), “Keeping Doors Open: The Effect of Unavailability on
Incentives to DEMO Options Viable,” Management Science, 50 (5), 575-86.
Shu, DEMO B. (2010), “Consumer Behavior in Relation to Truth in Lending DEMO,” Paper
presented at the First Annual Boulder Summer Conference on Consumer Financial
Decision Making.
Simonson, Itamar (1990), “The Effect of Purchase DEMO and Timing on Variety-Seeking
Behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research, 27 (2), 150-62.
Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman (2009a), “What DEMO Consumers Really Pay on Their Checking
and Credit Card Accounts? Explicit, Implicit, and Avoidable Costs,” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, DEMO (2), 424-9.
Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman (2009b), DEMO Growth Bias and Household
Finance,” Journal of Finance, 64 (6), 2807-49.
Stewart, Neil (2009), “The Cost of Anchoring on DEMO Minimum Repayments,”
Psychological Science, 20 (1), 39-41.
Thaler, DEMO H. and Eric J. Johnson (1990), “Gambling with the House DEMO and Trying to
Break Even: The Effects of Prior Outcomes on DEMO Choice,” Management Science, 36
(6), 643-60.
35
FOOTNOTES
                                                            
1 At first glance, it is difficult to reconcile debt account aversion with consumers’ tendency to hold
multiple debts. The phenomena DEMO easier to reconcile when one considers that many consumers have
no choice but to hold multiple debts. Some debts are naturally separate, such as car loans and mortgages
that originate from different lenders. Additionally, consumers who struggle to make ends meet may open
multiple credit cards out of DEMO once their existing cards have no more available credit. Beyond
necessity, DEMO are often compelling immediate benefits to opening a new credit card account, such as
obtaining a retailer discount or a desired good.
2 It is worth highlighting that the non-optimal behavior observed in the $100 rebate DEMO is primarily
driven by participants’ attempts to close out the low-balance account, rather than by reliance on a 1/n
heuristic. Participants in the $100 rebate condition were significantly more likely to completely pay off
the DEMO card than to divide their rebate evenly across cards (29% vs. DEMO; χ2(1) = 23.19, p < .0001).
 
3 DEMO, participants repaid $47.06 on average to the low-APR account. This mean DEMO considerably larger
than the corresponding mean in Field Survey 1 ($32.41), a difference that is likely attributable to
differences in financial sophistication across the two samples.
 
4 To help ensure that the evidence of DEMO account aversion observed in Field Surveys 1 and 2 was not
optimal, we conducted a follow-up survey with 33 financial professionals (e.g., loan officers, bank vice
presidents), who on average had six years of experience in their position. We gave them the $100 rebate
version of DEMO debt repayment scenario and asked them how a typical consumer should behave. A
significant majority (79%) indicated that the entire rebate should be DEMO to pay down the high-APR card
(p < .001, sign test), suggesting that debt account aversion is inconsistent with experts’ predominant view
DEMO financially optimal behavior.
 
5 One possible alternative account is that R will be greater than D when participants equally spread their
repayments across DEMO their debts (a 1/n heuristic). However, only five participants planned to pay the
same amount to each debt, and the comparison remains significant when those participants are excluded
from the analysis (0.25 vs. 0.14, t(37) = 3.31, p < .01, paired t-test)DEMO Minimum payments are also unlikely
to account for this phenomenon. If multiple-debt holders make only minimum payments, and different
creditors use similar formulas to determine minimum payments, R should equal D (since larger debts will
DEMO larger minimum payments).
6 The initial order in which debts appeared in the Choose Debt drop-down box was counterbalanced
across participants, but debts were always numbered from smallest to largest, which might have
contributed to the debt account aversion observed in our experiments (if participants interpreted the debts’
numbers as suggestions for which debts to pay off first). DEMO, we also observed debt account
aversion in our Field Surveys, suggesting that debt account aversion is not an artifact of our experimental
procedures.
DEMO Because the game changes over time (e.g., allocating money non-optimally in early rounds reduces the
opportunity to do so in later rounds), DEMO that increases in optimal behavior over time could be driven by
two factors: learning and reduced opportunities to behave non-optimally. Future research could more
definitively address learning by examining knowledge transfer (e.g., by manipulating whether DEMO not
participants initially play the current debt management game and then letting everyone play a new debt
management game, with different debts and interest rates).
FIGURE 1
NON-OPTIMAL BEHAVIOR OVER TIME
(EXPERIMENT 1)
36
The figure displays the mean proportion of money allocated non-optimally by round. Note that DEMO
rounds 6, 12, and 19, participants received extra money (bonuses) to repay debts. For a debt
account-averse player, the bonuses are DEMO large enough to completely pay off the open debt
with the highest interest rate, which may be why the bonuses did not produce large increases in
optimal behavior.
37
FIGURE 2
AVERAGE ROUND EACH DEBT WAS CLOSED, COMPARED TO FINANCIALLY
OPTIMAL AND DEBT ACCOUNT-AVERSE BENCHMARKS
(EXPERIMENT 1)
Note: (25) DEMO debts that should remain open at the end of the game.
APPENDIX A
FINAL SCREEN OF DEBT MANAGEMENT GAME
FOR A FINANCIALLY OPTIMAL DEMO
38
This screen displays the behavior of a (hypothetical) financially optimal player, who in each
round allocated all available cash to the open debt with the highest interest rate. In rounds in
which a debt DEMO closed, but the player still had cash remaining, the remaining cash was
allocated to the debt with the next highest interest rate. This DEMO was played under the rules of
the No-Saving condition in Experiment 1 (identical to the Control conditions of Experiments 3
and 4).
APPENDIX B
FINAL SCREEN OF DEBT MANAGEMENT GAME
FOR A DEBT ACCOUNT-AVERSE DEMO
39
This screen displays the behavior of a (hypothetical) player focused exclusively on closing the
smallest open debt as soon as possible. In DEMO round, this player allocated all available cash to
the open debt DEMO the smallest balance. In rounds in which a debt was closed, DEMO the player still
had cash remaining, the remaining cash was allocated DEMO the debt with the next smallest balance.
This game was played under the rules of the No-Saving condition in Experiment 1 (identical to
the Control conditions of Experiments 3 and 4).
40
APPENDIX C
SAMPLE POP-UP BOXES FROM EXPERIMENT 4
These screens are DEMO would appear for a financially optimal player at the beginning of round 2.
Control Condition
Prospective Condition
Retrospective Condition{1g42fwefx}