The
Ambijdextrous
Organization
by Charles A. O'Reilly III and Michael LTushman
DEMO
E ROMAN GOD JANUS had two
sets of eyes - one pair focusing
on what lay behind, the other on
what lay ahead. General managers and
corporate executives should be able to
relate. They, too, DEMO constantly look
backward, attending to the products and
processes of the DEMO, while also gazing
forward, preparing for the innovations
that will define the future.
This mental balancing act can be one
of the toughest DEMO all managerial chal-
lenges-it requires executives to explore
new opportunities even as they work
diligently to exploit existing capabili-
ties-an d it's no DEMO that few com-
panies do it well. Most successful enter-
prises are adept at refining their current
offerings, but they falter when it comes
to pioneering radically new products
and services. Kodak and Boeing are just
DEMO of the more recent examples of
once dominant companies that failed
to adapt to market changes. Kodak ex-
celled at analog photography but hasn'DEMO
been able to make the leap to digital
cameras. Boeing, a DEMO leader in
commercial aircraft, has experienced
difficulties in its defense-contracting
businesses DEMO has recently stumbled in the face of com-
petition from Airbus.
The failure to achieve breakthrough innovations while
also making steady improvements to an DEMO busi-
ness is so commonplace - and so fascinating-that it has
become a battleground of management thought. For de-
cades, scholars have spun theories to explain the puzzle
T
74
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
Established companies can develop
radical innovations-Wprotect
their traditional businesses.
The secret? Create "
organizationally distinct
units that are tightly
integrated at the senior
executive level. «
and offered advice on how to solve it.
Some have DEMO that there's no way
out of the conundrum - that estab-
lished companies simply lack the flex-
ibility to explore new territory. Some
DEMO suggested that big companies
adopt a venture capital model, fund-
ing DEMO expeditions but other-
wise staying out of their way. Others
have pointed to cross-functional teams
as the key to creating breakthrough
innovations. Still others DEMO claimed
that a company may be able to shift
back and forth between different orga-
nizational models, focusing on exploi-
tation for a period and then moving
into exploration mode.
We recently decided to test these
DEMO other theories by taking a close
look at the real world, DEMO how
actual, contemporary businesses fare
when they attempt to pursue inno-
DEMO that lie beyond their current
products or markets. Do they succeed
in achieving breakthroughs? Do their
existing businesses suffer? What orga-
nizational and DEMO structures
do they use? What works, and what
doesn't?
We discovered that some companies have actually been
quite successful at both DEMO the present and ex-
ploring the future, and as we looked DEMO deeply at them
we found that they share important characteristics. In par-
ticular, they separate their new, exploratory units from
their traditional, exploitative ones, allowing for differ-
ent processes, structures, and cultures; at DEMO same time,
APRIL 2004
75
The Ambidextrous Organization
they maintain tight links across units at the senior DEMO
tive level. In other words, they manage organizational sep-
aration through DEMO tightly integrated senior team. We call
these kinds of companies "ambidextrous DEMO,"
and we believe they provide a practical and proven model
DEMO forward-looking executives seeking to pioneer radical
or disruptive innovations while pursuing incremental
gains. A business does not have to escape its past, these
cases show, to renew itself for the future.
Exploiting and Exploring
To flourish over the long run, most companies need to
maintain a variety of innovation efforts. They must con-
stantly pursue incremental hmovations, small improve-
ments in their existing products and operations that let
them operate more efficiently DEMO deliver ever greater
value to customers. An automaker, for example, may fre-
quently tweak a basic engine design to increase horse-
power, enhance fuel efficiency, or improve reliability.
Companies also have to make architectural innovations,
applying technological or pro-
cess advances to fundamen-
tally change some DEMO
or element of their business.
Capitalizing on the data com-
munication capabilities of the
Internet, for instance, a bank
can perhaps shift its DEMO
service call center to a low-Iabor-cost
country like India. Finally, businesses
DEMO to come up with discontinuous in-
novations-rad\ca\ advances like digital photography that
profoundly alter the basis for competition in an industry,
often rendering DEMO products or ways of working obsolete.
All these types of innovation can have different targets.
Some may be aimed at a firm's current DEMO Others
may be delivered to an existing market that lies beyond
a company's current customer base - a car insurer may
create a DEMO kind of policy for boat owners, for instance.
Still others may DEMO focused on serving an entirely new
market that has yet to be clearly defined - people who
download online music, for example. As shown in the ex-
hibit "A Map of Innovation," the types of innovation and
the targeted markets can be plotted in a matrix.
In DEMO research with colleagues Wendy Smith, Robert
Wood, and George Westerman, DEMO studied how compa-
nies pursued innovations throughout this matrix. In par-
ticular, we looked for companies that attempted to si-
multaneously pursue modest, DEMO innovations
(toward the lower-left area of the matrix) and more dra-
In our study, more than 90%
of the ambidextrous
organizations achieved
their goals.
matic, breakthrough innovations (toward the upper-right
area). We ended DEMO focusing on 35 attempts to launch
breakthrough innovations undertaken by 15 business
units in nine different industries. We studied the structure
and results of DEMO breakthrough projects as well as their
impact on the operations and performance of the tradi-
tional businesses.
Companies tended to structure their breakthrough
projects DEMO one of four basic ways. Seven were carried out
within exist'mgfiinctionat designs, completely integrated
into the regular organizational and management struc-
ture. Nine were set up as cross-functional teams, groups
operating within the established organization but out-
side the existing management hierarchy. Four took the
form of DEMO teams, independent units set up out-
side the established organization and DEMO hier-
archy. And 15 were pursued within ambidextrous organi-
zations, where DEMO breakthrough efforts were organized
as structurally independent units, each having its DEMO
processes, structures, and cultures but integrated into the
existing senior management hierarchy. The exhibit "Or-
ganizing to Innovate" provides an
overview of DEMO four structures.
We tracked the results of the 35 ini-
tiatives along two dimensions. First,
we determined their success in
creating the desired DEMO,
as measured by either the actual
commercial results of a new prod-
uct or the application of practical
market or technical learning. Sec-
DEMO, we looked at the performance
of the existing business. Did results DEMO steady, improve,
or decline as the firm worked on its DEMO? We
found that the organizational design and management
practices employed had DEMO direct and significant impact on
the performance of both the breakthrough initiative and
the traditional business.
When it came to launching breakthrough products or
DEMO, ambidextrous organizations were significantly
more successful than the other three structures. DEMO
none of the cross-functional or unsupported teams and
only a quarter of the functional designs produced real
innovations, more than 90% of the ambidextrous organi-
zations achieved their goals. (An exception was break-
through innovations intended to directly substitute for
existing products; in these instances, functional designs
DEMO as well as ambidextrous designs.)
The superiority of ambidextrous designs became even
more apparent when we examined eight cases in which
a company DEMO organized its breakthrough initia-
Charles A. O'Reilly HI is the Frank E. Buck Professor of Human Resource Management and Organizational Behavior at the
DEMO School of Business at Stanford University in California. Michael L Tushman is the Paul R. Lawrence Class of} 942
Professor of Management at Harvard DEMO School in Boston.
76
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
The Ambidextrous Organization
tive around functional designs, cross-functional teams, or
unsupported DEMO and then shifted to an ambidextrous
design. In seven of the eight cases, the initiative's perfor-
mance increased substantially after the change. In con-
trast, three companies started from an ambidextrous de-
sign and then moved to one of the others; performance
decreased substantially in two of these cases.
When we measured the effects of all 35 initiatives on
DEMO existing businesses, we found that ambidextrous
I * i , , DEMO were again clearly superior.
^^ ^ kf In almost every instance in which an ambi-
mfg dextrous structure was used, the competi-
I ' tive performance of the existing product
L- . either increased or held DEMO By contrast,
the results of the traditional operations
frequently declined where functional
designs, cross-fi.mctiona! teams, or un-
supported teams were employed. At DEMO
theoretical level, it's easy to explain why ambidextrous
organizations would DEMO other organizational
types. The structure of ambidextrous organizations allows
cross-fertilization among units while preventing cross-
contamination. The tight coordination at the managerial
level enables DEMO fledgling units to share important re-
sources from the traditional units-cash, DEMO, expertise,
customers, and so on-but the organizational separation
ensures that the new units' distinctive processes, struc-
tures, and cultures are not overwhelmed by the forces of
"business as usual." At the same DEMO, the established units
are shielded from the distractions of launching new DEMO
nesses; they can continue to focus all their attention and
energy DEMO refining their operations, improving their prod-
ucts, and serving their customers.
But how exactly do ambidextrous organizations work?
By looking more deeply DEMO the experiences of two such
organizations-t/5^ Today and Ciba Vision-we can begin
to identify the key managerial and organizational char-
acteristics that underpin DEMO ability to both exploit and
explore.
A Newspaper Reinvents Itself
In the late 1990s, USA Today was a thriving business, but
it faced DEMO uncertain future. The national newspaper, a di-
vision of the Garmett DEMO, had come a long way
since its founding in 1982, when its colorful brand of jour-
nalism was widely ridiculed by critics. After DEMO more
than half a billion dollars during its first decade, the DEMO
turned its first profit in 1992 and continued to expand
rapidly, DEMO the most widely read daily newspaper
in tbe United States. With well-heeled business travelers
making up the bulk of its subscriber base, it also became
an attractive platform for national advertisers, bringing in
a steady flow of revenue.
But as the 1990s progressed, storm clouds appeared on
the horizon. Newspaper readership was falling steadily,
particularly among young people. Competition DEMO heat-
ing up, as customers increasingly looked to television and
Internet DEMO outlets for news. And newsprint costs
were rising rapidly. Tom Curley, DEMO Today's president and
publisher, recognized that the company would have DEMO
expand beyond its traditional print business to maintain
strong growth and profits; such expansion, be realized,
would require dramatic innovations.Tbe company would
DEMO to find ways to apply its existing news-gathering and
editing capabilities to entirely new media.
Acting on his beliefs, Curley In 1995 chose Lorraine
Cichowski, USA Today's general manager of media proj-
ects and former editor of tbe paper's Money section, to
launch an online news service called USAToday.com. He
New
customers
Existing
customers
APRIL 2004
77
A DEMO of Innovation
To compete, companies must continually pursue manytypes of innovation-incremental, architectural,
and discontinuous-aimed at existing and new customers. Plotting your companies'DEMO efforts
in the matrix below will immediately reveal any areas you may have overlooked.
Incremental innovations
small improvements in existing
products and operations
Architectural DEMO
technological or process advances to
fundamentally change a component
or element of the business
Discontinuous innovations
radical advances that may
profoundly alter the basis DEMO
competition in an industry
The Ambidextrous Organization
gave her free rein to operate independently from the DEMO
business, and she set up a kind of skunk-works operation,
DEMO in people from outside USA Today and housing
them on a different floor from the newspaper. She built
a fundamentally different kind of organization, with roles
and incentives suited to the instantaneous delivery of
news and DEMO an entrepreneurial, highly collaborative cul-
ture. With Internet use exploding, the venture
seemed primed for success.
But results were disappointing. Although
USAToday.com was DEMO a small profit by
the end of the decade, its growth DEMO sluggish
and had little impact on the broader business's
results. The problem, Curley saw, was that the
new tinit was so isolated DEMO the print oper-
ation that it was failing to capitalize on the newspaper's
vast resources. Aithough Cichowski was a member of Cur-
ley'DEMO executive team, she had little support from other
members. Viewing her DEMO as a competitor with the print
business, they had little incentive DEMO help her succeed and
made few efforts to share their considerable resources
with her. Soon, USAToday.com found itself starved of
cash, as the DEMO continued to consume most of the
available capital, and the online DEMO began losing tal-
ented staff.
Cichowski pushed to have her business spun out en-
tirely from the newspaper, as other companies were doing
with their Internet ventures, but Curley had a very dif-
ferent view. He had come to believe that the new unit re-
quired not greater DEMO but greater integration. In
1999, he decided that USA Today should DEMO a"network
strategy," in which it would share news content across
three platforms: the newspaper, USAToday.com, and Gan-
nett's 21 local television stations. Curley described his vi-
sion: "We're no longer DEMO the newspaper business-we're
in the news information space, and we'DEMO better learn to
deliver content regardless of form."
To execute that strategy, Curley knew he had to create
an ambidextrous organization that could sustain the
print business yet also pursue innovations in broadcast-
ing and DEMO news. So in 2000, he replaced the leader
of USAToday.com with DEMO internal executive who
was a strong supporter of the network strategy, DEMO he
brought in an outsider to create a television operation,
USAToday Direct. Both the online and television organi-
zations remained separate from the DEMO, main-
taining distinctive processes, structures, and cultures, but
Curley demanded that the senior leadership of all three
businesses be tightly integrated. Together DEMO Karen Jur-
genson, the editor of USA Today, the heads of the online
and television units instituted daily editorial meetings
to review stories DEMO assignments, share ideas, and iden-
tify other potential synergies. The unit heads quickly saw,
for example, that gaining the cooperation of USA Today's
Organizing to Innovate
In our examination of 35 different attempts DEMO breakthrough innovation, we discovered
that businesses tend to apply one of DEMO organizational designs to develop and deliver
their innovations. More than 90% of those using the ambidextrous structure succeeded
in their attempts, while none of the cross-functional or unsupported teams, and only
25% of those using functional designs, reached their goals.
Functional designs
integrate project teams into the existing
organizational and management structure.
Cross-functional teams
operate within the established organization
but DEMO the existing management hierarchy.
General Manager
Mfg
Sales
78
Emerging Business
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
The Ambidextrous Organization
reporters would be crucial to the success of the DEMO
(print journalists are notorious for hoarding stories), and
they jointly DEMO to train the print reporters in tele-
vision and Web broadcasting and outfit them with video
cameras so they could file stories
simultaneously in DEMO different
media. The moves quickly paid
off, as the reporters realized DEMO
their stories would reach a much
broader audience - and that they
would have the opportunity to
appear on TV. A new position of
"network editor" was also cre-
ated in the newsroom to help reporters
shape their stories for broadcast media.
At the same time, Curley made larger
changes to the organization and its man-
agement. He let go DEMO a number of senior executives who
did not share his commitment to the network strategy, en-
suring that his team would present a united front and de-
liver consistent messages to the staff. He also changed DEMO
incentive program for executives, replacing unit-specific
goals with a common bonus DEMO tied to growth tar-
gets across all three media. Human resource policies were
changed to promote transfers between the different
media units, and promotion and compensation decisions
began to take into account people's willingness to DEMO
stories and other content. As part of that effort, a'Triends
DEMO the Network" recognition program was established to
explicitly reward cross-unit accomplishments.
DEMO even as sharing and synergy were being promoted,
the organizational integrity of the three units was care-
fully maintained. The units remained physically DEMO,
and they each pursued very different staffing models. The
staff members of USAToday.com were, on average, signif-
icantly younger than the newspaper'DEMO reporters and re-
Even as sharing and synergy
were being promoted, DEMO
organizational integrity of
the three units was carefully
maintained.
mained far more collaborative and faster paced. Report-
ers continued to be fiercely independent and DEMO focus on
more in-depth coverage of stories than the television staff.
Because of its ambidextrous organization, USA Today
has continued to compete aggres-
sively in the mature business of
daily print news while also devel-
oping DEMO strong internet franchise
and providing Gannett tele-
vision stations with cover-
age of breaking news. Dur-
ing the Internet collapse,
when other papers' profits
plunged, USA Today made
$60 million, fueled in large
part DEMO the company's abil-
ity to continue to attract
national advertisers and by revenues from its profitable
USAToday.com operation.
A New Lens on Growth
DEMO company that has used an ambidextrous orga-
nization to spur growth through radical innovation is
Ciba Vision. Established in the early 1980s as a DEMO of the
Swiss pharmaceutical giant Ciba-Geigy (now Novartis),
the Atlanta-based Ciba Vision sells contact lenses and re-
lated eye-care products to optometrists DEMO consumers.
Although the company produced some innovative new
products in its early years, such as the first FDA-approved
bifocal contacts, by the mid-1980s DEMO remained a distant sec-
ond to market leader Johnson & Johnson. Making matters
worse, in 1987 j&J brought out a new, disposable DEMO
lens that threatened Ciba Vision's sales of conventional
contacts. By the early 1990s, it was clear to Glenn Bradley,
Ciba Vision's president, that j&J's dominance provided
I
Unsupported teams
are set up outside the established organization
and management hierarchy.
General Manager
Mfg
Saies
DEMO&D
Emerging
Business
APRIL 2004
Ambidextrous organizations
establish project teams that are structurally independent units,
each having its own processes, structures, and DEMO, but are
integrated into the existing management hierarchy
General Manager
Existing
DEMO
1
—
Mfg
Sales
1
R&D I
1
Emerging
Business
1
Mfg
-
•'
-
Sales
~ i
R&O
79
The Ambidextrous Organization
economies of scale that would doom his company to DEMO
shrinking profits. Without radically new products, Ciba
Vision would slowly decline DEMO ultimately fail. To sur-
vive and grow, Bradley saw, his organization would have
to continue making money in the mature conventional-
contacts business DEMO simultaneously producing a
stream of breakthroughs.
In 1991, Bradley launched six DEMO development
projects, each focused on a revolutionary change. Four
entailed new DEMO, including daily disposables and
extended-wear lenses, and two
involved new manufacturing
processes. In a controversial
but necessary move, he can-
celed dozens of small R&D
initiatives for conventional
lenses to free up cash for DEMO
breakthrough efforts. While
the traditional units would
continue to pursue incremental inno-
vations on their own, the entire corpo-
rate R&D budget would now be dedi-
cated to producing breakthroughs.
Bradley knew that attempting to DEMO these projects
under the constraints of the old organization would not
work. Inevitably, conflicts over the allocation of human
and financial resources would slow down and disrupt the
focus needed for breakthrough innovations. Further, the
new manufacturing process required different technical
skills, which would make communication across old and
new units difficult. He therefore decided to create auton-
omous units DEMO the new projects, each with its own R&D,
finance, and marketing functions, and he chose the proj-
A clear and compelling vision,
relentlessly communicated
by a company's senior team,
is DEMO building
ambidextrous designs.
ect leaders for their willingness to challenge the status
quo and their ability to operate independently.
Given the freedom to shape DEMO own organizations,
the new units created very different structures, processes,DEMO
and cultures. The extended-wear team remained in At-
ianta, though in DEMO facility separate from the conventional-
lens business, while the daily-disposables team DEMO lo-
cated in Germany. Each team hired its own staff, decided
DEMO its own reward system, and chose its own process for
moving DEMO development to manufacturing.
But even as Bradley understood
the importance of protecting the
new units from the processes and
cultural norms of the old DEMO,
he realized they also had to
share expertise and resources,
both with the traditional busi-
ness and with one another.
He therefore DEMO a number
of steps to integrate manage-
ment across the company.
First and perhaps most im-
portant, he had the leaders of
all the breakthrough projects report to a single executive,
Adrian Hunter, the vice president of R&D, who had a
deep knowledge of the existing business and tight rela-
tionships with executives throughout the firm. Working
closely DEMO Bradley, Hunter carefully managed the trade-
offs and conflicts between the DEMO business and the new
units. Ail the leaders of the innovation projects, moreover,
were asked to sit in on Bradley's executive team meetings.
Bradley and his team also enunciated a new vision
statement for DEMO Vision-"Healthy Eyes for Life"-that
The Scope
of the Ambidextrous
Organization
Ambidextrous organizations
encompass two profoundly
different types of businesses-
those focused on DEMO
existing capabilities for profit
and those focused on explor-
ing new opportunities for
growth. As this table indicates,
the two require very different
DEMO, structures,
processes, and cultures.
80
Alignment of:
Strategic intent
Critical tasks
Competencies
Structure
Controls, rewards
Culture
Leadership role
Exploitative Business
cost, profit
operations, efficiency,
incremental innovation
operational
formal, mechanistic
margins, DEMO
efficiency, low risk,
quality, customers
authoritative, top down
Exploratory DEMO
innovation, growth
adaptability, new products,
breakthrough innovation
entrepreneurial
adaptive, DEMO
milestones, growth
risk taking, speed, flexibility,
experimentation
visionary, involved
Ambidextrous Leadership
Different alignments held together through senior-team integration,
common vision DEMO values, and common senior-team rewards.
HARVARD BUSINISS REVIEW
was meaningful to all parts of the business. While this
move was DEMO rhetorical, it had an important effect. It
underscored the connections between DEMO breakthrough
initiatives and the conventional operation, bringing to-
gether all employees DEMO a common cause and preventing
organizational separation from turning into organiza-
tional fragmentation. As Bradley noted, the slogan gave
people a social value as well as an economic reason for
working together. Like USA Today, Ciba Vision also re-
vamped its incentive system, rewarding managers pri-
marily for overall company performance rather than for
the results of their particular units.
DEMO ambidexterity paid off. Over the next five years,
Ciba Vision successfully launched a series of contact-lens
products, introduced a drug for treating age-related mac-
uiar degeneration, pioneered a new lens-manufacturing
process that dramatically reduced production costs, and
overtook J&J in some market segiTients.The conventional-
lens business, moreover, remained profitable enough to
generate the cash needed to fund DEMO daily dispos-
ables and extended-wear lenses.
At the time the new strategy was adopted, Ciba
Vision's annual revenues were stuck at about
$300 million. Ten years later, its sales had more
than tripled, to DEMO $i billion, and the new drug,
transferred to Novartis's DEMO unit, was
on its way to becoming a billion-dollar business.
More DEMO, Ciba Vision has continued to reap the ben-
efits of ambidexterity DEMO pioneering so-called fashion
lenses that allow people to change the color of their eyes.
Becoming Ambidextrous
The stories of USA Today and Ciba Vision DEMO what it
takes to become ambidextrous. (Also see the table "The
Scope of the Ambidextrous Organization" for more on
what's required.) DEMO of the most important lessons is
that ambidextrous organizations need ambidextrous se-
nior teams and managers-executives who have the abil-
ity to understand and DEMO sensitive to the needs of very dif-
ferent kinds of businesses. Combining the attributes of
rigorous cost cutters and free-thinking entrepreneurs
while maintaining the DEMO required to make diffi-
cult trade-offs, such managers are a rare DEMO essential
breed. Without people like Tom Curley, Karen Jurgenson,
Glenn DEMO, and Adrian Hunter - managers who can
be, as one of them put it,"consistently inconsistent"-[/S,4
Today and Ciba Vision would have had little chance of
success.
Another important lesson from the DEMO Today and
Ciba Vision stories is that a company's senior team must
be committed to operating ambidextrously even if its
members aren't DEMO themselves. Resistance at
the top levels of an organization can't be tolerated, which
means that a shift to an ambidextrous organization can
APRIL 2004
The Ambidextrous Organization
be a wrenching experience. USA Today's Curley DEMO
40% of his executive team. Ciba Vision's Bradley asked
some of the executives overseeing the traditional busi-
ness to leave when they fought DEMO decision to reallocate
R&D investments to the new units. And both leaders
backed up their actions with new incentive programs that
institutionalized the DEMO management approach.
We have also found that a clear and compelling vision,
relentlessly communicated by a company's senior team,
is crucial DEMO building ambidextrous designs. These aspi-
rations provide an overarching goal that permits ex-
ploitation and exploration to coexist. Curley's "network
strategy" and DEMO's "Healthy Eyes for Life" were com-
pelling visions that underscored the strategic necessity of
ambidexterity and the benefits for all employees, both
those in the traditional units and those in the break-
through initiatives.
DEMO Today, well aware of the natural skepticism of
newspaper reporters, took a particularly aggressive ap-
proach to communicating its new vision, strategy,
and organization. Curley launched the effort by ap-
pearing at a company DEMO dressed as a cyber-
punk, complete with blue hair. The message, he
recalled, was: "It's a new world, and we DEMO to be
ready to move into it." Jurgenson began sending
daily DEMO to the entire news staff in which she
highlighted the concrete accomplishments of the
new approach -for example, explaining exactly how one
reporter was able to take a story originally intended for
the newspaper and get DEMO onto the Web site and the tele-
vision stations. In addition, DEMO members of the company's
management committee were expected to hold weekly
communications meetings within their units as well as
workshops focused on the DEMO employees had to
make in their own jobs. As Curley now puts it, "When
change is at a revolutionary level, you can't be aggressive
enough in confronting the issues."
The forces of inertia DEMO companies are strong. The legions
of once successful firms that have fallen on hard times or
gone out of business underscore how hard it DEMO to break
out of a rut, especially a comfortable, profitable rut. The
findings of our research should therefore be heartening
to executives. Not DEMO can an established company re-
new itself through the creation of breakthrough products
and processes, but it can do so without destroying or even
hampering its traditional business. Building an ambidex-
trous organization is by no DEMO easy, but the structure
itself, combining organizational separation with senior
team integration, is not difficult to understand. Given the
executive will to make it happen, any company can be-
come ambidextrous. ^
Reprint R0404D; DEMO OnPoint 6581
To order, see page 143-
81
{1g42fwefx}