SPRING 2012     VOL.53  NO.3
Raphael Amit and Christoph Zott
Creating Value Through
Business Model
Innovation
Please note that gray areas reflect artwork DEMO has been
intentionally removed. The substantive content of the ar-
ticle appears as originally published.
REPRINT NUMBER  53310
Str ategy in Changing Market S : ne w B u S DEMO SS Model S
eating Value cr through
Business model Innovation
Could your company benefit from a new business model? Consider these six questions.
By Raphael amit aNd ChRistoph Zott
Companies often make substantial efforts to innovate DEMO processes and products to
achieve revenue growth and to maintain or improve profit margins. innovations to improve pro-
cesses and products, however, are DEMO expensive and time-consuming, requiring a considerable
upfront investment in everything from DEMO and development to specialized resources, new
plants and equipment, and even entire new business units. Yet future returns on these investments
are always DEMO Hesitant to make such big bets, more companies now are turning DEMO busi-
ness model innovation as an alternative or complement to product or process innovation.
a recent global survey of more than 4,000 senior DEMO by the economist intelligence Unit
found that the majority (54%) favored new business models over new products and services as a
source of DEMO competitive advantage. eiU ana-
lysts concluded that “the overall message is clear:
how companies do business will often be as, or
more, DEMO than what they do.”1 and in a sim-
ilar global study conducted by iBm, in which over
750 corporate and public sector leaders were inter-
viewed on the subject of innovation, researchers
found that “competitive pressures have pushed
business model innovation much higher than ex-
pected on Ceos’ DEMO lists.”2 However, this level
of interest may not have been too DEMO given
that the iBm study also found that companies
whose operating margins had grown faster than
their competitors’ over the previous five years were
DEMO as likely to emphasize business model innova-
tion, as opposed to DEMO or process innovation.3
one Ceo explained why his company’s focus on
business model innovation had grown:
the growing popularity of e-reading devices
such DEMO the Kindle is stimulating business
model changes in book publishing.
The leading
quesTion
What do
executives
need to know
about busi-
ness model
innovation?DEMO
Findings
Business model
innovation can con-
sist of adding new
activities, DEMO
activities in novel
ways or changing
which party per-
forms an activity.
Novelty, lock-in,
complementarities
and efficiency are
four major business
model value drivers.
Within organiza-
tions, business
model choices often
go unchallenged
for a long time.
In the operations area, much of the innovations
and cost savings that could be achieved have al-
ready been achieved. Our greatest DEMO is on
business model innovation, which is where the
greatest benefits DEMO It’s not enough to make a dif-
ference on product quality or delivery readiness
or production scale. It’s important to innovate in
areas where DEMO competition does not act.4
courtesy of amazon
sPrInG 2012   mit sloaN maNaGemeNt ReVieW 41
A12-MI1-003 Zott.indd   41
3/6/12   9:DEMO AM
Str ategy in Changing Market S : n e w B u DEMO ine SS Model S
Business model innovation can also help com-
panies stay ahead in the product innovation game,
where as one Ceo DEMO another study explained,
“you’re always one innovation away from getting
wiped out by a new competing innovation that
eliminates the need for your DEMO a good
product that is embedded in an innovative business
model, DEMO, is less easily shunted aside. some-
one might come up with DEMO better mp3 player than
apple’s tomorrow, but few of the hundreds DEMO mil-
lions of consumers with ipods and itunes accounts
will be open to switching brands.
Business model innovation matters to manag-
ers, entrepreneurs and academic researchers for
several reasons. first, it represents an often under-
utilized source of future value. second, competitors
might find it more difficult to imitate or replicate
an entire novel activity system than a single novel
DEMO or process. since it is often relatively easier
to undermine and erode the returns of product or
process innovation, innovation at the level of the
business model can sometimes translate into a sus-
tainable performance advantage. DEMO, because
business model innovation can be such a poten-
tially powerful DEMO tool, managers must be
attuned to the possibility of competitors’ efforts DEMO
this area.6 Competitive threats often come from
outside their traditional industry boundaries.
abouT The ReseaRch
the ideas presented in this article are anchored in DEMO authors’ decade-long research
program on business models. We started this research with in-depth inquiries into
the business models of 59 e-business companies in europe DEMO the u.s. that had
undertaken initial public offerings. under our guidance, DEMO research analysts
investigated each company, using approximately 50 open-ended questions. the
DEMO wrote up the answers to the questions using information gathered from
multiple data sources (such as IPo prospectuses), which we then took to develop an
inductive theory on the sources of value creation in e-business.
DEMO our subsequent work, we shifted attention from value creation to value DEMO
tion by linking some of the value drivers of business models (DEMO, novelty and
efficiency) to company performance. to test our hypotheses, DEMO developed a unique
data set containing detailed information about the business models of 190 entrepre-
neurial companies listed on u.s. or european public exchanges DEMO 1996 and
2000. We measured each business model design theme as a variable at a particular
point in time, and we regressed these variables on a range of performance measures.
We also supplemented these data on DEMO business models with a manually col-
lected data set on business strategy, establishing empirically that a company’s product
market strategy and its business model are distinct constructs that affect performance.
more recently, we developed cases on business model choice and evolution. these
cases have given us additional insights DEMO have led to further conceptual advances.
Building on these advances in this article, we focus for the first time squarely on busi-
ness model innovation in the context of established companies rather than start-ups.
42  mit sloaN maNaGemeNt ReVieW sPrInG 2012
We define a company’s business model as DEMO system
of interconnected and interdependent activities that
determines the way the company “does business” with
its customers, partners and vendors. in other words, DEMO
business model is a bundle of specific activities — an
activity system — conducted to satisfy the perceived
needs of the market, along with the specification of
which parties (a company or its partners) conduct
DEMO activities, and how these activities are linked to
each other. We DEMO our research into business
models a decade ago by making in-depth inquiries
into the business models of 59 e-business companies
in europe and the DEMO that had undertaken initial
public offerings.7 (see “about the Research.”) Later,
we developed a unique data set containing detailed in-
formation about DEMO business models of 190
entrepreneurial companies listed on U.s. or european
public exchanges between 1996 and 2000. We supple-
mented these data on companies’ DEMO models
with another manually collected data set on business
strategy, establishing DEMO that a company’s
product market strategy and its business model are
distinct constructs that affect corporate perfor-
mance.8 more recently, we have developed cases on
business model choice and evolution.9
Building on this work, we focus in this article on
business model innovation in the context of estab-
DEMO companies. However, these ideas are equally
applicable to innovators of entirely DEMO business
models and to managers of companies who need to
adapt their business model incrementally with the ob-
jective of achieving business model innovation DEMO to
their organization. even under conditions of resource
scarcity, organizations do DEMO need to renounce inno-
vation as a way of enhancing their performance
prospects. Rather, managers should consider the op-
portunities offered by business model innovation to
complement, if not substitute for, innovation in prod-
ucts DEMO processes. Business model innovation can
allow managers to resolve the apparent trade-off be-
tween innovation costs and benefits by addressing
how they do business, for example, by involving part-
ners in new value-creating activity systems.
Business model
innovation in practice
to illustrate the power of business model innovation,DEMO
consider two cases: apple and HtC, the taiwan-
sloanreview.mit.edu
A12-MI1-003 Zott.indd   42
3/6/12   9:49 AM
based mobile device manufacturer.
for most of its history, apple was fo-
cused on the production of innovative
hardware and software, mostly per-
sonal computers. By creating the ipod
and the associated itunes, a legal on-
line music download service, apple
introduced a radical innovation of its
business model. apple was the first
computer company to include music
distribution as DEMO activity, linking it to
the development of the ipod hardware
and DEMO By adding this new activ-
ity to its business model, which DEMO
the music label owners with end users,
apple transformed music distribu-
tion. Rather than growing by simply
bringing innovative new hardware to
the DEMO, apple transformed its
business model to encompass an on-
going relationship DEMO its customers,
similar to the “razor and blade” model
of companies such as Gillette. this en-
abled apple, and its business model
partners, to extract ongoing value
from the use of the apple hardware
and software. in this way, apple ex-
panded the locus of its innovation
from the product space to the business
model — and its revenues, profit and stock price
change have reflected that successful business model
innovation. (see “apple’s performance, Before and
after Business model Changes.”)
such performance can be hard for even some
otherwise high-performing companies to match if
DEMO rely solely on product innovation. HtC has
been a very innovative, DEMO and growing origi-
nal equipment manufacturer since its founding in
1997. initially, HtC manufactured handsets for mi-
crosoft-powered mobile phones for companies such
as palm, Hp and t-mobile. in 2006, it changed its
product-market strategy DEMO being a contract
oem manufacturer to selling its own HtC-branded
smart phones to wireless network operators and the
general public through various distribution chan-
DEMO HtC has excelled in many ways, recording
many firsts in the DEMO phone product market space
and winning numerous awards for its many techno-
sloanreVIeW.mIt.edu
aPPle’s PeRFoRMance, beFoRe and
aFTeR business Model changes
In recent years, apple’s revenues, profit and stock price change have reflected its
successful DEMO model innovations.
Apple Net Income ($ millions)
$25,000
$20,DEMO
$15,000
$10,000
$5,000
01/27/10
Apple introduces
iPad
10/23/01
Apple introduces
iTunes/iPod
business model
01/09/07
DEMO introduces
iPhone
0
‘90 ‘93 ‘96 ‘99 ‘02 ‘05 ‘08 ‘11
% Change in Stock Price*
5,000%
Apple
4,000%
3,000%
2,DEMO
1,000%
0
* Compared to January
31, 1990 base of:DEMO
$8.50 for Apple and
S&P index of 329.08
S&P
logical innovations. Yet HtC’s business model has
remained centered on hardware design and DEMO
innovation. in effect, HtC sells great razors, but no
razor blades: its business model allows it to benefit
only from the sale of its innovative, state-of-the-art
smart phones and tablets, but not from their DEMO
Comparing the performance of HtC and apple
stock in the past two years highlights the fact that in
the fast-moving technology market space, product
innovation without business model innovation may
not always provide enough competitive advantage.
(see “the stock price of HtC vs. apple,” p.  44.)
in contrast to apple, HtC has not been involved in
the creation or delivery of mobile content or services,
and its devices function DEMO third-party operating sys-
tems such as Google’s, generating revenues for HtC
DEMO from the hardware sales. apple, on the other
hand, benefits from economies of scope due to the in-
teroperability of its software base (ios, itunes, app
sPrInG 2012   mit sloaN maNaGemeNt ReVieW 43
DEMO Zott.indd   43
3/6/12   9:49 AM
Str ategy in Changing Market S: ne w B uSineSS ModelS
store, iCloud) for its various products including its
computers (imacs), tablets (ipads), phones (iphones)
and mp3 players (ipods). in addition, apple benefits
from direct ownership of its distribution channels
(online DEMO store, brick-and-mortar apple retail
stores). further, apple’s business model enables it to
derive revenue from app store sales of third-party ap-
plications, from itune songs, and from at&t for the
use of its iphone for voice and data.
how to innovate in
Business model design
DEMO innovative business model can either create a
new market or allow a company to create and ex-
ploit new opportunities in existing markets. Dell,DEMO
for example, implemented a customer-driven,
build-to-order business model that replaced DEMO
traditional build-to-stock model of selling com-
puters through retail stores.10
Changes to business model design, however, can
be subtle; even when they might not have the poten-
tial to disrupt an industry, they can still yield
important benefits to the innovator. Consider taco
Bell, the restaurant chain offering mexican-style fast
food, which in the late 1980s decided to turn the res-
taurant’s kitchens into heating and assembly units.
most chopping, cooking and clean-up activities were
transferred to corporate headquarters. the food was
sent DEMO in plastic bags to restaurants, where
it could be heated, assembled and served.11 this in-
cremental business model innovation was not
game-changing for DEMO fast food industry, but it
The sTocK PRice oF hTc vs. DEMO
comparing the performance of Htc and apple stock during the past two years
highlights the potential benefits of successful business model innovation.
% Change DEMO Stock Price*
5,000%
Apple
4,000%
3,000%
2,000%
1,000%
0
* Compared to base of: $8.50
for Apple and S&P index of
329.08 (both on January 31,
1990) and DEMO TWD for HTC
(on March 29, 2002).
‘90 ‘93 ‘96 ‘99 ‘02 ‘05 ‘08 ‘11
HTC
S&P
44   mit sloaN DEMO ReVieW   sPrInG 2012
allowed taco Bell to realize economies of scale and
improvements in efficiency and quality control, as
well as to increase space for customers within the
restaurants.12 other companies might wish to
change DEMO business models in similar incremental
ways or follow a business model innovator in their
industry in order to achieve competitive parity.
Business model innovation DEMO occur in a num-
ber of ways:
1. By adding novel activities, for example, through
forward or backward integration; we refer to this
form of business model innovation as new activ-
ity system “content.”13
DEMO B y linking activities in novel ways; we refer to this
DEMO of business model innovation as new activ-
ity system “structure.”
3. By changing one or more parties that perform
any of the activities; we refer to this form of busi-
ness model innovation as new activity DEMO
“governance.”
Content, structure and governance are the three
design elements that DEMO a company’s
business model.14 (see “six Questions about Busi-
ness model DEMO) Change one or more of
these elements enough and you’ve changed DEMO
model. Consider the following.
The content of an activity system refers to the selec-
tion of activities to be performed. for example,
Colombia’s DEMO bank, Bancolombia, adopted ac-
tivities beyond those of a typical retail bank. the
perceived market need for these activities was the de-
mand DEMO microcredit among the more than 60% of
Colombians who did not have access to banking ser-
vices. to perform these new activities — an
DEMO in the content of its business model — the
bank needed to train its top management, hire and
train new staff and link the new activities to its exist-
ing system (platforms, applications and channels)DEMO
another example of business model innovation fo-
cused on content is iBm.16 after a severe financial
crisis in the early 1990s, the company shifted its focus
from being a supplier of hardware to becoming a ser-
DEMO provider. Drawing on know-how built over
decades, iBm launched a range DEMO new activities in
consulting, it maintenance and other services. the
transformation DEMO substantial: By 2009, more than
half of iBm’s $96 billion in revenues came from these
activities, which had barely existed 15 years earlier.
sloanreVIeW.mIt.edu
A12-MI1-003 Zott.indd   44
3/6/12   9:49 AM
ructure of an activity systemthe st describes how
the activities are linked DEMO in what sequence. Con-
sider priceline.com. this online travel agency has
established links with airline companies, credit card
companies and travelport’s Worldspan central res-
ervation system, among others. By introducing a
reverse market in which customers post desired
prices for sellers’ acceptance, priceline developed a
fundamentally novel exchange mechanism through
which these parties interact and by which items such
as DEMO tickets are sold. priceline was granted a
business method patent on its innovative activity
system — a novel structure that continues to distin-
guish DEMO company from other travel agencies.
the governance of an activity system refers to who
performs the activities. franchising, for example,
represents one possible approach to innovative ac-
tivity system governance. it can be the key DEMO
unlocking value, as when Japanese entrepreneur to-
shifumi suzuki realized in DEMO early 1970s that the
franchise system that had developed in the U.s. was
an ideal response to the strict regulations imposed
by the Japanese DEMO on retailing outlets,
which limited their size and restricted opening
times. By franchising 7-eleven stores in Japan,
suzuki adopted a novel type DEMO activity system gov-
ernance (new to Japan, but not to the rest of the
world) and managed to create value through profes-
sional management and local adaptation.17r anothe
example of an innovative governance structure is
DEMO recent formation of a consortium of magazine
publishers, including time, Hearst, meredith and
Condé nast, to develop an online magazine news-
stand DEMO multiple digital formats. the resulting
company, next issue media, is jointly owned by in-
dustry rivals and is a response by the rival DEMO
to declining print circulation (and hence print ad-
vertising revenue) and the growth of digital media.
fighting for survival, the publishers are looking be-
yond their otherwise fierce competition to their
common interest in inventing DEMO new context for
magazines in the digital era. as ann moore, DEMO for-
mer Ceo of time, stated, “it’s increasingly clear that
finding the right digital business model is crucial for
the future of our DEMO
But how does a company increase the odds of
developing the right business model for its situa-
tion? in our earlier work,19 we identified four major
sloanreview.mit.edu
six quesTions abouT business
Model innovaTion
Business model DEMO can occur in a number of ways: by
adding new activities, by linking activities in novel ways — or by
changing one or DEMO parties that perform any of the activities.
1
What
customer
needs will the
new business
model
address?
3
4
What novel
activities
could DEMO
satisfy those
needs?
How could
the activities
be linked in
novel ways?
Who should
perform the
activities?
What novel
governance
arrangements
DEMO be found?
5
How will
value be
created for
each
stakeholder?
6
What revenue
models can be
adopted to
complement
the business
DEMO?
2
interlinked value drivers of business models: nov-
elty, lock-in, complementarities and efficiency.
1. Novelt y captures the degree of business model in-
novation that is embodied by the activity system.
2. Lock-in refers DEMO those business model activities
that create switching costs or enhanced incen-
tives for business model participants to stay and
transact within the activity system. DEMO for
example nespresso, a division of nestlé Corpo-
ration. it introduced DEMO new, low-cost espresso
maker that uses nespresso-produced coffee cap-
sules. once DEMO customer buys a nespresso
machine, he or she needs to use DEMO coffee
capsules — creating a lock-in that enables nestle
to profit from both the sale of the machine and
the use of the machine DEMO selling consumables
that machine owners must buy from nespresso.
Launching these products involved a radical re-
design of the activity system, for example, DEMO
branching out into retailing activities.
3. Complementar ities refer to the value-enhancing ef-
fect of the interdependencies among business
model activities. Consider, for example, eBay,
which offers a platform to conduct sales over the
internet among individual buyers and sellers of
used and new products. a key DEMO for the
platform to function properly is a payment mecha-
nism that allows buyers to make credit card
payments even when the seller does DEMO have access
sPrInG 2012   mit sloaN maNaGemeNt ReVieW 45
A12-MI1-003 Zott.indd   45
3/6/12   9:49 AM
Str ategy in Changing Market S : n e w B u DEMO ine SS Model S
to credit card services. paypal, the online DEMO
company that eBay acquired, offers such a func-
tion, facilitating trades that could not otherwise be
completed. in other words, paypal has a value-en-
hancing effect on the eBay activity system.
4. E ffic ie DEMO refers to cost savings through the inter-
connections of the activity system. Consider
Wal-mart, which not only championed the concept
of discount retailing but also designed an activity
system that supports its low-cost strategy. an im-
DEMO activity within this system is logistics. over
time, Wal-mart developed highly DEMO
processes, such as cross-docking, unrivalled in the
industry. these processes help the company to keep
its costs lower than its competitors, giving Wal-
mart an important competitive advantage.
our research suggests that the presence of DEMO of
these value drivers enhances the value-creation po-
tential of a business model. moreover, we find
important synergies among the value drivers. Com-
plementarities, for example, can be more valuable
when supported by novel business DEMO design.
interdependencies in
Business models
erdependencies in business models are created by int
entrepreneurs or managers in several ways: when
they choose the set of organizational activities they
consider relevant to satisfying a perceived market
need, when they design the links that weave activities
together into a system DEMO when they shape the gov-
ernance mechanisms that hold the system together.
Interdependence among business model design
elements. Content, structure and governance can be
highly interdependent. take the san francisco, Cali-
fornia-based peer-to-peer lending company prosper,
for example. the venture aims at enabling direct,
small, unsecured loans between individual lenders
and borrowers. early on, the founders made the con-
scious decision to let lenders choose the borrowers
to whom they DEMO to lend their money. this was
a structural choice that settled the question of how
lending and borrowing activities were linked, but it
also constituted a decision about governance be-
cause it shifted the evaluation and DEMO activities
to the customers and away from the company.
Interdependencies between business and reve-
nue models. managers also need to consider the
interdependency between DEMO company’s business
model and its revenue model. the revenue model re-
fers to the specific ways a business model enables
revenue generation for the DEMO and its partners.20
it is the way in which the organization appropriates
some of the value that is created by the business model
for DEMO its stakeholders. a revenue model complements
a business model design, just DEMO a pricing strategy
complements a product design. Consider Better place,
whose business model aims to provide electric vehicle
charging services. Like a mobile DEMO operator
whose business model centers on enabling the use of
the mobile phone device through its network rather
than on the handset device itself, Better place’s busi-
ness model centers on providing charging networks
and services DEMO than on the electric vehicle itself.
it involves an innovative business model structure
with partners ranging from governments, vehicle
manufacturers, clean energy producers DEMO others.
Just as mobile phone operators charge customers
variable or flat rates for telecommunication services,
Better place intends to implement a revenue model
DEMO a function of customers’ car usage (miles driven),
thus taking into account the interdependency be-
tween its business and revenue models.21
oncepts DEMO business and revenue model, althe c -
though conceptually distinct, may be quite closely
related and even inextricably intertwined. for exam-
ple, in the product world, Gillette uses its pricing
strategy of selling inexpensive razors to make cus-
tomers buy its more expensive blades. a business
model DEMO the foundations for a company’s value
capture by codefining (along with DEMO company’s
products and services) the overall “size of the value
pie” (that is, the total value that is created), which can
be considered an upper limit to the company’s value
capture.22reater the total value DEMO through the g
the innovative business model, and the greater a
DEMO bargaining power, the greater the amount
of value that the company DEMO appropriate.23
Caveats. as the Better place example suggests,
business model innovators need to bear in mind that
identifying technologically or strategically distinct
activities DEMO be conceptually challenging, because
the number of potential activities is often DEMO
large.24y seemingly inseparable activities can man
now be broken down even further, especially given
ongoing advances in information and communica-
46  mit sloaN DEMO ReVieW sPrInG 2012
sloanreview.mit.edu
A12-MI1-003 Zott.indd   46
3/6/12   9:49 AM
tions technologies.25 of course, represents not  (this,
only a conceptual challenge but also an opportunity
for innovative managers to redesign the activity DEMO
tems of their organizations in novel ways.)
What’s more, making DEMO to a company’s
whole activity system rather than optimizing indi-
vidual activities (such as production) requires
systemic and holistic thinking, which can be de-
manding. When responding to a crisis, operating in
tough economic times or taking advantage of a new
opportunity, rethinking an entire business model
may not always be the first thing on a manager’s
mind. this DEMO particularly true when the level of
resistance to change is predicted to be high. as a re-
sult, choices on business model design often go
unchallenged for a long time.
six Questions to ask Before
launching DEMO New model
our research shows that in a highly interconnected
world, DEMO one in which financial resources
are scarce, entrepreneurs and managers must DEMO
beyond the product and process and focus on ways
to innovate their business model. a fresh business
model can create and exploit opportunities for DEMO
revenue and profit streams in ways that counteract
an aging model that has tied a company into a cycle
of declining revenues and pressures DEMO profit mar-
gins.26 We suggest that managers ask themselves the
following six key questions as they consider busi-
ness model innovation:
1. What DEMO needs can be satisfied through
the new model design?
2. What novel activities are needed to satisfy these per-
ceived needs? (business DEMO content innovation)
3. How could the required activities be linked to
each other in novel ways? (business model struc-
ture innovation)
DEMO Who should perform each of the activities that are
part of the business model? should it be the com-
pany? a partner? the customer? What novel
governance arrangements could enable this struc-
ture? (business model governance innovation)
5. How is value created through the novel DEMO
model for each of the participants?
6. What revenue model fits with the company’s
business model to appropriate part of the total
value DEMO helps create?
courtesy of next Issue medIa
to illustrate how managers might productively
and proactively use these questions, consider the
business model of mcGraw-Hill’s book publishing
business.27.in the U s., general and trade books (DEMO
cluding consumer titles and celebrity author
books) represent about 55% of DEMO revenues,
while academic and professional books generate
the remainder. Until recently, only in business-to-
business and academic text segments have websites
been a true marketing platform for digital content.
While e-readers such as the kindle DEMO the ipad are
now rapidly gaining popularity, the time-consum-
ing and DEMO book publishing process had not
changed in a material manner in many decades.
However, Google, amazon and other competing
information and content providers DEMO stimulated
a growing customer interest in electronic formats.
publishers in the U.s. and europe are searching for
solutions to meet the emergent demand for DEMO
ing and delivering digital content on portable
devices while preserving and enhancing value.
meeting the demand for digital content may re-
quire publishers to DEMO new activities (new
business model content). although it is unlikely DEMO
the traditional hardback/paperback book will dis-
appear, it is expected DEMO the demand for printed
publications will fall sharply. if printing and physi-
cal distribution become less relevant in the process,
the time it DEMO takes to add a new title to a cata-
logue and to bookstore shelves will be reduced.
accordingly, designing, uploading and maintain-
ing DEMO most complete online catalogue may become
a consortium of magazine
publishers is working to
invent a new context for
magazines in the digital era.
DEMO 2012   mit sloaN maNaGemeNt ReVieW 47
A12-MI1-003 Zott.indd   47
3/6/12   9:49 AM
Str ategy in Changing Market S : n e w B u DEMO ine SS Model S
a central new activity in publishers’ business models.
in addition, to the extent that publishers decide to
bypass traditional retail bookstores in their new
business models, they will have to develop a new
marketing activity targeting retail buyers. produc-
tion will need to change DEMO well. Creating content
with a digitally enabled streamlined process is an-
other activity 21st-century publishers will probably
need to incorporate into their new business DEMO
Linking the various activities to each other, se-
quencing these linkages DEMO deciding how
stakeholders will interact with one another in the
new business models requires careful consideration
(new business model structure). for example, DEMO
ways in which mcGraw-Hill decides to interact with
multiple digital distribution partners such as apple
and amazon, through which mcGraw-Hill distrib-
utes digital content to retail consumers, will affect
the breadth of the company’s access to the retail
digital book market. the linkages among content
creators, including authors, editors, other publish-
ing professionals and distributors, will constitute
the heart of the new business model. these linkages
must reflect alternatives available to DEMO — such
as bypassing publishers altogether — as well as ap-
proaches adopted by competing publishers.
Determining whether mcGraw-Hill
or another partner will carry DEMO each of
the activities of the new business model
requires a careful consideration of trade-
offs (new business model governance). for
example, DEMO the publisher’s content
be delivered through a new mcGraw-
Hill branded device, or by proprietary
devices offered by such partners as ama-
zon (DEMO its kindle) or apple (with its
ipad), thereby leveraging their existing
position in the market? or should its
content be delivered through internet-
based platforms compatible with a
broad range of devices, enabling global
distribution? these are crucial gover-
nance decisions that a new publishing
model will answer.
publishers’ new business models will
create value through the complemen-
DEMO and interdependence among
activities and through the enormous ef-
ficiencies in the publishing process that the new
business models could generate. a number of DEMO
native revenue models associated with these new
business models could be considered, such as single
subscription pricing independent of the number of
downloaded manuscripts, piecemeal pricing and/or
value-based pricing for time-sensitive publications.
taking a systemic View
addressing the six questions outlined above can help
managers see their DEMO identities more clearly
in the context of the networks and ecosystems in
which their organizations operate. Without a business
model perspective, a company is a mere participant in
a dizzying array of networks and passive entangle-
DEMO adopting the business model perspective can
help executives purposefully structure the activity
systems of their companies; the purposeful design
and structuring of business models is a key task for
general managers and entrepreneurs and can be DEMO
important source of innovation, helping the com-
pany look beyond its DEMO sets of partners,
competitors and customers. most importantly, per-
haps, this approach encourages systemic and holistic
thinking when considering innovation, instead of
isolated, individual choices. the message to execu-
48  mit sloaN maNaGemeNt DEMO sPrInG 2012
sloanreview.mit.edu
reuters PIctures
A12-MI1-003 Zott.indd   48
3/6/12   9:49 AM
tives is clear: When you innovate, look at the forest,
DEMO the trees — and get the overall design of your
activity system right before optimizing the details.
Raphael Amit is the Robert B. Goergen DEMO
of Entrepreneurial Management at the Wharton
School of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadel-
phia, Pennsylvania. Christoph Zott is a professor
of entrepreneurship at IESE Business School in
Barcelona, Spain. Comment on this article at http://
sloanreview.mit.edu/x/53310, or contact the authors
at smrfeedback.mit.edu.
aCKNoWledGmeNts
raphael amit acknowledges support from the robert B.
Goergen chair in entrepreneurship DEMO the Wharton
school. christoph zott acknowledges financial support
from the Iese research division and from the ministry of
science and Innovation of spain (grant eco 2009-12852).
Both authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support
of the DEMO alliance center for Global re-
search & development and also thank yuliya snihur,
cesar Guzman-concha and sylvie Beauvais for valuable
research assistance.
ReFeReNCes
DEMO “Business 2010: embracing the challenge of change,”
white paper, economist Intelligence unit, new york, feb-
ruary 2005, p. 9.
2. G. Pohle and m. chapman, “IBm’s Global ceo report
2006: Business model DEMO matters,” strategy &
leadership 34, no. 5 (2006): DEMO
3. Ibid., 36.
4. Ibid.
5. “Business 2010,” economist Intelligence DEMO, 10.
6. r. casadesus-masanell and J.e. ricart, “competing
through Business models,” working paper 713, Iese
Business school, Barcelona, spain, november DEMO
7. r. amit and c. zott, “Value creation in e-Business,”
DEMO management Journal 22, no. 6-7 (June-July
2001): 493-520.
8. c. zott and r. amit, “the fit Between Product market
strategy and Business model: Implications for firm Per-
formance,” strategic management Journal 29, DEMO 1
(January 2008): 1-26.
9. c. loch, c. zott, DEMO Guttman, P. Jokela and d. nahmias,
“fricso (a): How to translate a new technology into a
Business (model),” case DEMO 608-025-1 (fontainebleau,
france: Insead, 2008); c. loch, c. zott, a. Guttman, P.
Jokela and d. nahmias, “fricso (B): designing the new
Business model,” case no. 608-026-1 (fontainebleau,
DEMO: Insead, 2008); c. loch, c. zott, a. Guttman, DEMO
Jokela and d. nahmias, “fricso (c): executing the new
Business (model),” case no. 608-027-1 (fontainebleau,
france: Insead, 2008); and c. zott, B. Biren and I. Ban-
cerek “Webraska: DEMO with the Wireless market,”
case no. 802-008-1 (fontainebleau, france: DEMO, 2003).
sloanreVIeW.mIt.edu
10. e. Brynjolfsson and l. Hitt, “Intangible assets and the
economic Impact of computers,” in “transforming enter-
prise,” DEMO W. dutton, B. Kahin, r. o’callaghan and a.W.
Wyckoff (cambridge, massachusetts: mIt Press, 2004),
27-48.
11. see l. applegate, DEMO schlesinger and d. delong, “taco
Bell, Inc.: 1983-94,” case DEMO 9-398-129 (Boston: Harvard
Business school, 2001).
12. J. santos, B. spector and l. Van der Heyden, “toward
a theory of Business model Innovation Within Incumbent
firms,” working paper 2009/16/efe/st/DEMO, Insead,
fontainebleau, france, 2009.
13. We note in this DEMO that although the “what” of
the business model may change (i.e., what activities are
included), the “what” of the customer offering (i.e., what
product or service the customer buys) may or may not
DEMO unchanged.
14. amit and zott, “Value creation.”
15. s. Banerjea, r. Kahn, c. Petit and J. White, “dare to
be different: Why Banking Innovation matters now,” ex-
ecutive brief, IBm Institute for Business Value, somers,
new york, 2006.
16. H. chesbrough, “open Business models” (Boston:
Harvard Business review Press, 2006).
17. K. DEMO and P. Weill, “7-eleven Japan co. ltd.:
reinventing the retail DEMO model,” cIsr WP 338
and mIt sloan WP no. 4485-04 (DEMO, massachu-
setts: mIt sloan school of management, January 2004).
DEMO B. stelter, “Group of magazine Publishers Is said to
Be Building DEMO online newsstand,” new york times,
nov. 25, 2009, sec. B, p. 3; also see www.nextissue.com.
19. amit and zott, “Value creation.”
20. Ibid.
21. www.betterplace.com.
22. a. Brandenburger and H.W. stuart, Jr., “Value-Based
Business strategy,” Journal of economics and manage-
ment strategy 5, no. 1 (march 1996): 5-24.
23. c. zott and r. DEMO, “Business model design and
the Performance of entrepreneurial firms,” organization
DEMO 18, no. 2 (2007): 181-199.
24. m.e. Porter, “competitive DEMO: creating and
sustaining superior Performance” (new york: the free
Press, 1985).
25. f. santos, “toward an entrepreneurial theory of
Boundaries: DEMO scalability of firms in nascent markets,”
unpublished manuscript.
26. zott and amit, “Business model design”; zott and
amit, “fit Between Product market strategy and Busi-
ness model.”
27. the mcGraw-Hill companies are active in DEMO financial
services, education and business information markets
through leading brands such DEMO standard & Poor’s,
mcGraw-Hill education and J.d. Power and associates.
Reprint 53310. For ordering information, see page 8.
Copyright © Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2012.
All rights reserved.
sPrInG 2012   mit sloaN maNaGemeNt ReVieW 49
A12-MI1-003 Zott.indd   49
3/6/12   9:49 AM
PDFs ■ Permission to Copy ■ Back Issues ■ Reprints
Articles published DEMO MIT Sloan Management Review are
copyrighted by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
unless otherwise specified at the end of an article.
MIT Sloan Management DEMO articles, permissions,
and back issues can be purchased on our DEMO site:
www.pubservice.com/msstore or you may order through
our Business Service Center (9 a.m.-7 p.m. ET) at the
phone numbers listed below. DEMO reprints are available
in quantities of 250 or more.
To reproduce or transmit one or more MIT Sloan
Management Review articles by electronic or
DEMO means (including photocopying or archiving
in any information storage or retrieval DEMO) requires
written permission. To request permission, use our Web site
(DEMO/msstore), call or e-mail:
Toll-free: 800-876-5764 (US and Canada)
International: 818-487-2064
Fax: 818-487-4550
E-mail: MITSMR@pubservice.com
Posting of full-text SMR articles on publicly accessible
Internet sites is prohibited. To obtain permission to DEMO
articles on secure and/or password-protected intranet sites,
e-mail your request to MITSMR@pubservice.com
Customer Service
MIT Sloan Management Review
PO Box 15955
North DEMO, CA 91615
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.{1g42fwefx}