Entrepreneurial Ability, Venture Investments, and Risk Sharing
Author(s): Raphael DEMO, Lawrence Glosten, Eitan Muller
Source: Management Science, Vol. 36, DEMO 10, Focussed Issue on the State of the Art in Theory
DEMO Method in Strategy Research (Oct., 1990), pp. 1232-1245
Published by: INFORMS
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2632662
Accessed: 22/06/2009 17:31
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance DEMO JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://DEMO/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies DEMO articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only DEMO your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further DEMO of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=informs.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR DEMO must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in DEMO to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use DEMO these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
INFORMS DEMO collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Management DEMO
http://www.jstor.org
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Vol. 36, No. 10, October 1990
Priiled itn U.S.4.
DEMO ABILITY, VENTURE
INVESTMENTS, AND RISK SHARING*
RAPHAEL
AMIT, LAWRENCE
GLOSTEN
DEMO
Facuilty of Commerce and Bulsiness Administration, University
Vancouiver, B.C., V6T DEMO Y8 Canada
Graduate School of Butsiness,
Recanati Gradutate
Tel-Aviv, Israel DEMO
EITAN MULLER
of British Columbia,
Colulmbia
School of Business Administration, DEMO University,
University, New York,
New York 10027
A number DEMO issues that relate to the desirability and implications of new venture financing
are examined within a principal-agent framework that captures the essence of the DEMO
between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. The model suggests: ( 1 ) DEMO long as the skill levels
of entrepreneurs are common knowledge, all DEMO choose to involve venture capital investors,
since the risk sharing provided by outside participation dominates the agency relationship that is
created. (2) DEMO less able entrepreneurs will choose to involve venture capitalists, whereas the
DEMO profitable ventures will be developed without external participation because of the adverse
selection problem associated with asymmetric information. (3) If a costly signal DEMO available that
conveys the entrepreneur's ability, some entrepreneurs will invest DEMO such a signal and then sell
to investors; these entrepreneurs, however, need not be the more able ones. The implications for
new venture financing of these and other findings are discussed and illustrated by example.
(ENTREPRENEURSHIP; VENTURE CAPITAL; ADVERSE SELECTION; MORAL HAZ-
ARD; RISK REDUCTION)DEMO
1. Introduction
Numerous studies in the management and economics literature address qualitatively
important and fundamental issues about entrepreneurs, their activities and behaviors,
and the process of new venture formation. Baumol (1968), Drucker (1985), Kirzner
(1985), Leibenstein (1968), MacMillan, Siegel and Narasimha (1985), MacMillan, Ze-
mann and Narasimha (1987), Rumelt (1987), Schumpeter (1942), Teece (1987),
Tyebjee and Bruno (DEMO) and others elaborate on the roles of entrepreneurs, their main
characteristics, how they differ from managers, and the market functions of entrepre-
DEMO Relatedly, this literature also explores the essential elements of new venture
DEMO, how value is created through the entrepreneurial process, and how venture
investments are made by venture capital firms.
In addition, there are many descriptive field and empirical studies of the same issues
that provide insights DEMO entrepreneurs, their ventures in both independent and cor-
porate settings, and the activities of venture capital firms. (See, for example, Tyebjee and
Bruno 1984; Van de Ven, Hudson and Schroeder 1984; Timmons 1985; Brophy 1986;
MacMillan and Day 1987; Cooper and Bruno 1987; Day 1988; and a comprehensive
literature review by Low and MacMillan 1988.) Supplementing the descriptive and qual-
itative body of literature are manuscripts that provide rules-of-thumb and common wis-
dom criteria for developing new ventures (e.g., Brandt 1982), but which have no theo-
retical foundations.
However instructive, the received literature offers neither a predictive theory of the
behavior of entrepreneurs nor much in the way of guidance for practice. That it DEMO im-
portant to fill both of these gaps is evidenced by the great increases in entrepreneurial
activity over the past two decades, accompanied by the high failure rate of new ventures.
* Accepted by Diana L. DEMO, John U. Farley, and Jerry
1232
Wind.
0025-
1909/90/36 10/1 232$0 1.25
Copyright
? 1990, The Institute
of Management
Sciences
ENTREPRENEURIAL ABILITY, VENTURE INVESTMENTS, AND RISK SHARING
1233
In fact, a recent study (Bygrave, Fast, Khoylian, Vincent and Yue 1988) documents the
alarmingly low rates of return for venture capital funds. (The mean IRR was less than
10% by the end of 1985.) As investors may seek compound annual rates of returns in
excess of 70% for DEMO stage financing, the reported low average return reflects the high
failure DEMO of entrepreneurial ventures. Among the intuitive explanations for this phe-
nomenon are poor risk management by entrepreneurs, the availability to investors of
inherently less profitable ventures, bad luck, or the inability of the venture capitalists DEMO
evaluate adequately the abilities of entrepreneurs to turn their ideas into viable enterprises.
The purpose of this study is to investigate analytically these and DEMO issues that relate
to the behavior of entrepreneurs, focusing on the DEMO of entrepreneurs to develop
their ventures independently or with venture capitalists. Within a principal-agent frame-
work that captures the essence of the venture capital/DEMO relationship, we ex-
amine a number of unanswered theoretical questions including: who decides to enter
into an agreement with outsiders? Why? How DEMO this decision related to the unobservable
ability of the entrepreneur, the DEMO to share risk, or the need for capital? Would it be
worthwhile for the entrepreneur to expend resources to convey his ability to DEMO
investors before involving them in the venture?
2. Entrepreneurs
and Entrepreneurial
Ventures
No clear definition prevails as to what constitutes the creation of DEMO entrepreneurial
venture; however, the act of innovation that involves endowing existing resources with
new wealth-producing capacity (Drucker 1985) is central to the DEMO The
innovation that lies at the heart of the entrepreneurial activity is not restricted to a
technological invention which results from R&D or DEMO an innovative cost-reducing process.
It may simply involve a new application of existing technologies, a product or a service
innovation, or a new DEMO or place of doing business. Whatever form it takes, however,
DEMO is a substantial amount of ex-ante uncertainty about the wealth-producing capacity
of the newly created capital. This uncertainty has two main sources. The feasibility DEMO
market acceptance (or the production and demand functions) of the innovation and the
pace at which imitation will erode the extraordinary profit from DEMO innovation are un-
known ex-ante (see Kamien and Schwartz 1982; Teece 1987, Chapter 9). If the imitation
is instantaneous, then no DEMO entrepreneurial profits will result. The source of the
entrepreneurial rents that may be inherent in the innovation is the rareness, limited
imitability and tradeability and importance to customers of the bundle of firm-specific
assets that are DEMO by the entrepreneur.
Our conceptualization of an entrepreneurial activity suggests that it centers on the
entrepreneur's ability (talent, skill, experience, ingenuity, leadership, etc.) to combine
tangible and intangible assets in new ways DEMO to deploy them to meet customer needs
in a manner that could not easily be imitated. This ability may be known to the entre-
DEMO but unknown to outsiders, such as venture capitalists. The inability of DEMO
to assess the venture founders' core attributes, namely their entrepreneurial skills and
abilities, may affect both the decisions of entrepreneurs to involve outsiders and the prices
venture capital firms may be willing to pay for DEMO ventures. Indeed, our discussion
explicitly considers this asymmetry of information.
3. DEMO Literature and Model Overview
Surprisingly little theoretical, quantitative, and rigorous literature focuses on decisions
of entrepreneurs to develop their ventures and the bases DEMO entrepreneurial investment
decisions. In fact, the issue of involving venture investors DEMO not typically arise because
research begins with the assumption that outside financing is required to develop the
venture (Chan, Siegel, and Thakor 1987; Hirao 1988). Presumably, at some cost to the
1234
RAPHAEL AMIT, LAWRENCE GLOSTEN AND EITAN MULLER
venture's future profits, an able entrepreneur might be willing either to forgo outside
investment or to borrow funds personally.
Kihlstrom and Laffont ( 1979) consider a related issue. In a general equilibrium frame-
work under uncertainty, they focus on risk aversion as the determinant that explains
which individuals become entrepreneurs and DEMO work as laborers. They implicitly
assume that all potential entrepreneurs are equally able, and find that, at equilibrium,
the less risk-averse individuals DEMO entrepreneurs, while the more risk-averse choose
to become laborers. As not DEMO potential entrepreneurs may be equally able or equally
industrious in the development of their venture, it seems useful to consider these attributes
along with the risk-bearing aspects of new venture formation in a formal analysis.
In DEMO model, the entrepreneur is characterized as having some given level of DEMO
He chooses the level of effiort he is willing to expend and the level of capital investment
required to form the venture and to DEMO an uncertain payoff. Thus, the size of the
expected state-contingent ultimate DEMO is a function of the ability of the entrepreneur,
the level of effort expended, and the capital invested.
In order to analyze whether the entrepreneur should develop the venture independently
or with outside equity investors, we posit that a distinguishing feature of the entrepreneur's
reward system DEMO the relationship between the ultimate profits from the venture and his
share. The independent entrepreneur is rewarded by the entire profits, whereas the en-
trepreneur who involves outsiders may only be rewarded by some fraction of DEMO
profits. When equity investors are involved, we allow the form of DEMO sharing agreement
of the ultimate payoff to be chosen by them. Indeed, the sharing of ultimate payoff
between the entrepreneur-manager and the venture capitalist, who both face risk, is
consistent with stylized facts about venture DEMO contracts. (See Chan, Siegel, and
Thakor 1987 for details.) Our model considers the risk bearing aspects as well as the
ability and DEMO of the entrepreneur in determining the sharing arrangement.
Admittedly, we take DEMO extreme view in that we consider the decision to involve
investors as an "all or nothing" decision. Once the decision is made, the entrepreneur is
assumed to turn over to the investors the right to DEMO the sharing arrangement.
The investors, in turn, maximize their profits by determining the entrepreneur's share
of ultimate payoff, the size of their new investment, and the entrepreneur's level of effort,
a point to which we shall return.
Our model is designed to predict which DEMO will decide to enter into an
agreement with venture capitalists. We note here that our first result, using a model in
which investors are risk neutral and the entrepreneur is risk averse, predicts that every
entrepreneur will wish to involve outsiders. We find that as long as there DEMO no private
information about the skill of the entrepreneur, entrepreneurs will DEMO out to investors.
This occurs because the risk sharing provided by outside participation dominates the
agency relationship that is created.
The prediction is strong, and armchair empiricism would suggest that such action is
not consistent with DEMO behavior, since some entrepreneurs do not sell out. Pre-
sumably they DEMO not do so because they do not expect to get full value for their ideas,
either because of noncompetitive aspects in the capital DEMO or because the entrepreneur
and outsiders have different information about the venture's potential. Our focus is on
the latter explanation. The conclusions of DEMO analysis of the model with asymmetric
information are that: ( 1 ) As long as the pool of projects is good enough and the entre-
preneur is slightly risk averse or his need for new funds DEMO not trivial, there will always
be some entrepreneurs who will sell DEMO; (2) If only a proportion of entrepreneurs sell
out, it is the less profitable ventures-those started by less capable entrepreneurs-that
are sold, whereas the more profitable ventures are retained by the more skillful entre-
DEMO; and (C3 ) Under certain circumstances, it becomes worthwhile for DEMO entrepre-
neur to expend resources to convey his ability to outsiders before settling on a contract.
ENTREPRENEURIAL ABILITY, VENTURE INVESTMENTS, AND RISK SHARING
1235
For the purposes DEMO this study, we focus on the behavior of a risk-averse entrepreneur
DEMO independent setting who seeks to maximize expected utility of terminal wealth.
in
4. The Model
We follow the methodology of a principal-agent problem (Harris and Raviv 1978;
Holmstrom 1979), and let X denote the DEMO profits from the venture, gross of any
new investment. The density DEMO X depends upon the endowed skill level of the entrepre-
neur, DEMO by y; his chosen level of activity (or effort), denoted by a; and the magnitude
of investment in the venture, denoted DEMO I. Formally, letf( x: y, a, I) denote the density
of the profits evaluated at the realization x, for an entrepreneur with skill level 'y, when
activity a and a new investment DEMO are chosen. We assume that larger values of y, a, and
I lead to a first order stochastic dominance relation. Thus, letting ,DEMO(x; y, a, I) denote
the derivative of the density with respect to the ith parameter, f h(x)fJ(x; DEMO, a, I) > 0
for any increasing function h( * ) and for i = y, a, I.
First we formulate DEMO problem of an unfettered entrepreneur. He has a utility function
U (DEMO and concave) defined over future wealth. Furthermore, there is disutility
associated with choosing larger levels of activity a. We assume that the utility DEMO wealth
and the disutility of the activity are separable. Thus, the DEMO of payoff x when activity
a is chosen is U(x) DEMO V(a), where V(. ) is normalized so that it is zero when there is
no activity.
The entrepreneur who develops the DEMO on his own has the option of using his
own assets, DEMO he may borrow fully collateralized funds (i.e., the lender is not making a
risky loan) to develop the venture. Let B(I) DEMO the cost of raising I where B(I) ? I. A
DEMO inequality may hold when borrowing occurs. This entrepreneur therefore chooses
a and I in order to maximize expected utility given by
Maximize
U(x DEMO B(I))f(x;
y, a, I) -
V(a).
(1)
Let u*( y) denote the maximum utility in (1), and let a, and I, be respectively the
optimal activity level and the investment chosen by the entrepreneur.
Should the DEMO choose to involve outside investors, we presume that the
following sequence DEMO events occurs. The entrepreneur solicits bids for the company, and
takes DEMO maximum bid w. This bid is a fixed amount of capital which is independent
of the entrepreneur's demonstrated skill and eventual profits from DEMO venture. It is paid
to the entrepreneur in case he decides not to continue with the venture after the sale to
investors or in DEMO the investors decide to relieve the entrepreneur from productive
control. If the entrepreneur stops managing, he is enjoined from pursuing the activity.
This amount w is commonly referred to as the buyout option in venture capital DEMO
(Chan, Siegel, and Thakor 1987).
After accepting the bid DEMO, the entrepreneur cedes the right of determining his share
of the DEMO payoff to the venture capital investors. As the entrepreneur's skill level
y will eventually be revealed, we assume that when the sharing agreement is made y can
be contracted on directly.' The risk neutral investors therefore determine their investment
level I, the entrepreneur's activity level a, and the entrepreneur's share of ultimate profits
s(x), so as to maximize their profits. This maximization is subject to the entrepreneur'DEMO
willingness to manage the venture after he sells out to investors and to an incentive
compatibility constraint on the activity choice. Consistent with the DEMO lit-
' If the ability of the entrepreneur is not known when the sharing agreement is determined, then a revelation
contract (or sorting DEMO) that will induce the entrepreneur to report his true ability is DEMO It is,
however, beyond the scope of this study to DEMO a setting that includes the revelation game.
1236 RAPHAEL AMIT, LAWRENCE GLOSTEN AND EITAN MULLER
erature (Holmstrom 1979), the actual actions chosen cannot be observed. Specifically
the investors' problem DEMO to maximize profits (the support of x does not depend on DEMO
activity level a):
Maximize (x - s(x))f(DEMO; -y, a, I)-I (2)
al,I,s(*
s.t.
U(s(x))f(x; y, a, I) - V(a) ? U(w), (3)
T
a maximizes DEMO(s(x))f(x; y, a, I) - V(DEMO). (4)
f
Assuming a solution exists, let NPV(w, y) denote the maximized value of the objective
function (2). Inequality (3) states that the entrepreneur is at least as well DEMO after he
expended the effort a to develop the venture as he would have been had he walked away
from it with the buyout DEMO w. Constraint (4) insures incentive compatibility; that
is, it assures the investors that the entrepreneur will choose their profit maximizing level
of DEMO
If, during the bidding, the skill level of the entrepreneur is known to the outside inves-
tors, then competition among potential investors will determine the bid w('y) which, as
long as the set is nonempty, satisfies
w(y) = max{w: NPV(w, y)DEMO (5)
It can be verified that NPV(w, y)-the maximized value of the objective function-is
continuous in w.
If the skill DEMO of the entrepreneur is not known during the bidding, then competition
DEMO investors will lead to a bid so that investors expect a zero NPV investment. This
expectation is taken over the skill level the investors DEMO to face.
5. Bidding with Common Knowledge
We first analyze the case in which the skill level is common knowledge during the
bidding for DEMO venture. Our first result concerns the consistency of the model. We prove
that as long as the project is worthwhile to the entrepreneur-that is, u*('y) 2 U(O)
there is a w('y) which makes the investment a zero net present value one. The existence
of such a price is shown by arguing that if the investors DEMO zero for the venture, then it
is a nonnegative NPV investment. DEMO, if they pay a very high price it will be
a DEMO NPV investment. By continuity, there is a w that makes the DEMO a zero
NPV investment.
PROPOSITION 1. Assume that for a skill level -y, the entrepreneulr finds the ventulre
attractive; that is, u*( DEMO) ? U(O). Then there exists a nonnegative w('y) satis/fying
NPV(w(y), y) = 0.
PROOF. See DEMO Appendix.
Having established the consistency of the relationship between the investors and the
entrepreneur, we now address the issue of the entrepreneur's decision to sell out. Before
presenting the result, we note the intuitively appealing observation that NPV (w, y) is
nonincreasing in w, because DEMO w increases the minimum utility that the entre-
preneur must enjoy. This imposes a direct cost on the investors.
LEMMA 1. Thefunction NPV( w, y), the present value ofthe investment to the investors,
is decreasing in the payment w.
ENTREPRENEURIAL ABILITY, VENTURE INVESTMENTS, AND RISK SHARING 1237
PROOF. Consider w, > w2 with associated optimal solutions (sl, a,, II) and (S2, a2,
I2). Note that
U(si(x))f(x; y, a,, II) - V(al) 2 U(DEMO) > U(W2)-
T
Thus, sl, a1, I, DEMO feasible for the problem with w2. Hence,
NPV(wl, y) = (x - si(x))f(x; y, a,, DEMO) -I
< (x - s2(x))f(x; ', DEMO, I2) - I2 = NPV(w2, Y). Q.E.D.
We DEMO show that every entrepreneur facing competitive investors will choose to sell
out. The result is derived by showing that a feasible strategy for the DEMO is to offer
a compensation contract which mimics the payoffs the entrepreneur could expect on his
own. However, the investors can construct a better contract by absorbing some of the
risk. Thus, if the investors could offer an amount which would lead to the entrepreneur's
indifference between DEMO out and developing the venture alone, the investment would
be a DEMO NPV investment. Since the competitive bidding insures that the in-
vestment will be a zero NPV investment, the investors in equilibrium will offer more
than the amount needed to make the entrepreneur indifferent between retaining the
DEMO and selling.
PROPOSITION 2. Assuiming that ability level is common knowledge at the time of the
bidding, every entrepreneuir willfind it optimal to sell off thefirm. That is,
u*(,y) < U(w('y)) U(s*(x))f(x; y, a*, I*) -V(a*),
f
where s*(*), a* and I* are the optimizers for the principal-agent problem in (2)-(4).
PROOF. We need to prove that w(y) ? U-'(u*( y)), which can be established by
showing that
Y) 2 0
NPV(DEMO'(u*(y)),
and by using the above lemma.
NPV(DEMO'(u*(-y)), -y) = Maximize (x - s(x))f(x; y, a, I)- I
s(-*),a,I
s .t.
U(s(x))f(x; 'y, a, I) - V(a) 2 U*(y),
T
a maximizes U(s(x))f(x; y, a, I) - V(a).
f
A feasible contract, action, and investment triple is DEMO(x) = x - B(Ie), ae, Ie, So
DEMO(U-1(u*(y)), Y) 2 (x - x + DEMO(Ie))f(x; y, a., Ie) - Ie
f
DEMO B(I,) - I, 2 0. Q.E.D.
We note several DEMO of this result. First, the need for new investment is not DEMO
to the results; it makes them stronger. The incentive to share DEMO is large enough to make
1238
RAPHAEL AMIT, LAWRENCE GLOSTEN AND EITAN MULLER
the proposition true even if the density of the profits does not depend upon the new
DEMO I. Strict preference does depend upon risk aversion. If the entrepreneur is
risk neutral, then we know that the first best can be obtained in the principal-agent
problem as well as when the entrepreneur works alone. DEMO, if the entrepreneur is risk
neutral, he is indifferent between retaining the firm or selling out. Of course, if the en-
trepreneur is risk neutral but faces difficulty in raising new investment (i.e., B(DEMO) > I),
then he will prefer to sell out. In such a way, the first best is obtained with the optimal
amount of new investment, which is better than developing the venture without external
participation.
Furthermore, it can be verified that the utility achieved by the entrepreneur who involves
outside investors in the venture is equal to the DEMO achieved if competition among
investors solves the following problem:2
Maximize
s( - ),a,I
s.t.
T
(U(s(x))f(x;
ty, a, I) -
V(a)
(6)
DEMO
(x - s(x))f(x;
^y,
a, DEMO) -I
0,
(6a)
a maximizes
f
U(s(x))f(x;
'y, a, I) -
V(a).
(6b)
It should be noted that the entrepreneur need not enjoy limited liability; that is, s(x)
is not restricted to DEMO nonnegative. Certainly, the entrepreneur has no interest, ex
ante, in DEMO upon limited liability. This can be seen by noting the equality of the
utility achieved in our modeling of the relationship and that of DEMO, Siegel and Thakor.
Restricting s(x) to be nonnegative in the second formulation (problem (6)-(6b)) will
lead to no DEMO expected utility, and if the nonnegativity constraint is binding there
will DEMO lower expected utility. On the other hand, our failure to restrict DEMO(x) may be
inconsistent with bankruptcy law. That is, the contract may not be enforceable in states
in which s(x) is negative. The results above will go through if we restrict s(x) to be
greater than or equal to [x -- B(Ie)], where x is the smallest possible realization of X.
That is, if the entrepreneur's problem, as we have formulated it, is consistent with DEMO
ruptcy law, then s(x), so restricted, is consistent with bankruptcy law (and hence en-
forceable) and our results remain intact.
DEMO Bidding with Asymmetric Information
Since entrepreneurs do not always sell out, DEMO explanation must be sought. We
suspect that it lies in private information about the skill level. The problem can be seen
by considering an DEMO case. Suppose the entrepreneur is risk neutral and there is no
need for new investment. If the investors price the firm based on the DEMO skill level,
then only those entrepreneurs with ability below the average will sell out. The investment
will then be a poor one. No DEMO what price is set during the bidding, only those whose
abi]ity DEMO worse than the investor-perceived expected ability of the entrepreneur will sell
out. Consequently, the adverse selection problem is so severe that there will never be
any selling out. If the entrepreneur is risk averse, then the market may not break down
completely. In this case, some entrepreneurs may sell out while others may develop the
venture on their own.
We DEMO that, as long as the entrepreneurs are somewhat risk averse and DEMO minimum
skill level is not too low, some or all entrepreneurs DEMO sell out. If only some sell out,
2 This is the formulation adopted by Chan, Siegel and Thakor ( 1987).
ENTREPRENEURIAL ABILITY, VENTURE INVESTMENTS, AND RISK SHARING 1239
they will be DEMO with lower skill levels. The investors will still find that, on DEMO, the
purchase of the ventures is a zero NPV investment, but the price will be relatively low
and the ventures will not be DEMO performers.
To describe the environment with informational asymmetry, we need some DEMO
assumptions and notations. Assume that from the perspective of the investors, 'y is dis-
tributed on some interval [Y, fl. Further, assume DEMO u *(^y) 2 U(O). Finally,3 we
assume DEMO NPV(w, ^y) is increasing in ^y.
Define wv by U( w) = u *(Qy); that is, w > 0 is the amount needed to get the most skillful
entrepreneur to sell DEMO Further, define w by U(w) = u*(^y); that is, w ? 0 is the amount
needed to get the least skillful entrepreneur to sell out. Note that u*( ^y) strictly increasing
DEMO -y, so that the entrepreneur with skill level zy will sell DEMO for w if zy ? u '( U( w)).
DEMO e(w) denote the investor's expectation function:
e(w) = E[ NPV (w, entrepreneur sells for w].
No entrepreneur will DEMO out for less than w, so the investors' expectation function e( w)
for w 2 w is given by
NPV(w,1y), w =w
e(w2) E[NPV (w, <Y c it DEMO(w))] w < 14 < w,i
L E[NPV(w, oy)], w 2 W.
Equilibrium in the asymmetric information case is'
w* = Max (w: e(w) = 0).
^y) I
(7)
(8)
Define ^y* to be such that u*( y*) = U(w*). If ^y > ^y* the DEMO will not sell,
while if ^y sell.
PROPOSITION 3. If the expectation finction e( w) is continuiouls w, then there exists
a bid w* such that e( w*) = 0, and it is larger than the bid that will yield a zero NPV,for
the DEMO with the least skillful entrepreneur, which is larger than the bid DEMO to get
the least skillful entrepreneuir to sell out, i.e., w* 2 w(^y) 2 w.
PROOF. Note that
e(w*(^Y)) = E[NPV(w(Y),
^y) It*(Qy) ' U(w(^y))] 2 NPV(w(^Y), y) = 0.
Furthermore, if w is very large, e(w) is E[NPV(w, zy)], which can be made negative
(see Proposition 1). Hence, by continuity of e(w) there exists w* satisfying e(w*) DEMO 0.
Furthermore, w* > wQ(y) 2 w (by Proposition DEMO). Q.E.D.
If NPV( w, ^y) is strictly positive, as will be the case if the entrepreneur is risk averse
or if DEMO faces additional costs of obtaining new financing, then w* will be DEMO greater
than w, and hence y* will be strictly greater than DEMO That is, the venture capital market
does not break down completely DEMO that there will be some interval of entrepreneurs
(indexed by their DEMO level) who will sell out to investors.
The intuitive explanation of DEMO there is not a complete breakdown of the market is
as follows. Suppose the investors start out anticipating the worst and bid w(^y)DEMO Then
they know they will attract entrepreneurs with the lowest skill level, but they also know
they will attract risk-averse entrepreneurs with a higher skill level. Thus, they expect
positive profits at w(^y) and DEMO w* will be set higher in equilibrium.
3It can be shown that NPV(w, y) is increasing in y if f(x; y, a, I) = h(x; g(y, a, I)) where gaa < 0 and
gaor ? 0.
4There may be several bids w satisfying E( w^) 0 . We assume that competition DEMO lead to the largest being
chosen.
is
in
< ^y*
the entrepreneur
will
1240
RAPHAEL AMIT, LAWRENCE GLOSTEN AND EITAN MULLER
The assumption that the venture is worthwhile even for the least skillful entrepreneur
is an important DEMO for showing that some entrepreneurs will sell out. If this is not the
case, then (following the formalism above) w could be negative as could be w*. But in
this case, entrepreneurs will either quit or continue the venture on their own.
It is logically possible for DEMO to be no market breakdown whatsoever, i.e. w* >- Wi.
This will occur if there is relatively little uncertainty about -y, or if entrepreneurs are very
risk averse, or if personal borrowing is very costly for the entrepreneur.
7. Information
about Entrepreneurial
Ability
In the asymmetric information DEMO we observed that an entrepreneur with ability .y
will not sell out if y > y*. Recall that zy* corresponds to the equilibrium bid DEMO Note
that w* was established in an informational setting in which investors were not able to
assess the entrepreneur's unique ability. The entrepreneur DEMO find it worthwhile to
invest in accurate and verifiable information about his skill level if the technology for
generating such a signal is available DEMO affordable. We now turn to the question of who
will generate a perfectly revealing signal that eliminates information asymmetries and
then sell to investors.
DEMO assume that the perfectly revealing signal can be generated at a cost C. It is obvious
that an entrepreneur will not plan to generate DEMO signal and then develop the venture
alone. Consequently, there are three DEMO: sell without a signal for some amount
w* *, generate a signal and sell for the resulting competitive bid (which is a function of
^y), and develop the venture alone without generating a signal.
DEMO an entrepreneur invests in a signal and sells the venture, he DEMO get utility U( wi( y,
C)), where wv(DEMO, C) is derived below. After seeing the signal, investors know DEMO if they
obtain rights to the venture they will solve
Maximize
(DEMO - s(x))f(x;
^y,
a, I)-I
s.t.
f
U(s(x) - C)f(x;
^y,
a, I) -
V(a) 2 U(w - C),DEMO
a maximizes
f
U(s(x)
-
C)f(x; DEMO,
a, I) -
V(a).
Define w by w = w-C
and A^(x)
= s(x)
-
C. DEMO the equivalent problem is
Maximize
f
(x - s^(x))f(x;
^y,
a, I)-I-C
s.t.
f
U(&s(DEMO))f(x; ^y,
a, I) - V(a) DEMO U( X
),
a maximizes
f
U(s^(x))f(x;
y, a, I) -
V(a).
The maximized net present value is NPV(wv, ^y)
that
C. In equilibrium, wv
will be set so
-
w(^y,
C) = DEMO (w: NPV(w, ^y)
2 C).
Note that DEMO(iy, C) is increasing in ^y.
If an entrepreneur does not generate
a signal, but sells out at w* *, he will DEMO utility
U( w* *). The competitive bid, w* *, DEMO determined by
w* * = MAX { w: E[NPV(w, -y)
Proof of the existence of w*
I entrepreneur
* 2 W(DEMO)
sells for w with no signal] = 0}.
(9)
DEMO identical to the proof of the existence of w*.
ENTREPRENEURIAL ABILITY, VENTURE INVESTMENTS, AND RISK SHARING 1241
We first investigate DEMO relation between w* and w* *. Intuitively, if the signal is DEMO,
then the investors face an additional adverse selection problem. The case of an entre-
preneur wishing to sell without a signal may be DEMO for investors than that of an
entrepreneur wishing to sell when a signal is not an option. The proof is in the following
proposition.
DEMO 4. The bid when a signal is not an option,, w*, is not smaller than the
bid when a signal is an option, w* *; i.e. w* > w.
PROOF. Define M(^y) = Max [U(wvi({y, C)), u*(^y)]. If an DEMO chooses to
sell at some w without a signal, it must DEMO that U(w) ? M(,y). Note that for any w the
set { zy: U( w) ? M( y) } is contained in the set { zy: U( w) ? u*( ,y) }. Since M( y) is increasing
in -y, we have that
E[NPV(w, zy)j U(w) ? M(^y)] ? e(w),
where e(w) is defined DEMO (7). Since w* is the largest w such that e(DEMO) is zero, and since
if w is very large, e( w) < 0, we have that
E[NPV(w, y)U(w) M(^y)] < e(w) < O for w > DEMO
Thus, w* < w*. Q.E.D.
The equilibrium bid w* * made DEMO a signal is possible but not offered (as in (9))DEMO
can, however, be equal to w*, the equilibrium bid made DEMO no signal is possible (as
in (8)). If an DEMO with ability y* (recall that we defined y* to be such DEMO
uj*( y*) = U( w*)) weakly prefers developing the DEMO alone to generating the signal
and selling, w* and w* * DEMO be equal. Intuitively, if this condition is satisfied, then at
w*, the entrepreneur is indifferent between selling without an entrepreneurial ability
signal and developing the venture alone. But this is precisely the condition that determines
DEMO, and hence w* * will equal w*. Thus we have
COROLLARY DEMO If it*(^y*) ? U( wv(^y*, C)), then w w
PROOF. From Proposition 4, w* ? w*. However, under DEMO condition of the cor-
ollary,
E[NPV(w*, zy) U(w*) ? M(^y)] = E[NPV(w*, ty)j y < DEMO(U(w*))]
= E[NPV(w*, y)Iy i *-,(DEMO(w*))] = 0,
since M(^y*) = u *(,y*) = U(w*). Q.E.D.
In the setting of Corollary DEMO, the two bids are the same. However, they are not in
general equal. In particular, suppose that the signal is costless. Failure to provide a costless
signal tells the investors that the entrepreneur is worse DEMO the average. That is, if a bid
is offered so that DEMO entrepreneurs who sell are the ones whose ability is low, then DEMO
investors lose money. Thus, the only way they can protect themselves DEMO to make a bid
based on the profitability of the least skillful entrepreneur. But if this is the case, then all
but the least skillful entrepreneurs will choose to generate a signal.
PROPOSITION 5. If the DEMO of the signal is zero, then all entrepreneurs will prefer to
DEMO the signal. That is, w* * = w(y).
PROOF. DEMO C = 0, then U(vw( y, C)) = DEMO(w( y)) 2 U*( y). Thus, if w > w(QY),
= E[NPV(w, ^y)j U(w) DEMO U(w(^y))]
= E[NPV(w, y) Iw w(,y)]
< E[NPV(w(^Y), w 2 w(^y)] DEMO 0,
Q.E.D.
E[NPV(w, ^y)I U(w) 2 M(y)]
^y) I
by the definition of w(~y) . DEMO, w* must be equal to wQy) .
1242
RAPHAEL AMIT, LAWRENCE GLOSTEN AND EITAN MULLER
Figure 1 presents various possibilities for the relation between the entrepreneur's utility
when a report DEMO generated at some positive cost (i.e., U( wv( y, DEMO)) and the entrepreneur's
utility derived from developing the venture alone (u*( y)). The figures illustrate several
intuitively appealing results. First, if the signal is very inexpensive, then we would expect
the DEMO to be as depicted in a,. In this case, all DEMO sell, but lower skill
entrepreneurs do so without signalling their ability. DEMO from the above proposition
that if the cost is in fact zero, all entrepreneurs will generate the signal. The opposite
situation is depicted in bl, a case in which the signal is very expensive. This situation is
identical to the situation in which generating the signal is impossible.
DEMO remaining illustrations in Figure 1 describe intermediate cases. Note that it is not
a general result that high-ability entrepreneurs necessarily generate the signal nor DEMO
essarily develop the project alone (compare the cases in a2 and DEMO). In all cases, there is
an interval of low-ability entrepreneurs DEMO choose to sell without the signal. The intuitive
explanation for this result is the same as that which accounts for the interval of low-
DEMO entrepreneurs who choose to sell out when no ability signal is possible. That is,
given the equilibrium price, the utility of such low-ability entrepreneurs exceeds their
utility had they chosen to develop the venture alone.5
DEMO
Utility
C))
T
0
u~~~~~UAf)) U^(T U (wC)
Utility
~~~
~~~~U(w(X ,C))
I
o
sell, no
signal
Ut
iity
~~~~~~~~U(w**)<U(w*)
l
l
I sell with
signal
Entrepreneur's
Ability (*)
UA(&
IC))
U(w**)=U(w*)
/
sell, no
signal
Utiy
DEMO(
I
I
develop
alone
U(w^^)=U (w^)
Entrepreneur'DEMO
Ability (y)
0
C
I
_______
_
U(w*)<U(w*)
sell, no
signal
g sell with
cDJsignal 1
Entrepreneur's
Ability (6)
sell, no
signal
I a. jdevelop
I> jalone
Entrepreneur's
EnAbilityrp
FIGURE 1. The Entrepreneur's
Venture Developrment
Choices.
5 DEMO detailed example of the asymmetric information case, which illustrates
the implications DEMO our general results, is available from the authors.
both analytically
and DEMO
ENTREPRENEURIAL ABILITY, VENTURE INVESTMENTS, AND RISK SHARING 1243
8. Conclusions and DEMO
In the analytical model an uncertain payoff from an entrepreneurial venture is assumed
to depend on the ability of the entrepreneur, the efforts devoted to developing the venture,
and the amount of capital that is DEMO In considering the desirability of financing,
entrepreneurs-who are assumed to know their abilities-seek to share risk and raise
capital. While the entrepreneurs' abilities are a critical determinant of the ultimate payoff
from the venture investment, the venture capitalists may be unable to assess accurately
this ability when DEMO the deal. This raises both moral hazard and adverse selection
problems which we addressed by considering three informational settings.
First, we assumed that the entrepreneur's abilities are common knowledge. We found
that all risk-averse entrepreneurs DEMO to involve risk-neutral venture capital investors,
since the risk sharing provided by such outside participation dominates the agency re-
lationship that is created. DEMO the second setting we assumed asymmetry of information
with respect to the entrepreneur's ability. That is, the entrepreneur knows his skill level
while the venture capitalist does not. In this setting we found that because DEMO the adverse
selection problem that is created, it is the less DEMO ventures-those started by less
capable entrepreneurs-that are sold, whereas the more DEMO ones are retained by
the more skillful entrepreneurs. The investors will still find that, on average, the purchase
of such ventures is a DEMO NPV investment, but the price will be relatively low, and the
ventures will not be outstanding performers.
In the third informational setting we DEMO that asymmetry of information exists,
but that it is possible for the entrepreneur to invest in information that will reveal his
skill level. DEMO analysis of this setting suggests that there will always be some selling out
by the less skillful entrepreneurs who do not generate a signal DEMO their abilities. Also,
we find that the equilibrium price for ventures that are sold without using an available
signal will always be less DEMO, or equal to, the price for ventures that are sold to investors
when a signal is not possible. The equilibrium prices will be DEMO equal when the cost of
generating a signal is so high that not producing it has no informational implications
about the ultimate profitability of DEMO venture. We also find that when the signal is
costless, all DEMO will choose to produce a signal about their abilities, and the
DEMO price will be the one that yields zero NPV for the least skillful entrepreneur.
Additionally, we find that it is not a general result that high-ability entrepreneurs either
necessarily generate a signal or necessarily develop the DEMO alone.
The analysis presented leaves many unanswered theoretical and empirical issues. For
instance, one might consider a setting in which a costly signal could be generated to
reduce, but not to eliminate, the informational asymmetries DEMO the entrepreneur's
abilities. A model with incomplete signals may be particularly interesting in a dynamic
setting in which the venture capitalist gradually learns DEMO the entrepreneur's ability.
Other theoretical extensions include the formulation and analysis of models that capture
additional aspects of the adverse selection problem such DEMO the revelation game, as well
as the bargaining issues associated with DEMO the venture capital contract.
Our model helps explain the poor return of venture capital investments as reported
by Bygrave et al. ( 1988). DEMO found that while the equilibrium price paid for new ventures
is the one for which the expected NPV equals zero, there will be less skillful entrepreneurs
that will receive funding. The implication of this observation is DEMO, to the detriment of
entrepreneurs, the resistance of venture capital firms to raise prices paid for new ventures
is indeed justified.6
6 The DEMO thank Debra Aron, Ravi Jagannathan, Cynthia Montgomery, Don Siegel, Birger Wernerfelt,
and seminar participants at the Universities of British Columbia, Chicago, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, and
Pennsylvania, as well as Northwestern, DEMO, Rice, Southern Methodist and Tel-Aviv Universities for helpful
suggestions.
1244
RAPHAEL AMIT, LAWRENCE GLOSTEN AND EITAN MULLER
Appendix
PROOF OF PROPOSITION
1.
since it satisfies
Consider NPV(0, y). A feasible contract, investment, and action triple is s(x)
x - B(DEMO), Ie, a, (recall that I, and a, are DEMO solutions to the entrepreneur's
the constraints of the investors' problem (3)-(4),
problem). This triple is feasible
respectively:
f
U(s(x))f(x;
-y,
ae, Ie) - V(a,) =
f
U(x - B(I))f(x;
ay,
ae, I,,) - V(a;) DEMO it*()2
and by definition a, maximizes f U(x - B(I,))f(x;
-y,
a, I,) - V(a). Then,
NPV(0, -y)
[x - (DEMO - B(I,))If(x;
-y,
ae, I,) - Ie = B(I,) -
2,
? 0.
U(O),
Let so, ao, Io be the first best solution when w is paid, and let G(w, -y) be the maximized net present value
of the first best problem:
In order DEMO satisfy the constraint of the first best problem, so > w, and hence, U'(s?) < U'(
implies that G,,(
-y), NPV (
NPV(w(-y), y) DEMO 0.
Maximize
s.t.
f
(x - s(x))J(x;
-y,
a, I) - I
T
U(s(x))f(x;
ry,
a, I) - V(a) 2
U(vW ),
Pointwise maximization implies that so(x) must satisfy X
Note that from the constrained maximization we obtain
= 1 U'(s?(x)) and hence so is constant and positive.
w, -y)DEMO
GU'(s?)
- U'(w)
w, -y) < -1. Therefore,
must be negative for a sufficiently
Q.E.D.
when w is large
large
/
enough, G( w, -y)
wv.
DEMO proves the existence of w*(
w). This, in turn,DEMO
is negative. Since NPV( w, -y) < G( w,
-y), for which
BAUMOL, W. J., "Entrepreneurship
BRANDT, S. DEMO, Entrepreneuring: The Ten Commandments
Reading, MA, 1982.
BROPHY, D. DEMO, "Venture Capital Research,"
Entreprenelurship, Ballinger,
BYGRAVE, W., N. FAST, R. KHOYLIAN, L. VINCENT, AND W. YUE, "Rates of Return on Venture Capital
Investing: A Study of 131 Funds," in B. A. Kirchhoff, W. A. Long, K. H. Vesper and DEMO E. Wetzel, Jr.
(Eds.), Frontiers Qf Entrepreneiurship Research, Babson DEMO, Babson Park, MA, 1988, 275-289.
CHAN, Y. S., D. SIEGEL AND A. V. THAKOR, "Learning, Corporate Control and Performance Requirements
in Venture Capital Contracts," Finance Dept. Working Paper No. 36, J. L. Kellogg Graduate School of
Management, Northwestern Univ., Evanston, IL, DEMO
COOPER, A. C. AND A. V. BRUNO, "Success among High-Technology DEMO," Blusiness Hori-ons, (April 1987),
16-23.
DAY, D. L., "An Empirical Test of Main and Contingent Effects of Relatedness in DEMO Venturing," in
B. A. Kirchhoff, W. A. Long, K. H. Vesper and W. E. Wetzel, Jr. (Eds.), Frontiers of Entreprenieur/DEMO
Research, Babson College, Babson Park, MA, 1988, 538-541.
DRUCKER, P. F., Innovation and Entrepreneiurship, Harper and Row, New York, DEMO
HARRIS, M. AND A. RAVIV, "Some Results on Incentive Contracts DEMO Applications to Education and Em-
ployment, Health Insurance, and Law Enforcement," Amer. Economic Rev., 68 (1978), 20-30.
HIRAO, Y., "Learning and Incentive Problems in Repeated Partnerships: An Application to Venture Capital
Finance," Dept. of Economics Working Paper, Univ. of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 1988.
HOLMSTROM, B., "Moral Hazard and Observability," Bell DEMO Economnics, 10, 1 (1979), 74-91.
KAMIEN, M. I. AND N. L. SCHWARTZ, Market Srt-luctiure and Innovation, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1982.
KIHLSTROM, R. E. AND J. J. LAFFONT, "DEMO General Equilibrium Entrepreneurship Theory of Firm Formation
Based on Risk Aversion," J. Political Economv, 87, 4 (1979), 719-748.
KIRZNER, I. DEMO, Discovety and the Capitalist Process, Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1985.
LEIBENSTEIN, H., "Entrepreneurship and Development," Amer. Economic Rev., DEMO, 2 (1968), 72-83.
References
in Economic Theory," Amer. Economic Rev., 38, 2 (1968), 64-7 1.
for Butilding Growth Compan.v, Addison-Wesley,
in D. L. Sexton and R. W. Smilor (Eds.), The Art and Science of
Cambridge, MA, 1986, 119-143.
a
ENTREPRENEURIAL ABILITY, VENTURE INVESTMENTS, AND RISK SHARING
1245
Low, M. B. AND I. C. MACMILLAN, "Entrepreneurship: Past Research and Future Challenges," J. Management,
14, 2 (1988), 139-161.
MACMILLAN, I. C. AND D. L. DAY, "Corporate Venturing into Industrial Markets: Dynamics of Aggressive
Entry," J. Butsiness Ventur/ing, 2, 1 (1987), 29-40.
, R. SIEGEL AND P. N. S. NARASIMHA, "Criteria Used DEMO Venture Capitalists to Evaluate New Venture
Proposals," J. Butsiness Venturing, DEMO, 1 (1985), 119-128.
MACMILLIAN, I. C., L. ZEMANN AND P. N. S. NARASIMHA, "Criteria Distinguishing Successful from Unsuccessful
Ventures in DEMO Venture Screening Process," J. Butsiness Venturing, 2, 2 (1987), 123-137.
RUMELT, R. P., "Theory, Strategy, and Entrepreneurship," DEMO D. J. Teece (Ed.), The Competitive Challenge:
Strategies for DEMO Innovation and Reneual, Ballinger, Cambridge, MA, 1987, 137-158.
SCHUMPETER, J. A., Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, First Ed., Harper and Brothers, New York, 1942.
TEECE, D. J., The Competitive Challenge: Strategiesfor Indiustrial Innovation and Renewal, Ballinger, Cambridge,
MA, 1987.
TIMMONS, J. A., New Venture Creation, Second Ed., Richard D. Irwin, Homewood, IL, 1985.
TYEBJEE, T. AND A. V. BRUNO, "A Model of Venture Capitalist Investment Activity," Managemnent Sci.,
30, 9 (1984), 1051-1066.
VAN DE VEN, A. H., R. HUDSON AND D. M. SCHROEDER, "Designing New Business Start Ups: Entrepreneurial,
Organizational and Ecological Considerations," J. Management, 10, 1 (1984), 87-107.
T.{1g42fwefx}