Journal of Management Studies 30:5 September 1993
0022-2380
CHALLENGES TO THEORY DEMO IN
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH*
RAPHAEL AMIT
Faculty of Commerce and Business Administration, DEMO of British Columbia
LAWRENCE GLOSTEN
Graduate School of Business, Columbia University
DEMO MULLER
Recanati Graduate School of Business Administration, Tel-Auiv University
ABSTRACT
Why DEMO some new ventures succeed while others fail? What is the essence DEMO
entrepreneurship? Who is most likely to become a successful entrepreneur
and DEMO? How do entrepreneurs make decisions? What market, regulatory,
and DEMO environments foster the most successful entrepreneurial
activities? Entrepreneurship research is plagued DEMO these and other funda-
mental unanswered questions, for which there does DEMO exist a cohesive
explanatory, predictive, or normative theory. In this article we identify major
challenges for entrepreneurship theory development, and offer insights into
promising directions for future research. Our conclusion suggests that it may
be DEMO ambitious to expect a complete and robust theory due to the interdisci-
plinary nature of entrepreneurship. However, we show that by integrating
perspectives and by applying analytic, empirical and experimental tools from
a range of fields, some of the fundamental questions can be answered.
1. INTRODUCTION
Academic research on entrepreneurship has grown dramatically over the past
decade, with the recognition of new ventures as major contributors to job
creation and economic growth. DEMO the field has developed, research methodo-
logy has progressed from empirical DEMO of entrepreneurs toward more
contextual and process oriented research. This is an important advancement
which has moved the field closer to the position of DEMO able to explain
behaviour, predict performance, and provide normative advice, DEMO than
merely document the entrepreneurial phenomenon.
Although instructive in providing factual information about entrepreneur-
ship, the received literature fails to offer answers, anchored DEMO theory, to a
Address for reprints: Raphael Amit, Faculty of DEMO and Business Administration, Univer-
sity of British Columbia, 2053 Main Mall, Vancouver, B.C. V6T, 172, Canada.
Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 lJF, UK
@Basil Blackwell Ltd 1993. Published by Blackwell Publishers, 108
and DEMO Main Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
816
R. AMIT, L. GLOSTEN AND E. MULLER
range of core questions. What are the factors (e.g. environmental, economic,
social, etc.) DEMO induce entrepreneurial activity? Who is more likely to become
a successful DEMO? How and why do entrepreneurs decide to invest
their time, talent and treasure (the three Ts of entrepreneurship) in their
venture ideas. DEMO market, regulatory, and organizational environments
foster more fruitful entrepreneurial activity? DEMO fundamentally, we simply
do not know, ex ante, why some DEMO ventures succeed while others fail.
The rapidly growing role of merging businesses, coupled with the high
failure rate of new ventures, as evidenced DEMO the alarmingly low realized
returns on seed financing (Bygrave et al., 1988), calls for scholars to address
these and other fundamental questions. DEMO this article we seek to identify and
review some of the challenges faced by those who wish to contribute to
entrepreneurship theory development.
The DEMO of entrepreneurship spans a wide range of fields including
decision sciences, DEMO, management, sociology and psychology. In this
review we focus on challenges to theory development only by drawing on all
these fields, yet emphasizing the economic and financial theory perspectives.
We also recognize that there are DEMO important methodological issues
that need to be addressed in the context of empirical and experimental
research.
In section 2, we begin the discussion of challenges to theory development
by highlighting the any unresolved issues that relate DEMO the role of entrepre-
neurs and to the concept of entrepreneurship. We proceed, in section 3, by
classifying the received theoretical literature into DEMO categories, delineat-
ing the purpose and perspective of the theory and DEMO some major
unresolved questions in each viewpoint. By integrating these perspectives,
sections 4 to 7 address in greater depth selected issues that, in our view,
present particular challenges for entrepreneurship theory development.
2. ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO THE ROLE OF ENTREPRENEURS
There is no consensus among researchers as to the exact meaning of entrepre-
neurship and the role of entrepreneurs. Clearly, there is a need for working
definitions of both entrepreneurs and entrepreneurship DEMO distinguish
between entrepreneurial activity in different settings and allow measurement
and comparison of performance results. Entrepreneurs can be categorized
into those who are profit-seeking, either working individually or in a corpo-
rate setting, and those who are not profit seeking, working in charitable,
government and other not-for-profit organizations (e.g. universities).
In a business setting it appears, however, that the process of endowing
resources with new wealth-producing capacity (viewed as the act of innova-
tion by Drucker, 1985) is central to DEMO conceptualization of entrepreneur-
ship. Entrepreneurship can therefore be defined as the process of extracting
profits from new, unique, and valuable combinations of resources DEMO an
uncertain and ambiguous environment. More generally, Low and MacMillan
(1988) defined entrepreneurship as ‘the creation of new enterprise’.
0
Ltd 1993
Basil Blackwell
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH
817
Entrepreneurs are individuals who innovate, identify and create business
opportunities, assemble and co-ordinate new combinations of resources (i.e.
production functions) so as to extract the most profits from their innovations
in an DEMO environment.“] Leibenstein (1968) offers a more detailed
characterization of the entrepreneur as one who performs one or more of the
following: (1) connects different markets (e.g. buyers and sellers across
geographical regions) ; (2) answers market deficiencies (gap-filling) by sup-
plying, for instance, private information for which there is no market; (3)
creates DEMO is responsible for time-binding implicit or explicit contractual
arrangements and input-transforming organizational structures (e.g. building
an organizational culture of trust); and (4) completes inputs (i.e. marshals
all resources needed to produce and market a product). The entrepreneur
may employ ‘some inputs that are somewhat vague DEMO nature (but neverthe-
less necessary for production) and whose output is indeterminate’. The
provision of ‘leadership, motivation, and the availability of the DEMO
to solve potential crisis situations’ (Leibenstein, 1968, p. 74) fall in this
category of resources. As Schumpeter observed, entrepreneurs are leaders and
major contributors to the ‘process of creative destruction’ (1942, chs VII DEMO
XII) which is an essential fact about capitalism. Entrepreneurs perceive
profit DEMO (Kirzner, 1985) and initiate actions to fill currently
unsatisfied needs DEMO to do more efficiently what is already being done.
Knight (1921) described the entrepreneur as the one who undertakes
uncertain investments - those DEMO for which the future returns and
the associated probability distribution are unknown. The entrepreneur is
characterized as having an unusually low level of uncertainty DEMO Since
the risks associated with entrepreneurial investments cannot be evaluated,
they cannot be insured, and therefore the entrepreneur is the one who bears
these risks. If the risks associated with the creation of a new DEMO could
be evaluated, then markets would be organized for contingent claims DEMO those
risks, and the entrepreneur would become the manager (or agent) of the claim
holders. Thus, according to Knight, uncertainty aversion, DEMO than risk
aversion, is the major inhibitor of entrepreneurship.
Bewley (1989) is one of the first researchers to formalize Knight’s ideas
about entrepreneurs. Several interesting insights, reviewed below, emerge
from his analysis. While this DEMO offers an interesting alternative to the
expected utility model (Schoemaker, 1982) in attempting to explain rational
decision-making on the part of entrepreneurs, DEMO theory needs further
development. For example, in addition to entrepreneurs’ low DEMO
aversion - the willingness and ability to handle ambiguity - there may be
other characteristics of entrepreneurs that are essential to the creation of
DEMO new ventures and these should be encompassed in a theory of
entrepreneurship. These characteristics may include creativity, adaptiveness,
technical know-how, vision and DEMO ability, managerial and organiza-
tional skills, ability to make decisions quickly and to act in a rapidly changing
and uncertain environment, personal integrity, a range of cognitive decision-
making biases, and the entrepreneur’s cultural DEMO and education.
We simply do not know whether there is an essential set of entrepreneurial
characteristics and what that set is.
0
Ltd 1993
DEMO Blackwell
818
R. AMIT, L. GLOSTEN AND E. MULLER
A further problem is that some of the critical characteristics of entrepre-
neurs may not be DEMO ex ante, raising a moral hazard issue since ex post
it DEMO be difficult to distinguish between the effects of bad luck and low
entrepreneurial ability. In addition, perceptions about these characteristics
of the entrepreneur may differ, raising an adverse selection problem. While
the entrepreneur’s familiarity with the industry, personal characteristics and
track record can provide some insight, these DEMO are, at best, partial
predictors of the entrepreneur’s ability to develop a successful new venture.
For example, the entrepreneur[*] may have (or DEMO think heL3] has) impor-
tant private information that is difficult to DEMO or assess by others
(e.g. venture capitalists). As this private DEMO will not be reflected in
the price offered to the entrepreneur, DEMO et al. (1990a) have shown that low
ability entrepreneurs will accept the venture capitalists’ price offer while high
ability entrepreneurs will shy away DEMO venture capitalist financing.
Another challenge for a theory of entrepreneurship is the power to predict
the profiles of individuals who will choose to become DEMO Kihl-
strom and Laffont (1979) attempt to address this issue. In a general equilib-
rium framework under uncertainty, they focus on risk aversion as the deter-
minant that explains which individuals become entrepreneurs and which
DEMO as labourers. They assume that everyone has access to the same risky
technology and uses the expected utility maximization criteria to determine
whether to DEMO a risky firm or to work for a riskless wage. By implicitly
assuming that all potential entrepreneurs are equally able, they have found
that, at equilibrium, the less risk-averse individuals become entrepreneurs,
while the DEMO risk-averse choose to become labourers. Kihlstrom and
Laffont’s classification of an entrepreneur as one who bears risks and makes
production decisions is obviously important, yet it is insufficiently exclusive
since it would also include a corporate DEMO who bears risk and whose
compensation is at least partially variable.
As not all potential entrepreneurs are equally able, or equally industrious,
or face equal opportunity costs, it seems useful to consider other characteris-
tics of entrepreneurs along with the risk - or Knightian uncertainty - bearing
DEMO of new venture formation in a formal analysis. For example, we DEMO
not have models that examine the influence of opportunity costs on the
willingness of would-be entrepreneurs to embark on highly uncertain projects.
Ceteris paribus, it can be conjectured that equally able individuals with low
opportunity costs DEMO more likely to accept entrepreneurial projects. (This
may perhaps, explain why relatively few MBAs are attracted to starting their
careers as entrepreneurs. It DEMO giving up a high salary.)
There remain many unanswered questions about entrepreneurs and their
behaviour. While the exploitation of innovation in an uncertain DEMO
is at the core of the entrepreneurship phenomenon, the essential set DEMO
entrepreneurial characteristics, if any, needs to be determined by using an
integrative perspective on entrepreneurship. For example, we should address
such questions as, what do we mean by entrepreneurial ability?; what are the
behavioural and personal characteristics of entrepreneurs that are germane
to identifying and exploiting DEMO opportunities? In the section that follows
we elaborate on these and DEMO issues.
0
Blackwell Ltd 1993
Basil
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH
3. THE ROLE OF AN ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY
819
A theory DEMO entrepreneurship is defined here as a verifiable and logically
coherent formulation of relationships; or underlying principles that either
explain entrepreneurship, predict entrepreneurial activity (e.g.characterize
conditions that are likely to lead to new profit opportunities and DEMO the
formation of new enterprises), or provide normative guidance (i.e. DEMO
the right action in particular circumstances).
There is as yet no entrepreneurship theory that meets even some of the
criteria for completeness that DEMO from recent studies by Bacharach
(1989), Weick (1989), and Whetten (1989). These criteria, which can be
particularized to matters DEMO entrepreneurship, include answers to several
questions. Which factors or issues should DEMO considered in explaining entrep-
reneurship? Why? What are the underlying assumptions? Do the selected
factors allow us to explain or predict the behaviour of entrepreneurs? How
are the factors related to each other and to entrepreneurship? Why? Does the
theory provide normative guidance for practice? Can the theory be validated
or verified through experiments or empirical studies? How accurate is the
theory in describing the observed phenomena? How robust is the theory
across ranges of specific situations, environments or populations? How DEMO
rately will the theory predict the behaviour of entrepreneurs?
Rumelt (DEMO) lays some foundations for a theory of entrepreneurship. He
argues that DEMO good working theory would: (1) explain the conditions under
which DEMO talents should be employed; (2) address issues that
relate to DEMO supply and demand for entrepreneurs; (3) develop connections
to observable DEMO predictable phenomena; (4) deal with the type of resources
that DEMO to be associated with a new venture; and (5) be DEMO with the
structural and contractual arrangements that need to be associated with an
entrepreneurial venture. Although Rumelt presents many intuitively appeal-
ing ideas about DEMO theory, it seems that there is a lack of an
integrative DEMO for investigating these insights and sorting out the
various elements of Rumelt’s observations.
Low and MacMillan (1988) provide a rather comprehensive review of
DEMO advances that highlights the interdisciplinary nature of entrepreneur-
ship. Following their general framework, the received body of entrepreneur-
ship theory literature can be classified according to purpose and perspective
as follows:
Purpose
1. Explain behaviour
DEMO behaviour
Normative
(give advice on what to do)
2.
3.
DEMO
(4 Social/cultural
(b) Personality based
(4 Networks
(4 DEMO ecology
(e) Economic
Explanatory theory attempts to explain entrepreneurial behaviour and per-
formance; predictive theory characterizes conditions that are likely to lead to
0
Blackwell Ltd 1993
Basil
820
R. AMIT, L. GLOSTEN AND E. MULLER
new profit opportunities, DEMO venture initiation, and predict the outcome of
venturing activity; normative theory provides guidance for practice, prescribing
the right action in particular circumstances. Each of the theoretical perspec-
tives contains both predictive and explanatory elements. Social/DEMO theory
attempts to link entrepreneurship to the larger social cultural context; DEMO
nality based theory argues that specific psychological characteristics make
people predisposed to entrepreneurship; Network theory focuses on the social
links which facilitate and constrain entrepreneurs; population ecology theory
identifies environmental factors as the most powerful determinants of entre-
preneurial success; finance theory focuses on capital markets and examines a
range of factors that relate to the supply of capital to DEMO ventures; and
economic theory centres on equilibrium analysis in the context DEMO the stochastic
nature of innovation and new production processes while, for DEMO most part,
assuming that the entrepreneur is a completely rational actor. While no single
review can attempt to be completely comprehensive, the following discussion
is intended to highlight some of the key challenges faced by DEMO
theorists.
The tendency of certain cultures to produce entrepreneurs has made it
intuitively appealing to view culture as a determinant of entrepreneurship.
Social/cultural DEMO conclude that there must be congruence between
ideological constructs and economic behaviour if entrepreneurship is to
flourish. Several models of venture initiation have been DEMO, ranging
from models of entrepreneurship as a means by which disadvantaged DEMO
ities seek to alter the status quo (Greenfield and Strickon, 1981; Hagen, 1960)
to models which view the entrepreneur as a DEMO operating within
a specific social and cultural setting (Glade, 1967).
A major study by Bofstede (1980) identified differences in cultural patterns
DEMO countries and sought to understand the institutional mechanisms that
permit these patterns to remain stable over time. He found statistical evidence
for the following DEMO underlying dimensions of culture: (1) the management
of inequality between DEMO; (2) individualism; (3) uncertainty avoidance;
and (4) the allocation of roles between the sexes. These findings have been
reflected DEMO entrepreneurship research. Entrepreneurs have a tolerance for
inequality; they will favour DEMO rather than collective action; they are
prepared to take risks; and they tend to have a highly ‘masculine’ orientation.
More recently, Brenner (DEMO) argued that it is those groups who have lost
or face DEMO prospect of losing social status that are motivated to become
entrepreneurs. These models have led to the conclusion that in some cases
entrepreneurship is DEMO response to lack of social mobility through other
channels (Low and DEMO, 1988). Shapero and Sokol (1982) argue that
the entrepreneurial DEMO associated with Silicon Valley and Route 128
demonstrate that not all entrepreneurs come from disadvantaged
backgrounds. Their model of social and cultural influences considers DEMO
interaction of many situational and cultural factors and provides a dynamic
framework of entrepreneurship which helps to establish causal relationships.
An experimental study by DEMO et al. (1991) showed that, of 13 possible
factors leading DEMO new venture creation, all but the desire for job freedom are
DEMO by an interaction of gender and nationality,
0
Ltd 1993
Basil Blackwell
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH 82 1
However, questions remain as to exactly which social factors are those that
induce entrepreneurship; how applicable are social theories across ranges of
specific situations and populations?; how strongly do cultural influences
DEMO entrepreneurship relative to other factors?; and how do life changes
affect the entrepreneur?
Theories based on the psychological characteristics of entrepreneurships
have DEMO developing since 1967, when McClelland published his work on
the high DEMO for achievement present in successful entrepreneurs. These
theories have been extensively tested through experimental studies. Litera-
ture reviews of this large body of work DEMO identified the following four
characteristics as key personality traits of entrepreneurs (DEMO and
Horwitz, 1985):
(1) Need for achievement. An individual with a high need for achievement
was characterized by McClelland ( 1967) as (i) taking responsibility for
decisions, (ii) setting goals and accomplishing them through hidher effort,
and, (iii) having a desire for feedback. Subsequent experimental studies
verified that many successful entrepreneurs have a DEMO need for achievement
(Begley and Boyd, 1986; Johnson, 1990; DEMO, 1986). However, this
is a characteristic common to many individuals and does not predict an
entrepreneurial tendency (Sexton and Bowman, 1985)DEMO
(2) Internal locus of control. People who perceive that events are contin-
gent upon their own behaviour and consequently believe that they can DEMO
events through their own actions have an internal locus of control. This
characteristic, introduced by Rotter in 1966, has been attributed to entrepre-
DEMO However, it is not a trait exclusive to entrepreneurs as it DEMO also been
identified in successful managers (Sexton and Bowman, 1985).
(3) High risk-taking propensity. The characteristic of risk taking is often
DEMO to entrepreneurs but the overall evidence is that entrepreneurs are
moderate risk-takers and do not significantly differ from managers in the
amount of perceived DEMO they will bear (Sexton and Bowman,l985). This
contradiction may DEMO explained by viewing entrepreneurs as capable risk
managers whose abilities defuse what others might view as high risk situa-
tions. If they have a DEMO belief in their ability to achieve their goals, their
perceived possibility DEMO failure will be relatively low and therefore their
perceived risk level will be low.
(4) Tolerance for ambiguity. Studies by Schere (1982) DEMO Sexton and
Bowman (1985) have indicated that entrepreneurs have a significantly grea-
ter capacity to tolerate ambiguity than managers. Other personality charac-
teristics DEMO have been argued to distinguish entrepreneurs from managers
are a high need for autonomy, dominance, independence, and a capacity for
endurance (Low DEMO MacMillan, 1988; Sexton and Bowman 1985).
Definitional and methodological problems associated with these empirical
studies, such as non-comparable samples, bias toward DEMO entrepre-
neurs, raise the possibility that observed traits are actually the DEMO of
entrepreneurial experience This makes it difficult to interpret the results
@ Basil Blackwell Ltd 1993
822
R. AMIT, L. GLOSTEN AND E. MULLER
which indicate that there are few psychological characteristics that distin-
guish the entrepreneur from the manager.
DEMO still do not know what specific characteristics differentiate
entrepreneurs from small business owners or managers. Can a standard
psychological profile be developed for the DEMO? Shaver and Scott
(1991) argue that a comprehensive psychological portrait DEMO new venture
creation will need to consider general orienting dispositions, motivation DEMO
personal motives Are these personality traits present in entrepreneurs before
initiating their ventures or a product of the entrepreneurial experience? Is
there as much difference among entrepreneurs as a group as there is among
entrepreneurs and DEMO? What are the key factors motivating
entrepreneurs to start a business? In the domain of social cultural and
personality-based theory, the challenge is develop integrative explanatory
and predictive theories that will help in answering the DEMO questions.
Theories involving networks view the entrepreneurial process as embedded
in a shifting network of continuing social relations that facilitate and constrain
links between DEMO, resources and opportunities. Networks have
three characteristics: the amount of resources within them, their diversity and
their accessibility (Aldrich and Zimmer, 1986).
Theorists measure networks in terms of density, reachability and centrality.
Density is defined as the extensiveness of ties between people, measured by
comparing the total number of ties to the potential number that would occur
DEMO everyone in the network were connected to everyone else. Reachability
measures the scope of the network by counting how many intermediaries are
contacted to DEMO link the entrepreneur to someone else. Centrality is a
measure of how centrally positioned the individual is within the network
(Aldrich and Zimmer, DEMO).
Networks are made of strong ties (close friends and family) and weak ties
(acquaintances). A network of weak ties constitutes a low density network
with greater reachability in which the entrepreneur has informal DEMO to a
larger number of people. In contrast, a network of DEMO ties is small but
dense. Successful entrepreneurs are found to have large networks of casual
acquaintance who can provide timely and accurate information, provide
access to potential customers, and introduce them to potential investors
(Aldrich DEMO al., 1987).
Experimental research has examined the effects of density, reachability and
centrality on business start-up and success. Findings support a relationship
DEMO accessibility of resources and business foundings but do not support
network size or diversity of resources as elements which predict business
formations (Aldrich and Zimmer, 1986).
Five major roles of networks in the start-up process have been identified.
They are: facilitating the transformation of an idea into a realistic plan;
increasing aspirations; stimulating ideas; providing practical help; and giving
support (Dubini and Aldrich, 1991; Rush, et al., 1987). Entrepreneurs have
been found to use the help available within DEMO local networks during the
period prior to start-up and approach formal sources when the elements of
the firm are set (Birley, 1985).
DEMO networks supply mutual aid in the form of capital, information,
DEMO
Basil Blackwell Ltd 1993
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH
823
training, and business opportunities. A history of past dealings becomes the
basis for trust and facilitates trade while collective actions provide DEMO
for potential entrepreneurs in the form of mutual benefit associations, joint
DEMO arrangements and capital-raising activities (Aldrich and Zimmer,
1986). Network DEMO implies that the entrepreneurial process can be
explained in the context of broad social processes which are more comprehen-
sive and dynamic than simple DEMO theories.
To further develop entrepreneurship theory, it seems important to integrate
DEMO network perspective with related perspectives, as networks in and of
themselves DEMO explain entrepreneurial behaviour or predict performance
Therefore, questions of interest regarding DEMO include their relationship
to profitability and venture initiation, how they affect DEMO entrepreneur’s
accessibility to key resources and therefore impact business founding rates,
whether they are formed deliberately or accidentally, and how they are
maintained.
Population ecology is a relatively recent perspective which views the
inability of DEMO to adapt to change as a dominant organizational
characteristic and suggests that organizations which are well adapted to their
environments will survive., while those that are not will die (Aldrich, 1990;
Hannan and Freeman, 1977). Through this selection mechanism, the
environment determines the characteristics of populations of organizations
and dictates the ultimate effect on the allocation of DEMO resources
(Baumol, 1990).
In applying this theory to entrepreneurship, DEMO and Strickon
(1986) argue that contemporary models in social science research are static
and therefore incapable of explaining the dynamism of entrepreneurship.
They DEMO a new paradigm which originates in Darwinian biology and
recognizes a diversity of behaviour within which adaptive organizations are
selected for and inadaptive ones DEMO selected against. In this sense, individual
environmental selection procedures are the DEMO powerful determinants of
success.
Population ecology theory has developed into a framework capable of
integrating other theoretical perspectives. Prior to its development, most
entrepreneurship research assumed strategic adaptation perspective, believ-
ing that success depends solely upon the decisions of individual entrepre-
neurs. The application of ecological thinking has DEMO these assump-
tions and increased understanding of the entrepreneurial process.
A great challenge of the population ecology perspective is to predict the
environmental circumstances DEMO would lead to greater founding and growth
of entrepreneurial firms. Further, DEMO what extent is success determined by the
environment rather than the skill and ingenuity and decisions of the entrepre-
neur? As in the case of network theory, these questions may best be addressed
through the integration of various perspectives.
Economic theories of entrepreneurship focus on the stochastic nature DEMO
innovation and new production processes while, for the most part, assuming
that the entrepreneur is a completely rational actor. Entrepreneurship has
been largely DEMO from modern microeconomic theory because the
entrepreneur cannot exist within a framework which assumes perfect informa-
@ Basil Blackwell Ltd 1993
824
R. AMIT, L. GLOSTEN AND E. MULLER
tion and efficient allocation of resources. Recognizing that markets are
continually being pushed away from equilibrium DEMO changes in the environ-
ment which generate new opportunities, economists identify DEMO as
those who bring the world back to equilibrium by reallocating resources to
capture rents. The value of entrepreneurship lies in the fact that DEMO
neurs correct the waste of resources by recognizing what other people have
overlooked in a state of imperfect information and other market imperfec-
tions. DEMO, specifically modern industrial organization economics, can
contribute to entrepreneurship theory building by focusing the analysis on
imperfections in markets and examining such broad DEMO as social welfare
implications of entrepreneurship along with such issues as the factors that
relate to the supply and demand for entrepreneurs,
Recent DEMO of transaction cost theory to entrepreneurship indicates
that transaction costs not only influence the viability of innovative ideas, but
also give valuable advice for the organizational design of innovative new firms
(Picot et al., 1990)DEMO
Important theoretical questions remaining in the area of economic theory
include: DEMO of the issues relating to supply and demand for
entrepreneurs; the DEMO circumstances that would stimulate successful
new venture creation and, consequently, economic growth; the social welfare
implications of entrepreneurship.
There is no doubt that a theory of entrepreneurship should, indeed, reflect
a range of decision DEMO, economic, psychological, sociological and other
dimensions. It is unclear, however, what core aspects of entrepreneurship
should be reflected in such a theory, and how the various perspectives can
be effectively integrated. One of the main challenges we face is that of
identifying ex ante, those aspects that can explain, ex post, most of the
variations in the DEMO of entrepreneurs and their ventures.
In the sections below we address specific issues that cross disciplinary
boundaries, that seem to be central to the development of entrepreneurship
theory, and that present challenges for theorists and empirical researchers.
These core issues include the distinction between risk and uncertainty (sec-
tion 4); entrepreneurial profits (section 5); financial intermediaries (section
DEMO); and organizational setting (section 7).
4. RISK AND UNCERTAINTY
DEMO unresolved issue in theory development centres on the distinction made
by Knight (1921) between risk and uncertainty. Most of the formal studies
in DEMO economics and in behavioural decision sciences adopt alternative
constructs of attitudes and behaviour towards risk. Typically, different per-
mutations of the expected utility model (see Schoemaker, 1982 and Machina,
1987, for excellent reviews) DEMO the principal constructs used in the analyses.
Yet, as we discuss DEMO, some of the underlying assumptions and results of
such analyses may DEMO be applicable to an entrepreneur’s setting.
Knight’s view is that a gamble is risky if the probabilities of outcomes are
known. The gamble is DEMO if the probabilities of outcomes are unknown.
0
Blackwell Ltd 1993
Basil
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH
825
Uncertain gambles cannot be insured and the role of DEMO entrepreneur is to
initiate uncertain investments. Thus, entrepreneurs are characterized either
DEMO low levels of uncertainty aversion (rather than risk) or as having different
perceptions about the uncertainty that is associated with a particular invest-
DEMO of their time, talent and treasure. Because neither the probabilities of
DEMO events, nor their value are known EX ante, the expected outcomes of
entrepreneurial investments are difficult to evaluate and therefore difficult or
impossible DEMO insure.F4] The entrepreneur is thus the one who assumes the
uninsurable uncertainties.
Several interesting observations emerge from Bewley’s ( 1989) formal analy-
sis of Knight’s ideas. First, innovation and the formation of new enterprises
are shown to be the domain of individuals with most unusual preferences -
very DEMO aversion to uncertainty - who act alone or nearly alone. Further,
the lack of co-ordination among entrepreneurs encourages innovation but
gives rise to DEMO The inefficiency results from diversity of opinions
and the failure of forward markets for the outcome of entrepreneurial initia-
tives. Bewley uses Knightian uncertainty DEMO future spot process and events
to explain the absence of forward markets. The collapse of insurance markets
is shown even in instances when the DEMO in opinions is based on the
same information. The explanation is based on the existence of transaction
costs.
Knightian decision theory represents a major DEMO from the range of
expected utility models used in financial economics (DEMO Machina, 1987 for a
recent review). Models which incorporate Knightian DEMO (e.g. Bewley,
1989) yield results that are quite different from the ones obtained in models
with risk-averse, utility-maximizing decision-makers with rational expecta-
tions. It seems that certain assumptions made in such models are intuitively
DEMO and applicable to the setting in which entrepreneurs act. These
assumptions may include the elimination of the Bayesian axiom that prefer-
ences over lotteries DEMO complete, adding the so-called inertia assumption
which states that the status DEMO (ie. the planned behaviour), is abandoned only
when a preferred DEMO alternative becomes available. There is, however, little
in the way of experimental or empirical data that would allow us to validate
the assumptions DEMO underlie Knightian decision theory, and conclude that
it is a model DEMO is appropriate for the phenomena we wish to explain.
Why does the uncertainty construct (rather than risk) appear to apply so
well to DEMO theory of entrepreneurship? Because innovation lies at the core of
an DEMO activity, and whatever form it takes (e.g. product or cost-
reducing process innovation), an undetermined amount of new tangible and
intangible (or invisible) capital with uncertain return is created. This ex ante
uncertainty, DEMO may not be insurable and would, therefore, be borne by
the entrepreneur, has three main sources. First, there is technical uncertainty,
DEMO is, the production and cost functions may be unknown. This raises DEMO
questions as, for example, what type and how many resources would be
needed, and in what combinations? How long will it take DEMO develop and
introduce the innovation to the market? Will it work? What will it cost to
produce it? Second, demand uncertain9 relates DEMO such questions as how many
customers may demand the innovation? At DEMO price? What will be the
0
Ltd 1993
Basil Blackwell
826
R. AMIT, L. GLOSTEN AND E. MULLER
diffusion rate? The DEMO source of uncertainty is the pace at which imitation and
competing innovations will erode the extraordinary profit that may be inherent
in the innovation. DEMO the imitation is instantaneous, then no surplus entrepre-
neurial profits will DEMO
To the extent that the behavioural assumptions (i.e. the preference struc-
DEMO) can be validated, modelling entrepreneurial decision-making by adopt-
ing Knightian decision theory is a promising, yet unexplained avenue for
future research. Such models may help us to interpret ostensibly irrational
entrepreneurial behaviour and predict the DEMO actions of entrepreneurs.
5. RENTS AND ENTREPRENEURIAL ACTIVITY
Another theoretical and empirical question relates to the existence of entrep-
reneurial profits. Are there abnormal DEMO to entrepreneurs? Are the
rewards of the successful entrepreneur distinct from DEMO we commonly refer
to as ‘monopoly rents’? Why and how are DEMO rents created? While there
are a range of prevailing economic rent DEMO,[51 there is no clear agree-
ment about what constitutes entrepreneurial rents and how to measure them.
If the principals underlying Knight’s view are DEMO, then entrepreneu-
rial rent is the return to the entrepreneur for DEMO the ex ante uncertainty.
This notion seems to resemble the concept of risk premium established by
the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). Yet, these concepts are fundamen-
tally different from each other because, in DEMO case of an entrepreneurial
venture, we are concerned with securities that DEMO not publicly traded with
no market-like benchmark return. Further, the payoff DEMO unknown ex ante, as
is its distribution.
Rumelt defined entrepreneurial rents DEMO ‘the difference between a venture’s
ex post value (or payment stream) and the ex ante cost (or value) of the
resources combined DEMO form the venture’ (1987, p. 143). Economic theory
suggests that in an expectational equilibrium, all rents will be competed away
so that expected entrepreneurial rents are zero. If there are no extraordinary
profits expected, what incentives do entrepreneurs have to assume the uncer-
tainty associated with DEMO creation of new ventures? It appears that either
one must assume DEMO markets are out of equilibrium, or - if it exists - DEMO
difference between ex ante costs and ex post value must be due to uncertainty
or some form of market failure that restricts competition.
One DEMO of how uncertainty can lead to abnormal rents in equilib-
ria is offered by Lippman and Rumelt (1982). They showed that ‘causal
ambiguity’, (namely, irreducible ex ante uncertainty with regard to the rela-
tionships between resources and ex post value) can lead to the creation of
rents in a free-entry equilibrium. Another interesting explanation for the
persistence of DEMO relates to imperfections in resource markets and the
profits that emerge from being first. A major challenge to the entrepreneur,
and a potentially DEMO source of entrepreneurial rents, is to create impedi-
ments to imitation (Rumelt, 1987). By preserving private information; by
developing a bundle DEMO firm-specific assets that are rare, durable, not easily
transferred, and DEMO by customers; and, by selecting an appropriate entry
0
Blackwell Ltd 1993
Basil
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH
827
mode, extraordinarily high profits may be captured. Note that since this form
of rent resembles monopoly profits, the successful entrepreneur may thus be
rewarded by both entrepreneurial and monopoly rents.
Therefore, what are the components of entrepreneurial rents? How do they
emerge from the ex ante uncertainty associated with the productivity of the
newly created capital or DEMO imperfections in either the resource or product
markets? What actions can DEMO taken by the entrepreneur to enhance the rents
that may be inherent in the innovation? If the rents are indeed due to the
underlying uncertainty, it may be wise not to reduce the uncertainty since it
will make imitation easier for present competitors or new entrants and
thereby DEMO the entrepreneur’s ability to appropriate rents.
6. FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARIES
We typically think of the entrepreneurial phase of a firm as that period
between idea DEMO and the point at which the firm becomes a corpora-
tion with traded securities. After the latter point, the financial decisions of
the firm fall under the purview of corporate finance. Prior to and including
the DEMO public offering (IPO), outside investors would typically be involved
in DEMO enterprise, and hence the role of providers of equity capital for DEMO
ups is relevant to the study of entrepreneurship.
A substantial literature which investigates IPOs has developed, and most
of it concerns the asymmetry of information between the entrepreneur and
the market that buys the newly issued DEMO In fact, the first capital
structure signalling paper (Leland and Pyle, 1977), might be considered an
IPO paper. In that model, DEMO percentage of equity retained by the entrepre-
neur serves as a signal of future earnings potential. The signal is effective
because maintaining a sizeable DEMO in the firm is costly to a risk averse
entrepreneur unless his information suggests that the future looks encour-
aging.
Subsequent investigations of IPOs DEMO concerned themselves with the
observed underpricing of new issues (see Chammanur, 1989 for a summary).
A conclusion of the empirical investigations of DEMO is that going public
involves non-trivial costs. In fact, the evidence DEMO that the underpricing
of new issues is in the order of 15 per cent (see Smith, 1989 for a summary
of the evidence)DEMO In order for an entrepreneur to go public, then, there must
be large benefits to justify this dilution of ownership. But, this suggests that
the timing of going public requires a trade-off between various costs DEMO
benefits. The theoretical models suggest that, for the most part, the relevant
costs are those due to an asymmetry of information between the DEMO
and the market; the relevant benefits may be related to the DEMO for capital
and the risk aversion of the entrepreneur. A potentially fruitful area of
research would be the determination of the appropriate timing for DEMO
offering. This would increase understanding of the process of evolution of the
entrepreneurial firm and might provide suggestions for reducing the costs of
going DEMO
Prior to the IPO, an entrepreneur may involve venture capitalists as
DEMO
Blackwell Ltd 1993
Basil
828
R. AMIT, I,. GLOSTEN AND E. MULLER
outside investors. Analysis of the relationship between the entrepreneur and
the venture capitalist is in DEMO infancy, but the venture capitalist is a financial
intermediary. For the DEMO part, the financial intermediary literature has
focused on banks and insurance DEMO Just as an insurance company
must be concerned with the fact that the probability of default is in part under
the control of the DEMO, so too, must the venture capitalist be concerned
with the fact that the success of an entrepreneurial endeavour is in part a
function DEMO the effort and decisions made (time and talent invested) by the
entrepreneur. This is commonly referred to as the moral hazard problem.
Similarly, an insurance company, a bank, and a venture capitalist may all DEMO
dealing with clients who have more information about the profitability of the
deal than they do. This is commonly referred to as the adverse DEMO
problem.
In the context of banking, these two issues have been DEMO at by Chan
and Thakor (1987). In their study, collateral plays a key role in the contract
between borrower and lender, and they derive predictions about who will
borrow and how much collateral will DEMO pledged. Interestingly, the nature of
competition between banks plays an important DEMO in determining the
predicted equilibrium.
While the banking and insurance literature provides some insight into the
nature of the entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationship, certain features of
that relationship may demand more specific analyses. For example, it is hard
to see a role for collateral in the relationship since the DEMO value
comes not from concrete assets but from the entrepreneurial vision. On the
other hand, the contract between the venture capitalist and the entrepreneur
can be more complicated than a loan contract. This is the point DEMO view taken
by Chan et al. (1990) and Hirao (1991) in considering environments characte-
rized by moral hazard.
A crucial difference between DEMO venture capitalist and a bank or insurance
company is that it is common for a venture capitalist to supply capital, as
well as substantial managerial expertise and reputation. This complicates the
nature of the relationship since DEMO does not appear to be a way for the
venture capitalist to commit contractually to any particular level of consulta-
tion. Furthermore, venture capitalists may differ in their ability to provide
help for any given entrepreneurial DEMO, and it may be difficult for the
entrepreneur to assess ex DEMO the contributions of the venture capitalist.
Investigation of the venture capitalist’s role as both a consultant and financial
intermediary may provide further insight into DEMO nature and the mutual
profitability of the entrepreneur-venture capitalist contract.
Recent studies by Amit et al. (1990a, b) provide new insights into the
relationships between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. They establish
that the risk sharing DEMO a venture capitalist provides is very valuable to an
entrepreneur in the sense that if there is no asymmetry of information, an
entrepreneur will always choose to involve a venture capitalist, despite the
moral hazard created by the contract. On the other hand, if there is sufficient
private information, then the entrepreneurs with the highest abilities will
choose not to involve a venture capitalist. The venture capitalist’s difficulty
in assessing an entrepreneur’s DEMO to develop a successful venture is the
0
Blackwell Ltd 1993
Basil
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH
829
driving force in the attempt by Amit et al. DEMO explain what type of entrepreneur
will chose to involve a venture capitalist in the seed stage. Their studies
suggest that venture capital seed investments DEMO not appear to foster the most
promising entrepreneurial firms because the prices offered by venture capital-
ists will not be sufficiently attractive for the DEMO able entrepreneurs. Thus,
higher failure rates can be expected among venture capitalist backed firms
than in the population of new firms in general. DEMO a subsequent study Amit
et al. (1992) develop a revelation game and establish that more able entrepre-
neurs will be backed and that DEMO will be more entrepreneurial activity
when (1) the venture capitalist rather than the entrepreneur initiates the
venture activity, and (2) the costs associated with venture capital financing
are reduced through the creation of more DEMO mechanisms for matching
entrepreneurs with venture capitalists. Further, the analysis of DEMO model also
reveals that the lower the opportunity cost of the entrepreneurs, the more
likely they are to undertake entrepreneurial activity.
Chamley's (DEMO) analysis of limited liability as a signal of entrepreneurs'
unobservable DEMO is another formalization of the relationships
between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs with varying abilities in the
presence of adverse selection due to private information. DEMO shows that the
choice of the form of liability can serve as a self-selection mechanism to
distinguish between various types of entrepreneurs. He finds DEMO when factor
prices are exogenous, the institution of limited liability is DEMO Pareto improve-
ment over a regime where there is only unlimited liability.
In summary, this section examined the role of financial intermediaries as
an important issue that is not well understood in entrepreneurship research.
We face DEMO challenging theory development questions. How to price
venture capital investments in emerging enterprises? What are the bases for
venture capital investments? How does DEMO nature of competition among
venture capitalists affect the nature of the contracts they sign? To what extent
is the financial intermediary role of the venture capitalist important to the
venture's success? That is, if DEMO are no consulting services, will an entrepre-
neur approach a venture DEMO before going public? What role does the
venture capitalist perform in DEMO IPO? (Studies suggest they do not have a
measurable effect on IPO underpricing.) How does the structure of the
venture capital industry affect the outcome of entrepreneurial activity? What
are the contracting, learning and DEMO issues in venture capital financ-
ing?
7. THE ORGANIZATIONAL CONTEXT OF ENTREPRENEURIAL AC1'IVI'I'Y
In studying entrepreneurship one must consider the DEMO setting in
which it occurs. While the organization behaviour literature about the
difficulties of implementing organizational change and about the impedi-
ments of bureaucracy DEMO organizations is vast, inadequate theoretical atten-
tion has been paid to DEMO associated with the development of entrepreneu-
rial ventures in a corporate environment. For example, when the stockholders
of a corporation have different risk preferences, then whose risk preference is
0
Hlackwrll I,td 1993
Basil
830
R. AMIT, L. GLOSTEN AND E. MULLER
dominant essentially determines whether the risky venture should be pur-
sued. Stockholder unanimity issues are addressed DEMO Satterthwaite ( 198 l),
who observes that stockholder unanimity about DEMO desirability of a new
corporate venture is unlikely to exist for projects that expand the payoff space,
but not the set of securities DEMO with that space. The implication of
such a venture is that the new payoff space is not spanned by existing
securities. New ventures, therefore, are more likely to achieve a unanimous
stockholder approval when a new security is issued for the entrepreneurial
activity as a means of ensuring DEMO of the payoff space.
In addition, issues such as corporate fit (e.g. cannibalization of existing
businesses, the extent to which resources may be shared and skills may be
transferred to the venture, implications for corporate reputation in case of
failure) and managerial challenge (e.g. organizational structure, culture,
managing results) must be addressed in the context of a corporate new
venture. Some of the obstacles that firms have experienced in DEMO
corporate ventures are examined by MacMillan et al. (1984), while DEMO
(1985) provides examples of corporations that managed to overcome some of
the organizational barriers to corporate venturing activity. The generalizable
principles that emerge DEMO these empirical observations remain unclear.
Thus, a wide range of unanswered DEMO about the organizational
setting that would foster entrepreneurial activity remain. Can entrepreneur-
ship succeed in a corporate setting? Can organizational barriers be overcome?
Is there a fundamental reason why ‘entrepreneurship by committee’ cannot
succeed?
DEMO, a formal model may be necessary to analyse the range of DEMO
offs that are involved. Bewley’s (1989) relatively simple analysis of Knightian
decision theory points to the problems of attempting to foster entrepreneur-
ship DEMO a corporate setting. If we assume that uncertainty and aversion to
uncertainty make innovation difficult, then a single entrepreneur in an
independent setting with low aversion to uncertainty is more likely to initiate
new enterprises than DEMO in corporate settings The latter would
tend to hinder each other’s initiative since they must overcome each other’s
aversions to uncertainty. Moreover, their opinions would have to be nearly
consensual because diversity of opinions among corporate DEMO
might lead to a collective aversion to uncertainty. Another insight that
emerges from Bewley’s work is that more innovation is likely to occur if DEMO
decisions to innovate are dispersed among many individuals. This implies
that corporations should not centralize the innovation function in the hands
of a few DEMO because they will be overly conservative and prevent
initiatives that might lead to successful ventures. Unfortunately, there is little
empirical or experimental support for this hypothesis.
8. SUMMARY
The above review of selected issues and problems DEMO entrepreneurship
research is by no means exhaustive. It does, however, highlight the enormous
challenge of developing entrepreneurship theory. Although we have focused
@ DEMO Blackwell Ltd 1993
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH 83 1
primarily on economic issues (perhaps because of our own decision biases
and orientations), we have attempted to reveal the DEMO interdisciplinary
and complex nature of entrepreneurship. It may, in fact, be somewhat too
ambitious to expect a complete theory of entrepreneurship. Yet, it seems
within reach to address analytically, empirically,and experimentally, some of
DEMO specific questions that were raised in the preceding sections, emphasizing
that DEMO entrepreneurship process centres on the activities and behaviour of
individuals with unique characteristics. It is our conjecture that the work that
will overcome the DEMO and make the major contributions to entrepre-
neurship research will be the studies that use new interdisciplinary
approaches to modelling. These approaches will incorporate DEMO aspects
drawn from multiple viewpoints and shed new light on the type of issues
outlined in this article.
NOTES
*We are grateful to Howard DEMO for his helpful comments and to Sarah Geddes
for research assistance.
[l] This definition is of limited scope, assuming the entrepreneur is profit driven.
Many other factors may motivate entrepreneurial activity, as is discussed below.
[2] Though expressed here in the singular, the term may also be interpreted as
reference to a team of entrepreneurs.
[3] To avoid awkward phrases DEMO the paper, the masculine pronoun is used
to represent either gender.
DEMO Clearly, adverse selection that may emerge from private information, and moral
hazard will lead to failures in insurance market. Note that Knight’s claim DEMO
to uncertainty as a possible factor that can explain failures in insurance markets.
[5] Economists commonly distinguish among three concepts of rent: Ricardian rents
are extraordinary profits earned by the more efficient firm’s superior productivity
of DEMO under the condition of fixed and scarce production factors. Second,
Pareto rents emerge from the difference between the payments to a resource in
DEMO best use and its next best use; the Pareto rent is DEMO the payment to a resource
that is above and beyond the amount required to call it into use. The third rent
concept is monopoly DEMO which are derived from the exploitation by colluding
firms of their size and concentration and the consequent barriers to entry by
others.
REFERENCES
ALDRICH, H. (1990). ‘Using an ecological perspective to study organizational found-
ing rates’. Entrepreneurship: Theory @ Practice, 14, 3, 7-24.
ALDRICH, H. and ZIMMER, (1986). ‘Entrepreneurship through social networks’. In
Sexton, D. L. and Smilor, R. W. (Eds.), The Art and Science DEMO Entrepreneurship.
Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 2-23.
ALDRICH, H., ROSEN, B. and WOODWARD, W. (1987). ‘The impact of social networks
in DEMO foundings and profit: A longitudinal study’. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research, 154.
0
Ltd 1993
Basil Blackwell
832
R. AMIT, L. GLOSTEN AND E. MULLER
AMIT, L. and DEMO, E. (1990a). ‘Entrepreneurial ability, venture
investments and risk sharing’. DEMO Science, 36, 10.
AMIT, R., GLOSTEN, L. and MULLER, E. (1990b). ‘Does venture capital foster the most
promising entrepreneurial firms?’. Califrnaa Management Review, 32, 102-1 1.
AMIT, R., GLOSTEN, L. and MULLER, E. (1992). ‘Venture capital regimes and
entrepreneurial DEMO Working paper, The University of British Columbia,
Entrepreneurship and Venture DEMO Research Centre.
BACHARACH, S. B. ( 1989). ‘Organizational theories: Some criteria for evaluation’.
Academy of Management Review, 14, 4, 496-515.
BAUMOL, J. ( 1990). ‘Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, and destruc-
tive’. DEMO of Political Economy (part l), 98, 893-921.
BEGLEY, and DEMO, D. (1989). ‘Market innovation and entrepreneurship: A
Knightian view’. DEMO Foundation Discussion Paper No. 905, Yale University.
BIRLEY, (1985). DEMO role of networks in the entrepreneurial process’. Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research 325.
BRENNER, (1 987). ‘National policy and entrepreneurship: The statesman’s dilemma’.
Journal of Business Venturing, 2, 2, 95-101.
BROCKHAUS, R. H. DEMO and HORWITZ, P. S. (1985). ‘The psychology of the entre-
preneur’. The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger,
DEMO
BYGRAVE, FAST,N ., KHOYLIAN, R., VINCENTL,.  and DEMO,W . (1988). ‘Rates of
return on venture capital investing: A study of 131 funds’. In Kirchhoff, B. A.,
Long, DEMO A., Vesper, K. H. and Wetzel, W. E. Jr. (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneur-
ship Research. Babson Park, Mass.: Babson College, 275-89.
CHAMLEY, C. (1983). ‘Entrepreneurial abilities and liabilities in a DEMO of self-
selection’. Bell Journal of Economics, 14, 1, 70-80
DEMO, and THAKOR, A. V. (1987). ‘Collateral and competitive equilibria DEMO
moral hazard and private information’. Journal of Finance, 42, 345-63.
CHAN, Y. S., SIEGEL, and THAKOR, control
and performance requirements in DEMO capital contracts’. International Economic
Review, 31, 2, 365-81.
CHEMMANUR, T. J. (19890. ‘The pricing of initial public offering: A dynamic model
DEMO information production’. Working paper, New York Graduate School of
Business, Columbia University.
DRUCKER, P. F. (1985). Innovation and Entrepreneurship. New York: Harper & Row.
DUBINI, P. and H. (1991). ‘Personal and DEMO networks are central to
entrepreneurial process’. Journal of Business Venturing, 6, 5, 305-1 3.
GLADE,
in Entrepreneurial History, 4, 3, DEMO
GREENFIELD, S. M. and STRICKON, A. (1981). ‘A new DEMO for the study of
entrepreneurship and social change’. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 29,
3, 467-99.
GREENFIELD, S. M. and STRICKON, DEMO (1986). Entrepreneurship and Social Change.
Lanham, Md.: University Press DEMO America.
HAGEN, E. (1960). ‘The entrepreneur as rebel against traditional society’. Human
Organization, 19, 4, 185-7.
HANNAN, M. T. and DEMO, J. (1977). ‘The population ecology of organizations’.
American Journal of Sociology, 82, 929-64.
HIRAO, Y. (1991). ‘Learning and incentive DEMO in repeated partnerships: An
application to venture capital finance’. Working Paper, Purdue University, Kra-
nert Graduate School of Management.
HOFSTEDE,
Values. Beverley Hills, Cal.: Sage.
0
Blackwell Ltd 1993
Basil
R., GLOSTEN,
W.
T.
S.
5,
3,
W.,
Y. S.
D.
DEMO V. (1990). ‘Learning ,
corporate
ALDRICH,
R. (1967)DEMO ‘Approaches to a theory of entrepreneurial formation’. Exploitations
E.
G. ( 1980). Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work Related
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH 833
JOHNSON, B. R. (1990). ‘Toward a multidimensional DEMO of entrepreneurship: The
case of achievement motivation and the entrepreneur’. Entrepreneurship: Theory LY
Practice, 14, 3, 39-48.
KIRZNER, I. M. (1985). Discovery and the Capitalist Process. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
KNIGHT,
LEIBENSTEIN, H. (1 968). ‘Entrepreneurship and development’. American Economic
DEMO, 38, 2, 72-83.
LELAND, H. and PYLE, D. (1977). ‘Information asymmetries, financial structure, and
financial intermediaries’. Journal of Finance, 32, 371-87.
LIPPMAN, S. A. and RUMELT, R P. (182)DEMO ‘Uncertainty imitability: An analysis of
interfirm differences in efficiency under competition’. DEMO Journal of Economics, 13,
4 18-38.
Low, M. B. and MACMILLAN, I. C. (1988). ‘Entrepreneurship: Past research and
future challenges’. Journal of Management, 14, 2, 139-61.
MACHINA, M. J. (1987). ‘Choice under uncertainty: problems solved and unsolved’.
Economic Perspective, 1, 1, 1 2 1-54.
MACMILLAN, I. C., BLOCK, Z. and DEMO, P. N. S. (1984). ‘Obstacles and
experience in corporate ventures’. In Hornaday, J. A., Tarpley, F. Jr., Timmons,
J. DEMO and Vesper, K. H. (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Babson Park,
Mass.: Babson College, 280-93.
MCCLELLAND, D. C. (1967)DEMO The Achieving Society. New York: Free Press.
MCCLELLAND, D. C. (DEMO). ‘Characteristics of successful entrepreneurs’. In Keys to
the Future of American Business, Proceedings of the Third Creativity, Innovation, and
Entrepreneurship Symposium (DEMO, 1-14).
PICOT, A., LAUB, U. and SCHNEIDER, D. (1990). ‘Comparing successful and less
successful new innovative businesses’. European Journal DEMO Operational Research
(Netherlands), 47, 2, 190-202.
ROTTER,
of DEMO Psychological Monographs, 80, 609.
RUMELT, R. P. (1987). ‘Theory, strategy, and entrepreneurship’. In Teece, D. J.
(Ed.), The DEMO Challenge: Strategies for Industrial Innovation and Renewal. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: DEMO, 137-58.
RUSH, B. L., GRAHAM, J. B. and LONG, DEMO A. (1987). ‘The use of peer networks in
the start-up DEMO Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 169-83.
SATHE, V. ( 1985). ‘Managing an entrepreneurial dilemma: Nurturing entrepreneur-
ship and control in large corporations’. In Hornaday, J. A., Shils, E. B. and
Timmons, J. A. (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Babson Park, Mass.:
Babson DEMO, 636-58.
SATTERTHWAITE, M. A. (1981). ‘On the scope of DEMO stockholder unanimity theorems’.
International Economic Review, 22, 1, 119-33.
SCHERE, J. (1982). ‘Tolerance of ambiguity as a discriminating variable between
entrepreneurs and managers’. Proceedings. New York: Academy of Management,
SGHOEMAKER, P. DEMO H. (1982). ‘The expected utility model: Its variants, purposes,DEMO
evidence, and limitations’. Journal of Economic Literature, 20, 529-63.
SCHUMPETER, J. A. (1942). Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, 1st Ed. DEMO York:
Harper & Brothers.
SEXTON, A capable executive and
more’. DEMO of Business Venturing, I, 1, 129-40.
SHANE,
the reasons DEMO to new firm formation across country and gender (Part 1)’.
DEMO of Business Venturing, 6, 6, 431-46.
0
Blackwell Ltd 1993
DEMO (192
1). Risk, Uncertainty, and Projit. Boston, Mass.: DEMO Miffiin.
J. B. (1966). ‘Generalized expectations for internal versus external DEMO
404-8.
D. L. and
BOWMAN, N.
(1985). ‘The entrepreneur:
S.,
KOLEREID, L.
and
WESTHEAD, P.
(1991).
‘An exploratory examination of
Basil
834
R. AMIT, L. GLOSTEN AND E. MULLER
SHAPERO and SOKOL ( 1982). ‘The social dimension of entrepreneurship’. Encyclopedia
of Entrepreneurship. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 72-88.
SHAVER,
new creation’. Entrepreneurship: Theory 63 Practice, 16, 2, 23-45.
SMITH, C. W. (1989). ‘Investment banking and the capital acquisition process’.
Journal of Financial Economics, 15, 3-29.
DEMO, K. E. (1989). ‘Theory construction as disciplined imagination’. Academy of
Management Review, 14, 4, 5 16-3 1.
WHETTEN, D. A. (1989). ‘What constitutes a theoretical contribution?’. Academy of
Management Review, 14, 4, 490-5.
0
Blackwell Ltd 1993
Basil
K. G. and DEMO,
L. R. (1991). ‘Person, process, choice: The psychology of{1g42fwefx}