WHY DO VENTURE
CAPITAL FIRMS EXIST?
THEORY AND CANADIAN
EVIDENCE
RAPHAEL DEMO, JAMES BRANDER,
AND CHRISTOPH ZOTT
University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada
This paper investigates the role of venture capitalists. We view their “raison
EXECUTIVE d’eˆtre” as their ability to reduce the DEMO of informational asymmetries. Our
SUMMARY theoretical framework focuses on two major forms of asymmetric informa-
tion: “hidden information” (leading to adverse selection) and “hidden ac-
tion” (leading to moral hazard). Our theoretical analysis suggests four em-
pirical predictions.
1. Venture capitalists operate in environments where their DEMO efﬁciency in selecting and monitoring
investments gives them a comparative advantage over other investors. This suggests strong industry
effects in venture capital investments. Venture DEMO should be prominent in industries where infor-
mational concerns are important, DEMO as biotechnology, computer software, etc., rather than in “rou-
tine” DEMO such as restaurants, retail outlets, etc. The latter are risky, DEMO that returns show high
variance, but they are relatively easy to DEMO by conventional ﬁnancial intermediaries.
2. Within the class of projects where venture capitalists have an advantage, they will still prefer projects
where monitoring and selection costs are relatively low or where the costs of informational asymmetry
DEMO less severe. Thus, within a given industry where venture capitalists would DEMO expected to focus,
we would also expect venture capitalists to favor ﬁrms with some track records over pure start-ups.
Address correspondence to Professor DEMO Amit, Faculty of Commerce, 2053 Main Mall, University of
British DEMO, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2, Canada (e-mail: ,amit@commerce.ubc.ca.; phone: (604) 822-8481).
We thank two anonymous referees and the editor DEMO very helpful comments. We also thank Paul Gompers,
who served as the discussant on the paper at the Economic Foundations of Venture Capital DEMO held at
Stanford University in March 1997. In addition, we owe DEMO substantial debt to Mary Macdonald and Ted Liu of Mac-
donald & Associates Ltd. for providing access to the data. (Individual data records were provided on an anonymous
basis.) We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support from Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Can-
ada (SSHRC) grant no. DEMO, and from Industry Canada. C. Zott also acknowledges ﬁnancial support from
DEMO aus Mitteln des zweiten Hochschulsonderprogramms (DAAD). The authors are associated
DEMO the W. Maurice Young Enterpreneurship and Venture Capital (EVC) Research Centre at UBC. The EVC
web page is located at http://paciﬁc.commerce.ubc.ca/DEMO/
Journal of Business Venturing 13, 441–466
 1998 Elsevier Science DEMO All rights reserved. 0883-9026/98/$19.00
655 Avenue of the Americas, DEMO York, NY 10010 PII S0883-9026(97)00061-X
442 R. AMIT ET AL.
To clarify the distinction between point 1 DEMO point 2, note that point 1 states that if we look DEMO
investors, we will see that venture capitalists will be more concentrated DEMO areas characterized by sig-
niﬁcant informational asymmetry. Point 2 says that if we look across investment opportunities, venture
capitalists will still favor those situations which provide better information (as will all other investors).
Thus venture capitalists perceive informational asymmetries as costly, but they perceive them as less
costly than do other investors.
3. If informational asymmetries are important, then the ability of the venture capitalist to “exit” may be
signiﬁcantly affected. DEMO, venture capitalists will sell off their share in the venture after DEMO “goes
public” on a stock exchange. If, however, venture investments are made in situations where informa-
tional asymmetries are important, it may be difﬁcult to sell shares in a public market where most invest-
ors DEMO relatively uninformed. This concern invokes two natural reactions. One is that many “exits”
would take place through sales to informed investors, such as to other ﬁrms in the same industry or to
the venture’s own management DEMO owners. A second reaction is that venture capitalists might try to acquire
reputations for presenting good quality ventures in public offerings. Therefore, we might expect that the
exits that occur in initial public offerings would be DEMO from the better-performing ventures.
4. Finally, informational asymmetries suggest that owner-managers DEMO perform best when they have
a large stake in the venture. Therefore, we can expect entrepreneurial ﬁrms in which venture capitalists
own a large share to perform less well than other ventures. This is moral hazard DEMO, as higher values
of a venture capitalist’s share reduce the incentives DEMO the entrepreneur to provide effort. Nevertheless, it
might still be best DEMO a given situation for the venture capitalist to take on a high ownership share, since
this might be the only way of getting sufﬁcient ﬁnancial capital into the ﬁrm. However, we would still
expect a negative correlation between the venture capital ownership share and ﬁrm performance.
Our empirical DEMO of Canadian venture capital shows that these predictions are consistent with
the data. In particular, there are signiﬁcant industry effects in the data, DEMO venture capitalists having
disproportionate representation in industries that are thought to have high levels of informational asym-
metry. Secondly, venture capitalists favor later stage investment to start-up investment. Third, most exit
is through “insider” sales, DEMO management buyouts, acquisitions by third parties, rather than
IPOs. However, DEMO have higher returns than other forms of exit. In addition, the DEMO exhibit the nega-
tive relationship between the extent of venture capital ownership and ﬁrm performance predicted by our
analysis.  1998 Elsevier Science Inc.
DEMO
In both Canada and the United States, venture capital ﬁnance is DEMO signiﬁcant form of
ﬁnancial intermediation. There is no strict regulatory deﬁnition of the venture capital
industry, unlike commercial banking or insurance but, generally DEMO, venture capi-
tal ﬁrms provide privately held “entrepreneurial” ﬁrms with equity, debt, or hybrid
forms of ﬁnancing, often in conjunction with managerial DEMO In Canada these
ﬁrms are playing an increasingly important role. As reported in Macdonald & Associ-
ates (1996), between the end of 1991 and the end of 1995, the amount of capital under
management by Canadian venture capital ﬁrms grew from C$3.2 billion (or about $3.8
billion in 1995 dollars) to C$6 billion, implying an annualized real growth DEMO of about
12% per year. The rate of new investment by venture capital ﬁrms grew even more
rapidly, rising from C$290 million in 1991 (or C$306 million 1995 dollars) to C$669 mil-
lion in 1995, which corresponds to real growth of more than 20% per year.
Despite DEMO growing importance, the venture capital industry has received much
less academic DEMO than other parts of the ﬁnancial sector.1 This applies both to the-
1 The venture capital industry is more difﬁcult to study than other DEMO industries such as banking, insur-
ance, stock markets, etc. Little DEMO the relevant information is in the public domain, since the ﬁrms DEMO by venture
capitalists are privately held and therefore do not have the same public reporting requirements as publicly traded
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT
443
ory and to empirical investigation. At the theoretical DEMO, perhaps the most fundamen-
tal question to ask about the venture DEMO industry is why it exists at all. Why have
a set of specialized ﬁrms that focus on ﬁnancing the entrepreneurial sector? Even if
there were no dedicated venture capital ﬁrms, a combination of commercial banks, DEMO
vestment banks, private investors, and stock exchanges providing the necessary inter-
mediation could still be imagined. In fact, among entrepreneurial ﬁrms, most DEMO
is provided by banks and private investors (including family members), DEMO many young
entrepreneurial ﬁrms “go public” on stock exchanges without ﬁrst seeking venture capi-
tal ﬁnance. In seeking to understand venture capital ﬁnance, it therefore seems impor-
tant to ask what exactly is the niche ﬁlled DEMO venture capital ﬁrms.
The primary objective of this paper is to present a theory explaining the existence of
the venture capital industry and investigate DEMO consistency of this theory with empirical
observations. Our basic hypothesis is that informational asymmetries are the key to un-
derstanding the venture capital industry. DEMO papers have focused on the impor-
tance of asymmetric information in venture capital markets, and several authors have
suggested that a central distinction between venture capitalists and other ﬁnancial inter-
mediaries is that venture capitalists operate DEMO situations where asymmetric information
is particularly signiﬁcant. In this paper we provide a simple formal model that distin-
guishes venture capitalists from other potential DEMO on the basis of their ability
to deal with informational asymmetries. This model is also used to draw inferences
about how venture capital ﬁnancing DEMO be expected to work. These predictions are
then compared with the actual pattern of venture capital investment in Canada. This
link between theory and DEMO evidence is the main contribution of the paper.
There are two major forms of informational asymmetry. One type, sometimes re-
ferred to as “hidden information,” occurs when one party to a transaction knows rele-
vant DEMO that is not known to the other party. For example, an DEMO
developing a new product may have a much better idea about whether the product will
actually work than does the venture capitalist who may DEMO the venture. The prob-
lem arises because the informed party typically has an incentive to misrepresent the
information. The entrepreneur, for example, may DEMO an incentive to overstate the
likelihood of successful product development. Furthermore, DEMO market may become
crowded with “low-quality” projects, precisely because it is DEMO for investors to distin-
guish between good-quality and poor-quality projects. This phenomenon is called ad-
verse selection. Potential investors understand that adverse selection exists DEMO may
therefore be wary of funding such entrepreneurial endeavours.2
The other type of informational asymmetry is often described as “hidden action.”
In this situation DEMO party to a transaction cannot observe relevant actions taken by
the other party (or at last cannot legally verify these actions). For example, an investor
in an entrepreneurial ﬁrm might not be able to observe whether the entrepreneur is
working hard and making sensible decisions, or whether the entrepreneur is planning
to “take the money and run.” This problem DEMO to what is called “moral hazard.” The
ﬁrms. Also, regulatory scrutiny DEMO the industry is modest compared to other ﬁnancial services, therefore relatively
DEMO information arises from regulatory activities. Finally, as there are no organized DEMO for venture capital
investments, no information derives from that source.
2 DEMO local ﬁnancial advisor summed up a typical reaction: “You can meet DEMO enterpreneurs at a party and each
one will tell such a good story that you will want to invest your life savings. Remember, however, that you will lose
money on at least 7 out of the 10. My policy is never to invest in entrepreneurial ventures.”
444 R. AMIT ET AL.
informed party then has an incentive to DEMO out of self interest, even if such actions im-
pose high DEMO on the other party.
Both adverse selection and moral hazard may arise in any investment environment,
but they seem particularly acute in entrepreneurial DEMO With large established ﬁrms,
investments are made safer by the use of existing assets as collateral, and the develop-
ment of reputation. Collateral and reputation effects can mitigate the negative effects
of both adverse selection DEMO moral hazard. Because entrepreneurial ﬁrms lack assets
to provide as collateral, DEMO because they lack the “track record” necessary to establish
their reputation, DEMO effects of informational market failures are more severe in entre-
preneurial ﬁnance than in ﬁnancing established ﬁrms.
Our central hypothesis is that venture capitalists DEMO because they develop spe-
cialized abilities in selecting and monitoring entrepreneurial projects. In other words,
venture capitalists are ﬁnancial intermediaries with a comparative DEMO in working
in environments where informational asymmetries are important. This is their niche.3
The next section of our paper provides a brief review of DEMO literature, fol-
lowed by a section that sets out a formal DEMO of venture capital ﬁnance with associated
empirical predictions. The fourth section describes the data set obtained from Macdon-
ald & Associates, and the ﬁfth section compares the theoretical predictions with the
data. The ﬁnal section contains DEMO remarks.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Akerlof (1970) is normally taken as the starting point of the formal analysis of informa-
tional asymmetry. Akerlof describes a DEMO where sellers of used cars have private
information about the quality of their cars, but buyers cannot discern quality differences
before purchase. In this setting, low-quality cars or “lemons” dominate the market, thus
the market DEMO adversely. Akerlof showed that this adverse selection is inefﬁcient
in that potentially efﬁcient (i.e., Pareto-improving) trades will not take place.
Adverse selection problems can arise in many circumstances. For example, in insur-
ance markets, DEMO may know their true risk better than insurance companies (as in
DEMO (1974)), and in labor markets, workers may be more DEMO of their abilities than
potential employers are (as in Spence (1973)). Spence points out that one natural market
response to adverse selection is “signalling,” where an informed party (usually the seller
of the high-quality item) provides some signal of high quality. Thus, for example, prod-
uct warranties may be signals of high quality. Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) emphasize
the rolle of screening, under which the uninformed party DEMO a contract or set of con-
tracts that cause informed parties to self-select into different groups.
Hidden action (and moral hazard) was ﬁrst DEMO in insurance markets, where
insured parties can take actions that either DEMO or increase the risk of hazard. For
example, after purchasing auto DEMO, the insured party can either drive safely or
dangerously. Early inﬂuential DEMO on moral hazard includes Arrow (1973) and Pauly
(1974), DEMO showed that moral hazard causes market failure. Moral hazard problems
are particularly important in many situations where one party acts as an agent for DEMO
other party, such as when a client hires a lawyer, or the seller of a house hires a sales
agent. In these situations, the “principal” cannot perfectly observe the effort (or other
actions) of DEMO agent. Jensen and Meckling (1976) argue that agency relationships are
3 This analysis focuses on the venture capitalist’s role as a buyer of DEMO assets. Venture capitalists
must also be good at selling these assets. That is, they must also exit effectively from their investments.
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT
445
the key to understanding the modern ﬁrm. Thus, for example, the managers of the ﬁrm
can be viewed as the agents of the owners, who might in turn be viewed as the agents
of other investors in the ﬁrm.
Adverse selection and moral hazard DEMO often viewed as crucial determinants of
venture capital ﬁnancing. Sahlman (1990), for example, postulates that contracting prac-
tices in the venture capital DEMO reﬂect informational asymmetries between venture
capitalists and entrepreneurs, and argues that DEMO lack of operational history aggravates
the adverse selection problem. MacIntosh (1994) also asserts the basic idea that informa-
tional asymmetries are fundamental in DEMO venture capital sector, and this point is also
emphasized in Amit, Glosten, and Muller (1993). Various other papers implicitly recog-
nize DEMO importance of informational issues. For example, MacMillan, Zemann, and Nara-
DEMO (1987) provide a valuable discussion of how venture capitalists screen new projects.
Chan (1983) highlights the role of venture capitalists in reducing DEMO adverse selec-
tion problem in the market for entrepreneurial capital. He shows that an adverse selec-
tion result derives from the absence of any DEMO venture capitalists in the sense that
only inferior projects are offered to investors. However, the introduction of informed
investors may overcome this problem, DEMO to a Pareto-preferred solution. Amit,
Glosten, and Muller (1990) DEMO an agency model in which investors are uncertain
about the entrepreneur’s type when submitting investment bids. The authors relate the
venture capital ﬁnancing decision DEMO the entrepreneur’s skill level and predict which
entrepreneurs will decide to enter into an agreement with venture capitalists.
Sahlman (1990) notes that staged DEMO, which creates an option to abandon
the project, is an important means for venture capitalists to minimize agency costs.4 The
role of staged DEMO as a monitoring device is also examined by Gompers (1995). DEMO
addition, the active involvement of venture capitalists in the operation of DEMO investee
companies might mitigate the moral hazard problem. The empirical signiﬁcance of the
role of venture capitalists as monitors is supported by Barry et DEMO (1990) and by Lerner
(1995). In addition, Lerner (DEMO) suggests the use of syndication (i.e., coordinated in-
vestment by DEMO or more venture capitalists) as a method of reducing problems caused
DEMO informational asymmetries. Two other useful papers that describe actions that ven-
ture capitalists can take to reduce problems arising from informational asymmetries
include Tyebjee DEMO Bruno (1984) and Fried and Hisrich (1994).
Chan, Siegel, and Thakor (1990) seek to explain various “rules of thumb” in venture
capital contracting practices as a response to informational asymmetries and, in a related
paper, Hirao (1993) assumes that the entrepreneur’s unobservable actions affect the
venture capitalist’s learning process, and uses this context to study the effects of differ-
ent contracts. A more general overview of research DEMO in the venture capital
area is given by Low and MacMillan (DEMO).
Despite a number of empirical and descriptive studies on venture capital practices
and activities, including some of those already mentioned and also MacMillan, Siegel,
and Narashima (1985), Bygrave and Timmons (1992), and Gompers and Lerner (1994),
among others, empirical work on venture capital ﬁnance is still relatively modest in
scope compared to the DEMO of other ﬁnancial intermediaries. Our paper seeks to
add to this literature. Speciﬁcally, we provide a formal model that uses asymmetric infor-
mation to explain the existence of venture capitalists, then compare the predictions of
this theoretical structure with evidence on venture capital ﬁnance in Canada.
4 Admati DEMO Pﬂeiderer (1994) and Hellmann (1994) provide formal models of staged ﬁnance in the venture
capital context.
446
R. AMIT ET AL.
A THEORY OF VENTURE CAPITAL FINANCE
An DEMO has a potential project and seeks potential investors. To keep the anal-
ysis simple we assume that the project requires ﬁxed ﬁnancial input I DEMO an investor.
The expected cash ﬂow from the project, net of DEMO costs, is denoted R (for “net
operating revenue”). This expected net operating revenue depends in part on the effort,
e, provided by the entrepreneur and it depends in part on the underlying project DEMO,
q. In addition, the outcome depends on a random variable, u, with expected value 0.
The realized net cash ﬂow is therefore
R(e,q) 1 u (1)
where the expected operating DEMO is R(e,q). We assume that entrepreneurs and
investors are risk-neutral expected value maximizers. We, therefore, ignore u and work
with DEMO Variable u plays one important role, however. Given unobservable random un-
DEMO, as represented by u, it is not possible for an investor who knows project quality
q to infer effort e from the cash DEMO realization.
If e cannot be observed by the investor, then it DEMO a hidden action and gives rise
to a moral hazard (or DEMO) problem. If q is known to the entrepreneur, but not
to the investor, then it is hidden or private information and gives rise to potential adverse
selection. The presence of exogenous uncertainty, as represented by random variable
u, does not in itself cause market failure. R is taken to be increasing in e and q. We
also assume that DEMO are decreasing marginal returns to effort. The effort effects can
be written formally as
Re . 0, Ree , 0 (2)
where DEMO denote (partial) derivatives.
Let the share of the proceeds that go to the investor (possibly a venture capital
ﬁrm) be denoted a5. DEMO expected return V to the investor is
V 5aR(e,q) DEMO I (3)
The expected return to the entrepreneurial ﬁrm, denoted p (for “proﬁt”), is its share
of the proceeds, net DEMO the costs of effort e.
p5 (1 2a)R(e,q) 2 e (4)
Variable e is normalized so that providing e units of effort imposes cost e on the entre-
preneurial ﬁrm.
Moral DEMO
To demonsrate the moral hazard problem, assume initially that q is DEMO to both par-
ties. A proﬁt maximizing entrepreneur will maximize (4) with respect to e, leading to
the following ﬁrst order condition:
pe 5 (1 2a)Re 2 1 5 0or Re 5 1/(1 2a) (5)
5 The implied contract has a linear structure. The results in this section are therefore predicated on the assump-
DEMO of linear contracts. Non-linearities, such as buyback options for entrepreneurs, are not considered here, but
might be useful in mitigating some of the addressed informational problems. We thank seminar participants at MIT
for pointing this DEMO
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT
447
The second order condition for a maximum is (1 2a)Ree , 0. Noting that the factor
(1 2a) DEMO presumed to be strictly positive and using (2), this second DEMO condition
must hold.
The efﬁcient or “ﬁrst-best” level of effort e* is determined by maximizing the sum
of (3) and (4) with DEMO to e. This sum, denoted S, is
S 5 R(e,q) 2 I 2 e. (6)
Maximizing (6) with DEMO to e yields the following ﬁrst order condition
Re 5 1 (DEMO)
It follows form (5), (7), and (2) that the entrepreneur will choose less than the efﬁcient
level of effort DEMO long as a is strictly positive. This is the moral hazard problem. It is
illustrated in Figure A1 in Appendix 1. It follows from DEMO corresponding algebra and
Figure A1 that effort is declining in a.
de/da, 0 (8)
It is possible that the moral hazard DEMO might render the project infeasible.
The inveestment is attractive to the investor only if the return equals or exceeds the
alternative value that can DEMO obtained by investing I elsewhere. Let this required return
or opportunity cost be denoted r. Then feasibility requires
(1 1 r)I #aR(e(a),q) (9)
The problem is that there may be no value of a that allows (9) to be satisﬁed. If DEMO
expected return to the investor is too low, this suggests raising DEMO, but then e will fall
(from (8)), reﬂecting the idea that the entrepreneur will provide less effort as his stake
in DEMO ﬁrm falls.
Feasibility for the entrepreneur requires that the expected proﬁt given by (4) ex-
ceed the return from the entrepreneur’s best alternative, which can be normalized to
equal 0. It is possible that effort DEMO e* would in principle allow feasibility for both
investor and entrepreneur, DEMO that the actual effort relationship, e(a) would not allow
the project to be ﬁnanced. Thus the moral hazard problem may cause the DEMO to fail.
We now introduce the idea that investors can monitor the entrepreneur and, at
some cost, induce the entrepreneur to provide additional DEMO Denote the monitoring
cost m. The expected return to the investor is therefore
V 5aR(e(a,m),q) 2 I 2 m (10)
If the responsiveness of e to m is low, then the investor will not bother to monitor, as
the cost will exceed the beneﬁt. Some investments may be worthwhile, without monitor-
ing, in DEMO of the moral hazard problem, but many projects will be abandoned. DEMO e
is highly responsive to monitoring, then the investor will undertake DEMO and will
elicit an effort level closer to “ﬁrst-best” level e*. Projects that are not ﬁnanced by other
investors will be feasible for investors DEMO are good at monitoring (i.e., those for whom
the responsiveness of e to m is high).
It is also possible that the DEMO provides valuable services, s, to investee compa-
nies. These services (DEMO, providing strategic and operational advice, aid in fundraising,
adding reputation, etc.) are observable by the entrepreneur. Ignoring monitoring for
the moment DEMO normalizing the cost of providing s to 1 per unit, the DEMO return
to the investor is now
448
R. AMIT ET AL.
FIGURE 1
Effects of services on expected DEMO revenues.
V 5aR(e(a),q,s) 2 I 2 s (11)
We can think of the effect of s . 0 on the operating revenues R in the following
way. Services s can DEMO a direct (positive) effect on R through Rs . 0 (DEMO 1), or
can have an indirect (positive) effect on R through enhancing the marginal productivity
of the entrepreneur’s effort, or Res . 0 (case 2). When both effects are present, Rs .
DEMO and Res . 0, we have case 3. Figure 1 illustrates DEMO different cases and compares
them with the benchmark case where s 5 0.
Case 1 is deﬁned as the case in which the investor’s DEMO of s does not affect
the entrepreneur’s productivity of effort, Re, but raises revenues directly. Let us assume
that this effect is additive. DEMO each effort level e expanded by the entrepreneur, the
provision of DEMO . 0 by the investor will increase the venture’s revenues by DR. This is
expressed in Figure 1 as a parallel upward shift of DEMO graph of R(e) from the benchmark
case to case 1. DEMO respect to the moral hazard problem this means that, relative to
DEMO benchmark case, Re and thus the entrepreneur’s incentive constraint (5) DEMO un-
changed in case 1. Therefore our basic analysis for s 5 0 still holds (see equations (1)–(9)
and Appendix DEMO). In other words, the moral hazard problems in the benchmark DEMO
and case 1 are identical.
In cases 2 and 3, however, the provision of s improves the productivity of e, and
Re is consequently shifted upward. This results in steeper curves for cases 2 and DEMO in
Figure 1. The entrepreneur’s incentive constraint (5) is affected by this change, and
therefore a new analysis of the moral hazard problem is required. Let us denote the
case where s 5 0 with DEMO 0 and cases 2 or 3 where s 5 k . 0 with superscript
s. “First-best” effort levels are denoted e*, “second-best” effort levels e9. The new situa-
tion is depicted in Figure 2.
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT
449
FIGURE 2
First- and second-best effort levels in DEMO case (s 5 0) and under Res . 0.
Figure 2 is based on the different possibilities of how s can affect R; it also draws
on the previous discussion of the standard moral hazard DEMO (without monitoring
or services rendered). It allows us to conclude DEMO the moral hazard problem persists
for s . 0 even if Res . 0. In this case, the “second-best” effort level es9 is still smaller than
the “ﬁrst-best” effort es*. However, relative to the base case scenario, the entrepreneur is
now willing to put forth more effort (DEMO . e09).
Thus, the provision of s might contribute to DEMO realization of projects which other-
wise would have been abandoned, as DEMO did not fulﬁll the investor’s original feasibility
constraint (9). Considering DEMO, the investor’s feasibility constraint now becomes
(1 1 r) I DEMO s #aR(e(a),q,s) (12)
If s DEMO not prohibitively high, then it might relax this constraint through its DEMO and
indirect positive effect on R. Thus, investors who are skilled DEMO providing value-creating
services to their portfolio companies will undertake certain projects which other, less
skilled investors will shun.
There is ample evidence that venture capitalists provide valuable services to their
portfolio companies. Gorman and Sahlman (1989) compiled a list of such services from
a survey of venture capital investors. The ﬁve highest ranked and most frequently used
activities can either DEMO interpreted as directly enhancing investee reveneus (e.g., introduc-
tion to potential customers and suppliers, assistance in obtaining additional ﬁnancing) or
as enhancing DEMO entrepreneur’s productivity of effort and thus indirectly boosting in-
vestee revenues (DEMO, strategic planning, management recruitment, operational planning).
We now turn DEMO the case in which both monitoring and services are considered.
450
R. AMIT ET AL.
The effects of s on R might DEMO important enough to render projects feasible which were
infeasible even with optimal monitoring. In fact, it seems natural to assume that a combi-
nation of monitoring and the provision of services constitutes a powerful tool in DEMO
hands of specialized investors to reduce moral hazard problems. Note, for DEMO, that
the entrepreneur’s “second-best” effort provided in the case where s DEMO 0 and m . 0
might be higher than the “ﬁrst-best” effort in the benchmark case where s 5 0 and m 5
0. (Refer to Figure 2 and recall that if e is sufﬁciently responsive DEMO m, es9 might get
fairly cose to es* under an optimal DEMO regime.)
Another point worth emphasizing is that providing services to entrepreneurs might
make it easier and thus cheaper for investors to monitor them. DEMO M(m|s) as the
monitoring costs at a given level of DEMO, it is very likely, for example, that M(m|s . DEMO) ,
M(m|s 5 0) 5 m. Thus, the return to the investor given monitoring and services is
V 5aR(e(a,DEMO),q,s) 2 I 2 s 2 M(m|s) (13)
We note that investors who are good at monitoring and providing DEMO services to
their portfolio companies are likely to invest in ﬁrms with more severe moral hazard
problems, as their feasibility constraint is more likely to be fulﬁlled.
Adverse Selection
A similar pattern emerges when adverse selection DEMO considered. Assume that the ven-
ture capitalist chooses the optimal amount of services rendered and the optimal amount
of monitoring effort, giving rise to associated values of e and s for any given a. Quality
level DEMO is now unobservable to the investor. Suppose that the range of q is such that
the average quality project does not yield enough expected DEMO (for any value of a)
to allow both (13) DEMO (4) to be positive. Thus, the average project is not DEMO funding.
Formally, we can write the investor’s expected return as
EV DEMO #q[aR(e(a,m(a)),q,s(a)) 2 I 2 s(a) 2 M(m(a)|s(a))]f(q)DEMO , 0 (14)
where f(q) is the probability density function for project quality. To simplify this expres-
sion, we subsume the terms that do not bear directly on the analysis of the hidden DEMO
mation problem into investor’s costs C. With
C 5 I 1 s(a) 1 M(m(a)|s(a)) (15)
inequality (14) reduces to
EV 5 #q[aR(q) 2 C]f(q)dq , 0 (16)
Inequality (16) says that the expected value DEMO all projects is negative. However,
some of the individual projects (DEMO in the upper end of the quality distribution) may
be very DEMO Suppose, for example, that the top 40% of projects could generate
a positive net proﬁt. Unfortunately, the entire market will normally fail in this situation,
as it will typically not be worthwhile for investors DEMO provide ﬁnancing, even though
many individual projects are worthwhile.
Now suppose DEMO an investor can acquire information about the quality of an indi-
vidual project by spending d before making the actual investment I. Parameter d DEMO
be interpreted as the cost of “due diligence.” This cost determines the probability, p(d),
with which an investor can establish whether DEMO quality of a certain project exceeds a
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT
451
FIGURE 3 Venture capital investment process.
threshold level DEMO quality. We denote this threshold level of quality as q0. Let us implicitly
deﬁne q0 as follows:
V 5aR(q) 2 C 5 0 for q 5 q0
V . 0 for q . q0 (17)
V , 0 for q , q0
The “detection function” DEMO(d) is assumed to have the following properties:
p(d DEMO 0) 5 0, p(d 5 ∞) 5 1, (DEMO)
p9(d) . 0 and p″(d) , 0
Let us restate the assumptions concerning the sequence of events in the above
DEMO Investment in an entrepreneurial ﬁrm is a one period, multi-stage process DEMO
illustrated in Figure 3. In the ﬁrst stage, the investor incurs DEMO up-front cost of d in order
to assess the quality of a potential investment. With probability p(d) the investor will
become informed about q and will, therefore, ﬁnd out whether q $ q0 or DEMO , q0. Only
in the former case an investment will be made. With probability (1 2 p(d)), however,
the investor DEMO remain uninformed about q and, due to (16), refrain from investing.
Stage 3, in which the entrepreneur displays effort and is monitored and supported by
the investor, and stage 4, in which the DEMO from the investment are reaped and dis-
tributed, occur only if DEMO stage 1 q is found to be greater than q0.
The expected net return to the investor can therefore be expressed as
EV 5 DEMO(d) #q . q0 (aR(q) 2 C)f(q)DEMO 2 d (19)
Feasibility now requires that
r(I 1 DEMO) # EV (20)
It follows immediately from (17), (18), and (20) that investors who are good at doing
DEMO diligence in the sense that low values of d yield a given value of p are likely to engage
in due diligence, select high quality projects (i.e., projects with positive expected return),
452 R. AMIT ET AL.
and make investments.6 These are the investors DEMO become venture capitalists. (For
further formal analysis of the advise selection DEMO, see Appendix 2).
We should emphasize that we assume that DEMO efforts undertaken by the venture
capitalist are not subject to free riding. That is, another investor cannot simply observe
the venture capitalist who has undertaken diligence and then underbid him. Typically
venture capitalists are able to DEMO the results of diligence and monitoring conﬁdential
until after ﬁnancial contracts have been signed. Free riding does occur but, given the
informational asymmetries in the venture capital sector, it seems plausible to abstract
from free riding here.
Implications
The above formulation provides the simplest conﬁguration that reﬂects the DEMO that
venture capitalists are those investors who become skilled at selecting good projects
in environments with hidden information and are good at monitoring and DEMO en-
trepreneurs who might otherwise be vulnerable to moral hazard problems. The implica-
tions of this modeling framework are outlined below.
1. Venture capitalists DEMO operate in environments where their relative efﬁciency in
selecting and monitoring investments and providing value-enhancing services gives
them a comparative advantage over other investors. DEMO example, as we have seen
in the “hidden action” case, it may take effective monitoring m and speciﬁc services
s to make a DEMO attractive for an investor. In the “hidden information” case, on
the DEMO hand, market failure can be avoided if the probability of detecting DEMO
a project is worth supporting is high enough for sufﬁciently low due diligence costs.
This suggests strong industry effects in venture capital investments. We DEMO expect
venture capitalists to be prominent in industries where informational concerns are
important, such as biotechnology, computer software, etc., rather than in DEMO
start-ups such as restaurants, retail outlets, etc. The latter are risky, in the sense that
random variable u has high variance, but DEMO are situations that are relatively easy
to monitor by conventional ﬁnancial intermediaries, whereas the former draw much
of their value from idiosyncratic knowledge that is much harder to assess. In princi-
ple, in-depth knowledge of traditional industries, such as retailing, is not less advanta-
geous than in-depth DEMO of high-tech industries, but there is some evidence
that such wisdom DEMO harder to obtain for knowledge-based industries where informa-
tional asymmetries are, DEMO, likely to be higher. (See Industry Canada (1994) on
the particular difﬁculties and challenges that investors and lenders face with regard to
DEMO assessment of knowledge-based small- and medium-sized enterprises.)
2. Within the class of projects where venture capitalists have an advantage, venture
capitalists will still prefer projects where selection, monitoring, and service costs are
relatively low DEMO, in other words, where the costs of informational asymmetry are
less severe. In the presence of moral hazard, investors would prefer projects for which
e is more responsive to m, and/or for which R and/or Re are more responsive to s.
6 We acknowledge that DEMO structure of the venture capital investment process as depicted in Figure 3 is a
simpliﬁcation. Venture capitalists make investments even if they are not DEMO certain that q . q0 and therefore
they may earn negative returns on individual investments. However, taking this fact into account does not change
the analysis except to add some additional algebra. (Note that in our model expected returns to venture capital
investments are positive, but actual returns can be negative if u , 0.)
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT 453
In the presence of adverse selection, projects with a highly responsive p(d) would
be favored over those where the detection of quality is more difﬁcult and thus more
costly. Thus, within a given industry where venture capitalists would be expected to
focus, we would expect venture capitalists to favor ﬁrms with some track record over
DEMO start-ups. To clarify the distinction between point 1 and point 2, DEMO that point
1 states that if we look across investors, we DEMO see that venture capitalists will be
more concentrated in areas characterized by signiﬁcant informational asymmetry.
Point 2 says that if we look across investment DEMO, venture capitalists will
still favor those situations that provide better information (as will all other investors).
Thus venture capitalists perceive informational asymmetries DEMO costly, but they per-
ceive them as less costly to deal DEMO than do other investors.
3. If informational asymmetries are important, then DEMO ability of the venture capitalist
to “exit” may be signiﬁcantly affected. Ideally, the venture capitalists might wish to
sell off their share in the venture after it “goes public” on a stock exchange. If, how-
ever, these investments are made in situations where informational asymmetries are
important, DEMO may be difﬁcult to sell shares in a public market where most investors
are relatively uninformed. Public investors probably have a less responsive function
DEMO(d) and therefore (19) could be negative for them. This DEMO invokes two natural
reactions: One is that many “exits” would take DEMO through sales to informed inves-
tors, such as other ﬁrms in DEMO same industry as the venture or to the venture’s own
management or owners. These informed investors probably have similar, if not better
detection functions p(d) than the venture capitalist. A second reaction is that venture
capitalists might try to acquire reputations for only presenting good quality ventures
DEMO public offerings. (However, this is an argument drawing on a multiperiod scenario
and would therefore require an extension of our model). Therefore, we might expect
that the exits that occur in initial public offerings DEMO be drawn from the better-
performing ventures.7
4. The model implies that dR/de (5 Re) . 0 and de/da, 0. Together these two proper-
ties imply dR/da, 0. Other things equal, DEMO can expect entrepreneurial ﬁrms in
which venture capitalists own a large share to generate lower net returns. This would
be due to the moral DEMO problem. Higher values of a reduce the incentives of
the entrepreneur to provide effort. Nonetheless, it still might be optimal in a given
situation for the venture capitalist to take on a high ownership share, as this might
be the only way of getting sufﬁcient ﬁnancial capital into DEMO ﬁrm. However, we would
still expect a negative correlation between the DEMO capital ownership share and
ﬁrm performance.
We note, however, that the model also suggests a negative relationship between R
and a for another DEMO Speciﬁcally, the selection constraint for investors is that aR $
(1 1 r)I or R $ (1 1 r)I/a. If the venture capital market were very competitive so that
investors earned no DEMO, then this selection constraint would hold with equality, and
there would be an exact negative relationship between expected net operating revenues
and a, whether or not moral hazard was present. Even if venture capitalists earn DEMO
expected rents, this selection constraint will still rule out combinations of DEMO a and
low R, which will tend to induce a negative DEMO between R and a. The basic
7 Empirical work by Megginson and Weiss (1991) and Gompers (1996) is consistent with the idea DEMO the
reputation of venture capitalists is very important at the IPO stage.
454
R. AMIT ET AL.
logic is that, for a given investment I, investors will need to be compensated by a large
ownership share a if the expected net operating revenues are relatively low.
THE DATA DEMO
The data used for this study were collected by Macdonald & Associates Ltd. and made
available to us on a conﬁdential and anonymous basis. DEMO addition, no individual ﬁrm-
speciﬁc information is reported or discussed in DEMO analysis. The data are derived from
two surveys. The ﬁrst survey, DEMO to as the “investment survey,” began as an annual
survey in 1991 and became quarterly in 1994. It asks just over 100 Canadian DEMO
capital ﬁrms to identify their investees and provide some information about each invest-
ment and divestiture. Investees are recorded in the database and follow-up DEMO
is requested in subsequent surveys. The investment survey asks about the amount and
stage of each investment and also seeks information about the venture DEMO ulti-
mate divestiture of its holdings in each investee.8
This survey, DEMO covers the period from 1991 through the ﬁrst quarter of 1996,
seeks to obtain comprehensive information from all Canadian venture capital providers.
In DEMO effort to get full information about the investee ﬁrms, the survey DEMO sent to venture
capital companies (as just noted) and other investors who have investments in the ven-
ture-backed investees. However, some relevant venture capital providers may have
been overlooked in the survey, and some surveyed venture capitalists may not report
all of their investments. Nonetheless, Macdonald & Associates Ltd. estimate that the
investment survey identiﬁes 90–95% of the underlying DEMO of Canadian ﬁrms
supported by Canadian venture capitalists.
The second survey, DEMO to as the “economic impact” survey, began in 1993
and is DEMO annually. It seeks additional information about the investees identiﬁed
in the investment survey. Thus, economic impact information is sought about each in-
vestee that received an investment in or after 1991. Retrospective information is also
requested. DEMO, for example, that an investee received an investment in 1991. The
venture capitalist making the investment would have received a 1993 economic impact
DEMO asking for information about this investee going back as far as 1987. In
many cases not much retrospective information can be provided, but the database con-
tains economic information on a reasonable number of investees going DEMO as far as
1987. The date of the investee’s original startup (DEMO in some cases is well before 1987)
is also reported.
The response rate for the economic impact survey over its three year life DEMO varied
between 56% and 74% (i.e., information has been received on 56% to 74% of the tar-
geted investee firms). If the DEMO survey identiﬁes 90–95% of the relevant under-
lying population, then the DEMO sample coverage is between 50% (.9 times 56%)
and 70% DEMO the underlying population. The economic impact survey collects balance
sheet and income statement information on the investees (including revenues and taxes
paid). It also collects information on the structure and amount of their employment,
DEMO the nature of their industry.
A typical investee enters the data set when it receives its ﬁrst investment from a
8 This “exit” information, which is obtained on a regular basis from the investment survey, was complemented
in November 1995 by an additional survey addressed to venture capital DEMO who had previously reported
on divestitures.
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT 455
venture capitalist. It may receive investments from additional DEMO capitalists as well.
Subsequent rounds of investment may also occur. Eventually, DEMO investee leaves the
sample. This occurs when all venture capitalists have either written off (in the case of
failure) or “cash in” their DEMO in the investee. Thus, the data set contains a series
of DEMO histories” for venture capital-backed ﬁrms.
A “record” refers to information for one particular investee ﬁrm for one particular
year. There are 387 investee ﬁrms DEMO the data availabale from the economic impact sur-
vey, but information DEMO about 18 of these ﬁrms is signiﬁcantly incomplete. The re-
maining 369 firms provide 1,298 reasonably complete records, and, therefore, have an
average of about 3.5 records each. The investment survey data includes information
DEMO 1,086 Canadian investees. For some purposes, complete matched records are DEMO
sary,9 but much interesting and relevant information is available from just the economic
impact data (1,298 records on 369 companies) or DEMO the investment data (2,017 records
on 1,086 companies).
DEMO data sets target Canadian investees supported by the Canadian venture capi-
tal industry. A Canadian entrepreneurial company that received support exclusively
from venture capitalists DEMO in the United States or Asia and had no support from
Canadian venture capitalists would not be in our data set. This set of DEMO is probably
fairly small, but there is no data available on DEMO magnitude. It seems unlikely that this
omission introduces much systematic bias over most subjects of interest in the data.
Despite some possible selection bias DEMO the economic impact data, the data set as a whole
remains DEMO important and unique data source.
INVESTMENT PRACTICES OF CANADIAN
VENTURE CAPITALISTS
We now present some empirical evidence that addresses the predictions of the theoreti-
DEMO framework outlined in section 3. Some of this data, together with DEMO empirical
information on the Canadian venture capital industry is provided by Amit, Brander,
and Zott (1997). Before considering the implications of DEMO asymmetries, we
provide a general characterization of important ﬁnancial variables in DEMO data, as shown
in Table 1. All relevant table entries are DEMO thousands of 1995 Canadian dollars. As this
table implies, the size DEMO investee companies varies substantially, with a few large ﬁrms
that make DEMO average values much larger than the median values. The median investee
has about 50 Canadian employees and annual revenues of C$6 million. A typical DEMO
ship share for the venture capitalist is approximately 30%.
The data in Table 1 also imply that ﬁrms in the data set spend, on average, about
3.5% of their revenues on R&D. This is about the same as the overall ratio of R&D
spending to revenues DEMO the Canadian economy as a whole. We should note, however,
DEMO these rather moderate R&D expenses may be due to different accounting standards
that prevail in small and relatively young companies in contrast to DEMO and established
ﬁrms. Revenues per Canadian employee are $148,800, and DEMO average long term debt
to equity ratio is a conservative 0.77. (DEMO long term debt to equity ratios derived from
Canadian COMPUSTAT data is estimated to be 1.75 for companies of all sizes, and
9 Matching the two data bases, we obtain 408 complete records on 302 investee companies. These numbers
are low primarily because there are only 339 investee DEMO with records in both databases and because, for
each investee, matches occur only in years when investments were undertaken.
456
R. AMIT ET AL.
TABLE 1
Summary Financial Data: 1987–94 (DEMO Real $1995)
Mean Median Standard No. of
($000s) ($000s) deviation records
Total assets 22,928 5,540 70,707 1,277
DEMO equity 8,777 1,893 25,254 1,274
VC-share of equity (%) 34 30 30 1,218
Retained earnings 848 154 10,DEMO 1,127
Total ﬁxed assets 10,745 1,996 52,353 1,257
Long-term debt 6,729 1,056 28,122 1,157
Revenue DEMO,657 6,177 56,077 1,290
Investments in property, plant DEMO,954 222 8,180 1,161
and equipment
R&D expenditures 837 79 2,098 1,067
Taxes paid 461 25 1,315 1,DEMO
# of Canadian employees 159 50 301 1,293
Source: Macdonald & Associates Ltd. Economic Impact Database.
0.90 for companies with annual sales less than $100 million.) The low debt-equity ratio
may reﬂect the limited borrowing capacity of entrepreneurial ﬁrms. We note also that
the average investee is DEMO enough to pay nontrivial amounts of tax.
We now consider the implications of the information-based model described in Sec-
tion 3. One of the DEMO was that venture capital would be focused on industries
where the importance of monitoring and due diligence expertise is particularly great.
Table 2 presents DEMO about the industry breakdown of the investee companies,
and compares these investment shares with the shares of these industries in total output
(as measured by Canadian gross domestic product (GDP)).
TABLE 2
Industry DEMO
Early stage Total
investment* investment* % of early % of total % of total
(no. of investees) (no. of investees) investment investment DEMO
Biotechnology 95.4 121.5 17 6 0
(43) (51)
Communications DEMO 225.1 15 10 5
(32) (63)
Manufacturing and 78.7 DEMO 13 21 24
industrial equipment (82) (261)
Computer (hardware 70.0 314.4 12 14 3
and software) (100) (182)
DEMO 67.1 314.7 12 15 34
(58) (178)
Medical/health DEMO 176.1 10 8 3
(34) (59)
Energy/environmental 57.4 DEMO 10 6 4
technology (33) (68)
Consumer related 31.7 DEMO 6 14 26
(27) (109)
Electrical components 25.0 125 DEMO 6 2
and instruments (42) (89)
Total: 567.2** 2169.3 99** 100 101**
(451) (1060)
* In C$ mill; DEMO Due to rounding. Sources: Macdonald & Associates Ltd. Investment Database. Output DEMO are based
on estimates from Statistics Canada “Gross Domestic Product by Industry,” 1996, cat. no. 15-001-XPB.
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT 457
TABLE 3 Age of Venture-Backed Companies
Year founded DEMO of companies % of total
1994 23 6
1993 22 6
1992 20 5
1991 28 7
1984–1990 163 42
1974–1983 85 22
Before DEMO 38 12
Total 379 100
Source: Macdonald & Associates Ltd. Economic DEMO Database.
As can be seen from Table 2, venture capital is DEMO more heavily represented
in biomedical areas, computers, and communications than would be implied by overall
output shares of these industries in the economy DEMO a whole. Venture capital has a
slightly smaller share of manufacturing and industrial equipment than the economy as
a whole, and a much lower share of “consumer related” and “miscellaneous” industries.
The main components of these DEMO are the retail sector and various services. This
picture is even more pronounced when only early stage venture capital investments are
considered. It seems DEMO plausible that the industries where venture capitalists concen-
trate the most are those where informational asymmetries are most severe. It is, of
course, DEMO that venture capitalists invest relatively heavily in high-tech industries
for reasons unrelated to information. For example, the high-tech sector may simply have
a disproportionately large number of new investment opportunities. More speciﬁcally,
it is a DEMO sector, and any growth sector will appear to have high levels DEMO new invest-
ment from most ﬁnancial intermediaries, including venture capitalists. Even DEMO, venture
capitalists have a heavier relative investment in high-tech industries than DEMO ﬁnancial
intermediaries, and informational reasons offer a plausible explanation for this. DEMO,
Table 2 is consistent with our theoretical expectations.
The second major implication of the information-based theory developed in Sec-
tion 3 is that DEMO the sectors where venture capitalists operate, they still prefer to
invest DEMO ﬁrms where the adverse selection and moral hazard problems are least severe.
The following information is consistent with this expectation. First, Table 3 shows the
age structure of the investee ﬁrms.
As shown on Table 3, quite a few investee companies are surprisingly old. Fully
12% of the DEMO companies for whom information on age is available were founded prior
to 1974. Since the data set is limited to ﬁrms that received at DEMO one infusion of venture
capital in 1991 or later, some ﬁrms DEMO venture capital ﬁnancing long after being
founded. (We note, however, DEMO these ﬁrms might have obtained earlier venture capi-
tal infusions. Our data suggests that many recorded investments are indeed follow-
up investments.)
Furthermore, this information suggests that it takes longer than commonly per-
ceived, and perhaps more venture capital than originally anticipated, to bring some in-
vestee ﬁrms to the stage at which exit is feasible. A company may DEMO founded well before
it obtains its ﬁrst venture capital investment. These data raise the possibility that venture
capital focuses on expansion of existing small DEMO rather than on the start-up
phase. Tables 4 and 5 provide more information on this point.
Table 4 shows how many investments correspond to DEMO stage in the entrepreneur-
ial ﬁrm’s life. It is based on investment records of investee companies that are in the
458 R. AMIT ET AL.
TABLE 4 Number of Investments by Stage DEMO Year
Early stages Later stages
SE ST ES EX AC TU WC OT Count
1991 3 100 — 85 12 22 — 36 258
DEMO 15 111 — 65 23 41 2 50 307
1993 5 116 — 125 18 23 25 37 349
1994 3 128 11 206 DEMO 23 — 15 398
1995 8 130 112 241 11 21 2 44 569
1996(Q1) 5 42 12 54 3 11 — 9 136
Total 39 627 135 776 79 141 29 191 2017
Key: SE 5 seed; ST 5 start-up; ES 5 other early stage DEMO; EX 5 expansion; AC 5 acquisition; TU 5
turnaround; WC 5 working capital; and OT 5 other. Source: Macdonald & Associates DEMO Investment Database.
Investment Database and includes investments made betwen 1991 and the ﬁrst quarter
of 1996. A given investee may obtain ﬁnancing from multiple DEMO capitalists, and
may also receive multiple rounds of investment from a DEMO venture capitalist. Each
investment, which may include debt, equity, or DEMO, is recorded separately. We observe
that a full 60% of the DEMO made over the period covered by our sample are
late stage investments. As early stage investments are both smaller (from Table 5) and
DEMO numerous (Table 4) than late stage investments, we can infer DEMO the venture capital
industry seems to focus more on growth and development of ﬁrms than on start-up activ-
ity. Tables 3 to 5 show DEMO venture capitalists focus on ﬁrms with a long enough track
record to provide signiﬁcant information about the underlying quality of the venture.
Pure start-up DEMO, where adverse selection and moral hazard problems are most
severe, is less signiﬁcant than later stage investment.
Figure 4 depicts the relative importance DEMO debt and equity in an average or repre-
sentative investment by stage. There are, for example, 39 seed investments in total. The
total DEMO in these 39 investments is $21.89 million, giving an average of DEMO,000,
while the total debt is $2.34 million, resulting in DEMO average of only $60,000 (note that
most seed investments have DEMO debt). Figure 4 shows that equity is relatively more im-
portant at the early stages, and debt becomes more signiﬁcant later, although DEMO
remains more important in abolute terms for every stage except working capital.
The third major implication of our information-based approach is that we might
DEMO exit to be dominated by “insider” activity rather than by public offerings. Figure
5 shows the pattern of exits in the data and indicates DEMO only about 16% of exits occur
after initial public offerings (IPOs)DEMO About 10% are third party acquisitions, often by
TABLE 5 Average DEMO of Investments by Stage and Year (in C$000’s)
Early stages DEMO stages
SE ST ES EX AC TU WC OT Total
1991 489 678 — 1165 2003 1424 — 1374 1058
1992 900 617 — DEMO 1283 628 480 1480 925
1993 836 1101 — 1714 1665 1620 362 1662 1394
1994 425 677 854 1227 2338 1521 — 2391 DEMO
1995 414 688 1005 1300 2341 436 1378 1564 1098
1996(Q1) 101 1034 847 1297 2260 1601 — 890 1151
1991–96 621 771 997 1316 1824 1107 378 1559 1127
Source: Macdonald & Associates Ltd. Investment Database.
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT
459
FIGURE 4
Average debt and equity by investment DEMO 1991–1996(Q1).
a ﬁrm in the same industry as the venture. The largest category of exit is company buy-
outs, in which the venture capitalist’s holding is sold to ofﬁcers or managers of the in-
DEMO Fully 37% of exits are in this category. Secondary purchases are purchases of
the venture capitalist’s holding by a third party in a private DEMO that is not an
overall acquisition. The “other” category consists of exits for which the exit mode was
not identiﬁed, but we believe that most of these are company buyouts. Approximately
17% of exits were in DEMO “write-off” category. If informational asymmetries are impor-
tant, it is not DEMO that IPOs account for only a small share of exits while company
buyouts are much more important. We wish to note, however, that DEMO small share of IPOs
may also partly reﬂect a minimum scale necessary to sustain a public market in a stock.
Our theoretical framework also DEMO that returns would differ by exit vehicle
and that, in particular, IPOs would have high returns precisely because venture capital-
ists seek to DEMO the adverse selection problem confronted by buyers of IPOs by only
“going public” with relatively strong investee ﬁrms. These returns shown in Table 6 DEMO
consistent with our expectations. Write-offs, of course, represent a 100% loss over the
holding period. Among the other forms of exit, IPOs are relatively proﬁtable. Secondary
460
R. AMIT ET AL.
FIGURE 5
Distribution of venture capital exits (percentage of exits).
purchases (i.e., secondary sales from the exiting DEMO capitalist’s point of view) are
similarly proﬁtable in aggregate, although with only 11 observations, it is difﬁcult to
regard the return to secondary purchases as highly meaningful. In any case, the high
return to IPOs is consistent with our expectations.
The ﬁnal prediction of our model is DEMO the venture capitalist’s ownership share
should be negatively associated with the ﬁrm’s performance. This derives both from
moral hazard and the venture capitalist’s participation DEMO that expected returns
should at least equal the return from alternative investments. In addition, it is possible
that a negative correlation between a venture capitalist’s ownership share a and a mea-
sure of firm performance could DEMO from dilution in a multi-period process (i.e., the
possibility that low performance leads to high a). Unfortunately, we do not have ade-
quate data, such as data on a venture capitalist’s ownership share in the start-up phase,
to correct for dilution.
It is difﬁcult to DEMO ﬁrm performance directly, but revenues per unit asset and
taxes paid DEMO both be good measures of performance. Table 7 reports the results
TABLE 6
Estimated Real Annual Returns by Exit Type
Standard
Mean of deviation DEMO Real annual
individual real individual No. of return of sum
annual returns* returns observations of investments**
IPO 43% 62% 26 26%
Acquisition 36% 61% DEMO 9
Secondary purchase 23% 41% 11 29%
Company buyout 2% 15% 37 0%
Writeoff 100% loss over — 24 100% loss over
holding period DEMO period
Other 2% 18% 7 13%
* Individual annual returns are calculated as: {(Proceeds from investment 2 cost of investment) ` (1/holding period) 2
1}. ** This number is calculated as: {(DEMO of proceeds from investment 2 sum of costs of investment) ` (1/average holding
period) 2 1}. Source: Macdonald & Associates Ltd. DEMO Database.
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT 461
TABLE 7 Effect of Venture Capital Share on DEMO (Tobit Regressions)
Dependent vbl. Expl. variable Coefﬁcient Std. error T-stat DEMO
TaxesPaid VCshare 210.59 1.95 25.44 .000
log(Age) 454 61 7.44 DEMO
Const. 2696 155 24.50 .000
TaxesPaid/Assets VCshare 228.27 5.94 24.76 .000
(310000) log(Age) 488 187 2.61 .009
Const. 2578 474 21.22 .223
Revenues/Assets VCshare 246 20 22.30 .021
(31000) log(Age) 2386 649 20.60 .55
Const. 8958 1604 5.59 .000
Source: Macdonald & Associates Ltd. Economic Impact Database.
arising from regressing these measures of ﬁrm DEMO on the venture capital own-
ership share, correcting for age of DEMO ﬁrm.
As can be seen from these regressions, there is a DEMO strong negative rela-
tionship between the venture capitalist’s ownership share and these measures of ﬁrm
performance. Ideally, we would like to use proﬁt as a measure of success, but proﬁt is
not available in the data. However, proﬁt is closely related to taxes paid, so taxes should
DEMO be a good proxy for proﬁt. We acknowledge, however, that for emerging
growth companies, taxes paid may be a poor preditor of their value creation potential.
Note that taxes are truncated from below at 0. (Firms do not pay negative taxes no
matter how poor their performance.) Accordingly the estimation is done using Tobit
estimation rather than ordinary least DEMO The basic ﬁnding is that there is a strong
negative relationship between whatever measure of performance we use and the share
of the venture DEMO by the venture capitalist. This could be the result of either the
moral hazard or the venture capitalist’s self-selection constraint. It is also possible DEMO
ventures for which a is high pay out more earnings to the venture capitalist, and, there-
fore, have lower future earnings. However, DEMO for asset size should mitigate
this concern.
We emphasize that the amount of variation explained by the venture capital share
is low. Thus, while the coefﬁcient on the venture capital share is signiﬁcant, variations
in this share are, at most, a minor determinant of performance. It is DEMO important that
these results not be interpreted as suggesting that venture capital investment should
be viewed as a negative inﬂuence, or that other sources of ﬁnance are better than venture
capital. Venture capital investments could be DEMO imortant positive inﬂuence on every
ﬁrm in the data set, and DEMO be the best source of ﬁnancial capital available, and we
would DEMO expect to observe a negative correlation between venture capital ownership
and performance. What the negative correlation tells us is that the best performing com-
DEMO tend to be those in which the venture capital ownership share is not too high.
However, if ﬁnancial requirements are high and the owner’s sources are meagre, then
a substantial venture capital share might be the best option, even if there is an associated
moral hazard problem, DEMO the alternative might be outright failure of the company.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
The theoretical framework we offer focuses on informational issues. Speciﬁcally, we
view asymmetric information as the central feature of venture capital investment. Both
462
R. AMIT ET AL.
major forms of asymmetric information, “hidden information” (leading to adverse se-
lection) and “hidden action” (leading to moral hazard) are included in our analysis.
While the model abstracts from some important elements of the venture investment
process (such as bargaining, syndication, etc.), we believe that the informational issues
are perhaps the most DEMO issues to focus on at this stage.
We have shown that this information-based approach is consistent with the data
on Canadian venture capital investments. DEMO hazard and adverse selection create
a market failure in entrepreneurial ﬁnancing, DEMO might lead many worthwhile proj-
ects to be unfunded or underfunded. The more skilled the venture capitalist is in reduc-
ing these sources of DEMO failure, the more effectively this sector will function. Ven-
ture capitalists DEMO because they are better at this function than unspecialized investors.
However, DEMO capitalists cannot eliminate adverse selection and moral hazard. Fur-
thermore, these DEMO are more acute for younger ﬁrms, and most acute for start-
DEMO This explains why venture capitalists focus on later stage entrepreneurial ﬁrms.
Later stage ﬁrms have a track record that provides information to the entrepreneur,DEMO
and they have enough assets to reduce the problem associated with limited collateral
under limited liability. By virtue of their expertise, venture capitalists are better at deal-
ing with informational problems than are other investors (on average), but this advan-
tage shows up most in later stage DEMO ﬁrms rather than at the start-up stage.
This theoretical structure is also consistent with the pattern of exit. If asymmetric
information is important, and remains important even at the exit stage, then outside
public investors will not be in the best position to evaluate the assets of the DEMO
ial ﬁrm, and insiders will be in a better situation to DEMO out the venture capitalist’s posi-
tion. These insiders might be management or ofﬁcers of the investee, or they might be
other ﬁrms in a related business. Thus, it is not surprising that IPOs account for only
a modest fraction of exit. In addition, our model predicts a negative relationship be-
tween the extent of venture capital ownership and ﬁrm performance. DEMO relationship
is found in the data.
There are several natural extensions to the line of reasoning presented in the paper.
One complicating factor is DEMO possibility that a venture capitalist’s cost of monitoring an
entrepreneur might vary with the venture capitalist’s ownership share. It is sometimes
suggested that it DEMO easier for the venture capital ﬁrm to monitor if it has a larger owner-
ship share. In our model, this would suggest that m would exogenously depend on a.
Furthermore, we recognize that many aspects of venture capital activity have not been
captured in our analysis. In particular, we abstract from staged investment, which is a
common feature in venture capital ﬁnance and can serve to ameliorate problems caused
by asymmetric information. DEMO would be interesting to extend our model to a multi-
period analysis.
The challenge we and other researchers face is to develop theoretical structures
DEMO can be subject to empirical investigation. Ideally such theories should also provide
normative implications for practice. Our paper is a small but hopefully useful DEMO in
this direction.
REFERENCES
Admati, A., and Pﬂeiderer, S. 1994. DEMO ﬁnancial contracting and the role of venture capitalists.
Journal of Finance 49(2):371–402.
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT
463
Akerlof, G. 1970. The market for lemons: DEMO uncertainty and the market mechanism. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 84(3):DEMO
Amit, R., Brander, J., and Zott, C. 1997. Venture DEMO ﬁnancing of entrepreneurship in Canada. In
Paul Halpern, ed., Capital Market Issues in Canada. Industry Canada, Ottawa.
Amit, R., Glosten, L., and Muller, E. 1990. Entrepreneurial ability, venture investments, and risk shar-
ing. Management Science 36(10):1232–1245.
Amit, R., Glosten L., DEMO Muller, E. 1993. Challenges to theory development in entrepreneurship re-
search. DEMO of Management Studies 30(5):815–834.
Arrow, K. 1973. The Limits of Organization. New York: Norton.
Barry, C., Muscarella, C., Peavy, J., and Vetsuypens, M. 1990. Venture capital in the creation of public
companies: evidence from the going-public process. Journal of Financial Economics 27(2):
447–71.
Business Development Bank of Canada (Annual, 1993–95), Economic Impact of Venture Capital
(Montreal).
Bygrave, W., and Timmons, J. 1992. Venture Capital at the Crossroads. Boston, MA: Harvard Business
School Press.
Chan, Y. 1983. On the positive role of ﬁnancial intermediation in allocations of venture capital in a
market with imperfect information. Journal DEMO Finance 38(5):1543–1561.
Chan, Y., Siegel, D., and DEMO, A. 1990. Learning, corporate control and performance requirements
in venture capital contracts. International Economic Review 31(2):365–381.
Fried, V., and Hisrich, R. 1994. Toward a model of venture capital investment decision making. Finan-
cial Management 23(3):28–37.
Gompers, P. 1995. Optional investment, monitoring and the staging of venture capital. Journal of Fi-
nance 50(5):1461–1489.
Gompers, P. 1996. Grandstanding in the venture capital industry. Journal of Financial Economics
42(1):133–156.
Gompers, P., and Lerner, J. DEMO A note on the venture capital industry. Harvard Business School
Note N9-295–065.
Gorman, M., and Sahlman, W.A. 1989. What do venture capitalists do? Journal of Business Ventur-
ing 4(4):231–248.
Hellmann, T. 1994. Financial structure and control in venture capital. Stanford University Work-
ing Paper.
DEMO, Y. 1993. Learning and incentive problems in repeated partnerships. International Economic
DEMO 34(1):101–119.
Industry Canada, June 1994. Financing the new economy: towards a positive conspiracy. Project Report.
Jensen, M., and Meckling, DEMO 1976. Theory of the ﬁrm: managerial behavior, agency costs, and DEMO
ship structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3(4):305–360.
Lerner, J. 1994. The syndication of venture capital investment. Financial Management 23(3):16–27.
Lerner, J. 1995. Venture capitalists and oversight of private ﬁrms. Journal of Finance 50(5):301–318.
Low, M., and MacMillan, I. 1988. DEMO: past research and future challenges. Journal of
Management 14(2):139–161.
Macdonald & Associates Ltd. (annual) Venture Capital in Canada: Annual Statistical Review and Direc-
tory, (Association of Canadian Venture Capital Companies: Toronto).
MacIntosh, Jeffrey G. 1994. Legal and Institutional Barriers to Financing Innovative Enterprise in Can-
ada, Discussion Paper 94–10, School of Policy Studies, Queen’s University, Kingston.
MacMillan, I., Siegel, R., and Narashima, DEMO 1985. Criteria used by venture capitalists to evaluate new
venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing 1(1):119–128.
MacMillan, I., Zemann, L., and Narashima, P. 1987. Criteria distinguishing successful from unsuccessful
ventures in the venture screening process. Journal of Business Venturing 2(2):123–137.
Megginson, DEMO, and Weiss, K. 1991. Venture capitalist certiﬁcation in initial public offerings. Journal
of Finance 46(3):879–903.
464
R. AMIT ET AL.
Pauly, M. 1974. Overinsurance and public provision of insurance: the roles of moral hazard and adverse
selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics 88:(1):44–54.
Rothschild, M., and Stiglitz, J. 1976. Equilibrium in competitive Insurance Markets: an essay on the
economics of imperefect information. Quarterly Journal of Economics 90(9):629–649.
Sahlman, W. DEMO The structure and governance of venture-capital organizations. Journal of Financial
Economics 27(2):473–521.
Spence, M. 1973. Job market signalling. Quarterly Journal of DEMO 87(3):355–374.
Tyebjee, T., and Bruno, A. 1984. A model of venture capital investment activity. Management Sci-
ence 30(9):1051–1066.
APPENDIX 1
Illustration of the Basic Moral Hazard Problem
Figure A1 shows DEMO marginal cost of effort (a horizontal line) and the marginal
expected beneﬁt of effort (given by Re). The efﬁcient amount of effort occurs where
marginal beneﬁt equals marginal cost, and is denoted e* in the diagram. The marginal
beneﬁt perceived by the entrepreneur is only (1 2a)Re, which is strictly below Re.
It follows that the amount of effort actually chosen, denoted e9, is less than the efﬁcient
DEMO The basic problem is that the entrepreneur cannot precommit to provide
effort level e*. Once ﬁnancing is obtained and share a of the ﬁrm DEMO been sold to
the investor, the entrepreneur will only provide effort DEMO e9. If the investor and the
entrepreneur could contract over e, DEMO they could agree that e* would be provided,
but this is impossible under the assumption that e cannot be observed (or at least
legally veriﬁed) by the investor.
FIGURE A1
Moral hazard.
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT 465
APPENDIX 2
Formal Analysis of the Adverse Selection DEMO
From (18) we derive the ﬁrst-order condition
∞ (aR(q) 2 C)f(q)dq 2 1 5 0 (A2.1)
EVd 5 p9(d) #q0
where F is the cumulative distribution of q. Let
K 5 ∞ (aR(q) 2 C)f(q)dq (A2.2)
#q0
Then (A2.1) simpliﬁes to
p9(d) 5 1 (A2.3)
K
To derive the second-order condition, EVd is differentiated DEMO respect to d, yielding
EVdd 5
5 p″(d) K (DEMO)
p″(d) #∞ (aR(q) 2 C)f(q)DEMO
q0
It follows from (17) and (18) that (A2.4) is strictly negative, which is the precondi-
tion for (A2.3) to yield a maximum.
(A2.3) has interesting implications. Suppose that R(q) is such that there are many
worthwhile projects and a few projects DEMO have very low negative expected returns.
q0 is therefore low. Speciﬁcally, DEMO that K is relatively large, resulting in a rather
low value DEMO p9(d), which in term implies a relatively large optimal value of d (if a
solution to (A2.3) exists at all). Thus, with such a constellation of parameters, it pays
to invest DEMO d in due diligence. On the other hand, if R(q) is such that K is relatively
small (which may happen if there are only few attractive projects and many ‘lemons,’
i.e., if q0 is high), this will result in a relatively small optimal value DEMO d (depending,
of course, on the shape of p(d)).
In order to illustrate the point that an investor with a highly responsive detection
function p(d) (say, investor h with a detection function p(dh)) is more likely to invest
in projects DEMO high asymmetry of information than an investor with a less responsive
p(d) (say, investor l with a detection function p(dl)), let us consider the following case.
Assume that q0 is high and K is small, resulting, according to (A2.3), in a large p″(d).
This is fairly realistic, as the pattern of returns of venture capitalists is usually skewed
with most investments generating either disappointing DEMO negative returns and only a
few becoming ‘stars’.
It may happen that investor h ﬁnds it worthwhile to spend dh* . 0 (which is the
value of dh that satisﬁes A2.3) and go ahead with project q $ q0, while investor l ﬁnds
that the optimal value of dl is dl* 5 0 and thus refrains from investing. (Of course,
even if dh* . 0, the investor’s feasibility constraint (20) has to hold before investment
I is made.) These points are illustrated in Figure A2.
Note that for some values of K, both dl* and dh* can be positive in our example.
Then it pays even DEMO investor l to do due diligence. Again, it also depends on DEMO
(20) whether either investor l or h or both ﬁnd the investment attractive.
466
R. AMIT ET AL.
FIGURE A2
Optimal due diligence for different DEMO functions p(d).{1g42fwefx}