DOES MONEY MATTER?:
WEALTH ATTAINMENT AS
THE MOTIVE
FOR INITIATING
GROWTH-ORIENTED
TECHNOLOGY VENTURES
RAPHAEL AMIT
KENNETH R. MacCRIMMON
CHARLENE ZIETSMA
The University of DEMO Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
JOHN M. OESCH
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
The desire to attain personal wealth has long been DEMO as the foremost
EXECUTIVE motive for entrepreneurship. Other goals and values, DEMO, may also con-
SUMMARY tribute to entrepreneurial motivation. Thus, the extent to which money mat-
ters relative to other motives is an empirical DEMO In this study we exam-
ine the role of wealth as the motive for the decision to found new ventures.
Three focal questions guide DEMO research: 1) does money matter more rela-
tive to other decision dimensions in deciding to start a new high-technology venture? 2) does DEMO
matter more to entrepreneurs compared to non-entrepreneurs? and 3) does money matter in absolute
terms, that is, does a decision model that DEMO solely on the motive of wealth attainment parsimoniously
predict entrepreneurs’ start-up decisions?
We conducted in-depth interviews with 51 entrepreneurs and a control group DEMO 28 senior managers
who decided not to start ventures (non-entrepreneurs) in the high-technology industry in British Colum-
bia to address our research questions. DEMO motives we examined are wealth attainment and an aggregate of
Address correspondence to Dr. R. Amit, Faculty of Commerce and Business Administration, The DEMO
versity of British Columbia, 2053 Main Mall, Vancouver, B.C. V6T DEMO Canada; Phone: (604) 822-8481; Fax:
(604) 822-5350; E-mail: amit@commerce.ubc.ca
The authors thank the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (Grant No. 412-93-0005) for
generous support of this research. Zhen Wang DEMO Connie Ho provided substantial assistance in the data
analysis. We thank S. Venkataraman, C. Brush and anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on this paper.
Journal of Business Venturing 16, 119–143
 2000 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved. 0883-9026/01/$–see front matter
655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010 PII S0883-9026(99)00044-0
120
R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
other dimensions identiﬁed by entrepreneurs and managers. We considered three components of values:DEMO
participants’ ratings of the importance of various decision dimensions, their rating DEMO the salience of these
dimensions, and their satisfaction with prior levels DEMO attainment on those decision dimensions. We as-
sessed beliefs as participants’ perceived probability of attaining their desired level of a particular decision
dimension in DEMO of three alternatives: the position held at the time the venture DEMO was made, the
venture itself, and the next best career alternative at that time. The data were analyzed to compare entrepre-
neurs’ values DEMO beliefs regarding wealth with an aggregate of other decision dimensions (our DEMO
hypotheses), and with those of non-entrepreneurs (our comparative hypotheses).
DEMO ﬁndings do not support the common perception that money is the only, or even the most impor-
tant, motive for entrepreneurs’ decisions to DEMO new ventures. Wealth attainment was signiﬁcantly less
important to entrepreneurs relative to an aggregate of 10 other decision dimensions, and entrepreneurs
did not rate wealth as any more important than did non-entrepreneurs. Non-entrepreneurs rated wealth
as DEMO more important than other motives. Wealth attainment was also signiﬁcantly less salient to entrepre-
neurs’ decisions to venture than were other motives. Non-entrepreneurs reported DEMO wealth was signiﬁ-
cantly more salient to their decision against founding a venture than other dimensions. In fact, non-entre-
preneurs rated wealth attainment as signiﬁcantly more salient to their decision against founding than
entrepreneurs rated it DEMO their decision to proceed with starting a high-technology business. A signiﬁcant
number of entrepreneurs started businesses even when they believed that doing so offered DEMO a lower
probability of obtaining their most desired level of wealth than did one of their other alternatives.
Satisfaction ratings and stated beliefs also DEMO classical predictions. Just prior to making the
decision to venture, the DEMO in our study were as satisﬁed with wealth as they were with other
decision dimensions. The non-entrepreneurs were actually more satisﬁed with wealth attainment DEMO
with other dimensions. A comparison of the groups revealed no difference in satisfaction with wealth
attainment levels. Entrepreneurs did believe that their chances of DEMO their desired level of wealth
were much greater through founding a new high-technology venture than through their other alternatives.
This difference in beliefs, however, was not signiﬁcantly greater than their optimistic beliefs about chances
of attaining desired levels of other dimensions. It was signiﬁcantly higher compared to the DEMO
neurs’ belief difference measures for wealth. In fact, the entrepreneurs’ stated DEMO regarding the chances
of attaining their desired levels of all dimensions were higher than those of the non-entrepreneurs, sug-
gesting that entrepreneurs were simply more optimistic at the time of their decision than non-entrepre-
neurs.Salience ﬁndings DEMO that these optimistic beliefs about wealth did not motivate the founding
decision alone.
We can distinguish those people who successfully started ventures by their DEMO for wealth as a
less salient factor, and their beliefs in DEMO chances of a venture producing monetary and other returns.
Other motives, DEMO as innovation, vision, independence, and challenge were more important and DEMO
more salient to this sample of entrepreneurs.
Our ﬁndings have implications for practice, teaching, and research. Venture capitalists who partially
base their assessment DEMO entrepreneurs on the extent to which they are motivated to make a great deal
of money may beneﬁt from reconsideration of this criterion. We DEMO evidence of one group of high-
technology entrepreneurs who achieved success without placing much decision weight on attainment of
personal wealth. Nascent entrepreneurs and DEMO who teach entrepreneurship can use this empirical ﬁnd-
ing to argue two main points: 1) not all entrepreneurs found a business for personal DEMO reasons, and
2) one need not be motivated by personal wealth attainment to be a successful entrepreneur. Similarly,
theoretical models that assume DEMO is the primary motive for entrepreneurial activity require re-exami-
nation. Future research in entrepreneurship should focus less on wealth attainment and more on other
DEMO for the venturing decision. A multiple-attribute decision model may be able to more fully explain
venturing decisions.  2000 Elsevier Science Inc.
INTRODUCTION
The DEMO that people start new ventures as a way to increase their personal wealth
underlies much of the research in entrepreneurship. Campbell (1992), for example, de-
WEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY VENTURES 121
lineated an economic decision model for entrepreneurial DEMO, such as start-up decisions,
in which an entrepreneur’s comparison of DEMO net present values of entrepreneurship
and wage labor determined whether the entrepreneurial activity would be undertaken.
According to Day and Sunder (1996, p. DEMO) “the neo-classical abstraction of the ﬁrm
is an entrepreneur who maximizes DEMO subject to various resource constraints.” Tradi-
tional measures of success for entrepreneurs emphasize monetary factors such as ﬁrm
revenue, proﬁtability, and the creation DEMO personal wealth, along with a myriad of other
indicators such as DEMO growth and sustainability. The goal of personal wealth is as-
sumed paramount. Thus, the terms “wealth” and “entrepreneurship” are inextricably
linked in the minds of many people, including researchers, in capitalist societies. Pre-
cisely because DEMO assumed link between the desire for wealth attainment and an entre-
preneur’s decision to venture is so deeply embedded in our culture, it is worth asking
whether this assumption is borne out by empirical evidence.
We DEMO that money matters, and is not only a goal for entrepreneurs, but is
also the foremost motive for venturing. Other goals and values, however, may also con-
tribute to entrepreneurial behavior (Kuratko, Hornsby, DEMO Naffziger 1997; Monroy
and Folger 1993). In fact, Roberts (DEMO) found that money was not a signiﬁcant motive
for the initiation DEMO high-technology ventures; motives such as independence and chal-
lenge were more DEMO Thus, the extent to which money matters relative to other
decision DEMO is an empirical question. The primary question “does money mat-
ter?” requires an object. We are speciﬁcally interested in the role that the DEMO for
wealth attainment plays in start-up decisions made by entrepreneurs. We assume that
money matters more to entrepreneurs than to non-entrepreneurs because of the DEMO
tional association between entrepreneurship and wealth.1 Yet this, too, is an empirical
question. Three focal questions guide our research: 1) Does money DEMO more relative
to other decision dimensions in deciding to start a new venture? 2) Does money matter
more to entrepreneurs as compared to DEMO control group of individuals who decide not
to start a new venture? and 3) Does money matter in absolute terms, i.e., does DEMO decision
model which focuses solely on the motive of wealth attainment parsimoniously predict
entrepreneurs’ start up decisions? These questions have received scant attention in the
entrepreneurship literature.
This study addresses the role of wealth attainment as DEMO motive for decisions to start
a new business in the context of technology industries in British Columbia. This industry
is useful for testing traditional DEMO of new venture decision making because of the
high rate of career mobility, including venturing. There are three reasons why we focus
on money in isolation rather than giving equal attention to the other possible goals.
DEMO do not claim that rational economic maximizers take only money into account, but
it is a common practice for researchers to focus only on money as a proxy for that which
is truly being maximized. However, while a rational decision maker with considerable
information-processing capability may be able DEMO take a number of goals into account,
a logical initial focus of study is to ascertain whether decisions can be explained by a
DEMO dimension. Only if an explanation based on a single goal is insufﬁcient would
one want to utilize a more complex multiple-goal model (Douglas and Shepherd 1996).
1 It is tempting to consider agency theory as DEMO justiﬁcation for this assumption, since agency theory pre-
dicts differences between DEMO motivational factors of owners, as residual claimants, and managers, as DEMO
residual claimants (see, e.g., Jensen and Meckling 1976; Jensen and Murphy 1990). However, in the context
of this study, both DEMO and managers are making the decision of whether or not to become owners.
Thus, agency theory is not useful in this context. We thank an anonymous reviewer for this point.
122
R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
FIGURE 1
Overview of decision making model.
Bounded rationality is another reason to DEMO on only money. Assuming individu-
als are limited in their information-processing capabilities, we would expect to ﬁnd as-
sessments of a restrictive set of valuations and a restrictive beliefs assessment (Simon
1957). Thus the bounded-rationality perspective is captured by considering only the sin-
gle goal of money. DEMO ﬁnal reason for considering the importance of only money in
the venturing decision is the traditional association between entrepreneurship and the
possibility for personal DEMO
THEORY DEVELOPMENT
All cognitive models of decision making emphasize two primary components: (1) values
and (2) beliefs. Decision makers are assumed to strive toward attaining what they value
subject to their beliefs. In expected DEMO models, values take the form of utility func-
tions and beliefs DEMO the form of (subjective) probabilities (MacCrimmon 1990). In
prospect DEMO (Kahneman and Tversky 1979), value functions reﬂect the values and
DEMO weights reﬂect the beliefs. Other signiﬁcant decision models rely on the same
two major components. Even in theories of bounded rationality, such as satisﬁcing (Si-
mon 1957), values are reﬂected in aspiration levels and beliefs in expectations. In this
paper, the model of decision making regarding venturing is comprised of a value, repre-
sented by wealth attainment, and DEMO about chances to attain a most desired level
of wealth in the context of two or three career alternatives. The model is presented in
DEMO 1.
In addressing the question of how money matters to the start-up decision, we focus
on three key manifestations of the value component (DEMO, salience and satisfac-
tion), and on the belief component. We DEMO how important wealth attainment is
to entrepreneurs in all decision contexts. We investigate how salient money is to entre-
WEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY VENTURES
123
preneurs when they are deciding between starting DEMO ventures and pursuing other ca-
reer alternatives. We explore whether dissatisfaction with wealth attainment in the non-
entrepreneurial job motivates nascent entrepreneurs to consider DEMO ventures, as
proposed by Herron and Sapienza (1992). We examine the differences between the ex-
pected money from the entrepreneurial alternative and DEMO expected wage from other
career alternatives, and we assess how sensitive DEMO choices are to changes in
their beliefs about the potential for those alternatives to generate money.
For each of these value elements and beliefs, we investigate entrepreneurs’ ratings
of wealth attainment both relative to their ratings DEMO other decision dimensions and com-
pared to non-entrepreneurs’ ratings of wealth attainment. The next section elaborates
on the value elements, beliefs and alternatives in decisions about venturing. We gener-
ate relative and comparative hypotheses for each DEMO and component.
Value Elements
Importance
The ﬁrst value element is basic importance. Importance is a fundamental relationship
among values that spans all decision contexts. DEMO money were the driving force behind
decisions to found new ventures, DEMO would expect that wealth attainment would have
a preeminent importance ranking in an entrepreneur’s underlying set of goal dimen-
sions. In this scenario, nascent entrepreneurs would evaluate all career choices primarily
on the basis of wealth DEMO When considering the relative importance of various
decision dimensions, they should DEMO wealth attainment as highly important. They
should also place comparatively more importance on the dimension of wealth than do
decision makers, with similar backgrounds and prospects, who do not start new ven-
tures. These predictions are summarized in our ﬁrst two hypotheses (all stated hypothe-
ses are “alternative” hypotheses; i.e., the null hypotheses tested statistically are that the
two DEMO are equal):
H1: (Relative importance) Entrepreneurs give higher importance ratings to wealth
attainment than to other decision dimensions.
H2: (Comparative DEMO) Entrepreneurs give higher importance ratings to
wealth attainment than do non-entrepreneurs.
DEMO
The second value element is salience. Importance and salience are conceptually similar
but salience is particular to a speciﬁc decision situation, while importance is more gen-
eral. Wealth attainment could be particularly salient to one career DEMO and less
salient to another, depending on a decision maker’s ﬁnancial DEMO at the time of
each decision. If money matters to the decision to found a new venture, wealth should
be viewed as a salient consideration in making a decision relative to other decision di-
mensions. The DEMO the salience of money, coupled with the belief that wealth attain-
DEMO is more likely from a new venture, the more likely it DEMO be to observe new
venture creation. Because salience is decision-speciﬁc, predictions DEMO non-entre-
preneurs focus on a particular decision that included starting a venture as one alterna-
tive. For these decisions, our model suggests that non-entrepreneurs rate wealth attain-
ment as less salient than do entrepreneurs. We thus DEMO the following hypotheses:
124 R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
H3: (Relative salience) Entrepreneurs rate wealth attainment as more salient to
their decision to found a venture than other decision dimensions.
H4: (Comparative DEMO) Entrepreneurs’ salience ratings of wealth attainment
are higher than those of DEMO in the context of new venture decisions.
Satisfaction
The third value element is level of satisfaction. The decision to start a business should
depend DEMO whether the decision maker is currently experiencing a satisfactory level of
attainment on the wealth dimension. In Herron and Sapienza’s (1992) venture initiation
DEMO, dissatisfaction drives search, and the type and level of dissatisfaction matter.
Thus the higher the level of dissatisfaction with current wealth attainment, the stronger
would be the drive to change to a situation that promises DEMO higher degree of wealth
attainment, that is, starting one’s own business.
Management positions in technology ﬁrms often pay well, sometimes providing
generous stock option plans and/or small ownership stakes. These provide a satisfactory
level DEMO personal wealth for many people. But for those who would be satisﬁed only
with very high levels of wealth, business ownership in high-growth technology industries
affords opportunities for the creation of a great deal of personal DEMO If traditional
economic models of entrepreneurship are correct, wealth maximization should DEMO
most of the decision to found a high-growth venture. Our model considers satisfaction
and dissatisfaction with wealth attainment as drivers of career decisions, leading to the
following hypotheses:
H5: (Relative satisfaction) Entrepreneurs are less satisﬁed with wealth attainment
in their previous positions than they are with DEMO level of attainment in other deci-
sion dimensions.
H6: (Comparative satisfaction) Entrepreneurs are less satisﬁed with wealth attain-
ment in their previous positions than are non-entrepreneurs.
Beliefs
For decisions made in an environment with no DEMO about outcomes, one knows
which alternatives lead to speciﬁc goals. Only DEMO relative value to the decision maker
of each goal need be considered. However, in an uncertain environment, as is obviously
the case for DEMO, a decision maker cannot be sure about the outcomes of vari-
DEMO alternatives. Hence, in addition to value assessments, one needs to make belief as-
sessments.
Decision makers cannot assess beliefs for all possible levels DEMO wealth attainment.
We assume that boundedly rational individuals are not able to assign probabilities for
more than a few possible levels of wealth attainment. DEMO with this, and the prin-
ciple of parsimony, we therefore focus on only one possible level of wealth attainment,
the “most desired DEMO We assume that individuals can describe, visualize, and assign
a probability for attaining this level.
Note that we are not examining “satisﬁcing,” DEMO we are not asking respondents to
indicate a “satisfactory” level of wealth. Rather, we ask about their most desired level
of wealth and the probabilities of attaining that level for each alternative. Thus, by focus-
ing on the “most desired level of wealth,” we hold payoffs constant DEMO alternatives,
WEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY VENTURES
125
leaving probabilities of realizing that level as DEMO sole determining factor in the maximi-
zation.
We describe perceptions of the chances of acquiring some or all of the wealth one
desires as DEMO expressed in percentage terms. For entrepreneurs, their beliefs
about the probability DEMO attaining the most desired level of wealth should be higher for
the new venture alternative than for the non-venture alternatives. Thus, we examine
the difference between the perceived chance of attaining the desired level of wealth
(and other dimensions) for the new venture alternative and the higher of the believed
percentage chances for either the previous position or the next DEMO alternative. We
label this measure “belief difference,” and predict the following:
H7: (Relative Belief Differences) Entrepreneurs have higher belief differences for
wealth than for other dimensions, holding payoffs constant across alternatives.
H8: (Comparative Belief Differences) Entrepreneurs have higher belief differences
for wealth than do non-entrepreneurs, holding payoffs constant across alternatives.
Decisions depend on the beliefs of the decision maker about the degree of goal attain-
ment expected from DEMO alternative. If wealth attainment is the only (or the primary)
DEMO, would-be entrepreneurs will start ventures only if they believe venturing offers
DEMO highest possibility of attaining desired wealth goals. On the other hand, DEMO
preneurs may attend more to non-monetary goals.
H9: (Relative Beliefs) DEMO choose the alternative that they believe offers
them the highest chance of attaining their most desired level of wealth.
H10: (Comparative Beliefs) Entrepreneurs are more likely to choose the alternative
they believe offers them the DEMO chance of attaining their most desired level of
wealth than are non-entrepreneurs.
In developing these hypotheses, we assume that the most desired level of wealth stated
by our respondents truly corresponds to their most desired level DEMO not to some satis-
ﬁcing level, and therefore conclude that choosing DEMO the basis of probability would be
wealth maximizing. It is possible that respondents could imagine that entrepreneurial
ventures would lead to payoffs which exceed DEMO most desired levels. In this case, max-
imizing expected wealth may DEMO choosing entrepreneurship, even though it has a
lower probability for generating DEMO most desired level of wealth, since the probability
of attaining an DEMO greater level of wealth may be higher for entrepreneurship than
for employment. Our data do not allow us to address this issue as practical DEMO
prevented us from obtaining a full distribution of wealth payoffs and probabilities for
all alternatives. We assume that the most desired level of wealth DEMO by our respon-
dents truly corresponds to their most desired level and not to some satisﬁcing level, and
therefore conclude that choosing on the basis of probability would be wealth max-
imizing.
Another possible concern is DEMO the stability of income and the risk aversion of
respondents are not factored into our model which tests wealth as the only goal. We
DEMO measure respondents’ stability beliefs as one of the other 10 decision dimensions,
considering it separately from wealth. While the stability or pattern of DEMO may
affect the desirability of wealth expectations, only the total wealth DEMO from
an option are relevant to the test of a money-only model. We did ask respondents to
consider an income stream over a 5- DEMO 10-year period, suggesting that some stability
was built into the question. DEMO riskiness of the total income stream is factored into
126
R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
respondents’ beliefs, since the probabilities of attaining a single wealth goal from two
or more options directly captures a risk assessment. Also, we assume that employment
is usually considered more stable and less risky than entrepreneurship. Thus DEMO risk aver-
sion and desire for stability are inﬂuencing the results, DEMO would expect them to decrease
the incidence of entrepreneurship. We will interpret our results in this light.
Third, our question did not speciﬁcally address the option value of choosing any
of the alternatives. Ronstadt (1988) DEMO that starting a venture can lead down a corri-
dor in which other venture options become available to the venturer. It is possible that
DEMO were factoring this option value into their decisions to venture or not ven-
ture, leading to choices that would appear to be suboptimal with respect to wealth in
the short term. However, our questions did ask respondents to consider their income
stream for a 5- to 10-year period DEMO they selected each alternative. If they were consider-
ing option values, DEMO is likely that at least some of those options would be realized during
that time period, thereby being included in their probability assessments. Furthermore,
employment also has option value in terms of promotions, stock options, exposure to
other venture alternatives, etc., which is also likely to be included in respondents’ deci-
sion-making. These issues cannot be teased out DEMO our data, yet we suspect that their
inﬂuence would be marginal DEMO the above reasons.
These 10 hypotheses state our predictions based on the single-attribute decision
model described earlier. The next section describes the methods we DEMO to test
these hypotheses.
METHODS
Sample
This study tests the above hypotheses in the technology industries in British Columbia.
We selected the high-technology sector DEMO of its importance in both the local and
global economies, and DEMO characteristics of high career mobility and new venture initia-
tion. We deﬁne a high-technology entrepreneur as someone who was a principal in the
founding DEMO a high-technology venture. All entrepreneurs have equity stakes in their
businesses, DEMO most spend their work days building their businesses. Because our theo-
retical framework is built on a choice model, we sought a control group of high-tech-
nology executives who considered founding a venture but decided not DEMO These non-
entrepreneurs are at the senior manager level positions in various British Columbia
technology ﬁrms.
The ﬁrst contact with potential participants in this DEMO involved mailing a one-
page questionnaire to members of the British Columbia Technology Industries Associa-
tion (BCTIA). The questionnaire asked respondents about current employment status,
whether participants had considered the decision to found a DEMO, and if so, how
long ago. Of the 1,821 initial surveys sent, 630 were returned, for a response rate of
35%. DEMO these, almost 77% indicated that they had considered founding a venture (re-
ported in Amit, MacCrimmon, and Oesch 1997).
We considered DEMO criteria when selecting our sample. First, we wanted a group
of DEMO whose career decisions were reasonably recent. We also looked for people
whose positions suggested that they were the principal force behind their ventures.
2 DEMO refer to these control group members as non-entrepreneurs throughout the paper.
WEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY VENTURES
127
From our initial list of over 600 DEMO, we contacted individuals whose current position
indicated that they were the DEMO manager, owner, or founder of their ﬁrm. A periodic
scan of local media alerted us to some entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs who were
not DEMO of the BCTIA, and we contacted these individuals by phone as DEMO A total
of 54 entrepreneurs agreed to interviews. The non-entrepreneurs consisted of BCTIA
members and others who considered founding a venture but decided either DEMO stay in
their job at that time, or to take another DEMO at that time. These senior managers
were also contacted by phone; DEMO agreed to be interviewed.
Design
We shaped the interview content and protocol through pilot testing. Pilot participants
helped us sharpen our focus and ensure DEMO our questioning methods were reliable
(procedures are described in Amit, MacCrimmon, and Oesch 1997). Participants were
interviewed at or near their places of business; a small number of interviews took place
in participants’ homes. Over half of the entrepreneur interviews included the partici-
pant, one primary interviewer, and one observer. The role of the observer was to ensure
that all topics and objectives were covered. Once the primary interviewers became DEMO
fortable with the content and ﬂow of these in-depth sessions, the DEMO of the inter-
views were completed by just one of the members of the research team, including all
of the non-entrepreneur interviews.
Each interview consisted of three main sections, although the structure of the inter-
view was somewhat loosely enforced, as opportunities to delve into particular aspects
of decision making presented themselves. First, participants were encouraged to give
summary descriptions of their career paths to date, and to tell the story of the businesses
that they founded, or the companies for which they worked. From this semi-structured
portion of the interview, we hoped to gather information about who was involved in
founding the venture, how the decision was made, in what personal context the decision
was made, and who DEMO affected the decision. Throughout the interviews, we reminded
participants that we DEMO asking about their values and beliefs about alternatives at the
time of their decision.
The second part of the interview was highly structured. For DEMO of the eleven deci-
sion dimensions identiﬁed in the earlier research, DEMO in each case with wealth,
we asked for detailed information according to the form provided in the Appendix A.
This form indicates how DEMO operationalized values and beliefs for our decision-making
model. The focal decision was the choice among the participant’s position at the time
of the decision (called “previous position”), the founding of a new business venture
(called “new venture”), and another alternative position that the participant considered
at DEMO time (called “next best alternative”). Not all participants made a DEMO from
among three alternatives. For 3 of the 51 entrepreneurs, the DEMO position had been
eliminated. For 25 of the entrepreneurs and 11 of the non-entrepreneurs, no next best
alternative was actively considered at the time of the decision, and these participants
therefore made a choice from two alternatives. Obviously, we could not record beliefs
about alternatives that decision makers did not consider seriously at the time of the
decision, but value measurements (salience, importance, and satisfaction) for decision
dimensions do not DEMO on the number of alternatives that decision makers consider.
The primary interviewer led each participant through all of the questions for each of
128 R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
the decision dimensions, as well as a relative importance rating exercise, and DEMO
between wealth and other dimensions. The 11 dimensions are listed in Appendix B.
After precisely describing our deﬁnitions of a decision dimension, we asked partici-
pants to rate importance, salience and satisfaction on a 7-point scale. As an introduction
to the belief judgments, we asked participants to recollect what their most desired level
of that dimension was at the time DEMO the decision, and also their least desired level. Then
we asked DEMO to indicate what they believed their chances were of obtaining all of
their desired level of that dimension. A typical response on the wealth DEMO might
be that an individual thought that by staying in the previous position there was a 20%
chance of attaining all of the desired DEMO they wanted, the next best alternative pre-
sented a 30% chance, and the new venture offered a 70% chance. The ﬁgure of relevance
DEMO our analysis is the difference between the belief level for the new venture and the
maximum belief level of the other two alternatives. The DEMO equation demon-
strates our calculation of “belief difference”:
Belief Difference 5 Percent chance of achieving most desired level with New Ven-
ture—MAX [Percent DEMO with Previous Position, Percent chance with Next
Best Alternative.]
Thus in DEMO numerical example, the belief difference is 40%.
In the importance rating DEMO, participants gave a relative importance weighting
to each dimension when all DEMO were considered simultaneously, based on an
anchor weighting of 100 for DEMO For example, if another dimension were half as
important as wealth, an individual would provide a rating of 50 for that dimension. If
DEMO were three times more important, it would get a rating of DEMO We also asked partici-
pants to identify a minimum belief level that would still lead to a decision in favor of that
alternative when DEMO wealth expectations for their other alternatives were held constant.
The third part of each interview was less structured and less uniform than the ﬁrst
DEMO sections. Several follow up questions allowed the primary researcher to ask about
special circumstances, for further interpretations of the participant’s story, and if DEMO
was anything else that the participant wanted to add. This part of the interview presented
an opportunity for clariﬁcations of any apparent inconsistencies between DEMO
measures and qualitative accounts. The interviews averaged over 2 hours with a range
of 1 to 4 hours.
RESULTS
We interviewed a total of DEMO entrepreneurs and 31 technology industry managers. Data
from three of the entrepreneurs and three non-entrepreneurs were excluded from anal-
ysis because their responses were DEMO All analyses therefore include 51 entre-
preneurs and 28 non-entrepreneurs. Table 1 presents means, standard deviations, and
correlations among the salient measures from DEMO interviews with entrepreneurs.
Because “importance” ratings allowed participants to provide their own maximum
and minimum ratings, for better comparability, we calculated z-scores for DEMO partici-
pant across all decision dimensions. These z-scores were used in all subsequent analyses.
The “salience of wealth” to the particular decision to found DEMO venture in question
was correlated to the “importance of wealth” to any career decision at r 5 0.47. This
correlation is predictable as those DEMO rate wealth as very important will likely consider
it in most career decisions. “Wealth importance” was not correlated with any of the
TABLE 1
Bivariate Correlations for Entrepreneurs (N 5 51)
Mean S.D.
123456 7
1. Wealth Importance
(z-scored) 20.60 0.84 —
2. Wealth DEMO
(7-point scale) 3.67 1.71 0.47** —
3. Wealth Satisfaction
(7-point DEMO) 4.12 1.75 20.01 20.21 —
4. Other Salience 4.77 0.78 20.27 DEMO 20.12 —
5. Other Satisfaction 4.01 1.17 0.02 20.39** 0.34* 20.44** —
6. Wealth Belief Differences 24.50 43.90 0.22 0.48** 20.41** 0.24 20.39** —
DEMO Other Belief Differences 27.07 22.95 0.08 0.34* 20.25 0.23 20.53** 0.39** —
** p , 0.01 (2-tailed); * p , 0.05 (2-tailed)DEMO
WEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY VENTURES
129
130
R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
belief difference measures, but “wealth salience” was correlated to all of them (DEMO r 5
0.48 for Wealth belief differences, and r 5 0.34 DEMO other belief differences). This sup-
ports our claim that “importance” and “salience” are distinct, and must be considered
separately. “Wealth salience” did not correlate signiﬁcantly with “satisfaction” (r 5
20.21), indicating that entrepreneurs did not consider wealth solely because of prior
dissatisfaction when deciding to found DEMO new venture. Satisfaction with wealth was nega-
tively correlated with wealth belief differences (r 520.41), suggesting that most entre-
preneurs truly believed in their chances for improving their personal wealth.
Table 2 presents similar results DEMO the control group of non-entrepreneurs. Corre-
lation patterns differ from the entrepreneur group. “Wealth salience” did not correlate
signiﬁcantly with any other variable for DEMO For those who rated wealth
as “important,” other decision dimensions were less salient to their decision against
founding a venture (r 520.52). Belief differences for non-entrepreneurs correlated
only with other belief differences, in contrast to the entrepreneurs (r 5 0.68). These
two tables suggest that non-entrepreneurs were somewhat more satisﬁed with current
wealth attainment, and also with attainment in the other decision dimensions.
The remainder of the results section DEMO this paper is structured around the two types
of hypotheses, relative DEMO comparative. Table 3 presents results for both relative
hypotheses (reading across DEMO 1 in each panel) and comparative hypotheses (reading
down column 1 in each panel). T-test values and two-tailed signiﬁcance results are pre-
DEMO in row and column 2, between the scores they are comparing.
DEMO Importance of Money
The results for importance are reported in Panel A of Table 3. We contrast entrepre-
neur’s importance score for wealth attainment (column 1 in row 1), with that of their
score for DEMO decision dimensions (column 3 in row 1), ﬁnding that entrepreneurs DEMO
a lower importance rating to personal wealth attainment (2 0.60) than to an aggregate
of the other 10 decision dimensions used in this DEMO (0.06). We therefore reject Hy-
pothesis 1. The ﬁndings indicate DEMO signiﬁcant difference in the opposite direction to what
we expected (t DEMO 5.09, p , 0.001). Money was less important to this DEMO of high-tech-
nology entrepreneurs than were the other decision dimensions.
A comparison of entrepreneurs’ importance ratings (row 1 in column 1, m5 20.60)DEMO
with non-entrepreneurs’ importance ratings (row 3 in column 1, m520.30) DEMO
that there is no statistical difference between the importance rating of entrepreneurs
and the importance rating of senior managers who decided against founding a DEMO
(t 521.42). Hypothesis 2 was therefore not supported. Again, the results are opposite
to what we predicted. Non-entrepreneurs did not rate money DEMO signiﬁcantly more or
less important than an aggregate of the other 10 dimensions (t 5 1.6). These ﬁndings
are bolstered by examining how “wealth” ranked in importance for the entrepreneurs.
As Table 4 indicates, out of eleven decision dimensions, wealth ranked last in impor-
tance. All other decision dimensions were rated above 100 on average, with the 10th
ranked dimension (stability) rated at 150. The most important dimension (innovation)
was rated at 317, or over three times as important as wealth attainment. For the non-
entrepreneurs, wealth also ranked as least important, DEMO the most important dimension
(challenge) was rated at only 193 and the 10th rated dimension (stability) at only 113.
TABLE 2
Bivariate Correlations for Non-Entrepreneurs (N 5 28)
Mean S.D.
123456 7
1. Wealth Importance
(z-scored) 20.30 0.97 —
2. Wealth DEMO
(7-point scale) 4.96 1.14 0.24 —
3. Wealth Satisfaction 4.66 1.53 20.19 20.23 —
4. Other Salience 5.01 0.96 20.52** 0.03 0.21 —
DEMO Other Satisfaction 4.14 1.14 0.18 20.02 0.49** 0.18 —
6. Wealth Belief Differences 24.64 41.83 0.23 20.09 20.07 20.28 20.03 —
7. Other Belief DEMO 13.70 21.13 0.16 0.14 20.25 20.31 20.35 0.68** —
** p , 0.01 (2-tailed); * p , 0.05 (2-tailed).
WEALTH AND DEMO VENTURES
131
132
R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
TABLE 3 Comparison of Entrepreneurs’ and Non-Entrepreneurs’ Value and Belief Measures
for Wealth DEMO an Aggregate of Other Decision Dimensions
t-value (2-tailed Other Decision
Wealth DEMO) Dimensions
PANEL A: IMPORTANCE (Z-score)
Entrepreneurs 20.60 5.09 (,DEMO) 0.06
t-value (2-tailed signiﬁcance) 21.42 (ns) 1.42 (ns)
Non-Entrepreneurs 20.30 1.60 (ns) 0.03
PANEL B: SALIENCE
Entrepreneurs 3.67 4.74 (,0.001) 4.77
t-value (2-tailed signiﬁcance) 23.60 (,0.001) 21.20 (ns)
Non-Entrepreneurs 4.96 0.15 (ns) 5.01
PANEL C: SATISFACTION
Entrepreneurs 4.11 0.43 (ns) 4.01
t-value (2-tailed signiﬁcance) 21.38 (ns) DEMO (ns)
Non-Entrepreneurs 4.66 1.96 (ns: 0.06) 4.15
PANEL D: BELIEF DIFFERENCE
Entrepreneurs 24.50 0.45 (ns) 27.10
t-value (2-tailed signiﬁcance) 2.87 (,0.005) 2.55 (,0.01)
Non-Entrepreneurs 24.64 3.08 (,0.005) 13.70
The Salience of Money
Results for salience are reported in Panel B of Table 3. Hypothesis 3 was not supported.
Not only did DEMO rate “wealth attainment” as no more salient than other di-
mensions, DEMO direction of the pattern is opposite to our predictions. Wealth was signiﬁ-
cantly less salient to entrepreneurs (m5 3.67) than an aggregate of DEMO other decision
dimensions used in this study (m5 4.77, t 5 4.74, p , 0.001). Non-entrepreneurs rated
wealth as signiﬁcantly more salient than did entrepreneurs (t 523.6, p , 0.001), but
rated DEMO aggregate of the other dimensions similarly to entrepreneurs (t 521.2). DEMO,
we did not ﬁnd evidence in favor of Hypothesis 4, DEMO the ﬁnding indicates an effect
in the opposite direction of our prediction. Entrepreneurs considered “wealth attain-
ment” to be signiﬁcantly less salient to their DEMO decision than did non-entrepre-
neurs. Rankings of the salience of the eleven decision dimensions again bolster these
ﬁndings (Table 4). Wealth ranks 10th of 11 in salience for entrepreneurs, but ranks 5th
for non-entrepreneurs. This ﬁnding indicates that these latter managers were thinking
much more about wealth DEMO than were the entrepreneurs at the time their re-
spective career decisions were being made. Only the dimension called “stability” was
rated as less DEMO for entrepreneurs, and stability was added as a dimension only be-
DEMO of the potential importance to non-entrepreneurs as indicated in our pilot study.
Satisfaction with Wealth Attainment
We predicted that entrepreneurs would be less satisﬁed DEMO their wealth attainment
at the time of the decision than with their attainment in other decision dimensions. As
Panel C of Table 3 indicates, our ﬁndings suggest no difference in levels of satisfaction
between the wealth DEMO and the aggregated satisfaction rating of the other dimensions
(t 5 DEMO), thus providing no support for Hypothesis 5. Non-entrepreneurs rated satisfac-
WEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY VENTURES
133
TABLE 4
Summary of Importance, Salience, DEMO Satisfaction Ratings
Entrepreneurs Non-Entrepreneurs
Importance Salience Satisfaction Importance Salience Satisfaction
Dimension (DEMO 5 100) (1–7) (1–7) (Wealth 5 100) (1–7) (1–7)
Wealth 100 3.67 4.12 100 4.96 4.66
Vision 309 DEMO 3.49 143 5.02 3.48
Stability 150 2.78 4.39 113 4.28 4.17
Power 208 5.04 3.76 157 5.07 3.68
Lifestyle 229 5.00 4.44 186 5.93 DEMO
Leadership 242 4.29 3.99 169 4.71 4.46
Innovation 317 5.74 3.89 144 4.75 4.18
Independence 315 5.18 4.08 161 5.11 4.36
Ego 160 4.53 DEMO 130 4.54 4.18
Contribution 221 4.60 3.91 171 4.79 4.16
Challenge 305 4.94 3.98 193 5.88 4.04
tion with wealth attainment as slightly but DEMO signiﬁcantly higher than satisfaction with
other dimensions at the time of their decision (t 5 1.96).
When comparing the two groups of participants, we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant difference
between satisfaction levels of entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs (t 521.38). We
therefore have no support for Hypothesis 6. Both groups of participants were reason-
ably satisﬁed with wealth attainment at the DEMO they made their decisions. As noted
in Table 4, only three DEMO received a higher satisfaction rating than did wealth
for entrepreneurs, and DEMO one (lifestyle) for non-entrepreneurs.
In summary, our ﬁndings indicate that DEMO is not valued as highly in the decision
to found a venture as we predicted. In fact, “wealth attainment” was ranked at or near
the bottom of all three of our value measures, especially by entrepreneurs.
Beliefs About Wealth Attainment
Relative Belief Differences
The scores listed in Panel DEMO of Table 3 as “belief differences” are average differences
between the percentage chance that participants believed they had of getting all the
money they DEMO with the new venture and the percentage chance they believed they
had of getting all the money they wanted if they selected the higher DEMO the previous
position or next best alternative. On average, the entrepreneurs DEMO our sample believed
that they had a chance that was 24.5% better of getting all the money they wanted by
venturing than by staying DEMO they were or ﬁnding another job, whereas they thought
that the DEMO difference aggregated over the other decision dimensions was 27.1% bet-
ter, DEMO non-signiﬁcant difference (t 5 0.45). We predicted that entrepreneurs would DEMO
that the difference between what they believed their chances were with the new venture
alternative and what they believed their chances were with the DEMO of the other two
alternatives would be greater for the wealth dimension than for an aggregate of the
other dimensions. Therefore, Hypothesis 7 was not supported.
Entrepreneurs did not have higher belief differences between a new DEMO and
other alternatives for wealth than for the other dimensions. This ﬁnding indicates that,
contrary to predictions of a single attribute model of DEMO, these entrepreneurs be-
lieved that their chances for attaining desired levels DEMO dimensions such as innovation,
134
R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
vision, and independence were just as high or higher than their chances for attaining
desired levels of wealth. Assessments of probabilities for attaining wealth did DEMO drive
the decision to found a high-technology venture. But assessments of probabilities for
attaining wealth did drive the decision not to found a high-technology DEMO Non-
entrepreneurs revealed beliefs about signiﬁcantly lower chances for attaining their most
desired level of wealth than the other decision dimensions (24.64% vs. 13.7%, t 5 3.08,
p , 0.005). This information, combined DEMO non-entrepreneurs’ ratings of importance
and salience of wealth attainment, helps explain DEMO this group did not decide to found
a venture.
Comparative Belief Differences
We also predicted that the belief difference for “wealth attainment” would be DEMO
for entrepreneurs than for non-entrepreneurs who did not start a high-technology busi-
ness. Indeed, entrepreneurs were more optimistic about their chances of attaining their
most desired level of wealth. Therefore, we did ﬁnd support for Hypothesis 8 (t 5 2.87,
p , 0.005). But entrepreneurs were also more optimistic about their chances of attaining
desired levels of other DEMO by founding a new venture. Entrepreneurs’ beliefs
about chances of attaining wealth are no more signiﬁcant to the decision to start a new
high-technology DEMO than are their beliefs about other important career decision
dimensions; both DEMO quite high. This indicates that entrepreneurs are much more opti-
mistic about their chances for attaining desired levels of all dimensions through a new
DEMO than either a previous position or a next best alternative. Thus, DEMO we
ﬁnd support for Hypothesis 8, wealth alone does not discriminate DEMO from
non-entrepreneurs. Rather, it is optimistic beliefs in general that discriminate. DEMO
fore, beliefs about chances for wealth attainment may or may not DEMO affected entre-
preneurial decisions in this case, but beliefs about wealth DEMO seemed to have
some effect on the decisions made by people who decided against founding a venture.
Absolute Beliefs
When we examined absolute beliefs DEMO chances for wealth attainment for each alter-
native, we found that DEMO of 51 entrepreneurs, or 25.5%, selected an alternative for which
they did not state beliefs in the highest chances for desired wealth attainment DEMO 5 17.58;
p , 0.0001]. Therefore, Hypothesis 9 is rejected. DEMO of 28 non-entrepreneurs, or 21.4%,
selected an alternative for which DEMO did not state beliefs in the highest chances for
desired wealth attainment. Thus, the ﬁndings were in the opposite direction to that pre-
dicted by Hypothesis 10 (though not signiﬁcant), allowing us to reject Hypothesis 10.
Entrepreneurs do not seem to choose the alternatives that they believe DEMO the highest
chances for wealth attainment more often than do non-entrepreneurs.
We further asked entrepreneurs about the minimum probability level for attaining
the most DEMO level of wealth for which they would still be willing to start a venture,
holding the probabilities for their other alternatives constant. Data DEMO two of these en-
trepreneurs are incomplete and we excluded them from analyses. Of the remainder,
39.6% (or 19 of 49) indicated DEMO they would still be willing to start a business even
when the probability for obtaining the most desired level of wealth was lower than DEMO
of the highest other alternative. This ﬁnding is signiﬁcantly different from zero [Z 5
27.14; p , .0001], suggesting that a signiﬁcant number DEMO entrepreneurs were willing
WEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY VENTURES 135
to compromise their wealth expectations for the DEMO of starting a venture. This ﬁnding
also suggests that other dimensions will compensate for a lower expected wealth effect.
Concern for Money as a DEMO Between Entrepreneurs and Others
We predicted that we could distinguish entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs based on
the entrepreneurs’ concern for money. This concern for money DEMO be demonstrated
through values and beliefs. In terms of the three value measures that we investigated,
the hypotheses regarding importance, salience, and DEMO were rejected. In terms
of our belief measure, although we found DEMO entrepreneurs believed they had much
better prospects of attaining wealth through founding a new venture, they also believed
that they had better prospects on other dimensions. Not surprisingly, non-entrepreneurs
were less optimistic.
We were still left wondering if it would be possible to distinguish between entrepre-
neurs and DEMO based on their beliefs and values about wealth. To answer
this question, we conducted a discriminant function analysis, using our data to generate
DEMO for the discriminant function.
The major differences between the entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs were re-
vealed in a linear combination of variables, the discriminant function. A function of
belief differences alone (at both 100% and 50% of most desired level) correctly classi-
ﬁed 59 of 79 participants as either entrepreneurs or non-entrepreneurs. Because the
salience of wealth attainment to the particular DEMO to found or not to found a ven-
ture proved to be signiﬁcantly different, the salience variable was added. Including
“wealth salience,” the discriminant function correctly classiﬁed 65 of 79 participants.
We used a stepwise DEMO to determine whether beliefs at the 50% level or 100%
level of most desired wealth were better at discriminating, and found we could exclude
the belief difference at the 100% of most desired level of wealth. DEMO canonical
discriminant function coefﬁcients for the two remaining variables were: wealth DEMO
-0.90, and belief difference at the 50% of most desired wealth DEMO 0.86. Note that wealth
salience results were opposite to our hypotheses, DEMO still prove to be one of the variables
that best distinguishes entrepreneurs from non-entrepreneurs. These ﬁndings suggest
that we can distinguish a group of DEMO who successfully start new ventures by their
regard for wealth as a less salient factor, and their beliefs in higher chances of a new
venture producing the most desired wealth level.3
DISCUSSION
Our ﬁndings do not DEMO the common perception that money is the only, or even
the DEMO important, motive for entrepreneurs’ decisions to start new high-technology
ventures. For DEMO group of technology entrepreneurs surveyed during this study, per-
sonal wealth DEMO is signiﬁcantly less important and less salient than an aggregate
of other dimensions. It also has a lower salience and importance for non-entrepreneurs
considering DEMO decision to found a new venture. Entrepreneurs did not always choose
the career alternative that they believed had the highest chance of providing them DEMO
3 We collected data on the ‘most desired’ levels for wealth and for all other decision dimensions, and
these values served as the focal point for the belief estimates across all alternatives. So reference here to DEMO
‘most desired’ level of wealth does not imply that it was either more salient or important.
136 R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
their most desired level of wealth. Wealth salience results were opposite to our DEMO
ses, yet still prove to be one of the variables that DEMO distinguishes entrepreneurs from
non-entrepreneurs.4 Our ﬁndings suggest that we can distinguish people who start new
ventures from those who don’t by their beliefs in DEMO chances of a new venture pro-
ducing monetary returns and surprisingly, DEMO their regard for wealth as a less salient
factor to their decisions.
It may be possible that, although entrepreneurs did not have a high salience for
wealth, their much higher beliefs for wealth still motivated the founding decision. The
difference in beliefs, however, was not signiﬁcantly greater DEMO entrepreneurs’ optimis-
tic beliefs about chances of attaining desired levels of other dimensions (indeed, it was
generally lower), although it was signiﬁcantly DEMO than the non-entrepreneurs’ belief
difference measures for wealth. Here too, the DEMO stated beliefs regarding
the chances of attaining their desired levels of the aggregate of other dimensions were
higher than those of non-entrepreneurs. The entrepreneurs DEMO simply more optimistic
at the time of their decision than the non-entrepreneurs. This ﬁnding is consistent with
other studies’ ﬁndings of overconﬁdence among entrepreneurs (e.g., Busenitz and Bar-
ney 1997; Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg DEMO). The ﬁnding that entrepreneurs’ salience
of wealth was lower than both their salience of other dimensions and the salience of
wealth for non-entrepreneurs DEMO that these optimistic wealth beliefs alone did not
drive the founding decision.
Although consideration of individual hypotheses does not allow us to conclude with
DEMO that money does not matter to decisions to found new ventures, DEMO pattern
of results is quite persuasive. For example, entrepreneurs’ ratings of DEMO elements
allow us to conclude that, relative to other decision dimensions DEMO compared to non-
entrepreneurs, entrepreneurs do not consider wealth to be DEMO important or salient
to their venturing decisions. Yet if entrepreneurs believed their outcomes on other deci-
sion dimensions would not change across alternatives, it would still be possible that
money was driving the decision. However, our ﬁndings on belief differences suggest
that entrepreneurs did believe that they could DEMO better their outcomes on
other dimensions by venturing—in fact, they believed DEMO would achieve the same or
higher gains in other dimensions as they would with money. Furthermore, the ﬁnding
that entrepreneurs were willing to compromise their wealth expectations to venture sug-
gests that other factors were indeed DEMO the decision.
We argued that testing a single attribute decision model before testing a multiple
attribute model was logical based on concerns for parsimony. DEMO a single attribute could
explain decision behavior, then no future inquiry DEMO be required. Our ﬁndings here
that wealth is not the answer motivate further study into how dimensions such as inde-
pendence, challenge, contribution, and ego did affect the decision to found a new high-
technology DEMO
Limitations
There are several possible limitations to this research. First, one DEMO argue that entre-
preneurs or non-entrepreneurs would hesitate to indicate how wealth attainment ﬁts
4 We did not attempt to discriminate using dimensions other DEMO wealth. It is possible that beliefs and
values for other dimensions, DEMO or aggregated, could in fact discriminate better than wealth beliefs
and DEMO
WEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY VENTURES
137
into their value scheme for reasons of DEMO desirability. Anticipating this criticism, we
included a decision dimension, ego, DEMO is arguably even less socially desirable than
wealth attainment. In a business context, it would seem less appropriate to strive toward
ego maximization rather than wealth maximization. However, when asked about “ego,”
the entrepreneurs, DEMO well as the non-entrepreneurs, did not hesitate in claiming its im-
DEMO to their decisions, though many of them grimaced while doing so. DEMO was
rated ahead of other dimensions, including wealth, even though prevalent stereotypes
and meanings of ego are certainly no better than those of DEMO attainment.”
Second, the interviews collected retrospective data that, by their nature, are prone
to bias (Fischoff and Beyth 1975; Golden 1992). One of the reasons that we selected
the high-technology sector was to DEMO the time lag between career decisions and
the interviews for this research. Managers and entrepreneurs in this sector observe rapid
change in the industrial DEMO and in their career opportunities. Initially, we hoped
to limit the DEMO to individuals who had either considered starting a new venture
or who had done so within the last 5 years so as to minimize DEMO from retrospection.
This limit proved to be impractical. Some high-technology businesses do not achieve
measurable success until they have been in existence for more DEMO 5 years. Ideally,
we would be able to interview nascent entrepreneurs about their decision making, and
then track their progress. This is a possible future project, but for the purposes of creat-
ing and testing the viability of our model, we needed founders of established businesses.
Perhaps entrepreneurs forgot how much wealth attainment concerned them at the
time of DEMO decision. However, since we asked about many dimensions, there is no
reason to expect that their memories about wealth attainment would be any DEMO than
those concerning other dimensions. Bias in these memories remains a valid criticism
(Golden 1997), and as interviewers, we attempted to remind DEMO repeatedly
that we needed them to rate the variables in accordance with the way they considered
them at the time the decision was made. DEMO interviewees began the interview by
telling us detailed stories about their founding decision (including information about
their personal lives and circumstances), we felt they would be more able to mentally
return to their cognitions at DEMO time of the decision.
Alternatively, non-entrepreneurs may have retrospectively biased their DEMO
about the wealth-producing prospects of ventures downward to avoid cognitive disso-
nance (Festinger 1957) since they did not start ventures. However, this does not explain
why the non-entrepreneurs gave a higher salience and importance to DEMO than
did entrepreneurs.
As interviewers, we were very pleased with the DEMO to task, and forthright
manner that the majority of participants displayed DEMO our sessions. All seemed very
interested in our research and results, DEMO well as the opportunity to explore their own
decision making from the perspective of our model. Thus, we take these data at face
value, and based on this research, we conclude that these decisions to DEMO high-tech-
nology ventures were not driven by prospects of wealth attainment. Rather, wealth is
a welcome by-product that most entrepreneurs believed they would achieve if they pur-
sued their goals regarding other decision dimensions.
The third DEMO relates to three concerns we mentioned with respect to respon-
dents’ beliefs. Our data did not include a full distribution of payoffs and associated DEMO
abilities for the decision dimensions for reasons of practicality. Instead, we DEMO re-
spondents to identify their most desired level of wealth and consider that ﬁgure when
calculating probabilities across alternatives. While we cannot rule out DEMO an expected
138
R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
value calculation based on a full distribution of payoffs and probabilities might lead DEMO
a different choice, we do feel that respondents told us their DEMO desired level” of
wealth, and not some satisﬁcing level.
Our analysis DEMO beliefs also did not address the risk aversion of respondents or their
desires for a stable pattern of payments. However, if our assumption that entrepreneur-
ship is both riskier and less stable than employment is accurate, we would expect the
incidence of entrepreneurship choice to be decreased. Our DEMO, then, are conserva-
tive: a signiﬁcant number of entrepreneurs chose DEMO even when they had
lower wealth beliefs for that option, despite DEMO less attractive stability and risk character-
istics.
Our analysis of beliefs also did not address the option value of either employment
or entrepreneurship. However, since we asked respondents to consider their income
stream for a 5- DEMO 10-year period if they chose each of the alternatives, we can DEMO
they implicitly considered option value when stating their beliefs, at least DEMO the extent
that they considered their option value when they were actually making the decision
to venture.
A ﬁnal limitation relates to the generalizability DEMO our data. Our sample consisted
of high-technology managers and entrepreneurs in British Columbia. It is likely that
high-technology entrepreneurs differ in substantial ways from DEMO entrepreneurs. Our
sample indicated high salience and importance of such factors as innovation, vision, and
challenge. A group of entrepreneurs in another sector DEMO less likely to rate these ﬁndings
as high. To the extent that stereotypes about “techies” are true, it may be that high-
technology entrepreneurs are more excited about getting their new innovation into the
marketplace than DEMO are about making major economic gains from it. To the extent
this is true, investigations of entrepreneurs outside of high-technology industries might
yield a different set of ﬁndings.
The British Columbia milieu might create some additional DEMO issues.
Some of our participants (both entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs) discussed desir-
ability of living in British Columbia because of climate and lifestyle advantages, despite
facing more limited job market prospects for high-technology employees. This may DEMO
diminished the importance of money for both entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs,
as they willingly sacriﬁced wealth for lifestyle.
However, both groups would presumably be affected the same way by the atmo-
sphere, leaving unexplained differences between the groups in their rated importance
and salience for wealth. It is DEMO possible that Canadian entrepreneurs are less focused
on wealth attainment than entrepreneurs in other countries, and so studies in other loca-
tions might yield a different pattern of ﬁndings. Further research is required.
Implications and Directions DEMO Future Research
Wealth was more important and more salient to those who did not start a technology
venture, and we believe that this ﬁnding calls into question the stereotypical role of
money in new venture creation. DEMO might also wonder if concerns about wealth attain-
ment actually hinder venturing behavior. If a segment of nascent entrepreneurs believes
that greed, or at worst, a prominent concern for wealth attainment, is a requirement
for DEMO venturing, this segment would be demotivated by conventional wisdom.
Our ﬁndings DEMO that as teachers of entrepreneurship, we should communicate the
WEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY VENTURES
139
value of a balanced set of decision DEMO, and encourage the segment of entrepre-
neurs who value this balance.
DEMO ﬁndings also suggest that venture capitalists who are looking for a strong
money motivation from entrepreneurs may beneﬁt from rethinking their perspective.
Two of DEMO subjects volunteered information that they had problems obtaining ﬁnancing
because the venture capitalists felt they were not focused enough on potential monetary
gains from DEMO venture. Once they adopted a money-focused posture in interviews, they
did DEMO fact obtain venture capital ﬁnancing. If successful growth-oriented entrepreneurs
are not money-focused in venturing decisions, it may be that venture capitalists are turn-
ing down worthwhile projects that will generate desired returns, perhaps as a by-
product.
Our initial interpretation of these results answers the main question posed DEMO this
paper. Wealth attainment does not matter much, relatively speaking, to our entrepre-
neurs’ decisions to found a high-technology venture. Our hypotheses, based on classical
economic theory, were soundly rejected. The entrepreneurs in our study did not found a
business simply to get all the money they DEMO They believed that founding a business
provided a good chance to achieve their desired level of wealth, but wealth attainment
was not the motivating factor. Money is not why they became entrepreneurs. The only
hypothesis to DEMO empirical support involved differences between the beliefs of en-
trepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs at the time of the decision to found or not to found
DEMO technology venture. Most entrepreneurs identiﬁed that they had almost no chance
of attaining their most desired level of wealth as a wage earner, but that this was not an
important or salient consideration. Truly, the entrepreneurs believed they would attain
more personal wealth by venturing, but they also believed they would attain more of
the other dimensions that they indicated DEMO more important and more salient. The
other decision dimensions that we use in our model simply matter as much or more
than did money DEMO the decision to found a venture.
These ﬁndings have substantial implications for research in entrepreneurship. Clas-
sical models, which assume money as the primary motive for entrepreneurial activity,
require reexamination.
Future research in entrepreneurship would DEMO from focusing less on wealth
attainment and more on belief differences and on other motives for venturing. Our ﬁnd-
ing that entrepreneurs’ beliefs were DEMO than those of non-entrepreneurs for all of
the decision dimensions suggests that venturing decisions are driven by optimism more
than by ﬁnancial motives. We DEMO note, however, that “optimism” implies beliefs
that are more favorable than they should be. Because we do not have, and it would be
very difﬁcult (if not impossible) to specify, the “true” beliefs, DEMO is possible that the ven-
tures did indeed offer the better prospects for goal attainment that our entrepreneurs
expected. The basis for using the DEMO “optimism” is the general observation that a high
proportion of new ventures are unsuccessful, although the entrepreneurs surveyed for
this study had, in DEMO cases, already established successful ventures. Busenitz and Bar-
ney (1997) DEMO ﬁnd that entrepreneurs tended to be more overconﬁdent than managers
of large corporations in a laboratory study, and suggested a positive role for overconﬁ-
dence in timely decision making under uncertainty. Similarly, Kahneman and Lovallo
(DEMO) argue that unjustiﬁed optimism biases often compensate for unreasonable risk
aversion DEMO (though not perfectly). It may be that overconﬁdence is a DEMO pre-
requisite to entrepreneurial risk-taking. However as Russo and Schoemaker (1983)DEMO
point out, “the ideal business person is a realist when making DEMO decision, but an optimist
140
R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
when implementing it” (p. 79). Further research is necessary to identify the effect of
overconﬁdence on venturing.
Our preliminary analysis suggests that other decision DEMO matter more to
entrepreneurs than wealth. This is consistent with the ﬁndings of Roberts (1991). We
extend his work by considering a broader set of motives, and by comparing the motives
of entrepreneurs with those of non-entrepreneurs. Our analysis prompts the question,
“If money doesn’t matter, what does?” Because our focus in this paper was to examine
DEMO role of money in venturing decisions, we have little to say DEMO about this question.
Our preliminary ﬁndings indicate that entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs differed
signiﬁcantly in the dimensions they valued (see Table 4). Speciﬁcally, DEMO
rated innovation as signiﬁcantly more salient to their venture decisions than did non-
entrepreneurs, and they rate wealth, stability and lifestyle as signiﬁcantly DEMO salient.
Entrepreneurs rated all decision dimensions other than stability as more salient than
wealth attainment to venture decisions. They also rated vision, innovation and indepen-
dence as signiﬁcantly more important than did non-entrepreneurs, but rated stability
and lifestyle as signiﬁcantly less important. Interestingly, our results indicate no signiﬁ-
cant differences in ratings of satisfaction with prior positions between entrepreneurs
and DEMO We therefore conclude that dissatisfaction did not drive
these decisions.
More thorough analysis is beyond the scope of this paper, but would be a productive
area for further research. Future analyses will involve the construction of DEMO multi-attri-
bute utility model to see if we can better explain entrepreneurs’ and non-entrepreneurs’
motives for their founding decisions. If we can identify the DEMO in which multiple attri-
butes, or decision dimensions as we refer DEMO them in this paper, are considered by those
making venturing decisions, and identify values and beliefs that can discriminate be-
tween entrepreneurs and DEMO, we may be better able to explain decisions
to found new DEMO
Further, if such a model proves to be a good explanatory DEMO, we may be
able to extend it to predictions of who DEMO persist in venturing based on the decision
making of the entrepreneurs involved. To date, psychological proﬁles of entrepreneurs,
while very common, have DEMO been successful at distinguishing entrepreneurs. This issue
is of interest not only to researchers, but also to potential entrepreneurs, venture capital-
ists and DEMO who work to foster entrepreneurship. A multiple attribute decision model
provides promise of successful prediction, and is therefore worthy of future investi-
gation.
REFERENCES
Amit, R., MacCrimmon, K.R., and Oesch, J. 1997. The decision to start a new venture: Values,
beliefs, and alternatives. Working DEMO, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C.
Busenitz, L.W., and DEMO, J.B. 1997. Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large
organizations: Biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journal of Business Ven-
turing 12(1):9–30.
Campbell, C.A. 1992. A decision theory model for entrepreneurial acts. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice 17(1):21–27.
Cooper, A., Woo, C., and Dunkelberg, W. 1988. Entrepreneurs’ perceived chances for success.
Journal of Business Venturing 3:97–108.
Day, R.H., and Sunder, S. 1996. Review: DEMO and work of Richard M. Cyert. Journal of Eco-
nomic Behavior and Organization 31:139–148.
Douglas, E.J., and Shepherd, D.A. 1996. An economic theory of entrepreneurial attitudes and
WEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY VENTURES
141
intentions. In P.D. Reynolds, S. Birley, DEMO Butler, W.D. Bygrave, P. Davidsson, W.B.
Gartner, and P.P. McDougall, eds., Frontiers of entrepreneurship research, p. 97. Wellesley,
MA: DEMO College.
Festinger, L. 1957. A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Fischoff, B., and Beyth, R. 1975. I knew it would happen: Remembered probabilities of once-
future things. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 13:1–16.
Golden, B.R. 1992. The past is the past—or is it? The use of retrospective accounts as indicators
of past strategy. Academy of Management Journal 35:848–860.
Golden, B.R. 1997. Further remarks on retrospective accounts in organizational and strategic
management research. Academy of Management Journal DEMO:1243–1252.
Herron, L., and Sapienza, H.J. 1992. The entrepreneur and DEMO initiation of new venture launch
activities. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 17(1):49–55.
Jensen, M.C., and Meckling, W.H. 1976. Theory of the DEMO: Managerial behavior, agency cost
and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3:305–360.
Jensen, M.C., and Murphy, K.J. 1990. Performance pay and top-management incentives. Journal
of Political Economy 98:225–265.
Kahneman, D., and DEMO, D. 1993. Timid choices and bold forecasts: A cognitive perspective
on risk taking. Management Science 39(1):17–31.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decisions under risk. Econo-
DEMO 47:263–291.
Kuratko, D.F., Hornsby, J.S., and Naffziger, D.W. DEMO An examination of owner’s goals in sus-
taining entrepreneurship. Journal of Small Business Management 37(1):24–33.
MacCrimmon, K.R. 1990. Expected utility theory DEMO benchmark and guide to research: Discussion
of papers by Amos Tversky, Ward Edwards and Tom Wallstein. In R. Hogarth, ed., Insights
in DEMO making: A tribute to Hillel J. Einhorn. Chicago, IL: University DEMO Chicago Press.
Monroy, T., and Folger, R. 1993. A typology DEMO entrepreneurial paradigm. Journal of Private
Enterprise 9(2):64–79.
Ronstadt, R. 1988. The corridor principle. Journal of Business Venturing 3(1):31–40.
Russo, J.E., and Schoemaker, P.J.H. 1983. Decision traps. New York: Doubleday.
DEMO, H. 1957. Models of man. New York: Wiley.
APPENDIX A: DEMO
Our Meaning
Becoming wealthy, making a lot of money, meeting all your ﬁnancial needs and wants.
Most Desired Level
What was your most DEMO level of wealth at the time of decision (i.e., best case sce-
nario)? Assume a time horizon of about 10 years.
Least DEMO Level
What was the least desired level that might have arisen under any circumstance (i.e.,
worst case scenario)?
Constraints
Were there DEMO minimum wealth requirements that played a major role in determining
the decision?
SALIENCE: How important was wealth in this particular decision?
1234567
Of no Low Medium- Medium- Medium- High Utmost
importance importance low importance DEMO importance importance
importance importance
142 R. AMIT, K.R. MACCRIMMON, C. ZIETSMA, AND J.M. OESCH
SATISFACTION: How satisﬁed/dissatisﬁed were you with your wealth attainment in your previous
position, that is, just prior to starting the venture
1234567
Extremely DEMO Somewhat Neutral Somewhat Very Extremely
dissatisﬁed dissatisﬁed dissatisﬁed satisﬁed satisﬁed satisﬁed
BELIEFS: In the following table, for each alternative, specify your beliefs about the level of wealth
attainment for the indicated scenarios
State the chances DEMO State the chances of State the chances of
attaining the indicated attaining the indicated attaining the indicated
level if stay in level if start DEMO if take
Percentage of the PREVIOUS NEW VENTURE NEXT BEST
desired level POSITION ALTERNATIVE
100%
At least 75%
At least 50%
At least 25%
DEMO of Risky Prospects
Now we would like to ask some hypothetical questions but want you to keep in mind
your situation at the time DEMO the decision. We will hypothesize various levels of attain-
ment of your desired level and for each, would like you to consider whether you would
take this assured amount or a venture with the corresponding chances. DEMO whether
you would prefer the assured amount or the risky venture for each line of the following
table
ASSURED AMOUNT
Assume that you
can DEMO yourself RISKY VENTURE
of attaining the Prefer
following % of the assured Chances of getting Prefer riskyChance of getting
desired level amount the worst DEMO ventureyour desired level
75% or 75% 25%
50% or 50% 50%
25% or 25% 75%
REASSESSMENT: If you had the decision to make over, would wealth have been more or less signiﬁcant?
12 3456 7
Of no Considerably Slightly Same Slightly Considerably Highest
signiﬁcance less less more DEMO possible
signiﬁcant signiﬁcant signiﬁcant signiﬁcant signiﬁcance
WEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY VENTURES
143
APPENDIX B Summary List of Decision Dimensions (from Amit, MacCrimmon & Oesch,
1997)
Wealth: becoming wealthy, making money, meeting ﬁnancial needs and goals
Vision: realizing your own DEMO about how the organization should evolve; determining goals
and capabilities that DEMO organization should pursue
Stability: feeling certain about political, social, and DEMO situation; very little chance of unfore-
seen shocks; feeling comfortable knowing how your near future will unfold
Power: inﬂuencing outcomes; making things DEMO; having an impact; exerting control; having
it your way; being involved in crucial decisions; being in charge
Lifestyle: accommodating dual career DEMO; spending time with family, in recreational oppor-
tunities; living where DEMO want; having fun, being healthy
Leadership: motivating and inﬂuencing others
DEMO: doing something new or different; introducing original ideas about products or processes
Independence: having ﬂexibility; being your own boss; working when, DEMO, and with whom you want
Ego: standing out from the crowd; winning; creating a legacy; making a name; outdoing
others
Contribution: helping others; making a difference to your organization, community, industry; DEMO
opportunities
Challenge: using your full range of talents; self-actualization; assuming DEMO responsibility; dealing
with a wider range of issues{1g42fwefx}