SOCIAL CAPITAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR: A STUDY OF INTERFIRM
NETWORKS AND RIVALRY AMONG GLOBAL AUTOMAKERS
GOCE ANDREVSKI
Gatton College of Business and Economics
University DEMO Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40506
Tel: 859-273-9909
andrevski@uky.edu
WALTER J. FERRIER
Gatton College of Business and Economics
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40506
Tel: 859-257-9326
walter.ferrier@uky.edu
DANIEL J. BRASS
Gatton College of Business and Economics
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40506
Tel: 859-257-4260
dbrass@uky.edu
_________________________________
A version DEMO this paper is currently under
review at the Academy of Management
Journal . Please do not cite or quote.
November 2007
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
SOCIAL CAPITAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR: A STUDY OF INTERFIRM
NETWORKS AND RIVALRY AMONG GLOBAL AUTOMAKERS
ABSTRACT
This paper explores DEMO changes in the firm’s access to structural and relational social
capital affect its competitive behavior. Our analysis of 509 alliances and 5310 competitive
actions DEMO 16 year-time frame in the automobile industry showed that the diversity of the
alliance types is positively related to the firm’s ability to compete DEMO intensively and with a
wider variety of action types than rivals. Our findings suggest that diversity and non-redundancy
of ties with network partners, rather than the total number of alliances, are critical for an
automaker’s ability to outcompete rivals.
2
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
Scholars in the field of strategic management DEMO long been interested in the topic of
interfirm rivalry. With its keen focus on competitive actions – specific and detectable moves
initiated by a DEMO to defend or improve its market position (Chen & MacMillan, 1992) –
competitive dynamics research has demonstrated robust support for a wide range of important
antecedents and consequences associated with interfirm rivalry (Smith, Ferrier & Ndofor, 2001).
With few notable exceptions (i.e., Gnyawali, He & Madhavan, 2006), however, research on
competitive dynamics has largely DEMO the impact of the relational context on competitive
behavior. Indeed, competing DEMO are not autonomous units that act in isolation within the social
environment (Granovetter, 1985). Rather, they are embedded in a network of many
interconnected firms that either facilitates or constrains competitive behavior (Uzzi, DEMO). The
specific nature of a given firm’s connectedness within an interorganizational network is likely to
influence its level of access to not only DEMO information about potential profit opportunities,
but also to unique knowledge and resources that complement the firm’s existing stock of
resources and capabilities (Brass, Galaskiewicz, Greve, & Tsai, 2004; Gnyawali & Madhavan,
2001). Thus, we believe it is important to account for a firm’s social capital when exploring
competitive behavior.
Taken together, purposeful action, tacit DEMO and alertness to profit opportunities
represent the essential elements of the Austrian view of competition (Grimm & Smith, 1997;
Kirzner, 1973; DEMO, 1949; Hayek, 1948). Firms strive to outcompete rivals by DEMO
opportunities for offering different product styles, designs, or sizes of products; using different
mixes of materials or production factors, and/or initiating DEMO marketing campaigns and
distribution channels. Such competitive actions result, from the DEMO by which decision
makers subjectively perceive and reconcile opportunities, resources and DEMO, and rivals’
3
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
competitive responses within the enacted social-competitive context (O’Driscoll & Rizzo, 1985).
Consistent with this, network researchers have DEMO that the embeddedness of firms in
their social networks affect their ability to recognize and exploit opportunities for initiating
innovative competitive actions (Granovetter, DEMO; Uzzi, 1996). “The structure and quality of
social ties among firms shape economic action by creating unique opportunities and access to
those DEMO The type of network in which an organization is embedded defines the
opportunities potentially available; its position in that structure and the types of interfirm ties it
maintains define its access to those opportunities” (Uzzi, DEMO: 675). Once profit opportunities
are recognized, a firm’s ability to act on these opportunities is affected by its capacity to utilize
its DEMO in conjunction with the complementary resources of other firms in the network
(Dyer & Singh, 1998). Because “the knowledge of the circumstances DEMO which we must make
use never exists in concentrated or integrated form but solely as the dispersed bits of incomplete
and frequently contradictory knowledge…” (Hayek, 1948: 77), firms with more favorable access
to information DEMO knowledge of network partners are more likely to recognize and exploit more
opportunities for competing more aggressively than rivals.
Our study explores how a DEMO competitive behavior is influenced by its social capital.
By integrating both the structural and the relational view of social capital (Burt, 1992; Lin,
2001), we extend the recent conceptual and empirical work that DEMO competitive dynamics
and inter-firm networks  (Gnyawali & Madhavan, 2001; Gnyawali, He & Madhavan, 2006). We
argue that a firm’s position DEMO the interorganizational network structure and the variety of types
of resources accessed through the network positively affects both the number and the variety of
DEMO actions carried out by the firm. In addition, we examine how DEMO changes in the
access to social capital affect the changes in the competitive behavior of firms over time. Finally,
4
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
our study accounts for the network of DEMO among not only the central actors in a given
industry, but DEMO out-of-industry partners, such as suppliers, marketing agencies, information
technology firms, distributors, financial institutions, and others. In so doing, we account for a
broad range of potentially important network-borne resources accessible to a given DEMO
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Competitive Dynamics and the Market Process
The Austrians view the market and competition as a process of incessant discovery of
better or DEMO ways of satisfying customers’ needs and wants (Kirzner, 1973; Schumpeter,DEMO
1934). The competitive marketplace is conceptualized as an interactive, continuous DEMO
whereby a firm’s success “…depends not on how the firm positions itself at a certain point in
time, but on how it acts over long periods of time” (D’Aveni, 1994: 17).
Within strategic management, the competitive dynamics stream of research has adopted
the Austrian view of the market process and has embraced the idea that firms which compete
DEMO aggressively than rivals enjoy superior performance and economic returns. Researchers
within this stream have developed theory and empirical methods centering on a
conceptualization of DEMO strategy as competitive action, defined as an externally-directed,
specific, and observable competitive move a firm initiates to enhance its relative competitive
position (Grimm & Smith, 1997; Smith et al., 2001). Early research focused attention on the
action-reaction dyad level of analysis whereby the characteristics DEMO an individual competitive
action, as well as the characteristics of the DEMO firms, are important predictors of the
intensity of an individual competitive DEMO (e.g., Chen, Smith & Grimm, 1992). More
recently, DEMO has also explored the link between the characteristics of an aggregated set of
actions over a finite time period – the action repertoire-year level DEMO analysis – and performance
5
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
(e.g., Miller & Chen, 1994, DEMO). This research has found, for example, that the total number of
competitive actions carried out by a given firm is positively related DEMO profitability and market
share gain (Ferrier, Smith & Grimm, 1999; Young, Smith, & Grimm, 1996). Further, firms that
carry DEMO complex repertoires of actions – a wide range of different types of actions, as opposed
to a repertoire that consists of only a few different action types – also experience better
profitability and market share gains (Ferrier et al., 1999; Miller & Chen, 1996).
Researchers have also explored several important antecedents of competitive action at
this level of DEMO For instance, prior studies found that firm size is related to DEMO number of
actions a firm undertakes (Chen & Hambrick, 1995; DEMO et al., 1996). Other studies have
found that important characteristics DEMO the firm’s top management team – TMT size, tenure, and
educational and functional background heterogeneity – impact, firms’ likelihood to initiate
competitive actions (Hambrick, Cho & Chen, 1996) and moderate the relationship between
DEMO repertoire simplicity and performance (Ferrier & Lyon, 2002).
These findings notwithstanding, and despite a clear understanding that a firm’s stock of
resources and capabilities drives its ability and motivation to compete aggressively in the
DEMO (Chen, 1996; Chen, Su & Tsai, 2007; Grimm & Smith, 1997), the relationship
between network-borne resources on competitive behavior remains largely unexplored. This is
particularly salient in hypercompetitive contexts where rivals carry DEMO a wide range of
competitive actions, such as price cuts, new product introductions, and new marketing
campaigns, with great frequency, ferocity, DEMO simultaneity (D’Aveni, 1994; Ferrier, 2001). In
such environments, DEMO is indeed difficult for a given firm alone to “see” and utilize the full scope
of marketplace knowledge and resources/capabilities required to continuously DEMO aggressively
strive to outcompete and out-perform rivals (Powell, Koput & Smith-Doerr, 1996). Thus, some
6
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
firms purposefully combine and leverage their internal DEMO and capabilities with that of
their alliance partners’ specialized knowledge and competencies to meet competitive challenges.
We explore the competitive behavior of firms at DEMO competitive action repertoire level of
analysis, which is defined as “…the DEMO of market actions used by firms to attract, serve and keep
DEMO (Miller & Chen, 1996: 32). We examine two characteristics DEMO the focal firm’s
competitive action repertoire: intensity and complexity. Drawing from DEMO research (Ferrier et
al., 1999; Ferrier & Lyon, 2002; DEMO & Chen, 1994, 1996; Young et al., 1996), competitive
repertoire intensity is defined as the total number of newly created competitive DEMO,
regardless of type, carried out in a given year. Competitive DEMO complexity refers to the
extent to which the set of competitive actions carried out by a firm in a given year comprises a
wide DEMO of action types, as opposed to consisting of just a few DEMO types.
Interorganizational Networks and Competitive Resources
Coleman (1988) was among the first to introduce the concept of social capital in an effort
to DEMO reconciliation between two opposing perspectives on social action. On the one hand,
sociologists argue that actors (i.e., individuals, groups, firms etc.) are embedded in the social
context and, therefore, their actions are DEMO (determined) by social norms, rules, and
obligations. On the other hand, classical economists offer an atomistic view of social action,
whereby actors act independently of the context following the principle of utility maximization.
DEMO (1988) middle ground explanation asserts that whereas actors engage in purposeful
behavior, their actions are either constrained or facilitated by the context in which they are
embedded. Put more succinctly, “the achievement of certain ends (goals) would not be possible
in the absence of social capital” (Coleman, 1988: 98). This suggests that firms that are more
DEMO embedded in the social context will be more capable of achieving their goals and vice
7
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
versa. Given that the goal of a DEMO is to gain superior performance and profits (Kirzner, 1973;
Hunt, 2000), it follows that firms would purposefully invest in building social capital to increase
their profits. In line with the Austrian view of DEMO, Lin (2001:12) argues that social
capital is “…investment in DEMO relations with expected returns…” whereby “…resources
embedded in a social structure…are accessed and/or mobilized in purposive actions.” Social
capital is unevenly distributed across DEMO, firms or regions and, therefore, knowledge and
resources that are DEMO in social relations are differentially accessible to and mobilized by
competing firms. Those firms with greater access to the unique network-borne resources are
expected DEMO create competitive advantages and profits. Firms that are better connected with other
firms gain faster access to information about profit opportunities and have greater DEMO for
internalizing partners’ know how (Burt, 1992; Kogut & Zander, 1992). Although there is still no
consensus in the network literature DEMO what represents “better connectedness,” it is commonly
accepted that the network relations provide access to social capital that firms can use in pursuing
DEMO plans and actions.
Prior research in the area of inter-firm networks has focused on the effects that the
position in the network structure has DEMO single facets of a firm’s competitive activity such as
innovation and patenting new technologies (e.g., Baum, Calabrese, & Silverman, 2000;), DEMO
product development (Yli-Renko, Autio & Sapienza, 2001), or firms’ DEMO rates (Baum and
Oliver, 1991; Uzzi, 1996) and revenue DEMO (Baum et al., 2000). However, the network
structure influences DEMO dynamics in much more complex and dynamic ways. A firm
with greater access to network information and knowledge is expected to be more capable DEMO
launching a series of competitive moves such as advertising and product promotions, sales
incentives and price discounts, or introducing series of incremental product DEMO
8
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
(Smith, Ferrier & Ndofor, 2001). It is through this complex competitive attack that a firm can
create DEMO advantages, increase its market share and earn economic profit (Miller &DEMO
Chen, 1996; Ferrier et al., 1999; Ferrier, 2001). DEMO order to more fully understand the process
through which social capital influences firms’ competitive behavior, we examine a firm’s total
repertoire of competitive actions.
The Relational Versus Structural Perspective of  Interorganizational Social Networks
The relational view of social capital focuses on the qualitative characteristics of resources
embedded in DEMO network:  The range, variety or heterogeneity of resources, resource superiority,
resource combinations, etc. (Lin, Fu, & Hsung, 2001). By contrast, the structural view focuses on
the structure of relations among actors and attempts to recognize some stable patterns and
properties that facilitates DEMO to resources and their mobilization (Scott, 1991). It views the
network as “a set of nodes and set of ties representing some DEMO, or lack of relationship,
between nodes” (Brass, Galaskiewicz, Greve & Tsai, 2004:795). Both perspectives are equally
important and interdependent (Lin, 2001). The access and mobilization of network resources are
DEMO by occupying a favorable position in the network structure. Conversely, the DEMO
from being positioned advantageously in the network is contingent upon the value of the
resources that can be mobilized in pursuing one’s interests. We, argue that both types of social
capital – the relational and the DEMO – are important when examining the relationship
between interorganizational social networks and competitive action.
The diagrams in Figure 1 illustrate our key point. Here, firm A and firm B are depicted to
have identical structural positions DEMO their respective interorganizational networks. However,
upon closer examination, each has DEMO to very different types of resources and capabilities.
Firm A’s web of relationships is comprised primarily of research and development (R&D) and DEMO
9
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
few manufacturing alliances. By contrast, firm B’s alliance network comprises many different
alliance types. This suggests that the content DEMO network ties may distinctively affect the firms’
competitive behavior above and beyond the effect of the firm’s structural position in the network
structure.
--------------------------------
DEMO Figure 1 about here
--------------------------------
Our paper explores how the structural properties of a firm’s inter-organizational network
– size and nonredundancy of the ties DEMO impact competitive behavior. We also characterize the
diversity associated with the content of the ties in the firm’s network across different alliance
types (alliance diversity):  Manufacturing, marketing, distribution, finance, logistics and supply,
information technology, and management. We define alliances as “any voluntarily initiated
interfirm cooperative agreement that involves exchange sharing, or codevelopment, and it can
DEMO contributions by partners of capital, technology or firm-specific assets” (Gulati, DEMO:
621).
THEORY AND HYPOTHESES
Network Size and Competitive Actions
Previous research has shown that the number of alliances with competitors positively
affect DEMO ability to compete aggressively (Gnyawali et al., 2006). Firms that are more central
in the competitors’ network have better access to information DEMO competitors’ capabilities,
which increase the range of potential competitive moves. Also, the access to network resources
increases the capabilities of a central firm to successfully commercialize the profit opportunities
into feasible courses of action, which in turn positively affect competitive intensity (Gnyawali et
al., 2006).
DEMO
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
In addition to the alliances with competitors, we also consider alliances with out-of-
industry partners as important antecedents of DEMO competitive behavior. A firm engaged in
multiple collaborative linkages with other market participants may learn sooner about
technological advances and profit opportunities that are DEMO in adjacent industries or
technological domains. The early access to information and resources can enable a firm to
become a first mover or to DEMO catch up with first movers by carrying out a broad range of
competitive moves (Gnyawali et al., 2006).
The close collaboration with DEMO or distributors can create capabilities for both
parties in the relationships. Kogut (2000) noted that Toyota actively invested in collaborative
relationships with its DEMO that, over time, resulted in upgraded supplier competencies. This
enabled suppliers to actively contribute ideas for improving Toyota’s manufacturing and product
development processes, positively affecting Toyota’s competitive market position. Empirical
data support this proposition as DEMO For example, Dyer (1996) found that firms with tightly
developed DEMO networks have higher product quality (via fewer reported defects) and faster
new-model cycle times. This suggests that firms that establish more alliances with DEMO are
able to more frequently attack rivals with frequent introduction of new products, improvements
of existing products, or offers of more affordable prices DEMO existing products. Similarly, a firm’s
resource base may be enhanced and DEMO when the firm establishes alliances with
distributors or customers with complementary knowledge and expertise. This, in turn, is
expected to increase firms’ capability DEMO engage rivals with a greater number and a greater
variety of competitive actions types.
11
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
Hypothesis 1a: The greater the firm’s network size, the greater will be its competitive
repertoire complexity.
Hypothesis 1b: DEMO greater the firm’s network size, the greater will be its competitive
DEMO intensity.
Non-redundant Ties and Competitive Actions
Burt (1992) argued that the size of a firm’s network is less important than the structure of
DEMO firm’s relationship. In particular, Burt emphasized the importance of structural holes DEMO the
lack of ties between two firms to which a focal firm is connected – for gaining access to non-
redundant information. For focal DEMO A, a tie with partner B is non-redundant to the extent DEMO
the partner B has no ties with other actors to which a focal firm A is connected. Firms with a
higher number of nonredundant DEMO enjoy more effective access to unique competitive
information and specialized resources (DEMO, 1992).
A firm can capitalize in several ways when it DEMO established alliances with competitors
that are not connected to each other (DEMO, when the firm spans structural holes). Firms that have
exclusive DEMO with competitors who have developed better competencies in different
geographic parts of the market or different segments of the market has greater potential to
DEMO on these distinctive but complementary resources and offer superior products.
Collaboration with partners provides opportunity to learn unique competences and expertise
developed in different DEMO segments, which in turn enables the firm to surprise competitors
with DEMO effective competitive moves in the focal market. For example, Ford’s alliance DEMO
Fiat may provide access to know-how and expertise in manufacturing and designing small city
cars, or Nissan’s alliance with Alpha Romeo provides access to unique competences in
12
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
developing expensive sport cars, which enables these firms to more effectively compete in the
North American market.
Moreover, a firm with greater number of nonredundant ties is better informed about the
DEMO for actions of the other two parties. For example, when firm DEMO collaborates with rival firms
B and C, which are not connected DEMO each other, firm A can better comprehend and anticipate the
future DEMO actions of B and C. This in turn enables firm A to more quickly respond to rivals’
newly created competitive actions. Further, competitive uncertainty arises from competitors’
inability to accurately anticipate each other’s actions in the DEMO (O’Driscoll & Rizzo, 1985).
Firms positioned in a network with many structural holes will glean unique and non-redundant
information about other firm’s DEMO Hence, we argue that the firms with more non-
redundant ties DEMO face lower degree of uncertainty and therefore will be willing to bear more
risk (Knight, 1921; McMullen & Shepherd, 2006). This, in turn, suggests that they will be more
likely to undertake a greater number and a greater variety of competitive actions.
Hypothesis 2a: The greater the number of non-redundant ties in the firm’s network, the
greater will be its competitive repertoire complexity.
Hypothesis 2b: The greater the number of non-redundant ties in the firm’s network, the
greater will be its competitive repertoire intensity.
Alliance Diversity and Competitive actions
Lin (2001) argued DEMO the focus on the structural social capital does not fully explain the
actors’ benefits from accessing and mobilizing the embedded resources in the social DEMO
The content of the capabilities accessible through network ties is also critical for a firm’s ability
13
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
to compete aggressively. We argue that the DEMO of alliance types can provide access to diverse
knowledge and information, DEMO enables a firm to recognize a wide range of profit
opportunities. The access to a diverse set of external resources complements the internal
organizational DEMO processes (Naphaiet & Ghoshal, 1998) and thus increases firms’
absorptive DEMO The absorptive capacity refers to firm’s “ability to recognize the value of
new information, assimilate it, and apply it to commercial ends” (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990:128).
According to Cohen and Levinthal (1990), firms that have greater access to cross-functional
knowledge are more capable of introducing innovative solutions. Hence, a firm that partners with
other firms from different technological and/or functional areas is expected to have greater
knowledge DEMO a wider range of business domains. This will increase the firm’s ability to carry out
a greater number and wider variety of competitive moves.
DEMO, network position affects a firm’s abilities to recognize opportunities for
combining DEMO own resources with those of network partners and thus offering new competitive
actions. To illustrate this point, consider the following alliances that automakers have established
with various partners. On August 3, 2006 Apple Computer announced an alliance with General
Motors, Ford and Mazda to integrate the iPod into car’s audio systems. This alliance, which
made iPod compatible with more than 70% of these firms’ new 2007 model vehicles, enabled
these automakers to introduce new product features in their vehicles (product improvements)
along with launching more appealing advertising campaign (advertising). Likewise, on May 7,DEMO
2002, BMW signed a partnership agreement with the Allianz CP insurance DEMO and Auto
Assist to support its new warranty service. This alliance enabled BMW to provide extended
warranty service for several of its vehicle models (sales incentives). On July 15, 2004, Toyota
established a joint DEMO with Chinese automaker FAW to manufacture present models for
14
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
China’s automobile market. This provided Toyota with DEMO better capacity to enter new market
(new market entry). All DEMO suggests that the variety of alliance types directly impact firms’
ability to launch a wide variety of competitive actions.
Following the above, we argue that the access to diverse knowledge and information
provided by diverse set DEMO alliance types will increase firms’ capabilities to launch a greater
number and variety of competitive actions.
Hypothesis 3a: The greater the firm’s diversity of alliance linkages, the greater will be its
competitive repertoire complexity.
Hypothesis 3b: The greater the firm’s diversity of alliance linkages, the greater will DEMO its
competitive repertoire intensity.
Nonredundancy, Alliance Diversity and Competitive Actions
Nonredundancy DEMO ties and alliance variety are two concepts that reflect access to diverse
knowledge and information. However, they also depict a distinctive portion of the network
resources accessible to a firm. Firm A may have many non-redundant DEMO within a network of
technology-related alliances and thus obtains diverse knowledge within this particular functional
domain. On the other hand, firm B may have a similar position within the network structure (also
non-redundant ties), but have a set of alliances with partners from many different functional
domains:  Finance, marketing, manufacturing, supply and logistics (alliance variety). In this
case, firm A will gain diverse information within one functional domain, whereas firm B will
gain access to diverse knowledge and information that crosses several functional domains. This
can create a competitive advantage for firm DEMO, especially if it competes in industries based on
15
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
production of complex products that require wide DEMO To stay competitive, automakers, for
example, must introduce and sustain DEMO lines that are simultaneously technologically
sophisticated, have recognizable brand images, have appealing designs, and set at appropriate
price points. Further, an automaker’s DEMO must be distributed through a network of
knowledgeable dealers who can convey to customers the relative advantages. In such cases, the
diversity of alliances provides substantial advantages in a firm’s efforts to introduce a product
superior DEMO current market offerings.
Following the above, we expect that network non-redundancy DEMO alliance variety will
interact in explaining a firm’s capacity to launch more intensive and complex action repertoires.
In particular, a firm with a low level of alliance diversity might instead gain access to unique
knowledge associated DEMO diverse functional domains, for example, by forming nonredundant
ties with other automakers. Conversely, a firm with a diverse portfolio of alliance ties would
benefit less from nonredundancy of ties with competitors, because it already has access to
diverse sets of resources through out-of-industry network partners. We predict, therefore:
Hypotheses 4a: There will be interaction between alliance diversity and nonredundancy
of ties in explaining the competitive repertoire complexity; the impact of the
nonredundancy of the ties on the competitive repertoire complexity will be DEMO when
alliance variety is low.
Hypotheses 4b: There will be interaction DEMO alliance diversity and nonredundancy
of ties in explaining the competitive repertoire intensity; the impact of the nonredundancy
of the ties on the competitive repertoire intensity will be stronger when alliance variety is
low.
16
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
METHOD
Sample
To test our hypotheses, we drew a sample of firms from the automobile industry (SIC
3711). In line with Chen’s (1988) sampling criteria, the automobile industry has clearly
identifiable boundaries, which ensures that competitive moves carried out among industry
participants are squarely directed toward one another. Further, the auto industry’s sharp
boundaries – who is in, who is not – is ideal for interorganizational social network analysis.
Also, automobile manufacturing is the primary line of business for the major global auto firms in
this industry. Used to DEMO single- or dominant-business firms (Rumelt, 1974), this criterion
provides us with the assurance the firms in our sample are highly dependent on DEMO auto market
and are keenly aware of one another as rivals (DEMO, 1996). Finally, the auto industry consists of
very large, DEMO, and newsworthy global firms and has long exhibited intense competitive
interaction DEMO new product introductions and product improvements, clever advertising
campaigns, predictable end-of-model year price cuts and flexible financing options, the bundling
of service contracts with leasing agreements, integration of satellite radio and emergency calling
functionality with audio systems, and so on.  This provides assurance the competitive moves
DEMO out by firms in our sample are publicized in the media.
Among firms in the broader auto industry, we selected automakers that participated in
two market segments – the sports car and subcompact classes. More than DEMO vehicle classes,
these two segments are characterized by a wide variety of vehicle makes, models, and model line
extensions. These two segments DEMO provide a wide range of price points.
17
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
Overall, our study included over 5,310 competitive actions associated with more than 140
different vehicle models from eight DEMO automakers (i.e., Mitsubishi, Nissan, Toyota, Mazda,
BMW, VW, Ford, and GM) over a 16-year period (firm-year as unit DEMO analysis; N=128).
Competitive Actions Data
The data collection method used DEMO this study was structured content analysis (Jauch,
Osborn, & Martin, 1980). “This method comprises techniques for reducing a text to a unit-by-
variable matrix and enables researcher to quantitatively test hypotheses” (Denzin & Lincoln,
2000). We searched for published articles of news announcements DEMO competitive actions and
alliances of the eight major automakers over 16 years (1988-2003). The vehicle models and
makes for each of the automakers in the sport car segment and subcompact class were identified
from Kelly DEMO (www.kbb.com). All relevant articles containing news about competitive
actions and DEMO for each firm and the type of model were drawn from Factiva – an
electronic online data base (www.factiva.com). Because of its global scope (news sourced from
Reuters, Dow Jones and others), our DEMO of Factiva as a news source enhanced our confidence
that the published news accounts of competitive actions or alliances within the auto industry are
DEMO be biased toward the action news of firms that predominantly sell on the North American
market.  In addition, compared with other sources used DEMO the previous research (e.g., F&S
Predicast), Factiva provides full articles in electronic form, rather than just news headlines
alone. This enhances our ability to reliably categorize news about a given automaker’s
competitive actions DEMO different action types.
We first established a raw database comprised of all published news accounts of the
competitive actions carried out by firms in DEMO sample. This initial pool of news items was
selected by applying the following the criteria within the Factiva search engine: Auto company
18
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
name, vehicle model names (all segment DEMO listed in Kelly Blue Book), and panel time
markers (i.e., date range from 01/01/1988 through 12/31/2003). Then, we developed and applied
a detailed key word screening schema to the DEMO found in the title and first paragraph of
each news item. This assisted us in establishing an initial categorization of each news item into
DEMO of following action type categories:  Price (e.g., announcement of price changes or sale
incentives), marketing (e.g., announcement of new advertising DEMO promotional campaign),
product improvements (e.g., changes in the design, engine performances, interior and exterior,
mechanical changes etc.), new product introduction (e.g., introduction of new brand of vehicle),
market expansion (e.g., new dealerships, entry into new international markets) and overt DEMO
(e.g., announcements of future actions that may or may not be realized). The action types were
adopted from prior previous research in DEMO dynamics (e.g., Ferrier et al., 1999) and
adjusted to the specific characteristics of the automobile industry. Table 1 provides a complete
list DEMO these action categories, as well as examples and the earliest date DEMO the news
announcement.
After cleaning the data from repeating or irrelevant news, the full articles (and citations)
were transferred into a Microsoft DEMO database. One of the authors read and independently re-
coded each of the resultant 5,310 news articles into the 6 action categories described DEMO To
test for reliability of the coding, we randomly selected 50 DEMO, which were independently re-
coded by two expert raters. We used DEMO & Leigh’s (1989) procedure to estimated the
reliability of our coding the news items into the different action categories. We achieved a
reliability DEMO of 0.88, which exceeds the convention of 0.70 (Denzin & Lincoln, 2000).
19
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
Competitive Actions Measures
Competitive repertoire complexity. The DEMO of action repertoires is defined as the
extent to which the total number of competitive actions a firm carries out in a given year
DEMO a wide range of action types as opposed to just a few action types. To calculate the
competitive repertoire complexity we used Shannon’s (1948) estimate for “action type diversity”
score. This index takes into account both the number of action categories and the degree of
concentration of actions DEMO each category.
s
Adj. Shannon’s Diversity index =-
i=1 ∑
pi{ln(pi)}- (s-1)/2n
Where n denotes an automaker’s total action volume; pi = ni/n, which denotes the degree
of concentration of action category i (i=1, 2, …6); s=6, which denotes the DEMO of action
categories. High scores indicate that a firm carries out a complex action repertoire in a given year
that consists of a many DEMO action types. Low scores indicate a simple competitive action
repertoire that consists of only a few action types. We also ran our analysis using DEMO
ratio- and Herfindahl-based measures for action repertoire complexity used in some prior
research (Miller & Chen, 1996; Ferrier et al., 1999). DEMO changed the results reported below.
Competitive repertoire intensity. We defined the competitive repertoire intensity as the
total number of newly created competitive actions, regardless of type, carried out by a firm in a
given year. We created an annual tally of all competitive actions carried out by a DEMO in a given
calendar year and used the log of this count to reduce positive skewness and kurtosis. High
scores indicate an intense, aggressive competitive repertoire consisting of many competitive
actions; low scores suggest that the firm is competitive tentative or complacent.
20
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
Interorganizational Network Data and Measures
We again DEMO Factiva to identify news items associated with the establishment of new
alliances, joint ventures, and other long-term collaborative efforts, contracts, or consortia
DEMO each of our eight firms and partners both from within and outside the focal automobile
industry during the period 1984 through 2003. Using a DEMO similar to the collection and
coding of action types, we pre-screened, read, and re-coded each news items pertaining to an
alliance into one of the following seven functional areas: Distribution, information
technology/management, supply/logistics, manufacturing, R&D/technology, marketing, and
finance. Table 1 DEMO a complete list of these alliance types, as well as actual DEMO drawn
from our data). Again, we used the Perreault and DEMO (1989) reliability index discussed above
and arrived at a reliability score of 0.92. Our data includes 509 alliances of different types
established by DEMO in our sample during the 1984-2003 time panel.
Nonredundancy of ties. To compute non-redundancy of the ties with competitors, we
established the boundaries of the network by identifying all other competitors (those with 3711
as a primary SIC code) with which our eight firms had established at least one alliance. We
identified 18 additional competitors and searched for alliances among DEMO Our final network
size for this particular measure included alliances among 26 automakers. We then constructed
26×26 matrixes for each year by adding newly DEMO alliances to the network of the
previous year, and deleting alliances DEMO dissolved during the current year. The matrix for the
year 1988 was formed using all alliances formed in the period from January 1, 1984 to December
31, 1988.
We used UCINET 6 to compute Burt’s (DEMO) measure of efficiency (i.e.,
nonredundancy) of ego’s network. The DEMO that UCINET 6 uses is following:
21
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
Effective size of i’s network = ∑[1- DEMO piq mjq], q≠i,j
Where, piq is the proportion of i’s network time and resources invested in the relationship with q
(interaction with q divided by the sum of i’s relations), and mjq is DEMO marginal strength of
contact j’s relation with contact q (interaction with DEMO divided by the strongest of j’s relationships
with anyone). This measure takes into account the strength of the relationships, which in our
sample was represented by the number of alliances established between two automakers. For
DEMO, by 2003, Ford maintained three alliances with DaimlerChrysler, but seven DEMO GM, so
it was assumed that Ford has a stronger relationship DEMO GM than with DaimlerChrysler.
The efficiency of the network (i.e., the effective size divided by the number of alters in
the ego's DEMO) indicates the degree of redundancy of the firm’s ties in the DEMO “The
efficiency ratio varies from a maximum of one, indicating that DEMO contact in the network is
non-redundant, down to a minimum approaching DEMO, indicating high contact redundancy and
therefore low efficiency” (Burt, 1992: 53).
Network size. We computed the size of the firm’s network DEMO counting all newly formed
alliances in each year and subtracting the alliances that were terminated during the same year.
Alliance diversity. We calculated alliance DEMO using Shannon’s (1948) diversity index.
Similar to our measure for calculating action repertoire complexity (as described above), our
calculation for alliance diversity included seven alliance types: Distribution, information
technology/management, supply/logistics, DEMO, R&D/technology, marketing, and
finance). High scores indicate DEMO a firm has a network of partnerships that represent a wide
range of alliance types. Low scores suggest that a firms alliance network consists DEMO a narrow
range of alliance types. (As with action repertoire complexity, we also ran our analysis using
22
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
alternative measures of alliance diversity – concentration DEMO and Herfindahl index – with no
impact on the results).
Control variables.  Firm size was approximated using the total assets of a firm in a given
year as reported by Research Insight and Mergent online DEMO We also used total revenue,
but included only total assets in the analysis since the two measures are highly correlated at
0.926. Because DEMO collected data from only two automobile segments – the sports car and
subcompact classes – we controlled for the number of models in each DEMO in each year of
our analysis. We also controlled for firm past performance, because prior research in competitive
dynamics found that past performance strongly influences competitive actions (Ferrier, 2001).
We used return on equity (lagged one year) as an approximation for past performance. In
addition, DEMO controlled for the total number of alliances when we tested the impact of alliance
variety on competitive complexity.
We also accounted for other unobservable DEMO factors that may influence the
competitive behavior of firms by using fixed (firm) effects model. Finally, because we used a
combination of cross-sectional and longitudinal research design (i.e., panel data) it is possible
that some time-specific factors other than our explanatory variables are affecting the dependent
DEMO Hence, we also controlled for the time-fixed effects in our model.
DEMO Method
We collected panel data of eight auto manufacturers (Ford, GM, BMW, Nissan, Toyota,
Mazda, Mitsubishi, and Volkswagen) over DEMO period of 16 years. This data allowed us to examine
not only how the firms’ positions in the network structure affect their competitive behavior DEMO a
given year, but also how the relative changes of their DEMO in the network structure affect
their competitive activity over time. To do so, we needed to specify our model so that we could
23
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
successfully satisfy the following statistical concerns. First, it is possible that there are some
firm-specific effects that influence firm’s DEMO activity that are either observable but not
included in our model or unobservable and therefore not accounted for by our explanatory
variables (e.g., DEMO strategy or some unique configuration of HRM practices). One way to
capture these differences across firms is to introduce dummy variable for each DEMO such that the
differences across firms will be captured in the differences in the constant term (Greene, 2003).
In addition, we also had to account for exogenous factors that are changing over time. Hence, the
model we used to test our hypotheses is the fixed firm DEMO time effects model (Greene, 2003),
which can be formulated DEMO follows:
Yit = αi + γt + β'xit + εit
where αi is the effect of a firm i (i=1 to 8) (Each αi is treated as an unknown parameter that
needs to DEMO estimated); γt is the year t effect (t=1 to 16);  β'xit is the coefficient (slope) that is
assumed to DEMO constant across firms; and εit are the errors that are assumed DEMO be independent
and identically distributed.
The coefficients of this model are estimated using OLS method. Applying fixed effects
estimator however, does not rule out the possibility of a serial correlation of the errors.
Therefore, we applied the Wooldridge test for autocorrelation available within STATA
(Wooldridge, 2002). DEMO support to reject the null hypothesis (H0: no first-order autocorrelation)
was found for the model 1 when the dependent variable is action DEMO (F(1, 7) = 3.436;
Prob > .1062). DEMO Wooldridge test indicated serial correlation when action intensity was the
dependent variable-Model 3 (F(1, 7) = 30.312; p<.0009). To DEMO for the presence of serial
correlation, we applied “prais” command in DEMO using Cochrane-Orcutt procedure to estimate ρ
(rho-the correlation between successive error DEMO). After we re-estimated the coefficients
24
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
(corrected for first-order serially-correlated residuals), the Durbin-Watson statistics indicated no
presence of serial correlation (DW=1.92). We tested for the heteroscedasticity in the error
distribution applying White (1980) test. DEMO null hypothesis that the error distribution is
consistent (homoscedastic) was not rejected. (p-value = .4584)
RESULTS
Table 2 illustrates the summary statistics and the inter-correlation matrix of the all
variables included in the analysis, and Table 3 shows the OLS estimates of the fixed effects
model.
DEMO
Insert Table 2 about here
--------------------------------
--------------------------------
Insert Table 3 about here
--------------------------------
Several pairwise correlation coefficients are 0.5 or greater. These relatively high
DEMO coefficients are a result of the existence of increasing trend in some of the variables,
which is accounted for by our time and DEMO fixed effects model. Table 3 shows that several
coefficients of the control variables are statistically significant. First, the number of models that
each global automaker sells in the sport car and subcompact class segments has positive DEMO on
the total number and the variety of competitive actions carried out by firms (p<.001). In addition,
the coefficient of past performance is positive and marginally statistically significant (see model
3; (P<.08)), which, consistent with the previous research (Ferrier, 2001; Ferrier,
MacFhionnlaoich, Smith & Grimm, 2002), indicates that better DEMO firms exhibit more
aggressive competitive behavior. The size of firms as measured by the total assets and total
25
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
revenues is not related to the competitive DEMO of firms. Finally, as expected, the time fixed
effects and firm fixed effects were statistically significant for all models (see Table 3).
Hypotheses 1a and 1b predict that the network size will positively affect DEMO
repertoire intensity and competitive repertoire complexity. We did not find support for these
hypotheses as the coefficients for network size in either Model 1 DEMO Model 3 were not
statistically significant.
Hypothesis 2a predicted that firms with the greater number of non-redundant ties will
carry out more complex competitive DEMO As indicated in Model 1, the coefficient for
network non-redundancy is DEMO and in the expected direction (b=1.76; p<.001). This
suggests that firms embedded in a network rich with structural holes (greater number of non-
redundant ties) carry out repertoires consisting of a wide variety of competitive action types. We
did not find support for Hypothesis 2b, which predicts that the greater number of non-redundant
ties is positively related DEMO competitive repertoire intensity, as the coefficient was not significant.
Hypotheses 3a DEMO 3b predicted that the diversity of alliance types that a firm maintains
with partners will be positively related to both competitive repertoire intensity and DEMO
repertoire complexity. We found support for both hypotheses, as the coefficients DEMO alliance
diversity in Model 1 (b=0.48; p<.001) and Model DEMO (b=0.42; p<.01) are statistically significant.
Finally, our statistical analysis provided support for hypothesis 4a (see Model 2), which
predicted that alliance diversity and nonredundancy of ties will interact in explaining the
complexity DEMO competitive repertoire (b=-0.75; p<.001). The interaction diagram found in Figure
2 depicts the form of this interaction (the chart is based on the non-standardized coefficients
shown in Table 3. We also computed interaction DEMO using standardized coefficients and the
form of the relationship is identical to that shown in Figure 2). When the alliance diversity is
26
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
high, the complexity of action repertoire is high regardless of the level of non-redundancy of ties.
However, when the alliance variety is low, nonredundancy has positive effect on complexity of
action repertoire. We didn’t find support for hypothesis 4b.
DISCUSSION
Our results suggest DEMO the diversity of alliance types is an important antecedent of firms’
competitive behavior. Firms that are embedded in an alliance network comprised of partners DEMO
have specialized knowledge and expertise across a wide range of functional areas are more
capable of discovering and exploiting market opportunities. Indeed, we found such firms carry
out more intensive and complex action repertoires than firms DEMO are only weakly embedded in
an interorganizational network. We believe this especially important in hypercompetitive
environments and/or industries whose products are very complex DEMO require coordinated
knowledge and expertise from different functional areas. Our findings provide support for and
extend recent qualitative studies within the auto industry. For DEMO, Schamp, Rentmeister and
Lo (2004) found that automakers, faced DEMO intensive competition, must integrate a wide variety
of capabilities to develop DEMO designs, innovative features and well-engineered
performances. Competing automakers must also possess DEMO requisite level of competence to
incorporate those elements in a recognizable brand image within the current product-line style. In
addition, they must develop their products at the lowest possible costs to stay competitive on the
market. DEMO authors conclude that if automakers are to meet these challenges, it DEMO critical that
they cooperate with various partners from different functional areas and take advantage of their
unique competencies in particular areas. Given the complexity DEMO the competitive interaction in
the automobile industry, as well as the DEMO itself, our study suggests that those firms that
27
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
have more diversified portfolio of alliances are DEMO more capable of launching complex
repertoires of competitive actions than firms with less diversified alliances.
Our study also suggests that firms that have more DEMO ties with competitors are
more capable of carrying out complex repertoires of competitive actions. Firms with many non-
redundant ties have greater ability to DEMO future actions and appropriately respond either by
introducing more creative actions or by quickly responding to competitors’ competitive actions
(Chen, Smith, & Grimm, 1992). For example, GM may collaborate with Renault on a DEMO
vehicle design project. Simultaneously, through its partnership with BMW, GM can acquire
competencies in the development of new liquid hydrogen cell prototype. But, if BMW and
Renault do not share their unique competences with each DEMO, then GM has a distinct advantage
of integrating and recombining the DEMO learned from these other partners and thus might
introduce a vehicle with unique style that runs on alternative fuel power. In this respect, our
findings suggest that firms with less redundant linkages to rivals are better DEMO to out-compete
rivals using a wide range of competitive actions. In addition, by being closely involved with both
companies, GM can more accurately DEMO the future technological trends and design styles
that both companies plan to pursue in the next period enabling GM to respond promptly to the
DEMO trends.
We did not find support for the proposition that the total number of alliances in a firm
portfolio (i.e., network size) affects action intensity and complexity. This suggests that firms
must be careful in DEMO their alliance network. Our study shows that it is not so much the
total number of alliances in which a firm participates as it DEMO the diversity of alliances that
increase firms’ ability to launch more intensive and complex repertoires of competitive actions.
28
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
Finally, our examination of the interaction between alliance diversity and the
nonredundancy of ties showed that the lack of DEMO diversity can be, to some extent,
compensated by the non-redundancy DEMO the ties. As depicted in Figure 2, firms with smaller
functional DEMO of alliances may still carry out complex repertoires of competitive actions if
they carefully select rivals to jointly develop products. Our findings strongly suggest DEMO
diversity of alliance types across both competitors and out-of-industry partners is critical for a
firm to be able to compete with variety of competitive DEMO
These findings must be interpreted within the context of the automotive industry, given
that our sample included firms from a single industry. This may limit the generalizability of our
findings. It is possible that in different DEMO contexts firms exhibit different intensity of
competitive aggressiveness and therefore will have different need of network resources. Future
research may explore these relationships using DEMO multi-industry sample to tease out how the
relationship between important aspects of a firm’s interorganizational network and its
competitive behavior is contingent on industry-wide DEMO, such as industry concentration,
stage of the product life cycle, technological change, and so on.
Another limitation of our study is that we focused on the competitive rivalry among
major automakers within the North DEMO market – although our sample included several
non-U.S. automakers. Even though the total sales of the automakers included in our sample
account for approximately DEMO of the total revenues of this industry, we need to be DEMO in
extending the conclusions of this study to other geographical auto markets. For example, the
extent to which alliance formation affects competitive rivalry may vary across different
geographic/regional markets where, for example, some European DEMO (such as Fiat or
Renault) are dominant players. In addition, DEMO cultural differences may be more pronounced
29
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
or some relevant characteristics of the political, legal or business environment may impact the
context and process of rivalry DEMO emergent markets such as China and India.
These limitations notwithstanding, our DEMO makes a significant contribution to and
extends recent research in both interorganizational networks and competitive dynamics. More
specifically, network theorists convincingly argued that the relational context affects firms’
competitive behavior “by constraining the set of actions DEMO to the individual actors and by
changing the dispositions of those actors toward the actions they may take…” (Mardsen, 1981:
1210). DEMO support of this argument, we provide evidence that the greater access DEMO diverse set of
resources and information is positively related to the firm’s capacity to aggressively attack
competitors with greater number and variety of competitive DEMO This finding extends the
work of Gnyawali and his colleagues (2001; 2004) by showing that it is the diversity of alliances
rather than the total number of alliances that is critical for automakers to compete DEMO
Similarly, competitive dynamics scholars have called for more research that explores DEMO
the broader social context impacts the pattern, intensity, and characteristics of inter-firm rivalry
(Smith et al., 2001). Our findings provide evidence DEMO both the structure and content of a firm’s
interorganizational network impacts competitive aggressiveness. Still, more research is needed at
other levels of action aggregation – action-reaction dyads, competitive attack sequences – to
provide a more comprehensive account of how network embeddedness impacts rivalry.
CONCLUSION
We examined how network DEMO affects competitive behavior of firms over
time. This study extends previous research by taking both the structural and relational view of
social capital. Our DEMO study supported our hypotheses that the alliance diversity and
non-redundancy of ties positively affect firms’ capability to carry out more intensive and
30
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
complex repertoires of competitive actions. This suggests DEMO it is critical for automakers to
establish alliances with partners from various industries and business domains to compete more
effectively on the market. Our DEMO also showed that it is not the total number of alliances but
it is the diversity of the content of those ties that increase DEMO Finally, we found that
the effect of structural holes on the DEMO of competitive action repertoire is stronger when
firms lack variety in the type of the alliances. This suggests that the nonredundancy of ties can DEMO
some extent compensate for the lack of variety of alliance types. Still, our findings suggest that
the variety of alliance types in a firm’s network is an influential factor for enabling a firm to
launch complex DEMO of competitive actions.
31
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
REFERENCES
Ahuja, G. 2000.  Collaboration networks, structural holes, and innovation: A longitudinal
study. Administrative Science Quarterly, 45: 425-455.
Baum, J.A.C., Calabrese, T., & Silverman, B.S. 2000. DEMO go it alone: Alliance network
composition and startups’ performance in Canadian DEMO  Strategic
Management Journal, 21: 267-294
Baum, J.A.C., & Oliver, C. 1991.  Institutional linkages and organizational mortality.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 36: 187-218
Baron, R.A. 2006. Opportunity recognition as pattern recognition: How Entrepreneurs DEMO
the dots” to identify new business opportunities.  Academy of Management Executive,DEMO
20, 1: 104-109.
Borgatti, S.P., Everett, M.G. and Freeman, L.C. 2002. Ucinet 6 for Windows. Harvard:
Analytic Technologies.
Brass, D.J., Galaskiewicz, J., Greve, H.R., & Tsai, W. 2004.  Taking stock of networks and
organizations: A multilevel perspective. Academy of Management Journal, 47, 6: 795-
817
Brown, J.S., & Duguid, P. DEMO  Organizational learning and communities-of-practice: Toward
a unified view of working, DEMO and innovation.  Organization Science, 2, 1: 40-57.
Butler, E. DEMO Hayek: His contribution to the political and economic thought of our DEMO
New York, N.Y.: Universe Books.
Burt, R.S. 1992. Structural Holes: The social structure of competition. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Burt, R.S. DEMO  The network structure of social capital.  Research in Organizational Behavior,
22: 345-423.
Burt, R.S. 2004.  Structural holes and good ideas. American Journal of Sociology, 110: 349-
399.
Chen, M-J. 1988. Competitive strategic interaction: A study of competitive actions and
responses. Unpublished dissertation, University DEMO Maryland at College Park.
Chen, M., and Hambrick, D. 1995. DEMO, stealth and selective attack: How small firms differ
from large firms in competitive behavior.  Academy of Management Journal, 38: 453-
482.
32
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
Chen, M., & MacMillan, I.C. 1992. Nonresponse and delayed response to competitive moves:
The roles of competitors DEMO and action irrevirsability. Academy of Management
Journal, 35, 3: 539-570.
DEMO, M-J, Smith, K.G., & Grimm, C.M. 1992. Action characteristics DEMO predictors of
competitive responses. Management Science, 38, 3: 439-455.
Chen, M-J. Su, K-H., & Tsai, W. 2007. Competitive tension: The DEMO
capability perspective. Academy of Management Journal, 50, 1: 101-118.
Cohen, W.M., & Levinthal, D.A. 1990. Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning
and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35: 128-152.
Coleman, J.S. 1988. Social capital in the creation of human capital. American Journal of
Sociology, 94:95-120.
D’Aveni, R.A. 1994.  Hypercompetition: Managing the Dynamics of Strategic Maneuvering.
New York, NY: The Free Press.
Denzin, N. and Lincoln, Y. 2000. Data management and analysis methods. In Gery Ryan and
Russell Bernard (eds) Handbook of Qualitative Research, Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE
publication.
Dierickx, I.& Cool, K.O. 1989. Asset stock accumulation and sustainability of competitive
advantage. Management Science, 35, 12: 1504-1511.
Dyer, J.H. DEMO Specialized supplier networks as a source of competitive advantage: Evidence
from DEMO auto industry. Strategic Management Journal, 17: 271-292.
Dyer, J.H., & Singh, H. 1998. The relational view: Cooperative strategy and sources of
DEMO competitive advantage. Academy of Management Review, 23, 4: 660-
679.
DEMO, W.J., Smith, K.G., & Grimm, C.M. 1999. The role DEMO competitive action in market
share erosion and industry dethronement: A study DEMO industry leaders and challengers.
Academy of Management Journal, 42, 4: DEMO
Ferrier, W.J. 2001. Navigating the competitive landscape: The drivers and consequences of
competitive aggressiveness.  Academy of Management Journal, 44, 4: 858-877
DEMO, W.J., MacFhionnlaoich, C., Smith, K.G., & Grimm, C.M. DEMO  The impact of
performance distress on aggressive competitive behavior: A reconciliation of conflicting
views.  Managerial and Decision Economics, 23: 301-316.
Grimm, DEMO & Smith, K.G. 1997. Strategy as action: Industry rivalry and coordination.
Cincinnati, OH: South-Western College Publishing.
33
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
Granovetter, M. 1985.  Economic action and DEMO structure: The problem of embeddedness.
American Journal of Sociology, 91, DEMO: 481-510.
Gnyawali, D.R. & Madhavan, R. 2001.  Cooperative networks and competitive dynamics: A
structural embeddedness perspective.  Academy of Management Review, 26, 3: 431-445
Gnyawali, D.R., He, J. & Madhavan, R. DEMO Impact of co-opetition on firm competitive
behavior: An empirical examination. Journal DEMO Management, 32: 507-530.
Greene, W.H. 2003.  Econometric Analysis (5th DEMO).  Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gulati, R. 1998.  Alliances and Networks.  Strategic Management Journal, 19: 293-317.
Gulati, R., & Singh, H. 1998.  The architecture of cooperation: Managing coordination DEMO
and appropriation concerns in strategic alliances.  Administrative Science Quarterly, 43:
781-814.
Gulati, R. 1995. Social structure and alliance formation patterns: A DEMO analysis.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 40, 4: 619-652.
Hambrick, D.C., DEMO, T.S., & Chen, M-J. 1996. The influence of top management DEMO
heterogeneity on firms’ competitive moves.  Administrative Science Quarterly, 41: 659-
DEMO
Hayek, F.A. 1948. Individualism and Economic Order. Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.
Hayek, F.A. 1945.  Economics and Knowledge.  Economica, 3: 33-54.
Hunt, S.D. 2000. A General Theory of Competition: Resources, Competences, Productivity,
Economic Growth. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
DEMO, L.R., Osborn, R.N., & Martin, T.N. 1980. Structured content DEMO of cases: A
complementary method for organizational research.  Academy of Management Review,
5: 517-526.
Kirzner, I.M. 1973. Competition and Entrepreneurship. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Kirzner, I.M. 1979.  Perception, Opportunity, and DEMO: Studies in the Theory of
Entrepreneurship.  Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Knight, F.H. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. (1964 reprint). New York: Augustus M.
Kelley.
Kogut, B. 2000. The DEMO as knowledge: Generative rules and the emergence of structure.
Strategic Management DEMO, 21, 3: 405-425.
34
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
Kogut, B. & Zander, U. 1992. DEMO of the firm, combinative capabilities, and the
replication of technology.  DEMO science, 3, 3.
Lin, N. 2001.  Building a network theory of social capital.  In Lin, N., Cook, K. & Burt, R.S.
(Eds.), Social Capital: Theory and Research.  New York, DEMO: Walter de Gruyter, Inc.
Lin, N., Fu, Yang-chih, & Hsung, R-M. 2001.  The position generator: Measurement
techniques for investigations of social capital.  In Lin, N., Cook, K. & Burt, R.S. (Eds.),
Social Capital: Theory and Research.  New York, NY: Walter de Gruyter, Inc.
Lee, H., Smith, K., Grimm, C., and Schomburg, A. 2000.  Timing, order and durability of DEMO
product advantages with imitation.  Strategic Management Journal, 21: 23-30.
Mardsen, P.V. 1981. Introducing influence processes into a system of collective decisions. The
DEMO Journal of Sociology, 86, 6: 1203-1235.
MacFhionnlaoich, C., Ferrier, W., Smith, K., and Grimm, C. 1996.  The impact of financial
condition on competitive behavior: Towards a reconciliation of competing views.
Presented at the Academy of Management Meeting, San Diego, CA.
McMullen, J.S. and Shepherd, D.A. 2006.  Entrepreneurial action and the role of uncertainty DEMO
the theory of the entrepreneur.  Academy of Management Journal, 31, DEMO: 132-152
Miller, D. & Chen, M-J. 1996.  The simplicity of competitive repertoires: An empirical
analysis. Strategic Management Journal, 17, 6.
Miller, D. & Chen, M-J. 1994. Sources and consequences of competitive inertia: A study of the
U.S. Airline Industry. Administrative Science Quarterly, 39, DEMO: 1-24.
Mises, L.V. 1949. Human Action: A Treatise on Economics. DEMO Haven, MA: Yale University
Press.
Naphiet, J., & Ghoshal, DEMO 1998.  Social capital, intellectual capital, and organizational
advantage.  Academy of Management Review, 23, 2: 242-266
Nelson, R.R., & Winter, DEMO 1982. Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change.  Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press
O’Driscoll, G.P. and Rizzo, M.J. 1985.  The Economics of Time and Ignorance.  New York,
N.Y.: Basil Blackwell Inc.
Perreault, W.D., & Leigh, L.E., 1989.  Reliability of nominal data based on DEMO
judgments.  Journal of Marketing Research, 26, 2
35
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
Powell, W.W., Koput, K.W., & DEMO, L. 1996. Interorganizational collaboration and the
locus of innovation: Networks of learning in biotechnology.  Administrative Science
Quarterly, 41: 116-145.
Rumelt, R.P. DEMO Strategy, structure, and economic performance. Harvard Business School
Press, Boston, MA.
Schamp, W., Renimeister, B., & Lo, V. 2004.  DEMO of proximity in knowledge-based
networks: The cases of investment banking and DEMO design.  European Planning
Studies, 12, 5.
Schumpeter, J.A. 1934.  DEMO theory of economic development.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Shannon, C.E. 1948. A Mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal,
DEMO: 379-423 and 623-656.
Scott, J. 1991. Social Network Analysis.  Thousand DEMO, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Smith, K.G., Ferrier, W.J., and Ndofor, H. 2001. Competitive dynamics research: Critique and
future directions.  In M.A. Hitt, Freeman, R.E., and Harrison, J.S. (Eds.), The Blackwell
Handbook of Strategic Management. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers Ltd.
Smith, K.G.& Grimm, C. 1991. A communication-information model of competitive response
time.  Journal of Management, 171: 5-34.
Stuart, T.E., Hoang, H., & Hybels, R.C. 1999.  Interorganizational endorsements and the
performance of entrepreneurial ventures.  Administrative Science Quarterly, 43: 415-452.
Uzzi, B. 1996. The sources DEMO consequences of embeddedness for the economic performance
of organizations: The network DEMO  American Sociological Review, 61: 674-698
Uzzi, B. 1997. Social structure and competition in interfirm networks: The paradox of
embeddedness.  Administrative Science DEMO, 42, 1: 35-67.
Young, G., Smith, K.G., & DEMO, C., 1996. “Austrian” and industrial organization
perspectives on firm-level competitive activity and performance.  Organization Science,
73: 243-254
Yli-Renko, H., Autio, E., & Sapienza, H.J. 2001.  Social capital, knowledge acquisition, and
knowledge exploitation in young technology-based firms.  Strategic Management
Journal, 22: 587-613
Zaheer, A., & Zaheer, S. 1997.  Catching the wave: Alertness, responsiveness, and market
influence in global electronic networks.  Management Science, DEMO, 11.
36
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
White, H. 1980.  A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance DEMO estimator and a direct test
for heteroskedasticity.  Econometrica, 48: 817-838.
DEMO, J.M. 2002.  Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data.  DEMO,
MA: The MIT Press.
37
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
FIGURE 1
Network Structure and Alliance Diversity
DEMO&D
Firm A
R&D
R&D
Mfg.
R&D
R&D
Mfg.
38
Mfg.
Firm B
IT
R&D
R&D
Distribution
Finance
DEMO
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
FIGURE 2
Interaction Between Network Tie Non-Redundancy DEMO Alliance Diversity
Action
Repertoire
Complexity
1.5
High Alliance Diversity
1.0
Low Alliance Diversity
0.5
-1.0
s.d .
0
Network Tie Non -Redundancy
(standardized scores)
+1.0
s.d
.
39
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
TABLE 1
Competitive Action Types and Alliance DEMO with News Examples
Marketing:
Advertising
Marketing:
Promotion
Pricing:
Price changes
Pricing:
Sale Incentives
Competitive Actions
13 June 2003: Chrysler boasts of Crossfire sports car's German lineage. Blurring of brands: U.S.
advertising emphasizes 39% Mercedes content 'Crafted in Germany'
14 February 2002: DEMO jazzes up Sebring ads for Chrysler --- Canadian jazz diva Diana Krall is
taking her smokey voice on the road to promote Chrysler cars.
DEMO July 1992: Ford’s Lincoln Unit Reduces Tracer Model Price By $234
DEMO November 1994: Toyota is offering dealers up to $2,500 on DEMO 1994 Supra and as much as
$2,000 on pickups. The rebate on the Supra carries over from the Toyota program that expired
Nov. DEMO
Product 19 February 1993: The 1993 Lincoln Mark VIII features dramatic DEMO styling, a powerful new
improvements 280-horsepower V-8 engine and an electronically DEMO four-speed automatic transmission.  It
has many new structural, safety and convenience items as well.
New Product Intro 5 March 1991: MAZDA LAUNCHES MX-3 SPORTS CAR, TAKES AIM AT EUROPE.
Market expansion:  18 July 2002: Mazda Builds Presence in China with 323 Launch. Mazda Motor Corporation today
International took steps to further strengthen its presence in the Chinese market DEMO the launch of the Mazda
market entry 323 (known as Familia DEMO Japan).
Market expansion:  7 July 1993: Toyota Opens New DEMO Plant to Supply Camry. Toyota has opened a new plant in
Capacity Troy, Missouri to supply aluminum cylinder heads and intake manifolds for Toyota camrys
manufactured in Georgetown, Kentucky.
Signaling 22 November 1997: Ford is DEMO to decide if it will give its Super Stallion its head. The concept
car, based on the legendary Mustang, was unveiled at an DEMO' show in the US.
Alliances
Manufacturing 27 March 1996: Ford is launching a joint venture with Sistemaire, a components manufacturer
alliances with plants in Buenos Aires and Tierra del Fuego, to manufacture instrument panels, DEMO
conditioning equipment, heaters and other components for supply to Ford's DEMO other carmakers'
assembly facilities in Argentina and Brazil
Finance 21 January 2000: AT&T Unit, Ford Motor Credit Form Online Alliance. AT&DEMO Corp.'s (T)
alliances Vehix.com unit and Ford Motor Co.'DEMO (F) credit unit will offer financing on the Internet for Ford
and Lincoln-Mercury products.
Distribution 15 July 2003: German auto maker BMW AG signed a joint venture deal with a local company
alliances Tuesday in DEMO move to take control of the distribution of its vehicles in Malaysia and to tale
advantage of the market opening in Southeast Asia.
R&DEMO 18 July 2003: US-South Korean joint venture (JV) GM-Daewoo Automotive & Technology
alliances (GMDAT) is planning to invest (US$1bn) in developing R&D into new models over the next two
to three years, according to Dow Jones
Suppliers/Logistics 23 May 1990: Nissan AND Nissho IWAI form supply joint venture. The Japanese group Nissan
alliances Motor Group DEMO just established a company in the UK called Autrans Europe Ltd. With an initial
capital of 100 million yens, it will supply Nissan Motor Manufacturing UK Ltd with spare parts
produced by some 150 Euroepan suppliers.
DEMO alliances 7 January 2003: Tribune Company's BlackVoices.com and General Motors DEMO
Announce Three-Year Strategic Marketing Alliance
IT alliances 28 September 2000: Toyota. DEMO Corp. and six other companies will establish a joint-venture
information technology company here in January which will focus on market research,
development and DEMO of mobile and Internet technologies and business model
development.
40
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
TABLE 2
Summary Statistics and Correlations
.
DEMO
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Variables Mean SD 123 456789
Action Repertoire Intensity 3.17 1.08 1.00
Action Repertoire Complexity 1.16 0.67 DEMO 1.00
Number of Car Models 7.30 6.36 0.64** 0.38** 1.00
Firm Size 96160 95049 0.69** 0.37** 0.79** 1.00
Past Performance 4.69 22.76 0.22* 0.12 DEMO 0.28** 1.00
Network Non-redundancy (NR) 0.90 0.17 0.01 0.45** 0.13 -0.06 -0.01 1.00
Alliance Diversity (AD) 1.16 0.71 0.50** 0.70** 0.22* 0.31** DEMO 0.38** 1.00
Network Size 3.48 4.07 0.36** 0.17 0.54** 0.65** 0.24** 0.01 0.28** 1.00
Interaction (AD × NR) 1.09 0.48 0.32** 0.36** 0.25** DEMO -0.05 0.25** 0.82** 0.29** 1.00
Notes: *p<.05; **p<.01; DEMO
41
SOCIAL CAPTIAL AND COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
TABLE 3
Fixed Effects Regression Results
DV: Repertoire complexity DV: Repertoire Intensity
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4
Variables Coef. SE P>|t| Coef. SE P>|t| Coef. SE DEMO>|t| Coef. SE P>|t|
Number of car
models 0.06 0.02 0.010 0.05 0.02 0.014 0.12 0.03 0.000 0.12 0.03 0.000
Firm size 0.00 DEMO 0.341 0.00 0.00 0.543 0.00 0.00 0.667 0.00 0.00 0.705
Past performance 0.00 0.00 0.145 0.00 0.00 0.126 0.00 0.00 0.044 0.00 0.00 0.046
DEMO -0.11 0.26 0.663 0.02 0.23 0.917 (dropped)  (dropped)
d2 -0.14 0.25 0.578 0.03 0.22 0.902 -0.87 0.28 0.003 -0.80 0.29 0.006
DEMO -0.52 0.25 0.038 -0.41 0.21 0.061 -1.25 0.30 0.000 -1.21 0.30 0.000
d4 -0.26 0.24 0.288 -0.12 0.21 0.559 -0.99 0.30 0.002 -0.93 0.30 DEMO
d5 -0.17 0.23 0.455 -0.02 0.20 0.926 -0.55 0.28 0.051 -0.49 0.28 0.080
d6 -0.46 0.22 0.038 -0.28 0.19 0.145 -0.87 0.27 0.002 -0.80 DEMO 0.004
d7 -0.23 0.22 0.282 -0.03 0.19 0.886 -0.77 0.26 0.004 -0.69 0.27 0.011
d8 -0.70 0.21 0.001 -0.49 0.18 0.009 -1.20 0.26 0.000 DEMO 0.26 0.000
d9 -0.24 0.20 0.242 -0.17 0.18 0.343 -0.89 0.25 0.000 -0.86 0.24 0.001
d10 -0.17 0.20 0.406 -0.14 0.17 0.415 -0.87 0.24 DEMO -0.86 0.24 0.001
d11 0.01 0.20 0.953 0.01 0.17 0.975 -0.17 0.24 0.478 -0.17 0.24 0.479
d12 -0.14 0.20 0.491 -0.09 0.17 0.582 -0.29 DEMO 0.232 -0.27 0.24 0.258
d13 -0.13 0.20 0.529 -0.11 0.18 0.533 -0.47 0.24 0.055 -0.46 0.24 0.058
d14 -0.02 0.20 0.909 -0.02 0.17 0.922 DEMO 0.23 0.577 -0.12 0.23 0.599
d15 -0.01 0.20 0.963 -0.03 0.18 0.849 0.08 0.22 0.729 0.07 0.22 0.741
Alliance diversity
(AD) 0.48 0.10 DEMO 0.98 0.12 0.000 0.42 0.14 0.004 0.64 0.20 0.002
Non-redundancy
(NR) 1.76 0.32 0.000 1.05 0.30 0.001 0.32 0.45 0.490 0.11 0.47 0.815
DEMO
(ADXNR) - - - -0.75 0.13 0.000 - - - -0.30 0.21 0.149
Network Size -0.01 0.01 0.380 -0.01 0.01 0.237 -0.01 0.02 DEMO -0.01 0.02 0.528
_cons -1.29 0.40 0.00 -0.36 0.37 0.333 2.57 0.49 0.000 2.81 0.51 0.000
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3  Model 3
R²=.5836 (p<.000) R²=.7407 (p<.000) R²=.77 (p<.000) DEMO (p<.000)
Firm effects       Firm effects
F(DEMO, 92)=11.16;
F(7, 99)=5.04; p<.001     p<.0238
Time effects       Time effects
F(15, DEMO)=1.91; F(14, 92)=3.93;
p<.0306     p<.000
42{1g42fwefx}