Sequential Choice in Group Settings: Taking
the Road Less Traveled and Less Enjoyed
DAN ARIELY
JONATHAN LEVAV*
Many individual decisions take place in a DEMO context wherein group members
voice their choices sequentially. In this article we examine the impact of this dy-
namic decision process on individuals’ choices DEMO satisfaction with their outcomes.
We propose that choices reﬂect a balancing of two classes of goals: goals that
are strictly individual and goals that are triggered by the existence of the group.
The latter sometimes results DEMO choices that undermine personal satisfaction and
increase regret. We ﬁnd support for goal balancing in three studies in which we
tracked consumers’ orders of DEMO and drinks. In the Lunch study we found that
real groups (DEMO) choose more varied dishes than would be expected by random
sampling DEMO the population of all individual choices across all tables. The Beer
study demonstrates that this group-level variety seeking is attributable to the in-
teraction—implicit DEMO explicit—among group members, and can be dissipated when
the group is DEMO to “disband” and its members make strictly individual choices.
Finally, the DEMO study demonstrated that individual choices in a group context
are also aimed at satisfying goals of information gathering and self-presentation
in the form of DEMO
e begin with a true story of a brunch honoring a
W colleague who had recently accepted an academic
position at a west coast DEMO To celebrate this joyous
occasion, we chose a restaurant that was DEMO
recommended but that most of us had never visited. While
perusing the rich menu, one of the authors was
contemplating two options: a DEMO toast platter and a
pancake platter. Both seemed attractive. However, when
DEMO member of the party requested the pancakes, the
author in question DEMO to order the French toast. Why
did the choice of one diner affect the choice of another?
Indeed, do choices differ when made sequentially in a group
context? In this article we study the goals and motives that
may prompt individuals’ choices in a sequence to differ DEMO
choices made in other decision settings.
Research in consumer behavior and social psychology has
*Dan Ariely is the Sloan Career Development Professor at the DEMO
School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, E56-329,
Cambridge, DEMO 02142 (e-mail: ariely@mit.edu). Jonathan Levav is de-
veloping his career as a doctoral student at the Fuqua School of Business,
Duke DEMO, Durham, NC 27708 (e-mail: jl19@mail.duke.edu). The
authors would like to thank Jim Bettman, Kristin Diehl, Rebecca Hamilton,
George Loewenstein, Rebecca Ratner, Itamar Simonson, Rami Zwick, and
Gal Zauberman for their important comments on various drafts of this
article. Special thanks are extended DEMO John Lynch for his patience, support,
and extensive comments throughout DEMO research. They would also like
to thank Ping Yuan, manager of DEMO China Restaurant, and Robert Poitras
and Chris Rice, owners of the Carolina Brewery. Order of authorship is
alphabetical.
279
produced ample evidence that DEMO decisions and judgments
of individuals in a group are dependent upon the decisions
and judgments of other group members such that choice or
opinion DEMO are induced (for a review, see Levine and
Moreland 1998). For instance, Asch’s (1955) classic
experiment on judgments of line lengths showed high levels
of social conformity despite the existence of a correct
DEMO to the task. His ﬁndings were later qualiﬁed by
Deutsch and Gerard (1955), who attributed shifts in
judgment or choice to an adherence to norms (normative
social inﬂuence) or acceptance of persuasive arguments
(informational social inﬂuence). Thereafter, the notion of
normative and informational social inﬂuence has served as
the primary paradigm guiding research on choice and
judgment DEMO (see, e.g., Burnkrant and Cousineau 1975;
Herr, Kardes, DEMO Kim 1991; Kaplan and Miller 1987;
Levine and Moreland 1998; Moscovici 1985; Myers and
Lamm 1976). One emergent proposition is that the type of
inﬂuence will depend upon the decision task. For instance,DEMO
Kaplan and Miller (1987) suggest that normative inﬂuence
should predominate for judgmental tasks such as dish
selection in a restaurant, while informational inﬂuence
should dictate judgment or choice for intellective tasks, such
as solving problems, that have a single correct solution.
The preponderance of evidence indicates that the
prevailing outcome of group-inﬂuence situations is choice
and opinion convergence (Festinger 1950; Levine and
Moreland 1998). Mackie and Goethals (1987) ascribe this
q 2000 by JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH, Inc. ● Vol. 27 ● December 2000
All rights reserved. 0093-5301/2001/2703-0001$03.00
280
to an isomorphism between individual and group goals.
They characterize the DEMO between an individual and
his group as “pervaded by an atmosphere of ambivalence”
(p. 148; see also Thibaut and Kelley 1958). The DEMO
is a consequence of the recognition by both the group and
the individual that they are interdependent for mutual goal
satisfaction, and that this interdependence represents a
conﬂict that necessitates compromise. Indeed, Mackie and
Goethals (DEMO) believe that there is a meaningful distinction
between individual goals and DEMO goals. This distinction
is pertinent to the group-inﬂuence literature because
researchers have often focused on situations wherein the
group is tasked with producing a DEMO output from the
totality of the individuals’ inputs. For instance, studies DEMO
jury decision making (see, e.g., Kaplan 1987) examine the
process groups use to reach a single verdict from multiple
opinions. Similar qualiﬁcations DEMO to research about
group polarization (e.g., Isenberg 1986), groupthink (DEMO
1982), and competition versus cooperation (e.g., Deaux
1996). In consumer research, Corfman and Lehmann (1993)
support the notion of DEMO and individual goals by showing
that others’ welfare is taken into account when making a
group decision. Other studies have analyzed the result of
DEMO inﬂuence on one individual’s decision in cases where
an individual is exposed to judgments of others (Asch 1955),
in purchases of luxuries DEMO necessities (Bearden and Etzel
1982), and where word-of-mouth information is DEMO
(Herr et al. 1991).
An examination of our opening anecdote DEMO a pair
of subtle, yet signiﬁcant, differences between the celebratory
brunch and traditional work on social inﬂuence. In contrast
to research about single DEMO decisions, the output of the
decision-making process in our restaurant example
DEMO exactly to the inputs provided by individual
group members—the “group decision” is really just a
sequence of the individuals’ choices. Second, as opposed
to previous studies on the effect of group inﬂuence on a
single person’s DEMO, our study does not use confederates
or manipulate the nature of DEMO group in order to test its
effect on a single individual. Instead, we study a natural
situation where multiple, interdependent individual
decisions occur DEMO an environment whose effect is contingent
on the actual choices made by each group member. This is
quite different from the previous approach because DEMO allows
us to investigate how the constraints introduced by the group
inﬂuence the dynamics of the decision-making process.
Mackie and Goethals’s (1987) notion DEMO individual and
group goals is static, and thus must be altered DEMO suit our
setup. We suggest that the two general goal classes or
motivations most applicable in our case are individual-alone
goals and individual-group goals. DEMO former are goals of
the individual that are independent of the presence of others
(e.g., satisfying one’s own taste), while the latter DEMO
contingent on choices made by other group members or are
only induced because of the existence of a group context
(e.g., the desire DEMO portray oneself as interesting and unique).
These two goal classes can have interesting implications
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
because the group context (or contingency) sometimes
forces them into direct conﬂict, such that fulﬁlling different
DEMO is achieved by choosing different alternatives. For
instance, the dessert that DEMO consumer likes best might portray
him as less unique if a majority of the group has already
ordered it. We conjecture that consumers resolve DEMO conﬂict
through a goal-balancing process in which they weigh the
importance of each goal class, yielding a choice that reﬂects
a trade-off and implicit acceptance or rejection of the
constraints the goal classes impose. Thus, the consumer in
our example might decide to underplay individual-only
goals and pick DEMO dessert that makes him seem unique. At
the group level, goal DEMO can yield two patterns of
choice: group uniformity and group variety DEMO Group
uniformity represents a tendency for individual choices to
converge on a single alternative. Conversely, group variety
seeking is a tendency for choices to diverge and include
varied alternatives. In this article we investigate the group-
DEMO outcome that results from the goal balancing
undertaken by the individual group member when making
decisions in a sequence.
It is important to note DEMO our aim in introducing the goal
classes was to make the simple conceptual point that the
importance of certain goals is often contingent on DEMO
decision environment. However, “goal class” is simply a
generic name for DEMO category of goals and is therefore too
broad to generate speciﬁc hypotheses about the outcome of
choice behavior. Mackie and Goethals (1987) articulate DEMO
speciﬁc goal types that they consider important for
understanding the tension between individual and group
goals. “Utilitarian goals” represent the need for “tangible
outcomes” (p. 146). “Knowledge goals” presume that
individuals in a group are DEMO in their quest to
acquire information about the world. Finally, “identity
DEMO assume that individuals desire to understand
themselves and their reality in order to form an ego identity
and establish a positive sense of self. DEMO adapt the
deﬁnitions of these goal types to a consumer decision
setting, and add a fourth goal type (minimizing regret and
avoiding losses) that has traditionally been important in
consumer research and is relevant to DEMO group context under
study. In the next section we detail some of the major goals
that individual consumers attempt to satisfy when making
choices DEMO a group context. We will also speculate about the
choice pattern that would result from considering each goal
in isolation.
Goal Types
Satisfying One’s DEMO (Individual-Alone Goal).
This goal relies on the basic economic premise DEMO indi-
viduals, irrespective of the context, will choose those items
that maximize satisfaction of their taste, where taste is de-
ﬁned as an internal need that is independent of any external
factors. Fulﬁllment of this DEMO necessitates the selection of
an identical alternative whether the individual decision
maker is choosing in a group context or not. Note, however,
SEQUENTIAL CHOICE IN GROUP SETTINGS
that individuals could still be inﬂuenced by DEMO group when
satisfying their own taste if informational social inﬂuence
is active. Such situations would be characterized by choice
uniformity if other group members DEMO viewed both as
possessing similar tastes and more information about the
alternatives. In contrast, variety seeking would occur if oth-
ers were viewed as possessing different tastes (see Fig. 1).
Minimizing Regret and Avoiding Losses (Individual-
Group Goal). Loss aversion (Kahneman and Tversky
1979) predicts that consumers will experience more disu-
tility from observing another diner in DEMO group enjoying a
better dish compared to the corresponding utility that they
would derive from observing another diner who had selected
a worse dish. DEMO might then feel compelled to order the
same dish in order to minimize the potential for disutility
and regret. Assuming a ﬁxed distribution of DEMO, loss aver-
sion and regret minimization suggest that individuals in a
DEMO context will have a greater tendency for group uni-
formity relative to the overall set of alternatives selected by
the same individuals choosing alone.
DEMO Gathering (Individual-Group Goal).
Consumer choices may also be an endeavor DEMO acquire in-
formation about preferences regarding similar or identical
future experiences (DEMO 1976). In an often-cited ex-
ample of variety-seeking behavior, Simonson (1990) found
that students picking candy bars for consumption in the next
three lectures, opted for more varied choices than students
picking a single candy bar in the beginning of each of three
successive lectures. This DEMO is commonly attributed to
individuals’ desire to learn their preferences (Hauser DEMO
Wernerfelt 1990; McAlister and Pessemier 1982) or hedge
the risk of future changes in taste (Simonson 1990).
In a group setting, DEMO could similarly seek to
diversify their choices in order to gain more information
through interaction with other group members. The beneﬁt
of sharing information DEMO occur naturally in situations
where members can share their choices, but DEMO where no
sharing takes place and information is transmitted only
though verbal opinions or facial expressions during or after
consumption. Sharing might also create DEMO toward
variety seeking under “attribute satiation” models, where
each dish is DEMO an attribute in McAlister’s (1982) dynamic
attribute satiation model. With diminishing marginal sen-
sitivity to each bite of a given entre´e, sharing of entre´es
may produce more utility than consuming all of one’s most
preferred DEMO We posit that the group’s presence can
induce collective variety seeking even when there is no
sharing, and all the studies reported herein focus on such
contexts.
Self-Presentation (Individual-Group Goal). It is well
known that individuals consume products in an effort to
convey an image to themselves DEMO others (Belk 1988).
Choices made in group settings provide an DEMO venue for
conveying such signals. An abundance of social psycho-
logical work has shown that such situations are characterized
281
FIGURE 1
AN ILLUSTRATION DEMO GOAL CLASSES, GOALS, AND THEIR
PREDICTIONS
NOTE.—In cases where informational social inﬂuence is present during the
decision process, an outcome of group uniformity or variety seeking can result.
by uniformity (Asch 1955; Deutsch and DEMO 1955; Hinsz
and Davis 1984; Kaplan 1987). However, Snyder DEMO From-
kin (1980) suggest that people will make choices that are
unique in order to present themselves in a positive light.
Research by DEMO and Kahn (1999) corroborates this point.
They ﬁnd that in some cases individuals seek variety because
they expect to be viewed more favorably DEMO a result. In
related work, Hsee (1999) shows that consumers DEMO a
low level of variety for products whose origin is hard to
observe (such as the label of a T-shirt), but choose a high
level of variety when the differences are easy to observe
(such as the color of a T-shirt). These ﬁndings suggest that,
DEMO on the image an individual wants to convey, the
identity goal DEMO either lead to group uniformity or variety
seeking. When unique choices can be used as positive self-
presentation cues, variety seeking at the group level will
ensue. Similarly, personality traits that relate to self-presen-
tation may also determine the tendency to seek variety in
groups. For instance, individuals who are high on the trait
of need for uniqueness (Snyder and Fromkin 1977) will be
more likely to select options that have yet to be chosen,
thus yielding greater group level variety.
In sum, we have outlined four types of goals that indi-
viduals face when DEMO alternatives in a group setting:
satisfying one’s taste, avoiding losses DEMO minimizing regret,
information gathering, and self-presentation. The objective
of this DEMO is to examine goal balancing and its outcome
in consumer choices in a group context. We propose goal
balancing only as a general framework DEMO can help us
understand the trade-offs implicit in these decisions. Figure
282
1 summarizes the predicted direction of the outcome ac-
cording to DEMO goal type, assuming each goal was consid-
ered in isolation. We DEMO our argument using three
studies that successively reveal the outcomes of goal bal-
ancing and the reasons that may underlie it. In study 1 (the
Lunch study) we test the goal-balancing hypothesis at its
most basic level: Does group context inﬂuence individual
choices, and, if so, DEMO is the revealed choice pattern? In
study 2 (the Beer study) we seek more direct evidence that
goal balancing entails a trade-off between goals, including
loss aversion and the taste satisfaction goal. Finally, study
DEMO (the Wine study) examines the importance of the infor-
mation and identity goal types in goal balancing.
STUDY 1: THE LUNCH STUDY
The principal aim of study 1 was to ascertain whether
goal balancing imposes DEMO constraints on choice
by examining the group-level outcome of sequential deci-
sions in a group context. The outcome pattern would also
serve as an DEMO indication of which goal types were
being traded off. A null effect of group context would imply
that the goal of satisfying one’s taste (an individual-alone
goal) trumps all other concerns and suggests that the con-
straints imposed by goal balancing are insigniﬁcant. An out-
come of choice DEMO at the group level would provide
some evidence supporting regret minimization and loss aver-
sion and possibly self-presentation in the form of conformity
as DEMO primary goals that individuals consider when making
choices in a group context. In contrast, a pattern of group
variety seeking would hint that satisfaction of taste and loss
aversion are traded off in favor of information DEMO
and uniqueness as a form of positive self-presentation.
To test for the inﬂuence of group context on individual
decisions in a natural setting, we collected lunch order slips
from a popular Chinese restaurant in Durham, North Car-
olina. The data were gathered over a period of six weeks,DEMO
in collaboration with a restaurant manager who was blind
to the hypothesis. We analyzed the order codes of all tables
of two or more DEMO Lunch orders were of uniform size
and price, and, unlike the usual custom in Chinese restau-
rants, were served as individual portions and not shared.
The restaurant offered a total of 25 lunch selections, not
including soups and appetizers.
There are two possible benchmarks for comparison that
DEMO be considered in a one-cell study of a group’s effect
on individual choice. The ﬁrst is the pattern of selections
of customers lunching alone. DEMO did not choose this bench-
mark due to the possibility of a selection confound: people
who dine alone may somehow have different preferences
than those who dine in groups. Instead, we constructed
“nominal groups,” as is common in group problem-solving
research (see, e.g., Baron, Kerr, and Miller 1992; Diehl and
Stroebe 1991; Laughlin, VanderStoep, and DEMO
1991). That is, we randomly aggregated the orders of in-
DEMO from the real groups into tables of the same size
and compared the variety in those simulated groups to the
variety of selections at DEMO tables.
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
Method
Eight hundred and fourteen lunch order slips were col-
lected over the course of six weeks, representing a total of
2,202 diners. As discussed above, the choice variability
within these tables cannot be meaningfully interpreted with-
out a comparison to a DEMO population that was not
subject to the group contingency. To overcome this problem
we created a simulation program designed to generate such
nominal groups DEMO a control. The simulation was pro-
grammed to take the entire set of individual choices (2,202
dinners across 814 tables) and randomly DEMO individuals
to tables (for an illustration, see Fig. 2). The constraint im-
posed on these nominal groups was such that they had DEMO
same distribution of table sizes as the original set. In effect,
this created a comparison group that reproduced the same
overall (i.e., DEMO) variety in dish choices and table sizes,
but without any DEMO interorder dependencies. In
order to achieve stability in our measure of the reference
group’s variety, we repeated this process 100 times and used
the generated tables (groups) from all these runs as our
reference class.
DEMO on both the original and created tables, we com-
puted a DEMO Index, or V, that was calculated as shown
in Equation 1. This deﬁnition bounded the Variety Index
between 0 and 1. The index DEMO designed to equal 0 when
all the dishes in a table are identical and 1 when all the
dishes in a table are different. DEMO example, if there are three
diners at a table, and all three choose different items, V will
equal ( ) ; if two of the diners choose the same item,2/2 p 1
V DEMO equal ( ); ﬁnally, if all three diners choose1/2 p .5
the same item, V will equal ( ). Goal balancing0/DEMO p 0
FIGURE 2
AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE RANDOMIZING SIMULATION
SEQUENTIAL CHOICE IN GROUP SETTINGS
would be supported if the group context DEMO shown to sig-
niﬁcantly inﬂuence V levels; a higher or lower DEMO in the real
groups would indicate that the outcome of such a balancing
process is group variety seeking or group uniformity, re-
spectively.
Variety Index (V) p
number of different options chosen within a table DEMO 1 .
table size 2 1
Results and Discussion
The analysis of the Lunch study consisted of comparing
the Variety Index across the real DEMO simulated tables. Two
important results emerge. First, a comparison between the
DEMO for the real sample and the distribution of V’s obtained
through the simulation (see Fig. 3) indicates that the group
context has a DEMO and signiﬁcant inﬂuence on individual
decision making. We interpret this to mean that individual-
group goals constrain choice such that fulﬁllment of taste
satisfaction DEMO limited. Second, the results suggest that the
outcome of the group DEMO is to increase variety in
choices at the group level. In fact, all the tables produced
by our simulation displayed a lower Variety Index measure
than the original tables (i.e., there was no overlap with DEMO
simulated distribution)!
In addition to this overall analysis, we also DEMO the data
separately for each table size (see Table 1). DEMO difference
in the variety index was in the same direction for all ﬁve
table sizes in aggregate, although it was signiﬁcant only for
four of the ﬁve comparisons separately (all but table size
3). From these ﬁndings we deduce that certain group con-
texts (e.g., dining DEMO a Chinese restaurant) create a preference
contingency that prompts individuals to DEMO toward selec-
tions that increase variety at the group level.
It is worthwhile noting that we obtained these results
despite a couple of factors DEMO would exert a bias against
group-level variety seeking and limit our power to detect
them statistically. First, because the restaurant we selected
was a popular establishment, customers would be more
likely to have favorite dishes, DEMO displaying stickiness
in their selections irrespective of the group’s choices. Sec-
ond, the overall levels of V may seem high. Recall that there
were 25 possible options on the menu, making it quite dif-
ﬁcult to ﬁnd anything but highly varied choices, even with-
out the group context (i.e., through randomly generated
groups). For instance, if the group contingency were non-
existent and the prior odds of selecting any dish DEMO equal,
1 in 25, the probability that both people at DEMO table would
choose option 1 would equal . The(1/25) DEMO (1/25) p .0016
probability that both would choose option 2 is also
(1/25) ∗ (1/25), and so on for all 25 options. With 25 ways
that a pair of diners DEMO agree, the probability of
agreement p 25 ∗ [(1/25) ∗ (1/25)] p 1/25 p .04, and the
DEMO of ﬁnding variety under these conditions is there-
283
FIGURE 3
A HISTOGRAM OF THE VARIETY INDEX (V) FOR THE 100
SIMULATED TABLE DEMO AND THE ONE REAL TABLE SET
fore . For two-person groups, DEMO both1 2 .04 p .96
members agree, V takes on its DEMO value,
V(min) p 0, and when they differ, DEMO takes on its maximum
value, . With the aforementioned probabilitiesV(max) p 1.0
of agreement and disagreement, the expected value of
V p (.04 ∗ 0) 1 (.96 ∗ 1.0) p .96. The DEMO effect that
we ﬁnd, though small, is therefore impressive in light of the
odds of randomly generating a similar effect. In conclusion,
DEMO Lunch study is consistent with the idea that group context
can induce individuals to make choices that produce greater
variety at the group level.
DEMO 2: THE BEER STUDY
The Beer study was designed to achieve DEMO objectives.
The ﬁrst was to replicate our previous ﬁndings using a setup
that would allow more experimental control. The second,
and more important, objective was to examine more directly
the idea that individual choice in DEMO group context reﬂects
trade-offs (or sacriﬁces) of different goals. Speciﬁcally, DEMO
wanted to examine whether goals other than individual taste
satisfaction—an individual-alone goal—could determine
choices made in a group setting. Last, we wanted to rule
out the alternative explanation that the group-level variety
we found in study DEMO is due to positive affect stimulated by
the occasion of dining out. Kahn and Isen (1993) have
shown that positive affect induces variety DEMO in indi-
viduals, perhaps by prompting more inclusive categorization
structures. Conceivably, if the group dining context created
positive affect, consumers might be led to categorize more
inclusively and to consider a broader variety of options DEMO
they would as individuals. If so, the same collective variety-
284
seeking behavior should manifest when people in con-
sumption groups are DEMO to choose individually.
In the Lunch study, we ﬁnd evidence hinting DEMO personal
taste satisfaction may be sacriﬁced in favor of other goals,
yielding variety seeking at the group level. A key impli-
cation of DEMO conjecture is that satisfaction should depend
on the individual’s location in the choice sequence. The
hypothesis for the “sequential order effect” is derived from
DEMO notion that the ﬁrst consumer in the sequence is free to
fully satisfy his/her taste because others have yet to create
the group DEMO by expressing their choices. However,
the remaining consumers are faced with this contingency,
which constrains their choices to those alternatives that in-
DEMO group-level variety. We consequently expect satis-
faction with consumption to be higher for the ﬁrst person
than for the second through nth persons in DEMO sequence.
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
FIGURE 4
AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE BEER SAMPLE MENU AND THE
DESCRIPTION OF THE FOUR BEERS USED IN THE DEMO
STUDY
Method
A local microbrewery permitted us to pose as regular
restaurant waiters and offer their patrons a free sample of
beer. One hundred DEMO of two or more (of age) diners
(mean table size DEMO 2.7 persons) were approached by one
of us and told that DEMO brewery was conducting a special
promotion, whereby free 4 ﬂuid ounce DEMO glasses of
house beer were being offered to interested customers. We
next described the different beers (see Fig. 4) and asked
them to DEMO their selection.
The essence of the Beer study involved the introduction
of two types of selection processes that were manipulated
between tables (subjects). Tables were randomly assigned
to one of two conditions (50 tables in each condition), the
Collective condition and the Independent condition. In the
DEMO condition, subjects were read the descriptions of
the beers and offered DEMO promotion menus to peruse.
They then were asked to make a selection one by one,
indicating to the waiter which beer they would DEMO to taste,
as they would in a normal ordering situation. In the Inde-
pendent condition, subjects were read the descriptions of
the beers, offered the same promotion menus to peruse, but
were told that DEMO “special rule for this promotion” required
them to make their selection without looking at or consulting
other members of the table. These customers simply DEMO
their choice on an individual menu. (None of the subjects
in DEMO Independent condition resisted the idea of submitting
conﬁdential forms, and in DEMO were rather amused by
the notion.) The different beer selections were DEMO for
the two experimental groups, including the order of choice
for DEMO Collective condition.
Customers in both conditions then received their beer
sample together with a short, three-question satisfaction sur-
vey to ﬁll out as part of “the brewery’s desire to ﬁnd out
what people think about its DEMO The ﬁrst question asked
customers to rate how much they liked the beer that they
had just sampled. This rating was done on a DEMO scale,
where 0 represented “didn’t like it at all” and 10 represented
“liked it very much.” A second question asked subjects if
they DEMO that they had ordered a different sample of beer.
TABLE 1
MEAN VARIETY INDEX (V) IN THE LUNCH STUDY, FOR NATURAL TABLES AND RANDOMLY ASSIGNED TABLES
Table size Occurrence
Vin
real tables
Vin
simulated tables DEMO
t
-value
All 814 .952 .925 .027 4.46
2 diners 428 .965 .942 .023 2.57
3 diners 227 .918 .914 .004 .28
4 diners DEMO .968 .892 .076 8.72
5 diners 21 .988 .866 .122 9.90
6 diners 4 1.00 .859 .141 18.7
p
-value
! .001
p .010
DEMO .782
! .001
! .001
! .001
SEQUENTIAL CHOICE IN GROUP SETTINGS
The response for this question was a DEMO yes or no answer.
Third, customers were asked to estimate how DEMO times
they planned to visit the microbrewery in the next month.1
The rationale underlying the ﬁrst two questions was to assess
both satisfaction and DEMO in the Collective and Indepen-
dent conditions in order to test whether choices made in a
group setting are constrained and whether they reﬂect DEMO
sacriﬁce of certain goals. Although the Lunch study pro-
vided evidence of the group-level choice pattern and hinted
that it comes at the expense DEMO taste satisfaction, the Beer
study allows for a more direct test DEMO the sacriﬁce of taste
satisfaction and the consequent choice pattern. We expected
to replicate the group variety-seeking pattern from the ﬁrst
study, and predicted that it would come at the cost of taste
satisfaction.
Results and DEMO
The results were consistent with the notion of goal bal-
ancing. First, we found that variety seeking (V) was sig-
niﬁcantly higher in the Collective condition ( )M p .843
than in the Independent condition ( ), ,M p .46 t 98 p 5.69
p ! DEMO, thus replicating the results of the Lunch study. In
addition to DEMO Variety Index measures, the aim of the Beer
study was to DEMO the impact of increased variety within a
table on the satisfaction and regret of the individuals who
composed these tables. Our hypothesis was that DEMO the
road less traveled” would prompt customers to sacriﬁce
choosing their preferred beer in favor of a lesser-liked beer
because of a desire to DEMO other goals, leading to in-
creased group-level variety. The results of DEMO postcon-
sumption questionnaire support this conjecture (see Table
2). Subjects DEMO signiﬁcantly higher satisfaction with
their beer choice in the Independent condition ( )M p 7.75
than in the Collective condition ( ), ,M p 6.80 t 98 p 3.12
p ! .005. Responses to the DEMO question (the “yes/no”
question on the survey) were, as DEMO, highly correlated
with the satisfaction ratings ( ). Subjects in the Col-r p .677
lective condition were signiﬁcantly more likely to regret
their DEMO (38.4 percent) than subjects in the Independent
condition (12.4 percent), Mann-Whitney ,U p 6707 p !
.001. Furthermore, these ﬁndings reject the notion that in-
formational social inﬂuence is driving our results in DEMO
sense that information from others was not used to better
satisfy one’s taste.
The sequential-order hypothesis stipulates that satisfac-
tion in the Collective condition DEMO also depend on the
individual’s location in the choice sequence. In order to test
this idea, we recorded the order in which people in the
Collective condition voiced their choices. As the waiters,
we asked DEMO for their orders in a randomly prede-
termined sequence, so that DEMO way customers could not
self-select into the ordering. Recall that the ﬁrst consumer
in the sequence was free to satisfy his/her tastes fully DEMO
cause the group contingency (and need for goal balancing)
1This DEMO did not convey any useful information and will not be
discussed further.
285
TABLE 2
LIKING FOR THE DIFFERENT BEERS IN THE COLLECTIVE
AND DEMO CONDITIONS
Independent Collective
Mean liking SD Mean liking SD
Amber ale 8.19 1.50 7.19 2.15
Lager 7.68 2.15 7.44 2.02
Pale ale 7.10 2.30 DEMO 2.56
Summer wheat 7.68 2.32 6.17 2.80
Grand total 7.75 2.09 6.80 2.47
had yet to be created. Our data conﬁrmed this prediction:
DEMO satisfaction ratings in the Collective condition for the
ﬁrst customer in the sequence ( ) were signiﬁcantlyM p 7.26
higher than the mean ratings DEMO the rest of the group mem-
bers ( ), , . DEMO testsM p 6.48 F(1, 49) p 4.97 p p .03
showed that the ﬁrst customer in the Collective condition
was as happy DEMO his/her beer ( ) as the averageM p 7.26
customer in the Independent condition ( ),M p 7.75 t 49 p
1.23, . However, patrons not choosing ﬁrst in the Col-p 1 .2
lective condition were signiﬁcantly less happy with their
beer ( ) than the DEMO in the IndependentM p 6.37
condition ( ), .M p 7.75 DEMO 49 p 4.15, p ! .001
Responses to the regret question DEMO an identical
pattern: overall reported regret was signiﬁcantly higher in
the DEMO condition (38.4 percent) than in the Indepen-
dent condition (12.4 DEMO), , . In ad-U p 6707 p ! .001
dition, DEMO ﬁrst customer in the Collective condition was
signiﬁcantly less likely to report regret (24 percent) than the
remaining members of his table (48 percent), ,U p 3205
p ! .05. The latter were also signiﬁcantly more likely to
regret their choices (48 percent) relative to DEMO in the
Independent condition (12.4 percent), , .U p 3502 DEMO ! .001
This set of ﬁndings also rules out the interpretation of our
Lunch study results in terms of a group setting effect on
DEMO, categorization, and consequent variety seeking.
Several conclusions can be drawn from the results dis-
cussed thus far. First, personal taste satisfaction cannot ac-
count for the data obtained because average satisfaction in
the Collective condition DEMO actually lower than that of
individuals choosing independently. Second, the group-level
DEMO of variety seeking is consistent with the notion that
individuals within a group context balance their individual-
alone goals against the constraints introduced by DEMO
group goals. Finally, the robust ﬁnding of variety seeking
allows us DEMO reject regret and self-presentation in the form
of conformity as the principal goals fulﬁlled by our
participants.
STUDY 3: THE WINE STUDY
The data supporting the existence of a group contingency
(studies 1 and 2) DEMO that personal taste satisfaction and
regret minimization are sacriﬁced for the sake of group-
level variety (study 2). Our goal-balancing framework in-
286
dicates that satisfaction of other goals—information gath-
ering and self-presentation (in the form of unique-
ness)—might offset the disutility that arises from DEMO for-
feiture. Information gathering is essentially a rational view
that implicates consumers’ desire to learn their preferences
as a motive for variety seeking (Scitovsky 1976). If this
explanation is correct, then eliminating the need to obtain
information from other group members should obviate the
need to seek DEMO The Variety Index for groups with a
diminished need for information should therefore be lower
than the V for groups with a higher need DEMO information.
Second, the self-presentation goal is a social signaling ex-
planation DEMO which consumers seek group-level variety in
order to convey an image of individuality and uniqueness
to themselves and others (Hsee 1999). If this explanation is
accurate, then a measure of need for uniqueness (NFU; Sny-
der and Fromkin 1977) should be positively correlated with
the tendency to seek variety. The Wine study is designed
to identify whether each DEMO these explanations is a signiﬁcant
factor in goal balancing.
Method
Forty-ﬁve groups of business students from the daytime
and global executive master’s program at DEMO University
were approached under the aegis of a “marketing study on
wines” and asked to sample a few wines. Groups ranged in
size from DEMO to six members ( ), and were ran-M p 4.3
domly DEMO to one of two conditions: Information and
No Information. Two lists DEMO wines were prepared, each
containing four different wines (set 1 and set 2). In the
Information condition, participants ﬁrst sampled 1 ﬂuid
ounce of each of four different types of wines from one set
DEMO were provided with a list that contained the name, year,
DEMO a brief description of each wine. Next they were asked
to choose one of the four wines from the same set for the
purpose DEMO receiving a full, 4 ﬂuid ounce glass. Since the
initial tasting DEMO done in the same group context, any pos-
sible information about DEMO wines had already been acquired
or transmitted prior to the second phase because the latter
involved previously tested wines. In contrast, subjects in the
No Information condition received a new list of wines in
the second DEMO, allowing for learning and information
sharing to take place during both DEMO ﬁrst and second phases.
Participants in the No Information condition sampled 1 ﬂuid
ounce of each of four different types of wines from one DEMO
the sets, but were asked to choose one of the four DEMO
from the other set for the purposes of receiving their full,
4 ﬂuid ounce glass (groups who received set 1 in stage 1
received set 2 in stage 2, and groups who received set 2 in
stage 1 received set 1 in stage 2). The two DEMO sets were
counterbalanced between groups. Thus, the manipulation
kept the process DEMO wine consumption identical between the
two groups and changed only the level of information avail-
able for the second set of wines.
After sampling DEMO selection in the second phase, sub-
jects in both conditions completed DEMO satisfaction question-
naire regarding their chosen wine (the 4 ﬂuid ounce DEMO).
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
The satisfaction survey consisted of four questions. The ﬁrst
question asked participants to rate how much they liked the
DEMO they had just sampled using a 0–10 scale, where 0
represented DEMO like it at all” and 10 represented “liked
it very much.” The second question asked participants if
they wished that they had ordered a DEMO sample of wine.
The response for this question was a simple yes or no answer.
The third question asked participants to estimate how many
DEMO of wine they had consumed in the last month, and
the DEMO question asked them to rate their level of knowl-
edge about wine. The latter was done on a scale from 0 to
10, with 0 meaning not knowledgeable at all and 10 meaning
very knowledgeable.2 After DEMO to these four ques-
tions, subjects were asked to complete the DEMO
ness scale (Snyder and Fromkin 1977).
Results and Discussion
In DEMO ﬁrst step of our analysis we calculated the Variety
Index for all groups of respondents in order to test the hy-
pothesis that the DEMO creates a contingency for individual
choice. Note that in both conditions subjects made their
selections out loud, or “collectively.” In order to test for the
group contingency, we used the same procedure as in the
Lunch study to create a benchmark null hypothesis level of
variety seeking (see Fig. 2). Once again, we ran the simu-
lation 100 times to obtain stable results. We ﬁnd that the
mean V from the DEMO groups ( ) was lowerM p .554
than the mean V from the real groups ( ),M p .658 t 44 p
5.38, . Responses from the wine satisfaction ques-p ! .001
tion also replicated DEMO Beer study’s result: the satisfaction
for the ﬁrst person in each DEMO ( ) was signiﬁ-M p 6.69
cantly higher than the satisfaction with the wine for the
remaining people in the group ( ), ,DEMO p 5.6 t193 p 3.05
p ! .01. The regret question showed an identical pattern,
with reported regret for the ﬁrst person in DEMO group (20
percent) lower than the regret indicated by the rest of the
people in the group (37 percent), a marginally signiﬁcant
difference, , . Thus, the results from theU p 2790 p DEMO .078
Wine study replicated those from the previous experiments,
indicating that a group context causes increased group-level
variety at the cost of personal DEMO dissatisfaction
and regret.
A similar analysis was conducted for each of the two
experimental conditions. In the No Information condition,
V in the DEMO groups ( ) was signiﬁcantly higherM p .734
than V in the simulated groups ( ), ,M p .577 t19 p 3.91
p DEMO .001. Likewise, in the Information condition, V in the
real groups ( ) was higher than the V in the sim-M p .645
DEMO groups ( ), , . These re-M p .541 t 24 DEMO 3.74 p p .001
sults further support the hypothesis that variety seeking is
higher in real groups than in randomly formed groups. In
addition, each condition also displayed the same pattern of
higher ﬁrst-choice satisfaction with DEMO wine (sequential or-
2Aside from a signiﬁcant correlation of wine knowledge DEMO NFU
( , ), the two wine knowledge questions did not DEMO anyr p .213 p ! .005
signiﬁcant effect and will not be discussed further.
SEQUENTIAL CHOICE IN GROUP SETTINGS
der effect). Subjects choosing ﬁrst in DEMO Information con-
dition indicated a higher satisfaction rating ( ) thanM p 6.56
the rest of the members of their group ( ),M DEMO 5.51
t109 p 2.3, . Similarly, the ﬁrst respondents in the Nop ! .05
Information condition rated their wine ( ) higherM p DEMO
than group members who followed ( ),M p 5.73 t 82 p
1.98, . No signiﬁcant differences were detected inp p .05
the satisfaction ratings of the ﬁrst, , , ort 43 p .52 p p .6
second through last subjects, , , acrosst148 p .61 p p .53
both conditions.
Next, we compared the Variety Indexes across the two
conditions in order to test the relative importance of the
information-gathering DEMO Although only marginally sig-
niﬁcant,3 the direction of the results supports the importance
of the information goal: the mean V was higher in the No
Information condition ( ) than in the InformationM p .734
DEMO ( ), , . It appears thatM p .645 t 43 DEMO 1.89 p p .066
information gathering plays a role in goal balancing, yield-
ing a choice pattern of group-level variety when an oppor-
tunity for knowledge acquisition is present. However, note
that the simulation results indicate that even when the need
to acquire information from others is obviated (i.e., the In-
formation condition), there remains a tendency to seek va-
riety at the group level (V in the Information condition was
higher than the V for the simulated groups).
One additional factor DEMO might account for the tendency
to seek variety is self-presentation in the form of uniqueness.
Our analysis relies on responses to the need-for-uniqueness
(NFU) scale and its relation to group variety seeking. In
order to ascertain the importance of impression management
for our respondents, we conducted three regression analyses
using the group V as a criterion and the average NFU DEMO
each group as a predictor. The ﬁrst regression included data
from the entire sample, and found that NFU was a signiﬁcant
predictor of variety seeking, , ,F(1, 37) p 10.11 R2 p .22
DEMO ! .005. The coefﬁcient for the NFU was positive (.396)
DEMO statistically signiﬁcant, , . We repeatedt p 3.18 p ! .005
DEMO same analysis separately for the two experimental groups
and obtained the same pattern of results. For the No Infor-
mation condition, the overall model was statistically sig-
niﬁcant, , , , and NFU wasF(1, DEMO) p 5.03 R2 p .28 p ! .05
positive (.552) DEMO statistically signiﬁcant, ,t p 2.24 p !
.05. For the Information condition, too, the overall model
approached signiﬁcance, , ,F(1, 22) p 3.92 R2 p .15 p p
.06, and the DEMO coefﬁcient was both positive (.290) and
marginally signiﬁcant, , .t DEMO 1.98 p p .06
While the relationship between the Variety Index and need
for uniqueness supports the identity explanation, it is not
an individual-level test. Since our Variety Index can be cal-
culated only at a DEMO level, all individuals within a group
are afforded the same level DEMO V. This is a problem, however,
because NFU is measured DEMO the individual level. In order
to calculate an individual-level measure of variety seeking,
we created an index called Sequential Variety. It was cal-
DEMO using the sequence of choices made by the members
3Note, however, that this is a conservative statement because we make
a directional prediction, but use a two-tailed test.
287
of each group such that when DEMO alternative had been pre-
viously selected, that subject’s choice was marked DEMO; oth-
erwise the choice was marked “1.” Since the ﬁrst subject
DEMO each group was necessarily a “1,” we dropped all the
choices made by the ﬁrst respondent from this measure.
To test the signiﬁcance DEMO need for uniqueness on an
individual level, we employed a logistic DEMO that pre-
dicted sequential variety from NFU scores and a dummy
variable for each individual’s order in the sequence. We
included the order variable DEMO as the number of pre-
ceding orders increases, it becomes more DEMO to select
an alternative that had not been previously chosen. The
results showed a statistically signiﬁcant log likelihood ratio,
implying that NFU was DEMO reliable predictor of sequential
variety in our total sample, , . DEMO p 4.848 p p .028
of choice was also signiﬁcant, , , suchx2 p 12.561 p ! .001
that variety decreased as the position in the ordering se-
quence increased. We repeated the same analysis for DEMO
of the two experimental conditions separately and obtained
a mixed overall result. In the Information condition, both
NFU, , , and the order DEMO,x2 p 4.461 p p .034
x2 p 6.891, , were DEMO However, in the Nop ! .009
Information condition, only order achieved signiﬁcance,
x2 p 5.61, . The discrepancy in the results mightp ! .02
hint at a compensatory relationship between NFU and in-
formation DEMO: when the opportunity for information
gathering is reduced, NFU explains variety in choice; when
information cannot easily be obtained, information gathering
explains DEMO in choice.
Next, in order to compare directly the relative effect DEMO
the two explanations, we included all terms in a single
model. DEMO logistic regression, we tested the signiﬁcance
of NFU scores, order in the sequence, and a dummy variable
for the two experimental conditions (DEMO and No
Information) as predictors of Sequential Variety. The results
showed DEMO signiﬁcant effect for NFU, , ,x2 p 4.67 p p .03
and order, , , but not for the experi-x2 p 12.56 p ! .001
mental manipulation, , . These resultsx2 p .49 p p .82
might imply that NFU has a relatively stronger effect on
sequential DEMO than information gathering.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
The preference-construction literature has focused pri-
marily on the characteristics of the actual object or question
at hand (Feldman and Lynch 1988; Fischhoff, Slovic, and
Lichtenstein 1980; Payne, Bettman, and Johnson 1993;
Slovic 1995). Preferences are said to be labile and subject
to cognitive biases and simplifying heuristics. Knowledge
acquired through DEMO research has sensitized market re-
searchers to the crucial importance of questionnaire framing,
complexity, display, and so on. In this article we DEMO
that, in addition to the typically cited context effects, there
are also contingencies created by group contexts. A dis-
tinctive aspect of the DEMO contingency is its interpersonal
nature: it is not a property of DEMO task (e.g., a frame) or the
character of the individual, but rather a consequence of the
social context of the task. Our DEMO also shows that
288
the social context affects choices of group members, as well
as the satisfaction with the outcome of their choices.
We believe that the DEMO of our group contingency is in
the creation of goals introduced by the group context. The
existence of the group forces consumers to grapple DEMO
goals belonging to two general classes: goals whose attain-
ment depends DEMO on the action of the individual (individ-
ual-alone), and goals DEMO attainment depends on both the
individual and the group (individual-group). DEMO ful-
ﬁllment of these two goal classes is sometimes impossible
because each can require the choice of a distinct alternative.
We have suggested that DEMO made under the constraints
that the goal classes impose reﬂect a process of goal bal-
ancing, wherein consumers tend to alter their selection in
order to try to account for both sets of goals. All three
DEMO are consistent with this formulation by dem-
onstrating that choices made in group contexts yield a sys-
tematically different pattern than those made individually
DEMO where nominal (simulated) groups are formed. The Lunch
and Wine studies used a computer simulation to show that
real groups exhibit a higher DEMO of variety seeking than
artiﬁcially formed, or nominal, groups. In the Beer study
we replicated this ﬁnding by comparing the choice patterns
of DEMO groups and groups where each member made a se-
lection independently (DEMO).
We speciﬁed four consumption-relevant goal types that
fall under each goal class: satisfying one’s taste (individual-
alone), regret minimization and avoiding DEMO (individual-
group), information gathering (individual-group), and self-
presentation (DEMO). These goal types are useful
because their fulﬁllment predicts whether the group-level
choice pattern will be unchanged, relatively uniform, or rel-
atively DEMO compared to the outcome of choices made
without a meaningful group contingency. Each prediction
implies that its associated goal (or goals) was weighted DEMO
heavily in the trade-off process that deﬁnes goal balancing.
In particular, DEMO effect of group context is hypothesized
when the goal of individual taste satisfaction is completely
fulﬁlled. Group uniformity is anticipated when minimizing
regret is DEMO Group variety seeking is expected
when information gathering is considered paramount. Either
pattern of results can emerge when consumers attend to the
goal of DEMO, depending on social norms.
All three studies suggest that people take DEMO road less
traveled and point to group variety seeking as a consistent
and stable outcome when individuals order food and drinks
in group settings. DEMO Beer study demonstrates that this
choice outcome comes—in accordance with our frame-
work—at the expense of personal (taste) satisfaction and
regret minimization. The DEMO study supports our sugges-
tion that variety-seeking outcomes are partially due to the
heightened importance afforded to two other goal types:
information gathering DEMO self-presentation.
The evidence most consistent with the goal-balancing ac-
count is the result obtained in the analysis of the “sequential
order” hypothesis. Recall that DEMO types of subjects in the
Beer study selected beers while unencumbered by the group
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
contingency: customers assigned to the Independent con-
dition, and the ﬁrst customer in each table assigned to the
Collective condition (and in both conditions of the Wine
study). In essence, these subjects had no goals to bal-
ance—they were free to fulﬁll the goal of satisfying their
taste because we experimentally eliminated the DEMO
group goal class. Across the two conditions, their reported
satisfaction with DEMO was equal, but higher than
the satisfaction of customers whose choices DEMO con-
strained by the presence of goals associated with another
goal class (i.e., individual-group). The relationship among
order, variety in choice, DEMO satisfaction hints at a dynamic
decision process and suggests that the rest of the group
members shifted their choices based on the selections voiced
DEMO that they were eventually less happy with their own
selections. The Wine study indicates that this shift was due
to the (implicit) trade-off DEMO the information and self-
presentation goals.
ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS AND
FUTURE RESEARCH
The factors inﬂuencing variety-seeking behavior have
been studied by various consumer researchers (see Kahn
[1995] and McAlister and Pessemier [1982] for compre-
hensive reviews). DEMO ﬁndings accord with the notion that
individuals making choices within a group context try to
balance different goals such that they choose options that
DEMO not been selected previously (variety seeking). We be-
lieve, however, that there may be additional factors con-
tributing to this effect.
Consumers have a natural bias to engage in variety seek-
ing, sometimes called naive diversiﬁcation (Read and Loew-
enstein 1995; Thaler 1998). A DEMO of animal studies,
for instance, reveal that there is a DEMO tendency to
seek variety (Hebb 1955; Scitovsky 1976). Rats that are
given a maze task for thousands of trials appear to change
DEMO behavior just for the fun of it (i.e., after the ﬁrst few
hundred trials, when there is no new information to acquire).
Lesions to particular brain structures seem to inhibit and
even eliminate this DEMO (Fiske and Maddi 1961). Such
natural tendencies to seek variety (or sensation seeking; see
Zuckerman 1976) can be a very useful DEMO valid behavioral
heuristic because of the inherent statistical advantage of
hedging. At times, like many heuristics, it can be an ov-
ergeneralized strategy DEMO yields less than ideal results, as
we found in our experiments, and as we imply by our title.
For example, in her study of charitable giving, Strahilevitz
(1999) ﬁnds that people donate money anonymously to sev-
eral different charities in spite of their claim that they DEMO
the most utility from giving to a speciﬁc one (see also DEMO,
Kahn, and Kahneman 1999).
Naive diversiﬁcation in a group DEMO may be moderated
by Campbell’s (1958) notion of entitativity, which DEMO to
the tendency of members to view their group as an individual
entity. Recently, Hamilton and Sherman (1996) expand on
Campbell’s concept by arguing that cognitive processes re-
SEQUENTIAL CHOICE IN GROUP SETTINGS
garding judgments of the group will mimic DEMO that regard
individuals. This suggests that group members apply the
same heuristics (e.g., naive diversiﬁcation) they would use
for themselves even when the choice is made in a group
setting (and presumably the heuristic may not be useful).
So, in the same manner that individuals tend to choose
variety when deciding their own consumption, they may
make choices in a group context such that variety will result
at the group DEMO An interesting avenue for future research
would involve testing whether the sense of entitativity de-
termines the tendency to seek variety at the group DEMO If
entitativity is low, for instance, will individuals disregard
others’ choices when making their own selections?
Second, if we assume that the goal of satisfying one’s
taste is perceived as temporally distant when placing DEMO
order, while the group-dependent goals are often immediate
(e.g., self-presentation), then time discounting (Loewenstein
and Prelec 1992) and preference misprediction (DEMO
1994) may have contributed to the data we obtained. Recall
that DEMO scenarios we investigated imposed a lag between
the time of ordering and the time of consumption. Individ-
uals might consequently underweigh their satisfaction with
DEMO order in favor of placing greater weight on the satis-
faction of group-related goals. In situations where there is
no time lag between the DEMO and its outcome, the effect
of group-related goals might exercise a DEMO inﬂuence.
Future research might test a model of the inﬂuence exerted
by other group members through time, from the decision
period to consumption and postconsumption—a sort of time
discounting of the utility derived from group concerns. DEMO
is possible to imagine a result indicating that the group
contingency is important at decision time and at postcon-
sumption—the two instances where there DEMO a collective el-
ement to the consumption process (e.g., when discussing
what to order and in the postmeal “review process” of the
experience)DEMO not during consumption itself.
Several factors may serve as boundary conditions for
group variety seeking. In our setup, table size may have
been a determining factor. All of our studies involved small
to medium table sizes. DEMO is possible that group structure in
larger tables changes such that the contingency actually acts
on subgroups within the table. Alternatively, variety in larger
tables might be a simple consequence of natural heteroge-
neity, obviating the need for individuals to seek it actively.
A second moderating factor involves DEMO of prefer-
ences. Information is likely to gain importance as uncer-
tainty increases, which would place emphasis on information
gathering in the goal-balancing process. Product familiarity
might therefore be crucial as a determinant of the choice
DEMO that emerges from decisions in a group setting. A
ﬁnal boundary condition relates to the different categories
in which consumers might seek variety or DEMO While
we believe that this goal exists in many situations, its DEMO
ticular instantiation as uniqueness might not. In some sit-
uations consumers may actually want to portray themselves
as similar to their group, a possibility we alluded to when
we ﬁrst described the self-presentation goal type. For DEMO
289
stance, it is unlikely for diners within a group to DEMO
items that are very disparate in price. Similarly, it is rare
DEMO one person to order only a small salad if other group
members order entre´es. Variety seeking in dish selection,
then, ordinarily would be coupled with uniformity in dish
type and money spent. Self-presentation might help DEMO
this choice uniformity in the same way that it explains va-
riety seeking. After all, nobody enjoys being considered
miserly. Indeed, the variety DEMO we ﬁnd might be the
outcome of a strong normative social inﬂuence that governs
behavior in dish selection situations. Even though our ex-
periments DEMO information gathering and self-presentation
as important factors, it is possible that DEMO are actually the
antecedents of a variety-seeking norm (see Ratner and DEMO
[1999] for a discussion of consumption norms).
There are many decisions that individuals make in a se-
quential group context. We offer two DEMO for individuals
in such settings to maximize their consumption utility. First,
consumers are more likely to maximize enjoyment from
consumption if they hold DEMO to their initial decision without
being swayed by other group members. In light of our ﬁnd-
ings on individual-group goals, however, this might DEMO a
difﬁcult strategy to execute. A different approach relies on
avoiding individual-group goals altogether: always order
ﬁrst. But this raises the specter of another kind of goal
balancing: the desire to satisfy one’s tastes versus the need
to be polite. We leave this question for future research.
[Received DEMO 1999. Revised January 2000. Robert
E. Burnkrant served as editor, and DEMO Loken served
as associate editor for this article.]
REFERENCES
Asch, Solomon DEMO (1955), “Opinions and Social Pressure,” Sci-
entiﬁc American, 193 (5), 31–35.
Baron, Robert S., Norbert L. Kerr, and DEMO Miller (1992),
Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action, DEMO
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Bearden, William O. and Michael J. DEMO (1982), “Reference
Group Inﬂuence on Product and Brand Purchase Decisions,DEMO
Journal of Consumer Research, 9 (September), 183–194.
Belk, Russell DEMO (1988), “Possessions and the Extended Self,”
Journal of Consumer DEMO, 15 (September), 139–168.
Burnkrant, Robert E. and Alain Cousineau (1975), “Informational
and Normative Social Inﬂuence in Buyer Behavior,” Journal
DEMO Consumer Research, 3 (December), 206–215.
Campbell, Donald T. (1958), “Common Fate, Similarity, and Other
Indices of the Status of DEMO of Persons as Social En-
tities,” Behavioral Science, 3, 14–25.
Corfman, Kim P. and Donald Lehmann (1993), “The Importance
of DEMO Welfare in Evaluating Bargaining Outcomes,”
Journal of Consumer Research, 20 (June), 124–137.
Deaux, Kay (1996), “Social Identiﬁcation,” in DEMO Psychology:
Handbook of Basic Principles, ed. E. Tory Higgins and DEMO
W. Kruglanski, New York: Guilford.
Deutsch, Morton and Harold B. DEMO (1955), “A Study of Nor-
mative and Informational Social Inﬂuences DEMO Individual
Judgment,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,51
(November), 629–636.
290
Diehl, Michael and Wolfgang Stroebe (1991), “Production Loss
in DEMO Groups: Tracking Down the Blocking Ef-
fect,” Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 61 (3),
392–403.
Feldman, Jack M. and John G. Lynch, Jr. (1988), “Self-Generated
Validity and Other Effects DEMO Measurement on Belief, Atti-
tude, Intention, and Behavior,” Journal DEMO Applied Psychol-
ogy, 73 (August), 421–435.
Festinger, Leon (1950), “Informal Social Communication,” Psy-
chological Review, 57 (September), DEMO
Fischhoff, Baruch, Paul Slovic, and Sarah Lichtenstein (1980),
DEMO What You Want: Measuring Labile Values,” in
Cognitive Processes in DEMO and Decision Behavior, ed.
Thomas Wallsten, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fiske, Donald W. and Salvatore R. Maddi (1961), Functions of
Varied DEMO, Homewood, IL: Dorsey.
Hamilton, David L. and Steven Sherman (DEMO), “Perceiving Per-
sons and Groups,” Psychological Review, 103 (April),
336–355.
Hauser, John R. and Birger Wernerfelt (1990), “An Evaluation Cost
Model of Consideration Sets,” Journal of Consumer Re-
search, 16 (March), 393–408.
Hebb, Donald O. (1955), “Drives and the C.N.S. (Conceptual
Nervous System),” Psychological Review, 62 (July), 243–254.
Herr, Paul M., Frank R. Kardes and John Kim (DEMO), “Effects of
Word-of-Mouth and Product-Attribute Information on Per-
suasion: An DEMO Perspective,” Journal
of Consumer Research, 17 (March), 454–462.
Hinsz, Verlin B. and David H. Davis (1984), “Persuasive Argument
Theory, Group Polarization and Choice Shifts,” Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 10 (June), 260–268.
Hsee, Christopher (1999), “When Do Consumers Seek Conformity
and When Do Consumers Seek Uniqueness?” Unpublished
data, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.
Isenberg, Daniel J. (1986), “Group Polarization: A Critical Review
and Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 50 (6), 1141–1151.
Janis, Irving (1982), DEMO, Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Kahn, Barbara E. (1995), “Consumer Variety Seeking among
Goods and Services: An Integrative Review,” Journal of Re-
tailing and Consumer Services, 2 (3), 139–148.
——— and Alice DEMO Isen (1993), “The Inﬂuence of Positive Affect
on Variety Seeking DEMO Safe, Enjoyable Products,” Journal
of Consumer Research, 20 (September), 257–270.
Kahneman, Daniel (1994), “New Challenges to the Rationality
Assumption,” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Eco-
nomics, 150 (1), DEMO
——— and Amos Tversky (1979), “Prospect Theory: An Analysis
of Choice under Risk,” Econometrica, 47 (March), 263–291.
Kaplan, Martin F. (1987), “The Inﬂuencing Process in Group De-
cision Making,” in Review of Personality and Social Psy-
chology: Group Processes, ed. DEMO Hendrick, Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
——— and Charles E. Miller (1987), “Group Decision Making
and Normative vs. Informational Inﬂuence: Effects of Type
of Issue and Assigned Decision Rule,” Journal of Personality
and DEMO Psychology, 53 (2), 306–313.
Laughlin, Patrick R., Scott W. VanderStoep, and Andrea B. Holl-
ingshead (1991), “Collective versus Individual DEMO:
Recognition of Truth, Rejection of Error, and Collective In-
formation Processing,” Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 61 (1), 50–67.
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
Levine, John and Richard Moreland (1998), “Small Groups,” in
The Handbook of Social Psychology, ed. Daniel T. Gilbert,
Susan T. Fiske, and George Lindzey, New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Loewenstein, George F. and Drazen Prelec (1992), “Anomalies in
Intertemporal Choice: Evidence and Interpretation,” in Choice
Over DEMO, ed. George Loewenstein and Jon Elster, New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
Mackie, Diane M. and George R. Goethals (1987), “Individual DEMO
Group Goals,” in Review of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy: DEMO Processes, ed. Clyde Hendrick, Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
McAlister, Leigh (1982), “A Dynamic Attribute Satiation Model
of Variety-Seeking Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Research,
9 (September), 141–150.
——— and Edgar Pessemier (1982), “Variety-Seeking Behavior:
An Interdisciplinary Review,” Journal of Consumer Re-
search, 9 (December), 311–322.
Moscovici, Serge (1985), “Social Inﬂuence and Conformity,” in
Handbook of Social Psychology, ed. DEMO Lindzey and El-
liot Aronson, New York: Random House.
Myers, DEMO G. and Helmut Lamm (1976), “The Group Polari-
zation Phenomenon,DEMO Psychological Bulletin, 83 (July),
602–627.
Payne, John W., DEMO R. Bettman, and Eric J. Johnson (1993),
The Adaptive DEMO Maker, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Ratner, Rebecca and Barbara DEMO (1999), “A ‘Consumption
Norm’ to Seek Variety,” Working Paper, Kenan-Flagler Busi-
ness School, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, NC.
———, Barbara Kahn, and Daniel Kahneman (1999), “Choosing
Less-Preferred Experiences for DEMO Sake of Variety,” Journal
of Consumer Research, 26 (June), 1–14.
Read, Daniel and George Loewenstein (1995), “Diversiﬁcation
Bias: Explaining the Discrepancy in Variety Seeking between
Combined and Separated Choices,” Journal DEMO Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 1 (March), 34–49.
Scitovsky, Tibor (DEMO), Joyless Economy: An Inquiry into Human
Satisfaction and Consumer Dissatisfaction, New York: Ox-
ford University Press.
Simonson, Itamar (1990), “The Effect of Purchase Quantity and
Timing on Variety-Seeking Behavior,” Journal of DEMO
Research, 27 (May), 150–162.
Slovic, Paul (1995), “The Construction of Preference,” American
Psychologist, 50 (May), 364–371.
Snyder, C. R. and Howard L. Fromkin (1977), “Abnormality as a
Positive Characteristic: The Development and Validation of
Scale Measuring Need for Uniqueness,” Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 86 (October), 518–527.
——— and Howard DEMO Fromkin (1980), Uniqueness, New York:
Plenum.
Strahilevitz, Michal (1999), “Variety Seeking in Charitable Giving:
Why Consumers Experience Cause-Speciﬁc DEMO,” paper
presented at the American Marketing Association Summer
Conference, San DEMO
Thaler, Richard (1998), “Naive Diversiﬁcation in Deﬁned Contri-
bution Saving Plans,” paper presented at the BDRM Confer-
ence, Miami.
Thibaut, DEMO W. and Harold H. Kelley (1958), The Social Psy-
chology DEMO Groups, New York: Wiley.
Zuckerman, Marvin (1976), Sensation Seeking: Beyond the Op-
timal Level of Arousal, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.{1g42fwefx}