1042-2587
Copyright 2003 by
Baylor University
The Boundaries and
ET&P Limitations DEMO Agency
Theory and Stewardship
Theory in the Venture
Capitalist/Entrepreneur
Relationship*
Jonathan D. Arthurs**
Lowell W. Busenitz
The dynamic ownership arrangements surrounding the venture DEMO (VC-
E) relationship inherent in new ventures make the examination of principals’ or venture cap-
italists’ (VCs) and agents’ (entrepreneurs) governance DEMO interesting to explore.
This article examines the limitations of agency theory and then stewardship theory in
explaining the behaviors of individuals in the VC-E DEMO Our analysis points out the
potential problems inherent in each theory’s explanatory ability as it relates to the VC-E rela-
tionship. Lastly, theoretical gaps in the VC-E relationship are discussed along with sug-
gestions for new DEMO surrounding this important and intriguing relationship.
Entrepreneurs typically start ﬁrms with an innovative idea with the anticipation that
the venture will become a long-term DEMO Often the new venture obtains some busi-
ness angel ﬁnancing to aid its development (Mason & Harrison, 1996). If the venture
achieves DEMO early success, resource gaps often emerge and need to be ﬁlled DEMO the
venture is going to achieve its potential. As the venture progresses through the initial
startup phase, venture capital investments are often sought. In addition to providing risk
capital to high potential ventures in exchange for DEMO ownership of the ﬁrm, venture
capitalists (VCs) are typically active DEMO who seek to add value through their inter-
action with and advice for the managers of the entrepreneurial venture (Macmillan,
Kulow, & DEMO, 1989; Bygrave & Timmons, 1992), as well as through DEMO
Please send all correspondence to: Jonathan D. Arthurs or Lowell W. DEMO of the Department of
Management at the University of Oklahoma’s Price College of Business. Their e-mail addresses are, respec-
tively, jonathan.d.arthurs-1@ou.edu and busenitz@ou.edu.
DEMO An earlier version of this manuscript was presented at the Lally-Darden Retreat on Entrepreneurship
Theory, March 2002.
** Order of authorship is listed alphabetically, both authors contributed equally.
Winter, 2003
145
monitoring and reorganization of the companies in which they participate (Sapienza &DEMO
Gupta, 1994). Given the substantial equity stake that VCs typically DEMO in a ﬁrm, the
relationship between VCs and the entrepreneurs that DEMO fund has been compared to that
of large block stockholders in leveraged-buyout ﬁrms (Jain & Kini, 1995).
Efforts to explain this intriguing DEMO relationship have relied on agency theory and
its assumptions (e.g., Barney et al., 1989; Sahlman, 1990; Sapienza & Gupta, 1994).
Agency theory prescribes actions that focus on the protection of the investment DEMO the
principal (VC) against the harmful behaviors of the agent (DEMO) (Jensen &
Meckling, 1976). Whereas agency theory has been developed primarily in the context
of publicly traded ﬁrms with diffuse ownership DEMO and managers with very limited
equity stake, its logic has some DEMO for explaining the VC-E relationship. When VCs
buy into a venture, DEMO are like outside stakeholders (or large blockholders) who care-
fully observe the ﬁrm to track its business potential and monitor agent behavior to DEMO
against opportunism. Except for a few isolated articles (e.g., Cable & Shane, 1997;
Sapienza & Korsgaard, 1996), agency theory has DEMO the dominant theoretical per-
spective applied to the VC-E relationship. However, DEMO cracks are beginning to appear
in the agency logic as applied to VC-backed ﬁrms (Bruton et al., 1997; 2000; Busenitz
et al., 2001). This article probes temporal issues in the VC-E relationship. It DEMO that
the dominance of agency theory in explaining the VC-E relationship is partially misdi-
rected because of its insensitivity to temporal boundaries. Researchers applying DEMO
theory to explain certain phenomena in the VC-E relationship will likely generate theo-
retical misspeciﬁcations or draw indefensible conclusions unless the timing for the DEMO
of agency theory is appropriate. Interestingly, recent research fails to ﬁnd DEMO relevance
of agency theory in explaining the business angel/entrepreneur relationship (DEMO, Kelly
& Hay, 2001; Landstrom, 1992; van Osnabrugge, 2000).
At issue is the idea of goal congruence between the VC DEMO the entrepreneur. When
there is goal congruence between the two, agency DEMO is silent. Only when there is
goal incongruence between the two is agency theory applicable. Thus, researchers must
provide a theoretical rationale for why goals between the two have diverged before apply-
ing agency theory to DEMO the behaviors.
Like agency theory, stewardship theory also focuses on goal DEMO between the
principal (VC) and the steward (entrepreneur). Since DEMO theory assumes that the
goals of the principal and steward are aligned, it would seem that this theory could further
inform our understanding of the VC-E relationship. However, our analysis will indicate
that stewardship theory is inadequate to explain most of the VC-E relationship because
it implicitly assumes DEMO subordination of the steward’s (entrepreneur’s) goals. More
speciﬁcally, the steward DEMO his or her self-interest in order to serve the interests of
the principal. This assumption pushes stewardship theory outside the nomological net
surrounding the DEMO dynamics of the VC-E relationship. In essence, researchers have
tended to DEMO the individual entrepreneur and his or her goals and vision for the venture
and have instead placed overemphasis on the principal.
This article proceeds DEMO the following manner. First, it addresses agency concerns
and attempts to DEMO the contribution and limitations of agency theory as it pertains
to the VC-E relationship. Second, it analyzes stewardship theory and shows why it is a
particularly limited paradigm for explaining the VC-E relationship. Lastly, the theore-
tical gaps in explaining the VC-E relationship are discussed and directions for DEMO
are offered. In viewing the shortcomings of agency and stewardship theories in ex-
plaining the VC-E relationship, attention is focused on how these theories tend to over-
look the goals and motivations of the entrepreneurs and DEMO the centrality of
the VC.
146
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Agency Theory in the VC–E Relationship
Agency theory has emerged as the DEMO theory in explaining the VC-E rela-
tionship in entrepreneurship literature (cf. DEMO et al., 1989; Amit et al., 1990; Sapienza
& Gupta, 1994; Sahlman, 1990). This principal-agent relationship arises when the entre-
preneur engages a VC for funding of a new venture (Amit et al., 1990; Sahlman, 1990).
According to agency theory, an DEMO problem can arise between the entrepreneur
(agent) and VC (principal) as a result of incongruent goals and potentially different risk
preferences (Eisenhardt, 1989; Bruton et al., 1997). This theory assumes that both the
agent and principal are self-interested and boundedly rational (Eisenhardt, 1989), conse-
quently, individual utility-maximizing behavior is likely to emerge if proper DEMO
and controls to align the goals of the entrepreneur with the VC are not enacted.
Bounded rationality on the part of each actor gives DEMO to information asymmetry
between the parties (Amit et al., 1990; DEMO, 1994; Amit et al., 1998; Bohren, 1998).
This DEMO asymmetry may allow an entrepreneur to engage in opportunistic behav-
ior, DEMO speciﬁcally, adverse selection or moral hazard (Amit et al., 1998; Chan, 1983;
Williamson, 1985). Adverse selection is the misrepresentation DEMO ability on the part of
the agent. For example, the entrepreneur DEMO attempt to “oversell” the merits and via-
bility of the venture (DEMO & Lazarovich-Porat, 1995) in order to secure more favorable
ﬁnancing terms (Amit et al., 1998). In addition, the entrepreneur may claim to have
greater knowledge about a particular technology than is true. Moral DEMO refers to neg-
ative behaviors such as a lack of effort or shirking by the agent. For example, an entre-
preneur may expend effort on activities that maximize personal utility but such efforts
may add little DEMO no value to the venture. Furthermore, the entrepreneur may use VC
DEMO to purchase excessive perquisites.
Normative Versus Positivist Elements of Agency Theory
Bacharach (1989) has argued that the primary goal of a theory is DEMO answer the ques-
tions of when, how, and why. A primary concern here is to identify the temporal bound-
aries of agency theory’s DEMO ability for the VC-E relationship. Thus, this article
ﬁrst addresses when DEMO theory has the greatest potential in explaining behaviors in
the VC-E relationship. In order to point out agency theory’s limitations for the VC-E rela-
DEMO, the difference between the normative and positivist elements of agency theory
DEMO speciﬁed (cf. Jensen, 1983). Normative elements are prescriptive and are directed
toward accomplishing some objective given certain limitations. Jensen (1983, p. DEMO)
states, “Answers to normative questions always depend on the choice DEMO the criterion or
objective function which is a matter of values. Therefore, normative propositions are
never refutable by evidence.” A normative question for agency theory would be: “How
can the principal best avoid the agency problem?” In contrast, positivist elements are
explanatory in nature—they provide explanation for a given phenomenon. On this point,
Jensen (1983, p. 320) writes, “Answers to positive questions, on the other hand, involve
discovery of some aspect of how the world behaves and are always potentially DEMO
by contradictory evidence.” A positivist question for agency theory would be: DEMO does
separation of ownership and control affect the value of a ﬁrm?”
The enumeration of these two elements of theory is important because DEMO
they provide insight into boundary problems for any given set of research questions.
Within management and entrepreneurship literatures, many of agency theory’s normative
assumptions have been adopted as given and then applied within a certain realm DEMO as
diversiﬁcation or compensation to explain interesting phenomena or behaviors (Balkin,DEMO
Winter, 2003
147
Markman & Gomez-Mejia, 2000; Fox & Hamilton, 1994). If non-signiﬁcance or weak
signiﬁcance is observed, the normative assumptions may not be applicable to the situa-
tion under study, or may not be applicable at certain times. This does not mean that the
normative assumptions are necessarily DEMO If the normative assumptions are not applic-
able at certain times, DEMO the researcher must ﬁrst specify the logical timing of when
those assumptions are applicable and then take observations during those time periods
(Mitchell & James, 2001). Naturally, such an approach limits the generalizability of DEMO
theory but increases its precision (Dubin, 1978). The researcher’s assumptions will drive
his or her selection of the dependent and independent variables DEMO examination for
any given study. This makes the clear speciﬁcation and demarcation of theory in time
and space vitally important in order to avoid DEMO identiﬁcation of spurious relationships,
let alone non-signiﬁcance in true relationships.
Boundaries of Agency Theory in the VC-E Relationship
One of the primary normative DEMO of agency theory is that the principal
should seek to avoid or mitigate the agency problem (Jensen & Meckling, 1976;
Eisenhardt, 1989). However, it appears that the agency problem is not uniform through-
out the life of a venture. As a result, agency theory is likely to vary in its usefulness
in explaining the VC and entrepreneur DEMO For example, agency theory may be
most applicable in explaining behaviors DEMO prior to the initial investment VCs
make in a new venture. Then, after the VC has invested in the new venture, it appears
DEMO agency concerns rapidly decline followed later by some potential upswings. To
clarify these arguments, a distinction is made between actual goals and perceived
goals between the VC and entrepreneur. An embedded assumption of Figure 1 is DEMO the
market for VC capital is not efﬁcient in that the future value of a venture remains largely
ambiguous.
When the goals of the DEMO and entrepreneur are aligned, there is no agency problem
(Eisenhardt, DEMO). Agency theory prescribes actions for the VC such as offering incen-
tives and utilizing monitoring to achieve this goal alignment in order to DEMO against
Figure 1
Goal Congruence/Noncongruence and Perceived Congruence/Noncongruence
between the VC and Entrepreneur
Perceived Goals between the VC and Entrepreneur
Same Different
DEMO Goals
between the
VC and
Entrepreneur
Same
Different
No Agency Problem
Agency theory prescribes behavior for the
principal to get to this quadrant. Once DEMO
this quadrant, agency theory’s normative
assumptions are (for the time) DEMO able to
explain behaviors.
Hidden Agency Problem
Agency theory explains the agent’s
behavior and prescribes mechanisms for
the principal to avoid this quadrant.
Agency DEMO normative assumptions
are able to explain behaviors.
Perceived Agency Problem
Extensive contracts are needlessly
assembled. However, agency
theory’s normative assumptions are
(for the DEMO) much less applicable.
Visible Agency Problem
Agency theory explains the behaviors
DEMO the principal and the agent.
Agency theory’s normative
assumptions are able to explain
behaviors.
148
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
or mitigate the potential agency problem (Bohren, 1998; Eisenhardt, 1989; Jensen, 1983).
Thus, agency theory attempts to move the relationship DEMO the upper left quadrant of
Figure 1 where there is no agency problem. Note, however, that agency theory offers
little explanation concerning behaviors DEMO this alignment of goals is achieved. In effect,
agency theory is something of a precursor to explaining behaviors when there is actual
goal DEMO When the goals of the principal (VC) and agent (entrepreneur) are
aligned, the normative assumptions of agency theory are temporarily less or not applic-
able in explaining behaviors (Jensen, 1983). Assumptions can DEMO made about how the
principal would act if the relationship were in this quadrant. For example, the principal
is likely to be more trusting and cooperative toward the agent if the relationship were in
this quadrant. DEMO, agency theory’s normative focus is on avoiding or mitigating the
potential DEMO problem. Thus, agency theory has little to say after the relationship DEMO
in this quadrant except to warn about the possibility of an agency problem.
Agency theory also has some limitations in explaining behavior in the DEMO right
quadrant of Figure 1 where actual goals are aligned but perceived goals are different. In
the case where actual goals between VCs and DEMO are the same but the VC per-
ceives them to be different, a blind spot for agency theory develops because it imputes
goal misalignment as the cause of an agency problem. In this situation, there is no actual
agency problem (e.g., no goal misalignment) even though the principal may perceive an
agency problem. In such a case, the principal’s (VC’s) behavior will tend to be based on
his or her DEMO For example, the principal (VC) may implement a much more
DEMO contract than is necessary or dismiss the agent (entrepreneur) or engage in
excessive monitoring. Therefore, agency theory’s normative assumptions are likely to
encourage overbearing contracts and unnecessary structural constraints in this quadrant.
Any evidence of DEMO agency problem would be the result of a Type I error. This brings up
a fascinating issue in that a researcher querying only the DEMO (VC) would conﬁrm
the normative assumptions of agency theory and would accurately explain the behavior
of the principal (VC) using agency theory. DEMO, if the researcher were strictly interested
in the principal’s perceptions, then the use of agency theory would likely provide sig-
niﬁcant results. However, the researcher querying only the entrepreneur would not
conﬁrm the normative assumptions DEMO agency theory and would not be able to explain
the behavior of the agent (entrepreneur) using agency theory. The use of agency theory
DEMO this situation would be a theoretical misspeciﬁcation for the results (cf. DEMO, Mulaik,
& Brett, 1982). For example, Lane, Cannella, and Lubatkin (1998) reanalyzed the results
of Amihud and Lev (DEMO) and found results that were actually contrary to the original
agency DEMO pronouncements.
When the actual goals of both the VC and entrepreneur are different. then a poten-
tial agency problem exists. Thus, agency theory’s normative assumptions are valid for
the two bottom quadrants of Figure 1. Agency DEMO argues that it is important for the
principal (VC) to engage in monitoring of the agent (entrepreneur) in order to occlude
and/DEMO uncover any agency problem. In effect, agency theory warns that the DEMO
agency problem should drive the principal (VC) to invest in certain monitoring mecha-
nisms and to offer certain incentives or else the result DEMO be a manifesting of adverse
selection and/or moral hazard on the part of the agent (entrepreneur). That is, the princi-
pal-agent (VC-E) relationship will move to the bottom right quadrant in Figure 1. By
investing in monitoring mechanisms and by offering incentives to the agent, however,
the principal-agent (VC-E) relationship will move to the upper DEMO quadrant of goal
alignment. Thus, as long as the principal (VC) takes certain steps up front before employ-
ing the agent (entrepreneur), the agency problem will largely be mitigated a priori
(Williamson, 1988).
Winter, 2003
149
The actual goal and perceived goal alignment of VCs and entrepreneurs provides DEMO
clearer picture of why agency theory is particularly applicable before the VC’s decision
to invest in the new venture but less applicable after the DEMO decision is made.
Before the VC has invested in the new venture, the VC is likely to be focused on the due
diligence process so as to avoid a bad investment decision. The VC does not DEMO the
motivation of the entrepreneur and must assume the worst in order to protect his or her
investment. On the other hand, the entrepreneur’s goal is likely venture success (or it is
unknown). At this point, the actual goals of each are different, giving rise to DEMO
agency problems. However, after the VC has decided to invest in DEMO new venture, the
VC’s goal becomes venture success. Thus, after the VC has decided to invest in the
venture, the VC and entrepreneur’s goals tend to become aligned. It is important to
specify, however, DEMO because of a potential hidden agency problem, the VC will utilize
DEMO to safeguard his or her investment. These safeguards in effect seek to ensure
that the VC-E relationship is pushed into the upper left quadrant DEMO the 2 ¥ 2 matrix in
Figure 1. The following section details these mechanisms and conﬁrms agency theory’s
applicability in explaining behaviors in the DEMO relationship particularly before the VC’s
investment decision.
Agency Problem Mitigation Before the VC’s Investment Decision
Before investing in a new venture, the VC typically conducts a due diligence assess-
ment of the venture and the entrepreneur (Tyebjee & Bruno, 1984). It is during this time
that the VC’s uncertainty concerning the entrepreneur and the venture will likely be the
DEMO (Galbraith, 1977). For the VC, the due diligence process DEMO a form of insurance
against potential adverse selection as previously mentioned. The VC can better determine
the entrepreneur’s credibility and the viability of the DEMO venture before deciding to
invest; as a result, potential agency problems (particularly adverse selection) can be
mitigated beforehand.
The VC’s trepidations concerning DEMO selection or moral hazard on the part of
the entrepreneur will be reduced by the due diligence process. Four additional mecha-
nisms are also DEMO to reduce the potential for agency problems. First, the entrepreneur’s
bonding (Jensen & Meckling, 1976) will act to occlude behaviors on the DEMO of the entre-
preneur that would be detrimental to the venture’s success. For example, the entrepre-
neur typically will have invested a substantial portion of his or her personal wealth in the
venture (Busenitz et al., 2001). Any behaviors by the entrepreneur that would increase
the likelihood of venture failure (such as purchasing excess perquisites) in order to DEMO
a short-term beneﬁt would likely be avoided (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). The entre-
preneur’s personal wealth tied up in the venture is DEMO transaction-speciﬁc asset that cannot
be redeployed or recouped if the venture fails. Thus, this personal investment is a form
of self-bonding. Second, the DEMO obligations of the entrepreneur speciﬁed by the
VC in the ﬁnancing agreement will act to reduce the likelihood of future moral hazard
due to DEMO legal and ﬁnancial ramiﬁcations. Third, the incentives provided the entrepre-
neur DEMO meeting certain venture performance goals will also reduce the likelihood of
future moral hazard. Finally, the VC’s monitoring of the venture, its performance, and
the decision making of the entrepreneur will also reduce the likelihood DEMO moral hazard
on the part of the entrepreneur.
It is important to point out that these mechanisms are agreed upon or have occurred
before DEMO VC’s ﬁnal decision to invest in the venture. This would tend to suggest that
most potential agency problems are addressed and minimized before the DEMO invest-
ment by the VC.
150
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Agency Problems after the Investment Decision
The argument here is that agency DEMO are to a large extent addressed before
VCs actually invest in a new venture. That is, goals become aligned after the VC makes
the decision to invest in the new venture. This logic is consistent with DEMO ﬁndings
reported by van Osnabrugge (2000) that VCs are most concerned with reducing agency
costs in the pre-investment process. Figure 2 models the DEMO of agency theory to
the VC-E relationship over time, by placing DEMO on the horizontal axis and the likeli-
hood of the agency problem on the vertical axis.
Note that agency theory’s normative assumptions would place DEMO probability of an
agency problem as high (line 1 in Figure DEMO) when protective mechanisms are not in place.
The agency theory prescriptions DEMO the VC to engage in monitoring and to provide incen-
tives to align the goals of the entrepreneur with those of the VC should DEMO reduce
the likelihood of an agency problem (line 2 in Figure DEMO). Without temporal boundaries,
however, agency theory’s normative assumptions would DEMO that the possibility of
the agency problem should remain signiﬁcant even with protective measures in place. By
specifying logical temporal boundaries, it would appear that the more realistic likelihood
of an agency problem will curve drastically DEMO initially followed later by possi-
ble inﬂexion points that would cause the curve to slope upward (line 3 in Figure 2).
Consequently, DEMO those times when the likelihood of an agency problem is low, DEMO
use of agency theory to explain behaviors would be improper.
Once the investment has been made, the probability of opportunistic type behavior
occurring in the VC-E relationship will be low and probably slightly decreasing over time
DEMO reﬂected in line 3 of Figure 2. As the VC and entrepreneur work together over time,
Figure 2
The Temporal Nature of Agency DEMO of VC-E Behaviors
Line 1:  Without
protection
High
Likelihood of
an Agency
Problem
VC review of
Bus. Plan
Line 2:  With
protection
DEMO VC
funding
Potential inflexion points
Low
Time
Winter, 2003
Line 3:  “Real”
151
the VC-E relationship has the potential to move beyond just the more DEMO ﬁnancier-
entrepreneur relationship with the common goal of a successful venture exit. Research
suggests that VCs sometimes become friends and close conﬁdants of entrepreneurs;DEMO
indeed, entrepreneurs often desire even more involvement with their VCs (Ehlrich et al.,
1994; Bygrave & Timmons, 1992; Perry, 1988)DEMO When such a relationship builds, the
probability of opportunistic behavior on DEMO part of the entrepreneur should usually
decline. That is, trust (rather than distrust) will likely become the dominant ethic in
the relationship. Using the assumptions from agency theory, researchers examining the
behaviors of each party during those time periods when trust is likely high between
the VC DEMO entrepreneur would have an increased chance of obtaining non-signiﬁcant
results.
It is argued here that the inﬂexion points (indicating an increased likelihood of an
agency problem) can be triggered by signals from either the entrepreneur or venture itself.
An entrepreneur’s actions may signal to the VC the possibility DEMO malfeasance, misfea-
sance, or nonfeasance. For example, if ongoing disagreements DEMO concerning
certain venture decisions or if the VC perceived that the entrepreneur was being duplic-
itous or deceptive, the likelihood of goal incongruence between the two and the poten-
tial for opportunism on the part of DEMO entrepreneur would likely rise. Note, however, that
these signals would likely emerge over time and would change the way the venture cap-
italist DEMO with the entrepreneur. Venture signals would include the perception by the
VC that the business model was not going to be successful, or that emerging competi-
tion was going to prevent the new venture from succeeding. DEMO type of signal could
indicate a potential increase in the likelihood of an agency problem because the VC would
be concerned with some sort DEMO opportunistic defection on the part of the entrepreneur
(Cable & Shane, 1997). If strong enough, these signals (in effect) indicate that the future
value of the venture is substantially less than was previously DEMO Game theorists
would argue that the situation would have become something of a terminal prisoner’s
dilemma in which each player’s dominant strategy would be DEMO defect from the relation-
ship (Rasmusen, 2001). On the other hand, if the venture remained on course to meet its
goal of attaining IPO, the potential for an agency problem would likely continue to
decline over time.1 Without these signals or inﬂexion points, the use of agency theory to
explain behaviors in the VC-E relationship by researchers would DEMO unwarranted after
the VC has decided to invest in the new venture.
Limitations of Agency Theory
The limitations of agency theory for explaining behaviors DEMO the VC-E relationship
can now be summarized. Agency theory has provided both predictions and prescriptions
for explaining individual behavior when outside ownership is involved (Bohren, 1998;
Jensen, 1983). A key prescription of the DEMO is for principals to minimize the agency
costs by imposing internal controls to restrain the agent’s self-serving behavior (Jensen
& Meckling, 1976; Davis et al., 1997). It is assumed that if there is no principal-agent
(VC-E) goal incongruence then the agent’s self-interested utility-maximizing behavior
will DEMO in wealth maximization for the principal (VC). Interestingly, a second key
prescription of agency theory that has thus far obtained only weak DEMO no association in
1. We limit our horizons here to pre-IPO ﬁrms. Once a ﬁrm goes public with a multitude of investors now
involved, we suspect that a new set of agency issues come to the DEMO However, the post-IPO era is
beyond the scope of this analysis.
DEMO
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
organization research is the idea of better goal alignment between principal (VC) and
agent (entrepreneur) through compensation incentives and partial ownership schemes
(DEMO, 1998; Balkin et al., 2000). The assumption is that DEMO incentives will spur the
agent (entrepreneur) to maximize his or her utility and concomitantly maximize the
wealth of the ﬁrm.
The general lack DEMO empirical support for an agency relationship among VCs and
entrepreneurs (Bruton DEMO al., 2000; Busenitz et al., 2001) suggests at least two responses.
One, there are those who would suggest that future research should adjust and do a better
job measuring agency variables. For example, in response to their nonsigniﬁcant ﬁnd-
ings on the impact of ownership levels, Sapienza and Gupta (1994) suggested alternative
ownership measures. They also suggested DEMO more on process rather than on struc-
tural issues and encouraged longitudinal studies. A second response, and the position of
this article, recognizes DEMO limitations in agency theory’s explicative ability. While the
logic of improving ﬁrm performance by aligning the goals of the agent with the owner
seems DEMO, a partial ﬁnancial ownership stake does not seem to necessarily spur
DEMO agent to behave in ways that an owner would (Pierce et DEMO, 1991).
While agency theory seems useful for explaining the VC-E DEMO before the
VC’s decision to invest in the new venture, its DEMO power becomes more limited
once the VC decides to invest in the new venture. The reason for this is threefold. First,
the goals DEMO the VC and entrepreneur will likely become aligned thereby mitigating the
potential agency problem. Second, after deciding to invest in the new venture, DEMO VC is
likely to change from being a wary investor to a willing collaborator (Tyebjee & Bruno,
1984; Sapienza, 1992). Third, the founding entrepreneur remains a substantial legal
owner, albeit at a DEMO percentage, while maintaining strong individual-speciﬁc invest-
ments in the venture he DEMO she has founded. Even after VCs become investors in a venture,
entrepreneurs generally retain signiﬁcant interest and therefore remain signiﬁcant prin-
cipals even DEMO the percentage of ownership tends to decline with further rounds of
VC ﬁnancing. If entrepreneurs were to engage in behaviors to take advantage of DEMO,
they would harm their own long-term ﬁnancial position by increasing the likelihood of
venture failure. The cost of venture failure would likely hurt DEMO entrepreneur much more
than the invested VC.
The above arguments concerning agency theory revolve around the theory’s primary
concern with instituting governance mechanisms to DEMO the principals’ investments
from shirking-type behavior. The focus of agency theory on protection against down-side
risk, in our opinion, helps clarify in an DEMO sense why it so often fails to capture phe-
nomena in the VC-E relationship. Entrepreneurship is almost always about the pursuit of
upside potential DEMO much less about downside protection. The upside potential speciﬁed
by agency theory is limited because an agent (entrepreneur) is supposed to have little
DEMO for the long-term success and direction of the venture unless properly motivated
by the principal. However, an entrepreneur is highly likely to be very concerned with the
long-term success and direction of the venture even after DEMO a portion of the owner-
ship to a VC. Indeed, entrepreneurs DEMO engage a VC for funding in order to max-
imize the long-term success of the venture. While the entrepreneur would be concerned
with his DEMO her ﬁduciary responsibility to those providing funding, it is highly unlikely
DEMO the entrepreneur would completely subordinate his or her vision for the venture to
the VC. Agency theory logic does not recognize that those involved DEMO an entrepre-
neurial venture are almost always primarily concerned with its upside potential.
In sum, it has been argued that an entrepreneur will rarely act like an agent described
by agency theory. The venture’s success is DEMO and so the entrepreneur is highly
unlikely to pursue a short-term (DEMO much lower) gain at the expense of the venture’s
Winter, 2003
153
long-term success. Agency theory’s description of an agent, (e.g., an entrepreneur), as
one who is potentially verging on malfeasance, misfeasance, or DEMO for the
attainment of some short-term gain, is generally not indicative DEMO entrepreneurs and their
intimate involvement with the ventures they have founded. Consequently, agency theory’s
description of an entrepreneur (agent) renders it unsatisfactory for accurately explaining
many of the behaviors in the VC-E relationship after the DEMO invests in the new venture.
Stewardship Theory as an Alternative in VC-E Relations
With the theoretical and empirical limitations of agency theory in explaining DEMO VC-
E relationship now becoming clearer, stewardship theory is probed to DEMO whether
it could provide greater explanatory power for the VC-E relationship. Several articles
have recently offered stewardship theory as the antithetical counter to agency DEMO (e.g.,
Fox & Hamilton, 1994; Davis et al., 1997). Our purpose was to ﬁll in the gaps left by
agency DEMO and ﬁnd a theoretical foundation that could better explain the VC-E rela-
tionship when the entrepreneur and venture capitalists’ goals were in alignment. After DEMO,
goal alignment between the two is a logical assumption after the VC has decided to invest
in the new venture. With its roots DEMO sociology and psychology, stewardship theory char-
acterizes human beings as having DEMO needs for self-esteem, self-actualization,
growth, achievement and afﬁliation. This is in contrast to agency theory’s characteriza-
tion of human beings as opportunistic, inherently untrustworthy, and focused on a narrow
pursuit of ﬁnancial gains. Davis and colleagues (1997) used McGregor’s Theory X and
Theory Y (McGregor, 1960) to represent two different “models of man” that support
agency DEMO and stewardship theory respectively. Instead of betraying the principal,
stewardship theory suggests that the steward’s behavior is organization centered, seeking
to improve organizational performance by satisfying the principals.2 In essence, stew-
ardship theory is centrally concerned with identifying the situations in which the inter-
ests of the DEMO and the steward are aligned. The steward’s utility is maximized when
his or her goals are aligned with those of the principal and other DEMO and thus
stewardship theory relegates itself to explaining behaviors in the upper left quadrant of
the 2 ¥ 2 matrix in Figure 1. By DEMO, then, stewardship theory has no ability to explain
behaviors before the VC has decided to invest in the new venture because goals are DEMO
aligned at that point. That is, before investing in the new DEMO, the VC’s goal is to
avoid a bad investment decision, whereas the entrepreneur’s goal is venture success (or
it is unknown).
Unfortunately, stewardship theory provides little help in shedding theoretical light on
the VC-E relationship even when goals are aligned. Although some of the factors con-
DEMO the “model of man,” such as identiﬁcation and cultural differences are insightful
(cf. Davis et al., 1997), other assumptions generally lack DEMO power for the entre-
preneurship context. One problem with the application of stewardship theory for the VC-
E relationship is that attention is still DEMO on aligning the interests of the steward
(entrepreneur) with the principal (VC). For example, “Although agency theory addresses
manager-principal interest divergence, additional theory is needed to explain what, if
2. Those writing about stewardship theory are typically concerned with all stakeholders. However, given the
focus of this article on the VC-E relationship, and for the sake of parsimony in our comparison of agency
theory and stewardship theory, we will refer to stakeholders as principals or VCs.
154
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
anything, causes interests to be aligned” (Davis et al., 1997, DEMO 20–21). However, agency
theory is better suited to answer what DEMO interests to be aligned because it recognizes
that agents and principals are inherently self-interested and that their interests may not
be aligned in the DEMO place. It is this self-interest that may result in behaviors on the part
of the agent that are contrary to what the owner would DEMO from the agent. Steward-
ship theory argues that individuals can “turn off” self-interest. For example, “steward-
ship theory deﬁnes situations in which managers are not motivated by individual goals,
but rather are stewards whose motives DEMO aligned with the objectives of their principals”
(Davis et al., 1997, p. 21). It is likely that the entrepreneur’s prevailing concern or inter-
est is the success of the venture that he or she DEMO founded. If the entrepreneur is pri-
marily concerned with venture success, DEMO would not be in the best interest of the venture
(and DEMO) for the entrepreneur to “turn off” his or her self-interest.
While DEMO theory paints a gloomy picture of the agent, stewardship theory paints
DEMO excessively rosy picture of the steward. In short, the same problem DEMO agency theory
in explaining VC-E behaviors plagues stewardship theory. That is, DEMO entrepreneur will
generally not act like the steward portrayed by stewardship theory or like the agent por-
trayed by agency theory. Again, it seems that the entrepreneur will maintain a strong
attachment and psychological ownership (Pierce et al., 2001) toward the venture even
after ceding a portion DEMO ownership to the VC. The entrepreneur will remain an owner
and will act like an owner after the VC invests in the new venture. DEMO such, the entre-
preneur will not likely subordinate his or her DEMO to those of the VC. Because the
VC is “signing on” to the organization after investing in the new venture, he or she is in
essence buying into an idea and vision established by the entrepreneur. DEMO process
results in goal congruence between the two in that they both want the venture to succeed.
Cyert and March (1963) also argue DEMO there is likely to be agreement on the goals of
the organization but also a potential for latent conﬂict. The VC may not always DEMO
with how the entrepreneur wants to run the business, but we DEMO these differences
will be primarily the result of good-faith disagreements and not some sort of self-
interest, evidencing moral hazard on the part of the entrepreneur (Bruton et al., 2000).
Foundations for a New DEMO
The fundamental logic of agency theory and stewardship theory and their focus and
prescriptions to preserve the wealth of investors tends to provide an DEMO and to
some extent inaccurate picture of the entrepreneur and to a lesser extent the VC. The
above analysis suggests that a great deal DEMO theoretical work is needed to accurately
explain the VC-E relationship. More speciﬁcally, we believe that turning the focus away
from the entrepreneur is counterproductive to the development of good theory for entre-
preneurship research. This focus DEMO counter to entrepreneurship research where the in-
dividual entrepreneur is increasingly being seen as a cornerstone in the development
of new opportunities and the DEMO process (Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Shane &
Venkataraman, 2000)DEMO The VC literature has often drawn attention to the centrality of the
entrepreneur and the founding team (Bygrave & Timmons, 1992). Furthermore, the VC
literature frequently highlights the importance of the quality of the DEMO entrepre-
neurs in the funding decision (Bygrave & Timmons, 1992; DEMO & Meyer, 1998).
In essence, exploring entrepreneurship-related phenomena frequently starts with the
founder. Failure to integrate the individual perspectives severely limits the DEMO
power of any theory for entrepreneurship, particularly when the motives and DEMO
Winter, 2003
155
of the entrepreneur are ignored. More speciﬁcally, agency theory and stewardship theory
draw attention away from the entrepreneur and toward the VC. Given the DEMO impor-
tance of the founding team to a venture, it is DEMO increasingly evident that new
theory that speciﬁcally considers the centrality of the entrepreneur in the VC-E relation-
ship is needed.
In reality, it appears that the VC’s contribution to the VC-E relationship is not solely
ﬁnancial (Steier & Greenwood, 1995; Busenitz et al., 1999). Yet, DEMO theory prescribes
actions that focus on the protection of the investment of the principal (VC) against the
harmful behaviors of the agent (entrepreneur). Similarly stewardship theory prescribes
actions that would result in the principal (VC) obtaining the same performance by using
a steward that the principal would have gotten had the principal run the business himself
or herself. DEMO theory addresses the upside that an entrepreneur can offer for the
venture and neither theory can explain the relational rents that are possible through DEMO
VC-E relationship (De Clercq & Sapienza, 2000; 2001).
Given DEMO limitations of agency theory and the inadequacy of stewardship theory for
explaining the VC-E relationship, better theory is needed for understanding this impor-
tant relationship. While developing new theory goes beyond the scope of this article, we
develop some foundational issues that future theory needs to address if DEMO dynamics of
the VC-E relationship are to be more accurately explained. More speciﬁcally, we discuss
three issues that appear to be central in the VC-E relationship.
Beyond Separation of Ownership and Management
Agency theory as a DEMO paradigm for understanding capital markets, ﬁrm valua-
tion, and the implications of the separation of ﬁnancial ownership and control (Jensen &
Meckling, 1976) emerged as a viable choice in the search for a paradigm to explain the
VC-E relationship. VCs are clearly outside owners who often DEMO an active roll in over-
seeing the entrepreneurs and the strategic decisions of a funded venture. Consistent with
the above analysis, agency theory does indeed appear to have some explanatory value
concerning behaviors within the VC-E DEMO, particularly in the initial stages of
the VC-E relationship. A critical DEMO that signiﬁcantly limits agency theory’s relevance
to the VC-E relationship after the VC investment is made, is the assumption that goals
between the VC and entrepreneur are necessarily divergent and that the entrepreneur
must be induced DEMO monitored to act in ways that will lead to venture success and preser-
vation of the VC’s wealth. This inaccurately portrays entrepreneurs as potential DEMO
or deadbeats and portrays VCs as police ofﬁcers enforcing the law. If future research
examines the VC-E relationship from an agency perspective, consideration needs to be
given in more accurately portraying the nature of the relationship. DEMO of focusing
solely on a principal/agent relationship in which VC involvement is seen as a way to
monitor entrepreneurs, researchers will need to account for the trust developed in the
relationship and will need to DEMO VC involvement as a form of collaboration to grow
the venture.
Beyond Just Financial Ownership
Future theory development also needs to address the fact DEMO ownership of entre-
preneurial ventures involves more than just ﬁnancial ownership (DEMO et al., 2001; Steier
& Greenwood, 1995). Again, agency theory tends to point toward ownership percent-
ages, contractual obligations, and DEMO rights of external ﬁnancial owners versus internal
managers. Conceptualizations of the VC-E relationship using agency theory have usually
156
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
minimized the individual perspective of entrepreneurs and how they think. This static
DEMO imposed on the VC-E relationship through the agency lens has tended to put a veil
over the richer dynamics of this critical relationship.
Since DEMO of ﬁnancial ownership apparently have little effect (Sapienza & Gupta,
DEMO; Busenitz et al., 2001), perhaps future research should probe the investment of self
that virtually all entrepreneurs make in the ventures they DEMO The entrepreneurs by
deﬁnition are the ones who have founded the venture and have invested a large amount
of sweat equity generally long before DEMO get involved. While entrepreneurs progres-
sively give up a portion of the ownership of a venture in exchange for additional rounds
of VC funding, they are still likely to feel that the venture is “their venture” DEMO “their
baby.” After launching the business and getting it through some of the early stages, the
entrepreneur realizes that more resources are needed to fully develop the venture. After
ﬁrst round funding, VCs may now own 40% of the venture and the entrepreneur 60%.
But does the entrepreneur DEMO view his or her ownership as just 60%? We suspect not.
DEMO into consideration the non-ﬁnancial investments of time, energy, and sweat equity
that the entrepreneur has already made, it is likely that the entrepreneur will view his or
her ownership level as something greater, creating what we refer to as the “ownership
plus” mentality. Furthermore, buy-back arrangements in the contracts with VCs will
usually leave entrepreneurs with the hope that DEMO ownership stake will rise if the
venture reaches certain targets. These issues should frequently leave the entrepreneur
thinking in terms of a higher ownership DEMO
The non-ﬁnancial contributions and sweat equity invested in a venture by the founder
are clearly a non-trivial component of the overall ownership that an DEMO is likely
to have or perceive toward the venture. This ownership plus perspective has several
important implications. First, positively, the more psychological ownership DEMO the entre-
preneur has over and above his or her legal ownership, the more likely the entrepreneur
will continue to offer large amounts of sweat equity to the venture. This has implications
for valuing ventures higher DEMO to their “entrepreneurial assets.” This is in contrast to
valuing corporations lower due to their agency costs (Jensen & Meckling, 1976).
Second, the ownership plus perspective has implications for the VC-E relationship
and the DEMO to which VCs are encouraged to become involved in the venture beyond
their ﬁnancial investment. If the entrepreneur’s ownership plus is very high, VC non-
ﬁnancial contribution and participation in the venture may not be needed DEMO well received.
In light of this, it may become critical for DEMO to offer their business advice and coun-
seling in such a manner that the entrepreneurs feel like they are being treated in a pro-
DEMO fair manner (Busenitz et al., 1999; Korsgaard et al., 1995). Without this
perception of procedural justice/fairness in their relationship with DEMO VCs, entrepreneurs
are likely to feel as though they are being DEMO upon or that the VCs really do not
understand the business. The VC-based agency theory literature has tended to focus atten-
tion on VCs, the protection of their investments, and their newfound inﬂuence in moni-
toring the venture. All of these agency issues essentially focus on downside protection.
DEMO, the current literature by default appears to relegate the entrepreneur to DEMO
back seat once VCs make their initial investments.
In light of the above discussion, it would seem that future research should attempt
to more explicitly develop theoretical frameworks that integrate the upside potential of
these high-growth DEMO ventures. Procedural justice theory is one perspective that
has good potential to further explain and inform this relationship (Sapienza & Korsgaard,
1996; DEMO et al., 1997). Procedural justice logic would suggest that when DEMO
neurs are treated in a procedurally fair manner by their VCs, DEMO as by giving them their
fair say and by respecting their skills and insights, entrepreneurs will in all likelihood
Winter, 2003
157
continue to invest their sweat equity in the venture. Even though their DEMO ownership
percentage becomes diluted with each round of funding, entrepreneurs are DEMO to act
in a manner that is more consistent with full ownership when they are treated in a pro-
cedurally fair manner. Given that DEMO often embody ﬁrm-speciﬁc skills and
capabilities that are potential sources of competitive advantage (Alvarez & Busenitz,
2001), a venture is much more likely to reach its fuller potential if the entrepreneurs are
treated fairly.
DEMO Centrality of the Entrepreneur
Agency theory supports the perspective that the ﬁrm (new venture in this case) is a
legal entity that essentially DEMO as a nexus of contracts among various resources and
factors of production (Jensen & Meckling, 1976). The above arguments add to earlier
DEMO that recognizes the limitations of agency theory in the business angel/entrepre-
neur relationship (Kelly & Hay, 2001; Landstrom, 1992; van Osnabrugge, 2000). While
agency theory and contracts in the entrepreneurial venture are of some assistance in
understanding why VC ﬁrms exist (Amit et al., 1998), the dynamics inside the entrepre-
neurial ﬁrm have only begun to be tapped. In going beyond viewing the venture as a
nexus DEMO contracts, it seems that it could be beneﬁcial to view the DEMO as an exten-
sion of the individuals involved.
Focusing attention on the individual entrepreneur and the unique resources that he
or she brings to DEMO venture has provided signiﬁcant progress in understanding how entre-
preneurs think and make strategic decisions (Baron, 1998; Busenitz & Barney, 1997). DEMO
entrepreneurs do indeed have a unique cognitive structure, then it follows DEMO they have
the potential to generate a competitive advantage. Alvarez and Busenitz (2001) noted that
one of these advantages may be in the DEMO of new opportunities. The cognitive
ability of entrepreneurs enables them to more readily make sense out of uncertain and
complex environments that bafﬂe most DEMO Their knowledge structures enable them
to cut through massive amounts of information and chaos to see a pattern and a poten-
tial opportunity. In DEMO, it appears that those with an entrepreneurial cognition can gain
a DEMO advantage by learning more quickly and by making faster decisions that
nicely facilitate the development of new opportunities. An entrepreneurial cognition facil-
itates a DEMO decision-making style that is particularly beneﬁcial to a venture in the
initial stages of venture development. This cognition or knowledge structure enables
entrepreneurs to DEMO navigate through a wide array of problems and irregularities
inherent in the development of new ﬁrms” (Alvarez & Busenitz, 2001, p. 759).
If there is to be application of stewardship theory research to the DEMO relationship,
we suggest that the focus shift toward the entrepreneur and his or her vision for the
venture. Most research on the VC-E DEMO seems to implicitly assume that VCs
become the point-of-focus and superordinate once they choose to invest. Given the set
of unique resources and capabilities DEMO an entrepreneur possesses, it seems that the VC
should focus on DEMO, developing and leveraging the entrepreneur’s unique inputs
to the venture. In DEMO context of the VC-E relationship, the question then becomes, “How
can VCs promote the entrepreneur’s full application of his or her resources and DEMO
in the venture which he or she has founded?” Since entrepreneurs have an enduring
impact on the ﬁrms that they create (Schein, DEMO; Bamford et al., 1999), it would seem
that capitalizing on their individual-speciﬁc resources may well represent a potential
source of competitive advantage.
DEMO have taken different positions in regard to VCs actually adding value to
ventures with their non-ﬁnancial assistance (e.g., Sapienza, 1992; Steier & DEMO,
158
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
1995). While research ﬁndings are mixed, the above analysis suggests another way of
viewing the VC-E relationship. We suggest that VC input be DEMO from a comple-
mentary perspective. The VC should perhaps ﬁrst consider the strengths and weaknesses
of the entrepreneur and then seek to provide inputs DEMO exploit those strengths and mit-
igate weaknesses. Most of the literature on VC input discusses the VC’s role in offering
help in strategic planning DEMO generating needed links to key suppliers or customers.
Instead of focusing on the possible value that VCs may provide as strategic planners or
nodes DEMO communication, viewing the VC-E relationship in a complementary manner may
prove DEMO be more productive. This would involve matching the strengths and weaknesses
of the entrepreneur in a complementary manner with the strengths and weaknesses of DEMO
VC. This position assumes that VCs are also unique and are likely to have varied
resources, some of which have the potential to be valuable, rare and difﬁcult to imitate
(Barney, 1991). Failure to account for the uniqueness of entrepreneurs and VCs is highly
likely to DEMO the potential for the establishment of a competitive advantage through
the combined skills and abilities of those in the VC-E relationship. Indeed, the failure to
integrate and complement the capabilities of entrepreneurs by the VC team DEMO increase
the chances of the venture incurring a competitive disadvantage.
Finally, DEMO of the embeddedness of the entrepreneur within the venture he or
she has created, we suggest that without careful consideration of who the entrepreneur
is, understanding and accurately explaining the VC-E relationship will not be possible.
A common assertion among VCs is that it can be very legitimate DEMO fund a “B” level idea
as long as it is being championed by an “A” level entrepreneurial team (Bygrave &
Timmons, 1992). While one could debate the ranking of entrepreneurs and their ideas, a
more fruitful line of questioning may be to ask how an entrepreneur’s DEMO within
the venture attenuates over time. Furthermore, is the inﬂuence of DEMO in a new venture
vitiating, additive, or multiplicative?
Conclusion
This article has carefully examined VC-E research that used agency theory as its
DEMO foundation. Our analysis suggests that agency theory still has relevance to
the VC-E relationship but that its explanatory power is strongest in the pre-funding DEMO
Although stewardship theory has been recently juxtaposed as an alternative to agency
theory, our analysis casts doubts on stewardship theory as an effective lens through which
we can further probe the VC-E relationship.
We suspect that DEMO solid theoretical foundation for the VC-E relationship has yet to
be laid. With the goal of charting some new directions for this critical relationship, we
discussed three key gaps and issues that show promise for future DEMO work. First,
we argued that the nature of the relationship should be more accurately articulated by
assuming goal congruence and the development of DEMO after the VC has decided to invest
in the new venture. Second, we suggested that future work consider entrepreneurs as
much more than partial ﬁnancial owners after VCs invest; it is important to account for
their psychological ownership because they often think and act like owners beyond
what DEMO ﬁnancial equity position would suggest. We refer to this as ownership plus.
Finally, we argued that the venture is really an extension of the individual entrepreneurs
and the unique resources that lead them to found their DEMO Without better theoreti-
cal consideration of the entrepreneur within the VC-E relationship, we suspect that the
explanatory power of theory surrounding this critical relationship will be unnecessarily
restricted.
Winter, 2003
159
REFERENCES
Alvarez, S. & Busenitz, L. (2001). The entrepreneurship of resource-based theory. Journal of Management,
27, 755–775.
Amihud, Y. & DEMO, B. (1981). Risk reduction as a managerial motive for conglomerate mergers. Bell Journal
of Economics, 12, 605–617.
Amit, R., Brander, J., & Zott, C. (1998). Why do venture capital ﬁrms exist? Theory and Canadian evidence.
Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 441–466.
Amit, R., Glosten, L., & Muller, E. (1990). DEMO ability, venture investments, and risk sharing.
Management Science, 36(10), 1232–1245.
Bacharach, S.B. (1989). Organizational theories: Some criteria for DEMO Academy of Management
Review, 14, 496–515.
Balkin, D.B., Markman, DEMO, & Gomez-Mejia, L.R. (2000). Is CEO pay in high-technology DEMO related
to innovation? Academy of Management Journal, 43(6), 1118–1129.
Bamford, C.E., Dean, T.J., & McDougall, P.P. (1999). DEMO examination of the impact of initial founding
conditions and decisions upon the performance of new bank start-ups. Journal of Business Venturing, 15,
253–277.
Barney, J.B. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage, Journal of Management, 17,
99–120.
Barney, J.B., Busenitz, L., Fiet, J.O., & Moesel, D. (1989). The structure of venture DEMO governance: An
organizational economic analysis of relations between venture capital ﬁrms DEMO new ventures. Best papers
proceedings of the annual meetings of the Academy of Management, Washington, D.C.
Baron, R. (1998). Cognitive mechanisms DEMO entrepreneurship: Why and when entrepreneurs think differently
than other people. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 13, 275–294.
Bohren, O. (1998). The agent’s ethics in the principal-agent model. Journal of Business Ethics, 17, 745–755.
DEMO, G., Fried, V., & Hisrich, R.D. (1997). Venture capitalists and CEO dismissal. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 21(3), 41–54.
Bruton, G., Fried, V., & Hisrich, R.D. (2000). DEMO dismissal in venture capital-backed ﬁrms: Further evi-
dence from an agency DEMO Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 24(4), 69–77.
Busenitz, L.W. & Barney, J.B. (1997). Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large DEMO
tions: Biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journal of Business Venturing, 12(1), 9–30.
Busenitz, L., Fiet, J., & Moesel, D. (2001). Signaling theory and new venture evaluations. Paper presented
at the Babson-Kaufman Research Conference, Jonkoping, Sweden.
Busenitz, L.W., Fiet, J.O., & Moesel, D.D. (1999). The eventual effects of mutual cooperation between
venture capitalists and new venture team members on deal exits. Working DEMO, University of Oklahoma.
Bygrave, W.D. & Timmons, J.A. (1992). Venture Capital at the Crossroads. Cambridge: Harvard Business
School Press.
Cable, DEMO & Shane, S. (1997). A prisoner’s dilemma approach to entrepreneur-venture capitalist relation-
ships. Academy of Management Review, 22, 142–176.
Chan, Y. (1983). On the positive role of ﬁnancial intermediation in allocations of venture capital in a market
with imperfect information. Journal of Finance, 38(5), 1543–1561.
160 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Cyert, R.M. & March, J.G. (1963). A Behavioral Theory of the Firm, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Davis, J., Schoorman, F.D., & Donaldson, L. (1997). Toward a stewardship theory DEMO management. Academy
of Management Review, 22(1), 20–47.
De Clercq, D. & Sapienza, H.J. (2000). The venture capitalist-entrepreneur relationship: The creation of
relation rents. Paper presented at the Academy of Management Meetings, Toronto.
De Clercq, D. & Sapienza, H.J. (2001). The creation of relational rents in venture capitalist-entrepreneur
dyads. Paper presented at the Babson-Kaufman DEMO Conference, Jonkoping, Sweden.
Dubin, R. (1978). Theory Building. The Free Press, New York, N.Y.
Ehrlich, S., De Noble, A., & Weaver, R. (1994). After the cash arrives: A DEMO study of venture capital
and private investor involvement in entrepreneurial ventures. Journal of Business Venturing, 9, 67–82.
Eisenhardt, K. (1989). Agency DEMO: An assessment and review. Academy of Management Review, 14(1),DEMO
57–74.
Fox, M.A. & Hamilton, R.T. (1994). Ownership and DEMO: Agency theory or stewardship theory.
Journal of Management Studies, 31(1), 69–81.
Galbraith, J. (1977). Organization Design. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.
Jain, B.A. & Kini, O. (1995). Venture capitalist DEMO and the post-issue operating performance of
IPO ﬁrms. Managerial and Decision Economics, 16, 593–606.
James, L.R., Mulaik, S.A., & Brett, J.M. (1982). Causal analysis: Assumptions, models, and data. Beverly
Hills: Sage.
Jensen, M.C. (1983). Organization theory and methodology. The Accounting DEMO, 58(2), 319–339.
Jensen, M.C. & Meckling, W.F. (1976). Theory of the ﬁrm: Managerial behavior, agency costs, and owner-
ship structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 305–360.
Kelly, P. & Hay, M. (2001). Helping hand or watchful eye?: An DEMO theory perspective on private investor
involvement in entrepreneurial ventures. Paper presented at the Babson-Kaufman Research Conference,
Jonkoping, Sweden.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. DEMO,
47(2), 263–292.
Korsgaard, M.A., Schweiger, D., & Sapienza, H. (1995). Building commitment, attachment, and trust in
DEMO decision-making teams: The role of procedural justice. Academy of Management Journal, 38, 60–84.
Landstrom, H. (1992). The relationship between private investor and small ﬁrms: An agency theory approach.
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, DEMO, 199–223.
Lane, P.J., Cannella, Jr., A.A., & Lubatkin, DEMO (1998). Agency problems as antecedents to unrelated
mergers and diversiﬁcation: Amihud and Lev reconsidered. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 555–578.
Levy, H. & Lazarovich-Porat, E. (1995). Signaling theory and risk perception: An experimental study. Journal
of Economics and Business, 47, 39–56.
MacIntosh, J.G. (1994). Legal and institutional barriers to ﬁnancing innovative enterprise in Canada.
Discussion paper 94–10, School of Policy Studies, Queen’s University, Kingston.
Macmillan, I.C., Kulow, D.M., & Khoylian, R. (1989). Venture DEMO involvement in their investments:
Extent and performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 4, 27–47.
Mason, C.M. & Harrison, R.T. (1996). Informal venture capital: A study of the investment process, the post-
investment DEMO and investment performance. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 8,
105–125.
Winter, 2003 161
McGregor, D. (1960). The Human Side of Enterprise. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Mitchell, T.R. & James, L.R. (2001). Building better theory: Time and the speciﬁcation of when things
happen. Academy of Management Review, 26(4), 530–547.
Perry, L.T. (1988). Venture capital connection: How relationships between founders and venture capitalists
affect innovation in new ventures. Academy of Management Executive, 2, 205–212.
Pierce, J.L., Rubenfeld, S.A., & Morgan, S. (1991). Employee ownership: A conceptual model DEMO process
and effects. Academy of Management Review, 16(1), 121–144.
DEMO, J.L., Kostova, T., & Dirks, K.T. (2001). Toward a theory of psychological ownership in organiza-
tions. Academy of Management Review, 26(2), 298–310.
Rasmusen, E. (2001). Games & Information: An Introduction to Game Theory,3rd ed. Malden, MA: Black-
well DEMO
Sahlman, W. (1990). The structure and governance of venture capital organizations. Journal of Financial
Economics, 27, 473–524.
Sapienza, H.J. (1992)DEMO When do venture capitalists add value? Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 9–27.
Sapienza, H.J. & Gupta, A.K. (1994). Impact of DEMO risks and task uncertainty on venture capitalist-
entrepreneur relations. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 1618–1632.
Sapienza, H.J. & Korsgaard, M.A. (1996). Procedural justice in entrepreneur-investor relations. Academy of
Management Journal, 39, 544–574.
DEMO, E.H. (1983). The role of the founder in creating organizational culture. Organizational Dynamics,
Summer, 13–28.
Shane, S. & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research. Academy of
Management Review, 25, 217–226.
Steier, L. & Greenwood, R. (1995). Venture capitalist relationships in the venture structuring and post-
investment DEMO of new ﬁrm creation. Journal of Management Studies, 32, 337–357.
Tyebjee, T. & Bruno, A. (1984). A model of venture capitalist investment activity. Management Science,
30(9), 1051–1066.
van Osnabrugge, M. (2000). A comparison of business angel and venture capitalist investment procedures:
An agency theory-based analysis. Venture Capital, 2(2), 91–109.
Williamson, O. (1985). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: The Free Press.
Williamson, O. (1988). Corporate ﬁnance and corporate governance. DEMO of Finance, 43(3), 567–591.
Zacharakis, A.L. & Meyer, DEMO (1998). Do venture capitalists really understand their own decision process?DEMO
A social judgment theory perspective. Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 57–76.
Jonathan D. Arthurs is a Ph.D. student and Lowell W. Busenitz is DEMO Associate Professor, at the Price College
of Business at the University DEMO Oklahoma.
The authors wish to thank the participants of the retreat, DEMO anonymous reviewers, and Ken Brunsman for
their very constructive comments on DEMO drafts of this article.
162
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE{1g42fwefx}