1042-2587
© 2009 Baylor University
Firm-Speciﬁc Human
ET&P Capital and Governance
DEMO IPO Firms:
Addressing Agency and
Resource Dependence
Concerns
Jonathan D. Arthurs
Lowell W. Busenitz
Robert E. Hoskisson
Richard A. Johnson
Entrepreneurs with ﬁrm-speciﬁc DEMO capital represent both a potential source of com-
petitive advantage and a threat to appropriate the rents that are ultimately generated by
a new DEMO This situation presents interesting agency and resource dependence chal-
lenges. While potential investors in these ventures will want assurances that their interests
are protected, they will also want to ensure that these key entrepreneurs remain with DEMO
organization. Using agency theory and resource dependence theory, we examine the DEMO
of governance mechanisms that are implemented in ﬁrms going through an initial public
offering comparing those ventures which indicate a dependence on these critical DEMO
neurs versus those that do not. Our analysis reveals that ventures exhibiting dependence on
key entrepreneurs are associated with higher insider and outsider ownership DEMO the board,
greater start-up experience by the board, greater use DEMO contingent compensation, and
greater use of involuntary departure agreements.
Introduction
Entrepreneurs DEMO new opportunities by developing, recombining, and integrating
necessary resources into new conﬁgurations which reshape the very patterns of com-
petition (Schumpeter, 1934; Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). Ideas for new ventures often
emerge from promising insights that entrepreneurs have about the potential for a
new opportunity (Keh, Foo, & Lim, 2002). Such insights usually stem from individual
Please send correspondence to: Jonathan D. Arthurs, tel.: (509) 335-5628; e-mail: jarthurs@wsu.edu, to
Lowell W. Busenitz at Busenitz@ou.edu, to DEMO E. Hoskisson at hoskisson@rice.edu, and to Richard A.
Johnson at johnsonr@missouri.edu.
DEMO earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2006 Babson Entrepreneurship Research Conference in
Bloomington, Indiana.
July, 2009 845
etap_329 845..866
experiences, skills, and capabilities of the entrepreneur(s). When entrepreneurial DEMO
evolve from these insights, the ventures often develop around the speciﬁc DEMO and
capabilities of the founder(s), intricately linking them to the venture. Accordingly, entre-
preneurs frequently represent a key source for the creation of value and the generation
of rents (Alvarez & Busenitz, 2001; Barney, 1991).
While having entrepreneurs as a key resource for a venture can clearly be quite
advantageous, it can also create challenges in developing and protecting the ﬁrm. Ventures
that have such human capital with DEMO skills and capabilities have the potential
to turn these intangible resources into sources of competitive advantage (Barney, 1991;
Peteraf, 1993). However, Coff (1999) argues that while a ﬁrm may have a competitive
advantage, this advantage may not be reﬂected in the ﬁnancial performance of the ﬁrm
because the rents of the organization may be diverted ﬁrst DEMO other stakeholders such as
key personnel with ﬁrm-speciﬁc capabilities. If indeed a venture has speciﬁc resources
capable of generating rents, potential investors will want some assurances that the future
rents of the ﬁrm are distributed appropriately.
DEMO individuals are the source of a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage, they are DEMO an
advantaged position to negotiate for a greater portion of the value that they generate (Coff,
1999). Oftentimes, managers/entrepreneurs inside DEMO ﬁrm will have stronger bargaining
power due to their position (Alvarez & Barney, 2004). Their power is enhanced, in
particular, when DEMO are capable of uniﬁed action, have access or control over informa-
DEMO, and represent a signiﬁcant replacement cost to the organization if they DEMO exit
(Coff & Lee, 2003). These criteria are particularly salient in many entrepreneurial ven-
tures. Because entrepreneurial ventures seek to build competitive DEMO from inno-
vative pursuits, entrepreneurs and their idiosyncratic knowledge and capabilities DEMO
become central to the venture’s success (Baker, Miner, & Eesley, 2003). Furthermore, the
centrality of entrepreneurs within their venture provides them access and control over
information. Thus, it would seem that entrepreneurs represent both a source for a com-
petitive advantage but also a threat DEMO appropriate the rents that are ultimately generated.
Accordingly, we argue that DEMO is critical in initial public offering (IPO) ventures,
particularly when the entrepreneurs represent a critical resource for the venture. Gover-
nance is DEMO set of mechanisms used to manage the relationships among organizational
stakeholders and to establish and control the strategic direction of the ﬁrm (Hitt, DEMO,
& Hoskisson, 2007).
The presence of key entrepreneurs raises DEMO central issues facing potential investors
of new ventures with these resources. On the one hand, the investors in such ventures
generally desire to see the key entrepreneurs stay with the venture as the future success
of DEMO venture is closely linked to the capabilities of the entrepreneurs. If they were to exit
the organization, shareholders are likely to suffer signiﬁcant losses. On the other hand,
individuals with such resources tend to have DEMO bargaining power. Consequently, such
ventures face the challenge of setting up DEMO mechanisms that both protect future
appropriations for potential shareholders as well as encourage this valuable human capital
to stay with the venture. Both of DEMO issues are often present in entrepreneurial ventures
and they represent an agency concern and a resource-dependence concern, respectively.
As such, the imperative of DEMO of directors facing these issues is to protect potential
shareholder interests while concomitantly ensuring the retention of the key entrepreneurs
(or at least reducing the impact of any future exit). We argue that the resolution DEMO these
issues involves the establishment of certain protective mechanisms as well as fuller
disclosure of information.
By examining these issues, this research makes the following contributions. First,
with the growing importance of human capital (e.g., Barney & Wright, 1998; Forbes,
846
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
2005; Hitt, Bierman, Shimizu, & Kochhar, 2001), we develop and test theory on gover-
nance in entrepreneurial ventures when there is DEMO dependence on key entrepreneurs.
Research has recognized the importance of founders–entrepreneurs and governance issues
surrounding their presence (Audretsch & Lehmann, 2005; Nelson, DEMO). However, these
studies tend to treat founders as a homogenous DEMO when in fact they are not. We
speciﬁcally examine those entrepreneurs with capabilities that are key to the life of the
venture. While governance DEMO IPO ventures is interesting given the uncertainty and
the organizational transition occurring, this human capital dimension helps us to better
understand this dynamic situation; and we believe that properly governing these critical
human actors is likely critical to the success of the venture.
Second, this research addresses the formation of governance mechanisms and the
rationale for those mechanisms in an DEMO context. In preparing for an IPO,
there are a variety of actors such as earlier stage equity investors, underwriters, and of
course DEMO entrepreneurs that shape the governance mechanisms. Such mechanisms are
intended to make the venture more attractive to investors in the IPO market while also
DEMO the needs of the pre-IPO stakeholders. Most governance research does little to
consider the various speciﬁc actors (Gabrielsson & Huse, 2004; Hoskisson, DEMO, Johnson,
& Grossman, 2002). More explicitly, this study DEMO the types of governance arrange-
ments that are put in place and whether they differ based on the presence of key entre-
preneurs. We DEMO that the presence of key entrepreneurs represents a potentially
non-trivial inﬂuence on the mechanisms that are used, both from the position of market
concerns as well as the inﬂuence of key entrepreneurs.
In this study, “key entrepreneurs” are individuals with ﬁrm-speciﬁc skills that are
intimately linked to the DEMO performance of the venture. We speciﬁcally contrast the
governance in those ventures which identify a dependence on one or more key entrepre-
neurs versus DEMO that do not identify any dependence on critical human capital. As such,
the dependent variable in our study is binary (e.g., dependence DEMO one or more key
entrepreneurs as speciﬁed by the venture in the prospectus versus no such dependence).
Also, we use the terms “entrepreneur” and “insider” (common in governance research)
interchangeably. While our data do not allow us to consistently identify which of the key
entrepreneurs are DEMO, we examine all insiders/entrepreneurs in a governance setting
because this DEMO of individuals is the most important and most involved in bringing new
innovations to the market. In spite of this data limitation, our examination gives us an
important window into how ventures can manage important dependencies.
DEMO in the New Venture
This section introduces the rationale for our two theories of focus: agency theory and
resource dependence theory. When ﬁnancial capital is needed from equity investors such
as business angels and venture capitalists DEMO the initial stages of a venture, governance
arrangements are usually put DEMO place to manage the relationships and to engender
accountability among the various stakeholders (Rosenstein, Bruno, Bygrave, & Taylor,
1993). A DEMO of directors is typically established to monitor and implement governance
mechanisms designed to mitigate behaviors that may not be in the long-term best interest
DEMO the venture. With the raising of additional capital via an IPO, DEMO governance mecha-
nisms often go through substantial changes (Certo, Daily, & Dalton, 2001; Ehrhardt &
Nowak, 2003). Given the new set of shareholders that are joining, it is an appropriate time
to realign the mechanisms with the expectations of potential investors while also catering
DEMO the interests of pre-IPO stakeholders (Eisenhardt, 1989; Fama & Jensen, 1983).
July, 2009
847
Rearrangements can also help to communicate to prospective shareholders that at least
DEMO the venture has addressed some of the normal governance issues (Westphal
& Zajac, 1998). For example, the number of insiders on the board is often reduced to
communicate better governance in preparation for the DEMO and perhaps to help “window
dress” the venture (Jenkinson & Ljungqvist, 2002; Lerner, 1994). Ventures seeking to go
public can also DEMO the value of their ﬁrm through the quality of the board members
appointed (Certo, 2003).
The pre-IPO investors want the venture to DEMO well in the public markets as the
IPO process provides additional capital and provides a means for earlier investors to cash
out (Shepherd & Zacharakis, 2001). Although exploring how the various classes of actors
speciﬁcally inﬂuence different governance mechanisms is beyond the scope of this study,
DEMO believe that they all have some interrelated involvement in the process (DEMO,
Johnson, & Moesel, 1994; Rediker & Seth, 1995). Importantly, the nature of the gover-
nance mechanisms established prior to the IPO is fundamentally about aligning the
interests of various current and potential (future) stakeholders in order to attract additional
capital. However, these governance DEMO also vary based on the players that are
involved in the alignment process. And because the presence of key entrepreneurs repre-
sents an interesting DEMO, we explicitly develop theory to explain how this challenge
is addressed.
DEMO particular, this research compares the governance in those ventures where entre-
DEMO are key players of the ﬁrm vis-à-vis those ventures where the existence of the
ﬁrm is not contingent on any speciﬁc entrepreneurial actors. IPO DEMO are required to
indicate in the prospectus if they have key personnel that would be difﬁcult to replace and
whose loss would severely impact DEMO organization. As such, we focus on the impact that
this human DEMO has when it represents some of the unique and central capabilities of
the venture (e.g., they are the key resource of the organization DEMO a source for a potential
competitive advantage as illuminated by Barney, DEMO). Agency concerns can be sub-
stantial in these ventures due to the increased power that entrepreneurs often wield.
However, mitigating the potential agency problem is not the only concern of the board of
directors. Importantly, the board must ensure that those entrepreneurs that embody ﬁrm-
speciﬁc resources DEMO to the competitive advantage of the venture are retained. When
key entrepreneurs are present, retaining them usually increases the chances that the
venture will continue to grow and create value for its investors (Martens, Walker, &
Arcand, 2005). Thus, the board must deal simultaneously with both the agency problem
as well as the resource-dependence problem. Mitigating the DEMO problem will ensure
that investors are provided their share of any rents that are generated. Mitigating the
resource-dependence problem will ensure that rents are DEMO to be generated and
sustained.
Mitigating the Agency Problem
Agency theory provides a rich conceptual foundation to explain what can happen with
a separation DEMO ownership and control and has further provided certain normative pre-
scriptions to deal with the agency problem a priori (Sahlman, 1990; Williamson, DEMO).
These mechanisms are intended to more closely align the interests of the management
team and investors and they include incentivizing the agent, bonding the agent, and
monitoring the agent (Eisenhardt, 1989). As a part of the governance process, the central
duty of the board of directors is to oversee the top management team in order to protect
DEMO interests of the shareholders. Within the IPO context, for example, it is possible that
(key) entrepreneurs may expend effort on activities that DEMO enhance their own utility and
848
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
perhaps enable them to exit the venture at the expense of outside DEMO We expect to
ﬁnd the implementation of agency mechanisms to be different in ventures with key
entrepreneurs on their boards versus those without key DEMO
Agency theorists commonly discuss incentives to encourage agents to act in the best
interest of shareholders (Eisenhardt, 1989; Jensen & Meckling, 1976)DEMO Managerial com-
pensation is an example of such an incentive. Managerial compensation research indicates
that reward mechanisms can help to align the interests of DEMO and shareholders
(Barkema & Gomez-Mejia, 1998; Jensen & Murphy, 1990), especially where managers
have a signiﬁcant impact on the performance of DEMO ﬁrm (Miller, Wiseman, & Gomez-
Mejia, 2002). Whereas bonding places the entrepreneurs’ wealth at stake and induces goal
alignment because entrepreneurs DEMO not engage in behaviors which would threaten their
own wealth, incentives DEMO induce goal alignment by motivating entrepreneurs
with a potential for gain. Thus, where bonding may encourage entrepreneurs to avoid
certain negative behaviors, incentives DEMO entrepreneurs to engage in certain posi-
tive behaviors. To this end, DEMO options, which are a form of contingent compensation,
have been DEMO as a key incentive for executives particularly in new ventures (Certo,DEMO
Daily, Cannella, & Dalton, 2003). Contingent compensation represents future DEMO for
the entrepreneurs if they are able to grow the ﬁrm after the IPO and increase the stock
price. Indeed, stock options are frequently used in new ventures because they are initially
and oftentimes cheaper than DEMO types of rewards. Furthermore, where ownership in the
venture may promote DEMO risky decision making among the entrepreneurs, stock options
balance this inclination DEMO promote appropriately risky decisions.
Hypothesis 1: Higher levels of contingent compensation DEMO positively associated
with ventures exhibiting dependence on key entrepreneurs.
Agency theory addresses the conﬂicts of interest that can occur between managers and
owners (Jensen & Meckling, 1976). Given that board members are to actively participate
in ﬁrm governance, outsider representation on the board of directors has been found to
provide stronger monitoring of the top management team, and thus may lead to superior
performance (Hill & Snell, 1988; Shleifer & Vishny, 1997). More speciﬁcally, stronger
monitoring by outsiders can reduce DEMO agency costs leading to improved ﬁrm
performance. However, boards can vary DEMO how much oversight they tend to offer and
the percentage of ownership by outside directors can be a key motivation in providing
ongoing oversight DEMO order to protect the interests of the venture (Kosnik, 1990). Outside
directors with lower levels of equity are likely to be less DEMO to problems that may
emerge in the venture (Conyon & Peck, 1998). Furthermore, lower levels of ownership
among outside board members may also signal a lack of independence or a lack of
motivation. Furthermore, lower ownership levels among outside board members may
indicate that their presence DEMO merely symbolic to assuage the concerns of potential
investors. Outside directors with limited ownership may also be more closely aligned with
the entrepreneurs (Schulze, Lubatkin, Dino, & Bucholtz, 2001).
In ventures where key DEMO exist, the presence of strong outside board
members with higher levels DEMO ownership may be particularly valued by potential investors
in the post-IPO era. Key entrepreneurs, while very advantageous for the development of
a competitive advantage, are more likely to need some stronger counterparts on the board
to more effectively implement a check and balance system. Furthermore, such ventures
are likely to have higher levels of information asymmetry. This suggests that the DEMO
of outside board members, who take their monitoring and oversight of DEMO venture
seriously, becomes particularly important for such ventures. In order to DEMO and
July, 2009 849
maintain balanced governance, it becomes even more important for outsiders on the board
to involve themselves in governing the venture and to provide stronger DEMO
Hypothesis 2: Higher ownership levels by outsiders on the board of DEMO are
positively associated with ventures exhibiting dependence on key entrepreneurs.
A key tenet of agency theory is the assumption of information asymmetry between
the DEMO and agent (Jensen & Meckling, 1976). If the principal were completely
informed, the agent could not engage in acts of opportunism (DEMO, 1989). Indeed,
as the level of information asymmetry between DEMO principal and agent increases, acts of
opportunism become easier and more DEMO because the chance of being caught or
disciplined decreases signiﬁcantly. Again, DEMO draw attention to the increased information
asymmetry that may occur in ventures dependent on the capabilities of key entrepreneurs
for future success. An entrepreneur DEMO technical knowledge that is on the cutting edge
may be positioned to provide information which is generally unveriﬁable. If entrepreneurs
make certain claims about DEMO market potential of a developing technology, or if they make
claims DEMO their efforts in bringing new products to market, a board with DEMO experience
is less likely to be able to verify the claims.
Given these issues and earlier research ﬁndings, outside board members can be
very important (Sapienza, Manigart, & Vermeir, 1996; Zahra, Neubaum, & Huse, 2000),
particularly in small and medium-sized ﬁrms (Huse, DEMO). These arguments suggest that
experience among all board members (insiders DEMO outsiders) may be particularly essential
in this context. Ventures with entrepreneurs DEMO have expertise central to the ongoing
development of the venture are also likely to want to have board members who can
understand these entrepreneurs DEMO create some balance on the board. Board members who
have previously been involved in a start-up themselves are likely to be in a better DEMO
to probe some of the more subtle issues the key entrepreneurs face. From a monitoring
perspective, board members with start-up experience are likely to more quickly pick up on
when a key entrepreneur is really working DEMO the long-term best interest of the venture and
when they may be starting to edge toward malfeasance. From a growth and development
standpoint, such board members are likely to understand the context more fully and the
DEMO issues which arise, serve as a sounding board to the entrepreneurs, and guide and
defend future resource allocations more carefully. Overall, experienced board members
should reduce the board’s level of information asymmetry. Thus, we argue that start-up
experience with new ventures among board members will be particularly DEMO Such
experience is perhaps one reason why venture capitalists are usually associated with better
governance (cf. Amit, Brander, & Zott, 1998; Rosenstein et al., 1993; Sapienza et al.).
Hypothesis 3: Higher start-up experience among members on the board of directors
is positively associated with DEMO exhibiting dependence on key entrepreneurs.
Mitigating the Resource Dependence Problem
Most research examining the role of boards from a resource-dependence perspective
views the board DEMO providing access to essential resources from the external environment
(Hillman & DEMO, 2003; Hillman, Cannella, & Paetzold, 2000) as a means to manage
the organization’s dependence and reduce environmental uncertainty (Pfeffer & Salancik,
1978). This includes reducing the transaction costs associated with garnering DEMO
resources from the environment (Pfeffer & Salancik; Williamson, 1985). DEMO, this
dichotomy of external versus internal resources may be inappropriate when DEMO
human assets which cannot be owned by the company (Coff, 1997). By viewing the
850
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
ﬁrm as a nexus of contracts (Coff, 1997, 1999; Jensen & Meckling, 1976), the distinction
between internal and external resources tends DEMO apply perhaps only to non-human assets
such as capital, equipment, land, patents, trademarks, and the like. Whereas the non-
human assets cannot decide to exit the ﬁrm, human agents have the freedom and discretion
to leave the organization. As such, the board must also manage dependency on the
organization’s human assets as well even if these assets are DEMO employed by the
organization (Westphal & Zajac, 1998).
Whereas mitigating the agency problem will ensure that a portion of any future rents
DEMO ﬂow to shareholders, mitigating the resource dependence problem will increase the
DEMO that rents are generated in the ﬁrst place. That is, in DEMO ventures dependent
on the capabilities of key entrepreneurs for future survival and success, retaining the
entrepreneurs as active employees is likely to be critical. This dependence may have arisen
due to the cognition of the entrepreneurs (Alvarez & Busenitz, 2001; Busenitz & Barney,
1997) or the expertise of the entrepreneurs which would make them rarer, potentially more
valuable, and much more costly to replace (Barney, 1991). As such, keeping this expertise
in the organization is likely a high priority and a goal of the board of directors. Indeed,
Boeker and Karichalil (2002) observed that founders working in research and develop-
ment functions were less likely to leave their new venture. Even though many new
ventures DEMO be constrained by a paucity of resources (Baker & Nelson, 2005), expending
additional resources by extending a voluntary departure or employment agreement DEMO
important entrepreneurs may serve the interests of investors. An employment agreement
often prevents an entrepreneur from working in the same industry if he or DEMO were to
leave the organization voluntarily. As such, the employment agreement DEMO motivate
the entrepreneurs with critical ﬁrm-speciﬁc capital to stay with the organization. At the
very least, these agreements prevent this ﬁrm-speciﬁc capital from being employed in
other competitor ﬁrms.
Hypothesis 4: Greater use of voluntary departure (employment) agreements is
positively associated with ventures exhibiting dependence on key DEMO
As noted above, a central responsibility of the board of directors DEMO to reduce depen-
dencies and uncertainty. As such, the use of DEMO employment agreement ties entrepreneurs
to the organization and ensures that the skills critical to the organization’s future success
remain with the organization. An employment DEMO is useful because it prohibits the
voluntary exit of critical ﬁrm-speciﬁc human capital. It therefore allows the organization
(e.g., shareholders) to capture the rents generated by the entrepreneur because it creates
costs for the entrepreneur DEMO leave the venture. In addition to reducing the likelihood that
a key entrepreneur will depart the organization voluntarily, the board must reduce the cost
of an entrepreneur departing the organization involuntarily such as through an untimely
DEMO That is, the more speciﬁc and the more critical the skills DEMO capabilities of the
entrepreneur are to the venture, the more likely DEMO is that the board will make arrangements
to help buffer an involuntary departure. Such arrangements are likely to be received
positively by the market DEMO well (Westphal & Zajac, 1998). In the event of an untimely and
involuntary departure, the board would be responsible for ﬁnding a replacement with a
similar skill set of capabilities. A life insurance policy DEMO key entrepreneurs that provides
the venture with money needed for just such an occurrence is the involuntary departure
agreement we focus on here.
Hypothesis DEMO: Greater use of involuntary departure agreements is positively asso-
ciated with DEMO exhibiting dependence on key entrepreneurs.
July, 2009 851
The ﬁnal element which may be used to ensure the ongoing involvement DEMO entrepre-
neurs in their venture is the lockup agreement. The lockup agreement is an agreement
wherein the pre-IPO shareholders in the organization promise not DEMO sell or disperse any
of their shares for a speciﬁed period of time after the IPO (Bradley, Jordan, Yi, & Roten,
DEMO). According to Field and Hanka (2001), lockups act as DEMO signal to investors that key
employees will remain with the ﬁrm for a period of time and further signal that insiders
are not seeking DEMO cash out in advance of imminent bad news. While many lockup
agreements are 180 days, pre-IPO owners often extend their lockup period to signal
stability in the face of uncertainty. We test whether those ventures specifying DEMO
on key entrepreneurs will seek to alleviate retention concerns with key entrepreneurs
through longer lockup periods.
Hypothesis 6: The length of the average lockup period is positively associated with
ventures exhibiting dependence on key entrepreneurs.
Methodology
DEMO
To test the hypotheses, we created a sample of ventures that DEMO gone through an
initial IPO between 1990 and 1994. Given that IPO markets experience major ﬂuctuations
and assuming that there is no such thing DEMO a “typical” IPO year (Beatty & Zajac, 1994), the
time frame selected spans multiple years while also omitting the more extreme ends DEMO
the IPO market. Our sampling frame was comprised of 422 ﬁrms in technology-based
industries that went through an IPO in the U.S. market during DEMO timeframe as identiﬁed
through the New Issues database produced by Thomson Financial. The prospectuses of
each ﬁrm, released just prior to the IPO, DEMO the information in this study for all
independent variables. Firms with fewer than 10 employees were eliminated. Owing to
their very small size, they may behave differently from most IPO ﬁrms or be affected by
different DEMO Missing data within the prospectuses as well as ﬁrms going through a
seasoned equity offering improperly identiﬁed in the New Issues database as IPOs DEMO well
as those going through a leveraged buyout (LBO) were further eliminated, thereby reducing
the sample size to 313 ﬁrms. Two of the ﬁrms in the sample were missing information
on two of the variables. DEMO ran analyses with imputed variables and without. The results for
all of our hypotheses were unchanged so we include the two ﬁrms in the DEMO
Measures
The dependent variable is a binomial variable indicating dependence on a key entre-
preneur or entrepreneurs for future survival and success. As a DEMO of the IPO process and
the ﬁling of the prospectus, a DEMO must identify and enumerate the key risks that
potential investors may face. Some ventures’ prospectuses indicate that they are depen-
dent on key personnel, whereas others do not identify such dependence as a key risk.
When DEMO was speciﬁed in the prospectus, the venture was coded “1.” Those
DEMO not specifying dependence were coded “0.” As a sampling of our data, under the
heading of “Dependence on Key Personnel,” one prospectus stated “The Company is
highly dependent on the principal members of its scientiﬁc DEMO management staff, the loss
of whose services might impede the achievement DEMO its research and development or
strategic objectives.” Another prospectus was more speciﬁc: “The Company’s success to
date has been signiﬁcantly dependent on the contributions of its founders (four named
852
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
individuals speciﬁcally stated) and the loss of the services of one or more of them could
have a material adverse effect on the Company’s DEMO, results of operations and
ﬁnancial condition. None of such persons has DEMO employment or non-competition agree-
ment with the Company.”
The independent variables in this study were obtained from the prospectus of each
venture. Consistent with DEMO studies, contingent pay was operationalized as the value
of stock options DEMO the IPO logged to reduce skewness (Certo et al., 2003). Inside
directors are members of the board of directors who are current DEMO employees. Based on
prior research (Daily & Dalton, 1994), we deﬁned afﬁliated outside directors using SEC
regulation 14A, Item 6(b), where afﬁliated directors include relatives, customers, suppli-
ers, former employees, DEMO, and bankers. Afﬁliated outside directors were removed
from the sample as DEMO may not have the same incentives as or objectivity of true
independent outside directors (Daily & Dalton; Johnson, Hoskisson, & Hitt, 1993). The
remaining outside directors were classiﬁed as independent outside directors in DEMO they
have no other afﬁliation with the ﬁrm except as directors. Outsider equity was operation-
alized as the total equity owned by independent outsiders DEMO on the board of directors
divided by the total equity of the new venture.
Start-up experience represents the total number of start-up ventures that DEMO (both
inside and outside) have been involved with previously. In order to reduce skewness in the
variable, it was calculated as the log of one plus the total number of start-ups. We ran
the results DEMO logging them and got similar results. Voluntary departure agreements
were measured by looking at the presence of employment agreements. We have termed the
employment DEMO as “voluntary” to communicate how the intent of these agreements
is to create a burden on the key entrepreneurs should they leave voluntarily (on their own
accord). We also use this terminology in order to DEMO it from the life insurance (e.g.,
“involuntary departure agreements”). DEMO most prospectuses do not detail the substance
of the employment agreements, DEMO we did ﬁnd prospectuses that talked about them, they
proscribed an DEMO from working in the same industry for a period of time if he/she
should voluntarily leave the organization. The use of employment agreements DEMO similarly
coded as the log of one plus the total number of employment agreements used by the new
venture. Again, we ran the results without logging them and got similar results. Addition-
ally, involuntary departure agreements were measured by examining the presence of life
insurance policies on key DEMO The use of life insurance policies was also coded
as the log of one plus the total number of life insurance policies used by DEMO new venture.
Finally, the lockup period was calculated as the weighted DEMO of the number of days that
a share agreement is in effect logged to reduce skewness. We settled on a weighted average
of the DEMO period because it best reﬂects the impact of the lockup period and it is the most
ﬁne-grained measure available. Prior research in ﬁnance has DEMO to use 180 days as the
lockup period. Unfortunately, there are DEMO separate lockup periods in many IPO ﬁrms
so that the use of a single lockup period would be inappropriate. Also, the use of a dummy
variable to indicate a lockup longer than 180 days would be DEMO as well because
some ﬁrms may maintain a lockup of 210 or 240 days whereas others maintain a lockup of
1 year or even DEMO
Several control variables were used in the study in order to rule out alternative
explanations for the governance patterns. We controlled for both the DEMO of the ﬁrm in
years from the date of founding to the time of the IPO as well as the size of the ﬁrm.
DEMO with previous studies in entrepreneurship, size was coded as the log DEMO the
total number of employees. This study also wanted to hold constant the inﬂuence that
underwriters and venture capitalists may have on speciﬁc ventures. DEMO example, venture
capitalists often help to credential a venture going through DEMO IPO perhaps partially
July, 2009
853
substituting for things like board experience and lockup period length. Because board
DEMO can have a signiﬁcant impact on IPO ﬁrms and investors’ perceptions (DEMO, 2003),
the total number of directors was controlled for. Because excessive use of contingent
compensation can induce too much risk-taking by entrepreneurs, the use of noncontingent
compensation puts a delimiter on excessive risk-taking. As DEMO, we controlled for the
amount of noncontingent compensation (e.g., salary) and logged the value to reduce
skewness. Additionally, we controlled for ﬁrm performance using return on assets in the
year prior to the IPO. DEMO ﬁrms with poorer performance may be even more dependent
on key entrepreneurs. Additionally, we sought to control for the research and development
(R&DEMO) intensity of the new venture because greater R&D intensity may DEMO associated
with greater dependence on the skills of the entrepreneurs. R&D intensity was coded as
the total amount spent on R&D in DEMO year prior to the IPO divided by the total employees.
Because we utilize the lockup period as one of our independent variables, we wanted to
control for the total amount of shares locked up after the DEMO Fewer locked shares would
have less of an impact. The percentage of locked shares was calculated as the total number
of shares part of DEMO lockup agreement divided by the total number of shares outstanding
after the IPO. Additionally, we sought to control for the existence of a founder with the
organization. A founder would likely exert greater control over the DEMO mecha-
nisms extant in the organization. As such, we coded the DEMO “1” if a founder was
still part of the new venture and “0” otherwise. We also controlled for insider equity as
individuals critical to DEMO ﬁrm’s success will tend to have higher levels of ownership.
Insider equity was operationalized as the total equity owned by insiders divided by the
DEMO equity of the new venture. Lastly, we controlled for industry and DEMO effects.
We used a dummy variable for the 2-digit SIC code of the new venture. Furthermore, we
controlled for the number of IPOs ﬂoated each year in our sample.
Results
We used bivariate and binomial logistic DEMO to examine the hypotheses. Table 1
provides the mean, standard deviation, and correlations among all variables. The average
number of employees in our DEMO ﬁrms is 315 with a range from 10 to 8,600. The mean
board size is 5.86. The insider average is 2.29, independent outsider average is 3.04, and
the number of afﬁliated outsiders is 0.53 (DEMO was not included in our outsider ratio as we
noted above).
Table 2 presents the results for the hypotheses. Overall, model ﬁt was excellent in
that the ﬁnal model correctly classiﬁed 84.7% of the cases. DEMO addition, the results of a
Hosmer–Lemeshow test (which tests how well the model ﬁts the data), was not signiﬁcant.
A nonsigniﬁcant chi-square DEMO indicates the model has adequate ﬁt. Hypothesis 1
proposed that ventures dependent on key entrepreneurs would resort to increased contin-
gent compensation as a DEMO to align interests between the entrepreneurs and potential
shareholders. The coefﬁcient for this variable is positive and signiﬁcant (p < .05) in
support DEMO this hypothesis. Hypothesis 2 proposed a positive relationship between outsider
equity and dependence on key entrepreneurs. The coefﬁcient for this variable is margin-
ally DEMO in the second regression (p = .053), which is approaching DEMO levels
of signiﬁcance. Given our sample size, we are somewhat surprised DEMO this result because
the zero-order correlation between outsider equity and dependence on key entrepreneurs
is signiﬁcant (r = .16). There is some indication that dependency motivates greater equity
ownership among those who would oversee the DEMO management team, consistent with
agency theory predictions. We will address this DEMO further in the Discussion and
854
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 1
Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations among All Variables
Mean
DEMO
Deviation 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.
1. Dependence on entrepreneur†
0.81 DEMO
2. IPO activity 87.20 29.60 .05
3. Underwriter market share 0.02 0.04 -.14 -.05
4. VC backing† 0.53 0.50 .11 .01 .34
5. Age DEMO ﬁrm 8.92 7.32 -.17 .00 .00 -.06
6. Size of ﬁrm 2.02 0.57 -.17 .05 .40 .04 .29
7. R&D intensity‡ 29.44 38.18 DEMO .09 .00 .41 -.22 -.33
8. Firm performance -0.20 1.32 .00 .04 .09 -.04 .12 .22 -.20
9. % of shares locked 0.58 0.15 DEMO -.01 .16 .07 .07 .21 -.08 .21
10. Board size 5.86 2.08 .03 .19 .06 .27 -.15 -.05 .07
11. Noncontingent comp. 5.26 0.98 DEMO -.02 .08 .01 .12 .19 .10 .22 .22
12. Founder with ﬁrm† 0.66 0.48 .01 -.13 .03 .11 -.01 .04 .03 .12 .10 .04 DEMO
13. Insider equity 32.90 31.00 .09 .02 -.14 -.35 .20 .10 .11 -.17 .04 .33
14. Contingent pay 3.50 2.37 .04 .04 .07 .14 DEMO .02 .06 .24 .14 -.02 -.27
15. Outsider equity 22.10 23.80 .16 .11 .06 .47 -.11 -.05 .03 .21 .09 -.04 -.40 .12
16. DEMO experience 2.23 2.48 .21 -.04 -.15 .04 -.09 -.02 -.02 .19 .05 .17 .02 -.04
17. Voluntary departure 0.64 0.69 .03 .02 -.14 -.20 DEMO -.14 -.12 -.05 -.03 -.09 .07 .02
18. Involuntary departure 0.38 0.52 .21 .01 -.16 -.09 -.01 -.01 -.09 .04 -.03 .04 .20 -.07
DEMO Lockup period 5.45 0.45 .11 -.05 -.36 -.35 -.08 -.11 -.20 -.13 -.19 -.14 .14 -.06
.04 .19
-.15
.03 -.22
-.01 .11
-.04 DEMO
-.14 .06
-.18 -.05
-.20 -.06
-.47 .00
† Spearman rank correlations are reported where ordinal data are used.
‡ In thousands.
N= 313.
DEMO coefﬁcients >.10 are signiﬁcant at p < .05 and shown in DEMO
IPO, initial public offering; VC, venture capital; R&D, DEMO and development.
-.01
-.16 .07
-.05 .17 .21
-.10 .07 .27 .26
July, 2009
855
Table 2
Results of the Logistic Regression Estimating the Dependence on
Key DEMO
Dependent variable:
dependence on key
entrepreneurs
Model 1:
controls
Model 2:
agency variables
Model 3:
resource-dependence
variables
Control variables:‡
DEMO IPO activity .010 .009 .011†
Underwriter market share -8.167† -7.804† -7.203
VC backing -.920* -.773† -.809†
Age of ﬁrm -.037 -.043† -.054*
Size of DEMO -.592† -.387 -.016
R&D intensity .000 .000 .000
Firm performance -.301† -.405* -.452*
Percentage of shares locked -.008 .228 .647
Board size .048 DEMO -.094
Noncontingent compensation -.126 -.188 -.147
Founder with ﬁrm .208 .514 .433
Insider equity .012† .018* .015*
Independent variables:
Hypothesis 1: Contingent compensation .155* .165*
Hypothesis 2: Outsider equity .014† .015†
Hypothesis 3: Start-up DEMO 1.947** 1.763**
Hypothesis 4: Voluntary departure -.385
Hypothesis 5: Involuntary departure 2.318*
Hypothesis 6: Lockup period 1.647
–2 Log likelihood 255.999 240.585 231.214
Cox and Snell R2 .147 .188 .212
Nagelkerke R2 .236 .302 .340
DEMO X2 49.907** 65.322*** 74.693***
Change in X2 49.907 15.415 9.371
† p < .10 * p < .05 ** p < .01 *** p < .001
N = 313.
‡ Controls for industry were included in all models but were omitted from the table due to space limitations.
IPO, initial public offering; VC, venture capital; R&D, research and DEMO
Implications section. The last agency variable, start-up experience among board members,DEMO
was expected to act as greater experience (and information) and therefore would be
positively related to dependence on key entrepreneurs. Greater experience would DEMO
ently reduce the information asymmetry for the board. The coefﬁcient for this variable
is positive and signiﬁcant (p < .01), supporting hypothesis 3.
Hypothesis 4 proposed a positive relationship between the use of voluntary departure
DEMO (employment agreements) for top management and dependence on key entre-
preneurs. This variable was not signiﬁcant. Hypothesis 5 proposed a positive relationship
between DEMO use of involuntary departure agreements (life insurance policies) and depen-
dence on key entrepreneurs. The coefﬁcient for this variable is positive and signiﬁcant
(p < .05), supporting this hypothesis. Lastly, hypothesis 6 proposed a positive relationship
between the length of the lockup period and dependence on DEMO entrepreneurs. Although
the zero-order coefﬁcient is positive and signiﬁcant, it is DEMO signiﬁcant once the controls
are accounted for. Thus, hypothesis 6 is DEMO supported.
856
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
After performing the logistic regression, we conducted a casewise listing of the
residuals. This provided a listing of those cases with studentized residuals greater DEMO 2.0.
There were 13 such cases. We then obtained the DfBeta statistic to indicate cases which
are poorly ﬁtted by the model. It measures DEMO change in the logit coefﬁcients for a given
variable when a case is dropped. A DfBeta statistic for each case for each explanatory
variable DEMO then calculated and used in the model. While there is no theoretical guidance
as to what the cutoff criterion should be in determining outliers, we used a generally
accepted cutoff criterion as those with a dbeta >1.0 on critical variables in the model. After
removing cases with dbeta’s >1.0, results of subsequent analysis indicate improved overall
model ﬁt. This increased the levels of signiﬁcance for nearly all of the independent variables
that DEMO originally signiﬁcant, but did not affect the variables that were not DEMO
For example, outsider equity became signiﬁcant at p < .05. Also, contingent compensation
became signiﬁcant at p < .01 and involuntary departure agreement DEMO signiﬁcant at
p < .01. So overall, the residual analysis provided DEMO support for our results although
we report the results without the residual analysis as they are more conservative.
Discussion and Implications
In general, we ﬁnd partial support for our arguments. The ﬁndings of this study
generally DEMO that dependence on key entrepreneurs is an important issue within
newer ventures. Consistent with our theoretical arguments, it seems that dependence on
key entrepreneurs motivates a greater concern for reducing the potential agency problem
and the DEMO resource-dependence problem. More speciﬁcally, ownership of outsiders
on the board is DEMO when the organization is dependent on key entrepreneurs. This
higher ownership is interesting because it would tend to promote stronger monitoring by
these board DEMO The importance here is that outsiders will provide greater dispas-
sionate oversight whereas insiders will provide greater access to strategic information
that will be DEMO for guiding the ﬁrm (Baysinger & Hoskisson, 1990; Zahra, 1996). The
fact that the outsider equity relationship is only marginally signiﬁcant DEMO suggest
that this relationship is not terribly strong or that there is substitution or overlapping
effects between the various governance devices (cf. Rediker & Seth, 1995). For example,
the correlation between outsider equity and the presence of venture capital (VC) backing
is 0.47, indicating that VC ownership in all likelihood is absorbing some of the inﬂuence
here. DEMO, outsider and insider equity are negatively and signiﬁcantly correlated
(r =-.40) and outsider equity and outsider ratio are positively correlated (r = DEMO). These
relationships suggest that individual governance devices represent a system of governance
where one governance device might substitute for another (Hoskisson et al., 1994). Future
research could disentangle the involvement of VCs, for DEMO, examining the larger
equity positions that they typically obtain and how DEMO tend to manage entrepreneurs who
possess valuable human capital.
Additionally, we DEMO that contingent compensation was higher in those ventures
exhibiting dependence on key entrepreneurs. This would tend to suggest a desire for
greater goal alignment DEMO top management and potential shareholders also con-
sistent with agency theory prescriptions. A key tenet of agency theory is that an agency
problem cannot DEMO without information asymmetry (Eisenhardt, 1989) and that greater
information among DEMO board aids in mitigating any potential agency problem. To this
end, DEMO use of previous start-up experience provided a measure of knowledge that
would likely prove invaluable in this context. It comes as no surprise that DEMO previous
experience proved signiﬁcant.
July, 2009
857
Regarding the resource-dependence hypotheses, the greater use of involuntary depar-
ture agreements among those ventures exhibiting dependence on key entrepreneurs indi-
cates that the DEMO loss of any of the entrepreneurs would prove extremely difﬁcult.
The strong results here clearly support our central thesis that key entrepreneurs with their
DEMO skills and capabilities are critical to the life of a venture; DEMO much so that an
untimely departure of a key entrepreneur would likely result in a major setback to the
venture. Those overseeing these ventures DEMO putting into place insurance policies that can
help provide some added resources in the unlikely event that one of these key entre-
preneurs experiences DEMO untimely departure.
The voluntary departure agreement was not signiﬁcant. It may be that other mecha-
nisms are better predictors of keeping key entrepreneurs fully DEMO and motivated. For
example, if key entrepreneurs are also founders or DEMO are intimately involved with one
or more patents on behalf of the venture, they may already feel a strong tie to the venture,
sometimes referred to as psychological ownership (Pierce, Kostova, & Dirks, DEMO).
Psychological ownership has reference to a condition in which an individual thinks and
feels that the target or some part of that target DEMO ownership is his or hers (Pierce, Van
Dyne, & Cummings, 1992). Such ownership is likely to give rise to the investment DEMO
oneself into the entity or organization. Such investments can take many forms including,
“investment of one’s time; ideas; skills; and physical, DEMO, and intellectual
energies. As a result, the individual may begin to feel that the target of ownership ﬂows
from the self” (Pierce et al., 2001, p. 302). Thus, when psychological ownership is
present, formal contracts such as employment agreements may not be necessary. While
psychological ownership is relatively new to the management domain and has yet to DEMO
examined extensively in entrepreneurship research, we think that it may well DEMO much
potential in explaining governance systems in entrepreneurial ventures involving founders
and key entrepreneurs. In one of the ﬁrst important studies introducing psychological
ownership DEMO entrepreneurship research, Wasserman (2006) found that entrepreneurial
ventures with founders DEMO to enjoy lower compensation costs. This “founder discount”
though appears to disappear as organizations mature and grow. We see this research as
complementary and DEMO that taking into account psychological factors may be impor-
tant for understanding governance in entrepreneurial ventures.
While little research has also been conducted with DEMO periods, we thought that
a longer lockup period might help send DEMO signal that retention concerns have been
alleviated. While we did not ﬁnd signiﬁcance here, it appears that the lockup period
has some interesting correlations with venture capital and underwriter involvement. It
is possible that venture capital DEMO may partially explain the lack of signiﬁcance.
Venture capitalists are widely recognized as experts in governing new ventures (e.g., Amit
et al., 1998; Gorman & Sahlman, 1989). As such, they may provide greater protection
against resource dependence problems. For example, venture capitalists often establish
critical ties with other organizations (Megginson & Weiss, 1991), which may DEMO their
funded ventures with access to resources not otherwise available. This in turn may act as
a delimiter on the amount of risk faced DEMO the organization.
Future Research Opportunities
We believe our results are important for the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship. Our examina-
tion here has focused on the DEMO that arises in pre-IPO ventures. This context is
inherently interesting for rent appropriation theory because it represents a situation where
potential investors must be DEMO to invest. Therefore, the governance arising in these
ventures is likely DEMO more dynamic than that found in older, established organizations.
858
ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO and PRACTICE
We believe future research should seek to establish how the governance changes DEMO time
especially in those ventures dependent on key entrepreneurs. From a resource-dependence
perspective, it would seem important to observe the hiring patterns in the organizations to
understand whether actions are taken to abate this dependence over DEMO When there is a
substantial dependence on key entrepreneurs, it seems DEMO at some point it will become
important to diffuse the knowledge representing those unique managerial skills across the
organization perhaps through specialization. Whether there DEMO inducements given to
those critical entrepreneurs to foster such skill transfer by the organization beyond the
compensation evidence that we provide is left for DEMO research.
With the attention of this study on the role of human capital in entrepreneurial
ventures, it seems apparent that there is a place for human resource management such as
with the diffusion of knowledge just DEMO The management of human resources
in IPO ﬁrms has been found to have a positive relationship to performance (Cyr, Johnson,
& Welbourne, 2000). However, this study brings to light the importance and impact of
ﬁrm-speciﬁc human resources, rather than the impact of more generic measures of human
capital (e.g., education or experience). We believe other DEMO types of human capital
should be examined, possibly focusing on whether DEMO types of ﬁrm-speciﬁc human
capital arise at different times in the life of the new venture. Also, while ﬁrm-speciﬁc
human capital resources can clearly be quite advantageous, what are the implications of
this for the entire human resources of the ﬁrm? Are other less-important actors in the same
organization treated differently? If so, we think there may arise some DEMO issues
concerning fairness and transparency in human resource practices that may be exacer-
bated over time. If diffusion of knowledge is a goal among DEMO decision makers then
it would seem important to implement training and compensation practices which reduced
overall turnover in order to retain this knowledge in DEMO organization. So in the end, there
may be a trickle-down effect DEMO some organizations with important ﬁrm-speciﬁc human
capital such that the overall level of compensation and beneﬁts is higher vis-à-vis other
ﬁrms in an industry. DEMO the other hand, there may be some organizations that develop a
DEMO organization where less important members are treated generally poorly vis-à-
vis the important members in the organization. While examining these questions is beyond
the DEMO of this paper, we believe that the IPO practices may have DEMO direct bearing on
human resource strategy later on in the life of the organization and therefore present an
excellent research opportunity. Lastly, we think that understanding how a team of entre-
preneurs would be governed with DEMO added issue of social complexity versus governance
of key individual entrepreneurs (DEMO was the focus of our study) would provide important
insights for DEMO research.
From an agency theory perspective, it seems important to observe DEMO the board
membership changes over time (e.g., Lynall, Golden, & Hillman, 2003). We ﬁnd that
start-up experience is important initially. Over time, it would seem important to bring in
other directors with different experience as the new venture matures and develops. We
believe the makeup DEMO the board will change to reﬂect the changing competitive situation
facing the organization. A critical question in light of rent appropriation theory is whether
DEMO board membership creates a situation where critical top managers are able to
build their power. Does the transition of certain members from the board DEMO the
development of entrenchment among the top management team? We believe DEMO oppor-
tunity exists to probe this issue further.
Another area that future research could pursue is the process by which the governance
mechanisms that DEMO IPO ﬁrms have are put into place. This study has assumed that the
established governance mechanisms of the studied IPO ventures reﬂect the common
DEMO that investors tend to have. However, these governance arrangements do not
DEMO, 2009
859
just suddenly emerge from a vacuum. Rather, multiple human actors have usually been
involved. The founding entrepreneurs frequently put a board of directors into DEMO during
the early phases of the venture. When a venture raises outside capital, equity investors
usually demand one or more seats on the board of directors, so if a venture does not have
a board of directors prior to the raising of outside capital, they will put one into place at
that time.
Furthermore, boards of directors are not permanent once they are in place. Particularly
in anticipation of an IPO, a board will often be adjusted. So the establishment of these
governance mechanisms DEMO a dynamic and evolving process. While the founders make
the initial impact, different types of investors (e.g., business angels, VCs, corporations)
will undoubtedly make their presence and governance concerns reﬂected in the venture DEMO
well. Finally, in preparation for the IPO, it is likely that the underwriters also make their
concerns known since they want the ﬁrm DEMO appeal to outside investors. In sum, it seems
that the inﬂuences DEMO these various actors in the evolution of a venture’s governance
system could make for an interesting study.
Limitations
Given that this study is not DEMO limitations, the following discussion addresses
three areas in particular: the dependence on key entrepreneurs, the human actors in putting
the discussed governance arrangements into place, and the time context of this study.
These areas also provide opportunities for follow-on research.
As previously speciﬁed, the data for our dependence on key entrepreneurs is a
binomial variable based on the provided DEMO in the IPO prospectus. While this
study represents a constructive ﬁrst take on these data, further inquiry and development of
this variable could be very enriching. The prospectuses generally do not provide detailed
information about this DEMO and the speciﬁc individual(s) associated with this
dependence. For example, it would be interesting to explore if this dependence sometimes
involves more DEMO one individual and the background of the key entrepreneurs. Are they
always founders, did this dependence coincide with the development of the ﬁrm, DEMO did
they bring their expertise into the venture? Furthermore, there is undoubtedly variance
in the degree to which a venture depends on their DEMO entrepreneurs. Some skills and
capabilities are undoubtedly going to be worth more than others and will be harder to
imitate. It appears that this DEMO be an exciting domain for future research to further probe
this important area.
Generalizability concerns are important for most empirical studies including this one.
DEMO sample period involves a fair amount of variation in economic activity (DEMO preceding
the Internet bubble and the concomitant explosion in IPOs). The years of our sample
ranged from the relatively slow year of 1990 DEMO the more active years of the mid-1990s
prior to the bubble years of the late 1990s, giving this study good generalizability. We
suggest that our results are consistent with the assumption that governance concerns
among potential DEMO are relatively consistent across time, although ultimately this
remains an empirical DEMO Given the cyclical nature of the IPO market and given
that our sample represents a “middle ground” era, the question obviously emerges as
to whether the governance issues surrounding the role of the key entrepreneurs is DEMO to
vary at the higher and lower extremes of the market. While future research could certainly
examine the ﬁndings of this study across the DEMO range of the IPO market cycles, we
suspect that the need DEMO entrepreneurs with speciﬁc skills and capabilities remains largely
stable across time as does the need for appropriate governance mechanisms to assuage
investor concerns. In DEMO, while limitations exist with our 1990–1994 sample of IPO
860
ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO and PRACTICE
ventures, we think that our ﬁndings represent reasonable generalizability, particularly in
DEMO of the cyclical nature of the IPO market.
Practical Implications
It seems intuitive for an entrepreneurial venture to move toward the utilization of
speciﬁc DEMO and to endure dependence on key entrepreneurs when the represented
skills and capabilities are germane to the commercialization of the venture. It is from DEMO
idiosyncratic resources that sources of competitive advantage often emerge (Barney, 1991;
Peteraf, 1993). However, the implications of this study suggest DEMO such resources need
to be managed and that there are downside risks associated with these skills and capa-
bilities. Stated differently, sometimes a venture’s greatest asset can also become its
greatest weakness so appropriate governance mechanisms DEMO to be in place to give the
venture its best chance for success.
The ﬁndings from this study indicate that the presence of dependence DEMO key entre-
preneurs tends to be managed by incentivizing them through greater use of contingent
compensation, and by monitoring them more effectively through outside ownership and
by improved monitoring through more start-up experience. Whereas the incentivizing
DEMO are typically found in other agency theoretic research, the start-up experience
DEMO an interesting monitoring mechanism which we have not seen in prior studies. Yet this
start-up experience is likely most precious for assuaging investor concerns. DEMO,
we suspect that start-up experience among prestigious board members (such DEMO VCs) will
be even more efﬁcacious in that these board members DEMO protective of their reputation.
Accordingly, we believe that ventures exhibiting dependence DEMO key entrepreneurs may
be able to signal effective governance by populating the board with certain outsiders
(cf. Certo, 2003).
As previously discussed, it is likely that a variety of human actors get involved in
DEMO the appropriate governance arrangements. The ﬁndings of this study offer
some insights into what mechanisms are important for those ventures with entrepreneurs
involving key DEMO (e.g., outsider equity, contingent compensation, start-up expe-
rience, and DEMO departure agreements). This could be particularly signiﬁcant for
those who have little experience with putting into place governance arrangements. The
signals from this DEMO suggest that voluntary departure agreements and the lockup period
offer no signiﬁcant help with managing such dependencies.
REFERENCES
Alvarez, S. & Busenitz, L. (2001). The entrepreneurship of resource-based theory. Journal of Management,
27, 755–775.
Alvarez, S.A. & Barney, J.B. (2004). Organizing rent generation and appropriation: Toward a theory of the
entrepreneurial ﬁrm. Journal of Business Venturing, 19, 621–635.
Amit, R., Brander, J., & Zott, C. (1998). Why do venture capital ﬁrms exist? Theory and DEMO evidence.
Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 441–466.
Audretsch, D.B. & DEMO, E.E. (2005). The effects of experience, ownership, and knowledge on IPO
survival: Empirical evidence from Germany. Review of Accounting & Finance, 4(4), 13–33.
Baker, T. & Nelson, R.E. (2005)DEMO Creating something from nothing: Resource construction through entre-
preneurial bricolage. Administrative DEMO Quarterly, 50, 329–366.
July, 2009 861
Baker, T., Miner, A., & Eesley, D. (2003). DEMO ﬁrms: Bricolage, account giving and improvisational
competencies in the founding process. Research Policy, 32, 255–276.
Barkema, H.G. & Gomez-Mejia, L.R. (1998). Managerial compensation and ﬁrm performance: A general
research framework. Academy of Management Review, 41, 135–145.
Barney, J.B. (1991). Firm resources DEMO sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 17,
99–120.
Barney, J.B. & Wright, P.M. (1998). On becoming a strategic partner: The role of human resources in gaining
competitive advantage. Human Resource Management, 37, 31–46.
Baysinger, B. & Hoskisson, R.E. (1990). The composition DEMO boards of directors and strategic control: Effects
on corporate strategy. Academy DEMO Management Review, 15, 72–87.
Beatty, R.P. & Zajac, E.J. (DEMO). Managerial incentives, monitoring, and risk bearing: A study of DEMO
compensation, ownership, and board structure in initial public offerings. Administrative Science Quarterly,
39, 313–335.
Boeker, W. & Karichalil, R. (2002)DEMO Entrepreneurial transitions: Factors inﬂuencing founder departure.
Academy of Management Journal, 45, 818–826.
Bradley, D.J., Jordan, B.D., Yi, H-C., & Roten, I.C. (2001). Venture capital and IPO lockup expiration: An
empirical analysis. The Journal of Financial Research, 24, 465–492.
Busenitz, L.W. & Barney, J.B. (1997). Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large DEMO
tions: Biases and heuristics in strategic decision making. Journal of Business DEMO, 12, 9–30.
Certo, S.T. (2003). Inﬂuencing initial public offering investors with prestige: Signaling with board structures.
Academy of Management Review, DEMO, 432–446.
Certo, S.T., Daily, C.M., & Dalton, D.R. (DEMO). Signaling ﬁrm value through board structure: An investi-
gation of DEMO public offerings. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 26, 33–50.
Certo, S.T., Daily, C.M., Cannella, A.A., & Dalton, D.R. (2003). DEMO money to get money: How CEO stock
options and CEO equity DEMO IPO valuations. Academy of Management Journal, 46, 643–653.
Coff, R.W. (1997). Human assets and management dilemmas: Coping with hazards on the road to resource-
based theory. Academy of Management Review, 22, 374–402.
DEMO, R.W. (1999). When competitive advantage doesn’t lead to performance: DEMO resource-based view and
stakeholder bargaining power. Organization Science, 10, 119–133.
Coff, R.W. & Lee, P.M. (2003). Insider trading as a vehicle to appropriate rent from R&D. Strategic
Management Journal, 24, 183–190.
DEMO, M.J. & Peck, S.I. (1998). Board control, remuneration committees, and top management com-
pensation. Academy of Management Journal, 41, 146–157.
Cyr, L.A., Johnson, D.E., & Welbourne, T.M. (2000). DEMO resources in initial public offering ﬁrms: Do
venture capitalists make a DEMO? Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 25(1), 77–91.
Daily, C.M. & Dalton, D.R. (1994). Bankruptcy and corporate governance: The impact DEMO board composition
and structure. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 1603–1617.
Ehrhardt, O. & Nowak, E. (2003). The effect of IPOs on German family-owned ﬁrms: Governance changes,
ownership structure, and performance. Journal DEMO Small Business Management, 41(2), 222–232.
862 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and DEMO
Eisenhardt, K. (1989). Agency theory: An assessment and review. Academy of Management Review, 14,
57–74.
Fama, E.F. & Jensen, M.C. (1983). Separation of ownership and control. Journal of Law and Economics, 26,
301–325.
Field, L.C. & Hanka, C. (2001). DEMO expiration of IPO share lockups. Journal of Finance, 56, 471–500.
Forbes, D.P. (2005). The effects of strategic decision making on entrepreneurial DEMO Entrepreneur-
ship Theory and Practice, 29, 599–626.
Gabrielsson, J. & DEMO, M. (2004). Context, behavior, and evolution: Challenges in DEMO on boards and
governance. International Studies of Management & Organization, 34, 11–36.
Gorman, M. & Sahlman, W.A. (1989). What do venture capitalists do? Journal of Business Venturing, 4,
231–248.
Hill, C. & Snell, S. (1988). External control, corporate strategy, and DEMO performance in research intensive
industries. Strategic Management Journal, 9, 577–590.
Hillman, A.J. & Dalziel, T. (2003). Boards of directors and ﬁrm performance: Integrating agency and resource
dependence perspectives. Academy of Management Review, DEMO, 383–396.
Hillman, A.J., Cannella, A.A., & Paetzold, R.L. (DEMO). The resource dependence role of corporate directors:
Strategic adaptation of board composition in response to environmental change. Journal of Management
Studies, 37, 235–255.
Hitt, M.A., Bierman, L., Shimizu, K., & Kochhar, R. (2001). Direct and moderating effects of human capital
on DEMO and performance in professional service ﬁrms: A resource-based perspective. Academy of DEMO
agement Journal, 44, 13–28.
Hitt, M.A., Ireland, R.D., & Hoskisson, R.E. (2007). Strategic management: Competitiveness and globaliza-
tion (DEMO ed.). Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western.
Hoskisson, R.E., Hitt, DEMO, Johnson, R.A., & Grossman, W. (2002). Conﬂicting voices: The effects of
ownership heterogeneity and internal governance on corporate strategy. Academy DEMO Management Journal, 45,
697–716.
Hoskisson, R.E., Johnson, R.A., & Moesel, D.D. (1994). Corporate divestiture intensity in restructuring ﬁrms:
Effects of governance, strategy and performance. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 1207–1251.
Huse, M. (2007). Boards, governance and value creation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jenkinson, T. & Ljungqvist, A.P. (2002). DEMO public: The theory and evidence on how companies raise
equity ﬁnance (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Jensen, M.C. & DEMO, W.F. (1976). Theory of the ﬁrm: Managerial behavior, agency costs, and ownership
structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 305–360.
Jensen, M.C. & Murphy, K.J. (1990). Performance pay and top-management incentives. Journal of Political
Economy, 98, 225–264.
Johnson, R.A., Hoskisson, R.E., & Hitt, M.A. (1993). Board of directors involvement in restructuring: The
effects of board versus managerial controls and characteristics. Strategic Management Journal, 14(Summer
Special Issue), 3–50.
Keh, H.T., Foo, M.D., & Lim, F.C. (2002). Opportunity evaluation under risky conditions: The cognitive
processes of entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27(2), 125–148.
July, 2009 863
Kosnik, R.D. (1990). Effects of board demography and directors’ incentives DEMO corporate greenmail decisions.
Academy of Management Journal, 33, 129–150.
Lerner, DEMO (1994). The syndication of venture capital investments. Financial Management, 23, 16–27.
Lynall, M.D., Golden, B.R., & Hillman, A.J. (2003). Board composition from adolescence to maturity:
A multitheoretic view. Academy DEMO Management Review, 28, 416–431.
Martens, M., Walker, T., & Arcand, J. (2005). Founder transition decision for ﬁrms issuing Initial DEMO
Offerings. Paper presented at the Babson-Kauffman Entrepreneurship Research Conference. Wellesley, MA:DEMO
Babson College.
Megginson, W. & Weiss, K. (1991). Venture DEMO certiﬁcation in initial public offerings. Journal of
Finance, 46, 879–903.
Miller, S.M., Wiseman, R.M., & Gomez-Mejia, L.R. (2002). The DEMO between CEO compensation design and
ﬁrm risk. Academy of Management Journal, DEMO, 745–767.
Nelson, T. (2003). The persistence of founder inﬂuence: Management, ownership, and performance, effects at
initial public offering. Strategic Management Journal, 24, 707–724.
Peteraf, M. (1993). The cornerstones of DEMO advantage: A resource-based view. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 13, 363–380.
DEMO, J. & Salancik, G. (1978). The external control of DEMO New York: Harper & Row.
Pierce, J.L., Kostova, T., & Dirks, K.T. (2001). Toward a theory of psychological ownership in organizations.
Academy of Management Review, 26, 298–310.
Pierce, J.L., Van DEMO, L., & Cummings, L.L. (1992). Psychological ownership: A DEMO validation study.
In M. Schnake (Ed.), Proceedings of the Southern DEMO Association (pp. 203–211). Valdosta, GA:
Valdosta State University.
Rediker, K.J. & Seth, A. (1995). Boards of directors and substitution effects of alternative governance
mechanisms. Strategic Management Journal, 16, 85–99.
Rosenstein, J., Bruno, A.V., Bygrave, W.D., & Taylor, N. (1993). The CEO, venture capitalists, and the board.
Journal of Business DEMO, 8, 99–113.
Sahlman, W. (1990). The structure and governance of venture capital organizations. Journal of Financial
Economics, 27, 473–524.
Sapienza, H.J., Manigart, S., & Vermeir, W. (1996). Venture capitalist governance and value added in four
countries. Journal of Business Venturing, 11, 439–469.
Schulze, W.S., Lubatkin, M.H., Dino, R.N., & Bucholtz, A.K. (2001). Agency relationships in family ﬁrms:
Theory and DEMO Organization Science, 12, 99–116.
Schumpeter, J. (1934). The theory of economic development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Shane, S. & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld DEMO research. Academy
of Management Review, 26, 13–17.
Shepherd, D.A. & DEMO, A. (2001). Speed to initial public offering of VC-backed companies.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 26, 59–70.
Shleifer, A. & Vishny, DEMO (1997). A survey of corporate governance. Journal of Finance, 52, 737–
783.
864 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Wasserman, N. (2006). Stewards, agents, and the founder discount: Executive compensation in new ventures.
Academy of Management Journal, 49, 960–976.
DEMO, J.D. & Zajac, D.J. (1998). The symbolic management of DEMO: Corporate governance
reforms and shareholder reactions. Administrative Science Quarterly, 43, DEMO
Williamson, O.E. (1985). The economic institutions of capitalisms. New York: The Free Press.
Williamson, O.E. (1988). Corporate ﬁnance and corporate governance. Journal of Finance, 43, 567–591.
Zahra, S.A. (1996). DEMO, ownership and corporate entrepreneurship: The moderating impact
of industry technological opportunities. Academy of Management Journal, 39, 1713–1735.
Zahra, S.A., Neubaum, D.O., & Huse, M. (2000). Entrepreneurship in medium-size companies: Exploring
DEMO effects of ownership and governance systems. Journal of Management, 26, 947–976.
Jonathan D. Arthurs is an Assistant Professor, Department of Management and Operations, College of
Business, Washington State University.
Lowell W. Busenitz is the DEMO Chair in American Enterprise, Department of Management, Michael F.
Price College of Business, University of Oklahoma.
Robert E. Hoskisson is the George R. Brown Chair in Management, Jesse H. Jones Graduate School of
Management, DEMO University.
Richard A. Johnson is the Emma S. Hibbs/Frederick C. Middlebush Chair of Entrepreneurship and Professor
of Management, Department of Management, University DEMO Missouri.
July, 2009
865{1g42fwefx}