Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
J. Behav. Dec. Making, 20: 253–272 (2007)
Published online 2 January 2007 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com) DEMO: 10.1002/bdm.554
Inventor Perseverance after Being Told
to Quit: The Role of Cognitive Biases
THOMAS A˚ STEBRO1*, SCOTT A. JEFFREY2 and GORDON K. ADOMDZA
1Joseph L. Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto,Toronto,
Ontario, Canada
2 Department of Management Sciences, University of Waterloo,Waterloo, Ontario,
Canada
2
ABSTRACT
We ﬁnd that approximately one third (29%) of independent inventors continue to spend
money and 51% continue to spend time on projects after receiving highly diagnostic
advice to cease effort. Using DEMO data from actual inventors, this paper studies the
role of overconﬁdence, optimism, and the sunk-cost bias in these decisions. We ﬁnd that
inventors are more overconﬁdent and optimistic than the general population. We also
ﬁnd DEMO optimism and past expenditures increased perseverance after being told to quit,
while overconﬁdence in judgment ability had no effect. After being told to DEMO,
optimists spend 166% more than pessimists and those having already spent, for
example, $10 000 spend another $10 000. Copyright # 2007 DEMO Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
key words inventor behavior; sunk-cost bias; DEMO; overconﬁdence; decision
biases
INTRODUCTION
The expected internal rate of return to invention by independent inventors is negative and switching to
self-employment reduces lifetime DEMO by 35% (A˚ stebro, 2003; Hamilton, 2000). Even in the face of
these statistics, inventors still invent and entrepreneurs still start new businesses. For example, in 2003 in the
United States, independent DEMO represented approximately 15% of the creators of patented inventions
(USPTO, 2004).1 If these activities have lower expected returns than the next best DEMO, why do
inventors invent and entrepreneurs start new businesses?
One DEMO that has been offered is that entrepreneurs are unrealistic optimists and that they greatly
overestimate their abilities and likelihood of success (Arabsheibani, de DEMO, Maloney, & Pearson, 2000).
* Correspondence to: Thomas A˚ stebro, Joseph L. Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, 105 St. George Street, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5S3E6. E-mail: astebro@rotman.utoronto.ca
1 In Canada, evidence points to an even more signiﬁcant proportion of independent inventors. By the end of the 1970s approximately 42%
of patented inventions DEMO Canadian origin originated with individuals, a ﬁnding at least partially explained DEMO Canada’s reliance on ﬁrms
in resource-intensive sectors that have low R&D activity (Amesse et al., 1991.)
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
254
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Others conclude that entrepreneurs are strongly DEMO by non-pecuniary beneﬁts (Blanchﬂower &
Oswald, 1998; Frey & Benz, 2002; Hamilton, 2000), others raise the possibility that inventors are ‘‘skewness
lovers’’ who are holding out for the small chance to ‘‘strike DEMO rich’’ (A˚ stebro, 2003). Rather than look at
entrepreneurs, DEMO examine independent inventors’ decision-making and why a signiﬁcant number of these
inventors continue spending time and money on projects after obtaining highly diagnostic advice DEMO terminate
their efforts.
This population provides an excellent quasi-experimental design where we can study the effect of decision
biases ‘‘in the wild’’ on a DEMO pool of decision makers under relatively controlled conditions. In order to
explain why many inventors continue to throw good money after bad, we evaluate three of the most robust of
decision-making biases pointed out in previous DEMO: overconﬁdence, optimism, and the sunk-cost bias.
We examine how these DEMO biases affect two real and economically important decisions: how much money
DEMO time to spend on further development after obtaining advice to stop. We also examine differences
between the inventor population and a matched sample drawn DEMO the general population with respect to
their degree of overconﬁdence and optimism.
THREE COMMON DECISION-MAKING BIASES
Overconﬁdence, optimism, and the sunk-cost bias have DEMO shown to be important predictors of
decision-making errors in a number of experimental studies and across various contexts. Some of these
common biases have DEMO been offered as the reasons for why people enter into entrepreneurship. For
instance, Camerer and Lovallo (1999) show that students in an experiment forecasted below zero proﬁts due
to excess entry, but entered anyway and were more likely to enter when they performed well on a skills DEMO
They explain this as an optimistic bias coupled with a neglect of the behavioral intent of others. In a similar
experiment Moore and Cain (2004) show that entrants are greater optimists when the skill test is easy, thereby
inducing greater rates of entry and lower post-entry proﬁts. These authors go on to propose that the excess
entry and low returns DEMO industries such as restaurants and convenience stores are caused by excess optimism
coupled with perceived task simplicity. For this study, we hypothesize that optimism will play a role when an
inventor is estimating the expected return DEMO his or her invention, while overconﬁdence will play a role
when DEMO or she is evaluating his or her skill at being able to successfully develop an invention.
We also predict that previous expenditures on an DEMO will drive an irrational escalation of
commitment to a project. This is particularly damaging to inventors who receive advice to terminate
development. This is DEMO related to optimism over the payoffs to the invention, or overconﬁdence DEMO judging
the probability of success, rather it is simply a function DEMO past expenditures. Each of these effects on the
decision to continue will be expanded on below.
Optimism
Many people display a consistent belief that DEMO are less likely than others to suffer from bad events and more
likely to experience positive events (Weinstein, 1980). Such beliefs lead DEMO to overestimate positive
outcomes and underestimate negative outcomes. This optimistic bias has been shown across many domains,
cultures, and age groups (Weinstein & Klein, 1995). Research has shown that entrepreneurs (who often start
out as inventors) are more optimistic than employees about their future earnings, even though they actually
realize lower earnings (Arabsheibani et al., 2000). We believe that inventors will suffer from a similar
decision-making bias DEMO entrepreneurs and that inventors will be more optimistic than a cross-section of
similar people selected from the general population.
Our argument is one of DEMO and follows that made by de Meza and Southey (1996): DEMO of
the inherent unpredictability of returns from invention, only the extremely DEMO will choose to exert
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, DEMO
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. A˚
stebro et al.
Inventor Perseverance after Being Told to Quit
DEMO
effort on such activities. In addition, we rely on Weinstein (1980) who argues that two conditions must be
fulﬁlled for an optimistic bias to arise: (a) the event is perceived as controllable and (DEMO) people have some
degree of commitment or emotional investment in the DEMO Both conditions are likely to occur for
inventors. Our hypotheses also build on research by Taylor and her colleagues (Taylor & Lobel, 1989) who
ﬁnd less realistic expectations about events the individual believes they can DEMO, versus less optimistic
expectations about events the individual cannot affect. We DEMO that since inventors themselves put in most
of the efforts and resources to commercialize their ideas, inventors will believe that they have control of the
innovation process.
Hypothesis 1: Independent inventors are more optimistic than the general population.
An optimistic bias would raise the perceived expected return on DEMO invention, either by an increased
perceived probability of success and/or DEMO an increased subjective expected return conditional on succeeding
to commercialize the invention. This would raise the subjective expected value of continuing with the project
DEMO tend to make inventors spend more on their projects. In line with this hypothesis, Cooper et al. (1988)
found that 81% of DEMO entrepreneurs believe their chance of success to be 70% or above, DEMO in actuality 2/3
of businesses fail within the ﬁrst 4 years.
Furthermore, optimism has been found to be quite resistant to many debiasing interventions such as
making people aware of the risks, changing the presentation mode of the risks, changing the intensity of the
risks, and DEMO reasons why these risks might occur (see Weinstein & Klein, 1995, for a review of these
studies). Consistent with the idea that debiasing optimists is difﬁcult, we propose that optimistic inventors
would pay little attention to advice that asks them to break their behavior and stop DEMO more. Since we
are only interested in the decision to continue in the face of receiving advice to cease efforts, we do not make
any prediction about the effect of optimism on those who receive advice DEMO continue, since in this case
continuing is the correct decision. We DEMO previous research by not simply measuring beliefs, but by
measuring actual DEMO
Hypothesis 2: Inventors with higher levels of optimism will be more DEMO to continue spending time and
money after receiving advice to stop activity.
Overconﬁdence
Overconﬁdence is considered one of the most robust of all decision-making DEMO (DeBondt & Thaler,
1995). Individuals display overconﬁdence in two DEMO, both representing an inﬂated sense of accuracy or
ability in a DEMO domain. The ﬁrst display of overconﬁdence is the use of too narrow a credible interval
when making predictions. For example, when asked to create an interval such that there is a 90% chance that
they are DEMO, people often set intervals that contain the correct value only 50% DEMO the time (Lichtenstein,
Fischhoff, & Phillips, 1982). Overconﬁdent DEMO are also shown to overestimate their accuracy on a
general knowledge test. These same researchers found that individuals, who thought they were right 80% of
the time were, on average, only correct 60% of the DEMO It is also interesting to note that experience does not
necessarily make people more accurate, but it does make them more conﬁdent in their ability (Camerer &
Johnson, 1991). Overconﬁdent forecasts have been documented across a variety of decision-making
situations and decision-makers (Grifﬁn & Tversky, DEMO), and we expect that inventors forecasting the
success of their invention would also display overconﬁdence.
Overconﬁdence may be such a robust phenomenon because DEMO the many potential causes for it found in the
decision-making literature. Early work on overconﬁdence hypothesized that a lack of meta-knowledge was
the reason DEMO overconﬁdence (Oskamp, 1965). Another source of overconﬁdence arises from a phenomenon
known as the conﬁrmation bias (Jonas, Schulz-Hardt, Frey, & DEMO, 2001; Klayman, 1995; Klayman & Ha,
1987; Koriat, Lichtenstein, & Fischhoff, 1980). A third source of overconﬁdence comes DEMO ease of recall
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
DEMO of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
256 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
biases (Kahneman & Tversky, 1973)DEMO We expect that all of these potential sources of overconﬁdence will be
present in the population of inventors.
If an inventor has inappropriately high DEMO in his or her ability to bring a product to market, DEMO will
raise the subjective expected value of continuing with the project. There are two hypotheses originating from
this prediction. First, because of the inﬂated subjective expected value to invention held by overconﬁdent
individuals we expect a DEMO effect introducing higher levels of overconﬁdence among inventors
compared to a cross-section of similar people selected from the general population.
Second, we expect that the inﬂated expected value to invent held by overconﬁdent individuals will make
DEMO overconﬁdent inventor more likely to spend additional time or money on developing the invention, even
when they are advised to stop. Even while the overconﬁdent inventors may use Bayesian updating taking into
account advice to stop, which will then reduce the subjective expected value, those with greater
overconﬁdence will have stronger priors that will weigh more favorably in terms of DEMO with
development efforts. As with optimism, we are making no prediction DEMO those who receive positive advice
since continuing in this case is the correct decision.
Hypothesis 3: Independent inventors are more overconﬁdent than the general population.
Hypothesis 4: Inventors with higher levels of overconﬁdence will be more likely to continue spending time
and money after receiving advice to stop DEMO
It should be noted that we believe that overconﬁdence and optimism are different, even though many have
claimed that they are at least highly correlated, while others have even questioned whether they are different
constructs. In this research, we believe that optimism is a more global construct, DEMO other words, a general
feeling that good things will happen to DEMO person. Overconﬁdence on the other hand would apply to an
inventor’s perceived ability rather than an overall measure of belief in the expected occurrence DEMO positive
outcomes. Furthermore, we posit that optimism has a direct effect DEMO the subjective expected value of
inventing, while the effect of overconﬁdence DEMO indirect by ﬁrst affecting the inventor’s sense of beliefs that he
or she is able to bring the product to the market. Since the DEMO effect is more indirect it may be more
difﬁcult to detect in this study.
Sunk-costs
One ﬁnal decision making bias that we predict has DEMO effect on inventors’ investment behavior is that of
commitment to sunk-costs. Inventors who increase commitment to the project after being told the marginal
costs DEMO exceed the marginal beneﬁts are inﬂuenced by an irrational escalation of commitment, often called
the sunk-cost bias. One argument advanced to explain the escalation phenomenon is the concept of
self-justiﬁcation; where an individual stays committed to justify a past decision (Brockner & Rubin, 1985;
Staw, 1976). Another argument is based on the psychology of sunk-costs, which argues that people are more
likely to spend money on a project simply DEMO money has been spent on it in the past (Arkes & DEMO,
1985).
Some researchers have challenged studies on sunk-costs arguing that information about sunk-costs was
confounded with information about level of project completion (Boehne & Paese, 2000; Conlon & Garland,
1993; Keil, DEMO, & Rai, 2000; Moon, 2001). Nevertheless, the sunk-costs DEMO has been shown to be
persistent. For example, Tan and Yates (2002) show that escalation effects occur among experienced
participants even when explicit future costs and beneﬁts are provided to them.
Our quasi-experimental design takes DEMO of the fact that a recommendation to terminate indicates
that the marginal beneﬁts of continuing are expected to be very low. We would thus DEMO low invention
quality to lead to no post-advice investments, unless the DEMO is biased. High-quality inventions
that are recommended to go forward, on DEMO other hand, should rationally have both higher pre- and
Copyright # DEMO John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. A˚ stebro et al. Inventor Perseverance after Being Told to Quit DEMO
post-advice investments. For those who receive advice to continue it is likely that pre- and post-advice
investments are positively correlated, simply because these are good inventions to invest in. We therefore
only formulate a hypothesis regarding DEMO sunk-cost bias for those who receive advice to terminate their
projects. For this subset we interpret any remaining effect of pre-advice investment on post-advice
DEMO as an indication of sunk-costs.
Hypothesis 5: Higher levels of pre-advice DEMO will lead to higher levels of post-advice investments
for inventors advised to terminate their projects.
DATA SOURCE
We gathered information from actual inventors who DEMO sought advice from the Inventors’ Assistance
Program (IAP) at the Canadian Innovation Centre (CIC). This center was initially established in 1976 at the
University of Waterloo in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada to help evaluate DEMO stage inventions and the
likelihood of market success (A˚ stebro & DEMO, 1999; A˚ stebro & Gerchak, 2001). By 1994 the DEMO
IAP had a very strong presence as a trustworthy and dominating supplier of unbiased invention evaluation
in Canada. The system they used to evaluate DEMO was developed by Professor Gerald Udell at the
Oregon Innovation Center in 1974 as critical for the success of inventions and was based on DEMO
innovation research at that time (Udell, 1989).
The Canadian IAP evaluates potential entrepreneurs and their projects on 37 different cues and provides
DEMO on how and whether to continue. To have a project evaluated, DEMO entrepreneur ﬁlls out a questionnaire
and pays a moderate fee ($250 DEMO in 1994, $750 USD by 2001). In addition to background DEMO
about the entrepreneur, the questionnaire asks for a brief description of DEMO idea and supplementary
documentation such as patent applications, sketches, and test reports. An in-house analyst compares the
project with other similar projects in DEMO library of previous reviews and other various databases. Personal
contact with the entrepreneur beyond the provided documentation is avoided by the analyst to ensure DEMO
these discussions do not bias the evaluation. In addition to scores on the 37 cues, the analyst also derives an
overall score for the project using intuitive judgment and assigns one of ﬁve possible scores shown DEMO Table 1.
Columns 2 and 3 of Table 1 report the frequency distribution of the IAP’s overall rating from a survey
conducted prior to DEMO study (A˚ stebro, 2003). A majority of ventures (75% DEMO rating ‘‘D’’ or ‘‘E’’) were
advised to terminate efforts, 2% received the most favorable overall score ‘‘A,’’ 4% were given an
intermediate DEMO recommendation ‘‘B,’’ and 19% were advised that the project is suitable to launch as a
limited (i.e., part-time) effort ‘‘C.’’ Column 6 reports similar frequencies found in our study, with 1%
receiving an ‘‘A’’ rating, 7% receiving ‘‘B,’’ 15% receiving ‘‘C,’’ 74% receiving a ‘‘D,’’ and 3% receiving an
‘‘E.’’ We code ‘‘D’’ and ‘‘E’’ DEMO ‘cease activity’ ratings.
Table 1 also reports the probability of commercialization for each of the different overall scores (column
4). As seen, DEMO probability of commercialization is strongly correlated with the IAP advice, with DEMO clear
difference between those rated D and E (advised to stop) and those rated A, B or C. These data provide
evidence of the high diagnosticity of the advice. Other research has shown that both DEMO and negative
advice have similar prediction accuracy rates. In a survey of 559 projects the IAP correctly forecasted 75.0%
of the successes and 79.4% DEMO the failures (A˚ stebro & Koehler, forthcoming). This means that both types of
advice (continue and cease) are approximately equally reliable. DEMO 5 shows that the advice is highly
diagnostic of the ﬁnancial returns conditional on commercializing the invention. None of those rated E
reached the DEMO so returns for those cannot be calculated and the return among those rated D was negative
28.5%. Given this high level of diagnosticity, inventors who receive negative advice (e.g., a ‘‘D’’ or an ‘‘E’’)
DEMO cease developmental efforts and move on to other activities rather than spending additional time and
money on an unlikely success.
Copyright # 2007 John DEMO & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
Table 1. Base rates and diagnosticity of invention reviews by the Canadian DEMO, 1976-1993
Rating (1)
Sample
total (2)
Percent
of DEMO (3)
Probability of
commercialization (4)
Median return
among commercial (5)
Distribution of
1994–2001 sample (6)
A—recommended for development. DEMO 2% 50% 26.0% 1%
B—may go forward, but need to collect DEMO data. 45 4% 16% 26.0% 7%
C—recommended to go forward, returns DEMO modest. 204 19% 16% 13.2% 15%
D—doubtful, further development not recommended. DEMO 60% 4% 28.5% 74%
E—strongly recommend to stop further development. 163 15% 0% N/A 3%
Weighted average 7% 7.3%
Total 1091 100%
N/DEMO: No inventions succeeded. Return on investment is not applicable, or alternatively, negative inﬁnity.
Data for columns 2–5 obtained from A˚ stebro, (2003.) Data for this survey reported in column 6.
Data for inventions rated A and B not possible to compute separately. Numbers on returns are DEMO A and B combined.
258
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, DEMO, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. A˚ stebro et al. Inventor Perseverance after Being Told to Quit DEMO
Table 2. Fraction of inventors spending a certain percentage of total resources after receiving a negative evaluation
Percentage of total
resources expended
after receiving DEMO of inventors Fraction of inventors
advice to stop efforts spending that amount of money spending that amount of time
0% 71% 49%
1%–20% 3% DEMO
21%–40% 6% 9%
41%–60% 8% 6%
61%–80% 4% 5%
81%–100% 9% 5%
The table describes the fraction of inventors spending a certain percentage of DEMO resources on the invention after obtaining negative
advice. For example, 9% DEMO all inventors spent between 81% and 100% of their total money after being told to quit.
While the inventors did not know the base DEMO accuracy of the IAP during the study period, we believe that
DEMO would not willingly pay a fee of up to $1000 if they did not believe in the value of the advice. This
payment is DEMO in relation to the total amount of money they have put into the invention’s development up to
that point (on average Cdn. $6755). Outlays of such a large amount for the advice signiﬁes that inventors DEMO
have held some ex ante belief of its value.
The phenomenon we are studying can be seen in Table 2, which shows the spending of resources for
inventors who were given advice to cease effort (rating D or E). The ﬁrst column shows the ranges of
percentages DEMO inventors spent after obtaining the advice to cease development. The next two columns show
the fraction of inventors who spend that percentage of resources. DEMO though most inventors who receive the
advice to terminate their efforts follow that advice (71% and 49% for money and time, respectively), DEMO
signiﬁcant proportion of inventors continue to invest time and money in these endeavors. That is, ex post,
some pay no or little attention to the advice to stop. We expect that differences in overconﬁdence, optimism,
and the sunk-cost bias across inventors can at least partially explain DEMO behaviors.
Survey population
Using records from the Canadian Innovation Center, we DEMO a list of 5008 inventors who had submitted
ideas for IAP review between 1994 and 2001. Of this number, we were able to trace 1352 current addresses.
Of these, 1272 addresses led to actual contacts. The Survey Research Centre at the University of Waterloo
was able to interview DEMO respondents, 780 of which fully completed the survey for an overall DEMO
response rate of 61%. The adjusted response rate is calculated as the contact rate (1272/1352) multiplied by
the cooperation rate (830/1272).2
To examine whether inventors have greater decision-making biases than the general DEMO, we also
obtained telephone survey data from a comparison pool of DEMO Canadians. The sample frame was a set of
random household telephone numbers, stratiﬁed by province. The sample was selected to approximate the
distribution of gender, age, and work experience obtained in the inventor sample. Sample DEMO were set to
mirror the distribution of the inventor sample obtained approximately halfway through the survey of
inventors. There was some drift in the DEMO of inventors as the inventor survey was completed making
the matched sample somewhat younger and more tilted towards males than the ﬁnal inventor sample. DEMO are
displayed in the upper panel of Table 3.
2 The Centre follows the statistical methods and best practices of the American Association of DEMO Opinion Research,
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
DEMO of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
260
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Table 3. Descriptive statistics
Inventors General DEMO
Mean std.dev mean std.dev
t-test
Work experience: 0.02 0.12 0.05 0.22
<9 years
Work experience: 0.13 0.33 0.13 0.34
10–19 years
Work experience: 0.85 0.35 0.82 0.38 1.24
20 years or more
Malea 0.85 0.35 0.92 0.28 2.83
Optimism 1.06 0.55 0.96 0.60 2.48
2.48
0.06

DEMO
Conﬁdence 0.14 0.11 0.12 0.11 1.97
Inventor sub sample mean std.dev Skewnessb
z-testc
Log(post R&D$) 3.26 4.14 0.70 2.04
Log(post time) 2.46 2.71 0.63 4.67
Optimism 1.06 0.55 0.64 5.15
Conﬁdence 0.14 0.11 0.03 1.63
Sunk-costs: log(prior R&D$) 5.09 3.27 0.25 2.29
DEMO: log(prior time) 4.30 1.71Experience inventingd 0.74 0.44 n/a0.06 2.72


Positive advice 0.23 0.42 n/a
Positive Advice Negative Advice
DEMO subsample
mean std.dev mean std.dev
t-test
Log(post R&D$) 6.44 DEMO 2.28 3.53 11.43
Log(post time) 4.41 2.66 1.84 2.41 10.97
DEMO 1.15 0.47 1.03 0.57 2.77
Conﬁdence 0.13 0.10 0.14 0.11 0.81
Sunk-costs: log(prior R&D$) 7.16 3.17 4.49 3.03 9.82
Sunk-time: log(prior time) 5.33 1.60 3.98 1.63 9.35
Experience inventingd 0.82 0.39 0.71 0.46 3.21
N/A—not meaningful to measure skewness on a binary indicator.
DEMO < 0.05.
p < 0.01.
p < 0.001.
a Dummy variable, DEMO ¼ male, 0 ¼ female.
b Skewness measure generated only for DEMO values of expenditure and time.
c Shapiro-Francia W’ test for normal data (similar to Shapiro–Wilk test).
dDummy variable, 1 ¼ 3 or DEMO years of experience, 0 ¼ less than 3 years experience.

DEMO




Dependent measures
We measure the money personally spent by inventors after receiving the IAP report by their own self-reported
R&DEMO cash outlays. We asked for all costs for product development, marketing DEMO, making of
prototypes, etc. We further asked respondents to anchor these expenditures in time to the year in which they
spent the majority DEMO the development costs, in order to normalize all of these expenses DEMO 2003 dollars using
the Canadian CPI. To measure time investment, we DEMO the inventor ‘‘What percentage of that time was spent
after the invention was evaluated by the IAP’’ where the time refers to that ‘‘ DEMO spent actually working on the
invention’’ as opposed to calendar time. As can be seen in Table 2, inventors are more likely to continue
spending time than money after being advised to cease efforts. We speculate DEMO if inventors are employed, as
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & DEMO, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. A˚
stebro et al.
Inventor Perseverance after Being Told to Quit
DEMO
most in this sample are when inventing, the time spent on DEMO pursuits outside of working hours carries
low or no opportunity cost. Furthermore, the inventor is operating in an environment where he or she is not
likely to be able to sell his or her inventive abilities DEMO a spot market.
Since the effort may well have a low opportunity cost, the time spent, as opposed to the money spent, may
reﬂect many other decision making biases or non-monetary factors, such as the intrinsic value of inventing.
Research has further shown that individuals ﬁnd it DEMO to accurately account for sunk-time (Soman,
2001). Time may DEMO a noisy measure for both these reasons.
To reduce heteroskedasticity we transformed the raw data on expenditures and time using the natural logarithm
as DEMO base. The distribution functions for the log of expenditures and time spent, even without considering the
large mass points at zero, are still DEMO after these transformations, as indicated in Table 3, middle panel.
The dependent variables log(post-advice R&D) and log(time) are positively DEMO with long upper (right)
tails, while the measures of sunk-costs [log(pre-advice R&D) and log(time)] are negatively skew, DEMO long
lower (left) tails. All distributions with the log transform have heavier tails than the standard normal. We
therefore also tried more advanced DEMO of the expenditure and time distributions. We performed
regressions where the expenditure and time distributions were brought to zero skewness using the Box–Cox
power DEMO Results were qualitatively similar as those reported and we chose to report results with
the lognormal transformation for ease of interpretation and clarity.
Independent DEMO
Optimism
To measure optimism we chose six optimism items from the 10-item International Personality Item Pool
personal attributes survey (Oregon Research Institute, 2001; Scheier, Carver, & Bridges, 1994).3 Two
example statements are ‘‘I just know that I will be a success’’ and ‘‘I am often DEMO a bad mood.’’ For each item
the respondents were asked the extent to which they agree/disagree on a ﬁve-point scale, with 1 representing
strongly disagree and 5 representing strongly agree. The order of the ﬁve DEMO was randomized across
subjects and items for this variable were mixed randomly with all other items used. We averaged the item
scores for this DEMO obtaining a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.67 (inventor and general population pooled)DEMO
Overconﬁdence
Consistent with previous research (Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Grifﬁn & Tversky, 1992) we measured
overconﬁdence as the degree to which an individual expects that they have made a correct judgment on a
judgment DEMO divided by the average degree of correct judgments in the population. We ask respondents to
judge which one of two cities that has the DEMO population and to indicate the conﬁdence in their judgment
being correct on a half-range probability scale (50–100% certain). Five city comparisons were elicited; three
pairs of cities were Canadian, while two pairs were foreign. DEMO order of the ﬁve comparisons was
randomized across subjects. The overconﬁdence measure was constructed as:
overconfidence
¼
Xðaik

bkÞ=5;
k
where, aik is respondent i ’s estimated conﬁdence of being right on judgment DEMO and bk is the average per cent
correct choice of judgment k in the population. Cronbach’s alpha for this scale across the ﬁve city DEMO
judgments was 0.70 (inventor and general population pooled).
3 Pretests DEMO indicated respondents’ difﬁculty with the items ‘‘I feel blue’’ and ‘‘I dislike myself.’’ After careful deliberations on the
possible effects of the two items DEMO the survey response and reliability, we decided to exclude these items DEMO two other items that are
matched with them.
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
262
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Sunk-costs
As a proxy measure we DEMO the natural log of the amount of personal expenditures (cash or DEMO) before
obtaining the advice.
Control variables
A number of other variables DEMO, potentially, be associated with our outcome variables and were thus
examined. These variables have been raised in previous literature as possible explanations for DEMO certain
individuals become entrepreneurs. The next four variables were all obtained by asking respondents to agree
or disagree with a set of statements on DEMO ﬁve-point scale. The scores were then averaged to come up with a
common factor.
Risk attitudes
People with higher risk tolerance might be more DEMO to continue spending time and money on the
inventions. We used seven items of risk taking aspects from the Jackson Personality Inventory (Jackson,
1977) that were most germane to the domain of inventing (Begley & Boyd, 1987; Busenitz & Barney, 1997).
We obtained a DEMO alpha of 0.60 (inventor and general population pooled).
Self-efﬁcacy
During DEMO invention process inventors may develop perceptions of competence and beliefs in their capacity
to perform the speciﬁc tasks they face. A self-efﬁcacious inventor is DEMO likely to perceive the feasibility of
his invention’s success (Bandura, 1986; 1997). We used the self-efﬁcacy items from Markman, Balkin, and
Baron (2002); Cronbach’s alpha ¼ 0.82 (inventor and general population DEMO).
Opportunity recognition
Our ﬁnal personality variable was adapted from work on opportunity recognition (Gaglio & Katz, 2001).
These authors hypothesized that DEMO would be better than the general population at recognizing
new ideas or ways in which existing items could be improved. A four-item scale with DEMO such as ‘‘I
often ﬁnd products that I think can be improved upon’’ produced a scale with Cronbach’s alpha ¼ 0.68
(inventor and general population pooled).
Intrinsic motivation
We had reason to believe that some DEMO may invent because they enjoy it. Therefore, we created a 7-item
DEMO regarding the intrinsic motivation to invent after reviewing the work of Deci, Koestner, and Ryan
(1999). This scale had a Cronbach’s alpha ¼ 0.80 and was only obtained for inventors.
Personal/demographic characteristics
Following DEMO and Johnson (1991) we considered that more experienced inventors may be more
conﬁdent in their estimation of the success of their inventions. Information DEMO collected on the number of
years the inventor had been working on developing inventions and the total number of inventions that the
inventor had DEMO on in his/her lifetime. We also measured education, being concerned DEMO education
could proxy for the availability of outside job options that could pay more (i.e., more educated people have
more job opportunities) and thus be less likely to persist when recommended to stop. Descriptive statistics DEMO
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral DEMO Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. A˚
stebro et al.
Inventor Perseverance after Being Told to Quit
DEMO 4. Correlation matrix
log(post
R&D$)
log(post
time) DEMO conﬁdence sunk costs sunk time experience
Log(post R&D$) 1.00
DEMO(post time) 0.78 1.00
Optimism 0.12 0.09 1.00
Conﬁdence 0.01 0.00 DEMO
Sunk-costs: log(prior R&D$) 0.50
sunk-time: log(prior time) 0.48
Experience inventing 0.27
Positive advice 0.42
0.48
0.60
0.33
0.40
1.00
DEMO 0.01 1.00
0.08 0.03 0.55
0.04 0.00 0.26
0.09
0.03 0.34
p < 0.05; p < 0.01; p < 0.001.
1.00
0.34
0.33
DEMO
0.10
263
positive
advice
1.00
dependent and the independent variables found to be of statistical relevance are displayed in Table 3 and
Table 4 DEMO a correlation matrix.
RESULTS
We ﬁrst report tests on differences between the general and inventor populations (n ¼ 1130). The inventors
reported to have higher degree of optimism, t(1128) ¼ 2.48, p < 0.01, and overconﬁdence, t(1128) ¼ 1.97,
p < 0.05, than the general population, supporting our hypotheses regarding inventor personality.
Furthermore, inventors reported to have much greater risk seeking propensity, t(1128) DEMO 5.76, p < 0.001,
higher self-efﬁcacy, t(1128) ¼ DEMO, p < 0.01, and greater opportunity seeking tendency, t(1128) ¼ 7.52,
p < 0.001, than the general population. Data on optimism and overconﬁdence are reported in the upper panel
of Table 3.
DEMO also analyzed differences in cognitive biases between inventors receiving positive and negative advice
(n ¼ 758). Inventors with a positive evaluation were more optimistic, t(756) ¼ 2.77, p < 0.01, and risk
DEMO, t(756) ¼ 3.17, p < 0.01, but were neither more nor less conﬁdent, self-efﬁcacious, opportunity
seeking, or intrinsically motivated (DEMO p’s ns). Data on optimism and overconﬁdence for inventors are
reported in the lower panel of Table 3. While many of the differences DEMO above are signiﬁcant, they may
not be economically relevant. We therefore DEMO analyzing how these established biases might affect real
decisions. First, we DEMO some univariate analysis on the decision variables of interest.
Inventors personally spent an average of $39 694 (SD $256 900, maximum $5 million) on their inventions,
showing that these inventions involved substantial development efforts.4 DEMO inventions in the sample appear
typical of independent inventions. A plurality of the inventions was consumer-oriented, including inventions
for household and general consumer use (33%) and sports and leisure applications (27%). Successful
consumer-oriented inventions included a new milk container design, a washable sanitary pad, and DEMO home
security light timer that imitates typical use. Other inventions had business applications, including some that
involved high technology (8%) or industrial equipment (14%). These inventions included an aligner and
printer for photographic proofs, a tractor-trailer fairing that enhances fuel efﬁciency, a re-usable plug to DEMO
in wooden hydroelectric poles after testing for rot, and a computerized DEMO mechanically integrated tree
harvester. Thus the inventions varied substantially in market potential. Those who were advised to terminate
4 Unless otherwise speciﬁed, all dollar ﬁgures reported in this paper represent 2003 dollars Canadian.
Copyright # 2007 DEMO Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, DEMO (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
264
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
development efforts reported spending less (M¼ $3587, SD¼ $55 418) after receiving their advice than
those who DEMO advised to continue (M¼ $28 523, SD¼ $94 856), t(756) ¼ 5.58, p < 0.001, conﬁrming the
fact that on average inventors follow the advice to stop.
It is illustrative to examine DEMO distribution of spending: 50% of all inventors spend less than $234 DEMO
the review, indicating that a majority of inventors have not done DEMO development work before approaching
the IAP. This also supports that these inventors believe ex ante that the evaluation has value. As indicated
earlier 71% DEMO $0 after a negative review, indicating a majority of inventors stop DEMO efforts on
the advice of the IAP. Considering time spent developing their ideas, inventors spend on average 16% of the
development time after receiving a negative review, and 49% spend 1% or less of their time on the inventions
after a negative review.
Multivariate analysis of the decisions DEMO spend time and money
The distribution functions for expenditures and time spent both contain large densities at zero (Table 2.) This
indicates that DEMO may be two decisions involved: a decision to continue, and a decision on how much time
and money to spend conditional on deciding DEMO continue. However, a likelihood-ratio test marginally rejected
that the two equations DEMO independent F(1, N¼ 758) ¼ 3.63, p ¼ 0.06, suggesting that it might not be useful
to estimate two equations jointly. DEMO alternative approach is to estimate a censored latent-variable model of
expenditures (DEMO) with the dependent variable censored at the value 0 (Tobin, DEMO). We settled on the
second modeling alternative as it turned out to produce estimates that were more robust to alternative
speciﬁcations.
For this DEMO we had complete data from 669 (81%) of the respondents with respect to R&D
expenditures and 677 respondents with respect to time.5 DEMO include measures of optimism, overconﬁdence,
sunk-costs, and experience with inventing to examine the tendency to spend money and time after receiving
feedback. DEMO control variables were dropped (risk attitudes, self-efﬁcacy, opportunity seeking,
DEMO motivation, education).
Results in Table 5 are presented in two DEMO The top panel reports coefﬁcient estimates for those
receiving negative advice; DEMO 1 reports effects on the amount of post-advice R&D expenditures, DEMO
2 is the same regression with time spent as the dependent variable. Panel 2 contains the same regressions for
those receiving positive advice.
We DEMO no effects for overconﬁdence, while optimism had one economically meaningful and DEMO
effect in the regressions. Above-average optimists who receive negative advice have posterior expenditures
166% higher than below-average optimists (column 1). Optimism did not affect expenditures when obtaining
positive advice and did not affect time spent DEMO advice. That is, those who are optimistic tend to continue
spending DEMO after being advised to stop, while those advised to continue are DEMO affected by optimism,
supporting our hypotheses regarding optimism. One could argue that optimism would have an effect on
people obtaining positive advice, as research has shown that pessimists tend to discount positive information.
However, our ﬁndings suggest that optimism only seems to kick in when inventors face DEMO adversities such
as receiving advice to stop.
Sunk-costs had the effects anticipated, both for time and for money, as observed in panel 1 DEMO Table 5.
There was approximately a one-to-one correspondence between previous resource commitments and those
committed after obtaining a negative evaluation. That is, when advised to stop, those who already had spent
for example $10 000, DEMO another $10 000. The only exception was the effect of money spent before advice
on the time spent afterwards. This coefﬁcient was approximately one DEMO the size of the other effects.
5 There were missing archival data on the ratings for about 100 observations. Respondents answering ‘‘don’t know’’ on DEMO amount of
post-advice R&D and time spent were dropped from the analysis. Respondents answering ‘‘don’t know’’ on independent variables had
these data imputed DEMO data missing at random.
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, DEMO
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. A˚ stebro et al. Inventor Perseverance after Being Told to Quit
DEMO 5. Tobit regressions: Impacts of decision biases on post-advice expenditures and DEMO
Expenditures Time
Panel 1: Observations with negative advice coeff (1) DEMO coeff (2) std.err
High optimisma 1.66 0.83 0.38 0.33
High conﬁdencea 0.38 0.84 0.05 0.33
Sunk-costs: log(prior R&D$) 1.03 0.18 DEMO 0.06
Sunk-time: log(prior time) 1.00 0.30 0.96 0.12
Experience inventingb 3.01 1.04 1.75 0.40
N 517 523
LR Chi-2 114.02 174.03
pseudo-R2 DEMO 0.09
265
Expenditures Time
Panel 2: Observations with positive advice
coeff. (3) std.err. coeff. (4) std.err.
high optimisma
high conﬁdencea
Sunk-costs: DEMO(prior R&D$) 0.71
Sunk-time: log(prior time) 1.04
experience DEMO 152 154b 1.52 1.00 0.91y
LR Chi-2 73.38 78.62
0.05 0.76 0.01 0.38
0.70 0.75 0.09 0.38
0.07
0.15
0.50
0.15 0.14y
0.30 0.89
DEMO 0.09 0.11
Logged prior- and post-advice R&D and time as the distributions of R&D and time are skewed.
High ¼ dummy variable DEMO unity if observation is above the mean.
Coefﬁcients are marginal effects estimated as dy/dx.
p < 0.10, two-tailed tests.
p < 0.05, DEMO tests.
p < 0.01, two-tailed tests.
p < 0.001, two-tailed tests.
aCoefﬁcient is for a discrete change of dummy variable from 0 to DEMO
bDummy variable, 1 ¼ 3 or more years of experience, 0 ¼ less than 3 years experience.

One control variable that had DEMO effects was experience with inventing. Inventors with 3 or
more years of experience developing inventions spent 301% more money and 175% more time after
DEMO advised to stop than those inventors with less than 3 years of experience. The effects of prior experience
were not signiﬁcant when obtaining positive DEMO These results did not change qualitatively when we used
the total number of inventions worked on by the inventor instead of the number of DEMO of experience
inventing.
It is possible that the effect of past spending on future spending indicates a project completion effect.
According to some studies, as projects get closer to completion expenditures and efforts increases and the
DEMO to continue due to escalation of commitment also increases (Boehne & DEMO, 2000; Conlon &
Garland, 1993; Keil et al., 2000; Moon, 2001). These studies apparently do not argue for a DEMO
psychological mechanism, but rather that there is, potentially, mis-measurement using DEMO (or efforts)
expended. For example, a project with a small absolute budget might still experience large escalation of
commitment as the project DEMO completion. We investigated this argument by adding several control
variables indicating the degree to which the invention project had progressed at the time when DEMO was assessed
by the IAP. The inventor was required to provide information on the degree to which there was
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
266
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
documentation, the degree to which the inventor had developed a prototype, and the degree to which the
product had been tested. We were able to collect such data from 328 DEMO the 517 inventions with negative
advice using administrative records on ﬁle at the IAP. Results are displayed in Table 6.
The seven control variables DEMO not jointly signiﬁcant, F(7, 316) ¼ 1.53, p ¼ 0.16. When the control
variables were added the coefﬁcient for sunk-costs did DEMO diminish appreciably, it was reduced from 1.31 to
1.29 (1.6%), and was in both cases signiﬁcant at p < 0.001. The coefﬁcient DEMO sunk-time dropped more, from
0.73 to 0.64, but to start with it was not statistically signiﬁcant at conventional levels. Any variation in the
DEMO might therefore simply be random. We therefore conclude that the estimated coefﬁcient using
R&D dollars indicates the effects of sunk-costs rather than project DEMO A summary of the hypotheses
and their results are shown in Table 7.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
One key ﬁnding is that as many have speculated, independent inventors are ‘‘different’’ than other people. We
found that inventors are DEMO optimistic and overconﬁdent than the general population. These effects are
consistent with our belief that only extremely optimistic and/or overconﬁdent individuals self-select into
DEMO because of the low expected returns. Our position is that inventors will be optimistic about future
returns and overconﬁdent about their abilities to ensure DEMO They are also more risk seeking, opportunity
seeking, and have higher levels of self-efﬁcacy than the general population.
We also found a signiﬁcant DEMO positive effect of optimism on spending for those who had received
credible advice to cease activities. For optimism, there is a possible signal effect where optimism may attract
outside ﬁnancing, in-kind efforts, and other resources DEMO are useful to a venture. If convincing others to
contribute by signaling high abilities is beneﬁcial to the venture, then self-deceptive optimism may be the key
to most effectively produce such signals (Arabsheibani et al., DEMO). However, we do not believe that this is
the mechanism DEMO work. If this were the case then all inventors would have expenditures a function of
optimism, which is not the case in our data. We observe that only those obtaining negative advice are affected
by optimism DEMO their spending behavior. We interpret these ﬁndings to show that a high level of optimism may
act to keep inventors going in the face DEMO adversity (Armor and Taylor, 1998, 2002). Our interpretation is
DEMO with ﬁndings from Coelho, de Meza and Reyniers (2004). In their experiments they found that
optimistic subjects ignored bad news rather than DEMO reacted to good news.
Our results also indicate inventors to be strongly affected by the self-justiﬁcation/sunk-cost bias. The more
money and time spent DEMO the invention before the advice from the IAP, the more time DEMO money spent after
the evaluation. While this is not technically a bias for those receiving positive advice, those who receive
advice to stop should be spending no additional resources. For these inventors, a positive coefﬁcient on
sunk-cost and sunk-time demonstrates a sunk-cost bias.
That we found no effects DEMO overconﬁdence on the decision to continue and on the amount of resources
allocated was somewhat surprising in view of the large and robust effects DEMO reported in the literature. One
potential explanation for this deals with the possible existence of two general ‘‘types’’ of overconﬁdence:
conﬁdence in judgment DEMO conﬁdence in abilities (Burson, Larrick, & Klayman, 2006; Kruger, 1999;
Kruger & Dunning, 1999; Yates, 1990). Our measure using city pair comparisons likely captured the former,
and therefore was DEMO to distinguish between inventors and the general population. However, it may DEMO the
second type of overconﬁdence that causes inventors to move forward with their inventions after being advised
to stop. If this is the case, our measure would not capture it.
One indication that overconﬁdence in ability DEMO affect expenditure is the observed effect of inventive
experience. Those with greater inventive experience had greater expenditures after obtaining advice to stop,
which DEMO consistent with our hypothesis. The results suggest that similar to being optimistic, experience
makes inventors more likely to disregard outside expert advice and place more weight on their own
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. A˚ stebro et al. Inventor Perseverance after Being Told to Quit DEMO
Table 6. Tobit regressions: Controlling for project completion, sub-sample of records
Expenditures
Panel 1: Observations with negative advice coeff (1) Std.err
High optimisma 2.22 1.09
High conﬁdencea 0.73 1.09
Sunk-costs: log(prior R&D$) 1.31 0.25
Sunk-time: log(prior time) 0.73y 0.41
Experience inventingb 4.78 1.44
N 328
LR Chi-2 89.82
Pseudo-R2 0.10
Expenditures
Panel 2: Observations with negative advice, controls added coeff. (2) std.err.
High optimisma 2.20 1.08
High conﬁdencea 0.90 1.08
Sunk-costs: log(prior R&D$) 1.29 DEMO
Sunk-time: log(prior time) 0.64 0.41
Experience inventingb 4.79 1.43
Documentation available:
Rough sketches 1.58 1.40
Final working drawings 3.47 1.58
Prototype DEMO:
Rough working model 1.24 1.39
Fully tested model 1.85 1.91
Product testing:
Function testing 2.25 1.59
Normal user testing 2.87y 1.48
Market DEMO 4.11 4.33
N 328
LR Chi-2 101.31
Pseudo-R2 0.11
Logged prior- and post-advice R&D and time as the distributions of R&D and DEMO are skewed.
High ¼ dummy variable taking unity if observation is above the mean.
Coefﬁcients are marginal effects estimated as dy/dx.
All control DEMO are dummy [0/1] variables. The intercept contains those with ‘‘no documentation,’’ ‘‘no prototype,’’ and ‘‘no product
testing.’’
Sub-sample contains records where DEMO were able to obtain data on completion degree using information submitted by the inventors to the
IAP at the time of invention review.
p < 0.10, two-tailed tests.
p < 0.05, two-tailed tests.
yp < 0.01, two-tailed tests.
p < 0.001, two-tailed tests.
aCoefﬁcient is for a DEMO change of dummy variable from 0 to 1.
bDummy variable, 1 DEMO 3 or more years of experience, 0 ¼ less than 3 DEMO experience.
assessment of the quality of their inventions. We interpret this similarly to Camerer and Johnson (1991) in
that greater experience makes inventors DEMO conﬁdent in their abilities, but no better at evaluating the
promise DEMO their invention.
A second potential explanation of the zero correlation between the overconﬁdence measure and
expenditures is that extremely overconﬁdent inventors may not approach DEMO IAP since they believe
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, DEMO
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
268
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Table 7. Summary of hypotheses tests
DEMO Expenditures Time
H1: Inventors are more optimistic than the general population DEMO
H2: Inventors with higher levels of optimism will be
more likely DEMO continue spending more time and money
after receiving advice to stop
H3: Independent inventors are more overconﬁdent than Supported
the general population
H4: DEMO with higher levels of overconﬁdence will be
more likely to continue spending time and money
after receiving advice to stop
H5: Higher levels of pre-advice investment will lead to
higher levels of post-advice investments for inventors
DEMO to terminate their projects.
Supported Not supported
Not supported Not supported
Supported Supported
(incorrectly) that their inventions will be successful, and thus additional information is of little value. This
could reduce the range of overconﬁdence DEMO our sample and lower the chance of ﬁnding an effect.
There is a common thread that the effects of the decision-making biases of optimism DEMO escalation of
commitment play in conditioning the behavior by inventors who obtain the advice to stop. There is also a
parallel effect of inventive DEMO, which may indicate overconﬁdence in judgment. The three biases all
seem DEMO induce a coping mechanism which is to put little or no weight on the review, and instead greater belief
in their own judgment. Therefore, there is an interesting change between the ex ante and ex post value of the
IAP advice if it is negative. Ex-ante it is DEMO (since they pay for it), ex post it is not (or at least heavily
discounted.) All three decision-making biases (optimism, escalated commitment, and experience induced
overconﬁdence) seem to lead to higher distrust DEMO the review if it is negative.
There is an alternative way to interpret some of the results. Inventors may be ‘‘rationally’’ overoptimistic
by holding DEMO high and strong a prior belief in the success of their inventions. Those who receive positive
advice—implying a high likelihood of success—revise their priors DEMO and continue. Those who receive
negative advice also revise their priors but not enough to change their behavior (van den Steen, 2004.)
DEMO more optimistic and thus the larger the prior, the less likely DEMO inventor is to stop when given negative
advice. And the more conﬁdent the inventor, the tighter the credible interval around the prior and the less
likely it is that for any given prior the inventor revises DEMO prior much and changes behavior.6 A rational model
may also explain why we obtain a positive effect of inventive experience on continuing when advised DEMO stop.
Increases in skills over time may lead to an increase in optimism and/or overconﬁdence (Santos-Pinto &
Sobel, 2005).
There is, however, some information that speaks against this interpretation. First, the inventors are
submitting their ideas for external scrutiny and opinion, implying they are not sure they have winning ideas.
This should be reﬂected in lower DEMO beliefs of success and they should, according to the rational model, be
more prone to stop given negative advice. Further, the deﬁnition of overconﬁdence that we use captures their
credible intervals in general and would DEMO expected also to reﬂect their credible intervals on the focal
inventions’ priors. Either we have measurement problems or the credible intervals do not matter. DEMO latter
interpretation questions the rational updating model of van den Steen (DEMO). Finally, the rational model of
6 For example, for the Beta family of distributions, Bayesian updating takes the form p ¼ gp þ
p the posterior, g the precision attached to the prior, DEMO the risk implied by the new information andgþj j
js
where p is the prior probability,
gþj
the precision of the new information.
DEMO posterior is a weighted average of the information that the inventor has and the information the IAP provides.
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & DEMO, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. A˚
stebro et al.
Inventor Perseverance after Being Told to Quit
DEMO
Santos-Pinto and Sobel (2005) does not explain why experience only matters when receiving negative advice.
On balance we therefore subscribe to ‘‘coping with DEMO as the best general explanation for the observed
behavior.
Limitations and future research
One potential drawback of our methodology is that we relied on DEMO of past activities. This may have
created a hindsight bias in recall, which might depend on the outcome of any additional money spent. For
example, those who continued to spend money and later succeeded although advised to stop may have
become generally more optimistic at survey time because DEMO succeeded with their invention—causing a
spurious correlation between optimism and post-advice expenditures. We do not believe this to be a
signiﬁcant problem. First, only a small percentage of those advised to stop who continued actually did
DEMO in commercializing their inventions (6.9%). Second, if there was such a recall bias it should appear
more clearly among those advised to DEMO since a larger fraction among those individuals actually
succeed. But we do not ﬁnd a correlation between optimism and expenditures for these.
Some form DEMO socially desirable response may have occurred as well, since inventors may DEMO want to
admit that they spent additional time and money on an invention that eventually failed. We believe that if this
were the case, it would simply depress the number reported after receiving negative advice. This DEMO make
it harder rather than easier to ﬁnd an effect, so DEMO are not as concerned about this.
We believe that this sample is representative of serious inventors who are looking to commercialize their
inventions. Informal DEMO by the CIC suggest that nine of ten inventors who approach the Canadian IAP
abort the submission process after considering the examination fee to DEMO too high, suggesting that inventions
with low prospects are excluded from DEMO sample. This is a positive way to trim the sample, as DEMO likely limits
our sample population to only serious inventors. There may, DEMO, be some additional uncontrolled
sampling biases. For example, inventors who are already well informed about the commercial prospects of
their inventions may consider DEMO additional information from the IAP to be of marginal value. This could
imply that the quality of inventions in our sample is biased, although it could be mis-stated in either direction.
While both effects are a DEMO, we do not feel that it damages the results we ﬁnd DEMO those inventors
being advised to cease effort.
Another limitation of our study is that we are drawing conclusions about inventors who are at an DEMO
stage of their development process. They are a subset of all inventors and technological entrepreneurs, where
the subjective expected value of their invention is at least that of the examination fee, which was
approximately US $250 in 1994 and US $750 in 2001. We make no claims that DEMO sample is representative of
the general population of inventors. However, there DEMO no alternative efﬁcient method of obtaining a
representative sample of inventors and our method allows us to efﬁciently obtain a reasonably large sample
that DEMO likely to represent a fairly broad cross-section of independent inventors.
CONCLUSION
This paper is important because it provides some plausible reasons for the excess DEMO and concomitant
observed negative expected rate of return for inventors. Excess entry has been observed in several
experimental studies. Some have argued that overconﬁdence DEMO one’s own skills and the neglect of others’
skills and decisions cause excess entry (Camerer & Lovallo, 1999; Moore & Cain, 2004)DEMO While we do not
ﬁnd any evidence of this, it may DEMO due to the two suggestions made earlier regarding the measure of
overconﬁdence used and the population studied. Other researchers argue that excessive optimism is DEMO main
culprit Arabsheibani et al. (2000; de Meza & Southey, DEMO), and our ﬁndings are consistent with this claim.
The magnitude of the optimistic bias is quite large and on the same order as DEMO obtained by (Arabsheibani
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: DEMO/bdm
270
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
et al., 2000). We also ﬁnd that the sunk-cost bias is an important explanation of additional spending DEMO
spending should be curtailed.
This paper contributes to the decision-making literature by adding more evidence of a pervasive sunk-cost
bias, even among experienced inventors. In addition, it shows that while optimism can be healthy for the
psyche, it may lead people to spend money on losing propositions. This paper contributes to innovation
research by showing the effects of optimism and DEMO sunk-cost bias on inventor effort. As inventive activity
creates a net beneﬁt to society, understanding the factors that lead to the decision to continue on less than
promising inventions could provide a positive step in the DEMO utilization of inventor efforts. Finally, this
paper could contribute to policies DEMO how to more efﬁciently allocate inventive activities.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, the
MINE program, Ecole Polytechnique, in-kind support from the Canadian Innovation Centre and expert DEMO
from the Survey Research Centre, University of Waterloo. The authors thank DEMO Agarwal, David de Meza,
Toke Reichstein, Luı´s Santos-Pinto and participants at the 2004 Schumpeter and DRUID conferences for
comments.
REFERENCES
Arabsheibani, G., de Meza, D., Maloney, J., & Pearson, B. (2000). And a vision appeared unto them of a great proﬁt:
DEMO of self-deception among the self-employed. Economics Letters, 67, 35–41.
Arkes, DEMO R., & Blummer, C. (1985). The psychology of sunk DEMO Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 35, 124–140.
Armor, D. DEMO, & Taylor, S. E. (1998). Situated optimism: Speciﬁc outcome expectancies and self-regulation. In Advances
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 30, DEMO 309–379).
Armor, D. A., & Taylor, S. E. (2002). When predictions fail: The dilemma of unrealistic optimism. In T. Gilovich, D.
Grifﬁn , & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment (pp. 334–347).
Cambridge: Cambridge University DEMO
stebro, T. (2003). The return to independent invention: Evidence DEMO unrealistic optimism, risk seeking or skewness
loving? Economic Journal, 113, 226–239.
stebro, T., & Bernhardt, I. (1999). The social DEMO of return to Canada’s entrepreneur’s assistance program. The
Engineering Economist, 44, 348–361.
stebro, T., & Gerchak, Y. (2001). Proﬁtable advice: The value of information provided by Canada’s entrepreneur’s
assistance program. Economics of DEMO and New Technology, 10(1), 45–72.
stebro, T., & DEMO, D. (forthcoming). Calibration accuracy of a judgmental process that predicts the commercial
success of new product ideas. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, forthcoming.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action. DEMO Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efﬁcacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.
Begley, T. M., & Boyd, D. P. (1987). A comparison of entrepreneurs and managers of small business ﬁrms. Journal of
Management, 13(1), 99–108.
Blanchﬂower, D. G., & Oswald, A. J. (1998). What makes DEMO entrepreneur. Journal of Labor Economics, 16, 26–60.
Boehne, D. M., & Paese, P. W. (2000). Deciding whether to complete or DEMO an unﬁnished project: A strong test of
the project completion hypothesis. DEMO Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 81(2), 178–194.
Brockner, J., & Rubin, J. Z. (1985). Entrapment in escalating conﬂicts. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Burson, K., Larrick, R. P., & Klayman, DEMO (2006). Skilled or unskilled, but still unaware of it: DEMO perceptions of difﬁculty
drive miscalibration in relative comparisons. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90(1), 60–77.
Busenitz, L. W., & Barney, J. B. (1997). Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large DEMO: Biases
and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journal of Business Venturing, 12(1), 9–30.
A˚
A˚
A˚
A˚
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. A˚
stebro et al.
Inventor Perseverance after Being Told to Quit
DEMO
Camerer, C. F., & Johnson, E. J. (1991). The process-performance paradox in expert judgment: How can experts know so
much and predict so badly. In W. M. Goldstein, & R. M. Hogarth (DEMO), Research on judgment and decision making
(pp. 342–364). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Camerer, C. F., & Lovallo, D. (1999). Overconﬁdence and excess entry: An experimental approach. American Economic
Review, 89(1), 306–318.
Coelho, M. D., de Meza, D., & Reyniers, D. (2004). Irrational exuberance, entrepreneurial ﬁnance, and DEMO policy.
International Tax and Public Finance, 11, 391–417.
Conlon, D. DEMO, & Garland, H. (1993). The role of project completion DEMO in resource allocation decisions.
Academy of Management Journal, 36(2), DEMO
Cooper, A. C., Woo, C. Y., & Dunkelberg, W. DEMO (1988). Entrepreneurs’ perceived chance of success. Journal of Business
Venturing, 3(3), 97–108.
de Meza, D., & Southey, C. (DEMO). Financial decision making in markets and ﬁrms: A behavioral perspective. DEMO
Journal, 106(435), 375–386.
DeBondt, W. F. M., & DEMO, R. H. (1995). Financial decision making in markets and ﬁrms: A behavioral perspective.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. H. (1999). A meta-analytic review of experiments examining the effects of extrinsic
rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 627–668.
Frey, B. S., & Benz, M. (2002). Being independent is a great thing: Subjective evaluations of self-employment and
hierarchy. Unpublished manuscript.
Gaglio, C. M., & Katz, J. A. (2001). DEMO psychological basis of opportunity identiﬁcation: Entrepreneurial alertness.
Small Business Economics, 16(2), 95–111.
Grifﬁn, D., & Tversky, A. (1992). DEMO weighing of evidence and the determinants of conﬁdence. Cognitive Psychology,
24, 411–435.
Hamilton, B. (2000). Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical DEMO of the returns to self-employment. Journal of
Political Economy, 108(3), 604–631.
Jackson, D. N. (1977). Reliability of Jackson personality inventory. Psychological Reports, 40(2), 613–614.
Jonas, E., Schulz-Hardt, S., Frey, D., & Thelen, N. (2001). Conﬁrmation bias in DEMO information search after
preliminary decisions: An expansion of dissonance theoretical research DEMO selective exposure to information. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 557–571.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive
Psychology, 5, 207–302.
Keil, M., Mann, J., & Rai, A. (2000). Why software projects escalate: An empirical analysis and test of four theoretical
models. MIS Quarterly, 24(4), 631–664.
Klayman, J. (1995). Varieties of conﬁrmation bias. In The psychology of learning and motivation: Decision making from a
cognitive perspective (Vol. 32, pp. 385–418). San Diego: Academic Press.
Klayman, J., & Ha, Y. (1987). Conﬁrmation, disconﬁrmation, and information in hypothesis testing. Psychological
Review, 94(2), 211–228.
DEMO, A., Lichtenstein, S., & Fischhoff, B. (1980). Reasons for conﬁdence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 6, 107–118.
Kruger, J. (1999). Lake Wobegon be gone! The ‘‘below-average DEMO and the egocentric nature of comparative ability
judgments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(2), 221–232.
Kruger, J., & Dunning, DEMO (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How difﬁculties in recognizing one’s own incompetence
lead to inﬂated self-assessments. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO, 77(6), 1121–1134.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischhoff, B., & DEMO, L. D. (1982). Calibration of probabilities: The state of DEMO art to 1980. In D.
Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge:
Cambridge DEMO Press.
Markman, G. D., Balkin, D. B., & Baron, DEMO A. (2002). Inventors and new venture formation: The effects of general
self-efﬁcacy and regretful thinking. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27(2), 149–166.
Moon, H. (2001). Looking forward and looking back: Integrating completion and sunk-cost effects within an escalation of
commitment progress decision. Journal DEMO Applied Psychology, 86(1), 104–113.
Moore, D. A., & DEMO, D. M. (2004). Strategic myopia and entrepreneurial entry: An DEMO approach. Unpublished
manuscript, Carnegie Mellon University.
Oregon Research Institute. (2001 Jan 13, 2006). A Scientiﬁc Collaboratory for the Development of Advanced Measures
of Personality Traits and Other Individual Differences, from http://ipip.ori.org/
Oskamp, S. (1965). Overconﬁdence in case-study judgments. Journal of Consulting DEMO, 29, 261–265.
Santos-Pinto, L., & Sobel, J. (2005). A model of positive self-image in subjective assessments. American Economic
Review, 95(5), 1386–1402.
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/DEMO
272 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Scheier, M. F., Carver, C. S., & Bridges, M. W. (1994). Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism (and trait Anxiety,
self-mastery, and self-esteem): A reevaluation of DEMO life orientation test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
67(6), 1063–1078.
Soman, D. (2001). The mental accounting of sunk DEMO: Why time is not like money. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 14, 169–185.
Staw, B. M. (1976). Knee-deep in the big muddy: A study of escalating commitment to a chosen course of action.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 16, 27–44.
Tan, H. T., & Yates, J. F. (2002). Financial budgets and escalation effects. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 87(2), 300–322.
Taylor, DEMO E., & Lobel, M. (1989). Social comparison activity under DEMO: Downward evaluation and upwards contacts.
Psychoanalytic Review, 96(4), 569–575.
Tobin, J. (1958). Estimation of relationships for limited-dependent variables. Econometrica, 26(1), 24–36.
Udell, G. (1989). Invention evaluation services: A review of the state of the art. Journal of Product Innovation
DEMO, 6, 157–168.
USPTO. (2004). All Technologies Report, January 1963—December 1996. Washington, D.C.: United States Patent and
Technology Ofﬁce.
van den DEMO, E. (2004). Rational overoptimism (and other biases). American DEMO Review, 94(4), 1141–1151.
Weinstein, N. D. (1980). DEMO optimism about future life events. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO,
806–820.
Weinstein, N. D., & Klein, W. M. P. (1995). Resistance of personal risk perceptions to debiasing interventions. Health
Psychology, 14, 132–140.
Yates, J. F. (1990). Judgment and decision making. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Authors’ biographies:
Dr. Thomas A˚ DEMO is an associate professor of strategic management at University of Toronto. Previous to that he held
the University of Waterloo Associate Chair of Management DEMO Technological Change. Dr. A˚ stebro conducts research in
technological change and entrepreneurship.
Dr. Scott Jeffrey is an assistant professor in the Department of Management DEMO at the University of Waterloo,
Canada. He has a PhD in Managerial and Organizational Behavior from the University of Chicago Graduate School of
DEMO Dr. Jeffrey conducts research on individual decision-making, and employee performance.
Gordon DEMO is a PhD candidate in the Department of Management Sciences at the University of Waterloo, Canada.
He has an MASc in Management Sciences from the University of Waterloo and an MA in Economics from the University
DEMO Waterloo, Canada.
Authors’ addresses:
Dr. Thomas A˚ stebro, Joseph L. Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, 105 St. George Street, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5S3E6.
Dr. Scott Jeffrey and Gordon Adomdza, DEMO of Management Sciences, University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
Ontario, Canada DEMO 3G1.
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of DEMO Decision Making, 20, 253–272 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm{1g42fwefx}