Inventor Perseverance After Being Told to Quit:
The Role of Cognitive DEMO
Thomas Åstebro*
Joseph L. Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S3E6 Canada
astebro@rotman.utoronto.ca
tel (905) 569 4963
fax (905) 569 4302
Scott A. Jeffrey**
Gordon K. Adomdza**
DEMO of Management Sciences
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1 Canada
DEMO
gkadomdz@engmail.uwaterloo.ca
We acknowledge financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council,
the MINE program, Ecole Polytechnique, in-kind support from the DEMO Innovation Centre
and expert help from the Survey Research Centre, University DEMO Waterloo. We thank Ajay
Agarwal, David de Meza, Toke Reichstein and participants at the 2004 Schumpeter and DRUID
conferences for comments.
1
Inventor Perseverance After Being Told to Quit:
The Role of Cognitive DEMO
Abstract:
We find that approximately one third (29%) of independent inventors continue to spend money
and 51% continue to spend time on DEMO after receiving highly diagnostic advice to cease
effort. Using survey data from actual inventors, this paper studies the role of overconfidence,
optimism, DEMO the sunk-cost bias in these decisions. We find that inventors are more
overconfident and optimistic than the general population. We also find that optimism DEMO past
expenditures increased perseverance after being told to quit, while overconfidence DEMO judgment
ability had no effect. After being told to quit, optimists DEMO 166% more than pessimists and
those having already spent, for example, $10,000 spend another $10,000.
2
Inventor Perseverance
The expected internal rate of return to invention by independent DEMO is negative and
switching to self-employment reduces lifetime earnings by 35% (DEMO, 2003; Hamilton, 2000)
Yet, inventors still invent and entrepreneurs still start new businesses. For example, in 2003 in
the United States, independent inventors represented approximately 15% of the creators of
patented inventions, DEMO significant proportion (USPTO, 2004)1. If these activities have lower
expected returns than the 2nd best alternative, why do inventors invent and entrepreneurs start
new businesses?
One reason that has been offered is that DEMO are unrealistic optimists and that
they greatly overestimate their abilities and likelihood of success (Arabsheibani, de Meza,
Maloney, & Pearson, 2000)DEMO Others conclude that entrepreneurs are strongly motivated by non-
pecuniary benefits (DEMO & Oswald, 1998; Frey & Benz, 2002; Hamilton, 2000), others
raise the possibility that inventors are “skewness lovers” who are holding out for the small
chance to “strike it rich” (Åstebro, 2003)DEMO Rather than look at entrepreneurs, we examine
independent inventors decision making DEMO why a  significant number of these inventors
continue spending time and DEMO on projects after obtaining highly diagnostic advice to
terminate their efforts.
This population provides an excellent quasi-experimental design where we can study the
effect DEMO decision-biases “in the wild” on a unique pool of decision makers under relatively
controlled conditions. In order to explain why many inventors 1 continue DEMO throw good money
after bad, we evaluate three of the most DEMO of decision making biases pointed out in previous
research: overconfidence, optimism and the sunk-cost bias. We examine how these three biases
1 In DEMO, evidence points to an even more significant proportion of independent inventors. DEMO the end of the
1970s approximately 42% of patented inventions of Canadian origin originated with individuals, a finding at least
partially explained by Canada’s reliance on firms in resource-intensive sectors that have low R&D activity (Amesse
et al., 1991.)
3
Inventor Perseverance
affect two real and economically important decisions: how much money and time to spend on
further development after obtaining advice to stop. DEMO also examine differences between the
inventor population and a matched sample drawn from the general population with respect to
their degree of overconfidence and DEMO
Three Common Decision-Making Biases
Overconfidence, optimism, and the sunk-cost bias have been shown to be important
predictors of decision-making errors in a number DEMO experimental studies and across various
contexts. Some of these common biases have also been offered as the reasons for why people
enter into entrepreneurship. DEMO instance, Camerer and Lovallo (1999) show that students in an
DEMO forecasted below zero profits due to excess entry, but entered anyway DEMO were more
likely to enter when they performed well on a skills test. They explain this as an optimistic bias
coupled with a neglect DEMO the behavioral intent of others. In a similar experiment Moore and Cain
(2004) show that entrants are greater optimists when the skill test DEMO easy, thereby inducing
greater rates of entry and lower post-entry profits. DEMO authors go on to explain that the excess
entry and low returns in industries such as restaurants and convenience stores are caused by
excess DEMO coupled with perceived task simplicity. For this study, we hypothesize that
DEMO will play a role when an inventor is estimating the expected return from his or her
invention, while overconfidence will play a role when he or she is evaluating his or her skill at
being able DEMO successfully develop an invention.
We also predict that previous expenditures on an invention will drive an irrational
escalation of commitment to a project. This DEMO particularly damaging to inventors who receive
advice to terminate development. This is not related to optimism over the payoffs to the
invention, or overconfidence in judging the probability of success, rather it is simply a function
4
Inventor Perseverance
of past expenditures. Each of these effects on the decision DEMO continue will be expanded on
below.
Optimism. Many people display a consistent belief that they are less likely than others to
suffer from bad DEMO and more likely to experience positive events(Weinstein, 1980). Such
DEMO lead people to overestimate positive outcomes and underestimate negative outcomes. This
optimistic bias has been shown across many domains, cultures, and age groups (Weinstein &
Klein, 1995). Research has shown that entrepreneurs (who often start out as inventors) are more
optimistic than employees about their future earnings, even though they actually realize lower
earnings (Arabsheibani et DEMO, 2000). We believe that inventors will suffer from a similar
DEMO bias as entrepreneurs and that inventors will also be more optimistic than a
cross-section of similar people selected from the general population.
Our argument DEMO one of self-selection and follows that made by de Meza and Southey
(1996): because of the inherent unpredictability of returns from invention only the extremely
optimistic will choose to exert effort on such activities. In DEMO, we rely on Weinstein (1980)
who argues that two conditions must be fulfilled for an optimistic bias to arise: a) the DEMO is
perceived as controllable, and b) people have some degree of commitment or emotional
investment in the outcome. Both conditions are likely to DEMO for inventors. Our hypotheses also
build on research by Taylor and her colleagues (Taylor & Lobel, 1989) who find less realistic
expectations about events the individual believes they can control, versus less optimistic
expectations about events the individual cannot affect. We believe that since inventing is largely
DEMO individual effort, inventors will believe that they have control of the DEMO process.
Hypothesis 1: Independent inventors are more optimistic than the general DEMO
An optimistic bias would raise the perceived expected return on an invention, either by an
increased perceived probability of success and/or by an increased subjective expected return
5
Inventor Perseverance
conditional on succeeding to commercialize the invention. This would raise DEMO subjective
expected value of continuing with the project and tend to make inventors spend more on their
projects. In line with this hypothesis, Cooper et al. (Cooper, Woo, & Dunkelberg, 1988) found
that 81% of all entrepreneurs believe their chance of success to be 70% or DEMO, while in
actuality 2/3 of businesses fail within the first DEMO years.
Furthermore, optimism has been found to be quite resistant to DEMO debiasing
interventions such as making people aware of the risks, changing DEMO presentation mode of the
risks, changing the intensity of the risks, and generating reasons why these risks might occur (see
Weinstein & Klein, 1995 for a review of these studies). Consistent with the idea that debiasing
optimists is difficult, we propose that optimistic inventors would pay little attention to advice
that asks them to break their behavior and DEMO spending more. Since we are only interested in
the decision to continue in the face of receiving advice to cease efforts, we do not make any
predictions about the effect of optimism on those that receive DEMO to continue, since in this
case continuing is the correct decision. DEMO extend previous research by not simply measuring
beliefs, but by measuring DEMO behavior.
Hypothesis 2: Inventors with higher levels of optimism will be DEMO likely to continue
spending time and money after receiving advice to stop activity.
Overconfidence. Overconfidence is considered one of the most robust of all DEMO
making biases (DeBondt & Thaler, 1995). Individuals display overconfidence in two ways, both
representing an inflated sense of accuracy or ability in a specific domain. The first display of
overconfidence is the use of DEMO narrow a credible interval when making predictions. For
example, when asked DEMO create an interval such that there is a 90% chance that they are correct,
people often set intervals that contain the correct value DEMO 50% of the time (Lichtenstein,
Fischhoff, & Phillips, 1977)DEMO Overconfident individuals are also shown to overestimate their
6
Inventor Perseverance
accuracy on a general knowledge test. These same researchers found DEMO individuals, who
thought they were right 80% of the time were, on average, only correct 60% of the time. It is also
interesting to note that experience does not necessarily make people more accurate, but it does
make them more confident in their ability (Camerer & Johnson, 1991). Overconfident forecasts
have been documented across a variety of decision-making situations and decision-makers
(Griffin & Tversky, 1992), and we expect DEMO inventors forecasting the success of their
invention would also display overconfidence.
Overconfidence may be such a robust phenomenon because of the many potential causes
DEMO it found in the decision making literature. Early work on overconfidence hypothesized that a
lack of meta-knowledge was the reason for overconfidence (Oskamp, DEMO). Another source of
overconfidence arises from a phenomenon known as the confirmation bias (Jonas, Schulz-Hardt,
Frey, & Thelen, 2001; Klayman, 1995; Klayman & Ha, 1987; Koriat, Lichtenstein, & Fischhoff,DEMO
1980). A third source of overconfidence comes from ease of recall biases (Kahneman & Tversky,
1973). We expect that all of these potential sources of overconfidence will be present in the
population of DEMO
If an inventor has inappropriately high beliefs in his ability to bring a product to market,
this will raise the subjective expected value DEMO continuing with the project. There are two
hypotheses originating from this prediction. First, because of the inflated subjective expected
value to invention held by overconfident individuals we expect a self-selection effect introducing
higher levels of overconfidence DEMO inventors compared to a cross-section of similar people
selected from the general population.
Second, we expect that the inflated expected value to invent held by overconfident
individuals will make an overconfident inventor more likely to spend DEMO time or money
7
Inventor Perseverance
on developing the invention, even when they are advised to stop. Even while the overconfident
inventors may use Bayesian updating taking into DEMO advice to stop, which will then reduce
the subjective expected value, those with greater overconfidence will have stronger priors that
will weigh more DEMO in terms of continuing with development efforts. As with optimism,
we are making no prediction for those that receive positive advice since continuing DEMO this case is
the correct decision.
Hypothesis 3: Independent inventors are DEMO overconfident than the general population.
Hypothesis 4: Inventors with higher levels DEMO overconfidence will be more likely to
continue spending time and money after receiving advice to stop activity.
It should be noted that we believe DEMO overconfidence and optimism are different, even
though many have claimed that DEMO are at least highly correlated, while others have even
questioned whether DEMO are different constructs. In this research, we believe that optimism is DEMO
more global construct, in other words, a general feeling that good things will happen to a person.
Overconfidence on the other hand would DEMO to an inventor’s perceived ability rather than an
overall measure of belief in the expected occurrence of positive outcomes. Furthermore, we posit
that optimism has a direct effect inflating the subjective expected value of inventing, while the
effect of overconfidence is indirect by first affecting the inventor’s sense DEMO beliefs that he or she
is able to bring the product to the market. Since the second effect is more indirect it may be DEMO
difficult to detect in this study.
Sunk Costs. One final decision making bias that we predict has an effect on inventors’
investment behavior is DEMO of commitment to sunk costs. If inventors who have committed funds
to an invention tend to increase their commitment to the project even when DEMO expected
marginal costs are higher than the marginal benefits then they are influenced by a phenomenon
alternatively called the escalation of commitment or sunk DEMO bias.
8
Inventor Perseverance
One argument advanced to explain the escalation phenomenon is the DEMO of self-
justification; where an individual stays committed to justify a DEMO decision (Brockner & Rubin,
1985; Staw, 1976). Another DEMO is based on the psychology of sunk costs which argues that
people are more likely to spend money on a project simply because money DEMO been spent on it
in the past (Arkes & Blummer, 1985). Other researchers have challenged studies on sunk costs
arguing that information DEMO sunk costs was confounded with information about level of
project completion (DEMO & Paese, 2000; Conlon & Garland, 1993; Keil, Mann, & Rai, 2000;
Moon, 2001). Nevertheless, the sunk costs bias has been shown to be persistent. For example,
Tan and DEMO (2002) show that escalation effects occur among experienced participants even
when explicit future costs and benefits are provided to them.
Our quasi-experimental design DEMO advantage of the fact that a recommendation to
terminate indicates that the marginal benefits of continuing are expected to be very low. We
would DEMO expect low invention quality to lead to no post-advice investments, unless DEMO
decision-maker is biased. High-quality inventions that are recommended to go forward, DEMO the
other hand, should rationally have both higher pre and post-advice DEMO For those that
receive advice to continue it is likely that pre and post-advice investments are positively
correlated, simply because these are good inventions to invest in. We therefore only formulate a
hypothesis regarding the sunk DEMO bias for those that receive advice to terminate their projects.
For this subset we interpret any remaining effect of pre-advice investment on post advice
DEMO as an indication of sunk costs.
Hypothesis 5: Higher levels of DEMO investment will lead to higher levels of post-
advice investments for inventors advised to terminate their projects.
9
Inventor Perseverance
Data Source
We gathered information from actual inventors who had DEMO advice from the
Inventors’ Assistance Program (IAP) at the Canadian Innovation Centre (CIC). This centre was
initially established in 1976 at the University of Waterloo in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada to help
evaluate early DEMO inventions and the likelihood of market success (Åstebro & Bernhardt, 1999;
Åstebro & Gerchak, 2001). By 1994 the Canadian IAP had a very strong presence as a
trustworthy and dominating supplier of unbiased DEMO evaluation in Canada. The system
they used to evaluate inventions was developed by Professor Gerald Udell at the Oregon
Innovation Center in 1974 as DEMO for the success of inventions and was based on accumulated
innovation research at that time (Udell, 1989).
The Canadian IAP evaluates potential DEMO and their projects on 37 different
cues and provides advice on how and whether to continue. To have a project evaluated, the
entrepreneur fills out a questionnaire and pays a moderate fee ($250 USD in 1994, $750 USD by
2001). In addition to background information about the entrepreneur, the questionnaire asks for a
brief description of the idea and supplementary documentation such as patent applications,
sketches and test reports. An DEMO analyst compares the project with other similar projects in
their library of previous reviews and other various databases. Personal contact with the
entrepreneur beyond DEMO provided documentation is avoided by the analyst to ensure that these
discussions do not bias the evaluation. In addition to scores on the 37 DEMO, the analyst also
derives an overall score for the project using DEMO judgment and assigns one of five possible
scores shown in Table 1.
- - - - - - - - - - - - DEMO - - - - - - -
Insert Table 1 about here
- - - - - - - - - - - - DEMO - - - - - - -
10
Inventor Perseverance
Columns 2 and 3 of Table 1 report the frequency DEMO of the IAP’s overall rating
from a survey conducted prior to this study (Åstebro, 2003). A majority of ventures (75% with
rating “D” or “E”) were advised to terminate efforts Two per cent received the most favorable
overall score “A”, 4% were given an intermediate positive recommendation “B”, and 19% were
advised that the project is suitable to launch as a limited (i.e. part-time) effort “C”. Column 6
reports DEMO frequencies found in our study, with 1% receiving an “A” rating, 7% receiving
“B”, 15% receiving “C”, 74% receiving a “D”, and 3% receiving an “E”. We code “D” and “E”
as ‘cease activity’ DEMO
Table 1 also reports the probability of commercialization for each of the different overall
scores (column 4). As seen, the probability of DEMO is strongly correlated with the
IAP advice, with a clear difference DEMO those rated D and E (advised to stop) and those rated
A, B or C. These data provide evidence of the high diagnosticity of the advice. Other research
has shown that both positive and negative DEMO have similar prediction accuracy rates. In a
survey of 559 projects the IAP correctly forecasted 75.8% of the successes and 79.3% of the
failures (Åstebro & Chen, 2002). This means that both types of advice (continue and cease) are
approximately equally reliable. Column 5 shows that DEMO advice is highly diagnostic of the
financial returns conditional on commercializing the invention. None of those rated E reached
the market so returns for DEMO cannot be calculated and the return among those rated D was -
28.5%. Given this high level of diagnosticity, inventors who receive negative advice (e.g. a “D”
or an “E”) should cease developmental efforts and DEMO on to other activities rather than
spending additional time and money on an unlikely success.
While the inventors did not know the base rate DEMO of the IAP during the study
period, we believe that inventors DEMO not willingly pay a fee of up to $1,000 if they did not
11
Inventor Perseverance
believe in the value of the advice. This payment is DEMO in relation to the total amount of money
they have put into the invention’s development up to that point (on average Cdn. $6,755.)
Outlays of such a large amount for the advice signifies that DEMO must have some belief in
its value, ex ante.
The phenomenon DEMO are studying can be seen in Table 2 that shows the spending of
resources for inventors who were given advice to cease effort (rating D or E). The first column
shows the ranges of percentages DEMO inventors spent after obtaining the advice to cease
development. The next two columns show the fraction of inventors who spend that percentage of
resources. DEMO though most inventors who receive the advice to terminate their efforts follow
that advice (71% and 49% for money and time respectively), a significant proportion of
inventors continue to invest time and money in these DEMO That is, ex post, some pay no or
little attention to the advice to stop. We expect that differences in overconfidence, optimism and
the sunk cost bias across inventors can at least partially explain these DEMO
Survey Population
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Insert Table DEMO about here
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Using records DEMO the Canadian Innovation Center, we developed a list of 5,008
DEMO who had submitted ideas for IAP review between 1994 and 2001. Of this number, we
were able to trace 1,352 current addresses. Of these, 1,272 addresses led to actual contacts. The
Survey Research Center at the University of Waterloo was able to interview 830 respondents,
DEMO of which fully completed the survey for an overall adjusted response rate of 61%. The
adjusted response rate is calculated as the contact rate (1,272/1,352) multiplied by the
cooperation rate (830/1,DEMO).2
2 The Centre follows the statistical methods and best practices of the American Association of Public
12
Inventor Perseverance
To examine whether inventors have greater decision-making biases than the DEMO
population, we also obtained telephone survey data from a comparison pool DEMO 300 Canadians.
The sample frame was a set of random household telephone numbers, stratified by province. The
sample was selected to approximate the distribution of gender, age, and work experience
obtained in the inventor sample. DEMO quotas were set to mirror the distribution of the inventor
sample obtained approximately halfway through the survey of inventors. There was some drift in
DEMO population of inventors as the inventor survey was completed making the matched sample
somewhat younger and more tilted towards males than the final inventor DEMO Data are
displayed in Table 3, upper panel.
Dependent Measures
We DEMO the money personally spent by inventors after receiving the IAP report by
their own self-reported R&D cash outlays. We asked for all costs DEMO product development,
marketing research, making of prototypes, etc. We further asked respondents to anchor these
expenditures in time to the year in DEMO they spent the majority of the development costs, in
order to DEMO all of these expenses to 2003 dollars using the Canadian CPI. To measure
time investment, we ask the inventor “What percentage of that time was spent after the invention
was evaluated by the IAP” where the DEMO refers to that “…spent actually working on the
invention” as opposed to calendar time. As can be seen in Table 2, inventors are more likely to
continue spending time than money after being advised to cease DEMO We speculate that if
inventors are employed, as most in this DEMO are when inventing, the time spent on inventive
pursuits outside of DEMO hours carries low or no opportunity cost. Furthermore, the inventor is
DEMO in an environment where he or she is not likely to be able to sell his or her inventive
abilities on a spot market.
DEMO Research, http://www.aapor.org
13
Inventor Perseverance
Since the effort may well have a low opportunity cost, the time spent, as opposed to the
money spent, may reflect DEMO other decision making biases or non-monetary factors, such as
the intrinsic DEMO of inventing. Research has further shown that individuals find it difficult to
accurately account for sunk time (Soman, 2001). Time may be DEMO noisy measure for both these
reasons.
To reduce heteroskedasticity we transformed the raw data on expenditures and time using
the natural logarithm as the DEMO The distribution functions for the log of expenditures and time
spent, DEMO without considering the large mass points at zero, are still skew DEMO these
transformations, as indicated in Table 3, middle panel.
The dependent variables log(post-advice R&D) and log(time) are positively skew DEMO
long upper (right) tails, while the measures of sunk costs DEMO(pre-advice R&D) and log(time)]
are negatively skew, with long lower (left) tails. All distributions with the log transform have
DEMO tails than the standard normal. We therefore also tried more advanced transformations of
the expenditure and time distributions. We performed regressions where the expenditure DEMO
time distributions were brought to zero skewness using the Box-Cox power transformation.
Results were qualitatively similar as those reported and we chose to report DEMO with the
lognormal transformation for ease of interpretation and clarity.
Independent Measures
Optimism. To measure optimism we chose six optimism items from the 10 DEMO
International Personality Item Pool personal attributes survey (Oregon Research Institute 2001;DEMO
Scheier, Carver, & Bridges, 1994).3 Two example statements are DEMO just know that I will be a
success” and “I am often in a bad mood”. For each item the respondents were asked the DEMO to
3 Pretests results indicated respondents’ difficulty with the items “I feel blue’ and ‘I dislike myself’.
After careful deliberations on the possible effects DEMO the two items on the questionnaire response and
reliability, we decided DEMO exclude these items and two other items that are matched with them.
14
Inventor Perseverance
which they agree/disagree on a five-point scale, with 1 representing strongly disagree and 5
representing strongly agree. The order of the DEMO items was randomized across subjects and
items for this variable were mixed randomly with all other items used. We averaged the item
scores for DEMO variable obtaining a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.67 (inventor and general population
DEMO).
Overconfidence. Consistent with previous research (Busenitz & Barney, 1997; DEMO &
Tversky, 1992) we measured overconfidence as the degree to DEMO an individual expects that
they have made a correct judgment on a judgment task divided by the average degree of correct
judgments in the DEMO We ask respondents to judge which one of two cities that has the
larger population and to indicate the confidence in their judgment being DEMO on a half-range
probability scale (50% to100% certain). Five city DEMO were elicited; three pairs of cities
were Canadian, while two pairs were foreign. The order of the five comparisons was randomized
across subjects. DEMO overconfidence measure was constructed as
overconfid
∑
k
5 ,
=−
DEMO aik is respondent i’s estimated confidence of being right on judgment k and bk is the
average percent correct choice of judgment k in DEMO population. Cronbach’s alpha for this scale
across the five city size judgments was 0.70 (inventor and general population pooled).
Sunk Costs. As a proxy measure we use the natural log of the amount of personal
DEMO (cash or time) before obtaining the advice.
Control Variables
A number of other variables could, potentially, be associated with our outcome variables
DEMO were thus examined. These variables have been raised in previous literature as possible
explanations for why certain individuals become entrepreneurs. The next four variables DEMO all
15
Inventor Perseverance
obtained by asking respondents to agree or disagree with a DEMO of statements on a five point scale.
The scores were then averaged to come up with a common factor.
Risk Attitudes. People with higher DEMO tolerance might be more likely to continue
spending time and money on the inventions. We used seven items of risk taking aspects from the
DEMO Personality Inventory (Jackson, 1977) that were most germane to the DEMO of
inventing (Begley & Boyd, 1987; Busenitz & Barney, 1997). We obtained a Cronbach’s alpha of
0.60 (inventor and general population pooled).
Self-efficacy. During the invention process inventors may develop perceptions of
DEMO and beliefs in their capacity to perform the specific tasks they face . A self-
efficacious inventor is more likely to perceive the feasibility DEMO his invention’s success (Bandura,
1986, 1997). We used the self-efficacy items from Markman, Balkin, & Barron (2002);
Cronbach’s DEMO = 0.82 (inventor and general population pooled).
Opportunity Recognition. Our DEMO personality variable was adapted from work on
opportunity recognition (Gaglio & DEMO, 2001). These authors hypothesized that entrepreneurs
would be better than DEMO general population at recognizing new ideas or ways in which existing
items could be improved. A four-item scale with statements such as “I often DEMO products that I
think can be improved upon” produced a scale with Cronbach’s alpha = 0.68 (inventor and
general population pooled).
Intrinsic Motivation. We had reason to believe that some people may invent because they
DEMO it. Therefore, we created a 7-item scale regarding the intrinsic motivation DEMO invent after
reviewing the work of Deci, Koestner, and Ryan (DEMO). This scale had a Cronbach’s alpha =
0.80 and was only obtained for inventors.
16
Inventor Perseverance
Personal/demographic Characteristics. Following Camerer and Johnson (1991) we
DEMO that more experienced inventors may be more confident in their estimation of the
success of their inventions. Information was collected on the number of DEMO the inventor had
been working on developing inventions and the total number of inventions that the inventor had
worked on in his/her lifetime. DEMO also measured education, being concerned that education
could proxy for the DEMO of outside job options that could pay more (i.e. more educated
DEMO have more job opportunities) and thus be less likely to persist DEMO recommended to stop.
Descriptive statistics on dependent and the independent variables found to be of statistical
relevance are displayed in Table 3 and Table DEMO contains a correlation matrix.
Results
We first report tests on differences between the general and inventor populations
(n=1,130). The inventors reported to have higher degree of optimism t(1,128) = 2.48, p < .01,
and overconfidence t(1,128) = 1.97, p < .05 than the general population, supporting our
hypotheses regarding inventor personality. Furthermore, inventors reported to have much greater
risk seeking propensity t(1,128) = 5.76, p < .001, higher self-efficacy t(1,128) DEMO 2.85, p < .01,
and greater opportunity seeking tendency t(DEMO,128) = 7.52, p < .001 than the general population.
Data on optimism and overconfidence are reported in Table 3, upper panel.
We analyzed differences in cognitive biases between inventors receiving positive and
negative advice (n=758). Inventors with a positive evaluation were more optimistic t(756) =
2.77, p < .01 and risk seeking t(756) = DEMO, p < .01, but were neither more nor less confident,
self-efficacious, opportunity seeking, or intrinsically motivated (all p’s n.s.). Data on optimism
and overconfidence for inventors are reported in Table 3, lower panel. While many of the
differences reported above are significant they may DEMO be economically relevant. We therefore
17
Inventor Perseverance
continue analyzing how these established biases might affect real decisions. DEMO, we report
some univariate analysis on the decision variables of interest.
DEMO
Insert Table 3 About Here
------------------------------------
-----------------------------------
Insert Table 4 About Here
------------------------------------
Inventors personally spent an average of $39,694 (Std. Dev. $256,900, maximum $5
million) on their inventions, showing that these inventions involved substantial development
efforts.4 The inventions in the sample appear typical of DEMO inventions. A plurality of
the inventions were consumer-oriented, including inventions for DEMO and general
consumer use (33%) and sports and leisure applications (DEMO). Successful consumer-oriented
inventions included a new milk container design, a DEMO sanitary pad, and a home security
light timer that imitates typical DEMO Other inventions had business applications, including some
that involved high technology (8%) or industrial equipment (14%). These inventions included an
aligner DEMO printer for photographic proofs, a tractor-trailer fairing that enhances fuel efficiency,DEMO
a re-usable plug to insert in wooden hydroelectric poles after testing for rot, and a computerized
and mechanically integrated tree harvester. Thus the inventions varied substantially in market
potential. Those that were advised to terminate development DEMO reported spending less (M =
$3,587, SD = $55,418) after receiving their advice than those who were advised to continue (DEMO =
$28,523, SD = $94,856), t(756) = 5.58, p < .001.
It is illustrative to examine the distribution of spending: 50% of all inventors spend less
than $234 before the review, indicating that a majority of inventors have not done much
development work before approaching the IAP. This also supports that these inventors believe
4 DEMO otherwise specified, all dollar figures reported in this paper represent 2003 DEMO Canadian.
18
Inventor Perseverance
ex-ante that the evaluation has value. As indicated earlier 71% DEMO $0 after a negative review,
indicating a majority of inventors stop development efforts on the advice of the IAP. Considering
time spent developing DEMO ideas, inventors spend on average 16% of the development time after
DEMO a negative review, and 49% spend 1% or less of their DEMO on the inventions after a
negative review.
Multivariate analysis of the Decisions to Spend Time and Money.
The distribution functions for expenditures and time DEMO both contain large densities at
zero (Table 2.) This indicates that there may be two decisions involved: a decision to continue,
and a decision on how much time and money to spend conditional on DEMO to continue.
However, a likelihood-ratio test marginally rejected that the two DEMO were independent t(1,
N = 758) = 3.63, p = 0.06, indicating that it might not be useful to estimate two equations jointly.
An alternative approach is to estimate a censored latent-variable model DEMO expenditures (time)
with the dependent variable censored at the value DEMO (Tobin, 1958). We settled on the second
modeling alternative as it turned out to produce estimates that were more robust to alternative
DEMO
For this analysis we had complete data from 669 (81%) of the respondents with respect to
R&D expenditures and 677 respondents with DEMO to time. 5 We include measures of optimism,
overconfidence, sunk DEMO, and experience with inventing to examine the tendency to spend
money DEMO time after receiving feedback.
Insignificant control variables were dropped (risk attitudes, self-efficacy, opportunity
seeking, intrinsic motivation, education.) Results in Table 5 DEMO presented in two panels. The top
5 There were missing archival data on the ratings for about 100 observations. Respondents answering
“don’t know” on DEMO amount of post-advice R&D and time spent were dropped from the analysis.
Respondents answering “don’t know” on independent variables had these data imputed DEMO
missing data at random.
19
Inventor Perseverance
panel reports coefficient estimates for those receiving negative advice; column 1 reports effects
on the amount of post-advice R&D expenditures, column 2 is the same regression with time
spent as the dependent variable. DEMO 2 contains the same regressions for those receiving
positive advice.
-----------------------------------
Insert Table 5 About Here
------------------------------------
We found no effects for overconfidence, while optimism had one economically
meaningful and significant effect in the regressions. Above-average DEMO that receive
negative advice have posterior expenditures 166% higher than below-average optimists (column
1). Optimism did not affect expenditures when obtaining positive advice and did not affect time
spent after advice. That is, those who are optimistic tend to continue spending money after being
advised to stop, while those advised to continue are not affected by optimism, supporting our
hypotheses regarding optimism.
Sunk costs had the effects anticipated, both for time and for money, as observed in Panel
1 of Table 5. There was approximately a one-to-one correspondence between previous resource
commitments and those committed DEMO obtaining a negative evaluation. That is, when advised
to stop, those who already had spent for example $10,000, spent another $10,000. The only
situation where there was a lower effect was the effect DEMO money spent before the feedback on
time spent afterwards. This coefficient was approximately one fourth the size of the other effects.
One could argue DEMO optimism would have an effect on people obtaining positive advice,
as research has shown that pessimists tend to discount positive information. Since we DEMO
people high on optimism more likely to continue efforts when given negative advice, it could be
that pessimists receiving positive advice would be less likely to continue. However, our findings
20
Inventor Perseverance
suggests that optimism only seem to kick in when inventors DEMO large adversities such as
receiving advice to stop.
One control variable that had important effects was the experience with inventing.
Compared to those with DEMO than three years of experience, inventors with three or more years DEMO
experience developing inventions spent 301 percent more money and 175 percent more time
after being advised to stop (columns 1 and 2). The effects of prior experience were on the other
hand not significant when DEMO positive advice. (Results did not change qualitatively when
we used as DEMO proxy the total number of inventions worked on by the inventor instead of the
number of years of experience inventing.) A summary of the hypotheses and their results are
shown in Table 6.
-----------------------------------
Insert Table DEMO About Here
------------------------------------
General Discussion
One key finding is that as many have speculated, independent inventors are “different”
than other people. We found that inventors are more optimistic and overconfident than the
general population. These effects DEMO consistent with our belief that only extremely optimistic
and/or overconfident individuals self-select into inventing because of the low expected returns.
Our position is DEMO inventors will be optimistic about future returns and overconfident about
their abilities to ensure success. They were also more risk seeking, opportunity seeking, DEMO had
higher levels of self-efficacy than the general population.
We also found a significant and positive effect of optimism on spending for those who
DEMO received advice to cease activities. For optimism, there is a possible DEMO effect where
optimism may attract outside financing, in-kind efforts, and other resources that are useful to a
venture. If convincing others to contribute DEMO signaling high abilities is beneficial to the venture,
21
Inventor Perseverance
then self-deceptive optimism may be the key to most effectively DEMO such signals
(Arabsheibani et al., 2000). However, we do DEMO believe that this is the mechanism at work. If
this were the case then all inventors would have expenditures a function of optimism, which is
not the case in our data. We observe that only those DEMO negative advice are affected by
optimism in their spending behavior. We interpret these findings to show that a high level of
optimism may act DEMO keep inventors going in the face of adversity (Armor & Taylor, 1998,
2002).
Our results also indicate inventors to be strongly DEMO by the self justification/ sunk
cost bias. The more money and DEMO spent on the invention before the advice from the IAP, the
DEMO time and money spent after the evaluation. While this is not technically a bias for those
receiving positive advice, those that receive advice to stop should be spending no additional
resources. For these inventors, a positive coefficient on sunk cost and sunk time demonstrates a
sunk cost bias.
DEMO we found no effects for overconfidence on the decision to continue and on the
amount of resources allocated was somewhat surprising in view of DEMO large and robust effects
often reported in the literature. One potential explanation for this deals with the possible
existence of two general “types” of DEMO: confidence in judgment and in abilities
(Burson, Larrick, & Klayman, 2006; Kruger, 1999; Kruger & Dunning, 1999; Yates, 1990.) Our
measure using city pair comparisons likely captured the former, and DEMO was able to
distinguish between inventors and the general population. However, DEMO may be the second type of
overconfidence that causes inventors to move forward with their inventions after being advised
to stop. If this is DEMO case, our measure would not capture it.
22
Inventor Perseverance
One indication that overconfidence in ability does affect expenditure is DEMO observed
effect of inventive experience. We expected most experienced inventors to have made a few
costly mistakes in the past and therefore more appreciative DEMO expert advice. However, the results
suggest that similar to being optimistic, experience makes inventors more likely to disregard
outside expert advice and place DEMO weight on their own assessment of the quality of their
invention. Those with greater inventive experience had greater expenditures after obtaining
advice to stop, which is consistent with our hypothesis. We interpret this similarly to Camerer
DEMO Johnson (Camerer & Johnson, 1991) in that greater experience makes DEMO more
confident in their abilities, but no better at evaluating the DEMO of their invention.
A second potential explanation of the zero correlation between the overconfidence
measure and expenditures is that extremely overconfident inventors may not DEMO the IAP
since they believe (incorrectly) that their invention will be a success, and thus additional
information is of little value. This could reduce the range of overconfidence in our sample and
lower the chance DEMO finding an effect.
There is a common thread that the effects of the decision-making biases of optimism and
escalation of commitment play in conditioning DEMO behavior by inventors who obtain the advice
to stop. There is also a parallel effect of inventive experience which may indicate overconfidence
in judgment. DEMO three biases seem all to induce a coping mechanism which is to put little or no
weight on the review, and instead greater belief in their own judgment. Therefore, there is an
interesting change between the ex ante and ex post value of the IAP advice if it DEMO negative. Ex
ante it is valued (since they pay for it), ex post it is not (or at least heavily discounted.) All three
decision-making biases (optimism, escalated commitment and experience induced
overconfidence) seems to lead to higher distrust in the review if it is negative.
DEMO
Inventor Perseverance
Limitations and Future Research
One potential drawback of our methodology DEMO that we relied on self-reports of past
activities.  This may have DEMO a hindsight bias in recall which might depend on the outcome
of any additional money spent (e.g. commercialization).  For example, those who continued to
spend money and later succeeded although advised to stop may DEMO become generally more
optimistic at survey time because they succeeded with their invention – causing a spurious
correlation between optimism and post-advice expenditures. We DEMO not believe this to be a
significant problem. First, only a DEMO percentage of those advised to stop who continued
actually did succeed in commercializing their inventions (6.9%).  Second, if there was such a
recall bias it should appear more clearly among those advised to continue DEMO a larger fraction
among those individuals actually succeed. But we do not find a correlation between optimism
and expenditures for these.
Some form of DEMO desirable response may have occurred as well, since inventors may
not DEMO to admit that they spent additional time and money on an invention that eventually
failed.  We believe that if this were the case, DEMO would simply depress the number reported after
receiving negative advice.  This DEMO make it harder rather than easier to find an effect, so DEMO
are not as concerned about this.
We believe that this sample is representative of serious inventors who are looking to
commercialize their inventions. Informal DEMO by the CIC suggest that nine of ten inventors
who approach the Canadian IAP abort the submission process after considering the examination
fee to DEMO too high, suggesting that inventions with low prospects are excluded from DEMO sample.
This is a positive way to trim the sample, as DEMO likely limits our sample population to only serious
inventors. There may however be some additional uncontrolled sampling biases. For example,
inventors who are DEMO well informed about the commercial prospects of their invention may
24
Inventor Perseverance
consider the additional information from the IAP to be of DEMO value. This could imply that
the quality of inventions in our sample is biased, although it could be misstated in either
direction.
While both effects are a possibility, we do not feel that it damages the results we find
within those inventors being advised to cease effort. Another DEMO of our study is that we
are drawing conclusions about inventors who are at an early stage of their development process.
They are a DEMO of all inventors/technological entrepreneurs, where the subjective expected
value of DEMO invention is at least that of the examination fee, which was DEMO U.S.
$250 in 1994 and U.S. $750 in 2001. We make no claims that the sample is representative of the
general population of inventors. DEMO, there is no alternative efficient method of obtaining a
representative sample DEMO inventors and our method allows us to efficiently obtain a reasonably
large sample that is likely to represent a fairly broad cross-section of independent DEMO
Conclusion
This paper is important because it provides some plausible reasons for the excess entry
and concomitant observed negative expected rate of return for DEMO Excess entry has been
observed in several experimental studies. Some have argued that overconfidence in one’s own
skills and the neglect of others’ skills DEMO decisions cause excess entry (Camerer & Lovallo,
1999; Moore & Cain, 2004). While we do not find any evidence of this, it may be due to the two
suggestions made earlier regarding the measure of overconfidence used and the population
studied. Other researchers argue that DEMO optimism is the main culprit (Arabsheibani et al.,
2000; de Meza & Southey, 1996). This claim is consistent with our findings. The magnitude of
the optimistic biases is quite large and on the DEMO order as that obtained by Arabsheibani et al.,
(2000). DEMO also find that the sunk cost bias is an important explanation of additional spending
when spending should be curtailed.
25
Inventor Perseverance
This paper contributes to the decision making literature by adding DEMO evidence of a
pervasive sunk cost bias, even among experienced inventors. DEMO addition, it shows that while
optimism can be healthy for the DEMO, it may lead people to spend money on losing
propositions. This DEMO contributes to innovation research by showing the effects of optimism
and the sunk cost bias on inventor effort. As inventive activity creates a net DEMO to society,
understanding the factors that lead to the decision to continue on less than promising inventions
could provide a positive step in DEMO better utilization of inventor efforts. Finally, this paper could
contribute to DEMO regarding how to more efficiently allocate inventive activities.
26
Inventor Perseverance
Table 1. Base Rates and Diagnosticity of Invention Reviews by DEMO Canadian IAP, 1976-1993
Rating Sample Percent Probability of Median return
Total DEMO all Commercialization among
commercial*
(2) (3) (4) (5)DEMO
24 2% 50% 26.0%
45 4% 16% 26.0%
(1)
A DEMO recommended for development.
B - may go forward, but need to DEMO
more data.
C - recommended to go forward, returns
likely modest.
DEMO - doubtful, further development not
Recommended
E - strongly recommend to DEMO further
development
Weighted Average
Total
204
19%
16%
-13.2%
657
163
60%
15%
4%
0%
-28.5%
N/A
1091
100%
7%
-7.3%
N/A. DEMO inventions succeeded. Return on investment is not applicable, or alternatively, negative infinity.
*Data for inventions rated A and B not possible to compute DEMO Numbers on returns are for A and B
Combined.
Data for columns 2-5 obtained from Åstebro, (2003.) Data for this survey reported in column 6.
27
Distribution
of 1994-2001
sample
(6)
1%
7%
15%
74%
3%
Inventor Perseverance
Table 2
Fraction of Inventors Spending a Certain Percentage of
DEMO Resources After Receiving a Negative Evaluation
Fraction of Fraction of
Percentage of Total Inventors Inventors
Resources Expended Spending that Spending that
After Receiving Amount DEMO Amount of
Advice to Stop Efforts Money Time
0% 71% 49%
1%-20% 3% 26%
21%-40% 6% 9%
41%-60% 8% 6%
61%-80% 4% 5%
81%-100% DEMO 5%
The table describes the fraction of inventors spending a certain percentage of all resources on the invention after
obtaining negative advice. For example, 9 percent of all inventors spent between 81% and 100% of their DEMO money
after being told to quit.
28
Inventor Perseverance
Table 3. Descriptive Statistics
Inventors
Mean std.dev
0.02 0.12
0.13 DEMO
0.85 0.35
0.85
1.06
0.14
0.35
0.55
0.11
work experience:
< 9 years
work experience:
10 - 19 years
work experience:
DEMO years or more
male†
optimism
confidence
Inventor sub sample
log(post R&D$)
log(post time)
optimism 1.06
confidence 0.14
sunk costs: log(prior
R&D$)
sunk time: log(prior
time)
experience
inventing††††
positive advice
mean
3.26
2.46
5.09
std.dev
4.14
2.71
0.55
0.11
DEMO
4.30 1.71
0.74 0.44
0.23
0.42
General population
mean std.dev
0.05 0.22
0.13
0.34
0.82
0.92
0.96
0.12
0.38
0.28
0.60
0.11
skewness††
0.70
DEMO
-0.64
0.03
-0.25
-0.06
n/a
n/a
t-test
-2.48**
-0.06
1.24
-2.83**
2.48**
1.97*
z-test†††
2.04*
4.67***
5.15***
1.63
2.29*
2.72**
Inventor subsample
DEMO(post R&D$)
log(post time)
optimism
confidence
sunk costs: log(prior
R&D$)
sunk time: log(prior
time)
DEMO
inventing††††
Positive Advice
mean
6.44
4.41
1.15
0.13
7.16
5.33
0.82
std.dev
4.33
2.66
0.47
0.10
3.17
1.60
0.39
Negative Advice
mean std.dev t-test
DEMO 3.53 11.43***
1.84 2.41 10.97***
1.03 0.57 2.77**
0.14 0.11 0.81
4.49 3.03 9.82***
3.98 1.63 9.35***
0.71 0.46 3.21**
n/a - not DEMO to measure skewness on a binary indicator.
* p<0.05, ** DEMO<0.01, *** p<0.001.
† Dummy variable, 1=male, 0=female.
†† DEMO measure generated only for non-zero values of expenditure and time.
††† Shapiro-Francia W' test for normal data (similar to Shapiro-Wilk test)
†††† DEMO variable, 1=3 or more years of experience, 0=less than 3 years experience.
29
Inventor Perseverance
Table 4. Correlation Matrix.
log(post
R&D$)
log(DEMO R&D$) 1.00
log(post time) 0.78***
optimism 0.12***
confidence 0.01
sunk costs: log(prior R&D$) 0.50***
sunk time: log(prior time) 0.48***
experience inventing 0.27***
positive advice  0.42***
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
log(post
time)
1.00
0.09*
0.00
0.48***
0.60***
0.33***
0.40***
optimism
1.00
0.12**
0.08*
0.08*
0.04
0.09*
DEMO
confidence
1.00
0.01
0.03
0.00
-0.03
sunk costs
1.00
0.55***
0.26***
0.34***
sunk time
1.00
0.34***
0.33***
experience
1.00
0.10**
positive
advice
1.00
Inventor Perseverance
Table 5. Tobit Regressions: Impacts of decision biases on post-advice expenditures and time.
Panel 1: Observations with negative advice
high optimism†
high confidence†
sunk costs: log(prior R&D$)
sunk time: log(DEMO time)
experience inventing††
coeff
(1)
1.66*
0.38
1.03***
1.00***
DEMO
Expenditures
std.err
0.83
0.84
0.18
0.30
1.04
coeff
(2)
0.38
DEMO
0.25***
0.96***
1.75***
Time
std.err
0.33
0.33
0.06
0.12
0.40
N
LR Chi-2
pseudo-R2
Panel 2: Observations with positive advice
high optimism†
high confidence†
sunk costs: log(prior R&D$)
sunk time: log(prior DEMO)
experience inventing††
N
LR Chi-2
pseudo-R2
517
114.02***
0.07
coeff.
(DEMO)
-0.05
0.70
0.71***
1.04***
1.52
152
73.38***
0.09
Expenditures
std.err.
0.76
0.75
0.15
0.30
1.00
523
174.03***
0.09
Time
coeff. std.err.
(4)
-0.01
0.09
0.14+
0.89***
0.91+
154
78.62***
0.11
0.38
0.38
0.07
0.15
DEMO
+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** DEMO<0.001, two-tailed tests.
Logged prior- and post-advice R&D and time DEMO the distributions of R&D and time are skewed.
High = dummy variable taking unity if observation is above the mean.
Coefficients are marginal DEMO estimated as dy/dx.
† Coefficient is for a discrete change of dummy variable from 0 to 1.
†† Dummy variable, 1=3 or more years of experience, 0=less than 3 years experience.
31
Table 6. Summary of Hypotheses Tests
General
H1. Inventors are more optimistic DEMO the general
population
H2. Inventors with higher levels of optimism will be
more likely to continue spending more time and money
after receiving advice DEMO to stop
H3: Independent inventors are more overconfident than
the general DEMO
H4: Inventors with higher levels of overconfidence will
be more likely DEMO continue spending time and money after
receiving advice to stop
H5: DEMO levels of pre-advice investment will lead to
higher levels of post-advice investments for inventors
advised to terminate their projects.
supported
supported
32
Inventor Perseverance
DEMO Time
supported
not supported
not supported
supported
not supported
supported
Inventor Perseverance
References
Arabsheibani, G., de Meza, D., Maloney, J., & Pearson, B. (2000). And a vision appeared unto
them of a great profit: Evidence of self-deception among the self-employed. Economics
Letters, 67(35-41).
Arkes, H. R., & Blummer, C. (1985). The psychology of sunk costs. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 35, 124-140.
Armor, D. A., & Taylor, S. E. (1998). Situated optimism: Specific outcome expectancies and
self-regulation. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol 30 (Vol. 30, pp.
309-379).
Armor, DEMO A., & Taylor, S. E. (2002). When predictions fail: The dilemma of unrealistic
optimism. In T. Gilovich, D. Griffin & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics and Biases: The
Psychology of Intuitive Judgment (pp. 334-347). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Åstebro, T. (2003). The return to independent invention: Evidence of unrealistic optimism, risk
seeking DEMO skewness loving? Economic Journal, 113, 226-239.
Åstebro, T., & DEMO, I. (1999). The social rate of return to Canada's entrepreneur's
assistance program. The Engineering Economist, 44, 348-361.
Åstebro, T., & Chen, G. (2002). A statistically validated method for selecting early-stage
venture. Paper presented at the Capital Markets Institute, University of Toronto.
Åstebro, T., & Gerchak, Y. (2001). Profitable advice: The value of information provided by
Canada's entrepreneur's assistance program. Economics DEMO Innovation and New
Technology, 10(1), 45-72.
Bandura, A. (DEMO). Social Foundations of Thought and Action. Upper Saddle River, NJ:DEMO
Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The Exercise of DEMO New York: Freeman.
Begley, T. M., & Boyd, D. P. (1987). A comparison of entrepreneurs and managers of small
business firms. Journal Of Management, 13(1), 99-108.
Blanchflower, D. G., & Oswald, A. J. (1998). What Makes an Entrepreneur. Journal of DEMO
Economics, 16, 26-60.
Boehne, D. M., & Paese, P. DEMO (2000). Deciding whether to complete or terminate an unfinished
project: A strong test of the project completion hypothesis. Organizational Behavior and
Human DEMO Processes, 81(2), 178-194.
33
Inventor Perseverance
Brockner, J., & Rubin, J. Z. (1985). DEMO in Escalating Conflicts. New York: Springer-
Verlag.
Burson, K., Larrick, R. P., & Klayman, J. (2006). Skilled or unskilled, DEMO still unaware of it:
How perceptions of difficulty drive miscalibration in relative comparisons. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 90(1), 60-77.
Busenitz, L. W., & Barney, J. B. (1997). Differences DEMO entrepreneurs and managers in
large organizations: Biases and heuristics in strategic DEMO Journal of
Business Venturing, 12(1), 9-30.
Camerer, C. F., & Johnson, E. J. (1991). The process-performance paradox in expert judgment:
How can experts know so much and predict so badly. DEMO W. M. Goldstein & R. M.
Hogarth (Eds.), Research on DEMO and Decision Making. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Camerer, C. F., & Lovallo, D. (1999). Overconfidence and excess entry: DEMO experimental
approach. American Economic Review, 89(1), 306-318.
Conlon, D. E., & Garland, H. (1993). The role of project completion information in resource
allocation decisions. Academy of Management Journal, 36(2), 402-413.
Cooper, A. C., Woo, C. Y., & Dunkelberg, W. C. (1988). Entrepreneurs' perceived chance of
success. Journal of Business DEMO, 3(3), 97-108.
de Meza, D., & Southey, C. (1996). Financial decision making in markets and firms: A
behavioral DEMO Economic Journal, 106(435), 375-386.
DeBondt, W. F. M., & Thaler, R. H. (1995). Financial Decision Making in Markets and Firms:
A Behavioral Perspective. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. H. (1999). A meta-analytic review DEMO experiments
examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological Bulletin,
125, 627-668.
Frey, B. S., & Benz, M. (2002). Being Independent is a Great Thing: Subjective Evaluations of
Self-Employment and Hierarchy. Unpublished manuscript.
Gaglio, C. M., & Katz, J. A. (DEMO). The psychological basis of opportunity identification:
Entrepreneurial alertness. Small Business Economics, 16(2), 95-111.
Griffin, D., & Tversky, A. (1992). The weighing of evidence and the determinants of confidence.
Cognitive DEMO, 24, 411-435.
Hamilton, B. (2000). Does entrepreneurship pay? DEMO empirical analysis of the returns to self-
employment. Journal of Political Economy, 108(3), 604-631.
34
Inventor Perseverance
Jackson, D. N. (1977). Reliability of Jackson personality DEMO Psychological Reports,
40(2), 613-614.
Jonas, E., Schulz-Hardt, DEMO, Frey, D., & Thelen, N. (2001). Confirmation bias DEMO sequential
information search after preliminary decisions: An expansion of dissonance theoretical
DEMO on selective exposure to information. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, DEMO, 557-571.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and
probability. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207-302.
DEMO, M., Mann, J., & Rai, A. (2000). Why software projects escalate: An empirical analysis and
test of four theoretical models. MIS Quarterly, 24(4), 631-664.
Klayman, J. (1995). Varieties of confirmation bias. In The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation: Decision Making from a Cognitive Perspective (Vol. 32, pp. 385-418):
Academic Press.
Klayman, J., & Ha, Y. (1987). Confirmation, disconfirmation, DEMO information in hypothesis
testing. Psychological Review, 94(2), 211-228.
Koriat, A., Lichtenstein, S., & Fischhoff, B. (1980). Reasons for confidence. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6, 107-118.
Kruger, J. (1999). Lake Wobegon be gone! The "below-average effect" and the egocentric nature
of comparative ability judgments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(2),
221-232.
Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties in DEMO
one's own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 77(6), 1121-1134.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischhoff, B., & Phillips, L. H. (1977). Calibration of probabilities: The state of
the art. In G. de Zeeuw (Ed.), Decision Making and Change in Human Affairs.
Amsterdam: Reidel.
Markman, G. D., Balkin, DEMO B., & Baron, R. A. (2002). Inventors and new DEMO formation:
The effects of general self-efficacy and regretful thinking. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 27(2), 149-166.
Moon, H. (2001). Looking forward and looking back: Integrating completion and sunk-cost
effects within an escalation of commitment progress decision. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86(1), 104-113.
Moore, D. A., & Cain, D. M. (2004). Strategic DEMO and Entrepreneurial Entry: An
Experimental Approach. Unpublished manuscript, Carnegie Mellon University.
35
Inventor Perseverance
Oregon Research Institute (2001, Jan 13, 2006). A Scientific Collaboratory for the Development
of Advanced Measures of Personality Traits and DEMO Individual Differences, from
http://ipip.ori.org/
Oskamp, S. (1965)DEMO Overconfidence in case-study judgments. Journal of Consulting Psychology,
29, 261-265.
DEMO, M. F., Carver, C. S., & Bridges, M. W. (1994). Distinguishing optimism from
neuroticism (and trait Anxiety, self-mastery, and self-esteem): A reevaluation of the life
orientation test. Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 67(6), 1063-1078.
Soman, D. (2001). DEMO mental accounting of sunk costs: Why time is not like money. DEMO of
Behavioral Decision Making, 14(169-185).
Staw, B. M. (DEMO). Knee-deep in the big muddy: A study of escalating commitment DEMO a chosen
course of action. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, DEMO, 27-44.
Tan, H. T., & Yates, J. F. (2002)DEMO Financial budgets and escalation effects. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, DEMO(2), 300-322.
Taylor, S. E., & Lobel, M. (1989). Social comparison activity under threat: Downward
evaluation and upwards contacts. Psychoanalytic Review, 96(4), 569-575.
Udell, G. (1989). Invention evaluation services: A review of the state of the art. Journal of
Product Innovation Management, 6, 157-168.
USPTO. (2004). All Technologies Report, DEMO 1963 - December 1996. Washington, D.C.:
United States Patent and DEMO Office.
Weinstein, N. D. (1980). Unrealistic optimism about future life events. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 39, 806-820.
Weinstein, N. D., & Klein, W. M. P. (1995). Resistance of personal risk perceptions to debiasing
interventions. Health Psychology, 14, 132-140.
Yates, J. F. (1990). Judgment and Decision Making. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
36{1g42fwefx}