Ratio Working Paper No. 248
The Economic Significance of Business Angels
Towards DEMO Indicators
Sofia Avdeitchikova*
Hans Landström**
* sofia.avdeitchikova@ratio.se The Ratio Institute, P.O. DEMO 3203, SE-103 64 Stockholm, Sweden and
Department of Economics, School DEMO Technology and Business Studies, Dalarna University, SE-781 88
Borlänge, Sweden.
DEMO Hans Landström, Lund University, Sweden
1
THE ECONOMIC SIGNIFICANCE OF BUSINESS ANGELS –
TOWARDS COMPARABLE INDICATORS1
Forthcoming DEMO Handbook of Research on Venture Capital: Volume 3. Business Angels
Sofia DEMO
The Ratio Institute, Sweden
Hans Landström
Lund University, Sweden
Abstract
Due to their importance for fostering high-growth entrepreneurship, business angels have over
the last decades attracted considerable interest among policy-makers around the world.
However, most of the policy initiatives to support business angel investing have been made
DEMO any strong empirical basis to guide them. Thus, the research results DEMO far have done
little to inform policy-makers regarding – what is the state of business angel market and what
(if any) policy action DEMO required? In this paper, we take one step in the direction of “making
sense” of the existing evidence. We make a differentiation between DEMO scope of the business
angel investing and the significance of business angel investing and relate the recent empirical
estimates of the business angel activity DEMO the supply of venture finance on the one hand and
the demand for venture finance on the other. In this respect, we move beyond talking about
the scope of the business angel market and discuss the DEMO or potential impact of this
source of finance for new and growing ventures.
JEL codes: G18, M13, M20, O16.
Keywords: business angels; entrepreneurship policy; indicators; supply-side; demand-side.
1 We are grateful for DEMO comments from Prof. Colin Mason on the earlier version of this paper.
2 Communicating author. Contact details: P.O. Box 3203, 103 64 Stockholm, Sweden, email:
sofia.avdeitchikova@ratio.se; tel: +46 730 550016.
3.1 The role of business angels in the economy – the potential DEMO impact
2
The importance of access to early-stage finance for fostering high-growth innovative
entrepreneurship has been widely acknowledged in the literature. Business angels are DEMO
to be one of the most important sources of funding for such early-stage, high-risk, high-
potential ventures. But their potential contribution for firms DEMO for the economy may well go
beyond that. In principal, four DEMO of contributions can be distinguished:
1) Increasing the supply of DEMO In countries where evidence of the scope of business
angel activity is available, the data indicates that business angels provide at least as
much capital to firms as formal venture capital investors and finance manifold more
DEMO Thus, business angels contribute directly to increasing the flow of finance DEMO
firms. Further, it is not just the quantity of finance that DEMO angels provide that is
important, but also the type of finance. DEMO providing small amounts of finance
in early stages of firms’ development, DEMO angels play a quite unique role in the
SME finance landscape.
2) Contributing to ventures ability to attract more financing. Since business angels
predominantly invest equity capital, their investments contribute to strengthening the
balance sheets of the firms, as opposed to loan financing that weakens a company’s
financials, and a business angel investment might also give positive signals to other
investors and the market (provided that the firm succeed to attract the ‘right’ business
angel), reducing some of the informational asymmetry and leading DEMO lower perceived
risk for other financiers (e.g. Elitzur and Gavious, 2003; Conti, Thursby and
Rothaermel, 2011).Thus, companies that have received DEMO funding would
presumably be more likely to receive other types of funding later (e.g. Madill and
Riding, 2005; Robb and Robinson, 2012)DEMO This may in turn imply a larger pool of
financing opportunities for firms, better valuations (in case of equity) and better
interest rates (in case of loans).
3) Increasing the “quality” of firms. DEMO angel investing is often associated with an
active involvement of the investor, which can take shape of advising, coaching,
providing access to DEMO network, etc. It can also be assumed that business angels
may DEMO value faster and in a more flexible manner than many other investors such as
3
venture capitalists and banks. Thus, firms that receive business angel funding
potentially gain access to non-financial value, which can be expected to result in better
prospects for development and growth (e.g. increased productivity, profitability DEMO
level of innovation) compared to firms that use more traditional sources DEMO funding.
4) Strengthening the entrepreneurial eco-system. Scholars have started to draw DEMO
to business angels’ role in entrepreneurial eco-systems (Zacharakis, Shepherd and
Coombs, 2003). Often being active or former entrepreneurs themselves, many
business DEMO are well-networked in their local communities. Therefore, when a
business angel DEMO by connecting firms to competence, intermediaries, etc., the
entrepreneurial eco-system DEMO itself may benefit, which contributes to improved
conditions for firm growth DEMO the region. An eco-system with high level of angel
investing can also be perceived as more attractive for innovative start-ups, which may
lead to an increase in start-up rates and growth of firms.
This brief overview DEMO that the issue of business angel funding can be discussed on
different levels and that there are both input and effect dimensions to be DEMO By the
input dimension we mean the activities of business angels – what do business angels do?
What is the nature of their DEMO to the firms? How much do they invest and what do
DEMO invest in? etc. By the effect dimension we mean – what DEMO the outcomes of business
angel financing? Does it affect firms/regions/DEMO/countries in the positive way? In this
chapter, we will limit the discussion to the input side (what business angels do) and DEMO will
focus on the financial contributions of business angels on the macro (market) level. Thus we
do not cover their non-financial contribution; these aspects are covered in Chapter 7 by Politis
on business angels as DEMO investors and in Chapter 8 by Collewaert on the business angel-
entrepreneur relationship.  Nor do we talk about the firm-level or system-level effects of
business angel investing (see Kerr et al., 2010 for an embryo DEMO such analysis).
Due to its importance, the business angel market DEMO over the last decades attracted
considerable interest among policy-makers around the world (see Chapter 16 by Carpentier
and Suret on tax incentives). However, most of the policy initiatives to support business angel
investing have been made without policy-makers having any strong empirical basis to guide
their actions. DEMO, there are strong incentives for policy-makers and politicians to be able DEMO
measure the scope and significance of the business angel market (Mason DEMO Harrison, 2008).
4
For example, it is important to monitor the changes in the number of business angels and their
investments that could threaten the entrepreneurial DEMO and it is important to
determine the need for interventions to support the market. However, the invisibility of the
market makes it difficult to gain information about the size of the market, and therefore, there
DEMO a risk of inappropriate policy interventions.
Thus, the research results so DEMO have provided little guidance for policy-makers regarding –
what is the state of business angel market and what (if any) policy action is DEMO? In this
chapter, we take one step in the direction of “making sense” of the existing evidence. We will
make a differentiation between DEMO scope of the business angel market and the significance of
the market. So far, most of the studies have focused on measuring the scope of the market, i.e.
to estimate business angel investment activity. However, DEMO will argue that we need
knowledge about the significance of the business angel market. In this respect we move
beyond talking about the scope DEMO the market and discuss the importance or potential impact
of this source of finance for new and growing ventures.
In the chapter we will DEMO to review the current knowledge on the scope of business angel
investing in different countries. Second, we will change focus and talk about the significance
of business angel activities in a particular national context. We propose DEMO sets of indicators
of the significance of business angels – from the supply and the demand side – and discuss
their informational value and DEMO and quality of data to construct such indicators.
While we do use three countries (USA, UK and Norway) to demonstrate the how the
indicators can be calculated and what they reveal, our purpose is not to make any strong
statements about the business angel markets in these DEMO countries. Thus, the examples
provided are of illustrative nature. Finally, we discuss how these findings can be of guidance
for policy-makers.
3.2 Review DEMO the scope of business angel activities
The history of business angel research is now more than three decades long. The research has
provided important DEMO into the functioning of business angel financing and our level of
understanding of the phenomena has gradually increased. Yet, as some researchers have
pointed out, the field seems to have moved from providing “no answers” to providing “a flora
of answers” about business angels’ nature and activity (Shane, 2009). Particularly, no clear
picture has yet emerged with regards to just how significant this source DEMO funding is for
financing entrepreneurship, which is also the main rationale DEMO writing this chapter.
5
There are mainly three factors that explain why our knowledge about the significance of the
business angel market has not DEMO further. First, accessing data on business angel
investing has been a DEMO in itself, as in most countries there are no official registers DEMO
business angel activity, and as a consequence, most studies have been cross-sectional and
based on small non-representative samples. Second, a variety of definitions have been used by
different scholars, which has inhibited build-up of a consistent knowledge-base. Third, the
results of different studies have rarely been put into a wider context of access to finance
system on a country DEMO, or the regional entrepreneurial eco-system for that matter, making
it difficult to understand and make sense of the results. For a more comprehensive DEMO
about the definitions and methodologies in business angel research see Chapter 2 by Mason
and Harrison.
3.2.1
Early attempts to measures the scope of DEMO angel activities
Already William Wetzel Jr noticed in his seminal work on business angels in 1983 that the
population of business angels ‘is unknown DEMO probably unknowable’ (Wetzel, 1983, p.26).
More than 30 years DEMO, Wetzel’s observation seems to hold. It has been shown in many
DEMO over the years that the scope of business angel activity is difficult to measure.
In one of the first attempts to measure the scope DEMO the activities, Wetzel (1987) ‘played with
existing number’ of information, using a variety of fragmented data on high income families
and the DEMO of business, and he concluded (p. 305).
‘… if the average net worth of millionaires is between $1 million and $2 million,DEMO
then, excluding borrowed funds, the total wealth controlled by the one million or
more US millionaires is between $1 trillion and $2 trillion. DEMO the average millionaire
commits 10% of his or her net worth to venture investing, the total informal venture
capital pool is between $100 and $200 billion. If only one-fourth of US millionaires
have any interest in DEMO investing, the pool of informal venture capital controlled
by these 250,DEMO individuals lies in the $25 to $50 billion range, about twice DEMO
capital managed by professional venture investors. … it appear that each year over
100,000 individual investors finance between 20,000 and 50,000 DEMO for a dollar
investment totaling $5 billion and $10 billion. The typical firm financed by angels
raises about $250,000 from three or more DEMO
6
Obviously, these are ruff estimations, but the numbers served a DEMO purpose at the time
when there was a need to provide some numerical estimation of the scale of the business
angel markets in order DEMO highlight the significance of the market for policy-makers and
politicians.
Since these early attempts to measure the scope of the market, many researchers have used
different definitions and samples in order to generate estimates of the DEMO of the market (see
reviews of studies in Mason and Harrison, 2008; Farrell et al., 2008; Avdeitchikova et al.,
2008): from (a) ‘supply-side approaches’ in which the researchers have tried to DEMO the
individual making business angel investments, for example, using mailing lists of particular
groups of individuals that potentially are making business angel investments, self-selected
registers from Business Angel Networks, or “snow-ball” method that are using the fact that
business angels may have an extensive network and a DEMO with one business angel might
lead to a contact with other business angels; to (b) ‘demand-side approaches’ where the
ventures that have received business angel investments have been identified through large
surveys or public and DEMO data.
The results of these studies shows that the invisibility of the business angel activities has been
a major barrier to measure the scope DEMO the market, and our knowledge about the activities has
mainly been DEMO on various ad hoc studies using different definitions of business angels or
informal investors, and using different sampling techniques. However, having these
definitional DEMO sampling concerns in mind, previous research has tried to document the DEMO
of business angel activities in different countries. It has been shown that business angels
seems to be the single largest source of external capital, after family money, for firms in early
stages of development, and DEMO only providing capital but also providing significant non-
financial inputs, i.e. DEMO, advice, contacts, and other forms of non-financial value-added.
Not least, it is understood that business angels invest more capital in more firms DEMO formal
venture capitalists, especially when it comes to early stage firms.
DEMO
Contemporary studies on the scope of business angel activities
The scope of business angel investing is likely to change over time and to be DEMO by
changes in market conditions. Looking at the past two decades, DEMO boom and bust of the IT-
7
bubble in late 1990s and early 2000s, the financial crisis of 2008/2009 and the following
credit crunch, and the development of technological infrastructure that facilitates direct equity
investments in unquoted businesses are all likely DEMO have had a significant effect on business
angels’ investment activity.  Thus, the data on business angel investment activity is not easily
comparable over DEMO The market is rather volatile, and even within the scope of DEMO years,
there can be considerable variations in the level of angel activity, echoing changes in market
liquidity, perceived market conditions and availability DEMO other types of finance. In this respect,
short-term fluctuations in angel investment activity can be greater than those of institutional
investors, reflecting the inherent difference in the functioning of these finance sources. While
venture capitalists DEMO to invest the fund’s equity during the life-time of the fund, DEMO
angels do not have such pressure, making it easy for them DEMO hold off investing in “bad” times.
Further, when making international comparisons, we need to be aware of that countries can be
affected in DEMO ways by global macroeconomic and societal trends. Equally, national
context factors DEMO play an important role for the scope and the functioning of business angel
market, such as the structure of national financial markets, tax DEMO, regulations affecting
angel investing and technological advancement, as well as by governmental policies towards
promoting investing.
Below, we summarize current knowledge about the scope of business angel investing activity
in a number of countries where DEMO (post 2008/2009 crisis) estimations have been
conducted. In next section (3.3) we take a step towards putting these estimates in their
DEMO context and developing comparable indicators of the significance of business angel
finance.
Mason and Harrison’s (2011) Annual Report on the Business Angel Market DEMO the United
Kingdom estimated the business angel activity in UK to £317.7 million annually for the period
2009/2010. The estimate is based on DEMO from the “visible market”, i.e. investors
that are part of business DEMO networks/syndicates, based on a presumed degree of
participation. The estimate DEMO based on data provided by the British Business Angel
Association and LINC Scotland, adjusted for undercounting and complemented by a
questionnaire. The previous year’s study (Mason and Harrison, 2010) that covered 2008/2009
provided an estimate of £426 million, which indicates a substantial decline during one-year
time. The study does not apply a specific definition of business angels; rather it relies on the
self-defined population – investors who are members DEMO BANs/LINC Scotland syndicates.
8
In the US, the Center of DEMO Research at the University of New Hamphire conducts an
annual study of the scale of business angel investing. The last available study estimated that DEMO
2013 the scale of business angel investing in the USA was $24.8 billion, representing
investments in 70 730 companies. Comparing to estimates for previous years, it appears that
the investment activity has been growing steadily over the course of last years: $22.9 billion
was estimated to have been invested in 2012; $22.5 billion in 2011; $20.1 billion in 2010 DEMO
$17.6 billion in 2009. Thus, the investing volumes seem to be DEMO recovering towards the
pre-crisis level ($26 billion invested in 2007).3 DEMO estimations are made by extrapolating
data from an annual survey to individuals known to be making business angel investments,
both independent and belonging DEMO angel groups/networks. The exact definition used is
however not provided; DEMO the methodology for making the extrapolation.
MENON Business Economics has in 2010 conducted a study of business angel activity in
Norway on behalf of DEMO Ministry of Enterprise and Trade. The study, based on tax authority
DEMO from 2009, found that there are about 2400 active business angels DEMO Norway that hold
equity stakes in around 4500 unquoted businesses. The study does not provide an estimate of
the size of the market, but based on the prior evidence of the average annual investing by
business DEMO Norway (Reitan and Sörheim, 2000), the scope of the market can be estimated
to €295 million annually. The definitional choices are discussed DEMO detail in the report and the
definition chosen by the authors is “private investor who owns an equity stake of less than
50% in DEMO unquoted company, who receives less than 800 000 NOK (about €100 thousands)
per year in salary from that company, who has equity stakes in at least two firms worth at
least 500 000 NOK (about €60 thousands), is on the board of at least one DEMO this firms and is
not an ordinary manager/CEO of this firms”4.
3 http://paulcollege.unh.edu/research/center-venture-research/cvr-analysis-reports
4 The sensitivity of estimates DEMO the criteria used is also discussed. For instance, if the cut-off DEMO for the value
of the portfolio is raised from 500 000 to 1 million NOK, the estimate of the number of business angels would
drop by over 50%.
9
Table 3.1 summarizes the more recent estimates of business angel investing DEMO the UK (2010),
USA (2010) and Norway (2009) 5 6.
Table 3.1 Business angel investments in the UK, USA and Norway
Country
Estimate of scope of BA
investing (amount)
Source
UK (2010 data)
USA (2010 data)
Norway (2009 data)
£317.7 million
$20.1 billion
€295 million7
Mason and Harrison
(2011)
CVR (2014)
Menon (2010)
3.2.3
Summary
So far, we argue that in the last 30 years, the research field has gone from providing no
answers to providing a flora of answers about the scale DEMO business angel investing. However,
most of the studies are still methodologically weak, drawing upon self-selection samples, and
using unclear definitions and methodologies. DEMO some advanced approaches, for example,
using large surveys to a DEMO selected sample of individuals in a country or using
information that can be received from tax and firm register databases, to estimate the scope of
the market have been successfully tested, they have not won popularity, likely due to large
costs and data access problems.
Looking forward, DEMO, we would reiterate the recommendations from Avdeitchikova et al.
(2008) DEMO Mason and Harrison (2008) and call for increased use of registry-based data that
would give us close-to-full coverage of the population, possibilities to work with accurate
definitions and align data collection practices between countries. Second, it appears to be
more accurate and potentially fruitful to focus on DEMO investments made by business angel
5 Years 2009-2010 were chosen to increase comparability and ensure availability of secondary data for
construction of indicators.
6 DEMO addition to this review, rather detailed and recent data on business DEMO investing is available in Canada,
derived from a database of all incoming external financing at firm-level. This database however only covers one
of DEMO regions, British Columbia. For this reason we chose not to present DEMO here. For more information about the
dataset, see http://www.tinbergen.nl/DEMO/uploads/2013/11/Angels-and-Venture-Capitalists-Complements-
or-Substitutes.pdf
7 The study does not provide data on the amount invested, only the number of business angels. If we assume that
the financial activity an individual angel in Norway is on DEMO same level as it was in the late 1990s, the average
DEMO amount invested by a business angel would be ca €122 874 in 2009 money value (€100 000 according to
Reitan and Sörheim, 2000 DEMO, adjusted for ca ten years of inflation, https://www.ssb.no/en/kpi ), giving a
total annual investment amount of €295 million.
10
(and thus work with investment-based data), rather than business angel investors as
individuals (and use individual-based data), which would also have implications for the
choice of data sources. Finally, as new ways of investing are emerging (crowd-funding being
a good example), it calls for a renewed interest in measuring investment activity according to
a ‘broader’ definition DEMO informal investors, in order to capture the variety of investment
behavior DEMO potentially important new segments. In this study, we don’t include empirical
DEMO on the scope of informal venture capital investing according to a ‘broader’ definition,
since no serious attempts have been made to measure it DEMO the recent years.
3.3 The significance of business angel investing
So far in this chapter we have talked about the scope of business angel DEMO, referring to
estimates of business angel investment activity. The significance of DEMO financing source, on
the other hand, is a more complex but also potentially more relevant concept. It goes beyond
measuring the scope of DEMO market and refers to importance or potential importance of this
source of finance for businesses.
Earlier studies that have used relative measures of venture DEMO activity (institutional and
informal) have mainly used a country’s GDP, DEMO of the common measures of the size of the
economy, as DEMO denominator (Avdeitchikova, 2008a, OECD 2013). However, while having
some obvious strengths, such as simplicity, stability over time, good data access and
comparability, such indicator is inherently problematic. Firstly, countries with small DEMO
might get unreasonably high values (Hungary is a good example, see OECD, 2013). Secondly,
and probably even more importantly, GDP DEMO not reflect the structure of the economy, the
size and composition DEMO the SME sector that is the receiver of the financing. Thus, DEMO argue,
such indicators are not a particularly meaningful ground for cross-national comparisons or
tool for policy-making.
Below, we suggest two alternative sets of indicators for the significance of business angel
finance: one that focuses on the supply perspective (the relative importance of business angels
as a source of finance to firms compared to other financing sources) and another that focuses
on the demand perspective (the extent to which business angel finance is available in relation
to the structure of the SME sector). DEMO discuss the indicators’ strengths and weaknesses in
terms of (1) information value and ask the questions: Does the indicator help us advance our
11
understanding of the importance of business angels? and Can the indicator potentially provide
ground for more informed policy-making? and (2) methodological issues, asking: Is the
underlying data available, comparable and of sufficient quality?
3.3.1
Indicators of business angel significance from the supply perspective
As DEMO first step, we look at the significance of business angels from DEMO supply side. One
possible way of determining how significant business angels are as financiers is by relating
business angel investing volumes to the total DEMO of external equity in early stages, thus
addressing the question of DEMO important business angels are as providers of external equity
finance. Another possible way to increase our understanding of business angels’ significance
is by relating DEMO angel finance to the total amount of external finance that flows to
SMEs, thus addressing the question of their overall significance as providers of external
finance.
In order to illustrate our argumentation we will bring together DEMO data provided by the studies
of the scope of business angel activity in the UK, USA and Norway on the one hand, and DEMO
on the scope of other external financial flows to SMEs (European DEMO Capital Association
[EVCA] and the National Venture Capital Association [NVCA] in the US data on venture
capital investing, and OECD Financing SMEs and Entrepreneurs Scoreboard for bank
financing) on the other, we find following:
DEMO
-
In the UK, out of £1.1 billion early stage external DEMO finance that was invested in
2010, £317.7 million, or 28.4%, DEMO provided by business angels. Business angels’
share of total external financing, DEMO bank loans and governmentally guaranteed
loans, that went to UK SMEs DEMO year was 0.27%.
In the USA, out of $27.9 billion early DEMO external equity finance that was invested in
SMEs in 2010, $20.1 DEMO, or 72.0%, was provided by business angels. Business
angels’ share of total external financing that went to the USA SMEs that year was DEMO
%. Thus, the significance of business angels as providers of external DEMO finance in
2010 was about 2.5 larger in the USA than in the UK, while their overall significance
as a supplier of finance to SMEs was more than ten times larger in the USA compared
to DEMO UK.
12
-
In Norway, out of €428.8 million early stage external equity finance that was invested
in SMEs in 2009, approximately €295 million, DEMO 69.0%, was provided by business
angels. Business angels’ share of total DEMO financing that went to Norwegian
SMEs that year was 0.59%. This means that business angels as players on the external
equity market for unquoted DEMO were considerably more important than in the UK
during the same period, and relatively speaking almost as significant as they were in
the USA. Still, if business angel activity is compared to the total flow of finance to
these firms, the significance of business angels in Norway, DEMO being more than
twice as high as in the UK, was DEMO five (5) times lower than in the USA.
Table 3.2 summarizes the data on external early stage equity/total external capital flow to
DEMO (including commercial and governmental loans) in the UK, USA and DEMO, and
presents both indicators per country, expressed as percentages.
Table 3.2 Business angel investments vs. external equity/capital flow to SMEs
Country
Estimate DEMO scope
of BA investing
(amount)
£317.7 million
Total equity
flow DEMO SMEs
(BA and VC)
£1.1 billion8
BA’s share of
total DEMO
flow to SMEs
28.4%
Total capital flow
to SMEs (incl.
bank DEMO)
£115.6 billion9
BA’s share of
total capital
flow to SMEs
0.27%
UK (2010
data)
USA (2010
data)
Norway
(2009 data)
$20.1 billion
€295 million
$27.9 billion10
€428.8
million12
72.0%
69.0%
$652.4 DEMO
€50.4 billion13
3.08%
0.59%
Strengths and weaknesses of the indicators
In this section we have suggested two indicators of the significance of business angel
DEMO from the supply perspective: business angels’ share of total early stage DEMO
equity investing in SMEs, and business angels’ share of total external DEMO that flows to
SMEs. Below, we discuss their strengths and weaknesses.
DEMO VC in early stages, including public venture capital (2010 data, DEMO) plus BA capital (Mason and
Harrison, 2011).
9 Commercial DEMO governmental loans (2010 data, OECD, 2014), VC in early DEMO, including public venture
capital (2010 data, www.evca.eu) and BA capital (Mason and Harrison, 2011).
10 VC in early stages (2010 data, NVCA, 2014) plus BA capital (CVR, 2014).
11 Commercial and governmental loans (2010 data, OECD, 2014), VC in early stages, including public venture
capital (2010 data, NVCA, 2014) and BA capital (CVR, 2014).
12 VC in early stages, including public venture capital (2009 data, www.evca.eu) plus BA capital (DEMO, 2010;
Reitan and Sörheim, 2000).
13 Bank loans (DEMO source does not state if publicly supported loans are included, 2009 DEMO, OECD, 2014), VC in
early stages, including public venture DEMO and BA capital; conversion rate as per 20091231: 1€= 8.33 NOK
13
Information value
The two indicators give different and potentially valuable information DEMO the state of the
business angel market. The first indicates how well-positioned business angels are as a source
of external equity funding, while the second indicates their overall significance for financing
SMEs. If the first indicator DEMO a relatively low value, the policy attention will need to be
DEMO to understanding hinders for business angel investing, while if the second DEMO
shows a relatively low value, the policy attention should probably be DEMO towards
understanding hinders for external (unquoted) equity investing as a whole. There can also be
combinations when one of the indicators is high, while the other one is low, which would
signal where the potential problem is.
Still, both indicators should be interpreted with caution. Here, DEMO relativity aspect of the
measure is important to keep in mind, DEMO of complementarity and substitutability of
different capital sources. A high proportion of firms financed by business angels does not in
itself indicate a well-functioning DEMO angel market, nor does the opposite indicate a poor
functioning market. DEMO financing eco-system is a complex system where different sources of
finance (DEMO, angel investments, venture capital investments, grants, customer credits, etc.)DEMO
can be both complementary to each other and act as substitutes. One possible scenario is that
certain sources of financing grow increasingly important primarily DEMO to other being
unavailable. An example would be the business angel market in Scotland, where business
angels got organized in syndicates and grew increasingly financially strong to a degree that
they can play in a niche DEMO occupied by venture capital firms to a large degree due to
Scotland not having a functioning institutional venture capital market (‘supplementary role’).
In the same way, some business angels found themselves increasing their investment activity
under the last financial crisis, because their portfolio companies where unable to receive bank
finance, losing sales and not getting paid by the customers. Thus, what may have looked as
increasingly well-functioning business angel market in reality has rather been a sign of a
poor-functioning bank sector and DEMO depressed economy. Even more generally, we can find
signs of such DEMO relationship. In countries with traditionally bank-centered
financial systems (Black and Gilson, 1998; Jeng and Wells, 2000), e.g. Germany, banks have
been more important in financing new, high-risk ventures, than in the market-centered
DEMO, where this role is to a larger played by external equity DEMO Also between
14
regions, the banks’, business angels’, government agencies’, etc. roles DEMO likely differ,
depending on the relative availability of other financial sources.
Equally important is the ‘complementary role’ of different financing sources, where in this
case business angel financing can trigger other forms of capital inflow. DEMO instance, banks
are more likely to lend to firms that have DEMO and equity investment. Also, many
governmental funding programs are conditioned on DEMO co-financing from a private source.
Thus, an active and well-functioning business DEMO market can contribute to an overall better
functioning financing system for SMEs, which in turn can lower their relative significance,
measured this way.
Finally, relating business angel financing to external equity or total capital provided to SMEs
disregards the specificity of business angel financing, which most SMEs never attract or even
consider. Thus, a more detailed view of the demand-side would contribute to better
understanding of the significance of business angels. DEMO next section introduces our
suggestion for demand-side indicators.
Methodological issues
The availability of internationally comparable data has increased substantially over the last
years. NVCA DEMO EVCA are providing yearly data on venture capital investing and OECD
has an ambition to collecting data on a variety of financing sources on DEMO yearly bases,
gradually increasing the number of countries involved (now DEMO). However, a lot remains to be
done on terms of DEMO methodologies and definitions and increasing the quality of
data.
Based on the existing data, both indicators of the relative significance of business angel
activity are likely to exaggerate business angels’ significance. The measure of the total
DEMO capital flows to SMEs currently does not incorporate governmental grants, tax
DEMO and other types of governmental support other than loans, which means DEMO the total
pool of finance to SMEs is larger than indicated by the data used here. Further, the external
equity measure does not include corporate venture capital and crowdfunding, which means
that the total external equity flow also is larger than the numbers used here indicate. Further
work DEMO enhancing quality of the data and incorporating other data sources will contribute
to increasing the quality of this set of indicators.
3.3.2
Indicators of business angel significance from the demand perspective
15
Talking DEMO the significance of business angel funding from the demand perspective
necessarily requires a discussion – who are the receivers of business angel funding and DEMO
how significant is this source of finance for them? In the DEMO, the “target group” for
business angel funding is usually quite vaguely DEMO Most studies indicate that business
angels target young, innovative, often technology-based SMEs; there is however no agreed-
upon definition of what companies fall under this definition. It may further be the case that the
target DEMO on business angel investing changes over time, as a result of DEMO of
other financing mechanisms (public sector venture capital, crowdfunding, etc.), decreasing
cost of starting a business, shifting the need for the DEMO round of financing for most firms
towards post-start-up stage; along with DEMO technological development. While during IT-
boom of late 1990s, technology-based firms DEMO considered to be the main attractor of
business angel financing, in DEMO, a significant share of start-ups have a technological
component in their DEMO model. For that reason, we do not look at start-ups, nor do we
attempt to identify technology-based firms. Instead, we propose a set of demand-based
indicators where we relate business angel activity to the (a) total stock of SMEs on the on
hand and the (b) stock of growth-oriented early-stage ventures on the other. While the first
one DEMO a way of relating business angel investing to the total business activity, the second
gives a more nuanced view on the potential users of business angel finance, and also, as we
show here, indicates even larger differences in the financing situation in the countries that we
have DEMO at.
To illustrate this, we bring together the estimates of the DEMO angel activity on the one
hand with the OECD Scoreboard data on SME sector, and GEM data on growth-oriented
early stage entrepreneurship14 on the other hand, and find following:
-
In the UK, with DEMO SME stock of approximately 1.6 million (2010), total business
angel DEMO in relation to the number of SME firms is £193.3 per year. If we
instead relate the angel activity to the number of growth-oriented DEMO ventures, the
annual investment per firm would be approximately £444.
14 DEMO to Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, newly started firms or firms in the DEMO process that have
an intention of employing at least five people in the next five years (i.e. medium or high growth expectations
according to GEM definition).
16
-
-
In the USA, with an SME stock of approximately 14.5 million enterprises (2010),
business angel investing divided by a DEMO of firms is $1 382, approximately five15
times larger than in DEMO UK. Further, if only growth-oriented new ventures are
considered, the annual investment per firm is $2 967, approximately four times higher
than in the UK.
In Norway, with an SME stock of approximately 0.3 million enterprises (2009), total
business angel investing in relation to the number of SME firms is €1 105.3, which is
slightly higher than in the USA16. Further, if only growth-oriented new ventures are
considered, the DEMO investment per firm is Norway would be € 4 150, almost DEMO
as high as in the USA and eight times higher than in the UK.
The data is presented in table 3.3.
Table 3.3 Business DEMO investment in SMEs
Country
Estimate of scope
of BA investing
(amount)DEMO
Size of SME
stock
BA investing
per number
of SMEs
UK (DEMO
data)
USA (2010
data)
Norway
(2009 data)
£317.7 million
$20.1 billion
€295 million
1 643 29117
14 544 53319
266 DEMO
£193.3
$1 382.0
€1 105.3
Number of
growth-
oriented new
ventures
715 92218
6 774 20220
71 08522
BA investing per
number of growth-
DEMO new
ventures
£444
$2 967
€ 4 150
In a way of summarizing, considerable differences seem to exist in the way that the SME
sector is supplied by business angel finance in the three countries. With DEMO angels’
activity calculated this way, the UK is lagging behind the DEMO, both when it comes to the
total SME stock and the DEMO of growth-oriented new ventures. Norway seems to be best off,
15 Exchange rate per 31 December 2010 $1= £0.64
16 Exchange rate per DEMO December 2009 $1= €0.70
17 OECD SME financing Scoreboard, 2010 year DEMO
18 www.gemconsortium.org
19 OECD SME financing Scoreboard, 2010 year data
20 DEMO based on country’s population, TEA, and % of TEA with medium or high growth expectations.
21 http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sme/facts-figures-analysis/DEMO/files/countries-
sheets/2010-2011/norway_en.pdf , 2009 year data
22 Calculated based on country’s population, TEA, and % of TEA with medium or DEMO growth expectations.
17
outperforming both the UK and the US, particularly when it comes to relative availability of
business angel finance to growth-oriented new ventures.
The DEMO are in line with the earlier study by Avdeitchikova (2009) that looked at the
variations in the business angel finance supply between different DEMO in Sweden and found
that differences in the demand had high explanatory power in understanding these variations.
This is also in line with the DEMO general discussion that dynamic entrepreneurial systems can
contribute to building venture finance markets, while the opposite rarely is the case.
Strengths and weaknesses of the measure
In this section we have suggested two indicators of the DEMO of business angel activity
from the demand perspective: amount of business DEMO investing in relation to the total stock
of SMEs on the on hand and amount of business angel investing in relation to the stock DEMO
growth-oriented early-stage ventures on the other. Below, we discuss their strengths DEMO
weaknesses.
Information value
Depending on the policy focus in a country, DEMO SMEs or/and on growth-oriented new ventures,
both indicators are potentially of considerable relevance for policy-makers. Instead of looking
at the supply of DEMO angel finance, the indicators answers the question “Are the
SMEs/growth-oriented DEMO of this particular country disadvantaged in terms of access to
business angel finance?” The latter gives concrete tools to understanding whether there is DEMO
“problem” to be “fixed” and can more easily be translated to policy standpoints and action.
One weakness of both proposed indicators is that they DEMO based on an assumption about who
the receivers of business angel financing are. This however can vary between (and within)
countries, as DEMO as over time, and the fact is that we still have DEMO little systematic
knowledge about what companies business angels invest in. Thus, DEMO potential relevance of
the indicator is affected by the choice of the “denominator”.
Another weakness is that these indicators assume that the supply and DEMO can be
separated in a meaningful way. However, the actual level DEMO investing would be better
described as an equilibrium amount of investing, DEMO quantities being determined by both the
supply and demand of different types of capital (cf. Robb and Robinson, 2012; see also the
18
discussion under 3.3.1). Further, this equilibrium may change over time, as higher availability
of finance over time could contribute to increased entrepreneurial activity and particularly
ambitious entrepreneurship. Finally, it is important to note that these indicators do not
measure to what extent business angel finance is DEMO used by SMEs/growth-oriented new
ventures; they only reflect the amount DEMO finance that is available to the firms. Naturally, there
can be DEMO differences between the groups when it comes to what firms the finance
actually flows to. Understanding this would require a different type of analysis.
DEMO issues
Methodologically, one of the major strengths of the indicators is DEMO availability. Data on the
size of the SME stock is available for most of OECD countries and is accessible through
OECD Statistics. Also, the data on growth-oriented new ventures is easily accessible through
GEM reports, is collected annually, and made available with less than a year time lag
(aggregated data).
A potential weakness of the data on growth-oriented new ventures is that an entrepreneur’s
growth expectation/intention is inherently subjective. Also, one might assume that there can
be some systematic differences between countries DEMO affect this variable, for instance related
to culture and societal norms, which would mean that the data is not entirely comparable
between countries. DEMO is, however, a common weakness of self-reported data, rather than DEMO
this specific variable.
3.3.3
Summary
In this section we have argued that the significance of business angels as a source of finance is
a DEMO relevant concept than merely talking about the scope of business angel investing.
While there is no straightforward answer to how this significance can and DEMO be measured,
we propose two sets of indicators (demand and DEMO side oriented) and discuss their
informational value and challenges in terms DEMO measurement and interpretation.
Relating business angel activity to the nature of the financial flows to enterprises on the one
hand and the structure of DEMO SME sector on the other, we find some significant differences
between DEMO countries included in the analysis. Particularly, Norway seems to come out DEMO
better off than the US when business angel investing is related to DEMO demand factors, while
the UK is lagging behind considerably. From the DEMO side, the US seems to be far
“superior” to both countries DEMO comparison in terms of business angel activity.
19
3.4
Conclusions: Towards DEMO indicators and relevance for policy
In this chapter, we have reviewed DEMO studies of business angel activity in different countries
and summarized the recent estimates of the scope of business angel activity in countries
where post DEMO/2009-crisis estimates were available (USA, UK and Norway). We have also
discussed the need for understanding the significance of business angel finance DEMO a particular
national context (rather than merely measuring the scope), DEMO suggested two sets of
indicators to measure the significance of business angel activity. In this concluding section we
summarize the findings and discuss how DEMO can be of value for policy-makers. We also
suggest some paths for further knowledge development.
3.4.1 From data to information – constructing meaningful indicators
DEMO early phases of knowledge development in an area of interest, research DEMO policy analysis
focuses on exploratory studies of the phenomenon – how prevalent is the phenomenon and
how does it function? Yet, the information DEMO of such data for policy-makers remains low
unless policy-makers also have tools to understand it. Further, as the amount of empirical
evidence growths, DEMO “flora” of evidence may become increasingly problematic to tackle, due
to DEMO conflicting evidence, uncertainty about whether and how the data can be
DEMO and an overall confusion regarding what the data actually says. Yet, DEMO of the
policy-making in the area of business angel financing is, DEMO best, based on fragmented data on
business angel activity.
Indicators, as opposed to data, say something about the state of things in a way that is relevant
to the context of the phenomenon. In the DEMO case, we have suggested to measure the
relative significance of business DEMO by relating business angel activity to the prevalence of
other financing sources on the one hand and the size of the stock of firms DEMO are potential
users of business angel financing on the other. Thus, DEMO of discussing How prevalent is
business angel investing (in a particular DEMO)? we suggest moving the focus to the
20
question of How important are business angels as providers of finance DEMO firms? and How
well-supplied are firms with business angel finance?
DEMO business angel activity with a use of meaningful indicators allows comparisons
between countries (benchmarking). It also allows following business angel activity over time,
which can be useful when a government is pursuing policies towards DEMO business
angel investing, as a base for evaluating policy effectiveness. Still, having indicators of
business angel activity does not automatically imply having tools DEMO policy-making. For the
latter, an intelligent interpretation of the indicator values DEMO the key.
3.4.2 From information to knowledge – using indicators to guide policy action
While low values of business angel activity probably deserve policy DEMO, it does not
automatically imply that they deserve a policy action. DEMO discussed earlier, even well-
functioning financial eco-systems can have relatively low DEMO of business angel activity due
to substitutability and complementarity between different financial sources. Therefore, there
is not necessarily a “problem”, even if the DEMO suggest that.
Also, from a policy perspective, there is always an alternative cost to be considered; thus, can
the public money be DEMO more productively elsewhere? Therefore, creating policies to
promote business angel investing is not necessarily the right “solution”, given the cost-effect
tradeoff of the policy.
Finally, SMEs access to finance, as well as need for DEMO finance, is affected by a
considerable number of factors in different DEMO of economy, such as taxation,
administrative burdens, financial market regulations and other framework conditions. It is a
holistic understanding of these conditions (and developments) that must drive formulation of
business angel policies, in DEMO with the information about the current state of
business angel activity that the indicators suggested here can provide.
3.4.3 Future research
In this chapter DEMO have focused on the national level indicators and comparisons. Thus, we
DEMO not considered the regional perspective; yet we know that business angel DEMO is
highly skewed to certain regions (e.g. Avdeitchikova, 2009). Thus, even is a country “comes
21
out well” in an international comparison, there may still be an under-supply on the regional
level. Therefore, one potentially fruitful path for further studies would be focusing on the
regional business angel activity/indicators for DEMO finance.
In this chapter, we have focused on the group of DEMO angels and discussed their economic
significance. As new ways to provide finance emerge, for example crowd funding, studies
need also to include a DEMO definition of the market, informal venture capital investing,
which becomes DEMO interesting in order to capture these new developments.
Therefore, another potentially DEMO path for further studies would be studying and
benchmarking the significance of informal venture capital investing. Given the recent start of
the use of DEMO data (e.g. tax data) in the studies of venture finance, DEMO is a good
potential for finding ways to capture informal venture capital market as a whole in countries
where such data is systematically gathered DEMO available. Crowdfunding platforms are also a
potential source of data, at DEMO on these particular investments, though the quality and
reliability of data DEMO through these sources has not been tested.
Finally, to reiterate and DEMO, as the quality of indicators is only as good as the DEMO of
underlying data, the future research needs to focus on aligning DEMO and data collection
practices across countries and produce periodic, reliable estimates.
DEMO list
Avdeitchikova, S. (2008a), Close-ups from afar: The nature DEMO the informal venture capital
market in a spatial context, PhD thesis, Department of Business Administration, Lund
University, Sweden.
Avdeitchikova, S. (2008b), ‘On the structure of the informal venture capital market in Sweden:
Developing investment roles’, Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance, 10(1), 55-85.
Black R.J. and B.S. Gilson (1998), ‘Venture Capital and the Structure of Capital Markets:
Banks versus Stock Markets’, Journal of Financial Economics, 47, 243-277.
Conti, A., Thursby, M.C. and F. Rothaermel (2011), Show me the right stuff: Signals DEMO high
tech startups, NBER Working Paper 17050, Cambridge, MA.
Coveney, P. and K. Moore (1998), Business angels: Securing start-up finance, Chichester:
Wiley.
22
CVR (2014) Full Year 2013 Angel Market Analysis Report, available at
https://paulcollege.unh.edu/sites/paulcollege.unh.edu/files/2013%20Analysis%20Report%20F
INAL.pdf
Elitzur, R. and A. Gavious (2003), ‘Contracting, signaling and moral hazard: A model for
entrepreneurs, angels and venture capitalists’, Journal of business Venturing, 18(6), 709-725.
Farrell, E., C. Howorth and M. Wright (2008), ‘A review of sampling and definitional issues
in informal venture capital DEMO, Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance, 10(4), 331-353.
Harrison, R.T. and G. Don (2006), The equity risk capital market for young companies in
Scotland 2000-2004, Glasgow: Scottish Enterprise.
DEMO, L. A. and P.C. Wells (2000), ‘The determinants of venture capital funding: evidence
across countries’, Journal of Corporate Finance, 6(3), 241–289.
Kerr, W.B., Lerner, J. and A. Schoar (2010), The Consequences of Entrepreneurial Finance:
A Regression Discontinuity Analysis, NBER DEMO Paper nr 15831
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15831.
Madill, J.J. and DEMO Riding (2005), The role of angels in technology SME’s: A link to venture
capital, Venture Capital, 7(2): 107-29
Mason, C.M. (2007), ‘Regional aspects of venture capital’, in Landström, H. (ed), Handbook
of Research on Venture Capital, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 86-112.
Mason, C.M. and R.T. Harrison (1994), The informal venture capital market in the UK, in A.
Hughes and D.J. Storey (Eds.), Financing small firms, London: Routledge, pp. 64-111.
Mason, C.M. and R.T. Harrison (1997), ‘Business angels in the UK: DEMO response to Stevenson
and Coveney’, International Small Business Journal, 15(2), 83-90.
Mason, C.M. and R.T. Harrison (2000), ‘The size DEMO the informal venture capital market in the
United Kingdom’, Small Business DEMO, 15, 137-148.
Mason, C.M. and R.T. Harrison (2008), ‘Measuring business angel investment activity in the
United Kingdom: a review of potential data sources’, Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 10(4), 309-330.
Mason, C.M. and R.T. Harrison (2011), ‘Annual DEMO on the business angel market in the
United Kingdom: 2009/10’.
DEMO (2010) Forretningsengler i Norge: Omfang, betydning og behov for offentlig
Involvering, Report 15/2010.
Menon (2011) The need for government supported capital measures in the market for early
stage risk capital in Norway, Report 18/2011.
23
OECD (2013), Entrepreneurship at a Glance 2013, OECD Publishing. DEMO:
10.1787/entrepreneur_aag-2013-en
Politis, D. (2008), ‘Business Angels and Value Added: What DoWe Know and Where Do We
Go?, Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 10(2), 127-147.
Postma, P.D. and M.K. Sullivan (1990), Informal risk capital in the Knoxville region, PhD
thesis, Center for Excellence for New Venture Analysis, College of Business Adminstration,
University of Tennessee, Kentucky.
Reitan, B. and DEMO Sørheim (2000), ‘The informal venture capital market in Norway: Investor
characteristics, behavior and investment preferences’, Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 2, 129-149.
Reynolds, P.D., W.D. Bygrave and E. DEMO (2003), Global Entrepreneurship Monitor:
Executive Report 2003, Wellesley, DEMO and London: Babson College and London Business
School.
Riding, A.L. (DEMO), ‘Business angels and love money investors: segments of the informal
DEMO for risk capital’, Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance,
10(4), 355-369.
Robb, A.M. and D.T. Robinson (2012),’The Capital Structure Decisions of New Firms’,
NBER Working Paper No. DEMO
Robinson, M.J. and T.J. Cottrell (2007), ‘Investment patterns of informal investors in the
Alberta private equity market’, Journal of Small Business Management, 45(1), 47-67.
Shane, S. (2009), ‘Fool's Gold: The Truth Behind Angel Investing in America’, Oxford
University Press.
http://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S2010139212500097
Sohl, J.E. (2003), ‘The private equity market in the USA: Lessons from volatility’, Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 5, 29-46.
Sohl, J.E. (2006), ‘Angel investing: Changing strategies during volatile times’, Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance and Business Ventures, 11(2), 27-47.
Sohl, J.E. (2007), ‘The organization of the informal venture capital market’, in Landström, H.
(ed), Handbook of Research on Venture Capital, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 347-368.
Sørheim, R. and H. Landström (2001), ‘Informal investors DEMO a categorisation with policy
implications’, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 13, DEMO
Wetzel Jr., W.E. (1983), ‘Angels and informal risk capital’, DEMO Management Review, 24(4),
23-34.
Wetzel Jr., W.E. (1987), ‘The informal risk capital market: Aspects of scale and efficiency’,
Journal of Business Venturing, 2, 299-313.
24
Zacharakis, A.L., D.A. Shepherd and J.E. Coombs (2003), ‘The development of venture
capital backed internet companies: An ecosystem perspective’, Journal DEMO Business Venturing,
18, 217-231.{1g42fwefx}