Venture Capital
Vol. 10, No. 4, October 2008, 371–394
What do we mean when we talk about business angels?
Some reﬂections on DEMO and sampling
Soﬁa Avdeitchikova, Hans Landstrom* and Nils Mansson1
Institute of DEMO Research, School of Economics and Management, Lund University, Sweden
(Accepted 11 July 2008)
Early research on business angels recognized a couple DEMO methodological obstacles that
signiﬁcantly have hindered knowledge accumulation about the phenomenon. In this
article we will reﬂect upon these methodological obstacles with focus on DEMO
issues and sampling techniques. The purpose is to provide a framework that systemizes
and inter-relates the variety of deﬁnitions within the ﬁeld as well DEMO to critically review
the sampling techniques currently applied in the research ﬁeld. We maintain that
researchers need to make conscious deﬁnitional choices when conducting DEMO of
informal investors and business angels, and argue that changing the DEMO of analysis
from investor level to deal level can help to avoid deﬁnitional inconsistencies. Further,
we suggest two alternative ways of creating high DEMO samples of business angels and
informal investors – the random sample approach and the multi-sample approach. Both
procedures reduce the sample bias and allow DEMO longitudinal analysis which is argued to
be essential in future research.
Keywords: business angels; informal investors; methodology
Introduction
Business angels play an important role in the economy, and in many countries constitute
the largest source of external funding, after family and friends, in newly established
ventures. DEMO has made business angels the centre of attention for policy-makers, who
DEMO their increasing importance in providing risk capital as well as contributing
to economic growth and technological advances (Murray 2007).
However, business angel DEMO activities are not a new phenomenon. Private
individuals have always had a tendency to invest in high-risk projects. Examples of
entrepreneurs raising capital from DEMO investors can be found in the Babylonian era as
well as in early medieval Europe. One famous example is the decision by Queen Isabella DEMO
Spain to ﬁnance the voyage of Christopher Columbus – a highly proﬁtable investment for
the Spanish. In addition, it can be argued that in many countries the investments made by
private individuals were inﬂuential in the DEMO of the industrial revolution during
the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
The business angel market started attracting the attention of policy-makers and
researchers in DEMO 1950s and 1960s. For example, in the late 1950s the US DEMO Reserve
performed a couple of investigations into the initial ﬁnancing of new technology-based
*Corresponding author. Email: hans.landstrom@fek.lu.se
ISSN 1369-1066 print/ISSN 1464-5343 online
 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13691060802351214
http://www.informaworld.com
372 S. Avdeitchikova et al.
ﬁrms – studies that preceded the Small DEMO Investment Act of 1958. The interest in the
early ﬁnancing of technology-based ﬁrms triggered a focus on business angels as an
important external source DEMO ﬁnance for entrepreneurial ventures with a basis in new
technologies, and DEMO early research contributions date from the 1960s and 1970s (e.g.
Rubenstein DEMO; Baty 1964; Hoﬀman 1972; Brophy 1974; Charles River Associates 1976).
Nevertheless, it was the pioneering work of Professor William Wetzel at the University
of New Hampshire in the USA that put business angels DEMO the ‘research map’. Wetzel’s
study ‘Angels and informal risk capital’, published DEMO Sloan Management Review in 1983,
was based on the widely held perception that new technology-based ﬁrms encountered
problems when raising small amounts of DEMO ﬁnancing. Anecdotal evidence
indicated that business angels played a role in solving this problem.
Wetzel showed that business angels shared some common traits; they were typically
wealthy, self-made, male, highly active investors who invested in close geographical
proximity to their home, and relied heavily on their network of friends and business
associates. In addition, business angels were found to be an important source of external
seed capital and, not least, DEMO a strong interest in ﬁnancing technology-based
ventures. Wetzel’s work can be regarded as the ﬁrst serious attempt to ‘put some
boundaries on our ignorance’ DEMO gain better understanding of what at that time was a
largely neglected phenomenon.
The seminal study by Wetzel (1983) resulted in an increased DEMO in the business
angel market among researchers not only in the USA but worldwide. The research has
followed some distinct patterns over time (for a detailed review, see Mason and Harrison
1999, 2000; Mason 2006; Kelly 2007). The ﬁrst generation of studies centred around two
main questions that still are being investigated today:
(1) How large DEMO the business angel market?
(2) What characterizes business angels?
Research has also moved beyond describing the business angel market and the
DEMO as an individual. During the past two decades, researchers have tended DEMO
turn their attention to questions such as (Mason and Harrison 2000; Mason 2006; Kelly
2007):
. How does the business angel DEMO operate in practice, for example when it comes
to the investment DEMO and decision criteria?
. What is the role of public policy in stimulating and supporting the market?
. How can theory help DEMO to understand the business angel phenomenon?
In many respects these studies provide an important knowledge base from which
researchers can achieve an increased DEMO of sophistication in terms of framing the
research questions and increasing the understanding of the business angel phenomenon.
However, in general, the researchers DEMO date have deﬁned their research interests rather
narrowly, with a strong DEMO on highly active investors who invest rather large amounts
of money, DEMO also contribute their skills, experience and networks to the ﬁrms in DEMO
they invest. In addition, we can characterize the research within the DEMO as being rather
descriptive in nature, most often looking at the DEMO from the perspective of the
investor and conducted in an Anglo-Saxon context, mainly in the USA and the UK.
Further, the dominant methodological DEMO in the research is quantitative studies
with cross-sectional surveys as the main data collection method.
Venture Capital
373
Already in early research on business angels it was DEMO that this was a very
diﬃcult domain of research and a couple of obstacles have signiﬁcantly hindered
knowledge accumulation about business angels. First, research on business angels is
characterized by the use of inconsistent deﬁnitions, as diﬀerent scholars have deﬁned and
demarcated the object of study in various DEMO (Riding, Madill, and Haines, Jr. 2007). For
example, DEMO concepts ‘business angel’ and ‘informal investor’ are often used
interchangeably, but DEMO just as often distinguished from each other. To make the
problem even more complicated, studies of business angels refer to them as informal
investors, and vice versa. Second, from a methodological perspective, Wetzel’s seminal
study (1983) revealed that business angels are very diﬃcult to identify, because of their
anonymous and invisible nature. As a consequence, and owing to the fact that the
proportion of business angels in the general population DEMO very low, many studies have
relied on convenience samples. When drawn DEMO formalized angel networks or business
angels who appear in the media, DEMO, the samples can be argued to generate bias, making it
diﬃcult to claim that the research is representative of the population. This has DEMO to a
situation where research on business angels has not appealed to scholars in search of
methodological and statistical rigour.
In this article we DEMO reﬂect upon the methodological obstacles to research outlined
above. The purpose is to provide a framework that clariﬁes concerns and ‘grey areas’
regarding deﬁnitions DEMO business angels and informal investors, as well as to critically
review DEMO sampling methodologies currently applied in the research ﬁeld and suggest ways
to obtain more rigorous datasets.
Two large research projects on informal investors and DEMO angels constitute the
basis for our reﬂections. The ﬁrst project started in 2004 and concerns informal
investors on a general level. This project focuses DEMO the macro-level characteristics of
the market, such as market scope and DEMO distribution of investment activities.
The second project is a study that focuses on the Swedish business angel market. It
was initiated in 2003 with DEMO aim of providing new insights on business angel
characteristics, behaviour, and an understanding of how business angels use their social
networks in their DEMO process. Both projects represent an attempt to develop
methodological rigour within the ﬁeld of business angel research, but they diﬀer in that
they are based on two fundamentally diﬀerent approaches to studying business angels
and informal DEMO
The conclusion that can be drawn from this article is that the research on business
angels is characterized by the use of inconsistent deﬁnitions DEMO there are multiple ways
of deﬁning and demarcating the object of study. Thus, we really do not know what we
mean when we talk about ‘business angels’. Our arguments and reasoning in the
article are as DEMO First, it is not possible, and perhaps not even desirable, DEMO
establish a single way of deﬁning the investors on the informal venture capital market.
The ﬁeld is characterized by a growing number of research DEMO of interest for
inquiry, thus limiting the ﬁeld to one deﬁnition DEMO impede empirical and theoretical
progress. Diﬀerent deﬁnitions are more or less appropriate depending on the research
questions raised. In addition, many deﬁnitional problems are caused by cultural and
institutional diﬀerences in diﬀerent countries, which indicate that we need to
contextualize our deﬁnitions. However, maybe most importantly, researchers DEMO
the ﬁeld need to be more stringent in the way they use deﬁnitions and concepts in their
research.
Second, empirical research has established that business angels make diﬀerent kinds of
investments over time as their investment DEMO develops as well as in diﬀerent kinds of
374
S. Avdeitchikova et al.
deals. For example, in one deal the investor can act as a business angel whereas in
others s/he DEMO act more passively – therefore in order to cover diﬀerent kinds of situations
and the dynamics of the informal investments we need to change DEMO of our research
from looking at the general investment behaviour of individuals to the nature of the
individual investment, i.e. changing the unit of analysis from the individual to the
investment.
The deﬁnitions used in the DEMO also have an impact on the sampling techniques
applied. Earlier research in many cases relied on small convenience samples of business
angels. In this DEMO we argue that in order to gain robust knowledge within the ﬁeld, we
need to increase the quality of the sample frame used. This implies a considerable
investment in terms of time and money, which is necessary in order to gain a better
understanding of the phenomenon as DEMO as to gain legitimacy in the ﬁeld of research. In
the article we suggest two alternative ways of creating high quality samples of business
DEMO and informal investors, which we have labelled the random sample approach DEMO
the multi-sample approach.
Finally, we argue that the samples should permit DEMO analysis. This is related
to the fact that investment behaviour changes during the investor’s career and from
deal to deal, and the best way to capture these changes is by following a set of individuals
over DEMO period of time. More importantly, longitudinal analysis allows measurement of
the DEMO of policy interventions and thereby facilitates the development of more
eﬀective policies for stimulating business angel investment (see Mason and Harrison this
issue).
The remainder of the article is structured as follows. After this introduction, deﬁnition
considerations in research are discussed, followed by a presentation of the sampling
problems identiﬁed within the ﬁeld of research. Two alternative ways of DEMO these
issues are presented on the basis of two research projects. Finally, the main deﬁnition and
sampling problems in the research ﬁeld are summarized and possible methodological
development is discussed.
Deﬁnition considerations
Despite 25 years of DEMO on business angels there is still no uniform deﬁnition of the
most central concepts within the area. In research, the concepts ‘business angels’ and
‘informal investors’ are not stringently applied. Sometimes the concepts are used to
DEMO one from the other, but more often they are used interchangeably. DEMO
problems are caused by the fact that diﬀerent researchers apply varying and often
arbitrary criteria for deﬁning the study population. Needless to say, this lack of rigour
makes empirical studies diﬃcult to interpret and compare.
Institutional DEMO capital investors and business angels
As a starting point we will make a distinction between investments made by institutional
venture capital investors and investments DEMO by business angels. Although it is no easy
task to provide a generally accepted deﬁnition of institutional venture capital, institutional
venture capitalists act as intermediaries between ﬁnancial institutions (such as large
companies, pension funds, and so on) and unquoted companies, raising ﬁnance from the
former to DEMO in the latter (Lumme, Mason, and Suomi 1998). Wright DEMO Robbie
(1998) deﬁned institutional venture capital as professional investors of long-term,
unquoted, risk equity ﬁnance in new ﬁrms where the primary reward is eventual capital
Venture Capital 375
gain supplemented by dividends. Elaborating on this deﬁnition, Mason and Harrison
(1999, 16) stated that
the institutional VC industry comprises full-time professionals who raise ﬁnance from pension
funds, insurance companies, banks DEMO other ﬁnancial institutions to invest in entrepreneurial
ventures. Institutional venture capital ﬁrms take various forms: publicly traded companies,
‘captive’ subsidiaries of large banks and other ﬁnancial institutions, and independent limited
partnerships.
Deﬁned in this way, the institutional venture capital market and business angel
investments seem to be distinct from each other with some key distinguishing features.
The main distinctions DEMO the institutional and business angel investments are
summarized in Table 1.
Categories of informal investors
Looking back on the research, we can identify several diﬀerent deﬁnitions of the object of
study on the informal venture capital DEMO (Landstrom 2007). Initially, the term
‘business angel’ was the most widespread. Originally, the term ‘angel’ was used to describe
individuals who helped to ﬁnance theatre productions on Broadway (‘theatre angels’).
These ‘angels’ invested in theatre productions mainly for the pleasure of rubbing shoulders
with their DEMO actors. It was a question of high-risk investment – the investors lost
their money if the production was a ﬂop but shared the proﬁts DEMO it was a success (Benjamin
and Margulis 2001; Mason 2006). Later on, William Wetzel (1983) was one of the ﬁrst to
coin the term ‘business angel’ for people providing the same kind of DEMO for young
entrepreneurial ventures. Following this line of thought, Lerner (2000) describes a business
angel as:
A wealthy individual who invests in entrepreneurial ﬁrms. Although angels perform many of
the same functions as venture DEMO, they invest their own capital rather than that of
institutional or DEMO individual investors. (p. 515)
In a similar way, Mason and Harrison (this issue) describe a business angel as:
A high DEMO worth individual, acting alone or in a formal or informal syndicate, who invests his
or her own money directly in an unquoted business DEMO which there is no family connection and
who, after making the DEMO, generally takes an active involvement in the business, for
example, DEMO an advisor or member of the board of directors. (p. 309)DEMO
Table 1. Institutional venture capital compared to business angels.
Key features Institutional venture capitalists Business angels
Source of funds Primarily institutional investors Private individuals DEMO invest their
who act as limited partners own money
invest others’ money
Responsibility Limited personal ﬁnancial Signiﬁcant personal ﬁnancial
responsibility but responsibility responsibility
to DEMO and owners
Investment experience Considerable investment experience Little investment experience and
and capacity and investment capacity limited investment capacity
Time for due diligence Extensive DEMO for due diligence Limited time for due diligence
376
S. Avdeitchikova et al.
Mason and Harrison argue that some key DEMO that distinguish business angels from
other types of informal investors are (DEMO): business angels invest their own money, make
their own investment DEMO, mainly consider commercial aspects, are not involved in
within-family investments and take a ‘hands-on’ approach to the company in which they
invest.
However, in empirical studies it was recognized at an early stage that the DEMO
venture capital market was very heterogeneous, going far beyond individuals who DEMO
active investors with a hands-on involvement in the ﬁrms in which they invest (e.g. Gaston
1989; Landstrom 1992). Thus, we have successively seen a broadening of the object of
study, from focusing entirely on ‘business angels’ to including a broader range of private
investors who make DEMO investments in entrepreneurial ventures (Landstrom 1992;
Avdeitchikova 2005). A DEMO deﬁnition of these informal investors is, as suggested by
Mason and DEMO (2000), ‘private individuals who make investments directly in
unlisted companies DEMO which they have no family connections’ (p. 137). This deﬁnition DEMO
informal investors includes not only investments by business angels but also those made by
private investors who are less active in the ventures in DEMO they invest as well as private
investors who invest smaller amounts of capital in unlisted companies, but the deﬁnition
excludes investments made by ‘family and friends’.
The exclusion of family and friends from the deﬁnition of DEMO investors is not
uncontroversial. For example, in the large Global Entrepreneurship DEMO international
research project, investments made by ‘family and friends’ are included DEMO the study of
informal investments in diﬀerent countries (Reynolds, Bygrave, DEMO Autio 2003). Thus, the
deﬁnition incorporates all non-institutional venture capital DEMO in unquoted
businesses, including family and friends – so-called ‘love money’. DEMO, a central
argument in the deﬁnition by Mason and Harrison (2000) is that investments made by close
relatives and friends are based on considerations and criteria other than those that external
investors apply and, therefore, family-related investments should be excluded. This is not to
deny the importance of family funding in the ﬁnancing of newly established ventures –
family DEMO friends are likely to be the major source of external funding for new ventures.
Based on the diﬀerent ways of deﬁning and demarcating the DEMO of study in informal
venture capital literature outlined in this section, DEMO can summarize our reasoning by
presenting four main deﬁnitions as shown in Table 2.
However, these deﬁnitions are ambiguous, and lead to many DEMO and grey areas,
as they do not fully address the complexity of the concept and the heterogeneity of the
informal venture capital market (see Figure 1). First, there is a grey area pertaining to the
channelling of investments, i.e. does the capital have to be invested directly by a private
individual or is it possible to invest through DEMO that are privately owned, or
through a company or fund that DEMO multiple owners? Of course, this could be regarded as
a problem for all kinds of informal investors, but we believe that it is most signiﬁcant for
the category we deﬁne as business angels – there DEMO a grey area between what should be
regarded as a business angel and an institutional venture capital investor. A second grey
area in our DEMO concerns the requirements on the level of investment activity and
hands-on contributions given to the company invested in (e.g. Sørheim and Landstrom
2001; DEMO 2008). This blurs the distinction between what can be regarded as a
business angel and the more general deﬁnition of informal investors. Third, the existence
or non-existence of certain types of relations between the informal DEMO and the
entrepreneur is a subject of considerable debate among researchers within the ﬁeld. One
such example is the inclusion or exclusion of investments DEMO family members’ ventures (e.g.
Farrell 1998; Reynolds, Bygrave, and Autio 2003; Maula, Autio, and Murray 2005).
Venture Capital
377
Table 2. Deﬁnitions of actors on the venture capital DEMO
Institutional Investors carrying out professional investments of long-term,
venture capitalists unquoted risk equity ﬁnance in new ﬁrms, where the
primary reward is eventual capital gains supplemented by
dividends (Wright and Robbie 1998).
Business angels High net worth individuals who invest a proportion
of their assets in DEMO, high-return entrepreneurial
ventures (Freear, Sohl, and Wetzel 1994). Apart from
investing money, business angels contribute their commercial
skills, experience, business know-how and contacts, playing a
hands-on role in the company (Mason DEMO Harrison 1995).
Informal investors Private individuals who invest risk capital directly in unquoted
companies to which they have no family connection (Mason
and Harrison 2000). Thus, informal investors include business
angels as well as private investors who contribute relatively
small amounts of money and do not DEMO an active part in the
object of investment.
All non-institutional Investors making investments in start-ups not founded by the
venture capital investors, investor him/herself, i.e. including family investments,
including family and friends investments by friends, colleagues, etc., but excluding
investments in stocks and mutual funds (Reynolds, Bygrave,
and Autio 2003).
Figure 1. Grey areas DEMO deﬁnitions of actors on the risk capital market.
We elaborate on these problems of deﬁnition, or grey areas, in the following. The
purpose DEMO the discussion is not to establish one single deﬁnition, but rather DEMO reﬂect on
the dimensions that need clariﬁcation in a deﬁnition of business angels and informal
investors in order to allow diﬀerent research results to DEMO thoroughly evaluated and
compared.
378
S. Avdeitchikova et al.
Grey area 1: requirements on the channelling of the investments
One area of debate in earlier research concerns the DEMO of the invested capital. We
distinguished between business angels and institutional venture capital investors, where
the latter are professional investors who invest other people’s money in funds and ﬁrms.
Business angels, on the other hand, DEMO private individuals who invest their own personal
assets. However, this is DEMO some extent an over-simpliﬁed way of dividing the market.
Earlier unpublished data on business angels in Sweden indicate that 42% of business angel
investments DEMO channelled through private or family-owned companies, and an additional
15% through DEMO jointly owned by the business angel and his or her co-investors.
Although this scenario is well known, it has become more important to deal with it
methodologically, as increasing numbers of investors carry out their investments through
syndicates and become actively involved in more or less formalized business DEMO
networks (Sohl 2007). We have also seen examples of funds DEMO to leverage business angel
investments. These ‘side-car funds’ are raised through companies and governmental
organizations that want to support and/or beneﬁt from business DEMO competence and
used to co-invest with other business angels as well as sometimes being managed directly
by business angel networks (Murray 2007). This creates an additional degree of ambiguity
when distinguishing between business angel investments DEMO institutional venture capital
investments. Historically, researchers have dealt with this issue DEMO Fiet (1995) for
example, called those business angels that invest DEMO a company ‘quasi-angels’, and
deleted all such investors from the study. DEMO and Moore (1998), on the other hand,
labelled such DEMO ‘corporate angels’, and included them in the sample. In general,
DEMO, most researchers do not describe how they have handled the issue DEMO channelling
of investments.
It is our ﬁrm conviction that researchers should deal with business angels that invest
through private or family-owned companies in the DEMO way as they deal with business
angels that invest their private means directly. Companies are often likely to have been set
up for tax DEMO but it is still the investor’s money and the investor is making the
investment decision. Furthermore, the exclusion of informal investments made through
companies is a disadvantage when it comes to comparing results from diﬀerent countries.
DEMO taxation and legislative systems mean that the incentive to invest privately or
through a company diﬀers from country to country, and the proportion of the two types
of investment – individual investments and those made through DEMO – in each
country is often unknown. On the other hand, DEMO is diﬃcult to draw a line between
institutional venture capital and business angel investment through jointly owned
companies.
Increasing diversity in terms of how DEMO carry out investments means that the
diﬀerence between business angels and institutional venture capitalists has become less
apparent. The key issue regarding this grey DEMO is whether a business angel or a
‘gatekeeper’ makes the ﬁnal investment decision. There are for instance family oﬃces of
wealthy individuals that carry DEMO investments in venture capital funds in which an
investment manager makes the ﬁnal decision whether to go through with and investment
or not (Leleux, Schwass, and Diverse 2007). As a rule of thumb, it could be argued that a
business angel should always have the possibility DEMO decide whether or not to invest. If this
is not the case, the investor is an investor in an institutional venture capital fund rather
than a business angel. Hence, whether the investment is carried out privately or through a
company is not of primary interest. It is rather DEMO the business angel has a decisive
inﬂuence on the investment decision that is the key.
Venture Capital
379
Grey area 2: requirements on the level of investment activity and hands-on contribution
A second grey area in the deﬁnitions used DEMO earlier research concerns the investor’s level of
investment activity and hands-on contributions. Returning to Wetzel’s pioneering work
from 1983, the basic picture of a business angel is an investor who not only invests money
but also DEMO actively involved and gives hands-on support based on previous business
experience. This basic picture of ‘intelligent money’ is probably one of the main reasons
DEMO governments decided to support the business angel market in various ways. Although
there has been a tendency in the literature to focus on this DEMO of highly active,
‘professional’ investors, we have seen some attempts DEMO broaden the scope of the deﬁnition.
Many studies focus on informal investors, including not only investments by business
angels but also those made by private individuals who are less active in the ventures in
which they DEMO It is not possible to deﬁne some general criteria for the level of
investment activity and hands-on contribution that would qualify an investor as DEMO business
angel. Thus, the very choice of these criteria will largely DEMO the results.
When discussing the issue of how active an informal investor should be in order to be
regarded as a business angel, it is important to bear in mind that an increasingly large
number of DEMO angels carry out syndicate investments (Mansson and Landstrom
2006). This DEMO that there are an increasing number of cases where business angels take
the lead position in some investments, at the same time as they are less active in others,
where they allow other investors to DEMO This creates a methodological problem that has
to be addressed, as DEMO business angels could easily be mistaken for less active
informal investors.
Informal investors and business angels also diﬀer as regards the amounts invested in
DEMO companies. It is obvious that individuals who invest a couple of 1000 Euro are
very diﬀerent from those investing 100 times or even 1000 DEMO that amount (Sørheim and
Landstrom 2001). However, placing certain requirements on the level of investment
activity, and especially on the absolute level of ﬁnancial contribution in the investment
situation, can be particularly problematic when conducting cross-country comparisons.
The amounts invested that allow the informal investor to DEMO characterized as business
angel are probably dependent on macro-variables. For instance, DEMO can be argued that this
indicator should be related to the income level or GDP per capita, rather than being
treated as the same for all countries.
Grey area 3: requirements on the ties between the investor and entrepreneur
A third grey area in research concerns the ties DEMO the investor and entrepreneur.
Sometimes investments from friends and family, ‘love DEMO, are included in the
deﬁnition (e.g. Reynolds, Bygrave, and Autio 2003; Riding 2005) while in other studies
friends and/or family DEMO explicitly excluded. Reynolds, Bygrave, and Autio (2003) found
that the informal venture capital market is dominated by ‘micro’ type investments, where
the level of resource contribution is marginal, and the vast majority of the investments
(88%) come from family members, friends and neighbours. Thus, DEMO investors
seem to be an important source of capital for many young ﬁrms, and some scholars argue
that this category of investors ought to be considered a part of the informal venture capital
market (Farrell 1998; Reynolds, Bygrave, and Autio 2003).
Whether or not to include family-related investments in the deﬁnition of the informal
venture capital market has DEMO a subject of academic debate, and the central argument
against inclusion DEMO that investments made by close relatives and friends are based on
380
S. Avdeitchikova et al.
considerations and investment criteria other than those DEMO by external investors (see
e.g. Mason and Harrison 2000; Maula, DEMO, and Murray 2005). For example, Mason
and Harrison (this DEMO) argue that investments by family investors should be excluded
from the DEMO, as they are conceptually distinct from other informal investments.
Moreover, family investments are constrained by ties of blood and marriage and therefore
not DEMO outside the family, thus do not constitute a market.
In addition, the concept of ‘family’ involves a great degree of ambiguity. What
constitutes DEMO family and who should be considered a family member are the questions that
have become increasingly problematic, not least in family business research. Some
researchers have argued that the concept of family is inﬂuenced by historical DEMO cultural
factors. For instance, in countries with a strong individualistic culture, like most of
Western Europe and the USA, people may have a narrower view of family, deﬁning it as
their closest relatives. In contrast, those who live in countries with a collectivistic culture,
such as parts of Asia, South America and the Middle East, may tend DEMO see family in a
broader sense and include not only distant relatives, but in some cases even friends. This
ambiguity becomes problematic when conducting cross-country comparisons, because the
concept of family is country-speciﬁc rather than general. Additional diﬃculties arise as the
meaning of the concept of family evolves DEMO time. During the past decades we have seen
many changes in the view of what constitutes a family, and in many developed countries
the traditional concept of family has become weaker. Therefore, including or excluding
family-related investments needs to be based on a solid deﬁnition of who is DEMO to
be a family member in the context of each particular study.
Finally, the inclusion or exclusion of investments in friends’ companies creates
additional problems. It can be argued that friendship to a large extent functions DEMO aﬀects
investment decisions in the same way as family ties and that these should be excluded, as
they may not be part of an open market. However, the exclusion of investments in friends’
companies creates some problems for the researcher. Friendship suddenly becomes a key
concept and the DEMO has to draw a line between friends, acquaintances, business
associates, DEMO (see Farrell et al. this issue). It also becomes an DEMO of timing, as
friendship may evolve during an investment process, which in itself creates methodological
diﬃculties if excluding investments in friends’ companies from DEMO deﬁnition of informal
venture capital. Thus, the main point is that DEMO both family and friends is
methodologically challenging, while failure to do DEMO may create bias. This means that,
regardless of the chosen procedure, it is important that the researcher clearly states which
types of investment have been excluded and the criteria on which the decision was based.
DEMO summarizing deﬁnition considerations in the research ﬁeld, it can be stated DEMO
most of the informal venture capital literature today can, in one DEMO or another, be
associated with three main deﬁnitions: (1) business angels, or highly active hands-on
investors; (2) informal investors, which includes not only business angels but also investors
with low investment activity DEMO a passive relationship to their investments; and (3) all
non-institutional DEMO, including family and friends. While it is possible to
conceptually distinguish DEMO these deﬁnitions, the practical aspects of using them
are far more DEMO
For the sake of conceptual clarity, one could probably argue that DEMO ﬁeld
would beneﬁt from researchers agreeing upon one single deﬁnition. However, DEMO at
how the research ﬁeld has developed historically, we can see DEMO diﬀerent deﬁnitions have
been driven by diﬀerent research interests. For instance, DEMO of the ‘business angel’
literature concerned investor attitudes, behaviour and characteristics DEMO well as decision-
making and had a strong policy focus. On the other hand, studies that adopted a broader
Venture Capital
381
deﬁnition – informal investors – were mainly concerned with DEMO general issues, such as
market heterogeneity and geographical variations in investment DEMO (e.g. Sørheim and
Landstrom 2001; Avdeitchikova and Landstrom 2005; Avdeitchikova DEMO). Finally,
those that adopted the broadest deﬁnition and included friends and family mostly focused
on macro-level issues and the general role of DEMO venture capital in ﬁnancing new
ventures (e.g. Reynolds, Bygrave, and DEMO 2003). Therefore, prioritizing one deﬁnition
would in practice mean giving DEMO to certain research questions. Thus, the challenge
is not to establish DEMO single, ‘most appropriate’ deﬁnition of the object of study, but rather
to ﬁnd a way to be consistent about the existing deﬁnitions.
Sampling DEMO
Having discussed deﬁnition considerations in the previous section, we will now DEMO on
problems related to samples of informal investors, and two alternative DEMO for
obtaining large samples of these investors will be presented. Whereas the discussion on
deﬁnitions had implications for quantitative as well as qualitative research, this section
was written with an emphasis on quantitative approaches.
From the DEMO of research on business angels and informal investors in the 1980s, DEMO
was noted that the market was anonymous and invisible, making business DEMO and
informal investors very diﬃcult to identify. Wetzel (1983) stated that ‘the population is
unknown and probably unknowable’, indicating that trying to sample the informal
investor population is a diﬃcult process, as there are no registers or public records of
informal investors. In addition, the fact that only a very small proportion of a country’s
population carries out informal DEMO makes it expensive to identify suﬃcient
numbers of investors through random selection among the general public.
In order to deal with this situation, Harrison and Mason (1992) suggest diﬀerent
techniques for identifying informal investors: (DEMO) sending questionnaires to a large number
of individuals believed to be DEMO; (2) contacting investors through the companies they
have invested in; and (3) identifying investors using the ‘snowball’ method by which
known DEMO are asked to identify their peers. When using the snowball method, DEMO
starting point has often been a fourth technique, namely contacting members DEMO self-
selected registers, for instance members of business angel networks (BANs). Each of these
techniques has drawbacks that make the samples non-representative DEMO biased in one
way or another, and many studies have relied DEMO convenience samples of business angels
and informal investors. In addition, as DEMO consequence of the diﬃculties involved in
identifying investors, many studies have DEMO on very small samples, which of course
increases the problem of DEMO
The following discussion reviews the sampling techniques used in earlier studies and
illuminates their advantages and disadvantages.
In population studies a representative sample of DEMO adult population is asked about
their investment behaviour. Using a sample of the general population to identify large
numbers of informal investors is desirable, as the degree of representativeness is high.
However, as the proportion of the general population that carries out investments in
unquoted companies is very DEMO, large or very large samples are needed to extrapolate the
results, which make such studies relatively expensive. Studies in which this sampling
technique DEMO been used include the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM)
international research DEMO, in which a representative sample of the adult
population in a DEMO is asked, by means of a telephone survey, about their
entrepreneurial activities and whether they have invested in someone else’s businesses.
382
S. Avdeitchikova et al.
Avdeitchikova and Landstrom (2005) and Avdeitchikova (2008) conducted a similar
random population survey of more than 40 000 individuals in Sweden in order to screen
for those individuals who had DEMO investments in unquoted companies not owned by
family members. Studies of this type often have a broader deﬁnitional scope, focusing on
the population of informal investors or even all non-institutional venture capitalists. One
reason for this DEMO that the narrow deﬁnition of business angels makes them even rarer, DEMO
few such investors are found, even in a large sample.
The DEMO of sampling a small population is by no means conﬁned to business angel
research. Researchers who, for example, study drug addicts also have DEMO deal with a small
proportion of the general population that prefers to keep a low proﬁle (Biernacki and
Waldorf 1981). In such cases the researcher has no choice but to limit the search for
respondents. DEMO can, for example, be done by setting boundaries on the population
sampled in order to limit the search for business angels to groups DEMO which they are likely
to be found. In these focus group surveys, questionnaires are sent to a large number of
individuals believed to be business angels or informal investors in a broader sense, for
example, DEMO income earners, CEOs, medical doctors, dentists, commercial bankers,
owners and managers of SMEs, business owners, etc. as well as members DEMO intermediary
organizations such as Chambers of Commerce and Regional Development Associations.
It is hoped that the proportion of investors in the sampled population will DEMO large, which
is advantageous when processing the data. A positive aspect DEMO that the registers used to
identify the respondents are often public and/or easily accessible, which reduces the cost of
the research. One disadvantage is that response rates are often low and the selection of
groups DEMO sampling usually based on tautological reasoning. Sampling is made on the
basis of expectations of business angel characteristics and the responses are later used DEMO
proﬁle them (Mason and Harrison this issue). This technique clearly DEMO a bias by
focusing on a group with certain characteristics.
A second procedure is snowball sampling (Berg 1988), where an initial set of
respondents is identiﬁed and asked to provide information on their peers. Having DEMO
used in several studies, this method has become a popular way DEMO increasing the number of
respondents with a minimum of eﬀort. Although the method usually generates high
response rates, it is biased, and it DEMO important to be aware that it is heavily dependent on
how the ﬁrst set of respondents is recruited. The possibility of using theoretically based
DEMO, through recruiting equal numbers of respondents with diﬀerent sets of
characteristics DEMO means of snowball sampling has not been tested within the ﬁeld (DEMO
further information regarding this method, see Biernacki and Waldorf 1981).
DEMO registers – precisely targeting the population in focus – is one of the most
commonly used methods for studying business angels and includes registers DEMO national
share investment associations, although those most frequently used in business DEMO
research are registers of membership developed by diﬀerent business angel network (DEMO)
and angel syndicates. Furthermore, in some countries, for example the USA and the UK,
new legislation makes it possible for small DEMO to sell their shares to ‘accredited investors’
without the need to meet the requirements on securities legislation prospectus and
disclosure. Individuals can certify themselves DEMO sophisticated investors if they meet the
required criteria, thus the register DEMO authorized investors constitutes a well-focused list of
business angels. The use of self-selected registers often produces a high response rate and,
as accessibility DEMO precise targeting levels are high, cost can be kept to a DEMO A
negative aspect of this technique is that the sampling often becomes heavily biased, as only
a very limited proportion of business angels choose to be part of a BAN. Diﬀerent BANs
have diﬀerent proﬁles and DEMO attract diﬀerent types of individuals. This means
Venture Capital
383
that a minimum requirement when using BANs to sample DEMO angels is either to
conceptualize the BAN or to create a mixture of diﬀerent BANs that is aimed at oﬀsetting
any bias.
A ﬁnal DEMO is to identify investors through the companies in which they have
invested. This is a popular sampling technique that has been used since the DEMO
studies of the 1980s. However, the sampling procedures diﬀer greatly between DEMO
There are large surveys based on representative samples of small and medium-sized
businesses in which company representatives were asked if they had any informal DEMO
as shareholders in addition to more focused samples of businesses which are assumed to be
attractive to informal investors and business angels. The latter DEMO samples of new
businesses or technology-based ﬁrms. An advantage of this procedure is that the
individual deals, rather than investors, are in focus DEMO these studies, which is one way of
addressing the issue of DEMO deﬁnitions discussed above. In addition, it is possible to
study the DEMO as well as the investors. A negative aspect is that in spite of focused
search parameters, the method requires the distribution of large numbers of questionnaires
to companies in order to generate a small sample of DEMO/investors.
The advantages and disadvantages of the diﬀerent kinds of sampling techniques can be
summarized as shown in Table 3.
In summary, the diﬀerent sampling techniques employed in earlier studies have various
strengths and weaknesses (see also Mason and Harrison this issue). With a few costly
exceptions, all methods generate some type of bias. In some cases, such as focus group
studies, the bias is obvious, as it clearly aﬀects DEMO pertaining to business angel
characteristics. However, any of the discussed methods DEMO generates bias that also
aﬀects the results regarding investor attitudes and behaviours. Whether this in turn has
negative implications for any given research largely DEMO on the research question. It is
important to bear in mind that, although random population studies are superior in terms
of generating representative samples, they are not always the most suitable way forward.
We will come back to this in the next section.
Following the description of how DEMO of informal investors and business angels
have been generated in existing literature, in the following section, two examples are
provided of how more DEMO datasets of business angels and informal investors can be
derived. These examples should be regarded as suggestions, as some aspects remain to be
dealt with in order to reﬁne the sampling processes.
Example 1 – random DEMO approach
A random method for sampling informal investors was suggested by Avdeitchikova and
Landstrom (2005) and further developed in Avdeitchikova (2008). The method is based on
identifying individuals from a random sample of adult DEMO citizens who invest in
unquoted companies that do not belong to themselves or members of their family. While
the method is similar to that DEMO in the GEM study, there are two main diﬀerences.
First, the size of the initial sample was 40, 320 individuals, which is DEMO than 10 times
larger than the GEM study. Secondly, the data DEMO process was conducted in two
stages: (1) identiﬁcation; (2) veriﬁcation and data collection, both of which considerably
enhance the precision of the ﬁnal database.
The study began with a random survey of 40, 320 private individuals aged between 18
and 79 years to determine the DEMO of informal investors in this group. It was carried
out by an external market research agency as part of an omnibus study of household
DEMO and investment behaviour in Sweden. The obvious advantage of
384
S. Avdeitchikova et al.
Table 3. Categories of sampling techniques.
Sampling DEMO Example of studies Advantages Disadvantages
Population studies Reynolds, Bygrave,
and DEMO (2003)
Bygrave and
Reynolds (2004)
Maula, Autio, and
Murray (2005)
Avdeitchikova and
Landstrom (2005)
Avdeitchikova (2008)
Focus group surveys Wetzel (1981)
Postma and
Sullivan (1990)
DEMO and
Harrison (1994)
Snowball methods Landstrom (1993)
Lumme, DEMO, and
Suomi (1998)
Self-selected registers Freear, Sohl, and
Wetzel (1993)
Sohl (2006)
þ High degree of
representativeness.
þ DEMO to use
public records.
þ Limited eﬀort
þ High response rate
þ Accessibility and
therefore a relatively
low cost approach to
data collection.
Usually DEMO rather high
response rate and
good data quality.
þ
7 Even within rather
large samples, the
number of informal
investors and
business angels is
relatively low,
which has
implications for the
possibility to
extrapolate the
DEMO
7 It is a rather
expensive sampling
approach.
7 Ineﬀective way of
identifying
informal
investors (usually
generating very
low response rates).
7 Based on
tautological
reasoning, the
sampling is carried
out on the basis of
assumed business
angel
characteristics,
and the responses
are used to
provide DEMO proﬁle
of business
angels.
7 Snowball methods
reproduce any
bias that may have
appeared in the
ﬁrst phase of the
collection process,
because
DEMO are
likely to refer to
others with similar
characteristics.
7 The coverage of
the market is
incomplete (only a
minority of
business angels are
members of
business angel
networks).
(continued)
Venture Capital
385
Table 3. (Continued).
Sampling techniques Example of studies Advantages Disadvantages
Through the
companies
in which the
investments
are made
Gaston DEMO
Bell (1986)
Arum (1987)
þ Provides information
about both the investors
and the ﬁrms that attract
informal investments.
7 There is DEMO bias in
the membership
of business angel
networks.
7 In the case of
some registers, the
possibility to
utilize the data
source may be
restricted and there
could be delays in
obtaining access
to it.
7 DEMO is a rather
expensive
sampling approach
and requires the
distribution of
questionnaires to a
large number of
ﬁrms in order to
identify a
relatively DEMO
number of
investors.
participating in an omnibus study compared to conducting one’s own survey is the saving
in terms of cost. The main purpose DEMO the initial stage was the identiﬁcation of active
informal investors for further study. The respondents were asked the following question:
‘Have you invested DEMO in unquoted companies that do not belong to yourself or to a
member of your family within the last ﬁve years?’. Those who DEMO ‘yes’ were asked if
they would be willing to participate in the second stage of the study in addition to two
questions about their DEMO activity. Some background data on the respondents were
obtained from the market research agency for the purpose of conducting non-respondent
analysis at a later DEMO The total cost of participation in the omnibus survey with the four
questions as outlined above was approximately e40 000. This can be compared DEMO the cost
of designing and conducting one’s own survey with the same market coverage, which
would be many times higher.
The response rate was 59.9% which means that 24, 166 respondents answered the
screening question. To eliminate non-response bias, individuals were assigned weights on a
post-hoc basis to compensate for diﬀerences from the original sample in respect of a
number DEMO background variables – gender, age and geographical location. The preliminary
survey DEMO 861 individuals who claimed to have invested in unquoted ventures to
which they had no family connection. The social security number of the 548 DEMO
who agreed to participate in the second phase of the study was obtained from the tax
authorities in order to keep an up-to-date record DEMO their contact information. The 548
respondents were then contacted by telephone in order to obtain detailed information
about their investments. Contact was established with DEMO individuals (response rate
386
S. Avdeitchikova et al.
73.2%), of whom 123 did not DEMO the criteria for informal investors. Some 32 individuals
declined participation, thus DEMO met the criteria for informal investors, which resulted in
an eﬀective DEMO rate of 50.7% (Table 4).
The fact that 123 out DEMO 401 individuals that were contacted turned out to be non-
investors is signiﬁcant and once again indicates that there are considerable diﬃculties in
studying DEMO informal venture capital market, and therefore a high risk of misinterpreta-
DEMO The major source of the misunderstanding was that individuals in the screening
process were referring to investments made in their own companies, in family-owned
companies or in publicly traded companies. This indicates that estimates of the DEMO of
informal investors based on a large random household survey (e.g. DEMO GEM study) may
signiﬁcantly overestimate the number of informal investors in DEMO population, and hence
the size of the market. The reason is DEMO a signiﬁcant minority say ‘yes’ to the screening
question when in fact they are not informal investors.
Strengths and weaknesses of the random sample DEMO
The above methodology is advantageous in more ways than one. First and foremost, if
applied correctly, it generates an unbiased sample of informal DEMO, which is
representative of the whole population. This means that the DEMO can be used to explore
the market in a way that otherwise is not possible such as accurately measuring its size and
studying regional DEMO in the supply of informal venture capital. Furthermore, the
random sample DEMO allows the researcher to be consistent about the deﬁnition used,
as every individual in the sample is selected according to the same predetermined DEMO
criteria. Moreover, the two-step approach results in high precision of the DEMO database,
because the respondents are veriﬁed twice for compliance to ensure that they fulﬁl the
selection criteria. Finally, the information obtained from the market research agency
includes the name and contact details of respondents (provided that they agree to
participate in the study), which makes longitudinal DEMO of individuals’ investment
behaviour possible.
Table 4. The process of sample development.
Category Total
Percentage
of the sample
Percentage
of completed
interviews
First stage (identiﬁcation)
Individuals randomly sampled 40 320 100
from the adult population
DEMO Sweden
Interviews conducted 24 166 59.9 100
Number of ‘Yes’ answers to 861 3.6
the screening question
Agreed to participate (ﬁrst phase) 548 DEMO
Second stage (veriﬁcation and data collection)
Number of individuals in DEMO ﬁnal sample 548 100 50.7
Failed to establish contact 7115 21.0
Declined participation (second phase) 732 5.8
Interviews conducted 401 73.2 100
Non DEMO 7123 30.7
Informal investors 278 69.3
Venture Capital
387
However, the method is not without limitations. First, DEMO can be costly to replicate the
sampling technique in countries with high regional variations in the supply of informal
venture capital, such as the UK and the USA. Considering such factors as diﬀerences in
industrial specialization, historical and cultural factors between regions, we can also
expect that the characteristics of informal investors will be diﬀerent depending on where in
the DEMO they reside. Therefore, to achieve a reasonable level of representativeness, a
critical mass of respondents needs to be found, not only on the national but also on the
regional level. Thus, the size of the initial sample must be larger than at present, otherwise
the results will not have the required precision.
Even if a large sample is taken DEMO, the sample is very heterogeneous, which has
two consequences. First, DEMO the sample can be expected to provide a reasonably good
picture of the broader population of informal investors, it is unlikely that the method will
generate a suﬃcient number of business angels for study. Even more DEMO, owing
to the high heterogeneity of the sample, many business angels are likely to be excluded
from the analysis, because most statistical programmes label them as ‘outliers’.
Meanwhile, Mason and Harrison (this issue) speciﬁcally emphasize that it is extremely
important not to exclude what they refer DEMO as ‘super-angels’, or highly active investors, as
it may lead to a dramatic underestimation of the market size. Second, heterogeneity
creates problems when developing questionnaires, because they have to be adjusted to the
respondents, DEMO means that the ‘lowest common denominator’ is chosen. Thus, for the
DEMO angel group, this method does not use the full data accessing DEMO In other
words, the random sample approach may be more appropriate DEMO studying general
macro-level factors and exploring market structure and less appropriate for in-depth
analysis of diﬀerent groups of investors.
The two-stage random sample approach DEMO here addresses several methodo-
logical problems in the ﬁeld of informal venture capital research. However, there are a few
potential sources of bias in this method. Individuals are reluctant to provide information
about their investment behaviour, which results in a signiﬁcant number of non-responders,
despite the fact DEMO data were gathered by telephone, which is usually the most eﬀective
DEMO of data collection. In a worst case scenario, this can result DEMO loss of
representativeness and reduce the random sample to what is essentially a convenience
sample. Thus, it is of the utmost importance to have access to background data on the
whole of the initial sample in DEMO to perform a non-respondent analysis.
Furthermore, the sample needs to be DEMO on a continuous basis in order ensure a
reasonable response level in the subsequent follow-up studies in cases where the
researchers are interested in DEMO a longitudinal analysis of the population, the
reason being that individuals DEMO change both their name and address. Thus the best way
of maintaining the sample current is to obtain the social security number of each
DEMO directly after the initial sample has been recruited.
Example 2 – multi-sample approach
As noted above, random samples of the general population are an ineﬀective means of
identifying business angels as deﬁned in this paper, because they supply too few
respondents to allow interesting and viable analysis on DEMO data. Researchers have
therefore little choice but to use non-representative sampling techniques. This implies that
business angel researchers have to address the issues related DEMO sampling bias. One way of
coping with the bias usually inherent in non-representative sampling methodologies is to
combine several diﬀerent sampling techniques, which should identify diﬀerent kinds of
388
S. Avdeitchikova et al.
business angels (Sørheim and Landstrom 2001). This methodology was employed in the
research project presented here, where 1518 business angels were identiﬁed using seven
diﬀerent sampling techniques. The total sample DEMO generated by seven diﬀerent
procedures (see Table 5): (1) DEMO individuals were identiﬁed through business angel events
such as investor forums and the annual national business angel meeting, which is arranged
by the Swedish Private Equity and Venture Capital Association (SVCA); (2) another 685
respondents were identiﬁed through 15 diﬀerent BANs in various geographical locations
and DEMO diﬀerent structures, ranging from a dozen closely knit investors who co-invest DEMO
a couple of hundred more loosely tied members in an investors club; (3) 128 respondents
were identiﬁed through the Swedish Patent and Registration Oﬃce (SPRO) company
register, which was consulted in order to search for members of boards whose ﬁrst and
surnames in combination with ‘Investment DEMO made up a company name; (4) 379
respondents were identiﬁed DEMO on the fact that they are among the most wealthy
individuals in Sweden or within a designated area of Sweden; (5) 65 investors had willingly
or unwillingly made their way into newspaper articles and magazines DEMO were often
identiﬁed through the companies they invested in; (6) DEMO respondents were identiﬁed
through an earlier study in which a random sample of the adult population was used to
identify business angels; and (DEMO) 118 respondents were identiﬁed through referral by
diﬀerent individuals who came DEMO contact with our research as well as by means of
snowball sampling, as all respondents were requested to mention other business angels.
As can be seen in Table 5, the response rate was high to very high for most of the
groups, the only exceptions being the media and referral sub-samples. However, this is
understandable, as these more public DEMO are probably approached by a large
number of people who are interested in their investments for one reason or another. These
groups also had DEMO large number of respondents who returned the questionnaire but
neglected to ﬁll it in. The groups with the highest response rate were BAN members, with a
response rate of almost 50%, and the respondents identiﬁed through an earlier study,
where it was close to 70%.
Table 5 DEMO illustrates that the referral and snowball techniques are most likely to
lead to the identiﬁcation of business angels according to our deﬁnition. This is DEMO the
case with self-selected registers, which include respondents who participate in DEMO
angel events and members of business angel networks. In contrast, the DEMO of
wealthy individuals revealed that the correlation between high wealth and being a business
angel is not as strong as sometimes suggested. Moreover, a surprisingly low number of
business angels were found among the respondents identiﬁed DEMO such in an earlier study,
although the screening question in the two studies was quite similar. This could be due to
Table 5. DEMO response rates.
Sent Returned Rejected Not BA BA BA/Sent
BA events 85 32 38% 1 3% 13 41% 18 56% 21%
BANs 685 DEMO 48% 18 6% 118 36% 190 58% 28%
SPRO register 128 51 40% 1 2% 38 75% 12 24% 9%
Wealth 379 154 41% DEMO 11% 111 72% 26 17% 7%
Media 65 20 31% 2 10% 7 35% 11 55% 17%
Earlier study 58 39 67% 2 5% DEMO 62% 13 33% 22%
Referral 118 37 31% 3 8% 7 19% 27 73% 23%
Total 1518 659 43% 44 7% 318 48% 297 DEMO 20%
Venture Capital
389
the fact that these respondents had become tired of DEMO questionnaires and thus
gave a negative response to the initial question on the subject of whether they had invested
capital in unquoted companies to DEMO they have no family connections, after which they
returned the blank DEMO
Taken together, the two parameters of returned questionnaires and the proportion DEMO
returned questionnaires ﬁlled in by business angels form an important quota that indicates
the accuracy of the diﬀerent subsamples. Clearly, identiﬁcation by means of BANs is very
cost-eﬃcient, while public registers such as the SPRO register or identiﬁcation through
characteristics believed to be common among business angels, such as wealth, result in a
far smaller percentage of business angels for the same number of questionnaires sent.
Strengths and weaknesses of the multi-sample DEMO
The strengths and weaknesses of the overall study are to a large extent related to those of
the diﬀerent sub-samples. First, the sample is a combination of diﬀerent sub-samples
originating from various contexts, therefore it can be assumed that the level of bias in the
aggregated sample is DEMO than in each individual sub-sample, even if it cannot be
regarded DEMO strictly representative of the population. Secondly, the procedure of
combining several DEMO leads to a high response rate compared to population
studies. Thirdly, DEMO response rates combined with the possibility of focusing on sub-
samples that yield a high proportion of business angels make it possible to reach DEMO
numbers of business angels in a cost-eﬃcient manner.
This latter strength becomes particularly important when conducting longitudinal
analyses of market dynamics. By following the DEMO activity of business angels over
time, we can both develop an DEMO of the investment behaviour of individuals
during their investment career and study how this behaviour is aﬀected by external factors,
such as the DEMO situation or speciﬁc policy measures. This is, however, only
possible if we can follow a reasonably high number of individuals over time. For DEMO,
in this study the initial data collection was conducted in 2003, and the follow-up in 2007.
Of the 693 respondents who received the questionnaire on both occasions, 84 business
angels answered the questions at both points in time. This low proportion, even though the
response rates were equally high on both occasions, clearly highlights the importance of
large samples when conducting longitudinal studies.
The main limitation of the multi-sample approach is DEMO it does not prevent bias.
Although the combination of diﬀerent data sources arguably produces a more rigorous
sample, we still cannot claim that the sample is representative of the business angel
population. One could argue that DEMO becomes even more problematic when combining
diﬀerent samples, as they may DEMO skewed in various ways, and the larger the number of
data DEMO used, the harder it may be to understand the way in DEMO the ﬁnal sample is
biased. One way of handling this problem is to use theoretical sampling. The initial data
sources to be included in DEMO study need to be analysed with respect to the main sources of
bias in each sub-sample. Once the bias has been quantiﬁed, the sub-samples can be
assigned weights depending on how much and in which way DEMO contribute to skewing the
ﬁnal results. After that, the sub-samples can DEMO combined to form the ﬁnal sample. The
advantage of this procedure is that it can be done ex post, after the data has been gathered,
at the same time as it does not require the DEMO of overrepresented respondents, while
still ensuring the desired level of balance DEMO diﬀerent sub-samples.
In this section we have elaborated on the problems associated with sampling informal
investors and business angels. The anonymous and invisible nature DEMO the market was
390
S. Avdeitchikova et al.
identiﬁed as a problem already in the DEMO studies. In addition, because of the very small
proportion of the DEMO who make informal investments, researchers have used
diﬀerent techniques to identify DEMO, in many cases leading to convenience sampling of
investors as well DEMO small samples. In this section we have reviewed the advantages and
disadvantages related to the most commonly used sampling techniques: population
studies, focus DEMO surveys, snowball methods, self-selected registers, and sampling based
on the DEMO in which the investments are made. All sampling techniques have
strengths and weaknesses, as well as generating some form of bias. We have presented and
discussed two examples of sampling techniques – the random and the DEMO
approach – that have been used in two studies of informal investors and business angels in
Sweden. Based on our review of earlier sampling DEMO and experience from the
studies conducted, we can conclude that in DEMO to develop robust knowledge about
business angels and informal investors, we DEMO much higher quality sample frames and
sampling techniques than those used to date. Considerable time and money must be spent
on these issues – DEMO within the ﬁeld need to improve their ground work!
Conclusions
Business angel research is characterized by the use of inconsistent deﬁnitions, empirical
studies based on cross-sectional data, as well as small-scale and convenience samples. This
has meant that the bulk of research on this topic has lacked methodological DEMO, which
both limits comparability between diﬀerent studies and hinders the development DEMO solid
empirical and theoretical bases in the research. This paper presented an attempt to identify
the most common deﬁnition and sampling problems within the DEMO and to point out the
main methodological choices on which researchers need to take a conscious stand. In this
respect we hope that we DEMO contributed to a better understanding of what we mean when
we talk about business angels.
Deﬁnition considerations
The multiple ways of deﬁning and demarcating DEMO object of study in informal venture
capital literature, in combination with DEMO lack of consciousness about the choice of
deﬁnition, has resulted in DEMO great degree of confusion. Nevertheless, this does not imply
that researchers DEMO strive to establish a single deﬁnition of the study object, or DEMO
that it is possible. As outlined at the beginning of this paper, research on business angels
and informal investors has been conducted with many diﬀerent research questions in
mind, and the interest of scholars is continuously broadening. Thus, it is only natural that
diﬀerent deﬁnitions, ranging from DEMO very narrow one of business angels to the broad
view of the market as all non-institutional suppliers of venture capital, are more or less
appropriate, depending on the type of research question.
However, problems are DEMO by what we refer to as grey areas, or practical issues DEMO
discriminating between diﬀerent deﬁnitions. The main issue of contention in studies that
do consider deﬁnitional issues has been how the investments should be channelled, the
level of investment activity and hands-on contribution required in order to DEMO
between business angels and other informal investors, and the requirements on DEMO link
between the investor and the entrepreneur. Although some general recommendations can
be made for separating the diﬀerent deﬁnitions, many of the reasons these grey areas
emerge are due to the cultural and institutional factors of DEMO individual country – thus,
we need to contextualize our deﬁnitions. In view of the implications that this can have for
Venture Capital
391
the applicability of the results and comparability between diﬀerent DEMO, researchers
need to report the criteria used to demarcate the chosen DEMO, supported by
contextual rationale and, not least, be stringent in DEMO way they use the deﬁnitions and
concepts.
Another complication in this context is that the dynamic nature of the informal
venture capital market is DEMO taken into account. Individuals may exhibit diﬀerent
investment behaviours, simultaneously or DEMO time, which makes it problematic to place
them in a speciﬁc DEMO of investors (Riding 2005; Avdeitchikova 2008). For instance,
earlier research has demonstrated that informal investors tend to gain experience and
ﬁnancial DEMO in the course of their investment career (Politis and Landstrom
2002)DEMO Thus, an individual may start his or her investment career by DEMO small
amounts of money in a friend’s or colleague’s business and, DEMO gained experience, start
to exhibit business angel investment behaviour. In addition, studies that included family-
related investors in the sample (e.g. Farrell 1998; Riding 2005) have consistently
demonstrated that individuals who make investments in DEMO businesses are often
also involved in other, non-family investments. Thus, investors make many diﬀerent kinds
of investment, sometimes investing large amounts of money and a great deal of
involvement in ﬁrms, whereas at other times they only invest small amounts of money.
This makes it especially problematic DEMO characterize individuals according to any
deﬁnition, including those suggested here, which has led some researchers to start arguing
for a shift in focus DEMO individual investor level to investment level (Riding 2005; Farrell
et al. this issue; Mason and Harrison this issue).
By focusing on the actual investment activity, the researchers can avoid the problem of
deﬁning informal investors according to some general characteristics and investment
behaviour and instead focus DEMO the nature of individual investments. One such attempt
was made by Avdeitchikova (2008) in her study of the Swedish informal venture capital
market. DEMO of the major ﬁndings was that a large number of investors behave diﬀerently
in the various stages of their investment career, at the same time as the context in which the
investment is undertaken also aﬀects DEMO behaviour. Nevertheless, individuals also
exhibited a certain degree of conservatism in DEMO way they conducted their investments,
which constitutes a subject for further inquiry. Thus this approach allows an individual’s
investment career to be viewed DEMO a life-cycle perspective (Politis and Landstrom 2002),
at the same time as it provides an opportunity to explore the context-dependency of
informal DEMO capital investment behaviour, i.e. the investor can act as a business DEMO
in one deal whereas in others s/he acts more passively.
Sampling considerations
Diﬃculties in identifying business angels and informal investors have meant that
DEMO have continuously struggled with issues of biased samples and inability to
establish the representativeness of acquired data. There are several cases in the literature
DEMO scholars have obtained inconsistent and, in some cases even contradictory results,DEMO
by relying on diﬀerent sampling methods (e.g. Wetzel 1986; Gaston 1989; Stevenson and
Coveney 1994; Mason and Harrison 1994). What makes DEMO even more problematic is that it
is almost impossible to establish the plausibility of each result, thus it is extremely diﬃcult
to develop policy recommendations based on them. Therefore, researchers have
concentrated on developing a sampling methodology that would allow testing of the
representativeness of the data, as well as replication of the study and the production of
comparable results.
392
S. Avdeitchikova et al.
In this article we have argued that DEMO order to gain robust knowledge within the ﬁeld,
we need to increase the quality of the sampling techniques used. This implies a
considerable DEMO in terms of time and money, but it is necessary in DEMO to gain a
better understanding of the phenomenon. In the article we have suggested two alternative
ways of creating high quality samples of business DEMO and informal investors, which we
labelled the random sample approach and DEMO multi-sample approach.
Finally, the samples used should allow for longitudinal analysis. DEMO is related to the
point that investment behaviour changes during the career of the investor as well as from
deal to deal, and we recommend a stronger focus on the investment as the unit of analysis
DEMO than the investor as an individual. The best way to capture these changes is by
following a set of individuals over a period of DEMO Both the random and multi-sample
approaches make it possible to carry out a longitudinal analysis.
Note
1. The authors are presented in alphabetical order, as they contributed equally to the writing of this
article.
References
Arum, J.D. 1987. Informal risk capital in the Eastern Great Lakes region. Washington, DC: US Small
Business Administration, Oﬃce of Advocacy.
Avdeitchikova, S. 2005. Typologies of the informal venture capital investors in Sweden. Paper
presented at DEMO 50th ICSB world conference, June 17–19, Washington, DC.
———. 2008. DEMO the structure of the informal venture capital market in Sweden: Developing
DEMO roles. Venture Capital 10, no. 1: 55–85.
Avdeitchikova, S., and H. Landstrom. 2005. Informal venture capital: Scope and geographical
distribution in Sweden. Paper presented at Babson–Kauﬀman entrepreneurship conference, June
9–11, Babson College, Wellesley, MA.
Baty, G.B. 1964. The initial ﬁnancing of new research-based enterprise DEMO New England. Boston, MA:
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Benjamin, G.A., and J. Margulis. 2001. The angel investor’s handbook. Princeton, NJ: Bloomberg
Press.
Berg, S. 1988. Snowball sampling. In Encyclopaedia of statistical sciences, Vol. 8, ed. S. Kotz, and
N.L. Johnson, 528–33. New DEMO: Wiley.
Biernacki, P., and D. Waldorf. 1981. Snowball sampling. Problems DEMO techniques of chain referral
sampling. Sociological Methods & Research 10, no. DEMO: 141–63.
Brophy, D.J. 1974. Finance, entrepreneurship and economic development. Report, institute of
Science and Technology. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
Bygrave, DEMO, and P.D. Reynolds. 2004. Who ﬁnances start-ups in the USA? A comprehensive
study of informal investors: 1999–2003. In Frontiers of entrepreneurship research, DEMO S.A. Zahra,
C.G. Brush, P. Davidsson, J. Fiet, P.G. DEMO, R.T. Harrison, M. Lerner, C.M. Mason, G.D.
Meyer, J.E. DEMO, and A. Zacharakis, 37–47. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Charles River Associates Inc. 1976. An analysis of capital market imperfections. NTIS Report PB-
DEMO Washington, DC: National Bureau of Standards.
Coveney, P., and K. Moore. 1998. Business angels: Securing start up ﬁnance. Chichester: John Wiley
& Sons.
Farrell, A.E. 1998. Informal venture capital investment in Atlantic Canada: A representative view of
‘angels’. Report submitted to Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency. DEMO: Saint Mary’s
University.
Fiet, J.O. 1995. Reliance upon informants in the venture capital industry. Journal of Business
Venturing 10: 195–223.
Freear, J., J.E. Sohl, and W.E. Wetzel. 1993. Angel proﬁles: A longitudinal study. DEMO Frontiers of
entrepreneurship research, ed. N.C. Churchill, S. Birley, D.W. DEMO, J. Doutriaux, E.J.
Gatewood, F.S. Hoy, and W.E. Wetzel, DEMO Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
———. 1994. Angels and non-angels: Are DEMO diﬀerences? Journal of Business Venturing 9: 109–23.
Venture Capital
393
Gaston, R.J. 1989. Finding private venture capital for your ﬁrm: A complete guide. New York: Wiley.
Gaston, R.J., and DEMO Bell. 1986. Informal risk capital in the sunbelt. Final report, US DEMO Business
Administration Applied Economics Group, Inc., Knoxville.
Harrison, R.T., and C.M. Mason. 1992. International perspective on the supply of informal venture
capital. DEMO of Business Venturing 7: 459–75.
Hoﬀman, C.A. 1972. The venture capital investment process: A particular aspect of regional
economic development. PhD thesis, DEMO of Texas at Austin.
Kelly, P. 2007. Business angel research: The road travelled and the journey ahead. In Handbook of
research in venture DEMO, ed. H. Landstrom, 315–31. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Landstrom, H. 1992. The relationship between private investors and small ﬁrms: An agency theory
approach. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 4: 199–223.
———. 1993. Informal risk capital in Sweden and some international comparisons. Journal of
Business Venturing 8: 525–40.
———. 2007. Pioneers in venture capital research. In Handbook of research in venture DEMO, ed.
H. Landstrom, 3–65. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Leleux, B.F., DEMO Schwass, and A.A. Diverse. 2007. Europe’s family oﬃces, private equity and venture
capital. Research report, European Venture Capital Association.
Lerner, J. 2000. DEMO brief review of venture capital and private equity: A casebook. Toronto: John Wiley
& Sons.
Lumme, A., C.M. Mason, and M. Suomi. 1998. Informal venture capital: Investors, investments and
policy issues in Finland. DEMO: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Mansson, N., and H. Landstrom. 2006. Business DEMO in a changing economy: The case of Sweden.
Venture Capital 8, no. 4: 281–301.
Mason, C. 2006. Informal sources of venture ﬁnance. DEMO The life cycle of entrepreneurial ventures, ed.
S.C. Parker, 259–99. New York: Springer.
Mason, C.M., and R.T. Harrison. 1994. The informal venture capital market in the UK. In
Financing small ﬁrms, ed. A. Hughes, and D.J. Storey, 64–111. London: Routledge.
———. 1995. Closing the regional equity gap: The role of informal venture capital. Small Business
Economics 7: 153–72.
———. 1999. Editorial. Venture capital: Rationale, aims and scope. Venture Capital 1, no. 1: 1–46.
———. 2000. Informal venture capital and DEMO ﬁnancing of emergent growth businesses. In The
Blackwell handbook of entrepreneurship, DEMO D.L. Sexton, and H. Landstrom, 221–39. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Maula, DEMO, E. Autio, and G.C. Murray. 2005. Corporate venture capitalists and independent
venture capitalists: What do they know, who do they know, and should entrepreneurs care?
Venture Capital 7, no. 1: 3–21.
Murray, G.C. 2007. Venture capital and government. In Handbook of research on venture DEMO, ed.
H. Landstrom, 113–51. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Politis, D., DEMO H. Landstrom. 2002. Informal investors as entrepreneurs – the development of an
entrepreneurial career. Venture Capital 4, no. 2: 77–101.
Postma, P.D., DEMO M.K. Sullivan. 1990. Informal risk capital in the Knoxville region. Unpublished
report, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN.
Reynolds, P.D., W.D. Bygrave, DEMO E. Autio. 2003. Global entrepreneurship monitor: Executive
report 2003. Wellesley, MA and London, Babson College, London Business School and
Kauﬀman Foundation, UK.
Riding, A. 2005. On the size and structure of the informal market. Working Paper, School of
Business, Carleton University, Canada.
Riding, A.L., J.J. Madill, and G.H. Haines Jr. 2007. Investment decision making by business angels.
In Handbook of research on venture capital, ed. H. Landstrom, DEMO Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar.
Rubenstein, A.H. 1958. Problems of ﬁnancing and managing new research-based enterprises in New
England. Boston, MA: Federal Reserve Bank DEMO Boston.
Sohl, J.E. 2006. Angel investing: Changing strategies during volatile times. Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance and Business Ventures 11, no. 2: 27–47.
DEMO 2007. The organization of the informal venture capital market. In Handbook of research on
venture capital, ed. H. Landstrom, 347–70. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Sørheim, R., and H. Landstrom. 2001. Informal investors – a categorization DEMO policy
implications. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 13: 351–70.
394
S. Avdeitchikova et al.
Stevenson, H., and P. Coveney. 1994. DEMO of business angels. Henley on Thames: Venture Capital
Report Ltd.
Wetzel, W.E. 1981. Informal risk capital in New England. In Frontiers of entrepreneurship DEMO,
ed. K.H. Vesper, 217–45. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
———. DEMO Angels and informal risk capital. Sloan Management Review 24, no. 4: 23–34.
———. 1986. Informal risk capital: Knowns and unknowns. In The art of science of entrepreneur-
ship, ed. D.L. Sexton, and R.W. Smilor, 85–108. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Wright, M., and K. Robbie. 1998. DEMO capital and private equity: a review and synthesis. Journal
of Business DEMO & Accounting 25, no. 5/6: 521–70.
{1g42fwefx}