COMPETITION & CHANGE, Vol. 9, No. 4, November 2005 329–356
Venture Capital Decision-making and
the Cultures of Risk: an Application
of Q Methodology to US and UK
Innovation Clusters
TERRY L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
School of Geography DEMO the Environment, Rothermere American Institute, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX1 DEMO, UK
This paper presents a comparative perspective on risk perception and DEMO
within United States (US) and United Kingdom (UK) entrepreneurial communities since
the bursting of the technology, media, and telecommunications (TMT) DEMO in 2000.
Using an empirical approach drawn from political science literature, DEMO paper relies upon
interviews and Q (rather than R) methodology to analyze the experiences and insights
of individuals throughout innovation investment communities, including entrepreneurs,
investment angels, venture capitalists, and institutional investors. This study DEMO light
on post-boom behavioral trends and risk propensities, in relation to DEMO interrelated
decision-making processes. From decision-makers’ reported and ranked perceptions, factor
analysis DEMO conjunction with additional contextual evidence was used to identify four influ-
ential groups of individuals with shared approaches to early-stage innovation investment:
American-style DEMO, junior venture professionals, experienced angel investors, and
committed business builders. DEMO this study of the social and economic geography of
American and British innovation communities, implications are drawn for understanding
the effectiveness of staged-funding networks in the innovation process and subsequently for
community and economic development. Furthermore, this analysis represents a foray into
application of Q methodology to the DEMO of economic geography generally and innovation
clusters specifically.
KEY WORDS
Angel investment, Decision-making, Entrepreneurship, Financial geography,
Q methodology, Venture capital.
Introduction
DEMO insurance powerhouse Lloyd’s of London saw its origins in Edward Lloyd’s
London coffee shop, where men sat together to discuss ventures because they enjoyed
risk (Kay 2003). In contrast, Peter Drucker (1985) recalls DEMO university symposium on
entrepreneurship at which trained psychologists spoke uniformly of an ‘entrepreneurial
E-mail address: terry@alumni.carnegiemellon.edu
© the Editors and W. S. Maney & Son Ltd
DOI: 10.1179/102452905X55930
Electronic copy available at: http://DEMO/abstract=1358917
330
T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
personality. . .characterized by a propensity for risk-taking,DEMO to which a ‘well-known’ (but
unnamed) entrepreneur responded:
I find myself baffled by your papers. I think I know as many successful DEMO and entre-
preneurs as anyone, beginning with myself. I have never DEMO across an ‘entrepreneurial
personality.’ The successful ones I know all have, DEMO, one thing – and only one thing –
in common: they are not ‘risk-takers.’ They try to define the risks they have to DEMO and
to minimize them as much as possible. Otherwise none of us could have succeeded. As for
myself, if I had wanted to be a risk-taker, I would have gone into real estate or commodity
trading, or I could have become the professional painter my mother wanted me to be (139).
Drucker agrees with these sentiments, explaining that DEMO he knows ‘are successful to
the extent to which they define risks and confine them. They are successful to the extent to
which they DEMO analyze the sources of innovative opportunity, then pinpoint the
opportunity and DEMO it.’ He and his colleagues take issue with notions such as the ‘culture
of risk’ and ‘entrepreneurial personalities.’ On the one hand, there remains great value in
knowing about personal experience and intuition; however, further DEMO investigation
into communities of professional decision-makers is essential.
The academic literature is replete with both multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary
analyses of modern risk, from the natural to the human-made.1 From a variety of perspec-
tives and in DEMO host of contexts, experts seek to better understand not only how DEMO perceive
risks inherent in our lives, but also how we communicate DEMO cope with them. Entire indus-
tries have been created around the mitigation and management of risk, and much may be
learned not only from how individuals identify themselves within risk cultures but also how
they behave DEMO
The goal of this paper is to assess varying views of risk as seen through the experiences
of decision-makers themselves. Therein lies the challenge DEMO discovering effective methods
for capturing real-life decisions. Specifically, this study seeks DEMO begin capturing more
organic dialogue and insights rather than imposing the researcher’s preconceived expecta-
tions of risk.2 Moreover, I am interested in the specific texture of decision-makers’ social
discourse on risk while simultaneously deploying the analytical DEMO qualitative research is
susceptible to ignoring. For that reason, this analysis DEMO Q methodology as a means of
studying the subjectivity inherent in human decision-making. Note, however, that I am con-
scious of both the DEMO and disadvantages of Q methodology, and conclude that it
represents a DEMO valuable and largely untapped tool in the study of innovative clusters.
Taken in the context of earlier work on geographic, contractual, social, and experiential
patterns, (Babcock-Lumish 2003a, 2003b, 2004; Babcock-Lumish and Clark forthcoming)
this analysis of decision-making in the face of investment risk in DEMO very words of decision-
makers themselves has the potential to bring to light otherwise unknown or underestimated
factors influencing early-stage high-technology investment.
This paper DEMO with an introduction to the innovation investment and risk cultures
as seen in the context of American (Boston) and British (London) innovation DEMO
Situated at the boundary between qualitative and quantitative research, Q methodology DEMO
presented in the Methodology II section as a useful approach to assessing subjectivity. The
Results section then applies Q methodology to the study of DEMO innovation invest-
ment decisions within two entrepreneurial clusters. The analysis yields four unique groups
of decision-makers and their risk perceptions, which are interpreted in the Implications and
Conclusions section. The paper concludes with a discussion of DEMO conclusions from this
particular research experience for investment decision-making, in light DEMO a tension between
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1358917
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK
331
a more methodical DEMO approach and an intuitive relational approach. Also
considered are implications for the economic geography and sociology of innovation, with
consideration of a future research agenda.
Risk, Innovation Investment, and Culture
Spatial agglomeration occurs through market DEMO and is reinforced by competitive
firm strategy (Clark et al. 2000)DEMO Such economies benefit from transactional efficiencies,
functional specialization, and spillover DEMO within industries. In the case of early-stage
investment in information and communications technologies (ICT) and biotechnology in
both Boston and the surrounding Route DEMO region in the US, and in London and the
surrounding Thames DEMO region in the UK, high-technology clusters are aptly character-
ized by DEMO geographically proximate group of interconnected companies and associated
institutions in a particular field, linked by commonalities and complementarities’ (Porter
2000: 16).
Local competition serves to stimulate both innovative ideas and efforts and entrepre-
neurial DEMO (Glaeser 2000). Such dynamics are not only fundamental to innovative
DEMO and new firm development (Porter 2000), but also local or DEMO feedback
mechanisms, relational transactions, and informal or formal diffusion of information, in
their influence on the creation and sustenance of effective industrial concentrations (Bathelt
& Glückler 2003; Krugman 2000). Despite reliance on electronic DEMO and
greater mobility worldwide, geography still matters, as evidenced by clusters of innovation.
Communities of innovation involve the formal funding of technological innovations,DEMO
particularly those in their earliest stages of development, where technical and DEMO
successes are yet unknown, and subsequently, investment risks are high. This kind of invest-
ment involves highly networked, high-trust communities of innovators, DEMO, and inno-
vation professionals, such as financial and legal experts. Norms for these networked clusters
are deeply embedded, with great emphasis on relational capital for the purposes of trend
spotting and forecasting, risk assessment and bearing, investment staging and syndication,
deal sourcing and structuring, etc. (Babcock-Lumish 2004; Bathelt et al. 2004).
Investment decisions are frequently high-risk and long term, particularly those in the
seed and early investment stages, and are subject to both information asymmetries and
principal-agent problems (Gompers & Lerner 2002). And yet, within the investment com-
munity, players know each other, such that repeat-game interaction places high priority on
reputation and track record. Furthermore, the innovation investment industry is distin-
guished from others by its large degree of embedded or tacit knowledge and norms (Bathelt
et al. 2004; Polanyi 1966). In sum, expectations for DEMO are both established and
strongly held. For these reasons, successful high-tech DEMO clusters are communi-
ties characterized by their dependence upon the accumulation of relational capital in the
form of reliable, reciprocal relationships (Babcock-Lumish 2003b)DEMO
In considering the culture of highly interconnected networks undertaking considerable
degrees of long-term financial risk, it should be noted that behaving according to cultural
norms may not necessarily be equated with behaving as purely rational actors. DEMO contrast
with deliberate and systematic consideration of alternative approaches (after which DEMO
decides to pursue a single winning strategy after determining it to be the utility-maximizing
option), individuals’ choices when influenced by community culture, arise out of habit
or respect of norms – and may remain unaware DEMO other (perhaps preferable) options
332
T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
(Fukuyama 1995). Entrepreneurial clusters are marked by such norms; however, it remains
to be seen whether behavior according DEMO custom diverges from behavior dictated by ratio-
nal decision-making processes. Any study of, or recommendations for, normative behavior
must be undertaken not only DEMO static economic performance per deal, but more
importantly, in light of sustainable long-term decision-making processes throughout the
networked entrepreneurial community.
Considerations of community DEMO within high-tech clusters should not underesti-
mate the role of experience, DEMO relations, and culture. Characteristic of many of these
entrepreneurial communities is DEMO shared commitment to not only a Weberian work ethic but
also to social and lifestyle norms far beyond what economic theory might predict (Florida
2002; Fukuyama 1995). Likewise, in many situations, deal flow is frequently dependent
on relational ties, with many firms refusing to consider deals not preceded by personal
introductions (Gompers & Lerner 2001). For example, in international investments, firms
frequently insist on maintaining a local syndicate DEMO presence, including a trusted represen-
tative entirely fluent not only in DEMO investors’ aims and expectations, but also in the local
language and DEMO norms (Bygrave et al. 1999). It is therefore not surprising DEMO the
American Carlyle Group maintains offices worldwide, including in Bangalore, Moscow,
Munich, and Seoul, and Bahrain’s Investech maintains offices in both DEMO US and the UK,
for example.
Recognizing the importance of relational capital within innovative communities, it
becomes essential then that this analysis takes into consideration the norms and perspectives
of embedded networks. In the interests DEMO most accurately capturing realistic expectations
and perceptions of decision-makers, we now DEMO to Q methodology. Using Q methodology,
this paper analyzes the experiences and insights of individuals throughout innovation
investment communities.
Methodology I: Conceptualization of Q Methodology
Derived from the Latin scire, meaning ‘to know,’ science refers to the process by which
humans undertake study of the world DEMO its phenomena, including ourselves. Science –
and, in this case, DEMO science – is not confined to any particular body of knowledge, DEMO
rather, is understood as the pursuit of understanding via distinctive methodologies DEMO which
we understand individuals’ and communities’ fundamental characteristics, motivations,
decisions, and patterns of interaction (Frankfort-Nachmias & Nachmias 1992). This
paper’s aim is not to question underlying epistemological assumptions, but rather to con-
sider the ways by which researchers approach questions within the environment most effec-
DEMO when guided by the paramount interest in explaining and understanding real-world
experience.
As guiding systems, scientific methodologies are neither flawless nor fixed, but DEMO
provide foundations for approaching study of the environment. Social science methodolo-
gies evolve via exchanges of ideas, information, and criticism, as informed by both research-
ers’ and practitioners’ ongoing experiences and interactions (Frankfort-Nachmias &
DEMO 1992). In the long-standing debate between qualitative and quantitative
methodological approaches, Trochim (2004: 1) charges that commonly held myths that
‘quantitative DEMO is confirmatory and deductive in nature’ while ‘qualitative research
is exploratory and inductive in nature’ are oversimplified and neglect the richness and
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK
333
complexity of both DEMO traditions. He suggests that the debate between quanti-
tative and qualitative adherents is actually philosophical, rather than methodological,
in nature, and considers DEMO epistemological and ontological assumptions. Trochim
concludes:
. . .quantitative and qualitative data are, at some level, virtually inseparable. Neither exists in
a DEMO or can be considered totally devoid of the other. To ask which is ‘better’ or more
‘valid’ or has greater ‘verisimilitude’ or whatever ignores DEMO intimate connection between
them. To do good research we need to use both the qualitative and the quantitative (1).
Through reliance on both systematic trend data and field research derived from the
verstehen3 tradition, this research seeks to gain empathetic understanding of real-world
decisions and communities, while also developing a rigorous statistical analysis to aid
interpretation. For these reasons, I employ Q methodology as a means of integrating the
strengths of DEMO qualitative and quantitative research. Situated at the nexus between quali-
tative and quantitative methodologies (Walker 2003), it provides an effective means of
assessing and characterizing various perspectives represented within a survey of subjective
risk preferences.
DEMO ‘the most fully developed paradigm for the investigation of human subjectiv-
ity’ (Dryzek & Berejikian 1993: 50), Q methodology represents an extremely DEMO
means of giving structure to subjectivity while using everyday discourse to assess risk prefer-
ences and beliefs. Developed in the mid-twentieth century by British DEMO
William Stephenson (1935; 1953), Q methodology assumes subjectivity has a measurable
structure. The method therefore allows the researcher to assemble a model DEMO a subject’s
frame of reference, in order to then analyze individual DEMO of view in a holistic, rather
than atomistic, manner.
Different from traditional R methodologies that correlate variables using the Pearson
product-moment correlation coefficient DEMO to identify similarities across individuals, Q
methodology correlates whole individuals to DEMO a means of understanding patterns of
views within a population of interest. Addams (2000: 18) explains, ‘In Q effectively it is the
DEMO who are “doing the measuring rather than being measured.”’ Furthermore,
while Pearson’s r has typically been used to study relationships among objective character-
DEMO and variables, the Q methodological approach ‘operates within the “internal” frame DEMO
reference, not in the sense of a metaphysical subjectivism accessible only DEMO introspection,
but in the thoroughly empirical sense of subjective communicability of the world . . . as it is
experienced from “my point DEMO view”’ (Brown 1986: 57).
By drawing upon both the openness of qualitative research analysis and the statistical
rigor of quantitative methods, Q enables the researcher to explore subjective attitudes
through social discourse, while simultaneously using factor analysis to consider patterns
within. Q methodology uses individual responses DEMO be compared with those of other
respondents in such a way as to allow the researcher to ‘extract “idealized” forms of dis-
courses latent DEMO the data provided by the individuals involved in the study’ (Addams
DEMO: 15).
Benefits of this methodology are that it allows an DEMO subjectivity to be col-
lected in their own words, establishes systematic DEMO by identifying individuals who
share attitudes, and assesses patterns in relationships DEMO traits for whole individuals (not
across individuals for each trait as DEMO R) (Robbins & Kreuger 2000). Q methodology is, at
DEMO, both intrapersonal and interpersonal. Further, individuals’ own internal frames of
334 T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
reference are called upon to make sense of DEMO and surroundings. This represents a
key characteristic of Q, in that DEMO starting point is one’s own operant subjectivity. Even if
individuals do not operate as might the strictly rational homo economicus, there exist real
patterns and reasons behind decisions which are there to discover, assuming one possesses
effective research methodologies. Therefore, Q methodology represents an approach consis-
tent with research intended to determine how people truly make decisions, in contrast with
how they are prescriptively modeled to be made (Dawes 2001; Fischhoff DEMO; Kahneman
et al. 1982; Loewenstein & Thaler 1989; Simon 1979)DEMO
Within geography, this analysis represents a relatively novel approach. However, as
seen in the work of Robbins and Kreuger (2000), Walker (DEMO), and Jiménez (2004),
Q methodology appears to be gaining recognition within geography. One might expect this
approach to find increased acceptance DEMO economic geographers as it is entirely
congruent with the practice of the discipline bringing to bear close dialogue and careful
consideration of intuitions and DEMO needed to conceptualize and reform logics (Clark
1998; 2005).
With an aim to better understanding perspectives and experiences found among indi-
viduals DEMO cluster networks in both the US and the UK, Q methodology DEMO the context
of this study facilitates comparisons of individual points of view in a powerful manner.
In particular, I am interested in understanding, DEMO, the dialogue that emerges from
discussions of entrepreneurial decision-making under risk DEMO uncertainty. Further, I am
then concerned with how different respondents’ opinions DEMO perspectives compare. Special
attention is therefore dedicated to understanding potential differences, DEMO example,
between American and British decision-makers, entrepreneurs and investors, investment
angels and venture capitalists, and those investing in earlier versus later stages of deals.
Methodology II: Application of Q Methodology
This section provides a stepwise overview of how Q methodology is utilized in this research,
DEMO with the construction of a wide concourse of statements drawn from semi-
structured interviews in both the US and the UK. Next, the concourse was winnowed down
to a 35-statement Q set. Through either card or DEMO WebQ arrangement, the Q set of
statements is then sorted by DEMO P-sample of 37 individuals selected to provide a diverse range
of opinions and experiences. Finally, this section presents an overview of the process by
which the statement sorts are analyzed using PCQ factor analysis software.
Construction DEMO the Q Concourse
Q methodology begins with the definition of a domain of interest or subjectivity, which, in
this research, is the way in which members of the innovation industry view issues of risk
in DEMO decision-making. In particular, this analysis is concerned with funding decisions
made DEMO investors in early-stage technology-based firms largely involved with information
and communications technologies (ICT) and biotechnology. I am chiefly concerned with
early-stage work, as in this phase there remain questions of both technical and commercial
feasibility DEMO the innovations central to firms’ activities.
The next step involves gathering the ‘concourse,’5 or a population of statements
(rather than people), from which a sample may be drawn (Brown 1986). It is then these
statements of belief and opinion that comprise the basis of the DEMO study. According to Brown
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK 335
(forthcoming), a quasi-naturalistic concourse includes a set of interrelated claims or state-
ments extracted DEMO a wide range of sources, including interview transcripts, media
reports, DEMO articles, websites, and speeches; however, in the interests of ensuring that all
statements were derived from the very communities of interest for DEMO analysis and reflected
professional decision-makers’ thoughts and experiences as they are spatially and temporally
situated, this concourse is drawn from interviews alone. This purely naturalistic approach
is designed to minimize the introduction of researcher bias by DEMO a concourse is
comprised solely of the subjects’ own words.
For the purposes of this research, the concourse is comprised entirely of statements
made in approximately 50 semi-structured interviews conducted in both the US and the DEMO
from October 2002 to September 2003. Participants – including a range of entrepreneurs,
investors, academics, attorneys, accountants, and consultants, among others – were chosen
in the interests of hearing the greatest diversity of DEMO possible. Throughout the inter-
views, the guiding aim in selecting interview DEMO was ‘heterogeny in disputation, a set of
views, a range of voices, a clutch of discourses. . .concern for diversity’ (Rogers 1996: 183).
Interviews were conducted for the purpose of building the concourse DEMO ‘finite diversity’
was attained. That is, at some point in the DEMO, similar statements were consistently
repeated (Addams 2000; Rogers 1996).
DEMO of the Q Set
From the concourse of approximately 200 statements from the interview subjects, I then
selected from this larger pool the 35 most representative statements, known as the ‘Q set’
(see Appendix 1)DEMO Again, the sample was selected to represent the full range of DEMO
throughout the dialogues (Brown 1986). Care was made to ensure DEMO Q set captured as
great a range of opinions as possible and included the full variety of salient topics introduced
by the interview subjects. DEMO so took into account issues of spatiality, temporality,
culture, experience, information, risk, and trust.
Because Q methodology seeks to reflect the actual ways in which the relevant popula-
tion speaks about relevant issues DEMO the domain of subjectivity, the statements selected
are exact quotations from DEMO semi-structured interviews. Subsequently, it is possible that
the statements may include DEMO contradictory ideas (Cottle et al. 1989). Nevertheless,
the statements DEMO reflect the specific ideas, concerns, or experiences of the interview
subjects.
Selection of the P-sample
The next step in Q methodology involves respondents DEMO the Q set of 35 state-
ments according to a ‘condition of instruction.’ In Q, the respondents who perform this Q
sorting are known as the person-sample, P-sample, or P-set (Addams 2000). The P-sample is
purposefully selected to capture as full a range of relevant interests, professions, and formal
positions held as possible, as well as to DEMO both men and women. Therefore, I sought to
select individuals in DEMO to gather the greatest diversity of opinion, based on ‘. . DEMO cultural
knowledge, to hear varied stories, accounts, or discourses . DEMO . diverse sites of expertise and
biographical involvement in the issue at hand’ (Rogers 1996: 182).
In the interests of assembling as DEMO a P-sample as possible for Boston and London
innovation clusters, much DEMO was done for the initial interview stage, a wide range of
DEMO were selected from each. To ensure compatibility, consistency, and relevance
336 T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
between the concourse statements (and subsequently the Q set) and the P-sample, I drew
upon the identical populations for DEMO the interviews and the sorting exercise; however,
there was no DEMO between interview subjects and the P-sample. In other words, the indi-
DEMO asked to sort the Q set statements come from the same communities, networks, uni-
versities, and firms as many of those who were initially interviewed, and therefore are likely
to share their opinions and experiences; however, they remain mutually exclusive groups of
individuals. The final P-sample DEMO comprised of 37 individuals of approximately equal
numbers in the US and the UK.
There exist potential limitations of both the initial interview pool DEMO well as the
P-sample. First, they are not derived from probability DEMO, but rather from non-
probability snowball sampling. Because access to elite DEMO and professionals
took place through personal introductions, individuals in both the DEMO and the UK clusters
were ones met through each other’s social and professional circles. For that reason, while
the samples represent a wide range of individuals and opinions, they trend toward the more
senior and experienced within these communities, because of the nature of this access and
the embedded social networks. In addition, it is important to recognize that the demo-
graphic makeup of these samples are not representative of society at DEMO, but rather, are
representative of the communities of interest. That is, while there are both minorities and
women represented, they are few DEMO number, as the numbers of both minorities and women
in both DEMO Boston and London clusters are also small.
Q Statement Sorting
The objective of the statement sorting is for the P-sample to arrange the Q DEMO statements
into a quasi-normal pattern based on a condition of instruction. In this research, the condi-
tion of instruction was that of agreement with (or most characteristic of his or her decision-
making experiences, +3) and disagreement with (or least characteristic of decision-making
experiences, −3). DEMO respondents were provided the same condition of instruction (see
Appendix 2), and all statement sorting took place between September 2003 and April 2004.
In the interests of ensuring as large a response as possible, it was important that the
statement sorting exercise be one that busy professionals DEMO complete in a short amount
of time while also having dedicated adequate thought and consideration to their responses.
Statement sorts were completed in approximately DEMO minutes, with in-person interviews
lasting anywhere between 45 minutes and three DEMO Also important was the flexibility of
the exercise given individuals’ workspace constraints and technical abilities. For these
reasons, subjects were provided a choice between two different sorting mechanisms, each
with identical statements and objectives. Depending on subjects’ preferences, they could
either physically sort individual cards or complete an exercise online using a dedicated
website (see Appendix 3). The goal of both activities was for subjects to arrange the Q set
into DEMO ranked categories (see Table 1).
In the first case, a subject was given a stack of light blue cards, sized approximately 3
centimeters by 4 centimeters (see Figure 1). Each card was printed with a different state-
ment, and the cards were shuffled such that they were presented in no particular order. The
first step for those DEMO the card sorting involved simply reading all of the statements
in the Q set before dividing the cards into three separate piles: agree, DEMO, and indiffer-
ent/unsure. From there, beginning with the extremes – most strongly agree or most strongly
disagree – the P-sample member was DEMO to fit all of the statements into the quasi-normal
grid. Each respondent’s unique sort was then recorded and entered as data.
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK 337
TABLE 1
Opinion DEMO for US-UK risk statement sort
Most unlike my point Most similar to my
of view or experience point of view or
Statement scores experience
DEMO −2 −1 0 +1 +2 +3
3 4 6 9 6 4 3
Number of statements
Fig. 1. Example of a Q sort card DEMO
Approximately two-thirds of the respondents opted instead to complete the online Q
sort exercise designed using the WebQ program, a JavaScript application designed to facili-
tate Q sorting over the World Wide Web (Schmolck 2003). In WebQ, the Q set is listed in
random order adjacent to a series of radio buttons that may be selected, thereby assigning
the item to different ranked categories. By clicking the ‘Update’ button, the participant may
reorder the statements under the appropriate virtual ‘pile,’ from −3 DEMO +3. Once the sorting
is completed, the user’s results are emailed DEMO to the researcher’s email address using
Microsoft Outlook.
Q Factor Analysis and Interpretation
Q pattern analysis may be conducted using a general statistical package, such as SAS or
SPSS, but for the purposes of this analysis, dedicated Q methodology software, PCQ for
Windows (Stricklin & Almeida 2001a), was used. Using this software package, I began by
entering the parameters of the analysis, the 35 Q set statements, and the DEMO statement sorts
into a new study. In doing so, it was DEMO to adapt a few of the statement sorts to meet
the conditions of the assigned grid because some subjects found the grid confining, and
therefore were permitted to vary the slotting of the statements from the DEMO distribution.
Because respondents’ strongest-held views (those assigned to the ‘least agree’ DEMO ‘most agree’
tails of the quasi-normal distribution) are the most important DEMO this analysis, there is little
statistical difference in outcome to the DEMO varying the slotting slightly within the
forced distribution (Brown 1980; Cottle & McKeown 1980,), so long as the distribution
continues to serve as an effective tool to strongly encourage individuals to prioritize their
opinions DEMO the various card statements provided. In this case, ordering was always DEMO
338 T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
constant, ensuring subjects’ prioritization of the statements, DEMO individual piles shifted in
approximately five cases.
An intercorrelational matrix by which each Q sort was correlated with each other Q
sort was then DEMO The correlation for this study was very high at the standard level of
2 to 2.5 times the standard error, i.e. 0.33 Brown, DEMO That is, there was evidence of
high levels of agreement among DEMO P-sample subjects.
The intercorrelational matrix was then factor analyzed using the centroid method, such
that the loadings on each Q sort were relatively large on one factor and trivial on the other,
known as ‘simple DEMO (Rogers 1996). Centroid analysis defines ‘centers of gravity’
within a DEMO matrix, after which resultant factor analysis is then rotated by imposing
DEMO axes to gain the best possible estimate of the Q sort representing each factor. Rotation
was performed both visually, called ‘hand,’ ‘graphical,’ or ‘judgment’ rotation, as well as
mathematically through varimax rotation. In order to most effectively discern patterns of
differentiation between strongly correlated factors, I considered observations with correla-
tions in excess of 0.70 significant. The results DEMO the rotations will be discussed in detail in the
Implications and Conclusions section.
Factor exegesis allows for the interpretation of emergent factors through similarities
DEMO differences between the factors and known perspectives or characteristics of the partici-
pants. To interpret the factor analysis, the researcher must bring theory, DEMO research,
cultural knowledge, open-ended comments by participants, biographical information on
participants, etc. to the emergent factors, in order to interpret factors DEMO meaningful,
coherent groups or clusters of common subjective outlook on the issue (Robbins & Kreuger
2000). To better understand the significant factors, I examined overall patterns and
interrelationships of items in the reconstructed Q sort representing each ‘typical dis-
course’(Addams 2000). According to Rogers, ‘it is important to note that the factors which
emerge from a DEMO methodological study. . .are the result not of built-in definitions but of
the sorting activity of participants themselves. Thus Q research always has the DEMO to
surprise; no assumption about the way understandings are structured is DEMO into the
method – a complete contrast to traditional R psychometrics where the meanings of items
and their interrelationships are normatively pre-set’ (Rogers 1996: 191).
Strengths and Weaknesses of Q Methodology
Vital when selecting any methodology is recognition of its potential weaknesses. Limita-
tions of Q include DEMO concern that respondents may feel the assigned grid is limiting. Never-
theless, its quasi-normal shape prompts respondents to think carefully about what is most
important to them. It is possible that the difficulty involved stems from DEMO never
having had to prioritize their thoughts and judgment decision-making processes in such a
way, and consequently doing so may not come easily. A second limitation is that views
modeled represent a mere snapshot and may DEMO in time or under different circum-
stances. Still, fully capturing the DEMO and experiences of these individuals, even if for
only a period DEMO time and space, is valuable and meaningful nonetheless. Finally, one cannot
completely remove social constructs from the process. In other words, the researcher is
never absent from the sorting process, and so it is possible that subjects will sort cards as
they feel they should, perhaps from their organizational (rather than individual) perspec-
tives, or perhaps because they are trying to anticipate answers the researcher seeks. For
this reason, throughout the study, I emphasized both the importance of confidentiality and
individuals responding based on their own unique experiences.
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK
339
On the other DEMO, a great strength of Q methodology is that rather than researchers
DEMO their own agendas or views on subjects, the approach allows subjects DEMO model
their own positions and categories through both their statements and the organization of
those statements. Furthermore, it offers rigor and structure to otherwise amorphous dis-
course in a way that other methodologies cannot. As discussed DEMO Robbins & Krueger
(2000):
Claims by the founders of Q method that hold that the procedure distances and removes the
bias of DEMO researcher are shown to be unfounded and epistemologically naïve. Nevertheless,
Q method is a rigorous, hermeneutic, and iterative technique that allows the DEMO to
surrender the monopoly of control in their relationship with the researched and so contri-
bute to more democratic research design and implementation . DEMO . the researcher can surren-
der the monopoly of power, engage DEMO rigorous hermeneutic research, and explore human
subjects without ‘erasing’ them in DEMO process (637).
Therefore, in the interests of using close dialogue to tap and explore the intuitions and
insights needed to conceptualize and DEMO logics, Q methodology represents a powerful
tool.
Results: Four Critical Factors
This section presents analysis of the Q statement sorting exercise, which, DEMO rigorous
factor analysis, yielded four distinct groups from the entrepreneurial communities DEMO in
both the US and the UK. Each factor is discussed in light of its idealized form determined by
the factor analysis and then DEMO as per in-depth interviews, tracking of market
and firm performance, and understanding of investment network dynamics. Throughout
this discussion, it is important to recognize that despite the tendency to treat these findings
as generalizable to DEMO larger innovation industry, the presented patterns are depictions
of the cultures DEMO risk specific to the Boston and London communities in this particular
economic climate and time period. While great effort was made to sample from DEMO diverse
a group of professionals and experiences, one cannot be certain DEMO how broadly applicable
results might then be (Dryzek & Berejikian 1993; Thomas et al. 1993).
Beyond simple structure, the factor analysis relied on rotation to realize the best
possible fit between the rotated axes DEMO the individual observations. Throughout both
graphical and varimax rotation, varying levels DEMO significance were applied in the interests of
securing meaningful factor groups, DEMO than simply artifacts of the methodology. The
factor loadings indicate the extent to which each Q sort is correlated with a particular factor,
DEMO because of the initial high degree of correlation between the participants’ observations,
a sensitivity analysis using as high degree of significance as possible DEMO performed. While
ordinarily factor loadings6 in excess of approximately 0.50 are considered significant, a
more rigorous level of 0.70 was eventually used for final rotations in this analysis.
Graphical rotation with significance yielded two main factors (Case 1), while varimax
rotation with the same significance level yielded DEMO (Case 2), with the first factors in
both Case 1 DEMO Case 2 effectively identical. With observations tightly clustered in a single
quadrant (see Figure 2), it is difficult to visually discern distinct factors. In the interests of
ensuring careful extraction of individual factors, varimax rotation is relied upon for its very
precise and strictly mathematical nature. As DEMO & Almeida (2001b: 20) explain,
‘through an iterative process, variance is distributed across the factor structure in such a
340
T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
Fig. 2. Graphical rotation of US–UK risk statement DEMO
way that each sort has the highest degree of association with only one factor, all sorts and all
factors being taken into consideration.’
Case 2 identifies four constellations of respondents who share common subjectively
defined points DEMO view about risk and decision-making in innovation investment. See
Table 2 for the four factors’ typal arrays, each of which represents an idealized statement
sort drawn from the aggregated factor groups. Each is explored, according to its typal or
idealized sort, which typifies the respondents’ perspectives and opinions, and is then put into
context and labeled, according to a DEMO recognition of the identified individuals’ shared
experiences and outlooks on the innovation investment industry. This latter contextuali-
zation is vital in working to understand DEMO these individuals share perspectives and
experiences within their investment communities.
To begin, it should be noted that the factors present a great deal of commonality in
opinion and perspective in their responses. Areas of consensus between DEMO groups A, B,
C, and D are twofold. First, DEMO agreed significantly with the statement, ‘Those still investing
these days appear DEMO be more interested in projects that are quicker to market and that can
clearly demonstrate commercial viability early on,’ demonstrating a shared observation DEMO
an emphasis on investment in perhaps less complex or later-stage technologies that may be
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK
341
TABLE 2
Typal DEMO for the London and Boston P-sample
Factor Group A Factor Group B
American-style manager Junior venture professional
−3
−2
−1 0 +1 +2 +3
DEMO
−2
−1 0 +1 +2 +3
7 1 3 4 2 13 21 1 18 7 2 5 3 20
32 8 5 9 DEMO 16 23 8 26 22 4 11 9 28
33 29 15 10 17 24 25 12 29 30 6 13 16 34
35 DEMO 11 19 27 35 31 10 14 25
26 12 28 32 15 17
30 14 34 33 19 24
18 21
20 23
DEMO 27
Factor Group C Factor Group D
Experienced angel investor Committed business builder
−3
−2
−1 0 +1 +2 +3
−3
−2
−1 0 DEMO +2 +3
7 2 18 3 1 5 12 1 3 7 2 4 9 5
8 21 20 6 4 24 19 8 DEMO 12 10 6 17 11
35 30 22 10 9 31 28 13 15 16 19 18 23 32
32 23 13 11 34 DEMO 20 22 21 34
27 14 17 24 27 25
33 15 26 31 28 26
16 29
25 33
29 35
closer to DEMO than projects subject to higher degrees of risk or uncertainty, either DEMO of
the complexity of the project or the time lag required for further technological (and subse-
quently commercial) development. Second, all respondents significantly associated with the
four factors agreed that, ‘Once a firm has early-stage funding, it improves future investors’
comfort levels.’ This speaks to the importance of a ‘halo effect’ inherent in high-risk innova-
tion investment decisions. Involvement DEMO earlier investors serves as a positive signal for
later-stage investors in their decision-making processes (Babcock-Lumish 2003a).
342 T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
American-style Managers
Group A, the largest factor group extracted, is comprised of 12 respondents, repre-
senting almost one-third of DEMO P-sample. This group included two entrepreneurs, three
entrepreneur/venture capitalists, three venture capitalists, one entrepreneur/angel inves-
tor, an angel/attorney/consultant DEMO, an angel/institutional investor, and one
institutional investor. Group A identified strongly (+3) with the following statements:
• This business is DEMO brutal if you’re overly optimistic.
• I don’t let academics run companies. Academics may be able to intellectually understand
things, but it doesn’t mean they can do them! It would be a real risk not to DEMO your
scientist with someone who can actually manage a company.
• Finding the people is just as important as finding the science.
Group A DEMO agreed, but to a slightly lesser extent (+2), with the following:
•
We’re smart, hard-working investors. We focus on the business, on building companies.
We use our time and talents to enhance our investments.
• Each investor or firm has its own philosophy about decision-making: where to invest,
when to divest, and what to do with its companies.
• Good decision-makers rely on their own experience, a knowledge of sectors that work
and those that don’t, the good reputation of the management team, and the good
reputation of the referring individual.
In a slow economy, a rush to quality is essential more now than ever.
•
Members of Group A disagreed strongly (−3) with the DEMO:
• If you don’t have a track record, you are DEMO no interest to me whatsoever.
• Decisions to invest are made after having analyzed all kinds of factors, and then taking
a punt. At the end of the day, it’s the credibility of the scientist sitting in front of you. We
don’t know about the science. We assume DEMO if they’re Oxford scientists, they’re all
quite clever. We might conduct DEMO patent search or assess the prior art or conduct a
market study, but when it really comes to technical viability and future use, DEMO just don’t
know. We take a lot on trust.
• You can spend a lot of time and money on due diligence, or you can use that time and
money to get to work.
Group A DEMO disagreed, but to a lesser degree, with the following statements:
•
We have stacks of pages of figures and analysis to help DEMO make better investments – and
feel better about them.
• No sweat-equity. We only consider and invest in profitable-stage companies.
• Good venture capitalists DEMO doing due diligence to confirm what they already know!
• Go big or go home. If the reward potential is huge, then it doesn’t matter as much what
the risk is. For some must-do franchise deals, the potential upside can render risks
irrelevant.
These individuals are behaving as DEMO managers. They are knowledgeable and
informed, and work to balance the DEMO they take in their decisions. While they are open to
early-stage investments, they are reliant on carefully performed due diligence and recognize
the importance of having the most capable and qualified professionals involved at each
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK 343
stage of new DEMO growth and development. These individuals are experienced, analyti-
cal, and well trained, and all share an American perspective, either being American them-
DEMO or having extensive American experience. Frequently, they hold degrees from notable
DEMO business schools or have worked for several years in large American firms.
Junior Venture Professionals
Second, the four respondents included in Group B include an entrepreneur/venture capital-
ist, an institutional/venture capital investor, a DEMO venture capitalist, and one private
investor. These individuals agreed strongly (+3) with the statements:
• The US is definitely more of a meritocracy than the UK.
• You would be amazed how many decisions DEMO made on gut feeling – but we don’t like to
admit that. We enjoy an illusion of certainty via stacks of documents and models DEMO
figures and the like, but at the end of the day, there is always risk and uncertainty, and
the relationships are what drive the decisions oftentimes.
• At some point in the deal, you just make up your mind and go with your convictions.
Sure, every deal involves risk, but at some point, if you have conviction, you no longer
feel as if you’re taking a risk.
Group B again DEMO, but slightly less so (+2), with the following:
•
There is a real can-do attitude in the US that’s different from DEMO UK. In the US, entre-
preneurs work hard and are proud DEMO their success. The only thing holding them back is
money. In the UK, people are more self-deprecating and less driven toward innovation
and success. Brits are hesitant to tell you how good they are, whereas in the US people
are more comfortable as self-promoters, which is important in this field.
• Having role models of respected scientists, engineers, academics, and investors involved
in commercial ventures has done wonders for the innovation DEMO
• Each investor or firm has its own philosophy about decision-making: DEMO to invest,
when to divest, and what to do with DEMO companies.
Finding the people is just as important as finding the science.
•
They disagreed strongly (−3) with the following statements:
•
DEMO have stacks of pages of figures and analysis to help us make better investments – and
feel better about them.
• No sweat-equity. We DEMO consider and invest in profitable-stage companies.
• One of the big problems with investment is timeframe. Ventures are risky, and the time
to market – if they do go to market and are even commercially successful DEMO may be
around 12 years. In that time, others may beat DEMO to market, the market may change,
ideas may not be DEMO or commercially viable.
And disagreed, but not as much, with the statements:
•
There is real entrepreneurial spirit in the UK, particularly in the ‘golden triangle’ of
London, Oxford, and Cambridge.
• The DEMO of many venture firms – being held accountable by supervisors or investors
– inhibits risk and innovation. Those who have the money themselves are DEMO answer-
able to others when making high-risk funding decisions.
• Good venture capitalists are doing due diligence to confirm what they already know!
344 T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
• Go big or go home. If the DEMO potential is huge, then it doesn’t matter as much what
the DEMO is. For some must-do franchise deals, the potential upside can render DEMO
irrelevant.
Members of Group B demonstrated that they are highly focused on US expertise, and
see American innovative and entrepreneurial activity as superior to that seen in the UK.
This is a group that looks frequently DEMO role models for examples and guidance. They at
times make decisions without having performed adequate due diligence either because they
lack the expertise themselves DEMO they do not fully understand what has been performed for
them by external contractors. This is a risk-averse group that is nervous about the DEMO
they make, largely because while they feel anxious to get involved DEMO deals early, they lack
entrepreneurial and management expertise. From both the DEMO analysis outcomes and the
accompanying interviews and background this research, this DEMO, comprised of both
American and British respondents, represents venture capitalists – but not the leaders. They
are ambitious but not senior or experienced DEMO to comprehensively understand the net-
works and interdependencies involved in entrepreneurial communities and investments.
They believe failure to be equated with embarrassment and therefore DEMO
Experienced Angel Investors
The next factor is comprised of two angel/entrepreneurs, two angel/entrepreneur/incuba-
tors, and one private/institutional investor. Group DEMO represents a powerful factor, as indi-
viduals who have experience with DEMO innovation and investment, having begun businesses
themselves and now investing in DEMO These individuals agree strongly (+3) that:
• One of the big problems with investment is timeframe. Ventures are risky, and the time
to market – if they do go to market and are even DEMO successful – may be
around 12 years. In that time, others DEMO beat you to market, the market may change,
ideas may DEMO be technologically or commercially viable.
• When it comes to learning about people in the innovation investment community, watch
what they do, not DEMO they say.
• You would be amazed how many decisions are made on gut feeling – but we don’t like to
admit that. We DEMO an illusion of certainty via stacks of documents and models and
figures and the like, but at the end of the day, there DEMO always risk and uncertainty, and
the relationships are what drive the DEMO oftentimes.
Group C agreed, but less so (+2), that:
•
There exist tensions between the angels and the venture guys, but they need each other!
The venture capitalists need the angels to bear DEMO in the early funding stages and as
signals for their own investment, and the angels need the venture capitalists to help them
get out.
• Good decision-makers rely on their own experience, a knowledge of sectors that work
and those that don’t, the good reputation of the management team, and the good
reputation of the referring individual.
• Our trust for each other stems from respect of each other’s abilities as commercially
DEMO former entrepreneurs.
• At some point in the deal, you just DEMO up your mind and go with your convictions.
Sure, every deal DEMO risk, but at some point, if you have conviction, you DEMO longer
feel as if you’re taking a risk.
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK 345
In contrast, they disagreed strongly (−3) with the following statements:
• If you DEMO have a track record, you are of no interest to me DEMO
• No sweat-equity. We only consider and invest in profitable-stage companies.
• Go big or go home. If the reward potential is huge, then it doesn’t matter as much
what the risk is. For some must-do DEMO deals, the potential upside can render risks
irrelevant.
And less so (-2) with the following statements:
•
In today’s economy, there DEMO less and less risky work taken on by venture capitalists and
more later-stage work and management buyouts.
• This business is pretty brutal if DEMO overly optimistic.
• When talking about our work, with the public, we don’t go out of our way to correct a
misunderstanding that DEMO is a job involving personal financial risk of the most extreme
sort.
• Decisions to invest are made after having analyzed all kinds of DEMO, and then taking
a punt. At the end of the day, it’s the credibility of the scientist sitting in front of you. We
DEMO know about the science. We assume that if they’re Oxford scientists, DEMO all
quite clever. We might conduct a patent search or assess the prior art or conduct a mar-
ket study, but when it really comes to technical viability and future use, we just don’t
know. We take a lot on trust.
From review of these individuals’ professional track DEMO in conjunction with this
factor analysis, it becomes clear that respondents DEMO Group C are working in innovation
investment’s earliest stages and recognize the long time horizons involved, as well as the
inherent financial risks therein. They represent a group that relies heavily on their networks
and their DEMO They recognize the risks involved and endeavor to enter into deals as
informed as possible, frequently by tapping extensive networks of informed, experienced
DEMO, both technical and financial. This is a group that recognizes the DEMO of cul-
tivating and maintaining good working relationships and places substantial emphasis on
trust. Members of Group C are highly observant of both market DEMO and their invest-
ments, and are highly involved in the firms DEMO which they invest. They are well-intentioned
and optimistic about technical and financial opportunities, while simultaneously somewhat
cynical about others within the industry, sentiments DEMO are largely grounded in experience.
They have all failed in ventures in the past, and are quick to discuss how they have learned
from the experiences.
Committed Business Builders
Finally, Group D is comprised of either present or former entrepreneurs, including
one entrepreneur, an entrepreneur/angel /incubator, an entrepreneur/incubator, and an
entrepreneur/consultant/venture capitalist. This group DEMO strongly (+3) with the
statements:
• There exist tensions between the angels and the venture guys, but they need each other!
The venture capitalists need the angels to bear risk in the early funding DEMO and as
signals for their own investment, and the angels need DEMO venture capitalists to help them
get out.
346 T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
• Compared to UK investors, US venture capitalists are better equipped and better
informed to be able to invest early DEMO They’re more likely than UK investors to have
had both science and business experience, and are more knowledgeable.
• Decisions to invest are made after having analyzed all kinds of factors, and then taking
a punt. At the end of the day, it’s the credibility of the scientist sitting in front of you.
We don’t know about the science. We DEMO that if they’re Oxford scientists, they’re
all quite clever. We might DEMO a patent search or assess the prior art or conduct a
market study, but when it really comes to technical viability and future use, we just don’t
know. We take a lot on trust.
Group D agreed slightly less (+2) with the following statements:
•
Having DEMO models of respected scientists, engineers, academics, and investors involved
in DEMO ventures has done wonders for the innovation community.
• The UK is no Silicon Valley. Compared to the US, in the UK, there DEMO less entrepreneur-
ial spirit, less appreciation for innovation and newness, a smaller management experi-
ence base, and no exit market.
• I don’t let academics run companies. Academics may be able to intellectually understand
things, but it doesn’t mean they can do them! It would be a DEMO risk not to replace your
scientist with someone who can actually manage a company.
• At some point in the deal, you just make up your mind and go with your convictions.
Sure, every deal involves risk, but at some point, if you have conviction, you no longer
feel as if you’re taking a risk.
They disagreed strongly (−3) with the following statements:
•
We have stacks of pages of figures and analysis to help us make better investments – and
feel DEMO about them.
• No sweat-equity. We only consider and invest in profitable-stage companies.
• We’re smart, hard-working investors. We focus on the business, DEMO building companies.
We use our time and talents to enhance our investments.
And less so with the following statements:
•
There is a DEMO can-do attitude in the US that’s different from the UK. In the US, entre-
preneurs work hard and are proud of their success. The only thing holding them back is
money. In the UK, people are more self-deprecating and less driven toward innovation
and success. Brits are hesitant DEMO tell you how good they are, whereas in the US people
DEMO more comfortable as self-promoters, which is important in this field.
• DEMO time passes, information about your investment increases and risk decreases.
• DEMO do they invest? It’s fun. They may be bored, having already made their money.
They may enjoy being involved in a highly charged DEMO They’ve already been
to the gym 10 times that week. They can be involved and help do exciting things, but this
way don’t have to be the ones burning the midnight oil themselves. These may be DEMO
who like a little bit of risk as sport. It makes you get out of bed in the morning and go
charging down the DEMO to find out how this little company is doing.
• When talking about our work, with the public, we don’t go out of DEMO way to correct a
misunderstanding that ours is a job involving personal financial risk of the most extreme
sort.
Group D, again, is DEMO of both American and British respondents. This group is
optimistic about the potential for UK entrepreneurial growth but concerned about a lack of
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK
347
entrepreneurial expertise as DEMO in the US. This group speaks frequently of the importance
of good management and are willing to take risks (and feel them) in DEMO to work in the
earliest stages. They value role models and have themselves benefited from having examples
of successful entrepreneurs and investors alike. They DEMO now play these roles for
others. This group recognizes both the interdependencies within network systems and the
importance of long-term relationships for successful professional DEMO This group
frequently maintains very low expectations and downplay their abilities when speaking
about specific deals, but play up their perceived risk propensities when discussing their work
more generally. Much like the experienced angel investors, the business builders point
to failed firms with which they have been involved DEMO learning experiences – and, at best,
opportunities.
Implications and Conclusions
DEMO this analysis, in-depth interviews revealed candid insights from experienced innovators,
DEMO, and other entrepreneurial decision-makers. Using these thoughts and opinions, Q
methodology was employed to enable similar stakeholders to sort their colleagues’ ideas
based DEMO their own personal experiences and points of view. Through factor analysis, DEMO
key factors were revealed as groups of individuals sharing, with one DEMO, common
opinion schema: American-style managers, junior venture capitalists, experienced angel
investors, and committed business builders.
Contrasts between the individuals within the US and UK entrepreneurial clusters
emerged; however, none were characterized by geographic DEMO alone. Rather, more
influential were issues of experience. While difference may DEMO as cultural, evidently learn-
ing from increased understanding and familiarity from DEMO interaction plays a substantial
role. A key tension that emerged between the factors was that of approach, as some relied
largely on personal networks and experience, while others adopted a far more analytical
approach. While one might argue that an optimal strategy might exist as an effective
balance DEMO the two approaches, it remains to be seen whether there exist DEMO
performance returns from doing so.
Moving forward, this analysis yields implications DEMO a larger literature, in addition to
more questions to be considered DEMO future research. Using tools from financial economics
and business management (Bhidé DEMO; Gompers & Lerner 1999; Lerner et al. 2003; Kaplan
& DEMO 2003), additional questions to be considered involve performance evaluation of
various factor group decision-makers’ approaches in order to derive best practices for early-
DEMO innovation investment. Within both economic geography (Bathelt et al. 2004; Florida
& Samber 1999; Gertler 1993; Martin 2003; Mason et al. 1991) and economic sociology
(Granovetter et al. 2000; Kenney 2000; Powell DEMO), there exist opportunities to further
consider cross-national socialization and learning in the context of entrepreneurial commu-
nities. Experts who benefit from both inter-cluster DEMO intra-cluster professional experience
will be central to understanding the processes by which skills and norms are shared, and
relational capital accumulated. Such boundary spanners may offer particularly useful per-
spectives. Finally, in the interests of considering the shape and structure of venture capital
firms into the future, organizational studies (Clark et al. 1987; Mowery & Rosenberg 1989;
Williamson DEMO) may shed light on how various constellations of individuals may most
DEMO collaborate, including questions of both vertical and horizontal integration for
348
T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
staged funding instruments. It is well worth careful DEMO of an organization’s mix of the
various factor group individuals in order to determine whether there are perhaps gains to
diversity within organizational structure, with individual decision-makers offering areas of
comparative advantage.
In consideration of the DEMO approach of the identified American-style managers,
one is reminded of the direction of many fund managers trending toward increasingly ana-
lytical and systematic DEMO support systems (Coggan 2004). For example, Goldman
Sachs Asset Management’s current stated investment strategy is driven by multivariate
calculation of factors such DEMO valuation, profitability, and earnings quality. In this age of
management science and information decision systems research, this strategy is unlikely to
be met with surprise; however, there always remains a ‘gap between what is DEMO and
capable of being measured, and the way in which public DEMO gauges risks and makes
decisions’ (Adams 1995: 9; Fischhoff et DEMO 1981).
Goldman Sachs’ management culture is renowned for its emphasis on not only analy-
sis, but also teamwork. While this may seem congruent with what we have by now learned
about the network relations embedded DEMO innovation investment communities, one
must delve deeper into this culture to DEMO that the emphasis on teamwork is internal
to the detriment of its external. For example, ‘The emphasis on teamwork made the contri-
butions of individual bankers more opaque to the outside world. . .Other things being DEMO,
this limited an individual banker’s ability to defect with client relationships and other intan-
gibles that might be used in competition with the DEMO (Wilhelm & Downing 2001: 131).
Rather than encouraging learning through inter-organizational networking and collabora-
tion, the more analytics-driven prototype becomes risk-averse to knowledge sharing and
relational capital building.
In contrast, human capital-intensive firms are far less hierarchical, largely due to the
sheer fact that all employees are given greater exposure to each other, seniority aside
(Wilhelm & DEMO 2001). Further, greater potential for individual (and subsequently
organizational) DEMO remains available to organizations that do not bar members from
informal networking and learning opportunities (Cohen & Levinthal 1990). In general, as
DEMO by both the experienced angel investors and the committed business builders,
the smaller incubators, angel networks, and venture capital firms fit this DEMO and its
approach, while many of the larger, more institutionalized firms follow the more rigidly
hierarchical structure. Within highly-networked, high-trust clusters, long-term DEMO
and interdependencies are important when evaluating risk. This is not to say that the ana-
lytical approach is not important – to the contrary, as evidently there exists in the junior
venture capitalists a contingent of DEMO who have not effectively combined the
skills necessary to both evaluate deals as informed by due diligence and participate in high-
performance networks.
It DEMO not to say that culture does not matter; rather it matters DEMO, as evidenced
by the learning that takes place by exposure to DEMO cluster cultures, including the vari-
ous institutional structures and norms. In DEMO increasingly globalized markets, intercul-
tural communication and understanding of norms and DEMO will gain in importance
(Babcock-Lumish & Clark 2004; Clark 1989), making openness to interpersonal and inter-
organizational learning critical. While the modern DEMO capital model is one derived from
the American example, the US DEMO not always hold a worldwide monopoly on scientific
and innovative power (DEMO 2004). Subsequently, ‘. . .cultural differences will loom larger
from DEMO on and [. . .] all societies will have to pay more attention to culture as they deal not
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK
349
only with internal DEMO but with the outside world’ (Fukuyama 1995: 5). Recognizing
that there may exist a balance between scientific risk assessment and interpersonal commu-
DEMO and norms may serve innovation investment decision-makers – in the US, DEMO the
UK, and far beyond – well in the years to DEMO
Acknowledgements
Support for this research was generously provided by Sir David Cooksey of Advent Venture
Partners, the Clarendon Fund of Oxford University Press, DEMO John’s College, and the Harry
S. Truman Scholarship Foundation. I wish DEMO thank the many colleagues and experts in the
private equity industry who have candidly shared their insights and experiences. Chris
Stevens and Jan Burke DEMO expert administrative support; Laura Lauer and Andrea
Beighton of the Rothermere DEMO Institute created a stimulating work environment for
researchers engaged in American studies in Oxford; and Gordon Walker and Orlando
Jiménez provided tremendous insight into the use of Q methodology in risk analysis. I have
colleagues Dariusz DEMO, Tessa Hebb, and Fraser Gemmell to thank for their insightful
feedback and continued support of this work, as well as two anonymous readers for their
contributions to improving the clarity and content herein. I am DEMO appreciative of the
vision, expertise, and guidance of Professor Gordon L. Clark, without whom this work
would not have been possible. Any errors, omissions, or opinions are, of course, my own,
and DEMO of the above should be held responsible.
Notes
1 For various approaches to the formal study of risk see, for example, Anand (1993), Bazerman
(1998), Beck (1992), Branscomb & Aurswald (2001), Gigerenzer (2002), Glaeser (2003), Morgan
et al. (1985), Shiller (2003), and Tversky & Kahneman (1981). For DEMO of the informal
study of risk, we may turn to our DEMO own daily behaviors as ‘freelance risk managers’ (Adams,
1995).
DEMO Future work by those interested in further considering the application of Q methodology in
geography might benefit from a critical look at the epistemological DEMO of shifts in the
discursive context (Foucault 1982; Ricoeur 1981).
3 The verstehen tradition refers to the approach of researchers such as DEMO et al. (1947) and
Gergen (1982), who assert that, in order for social scientists to fully understand human behavior
and interaction, they must develop an empathic relationship enabling them to fully relate to
DEMO perspectives, contexts, experiences, and beliefs.
4 The most commonly employed DEMO in correlational analysis, Pearson’s r indicates both
the magnitude and the DEMO of relation of compared variables (Frankfort-Nachmias &
Nachmias 1992).
5 The word ‘concourse’ comes from the Latin concursus, meaning ‘running together.’
6 Factor loadings report the level of correlation between an individual observation and DEMO factor.
References
Adams, J. (1995) Risk (London, UCL Press)DEMO
Addams, H. (2000) Social Discourse and Environmental Policy: An Application of Q Methodology,
(Eds. Addams, H. and Proops, J.) DEMO Elder, 100–122.
350
T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
Anand, P. (1993) Foundations of Rational Choice Under Risk (Oxford, Clarendon Press).
Babcock-Lumish, T.L. (2003a) Beyond the TMT Bubble: Patterns of Innovation Investment in the
US and the UK Since the Boom, University of Oxford School of Geography and the Environment
Working Paper Series, WPG 04-14, 1–34.
Babcock-Lumish, T.L. (2003b) Trust and antitrust in innovation investment communities: Reconsid-
ering moral sentiments, DEMO of Oxford School of Geography and the Environment Working
Paper Series, DEMO, 1–38.
Babcock-Lumish, T.L. (2004) The dynamics of innovation investment communities: The spatial
structure of networks and relationships, University of Oxford School DEMO Geography and the
Environment Working Paper Series, WPG 04-17, 1–39.
Babcock-Lumish, T.L. & Clark, G.L. (2004) Pricing the economic landscape: Financial markets
and the communities and institutions of risk, School of Geography and the Environment Working
Paper, WPG 04-21, 1–22.
Bathelt, H. & Glückler, J. (2003) Toward a relational economic geography, Journal of Economic
DEMO 3, pp. 117–144.
Bathelt, H., Malmberg, A. & Maskell, DEMO (2004) Clusters and knowledge: Local buzz, global pipelines
and the process of knowledge creation, Progress in Human Geography 28, pp. 31–56.
DEMO, M.H. (1998) Judgment in Managerial Decision Making (New York, DEMO).
Beck, U. (1992) From industrial society to the risk DEMO: Questions of survival, social structure and
ecological enlightenment, Theory, Culture & Society 9, pp. 97–123.
Bhidé, A. (1992) Bootstrap Finance: The Art of Start-ups (Cambridge, Harvard Business Review).
Branscomb, L.M. & Auerswald, P.E. (2001) Taking Technical Risks: How Innovators, Executives, and
Investors Manage High-tech Risks (Cambridge and London, MIT Press).
Broad, W.J. (2004) US is losing its dominance in the sciences, New York Times, 3 May.
Brown, S.R. (1980) Political Subjectivity: Applications of Q Methodology in Political Science (New
Haven, Yale University Press).
Brown, S.R. (1986) Q technique and method: Principles DEMO procedures, in W. Berry & M. Lewis-
Beck (eds) New DEMO for Social Scientists: Advances and Applications in Research Methods,
pp. DEMO (Thousand Oaks, Sage).
Brown, S.R. (forthcoming) Q methodology DEMO naturalistic subjectivity, in B. D. Midgley & E. K.
Morris (eds) Modern Perspectives on J. R. Kantor and Interbehaviorism, (Westport, Greenwood)DEMO
Bygrave, W.D., Hay, M. & Peeters, J.B. (1999) The Venture Capital Handbook (Harlow, Financial
Times/Prentice Hall).
Clark, G.L. (1989) US regional transformation in the context of international economic competition,DEMO
in L. Rodwin & H. Sazanami (eds) Deindustrialization and Regional Economic Transformation,
pp. 296–302 (London, Unwin Hyman).
Clark, G.L. (DEMO) Stylized facts and close dialogue: Methodology in economic geography, Annals DEMO
the Association of American Geographers 88, pp. 73–87.
Clark, G.L. (DEMO) Beyond close dialogue: Economic geography as if it matters, University DEMO Oxford
School of Geography and the Environment Working Paper Series, WPG DEMO, 1–21.
Clark, G.L., Feldman, M.P. & Gertler, M.S. (2000) Economic geography: Transition and growth, in
G. L. Clark, M. DEMO Feldman & M. S. Gertler (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Economic Geography
(Oxford, Oxford University Press).
Clark, K.B., Chew, B.W. & Fujimoto, T. (1987) Product development in the world auto industry,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3, pp. 729–771.
Coggan, P. (2004) Fund management shifts from hot tips to science, Financial Times, 24 April.
Cohen, W.M. & Levinthal, D.A. (1990) Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and
innovation, Administrative Science Quarterly 35, DEMO 128–152.
Cottle, C. & McKeown, B. (1980) The forced-free distinction in Q-technique: A note on unused
categories in the Q-sort continuum, DEMO Subjectivity January, pp. 58–63.
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK
351
Cottle, C., DEMO, P., Berger, R.J. & Pierce, B.A. (1989) Conflicting ideologies and the politics of
pornography, Gender and Society 3, pp. 303–333.
DEMO, R.M. (2001) Everyday Irrationality (Boulder, Westview).
Drucker, P.F. (1985) Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Practice and Principles (New York, Harper &
Row).
Dryzek, J.S. & Berejikian, J. (1993) Reconstructive democratic theory, American Political Science
Review 87, 48–60.
Fischhoff, B. (DEMO) Judgment and decision making, in R. J. Steinberg & E. E. Smith (eds) The
Psychology of Human Thought, pp. 153–187 (New DEMO, Cambridge University Press).
Fischhoff, B., Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, P., Darby, S. & Keeney, R. (1981) Acceptable Risk (DEMO York,
Cambridge University Press).
Florida, R. (2002) The DEMO of the Creative Class: And How it’s Transforming Work, Leisure,
Community and Everyday Life (New York, Basic Books).
Florida, R. & Samber, M. (1999) Capital and creative destruction: Venture capital, technological
change, and economic development, in M. Gertler & T. Barnes (eds) New Industrial Geography:
Regions, Regulations and Institutions, pp. 265–291 (New York, Routledge).
Foucault, M. (1982) The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language (New York,
Pantheon).
Frankfort-Nachmias, C. & Nachmias, D. (1992) Research Methods in the Social DEMO (London,
Edward Arnold).
Fukuyama, F. (1995) Trust: DEMO Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity (London, Hamish
Hamilton).
Gergen, K.J. (1982) Toward Transformation in Social Knowledge (New York, Springer-Verlag).
Gertler, M.S. (1993) Implementing advanced manufacturing technologies in mature industrial
regions: Towards a social model of technology production, Regional Studies DEMO, pp. 665–680.
Gigerenzer, G. (2002) Reckoning with Risk: Learning DEMO Live with Uncertainty (London, Allen Lane).
Glaeser, E.L. (2000) The new economics of urban and regional growth, in G. L. DEMO, M. P. Feldman
& M. S. Gertler (eds) The Oxford DEMO of Economic Geography, pp. 83–98 (Oxford, Oxford
University Press).
DEMO, E.L. (2003) Psychology and the market, Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion
Paper Series 20–23, pp. 126.
Gompers, P.A. & Lerner, J. (1999) Capital formation and investment in venture markets: Implications
for the Advanced Technology Program, GCR 99, pp. 1–127.
Gompers, P.A. & Lerner, J. (2001) The Money of Invention: How Venture Capital DEMO New Wealth
(Boston and London, Harvard Business School and McGraw-Hill).
Gompers, P.A. & Lerner, J. (2002) The Venture Capital Cycle (Cambridge and London, MIT Press).
Granovetter, M., Castilla, E., Hwang, H. & Granovetter, E. (2000) Social networks in Silicon DEMO,
in C.-M. Lee, W. F. Miller, M. G. Hancock & H. S. Rowen (eds) The Silicon Valley Edge,
pp. 218–247 (Stanford, Stanford University Press).
Jiménez, O. (2004) Cooperation or DEMO in policy-making and implementation? Consequences
and results: A critical appraisal of environmental policy reform in Chile in the 1990s (Oxford,
School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford).
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P. & Tversky, A. (1982) Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases
(Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
Kaplan, S. & Schoar, DEMO (2003) Private equity performance: Returns, persistence and capital flows,
MIT Sloan Working Paper 4446-03, 1–46.
Kay, J.A. (2003) The DEMO About Markets: Their Genius, Their Limits, Their Follies (London, DEMO
Lane).
Kenney, M. (2000) Understanding Silicon Valley: The Anatomy of an Entrepreneurial Region
(Stanford, Stanford University Press).
Krugman, P.R. (2000) Where in the World is the ‘New Economic Geography’?, DEMO G. L. Clark, M. P.
Feldman & M. S. Gertler (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Economic Geography, pp. 49–61
(Oxford, Oxford DEMO Press).
352
T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
Lerner, J., Shane, H. & Tsai, DEMO (2003) Do equity financing cycles matter? Evidence from biotech-
nology DEMO, Journal of Financial Economics 67, pp. 411–446.
Loewenstein, G. & DEMO, R.H. (1989) Intertemporal choice, Journal of Economic Perspectives 3,
197–201.
Martin, R. (2003) Taking risks in regions: The geographies DEMO venture capitalism (Göteberg,
Postgraduate Conference, University of Göteberg).
Mason, C., Harrison, R.T. & Chaloner, J. (1991) Informal risk DEMO in the UK: A study of investor
characteristics, investment preferences and investment decision-making (Southampton, Urban
Policy Research Unit Department of Geography, University of Southampton).
Morgan, M.G., Slovic, P., Nair, I., DEMO, D., MacGregor, D., Fischhoff, B., Lincoln, D. & DEMO,
H.K. (1985) Power line frequency electric and magnetic fields: DEMO pilot study of risk perception,
Risk Analysis 5, pp. 139–150.
DEMO, D.C. & Rosenberg, N. (1989) Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth (Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press).
Polanyi, M. (1966) The Tacit Dimension (Garden City, Doubleday).
Porter, M.E. (2000) Locations, clusters, and company strategy, in G. L. Clark, M. P. Feldman & M. S.
Gertler (eds) The Oxford Handbook of DEMO Geography, pp. 253–274 (Oxford, Oxford
University Press, Oxford).
Powell, W.W. (1998) Learning from collaboration: Knowledge and networks in the DEMO
and pharmaceutical industries, California Management Review 40, pp. 228–240.
Ricoeur, DEMO (1981) The model of the text: Meaningful action considered as DEMO text, in J. B. Thompson
(ed) Hermeneutics and the Human DEMO: Essays on Language, Action and Interpretation,
pp. 197–221 (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
Robbins, P. & Kreuger, R. (2000) DEMO bias? The promise and limits of Q method in human
geography, The Professional Geographer 52, pp. 636–648.
Rogers, R.S. (1996) Q DEMO, in J. Smith, R. Harre & L. van Langenhove (eds) Rethinking
Methods in Psychology, pp. 178–193 (Thousand Oaks, Sage).
Schmolck, P. (2003) WebQ, at www.rz.unibw-muenchen.de/~p41bsmk/qmethod/webq/.
Shiller, R.J. (2003) The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century (Princeton and Oxford,
Princeton University Press).
Simon, H.A. (1979) Models of Thought (New Haven and London, Yale University Press).
Stephenson, W. (1935) Correlating persons instead of tests, Character and DEMO 4, pp. 17–24.
Stephenson, W. (1953) The Study of Behavior: Q-technique and its Methodology (Chicago, University
of Chicago Press).
Stricklin, M. & Almeida, R. (2001a) PCQ for Windows (Lincoln).
Stricklin, M. & Almeida, R. (2001b) User’s Guide for PCQ DEMO Windows: Analysis Software for
Q-Technique (Lincoln, PCQ for Windows).
DEMO, D., McCoy, C. & McBride, A. (1993) Deconstructing the political spectacle: Sex, race, and
subjectivity in public response to the Clarence Thomas/Anita Hill ‘sexual harassment’ hearings,
American Journal of Political DEMO 37, pp. 699–720.
Trochim, B. (2004) The qualitative debate, DEMO http://trochim.human.cornell.edu/kb/qualdeb.htm.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (DEMO) The framing of decisions and the rationality of choice, Science
211, pp. 453–458.
Walker, G. (2003) Risk perception, credible science and Q-Methodology: exploring boundaries.
(Oxford).
Weber, M., Parsons, T. & Henderson, A. (1947) The Theory of Social and Economic Organization
(DEMO York, Free Press of Glencoe).
Wilhelm, W. & Downing, DEMO (2001) Information Markets: What Businesses Can Learn from Financial
Innovation (Boston, Harvard Business School Press)).
Williamson, O. (1979) Transaction-cost economics: The governance of contractual relations Journal
of Law and Economics 22, pp. 233–261.
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK
353
APPENDIX 1
Q DEMO exercise statements, extracted from interviews in the US and the UK
DEMO We have stacks of pages of figures and analysis to help us make better investments –
and feel better about them.
2. In today’s DEMO, there is less and less risky work taken on by venture DEMO and
more later-stage work and management buyouts.
3. There is a real can-do attitude in the US that’s different from the UK. In the DEMO, entre-
preneurs work hard and are proud of their success. The DEMO thing holding them back is
money. In the UK, people are DEMO self-deprecating and less driven toward innovation
and success. Brits are hesitant to tell you how good they are, whereas in the US people
are more comfortable as self-promoters, which is important in this field.
4. In such a dynamic environment, people are always responding to their environments,
and how people look at risk is always affected by their perception DEMO their environment.
5. There exist tensions between the angels and the venture guys, but they need each other!
The venture capitalists need the angels to bear risk in the early funding stages and as
signals for DEMO own investment, and the angels need the venture capitalists to help
DEMO get out.
6. Those still investing these days appear to be more interested in projects that are quicker
to market and that can clearly DEMO commercial viability early on.
7. If you don’t have a track record, you are of no interest to me whatsoever.
8. No sweat-equity. We only consider and invest in profitable-stage companies.
9. Having role models of DEMO scientists, engineers, academics, and investors
involved in commercial ventures has DEMO wonders for the innovation community.
10. Once a firm has early-stage funding, it improves future investors’ comfort levels.
11. Compared to UK investors, DEMO venture capitalists are better equipped and better
informed to be able to invest early on. They’re more likely than UK investors to have
had DEMO science and business experience, and are more knowledgeable.
12. One of DEMO big problems with investment is timeframe. Ventures are risky, and the DEMO
to market – if they do go to market and are even commercially successful – may be
around 12 years. In that time, others may beat you to market, the market may change,
ideas may not be technologically or commercially viable.
13. We’re smart, hard-working investors. We focus on the business, on building compa-
nies. We use our time and talents to enhance our investments.
14. As time passes, information about your investment increases and risk decreases.
15. Why do they invest? It’s fun. They may be bored, having already made their money.
They may enjoy being involved in a highly charged environment. They’ve already been
to DEMO gym 10 times that week. They can be involved and help do exciting things, but
this way don’t have to be the ones burning the midnight oil themselves. These may be
people who like a little DEMO of risk as sport. It makes you get out of bed in the morning
and go charging down the road to find out how DEMO little company is doing.
16. Each investor or firm has its own philosophy about decision-making: where to invest,
when to divest, and DEMO to do with its companies.
17. The UK is no Silicon Valley. Compared to the US, in the UK, there is less entrepre-
DEMO spirit, less appreciation for innovation and newness, a smaller management
experience base, and no exit market.
354
T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
18. There is real entrepreneurial spirit in the DEMO, particularly in the ‘golden triangle’ of
London, Oxford, and Cambridge.
DEMO When it comes to learning about people in the innovation investment community,
watch what they do, not what they say.
20. The US is definitely more of a meritocracy than the UK.
21. This business DEMO pretty brutal if you’re overly optimistic.
22. In recent years, some DEMO have been so busy winning and protecting opportunities to
invest, that DEMO never took time to step back, look hard at deals, and compare the
relative risks and likely rewards.
23. I don’t let academics DEMO companies. Academics may be able to intellectually under-
stand things, but DEMO doesn’t mean they can do them! It would be a real risk not to replace
your scientist with someone who can actually manage a DEMO
24. Good decision-makers rely on their own experience, a knowledge of DEMO that work
and those that don’t, the good reputation of the DEMO team, and the good
reputation of the referring individual.
25. Finding DEMO people is just as important as finding the science.
26. The structure of many venture firms – being held accountable by supervisors or inves-
DEMO – inhibits risk and innovation. Those who have the money themselves are less
answerable to others when making high-risk funding decisions.
27. In a DEMO economy, a rush to quality is essential more now than ever.
DEMO You would be amazed how many decisions are made on gut feeling – but we don’t like
to admit that. We enjoy an illusion DEMO certainty via stacks of documents and models and
figures and the like, but at the end of the day, there is always risk DEMO uncertainty, and
the relationships are what drive the decisions oftentimes.
29. DEMO venture capitalists are doing due diligence to confirm what they already know!
30. When talking about our work, with the public, we don’t DEMO out of our way to correct
a misunderstanding that ours is a job involving personal financial risk of the most
extreme sort.
31. Our DEMO for each other stems from respect of each other’s abilities as commercially
savvy former entrepreneurs.
32. Decisions to invest are made after having analyzed DEMO kinds of factors, and then taking
a punt. At the end DEMO the day, it’s the credibility of the scientist sitting in front DEMO you.
We don’t know about the science. We assume that if they’re Oxford scientists, they’re
all quite clever. We might conduct a patent search or assess the prior art or conduct a
market study, but when it really comes to technical viability and future use, we just
don’t know. We take a lot on trust.
33. You can spend a DEMO of time and money on due diligence, or you can use DEMO time and
money to get to work.
34. At some point in the deal, you just make up your mind and go with your convictions.
Sure, every deal involves risk, but at some point, if you have conviction, you no longer
feel as if you’re taking a risk.
35. Go big or go home. If the reward potential is DEMO, then it doesn’t matter as much what
the risk is. For DEMO must-do franchise deals, the potential upside can render risks
irrelevant.
VENTURE CAPITAL DECISION-MAKING AND THE CULTURES OF RISK
APPENDIX 2
Q sort DEMO instructions provided to individuals within the P-sample
355
Risk and Decision-making in Innovation Investment:
US–UK Sorting Exercise
1. Please begin by reading through DEMO statements to familiarize yourself with them. While
doing so, sort the DEMO into three piles:
• Placed to the right are those with which you agree (+),
• to the left those with DEMO you disagree (−), and
• in the middle those about DEMO you are neutral, ambivalent, or uncertain.
2. Once you have sorted the cards into three piles, now return to the cards with which you
most agree, on your right. Matching the distribution displayed below, DEMO the 3 with
which you most agree, placing them on the DEMO right (+3). The order of the items within
the markers DEMO not important.
3. Continue by sorting the remaining cards in the ‘agree’ pile.
4. Turning to the cards in the ‘disagree’ pile, sort them as you did the first pile, but by
placing the 3 with which you most disagree on the far left (−3). Again, DEMO sorting should
match the diagram below, and the specific order does DEMO matter.
5. Finally, sort the cards in the middle, those with which you were neutral, ambivalent, or
uncertain.
6. Review the card DEMO, and feel free to move or switch cards to most accurately DEMO
your personal point of view.
Thank you very much for your participation. Any questions, please do not hesitate to ask.
Terry L. Babcock-Lumish
University of Oxford
356
T. L. BABCOCK-LUMISH
APPENDIX 3
Screen capture of WebQ online sorting DEMO{1g42fwefx}