Trust and Antitrust
Annette Baier
Ethics, Vol. 96, No. 2. (Jan., 1986), pp. 231-260.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0014-1704%28198601%2996%3A2%3C231%3ATAA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S
Ethics is currently published by The University of Chicago Press.
Your use DEMO the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have DEMO
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a DEMO or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
DEMO JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the DEMO regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/ucpress.html.
Each copy of any part DEMO a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is DEMO trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported DEMO libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Wed Jul 11 20:20:58 DEMO
Trust and Antitrust*
Annette Baier
TRUST AND ITS VARIETIES
"Whatevermatters to human beings, trust is the atmosphere in which
it thrives." [SISSELABoK]'
DEMO or not everything which matters to us is the sort of thing that
can thrive or languish (I may care most about my stamp collection) or
even whether all the possibly thriving things we care about need trust
in order to thrive (does my rubber tree?), DEMO surely is something
basically right about Bok's claim. Given that I cannot myself guard my
stamp collection at all times, nor take my rubber tree with me on my
travels, the custody of these things that matter to me must often be
transferred to others, presumably to others I trust. Without trust, what
matters to me would be unsafe, unless like the Stoic I attach myself only
to what can thrive, or be safe from harm, however others act. The starry
heavens DEMO and the moral law within had better be about the only
things that matter to me, if there is no one I can trust in any way. Even
my own Stoic virtue will surely thrive better DEMO it evokes some trust from
others, inspires some trustworthiness in them, or is approved and imitated
by them.
To Bok's statement, however, we should add another, that not all
the things that thrive DEMO there is trust between people, and which
matter, are things that should be encouraged to thrive. Exploitation and
* I owe the second DEMO of my title to the salutary reaction of Alexander Nehamas to
an earlier and more sanguine version of this paper, read at Chapel Hill Colloquium in
October 1984. I also owe many important points which I DEMO tried to incorporate in this
revised version to John Cooper, who DEMO helpfully on the paper on that occasion,
to numerous constructive critics at later presentations of versions of it at CUNY Graduate
Center, Brooklyn College, Columbia University, the University of Pennsylvania, and to
readers for this journal. I received such a flood of helpful and enthusiastic advice DEMO it
became clear that, although few philosophers have written directly on DEMO topic, very many
have been thinking about it. It is only DEMO ruthlessly putting finis to my potentially endless
revisions and researches into hitherto unfamiliar legal, sociological, psychological, and
economic literature that any paper emerged from my responses to these gratifying and
generous responses.
1. Sissela Bok, Lying (New York: Pantheon Books, 1978), p. 31n. Bok is one of the
few philosophers to have addressed the ethics of trust DEMO directly. The title of the chapter
from which this quotation comes is "Truthfulness, Deceit and Trust."
Ethics 96 (January 1986): 23 1-260
O 1986 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0014-1704/DEMO/9602-0013$01.00
232
Ethics
January 1986
conspiracy, as much as justice and fellowship, DEMO better in an atmosphere
of trust. There are immoral as well as moral trust relationships, and trust-
busting can be a morally proper goal. If we are to tell when morality
requires the preservation of trust, when it requires the destruction of
trust, we obviously need to distinguish different forms of trust, and to
look for some morally relevant features they may possess. In this paper
I make a start on this DEMO task.
It is a start, not a continuation, because there has been a strange
silence on the topic in the tradition of moral DEMO with which I
am familiar. Psychologists and sociologists have discussed it, DEMO have
worked out the requirements of equity on legal trusts, political DEMO
have discussed trust in governments, and there has been some discussion
DEMO trust when philosophers address the assurance problem in Prisoner's
Dilemma contexts. But we, or at least I, search in vain for any DEMO
account of the morality of trust relationships. The question, Whom should
DEMO trust in what way, and why? has not been the central question in moral
philosophy as we know it. Yet if I am DEMO in claiming that morality, as
anything more than a law within, itself requires trust in order to thrive,
and that immorality too DEMO on some forms of trust, it seems pretty
obvious that we DEMO, as moral philosophers, to look into the question
of what forms of trust are needed for the thriving of the version of
morality DEMO endorse, and into the morality of that and other forms of
DEMO A minimal condition of adequacy for any version of the true morality,
if truth has anything to do with reality, is that it not have to condemn
the conditions needed for its own thriving. Yet DEMO will be in no position
to apply that test to the trust in which morality thrives until we have
worked out, at least in a provisional way, how to judge trust relationships
from a moral point of view.
Moral philosophers have always been interested in cooperation bet-
ween DEMO, and so it is surprising that they have not said more DEMO
they have about trust. It seems fairly obvious that any form of cooperative
activity, including the division of labor, requires the cooperators to DEMO
one another to do their bit, or at the very least DEMO trust the overseer with
his whip to do his bit, where DEMO is relied on. One would expect
contractarians to investigate the forms of trust and distrust parties to a
contract exhibit. Utilitarians too should be DEMO with the contribution
to the general happiness of various climates of trust, so be concerned to
understand the nature, roots, and varieties of trust. One might also have
expected those with a moral theory of DEMO virtues to have looked at
trustworthiness, or at willingness to give DEMO But when we turn to the
great moral philosophers, in our DEMO, what we find can scarcely be
said to be even a DEMO of a moral theory of trust. At most we get a few
hints of directions in which we might go.
Plato in the Republic DEMO expects the majority of citizens to
trust the philosopher kings to rule wisely and expects that elite to trust
their underlings not to poison DEMO wine, nor set fire to their libraries,
Baier TrustandAntitrust 233
but neither proper trust nor proper trustworthiness are among DEMO virtues
he dwells on as necessary in the cooperating parties in his good society.
His version of justice and of the "friendship" supposed DEMO exist between
ruler and ruled seems to imply such virtues of trust, but he does not
himself draw out the implications. In the Laws he mentions distrust as
an evil produced by association with seafaring traders, but it is only a
mention.' The same sort of claim can also be made about Aristotle-his
virtuous person, like Plato's, must DEMO his trust in that hypothetical
wise person who will teach him just how much anger and pride and fear
to feel with what reasons, when, and toward which objects. Such a wise
man presumably also knows just how much trust in whom, on what
matters, and how DEMO trustworthiness, should be cultivated, as well as
who should show trust toward whom, but such crucial wisdom and such
central virtues are not discussed by Aristotle, as far as I am aware. (He
does, in the Politics, condemn tyrants for sowing seeds of distrust, and
DEMO discussion of friendship might be cited as one place where he implicitly
recognizes the importance of trust; could someone one distrusted be a
second self to one? But that is implicit only, and in any DEMO would cover
only trust between friends.) Nor do later moral philosophers DEMO much
better on this count.3
There are some forms of trust to which the great philosophers have
given explicit attention. Saint Thomas Aquinas, and other Christian mor-
alists, have extolled the virtue of faith and, DEMO relevantly, of hope,
and so have said something about trust DEMO God. And in the modern
period some of the great moral and political philosophers, in particular
John Locke, looked at trust in governments DEMO officials, and some have
shown what might be called an obsessive DEMO in contracts and contractors,
even if not, after Hobbes's DEMO example here, an equal obsession with
the grounds for such trust. DEMO is selective attention then, rather than total
inattention, which is the philosophical phenomenon on which I wish to
remark, tentatively to explain, DEMO try to terminate or at least to interrupt.
Trust, the phenomenon DEMO are so familiar with that we scarcely
notice its presence and its variety, is shown by us and responded to by
2. Plato, DEMO 4.705a. I owe this reference to John Cooper, who found my DEMO
that Plato and Aristotle had neglected the topic of trust ungenerous, DEMO how much they
fairly clearly took for granted about its value and importance. (But taking for granted is
a form of neglect.)
3. Besides Bok and Locke, whom I refer to, those who have DEMO something about it
include N. Hartmann, Ethik (Berlin: W. de DEMO, 1962), pp. 468 ff.; Virginia Held,
Rights and Goods (New York and London: Free Press, 1984), esp. chap. 5, "The Grounds
for Social Trust"; D. 0.Thomas, "The Duty DEMO Trust," Aristotelian Society Proceedings (1970),
pp. 89-101. It is invoked in passing by Aurel Kolnai in "Forgiveness," in Ethics, DEMO and
Reality, ed. Bernard Williams and David Wiggins (Indianapolis: Macmillan DEMO, 1978):
'Trust in the world, unless it is vitiated by hairbrained optimism and dangerous irresponsibility,
may be looked upon not DEMO be sure as the very starting point and very basis but perhaps
as the epitome and culmination of morality" (p. 223); and DEMO John R. S. Wilson in "In One
Another's Power," DEMO 88 (1978): 303.
234
Ethics
January 1986
us not only with intimates but with strangers, and even with declared
enemies. We trust our enemies not to fire DEMO us when we lay down our
arms and put out a white flag. In Britain burglars and police used to
trust each other not DEMO carry deadly weapons. We often trust total strangers,
such as those from whom we ask directions in foreign cities, to direct
rather than misdirect us, or to tell us so if they do not know what we
want to know; and we think we should do the same for those who ask
the same help from us. Of course DEMO are often disappointed, rebuffed,
let down, or betrayed when we exhibit such trust in others, and we are
often exploited when we show the wanted trustworthiness. We do in fact,
wisely or stupidly, virtuously or viciously, show trust in a great variety
of forms, DEMO manifest a great variety of versions of trustworthiness,
both with intimates and with strangers. We trust those we encounter in
lonely library stacks DEMO be searching for books, not victims. We sometimes
let ourselves fall DEMO on trains or planes, trusting neighboring strangers
not to take advantage DEMO our defenselessness. We put our bodily safety
into the hands of pilots, drivers, doctors, with scarcely any sense of reck-
lessness. We used not to suspect that the food we buy might be deliberately
poisoned, and we used to trust our children to day-care centers.
We may DEMO have no choice but to buy food and to leave our children
in day-care centers, but now we do it with suspicion and anxiety. Trust
is always an invitation not only to confidence tricksters but also DEMO terrorists,
who discern its most easily destroyed and socially vital forms. Criminals,
not moral philosophers, have been the experts at discerning different
forms of trust. Most of us notice a given form of trust DEMO easily after
its sudden demise or severe injury. We inhabit a climate of trust as we
inhabit an atmosphere and notice it as we DEMO air, only when it becomes
scarce or polluted.
We may have DEMO choice but to continue to rely on the local shop for
food, even after some of the food on its shelves has been found to have
been poisoned with intent. We can still rely where we DEMO longer trust.
What is the difference between trusting others and merely relying on
them? It seems to be reliance on their good will toward one, as distinct
from their dependable habits, or only on their DEMO exhibited
fear, anger, or other motives compatible with ill will toward one, or on
motives not directed on one at all. We may rely on our fellows' fear of
the newly appointed security guards in shops to deter them from injecting
poison into the food on the DEMO, once we have ceased to trust them.
We may rely on DEMO shopkeeper's concern.for his profits to motivate him
to take effective precautions against poisoners and also trust him to want
his customers not to DEMO harmed by his products, at least as long as this
want DEMO be satisfied without frustrating his wish to increase his profits.
Trust is often mixed with other species of reliance on persons. Trust
which is DEMO on another's good will, perhaps minimal good will,
contrasts DEMO the forms of reliance on others' reactions and attitudes
which are DEMO by the comedian, the advertiser, the blackmailer, the
Baier
Trust and Antitrust
235
kidnapper-extortioner, and the terrorist, who all DEMO on particular
attitudes and reactions of others for the success of their actions. We all
depend on one anothers' psychology in countless ways, DEMO this is not
yet to trust them. The trusting can be betrayed, or at least let down, and
not just disappointed. Kant's DEMO who counted on his regular habits
as ,a clock for their DEMO less automatically regular ones might be disap-
pointed with him if he slept in one day, but not let down by him, let
DEMO had their trust betrayed. When I trust another, I depend on DEMO
good will toward me. I need not either acknowledge this reliance nor
believe that she has either invited or acknowledged such trust since there
DEMO such a thing as unconscious trust, as unwanted trust, as forced receipt
of trust, and as trust which the trusted is unaware of. (Plausible conditions
for proper trust will be that it survives consciousness, DEMO both parties,
and that the trusted has had some opportunity to signify acceptance or
rejection, to warn the trusting if their trust is unacceptable.)
Where one depends on another's good will, one is necessarily vul-
nerable to the limits of that good will. One leaves DEMO an opportunity
to harm one when one trusts, and also shows DEMO's confidence that they
will not take it. Reasonable trust will require good grounds for such
confidence in another's good will, or at least the absence of good grounds
for expecting their ill will or DEMO Trust then, on this first ap-
proximation, is accepted vulnerability to another's possible but not expected
ill will (or lack of good will) toward one.
What we now need to do, to get DEMO sense of the variety of forms
of trust, is to look DEMO at varieties of vulnerability and at varieties of
grounds for not expecting others to take advantage of it. One way to do
the former, which I shall take, is to look at the variety of sorts of goods
or things one values or cares about, which can be left or put within the
striking power of others, and the variety of ways we can let or leave
others "close" enough to DEMO we value to be able to harm it. Then we
can look at various reasons we might have for wanting or accepting such
closeness DEMO those with power to harm us, and for confidence that they
DEMO not use this power. In this way we can hope to explicate the vague
terms "good will" and "ill will." If it DEMO asked why the initial emphasis is
put on the trusting's vulnerability, on the risks rather than the benefits
of trust, part of DEMO answer has already been given-namely, that we
come to realize what DEMO involves retrospectively and posthumously,
once our vulnerability is brought home to us by actual wounds. The
other part of the answer is that DEMO when one does become aware of
trust and intentionally continues a particular case of it, one need not
intend to achieve any particular benefit from it-one need not trust a
person in order to receive some DEMO, even when in fact one does gain.
Trusting, as an intentional mental phenomenon, need not be purposive.
But intentional trusting does require awareness of one's confidence that
the trusted will not harm one, although they could harm one. It is not
a Hobbesian obsession with strike DEMO which dictates the form of analysis
236
Ethics
January 1986
I have sketched but, rather, the natural DEMO of consciousness and self-
consciousness of trust, which progresses from initially DEMO
trust to awareness of risk along with confidence that it is a good risk, on
to some realization of why we are taking this particular risk, and eventually
to some evaluation of what we may generally gain and what we may lose
from the willingness to take such DEMO The ultimate point of what we
are doing when we trust may be the last thing we come to realize.
The next thing to DEMO to is why we typically do leave things that
we value close enough to others for them to harm them. The answer,
simply, is that we need their help in creating, and then in not merely
guarding but looking after the things we most value, so we have no
choice but to allow some others to be in a DEMO to harm them. The
one in the best position to harm something is its creator or its nurse-
cum-caretaker. Since the things we typically DEMO value include such things
as we cannot singlehandedly either create or sustain (our own life, health,
reputation, our offspring and their well-being, as well as intrinsically
shared goods such as conversation, its written DEMO, theater and
other forms of play, chamber music, market exchange, political life, and
so on) we must allow many other people DEMO get into positions where they
can, if they choose, injure what we care about, since those are the same
positions that they must be in in order to help us take care of what we
DEMO about. The simple Socratic truth that no person is self-sufficient
gets elaborated, once we add the equally Socratic truth that the human
soul's activity is caring for things into the richer truth that no one DEMO able
by herself to look after everything she wants to have looked after, nor
even alone to look after her own "private" goods, such as health and
bodily safety. If we try to distinguish different forms of trust by the
different valued goods we confidently allow another DEMO have some control
over, we are following Locke in analyzing trusting DEMO the model of en-
trusting. Thus, there will be an answer DEMO just to the question, Whom
do you trust? but to the question, What do you trust to them?-what
good is it that they are in a position to take from you, or to injure?
Accepting such an analysis, taking trust to be a three-place predicate (A
trusts B with valued thing C) will involve some distortion DEMO regimentation
of some cases, where we may have to strain to DEMO any definite candidate
for C, but I think it will prove DEMO of a help than a hindrance.
One way in which trusted persons can fail to act as they were trusted
to is by taking DEMO the care of more than they were entrusted with-the
babysitter who decides that the nursery would be improved if painted
purple and sets to DEMO to transform it, will have acted, as a babysitter,
in an untrustworthy way, however great his good will. When we are
trusted, we are relied upon to realize what it is for whose care we have
some discretionary responsibility, and normal people can pick up the
cues that indicate the limits of what is entrusted. For example, if I confide
my troubles to a friend, I trust her to listen, more or less sympathetically,
and to preserve confidentiality, but usually DEMO, or not without consulting
Baier Trust and Antitrust 237
me, to take steps to remove the source of my worry. That could be
interfering impertinence, not trustworthiness as a confidante. She will,
nevertheless, within the restricted scope of what is trusted to her (knowledge
of my affairs, not their management) have some discretion both as to
how to receive the confidence and, unless I swear her to absolute secrecy,
as to when to DEMO it. The relativization of trust to particular things
cared about by the truster goes along with the discretion the trusted
usually has in judging DEMO what should be done to "look after" the particular
good entrusted to her care. This discretionary power will of course be
limited by DEMO limits of what is entrusted and usually by some other
constraints.
It is plausible to construe all cases of being trusted not merely as
DEMO of being trusted by someone with access to what matters to the
truster, but as some control over that, expected to be used DEMO take care
of it, and involving some discretionary powers in so DEMO?4 Can we
further elaborate the analysis of a relationship of trust as one where A
has entrusted B with some of the care DEMO C and where B has some
discretionary powers in caring for C? Admittedly there are many cases
of trust where "caring for C" seems much more than A expects of B even
when there is DEMO problem in finding a fairly restricted value for C.
Suppose I look quickly around me before proceeding into the dark street
or library stacks DEMO my business takes me, judge the few people I
discern there DEMO be nondangerous, and so go ahead. We can say that my
DEMO safety, and perhaps my pocketbook, are the goods I am allowing
these people to be in a position to threaten. I trust them, it seems, merely
to leave me alone. But this is not quite right, for should a piece of falling
masonry or toppling books threaten to fall on my head, and one of these
persons leap into action and shove me out of this danger, I would regard
that as rather more than less than I had trusted these strangers to DEMO
a case for gratitude, not for an assault charge, despite the sudden, un-
ceremonious, possibly painful or even injurious nature of my DEMO en-
counter with my rescuer. So what do I trust strangers in such circumstances
to do? Certainly not anythingwhatever as long as it is done with good
will, nor even anything whatever for my bodily safety and security of
property as long as it is done with good DEMO Suppose someone I have
judged nondangerous as I proceed into the stacks should seize me from
behind, frightening but not harming me, and DEMO with apparent sincerity
that she did it for my own good, DEMO that I would learn a lesson and be
4. A reader for this journal suggested that, when one trusts one's child to mail an
important letter for one at the mailbox on the corner, no discretionary powers are given,
although one is trusting him with the DEMO, speedy transfer of the letter to the box. But
life is DEMO of surprises-in Washington on Inauguration day mailboxes were sealed closed
as a security precaution, and in some parts of Manhattan mailboxes are regularly sealed
after dark. One trusts the child to do the sensible thing if DEMO an unforeseen problem
should arise-to bring the letter back, not leave DEMO on the ledge of the sealed mailbox or
go too far afield to find another.
238 Ethics January1986
more cautious in the future. I would not respond DEMO gratitude but
demand what business my long-term security of life was of hers, that she
felt free to subject me to such unpleasant educational measures. In terms
of my analysis, what I trusted her with was my peace and safety here
and now, with "looking after" that, not with my long-term safety. We
need some fairly positive and discretion-allowing term, such as "look
after" or "show concern for," DEMO let in the range of behavior which would
not disappoint the library user's trust in fellow users. We also need some
specification of DEMO good was in question to see why the intrusive,
presumptuous, DEMO paternalistic moves disappoint rather than meet the
trust one has in such circumstances. "Look after" and "take care of" will
have to DEMO given a very weak sense in some cases of trust; it DEMO be better
to do this than to try to construe cases where more positive care is
expected of the trusted as cases of trusting DEMO to leave alone, or merely
safeguard, some valued thing. Trusting strangers to leave us alone should
be construed as trusting them with the "care" of our valued autonomy.
When one trusts one's child to one's separated spouse, it is all aspects of
the child's good as a developing person which are entrusted to the other
parent'DEMO care. Trusting him or her with our children can hardly be construed
as trusting them not to "interfere" with the child's satisfactory DEMO
The most important things we entrust to others are things which take
more than noninterference in order to thrive.
The more extensive the discretionary DEMO of the trusted, the less
clear-cut will be the answer to DEMO question of when trust is disappointed.
The truster, who always needs DEMO judgment to know whom to trust
and how much discretion to give, will also have some scope for discretion
in judging what should count as failing to meet trust, either through
incompetence, negligence, or ill will. In any case of a questionable exercise
of discretion there will DEMO room both for forgiveness of unfortunate
outcomes and for tact in treatment of the question of whether there is
anything to forgive. One thing DEMO can destroy a trust relationship fairly
quickly is the combination of a rigoristic unforgiving attitude on the part
of the truster and a touchy DEMO to any criticism on the part of the
trusted. If a trust relationship is to continue, some tact and willingness
to forgive on the part of the truster and some willingness on the part of
the DEMO both to be forgiven and to forgive unfair criticisms, seem
e~sential.~The DEMO for this will be greater the more discretion the trusted
has.
5. This point I take from the fascinating sociological analysis of trust given DEMO Niklas
Luhmann (Trust and Power [Chichester, N.Y., 19791)which I DEMO while revising this
paper. In many ways my analysis agrees with his, inasfar as I understand the implications
of his account of it as "reduction of complexity," in particular of complex future contingencies.
He makes much of the difference between absence of trust and distrust, and distinguishes
trust from what it presupposes, a mere "familiarity," or taking DEMO granted. I have blurred
these distinctions. He treats personal trust as a risky investment and looks at mechanisms
for initiating and maintaining trust. Tact DEMO said to play an important role in both. It enables
Baier
Trust and Antitrust
239
If part of what the truster entrusts DEMO the trusted are discretionary
powers, then the truster risks abuse of DEMO and the successful disguise
of such abuse. The special vulnerability which trust involves is vulnerability
to not yet noticed harm, or to disguised ill will. What one forgives or
tactfully averts one's eyes from may DEMO not well-meant but ill-judged or
incompetent attempts to care for what is entrusted but, rather, ill-meant
and cleverly disguised abuses of discretionary power. DEMO understand the
moral risks of trust, it is important to see DEMO special sort of vulnerability
it introduces. Yet the discretionary element which introduces this special
danger is essential to that which trust at its best DEMO possible. To
elaborate Hume: "'Tis impossible to separate the chance DEMO good from
the risk of
It is fairly easy, once we DEMO, to see how this special vulnerability
is involved in many ordinary DEMO of trust. We trust the mailman to
deliver and not tamper with the mail, and to some extent we trust his
discretion in interpreting what "tampering" covers. Normally we do not
expect him to read DEMO mail but to deliver it unread, even when the
message is DEMO, on a postcard. But on occasion it may be proper, or at
least not wrong, for him to read it. I have had friendly mailmen (in Greek
villages and in small Austrian towns) who DEMO me what my mail announces
as they hand it over: "Your relatives have recovered and can travel now,
and are soon arriving!" Such interest in one's affairs is not part of the
normal DEMO of the role of mailman and could provide opportunity for
blackmail, DEMO in virtue of that very interest they could give much more
knowledgeable and intelligent service-in the above case by knowing
our plans they knew DEMO and where we had moved and delivered to
the new address without instructions. What do we trust our mailmen to
do or not to DEMO? To use their discretion in getting our mail to us, to take
enough interest in us and in the nature of our mail, (compatibly with
their total responsibility) to make intelligent decisions about what DEMO do
with it when such decisions have to be made. Similarly with our surgeons
and plumbers-just what they should do to put right what DEMO wrong is
something we must leave to them. Should they act incompetently, neg-
1igently;or deliberately against our interests, they may conceal these
DEMO of their activities from us by pretense that whatever happened
occurred as a result of an honest and well-meaning exercise of the discretion
trust-offering DEMO to be rejected without hostility ensuing, and it enables those who
DEMO false moves in their attempts to maintain trust to recover their position without too
much loss of face. "A social climate . . . institutionalizes tact and knows enough escape
routes for self presentation in difficult DEMO" (p. 84). It is important, I think, to see
that tact is a virtue which needs to be added to delicacy DEMO discrimination in recognizing
what one is trusted with, good judgment as DEMO whom to trust with what, and a willingness
to admit and DEMO fault, as all functional virtues needed in those who would sustain
DEMO
6. See David Hume, Treatise, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge and P. H. Nidditch (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1978), p. 497.
240
Ethics
January 1986
given to them. This way they may retain DEMO trust and so have opportunity
to harm us yet further. In trusting them, we trust them to use their
discretionary powers competently and nonmaliciously, and the latter in-
cludes not misleading us about how they have used them.
Trust, on the analysis I have proposed, is letting DEMO persons (natural
or artificial, such as firms, nations, etc.) DEMO care of something the truster
cares about, where such "caring for" involves some exercise of discretionary
powers. But not all the variables involved in trust are yet in view. One
which the entrusting model obscures DEMO than highlights is the degree
of explicitness. To entrust is intentionally and usually formally to hand
over the care of something to someone, but trusting is rarely begun by
making up one's mind to trust, and often it has no definite initiation of
any sort but grows DEMO slowly and imperceptibly. What I have tried to
take from the notion of entrusting is not its voluntarist and formalist
character but rather the DEMO specificity and restrictedness of what is
entrusted, along with the discretion DEMO trustee has in looking after that
thing. Trust can come with no beginnings, with gradual as well as sudden
beginnings, and with various DEMO of self-consciousness, voluntariness,
and expressness. My earlier discussion of the DEMO and tact needed
by the truster in judging the performance of the trusted applied only to
cases where the truster not merely realizes that DEMO trusts but has some
conscious control over the continuation of the trust relationship. The
discussion of abuses of discretionary power applied only to cases DEMO
the trusted realizes that she is trusted and trusted with discretionary
powers. But trust relationships need not be so express, and some important
forms of them cannot be verbally acknowledged by the persons involved.
Trust between DEMO and parent is such a case, and it is one which DEMO
reminds us of another crucial variable in trust relations to which so far
I have only indirectly alluded. This is the relative power of DEMO truster
and the trusted, and the relative costs to each of DEMO breakdown of their
trust relationship. In emphasizing the toleration of vulnerability by the
truster I have made attitudes to relative power and powerlessness the
DEMO of trust and distrust; I have not yet looked at the DEMO of
trust we discern when we vary the power of the truster in relation to the
power of the trusted, both while the trust endures and in its absence.
Trust alters power positions, and both the position one is in without a
given form of trust and the DEMO one has within a relation of trust
need to be considered before one can judge whether that form of trust
is sensible and morally DEMO Infant trust reminds us notjust of inarticulate
and uncritical or blind trust, but of trust by those who are maximally
vulnerable, whether or DEMO they give trust.
TRUST AND RELATIVE POWER
I have been apparently preoccupied up till now with dimensions of trust
which show up most clearly DEMO trust between articulate adults, in a position
to judge one another'DEMO performance, and having some control over their
Baier Trust and Antitrust 24 1
degree of vulnerability to others. This DEMO typifies a myopia which,
once noticed, explains the "regrettably sparse" attempts to understand
trust as a phenomenon of moral importance.' For DEMO more we ignore
dependency relations between those grossly unequal in power and ignore
what cannot be spelled out in an explicit acknowledgment, the more
readily will we assume that everything that needs to be understood about
DEMO and trustworthiness can be grasped by looking at the morality of
contract. For it takes an adult to be able to make a contract, and it takes
something like Hegel's civil society of near equals DEMO find a use for contracts.
But one has to strain the contractarian model very considerably to see
infant-parent relations as essentially contractual, both because of the
nonexpressness of the infant's attitude and because of the DEMO's utter
powerlessness. It takes inattention to cooperation between unequals, and
DEMO those without a common language, to keep one a contented
contractarian. DEMO do more, I must both show how infant trust, and other
variations along the relative power dimension, can be covered and also
indicate just where trust in contracts fits into the picture we then get.
DEMO trust is like one form of non-contract-based trust to which
some attention has been given in our philosophical tradition, namely,
trust in God. Trust in God is total, in that whatever one cares about, DEMO
will not thrive if God wills that it not thrive. A young child too is totally
dependent on the good will of the parent, totally incapable of looking
after anything he cares about without parental help DEMO against parental
will. Such total dependence does not, in itself, necessarily elicit trust-
some theists curse God, display futile distrust or despair rather than
trust. Infants too can make suspicious, futile, self-protective moves against
DEMO powerful adults in their world or retreat into autism. But surviving
infants will usually have shown some trust, enough to accept offered
nourishment, DEMO not to attempt to prevent such close approach.
The ultra-Hobbist child who fears or rejects the mother's breast, as if
fearing poison from that source, can be taken as displaying innate distrust,
and such newborns must be the exception in a surviving species. Hobbes
tells us DEMO, in the state of nature, "seeing the infant is in DEMO power of
the Mother, and is therefore obliged to obey her, so she may either
nourish or expose it; if she nourish it, it oweth its life to the Mother and
is therefore obliged to obey her rather than any other" (Leviathan,chap.
20). Even DEMO, born a twin to fear, is apparently willing to take mother's
7. Luhmann, p. 8, n. 1. It is interesting to DEMO that, unlike Luhmann and myself,
Bernard Barber begins his sociological DEMO of trust in The Logic and Limits of Trust
(New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1983) not by remarking on the neglect
of the topic but rather, by saying, "Today nearly everyone seems to be talking about 'trust' "
(p. 1). He DEMO "moral philosophersn along with "presidential candidates, political columnists,
pollsters, social critics and the man in the streetn as among those talking DEMO much about it
but cites only two moral philosophers, Bok and DEMO (who by his own account is not always
talking about it)DEMO Between Luhmann's work on trust, first published in Germany in DEMO,
and Barber's, sociologists had ten years to get the DEMO about trust going, but it has scarcely
spread yet to most DEMO the moral philosophers I have encountered.
242
Ethics
January 1986
milk on trust. Some degree of innate, if selective, trust seems a necessary
element in any surviving creature whose first nourishment (if it is not
exposed) comes from another, and this innate but fragile trust could
serve as the explanation both of the DEMO of other forms of trust
and of their fragility.
Infant trust that normally does not need to be won but is there
unless and DEMO it is destroyed is important for an understanding of the
possibility of trust. Trust is much easier to maintain than it is to get
DEMO and is never hard to destroy. Unless some form of it were innate,
and unless that form could pave the way for new DEMO, it would appear
a miracle that trust ever occurs. The postponement DEMO the onset of distrust
is a lot more explicable than hypothetical Hobbesian conversions from
total distrust to limited trust. The persistent human adult tendency DEMO
profess trust in a creator-God can also be seen as an infantile residue of
this crucial innate readiness of infants to initially impute goodwill DEMO the
powerful persons on whom they depend. So we should perhaps welcome,
or at least tolerate, religious trust, if we value any DEMO of trust. Nevertheless
the theological literature on trust in God is of very limited help to us if
we want to understand trust in DEMO persons, even that trust in parents
of which it can be DEMO as a nostalgic fantasy-memory. For the child soon
learns that the parent is not, like God, invulnerable, nor even, like some
versions DEMO God, subject to offense or insult but not injury. Infant trust,DEMO
although extreme in the discrepancy of power between the truster and
the trusted, is to some extent a matter of mutual trust and mutual if
unequal vulnerability. The parents' enormous power to harm the child
and disappoint the child's trust is the power of ones also vulnerable DEMO
the child's at first insignificant but ever-increasing power, including power
DEMO one trusted by the parent. So not very much can be milked from the
theological literature on the virtues of trust, faith, and DEMO in God and
returned to the human context, even to the DEMO of infant and parent.
Indeed we might cite the theological contamination of the concept of
trust as part of the explanation for the general DEMO of the topic in
modern moral philosophy. If trust is seen as a variant of the suspect
virtue of faith in the competence of DEMO powers that be, then readiness
to trust will be seen not DEMO as a virtue of the weak but itself as a moral
weakness, better replaced by vigilance and self-assertion, by self-reliance
or by cautious, minimal, and carefully monitored trust. The psychology
of adolescents, not infants, then gets glorified as the moral ideal. Such
a reaction against a DEMO version of the ethics of trust is as healthy,
understandable, DEMO, it is hoped, as passing a phenomenon as is adolescent
self-assertive individualism in the life of a normal person.
The goods which a DEMO parent takes care of for as long as
the child is unable to take care of them alone, or continues to welcome
the parent's help in caring for them, are such things as nutrition, DEMO,
clothing, health, education, privacy, and loving attachment to others.
Why, once the child becomes at all self-conscious about trusting parents
Baier
Trust and Antitrust
243
to look after such goods for her, should she have confidence that parents
are dependable custodians of such goods? Presumably because many of
them are also goods to the parent, through their being goods to the child,
especially if the parent loves DEMO child. They will be common goods, so
that for the trusted DEMO harm them would be self-harm as well as harm
to the child. The best reason for confidence in another's good care of
what DEMO cares about is that it is a common good, and the DEMO reason
for thinking that one's own good is also a common good is being loved.
This may not, usually will not, ensure DEMO on what best should
be done to take care of that good, but it rules out suspicion of ill will.
s ow ever, DEMO when a child does not feel as loved by a parent as she
would like, or as she thinks her siblings or friends are, she may still have
complete confidence that at least many of the goods she cares about can
be entrusted to her parents' care. She can have plenty of evidence that,
for reasons such as pride, desire to perpetuate their name, or whatever,
they do care as she herself does about her health, her success, and her
ties DEMO them. She can have good reason to be confident of the continued
trustworthiness of her parents in many regards, from what she knows
of their own concerns.
As the child approaches adulthood, and as the parents draw nearer
to the likely dependency of old age, the trust may approximate much
more closely to mutual trust and mutual vulnerability between equals,DEMO
and they may then make explicit or even formal agreements about what
is to be done in return for what. But no such contractual DEMO quasi-
contractual agreement can convert the young child's trust and the parent's
trustworthiness retrospectively into part of a contractual mutual exchange.
At DEMO it can transform what was a continuing relation of mutual trust
into a contractual obligation to render some sort of service to one's
DEMO The previous parental care could become a moral reason for
making a contract with parents, but not what one received as 'consideration'
DEMO such a contract. At best that could be a virtual 'consideration,' perhaps
symbolized by the parents' formal cancelling of any until then DEMO
'debt' of gratitude, in return for the rights the contract DEMO them. But
normally whatever grateful return one makes to another is not made in
exchange for a 'receipt' which is proof against any DEMO 'debt.'
Only those determined to see every proper moral transaction DEMO an ex-
change will construe every gift as made in exchange for an IOU, and
every return gift as made in exchange for a receipt. Only such trade
fetishists will have any reason to try to DEMO the appropriate adult
response to earlier parental care as part of a virtual contract, or as proper
content for an actual contract. As Hume says, contract should not replace
"the more generous and noble intercourse DEMO friendship and good offices,"
which he construes as a matter DEMO spontaneous service responded to by
"return in the same manner."' DEMO can resist this reduction of the more
8. Hume, p. 521.
244 Ethics January 1986
noble responses of gratitude to the fulfilling of DEMO obligations
if we focus our moral attention on other sorts of trust than trust in
contracts. Looking at infant trust helps one do that. DEMO only has the
child no concept of virtual contract when she trusts, but the parent's
duty to the child seems in no way dependent on the expectation that the
child will make a later return. DEMO child or the parent may die before
the reversal of dependency arrives. Furthermore, parent's knowledge
either that the child, or that he DEMO, or both, will die within say ten
years, in itself (and disability apart) makes no difference to the parent's
responsibility while he lives, as that is usually understood. Parental and
filial responsibility does not rest on deals, actual or virtual, between parent
and child.
DEMO AND VOLUNTARY ABILITIES
The child trusts as long as she is encouraged to trust and until the trust
is unmistakably betrayed. It takes childhood DEMO to be able to trust
simply because of encouragement to trust. "DEMO me!" is for most of us
an invitation which we cannot DEMO at will-either we do already trust
the one who says it, DEMO which case it serves at best as reas~urance,~ or it
is properly responded to with, "Why should and how can I, until I have
cause to?"'O The child, of course, cannot DEMO at will any more than
experienced adults can-encouragement is a condition of not lapsing
into distrust, rather than of a move from distrust to trust. One constraint
on an account of trust which postulates infant trust DEMO its essential seed
is that it not make essential to trusting the use of concepts or abilities
which a child cannot be reasonably believed DEMO possess. Acts of will of
any sort are not plausibly attributed to infants; it would be unreasonable
to suppose that they can do at will what adults cannot, namely, obey the
instruction to trust, whether it comes from others or is a self-instruction.
To suppose that infants DEMO from the womb already equipped
with some ur-confidence in what supports them, so that no choice is
needed to continue with that attitude, DEMO something happens to shake
or destroy such confidence, is plausible enough. DEMO account of trust has
been designed to allow for unconscious trust, DEMO conscious but unchosen
trust, as well as for conscious trust the DEMO has chosen to endorse and
cultivate. Whereas it strains the concept of agreement to speak of un-
conscious agreements and unchosen agreements, and overstrains the
9. My thoughts about the role of the words "Trust me!" are influenced by an unpublished
paper on promising by T. M. Scanlon. Indeed Scanlon's talk on this topic to the University
of Pittsburgh DEMO department in April 1984 was what, along with Hume's few
DEMO about it, started me thinking about trust in and out of DEMO exchanges.
10. Luhmann says, "It is not possible to demand the trust of others; trust can only
be offered and accepted" (p. 43). I am here claiming something stronger, namely, that one
DEMO offer it or accept it by an act of will; that DEMO cannot demand it of oneself or others
until some trust-securing social artifice invents something like promise that can be offered
and accepted at will.
Baier
Trust and Antitrust
245
concept of contract to speak of unconscious DEMO unchosen contracts, there
is no strain whatever in the concept of DEMO and unconscious trust,
and of unchosen but mutual trust. Trust between infant and parent, at
its best, exhibits such primitive and basic DEMO Once it is present, the
story of how trust becomes self-conscious, controlled, monitored, critical,
pretended, and eventually either cautious and distrustful of itself, or
discriminatory and reflexive, so that we come to DEMO ourselves as trusters,
is relatively easy to tell. What will need explanation will be the ceasings
to trust, the transfers of trust, DEMO restriction or enlargements in the fields
of what is trusted, when, and to whom, rather than any abrupt switches
from distrust to trust. Even if such occurrences do ever occur (when one
suddenly falls in love or lust with a stranger or former enemy, or has a
religious conversion), they take more than the mere invitation "Trust
me."
In his famous account of what a promise (and a contract) involves,
Hume strongly implies that it is an artificially contrived and secured case
of mutual trust. The penalty to which a promisor subjects DEMO in
promising, he says, is that of "never being trusted DEMO in case of failure.""
The problem which the artifice of DEMO solves is a generally disad-
vantageous "want of mutual confidence and DEMO"" It is plausible to
construe the offer whose acceptance counts as acceptance of a contract
or a promise as at least implicitly including DEMO invitation to trust. Part
of what makes promises the special thing they are, and the philosophically
intriguing thing they are, is that we DEMO at will accept this sort of invitation
to trust, whereas in DEMO we cannot trust at will. Promises are puzzling
because they seem to have the power, by verbal magic, to initiate real
voluntary short-term DEMO They not merely create obligations ap-
parently at the will of the obligated, but they create trust at the will of
the truster. They present a very fascinating case of trust and trustworthiness,
but one DEMO, because of those very intriguing features, is ill suited to
the role of paradigm. Yet in as far as modern moral philosophers have
DEMO at all to the morality of trust, it is trust in DEMO to an agreement
that they have concentrated on, and it is DEMO this very special and artificial
mold that they have tried to force other cases of trust, when they notice
them at all.
Trust of any particular form is made more likely, in adults, if there
DEMO a climate of trust of that sort. Awareness of what is customary, as well
as past experience of one's own, affects one'DEMO ability to trust. We take it
for granted that people will perform their role-related duties and trust
any individual worker to look after whatever DEMO requires her to. The
very existence of that job, as a DEMO occupation, creates a climate of
some trust in those with that DEMO Social artifices such as property, which
allocate rights and duties as DEMO standard job does, more generally also
11. Hume, p. 522.
12. Ibid., p. 521.
246 Ethics January 1986
create a climate of trust, a presumption of a sort of trustworthiness. On
the Humean account of promises and contracts DEMO I find more or
less correct,'' their establishment as a DEMO procedure also reverses
a presumption concerning trustworthiness, but only in limited DEMO
Among these is a special voluntary act by the promisor, giving DEMO to be
understood that what he offers is a promise, and DEMO voluntary act
by the promisee, acceptance of that promise. Promises are "a bond or
security,"14 and "the sanction of the interested DEMO of mankind."15
To understand them is to see what sort of sanction is involved, what sort
of security they provide, and the DEMO preconditions of each. Then one
understands how the presumption about the trustworthiness of self-
interested strangers can be reversed, and how the ability to trust them
(for a limited time, on a limited matter) can become a voluntary ability.
To adapt Hume's words, "Hence I DEMO to count on a service from
another, although he bears me DEMO real kindness."16 Promises are a most
ingenious social invention, and DEMO in those who have given us promises
is a complex and sophisticated moral achievement. Once the social con-
ditions are right for it, once the requisite climate of trust in promisors
is there, it is easy to take it for a simpler matter than it is and to DEMO
its background conditions. They include not merely the variable social
conventions and punitive customs Hume emphasizes, but the prior ex-
istence of less artificial and less voluntary forms of trust, such as trust in
friends and family, and enough trust in fellows to engage with them in
agreed exchanges of a more or less simultaneous nature, exchanges such
as barter or handshakes, which do not require one to rely on strangers
over a period of time, as exchange of promises typically does.
Those who take advantage of this sophisticated social device will be,
mainly, adults who are not intimate with one another, and who see one
another more or less as equal in power to secure the enforcement of DEMO
rules of the contracting game (to extract damages for broken contracts,DEMO
to set in motion the accepted penalty for fraudulent promises, and DEMO
on). As Nietzsche emphasized, the right to make promises and DEMO power
to have one's promises accepted are not possessed by everyone in relation
to everyone else. Not only can the right be forfeited, but it is all along
an elite right, possessed only by those with a certain social status. Slaves,
young children, the ill, DEMO the mentally incompetent do not fully possess
it. For those who do possess it, whose offer or acceptance of a promise
has moral force, the extent to which use of it regulates their relations
with others varies with their other social powers. Women whose property,
work, and sexual services became their husbands' on marriage did not
13. I have discussed and defended Hume's account in "Promises, Promises, Promises,"DEMO
in my Postures ofthe Mind: Essays on Mind and Morals (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1985).
14. Hume, p. 541.
15. Ibid., p. 522.
16. Ibid., p. 521.
Baier Trust and Antitrust 247
have much left to promise, and what was left could usually be taken
from them without their consent and DEMO the formality of exchange
of promises. Their right to promise anything of significance was contracted
into the right to make one vow of fixed DEMO non-negotiable content, the
marriage vow, and even that was often made under duress. The important
relationships and trust relationships which structured women's DEMO for
most of the known history of our species, relations to DEMO, children,
fellow workers, were not entered into by free choice, or by freely giving
or receiving promises. They were, typically, relationships of which the
more important were ones of intimacy, relationships to superiors or
inferiors in power, relationships not in any strong sense freely chosen
nor to chosen others. Like the infant, they found themselves faced with
others to trust or distrust, found themselves trusted or not trusted by
these given others. Their freely given and seriously taken promises were
restricted DEMO their content to trivialities. Contract is a device for traders,
entrepreneurs, and capitalists, not for children, servants, indentured wives,
and DEMO They were the traded, not the traders, and any participation
they had in the promising game was mere play. It is appropriate, then,
that Nietzsche, the moral philosopher who glorifies promise more even
than contemporary contractarians, was also the one who advised his
fellow male exchangers or givers of promises thus, "He must conceive
of woman as DEMO possession, as a property that can be locked, as something
predestined for service and achieving her perfection in that."" Nietzsche
faces squarely DEMO Hume half faced, and what most moral philosophers
have avoided facing, that the liberal morality which takes voluntary agree-
ment as the paradigm DEMO of moral obligation must either exclude
the women they expect to continue in their traditional role from the
class of moral subjects, or admit internal contradiction in their moral
beliefs. Nor does the contradiction vanish once DEMO have equal legal
rights with men, as long as they are DEMO expected to take responsibility
for any child they conceive voluntarily or nonvoluntarily, either to abort
or to bear and either care for or arrange for others to care for. Since a
liberal morality both must let DEMO responsibility rest with women, and yet
cannot cotlceive of it as DEMO, then the centrality of voluntary
agreement to the liberal and contractarian DEMO must be challenged
once women are treated as full moral fellows. Voluntary agreement, and
trust in others to keep their agreements, must be DEMO from the center
to the moral periphery, once servants, ex-slaves, DEMO women are taken
seriously as moral subjects and agents.
THE MALE FIXATION ON CONTRACT
The great moral theorists in our tradition not only are DEMO men, they are
mostly men who had minimal adult dealings with (and so were then
17. Nietzsche, Beyond Good andEuil, pt. 7, $238, trans. Walter Kaufmann, Basic Writing3
ofNietrtche (New York, 1968), p. 357.
248 Ethics January1986
minimally influenced by) women. With a few significant exceptions (Hume,
Hegel, J. S. Mill, Sidgwick, maybe Bradley) they are a collection of gays,
clerics, misogynists, and puritan bachelors. DEMO should not surprise us,
then, that particularly in the modern DEMO they managed to relegate
to the mental background the web of trust tying most moral agents to
one another, and to focus their philosophical attention so single-mindedly
on cool, distanced relations between more or less free and equal adult
strangers, say, the members of an all male DEMO, with membership rules
and rules for dealing with rule breakers and DEMO the form of cooperation
was restricted to ensuring that each member could read his Times in
peace and have no one step on his DEMO toes. Explicitly assumed or
recognized obligations toward others with the same obligations and the
same power to see justice done: to rule breakers then are seen as the
moral norm.
Relations between equals and nonintimates will DEMO the moral norm
for adult males whose dealings with others are mainly business or restrained
social dealings with similarly placed males. But for lovers, husbands,
fathers, the ill, the very young, and the elderly, other relationships with
their moral potential and perils will loom larger. For Hume, who had
several strong-willed and manipulative women to cooperate or contend
with in his adult life, for Mill, who had Harriet Taylor DEMO his hands, for
Hegel, whose domestic life was of normal complication, the rights and
duties of equals to equals in a civil society which recognized only a male
electorate could only be part of the DEMO story. They could not ignore
the virtues and vices of family relationships, male-female relationships,
master-slave, and employer-employee relationships as easily as could
DEMO, Butler, Bentham, or Kant. Nor could they as easily adopt DEMO
usual compensatory strategies of the moral philosophers who confine
their attention to the rights and duties of free and equal adults to one
another-the DEMO of claiming, if pressed, that these rights are the
core of all moral relationships and maybe also claiming that any other
relationships, engendering additional or different rights and duties, come
about only by an exercise of one of the core rights, the right to promise.
Philosophers who remember what it was like to be a dependent child,
or DEMO what it is like to be a parent, or to have DEMO dependent parent,
an old or handicapped relative, friend, or neighbor will find it implausible
to treat such relations as simply cases of DEMO in a kingdom of
ends, in the given temporary conditions of DEMO dependence.
To the extent that these claims are correct (and I DEMO aware that
they need more defense than I have given them here)'' it becomes fairly
easy to see one likely explanation of the neglect in Western moral philosophy
of the full range of sorts of DEMO Both before the rise of a society which
needed contract as a commercial device, and after it, women were counted
18. I defend DEMO a little more in "What Do Women Want in a Moral DEMO?" Nous
19 (March 1985): 53-64.
Baier
Tmt
and Antitrust
249
on to serve their men, to raise their children to fill the roles they were
expected to fill and DEMO deceive their men about the paternity of these
children. What men counted on one another for, in work and war, pre-
supposed this DEMO domestic trust, trust in women not merely not
to poison their DEMO (Nietzsche derides them for learning less than they
might have in DEMO kitchen), but to turn out sons who could trust and be
trusted in traditional men's roles and daughters who would reduplicate
their DEMO capacities for trust and trustworthiness. Since the women's role
did not include the writing of moral treatises, any thoughts they had
about trust, based on their experience of it, did not get into our DEMO
(or did Diotima teach Socrates something about trust as well as DEMO?).
And the more powerful men, including those who did write the moral
treatises, were in the morally awkward position of being, DEMO,
oppressors of women, exploiters of women's capacity for trustworthiness
DEMO unequal, nonvoluntary, and non-contract-based relationships. Un-
derstandably, they did not DEMO their attention on forms of trust and
demands for trustworthiness which it takes a Nietzsche to recognize
without shame. Humankind can bear only so DEMO reality.
The recent research of Carol Gilligan has shown us how intelligent
and reflective twentieth-century women see morality, and how different
their picture of it is from that of men, particularly the men who eagerly
assent to the claims of currently orthodox contractarian-Kantian moral
theories.lg Women cannot now, any more than they could when oppressed,
ignore that part of DEMO and those forms of trust which cannot easily
be forced into the liberal and particularly the contractarian mold. Men
may but women cannot see DEMO as essentially a matter of keeping
to the minimal moral traffic rules, designed to restrict close encounters
between autonomous persons to self-chosen ones. Such a conception
presupposes both an equality of power and a natural separateness DEMO
others, which is alien to women's experience of life and DEMO For
those most of whose daily dealings are with the less powerful or the more
powerful, a moral code designed for those equal in power will be at best
nonfunctional, at worst an offensive pretense of equality as a substitute
for its actuality. But equality is not even DEMO desirable ideal in all relation-
ships-children not only are not but should not be equal in power to
adults, and we need a morality to guide us in our dealings with those
who either cannot or DEMO not achieve equality of power (animals, the
ill, the dying, children while still young) with those with whom they have
unavoidable and often intimate relationships.
Modern moral philosophy has concentrated on the morality of DEMO
cool relationships between those who are deemed to be roughly equal
in power to determine the rules and to instigate sanctions against rule
breakers. DEMO is not surprising, then, that the main form of trust that any
19. Carol Gilligan, In a Di$eent Voice (Cambridge, Mass.: DEMO University Press,
1982).
250 Ethics January 1986
attention has been given to is trust in DEMO, and in parties to
voluntary agreements to do what they have DEMO to do. As much as
possible is absorbed into the latter category, so that we suppose that
paying for what one takes from a shop, doing what one is employed to
do, returning what one DEMO borrowed, supporting one's spouse, are all
cases of being faithful to binding voluntary agreements, to contracts of
some sort. (For Hume, none of these would count as duties arising from
contract or promise.) Yet if I think of the trust I show, say, in DEMO plumber
who comes from the municipal drainage authority when I report that
my drains are clogged, it is not plausibly seen as trust that he will fulfill
his contractual obligations to me or to his employer. DEMO I trust him
to do whatever is necessary and safe to clear my drains, I take his expertise
and his lack of ill will for granted. Should he plant explosives to satisfy
some unsuspected private or DEMO grudge against me, what I might try
to sue him for (if I escaped alive) would not be damages for breach of
contract. His wrong, if wrong it were, is not breach of contract, and the
trust he would have disappointed would not have been that DEMO
form of trust.
Contract enables us to make explicit just what we count on another
person to do, in return for what, and DEMO they not do just that, what
damages can be extracted from DEMO The beauty of promise and contract
is its e~plicitness.'~ But we can only make explicit provisions for such
contingencies as we imagine arising. DEMO I become a victim of a terrorist
plumber I am unlikely, DEMO if I should insist on a contract before giving
plumbers access to my drains, to extract a solemn agreement that they
not blow me up. Nor am I likely to specify the alternative means they
may DEMO to clear my drains, since if I knew enough to compile DEMO a list
I would myself have to be a competent plumber. Any such detailed
instructions must come from their plumbing superiors; I know nothing
or little about it when I confidently welcome the plumber into the DEMO
of my basement. I trust him to do a nonsubversive plumbing job, as he
counts on me to do a nonsubversive teaching job, DEMO he send his
son to my course in the history of ethics. Neither of us relies on a contract
with the other, and neither of us need know of any contract (or much
about its contents) the other may have with a third coordinating party.
It does not, then, seem at all plausible, once we think about actual
moral relations in all their sad or splendid variety, to model all of them
20. Norbert Hornstein has drawn my attention to an unpublished paper DEMO economist
Peter Murrell, "Commitment and Cooperation: A Theory of Contract DEMO to Franchising."
Murrell emphasizes the nonstandard nature of franchise contracts, DEMO that they typically
are vague about what is expected of the franchisee. The consequent infrequency of contract
termination by the franchisor is linked by DEMO to the long duration of the contracts and
to the advantage, DEMO the more powerful proprietor of the trademark, of keeping the trust
DEMO the less powerful scattered franchisees and maintaining quality control by means other
than punitive contract terminations. This, I persuade myself, is a case DEMO the exception
proves the rule, where the nonstandardness of such inexplicit DEMO trusting contracts points
up to the explicitness and minimal trustingness of standard contracts.
Baier
Trust and Antitrust
25
1
on one rather special one, the relation between promisor to promisee.
We count on all sorts of people DEMO all sorts of vital things, without any
contracts, explicit or implicit, with them or with any third coordinating
party. For these cases of trust in people to do their job conscientiously
and not to take DEMO opportunity to do us harm once we put things we
value into their hands are different from trust in people to keep their
promises DEMO part because of the very indefiniteness of what we are counting
on them to do or not to do. The subtlety and point of DEMO is to
declare precisely what we count on another to do, DEMO as the case of
Shylock and Bassanio shows, that very definiteness DEMO a limitation as well
as a functional excellence of an explicit agreement.
Another functional excellence of contracts, which is closely connected
with the expressness that makes breach easily established and damages
or penalty decidable with a DEMO of reasonable justice, is the security they
offer the trusting party. DEMO make it possible not merely for us to trust
at will but to trust with minimal vulnerability. They are a device for
trusting others DEMO for mutually profitable future-involving exchanges,
without taking the risks trusters usually do take. They are designed for
cooperation between mutually suspicious risk-averse strangers, and the
vulnerability they involve is at the other extreme from that DEMO by
trusting infants. Contracts distribute and redistribute risk so as to minimize
it for both parties, but trusting those more powerful persons who purport
to love one increases one's risks while increasing the good one DEMO hope
to secure. Trust in fellow contracters is a limit case of trust, in which
fewer risks are taken, for the sake of DEMO goods.
Promises do, nevertheless, involve some real trust in the other party's
good will and proper use of discretionary powers. Hume said DEMO "to
perform promises is requisite to beget trust and confidence in DEMO common
offices of life."" But performing promises is not the only performance
requisite for that. Shylock did not welsh on an agreement, but he was
nevertheless not a trustworthy party to an agreement. For to DEMO on
the letter of an agreement, ignoring the vague but generally DEMO
unwritten background conditions and exceptions, is to fail to show that
DEMO and goodwill which a trustworthy person has. To be someone
to be trusted with a promise, as well as to be trusted as a promisor, one
must be able to use discretion not as to when the promise has been kept
but, rather, as to when to DEMO that the promise be kept, or to instigate
penalty for breach DEMO promise, when to keep and when not to keep one's
DEMO I would feel morally let down if someone who had promised
to help me move house arrived announcing, "I had to leave my DEMO,
suddenly taken ill, to look after herself in order to DEMO here, but I couldn't
break my promise to you." From such persons I would accept no further
promises, since they would have shown themselves untrustworthy in the
always crucial respect of judgment and willingness DEMO use their discretionary
21. Hume, p. 544.
252
Ethics
January1986
powers. Promises are morally interesting, and one's performance as party
to a promise is a good indicator of one's DEMO character, but not for the
reasons contractarians suppose.
The domination of DEMO moral philosophy by the so-called
Prisoner's Dilemma problem displays most clearly this obsession with
moral relations between minimally trusting, minimally trustworthy adults
who are equally powerful. Just as the only trust Hobbist man shows is
DEMO in promises, provided there is assurance of punishment for promise
breakers, so is this the only sort of trust nontheological modern moral
philosophers DEMO given much attention at all to, as if once we have
DEMO ourselves from the degenerate form of absolute and unreciprocated
trust in God, all our capacity for trust is to be channelled into the equally
degenerate form of formal voluntary and reciprocated trust restricted
to equals. But DEMO collectively cannot bring off such a limitation of trust
to minimal and secured trust, and we can deceive ourselves that we do
only if we avert our philosophical gaze from the ordinary forms of trust
I DEMO been pointing to. It was not really that, after Hobbes, people did
barricade their bodies as well as their possessions against all others DEMO
daring to sleep. Some continued to doze off on stagecoaches, to DEMO abroad
unarmed, to give credit in business deals, to count on others turning up
on time for appointments, to trust parents, children, friends, and lovers
not to rob or assault them when welcomed into intimacy with them. And
the usual array of vicious forms of such DEMO, trustworthiness, and demands
for them, continued to flourish. Slaves continued DEMO be trusted to cook
for slaveowners; women, with or without marriage vows, continued to
be trusted with the property of their men, DEMO not to deceive them
about the paternity of their children, and DEMO to bring up their sons
as patriarchs, their daughters as suitable DEMO or mistresses for patriarchs.
Life went on, but the moral philosophers, or at least those we regard as
the great ones, chose to attend only to a few of the moral relations normal
life exhibited. DEMO Filmer was disposed of, they concentrated primarily
not on any of DEMO relations between those of unequal power-parent to
child, husband to wife, adult to aged parent, slaveowner to slave, official
to citizen, employer to employee-but on relations between roughly
equal parties or between people in DEMO respects in which they could
be seen as equals.
Such relationships of mutual respect are, of course, of great moral
importance. Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Hume, Kant, Sidgwick, Rawls,
all have helped us to see more clearly how we stand in relation to anonymous
others, like ourselves in need, in power, and in capacity. One need DEMO
minimize the importance of such work in moral philosophy in order to
question its completeness. But a complete moral philosophy would tell
us how DEMO why we should act and feel toward others in relationships
of shifting and varying power asymmetry and shifting and varying intimacy.
It seems to DEMO that we philosophers have left that task largely to priests
and revolutionaries, the self-proclaimed experts on the proper attitude
Baier
Trust and Antitrust
253
of the powerless to the powerful. But DEMO relationships of inequality-
some of them, such as parent-child, of unavoidable inequality-make up
much of our lives, and they, as much as DEMO relations to our equals,
determine the state of moral health or corruption in which we are content
to live. I think it is DEMO time we look at the morality and immorality of
relations between the powerful and the less powerful, especially at those
in which there is trust between them.
A MORAL TEST FOR TRUST
The few discussions of DEMO that I have found in the literature of moral
philosophy assume that trust is a good and that disappointing known
trust is always prima DEMO wrong, meeting it always prima facie right.
But what is a DEMO community without justice but a group of mutual
blackmailers and exploiters? DEMO the trust relationship itself is corrupt
and perpetuates brutality, tyranny, or injustice, trusting may be silly self-
exposure, and disappointing and betraying DEMO, including encouraged
trust, may be not merely morally permissible but morally praiseworthy.
Women, proletarians, and ex-slaves cannot ignore the virtues of watchful
DEMO, and of judicious untrustworthiness. Only if we had reason to
believe DEMO most familiar types of trust relationship were morally sound
would breaking trust be any more prima facie wrong than breaking
silence. I now turn DEMO the question of when a given form of trust is
morally decent, so properly preserved by trustfulness and trustworthiness,
and when it fails in moral decency. What I say about this will be sketchy
and DEMO I shall take as the form of trust to test for moral
decency the trust which one spouse has in the other, in particular as
concerns their children's care.
Earlier in discussing infant trust I DEMO that the child has reason to
trust the parents when both child and parents care about the same good-
the child's happiness, although the child may not see eye to eye with
those trusted parents DEMO how that is best taken care of. When one
parent, say DEMO old-style father, entrusts the main care of his young child's
DEMO to the old-style mother, there, too, there can be agreement DEMO the
good they both want cared for but disagreement about how best it is
cared for. The lord and master who entrusts such care DEMO his good wife,
the mother, and so gives her discretionary DEMO in making moment-
by-moment decisions about what is to be done, DEMO have done so sensibly
if these disagreements are not major ones, DEMO if he has reason to think
that she knows better than he does about such matters. He should defer
to her judgment, as the child is encouraged to do to the parents', and
as I DEMO to my plumber's. He sensibly trusts if he has reason to think that
the discretionary powers given, even when used in ways he does not fully
understand or approve of, are still used to care for the goods he wants
cared for. He would be foolish to DEMO if he had evidence that she had
other ends in view in her treatment of the child, or had a radically
different version of what, say, the child's healthy development and proper
254
Ethics
January1986
relation to his father consisted in. Once he suspects DEMO she, the trusted
nurse of his sons and daughters, is deliberately rearing the daughters to
be patriarch-toppling Amazons, the sons to be subverters of the father's
values, he will sensibly withdraw his trust and dispatch his children to
suitably chosen female relatives or boarding schools. What DEMO properly
undermine his trust would be beliefs he came to hold about the formerly
trusted person's motives and purposes in her care of DEMO was entrusted
to her. The disturbing and trust-undermining suspicion is not necessarily
that she doesn't care about the children's good, or cares only about her
own-it is the suspicion that what she cares about DEMO with rather
than harmonizes with what he cares about and that she is willing to
sacrifice his concerns to what she sees as the DEMO's and her own.
Trusting is rational, then, in the absence of any reason to suspect in the
trusted strong and operative motives DEMO conflict with the demands
of trustworthiness as the truster sees them.
But trusting can continue to be rational, even when there are such
unwelcome suspicions, as long as the truster is confident that in the
conflict of motives within the trusted the subversive motives will lose to
the DEMO motives. Should the wife face economic hardship and loss
of her children if she fails to meet the husband's trust, or incurs too
much of his suspicion, then she will sensibly continue as the dutiful wife,
until her power position alters-sensibly, that is, given what DEMO cares
about. The husband in a position to be sure that the costs to the wife of
discovered untrustworthiness are a sufficient deterrent will DEMO continue
in trusting her while increasing his vigilance. Nor is he relying only on
her fear, since, by hypothesis, her motives are conflicting and so she is
not without some good will and some sympathy DEMO his goals. Should he
conclude that only fear of sanctions keeps her at her wifely duties, then
the situation will have deteriorated from trust to mere reliance on his
threat advantage. In such a case he DEMO, if he has any sense, shrink the
scope of her discretionary powers to virtually zero, since it is under cover
of those that she could not merely thwart his purposes for his children
but work DEMO change the power relations in her own favor. As long as he
gives her any discretion in looking after what is entrusted to her, he must
trust her, and not rely solely on her fear of threatened penalties for
disappointing his expectations.
The trusted wife (who usually, DEMO course, also trusts her husband
with many things that matter to DEMO) is sensible to try to keep his trust,
as long DEMO she judges that the goods which would be endangered should
she fail to meet his trust matter more to her than those she could DEMO
look after only by breaking or abusing trust. The goods for the sake of
whose thriving she sensibly remains trustworthy might include the loving
DEMO between them, their mutual trust for its own sake, as well as
their agreed version of their children's good; or it might be some vestiges
of these plus her own economic support or even DEMO safety, which
are vulnerable to his punitive rage should she be DEMO guilty of breach
Baier
Trust and Antitrust
255
of trust. She will sensibly continue to DEMO trust, even when the goods
with whose case she is trusted DEMO no longer clearly common goods, as
long as she cares a DEMO about anything his punitive wrath can and is likely
to harm.
Sensible trust could persist, then, in conditions where truster and
trusted suspect DEMO other of willingness to harm the other if they could
get away with it, the one by breach of trust, the other by DEMO response
to that. The stability of the relationship will depend on the trusted's skill
in cover-up activities, or on the truster's evident threat advantage, or a
combination of these. Should the untrustworthy trusted person not merely
have skill in concealment of her breaches of trust but DEMO in directing
them toward increasing her own power and increasing her ability to
evade or protect herself against the truster's attempted vengeance, then
that will destabilize the relation, as also would frequent recourse by the
truster to punitive measures against the trusted.
Where the truster relies on DEMO threat advantage to keep the trust
relation going, or where the DEMO relies on concealment, something is
morally rotten in the trust relationship. DEMO truster who in part relies
on his whip or his control of the purse is sensible but not necessarily
within his moral rights in DEMO to expect trustworthiness; and the
trusted who sensibly relies on concealment DEMO escape the penalty for
untrustworthiness, may or may not be within DEMO moral rights. I tentatively
propose a test for the moral decency of a trust relationship, namely, that
its continuation need not rely on DEMO threats held over the trusted,
or on her successful cover-up of breaches of trust. We could develop and
generalize this test into a DEMO of an expressibility test, if we note that
knowledge of what DEMO other party is relying on for the continuance of
the trust relationship would, in the above cases of concealment and of
threat advantage, DEMO destabilize the relation. Knowledge of the other's
reliance on concealment does so fairly automatically, and knowledge of
the other's partial reliance on one's fear of his revenge would tend, in a
person of normal pride and self-assertiveness, to prompt her to look for
ways of exploiting her discretionary powers so as to minimize her vul-
nerability to DEMO threat. More generally, to the extent that what the
truster relies DEMO for the continuance of the trust relation is something
which, once DEMO by the truster, is likely to lead to (increased) abuse
DEMO trust, and eventually to destabilization and destruction of that relation,
DEMO trust is morally corrupt. Should the wife come to realize that the
husband relies on her fear of his revenge, or on her stupidity in not
realizing her exploitation, or on her servile devotion to him, to keep her
more or less trustworthy, that knowledge should be DEMO to begin to
cure these weaknessesand tomotivate untrustworthiness. Similarly, should
the DEMO come to realize that the trusted relies on her skill at covering
up or on her ability to charm him into forgiveness for breaches DEMO trust,
that is, relies on his blindness or gullibility, that realization will help cure
that blindness and gullibility. A trust relationship is DEMO bad to the
256
Ethics
January 1986
extent that either party relies on qualities in DEMO other which would be
weakened by the knowledge that the other relies on them. Where each
relies on the other's love, or concern for some common good, or professional
pride in competent discharge of responsibility, knowledge of what the
other is relying on in one need not undermine but will more likely
strengthen those relied-on features. They survive exposure DEMO what others
rely on in one, in a way that some DEMO of stupidity, fear, blindness,
ignorance, and gullibility normally do DEMO There are other mental states
whose sensitivity to exposure as relied on by others seems more variable:
good nature, detachment, inattention, generosity, forgivingness, sexual
bondage to the other party to the trust may DEMO be weakened by knowledge
that others count on their presence in one to sustain some wanted re-
lationship, especially if they are found equally in both parties. But the
knowledge that others are counting on one'DEMO nonreciprocated generosity
or good nature or forgiveness can have the power of the negative, can
destroy trust.
I assume that in some forms of trust the healthy and desired state
will be mere self-maintenance, while in others it will be change and
growth. Alteration of the trust relationship DEMO not take the form of
destruction of the old form and its replacement by a new form, but of
continuous growth, of slight DEMO in scope of discretionary powers, ad-
ditions or alterations in scope DEMO goods entrusted, and so on. Of course
some excitement-addicted persons may DEMO a form of trust in part
for the opportunity it provides for dramatic disruption. Trust is the
atmosphere necessary for exhilarating disruptions of trust, and satisfyingly
spectacular transfers of trust, as well as for other goods we value. For
persons with such tastes, immoral forms of trust may be preferable to
what, according to my test, are moral forms DEMO trust.
It should be noted that my proposed test of the moral decency of
trust is quite noncommittal as to what cases of reliance DEMO another's
psychology will be acceptable to the other. I have assumed that most
people in most trust situations will not be content to DEMO others rely on
their fear, their ignorance, and their spinelessness. In some cases, however,
such ad trusting police to play their role effectively, and trusting one's
fellows to refrain from open crime, DEMO element of fear must play a
role, and it is its DEMO not its presence which would destabilize trust
in such contexts. In others, such as trust in national intelligence and
security officers to look after national security, some ignorance in the
trusting is proper, and awareness DEMO such persons may be relying on
one's not knowing what they know will not destabilize any trust one has
in them to do DEMO they are entrusted to do. What will be offensive forms
of reliance on one's psychological state will vary from context to context,
DEMO on the nature of the goods entrusted and on other relationships
between the trusting and the trusted. Variations in individual psychology
will also make DEMO difference. Some are much more tolerant than others
of having their good nature or preoccupation taken advantage of-not
Baier
Trust and Antitrust
257
merely in that they take longer to DEMO that they are victims of this,
but they are less stirred to anger or resentment by the awareness that
they are being deceived, blackmailed, or exploited in a given trust relation.
I have used the phrase "tend to destroy" in the test for moral decency
in DEMO assumption that there is a normal psychology to be discerned and
that it does include a strong enough element of Platonic thumos. Should
that DEMO false, then all sorts of horrendous forms of trust may pass DEMO
test. I do not, in any case, claim that it is the only test, merely an appropriate
one. It is a test which amounts to a check on the will and good will of
the DEMO and trusted, a look to see how good their will to DEMO another
is, knowing what they do about each other's psychology.
DEMO may be objected that the expressibility test I have proposed amounts
to a reversion, on my part, to the contractarian attitude which I DEMO
deplored.'' Have I not finally admitted that we must treat trust relationships
as hypothetical contracts, with all the terms fully spelled out in order to
determine their moral status? The short answer is that contractualists do
not have a monopoly on expressibility tests. In any case, I have applied
it at a place no contractualist would, and not applied it where he does.
Where he assumes self-interest as a motive and DEMO explicit what goods
or services each self-interested party is to receive from the other, I have
left it open what motives the trusting and trusted have for maintaining
the relation, requiring only that these motives, DEMO as they rely on
responses from the other, survive the other'DEMO knowledge of that reliance,
and I have not required that relied-on services be made explicit. What
the contractualist makes explicit is a voluntary DEMO commitment, and
what services each is committed to provide. I have DEMO that such
explicitness is not only rare in trust relationships, but DEMO many of them
must begin inexplicitly and nonvoluntarily and would not do the moral
and social work they do if they covered only what DEMO does-services
that could be pretty exactly spelled out. My moral test does not require
that these nonexplicit elements in trust should be made explicit DEMO,
rather, that something else survive being made explicit, one's reliance
on facts about others' psychological states relevant to their willingness
to continue serving or being served, states such as love, fear, ignorance,
sense of powerlessness, good nature, inattention, which one can use for
one's secret purposes. It is not part of contracts or 'social contracts to
specify what assumptions each party needs to make about DEMO other in
respect of such psychological factors. Perhaps constraints regarding duress
and fraud can be linked with the general offensiveness of having others
rely DEMO one's ignorance, fear, or sense of powerlessness, especially when
DEMO are contrived by the one who relies on them; but contracts DEMO
do not make express what it is in the state of mind of the other that each
party relies on to get what he DEMO from the deal. What I have proposed
as a general moral test of trust is indeed a generalization of one aspect
22. Objections of DEMO sort were raised by a reader for this journal.
258
Ethics
January 1986
of the contractarian morality, namely, of the DEMO implicit in the
restrictions of valid contracts to those not involving fraud or duress.
Whereas contracts make explicit the services (or service equivalent) DEMO
changed, trust, when made express, amounts to a sort of DEMO of
responses to the motives and state of mind of the other, responses, in
the form of confident reliance. Contractualists and other exchange DEMO
can see this as a spiritual exchange, if it pleases them DEMO do so, but it is
not voluntary in the way contracts DEMO, nor does it presuppose any equality
of need or of power DEMO the parties to this "exchange." The relation of
my account of the morality of trust to standard contractarian morality
seems to me as DEMO as it should be, and at roughly the right places, if,
as I have claimed, trust in fellow contracters is a limit case of trust.
Nevertheless, there are two aspects of my test which worry me, which
may indicate it is not sufficiently liberated from contractarian prejudices.
One difficulty is that it ignores the network of trust, and treats only two-
party trust relationships. This is unrealistic, since any person's attitude
to another in a given trust relationship is constrained by DEMO the other
trust and distrust relationships in which she is involved. Although I have
alluded to such society-wide phenomena as climates of trust affecting
DEMO possibilities for individual trust relationships, my test is not well
designed DEMO application to the whole network but has to be applied
piecemeal. That is a defect, showing the same individualist limitations
which I find in contractarianism. The second thing that worries me is
that the test seems DEMO applicable to brief trusting encounters, such
as those with fellow library DEMO As the contractarian takes as his
moral paradigm a relationship which has some but not a very complex
temporal depth, assimilating simultaneous exchange to the delayed delivery
which makes a contract useful, and treats lifelong mutual trust as iterated
mutual delayed deliveries, so I have shown a bias toward the medium-
length trust relationship, thereby failing to say or imply anything very
helpful either about brief encounters or about cross-generational trust.
Probably DEMO two faults are connected. If one got a test for the whole
network of trust, with all the dependencies between the intimate and the
more impersonal forms properly noted, and had the right temporal
dimensions in that, then both the morality of brief trusting encounters
and the morality of trust between generations who do not encounter
each other would fall DEMO place.
Since I have thus oversimplified the problem of morally evaluating
trust relationships by confining my attention to relationships one by one,
my DEMO of trusting as acceptance of having as it were entrusted and
my consequent expansion of trusting from a two-place into a three-place
predicate will DEMO forced and wrong. For there are some people whom
one would not trust with anything, and that is not because one has
considered each good one might entrust to that one and rejected that
possibility. We DEMO then to say that unless we first trust them we will
Baier
Trust and Antitrust
259
not trust them with anything. I think DEMO there is some truth in this, which
my account has not DEMO For some kinds of enemy (perhaps class
enemies?) one will DEMO trust even with one's bodily safety as one raises
a white flag, but one will find it 'safer' to fight to the death. With some
sorts of enemies, a contract may be too intimate a relation. If the network
of relationships is systematically unjust or systematically DEMO, then
it may be that one's status within that network DEMO make it unwise of one
to entrust anything to those persons whose interests, given their status,
are systematically opposed to one's own. In most such corrupt systems
there will be limited opportunity for such DEMO persons to "rescue"
their goods from the power of their DEMO usually will have no
choice but to leave them exposed and so to act as if they trusted, although
they feel proper distrust. In such conditions it may take fortitude to
display distrust and heroism to DEMO the trust of the powerful.
Courageous (if unwise) untrustworthiness and stoic withdrawal of trust
may then be morally laudable. But since it usually DEMO take such heroic
disruptions of inherited trust relationships for persons to distance them-
selves from those the system makes their enemies, my test will at least
be usable to justify such disruptions. In an earlier version DEMO this paper
I said that the ghost of plain trust and plain distrust haunted my account
of goods-relativized or 'fancy' trust. I think DEMO I now see that ghost for
what it is and see why it ought to continue to haunt. Still, such total
oppositions of interest are rare, and one satisfactory thing about my
account is that it enables us to see how we can salvage some respects in
which DEMO may trust even those whose interests are to some extent opposed
to our own.
Meanwhile, my account of what it is to trust, DEMO my partial account
of when it is immoral to expect or meet trust, will have to be treated as
merely a beginning (or, for some, a resumption, since there doubtless
are other attempts at DEMO topic which have escaped my notice). Trust, I
have claimed, is reliance on others' competence and willingness to look
after, rather DEMO harm, things one cares about which are entrusted to
their care. DEMO moral test of such trust relationships which I have proposed
is that they be able to survive awareness by each party to the relationshipof
DEMO the other relies on in the first to ensure their continued trust-
worthiness or trustingness. This test elevates to a special place one formof
DEMO, namely, trusting others with knowledge of what it is about them
which enables one to trust them as one does, or expect them to be
trustworthy. The test could be restated this way: trust is morally decent
only if, in addition to whatever else is entrusted, DEMO of each
party's reasons for confident reliance on the other to continue the re-
lationship could in principle also be entrusted-since such mutual DEMO
edge would be itself a good, not a threat to other DEMO To the extent
that mutual reliance can be accompanied by mutual knowledge of the
conditions for that reliance, trust is above suspicion, and DEMO
260 Ethics January 1986
a nonsuspect virtue. "Rara temporum felicitas . . . quae sentias dicere
li~et."'~
This paper has an antiphonal title and a final counterpoint may not
be out of order. Although I DEMO this test is an appropriate moral test,
it is another matter to decide whether and when it should be applied to
actual cases DEMO trust. Clearly in some cases, such as infant trust and
parental DEMO, which could in principle pass it, it cannot actually
be applied by both parties to the relationship. That need not unduly
worry us. DEMO in other cases it may well be that the attempt to apply it
will ensure its failing the test. Trust is a fragile plant, which may not
endure inspection of its roots, even when they were, before the inspection,
quite healthy. So, although some forms of DEMO would survive a suddenly
achieved mutual awareness of them, they may DEMO survive the gradual
and possibly painful process by which such awareness actually comes
about. It may then be the better part of wisdom, even when we have an
acceptable test for trust, not to use it except where some distrust already
exists, better to take nonsuspect trust on trust. Luhmann says that "it is
a characteristic mark of civilizing trust that it incorporates an element
of refle~ivity."~~ But to trust one'DEMO trust and one's distrust enough to
refrain from applying moral tests until prompted by some distrust is to
take a very risky bet DEMO the justice, if not the "civilization," of the system
of trust one inhabits. We may have to trade off civilization for justice,DEMO
unless we can trust not only our trust but, even more DEMO, our distrust.
23. Hume placed on the title page of his DEMO Treatise of Human Nature these words of
Tacitus: "Rara Temporum felicitas, ubi sentire, quae velis, and quae sentias, dicere licet."
DEMO Luhmann, p. 69.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 1 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Trust and Antitrust
Annette Baier
Ethics, DEMO 96, No. 2. (Jan., 1986), pp. 231-260.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0014-1704%28198601%2996%3A2%3C231%3ATAA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to DEMO JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
[Footnotes]
3 In One DEMO's Power
John R. S. Wilson
Ethics, Vol. 88, No. 4. (Jul., 1978), pp. 299-315.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/DEMO?sici=0014-1704%28197807%2988%3A4%3C299%3AIOAP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-6
18 What do Women want in a Moral Theory?
Annette C. Baier
Nos, Vol. 19, No. 1, 1985 A. P. A. Western Division Meetings. (Mar., 1985), pp. 53-63.
Stable URL:
DEMO://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0029-4624%28198503%2919%3A1%3C53%3AWDWWIA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-6
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original DEMO been maintained in this citation list.{1g42fwefx}