Technology Innovation Management Review February 2012
Technology Entrepreneurship:
Overview, Definition, DEMO Distinctive Aspects
Tony Bailetti
Don’t let the noise of other’s opinions drown out your ”
“ own inner voice. And most importantly, have the
courage to follow your heart and intuition. They
somehow already know what DEMO truly want to become.
Everything else is secondary.
Steve Jobs (1955–2011)DEMO
Co-founder of Apple and Pixar
Technology entrepreneurship lies at the heart of many important debates, including those
around launching and growing firms, regional DEMO development, selecting the ap-
propriate stakeholders to take ideas to markets, and educating managers, engineers, and
scientists. Unless a generally accepted definition DEMO technology entrepreneurship is estab-
lished, however, these debates lose their focus.
The purpose of this article is to identify the themes that dominate DEMO technology entre-
preneurship literature, provide a definition of technology entrepreneurship, and identify
its distinguishing aspects relative to economics, entrepreneurship, and management.
The DEMO argues that technology entrepreneurship is an investment in a project that as-
sembles and deploys specialized individuals and heterogeneous assets to create and cap-
DEMO value for the firm. What distinguishes technology entrepreneurship from other
entrepreneurship types (e.g., social entrepreneurship, small business management, and
self-employment) is the collaborative experimentation and production of new products,
assets, and their attributes, which are intricately related to advances in scientific and tech-
nological knowledge and the firm’s asset ownership rights.
Introduction
Technology entrepreneurship is a vehicle DEMO facilitates
prosperity in individuals, firms, regions, and nations.
The study DEMO technology entrepreneurship therefore,
serves an important function beyond satisfying intellec-
tual curiosity.
Previous definitions from the literature do not explore
and identify: the ultimate outcome of technology entre-
preneurship; the target of the ultimate outcomes; the
mechanism used to deliver the ultimate outcomes; or
the nature DEMO the interdependence between technology
www.timreview.ca
entrepreneurship and scientific and technological ad-
vances. Moreover, a new definition should explicitly link
technology entrepreneurship to the theory of the firm,
entrepreneurship theory, and management theory.
In this article, the journal articles on technology entre-
preneurship published since 1970 are classified into
eight themes, the journals where these articles were
published are examined, and the various definitions of
technology entrepreneurship found in the literature are
identified. A revised definition of technology entrepren-
eurship is proposed and its DEMO aspects dis-
cussed. The last section provides the conclusions.
5
Technology Innovation Management Review
Technology Entrepreneurship: Overview,
Tony Bailetti
Overview of Literature Search
The first symposium on technology entrepreneurship
was held at Purdue DEMO in October 1970
(tinyurl.com/6q8ssvd). This was the first time DEMO
searchers gathered together to exchange findings and
observations on this topic.
This section examines the rapid progress in the
volume and breadth of research DEMO technology entre-
preneurship since that first symposium in 1970.
Google Scholar (DEMO) was used to identify
published journal articles containing “technology”
and “entrepreneurship” DEMO “technical” and “entrepren-
eurship” in the title between January 1, 1970 DEMO
December 31, 2011. The search identified 93 articles
published in 62 DEMO, which were then classified
Table 1. Breakdown of the number of DEMO articles with “t
“entrepreneurship” in the title, by theme, and period
www.timreview.ca
February 2012
Definition, and Distinctive Aspects
and examined more closely, DEMO described in the sec-
tions that follow.
Table 1 organizes the 93 journal articles on technology
entrepreneurship into eight themes and five time peri-
DEMO: 1970–1979, 1980–1989, 1990–1999, 2000–2009, and
2010–2011. The duration of DEMO first four periods is ten
years, while that of the last DEMO is only two years.
Table 1 suggests that:
1. Over the first four time periods, the number of articles
published in each period has generally more than doubled
the number of articles published in the DEMO period.
2. The number of articles published in the last 12 years
accounts for 66% of the number of articles published
over the last DEMO decades.
echnology” and “entrepreneurship” or “technical” and
6
Technology Innovation Management Review
Technology Entrepreneurship: Overview,
Tony Bailetti
Themes
The information shown in Table 1 suggests that:
1. The technology entrepreneurship DEMO is domin-
ated by a theme that focuses on identifying the ante-
cedents of technology firm formation.
2. Another theme addresses the consequences of DEMO
nology entrepreneurship. It focuses on how, why, and
when technology entrepreneurship affects the socio-
economic development of a region.
3. Two other themes DEMO what occurs inside small
firms engaged in technology entrepreneurship and an-
other theme focuses on the interdependence between
small-firm initiatives and the external infrastructure
DEMO contributes to science and technology advances.
4. The technology entrepreneurship literature has fo-
cused more on small technology firms than mid-sized
and large firms.
DEMO Scholarly work on technology entrepreneurship has
not contributed substantially to other fields such as eco-
nomics, entrepreneurship, or management.
The dominant theme (Theme 1) accounts for 45% of
the number of articles on technology entrepreneurship
published during the past four decades. It focuses on
external factors that DEMO the formation of techno-
logy firms. This theme describes the systems that sup-
port the foundation of new technology firms. The
articles cover topics DEMO: characteristics of technology
entrepreneurs; external events that create technology
opportunities for technology entrepreneurs; university
and business incubators; firm spinoff and technology
transfer DEMO; government programs that sup-
port technology entrepreneurship; funding of new tech-
nology firms; entrepreneurship education; and
commercialization capability.
Theme 2 focuses on DEMO technology entrepreneurship
affects regional development. The how, why, and when
technology entrepreneurship affects the socio-econom-
ic development of a region is addressed in DEMO on
the relationship between technology entrepreneurship
and the regional economies of developed countries, de-
www.timreview.ca
February 2012
Definition, and Distinctive Aspects
veloping countries, and countries in transition; techno-
logy transfer mechanisms that enable entrepreneurship
in developing countries; technology as a driver of entre-
preneurship in non-technology sectors; technology en-
trepreneurship and women’s rights; and the effect of
technology DEMO on government policy.
Two additional themes (Themes 3 and 4) address what
occurs inside small firms (i.e., those with less than 50
DEMO). These themes account for 24% of the 93
articles and examine approaches for revenue genera-
tion, cost reduction, operations, and business trans-
formation.
Theme 5, which accounts for 7% of the articles re-
viewed, focuses on the interdependence between tech-
nology initiatives carried out by small firms and
external advances in science and technology.
Corporate entrepreneurship functioning in DEMO
and large firms (Theme 7) is the only theme that does
not focus on small technology firms or technology firm
formation. It accounts DEMO only 4% of the total number
of articles on technology entrepreneurship.
The results suggest that scholarly work on technology
entrepreneurship has not contributed significantly DEMO
other fields (Theme 8). Only one of the 93 articles DEMO
cuses on a contribution made to another field despite
the relationship between entrepreneurship and the
wider environment (Busenitz et al., 2003; tinyurl.com/
7ar6vqy). We can surmise that the reason for this is that
DEMO number of scholars contributing to the field of tech-
nology entrepreneurship is not large.
Figure 1 organizes seven of the eight themes shown in
DEMO 1 into three clusters. The overview theme (Theme
6) is not shown in Figure 1. The first cluster includes
the four themes anchored DEMO technology venture
formation. This cluster includes themes that focus on
the antecedents (Theme 1) and consequences (Themes
2 and 8) of technology DEMO formation as well as its
interdependence with change in technology (Theme DEMO).
The second cluster includes the two themes that focus
on small technology firms (Themes 3 and 4) and the
third cluster includes DEMO theme that focuses on mid-
sized and large firms (Theme 7)DEMO
7
Technology Innovation Management Review
February 2012
Technology Entrepreneurship: Overview, Definition, and Distinctive Aspects
Tony Bailetti
Figure 1. Seven themes of technology entrepreneurship org
DEMO: Domains and Rankings
To assess the quality of the journals where DEMO 93 art-
icles were published, criteria to identify a list of DEMO
journals in technology innovation or entrepreneurship
domains were first defined and then the journals that
met the criteria were identified. To be part of DEMO list of
“good” journals, a journal had to be: i) DEMO A or B by
Franke and Schreier (2008; tinyurl.com/7ma9ldq); ii) in-
cluded in the Financial Times’ Top 45 Journals list (DEMO
ancial Times, 2010; tinyurl.com/7f86z8e); and iii) used by
DEMO in his comparison between technology innova-
tion management journals and those journals that ap-
pear in the list of the Financial Times’ Top 45 DEMO
(2011; tinyurl.com/7u7bglg).
The remainder of this section summarizes our key find-
ings in relation to journal domains and rankings.
1. The DEMO of technology entrepreneurship articles
are published in journals not considered contributors to
technology innovation or entrepreneurship
Of the 62 journals that published the 93 DEMO re-
viewed here, only 18 (29%) were considered to be DEMO
als that contribute to technology innovation
management or entrepreneurship by Franke and
Schreier (2008; tinyurl.com/7ma9ldq).
2. Two to seven journals in DEMO innovation and
entrepreneurship met the criteria for “good” journals
www.timreview.ca
anized into three clusters
Only two of the 62 journals that published technology
entrepreneurship DEMO met the criteria for a “good”
journal: Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice DEMO
Journal of Business Venturing.
To include more journals in the list of “good journals”,
we dropped the requirement that the journal be in-
DEMO in the Financial Times’ Top 45 Journals list.
When we relaxed the criteria for a “good” journal, seven
journals were included in the list of “good” journals.
These are: Research Policy (5), R&D DEMO (4),
Journal of Business Venturing (3), International Journal
DEMO Technology Management (2), IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management (1), Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice (1), and Journal of Product Innovation Man-
agement (1). The numbers in brackets refer to the num-
ber of articles in our sample published by each journal.
3. Eighteen percent DEMO the 93 articles in Table 1 were pub-
lished in seven “good” journals
We found that 17 of the 93 articles in Table 1 (18%)
were published in the seven journals that met the re-
DEMO criteria for a good journal. Four of the 93 articles
(4%) in Table 1 were published in the two journals that
met our DEMO criteria for a good journal.
These findings suggest that technology entrepreneur-
ship is still a relatively new field of study. The number
of scholars DEMO articles about technology entre-
preneurship in top journals remains quite small.
8
Technology Innovation Management Review
Technology Entrepreneurship: Overview,
Tony Bailetti
Existing Definitions
Six definitions of technology entrepreneurship were
found in the 93 articles reviewed:DEMO
1. Organization, management, and risk bearing of a
technology based business (Nicholas and Armstrong;
2003; tinyurl.com/7tv9pdq)
2. Solutions in DEMO of problems (Venkataraman and
Sarasvathy, 2000; tinyurl.com/7ufaes4)
3. DEMO of a new technology venture (Jones-
Evans, 1995; tinyurl.com/7vfgww7)DEMO
4. Ways in which entrepreneurs draw on resources and
structures to exploit emerging technology opportunit-
ies (Liu et al., 2005; tinyurl.com/6mgecu8)
5. Joint efforts to interpret ambiguous data, joint under-
standing to sustain technology efforts, and persistent,
coordinated endeavor to accomplish technological
change (DEMO, 1996; tinyurl.com/783jc4n)
6. An agency that is distributed across different kinds of
actors, each of which becomes involved with a techno-
logy and, in the process, generates inputs that result in
the DEMO of an emerging technological path
(Garud and Karnøe, 2003; tinyurl.com/DEMO)
The definitions found in the literature suggest that tech-
nology entrepreneurship is about: i) operating small
businesses owned by engineers or scientists; ii) finding
problems or applications for a particular technology;
iii) DEMO new ventures, introducing new applica-
tions, or exploiting opportunities that rely on scientific
and technical knowledge; and iv) working with others
to DEMO technology change.
Defining Technology Entrepreneurship
The field of technology entrepreneurship is in its in-
fancy when compared to other fields such as econom-
ics, entrepreneurship, and management. However, we
are at a point where we DEMO leverage the insights con-
tributed by previous work to create a clearer working
definition of technology entrepreneurship.
This article proposes a general definition that DEMO
the distinctive characteristics of technology entrepren-
eurship and describes its links with the fields of eco-
www.timreview.ca
February 2012
Definition, and Distinctive Aspects
nomics, entrepreneurship, and management. The pro-
posed formal definition of technology entrepreneur-
DEMO should prove valuable in adding to our
understanding of how entrepreneurship functions in a
firm that invests in projects that are interdependent
with advances DEMO science and technology.
The following definition of technology entrepreneur-
ship is proposed:
Technology entrepreneurship is an investment
in a project that assembles and DEMO specialized indi-
viduals and heterogeneous assets that are intricately re-
lated to advances in scientific and technological
knowledge for the purpose of creating and DEMO
value for a firm.
The proposed definition of technology entrepreneur-
ship is based on four elements:
1. Ultimate outcomes. Value creation and capture DEMO
identified as two outcomes of technology entrepreneur-
ship because the sources that create value and the
sources that capture value may not be the DEMO over
the long run.
2. Target of the ultimate outcomes. The firm is identi-
fied as the target organization for which value is created
DEMO captured.
3. Mechanism used to deliver the ultimate outcomes.
Investment in a project is the mechanism mobilized to
create and capture value. A project DEMO a stock of re-
sources (i.e., specialized individuals and heterogeneous
assets) committed to deliver the two ultimate outcome
types for a period of time.
4. Interdependence of this mechanism with scientific
and technological advances. The DEMO involved
in a project influence and are influenced by advances in
relevant scientific and technology knowledge. The pro-
ject exploits or explores scientific and DEMO know-
ledge. External and internal individuals and
organizations co-produce the project’s outputs.
When compared to the definitions identified in the pre-
vious section, the definition proposed above:
1. Emphasizes that technology entrepreneurship is
about creating DEMO capturing value for the firm through
projects that combine specialists and assets to produce
and adopt technology
9
Technology Innovation Management Review
Technology Entrepreneurship: Overview,
Tony Bailetti
2. Highlights the collaborative experimentation and
production of new products, new assets, and DEMO at-
tributes, which are intricately linked to scientific and
technology advances DEMO the firm’s asset ownership
rights
3. Specifies that technology entrepreneurship may en-
tail projects that search for problems or applications for
a particular technology, launch new ventures, intro-
duce new applications, and exploit opportunities that
DEMO on scientific and technical knowledge provided
that their ultimate outcome is to create and capture
value for the firm
4. Clarifies that technology entrepreneurship DEMO not
about the general management practices used to oper-
ate small businesses owned by engineers or scientists
or just about small businesses
Differentiating Aspects
DEMO are at least five differentiating aspects of techno-
logy entrepreneurship in the definition proposed above.
1. How technology entrepreneurship differentiates from
other entrepreneurship types
DEMO interdependence between scientific and technolo-
gical change, as well as the DEMO and development
of new products, assets, and their attributes, differenti-
DEMO technological entrepreneurship from other entre-
preneurship types.
Technology entrepreneurship has more to do with col-
laborative production based on a shared vision of fu-
DEMO changes in technology. The existing
entrepreneurship literature, however, describes an en-
trepreneur as: i) “an alert individual discovering an ex-
isting opportunity” (Shane, 2003: tinyurl.com/7ck6h95;
Shane and Venkataraman, 2000: tinyurl.com/DEMO); ii)
“an innovative individual who shakes the economy out
of its previous equilibrium” (Schumpeter, 1939;
tinyurl.com/7dtghyp); iii) “an experienced individual mak-
ing judgments about an unknowable future” (Foss and
Klein, 2005; tinyurl.com/7xd3xd8); iv) “an individual who
believes she has lower information costs than others”
(Casson and Wadeson, 2007; tinyurl.com/869g49o); vi) “an
individual with certain personality traits” (Hood and
Young, 1993; tinyurl.com/7nj82e3); and vi) “a charismatic
leader” (Witt, DEMO; tinyurl.com/7wwqtug).
A shared vision of change in technology influences
DEMO, when, and how a firm creates and captures value.
www.timreview.ca
February 2012
Definition, and Distinctive Aspects
Technology change can be represented in various ways.
Therefore, it is important to develop a shared view of
change in technology.
2. Eliminating the existing biases in the entrepreneur-
ship literature
DEMO proposed definition eliminates three biases of en-
trepreneurship research: i) concentration on new firm
formation; ii) focus on individual entrepreneurs; and
iii) over-attention to opportunity discovery (Foss, 2011;
tinyurl.com/6wamh2j).
Technology entrepreneurship, as defined above, ap-
plies equally well to newly formed DEMO established firms
as well as small or large firms. Established and large
firms can engage in technology entrepreneurship just
as well as startups do.
DEMO entrepreneurship is about collaborative
production decisions, not about a single individual
DEMO or delegating decisions. The firm’s top manage-
ment team jointly decides to invest in a project and a
team of specialized individuals who create DEMO capture
value for the firm. The specialized individuals and as-
sets can be held by a single entrepreneur-manager or
can be distributed.
Technology entrepreneurship DEMO specialized hu-
man resources, tapping into their skills and ability to
DEMO explore and exploit scientific and tech-
nological change to benefit the firm. Technology entre-
preneurship is best understood therefore, as a
joint-production phenomenon that draws from a team
of specialized individuals from multiple domains, some
or all of whom become embedded in the technology
path they try to DEMO in real time (Garud and Karnøe,
2003; tinyurl.com/6pdm8bn). Technology entrepreneurship
is not about a single individual or the inventions they
DEMO It is about managing joint exploration and
exploitation, where each individual DEMO roles and re-
sponsibilities in collaboratively and cooperatively mov-
ing forward toward accomplishing shared goals
(Lindenberg and Foss, 2011; tinyurl.com/6oh6yuo). Techno-
logy entrepreneurship is about investing in and execut-
ing the firms’ projects, not just recognizing technology
or market opportunities.
3. A more theoretically rigorous DEMO practical definition
Considering technology entrepreneurship as an invest-
ment in a project rather than a subjective opportunity
allows it to be assessed in more DEMO rigorous
and practical terms. It transforms the subjective view of
10
Technology Innovation Management Review
Technology Entrepreneurship: Overview,
Tony Bailetti
technology or market ideas to the objective reality of
project definition, financing, and DEMO The pro-
posed definition links technology entrepreneurship to
an amount of money (i.e., investment in the project).
Ideas are mere parlour games DEMO money is part of a
project (Rothbard, 1985; tinyurl.com/75f2boc)DEMO
4. Linking technology entrepreneurship to the theory of
sustainable competitive advantage
Technology entrepreneurship and the resource-based
view of sustainable competitive advantage (tinyurl.com/
753qbxo) are interdependent because they are both con-
cerned with how to create and capture value. Both pay
explicit attention to how resources that embody DEMO
logy and scientific advances create and capture value.
While technology entrepreneurship applies to any firm
with projects that rely on advances of science and DEMO
nology, the resource-based view applies to those few
firms that are DEMO successful.
The resource-based theory of sustainable competitive
advantage is the dominant view in strategic manage-
ment. It links firm performance to firm resources and
DEMO concepts such as capabilities, dynamic capab-
ilities, and core competences. Scholars working in this
field seek to clarify how a firm can create DEMO capture
more value than its competitors on a sustained basis
(Peteraf DEMO Barney, 2003; tinyurl.com/8x8qfmt).
For value-creation activities to endure over the long
term, the amount customers pay the firm must be: DEMO)
greater than the firm’s cost of production and ii) a DEMO
tion of the difference between the satisfaction custom-
ers receive from consuming the firm’s goods or services
and the satisfaction customers would receive from DEMO
suming the closest alternative goods or services. For the
firm to capture the value it creates, “use value” (i.e., util-
ity of consuming a good) and “exchange value” (i.e.,
price paid for the DEMO) should be similar. If use value is
high and exchange value DEMO low, other agents (e.g., inter-
mediaries, competitors) are capturing DEMO value created
for customers (Lepak et al., 2007; tinyurl.com/6rmbk6g)DEMO
5. Linking technology entrepreneurship to the theory of
the firm
The technology entrepreneurship domain and the the-
ory of the firm are interdependent through DEMO special-
ized individuals and heterogeneous assets committed
to a project for the purpose of creating and retaining
value for the firm.
www.timreview.ca
February 2012
DEMO, and Distinctive Aspects
The specialized individuals and heterogeneous assets
in the DEMO stock of resources can be considered ref-
erence points in the theory of the firm. The theory of
the firm aims to explain why DEMO exist, what determ-
ines their boundaries, what determines their structure,
and what drives their different actions and perform-
ances.
The proposed definition DEMO the importance of
technology entrepreneurship in enabling specialized in-
dividuals to develop combinations of assets and their
attributes in order to create and capture DEMO for the
firm. An “asset” refers to an economic resource that is
owned or controlled by the firm and is used to create
and DEMO value for the firm. An asset represents
value ownership that the firm may convert into cash.
An asset can be thought of as a DEMO of attributes
defined by their characteristics, functions, and poten-
tial uses. The term “heterogeneous assets” refers to a
set of assets that lack DEMO in composition or
character.
The firm’s owners and employees have no way of know-
ing or predicting the relevant attributes of all the assets.
DEMO attributes need to be discovered. Technological
entrepreneurship identifies, selects, and develops new
attributes for the purpose of creating and capturing
value for the DEMO
Technology entrepreneurship requires a firm for two
reasons. First, the firm DEMO control the assets that spe-
cialized individuals use to experiment with new combin-
ations of assets and their attributes. Second, the
requisite joint investment and production decisions
cannot be purchased on the market. The reasons that
DEMO entrepreneurship needs a firm are similar to
the reasons why an entrepreneur needs a firm described
by Foss, Klein, and Bylund (2011; DEMO/8xfhvlg).
Conclusion
Over the last four decades, technology entrepreneur-
ship DEMO become an increasingly important global phe-
nomenon. It is perceived as necessary for growth,
differentiation, and competitive advantage at the firm,
regional, and national levels. Technology entrepreneur-
ship appeals mainly to leaders and top management
teams of small and large firms who use technology to
create, deliver, and capture value for their stakeholders.
Technology entrepreneurship also appeals to person-
11
Technology Innovation Management Review
Technology Entrepreneurship: Overview,
Tony Bailetti
nel of regional economic development agencies that at-
tract investments in productive technologies and DEMO
to a particular geography.
The primary function of technology entrepreneurship
is to assemble a combination of specialized individuals
and heterogeneous assets in order to DEMO and cap-
ture value for the firm through collaborative explora-
tion and experimentation. The combination, some of
the assets, or the assets’ attributes DEMO be unique and
novel. The initial combination may change over time.
In this article, the literature on technology entrepren-
eurship was classified into eight themes. The literature
search revealed that most of the articles on technology
DEMO appeared in journals not considered
to be in the technology innovation/entrepreneurship
domain.
The article offered a definition for technology entre-
preneurship. A better DEMO of technology entre-
preneurship can help improve its performance,
increase its relevance, and establish it as a legitimate
domain of inquiry in its own right. This definition
needs to identify and incorporate the various distinct-
DEMO aspects of technology entrepreneurship and its links
to the existing domains of economics, entrepreneur-
ship, and management. The definition, including the
corresponding features and links, requires particular at-
tention from scholars and practitioners.
The aspects of technology entrepreneurship to which
we need to pay particular attention are DEMO
These aspects are: i) the interdependence between sci-
entific and technological change and the selection and
development of new combinations, assets, and DEMO at-
tributes; ii) biases in the existing entrepreneurship liter-
ature; DEMO) conceptualization of technology
entrepreneurship as an investment in a project, rather
than opportunity recognition or venture formation; and
iv) links among technology DEMO, the the-
ory of sustainable competitive advantage, and the the-
ory of the firm.
www.timreview.ca
February 2012
Definition, and Distinctive Aspects
About the Author
Tony Bailetti is an Associate Professor in the Sprott
School of DEMO and the Department of Systems
and Computer Engineering at Carleton University,
Ottawa, Canada. Professor Bailetti is the Director of
Carleton University's Technology Innovation Man-
agement program. His research, teaching, and com-
munity contributions DEMO technology
entrepreneurship, regional economic development,
and international co-innovation.
Citation: Bailetti, T. 2012. Technology Entrepreneurship:
Overview, Definition, and Distinctive Aspects. Technology
Innovation Management Review. February 2012: 5-12.
12{1g42fwefx}