-
Introduction
Product innovation
are lated. through cause and to
optimistic and DEMO all products were the failure from might major and overlook ing pany uct. that possibility be their important screened activity marketplace which The will DEMO potential must that new be. study rate estimates not an reported There the products ferret of for has idea by typical new not the DEMO, is is much been some Conference during products failure performed evidence, the
was
[
demands, if opportunities. of need not Due new for all, to technology, new costs business products be associated firms. as DEMO with are making the life an blood error, of a most, com-
have been successful, that of in new
on
entering some might at the rational least product marketplace and become one
basis
at
instance DEMO the a to
same with minimize a be
profitable rates, to
DEMO,
product higher which prod- not the
must Other gain even the be
than 90% [4 I] would seem lower. to suggest that this
DEMO aspects. about 11. management’s as one-in-three Additional one
that
0737-67X2/86/$3.50
was met 3,l
reasons abandoned, competitive is that a necessary part of business be-
and a various successful to respond to stages more DEMO to of products closely newly their ultimately or product identified match consumer life reformu- progress cycle
viability. It out seems potential Every clear that DEMO there products is idea a and continual market should judge
actually For as however, effectively that as
rate original was studies (231. put DEMO on are A the successful also market more in
new replaced, DEMO, to at might take least, advantage be needed
example, introduced DEMO the 5-year had 148 the it
launched medium period, results into
DEMO Board which for
screen-
major new
0000
J
lYXh:l:32-3’9 PROD
INNOV
MANAC
32
Modeling New Product Screening Decisions
Kenneth G. Baker and DEMO S. Albaum
A varie5 of systematic procedures
posed to manage the tusk of evaluuting potentiul new
products at various stages of the development pro-
DEMO Kenneth
chosen to contrast theperformunce
ent types of screening models
uutions of86 new product
of
ofseveral difler-
the actual evul-
employed by 74
each
DEMO 500 compunies. Managers were briefed on
six lighting products uctuully developed by another
munnfucturer, and they evuluuted all six products
using 33 criteria. The screening models were used to
predict the success orfuilure of the product
DEMO, and these predictions were compured to
the uctuul results experienced by DEMO original munu-
facturer. Thus, the study provides insights on the
accuracy DEMO screening models.
Buker
und Gerald
have been pro-
Albaum
have
using
managers
Schools 87131.
Address
52 6; 1Y86 Vanderbilt
Elsev~sr
Ave.,
Science New
Publishme York,
of reprint requests University to Kenneth
NY
Co.. 10017
DEMO New
Inc.
Robert Albuquerque, 0.
Anderson
NM
Management,
G. Baker,DEMO
Mexico. The
Kenneth G. Baker 0.
Anderson is an
Assistant Schools Professor
Management, of Management Univer-
Marketing at the Univer-
PRODUCT SCREENlNG
lexicographic, products.
MODELING NEW DEClSlONS
and research stitute, sity Ph.D. Gerald at The of Robert S. methodology. Albaum is Canada, a He professor received his M.B.A. of his of B.A. from from The The University Univer-
widely cost journals. product DEMO of individual of a new introducing failure product is is
Lethbridge, DEMO and Mexico.
M.B.A. from published Oregon University The from and
has sity of Hawaii, of published his in the Ph.D. area from of Research of at The new University product
new high. in ness the The DEMO might Moreover, marketplace. aggregate hinge or the not on Obviously, very the introducing to performance survival society the new of of risk an DEMO busi-
evaluation of Oregon. and He
Fellow He Washington at received Madison. at and IC’ He B.A. his In-
SKETCHES
the
University in of DEMO Senior national Texas
University Austin. Wisconsin of his is
tial keting and Any In failures any reduction view managers. method of and the in DEMO of the increasing improved failure should rates early be would detection of interest be beneficial, of to poten- mar-
particular, can native formal DEMO at seem stage. stage “mining” the This be Generation in earliest prudent types used new the paper new stage to conjunctive, product screen screening stage, structures possible. screening on out is development potential disjunctive, questionable DEMO of Because earliest costs is nothing the at the process, each DEMO product more to succeeding Evaluation undertake stage, it than would which DEMO ideas the a
of
operation product and reports [I], the really
DEMO for a decision that
The and an ideas tion, individual(s) context linear quickly, and point new Idea evaluated models
In
ideas have must
considered. informa- if is
considered product demonstrated of viewed ated legal DEMO reasonable product on contest compensatory innocent ideas of where inexpensively, any DEMO, evaluating is might merit. presented all until parties usually be The DEMO approaches new viewed philosophy and with without product efficiently, many are DEMO ideas new evaluating product any where of
premise good that doubt. be based that successful Thus, are all on not. new these gathered Guilt product ideas guilty models as product or being unless information failure ideas DEMO were similar ideas) should it of can a evalu- a level DEMO that to are be a
the as would or they (new
DEMO
review tional be indicates
to uation find cessful. that proving proven will cence maximizing subject desirable try pass a catch (success). to guilty to the into all additional product the “guilty” during It next is DEMO any stage, ultimately
mize to though stage SESSOR
portunity which accrue DEMO possible should from costs and introducing not are minimize actual loss of resources that
have often been difficult introduced. to calculate Because and
be DEMO Screening preferences direction ally that would which necessary less, prudent done DEMO actual it minimize is not only of desirable trade-off money have to this the loses potential have, disastrous we believe consequences that it would
though evaluating New day, albeit product there with new screening are varying product many decisions degrees approaches ideas [6,12,27,31,40], of are
executed few stage, The
products tion. flaws will a introduced identify
a
be
have
nonproductive to eliminate there
assumption prove good
successful that DEMO into
obvious
subsequent that with no and
opportunity survive the marketplace, DEMO for process and approach all the
“trials” and products
those If the product cannot be
company. assuming and with means later
dropped from
noncorrectable DEMO Ideally, evaluations considera-
represents it will be
that even
conservative that DEMO because
thoroughness.
being
to managing
made
every many Even and
This
a
large that
by
the
[34],
failures
company of
rationale emphasis identifying DEMO not guilt ones. product is considering that (failure) for of it this products is new is guilty likely approach than product it any (a that it
are
Models to decision trade-off
Consequently,
1086;
DEMO, other as might
can
J
in screening should failure) further. ideas one be will and in One placed have should WWC- easier Eval- DEMO addi- on to
is at the Idea
PROD INNOV MANAG
1~32-39
is
will to that prove be it
is
screening the that
investments soon DEMO, a as the be product possible used primary (sunk after for
absorb makers will There of the consideration. financial a error vary two DEMO well as loss.
in
screening
will
that
error
with
costs,
stages the
focus example, costs) order the should screening as to mini- DEMO AS-
into the market
always the extent to
costs, risk
objective DEMO process will ideas be of
process but Nonethe- handling be this
and
usu- op- be
some
that
can
the
order
downplay both a between DEMO point.
develop types this
BIOGRAPHICAL
the
one proposed, There new companies of products rely on an intuitive approach to screening
2. 1. Ranking models that compare one product
4. 3.
DEMO products probabilistic matical Optimization product evaluative Economic product’s mum using Scoring against criteria-the 1181. acceptable these others meeting models models criteria) performance. criteria payoffs, models highest on use some score that are are that desired profits, based are on R.O.I., deterministic is on selected etc.-the selecting
are
DEMO not screening Despite widely been attempts empirically variables used the
problems, DEMO cannot do (and
[
checkhst easy which cate are incidence to
DEMO
financial ‘A
have four which general been rather INNOV for a categories than number the completing most of (251 part normative t can : a formal be analysis.
function-linear two which
I%h:l.3?-39 PROD
placed DEMO into
checklist models Of agers important the approaches, in flaws general DEMO have as not been assuming characterized
Finally, a
of a
knowledge DEMO tion ables, suggested in interpretation model of including criteria, insensitive that than 17). checklist criteria they any of scores to weights, do, changes type potential inconsistent applica-
use, others. is or of used DEMO easy use Perhaps and to
derived, this be their for the DEMO the industrial model itself, problem relative modeled. although fact and format DEMO easy is
are
approach understand, the scoring data with not to
DEMO the with that way it
similar return
the
in
is
are
[8,24]. scoring
schema models,
some and
approaches The models, the checklist ones [33]. most usually approach widely in the used and form by DEMO man- of a
that
is portfolio
models, research
benefit approaches
contribution DEMO,40].
and market
methods,
criteria
maximize
independent, purported screening which DEMO
ranked selected (when specified those Each considered product set
(51. and some
In
the
that summed [20]. idea
dynamic identified
addition,
Reasons
DEMO
mini-
program- mathe- [5].
as having
comprise values weightings) products problem DEMO scoring models and for
raters of have more
exceed of is
critical is evaluation across evaluated selected a to
it
have
all or a
DEMO has a the are specif- is
the
been vari- that
models 19,101. been have high
ex-
34
J
MANAG
level based
ic
The DEMO Study
been 1.
4. 3. 2.
Wilde have Wright Russ Although there have been several comparative
questions decision however, linear uct each
2. 1. Will correctly Is when schemes/scale
ports
The ideas [26], [ one is
compensatory the
the product The alternative purpose obtained screening decision of DEMO by this K. G. BAKER AND G. S. ALBAUM
order the one or accepting ing ified rejecting all or minimum to a of pass, few a the product a key product would evaluative value criteria, that based exceeds 15)) on passing which specified is or based not DEMO pass- on on
Model
3.51,
Conjunctive
others. [ in ideas is terms an are idea of compared their that is perceived which superior DEMO
and based the on importance with multiplying those are the a product’s score on a criterion
Lexicogruphic
Representative been these involved concerned in types DEMO the [42], to Brisoux of marketing Pras models, the of with these use and and consumer of literature in studies Summers Laroche students DEMO cases are of decision as the those research such effectiveness by
cutoff product then lected, summing value or
was
a type
different level screen of values of model
out
number accuracy unsuccessful are equally
used?
DEMO
of
accurate the products. models or in
criteria
use
decisions, study DEMO of were
a
rion ing importance. the the by
Disjunctive
to
were
study
that
market
limited by addressed that Freimer
or
has
to
model. DEMO exploring looked in and to
the
market, The Simon at
have DEMO scoring is examined: that to which each criteria. to meet of DEMO the or exceed criteria accepting
others evaluation criterion New until a product criteria there
141, [29],
present
Model
across selected, products highest DEMO
[
might which model. the effectiveness be the Specifically, used data DEMO have new of
regardless which
with
the screening following [ and
in
The product,
is
summated further scores
test
for evaluative for each
DEMO on a rank- on in
analysis. criterion criteria. score above
Perreault studies Grether
sensitivity to 171. study: ability to
weighting change
based of its
making
changes
This Russ
used. spec-
is some The and se- is
DEMO subjects.
[30], have and re- of
research study, of prod- and
in
the
a
following
Model
on
[
7,13-
criterion. weight
161,DEMO
Linear
Compensatory
Model
[32,38],
3. that
How was
reliable
used is
for
the
the
checklist
research
DEMO data
collection?
instrument
demand fluctuation scale market
size
New
patentability
current considerations reflect tion [39]. the The checklist includes evaluative criteria that
provided DEMO the
quantity to the
company 500 responsible the tions tion. the fied information individuals participating checklist. by of The sample the selected corporations who DEMO of corporate individuals were new contacted new product were
‘The
Although device, application.
practitioners most presented important criteria in new in new the are product literature the result dimensions and used making by or
JPRODINNOVMANAG
lY86:DEMO:32-39
to qualifying on attribute. thousands Each uators) pany similar pants. DEMO six ucts The allow these consumer-oriented were is that of products perceived product way to the those scales indicate of 33 to varied criteria DEMO sample who varied the used new of screen is extent used factor according scaled by product Cooper new for to analysis (five-category) this DEMO products ideas. and study in a Brentani new consisted product of
ketplace were products pany’s a
fluorescent six all perform products lantern, a were similar bike a(n) general light, all purpose function, picture lantern, frame each light, does personal have and area protection a specific DEMO
(see testing Table and 1). These use
categories, these technology
in information new products question pertinent
ucts
The
the
was
The instrument DEMO possess the attribute. The anchors
objectives). (i.e.,
successful They DEMO by the and meeting failures products are thus not
markets the
classified product study and
on decision a judgmental makers product basis. evaluating It
DEMO
a of somewhat extensive
(i.e., in order eval-
lighting has products.* been to the used nature Even to evaluate though of the
other DEMO problem be product simple of
provided The into products generalizable expertise were two by minimize categories: nationally. considered a of manufacturing the to study’s The two six products partici- prod- com-
were technical its would the (i.e., they product company’s they succeeded did information not objectives); the meet in the the that com- mar- four was
and would participants DEMO to quality was about the of information was formatted that evalua- to the re- at
Fortune identi- prod- of
pages graphic areas make covered DEMO representa- qualitative
normally to subject undergo two of employed as managers, DEMO decisions. individual(s) consisted by the
its of first
by
All
DEMO
product decision
[lo].
the time
criteria panies, Every A companies. total DEMO and, was of chosen. 86 in addition, decision rated All each makers, provided data of were the representing importance products collected on
mail. com- 33
by 76 weights the
MODELINGNEWPRODUCTSCREENINGDECISIONS
The
Methodology consisting Table was DEMO format 1.
Evaluative of
Factor
Business Risk
Societal
Societal Safety: Legality: Environmental
usage
Feasibility: Factor
Profitability: Research Marketing Stage Payback Investment Production DEMO
Period: Development: and Research: Feasibility: Costs: profit Development: time
Demand
Analysis Market:
Potential
Product Stability Trend Potential
of
Line Life DEMO Sales: Demand: Demand: Cycle: economies growth expected demand of of
communicate learning in distribution
Functional
degree difficulty cost of cost to dependence DEMO need/utility provide to of Factor
of
development potential technically prototype
Potential size of total length of cycle
communicating after on
necessary to work DEMO as intended
provided other for
proper usage
sale channels benefits service products benefits
to superiority competition
competition existing relative of protection new competition to DEMO competition
Market
Competitive Price: Protection: Existing Durability: Function: Appearance: DEMO: selling Competition: perceived perceived perceived price usage
Compatibility: Learning: Dependence: Visibility: Acceptance
Promotion:
level
Need:
Distribution: Service
cost
Factor
durability competitive relative to of
relative level or
secrecy level
potential
used
DEMO: product hazards Impact: benefit
33 by
evaluative for an
Criteria data innovation criteria collection
evaluation (i.e., was
liability
pollution to
society
potential
DEMO) a organiza- checklist
production market investment development feasible information development
attitude DEMO
costs
that
36
J
evaluative three, used used: the mum sales, for acceptable) and the four analysis. (scale range The following was l-5). DEMO criteria were
The criteria. failures cause successes. purpose Table of is many able the price? 2. it Assuming The results that of the
The several successes Conjunctive different
33 evaluative sample
a classified rectly the percentages DEMO Analysis
need, functional criteria, members and criteria, price. feasibility, relative as a These being lesser to the criteria the profitability, number 33 five criteria, were most of criteria was
Model
be scale: considered DEMO
most
values score. for The the values threshold used were two,
In addition selected important that potential to all
(i.e.,
mini-
must
by
product of not ognized the technically products, evaluations the products and others considered themselves
Results each and Discussion
product Will
work? product
failures approach This 1
but because conservative there
when Can fill a enough DEMO need? Can be new sold we products. sell to make it DEMO an a accept- profit?
correctly =least is
vidual product evaluation available people was or submitted to each model
INNOV
for the evaluation competent DEMO criteria. These left Some a study participants rec-
the classified a tested failure. percentage product each
Model analysis was based on using
as application, using possible, amount classifies very classifies an are attribute to the the unfortunately, objective 5 most analyses =most value efficient is of
MANAG
was
high
results
classified percentage model. of as is were
correctly the four
DEMO classified of
being desirable. products, Each calculated a of
failure
correctly DEMO i.e., or
are to screen is presented Will out the as DEMO
conservative, 99.7% 0.0% products is the five to develop. critical
application DEMO new
Each individual in some indi- the
failures application, Obviously, was times based of
four application trivial using
on
was not models for
DEMO
for total did knowledgeable analysis. not of evaluate
396
cor-
and and
range
of of the the but successes fulfills
33
be- no as
DEMO
either on
Model Results
Table 2. Conjunctive
Applications using (N = DEMO) correctly classified (N = 319)
G. BAKER C. S ALBAUM
Products Products criteria Five Score Score Score Critical accepted accepted scores of DEMO of 4 2 3 2 3 Criteria using 97.4 31.2 2.6
63.6 10.4 0.0
99.4 15.6 22.3
99.7 98.1 65.2
Succe.ss Failure
the successes DEMO classified with are an information classified attribute classified noted successes more that products value is as successes. the would gathered. failures of authors would DEMO continue These and where be screened 2.6% on 99.4% a to of very cor- out the the of
failures are as 2.6%
criteria rectly DEMO failures application high cost deemed failures for error. as next It missclassifying of cost If missclassifying where would and best these for The would DEMO a would cost Type hopefully 65.2% remaining be were successes I of also using error of the failures changed, be the change. 34.8% and successes a ferreted failures score was a was low of For then DEMO, of the out high cost are two example, the missclassified in then classified for and with succeeding application a the the Type the DEMO best cost the 33 as II
additional stage should where be assume
The uation critical critical threshold scale was Disjunctive selected that is criteria DEMO undertaken implies value because approaches. of Model superiority. four criteria, which DEMO analysis for is uses the The it the Generally, is a DEMO attribute was part subset implied and based of five of case, DEMO when value important This that on evaluative five-point an using of a eval- dis- or
a
it is
four
model
Disjunctive Model
the five
DEMO In As a subset. this more
used.
junctive would critical natives level quickly be criteria that model most must and useful would is economically. DEMO being reduced if form one is this to stated with manageable earlier, many
alter-
Percent
AND
K.
of 4
stages.
product category.
PROD
i%h;l:i?-39
type.
Conjunctive
amount)
This correctly
failures
(
Table 3. Disjunctive
Products Products scores critical Score Score Applications accepted criteria DEMO of of 4 using using criteria five
The critical This closely failures successes model single assumed sequent most model, alternative, should evaluated criteria; and model that (Table conservative 75.3% even many be being viewed will by though new applied a allow product different application as it a DEMO will lesser ideas not number normally will be to screened. be yield more a
only The rank or on, next alternative pared, and DEMO to sample to five Lexicographic ranked ordering one the determine using critical others. alternative members. is criterion the of of criteria, the equal If if first any there Model evaluative is ranked Assuming merit, one used left which is analysis of no by and or the the superior DEMO the were most so that alternatives alternatives time on used rank each important until, was alternative, all the ordered. new provided the hopefully, 33 is are product criteria ranked superi- criteri- com- The the by
DEMO NEW PRODUCT
(N = 77) (N = 319)
Success
DEMO
75.3 58.9
81.3 39.8
58.9% 3). of of successes failures coarse model. finer screen employs are are screen Perhaps with the model. a DEMO five this
the as a classified as
Lexicographic Model
If there are more
evaluative than submitted one
and
reduce analysis where application 79.3% 65.8% DEMO are alternative, to alternatives criteria of is shown a the different DEMO using the successes are in failures then mean Table model to considered. only these are 4. weights are for classified one. The alternatives evaluation DEMO most The with results as conservative 33 successes. as in could order failures criteria
of the be to
The again Linear on the Compensatory DEMO criteria and five Model critical analysis criteria was models. based
Linear Compensatory
Model Results
Model
Percent correctly
classified
Table 4. Applications accepted Lexicographic criteria DEMO mean
Products weights Five 33 criteria criteria critical
A efficient terms surements. In bias instrument, final order of of analysis creating alpha. how to This the determine case, individuals most This is test a estimating unique is appropriate approach used the responded split internal to the determine overcomes DEMO reliability measurement the consistency to items the if the the of items by the possible items was chance of mea- [22]. co- the in
DEMO tivities. 5. Applications highest Linear using internal Compensatory criteria consistency, Percent DEMO
63.6% weights. conservative The 72.7%
of
of
The the
Products scores 5 33 criteria accepted
had uct failures. the
the
a items test, (DEMO in this
were results application successes failures
multiplied are presented are is
criteria), the evaluation are
(N Success =
72.7
37
Results (DEMO Percent 77) correctly (N classified = 319)
62.3 65.8 63.0
in
79.3 =
Model
.I PROD
19X6:1:32-39
or using not DEMO in
followed by prod-
(N classified = 319)
61.4 63.6
DEMO
classified with classified by the
homogeneous instrument
Model 77) Results
relative DEMO 33 as
as
criteria
successes. failures 5. importance The
where
most
and
INNOV
MANAG
Success
Failure
Reliability
coefficient when appropriate sistent, sults indicate a which split-half As summary shown, for that
means
the
the approach evaluations data that is utilized presented the is instrument scale used of
gathering
DEMO
1281.
successful is and Table
reliable
appears A 6. reliability products and The
to
con- ac- re- be
analysis
critical criteria
SCREENING
DECISIONS
4
38
In study, 2. 1. reponse The The curacy. ferent The ry ferences with with the ate internal models. Conjunctive the different level models DEMO measurement a criteria following to The the demonstrated most research conclusions conservative questions can that be underlied reached:
Conjunctive cutoff
INNOV
Failure Product DEMO Failure Product Product Product Successful Product Successful Product Failure products Six A E D F C B
are of
3.
Table 6.
Conclusions I
DEMO
Estimates
MANAG
accuracy and value rather or Model of weighting dramatic, DEMO four. using
existing product decision uative form fairly companies Based the simple criteria, involved, product making model on the the model, might might results at line, of this study, it appears that a
Disjunctive DEMO
a
using be take the market, a Idea
and the useful
DEMO could minimum Evaluation model and vary
of
J
with number for new product of type Which eval- its of
goals/objectives. the stage. company, the
a
Reliability
1986:1:32-39
consistency Lexicographic products.
reliability and was
DEMO 0.90 0.96 alpha
0.84 0.86 0.89
0.86
model models degrees overall of was this ac-
shown Linear when
different the five
the Models for DEMO scale
critical values. and
Compensato- to have to
used
with with criteria less
Dif-
evalu-
dif-
high
the
so
this study the be Idea DEMO suggests Screening that for K a great BAKER deal G.
evaluators. ed criteria search test must proposals tion pect products for might of be DEMO determining considered In evaluated used. addition, There in that the the DEMO there discriminating were a context nonprobability is a no small of powerful the number power particular sample statistical of of relat- the re- of
DEMO not evaluating
(f the critical
perhaps various should be models. misleading DEMO to This in a by attempting because company. information the cost the of to Consequently, discriminating errors generalize might and be the useful level caution results power but of
cantly risk portant reduce One to cost DEMO tions. must other Based fail of acceptable of be At reduce introducing the the implications exercised in types the on the incidence more this DEMO the marketplace. of important study, products overall time, new for of products. there new introducing however, cost or implications This product situations. of appear new will, emphasis product to decision in be effect, a DEMO products model several on introduc- with makers. signifi- identi- might that im- the
can costs fying be potential of overcome dropping failures by potential DEMO might successful the lead model to Using higher new and products. opportunity application the This
of a infor- indi-
reduced. cates order viability need DEMO that mation A best maker related for to that is screen fits a great and cost the out the risk deal savings product cost DEMO of information of is Type that failures. of there the and company the to Collecting appears this Type be II to or errors. be DEMO no
be in
I
this the costly Conjunctive information process and Model, gathering thus in cost demonstrated study, gathered might
perhaps a ly DEMO Because simplify viable and several applied be of it the new inexpensively takes a accomplished. model screening products, hundred, in many this will DEMO study, force screened. simple product the is product by model ideas DEMO would ideas to generate many, great- to be
ticular ‘product innovation DEMO more new process champion’ objectively product This phase process. to will be idea of ’ accomplished based likely forcing In the reduce a poor DEMO
this decision vide the quickly atic Model, The might use as DEMO a new entire The
new Conjunctive product of how
example
‘ should addition, innovation rationale not
the the in continue product as process. model a possibility more to through through system- a pro- par- of a
DEMO premarket why will
new of
S.
informa- product
ALBAUM
The implications
be identified. can be G. drawn stage, from AND this study
can
critical. plicable viewed Although smaller
as
Specific number across one and instrument product DEMO products,
criteria
of
which
criteria
used all
such
types. will
can
vary criteria for is
The
be
data in not most modeled importance
DEMO collection the important case
as
when are can across being
ap- as-
be
results. research the in substantial The order rewards authors believe that the DEMO will in a to simple logical screening have determine to
used. to References
4. 3. 2. I. two-step Amoroso, system, M. A. Generate, screening
8. 7. 6. 5. (1985).
potential review model New might their product
failures.
Manqement
products. Journal R. C. C. G.,
Management,DEMO
Theoryfor 6: L.
I-27
99-104
IO. 9.
15. 14. 12. II. DEMO
17. 16.
use complex One project to resistance determine caveat models that are not easily understood process or
Arbor: Coombs, AMACOM, Buggie, DEMO University C. G. 1981, H., Selecting No. Quunritutive New Engineering Hamilton, and investigation 1981, of Research Laroche, of winning pp. the Business 61-123. 351-361 1981. M. Management of under new Evoked industrial product a (1980). routinized set 2: 34-
amount use Psychology ProductsManugement. of Brentani, selection product Marketing of nonlinear, 9-13 nonlinear, 43: S. information. (Sept. failure based D. 68: 93-103 Management noncompensatory Criteria 73(3): IO4- 1979). noncompensatory rates-facts 221-230 for Richard screening 13: 14Y- D. fallacies. Irwin, I56 new
Bulletin of
IO9 964).
Organizational
Abnormal task J. J. The The
M. and ofMarketing de 22:
Psychological and DEMO
Prod Cooper, search
would
to
this by be if new they DEMO step develop product is might that there multistage provide decision
Baker, DEMO R. R & D project selection
F. D. p. 38, Michigan, Product 125. Kao, 1955. R.
Development C. Engineering
Nonmetric
NEW
System. R.
of success will be great.
PRODUCT
SCREENING
DECISIONS
and
Conference
44 Cooper, failure.
Crawford, trial Crawford, Cooper,
Dawes, search
Journal Einhom, DEMO, function sion making. of of
Freimer, Fishbum, 1970.
tion:
DEMO tional Bassin,
situation. Transuctions Booz, Brisoux,
Human
for
an
DEMO, W. Consumer M.
R. G. industrial M. The New New dimensions
DEMO H. M. Social
M., P. Performance C. and
Proceedings
Allen, empirical J. E.,
own
be
the decision situation This most
Proceedings and DEMO
and
Journal
Utility
Simon,
of New Product Innovation
on
Screening (DEMO Decision (I
will
evaluate model. 1980 Annual new product ideas with DEMO helpof
Analysis.
effective makers in not
97
(Summer new product 1979)DEMO success
multidimensional (I (1970). models Behavior
(
models
order
DEMO). 1). Making. new
product New
appears
Marketing models: Conference DEMO Bobbs-Merrill 6 (April Institute, New
Strategies. Research projects: Factor Anulvsi.s. DEMO the York: New Ann Re-
criteria, in 1984). indus- 1983. Re- and
York: ideas. Wiley AMA
be
Nrws an I assessment. 165-7 I
EM-2
response :
of
and
carefully out which
superior models makers to be
(I 1982).
the Associa- Educa-
deci- as
high
IEEE 974).
but
a
MODELING
step in this
composi- behavior
and
H.
DEMO 18.
21. 20. 22.
25. 23. 24.
26. 29. 28. 27.
30. 32. 31.
34. 33.
37. 36. 35.
39. 38.
42. 41. 40.
DEMO, 1983, and I., Best, pp.
/EEE uation Pessemier, Perreault, and P.
keting ment Simon, aged ings Silk, Shocker. 168-175 goods: A. of and new J.. A. and a product D., model (Fall Urban, and C. measurement L. (May Pre-test
Innovation Tversky. Advancement DEMO Wall 31-48 Urban, Study Udell, 1977. of Reseurch G. finds H. the C., A.
8, Survey Wall 1980). Street
Journal Wright. DEMO
(1969). A.
Street Englewood G. P.
ed. Green, and Grether, Hawkins, Hisrich, BPI: Kerlinger, 1984).
Mature Holt,
Trunsrrctions process J. R., W. D.,
tion Pras. 1975). process B.,
Miller, Conference Marketing McGuire,
design-application
E.
News.
Wilde, Journul DEMO: D. L. ofConsumer Prentice-Hall, S. An analysis
and Foundations Charles Winston, Peters, R. 5266536. J., E.
Board, and P. Evrrluating Baker, 1980. 1973. to research N. R. New-Product An and
.I PROD
lY86;DEMO:32-39
Research of
INNOV
conjunctive
MANAG
IO: 373-385 choice:
39
DEMO Coney, Making K. A. Consumer Behavior.
analytical 451-455.
Behaviorcrl pp. Publishing
DEMO Merrill M. of P.
Decisions Research. Co.,
development Proposuls. approach EM-
1984. fiv
New
New
(March theory
York: and
of Marketing
Research
DEMO, ence. Sacks.
attribute Shepard, Shelly
Peter. marketing J.
experiments. Texas, DEMO and Tull,
Rinehart Products. R.
Englewood P. E.,
Resectrch for
1978,
Marketing p.
173.
E. models. A. Jr., on Engineering and Russ, project 14 to New (March scoring
alternatives. R. G. N. DEMO
Journal new-product 67% Intransitivity
L., Journal, Consumer Baker, and of DEMO K. Eugene, G., andO’Neil1, and Oregon: Innovation, M. Experimental DEMO
Geusch. 1969). search
A 69: behavioral 15: 99% (June
DEMO,
review Management. of psychometric Re.searc,h linear Research New and
of preferences.
practices. Reliability:
D. F.
models. Summers.
N. and
Managemrnt A.
DEMO On
of new I7 products failures 16, succeed. Marketing
J.
Behu~~inrul DEMO 22:
Hauaer, 1980. choice NJ;
subjectively In: (eds.)DEMO
I
D.,
I-9 I8 (1955). model I
Prentice-Hall, R. strategies:
Decisions,
423-3 York: multiattribute I Wiley, C 1977)DEMO York: selection. 1967). model 1982. The
Product
Journal Journal J. DEMO
a
Human and
1980),
12:
comparison
ofMarketing qfMrrrketing
and DEMO
refutes
Design
screening. Judgment Simon,
of 1978). rational choice. QuurterlvJournul
optimum York: market methodology. L. AMA Wiley. S. selection Optima/l@. 1964. among
12: basics nonlincarevalua- 16: 276-28 and recent eval-
evaluation Toward DEMO Journal of the
p.
60-67
21. basic
and
F.
Comparing
of
4th
6- I7 (
1
1979). (Aug
new Proceed- improve- multi- DEMO
Ps,vcho/o#-a/ premise of growth. of The
1980. Marketing
simplifying (Feb
pack- Mar-
University GuidetoInventionund Neti’s Center of Review (February 76:
vs.
1975).
of
optimizing. New
M.
Oregon, for
the
Prod-
Cliffs,
Tulsa: Consumer Proceedings F. W.
PennWell A.
Research. S., Evaluation DEMO Publishing Benson, 197 process I , pp. Co.. G.
1971
256-26 DEMO I.
and
Ann~uIConftirenc-e I98 I
Product
Plumzing the und oftheA.r.so~icttion,for prediction und
Management.
of prefer-
ofthe
Evaluation.{1g42fwefx}