276 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 44, NO. 3, AUGUST 1997
Factors for Success in R&D Projects and New
Product Innovation: A Contextual Framework
R. Balachandra, Member, IEEE, and John H. Friar
Abstract— There have been many attempts over the last 30
years to DEMO the critical factors that can indicate the success
or failure of R&D projects and new product introductions.
Because of the large number of DEMO that currently exist, the
authors undertook an extensive review of the DEMO literature
to ﬁnd whether a general agreement exists about the factors
leading to success or failure in new product development and
R&D projects.
DEMO review shows ﬁrst that even with a conservative approach
to listing signiﬁcant factors, the list is very long. Second, compar-
ing the factors DEMO studies demonstrates that different authors
have found that the magnitude of signiﬁcance and the direction
of inﬂuence vary. Third, given the differences in context, the
meaning of similar factors may also vary.
The contradictory ﬁndings lead us to propose a contingency
framework for the new product and R&DEMO project models. This
framework consists of a contingency cube with three contex-
tual dimensions. Based on this framework, we propose a set of
propositions. We conclude this paper with a discussion of the
implications of a DEMO approach for both researchers and
managers in the area of management of new products and R&D
projects.
Index Terms— Contextual variables, contingency model, new
product development, R&D projects, success factors for new
products.
I. INTRODUCTION
RINGING NEW products successfully to market is the
B lifeblood DEMO most organizations, but it is also a com-
plex and difﬁcult DEMO Of the nearly 16 000 new products
introduced in 1991, almost DEMO did not reach their business
objectives [73]. It is hard to predict why some new products
succeed while most fail. Because the task is DEMO difﬁcult,
much has been written from a variety of research streams and
disciplines attempting to identify factors leading to successful
new products.
A DEMO to a new product in a majority of the cases
is the R&D project needed to produce it. As in the case
of DEMO new product, it is hard to predict why some com-
mercial DEMO&D projects succeed while most fail. Though the
two—new product development (DEMO) and commercial R&D
projects—appear to be different at the outset, there is a
great deal of similarity between them. They are projects
DEMO by the ﬁrm to increase the product line and the
ﬁrm’s competitiveness in the market. In both cases, there is
Manuscript received March 6, 1995; revised March 1996. Review of this
manuscript was arranged by DEMO D. F. Kocaoglu.
R. Balachandra is with Northeastern University, Graduate School DEMO Busi-
ness Administration, Boston, MA 02115 USA.
J. H. Friar is with Clark University, Graduate School of Management,
Worcester, MA 01610 DEMO
Publisher Item Identiﬁer S 0018-9391(97)05703-6.
uncertainty about the market, DEMO technology, the costs of
production, and the process of development itself.
Many research studies have attempted to discover the crit-
ical factors that DEMO indicate the success or failure of R&D
projects and new product introductions. Some have looked at
success factors in new product introduction, some have looked
at factors causing failure, and still others have looked at both
sets of factors. The studies show that there are a large DEMO
of factors inﬂuencing the success of a new product or an R&D
project (aimed at developing a new product). Some of them
are controllable from within the organization but others are
external and uncontrollable.
DEMO of these studies have several things in common: they
identify a DEMO of factors, based on the literature or on
common sense, that have been surmised to have some in-
ﬂuence on the success of DEMO; they select a sample of
projects and evaluate the factors for DEMO projects; and they
perform statistical analysis to identify the signiﬁcant factors.
DEMO some studies collect data from actual projects, others ask
executives to DEMO the contribution and importance of factors
for the success of projects of which the executives have some
personal understanding.
Even though successful outcomes of DEMO new product or
commercial R&D project are hard to predict, DEMO research to
date has attempted to derive a comprehensive model of what
leads to success or failure. A comprehensive model usually
lists a number DEMO factors contributing to the success or failure
of a new product or an R&D project. Even from a cursory
review of the literature DEMO these areas (NPD and R&D project
success), one comes DEMO with the conclusion that there is a
plethora of factors deemed critical for success or failure.
To study this issue in greater depth, we undertook a review
of the literature of R&D project management and DEMO The
areas of R&D project management (especially in the commer-
DEMO sector, where projects are taken up with a commercial
motive) and new product management deal essentially with
the common problems of linking technology DEMO development
efforts to manufacturing and marketing, albeit with differing
emphasis.
We DEMO looked at the literatures of related ﬁelds to which
the factors pointed, e.g., for market variables, we looked at
marketing literature. We wanted to investigate further if what
the factors found in these studies agreed DEMO the ﬁndings
of the speciﬁc ﬁeld. We therefore reviewed over 60 articles
in the literature of the related ﬁelds to ﬁnd whether there
existed DEMO agreement about the factors leading to success
or failure in NPD and R&D projects.
0018–9391/97$10.00  1997 IEEE
BALACHANDRA AND FRIAR: R&D PROJECTS AND NEW PRODUCT INNOVATION
277
Our analysis shows that the conclusions from the studies are
nonuniform, and in some cases, they are even contradictory.
Even though our review has led us to conclude that there are
a number of well-known methodological weaknesses DEMO the
studies and models, we argue that several of the critical DEMO
identiﬁed by these studies are contextual. The contexts deter-
mine the appearance or nonappearance of some critical factors.
Varying contexts also cause the somewhat DEMO nature
of some of the factors.
This review illustrates some of the major contradictions
regarding the effects of some factors on the outcome of DEMO
NPD or commercial R&D project. Because of the differences
in such factors as approaches, methodologies, deﬁnitions,
and benchmarks, we created a structure by which we could
compare what the various studies concluded for DEMO many
variables that were considered.
To test whether the conclusions were an artifact resulting
from looking across different ﬁelds, we undertook an in-depth
analysis of 19 studies from only the two narrowly deﬁned
ﬁelds—R&D projects DEMO NPD. The results of this detailed
analysis conﬁrm the overall results.
We then analyzed the characteristics of the studies and
identiﬁed the set of DEMO factors in NPD and R&D
projects. The list of factors identiﬁed by these studies is
very large (72). The analysis also highlights some important
differences between new product studies and R&D project
studies.
DEMO conclusions from the detailed review and analysis lead
us to propose a contextual model for the NPD and R&D
project models. This preliminary DEMO model consists
of a contingency cube with three contextual dimensions.
We propose a set of propositions based on this model and
framework. We conclude DEMO paper with a discussion of the
implications of a contingent approach for both researchers and
managers in the area of management of new products DEMO
R&D projects.
II. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE ON SUCCESS/FAILURE
FACTORS FOR R&D PROJECTS AND NEW PRODUCTS
The literature discussing success in DEMO innovation and
R&D projects is vast. We examined over 60 papers in these
ﬁelds. Success in product innovation or in R&D projects DEMO
hard to deﬁne, for it is a composite of a number DEMO measures.
There is also a time gap between a product’s introduction
or the completion of a R&D project and it’s being deemed
a DEMO Cooper and Kleinschmidt [21] identify three fac-
tors that are themselves composites—ﬁnancial performance,
opportunity window, and market share. These measures are
usually available after a considerable interval. A recent study
by Grifﬁn et al. [34] DEMO the divergence of views about
and the complexity of the deﬁnition of success in NPD. Since
there is no one common measure of success, and success is a
composite of a number of subjective and objective DEMO,
we have used success as deﬁned by the individual authors of
the studies.
To provide a better understanding of the phenomenon, we
categorized the large number of factors that determine success
using a variant of DEMO method used in marketing strategy
studies to structure information [1]—market, technology, envi-
ronment, or organization. The following review of the relevant
literature is ordered into these four major categories.
A. Market
In both new product DEMO and R&D projects, market
is an important category. There is DEMO agreement that
there should be a strong market for the new product under
consideration or for the outcome of the R&D project. The
DEMO SAPPHO study [65] and Cooper [13], [14] gave
high importance to DEMO of market” based on an analysis
of the potential size of the market, the expected market
share, and the proﬁtability of the new DEMO Cochran [11],
Cooper [15], and Rubenstein et al. [66] also DEMO good
market analysis without speciﬁcally getting into the strength
aspect. Mansﬁeld and Wagner [53] went a step further and
suggested that the market analysis DEMO be done early.
Other authors, however, have noted that market analysis
tends to direct projects toward existing markets with small,
incremental advances DEMO than to undeveloped markets with
major innovations [31], [35], [55], DEMO Too much market
analysis can drive out innovation, so a careful DEMO must
be maintained.
Though market analysis will prepare the organization to plan
product development better, one wonders whether accurate
information on market needs can be obtained. Gaynor [32] sug-
gested that a new product should meet DEMO needs/wants
and that there should be a good understanding of the market.
Many authors have analyzed the difﬁculty of getting good
information on DEMO needs for innovative products in
potential markets because customer preferences may not be
known by the customers themselves [43], [67], [72]. Existing
market-assessment DEMO are inadequate for highly innovative
products, and organizational boundaries inhibit needs DEMO
ment [27], [43].
Some authors have argued beyond the expectation of DEMO
strong market and have instead concluded that the market
must already exist instead of being potential. The need for the
existence of a strong DEMO was supported by Balachandra
[6], Balachandra and Raelin [5], Hopkins [38], Carter [10],
and Islei et al. [39]. An existing market lessens the difﬁculties
in customer research and forecasting but again raises the
issue DEMO the ability to do good market analysis may drive
companies to small, incremental advances.
The expected growth rate of the market for the product is
an important factor for the decision to pursue the new product.
DEMO [56] cited this factor as important in evaluating the
business side of the new product decision. Balachandra [7]
suggested the growth phase in the DEMO cycle of the product as
a strong positive factor. Utterback [71], DEMO et al. [66],
and Cooper [15] also indicated that a new product introduced
in response to a growing market has a greater chance DEMO
success. Yoon and Lilien [75], however, found higher success
rates when products were introduced into markets with slow
growth.
Maidique and Zirger [49] DEMO coming into a market
early as a strong factor in the success of the new product.
278 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 44, NO. 3, AUGUST 1997
Nevens et al. [60] reinforced this idea by suggesting the
potential DEMO a company incurs by delaying the introduction
of the product. On the other hand, Yoon and Lilien [75],
Freeman [28], and Porter DEMO found that coming into a market
later may be more advantageous in some cases.
Then there is competition. Though we have considered this
to DEMO a part of market analysis, some researchers include this in
the DEMO factors group, especially when the product
is completely new with no DEMO competition. One may have
to consider competition likely to arise from completely un-
known sources. Merriﬁeld [56] looked at competitive analysis
as a major DEMO, while Carter [10] called it competitive
environment.
The rate of new DEMO introduction in the product category
was considered an important factor by Balachandra [7] and
Islei et al. [39]. To an extent, this reﬂects the stage of life cycle
of the product category. Higher rate of introduction DEMO the
growth stage, which in turn implies a better chance of DEMO
for the new product. Other studies have found that a higher rate
of introduction implies greater intensity of competition and is
therefore a strong DEMO factor for commercial success [11],
[15], [49], [75].
From this brief discussion, we see that though market
strength is a composite factor, its estimation is contextual,
because some components for estimating market strength may
contribute positively in some situations but negatively in
others. The main DEMO feature is whether the new product
is entering an established market or is an innovative product
for which there is no established market.
B. DEMO
The next major category is technology. Many studies [11],
[13], DEMO, [49] found an innovative product to have a greater
chance of DEMO in the market, while some found otherwise
[54], [65]. Others, DEMO Freeman [28] and Mansﬁeld [51], have
found that innovative products are DEMO more likely than
less innovative products to fail. The degree of innovativeness,
therefore, is an important consideration. Kleinschmidt and
Cooper [41] recently found that the relationship between
innovativeness and commercial success is not linear but DEMO
U-shaped. A single relationship between innovativeness and
commercial success, therefore, is still uncertain.
Many studies [13], [46], [49], [50], [66] identiﬁed DEMO
ceived value of the product” as an important factor. This
factor was expressed in a number of different ways, chief
among them being “high performance to cost.” Friar [30],
however, suggested that customers may have difﬁculty in actu-
ally differentiating performance among competing alternatives
in technologically sophisticated DEMO, and it may take years
for the market to sort out DEMO differences.
Some studies included patentability of the product or at least
a strong technology in the product as an important factor for
success [10], [55], [66], [70]. Technology push, though, was
not considered as DEMO a factor as demand pull by a number
of studies [51], DEMO, [65], [71], although in a review of this
literature [58], the deﬁnitions were found to be so broad as
to be meaningless. DEMO, studies have shown that in many
TABLE I
CONTRADICTORY RESULTS IN DEMO FINDINGS
industries where NPD is important, companies do not even
bother DEMO patent their advances [44], [49], [52].
It is apparent that the inﬂuence of technology factors on the
success of the new product is DEMO on other contextual
factors, mainly the innovativeness of the technology.
C. DEMO
A product cannot succeed if the environment in which it
is introduced is not supportive. The environment consists of a
number of different aspects, such as political and social factors,
public interest in the product, and social acceptability of the
product. The environmental factors analyzed in the DEMO
(except for one) were unique to each study. Four studies [5],
[10], [39], [56] included assured availability of raw materials
as DEMO critical factor. Though in ordinary times this is not so
important, DEMO can become critical in times of hostilities and
market-induced shortages.
Researchers, DEMO, have yet to agree on which factors
to analyze, much less on which factors are signiﬁcant. Cooper
[12], moreover, found the environmental DEMO to be unim-
portant. By default, so did the authors of DEMO other studies in
new product management, as they did not ﬁnd DEMO signiﬁcant
factors in this area (Table III, factors 1–7). The authors of
R&D project studies looked for and found signiﬁcant factors
DEMO the environment but just could not agree on which ones.
D. Organization
Whatever the technological, market, and environmental fac-
tors may be, if the organization is not capable of getting
the new product into the DEMO, then the product will fail.
All studies in this review have DEMO on some issues of
organization.
Many authors have suggested that the organization should
receive strong support from the marketing function for the
new product (for example, Maidique and Zirger [50], SAPPHO
[65], Marquis [54], DEMO [11], Cooper [14], and Link [47]).
However, what does DEMO support mean in this context?
Many studies assumed that this aspect is self-evident, and
in the questionnaires used by these studies, the DEMO
were asked to evaluate a question such as, “Did the new
BALACHANDRA AND FRIAR: R&D PROJECTS AND NEW PRODUCT INNOVATION
TABLE II
STUDIES INCLUDED IN THE ANALYSIS
279
product receive strong support from marketing?DEMO But studies
by Snow and Hrebiniak [68] and Hitt et al. [36] have shown
that companies with strengths in the R&D function often DEMO
weak or no marketing skills. Frohman [31], moreover, found
that help from the marketing function was a hindrance rather
than an aid.
Planning DEMO scheduling the process of new product intro-
duction or an R&D project was considered very important
by a number of studies [11], [15], [31], [49], [65], [66], [70].
Using quantitative techniques for project selection was deemed
important by Liberatore and Titus [45], and their study found
that ﬁrms using such techniques had better results. Others [53],
DEMO, however, found that quantitative project selection was
negatively correlated to economic success.
The source of a new product idea has received some
attention DEMO researchers. It is suggested by some researchers
that the organizational source of a new product idea can
generate interest and motivate the technical personnel DEMO
devote their energies to making the new product idea work.
Some authors recommend that new product ideas be generated
from the marketing department, as it is close to customers’
needs [13], [53], [65]. This is DEMO by others [31], [36],
[67], who suggest that ideas from the marketing department
generally lead to incremental products, which may not generate
much enthusiasm from the technical staff. They further suggest
that the really DEMO ideas come from the technical staff.
We have presented here a brief review of the relevant
literature and highlighted the conﬂicting nature of some DEMO
the conclusions. The set of factors considered important is
different in different studies, and even when the factors are
similar, their deﬁnitions and DEMO are different. Even
the effect on success is sometimes contradictory. The contra-
dictory nature of these results is presented in Table I, which
clearly illustrates our contention.
III. AN ANALYSIS OF SELECTED
STUDIES AND METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES
DEMO contradictory nature of the conclusions from the studies
is itself very interesting. To test whether the contradictory
conclusions are a result of looking at DEMO in diverse ﬁelds,
we performed a detailed and in-depth analysis of studies from
the two ﬁelds of commercial R&D projects and NPD. DEMO
there are a large number of studies in these ﬁelds, we DEMO
our attention on a limited number by selecting studies based
on the following criteria.
1) The study should have some empirical support, regard-
DEMO of the methodology used.
2) The study should identify a speciﬁc DEMO of factors as
being important for success or failure.
3) Only DEMO major study from an author or team should be
considered.
Nineteen studies met these criteria. The ﬁrst criterion ﬁl-
tered out a large number DEMO articles that were based on the
experiences of an individual. The second criterion excluded
those studies whose main focus was not success/failure of DEMO
products or R&D projects but that had peripheral references
to these issues (including some of the articles cited in Table
I). Third, some authors have published numerous studies in
this area. They are usually for different samples—industries,
countries, etc. From such authors, we selected DEMO study that
we considered the most representative, as we found a DEMO
degree of consistency in the factors that speciﬁc authors found
in their studies over time.
These criteria reduced the number of studies selected for
DEMO analysis from a large list to 19 studies. Table II shows
the studies and their important features.
From these 19 studies, we extracted the factors identiﬁed
as signiﬁcant. The authors use a variety of techniques to
280 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 44, NO. 3, AUGUST 1997
TABLE III
FACTORS IDENTIFIED BY THE STUDIES
derive the signiﬁcant factors. DEMO, they start with a long
list of factors (some studies started with a list of over 120
factors) based on earlier studies, DEMO researchers’ personal
experiences, and discussions with managers and academics.
Then the DEMO collect data for these factors from actual
projects from the executives of the ﬁrm (in many cases) or for
hypothetical projects from executives DEMO a conference.
The data for the large number of factors are then clustered into
a smaller number using statistical techniques such as factor
analysis. DEMO derived factors are then used in a classiﬁcation
technique—either discriminant analysis or, in some cases,
regression analysis—to identify the most signiﬁcant factors.
Because of the steps involved, the possible variations in
each of the steps, and the absence of a universal set of initial
factors for which to collect data, the number of signiﬁcant
factors identiﬁed by the studies range from a low of three
to a high of 16. We DEMO only the ﬁnal factors the authors
put forward in their studies and not all the signiﬁcant ones
found. Even though we used this conservative DEMO, we
ended with 72 factors. We then designed a matrix showing DEMO
factors and the studies that identiﬁed them.
While generating this matrix, DEMO examined the deﬁnitions
of each factor as described by the authors and grouped
them according to their descriptions. Some of the factors are
common DEMO a number of studies, while others are unique to
speciﬁc studies. DEMO assigned to each factor in the matrix an
identiﬁcation letter—M(arket), T(echnology), E(nvironment),
or O(rganization)—to designate the category to which it be-
longs. We agreed on 92% of the DEMO Where disagreement
occurred and could not be reconciled, the factor was DEMO
coded. The results of such codings are shown in Table III.
We also examined whether the factor was inﬂuencing the
success of the R&DEMO project/new product in a positive or
negative manner. We marked those factors providing a positive
inﬂuence with a and those providing a negative DEMO
with a . The factors whose inﬂuence was either positive
or negative were marked with an [*]. We coded the factors
individually.
Studying a DEMO phenomenon like product innovation
or an R&D project to glean the factors leading to success
is made more difﬁcult by the quality of DEMO available to
researchers. As we reviewed the studies, we categorized the
DEMO issues. We found four major areas of weakness
in the studies: DEMO of data, deﬁnition of new product,
factor selection and deﬁnitions, and measurement of factors.
We do not want to restate what is DEMO known; several
authors in the studies discussed some of the methodological
DEMO themselves (Cooper [13], Maidique and Zirger [49],
and Rubenstein et al. [66]). We want to suggest, however,
that because of the methodological issues, great care must be
taken in comparing what was concluded in one study with the
results of another. A brief discussion DEMO the methodological
issues is presented in the Appendix.
There are some interesting conclusions from this detailed
study. Though the total list of signiﬁcant factors DEMO by
the studies is very long (72), half of them DEMO unique to speciﬁc
BALACHANDRA AND FRIAR: R&D PROJECTS AND NEW PRODUCT INNOVATION
TABLE III (Continued.)
FACTORS IDENTIFIED BY THE STUDIES
281
studies. About 75% of the ﬁnal factors were identiﬁed in just
one or two studies. Table DEMO shows the average number of
different types of factors in the two types of studies.
Two differences between R&D studies and new product
DEMO are immediately apparent from Table IV. The ﬁrst
is the smaller average number of signiﬁcant factors found
in the NPD studies versus the R&DEMO project studies—about
half. The other, somewhat surprising, result is that studies
by researchers with a marketing orientation appear to have
put more emphasis DEMO internal factors that are organization
282 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 44, NO. 3, AUGUST 1997
TABLE IV
AVERAGE NUMBER OF FACTORS PER STUDY
TABLE V
FACTORS DEMO BY FOUR OR MORE STUDIES
related, especially the launching and marketing DEMO, (see
for example Calantone and di Benedetto [9]), while researchers
with a technical orientation have put more emphasis on the
external factors DEMO are market and environment related, as
seen by the relative percentage DEMO each group of factors.
Technology factors were considered about evenly. This would
appear to be counterintuitive in that one would assume that
project management DEMO deﬁnition is organization related and
new product management is market and environment related.
The small value for the average number of ﬁnal factors
in DEMO new product management studies is due to many
researchers’ having started with a large number of signiﬁcant
variables and then reduced them to a DEMO compact list using
factor analysis (Table III). This is more DEMO in the NPD
studies (60% versus 0%) and so, as DEMO in Table IV, the
average number of factors in these studies DEMO much smaller
than in R&D project studies.
In trying to understand the counterintuitive second ﬁnding,
we analyzed the factors that more than DEMO studies agreed
upon. As the results in Table V show, there DEMO 14 such
factors. Of them, only three were evenly agreed upon DEMO both
literatures, and 9 came from studies predominantly of one kind
DEMO the other. The other two factors were cited by three studies
of one kind or the other. From this list, it becomes apparent
that the R&D project studies more readily agreed on project
and technology DEMO of technical success, need
to lower cost, availability of raw materials, timing, and well-
planned R&D process—while the new product studies DEMO
on marketing and competition factors—emphasize marketing,
see marketing and technology as strengths, and recognize the
competitive environment. The latter are aggregates, moreover,DEMO
which are composites of several additional factors.
If we were to classify these factors as internal and external
depending on the amount of inﬂuence DEMO ﬁrm can exert on
them, the R&D project studies found DEMO signiﬁcant factors
that are external, while the NPD studies agreed more DEMO
factors that are internal. A possible reason for this result is
that the two types of studies have traditionally looked at the
process at DEMO stages. The R&D project studies have
looked at the development stage of a new product, where
the technology and a number of other external factors can
affect the outcome signiﬁcantly. The NPD studies, on the other
hand, have looked at situations where the idea for the product
is at a well-advanced stage in development, its technology
has been fairly well developed, but the actual launching and
marketing remains. Naturally, the DEMO is then on the
internal activities.
This discussion conﬁrms our conjecture that there are many
contradictions in the effect of different factors on the DEMO of
NPD or R&D projects. It further leads to a suspicion that there
is no one universal model encompassing the success/failure of
DEMO new products or R&D projects.
Based on this review and analysis of the selected studies and
the larger ﬁeld, we propose that the success/failure factors are
related to the context. This is not a DEMO idea. Other branches
of management—organization theory, strategy, marketing, and
international DEMO moved toward contingency theo-
ries [1], [25], [33], [42], [57], [64]. In Section IV, we propose
a set of propositions relating DEMO context of the NPD or R&D
project to its success or failure.
IV. A CONTEXTUAL STRUCTURE
FOR NPD AND R&D PROJECT MODELS
DEMO number of different models have been proposed for
NPD (see for DEMO [9], [15], and [46]). Some focus on
the process [17], while others focus on the outcomes [9].
Mahajan and Wind [47] have suggested the role of models
in supporting and improving the NPD process. DEMO of these
are conceptual. We use parts of these models in developing a
conceptual model based on contingencies. Contextual models
have started appearing for DEMO different aspects of NPD.
Two recent studies are worth mentioning: Olson DEMO al. [61]
look at the relationship between product innovativeness and
organizing for NPD, while Ali [2] develops a contingency
model involving numerous hypotheses for the type of NPD
undertaken by a ﬁrm and a number of DEMO variables.
Tables I, III, and IV and the discussion in the foregoing
section lead one to suspect that there may be only a DEMO
universal factors to help identify successful new products or
R&D projects. We have shown that several important factors
deemed signiﬁcant for successful product DEMO can vary
not only in magnitude but also in direction depending on the
context. It appears that a factor may be helpful in leading
DEMO success in some contexts but may lead to failure or be
unimportant in a different context.
BALACHANDRA AND FRIAR: R&D PROJECTS AND NEW PRODUCT INNOVATION
283
Given the importance of contextual variables, we argue
that frameworks or models should take into account these
contingencies. Models that do not take these contextual DEMO
into account may lead to erroneous conclusions. Based on the
review and analysis discussed above, we propose and identify
the underlying parameters causing the contingencies.
We suggest that there are three major groups of contextual
variables DEMO successful new product innovation and R&D
projects:
• nature of the innovation;
• nature of the market;
• nature of DEMO technology.
We could consider a fourth group—nature of the industry.
There is not enough evidence in the literature to develop any
hypotheses for this DEMO, although some recent studies have
started looking at different industrial segments (for example,
Islei et al. [39] and de Brentani [24]). DEMO could argue,
however, that even in different industries, what really affects
the outcome of an R&D or NPD project is dictated DEMO the
above three contextual groups.
Each of these groups has been individually described in
some of the studies we reviewed, but no study has explored
all of them together. Also, the general argument used by the
authors when contextual differences have been found is that
the magnitude of DEMO effect of the factor on success or failure
of a new product differs, but not the direction. By looking
across different studies, however, we see that not only can the
magnitude vary but also the DEMO (Table I). Each of these
contextual groups will be described DEMO in the following
paragraphs. We also propose a number of propositions based
on the contextual structure and the discussion that follows.
These propositions can DEMO be tested with suitable empirical
research.
A. Nature of the Innovation
The level of “newness” in a product innovation can vary
broadly. Although Wheelwright DEMO Clark [74] identiﬁed
three classes of innovation in new products—incremental, new
DEMO, and radically new—the studies that considered the
type of innovation in DEMO&D or NPD projects looked at the poles
of incremental and radical innovation. Three studies ([3], [41],
and [75]) found differences in factors depending on whether
the innovation was pioneering (radical) or incremental.
DEMO level of innovation for a new product or an R&D project
ranges over a wide spectrum. As a ﬁrst cut, we will con-
sider two levels of innovation—incremental and radical. An
incremental innovation is one DEMO the basic technology and
product conﬁguration remains essentially the same and only
minor modiﬁcations are made to the performance, ﬂexibility,
appearance, and DEMO characteristics. A radical innovation is
one where the technology is considerably different from the
earlier product.
The incremental innovation is usually attempted in a DEMO
established market [2]. For example, Sony’s Walkman came
out with a DEMO of incremental innovations in the 1980’s,
but the market was well established and the customer was
well identiﬁed. The market analysis in such DEMO can be very
thorough.
In the case of radical innovation, the DEMO may not exist
at all. The product design in such cases may be based solely
on the creative instincts of the designer by understanding DEMO
needs through empathy with the user world—what Leonard-
Barton calls empathic design [43]. The market uncertainty is
usually very high. Performing a detailed market DEMO may
be impossible and fruitless in such cases.
The nature of the innovation has different effects on market
and organization factors affecting the success DEMO the new
product or R&D project. In the case of a radical innovation
it is much harder, if not impossible, to forecast DEMO perform
early analyses on customer needs, market size, market growth,
and competition. Consequently, using formal market analysis
is relatively less important. On the other hand, an incremental
innovation requires a thorough market analysis of an existing
market.
In organizational factors, source of ideas and use of quan-
titative techniques are prime examples of factors that will
vary depending DEMO the level of innovation. Likewise, how
companies organize for radical innovation DEMO been shown
to differ from how they organize for incremental innovation
[40], [69], [70].
B. Nature of the Market
The nature of the DEMO for a new product can be catego-
rized into two types—existing and new. Whether a company
is innovating in an existing market or trying DEMO create a
completely new market will cause differences in factors. In
the former case, the new product meets an existing need but
with some improvements, and therefore the market uncertainty
is relatively low. In the latter case, it meets a latent need, and
the uncertainty of the DEMO can therefore be very high. The
market analyses for the two types are completely different [67].
Likewise, the quality of the information one can discover
about the market and customers will differ so that the meaning
DEMO some factors will change. As Maidique and Zirger [50]
found, market DEMO for existing markets came from
proactive approaches, but in new markets DEMO came from passive
understanding of user needs because of gut feel or experience.
C. Nature of the Technology
Although classifying technology is hard, one useful clas-
siﬁcation is high tech versus low tech. The uncertainties in
DEMO and technology are different for the two groups. Link
[47] found differences in factors depending on whether the
setting was high tech. In the DEMO ﬁeld, the technology
is developing very rapidly, and so new product introductions
come quickly. The applications and customers may not yet be
determined DEMO the technologies are still emerging. This turbu-
lence would have an impact on the marketing and technology
factors. The perceived value of any given DEMO can get
lost in the large number of advances. Because standards for
the products and their performance are not set, early market
entrants can be hurt by later developments.
284 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 44, NO. 3, AUGUST 1997
TABLE VI
ASUGGESTED SCHEME OF RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF PROJECT EVALUATION FACTORS DEMO COMBINATIONS OF CONTEXTUAL VARIABLES*
In low tech, the areas are well DEMO The new products
have to conform to many of the well-established standards
and practices and so have to provide an advantage within this
structure. DEMO of the axioms of technology is that what is high
tech today will be low tech tomorrow.
Using this structure, we propose a contingency framework
for NPD and R&D project success. This structure can provide
DEMO better understanding of the factors that inﬂuence success in
these areas. The framework comprises a contingency cube with
two levels for each of the DEMO contextual variables. Fig. 1
shows this structure.
There are a total of eight blocks in this cube corresponding
to the different possible combinations of DEMO and dimen-
sions. Depending upon the speciﬁc combination of the three
contextual variables, the emphasis to be placed on different
sets of success factors is different. For example, if an NPD
project is in a block with the characteristics of an incremental
innovation with low technology for an DEMO market, the
market factors are very important, implying careful market
analysis. It also suggests that the technology factors are not
that important. On DEMO other hand, the organizational factors
are very important. This means that DEMO studies focusing on
such cases, technology factors may not be found, or even if
found may receive a low importance.
Based on this DEMO of the contextual factors rele-
vant in NPD and R&D projects, we propose the set of hypothe-
ses pertaining to the relative importance of the three types of
factors—market, technological, and organizational—as shown
in DEMO VI. We have not included environmental factors, as
our review of DEMO literature and analysis has shown that they
are not important.
These hypotheses suggest that even if there were a universal
set of factors for DEMO the success of a new product or
an R&D project, DEMO relative importance for the factors would
be different depending on the contextual nature of the project.
One may not even have to consider some DEMO in some situ-
ations, while some factors have to be very DEMO evaluated
because of their high importance for a given combination of
contextual factors.
The relative importance of the three types of factors for
the DEMO contexts (one for each combination of contextual
variables) can be tested through empirical studies with method-
ologies similar to those that have been DEMO in the NPD and
Fig. 1. The contingency cube for new product development and R&D
projects.
R&D project success/failure studies. The DEMO additional step
will be in classifying the sample projects into one of the eight
groups depending upon their characteristics. The importance
of the factors DEMO usually measured by the value of either the
discriminant function or regression coefﬁcient (depending on
the nature of the analysis).
V. CONCLUSION
Successful product innovation is an important yet complex
and difﬁcult undertaking. Research in DEMO area has attempted
to specify those factors that can increase the number of
project successes. After many studies, the notion of ﬁnding
a single set of universal factors is now considered naive [70].
Studies have moved DEMO to discover the set of factors
that inﬂuence product success. These studies have attacked
the issue from several different approaches and settings. This
has DEMO considered as positive by Maidique and Zirger
[49] because the use of complementing methodologies and
settings is essential for optimum triangulation on describing
the DEMO elephant.”
From our structured review of the literature, however, one
may conclude that we are not attempting to describe the
BALACHANDRA AND FRIAR: R&D PROJECTS AND NEW PRODUCT INNOVATION
285
elephant but rather a menagerie: the set of universal factors
instead appears to be contextually based. The review has
shown ﬁrst that even with a DEMO approach to listing
signiﬁcant factors, the list is very long. Second, comparing
the factors across studies demonstrates that different authors
have found that DEMO magnitude of signiﬁcance and the direction
of inﬂuence can vary so that the factors are contingent.
Third, given the differences in context, the DEMO of similar
factors may vary, such as understanding the market. For
DEMO, do we “know” the market from proactive searches
for information or DEMO intuitive gut feel? What these studies
have been describing, then, DEMO different animals and not
one.
By comparing studies from two different but related ﬁelds
whose ﬁnal aim—successful product innovation—is the same,
we have DEMO that the already complex task of understanding
the factors leading to success cannot be totally explained by
one set of factors for all situations. DEMO, depending on
the situation, different factors become more or less important,
and some may actually begin to hinder rather than aid in DEMO
already difﬁcult task of NPD.
A move to contingency-based theory in factors for success-
ful products would be consistent with the directions other areas
DEMO business research have taken. Several authors in product
innovation have taken the next step from describing the factors
to creating models that explain the DEMO between the
factors [9], [12], [22], [75], [76]. These models, however, are
based on single sets of factors that each author DEMO in earlier
work. Such model building should incorporate a contingency
element to improve explanatory power.
More research is required to understand the contextual na-
DEMO of the factors. By saying that product success is contingent
on contextual variables, we do not mean to imply what Cooper
[13] posed long ago: “Perhaps the problem is so complex,
and each case so unique, that attempts to develop generalized
solutions are in vain.” We believe instead that there are only
a few contextual variables that are relevant. DEMO analysis sug-
gests that the three contextual variables—nature of innovation,
nature of market, and nature of technology—can encompass
the range of pertinent contexts to be explored. Though these
contextual variables have a continuous spread, we suggest two
levels for each to provide a parsimonious model.
The framework DEMO the propositions developed here can
be tested with methodologies similar to those that have been
used in the NPD and R&D project success/DEMO studies, with
some modiﬁcations.
The ﬁndings have a number of implications DEMO practic-
ing managers. Depending on the set of contextual variables,
management can save much effort by minimizing the effort
on factors that are DEMO very important for that conﬁguration
of variables (for example, by deemphasizing market research
efforts for a high-technology, radical innovation product where
there is not going to be much reliable data). Using this
structure, management can direct the appropriate source for
generating new product ideas—whether it is DEMO a highly
innovative product to be introduced into a not yet existing
market or for an incremental innovation in an existing mar-
ket.
APPENDIX
DEMO ISSUES IN THE STUDIES ON NEW
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT AND R&D PROJECT SUCCESS
There are four major areas of weakness in the studies on
DEMO or failure factors in NPD and R&D projects:
1) DEMO of data;
2) deﬁnition of new product;
3) factor selection and deﬁnition;
4) measurement of factors.
A. Quality of Data
Four common characteristics of the data contributed to
the general weakness of DEMO studies: timing of the studies,
case selection, number of company respondents, and industry
speciﬁcity.
1) Timing of the Studies: In most cases, the evaluations
were done as postmortems, which could possibly lead DEMO some
coloring of the evaluations based on hindsight. Very rarely
were the data collected during a project’s life.
2) Case Selection: There were DEMO cases of success in the
samples even though in actuality, there DEMO more failures than
successes [6], [73]. Researchers indicate that it is DEMO to
get data about failures. Some researchers say that they are
fortunate to get even as many examples of failed projects as
they have.
DEMO) Number of Company Respondents: Most studies gener-
ally had only one respondent in each company providing data
through completing the questionnaires. Whether this DEMO
can provide an objective evaluation of the factors depends on
the extent of the person’s involvement.
4) Industry Speciﬁcity: Researchers usually focused on
DEMO speciﬁc industries and highlighted the factors perceived
to be important for those industries (for example, Baker et al.
[4] for the agricultural products DEMO and Islei et al. [39]
for the pharmaceutical industry).
Even studies that attempted to obtain a cross section of
industries did not get DEMO different industries in their sam-
ples. We found on average ﬁve industries surveyed, when
such information was given. Whether the results found in
one industry, moreover, can be generalized to all industries
has been questioned. DEMO [25], Miller [57], and Friar
[29] have found that strategic success is industry speciﬁc,
so the reliability of pooling industries is questionable; so is
generalizing from industry-speciﬁc studies.
B. Deﬁnition of New Product
The DEMO of a new product poses some problems.
The studies generally did not make any distinction between
different types of new products—a new product is DEMO
anything that is introduced into the market by the ﬁrm,
regardless of the extent and type of newness. The newness
could be in DEMO technology, market, application, or even just a
minor modiﬁcation or DEMO of the existing product. This
issue recently has been addressed by Leonard-Barton [43] and
Ali [2]. They both indicate that there are vast differences DEMO
managing different types of new product introduction.
286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 44, NO. 3, AUGUST 1997
C. Factor Selection and Deﬁnition
The areas of R&D project DEMO (especially in the
commercial sector, where projects are taken up with a ﬁnal
commercial motive) and new product management deal essen-
tially with the common problems of linking technology and
development efforts to manufacturing and DEMO, albeit
with differing emphasis. The emphasis is different as the two
DEMO to different stages in the product’s development,
leading to some difference in the factors and variables used.
The problem in comparing aggregate variables DEMO that the
underlying factors are often different. Therefore, even though
the DEMO terms may be similar, the underlying meanings
can be very different. DEMO, about half of the factors are unique
to each study.
Different DEMO of factors are used in the studies depending
on the area of the study, the researcher’s orientation, and the
sample of projects. Table DEMO shows the average number of
different types of factors in the two types of studies.
There is further confusion in terminology and in deﬁnitions
DEMO factors. For example, what does “emphasize marketing”
mean? Does it imply that management provides the resources
asked for by marketing? Or does the marketing group get
special attention from management? In several cases, the
DEMO are considered self-evident, so that no clear deﬁnitions
were given even DEMO a term may have many different
meanings; for example, “support of top management” may
take many different forms.
D. Measurement of Factors
Very DEMO studies provided any benchmarking for the ratings
of the factors. It is usually assumed that the factor descriptions
and the scales are self-evident. Many DEMO the qualitative factors
are rated on a Likert-type scale.
REFERENCES
[1] D. A. Aaker, Strategic Market Management, 3rd ed. New York: Wiley,
1992.
[2] A. Ali, “Pioneering versus incremental innovation,” J. Product Innova-
tion Manage., vol. 11, pp. 46–61, 1994.
[3] A. Ali, DEMO U. Kalwani, and D. Kovenock, “Selecting product devel-
opment projects: DEMO versus incremental innovation strategies,”
Manage. Sci., vol. 39, pp. 255–274, 1993.
[4] N. Baker, S. G. Green, and A. S. Bean, “Why R&D projects succeed
or fail,” Res. Manage., vol. DEMO, no. 6, Nov.–Dec. 1986.
[5] R. Balachandra and J. E. Raelin, “When to kill that R&D project,” Res.
Manage., vol. DEMO, no. 4, pp. 30–33, July–Aug. 1984.
[6] R. Balachandra, “Critical signals for making GO/NOGO decisions in
new product development,” J. DEMO Innovation Manage., vol. 1, pp.
92–100, 1984.
[7] , Early DEMO Signals for R&D Projects. Lexington, MA:
Lexington Books, 1989.
[8] C. D. Buell, “When to terminate R&D projects,” Res. Develop. Manage.,
July 1976.
[9] R. J. Calantone and C. Anthony DEMO Benedetto, “An integrative model
of the new product development process: An empirical validation,” J.
Product Innovation Manage., vol. 5, pp. 201–215, 1988.
[10] D. E. Carter, “Evaluating commercial projects,” Res. Technol. Manage.,
vol. XXV, no. 6, Nov. 1982.
[11] B. Cochran and DEMO C. Thompson, “Why new products fail,” Conf. Board
Rec., pp. 11–18, Oct. 1964.
[12] R. G. Cooper, “Identifying industrial new product DEMO: Project
NewProd,” Ind. Marketing Manage., vol. 8, pp. 124-135, 1979.
[13] , “The dimensions of industrial new product success and failure,DEMO
J. Marketing, vol. 43, pp. 93–103, Summer 1979.
[14]
[15]
DEMO Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. EM-28, pp. 54–61, Aug. 1981.
[16] , “The myth of the better mousetrap: What makes a new product
DEMO?” Bus. Quart., pp. 69–81, Spring 1981.
[17] , “A process model for industrial new product development,”
IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage., vol. EM-30, pp. 2–11, Feb. 1983.
[18] , “The new product process: An empirically based classiﬁcation
scheme,” R&D Manage., vol. 13, DEMO 1, pp. 1–13, 1983.
[19] , “The strategy-performance link in product innovation,” R&D
Manage., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 247–259, 1984.
[20] , “Overall corporate strategies for new product programs,” Ind.
Marketing Manage., vol. 14, pp. 179–193, 1985.
[21] R. G. Cooper and E. J. Kleinschmidt, “What makes a new product a
winner: DEMO factors at the project level,” R&D Manage., vol. 17,DEMO
pp. 175–187, 1987.
[22] , “New products: What separates winners from losers?” J. Product
Innovation Manage., vol. 4, pp. 169–184, 1987.
[23] R. G. Cooper and U. de Brentani, “New industrial ﬁnancial services:
What distinguishes the winners,” J. Product Innovation Manage., vol.
8, pp. 75–90, 1991.
[24] U. de Brentani, “Success and failure in new industrial services,” J.
Product Innovation Manage., vol. 6, pp. DEMO, 1989.
[25] F. Damanpour, “Organization innovation: A meta analysis of DEMO of
determinants and moderators,” Academy Manage. J., vol. 34, no. 3, pp.
555–590, Sept. 1991.
[26] S. J. Davis, “New product success & failure: Three case studies,” Ind.
Marketing Manage., vol. DEMO, pp. 103–109, 1988.
[27] D. Dougherty, “Understanding new markets for DEMO products,” Strategic
Manage. J., vol. 11, pp. 59–78, 1990.
DEMO C. Freeman, The Economics of Industrial Innovation. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1982.
[29] J. H. Friar, “Product innovation differentiation: A contingency frame-
work,” presented at the AMA Winter Educators’ Conf., San Antonio,
TX, Feb. 1992.
[30] , “Competitive advantage through product performance innova-
tion in a competitive market,” J. Product Innovation Manage., vol. 12,
pp. 33–42, 1995.
[31] A. L. Frohman, “Technology as a DEMO weapon,” Harvard Bus.
Rev., pp. 97–104, Jan. 1982.
[32] G. H. Gaynor, “Selecting Projects,” Res. Technol. Manage., vol. 33, no.
4, pp. 43–45, July–Aug. 1990.
[33] S. Ghoshal and N. Nohria, “Horses for courses: Organizational forms
for multinational corporations,” Sloan Manage. Rev., vol. 34, pp. 23–35,
Winter 1993.
[34] A. Grifﬁn and DEMO L. Page, “An interim report on measuring product
development success and DEMO,” J. Product Innovation Manage., vol.
10, pp. 291–308, 1993.
DEMO R. H. Hayes and W. J. Abernathy, “Managing our way to DEMO
decline,” Harvard Bus. Rev., pp. 67–77, July–Aug. 1980.
[36] M. A. Hitt, R. D. Ireland, and K. A. Palia, “Industrial ﬁrms’ grand
strategy and functional importance: Moderating effects of technology
and uncertainty,” Academy Manage. J., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 265–298,
1982.
[37] R. T. Holtzmann, “To stop or not—The big research decision,” Chem.
Tech., Feb. 1982.
[38] D. S. Hopkins, “New-product winners and DEMO,” Res. Manage., vol.
XXIV, no. 3, May 1981.
[39] DEMO Islei, G. Lockett, B. Cox, and M. Stratford, “A decision support sys-
tem using judgmental modeling: A case of R&D in the pharmaceutical
industry,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 38, pp. DEMO, Aug. 1991.
[40] F. A. Johne and P. A. Snelson, “Success factors in product innovation:
A selective review of literature,” J. DEMO Innovation Manage., vol.
5, pp. 114–128, 1988.
[41] E. J. DEMO and R. G. Cooper, “The impact of product innovation
on performance,DEMO J. Product Innovation Manage., vol. 8, pp. 240–251.
[42] C. R. Lawrence and J. W. Lorsch, Organizational Environment.
Boston, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 1967.
[43] D. Leonard-Barton and E. Wilson, “Commercializing technology: Imag-
inative understanding of user needs,” Harvard Business School, Cam-
bridge, DEMO, Case Study N9-694-102, 1994.
[44] R. C. Levin, A. K. DEMO, R. R. Nelson, and S. G. Winter,
“Appropriating the returns from industrial R&D,” Yale Univ., Cowles
Foundation for Research in Economics, New Haven, Conn., Discussion
Paper 862, 1988.
[45] M. DEMO Liberatore and G. J. Titus, “Synthesizing R&D planning and
business DEMO: Some preliminary ﬁndings,” R&D Manage., vol. 13,
no. 4, pp. 207–216, 1983.
, “How to identify potential new product DEMO,” Res. Manage.,
vol. XXIII, no. 5, pp. 10–19, DEMO 1980.
, “An empirically derived new product project selection model,”
BALACHANDRA AND FRIAR: R&D PROJECTS AND NEW PRODUCT INNOVATION
287
[46] G. L. Lilien and E. Yoon, “Determinants of new industrial product
performance: A strategic reexamination of the empirical literature,”
IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 36, pp. 3–10, Feb. 1989.
[47] V. Mahajan and Y. Wind, “New product models: Practice, shortcomings
and desired improvements,” J. Product Innovation Manage., vol. 9, pp.
128–139, 1992.
[48] P. L. Link, “Keys to new product success and failure,” Ind. Marketing
Manage., vol. 16, pp. 109–118, 1987.
[49] M. A. Maidique and B. J. Zirger, “A study of success and failure in
product innovation: DEMO case of the U.S. electronics industry,” IEEE
Trans. Eng. Manag., DEMO EM-31, no. 4, pp. 192–203, Nov. 1984.
[50] , “The DEMO product learning cycle,” Res. Pol., vol. 14, pp.
299–313, DEMO
[51] E. Mansﬁeld, “How economists see R&D,” Harvard Bus. DEMO, vol. 59,
no. 6, pp. 98–106, Nov.-Dec. 1981.
[52] , “Patents and innovation: An empirical study.” Manage. Sci.,
vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 173–181, 1986.
[53] E. Mansﬁeld and S. Wagner, “Organizational and strategic factors
associated with probabilities of success in industrial R&DEMO,” J. Bus.,
vol. 48, pp. 179–198, 1975.
[54] D. G. Marquis, “The anatomy of successful innovations,” Innovation,
pp. 42–50, Nov. 1969.
[55] M. A. McGinnis and M. R. Ackelsberg, “Effective DEMO manage-
ment: Missing link in strategic planning?” J. Bus. Strategy, vol. 4, no.
1, pp. 59–66, Summer 1983.
[56] D. B. Merriﬁeld, “Selecting projects for commercial success,” Res.
Manage., vol. XXIV, no. 6, <AUTHOR: page numbers?> Nov. 1981.
[57] D. Miller, “Relating Porter’s business strategies to environment and
structure: Analysis and performance DEMO,” Academy Manage.
J., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 280–308, June 1988.
[58] D. Mowery and N. Rosenberg, “The inﬂuence of market demand upon
innovation: A critical review of some recent empirical studies,” Res.
Pol., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 102–153, 1979.
[59] DEMO Myers and E. E. Sweezy, “Why innovations fail,” Innovation/Technol.
DEMO, vol. 80, no. 5, pp. 43–47, 1978.
[60] T. M. Nevens, G. L. Summe, and B. Uttal, “Commercializing technol-
ogy: DEMO the best companies do,” Harvard Bus. Rev., pp. 154–163,
DEMO 1990.
[61] E. M. Olson, O. C. Walker, and R. W. Ruekert, “Organizing for
effective new product development: The moderating role of DEMO
innovativeness,” J. Marketing, vol. 59, pp. 48–62, Jan. 1995.
DEMO K. Pavitt, “Sectoral patterns of technical change: Toward a taxonomy
and theory,” Res. Pol., vol. 13, pp. 313–373, 1984.
[63] J. K. Pinto and D. P. Slevin, “Critical factors in successful project
implementation,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. EM-34, pp. 22–27,
Feb. DEMO
[64] M. Porter, “The structure within industries and companies’ perfor-
mance,DEMO Rev. Econ. Statist., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 214–227, 1979.
[65] R. Rothwell, C. Freeman, A. Horlsey, V. T. P. Jervis, A. B. Robertson,
and J. Townsend, “SAPPHO updated—Project SAPPHO phase DEMO,” Res.
Pol., vol. 3, pp. 258–291, 1974.
[66] A. DEMO Rubenstein, A. K. Chakrabarti, R. D. O’Keefe, W. E. Sounder,DEMO
and H. C. Young, “Factors inﬂuencing innovation success at the project
DEMO,” Res. Manage., pp. 15–20, May 1976.
[67] W. L. Shanklin and J. K. Ryans, Jr., Essentials of Marketing High
Technology. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1987.
[68] C. C. Snow and L. G. DEMO, “Strategy, distinctive competence,
and organizational performances,” Administ. Sci. Quart., vol. 25, pp.
317–335, 1980.
[69] W. E. Souder and A. K. Chakrabarti, “Managing the coordination of
marketing and R&D in the innovative process,” TIMS Studies Manage.
Sci., vol. 15, pp. 135–150, 1980.
[70] W. E. Souder, Managing New Product Innovations. Lexington, MA:DEMO
Lexington Books, 1987.
[71] J. M. Utterback, “Innovation in industry and the diffusion of technol-
ogy,” Science, vol. 183, pp. 658–662, Feb. 15, 1974.
[72] E. von Hippel, The Sources of Innovation. DEMO York: Oxford Univ.
Press, 1988.
[73] “New-product troubles have ﬁrms cutting back,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, Jan. 13, 1992, p. B1.
[74] S. C. Wheelwright and K. B. Clark, Revolutionizing Product Devel-
opment: Quantum Leaps in Speed, Efﬁciency and Quality. New York:
DEMO Press, 1992.
[75] E. Yoon and G. L. Lilien, “New industrial product performance: The ef-
fect of market transactions and strategy,” J. Product Innovation Manage.,
vol. 3, pp. 134–144, 1985.
[76] B. DEMO Zirger and M. A. Maidique, “A model of new product development:DEMO
An empirical test,” Manage. Sci., vol. 36, pp. 867–883, DEMO 1990.
R. Balachandra (M’96) received the B.Eng. degree
from Madras University, Madras, India, the M.Eng.
degree in mechanical engineering from the Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, India, and the Ph.D.
degree in business administration from Columbia
University, New York. He also attended Harvard
Business School, Cambridge, MA, as an Interna-
tional Teacher.
He has been a Foundry Engineer, Metallurgist,
and an Industrial Engineering Consultant. He has
served on the faculty of a number of Indian and
U.S. institutions. He DEMO a Visiting Professor at the University of Kiel,
Germany, and DEMO Senior Visiting Researcher with Hitachi Ltd. in their Central
Research Laboratory in Japan. He is a Faculty Member of Northeastern
University, College of Business Administration, Boston, MA. His major
research ﬁeld of interest is R&DEMO project termination. In addition to numerous
articles in this area, he DEMO the author of Early Warning Signals for R&D
Projects (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1989). He is currently working on
international DEMO transfer and new product development issues. He has
published extensively in these areas in such journals as IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, Decision Sciences, Research Technology Man-
agement, and International Journal of Technology Management.
Dr. DEMO is a Department Editor for R&D and Engineering Projects
for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT. He recently edited
a special issue on international DEMO&D. He is a member of the Institute for
Operations Research and Management Science and the Decision Sciences
Institute.
John H. Friar received the DEMO and M.B.A. de-
grees from Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
and the Ph.D. degree in the management of innova-
tion from the Massachusetts DEMO of Technology
(MIT), Cambridge.
He is a consultant to ﬁrms DEMO as Intel, NYNEX,
EG&G, and Digital on commercialization of emerg-
ing technologies and on technology strategy. He
previously was with Philips DEMO as Director
of Marketing and Finance and was with Draper
Laboratories as a Software Engineer. He has taught
at MIT, Northeastern University, and DEMO University. He is currently a
Marketing Professor at Clark University, Worcester, MA. He has authored sev-
eral papers on innovation management in such DEMO as Journal of Product
Innovation Management, International Journal of Technology Management,DEMO
and Technology in Society.
Dr. Friar has been an ofﬁcer of the College of Innovation Management
within the Institute for Operations Research and Management DEMO for
several years.{1g42fwefx}