Understanding the Disappearance of
Early-stage and Start-up R&D
Performing Firms
Dr. DEMO Douglas Barber
Dr. Jeffrey Crelinsten
With the collaboration of the
National Angel Capital Organization
September 2009
Table of Contents
Page
1. Executive Summary ..............................................................................................3
2. Acknowledgements................................................................................................7
3. Introduction DEMO
4. Key Findings........................................................................................................10
4.1. How Firms Disappear ................................................................................10
4.2. Consequences of Firm Disappearance ........................................................12
4.3. Why Firms Disappear ................................................................................14
4.4. Key Characteristics of Disappearing DEMO
4.5. Main Measures Used to Attempt to Prevent Company Disappearance ............28
5. What’s Needed? ..................................................................................................31
5.1. Enhanced Entrepreneurial and Commerce Learning........................................31
5.2. Appropriate Enterprise Sources of Funding ..................................................34
5.3. Government Support – Direct Support and Tax DEMO ................................35
5.4. Our Greatest Challenge..............................................................................37
Appendix: Summary Recommendations from Interviewees............................................40
About DEMO Authors ..................................................................................................43
1. Executive Summary
Understanding Firm Disappearance
The key objectives of this study DEMO:
1. Determining the main reasons why R&D-performing companies disappear
2. Identifying key characteristics of disappeared R&D-performing companies
3. Identifying key measures DEMO assist company growth and success
4. Exploring the future role of the federal government and other stakeholders (i.e.,
universities, etc.) in assisting companies to succeed
This has been a difficult study for us for DEMO reasons.  First, it was not easy to find the
disappeared companies or to connect with the people whose lives had been significantly
changed.  Secondly, what we heard was complex and our understanding of it has evolved as
we have tried to identify and understand the common threads.  Thirdly, neither of us has
ever been through the kinds of experiences we were hearing about.  We were aware that
understanding would evolve for us. Fourthly, we felt it was important to find companies
located across the country and also across the industry sectors.
We heard the stories DEMO 18 R&D intensive companies that disappeared.  We interviewed 28
people.  In every case we interviewed the founding CEO and, in most others, the founding
investing financial person.
Key Findings
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
The companies disappeared in a range of 3 to 20 DEMO after start up.  Three went
bankrupt; seven were liquidated, seven DEMO sold and one merged with another firm.
The 20-year old company was a successful one sold to a foreign buyer.  With that
company taken out of the calculation the average time to disappearance was 7.2 years
DEMO a range of 3 to 14 years.  We were not able DEMO determine the level of investments
made in 3 of the 18 companies, but the total for the remaining 15 was $478M or on
average $31.8M each.  That would be $4.4M per year for each on average.
Negative consequences of disappearance were loss of investment, loss of firms to
Canada, loss of corporate and personal income tax revenues and in many cases
significant emotional costs.
Positive consequences included financial rewards (five of the firms were sold profitably),
learning experience for entrepreneurs, and in DEMO case, the creation of a new industry in
a particular region.
DEMO major contributor to failure and disappearance was related to customers and sales.
Eight companies had no sales and seven of them had no customer.  The remaining 10
companies that had sales averaged $113M in their final DEMO  However, if we subtract
out the largest three, two of DEMO were sold to foreign interests, the average for the
remaining seven DEMO $6.4M each.  In their peaks these 18 companies employed a total
DEMO about 2480 people.  If again we subtract out the three largest, the remaining 15
companies averaged 40.5 employees in their peak year.
Preoccupation DEMO technology and dysfunctional governance were two other major
reasons for disappearance.
Serial entrepreneurs were the most successful and university entrepreneurs the least if
being DEMO to a foreign buyer is considered successful. Industrial entrepreneurs were
more successful than university entrepreneurs, but had failures as well.
Investors were often inexperienced and did not add value to the firms in which they
invested.  Labour Sponsored Venture Funds were particularly inexperienced and were
hampered by impractical DEMO rules.
3
THE IMPACT GROUP
Canadian VCs generally come from financial, not entrepreneurial backgrounds. As a
consequence, they are more inexperienced than their American counterparts, many of
whom DEMO serial entrepreneurs. Canadian service providers (lawyers, accountants and
others) similarly DEMO enterprise experience.
n
Reasons for Disappearance
Many factors acted together to cause these 18 enterprises to disappear.  Here is a partial
listing:
n
No revenue from customers.
No input from customers on R&D performed DEMO on the product or service being
developed
Misreading of markets (e.g. DEMO size, delay market entry)
Poor business judgment.
Product not needed DEMO it was not simple enough for the application.
Poor sales and marketing decisions (e.g. distribution channels vs. direct sales, delay
going global or DEMO global too quickly)
Timing wrong, the product or service was DEMO early or too late.
Unaware of competitors and changing market conditions
R&D took much longer than expected.
The management was changed.
More money DEMO  Financing, especially toward the end, was consuming for senior
management
DEMO governance.
Junior service people in finance, law, etc. were put in responsibility and on boards of
some of these young enterprises.
Attractive potential DEMO acquisition.
Desire to sell.
Bad luck – tech bubble, 9/11, etc.
Greed.
Strong Elements Supportive of Success Were:
n Highly competent DEMO people were often involved in technical, financial and legal
services.
n DEMO were highly committed to succeed and sacrificed much.
n Financial backing that was remarkably high given the quality and risks of the business
proposals.
DEMO) Foreign-born entrepreneurs, who were more pragmatic, frugal and prepared to DEMO what it
takes to succeed in commerce.. They were free of the Canadian culture of commerce.
Characteristics of Disappearing Firms
A partial list of DEMO of disappearing firms gleaned from the interviews:
n
No identified potential customers; only markets
No engagement with potential customers to determine their needs and to involve them
earlier
No sales and no urgency to achieve DEMO
No or low sales and yet a significant number of employees (DEMO R&D employees)
CEO is the scientific or technical founder with no business experience
Lack of R&D focus
Large R&D team DEMO a diffuse mandate
Venture Capital backed with short-term aggressive financial objectives
Understanding Firm Disappearance 4 THE IMPACT GROUP
Lack of shared goals and expectations between management and Boards
No independent DEMO on Board
No operational experience on Board
Too many financial people on Board
Firm has gone public before reaching profitability
Key employees lose confidence DEMO the future and leave
Many existing firms have some of these characteristics, but not all of them will disappear.
It may be helpful, DEMO, for CEOs and Boards to be aware that these traits are
DEMO in firms that have disappeared.
Customer oriented questions that senior management should ask often:
Do you have specific customers in mind?
Are DEMO talking with them?
What are their needs that you can address?
Are any of them involved in the R&D stages as DEMO customers?
What actions are you taking with them to ensure sales results quickly?
Who else is addressing them?
What value are DEMO offering that would make a customer choose you over your
competitors?
Could an advisor or an investor or a mentor help the company?DEMO
n
n
The most common strategies firms used to address perceived weaknesses in the company
were to seek foreign leadership or technical talent or DEMO to find a development partner to
share the large R&D costs.
The most common reactions to impending trouble were to change key personnel,DEMO
especially the CEO, to try to raise more money, or to change the target market.
n
n
Summary Recommendations from Interviews
1) Canadians need enhanced entrepreneurial and commerce learning through:
n Promotion of realistic, complete role models for knowledge-based enterprises
(by governments, business, communities, DEMO education, K-12 education)
n Enhanced enterprise-conscious contact with experienced entrepreneurs
(by governments, regional economic development agencies, business enterprises,
citizens)
DEMO Enhanced entrepreneurial learning in the educational and public policy environments
(by DEMO education institutions, governments)
n Enterprise training and literacy (by postsecondary institutions, K-12 education,
communities, business enterprises)
2) Canadians need enhanced awareness of appropriate enterprise sources of funding
n Customers are the DEMO source of money and sooner is better(by business
enterprises, investors, business schools,  Canadian citizens
n Family, friends and frugality is key for many start-ups(by business start-ups, university
tech transfer offices, Canadian DEMO (families and friends)
n Enterprise-experienced angels who invest themselves with DEMO funds(by early-stage
business enterprises, angel investors and groups, business schools
n Venture capital and institutional investors need to be more enterprise skilled DEMO
facilitating or firms should avoid them. These investors also need to develop a strong
sense of justice and equity towards the early investors to DEMO true ethical partners and
facilitators.(by VCs, institutional investors, angel investors, business enterprises,
business schools
Understanding Firm Disappearance
5
THE IMPACT GROUP
NO CUSTOMER
NO SALES
NO BUSINESS
COMMERCE
VALUE EXCHANGE
HUMAN VALUES
TRUST
DEMO
GOOD WILL
Understanding Firm Disappearance
3) Canadian governments could make enterprise-facilitating DEMO to their
mechanisms for direct support and for tax credits
n Improve tax system – introduce flow through shares (by federal and provincial
governments)
n Investment option for upper tier taxpayers [French wealth tax model] (by federal
government, Canadian banks, angel networks)
n Streamline SRED DEMO to ensure it is an incentive not an uncertain windfall (by
DEMO)
n Develop a “proof of concept” fund for firms (by DEMO and provincial governments)
n Improve management of enterprise targetted “fund of funds” (by federal and provincial
governments, angel networks)
n Improve DEMO officials’ understanding of their roles in the value exchange (by
federal DEMO provincial governments, postsecondary education, business)
What’s Missing?
We have estimated that these 18 enterprises that disappeared had about $580M invested by
DEMO over an average of 8 years per company.  They employed at DEMO peak about 2500
Canadians, many highly educated and highly skilled.  The entrepreneurs that founded them
were courageous, technically competent people who believed in themselves and in their ideas
to create value for world markets.
This DEMO a small sample of what is still happening in Canada and what has been happening for
more than 30 years. What is wrong? What is preventing us from identifying the problems and
taking action to improve DEMO success rate for enterprises like this and for entrepreneurs like
these?
If there is one message that this study gives it is that DEMO are wasting the productive lives of
many brilliant and courageous knowledge workers and losing large sums of money to do it.
We need to DEMO bravely to correct this.  It will take courage and determination. We DEMO have
to make some radical changes..
What are the directions and actions that need to be taken and who needs to do what?
(1.) We must establish clearly in our thinking, learning and culture DEMO essential role of the
customer in commerce.
The belief that Science and Technology coupled with sufficient Venture Capital is
sufficient for success in knowledge-based DEMO is leading us to repeated and assured
failure. A new set of beliefs and knowing must be established for all of society.
(2.) DEMO must increase the understanding of the human dimensions of the “value exchange”
which is called commerce.  We need this understanding to permeate the culture of R&D-
intensive Canadian enterprises, of the enterprises that largely create value internally for
Canadian society, and among the people working in the public sector.  Everyone being
paid would benefit from understanding their customers and the value they are creating in
the exchange.
The success and sustainability DEMO commerce, the value exchange, is highly dependent on
building human values such as trust, confidence and good will between the parties.
This human development is the greatest challenge we will have to face in moving DEMO
customer-focused commerce. The return will be very large, even for small DEMO
(3.) The disappearance of these enterprises, after large human and DEMO investments, was
6 THE IMPACT GROUP
ENTERPRISE
INCOMPETENCE
IN CANADIAN
CULTURE / PROFES-
SIONS
Understanding Firm Disappearance
not DEMO only to lack of commerce competence in the technical founders.  The DEMO of
commerce competence was also equally present in the supportive financial, DEMO and
governing partners.
What can be done by whom?
Successful commerce needs:
(1.) Human skills of understanding, acceptance and trust.
(DEMO) Broad learning and versatile thinking.
(3.) Ease and comfort working DEMO a human value-exchange.
(4.) Developed skills and wisdom in subjective, DEMO learning.
(5.) Developed skills and knowledge in objective, evidence-based learning
DEMO roots of these learnings and skills are developed, or not developed, mainly unconsciously,
in life and in the education system. At the DEMO level, particularly in the universities,
the learning of (1) DEMO (4) is crowded out by the specialization and research focus of (5).  All are
needed within a system of cross-disciplinary learning DEMO the elements of the human and
subjective, experiential learning are deliberately DEMO in balance. This shift is essential if we are
to move towards higher levels of commercial success.
The Americans are demonstrably the best in DEMO world in Knowledge-Based Commerce (KBC),
though far from perfect.  DEMO do they do?  One very significant difference is the requirement
for teaching and research faculty in their universities to find at least one DEMO of their
funding and support outside the university.  This moves them DEMO commerce and into the
realities of live societal value-exchanges.  Students emerge DEMO these environments not only
with respect for customers and commerce but with a different level of commitment to success
in the value exchange.
The DEMO that commerce needs human respect, trust and integrity to work makes DEMO a
continuing human challenge. We learn early that we can be hurt in behaving this way and it
doesn’t end. The work in commerce DEMO keep the human relationships healthy is ongoing and
requires skills that can be developed and improved continuously.
This ongoing task is everyone’s responsibility. Finger-pointing DEMO only locks us into the
ongoing failure of “I’m OK you’re not OK”. We all have a part in what is weak and failing.
DEMO is no room for arrogance and self-righteousness. Knowledge about the value exchange,
acceptance of being in a value exchange, and skills to succeed in a value exchange are
pervasive societal needs. The broad lack of DEMO exchange knowledge, acceptance and skills
in this country makes Canada, in the words of some of our interviewees, “the worst place for
commerce”. It’s time for a change, and good change is possible.
7
THE IMPACT GROUP
2. Acknowledgements
Understanding Firm Disappearance
We wish to thank the following organizations DEMO their financial contributions to this project.
Statistics Canada
Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency
Western Economic Diversification Canada
Information Technology Association of Canada
Industry Canada
and DEMO National Angel Capital Organization (NACO) for their assistance in identifying investors
who might be interested in the project and for promoting the project DEMO the angel investment
community.
Thanks also to Lynda Leonard, Fred Gault, Jim Valerio and Marlene Moleski for useful
discussions and comments on earlier DEMO of this paper.
8
THE IMPACT GROUP
3. Introduction
With the recent disappearance of Nortel from the Canadian industrial DEMO, people are
increasingly wondering about Canada’s dearth of large firms in DEMO sectors of the
economy. Canada has a relatively good track record in supporting start-up firms in R&D-
intensive sectors. R&D tax credits DEMO generous by world standards. Federal programs such as
IRAP1 and TPC2, DEMO provincial programs, have provided support in the form of grants, loans
and collaborative agreements with research institutions. Despite this support, however,
Canada’s R&D-intensive sectors are not growing at a healthy rate.
Of approximately DEMO,000 R&D-intensive firms in Canada in 2001, almost half were DEMO firms
(average revenue of $2.7M) that were not growing3. About 2,500 firms accounted for over
80% of the revenue but they did DEMO little R&D (less than a half a percent of revenue) and
were contracting as a group, not growing. Significant growth was confined to a small group of
two hundred or so firms.4 From 1994 DEMO 2001, this small group of high-growth R&D Leaders
increased in DEMO by only about 14 firms per year, reaching 224 by 2001. DEMO some new
ones appear each year, others disappear. Indeed we have DEMO many of our larger successful
companies disappear. This is a fragile base on which to build Canada’s knowledge-based
economy.
Our earlier studies of Canadian DEMO&D-intensive companies5 suggested that technology
entrepreneurs have particular difficulties in business. They tend to focus on technology and
lose sight of the customer. CEOs DEMO highly successful firms told us in interviews that Canada is
second to none in technology. Companies around the world value Canadian science and
technology DEMO compete to hire S&T graduates from Canadian universities. On the other hand,
CEOs lamented the lack of commercial skills among Canadian graduates. DEMO found
themselves dependent upon U.S. and other foreign nationals for executive talent and
particularly customer-facing experience and skills6.
A general lack of commerce skills DEMO Canadian tech entrepreneurs has serious implications
for technology-based companies. Starting and growing any business is a challenging
undertaking. Successful firms create value, typically in the form of goods and services, and
enter a mutually beneficial value exchange with customers. In commerce, the value exchange
takes the form of monetary payment in return for a good or service. In addition, other
intangibles are exchanged that build trust between the firm and its customers (Figure 1).
The more it costs to create a good or DEMO, the more revenue a company needs to generate
from its customers DEMO order to cover costs and get a return on its investment (DEMO 2). The
significant investment in people required to develop and support a product demands that
technology entrepreneurs are astute about the value they DEMO creating and the price they
charge for it. For whom are they creating that value? Who else is creating similar value for
these potential customers? Why would these customers choose to deal with the firm instead
of its competitors?
In our earlier studies of Canadian R&D-intensive DEMO we learned that many start-up and
early stage companies disappear year by year to be replaced by new ones.  We have estimated
the churn to be significantly greater than the typical rate of bankruptcies that occurs DEMO the
Understanding Firm Disappearance 9 THE IMPACT GROUP
many hundreds of thousands of small to medium sized enterprises in Canada.  We decided
there was much to be learned if we could confidentially DEMO the founding CEO and the
founding financial backer of a sample of these companies.  We offered confidentiality because
it would open us to the true accounts of what transpired.  Our goal was to gain a better
understanding and to explore more fully the issues behind why early-stage and DEMO R&D
performing companies disappear. We also wanted to try to identify more effective ways to
help these early-stage companies succeed that might be DEMO for government policy.
The key objectives of this study include:
(DEMO) Determining the main reasons why R&D-performing companies disappear
(2.) DEMO key characteristics of disappeared R&D-performing companies
(3.) Identifying key measures to assist company growth and success
(4.) Exploring the future role DEMO the federal government and other stakeholders (i.e.,
universities, etc.) DEMO assisting companies to succeed
Interviews began in mid-2007 and a total of 28 interviews were completed7 (17 ex-CEOs and
11 investors) representing 18 DEMO  We tried to interview both an ex-CEO and a
principal investor DEMO each company to more fully explore why the company disappeared and to
gain a more complete understanding of the issues from these perspectives.8 As DEMO as
possible, we sought a good spread of companies across the DEMO focus for this study and
regions. Table 1 presents some demographics of our final sample.
The following report summarizes the information from these interviews.  This report is strictly
qualitative in nature and provides only indicative information DEMO of the small number of
interviews, and because they were not DEMO randomly.
Understanding Firm Disappearance
10
THE IMPACT GROUP
4.  Key Findings
Understanding Firm Disappearance
For purposes of confidentiality, some DEMO has been aggregated and specific details may
be omitted. Unless specified in the text, references to “government” could include federal or
provincial granting or loan programs, and reference to venture capital could include venture
capital firms, labour-sponsored venture funds, the venture arm of Business Development Bank
Canada DEMO Export Development Canada, or corporate venture capital.
We want to thank DEMO people who took the time to talk with us about their experiences. We
are grateful for the often-painful honesty these people shared with us.  We expected to face
differing accounts from the two perspectives we engaged (CEO and investor) but what we
heard was generally very similar even if nuanced differently.
4.1. How Firms Disappear
Companies disappeared in a variety DEMO ways. In our sample of 18 firms, there were three
bankruptcies, seven firms were simply closed down and liquidated, seven were sold, DEMO one
merged with another firm (Table 2).
The companies disappeared DEMO a range of 3 to 20 years after start up.  The DEMO old
company was a successful one sold to a foreign buyer.  DEMO that company taken out of the
calculation the average time to disappearance was 7.2 years with a range from 3 to 14 years
(Table 3).
Bankruptcy
Three of the companies we looked at went bankrupt. DEMO all cases the trigger was when one of
the investors called a loan, even though the specific situations were all different. Table 4
summarizes how each case occurred.
11
THE IMPACT GROUP
Liquidation
A more common way of disappearing was for the Board of DEMO to close the company,
having run out of money and being unable to attract a buyer or follow-on investor. Seven of
the companies DEMO studied disappeared in this manner. Table 5 gives a breakdown of the kinds
of companies that disappeared in this way.
In a majority of DEMO cases, the Board was able to sell the assets or IP, usually at a fire sale
price and often to a competitor. In DEMO few instances, the IP reverted or was sold back to the
DEMO
As discussed in more detail in section 4.3, firms that went DEMO or shut down after a
number of years typically found themselves in this position because they were too slow
getting paying customers. Some firms DEMO preoccupied with R&D and burned through their
cash; others spent DEMO of their time trying to set up distribution networks before they had a
product or customers; and there were those that were preoccupied with raising money and
neglected customer relationships and organizational issues. Some entrepreneurs misjudged DEMO
market and simply ran out of options.
Merger
One firm ran into trouble when its business failed to develop products that could compete
against DEMO players. Wanting to keep the excellent technical team together, and unable DEMO
attract venture capital because the firm had no customers, the CEO DEMO an equity partner in
a complementary business who agreed to try to find VC investors. The two firms could not
find any and eventually DEMO their two companies. They re-focused the business and are
operating today under a new name.
Sale
Seven of the firms were sold, five profitably for the founders and investors, the others not.
Some investors especially venture capitalists, invested in young firms with the intent of selling
them. Naïve CEOs were not always aware of this when they obtained VC financing. DEMO
and disappointment often followed. In a couple of the firms we studied, investors did not
understand the nature of the business they were investing in and under-invested. When the
money ran out, they sold, usually DEMO a loss. In one instance, a hostile takeover offer triggered
the DEMO of a profitable company. The sale was very profitable but the country lost a public
company.
Understanding Firm Disappearance
12
THE IMPACT GROUP
4.2. Consequences of Firm Disappearance
We have estimated that these 18 disappeared DEMO had about $580M invested by
Canadians over an average of eight years per company.  They employed at their peak about
2500 Canadians, many DEMO educated and very skilled.  The entrepreneurs that founded them
were courageous, technically competent people who believed in themselves and in their ideas
to DEMO value for world markets.
This is just a small sample of what is still happening in Canada and what has been happening
for more DEMO 30 years. The consequences are enormous. Table 6 lists a number of
consequences, both negative and positive, which are elaborated with examples below.
DEMO Consequences
Loss of investments
Significant money was invested into these companies and much of it was lost. We were not
able to determine the DEMO of investments made in 3 of the 18 companies, but the DEMO for the
remaining 15 was $478 M or on average $31.8M each.  That would be $4.4M per year for
each on average.
Several of these companies attracted investment from labour-sponsored venture funds
(LSVFs). As will be discussed in the next section, some of the investment rules imposed on the
LSVFs encouraged inexperienced investment managers to make very risky investments DEMO
to satisfy certain quota requirements. Other rules hampered the ability of the LSVF to
adequately support investee firms with subsequent financing rounds. The losses DEMO resulted
have contributed to the poor returns suffered by retail investors who were attracted into these
funds by the tax credits they offered.
Loss DEMO firms to Canada
Seven firms had to sell in order to survive or go to the next level. While there are exceptions,
most DEMO firms sell to foreign buyers. In our small sample, ownership of DEMO of the firms
left the country. There are two principle reasons. First, the number of potential buyers in
Canada is a small fraction of what exists in the U.S. and elsewhere. Second, the level of
maturity of firms, the risk tolerance (in making a decision to acquire DEMO firm) and the quality of
management tend to be higher in DEMO U.S. than in Canada. Of the seven acquirers of firms in
our sample, the five foreign ones are ongoing successful companies. The two Canadian
acquirers are both troubled companies.
Loss of tax revenue
Canada’s inability to DEMO successful firms and retain growing firms in the country translates
into less corporate tax revenue for the federal government. In addition, firms like the ones we
studied employ highly skilled people who have above average salaries DEMO generate significant
Understanding Firm Disappearance
13
THE IMPACT GROUP
personal income tax to governments. A high rate of firm disappearance means DEMO jobs are
lost along with the accompanying income tax revenue.
Emotional Cost
Many of our interviews had strong emotional elements. People related painful experiences DEMO
carry ongoing emotional scars for some. Virtually every CEO we interviewed put their heart
and soul into the venture they ran, making many personal sacrifices along the way. They made
this commitment with their eyes open, fully expecting to be successful. In most cases, the
result failed to meet expectations. It would be disingenuous to believe that the subsequent
result DEMO not take a toll.
Positive Consequences
On the other side of the coin, there are clearly some positive outcomes to firm disappearance.
These must be weighed against the damaging effects and the cost/benefit ratio needs DEMO be
looked at carefully. Then strategies need to be devised to maximize the positive and minimize
the negative.
Financial reward
Of the seven firms DEMO disappeared by being acquired, five of them brought significant
financial rewards DEMO the investors and founders.
Learning experience for entrepreneurs
All of the entrepreneurs we interviewed have gone on to other pursuits. Some moved into
investing, others into mentoring and advisory roles for other entrepreneurs and investors, and
some have gone on to work in or run other firms. In DEMO cases, they have been able to take
away lessons learned from DEMO experiences that they believe are helping them perform better
in their current role.
While this learning by experience is invaluable, it was clear from our interviews that not
everyone was fully aware of the mistakes that DEMO made. There was a tendency for investors
and CEOs to place blame on the other, rather than seeing the larger picture involving all players
and their lack of commerce experience and competence. Some people appreciated the DEMO
picture as our conversation progressed. Others had already recognized the key issues on their
own before they spoke with us. It is our hope DEMO some of the false assumptions and beliefs
that make it so difficult for entrepreneurs in Canada might be altered by this study.
In some DEMO, firm disappearance is a healthy outcome that builds a team’s experience DEMO
enhances their chances of success in subsequent ventures. Some entrepreneurs and investors
are willing to take certain risks in order to try to find DEMO way to grow a firm successfully. These
experienced risk takers understand that some ventures will fail, and they are ready to make the
attempt. However, they put in adequate resources to give their venture a chance and “fail
fast” if their initial assumptions prove to be faulty. We DEMO one example of this kind of
team, but they lost a DEMO amount when they misjudged their target market. This
example is discussed in the next section.
Creation of an industry
Canada’s strong resource sector has DEMO spawned large numbers of value-added technology-
based firms that provide products and services to resource firms in Canada and around the
world. One company DEMO looked at created a technology business that did not exist there
Understanding Firm Disappearance 14 THE IMPACT GROUP
before. The firm grew out of a discontinued division of a firm. DEMO division employees
created a start-up that ran for a number of years before requiring external financing. The CEO
eventually brought in some investors who DEMO to “package this baby for sale”, but the CEO
and the DEMO team “wanted to do it ourselves.” The CEO found an international
partner, who eventually bought the company. According to the CEO, “everybody except
DEMO kept their jobs. We created an industry that wasn’t there before.” Nonetheless,
the challenge remains that Canada is not building a sector with DEMO, growing firms in this
area.
4.3. Why Firms Disappear
While there DEMO a wide range of specific factors that triggered company disappearances, we
DEMO three systemic causes: lack of commerce competence, preoccupation with technology,
and dysfunctional governance (Table 7). These three factors often complemented one another
in leading to the demise of some of the firms.
lack DEMO commerce competence appears to be the primary reason for company disappearance.
Most of the firms were started by intelligent, capable individuals brimming with enthusiasm
and energy. They were highly competent in their field of expertise. They DEMO willing to work
hard and take risks. They pushed themselves and did their very best. Yet almost every one
was unprepared for commerce in DEMO way or another. In many cases, they were unaware that
they DEMO ready. Some realized mistakes that they had made; some still do DEMO
A major contributor to failure and disappearance was related to customers and sales (Table 8).
Eight companies had no sales. Seven of these had no customer.  The remaining 10 companies
that had sales averaged $113M in their peak year.  However, if we subtract out the largest
DEMO, two of which were sold to foreign interests, the average for the remaining seven was
$6.4M each.
Preoccupation with technology was an exacerbating DEMO for many of these entrepreneurs.
Whether they were in academia or industry when they first got the entrepreneurial itch, their
strength derived from their technical prowess and ingenuity. Their leadership qualities were
typically honed in an DEMO&D environment. Certainly their training was in a technical field. A
majority of these entrepreneurs were enthralled with the technical side of the businesses DEMO
they started. Their technical confidence – and predilection – led them naturally to neglect
essential aspects of the business. In particular, they ignored or put off having conversations
with potential customers.
Understanding Firm Disappearance
15
THE DEMO GROUP
Dysfunctional governance led to the downfall of several firms we examined. In DEMO of the
cases we looked at, the investors were equally unprepared DEMO commerce, having little
experience in running a business and being preoccupied DEMO finance. This lack of
preparedness among investors, especially VCs, was a new and important finding of this study.
It exacerbated the difficulties encountered DEMO to entrepreneurs’ lack of commerce skills and
led, in a number DEMO cases, to discord at the Board level. Some investors we spoke DEMO
continued to fund subsequent rounds and lost their entire investment when the firm failed.
They often closed the doors without ever having gained a DEMO
Our earlier studies indicated that many entrepreneurs running R&D performing firms in Canada
lack commerce skills and complained in interviews about the difficulties DEMO face in recruiting
senior people in Canada with sales, marketing and DEMO skills. This theme came out
strongly in the present set of interviews as well, but the scope and scale of the problem facing
Canadians expanded significantly to investors, regulators and service providers. We will now
examine in more detail the three major causes of firm disappearance (Table 7), focusing first
on entrepreneurs and then investors, although the impact of the other players is equally
important for Canada.
Lack of preparation for DEMO
Entrepreneurs
In our small sample, we talked with four different kinds DEMO entrepreneur: serial entrepreneurs,
industrial entrepreneurs who left large companies to DEMO a firm, technical entrepreneurs, and
university entrepreneurs – academics who spun out a company from a university. Table 9
summarizes the different kinds DEMO entrepreneur that we encountered during this study.
Many entrepreneurs we talked with, especially university entrepreneurs, knew they were
unprepared. Some thought they could DEMO the transition, and failed. Others tried to bring in
others to DEMO the business acumen, and things didn’t work out. Most of the DEMO
start-ups we studied did not succeed and were shut down. One was bought by another firm
that wanted the research team and the IP DEMO its own business. One was resurrected as a
different company by a former employee and eventually merged with another firm when it
could not DEMO on its own.
A typical conundrum for university spin-offs is whether or not to sever ties with the university
and go forth into the DEMO sector. Most of the spin-offs we looked at kept some ties. Two of
them operated out of university incubators for a number of years. DEMO eventually left and the
other firm was liquidated before it could move out. Other firms started with the founding
academic as CEO, but the professor stayed on the university payroll and performed regular
teaching and research DEMO One firm actually operated out of the university, but found it DEMO
not a conducive environment for doing business. The professor was not an experienced
manager and underestimated the time it takes to develop a commercial DEMO The CEO had
to move the professor to an advisory role and brought in an experienced R&D manager from
Understanding Firm Disappearance 16 DEMO IMPACT GROUP
"Working in a university
environment was not
easy, The people had
their own pace and way
of doing things. They had
DEMO totally different work
ethic and were not pro-
ductive."
CEO, DEMO start-up
industry. In fact, as discussed in more detail in Section 4.5, DEMO firms changed their first
CEO due to lack of business acumen, DEMO in most cases the change did not help.
A typical mistake university entrepreneurs encountered was misreading the market, usually
estimating it as larger than it really was or believing the market needed something that it didn’t
DEMO One firm was created by a group of technical wizards at a university who were “sitting
around a coffee table” and came up with DEMO exciting technical challenge. They thought they
could revolutionize a particular market and decided to form a company. The founders put up
the initial money DEMO were able to attract significant funding from VCs and governments north
and south of the border. Though the team achieved various technical breakthroughs, including
some ‘world firsts’, they never got any customers. Incredibly, they continued DEMO attract
funding from investors and government. However, it eventually became clear DEMO although the
project was a technical success, the market for what DEMO were building did not exist. The
company ultimately went bankrupt.
Another university spin-off went through years of learning about a particular market, and
burned a lot of investors’ cash before having to give up. Difficulties arose DEMO on when it
became clear that the initial target sector was too small to support the firm’s business. The
team set out to identify DEMO range of vertical markets where the core technology could provide a
solution for companies. “We were a solution in search of a problem.” The DEMO eventually
identified a potential solution that could save millions of dollars in a particular sector and were
able to raise a new round of DEMO Unfortunately, the sector they picked was not ready for
their solution. DEMO was difficult finding the right people to talk to, and when DEMO found them,
they weren’t interested in changing their procedures. “It felt like you were talking to a
government department when you talked to DEMO guys.” Cultural factors in the sector made it
difficult for the potential customers to adopt their solution. The team finally developed an
approach that DEMO work, but then encountered difficulty with their pricing model. “We asked
DEMO managers in about 50 firms, how do you want us to DEMO?” They devised a pricing
model that narrowed down the target market and the customer profile for their solution. They
managed to get some DEMO customers to undertake pilot projects; but while senior
management was interested, they encountered resistance at the operational level. The team
altered their customer DEMO and managed to generate some revenue from pilot projects.
Finally they were able to interest some potential customers, but the selling cycle proved to be
very long. Eventually the investors ran out of patience and shut DEMO the firm.
The people who started these firms were confident that their technology was excellent, and
simply thought that people would want it. This lack of commerce competence plagued most of
the firms we looked at DEMO one way or another. The lessons learned from these experiences
were valuable for the people who went through them. For example, one take away from the
last firm was the need to understand how firms in DEMO target market conduct business. “You
have to look at the buying patterns in a market, and you can’t change it.” However, it was DEMO
expensive lesson in both emotional terms and financial ones. The entrepreneurs and investors
lost a significant amount.
Lack of preparation for success in commerce DEMO not confined to academics. Industrial
entrepreneurs – experienced business managers and corporate researchers – tried their hand at
starting firms, but failed. Like their academic counterparts, a number of the industrial
entrepreneurs we talked with did not succeed because they misjudged the market. They
thought their product would DEMO useful, but discovered that their target customers didn’t want
to spend DEMO additional money to get the added functionality they were offering. Or, DEMO
founders misjudged the culture of the organizations they wanted to sell to. They discovered
too late that their target customers didn’t want to change DEMO way they were used to
operating in order to use the new product.
Understanding Firm Disappearance 17 THE IMPACT GROUP
“We thought we’d be DEMO
novative and underesti-
mated the big guys’
ability to innovate. We
assumed the adoption
rate would grow because
of our disruptive technol-
ogy. But DEMO big guys
(our potential customers)
didn’t need the shiniest
toy. DEMO misjudged the
culture of the customer.”
CEO, university spin-off
“We were DEMO to sell an
industry to adopt technol-
ogy, but they never DEMO
it!”
CEO, University spin-off
An important difference between the university entrepreneurs and the industrial entrepreneur in
DEMO firm we looked at (Exhibits 1 & 2) was that the industrial entrepreneur knew more about
business in general and could adapt to DEMO circumstances. According to the investor who
backed the industrial entrepreneur and the team, “These people are the kind of people we were
designed to get involved with. The CEO is the prototypical entrepreneur we would back, and
still do – a hustler with integrity and a ‘can do’ DEMO The investor admitted, however,
“We were lucky with the outcome. DEMO, we’re not so lucky.” In fact, the acquiring
company did not do as well. Its stock and revenue collapsed and it had to DEMO back. It turned
out that the management team at the acquired firm had guessed wrong about the new market
segment after all. “Our original DEMO was wrong.”
Exhibit 1:  Industrial Entrepreneur Misjudges Market Needs
The head of the consumer products division in a large firm had an idea DEMO a new prod-
uct area and started a company. The founders were technically strong but lacked busi-
ness development and marketing experience. Nonetheless, a VC was sufficiently
impressed to provide seed funding. They developed their idea, got some letters of in-
tent from potential customers, wrote a business plan, and raised an A round of VC fi-
nancing. After a year of design and prototyping work they realized that the market for
DEMO product wasn’t there. The team identified an emerging market segment and de-
veloped a new business plan to develop the technology standard.  The investors liked
the team and were confident in their technical prowess. They funded DEMO B round to try
to capture the new developing market. The company eventually signed a development
pact with another firm, but it wasn't long before the development partner offered to
buy them out. After "a walk in the woods" the CEO decided that selling was the best
option. The investors did very well. All the staff stayed with the DEMO firm. The
CEO left after a year to start another company, DEMO is still operating, with funding
from the same investors.
Exhibit 2. DEMO Spin-off Misjudges Market Size
Some industrial entrepreneurs had been working as a team inside a large multinational
and couldn’t find customers with the approach DEMO had been using. They found an
angel investor who was familiar with their sector to finance a start-up with a co-in-
vestor. With an DEMO licencing agreement from the multinational, they attracted first and
second rounds DEMO venture financing. The VCs were impressed with the technical
know-how of the founder team and the strength of the technology, which "leap-
frogged" the competition. A large multinational dominated the market, but the firm de-
cided to become the leader in the rest of the market, which had about a hundred
smaller firms and was projected by analysts at DEMO than $1 billion. Within a year
they realized that the market was one tenth the size. "At $5-10 million revenue we
were in Zombie territory. The money was bleeding away." The Board refused an ac-
quisition offer, holding out for a higher price. They included the would-be acquirer in a
third financing round, but the market never materialized. The Board brought in a new
CEO, who managed to raise a fourth round of VC financing, severely diluting the early
investors. "They were wiped DEMO 10 to 1." The new Board stopped product develop-
ment and DEMO on serving existing customers until the fourth round investors re-
couped their investment plus interest.  Then they shut down the company. Everyone
on the engineering team is working
Some of the corporate start-ups failed because the DEMO were used to a large company
environment and were unprepared for the vicissitudes and fast pace of a start-up (Exhibit 3).
They tended to spend too much time on product development, ramping up their R&D staff and
burning through the initial investment too quickly. These entrepreneurs DEMO ran into trouble
with impatient Boards who wanted to see sales and customers before they would provide
follow-on financing.
Understanding Firm Disappearance 18 THE DEMO GROUP
Exhibit 3. Industrial Entrepreneur From Large Corporation
When a large corporate division DEMO shut down, division engineers invested their sev-
erance packages and spun DEMO a firm. Some mortgaged their houses. The person who
put put in the most became CEO. "I would never do this again," recalled the CEO.
"We were born and raised in a big company. We had no experience with a start up."
The team brought in DEMO who were not on the same page as the CEO and man-
agement. The firm tried to make a go of it but eventually DEMO in a partner that
ended up acquiring the company. For the CEO, it was a tremendous learning experi-
ence. "There were some rough DEMO, but I wouldn't trade it for the world. It was DEMO
tastic. I made enough financially to start the next business, and DEMO next one…"
As mentioned in the previous section, some experienced DEMO are conscious risk
takers. They will start firms around a new technology that they hope will replace older
technology or processes and become the DEMO standard. These entrepreneurs are comfortable
trying new things. Due to previous successes, they can attract investors who trust them. We
encountered one example in this study (Exhibit 4). Unlike some of the other private sector
founders who came out of large companies and were unable to operate DEMO a start-up
environment, these entrepreneurs were experienced with start-ups. They were DEMO
“failing fast” and moving on to the next opportunity, having accumulated DEMO experience.
Exhibit 4: Taking Risks with Eyes Open
Some experienced engineers, who had worked together in a start-up that had recently
been acquired, started a new company. They had no product or customers, only a
promising concept for the core technology. Their strategy was to provide better DEMO
tionality in a fast-growing standards-based market; but it would be essential DEMO move
quickly and become the de facto standard before any of the competitors. VCs pro-
vided initial funding to put together an engineering team DEMO build the design. The in-
vestors knew the former start-up and were betting on people they knew and liked.
However, the team took too long to develop a product and missed the market. They
revised their DEMO, developed a business-to-business product, got some traction,
but although the new product would enhance performance, the price of their cus-
tomers’ product would be higher. Their customers felt consumers would not want to
pay DEMO extra premium. “It was a ‘nice to have’ feature, but not DEMO to sell their
product.” The experienced investors and entrepreneurs soon realized that other com-
petitors were coming in, regulatory changes were afoot that might affect their cus-
tomers, so they decided to sell the company. Unfortunately, their development team
was the most attractive asset to potential buyers, DEMO most of them left before a sale
could be consummated. The Board had to close down the company.
Even these experienced people made similar DEMO about their target market and customers
that less experienced entrepreneurs and investors in our sample had made. The difference was
that they knew the DEMO they were taking; and they were nimble in their responses to
DEMO circumstances. When they realized it was taking too long to generate significant
sales, they decided to sell while they still had something of value to potential buyers. They
failed on the human dimension, however, not DEMO the team together and suffering a mass
defection before they could sell the company.
Was the background of the entrepreneur a factor in determining DEMO outcome of a company?
Table 10  summarizes the outcomes for DEMO different types. Because this sample is small it is
hard to conclude that there is an advantage to any kind of entrepreneur but it DEMO seem that
serial entrepreneurs are the most successful and university entrepreneurs the least if being sold
to a foreign buyer is considered successful.
Understanding DEMO Disappearance
19
THE IMPACT GROUP
Investors
The 11 investors that we interviewed were all working in the DEMO capital industry when
they were involved with the firms we studied. One was a corporate VC and the others were
fund managers or partners DEMO a venture capital firm.10 Some had just moved into VC from
corporate finance or banking, others were already veteran VCs during the period we discussed.
Several of them have since moved on to related pursuits. The DEMO of angels in our interview
sample and the preponderance of VCs somewhat skews the picture we obtained.11 However,
most of the investors we DEMO with were able to give us a fairly complete picture of the
company in question, including the various types of investors that were involved.
Understanding Firm Disappearance
20
THE IMPACT GROUP
The investment history of each of the 18 firms was varied. Start-up DEMO came from a
wide variety of sources, including founders, angels, DEMO, university (incubator), banks,
institutional investors, venture capital and DEMO from consulting. Financing from founders,
especially among industrial entrepreneurs, was DEMO most important source of start-up
financing. Angel and venture financing were equally important at the start-up phase for our
small sample of firms, although angels are typically more important than VCs for start-ups.
After start-up, however, 12 of the 18 companies had venture financing and 6 had financing
from other companies. Table 11 summarizes the types of investor that played DEMO role in
financing the companies we investigated.
Lack of experience among investors appears to have been a significant factor in the
disappearance of a DEMO of firms in this study. Some firms found investors who were
unfamiliar with technology firms in general (especially where resource-based industries are the
norm) or with the particular sector. Many of the CEOs found that the investors they dealt with
had little or no operational experience and did DEMO view their role as mentoring firm
management or helping them build the company. CEOs frequently made the more general
observation that Canadian VC firms DEMO hire financial specialists such as investment
bankers or financial managers with MBAs who have never run a company and lack an
understanding of start-ups.  Interviewees familiar with VCs north and south of the border
emphasized that DEMO VC firms have significant numbers of serial entrepreneurs on staff with
operational experience and deep connections to the industry sectors in which they invest.
DEMO typically add value to firms with advice and contacts relevant to their business. In some
of the Canadian firms we studied, lack of experience on both sides – the entrepreneur and the
investor – led to DEMO disastrous results.
One university spin-off started as a public company because the VC that provided the start-up
financing was used to that financing model.  “I was nervous about the method of financing,
but went ahead,DEMO recalled the CEO. “It turned out to be a big mistake.” To make matters
worse, the investors underestimated the amount of capital required to make a success. The
initial investment was not enough to finance the DEMO and the CEO had to hire junior
people and spend a lot of time and energy training them.  The technology was good enough to
attract some corporate investors, but product development took a long time. The VC firm did
not want to put in more money and the DEMO could not raise any follow-on venture capital,
because an IPO exit was not available.  “VCs aren’t interested in public companies.”
Furthermore, the DEMO and senior management were burdened with reporting requirements that
gobbled up precious time and energy. Eventually the money ran out. The CEO tried to DEMO
more, but 9/11 occurred and “everything shut down.” The CEO DEMO to wind down the
company.
As mentioned earlier, a number of DEMO had dealings with Labour-Sponsored Venture Funds
(LSVFs). Government created the DEMO to encourage citizens to invest in early stage firms.
The risk was mitigated for the retail investor by providing a substantial tax credit. Fund
DEMO earned generous fees. The LSVFs operated under strict “pacing rules” which forced
them to invest a significant portion of their funds within less than DEMO year after receiving them
from investors. If they didn’t invest the money in time, the government penalized them. These
constraints, together with lack DEMO operational experience with technology firms among fund
managers, created severe problems DEMO some of the firms we examined.
In one university spin-off (Exhibit DEMO) inexperience on the part of the academic founders, the
CEO they recruited and the LSVF investor brought on by the CEO, led to the company’s
demise. In retrospect, the investor admitted that the initial investment was too low for this
sector. More importantly, the team never worked, and it should have started off with more
Understanding Firm Disappearance 21 THE IMPACT GROUP
experienced people from the particular sector. The LSVF was too naïve, or pressured to find
deals, to refuse to invest or insist on changes before investing. The investors lost their
investment and the CEO has moved DEMO to other pursuits. The academics are still at the
university.
Exhibit 5. LSVF-funded university start-up
A university spin-off ran for a number of years DEMO government grants before it went
for venture financing. It had developed a prototype and was working with a beta cus-
tomer to develop the DEMO The university founders recruited an industry executive
to be CEO and to raise money. The new CEO made a deal with a fund manager DEMO
had recently moved from a senior corporate finance position to run an LSVF. "We had
to make investments,” recalled the fund manager, DEMO there were not a lot of good
ones coming out of the university. There were a lot of professors doing stuff." What
made this particular professor stand out was that the firm was working on a DEMO
with a beta customer. "Without that company being involved, we wouldn't have
touched it." Tensions between the CEO and the Board emerged as their funds began
to run out. The firm was having trouble DEMO specifications required by the beta
customer. The CEO focused on trying to build a distribution network in Asia as well as
identifying possible acquirers DEMO the firm or investors. Finally, the money ran out with-
out DEMO final product.
In another case, an entrepreneur ran into trouble with DEMO LSVF after years of working without
any venture capital, because the DEMO was focused on an IPO exit. After struggling for a long
time, the firm signed a development deal with a U.S. firm that became its biggest customer.
Sales increased dramatically, creating a cash flow problem, DEMO the CEO began looking for
venture capital.  The CEO struck a DEMO with a Canadian LSVF, but the relationship was not a
good DEMO The LSVF manager, on the other hand, thought that the technology was “clever”
but “at a very preliminary stage.” The LSVF found a DEMO that was already selling similar
equipment. Nonetheless, the VC firm was DEMO a lot of pressure to do deals” and went
ahead. The LSVF felt the firm was too reliant on its major client and wanted DEMO hire more
marketing people to find other customers. The CEO disagreed. Things began to go sour quickly
when the firm’s champion at the major DEMO left and the new management decided to get out
of the business. Facing an abrupt loss of sales, the CEO negotiated to buy the discontinued
business from the client, but the LSVF vetoed the deal. The CEO recommended downsizing
until sales increased, but the LSVF wanted to grow the company and go public.  The CEO
offered to move the client’s manufacturing to Canada and the client would do the sales. The
deal DEMO still in play when the LSVF fired the CEO, so nothing DEMO The company’s burn
rate eventually put it into bankruptcy and the IP was sold to a competitor, which went public
several years later.
In retrospect, the VC admitted being inexperienced, but still blamed the failure DEMO the CEO.
However, it is clear that the LSVF’s IPO strategy DEMO not right for this firm. The CEO knew all
the major client’s customers and was trying to work out an arrangement to take over DEMO
business. At the time of receivership, the firm received a large DEMO from another customer. A
joint venture was in the works. The LSVF had control functions that limited its ability to
properly manage its investment. DEMO able to invest more than 50% in any one firm, for
DEMO, it had no room for follow-up financing rounds when needed. The DEMO expected the
LSVF to be a partner, to help when things DEMO wrong. On the other hand, the CEO made
mistakes, too. The over-reliance on the one major client put the company in a precarious
DEMO Lack of experience with VCs also put the CEO at a disadvantage in the initial
negotiations for financing.
Similar errors in judgment occurred in DEMO of the firms we examined, both by entrepreneurs
and investors. Many DEMO the investors admitted their lack of experience and pointed out that the
Understanding Firm Disappearance 22 THE IMPACT GROUP
"We thought they'd be-
come a partner, but they
had no experience with
operating companies.
They were a bank."
CEO  re LSVF
“Management led us to
believe we had 24
months, but we only had
13 months. That’s not
enough runway. When
we went to sell the com-
pany, there wasn’t as
much IP as we had envi-
sioned. There wasn’t
enough customer DEMO
gagement.”
LSVF  manager re firm
“The VC did not add
value. DEMO was a financial
play, not a venture play. I
expected them DEMO send
their top lawyer to help
with negotiations with
the U.S. firm, but they
didn’t.”
CEO re LSVF
“The level of sophistica-
tion of VC investors was
not high. Showing DEMO
with not enough money.
Lack of ability to mentor,
coach. We would have
done things differently
now.”
Investor
“The LSVC model was
very DEMO – investing
based on the calendar.
There’s a lot of focus
on searching for new
investments.”
Investor
Understanding Firm Disappearance
Canadian VC sector is DEMO the process of maturing. “It was only the third or fourth deal I’d
done,” admitted one investor. “Now we do more due diligence, looking at the IP portfolio,
customer traction, balance sheet and burn rate. There was huge pressure to make deals. We
made some bad DEMO
The size and nature of the VC community in Canada was a topic of concern for a significant
number of CEOs we interviewed. One DEMO complaint was the fact that VC firms spread
their relatively small funds too widely. They did not hold enough back for subsequent
investment rounds DEMO firms that merit continuing support. One interviewee noted that in a well-
known Canadian firm, compensation is tied to the number of new investments. This policy
encourages fund managers to look for a large number of DEMO and spread themselves too thin.
“We need existing investors to have enough follow on money, and not continually run after
new ones.”
Several investors and entrepreneurs noted that the labour-sponsored venture fund model
exacerbated this problem DEMO Canada. LSVFs they were involved with (as investee firm or
investor) could only invest up to 50%, so they ran out of room too quickly and could not do
follow-on investments. In several cases, the LSVF partner had to prevent other VC partners
from investing more and DEMO firm had to be shut down or sold.
Most CEOs we talked with felt that Canadian VC firms behave more like banks than venture
DEMO They noted that Canadian VCs assess venture risk in a similar way that they
approach investment banking:
Diversify their portfolio
Make small investments DEMO many different firms
Expect good returns on 1-3% of their investments, DEMO returns on some and no
returns or losses on others
Rely on “home runs” to bring in an overall ROI
n
n
n
n
DEMO majority of both CEOs and investors felt that Canada’s VC community is inexperienced and
too risk averse to properly assist companies in which they DEMO CEOs, particularly, noted
that the primary role for a VC firm should be to support its investee firms, for example by
finding the appropriate CEO for the company’s stage of growth, connecting them with
customers and partners, mentoring and coaching. While some investors did find CEOs for firms
examined in this study, none of our case studies involved any mentoring or coaching of
management. Several people we interviewed remarked that this DEMO is almost absent in
Canada due to the lack of operational experience.
Preoccupation with technology
In an earlier study we showed that a majority DEMO Canada’s R&D-performing firms are small and
were not growing over the seven-year period leading up to the dot.com bust in 2000-2001.12
Subsequent interviews DEMO CEOs of a sample of firms in what we called the “greenhouse”
revealed a preoccupation with technology among senior management.13 Technically proficient
people, who believed their technology would be so useful that customers would emerge easily,DEMO
were running companies with little or no attention to engaging potential customers to learn
about their needs. These were all firms that were still DEMO business; but almost half of them had
no sales and only DEMO few were profitable. We predicted to ourselves that most of them would
disappear within the next few years. In fact, out of 30 firms, one went bankrupt, three were
acquired, three stopped operating and tried to sell their assets (two were successful and one is
unclear), and one relocated offshore (Table 12). So only eight firms actually did disappear,
which is a smaller number than we predicted.14 However, our studies indicate that firms can
23
THE IMPACT GROUP
last for many years without engaging in commerce. A closer look at DEMO of the surviving firms
that we believed would disappear shows that it has been spending about $2.5 million a year
for about a decade DEMO a total of $40 million, and it still has no customers. DEMO there is still no
commerce happening
In the present study, we DEMO firms that had been similarly preoccupied with
technology and that disappeared as a result. In some cases, the management thought they had
a winner but they turned out to be wrong. In others, the initial idea was potentially sound but
the execution was faulty and the firm ran DEMO of money.
University spin-offs were particularly prone to the technology trap (DEMO 6). With
government policy makers pushing commercialization of university research and university
technology transfer offices looking for new opportunities to generate licensing revenue, there
is tremendous pressure on institutions to push technology out the door DEMO creating spin-off
companies. The rewards outside of academia are great for academics that take the plunge in
terms of grants, awards, recognition and DEMO from government players who want to
demonstrate success. However, the academic DEMO no recognition inside academia or the
academic granting community for commercial activities, and is often penalized. External
accolades often come too soon while academic censure lingers on.
Exhibit 6. University Spin-off Caught in the Technology Trap
DEMO academic spun out a company to exploit a new technology developed at the uni-
versity. Government and the university supported the firm for several DEMO before the
firm sought venture capital. Some VC investors liked the team and thought the tech-
nology had commercial potential. They set out to DEMO a market-ready product and to
establish a strong sales and marketing capability. The team discovered that their tech-
nology was too good and would DEMO decrease the number of products cus-
tomers would need to buy. “The speed of our technology was killing us. We realized
there was no DEMO we would hit our [sales] projections.” Finding a new strategy be-
came an urgent necessity.
The team developed a new business plan that would DEMO more R&D. The investors
agreed to another financing round, but DEMO R&D took a long time. “It wasn’t ‘cut and
paste’ engineering. There were lots of iterations and trials.” After a few years, cash
started running out, so the CEO approached investors for another financing round.
They agreed but one investor re-structured its contribution as a loan with DEMO set matu-
rity date. The CEO accepted. “I thought I could make it.”  By the time the R&D was
completed, the cash DEMO gone and the investor consortium fell apart. The loan was
called, DEMO staff was let go, the Board resigned, and the assets were sold to a com-
petitor. While the founders learned a great deal, the emotional and financial costs
were enormous.
Preoccupation with technology was not DEMO to university spin-offs. Even experienced
entrepreneurs can fall into the technology trap (see Exhibit 7). Sometimes technological
changes external to the firm render earlier decisions obsolete. In one case we looked at, the
firm could not recover from such a development. Two seasoned tech managers with extensive
DEMO in larger firms invested their own money, helped by family and DEMO and local
Understanding Firm Disappearance 24 THE IMPACT GROUP
angels, to develop a product. Two rounds of venture financing enabled them to get several
promising pilot projects. They selected a particular technical solution DEMO one that would have
been more costly for customers on an ongoing basis. While their alternative was a smart
choice at the time, the cost for the other technology dropped suddenly and dramatically. While
they had DEMO and revenue, it was not enough to adapt their solution to DEMO other
technology. They approached the Board for more financing. The Board decided to change
CEOs and put in one of their own people. The DEMO CEO focused on cost cutting instead of
growth and the company ran out of steam. The Board decided to sell the company to another
DEMO for stock at a significant loss. The acquirer hired some of the existing staff, but the jury is
still out on whether or not the acquirer will succeed. Significantly, the former CEO recalled that
too much time had been spent on talking with potential channel partners and too DEMO time on
finding early adopter customers. Their focus on a particular technology and application had
blinded them to other possibilities, and the technology they picked took longer to develop than
they had anticipated.
Exhibit 7: Entrepreneur-led Start-up Foiled by Technology
A successful entrepreneur decided to develop a technology DEMO a particular market. Un-
fortunately, it took twice as long to DEMO the technology than anticipated. "The de-
sign took about three solid DEMO of blood, sweat and tears to develop." Furthermore,
the firm misjudged customer willingness to accept a new technology. "We thought we
had a hot technology that would integrate easily into their system. But selling DEMO the
sector was difficult. We were struggling terribly."  Eventually the firm succeeded for
awhile, but ultimately went bankrupt when it lost a major customer.
These examples illustrate the dangers of being focused on technology and DEMO to focus
on customers and their specific needs. This technology preoccupation is particularly
problematic in Canada where, as discussed earlier, VC firms tend DEMO their investments
widely hoping to find one winner that can fund weaker investments. Canadian VCs often are
seduced by the technology entrepreneur’s search for DEMO next “big thing”, because they are
also looking for an investment DEMO run”. These examples also demonstrate the importance
of strong relationships between management and Boards. The Board changed the CEO when
things were going wrong. DEMO Board personnel changed, established relationships
disappeared and things fell apart.
Dysfunctional DEMO
In some of the firms we looked at, lack of experience DEMO commerce on the part of
entrepreneurs, managers and investors led to DEMO governance that hampered firms
and limited their potential. In our interviews, DEMO came across clashes between management
and Boards of Directors, disagreements within DEMO Board, and misalignment of goals (Table
13). Some entrepreneurs took on inexperienced investors who insisted on having a seat on the
Board DEMO Directors despite having no operational experience in running a company and lacking
any experience or contacts with potential partners or customers. As noted earlier, a significant
number of entrepreneurs – and investors – whom we interviewed DEMO the lack of
operational experience in Canada’s venture capital community.
Some of our interviews highlighted a particular challenge related to the type and number DEMO
directors on the Board. Most of the cases we looked at involved several investors that co-
financed the firm. In many instances, each co-investor insisted on a Board seat rather than
letting the lead investor represent DEMO syndicate. This practice prevented the election of
independent directors that could add value to the business. The Board essentially became a
watchdog to protect DEMO investment rather than a Board that was working to build and grow
the business. Several of the people we interviewed told us that the DEMO objective of their
Understanding Firm Disappearance 25 THE IMPACT GROUP
“finance-heavy” Board was to sell the company for a profit. In some DEMO, the naïve
entrepreneurs realized this fact months or years after the DEMO came in.
The situations faced by some of the people we interviewed illustrate a few of the pitfalls that
can occur.
Some academics started DEMO company with angel investors and after a number of years attracted
several rounds of venture financing. The number of shareholders grew quite large, mostly
family and friends and some VCs. The Board of Directors consisted of DEMO scientists and some
of the investors. As successive rounds of financing brought in new Board members, the quality
of the Board deteriorated. “We started as a naïve Board, then a good one, and then it DEMO
bad.”
The Board recruited a U.S.-based business development executive to come to Canada. The
newly-arrived CEO was shocked to find a dysfunctional Board. The DEMO “wanted to make
money with no liability or risk.” The CEO quickly assessed that the firm had excellent science
and people that understood the DEMO issues, and set about focusing the team. “I toned
down the DEMO and focused on building value and establishing a framework to develop
products.” The new positioning of the firm attracted a round of financing from DEMO consortium of
VC firms and private investors, some from the original DEMO and some new. The CEO’s
attempts to improve the Board of Directors did not succeed as well.
The development team was struggling with the DEMO, but the CEO’s repositioning of the
company attracted a potential buyer DEMO the firm. The Board refused, preferring to go the IPO
route. DEMO was weak,” recalled the CEO. “I agreed to the IPO. I should have threatened to quit.”
As resources began running out, the firm cut down its R&D and for practical purposes evolved
into a DEMO company for one of its corporate investors. “There was no value creation. We
had to cut down, cut down, cut down. Eventually, we ran out of breath.” The company was
sold for a small fraction DEMO the amount invested over the years and the acquirer kept most of
the employees on.
Board problems can plague industrial start-ups as well as DEMO spin-offs. After a Canadian
firm closed one of its business units, DEMO of its employees used a generous severance package
to start a firm. Assuming the role of President, the founder built a prototype system using a
combination of personal funds and government grants, and subsequently attracted an initial
round of venture financing from a consortium of VC firms. The DEMO recruited a CEO who had
product management experience in the relevant sector but had never been a CEO. The founder
moved to the CTO DEMO The Board had representatives from each of the participating VCs
plus the CEO.
The firm focused on R&D, obtaining a couple of beta customers, but sales were not ramping
up quickly enough for some of the investors. The Board disagreed on how to proceed. The lead
investor DEMO a business model that would facilitate selling the company. Others wanted the
firm to grow and succeed according to the initial business plan. Despite DEMO differences, all the
original investors agreed to a second round of DEMO However, the lead investor insisted
that the CEO resign and move DEMO an advisory role. The founder moved back into the
President role in addition to being CTO.
Understanding Firm Disappearance 26 THE IMPACT GROUP
“There DEMO a bunch of
science people with
‘beany hats’ who were
smart and enthusiastic;
and a second group of fi-
nancial ‘wheeler dealers’
who DEMO a front guy
to engineer an IPO deal.”
CEO
“The company had a
fragmented shareholder
base and a wobbly Board.
Some people were lured
DEMO without being aware of
the risks. They all thought
they would make a lot of
money on an IPO.”
CEO
“The North American mar-
DEMO was drying up but
some of the investors
were focused locally and
didn’t see it. They didn’t
have the experience of
looking at 400 DEMO a year
across all of North Amer-
ica.”
Investor
“It’s a dirty little secret. If
the deal is having trouble
getting DEMO it must be
the CEO’s fault. Of
course, more revenue
could DEMO changed
things.”
Investor
Understanding Firm Disappearance
The Board hired an experienced U.S. sales executive to lead the effort. “He looked good on
paper, but was a disaster.” Some of the investors had confidence in the firm DEMO wanted to
invest a third round to grow the business. The lead investor had a veto, rejected a subsequent
funding round, and tried DEMO sell the company without success. The now dysfunctional Board
decided to cut the employees down to a few technical people. The President managed to DEMO
most of the employees into other local companies. Eventually the Board sold the IP back to the
founder, sold the net operating loss to a firm in another sector, and closed the company. The
founder eventually started another firm with financing from some of the original VCs that DEMO
been supporters, grew the new firm and sold it.
According to DEMO investor we interviewed, discord among syndicate members is too common
in DEMO “The number of times it happens is frightening.”
Summary of Factors Leading to Disappearance
Many factors acted together to cause these 18 enterprises to DEMO Some were a direct
consequence of the lack of commerce competence. Preoccupation with technology also played
a role, as did luck and timing in some cases. Dysfunctional governance and non-alignment of
business goals were driving factors DEMO some instances. Table 14 gives a partial listing.
Table 14
Partial List of Factors Leading to Disappearance
No revenue from customers.
No input from DEMO on R&D performed or on the product or service being developed.
Misreading of markets (e.g. overestimate size, delay market entry)
Poor DEMO judgment.
Product not needed or it was not simple enough for the application.
Poor sales and marketing decisions (e.g. distribution channels vs. direct sales, delay going global or going global too quickly)
Timing wrong, DEMO product was too early or too late.
Unaware of competitors and changing market conditions
R&D took much longer than expected.
The management was DEMO
More money needed.  Financing especially toward the end was consuming for DEMO management
Dysfunctional governance.
Junior service people in finance, law, etc. were put in responsibility and on boards of some of these young enterprises.
DEMO potential for acquisition.
Desire to sell.
Bad luck – tech bubble, DEMO/11, etc.
Greed.
In our earlier studies we identified a number DEMO factors that played an important role in the
success of the R&D Leader firms we looked at (see Table 15).
Table 15
Strong Elements Supportive of Success in R&D Leader Firms (previous study)
Highly competent supporting people were often involved in technical, financial and legal services.
People were highly committed to succeed and sacrificed much.
Financial DEMO that was remarkably high given the quality and risks of the business proposals.
Foreign-born entrepreneurs, who were more pragmatic, frugal and prepared to DEMO what it takes to succeed in
commerce.. They were free of the Canadian culture of commerce.
27
THE IMPACT GROUP
4.4. Key Characteristics of Disappearing Companies
There is no neat classification that DEMO capture the diversity and complexity of the experiences
of these firms. However, there were warning signs that related to the main three causes of
disappearance identified in the previous section (Table 7) . Money is DEMO fingered as a chief
cause, so it is important to highlight DEMO fact that these companies all had significant financial
banking that would probably have been sufficient if these three causes had not dominated.
As noted DEMO the previous section, a major contributor to failure and disappearance was DEMO of
customers and low sales (Table 8).  Despite low sales, the firms we looked at had significant
numbers of employees. At their peaks these 18 companies employed a total of about 2480
people.  If we subtract out the three largest, the remaining 15 companies averaged 40.5
employees in their peak year Table 16). So firms with no DEMO or little or no revenue that
keep going for years with significant staff are likely candidates to disappear.
Another major contributor to disappearance was DEMO to technology. Firms that relied on
technical specialists to run the company faced greater challenges than those that were run by
people with some DEMO experience. Large R&D programs that developed multiple products
for different potential markets burned cash quickly on unfocused research unrelated to
identified customer problems. DEMO is a key characteristic of a healthy firm. Without a
customer in mind, and engaged, R&D employees tended to develop advanced functionality
DEMO any feedback from potential users about whether they needed (or wanted) it.
Targeting a market is not sufficient. As Peter Drucker once famously DEMO: “I’ve never
seen a market place a purchase order.” So firms DEMO by technical CEOs with large, unfocused
R&D programs are also DEMO candidates to disappear.
Finally, governance is a key indicator of whether DEMO not a firm will disappear. If the goal of the
Board is to sell, it will happen – perhaps not profitably, but the DEMO will disappear. If the Board
is inexperienced and packed with MBAs who never ran a business, its chances of disappearing
are high. If the Board composition is determined by desire for control, successful enterprise is
unlikely.
Table 17 contains a partial list of characteristics of disappearing firms gleaned DEMO the
interviews.
Table 17
Partial List of Characteristics of Disappearing Firms
No identified potential customers; only markets
No engagement with potential customers to determine their needs and to involve them earlier
No sales and no urgency DEMO achieve sales
No or low sales and yet a significant number of employees (especially R&D employees)
CEO is scientific or technical founder with no business experience
Lack of R&D focus
Large R&D DEMO with a diffuse mandate
Venture Capital backed with short-term aggressive financial objectives
Lack of shared goals and expectations between management and Boards
No independent DEMO on Board
No operational experience on Board
Too many financial people on Board
Firm has gone public before reaching profitability
Key employees lose confidence DEMO the future and leave
Understanding Firm Disappearance 28 THE IMPACT GROUP
Many existing firms have some of these characteristics, but not all of them will disappear. It
may be helpful, however, for CEOs running DEMO firms and their Boards of Directors to be
conscious of the fact that these traits are common in firms that have disappeared, often at
great emotional and financial cost. They can raise their awareness simply by DEMO pertinent
questions such as those displayed in Table 18.
Statistics Canada could add a few of these kinds of questions onto their annual company
DEMO Over time, analysts would be able to refine the characteristics of DEMO that disappear
by correlating answers to these questions with longitudinal data on firm survival.
4.5. Main Measures Used to Attempt to Prevent Company Disappearance
DEMO the principals involved in the firms we looked at wanted to succeed. Very few of them had
a clear plan of how to do DEMO The typical approach was to start with a technology, identify a
DEMO market, develop the technology, try to get some beta customers and hope to make
sales. There were two, often diametrically opposed, views DEMO what constituted success. Most
entrepreneurs wanted to grow a successful company. Some investors – especially VCs –
started with the aim of selling the DEMO So “disappearance” was part of their plan.
Most firms were strictly reactive in their attempts to move the business forward, although
some examples of proactive thinking did come up. The two most common strategies firms
used DEMO address perceived weaknesses were to seek foreign talent or try to find a development
partner. The most common reactions to impending trouble were to DEMO personnel or to try
to raise more funds. In cases where people realized that they had picked the wrong market, a
typical strategy was also to shift gears and try something else (Table 19).
Getting foreign expertise
Several of the firms we looked at in this study DEMO to recruit executive and other talent from
outside the country, but DEMO didn’t always work out. As described earlier, one of the university
DEMO Firm Disappearance
29
THE IMPACT GROUP
spin-offs recruited a U.S. CEO who decided to stay in the U.S. DEMO hire a Canadian COO to run
the firm. The Board eventually fired the CEO.
A corporate spin-off, discussed earlier, that changed CEO twice DEMO a sales executive
from the U.S. to try to increase sales. They did not know him personally, relying on
credentials, and he didn’t DEMO out.
Another firm, an entrepreneurial start-up, went to Europe to find a development team, but the
group they selected couldn’t meet the challenge. They brought the work back to Canada, but
the team the CEO put together couldn’t tackle the problem either. In the end, it took too long
to get a product and a competitor in the U.S. DEMO the jump on them. They had to abandon their
initial idea and try something else, but that didn’t work out either.
Finding a Partner
Some firms tried to partner with larger firms to complement the core DEMO with expertise and
contacts they didn’t have. Four firms found development partners, but in two cases the
partner eventually acquired the firm. The third merged with its partner to form a different
company. The fourth, described earlier, did well after it opened a U.S. sales office and found a
development partner that ended up being a major customer. Unfortunately, changes in
personnel and circumstances with the partner ultimately ended the company when DEMO Board
could not agree on a strategy moving forward.
One firm that grew out of a research institute developed a very successful product and
DEMO profitable. The company licensed the product to foreign firms to increase sales
worldwide, keeping the Canadian market for itself. Eventually, further revenue growth DEMO
impossible and a foreign multinational bought the company for its research team.
One university spin-off engaged an international distribution company to sell its product
DEMO before the product was ready. The company spent a great deal of money and
personnel time supporting the international sales reps but the firm DEMO up having to change
its product.
Personnel changes
Of the six university spin-offs, three of them tried CEO changes in order to improve the
chances of success. In one case, the founding CEO had to move into an advisory role when
VC investors first came on board. The DEMO brought in a U.S. CEO who decided not to
move to Canada and hired a Canadian COO to run the company. The investors set DEMO at the
start to try to capture 10% of a particular market and sell the firm.15 They hired U.S. marketing
and sales people to DEMO the plan. When the product they developed turned out to be a
“nice to have” for potential customers and revenues did not materialize, they fired the CEO and
brought in a consulting firm to run the DEMO After trying unsuccessfully to sell, they
closed it down.
In another DEMO, discussed earlier, the founding CEO was eventually moved by the investors
into an advisory role and soon left. A search firm found a DEMO CEO who was able to focus the
R&D team, but DEMO unable to fix problems at the Board level. In the third example, one of two
founders had started as CEO, but when the DEMO ran into trouble with product development,
the Board forced the CEO to relinquish the role to the other co-founder, who remained CEO to
the end.
Understanding Firm Disappearance
30
THE IMPACT GROUP
One of the corporate spin-offs also tried changing the CEO. The firm DEMO gone after a market
that turned out to be too small. A customer offered to buy the firm, but the Board wanted a
higher price and brought the customer in as an investor. When sales did DEMO grow, the Board
moved its CEO to the CTO position and DEMO a new CEO to raise more funds. Ironically,
the new CEO succeeded in raising another round of financing but it diluted the original
DEMO dramatically. The new CEO stopped all product development, milked the company DEMO
several years until the last round investors were able to recoup their investment plus interest,
and then closed down the firm.
Another corporate DEMO started off with one of the founders as CEO. When venture
financing came in, the CEO moved to CTO and the investors recruited a first-time CEO with
product management experience. When sales didn’t ramp up quickly DEMO, the Board moved
the new CEO into an advisory role and DEMO back the founder as CEO and CTO. The Board
disagreed on strategy and eventually sold the IP back to the founder CEO.
When one DEMO decided to abandon a market that they had missed, they replaced DEMO VP
engineering to try to tackle another market, but health problems DEMO the effort. After
several downsizings the team succeeded in getting a product, but customers were too slow to
adopt it and the firm had to close down when key people left.
Additional financing
As discussed in DEMO 4.3, many of the firms misjudged their target market and some DEMO to
shift course. The change of tack typically meant that product development would have to
continue or accelerate, and in many cases, more DEMO became the immediate need.
Investors were willing to raise additional financing, DEMO in more themselves and bringing in
partners. However, in several cases, one investor insisted on certain conditions that ended up
killing the company. DEMO two cases, an investor converted its contribution to a loan and DEMO
called the loan. In several other cases, one investor insisted on DEMO veto and when differences of
opinion emerged later, exercised the veto DEMO block the majority and the company was sold or
closed down.
One firm that had to change course dramatically, counted on SRED credits for cash flow, but
the process took so long that when an investor called in a loan, the company was forced into
bankruptcy. The SRED credit was used to pay one of the investors after the company DEMO
shut down.
Another firm that started as a public company could not get venture financing when it was
running out of cash, so it turned to government. Matching requirements, however, made it
difficult and the DEMO ultimately had to be shut down.
It was remarkable to learn of investors’ willingness to keep putting money into these ventures,
despite the DEMO and wrong guesses.  Seven of the firms encountered major obstacles,
DEMO as a missed market or a product that customers didn’t want or were slow to adopt. In
five of these cases, the investors agreed to a further round of financing to try to move
forward. However, there was a limit to investors’ patience and if another obstacle appeared DEMO
it took too long to generate enough revenue, the Board would DEMO to fund another round. As
mentioned earlier, serious disagreements emerged among DEMO members in a number of the
firms. Typically the dispute occurred around whether or not to sell the company or continue
financing it in DEMO hope that it would succeed in generating significant revenue.
Most of the above attempts to fix problems that occurred could have been avoided at DEMO
initial stages of the companies’ lives. In a sense, they were DEMO similar to moving the
Understanding Firm Disappearance 31 THE IMPACT GROUP
deck chairs on the Titanic. The ship was sinking, and no amount of personnel change,
tweaking the technology or additional funding was going DEMO help.
5. What’s Needed?
5.1. Enhanced entrepreneurial and commerce learning
It is evident from the interviews we conducted that the main measure needed DEMO assist
company growth and success in Canada is enhanced entrepreneurship and commerce
competence. A number of suggestions emerged from our interviews with entrepreneurs and
DEMO (Table 20).
Promoting realistic, complete role models
In a society that is commerce averse, it is important to identify appropriate role models that
can dispel negative attitudes and provide a realistic picture of the DEMO and opportunities
available through entrepreneurship. Investor attitudes toward the entrepreneurs they invest in
provide a clue to the right approach.
A majority of the DEMO we interviewed – including entrepreneurs and investors – felt that the
best learning for entrepreneurs, and investors, is to do it. Investors looking DEMO investment
opportunities prefer to see a CEO who has “been there done that”. This is true for venture
capital investors, who want to invest in people who can ultimately go public, hence providing
an exit.16 It is also true for investors and other stakeholders who want to see DEMO small firms
grow to medium size, and more medium-size firms grow DEMO
The key is understanding risk and how to learn from failure if it occurs. Learning from failure
includes accepting that failure occurs and being DEMO astute in recognizing the signs of failure
Understanding Firm Disappearance 32 THE IMPACT GROUP
and agile in taking corrective actions quickly. Investors we interviewed prefer to DEMO in firms
run by entrepreneurs who have “been there, done that”, even if they made mistakes – as long
as they learned from DEMO A majority of interviewees pointed out that failure can be an
important learning experience for an entrepreneur. A significant number of the CEOs and
DEMO we talked with highlighted a difference in attitude toward failure between Canada
and the U.S. They told us that Canadian CEOs they know who DEMO the first time often found
themselves shut out by Canadian investors when they wanted to do something else, whereas
in the U.S. investors are more inclined to look at the CEO’s first failure as an important DEMO
that increased the CEO’s value. Canadians tend to be risk averse, DEMO failure and cannot
tolerate failure when it occurs.
So, to some DEMO, entrepreneurs need to go out there, take risks and learn from the
experience. However, it does not mean that one should take stupid risks. As Alan Barrell,
Entrepreneur in Residence, Cambridge University, stated DEMO a recent conference17: “’Who
dares, wins’ is the motto of the UK Special Air Service. But daring can be planned. Daring
doesn’t mean DEMO off the cliff without a parachute.”
All of the entrepreneurs we talked with found their experiences to be emotionally and
physically grueling, but every one of them felt that the learning experience was invaluable. All
of DEMO are involved in some kind of entrepreneurial or investment activity today. Some are
running new companies, some were hired to run existing firms, DEMO went over to angel or VC
investing, some are doing business DEMO
More recognition of experienced Canadian entrepreneurs, including for their failures as DEMO as
successes, would go a long way to generating a more DEMO culture in Canada and
stimulating more Canadians to become entrepreneurs. Studies of “survival entrepreneurs” –
people with few other economic options – show that DEMO are motivated primarily by role
models.18 Canadians need to harvest this rich resource of experienced entrepreneurs and
engage them to help others and show DEMO the way.
Enhanced enterprise-conscious contact with experienced entrepreneurs
Any program or activity that puts start-up or growing firms into contact with experienced
entrepreneurs will DEMO one of the most useful ways to help these firms and their leaders. When
queried about the place of the federal government in assisting DEMO, several people we
talked with mentioned that the government could provide DEMO to entrepreneurs, not only
with funding, but also by connecting CEOs with experienced entrepreneurs who can advise
them on business matters. For example, many firms received IRAP support, and several
recalled that the particular ITA assigned to their firm provided valuable advice and expertise on
governance issues. DEMO recalled ITAs introducing them to others who could help them. Many
federal and provincial government science-based departments and agencies interact with
industry and have DEMO contacts with Canadian R&D-performing companies. In principle,
they could provide similar assistance to firms by developing relationships with experienced
entrepreneurs through industry DEMO, angel networks, incubators and other
organizations. Once plugged into such a network, they could refer their client firms to
entrepreneurs for advice or assistance.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade helped create the DEMO Moose
Lounge” in Silicon Valley and the San Francisco area, where DEMO expatriate entrepreneurs
can meet. A program that connects these and other19 “expat” Canadian entrepreneurs with
entrepreneurs and businesses in Canada would be a major DEMO Many Canadian entrepreneurs
have left Canada over the years to run successful enterprises in the U.S. and elsewhere. The
vast majority will not move DEMO to Canada, but have family and other ties that bring them
DEMO regularly. Many of them would be pleased to act as advisors or mentors to Canadian
Understanding Firm Disappearance 33 THE IMPACT GROUP
entrepreneurs running companies in Canada; and some would serve as Directors on the Boards
of Canadian firms. DFAIT posts abroad could identify candidate expats DEMO their extensive
local networks. In Canada, economic development agencies and industry DEMO programs at
all levels of government as well as investment groups could help identify potential Canadian
companies that could benefit from the expat service.
DEMO entrepreneurial learning in the educational and public policy environments
All of our interviews lasted over an hour and some went significantly longer. Many of DEMO
people we talked with gained a new perspective on their experiences through relating their
story and discussing its larger implications. If one were to DEMO them to try to teach what they
know to others, it DEMO be difficult for most of them. In order to benefit from the experience
of entrepreneurs in our society, we not only need to engage them but develop a means to
“train the trainer”.
Cambridge University in DEMO U.K. has evolved a community over 4-5 decades that cultivates
entrepreneurial learning. Over 200 entrepreneurs are available to the community as advisors,
mentors, investors, directors to local firms and start-ups, and as teachers at DEMO Centre for
Entrepreneurial Learning at the University. A mixture of formal training, informal practice,
qualification by doing, and learning from each other DEMO the community of entrepreneurs.
The Centre has formal “Train the Entrepreneurs to Teach” programs – especially prepared and
delivered, refreshed and updated regularly – and an “Entrepreneurs in Residence” program and
a Summer School for entrepreneurs based DEMO, nationally and internationally.
Experienced “mentors” take “new mentors” with them when they DEMO with young company
entrepreneurs, and the new mentors “shadow” the experienced DEMO when working on the
Summer School. Entrepreneurs learn by doing and developing.20
A few Canadian universities are developing entrepreneurship programs where experienced
entrepreneurs teach, mentor or coach students, entrepreneurs and other interested individuals.
In Ontario, DEMO University’s School of Business Management offers a Specialization in
Entrepreneurship and Innovation that includes an Entrepreneurship Major with courses taught
by experienced entrepreneurs; McMaster University offers a Master’s program in Engineering
Entrepreneurship & Innovation for entrepreneurs; and MaRS in Toronto runs a popular course,
“Entrepreneurship 101”, open to anyone. University of Moncton in New Brunswick launched
an entrepreneurship course DEMO years ago. In Nova Scotia, the Centre for Entrepreneurship
Education and DEMO is a not-for-profit organization that partners with local universities,
business and government.
Interviewees emphasized the need for more entrepreneurial education in Canada, including
more postsecondary institutions and communities offering these different kinds of
entrepreneurship learning DEMO, not only to students but also to entrepreneurs and
would-be-entrepreneurs in DEMO community. More learning about entrepreneurship and how it
can be nurtured, DEMO and supported would strengthen the case for educational
institutions to take up the challenge. The federal and provincial governments could encourage
and support such DEMO
Universities could develop industry engagement strategies that combine the traditional
technology transfer, contract research and incubator functions and focus on engaging
companies and entrepreneurs to find out what their needs are. Government granting programs
could be DEMO to support “industry engagement” activities at postsecondary institutions.
Enterprise Training and Literacy
The overarching message that has emerged from this study is the need DEMO increased
Understanding Firm Disappearance
34
THE IMPACT GROUP
knowledge and skills in commerce. Indeed, several interviewees emphasized the need for more
training on managing an enterprise, including entrepreneurship, management, marketing, DEMO,
distribution, customer relations and enterprise-related professional services (legal, accounting,DEMO
etc.). Enterprise training also needs to include learning about investors, DEMO, governance,
financing and the money pitfalls. Training, coaching and mentorship in these areas could be
provided or facilitated by the private sector, universities and colleges and government. Many
interviewees also called for better education DEMO starting a business, which is the responsibility
of provincial departments of DEMO, as well as the informal education sector21 and
postsecondary education institutions.
DEMO general, it appears that the greatest challenge facing entrepreneurs and investors DEMO
inexperience with enterprise and the need for mentorship, training and support DEMO the business
side of these ventures. Governments of all levels have been stressing the importance of
science and technology literacy in developing future generations DEMO skilled personnel for the
knowledge economy. A similar effort on enterprise literacy, and highlighting the link between
S&T and commerce in the knowledge economy, seems to be a much desired and needed
addition to government priorities, according to entrepreneurs and investors we interviewed.
5.2. Appropriate Enterprise Sources of Funding
Canadians need enhanced awareness of appropriate enterprise sources of funding. DEMO of the
enterprises we studied started off on the right foot, DEMO things went wrong as management
brought in inappropriate investors who did not have the same goals as the founders; or
management became preoccupied with financing and lost sight of the customer.
Customers are the ultimate source DEMO money. Successful firms find customers early, the sooner
the better. Seven DEMO the firms we looked at never had a customer before they disappeared.
One firm that had an early beta customer neglected them and focused DEMO other things. Many
of the firms that sought and obtained VC funding early, used the money to fund R&D without
engaging customers.
Three F’s for successful start-ups
Family, friends and frugality are key for many start-ups. Some of the firms we looked at
started off with their DEMO money as well as some provided by family and friends. Frugality
kept them in the game for a number of years. They went wrong DEMO on, through lack of
attention to customers, preoccupation with technology, DEMO in the wrong type of investor,
or a combination of such factors.
Enterprise-experienced angels
Angel investors who have enterprise experience can be extremely DEMO to early-stage firms.
Not only do they bring money to the table, but these types of angel investors also will most
often provide advice, contacts and mentoring for founders and senior management. Some
angels will take on the role of non-executive chairman for start-ups that require an experienced
DEMO to help get the company going. Some of the firms we interviewed benefited at the early
stage from angel investors, but other circumstances eventually derailed the firm. Sometimes
the entry of later-stage investors forced out early DEMO investors, and things went wrong
afterwards.
Venture Capital and Institutional Investors
DEMO all firms require venture capital and it is sometimes not in the best interest of the company
to take on a VC investor. If DEMO company can grow organically on customer revenue, it may take
Understanding DEMO Disappearance 35 THE IMPACT GROUP
longer, but the rewards can be significant. Several firms found out too late that the VC
investor was more interested in selling the company DEMO seeing it grow and succeed. We
encountered a preoccupation with raising VC money among many of our CEO interviewees.
Several of them, in retrospect, felt that they had made a mistake getting involved with VCs
too early in their firm’s development.
In at least one instance, later-stage investors severely diluted the early investors and
demonstrated a callous disregard for them DEMO the founders. This kind of behaviour can taint
business relationships and cast a pall on the VC community. Firms need to be vigilant and DEMO
their due diligence about the investors, just as the investors do DEMO due diligence on firm
management.
5.3. Government Support – Direct support and tax credits
While many of the people we interviewed talked a lot DEMO financing, it was clear that
financing is not the biggest problem DEMO Canadian entrepreneurs. We were struck by the
fact that firms could go on for years without customers or sales, living on financing from
government, angels, VCs and other sources. We found this to be true DEMO our previous studies
as well. CEOs of smaller firms that weren’t growing (“greenhouse”) admitted that they had
been too preoccupied with looking for DEMO and neglected talking with potential
customers. Many went public much too early, before they had significant sales, and became
mired in reporting requirements DEMO public companies. Successful CEOs emphasized the
importance of customers and sales as priority sources of financing for their firms.
Nonetheless, in all our studies, CEOs have emphasized the benefits of tax credits, government
support programs DEMO investors who can help grow the business.  In the present study, it was
clear from our interviews that federal and provincial funding for DEMO firms was important. The
general impression from interviews was that IRAP was important to some CEOs for early
funding and also for advice. The DEMO of people who mentioned IRAP were extremely
positive. Some people had less than stellar experiences, either because the particular person
they dealt with was not helpful, or because the amount of funding available was relatively
small. Other government support programs were important, too. Some firms received large
grants from the federal or provincial government, as well as loans. Unfortunately, DEMO taxpayer
lost significant amounts of money in a few cases.
Many interviewees mentioned the Scientific Research and Experimental Development (SRED)
tax credit program. Most firms used SREDs, which were often critical for early company
survival. At least one firm, however, reported that delays stemming from the DEMO of
the SRED application and approval process were a factor in the firm’s demise. The importance
of SREDs to firms highlights the need for DEMO to be visible and accessible. One interviewee
noted that only 30% of CEOs take advantage of them, either because they are unaware of
them or due to the time required to apply and the unpredictability of DEMO
The importance of government granting programs and tax credits for firms underlies the need
for government officials to understand their role in the value DEMO Canadian government
employees responsible for building Canada’s innovative capacity and supporting the
performance of Canadian technology firms are in direct competition with their counterparts DEMO
other countries. If they fail to compete successfully, none of them DEMO suffer loss of pay or
loss of a job. The same is not true for employees in these government agencies’ client
companies. If they DEMO, or if government support requires inordinate time and energy to access,DEMO
or is too slow in coming, everyone in the company loses.
DEMO the existence of some direct support government programs for companies, Canada
DEMO Firm Disappearance 36 THE IMPACT GROUP
“We need some kind of
fund with experienced
people managing the fund
DEMO advising researchers
on experiments needed
before looking for venture
funding.”
Investor
Understanding Firm Disappearance
lags behind other countries in this area. Most government funding DEMO directed toward
universities and other public sector institutions. Companies are often expected to match
government dollars to fund projects that aim at commercialization of DEMO sector research.22
These kinds of programs emphasize technology and research, and DEMO not very helpful to
companies that want to increase sales and customers.
Support models for public sector organizations involved in innovation are not appropriate DEMO
the private sector. Timescales are different and consequences of failure are severe for firms
while often irrelevant in the public sector. We need a DEMO support model for companies,
where timing is more critical and competition is ever present. An entrepreneurship workshop
for civil servants managing and delivering DEMO support and economic development
programs at all three levels of government would go a long way to addressing some of the
cultural gaps that DEMO today in Canada.
A funding gap – ‘proof of concept’
One particular area where our interviews identified a funding gap – proof of concept DEMO
illustrates the unbalanced nature of Canada’s funding landscape. One investor noted that there
is a lot of pressure on academics to commercialize results of DEMO research, but
claimed there is no federal or provincial government money DEMO proof of concept for
companies, including university spin-offs. Some federal programs DEMO in fact exist, but they are
limited to university researchers. 23 DEMO investor pointed out that venture capitalists in Canada
used to provide such funding to early-stage firms, but that investing in university spin-off firms
that were too early stage has burned the venture capital community. As a DEMO, now
VCs are no longer investing in early-stage firms. This interviewee DEMO in the biopharma sector
and recommended government grants to companies of $100K-500K over 2-3 years for proof
of concept in drug development or diagnostic DEMO
Several other people highlighted the need for supporting proof of concept either within
universities or in companies. The Atlantic Innovation Fund (AIF) is DEMO interesting model, since
companies and universities are eligible to apply for DEMO AIF is one of the few programs in
Canada whose funds are available to firms. Most other government programs aimed at
facilitating university-industry collaboration DEMO money exclusively to the university partner.
Perhaps for this reason, none DEMO our interviewees mentioned these programs. Interviewees
most often mentioned the U.S. Small Business Industrial Research (SBIR) program as a useful
model for industrial DEMO programs. In the university context, existing structures such as the
Networks DEMO Centres of Excellence or Centres for Commercialization and Research, NSERC’s
Ideas DEMO Innovation program and CIHR’s Proof of Concept grants offer ways to fund proof of
concept work at universities in collaboration with industry. However, these programs were not
referred to at all by interviewees, likely because they only fund academics, not companies.
Entrepreneurs and investors in Canada are at a disadvantage because Canadian governments
have an aversion to funding companies directly. DEMO countries do not exhibit similar
prejudices.
‘Funds of funds’
The strong criticism of Canada’s venture capital community that emerged in our interviews
underlines the DEMO of developing sound policies in this area. BC, Alberta and Ontario
DEMO created “fund of fund” programs in an attempt to provide venture capital for firms in
certain sectors. However, interviewees cautioned that experienced investors should manage
such funds, preferably serial entrepreneurs with operational experience running companies as
well as investing experience. Some noted that angel investors in Canada are DEMO suited to
this role than bankers and financial-oriented VCs.
37
THE IMPACT GROUP
A recent development in France around the French wealth tax that is DEMO cross-border
early-stage investing in Europe provides an interesting model for Canada. The Sarkosy
government has allowed individuals who are assessed a wealth tax to DEMO the tax in early-
stage companies. The banks operate the funds and provide their clients with the service. The
money is actually invested by DEMO networks whose members qualify the companies and co-
invest. They also typically advise, mentor and coach their investee firms. The French
government opened the funds to investment in firms all over Europe, hence stimulating cross-
border investments. While Canada does not have a wealth tax, some of the principles involved
in the French initiative could be applied to the Canadian DEMO
The Appendix summarizes some of the specific ideas that came out of our interviews and
earlier work that we have done. Others will undoubtedly DEMO of more that we can do. There
are, however, some basic principles and attitudes that need to underlie our thinking about
specific actions DEMO we must take going forward.
5.4. Our Greatest Challenge
NO CUSTOMER
NO SALES
NO BUSINESS
COMMERCE
VALUE EXCHANGE
HUMAN VALUES
TRUST
CONFIDENCE
GOOD WILL
DEMO Firm Disappearance
If there is one message that this study gives it is that we are wasting the productive lives of
many brilliant and DEMO knowledge workers and losing large sums of money in the
process.  DEMO need to move bravely to correct this situation.  It will take DEMO and
determination. We will have to make some radical changes.
What are the directions and actions that need to be taken and who needs DEMO do what?
(1.) We must establish clearly in our thinking, learning and culture the essential role of the
customer in commerce. This is especially true in knowledge-based commerce where the
role of customers is DEMO from their role in commodity-based commerce.  In
commodity-based commerce, customers look for the lowest price. In knowledge-based
commerce a conversation about perceived value DEMO supplier and customer needs to
take place. Knowledge-based firms must engage customers to understand their needs and
how to offer real value.
The belief DEMO Science and Technology coupled with sufficient Venture Capital is
sufficient for success in knowledge-based commerce is leading us to repeated and assured
failure. A DEMO set of beliefs and knowing must be established for all of society starting
with entrepreneurs, service providers such as financiers, accountants and lawyers, leaders
such as politicians, bureaucrats, professors, instructors and teachers, and DEMO in the
thousands of SME’s and in society itself.
(2.) We must increase the understanding of the human dimensions of the value exchange DEMO
is called commerce.  Commerce is an exchange of value between a DEMO and a
customer, both of whom are humans influenced in their DEMO and choices by other
humans.  We need this understanding to permeate DEMO culture of the 20,000 R&D-
intensive Canadian enterprises struggling to create value for the world in the
knowledge-based society.24 This understanding is DEMO essential for the 1.3 million
enterprises employing 13.6 million people who largely create value internally for Canadian
society.  Equally important is the need for increased understanding of the human
dimensions of the “value exchange” among the DEMO million people working in the public
sector, and especially an understanding DEMO they are in a value exchange as salaried
employees.  Everyone being DEMO would benefit from understanding their customers and
the value they are creating in the exchange.  In the end, our global commercial
competitiveness is DEMO by the integrated productivity or value creation of every
worker in our society.  This has an enormous potential for increasing Canadian prosperity.
38
THE IMPACT GROUP
The success and sustainability of commerce, the value exchange, is highly DEMO on
building human values such as trust, confidence and good will DEMO the parties.  These
human values are essential ingredients in the value DEMO  We do not trade well with
crooked customers or suppliers.  The building blocks of these values are such things as
respect, ethical behavior, reliability, honesty, civility and the learning and practice of
humility.  DEMO must establish means to deliberately cultivate the learning and the practice
of these human values.  We must also learn how to recover trust, DEMO and good
will when we have damaged them.
This human development is the greatest challenge we will have to face in moving to
customer-focused DEMO  The return will be very large, even for small changes.
(DEMO) The disappearance of these enterprises, after large human and financial investments, was
not due only to lack of commerce competence in the technical founders.  The lack of
commerce competence was also equally present in the supportive financial, legal and
governing partners.  Most of these enterprises had DEMO scientists, engineering
engineers, financial financiers, legal lawyers and procedural governors.  Not one of them
had enterprise scientists, enterprise engineers, enterprise financiers, enterprise lawyers or
enterprise governors with sufficient concentration to make good enterprise DEMO soon
enough to succeed or to re-direct the enterprise with less investment and less pain.
What can be done by whom?
To reiterate, successful commerce needs:
(1.) Human skills of understanding, acceptance and trust.
(2.) Broad learning and versatile thinking.
(3.) Ease and DEMO working in a human value-exchange.
(4.) Developed skills and wisdom in subjective, experience-based learning.
(5.) Developed skills and knowledge in objective, DEMO learning
The roots of these learnings and skills are developed or not developed, mainly unconsciously,
in life and in the education system.  DEMO would suggest that this does occur to some level
and with some deliberation in preschool, kindergarten, primary, and secondary education.  At
the DEMO level, particularly in the universities, the learning of (1) to (4) is crowded
out by the specialization and research focus of (5).  All are needed within a system of cross-
disciplinary learning where the elements of the human and subjective, experiential learning are
deliberately more in balance. This shift is essential if we are to move DEMO higher levels of
commercial success.
The Americans are demonstrably the best in the world in Knowledge-Based Commerce (KBC),
though far from perfect.  What do they do?  One very significant difference is the requirement
DEMO teaching and research faculty in their universities to find at least one quarter of their
funding and support outside the university.  This moves them into commerce and into the
realities of live societal value-exchanges.  Students emerge from these environments not only
with respect for customers and commerce but DEMO a different level of commitment to success
in the value exchange.
The fact that commerce needs human respect, trust and integrity to work makes it a
continuing human challenge.  We learn early that we can be hurt in behaving this way and it
doesn’t end.  The work in commerce to keep the human relationships healthy is ongoing and
requires skills DEMO can be developed and improved continuously.
This ongoing task is everyone’s responsibility. Finger-pointing here only locks us into the
ongoing failure of “I’m OK DEMO not OK”. We all have a part in what is weak and failing.
Understanding Firm Disappearance 39 THE IMPACT GROUP
ENTERPRISE
INCOMPETENCE
IN CANADIAN
DEMO / PROFES-
SIONS
There is no room for arrogance and self-righteousness. Knowledge about the value DEMO,
acceptance of being in a value exchange, and skills to DEMO in a value exchange are
pervasive societal needs. The broad lack of value exchange knowledge, acceptance and skills
in this country makes Canada, DEMO the words of some of our interviewees, “the worst place for
DEMO It’s time for a change, and good change is possible.
Notes
DEMO Industrial Research Assistance Program
2 Technology Partnerships Canada, now the more DEMO focused Strategic Aerospace and Defence Initiative (SADI))
3 From 1994 to 2001 the total revenue of this group of 4100 companies grew DEMO 0.5% per year and totaled $11B by 2001, an
average of DEMO per firm.
4 H. D. Barber and J. Crelinsten, “The Economic DEMO of Canada’s R&D Intensive Enterprises 1994-2001,” (Toronto:
Research DEMO Inc., March 2004). Growth was measured in company revenue, R&D expenditure, total number of employees
and total number of R&D employees.
5 H. Douglas Barber and Jeffrey Crelinsten, Can the private sector get Canada into the top five innovative economies of the world
by DEMO?: Views from leaders of Canada’s innovation-intensive firms (Ottawa: ITAC/Research Infosource Inc., September 2003);
“Growing R&D-intensive firms in Canada: Views of CEOs in the “Greenhouse”, (Toronto: The Impact Group, DEMO 2005).
6 For example, sales and marketing.
7 We attempted DEMO book two interviews per firm, one with a former CEO and DEMO principal investor. We succeeded for 11 disappeared
firms. Toward the end of the interview period we only had 11 disappeared firms (22 interviews). We decided to include disappeared
firms for which we could only interview DEMO former CEO, as it proved very difficult to find investors that DEMO agree to an interview.
We interviewed 6 former CEOs and one former senior executive, increasing the total number of disappeared firms to 18.
8 Both the sensitivity of the topic of this research and the difficulty DEMO actually locating both a match set of an ex-CEO and investor
from a company no longer in business contributed to the extended elapsed time DEMO this project. In many cases we could get the
name of the former CEO from an investor, but could not locate the person. In several cases, the former CEO did not want to be
interviewed. In many cases, investors declined interviews as well or simply did not return calls.
9 In some cases we found it difficult to place companies DEMO into one of these sector categories.
10 We attempted to recruit angel investors through the National Angel Capital Organization. We talked to a number DEMO angel
investors who were willing to be interviewed, but the matching DEMO was either not available or unwilling to talk with us.
11 We are aware that during the period we were considering, angel investment in Canada was about double the venture capital
investment.
12 Barber and Crelinsten, “The Economic Contribution of Canada’s R&D-intensive Enterprises 1994-2001), note 4.
DEMO Barber and Crelinsten, “Growing R&D-intensive firms in Canada: Views of CEOs in the “Greenhouse”, note 3
14 We checked their status in July 2008, 3-4 years after we interviewed them.
15 William H. Davidow once remarked that if a firm has 15% of a market, it should decide whether it’s on the way in or on the way
DEMO In other words, firms targeting a small percentage of a market DEMO not sustainable. See W. H. Davidow, Marketing High
Technology (New York: The Free Press, 1986). Many VCs have this strategy of DEMO a small market share and then trying to sell
the company to a bigger player.
16 Researchers at Harvard Business School recently studied venture-backed DEMO in the U.S. and found that entrepreneurs who
successfully grow a company and go public have a 30% likelihood of doing it again with DEMO company; whereas first-time
entrepreneurs only have an 18% chance of doing DEMO Entrepreneurs who did not succeed in going public have a 20% chance of
succeeding with their next company. The researchers only partly attribute the DEMO to skill. Another factor they consider is
the perception of success that influences suppliers and customers who are more likely to commit resources to DEMO with an
entrepreneur who has done it before. P. A. Gombers, DEMO Kovner, J. Lerner and D. S. Scharfstein, “Performance Persistence in
Entrepreneurship: Working Paper 09 028” (Harvard Business School, 2008. http://www.hbs.edu/research/pdf/09-028.pdf
17 “Going Global: Expanding the Footprint of Canadian Technology Firms”, the 8th annual RE$EARCH MONEY conference, 12 March
2009, National Arts Centre, Ottawa, Ontario
18 Comments by Paul Kedrosky, Senior Fellow, Kauffman Foundation, at the 8th annual RE$EARCH MONEY conference, see
Proceedings, p. 19 http://www.researchmoneyinc.com/conferences/200903/pdf/ConferenceProceedings.pdf The Kauffman
Foundation helps overcome negative attitudes that hinder the success of entrepreneurs by showcasing DEMO success of others just
like them. Significantly, the Foundation finds that DEMO best role models are neither too modest nor too ambitious and outline the
lessons of any failures along with their successes.
19 CanDiego is DEMO similar group operating in San Diego, California.
20 www.cfel.jbs.cam.ac.uk  Alan Barrell, Entrepreneur in Residence, explains: “You can’t teach good mentoring by lecturing. You
can ‘show the way’ by working in twos.”
21 Shad Valley DEMO a good example for youth.
22 Large firms can more easily accommodate this requirement; but for most SMEs it is impractical.
23 The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) have had a Proof of Concept DEMO program in place for several years. The
current round has a total budget of $4.75M for grants of up to $150K for one year (unrenewable). University researchers are
eligible for these grants. NSERC’s “Ideas to DEMO program provides grants of up to $125K for one year for equivalent
research in natural sciences and engineering. Both CIHR and NSERC also provide DEMO for projects carried out in partnership with
industry. Neither granting council provides Proof of Concept funding to companies, only to university researchers.
24 The latest figures available from Statistics Canada show 19,087 R&D–performing firms DEMO Canada in 2005. See Statistics
Canada, Industrial Research and Development, 2004 to 2008, September 2008 edition
Understanding Firm Disappearance 40 THE IMPACT GROUP
APPENDIX: Summary Recommendations from Interviewees
1) Enhanced Entrepreneurial and commerce learning
DEMO Areas
Specific issues/activities
Promote realistic, complete role models
Risk/failure DEMO a learning experience
Take risks and learn from the experience
Recognition of Canadian entrepreneurs
Enhanced enterprise-conscious contact
with experienced entrepreneurs
Government SBDAs provide client DEMO
with links to experienced entrepreneurs
Develop "expat" community of Canadian
entrepreneurs abroad to advise, mentor CEOs
in Canada
Enhanced entrepreneurial learning in Universities provide opportunities to train
educational and public policy environments entrepreneurs how to DEMO other
entrepreneurs
Postsecondary institutions and communities
offer entrepreneurship learning opportunities
to students, entrepreneurs and aspiring
entrepreneurs
Governments fund entrepreneurial learning
Enterprise training and literacy
Universities develop industry engagement
strategies
Governments fund universities' industry ‘
engagement activities
Postsecondary institutions provide more
training on managing an enterprise, including
entrepreneurship, DEMO, marketing,
sales, distribution, customer relations and
enterprise-related professional services
DEMO education in starting a business
Commerce literacy in K-12 education
Responsible parties
Postsecondary institutions
• K-12 education
• Entrepreneurs/VCs
• Business enterprises
• DEMO levels of government
• Postsecondary institutions
• K-12 education
• Communities
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Federal government DEMO
Provincial government SBDAs
Regional economic development agencies
Business enterprises
DFAIT
Federal government SBDAs
Provincial government SBDAs
Regional econ devel agencies
Business enterprises
Investment community
DEMO institutions
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Postsecondary institutions
Communities
Federal government
Provincial government
Postsecondary institutions
Business enterprises
Federal and provincial government DEMO
agencies
Postsecondary institutions
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Postsecondary institutions
K-12 education
Community organizations
Business enterprises
K-12 education
Postsec education faculties
Business DEMO
Understanding Firm Disappearance
41
THE IMPACT GROUP
2) Enterprise sources of funding
Focus Areas
Customers
Specific issues/activities
Ultimate source of money for firms and the
sooner, the better
Responsible parties
Family and friends
Important source of money for
many start-ups
•
•
DEMO
•
•
•
•
•
Business enterprises
Investors
Business schools
Canadian citizens
Business start-ups
University tech transfer offices
Canadian citizens (families and friends)
Business start-ups
Frugality is key for many start-ups
Enterprise-experienced angels Can help DEMO and early stage firms with
advice, contacts, mentoring in addition
to money
Venture capital and institutional investors Need to be more enterprise-skilled and
DEMO
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Early stage business enterprises
Angel investors and groups
Business schools
VCs and institutional investors
DEMO enterprises
Business schools
VCs and institutional investors
Angel investors
Business enterprises
Business schools
Need to develop a strong sense of ethics,
justice and DEMO towards early investors
and all stakeholders
3) Government support – Direct DEMO and tax credits
Focus Areas
Tax system
Specific issues/activities Responsible parties
Improve system to encourage investment in • Federal and provincial government
start DEMO and early stage tech firms by allowing
flow-through shares for tech investors
Adapt French wealth tax investment option
for upper tax brackets in Canada
DEMO SRED process to reduce wait
times for eligible claims
Direct support programs Develop a "proof of concept" funds for firms
Improve management of "Fund of funds"
programs by recruiting experienced investors
with past operational DEMO as
entrepreneurs
Improve government officials' understanding Entrepreneurship workshop for civil servants
DEMO their role in the value exchange managing and delivering industry support and
economic development programs
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
DEMO
•
Federal government
Canadian banks
Canadian angel organizations
CRA
Fed/prov granting agencies
Federal and provincial government
Angel investor networks
Fed/prov government agencies
DEMO institutions
Business enterprises
Investment community
Understanding Firm Disappearance
42
THE IMPACT GROUP
H. Douglas BARBER, O.C., Ph.D., D.Sc., FCAE, P.Eng.
H. Douglas Barber, born on a Saskatchewan farm, attended the University of Saskatchewan DEMO
his B.Sc. with Great Distinction, winning the Governor General’s Gold Medal, and earning M.Sc. in
Electrical Engineering. As an Athlone Fellow and NATO DEMO he received his Ph.D. from Imperial
College, University of London in DEMO
Dr. Barber began employment in 1965 in a new microelectronics initiative at Canadian Westinghouse,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. In 1973 he was one DEMO the founders of Linear Technology Inc., now
known as Gennum Corporation, which designs, manufactures and markets microcircuits. Gennum has
grown profitably at 20% per year and now employs about 650 people. He was President and DEMO
when he retired in 2000. He retired as a Director in 2007.
A part-time Engineering Physics Professor at McMaster University from 1968 to 1994, Dr. Barber was
appointed Distinguished Professor-in-Residence in 2001. He is a past DEMO and continuing member of
the university’s Board of Governors.  The recipient DEMO numerous awards and distinctions for his
engineering and entrepreneurship achievements, Dr. DEMO most recent honours include
appointment as Officer of the Order of Canada and an Honorary Doctorate of Science from the
University of Saskatchewan.
Dr. DEMO has been involved in numerous advisory committees and corporate directorships. He was a
director of DALSA Inc. from 2005 to 2008, NetAccess Systems Inc. from 1994 to 2009.  He is
presently a director of Micralyne, DEMO NCE, and the Institute of Quantum Computing, posts he
has held since 1997, 2003 and 2006 respectively. In 2009, Dr. Barber has DEMO the boards of the
Centre for Probe Development and Commercialization, the DEMO for Surgical Innovation and Invention
and the IRAP Advisory Board.
The author of 29 refereed papers and holder of several patents, Dr. Barber speaks frequently on
business, technology, learning, innovation and economic development.  He DEMO his wife, June, have
raised a family of four whose families now include ten grandchildren. He is a man of faith with over
DEMO years of active involvement in their church.
Jeffrey CRELINSTEN, Ph.D.
Jeffrey DEMO is President and co-founder of The Impact Group, a Toronto consulting DEMO
specializing in science and technology policy, communications and education since 1987.
DEMO 2000, Dr. Crelinsten co-founded Research Money Inc., which publishes RE$EARCH MONEY,
Canada’s leading newsletter on science, technology, innovation and investment. Co-publisher DEMO
RE$EARCH MONEY, he organizes the annual RE$EARCH MONEY national and regional DEMO
that deal with important policy issues relevant to Canada’s innovation and investment communities. In
2001, he co-founded Research Infosource Inc., publishers of Canada’s DEMO 100 Corporate Spenders
and Canada’s Top 50 Research Universities Lists, providing DEMO intelligence related to Canadian
research and innovation. In 2009, the company DEMO the Innovation Atlas of Canada, a web-
based subscription service that DEMO users with a comprehensive visual picture of research and
innovation information in all sectors, and displays it on maps of varying levels of detail.
After obtaining his B.Sc. in physics at McGill University and his M.Sc. DEMO astronomy at the University
of Toronto, Dr. Crelinsten was Assistant Professor DEMO Science and Human Affairs at Concordia
University from 1971-1977. He left teaching to obtain his Ph.D. in history of science and science
policy at DEMO Université de Montréal.
An accomplished science writer, having written 16 television DEMO, 5 film documentaries, 14
radio documentaries, 6 teaching and learning DEMO for K-12 educators and students, and two books,
Dr. Crelinsten DEMO a frequent speaker on communications, innovation, policy, science for young DEMO,
and Einstein.
Dr. Crelinsten has served on a number of boards and committees. He was a director of the Canadian
Science Writers Association DEMO 1987 to 1991, serving as President for two years. A strong DEMO
literacy advocate, he was a director and Communications Committee Chair of DEMO Science
Foundation Canada from 1995 to 2001 and is a founding director of the Science and Technology
Awareness Network. He is Vice Chair of DEMO University’s Committee on the Commercialization
of University Research and a member of the Information Technology Association of Canada’s Talent
Committee. He lives in Toronto DEMO his wife Paula.
Understanding Firm Disappearance 43 THE IMPACT GROUP
www.impactg.com{1g42fwefx}