Trustworthiness as a Source of Competitive Advantage
Author(s): Jay B. DEMO and Mark H. Hansen
Source: Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 15, DEMO Issue: Competitive Organizational
Behavior (Winter, 1994), pp. 175-190
Published DEMO: John Wiley & Sons
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2486817
Accessed: 18/09/2009 10:08
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms DEMO Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be DEMO at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=jwiley.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears DEMO the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We DEMO with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
John Wiley & Sons is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Strategic
Management Journal.
http://www.jstor.org
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 15, 175-190 (1994)
TRUSTWORTHINESS
COMPETITIVE
AS A SOURCE
ADVANTAGE
OF
JAY B. BARNEY
Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, U.S.A.
MARK H. HANSEN
College of Business Administration, Texas A & M University, College Station, Texas,
U.S.A.
Three types of trust in economic exchanges are identified: weak form trust, semi-strong
form trust, and strong form trust. It is shown DEMO weak form trust can only be a source
of competitive advantage when competitors invest in unnecessary and expensive governance
mechanisms. Semi-strong form trust can DEMO a source of competitive advantage when
competitors have differential exchange governance skills and abilities, and when these skills
and abilities are costly to imitate. The conditions under which strong form trust can be a
source of DEMO advantage are also identified. Implications of this analysis for
theoretical and empirical work in strategic management are discussed.
Significant differences in assumption and method
DEMO between behaviorally oriented and economi-
cally oriented organizational scholars
(Donaldson, 1990; Barney, 1990). While these
differences manifest themselves in a wide DEMO
of research contexts, no where are they more
obvious than in DEMO on the role of trust in
economic exchanges.
On the one hand, behaviorally oriented
researchers often criticize economic models that
assume exchange partners are inherently untrust-
worthy (Mahoney, Huff, and Huff, 1993) and
constantly tempted to behave in opportunistic
ways (Donaldson, 1990). These scholars DEMO
dissatisfied with economic analyses that suggest
trust will only emerge in an exchange when parties
to that exchange erect legal and contractual
protections (called governance mechanisms)
which make it in their self-interest to behave in
DEMO trustworthy manner (Williamson, 1975). This
rational, calculative, economic approach to trust,
many behavioral scholars argue, is empirically
Key words: DEMO, competitive
based view of the firm, organizational
transaction
cost economics
advantage,
resource-
economics,
CCC
( 1994
0143-2095/94/100175-16
by John DEMO & Sons, Ltd.
incorrect (since most exchange partners are, in
DEMO, trustworthy), socially inefficient (since it
leads to an overinvestment in unnecessary
governance), and morally bankrupt (Etzioni,
1988). A more reasonable approach, it is argued,
would adopt the assumption that most exchange
partners are trustworthy, that they behave as
stewards over the resources they have under
their control (Donaldson and Davis, 1991), and
DEMO that trust in exchange relationships-even
without legal and contractual governance
protections-will be common.
On the other hand, more economically oriented
scholars respond by observing that, at the very
least, it is difficult to distinguish between DEMO
partners that are actually trustworthy and those
that only claim to be trustworthy (Arrow, 1974;
Williamson, 1985). Since one cannot reliably
distinguish between these types of exchange
partners, legal and contractual protections are a
rational and effective means of assuring efficient
exchange. Trust, many economists would argue,
is in fact common in exchange relationships,
precisely DEMO of the constant threat of
opportunistic behavior, linked with governance
(Hill, 1990). Behavioral assertions that most
176
J.B. Barney and M.H. Hansen
exchange partners are inherently trustworthy and DEMO TRUST AND
that legal or contractual governance is thus TRUSTWORTHINESS
unnecessary are, at best, naive, and at worst,
foolish.
These debates about the role of trust in
exchange relationsips are interesting, in their
own right, but they are not terribly relevant for
strategic management research. Much of this
research focuses on understanding sources of
competitive advantage for firms (Rumelt, Schen-
del, and Teece, 1991; Bowman, 1974). The effort
to understand sources of competitive advantage
leads strategy researchers to study DEMO
between firms that enable some firms to conceive
of and implement valuable strategies that other
firms can either not conceive of and/or cannot
DEMO (Barney, 1991). Debates between
behavioral and economically oriented researchers
about how trustworthy individuals or firms are
fail to point to these kinds DEMO differences.
Moreover, while the behavioral and economic
approaches suggest very different DEMO
through which trust emerges in economic
exchanges, both these approaches assert DEMO
trust in economic exchanges will be very common.
Such common attributes of exchange
cannot be sources of competitive advantage
individual firms (Barney, 1991)DEMO To be a source
of competitive advantage, trust must
to only DEMO few firms in their exchange
not to most firms in most exchange
relationships
for
be available
relationships,
relationships
Numerous definitions of trust and DEMO
have been presented in the literature (Bradach
and Eccles, 1989; DEMO, 1988; Lewicki and
Bunker, 1994). For purposes of this DEMO,
Sabel's (1993: 1133) definition of trust has been
DEMO: trust is the mutual confidence that no
party to an exchange DEMO exploit another's
vulnerabilities.
Parties to an exchange can be vulnerable in
several different ways. For example, when parties
to an exchange find it very costly to evaluate
accurately the quality of the resources or assets
DEMO assert they will bring to an exchange,
these economic actors are subject to adverse
selection vulnerabilities (Akerlof, 1970). When
parties to DEMO exchange find it very costly to
evaluate accurately the quality of the resources
or assets others are actually offering in exchange,
these economic DEMO are subject to moral hazard
vulnerabilities (Holmstrom, 1979). Also, DEMO
parties to an exchange make large, asymmetric
transaction-specific investments in an DEMO,
they are subject to hold-up vulnerabilities (Klein,
Crawford, and Alchian, 1978). According to
Sabel, when parties to an exchange DEMO each
other, they share a mutual confidence that others
will not DEMO any adverse selection, moral
hazard, hold-up, or any other vulnerabilities DEMO
might exist in a particular exchange.
A definition of trustworthiness follows directly
from Sabel's definition of trust. As the word itself
implies, an exchange partner is trustworthy when
it is worthy of the trust of DEMO An exchange
partner worthy of trust is one that will not exploit
other's exchange vulnerabilities. Notice that while
trust is an attribute of DEMO relationship between
exchange partners, trustworthiness is an attribute
of individual exchange DEMO
In many ways, opportunism is the opposite of
trust. A firm'DEMO actions are opportunistic to the
extent that they take advantage of another's
exchange vulnerabilities. Williamson (1979)
emphasizes firms exploiting hold-up vulnerabili-
ties of exchange partners, caused by asymmetric
transaction-specific investment. However, the
exploitation DEMO other exchange vulnerabilities,
including adverse selection and moral hazard
vulnerabilities, DEMO also be opportunistic in
nature.
(Peteraf, 1993).
The purpose of this paper is to understand the
conditions under which trust and trustworthiness
DEMO exchange relationships
of competitive advantage
begins by defining trust,
closely related concept of opportunism.
three types of trust in exchange
defined and described:DEMO
strong form trust, and strong form trust.1 Then,
the conditions DEMO which these different types
of trust will, and will not, be sources of
competitive advantage for firms are discussed.
The paper concludes with DEMO discussion of some
of the empirical and theoretical implications of
the analysis.
can, in fact, be a source
for firms. The paper
trustworthiness,DEMO
relationships
weak form trust, semi-
and
the
Next,
are
I DEMO apologies to Gene Fama (1970).
Trustworthiness
and Competitive Advantage
177
TYPES OF TRUST
While trust is the DEMO confidence that one's
vulnerabilities will not be exploited in an exchange,
different types of trust can exist in different
economic exchanges. These DEMO types of trust
reflect different reasons parties to an exchange can
have the confidence that their vulnerabilities will
not be exploited. At least three DEMO of trust can
be identified: weak from trust, semi-strong form
trust, and strong form trust.
Weak form trust: Limited opportunities for
opportunism
DEMO reason that exchange partners can have the
mutual confidence that others will not exploit
their vulnerabilities is that they have no significant
vulnerabilities, at least in a particular exchange.
If there are no vulnerabilities, from adverse
selection, moral hazard, hold-up, or other
sources, then the trustworthiness DEMO exchange
partners will be high, and trust will be the norm
DEMO the exchange.
This type of trust can be called weak form
trust because its existence does not depend on
the erection of contractual or DEMO forms of
exchange governance. Nor does its existence
depend on commitments by parties to an exchange
to trustworthy standards of behavior. Rather,
trust DEMO in this type of exchange because
there are limited opportunities for opportunism.
Parties to an exchange, in this weak form context,
will gain all the benefits of being able to
trust their exchange partners without DEMO
governance or other costs.
Of course, weak form trust is likely DEMO emerge
in only very specific kinds of exchanges, i.e.,
exchanges DEMO there are limited vulnerabilities.
In general, whenever the quality of goods DEMO
services that are being exchanged can be evaluated
at low cost, DEMO whenever exchange partners do
not need to make transaction-specific investments
to obtain gains from an exchange, vulnerabilities
in that exchange will be limited, DEMO weak form
trust will be common. Easy-to-evaluate quality
effectively eliminates adverse selection and moral
hazard vulnerabilities; no transaction-specific
investments effectively eliminate hold-up vulner-
abilities. Without vulnerabilities, opportunistic
behavior is unlikely, and weak form trustworthi-
ness DEMO exist.
In this sense, weak form trust is clearly
endogenous; i.e., it emerges out of a very specific
exchange structure. Of course, DEMO exchange
structure can change and evolve over time. If an
exchange evolves such that the cost of evaluating
the quality of the goods or DEMO in an
exchange increases, then adverse selection and/
or moral DEMO vulnerabilities may emerge,
making weak form trust no longer possible. Also,
if transaction-specific investments develop over
time in an exchange, then hold-up vulnerabilities
may emerge, and weak form trust will no longer
exist.
Given this analysis, an important question
becomes: how often will weak form DEMO
ness exist? While, ultimately, this is an empirical
question, it seems likely that weak form trust
will be the norm in highly DEMO commodity
markets (Williamson, 1975). Examples of such
markets include the market for crude oil and the
market for soy beans. In all DEMO markets, it is
relatively easy for buyers and sellers to evaluate
DEMO quality of the goods or services they are
receiving (limited adverse DEMO and moral
hazard vulnerabilities). Moreover, in all these
markets, there are large numbers of equally
qualified buyers and sellers. Thus, firms do not
have to make transaction-specific investments to
trade with any one firm. DEMO parties to
exchanges in these kinds of markets are not
subject to significant exchange vulnerabilities,
weak form trustworthiness is usually the norm.
Of DEMO, that a market was once a highly
competitive commodity market does DEMO mean
that it will always be a highly competitive
commodity market. The cost of evaluating the
quality of goods or services can increase, the
number of buyers or suppliers can fall, and
significant exchange vulnerabilities can develop.
In this new exchange context, exchange partners
cannot rely on the emergence of weak form
trust, although other types of trust may develop.
Semi-strong form trust: Trust through
governance
When significant exchange vulnerabilities exist
(DEMO to adverse selection, moral hazard, hold-
up, or other sources), trust can still emerge, if
parties to an exchange are protected DEMO
various governance devices. Governance devices
impose costs of various kinds on parties to an
178
J.
B. Barney and M.
H. Hansen
exchange that behave opportunistically. DEMO the also acts to reduce the threat of opportunistic
appropriate governance devices are in place, the behavior.
cost of opportunistic behavior will be greater One implication of including governance
than its benefit, and it will be in the rational devices that impose social costs on opportunistic
self-interest of DEMO partners to behave in a exchange partners, instead of just economic DEMO,
trustworthy way (Hill, 1990). In this context, is DEMO expectation that opportunistic behavior will
parties to an exchange will have the mutual be unusual, even in settings where few market-
confidence that their vulnerabilities will not be based or contractual governance devices are in
exploited DEMO it would be irrational to do place, as long as these DEMO social forms of
so. This type of trust can be called semi-strong governance exist (Granovetter, 1985). Even
form trust, and is the type of trust emphasized some economists are beginning to recognize the
in DEMO economic models of exchange (Hill, importance of these more socially oriented forms
1990). of governance (Williamson, 1991). However,
A DEMO range of governance devices have been while this more social approach to governance
described in the literature. Economists have broadens the range of governance DEMO that
tended to focus on market-based and contractual should be studied, DEMO trust that emerges among
governance devices. One market-based govern- parties to an exchange with these social govern-
ance device is the market for reputations (Klein ance mechanisms in place is of the same type as
et DEMO, 1978). Firms or individuals that develop a the trust that DEMO with only economic
reputation for behaving opportunistically will governance devices in place. In both cases, trust
often be excluded from future economic emerges because rational actors find it in their
exchanges where exchange vulnerabilities are self-interest, for both economic and social
significant. The cost of these opportunities reasons, not to behave opportunistically. Put
foregone can be substantial, and the avoidance another way, neither economic nor behavioral
of these costs can lead exchange partners to be scholars would generally predict the emergence of
trustworthy in DEMO exchanges, albeit in a trust in exchanges where significant vulnerabilities
semi-strong DEMO Examples of more contractual exist, and in which there are no DEMO,
forms of governance include complete contingent contractual, or social forms DEMO governance.2 With
claims contracts, sequential contracting, strategic governance in place, DEMO, trust-of the semi-
alliances, and hierarchical governance strong variety-may emerge, DEMO the existence
(Williamson, 1985; Hennart, 1988; Kogut, 1988). of significant exchange vulnerabilities.
Contractual governance devices explicitly define Like weak form DEMO, semi-strong form trust
what constitutes opportunistic behavior in a is endogenous; i.e., it emerges out of the structure
particular exchange, and specify DEMO economic of a particular exchange. However, unlike weak
costs that will DEMO imposed on offending parties form trust, the structure of that exchange DEMO
(Williamson, 1979). modified, in the semi-strong case, through the
Recently, this economic focus on market-based use of governance devices of various types. If
and contractual governance devices has been parties to an exchange DEMO and/or exploit the
criticized as being badly under socialized correct governance devices, then opportunistic
(Granovetter, 1985). Several authors have sug- behavior in that exchange will be unlikely, and
gested that a variety of social costs can also be trust-albeit of the semi-strong variety-will
imposed on DEMO partners that behave in exist.
opportunistic ways. For example, a firm DEMO Of course, the creation and exploitation of
gains a reputation as DEMO 'cheater' may bear different forms of governance is not costless.
substantial economic opportunity costs (Klein et The costs of market-based and contractual forms
al., 1978), but it may also lose its social legitimacy
(DEMO and Powell, 1983). Also, Granovetter
(1985) has argued that exchange partners, be they
individuals or firms, that are deeply embedded DEMO
social networks put those networks of relations
at risk when they engage in opportunistic
behavior. The imposition of these social costs
2 Granovetter (1985) would probably argue that relatively
few economic exchanges are not embedded in some broader
network of social relations. This, of course, is ultimately DEMO
empirical question. However, Granovetter's theory suggests
that without some mechanism DEMO impose social costs on those
that behave opportunistically, social governance will DEMO
generate trust in a relationship.
Trustworthiness
and Competitive Advantage
179
of governance are well documented (Williamson,
1985). While social forms of governance have
fewer direct costs associated DEMO them, they are
nevertheless costly, in the sense that the use of
these forms of governance requires one only to
engage in exchanges DEMO potential partners
are embedded in specific broader social networks
of relations. This limitation on potential exchange
partners is an opportunity cost of using social
DEMO of governance.
Traditional transactions cost logic suggests that
rational economic actors will insist on just that
level of governance necessary to ensure the semi-
DEMO trustworthiness of exchange partners. If
existing social forms of governance cannot assure
the emergence of semi-strong trustworthiness,
then additional, and costly, legalistic DEMO contrac-
tual forms of governance (including, perhaps,
complete contingent claims contracts and sequen-
tial contracting) will need to be created. If this
level of governance is not sufficient, more
elaborate and costly intermediate market forms
may be erected (e.g., strategic alliances). If even
this DEMO of governance is not sufficient, then
even more costly hierarchical forms DEMO governance
may be erected (Williamson, 1975, 1979). There
may DEMO be some exchanges where hierarchical
governance is not sufficient to create semi-strong
form trust (Grossman and Hart, 1986).
One implication of this DEMO is that there
may be some potentially valuable exchanges that
cannot be pursued. Whenever the cost of
governance needed to generate semi-strong form
trust DEMO greater than the expected gains from
trade, and exchange with semi-strong DEMO
partners will not be pursued. This can happen
in at least two ways. First, the expected gains
from trade may be relatively small, DEMO which
case even modest investments in governance
mechanisms may not pay off. Second, the
expected gains from trade may be very large,
but so may be the exchange vulnerabilities in
that trade. In this type DEMO exchange, the high
cost of governance may still be greater than DEMO
expected value of exchange, even if that expected
value is large. DEMO, as Grossman and Hart
(1986) suggest, there may be some exchanges
where no governance devices will create semi-
strong form trust (i.e., where the cost of
governance is infinitely high). If the only types
of trust that can exist in economic exchanges are
of the DEMO and semi-strong types, then these
valuable, but costly to govern, DEMO may
have to remain unexploited.
Strong form trust: Hard-core trustworthiness
In DEMO form trust, trust is possible because
exchange vulnerabilities do not exist. DEMO the semi-
strong case, trust is possible, despite exchange
vulnerabilities, DEMO of the significant social
and economic costs imposed by governance
mechanisms on the opportunistic behavior of
exchange partners. In strong form trust, trust
emerges in the face of significant exchange
vulnerabilities, independent of whether or not
elaborate social and economic governance mech-
anisms exist, because opportunistic behavior
would violate values, principles, and standards
of behavior that have been internalized DEMO parties
to an exchange.
Strong form trust could also be called principled
trust, since trustworthy behavior emerges in
response to sets of principles and standards that
guide the behavior of exchange partners. Frank
(1988) might DEMO strong form trust 'hard-core
trust'. Hard-core trustworthy exchange partners
are DEMO, independent of whether or not
exchange vulnerabilities exist and independent
of DEMO or not governance mechanisms exist.
Rather, hard-core trustworthy exchange partners
are DEMO because that is who, or what,
they are. This type DEMO trust is, perhaps, closest
to the type of trust emphasized by more
behavioral scholars (Mahoney et al., 1993).3
In this sense, strong form trustworthiness is
clearly exogenous to a particular exchange
structure. Strong DEMO trust does not emerge
from the structure of an exchange, but DEMO,
reflects the values, principles, and standards that
partners bring to an exchange. Those values,
principles, and standards may reflect an exchange
partner's unique history, its culture, or the
personal beliefs and DEMO of critical individuals
associated with it (Arthur, 1989; Barney, 1986;
Dierickx and Cool, 1989).
3 In principle, some level DEMO compensation will always exist
where strong form trustworthy exchange partners will abandon
their values, principles, and standards of behavior, and act
in opportunistic ways. This level of compensation might be
called the 'Faustian' price. DEMO, this level of compen-
sation is much higher for a strong DEMO trustworthy exchange
partner, compared to a semi-strong form trustworthy exchange
partner.
180
J.
B. Barney and M.
H. Hansen
The
strong
form trustworthiness DEMO
of
While the existence of strong form trustworthiness
is, ultimately, an empirical question, research
from a variety of disciplines can be helpful in
answering the existence question. If exchange
partners are individuals, then research in develop-
mental psychology suggests that strong form
trustworthiness can exist in at DEMO some people.
Developmental psychologists have studied the
stages of moral development in children and
young adults (Kohlberg, 1969, 1971). These
stages are summarized in Table 1.4 When children
are very young (small babies), they are able to
make very few, if any, moral choices. DEMO
this stage, decision making and behavior are
essentially amoral. However, as children mature,
they often have to decide whether or not to
DEMO their choices and behaviors to a set
of values, principles, and standards.S In the
conventional morality stage (Kohlberg, 1969),
children conform their choices and behaviors to
a set of values, principles, and DEMO in order
to avoid the costs imposed on them by others
for failing to do so. In this stage, children are
moral because the costs of being caught violating
principles and standards (i.e., punishment) are
too high. In the post conventional morality stage,
choices and behaviors DEMO to a set of
values, principles, and standards because they
are internalized by individuals. While external
costs could still be imposed on choices DEMO
behaviors that do not conform to these principles
and standards, avoiding DEMO costs is not the
primary motivation for moral behavior. Rather,
the primary motivation for such behavior is to
avoid internally imposed costs, including a sense
of personal failure, guilt, and so forth.
Some obvious DEMO exist between the types
of trust and trustworthiness identified here, and
DEMO stages of moral development identified in
developmental psychology. These parallels are
identified in Table 1. The amoral stage in the
moral development literature is DEMO to
weak form trustworthiness. Just as young children
cannot violate moral standards when they are
4 This is a simplification of the actual typology DEMO by
Kohlberg (1969, 1971). However, it is consistent with
DEMO's findings.
5 These values, standards, and principles are normally taken
from a child's parents or other caregivers (Kohlberg, 1969).
DEMO to make moral choices, individuals in
exchange relationships cannot act opportun-
DEMO when there are no opportunities to do
so. Conventional morality is analogous to semi-
strong form trustworthiness. In conventional
morality, individuals make choices to conform
their behavior to a set of principles and standards
in order DEMO avoid the cost of failing to do so; in
semi-strong form DEMO, opportunistic behavior is
avoided because of the economic and social
costs DEMO on such behavior by governance
mechanisms. Finally, post conventional morality
is DEMO to strong form trustworthiness. In
both cases, choices and behavior conform DEMO a
set of principles and standards because those
principles and standards have been internalized.
While external costs may be imposed on individ-
uals that DEMO these principles and standards,
avoiding these external costs is not the primary
reason choices and behavior conform to them.
Rather, the avoidance of internally imposed
costs-including a sense of personal failure and
guilt-provide the primary DEMO for this
type of principled behavior.
Psychologists have shown that postconventional
morality is not uncommon (Kohlberg, 1971).
While some people never mature DEMO the
amoral or conventional morality stages, many
have sets of values, principles, and standards
that they use to guide their choices and behaviors.
In order for postconventional morality to lead to
strong form trustworthiness, all that is additionally
required is that some of these values, principles,
and standards suggest that exploiting an exchange
partners vulnerabilities is inappropriate.
The DEMO form trustworthiness of firms
At the individual level, the existence of DEMO
form trustworthiness in at least some people
seems plausible. However, that DEMO
exchange partners-can be strong form trust-
worthy does not necessarily imply that firms-as
exchange partners-can be strong form trust-
worthy. Firms, as exchange partners, can be
strong form trustworthy for at least two reasons.
Either a firm may possess a culture and associated
control systems that reward strong DEMO trust-
worthy behavior, or the specific individuals
involved in a particular DEMO may, them-
selves, be strong form trustworthy.
Zucker (1987) has shown that firm founders
Trustworthiness
and Competitive Advantage
Table 1.
Stages in moral development
Amoral stage
DEMO there are no moral choices to be made
Conventional morality
Decisions and behaviors conform to standards in
order to avoid the cost of being DEMO violating
standards
Postconventional morality
Decisions and behaviors conform to standards
because they have been internalized as principles
and values
Parallels between stages of moral DEMO and types of trust
Types of trust and trustworthiness
Weak form trust
Limited opportunities for opportunism
181
Semi-strong form trust
Trust emerges in response DEMO social and economic
governance mechanisms that impose costs on
opportunistic behavior
Strong form trust
An exchange partner behaves in a trustworthy
manner because to DEMO otherwise would be to violate
values, standards, and principles of behavior
can have a very strong impact on the culture
and other institutional DEMO of firms. This
impact can continue, even if these individuals
have DEMO dead for many years. Others, besides
founders, can also have these strong cultural and
institutional effects. For example, transform-
ational leaders (Tichy DEMO Devanna, 1986) can
have the effect of re-creating a firm's culture and
fundamentally changing other of its institutional
attributes.
If these influential DEMO were themselves
strong form trustworthy, they may have created
an organizational DEMO characterized by strong
form trustworthy values and beliefs. These strong
form trustworthy values and beliefs may also be
supported and reinforced by internal reward DEMO
compensation systems, together with decision-
making mechanisms that reflect strong form
DEMO standards. A firm with these cultural
and institutional mechanisms in place will often
behave in a strong form trustworthy manner in
exchange relationships.
Notice DEMO, if a firm has a strong form
trustworthy culture and associated DEMO mech-
anisms, it is not necessary for each individual in
a DEMO to be strong form trustworthy. Rather, all
that is required is DEMO individuals in a firm be
at least self-interested in their behavior. In this
situation, individuals in a firm will find it in
their self-interest to behave in a strong form
trustworthy way, when representing the firm, for
failure to do so would lead them to be subject
to a variety of social and economic sanctions.
Individuals who are unable to DEMO themselves
to a firm's strong form trustworthy standards
have several options, including, for example,
finding positions in the firm where trustworthiness
DEMO are not likely to arise, or changing firms.
Of course, that a firm once had a culture, and
associated internal control mechanisms, DEMO
encouraged strong form trustworthiness does not
mean that it will always have these attributes.
Cultures can evolve, control mechanisms can
change, and a DEMO may no longer have the
attributes to qualify as strong form trustworthy.
However, even when firms do not have strong
form trustworthiness cultures, DEMO still may be
possible for some of the exchanges in which a
firm engages to be characterized by strong form
trust.
Exchanges between firms DEMO, more often then
not, actually exchanges between small groups of
individuals in different firms. For example, when
an automobile company signs a supply agreement
with a supplier, the two groups of individuals
most directly involved in this agreement are the
purchasing people, in the automobile company,
and the sales people, in the supply company.
When two firms agree to form an equity joint
venture, several groups of people are directly
involved, including those in each parent firm
that are assigned the responsibility to interact
with the joint venture, and those that work in
the joint venture itself.
While the firms in these exchanges may not
have DEMO form trustworthy cultures, the specific
individuals that are most directly involved DEMO
these exchanges may, themselves, be strong form
182
J.B. Barney and M.
H. Hansen
trustworthy. Exchanges between strong form
DEMO individuals in different firms can lead
to strong form trust, even DEMO the firms,
themselves, may not be strong form trustworthy.6
TRUST DEMO COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGE
Trust can emerge in economic exchanges in any
of the three ways discussed. However, these
three types of trust are not equally likely to be
sources of competitive advantage. A strategic
analysis of trust DEMO trustworthiness focuses
attention on the conditions under which a
particular type of trust will be a source of
competitive advantage.
Weak form trust and DEMO advantage
The exchange attributes that make weak form
trust possible suggest that weak form trust will
usually not be a source of competitive advantage.
DEMO suggested earlier, weak form trust is most
likely to emerge in DEMO competitive commodity
markets. It is well known that exchange partners
in highly competitive commodity markets can
expect to gain few, if any, competitive DEMO
(Porter, 1980). In particular, while those partici-
pating in DEMO markets will be able to rely on
the existence of weak form trust in their exchange
relationships, the advantages of weak form trust
will accrue to all exchange partners in these
markets equally, thereby giving no one of them
a competitive advantage.
Indeed, one of the few ways those trading in
these markets can expect to gain advantages
from weak DEMO trust is if some competitors fail
to rely on weak form trust and, indeed, invest
in unnecessary and costly governance devices to
create DEMO form trust. Both those that
rely on weak form and semi-strong form trust,
in these highly competitive commodity markets,
6 Conflicts between DEMO and firm values, in this context,
act as a constraint DEMO the ability of strong form trustworthy
individuals to engage in strong form trust exchanges.
However, strong form trustworthy individuals can be expected
to engage in a variety of activities to neutralize the non-
strong form trustworthy DEMO of the firm within which they
operate. Moreover, the firm has DEMO incentives to let the
strong form trustworthy individuals continue in strong form
trust exchanges, since it gains all the advantages of these
exchanges.
can expect trust to exist in their exchange
relationships. However, those that invest in
governance to generate semi-strong form trust
will have higher costs, compared to those that
rely on weak form trust. Over time, those
that have invested in unnecessary (and costly)
governance will either abandon those governance
devices or suffer from competitive disadvantages.
Put differently, the cost advantage of those
that rely on weak form trust over those that rely
DEMO semi-strong form trust, in these highly
competitive conditions, is a measure of the
economic value of weak form trust. However, if
numerous competitors are all able to obtain this
value at the same low cost, then it will not be a
source of competitive advantage to any DEMO of
them (Barney, 1991).
Semi-strong form trust and competitive
advantage
Semi-strong form trust in exchange relationships
is economically valuable, in the sense that its
creation assures parties to an exchange that their
vulnerabilities will DEMO be exploited. However,
the ability to create semi-strong form trust in
economic exchanges depends on several
important governance skills and abilities that
parties DEMO an exchange must possess. For example,
for semi-strong form trust to emerge, exchange
partners must be able accurately to anticipate
sources and levels of opportunistic threat in the
exchanges in which they may participate. Also, to
create semi-strong form trust, exchange partners
must be able to rely on existing social governance
mechanisms and/or to conceive of, implement,
and manage the appropriate market-based and
contractual governance mechanisms. Only if
exchange DEMO can accomplish these tasks
will the 'right' types of governance be chosen to
create semi-strong form trust, and will the value
of semi-strong form trust be realized.
However, for semi-strong form trust to be a
source of competitive advantage, there must be
heterogeneity in the exchange governance skills
and abilities of competing firms (Barney, 1991).
If most DEMO firms or individuals have
similar governance skills and abilities, they will
DEMO be equally able to create the conditions under
which semi-strong form trust will emerge in their
exchange relationships. Moreover, the cost of
creating semi-strong form trust will also not
Trustworthiness
and Competitive Advantage
183
vary dramatically across these equally skilled
competitors. DEMO these competitors do not vary
in their exchange governance skills, no DEMO of
them will be able to gain a competitive advantage
based on the semi-strong form trust that they
are able to create with these DEMO
Of course, there is no reason to believe, a
priori, DEMO competing exchange partners will be
equally skilled or able in creating the conditions
necessary for semi-strong form trust. For exam-
ple, some exchange partners may have developed
a high degree of skill in managing, say, DEMO
ate market forms of governance (e.g., equity
joint ventures). These highly skilled actors may
be able to create semi-strong form trust using
DEMO intermediate market forms of governance
in economic exchanges where less skilled actors
may be forced to use hierarchical forms of
governance. If intermediate market DEMO of
governance are, in fact, less costly than hier-
archical forms of governance, those that obtain
semi-strong form trust through intermediate
market forms will have a competitive advantage
over those that must obtain trust in DEMO exchange
through hierarchical forms of governance. Similar
reasoning could apply to those that are highly
skilled in managing contractual forms of govern-
ance (e.g., complete contingent claims contracts)
compared to those that are only able to use
more costly intermediate market forms of govern-
ance or hierarchical DEMO of governance.
Heterogeneity in the skills and ability to create
semi-strong form trust in an exchange may
also reflect important social differences among
competing DEMO partners. For example, if a
particular firm is contemplating an exchange DEMO
another firm, where that relationship is deeply
embedded in a large DEMO network of social
relations, these firms may be able to rely
DEMO (relatively inexpensive) social governance
mechanisms to develop semi-strong form trust.
On the other hand, if a competing firm is
anticipating a similar exchange that is not deeply
7 Competing exchange partners do not have to DEMO the
same governance mechanisms for semi-strong trust to generate
competitive parity. Rather, all that is required is that
competing exchange partners erect functionally equivalent
governance devices (i.e., governance devices that generate
the same level of DEMO form trust) and that these
governance devices are about equally costly. DEMO arguments
also apply to bundles of governance devices to create semi-
strong form trust.
embedded in this broader social network of
relations, parties to this exchange may have
to rely on (more costly) economic forms DEMO
governance to ensure semi-strong form trust.
The firm that can rely on social governance to
generate semi-strong form trust will have a cost-
based DEMO advantage over the firm that
must rely on economic governance to generate
semi-strong form trust.
Heterogeneity in governance skills and abilities
is an important DEMO of variance in a
wide variety of different economic exchanges.
Compare, DEMO example, the exchanges between
Toyota and its suppliers, on the one hand, and
General Motors and its suppliers (Dyer and
Ouchi, 1993; Womack, Jones, and Roos, 1990),
on the other. Toyota's supply relationships are
deeply embedded in long-standing networks of
social and DEMO relationships. These social
governance mechanisms have enabled both Toy-
ota and its suppliers to engage in very vulnerable
exchanges (due to high transaction-specific invest-
ments that lead to a high risk of hold-up) with
substantially less contractual or other forms of
governance than is the case at General DEMO
(GM). Without the ability to rely on social
embeddedness to DEMO the opportunistic
behavior of its suppliers, GM has had to reduce
DEMO threat of opportunism by reducing the level
of transaction-specific investment in its suppliers
(i.e., by having multiple competing suppliers),
by insisting on elaborate contractual protections,
or by vertically integrating the supply relationship
(Dyer and Ouchi, 1993; Womack et al., 1990).
Overall, the DEMO of creating semi-strong form
trust at Toyota has been substantially lower than
the cost of creating semi-strong form trust at
GM.8
Of course, if several competitors all possess
these special governance skills and abilities to
approximately DEMO same level, then they will not
be a source of competitive DEMO for any
one of them, even if there are some competitors
DEMO do not possess these skills. However, as
long as the number DEMO competitors that have
these special governance skills and abilities is
less than what is required to generate perfect
competition dynamics, then they can be a source
8 Obviously, there may be some strong form trustworthiness
attributes to Toyota's relationships with its suppliers that do
not exist between DEMO and its suppliers.
184 J. B. Barney and M.H. Hansen
of competitive advantage for those DEMO possess
them (Barney, 1991).
Moreover, if these skills and DEMO can
rapidly diffuse among competitors, they will
be the source of DEMO temporary competitive
advantages. However, it seems likely that these
skills and DEMO will not rapidly diffuse through
most populations. For example, the ability DEMO
rely on social governance mechanisms in different
exchanges depends upon the structure of the
network of relations within which an exchange
is embedded. Those DEMO of relations, in
turn, are developed over long perods of time,
and are unique to a particular point in history.
Such path-dependent (Arthur, 1989) phenomena
are subject to time compression diseconomies
(Dierickx and Cool, 1989), and thus costly to
imitate. The development of special governance
skills is also path dependent. Moreover, these
skills are often socially complex, and thus costly
to imitate (Barney, 1991).
Whenever exchange partners possess rare and
costly-to-imitate governance skills and abilities,
they may DEMO able to use those abilities to gain
competitive advantages in creating semi-strong
form trust. On the other hand, when competing
exchange partners possess similar governance
skills and abilities, the creation of semi-strong
trust will generate only competitive parity.
Strong form trust and competitive advantage
For strong form trustworthiness DEMO be economi-
cally valuable, all those with a significant stake
in DEMO exchange must be strong form trustworthy.
If one or more parties to an exchange may
behave opportunistically in that exchange, then
all parties to that exchange will need to invest
in a variety of social and DEMO governance
mechanisms to insure semi-strong form trust.
Any potential economic advantages of being
strong form trustworthy are irrelevant when
semi-strong form governance protections are
DEMO and exploited, since strong form trust-
worthy parties are forced to DEMO as if they
were only semi-strong form trustworthy.
Economic opportunities in strong form trust
exchanges
On the other hand, if all those with a significant
stake in an exchange are strong form trustworthy,
some important DEMO valuable economic oppor-
tunities may exist. These opportunities reflect
either the governance cost advantages that strong
form trust exchanges may enjoy over semi-strong
form DEMO exchanges and/or the ability that
strong form trustworthy exchange partners may
have to explore exchange options not available to
semi-strong form trustworthy exchange DEMO
When two or more strong form trustworthy
individuals or firms engage in an exchange, they
can all be assured that any vulnerabilities that
might exist in this exchange will not be exploited
by their partners. Moreover, this assurance comes
with no additional investment in social or
economic forms DEMO governance. As long as the
cost of developing and maintaining strong form
trustworthiness in an individual or firm, plus the
cost of discovering strong form trustworthy
partners, is less than the cost of exploiting or
creating semi-strong form governance devices,
those engaging in a strong form trustworthy
DEMO will gain a cost advantage over those
exchanging in a semi-strong trustworthy context.
Consider, for example, several competing firms
looking to purchase raw DEMO from a set of
suppliers. Suppose that a small number of these
buyers and sellers are strong form trustworthy,
and that there are DEMO significant exchange
vulnerabilities in this raw materials purchase. In
order to complete this purchase, those purchasing
from semi-strong suppliers will need to rely on
and/or erect a variety of social or economic
governance devices. While DEMO governance
devices are costly, their existence will enable
firms to purchase DEMO raw material in question.
On the other hand, strong form trustworthy
DEMO purchasing from strong form trustworthy
suppliers will not have to rely on or erect social
or economic forms of governance in order to
complete DEMO purchase of the raw material. As
long as the cost of developing and maintaining
strong form trustworthiness, plus the cost of
discovering strong form trustworthy exchange
partners, is less than the cost of relying on or
erecting social or economic governance devices,
the firms purchasing raw materials DEMO a strong
form trust exchange will have a cost advantage
over those firms purchasing raw materials in a
semi-strong trust exchange.9
9 While ultimately DEMO empirical question, it seems likely
that the cost of creating and DEMO strong form
Trustworthiness
and Competitive Advantage
185
Perhaps even more important than this govern-
DEMO cost advantage, those engaging in strong
form trust exchanges may be DEMO to exploit
exchange opportunities that are not available to
those who are only able to engage in semi-strong
form trust exchanges. It has already DEMO
suggested that valuable semi-strong form
exchanges will not be pursued when the cost of
governance needed to generate semi-strong form
trust is greater than DEMO expected gains from
trade. This can happen when the expected gains
from trade are small (but modest vulnerabilities in
this exchange require modest levels of expensive
governance) or when the expected gains from
trade are substantial (but very large vulnerabilities
in this exchange require very substantial levels
of costly governance). While semi-strong form
trust exchanges will not be pursued DEMO these
situations, it may be possible to pursue strong
form trust DEMO In this sense, strong form
trustworthiness may increase the set of DEMO
opportunities available to an individual or firm,
compared to those who are only semi-strong
form trustworthy (Zajac and Olsen, 1993; Ring
and Van de Ven, 1994).
Consider, for example, several competing firms
looking to cooperate with one or more of several
other firms in DEMO development and exploitation
of a new, and sophisticated, technology. Suppose
that only a small number of these two sets of
firms are strong DEMO trustworthy, that the
technology in question has significant economic
potential, but that there are enormous exchange
vulnerabilities in the technology development
process. Semi-strong DEMO trustworthy firms, in
this setting, will need to invest in substantial
amounts of costly governance to try to create
semi-strong form trust. It DEMO even be the case
that no form of governance will create semi-
strong form trust (Grossman and Hart, 1986).
The potential economic DEMO that could be
obtained from this exchange will need to be
reduced by an amount equal to the present value
trustworthiness, plus the cost of discovering strong form
trustworthy exchange partners, will often be less than the
cost of relying on or erecting semi-strong governance
devices. The cost DEMO creating and maintaining strong form
trustworthiness can be spread across numerous economic
exchanges, thus reducing the per exchange cost. The cost of
discovering strong form trustworthy exchange partners can
be reduced through the discovery and signalling DEMO
described below.
of the cost of governing this exchange. Moreover,
the present value of this exchange will also have
to be discounted by DEMO residual threat of
opportunism. The reduced value of this exchange
could lead semi-strong form trustworthy firms to
decide not to pursue it, even though substantial
economic value may exist.
On the other hand, exchanges of this sort
between strong form trustworthy firms are
burdened neither by the high DEMO of governance
nor any residual threat of opportunism. Strong
form trustworthy firms will be able to pursue
these valuable, but highly vulnerable exchanges,
while semi-strong form trustworthy firms will be
unable to pursue them. This DEMO represent a
substantial opportunity cost for semi-strong form
trustworthy exchange partners, DEMO a source of
competitive advantage for strong form trust-
worthy exchange partners.'10
Traditional transactions cost logic suggests
that, when faced with these valuable but highly
vulnerable exchanges, exchange partners will opt
for hierarchical forms of governance and use
managerial fiat as a way to manage trustworthi-
ness DEMO (Williamson, 1985). However,
hierarchical governance is not always a solution
to these problems. First, there may be important
legal and political restrictions on the use of
hierarchical governance. For example, one cannot
acquire a direct competitor if such actions
lead to unacceptably high levels of DEMO
concentration. Also, firms may be required,
for political reasons, to maintain market or
intermediate market relationships with an
exchange partner (e.g., DEMO entering into a
new country market).
Second, as Grossman and DEMO (1986) suggest,
hierarchical governance does not necessarily
'solve' opportunism problems. Rather it simply
shifts those problems from a market or intermedi-
DEMO market context to inside the boundaries of
the firm. Where, in DEMO exchanges,
firms face the threat of opportunism in exchanges
with other firms, bringing these transactions
within the boundaries of a firm can simply lead
to division facing the threat of opportunism in
10 As previously, it seems likely that the cost of creating and
maintaining strong form DEMO, plus the cost of
discovering strong form trustworthy exchange partners, will
be less than the opportunity cost of relying only on semi-
strong DEMO trust governance devices.
186 J.B. Barney and M.H. Hansen
exchanges with other divisions. Put differently,DEMO
hierarchical governance does not automatically
create strong form trust exchange (Ouchi, 1980).
Where hierarchical governance may not always
be a solution to DEMO threat of opportunism,
exchanges between strong form trustworthy
exchange partners-whether those exchanges are
within the boundary of a single firm or not-
will, in general, create strong form trust. Strong
form trustworthy individuals or firms will often
be able to gain governance cost advantages over
semi-strong form DEMO individuals or firms.
Moreover, strong form trustworthy individuals
or firms will DEMO be able to engage in economic
exchanges that cannot be pursued by semi-
strong form trustworthy exchange partners. Put
differently, the level of vulnerability in some
economic exchanges may be greater than the
ability of any DEMO governance devices to
protect against the threat of opportunism. The
only way to pursue these exchanges is through
strong form trustworthiness.
Of course, if most competitors are strong form
trustworthy, and engage in exchanges with others
that are also strong form trustworthy, then the
advantages of strong form trustworthiness would
only be a source of competitive parity, and
not competitive advantage. However, while the
number of strong form trustworthy exchange
partners in a particular segment of the economy
is ultimately an empirical question, it seems like
a reasonable guess that strong form trustworthi-
ness in at DEMO some segments of the economy
is probably rare, and thus (assuming exchanges
with other strong form trustworthy exchange
partners are developed) at least a source of
temporary competitive advantage for strong form
trustworthy individuals and DEMO
Locating strong form trustworthy exchange
partners
Given the important competitive advantages that
may attend exchanges between strong form
trustworthy exchange partners, an important
question becomes: how can strong form trust-
worthy exchange partners recognize each other?
This process is problematic, since exchange
partners that are not strong form trustworthy
have a strong incentive to assert that they are.
If DEMO strong form trustworthy individual or firm
believes that an exchange partner is strong form
trustworthy, even though this partner is not, then
that DEMO form trustworthy individual or firm will
be willing to engage in a highly vulnerable exchange
without social or economic governance devices.
Without these devices DEMO place, the untrustworthy
exchange partner could exploit the strong form
trustworthy DEMO's exchange vulnerabilities with
impunity. Thus, simple assertions that one is DEMO
form trustworthy are not sufficient justification for
assuming that an exchange partner is, in fact,
strong form trustworthy.
Of course, a simple DEMO to this adverse
selection problem would be to observe directly
whether or not a potential exchange partner is
stong form trustworthy, and respond appropri-
ately. Unfortunately, the individual and organiza-
tional attributes that create strong form trust-
worthiness are difficult to observe directly. At
an individual level, the values, principles, and
standards around which strong form trustworthy
individuals organize DEMO lives are clearly not
directly observable. At the firm level, an DEMO
tion's culture, and associated control systems,
may be difficult DEMO observe, and their implications
for individual behavior ambiguous-at least to
those DEMO deeply embedded in this culture and
control system. Moreover, if the DEMO of
strong form trust depends on the strong form
trustworthiness of small groups of people in a
larger organization, evaluating the individual
values, DEMO, and standards of these people
remains difficult.
Even with these challenges, strong form trust-
worthy exchange partners can still be found. It
will DEMO be the case, for example, that exchange
partners will begin a relationship assuming that
others are at least semi-strong form trustworthy.
As this DEMO evolves overtime, parties to
an exchange may be able to gain DEMO
information to judge accurately whether or not
others are strong form trustworthy. If two or
more parties to an exchange discover that they
are DEMO form trustworthy, any subsequent
exchanges between these parties can generate
strong DEMO trust, and these exchange partners
will subsequently obtain all the advantages DEMO
strong form trustworthiness. On the other hand,
if experience shows that an exchange partner is
only semi-strong form trustworthy, then future
exchanges with this partner will continue with
semi-strong form trust generating governance
mechanism in DEMO
Trustworthiness
and Competitive Advantage
187
Notice that this process of discovering strong
DEMO trustworthy exchange partners assumes that
one's trustworthiness type does not automatically
change as a result of experience in a semi-strong
form trust relationship. DEMO the creation of semi-
strong trust exchanges inevitably led exchange
partners to become strong form trustworthy, then
all exchanges would inevitably be characterized by
strong form trust, and strong form trustworthiness
would not be a source of competitive advantage
to any individual or firm. Rather than changing
an DEMO partner's trustworthiness type, the
creation of a semi-strong form trust DEMO
creates an opportunity for exchange partners to
observe more directly another's trustworthiness
type. While it is certainly true that an exchange
partner's DEMO type may evolve over
the long run, the historical, path-dependent,
socially complex, and causally ambiguous nature
of strong form trustworthiness makes it unlikely
that semi-strong form trustworthy firms will be
able to become strong DEMO trustworthy in the
short and medium term.
This search for potential strong form trust-
worthy exchange partners can be shortened
through the use of DEMO of strong form
trustworthiness (Spence, 1973). Signals of strong
form trustworthiness must have two properties:
(1) they must be correlated DEMO the underlying
(but costly to observe) actual level of strong
form trustworthiness in a potential exchange
partner; and (2) they must be less costly to
exchange partners that are actually strong form
trustworthy than DEMO are to exchange partners
that only claim they are strong form trustworthy
(Spence, 1973).
Several behaviors by exchange partners qualify
as signals DEMO strong form trustworthiness. For
example, a reputation for being strong form
DEMO is a signal of strong form trustworthi-
ness." Gaining a reputation DEMO a strong form
trustworthy exchange partner occurs, over time,
as DEMO exchange partner confronts situations where
opportunistic behavior is possible, but chooses
DEMO to engage in opportunistic activities. There
11 Note that having a reputation for being strong form
trustworthy is not the same as not having DEMO reputation for
being opportunistic. A potential exchange partner may not
have a reputation for being opportunistic (i.e., they may not
be known as DEMO 'cheater') but still not have a reputation for
being strong DEMO trustworthy (i.e., they may not be known
as 'hard-core' trustworthy).
are no opportunity costs associated with a strong
form trustworthy individual DEMO firm not behaving
opportunistically, since such behavior is not in
this DEMO of exchange partner's opportunity set.
On the other hand, a DEMO form trustworthy
exchange partner will have to absorb opportunity
costs each time they decide not to behave in an
opportunistic way. These opportunity costs DEMO
it more costly for an exchange partner that is not
strong form trustworthy to develop a reputation as
strong form trustworthy, compared to an
exchange partner that is actually strong form
trustworthy.
While a reputation for DEMO strong form
trustworthy is a signal of strong form trustworthi-
ness, DEMO is noisy. In particular, this reputation
cannot distinguish between those exchange DEMO
ners that are actually strong form trustworthy,
and those that are not strong form trustworthy,
but have yet to engage in an DEMO where
returns to opportunistic behavior are large enough
to motivate opportunistic behavior. While a
reputation for being strong form trustworthy
does eliminate those exchange DEMO who have
acted opportunistically, it does not eliminate
those exchange partners DEMO might act opportun-
istically, given the right incentives.
Another signal of DEMO form trustworthiness
is being open to outside auditing of the exchange
relationship. This is less costly to strong form
trustworthy exchange partners, compared to
those that are not strong form trustworthy, since
trustworthy exchange partners were not going to
behave opportunistically anyway. One would
expect to see strong DEMO trustworthy firms and
individuals to be very open to outside auditors,
perhaps even paying the cost of outside auditors
chosen by potential exchange DEMO
A third signal of strong form trustworthiness
might be to make unilateral transaction-specific
investments in an exchange before that exchange
is actually in place. DEMO, Khana, and Nohria
(1994) have found, for example, that it is not
uncommon for firms with a strong track record
of DEMO engaging in joint ventures to sign
long-term third-party supply contracts that are
only valuable if a particular joint venture actually
goes forward-before that joint DEMO agree-
ment is complete. Such unilateral transaction-
specific investments are less costly to strong form
trustworthy firms, since they were not going to
behave in an opportunistic manner in developing
188
J.
B. Barney and M.H. Hansen
this joint venture anyway. These DEMO governance mechanisms. Semi-strong form trust
foreclose opportunistic opportunities for firms is only a source of competitive advantage when
that are not strong form trustworthy, and thus a small number of competitors have special skills
represent significant DEMO costs to these and abilities in conceiving of and implementing
firms. If all those involved in an exchange social and economic governance devices, and
independently make these kinds of unilateral when those skills and abilities are DEMO from
transaction-specific investments, then others in low-cost imitation. Strong form trust DEMO a source
these exchanges can conclude, with some of competitive advantage DEMO two or more
reliability, that they are strong form trustworthy. strong DEMO trustworthy individuals or firms
If strong form trustworthiness is relatively rare engage in an exchange, when strong form
among a set of competitors, DEMO if two or more trustworthiness is relatively rare among a set
strong form trustworthy exchange partners are of competitors, and when the individual and
able to engage in trade, then these strong form organizational attributes that lead to strong
trustworthy individuals or firms will gain at form trustworthiness DEMO immune from low-cost
least a temporary competitive advantage over imitation.
individuals or firms that are not strong form This analysis has important implications for
DEMO For this competitive advantage to research in organization theory and strategic
remain, however, the individual and organiza- management. For example, these ideas can be
tional attributes that make strong form trust- seen as an extension DEMO transactions cost theory-
worthiness possible must also be costly to imitate an extension that makes this form of analysis
and immune from rapid diffusion. DEMO, strategically more relevant. Where transactions
the individual and organizational attributes that DEMO economics implicitly assumes that the skills
make strong form trustworthiness possible (DEMO, and abilities needed to conceive of and implement
individual values, principles, and standards; an governance mechanisms are constant across indi-
organization's DEMO and associated control viduals and firms (Williamson, 1985), this
system) reflect an exchange partner's unique approach suggests that these skills and abilities
path through history (path dependence) and are may vary in DEMO strategicially important ways.
socially complex. As was suggested earlier, these Also, where transactions cost theory assumes
types of individual and organizational attributes either DEMO all potential exchange partners are
are usually immune from imitation and rapid equally likely to behave opportunistically or that
diffusion among competitors (Barney, DEMO; one cannot distinguish between those that will
Arthur, 1989; Dierickx DEMO Cool, 1989).12 behave opportunistically and those that will not
behave DEMO (Williamson, 1985), this
analysis suggests that potential exchange partners'
DISCUSSION opportunistic tendencies may vary, and that these
differences can be discovered. Discovery of
Trust, in economic exchanges, can be a source exchange DEMO that will not engage in
of competitive advantage. However, trust in DEMO behavior enables firms to gain all
these exchanges is not always a source of the advantages of trade, without the cost of
competitive advantage. Weak form trust is only governance.
a competitive advantage when competitors invest DEMO, consistent with many of the more
in unnecessary and costly semi-strong DEMO behaviorally oriented organizational scholars
cited earlier, the approach in this paper DEMO
both the assumption that all exchange partners
are likely to engage in opportunistic behavior
and the assumption that it is not possible to
know DEMO opportunistic a particular exchange
partner is likely to be. However, these DEMO
actions cost assumptions are not replaced by
equally extreme, if opposite, assumptions that
most exchange partners are trustworthy most of
the time. Rather, the approach adopted here is
12 Given the challenge of discovering strong DEMO trustworthy
exchange partners, these relationships are likely to be
relatively stable DEMO time. Indeed, it may well be the case
that exchanges between DEMO form trustworthy partners
may continue, even though they have limited potential DEMO
generating current economic value (Ring and Van de Ven,
1994)DEMO In this setting, the challenge facing exchange partners
is to discover DEMO ways to generate economic value with
older, stable, relationships. Even when this cannot be done,
economically nonviable exchanges may continue for some
DEMO because of the close relationships between partners.
Trustworthiness
and Competitive Advantage
189
that the trustworthiness of exchange partners can
DEMO, and that how trustworthy an exchange
partner is can be discovered. DEMO adoption of
this approach leads to the conclusion that, in
some DEMO, trust can be a source of
competitive advantage-a conclusion that is DEMO
possible if it is assumed that most exchange
partners are either untrustworthy or that most
exchange partners are trustworthy.
This analysis also points to DEMO important
exchange processes that have not received suf-
ficient attention in the organizations and strategy
literatures. First, the argument suggests that
semi-strong form trust can be a source of
competitive advantage if competing exchange
partners vary DEMO their skills and abilities in
conceiving of and implementing governance
mechanisms. What these specific skills and
abilities might be, and why they might develop
in some economic actors and not others, are
unexplored issues in this paper. Casual obser-
vation suggests that, for example, some firms
seem DEMO be better at managing certain kinds of
governance devices than others. Corning seems
to be able to manage joint ventures more
effectively than, say, TRW (Sherman, 1992).
Toyota seems to be able to manage complex
supply relationships more effectively than GM
(Dyer and Ouchi, 1993; Womack et al., 1990).
How these different skills and abilities evolve,
and their competitive implications, are important
research questions. In this context, comparative
research on semi-strong form governance in
different industries and different countries is
likely to be very important (Dyer and Ouchi,
1993).
Second, the argument suggests that strong
form trustworthy exchange partners may be
able to discover other strong form trustworthy
exchange partners. Once discovered, these kinds
of exchange partners can gain important competi-
tive advantages from working DEMO each other.
However, much more empirical work needs to
focus on DEMO process through which strong form
trustworthiness evolves in an economic actor.
Such empirical work will establish whether or
not strong form trustworthiness is a DEMO
stable attribute of economic actors, and whether
or not this attribute DEMO be imitated at low cost.
Also, empirical research needs to focus DEMO the
process of searching for strong form trustworthy
exchange partners. In particular, the role of
signals of strong form trustworthiness deserves
special empirical attention. In this context, it
may be helpful to compare the decisions and
behaviors of firms that have been able to develop
many strong form DEMO exchanges (e.g.,
Corning) with the decisions and behaviors of
firms that have been unable to develop these
strong form trustworthy exchanges.
By DEMO the competitive implications of
different types of trust in economic exchanges,
it becomes clear that extreme assumptions about
potential exchange partners-that most are DEMO
worthy and that most are opportunistic-are
overly simplistic. Rather, the trustworthiness DEMO
exchange partners may vary, and in that variance
the possibility of DEMO advantage may
exist.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Comments and suggestions from Ed Zajac,
Kathleen Conner, and Peter Ring were important
in the development of this paper. Useful feedback
was received from workshops at The Kellogg
School (Northwestern), Emory University, the
1994 Texas Conference on Organizations, the
University of DEMO, and from participants at
the 1994 Strategic Management Society meeting,
DEMO at HEC, near Paris, France. Andy Van de
Ven is amazed that the first author finally
understood the work of John R. Commons.
DEMO
Akerlof, G. A. (1970). 'The market for "lemons":DEMO
Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism,'
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, pp. 488-500.
Arrow, K. J. (1974) The Limits of DEMO
Norton, New York.
Arthur, W. B. (1989). 'Competing technologies,
increasing returns, and lock-in by historical events,'
Economic Journal, 99, pp. 116-131.
Bradach, J. L. and R. G. Eccles (1989). 'Price,
authority, and trust', Annual Review of Sociology,DEMO
15, pp. 97-118.
Barney, J. B. (1986). 'Organizational culture: Can it
be a source of sustained competitive advantage?',
Academy of Management Review, 11, pp. 656-665.
Barney, J. B. (1990)DEMO 'The debate between traditional
management theory and organizational economics:
Substantive DEMO or intergroup conflict?',
Academy of Management Review, 15, pp. 382-393.
Barney, J. B. (1991). 'Firm resources and sustained
190
J.B. Barney and M.H. Hansen
competitive advantage?', Journal of Management,
17, pp. 99-120.
Bowman, E. H. (1974), 'Epistemology, corporate
strategy and academe', Sloan Management Review,
15, pp. 35-50.
Dierickx, I. and K. Cool. (1989). 'Asset stock
accumulation and sustainability of competitive
advantage', Management Science, 35, pp. 1504-
1511.
DEMO, P. and W. Powell (1983). 'The iron cage
revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective
rationality in organizational fields', American Socio-
logical DEMO, 48, pp. 147-160.
Donaldson, L. (1990). 'A rational DEMO for criticisms
of organizational economics: A reply to Barney',
Academy of Management Review, 15, pp. 394-401.
Donaldson, L. and J. H. Davis (1991). 'Stewardship
theory or agency theory: CEO governance and
shareholder returns', Australian Journal of Manage-
ment, 16 (1), DEMO 49-64.
Dyer, J. H. and W. G. Ouchi (1993), 'DEMO
partnerships: Giving companies a competitive edge',
Sloan Management Review, DEMO, pp. 51-63.
Etzioni, E. (1988). The Moral Dimension: Toward a
New Economics. Free Press, New York.
Fama, E. (1970). 'Efficient capital markets: A review
of theory and empirical work', DEMO of Finance,
25, pp. 383-417.
Frank, R. H. (1988)DEMO Passions Within Reason. Norton,
New York.
Gambetta, D. (1988). Trust: Making and Breaking
Cooperative Relations. Basil Blackwell, New York.
Granovetter, M. (1985). 'Economic action and social
structure: The problem of embeddedness', American
Journal of Sociology, 91(3), pp. 481-510.
Grossman, S. J. and 0. Hart. (1986). 'The costs and
benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical and
lateral integration', Journal of Political Economy,
94, pp. 691-719.
Gulati, R., T. Khana and N. Nohria. (1994). 'Unilateral
commitments and the importance of process DEMO
alliances', Sloan Management Review, 35 (3),
pp. 61-69.
DEMO, J.-F. (1988) 'A transaction costs theory
of equity joint ventures', Strategic Management
Journal, 9 (4), pp. 361-374.
Hill, C. W. L. (1990), 'Cooperation, opportunism,
and the invisible hand: Implications for transactions
cost theory', Academy of Management Review, 15
(3), pp. 500-513.
Holmstrom, B. (1979). 'Moral hazard and observabili-
ty', Bell Journal of Economics, 10, pp. 74-91.
Klein, B., R. A. Crawford and A. A. Alchian (1978).
'Vertical integration, appropriable rents, and the
competitive contracting process', Journal of DEMO
and Economics, 21, pp. 297-326.
Kogut, B. (1988). 'DEMO ventures: Theoretical and
empirical perspectives', Strategic Management Jour-
nal, 9(4), pp. 319-332.
Kohlberg, L. (1969). 'Stage and sequence: The
cognitive-developmental approach to socialization'.
In D. A. Goslin (ed.), Handbook of Socialization.
Rand McNally, New York, pp. 347-480.
Kohlberg, DEMO (1971). 'From is to ought'. In T. Mischel
(DEMO), Cognitive Development and Epistemology.
Academic Press, New York, pp. 151-236.
Lewicki, R. J. and B. B. Bunker (1994). 'Trust in
relationships: A model of trust development and
decline'. Working paper, DEMO of Manage-
ment and Human Resources, Ohio State University.
Mahoney, J. T., A. S. Huff and J. 0. Huff, (1993).
'DEMO a new social contract theory in organization
science'. Working paper 93-0136, Department of
Management, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign.
Ouchi, W. G. (1980). 'Markets, bureaucracies, and
clans', Administrative Science DEMO, 25,
pp. 121-141.
Peteraf, M. A. (1993). 'The cornerstones of competitive
advantages: A resource-based view', Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 14(3), pp. 179-192.
Porter, M. (1980). Competitive Strategy. Free Press,
New York.
Ring, P. and A. Van de Ven (1994). 'Developmental
processes of cooperative interorganizational
relationships', Academy of DEMO Review,
19, pp. 90-118.
Rumelt, R., D. Schendel and DEMO Teece (1991).
'Strategic management and economics', Strategic
Management Journal, Winter Special Issue, 12, pp.
5-29.
Sabel, C. F. (1993). 'Studied trust: Building new forms
of cooperation in a volatile DEMO', Human
Relations, 46 (9), pp. 1133-1170.
Sherman, S. (September 21, 1992). 'Are strategic
alliances working?', Fortune, DEMO 77-78.
Spence, A. M. (1973). Market Signalling: Information
Transfer DEMO Hiring and Related Processes. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Tichy, DEMO M. and M. A. Devanna (1986). The
Transformational Leader. Wiley, New York.
Williamson, 0. E. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies:
DEMO and Antitrust Implications. Free Press,
New York.
Williamson, 0. E. (1979). 'Transaction-cost economics:
The governance of contractual relations', Journal
of Law and Economics, 22, pp. 233-261.
Williamson, 0. E. (DEMO). The Economic Institutions
of Capitalism. Free Press, New York.
Williamson, 0. E. (1991). 'Comparative economic
organization: The analysis of discrete structural
alternatives', Administrative Science Quarterly, 36,
pp. 269-296.
Womack, DEMO P., D. T. Jones and D. Roos. (1990).
The Machine that Changed the World. Harper
Perennial, New York.
Zajac, E. and DEMO P. Olsen (1993). 'From transaction
cost to transaction value analysis: Implications for
the study of interorganizational strategies', Journal
of Management Studies, 30, pp. 131-145.
Zucker, L. G. (1987). 'Institutional theories of
organization', Annual Review of Sociology, 13, pp.
443-464.{1g42fwefx}