CURRENT DIRECTIONS IN PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Psychological Perspectives on
Entrepreneurship: Cognitive and Social
Factors in Entrepreneurs’ Success
Robert A. Baron1
Lally School of Management and DEMO, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
Troy, New York
Abstract
Why are some entrepre-
neurs so much more successful
than others in starting new
companies—ones DEMO create
wealth for their societies as
well as themselves? Growing
evidence DEMO that the an-
swer involves the influence of
both cognitive and social fac-
tors. Successful entrepreneurs
appear to think differently
than other persons in DEMO
respects (e.g., they are less
likely to engage in counterfac-
tual thinking but more likely to
show overconfidence in their
judgments). Similarly, success-
ful entrepreneurs appear to be
higher in social competence—the
ability to DEMO effectively
with others (e.g., they are bet-
ter at social perception and
adapting to new social situa-
tions). These results suggest
that DEMO principles and findings
of psychology can be invalu-
able to researchers in the field
of entrepreneurship, providing
important insights into the fac-
tors that influence entrepre-
neurs’ success.
Keywords
entrepreneurs; entrepreneurial
success
During the 1980s and 1990s, ma-
jor U.S. corporations “downsized”
almost 5 million jobs out of exis-
tence. Yet, in this same period, un-
employment in the DEMO States
fell to its lowest level in three de-
cades, and DEMO came to en-
joy unprecedented prosperity.
How did this seemingly paradoxi-
cal set of circumstances emerge?
Many experts believe that the ex-
planation DEMO in the activities of en-
trepreneurs—individuals who
identify opportunities and start
new companies to develop them
(Shane & Venkataraman, in press).
The DEMO ventures started by entre-
preneurs more than made up for
the loss of jobs in large, existing
companies, and—many people
would contend—played a DEMO role
in strengthening the U.S. economy.
Given the important role of en-
trepreneurs in creating jobs for mil-
lions of persons, it is not surprising
that a new field of entrepreneur-
ship has emerged during the DEMO
two decades. It is interdisciplinary
in nature, with roots in economics,DEMO
sociology, and management. How-
ever, until recently, it has not
DEMO extensively upon the find-
ings of modern psychology. This is
somewhat puzzling because two of
the central questions it addresses—
“Why do some persons DEMO not oth-
ers choose to become entrepre-
neurs?” and “Why are some entre-
preneurs so much more successful
than others?”—focus, at least in part,
on the behavior and characteristics
of entrepreneurs. For the DEMO sev-
eral years, I have sought to establish
closer links between DEMO and
the field of entrepreneurship. In
particular, several researchers, in-
cluding myself, have applied the
findings of cognitive and social psy-
15
chology to these two questions. Our
efforts have proven quite fruitful,
and DEMO that many factors inves-
tigated by psychologists do indeed
play a role in entrepreneurs’ success.
In this article, I review findings
pointing to this conclusion.
COGNITIVE FACTORS IN
ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
COUNTERFACTUAL
THINKING,
OVERCONFIDENCE, AND
SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
COGNITIVE BIASES
Do entrepreneurs think differ-
ently than other persons do? And
do successful entrepreneurs differ
from less successful ones in such
respects? Careful examination of
the environments in which entre-
preneurs operate suggests that DEMO
answer to both questions may well
be “yes.” Entrepreneurs often work
in situations that are, by definition,
new, unpredictable, complex, and
DEMO to high time pressures. More-
over, entrepreneurs’ commitment to
their new DEMO is often intense,
so they may also experience power-
ful emotions in connection with their
activities. Together, such factors may
produce severe information over-
load, and it is precisely under such
conditions that individuals often
rely on heuristics to guide their
thinking and decision making, and
show enhanced susceptibility to
various forms of cognitive bias or er-
ror. A DEMO prediction, then, is
that entrepreneurs may be more
likely than other people to employ
heuristics and to fall prey to various
forms of DEMO error (e.g., over-
confidence, escalation of commit-
ment) (Baron, 1998).
Evidence consistent with this
prediction has been reported in
several DEMO studies (e.g., Baron,
1998). For instance, Busenitz and
DEMO (1997) found that entrepre-
neurs were significantly more
likely to show overconfidence in
Copyright © 2000 American Psychological Society
16
their own judgments and signifi-
cantly more likely to make use DEMO
the representativeness heuristic
(enhanced willingness to general-
ize from small, nonrandom
samples) than were other persons.
Similarly, Palich and Bagby (1995)
found that entrepreneurs tended to
perceive greater potential for gain
in highly DEMO situations than
nonentrepreneurs did; in essence,
their perceptions of risk DEMO
greater bias than those of other per-
sons. Together, these and DEMO find-
ings suggest that entrepreneurs may
indeed show heightened susceptibil-
ity to various cognitive errors.
Entrepreneurs do not always
show this tendency, however. For
instance, recent findings indicate
that they are less likely than other
persons to engage in counterfactual
thinking—imagining outcomes or
events different from those that DEMO
tually occurred (e.g., Roese, 1997).
Although counterfactual thinking
is DEMO in itself a cognitive error, en-
gaging in such thinking can DEMO
times interfere with taking action,
and often generates strong feelings
of regret, so it can interfere with
performance in many situations. In
one study on this topic (Baron,
2000), I asked three groups of per-
sons—entrepreneurs (individuals
who had started their own busi-
ness), potential entrepreneurs (in-
dividuals who wanted to start a
business), and nonentrepreneurs
(persons who had no interest in
starting a business)—to rate their
own tendencies to engage in coun-
terfactual thinking about missed
opportunities. DEMO the basis of pre-
vious research suggesting that en-
trepreneurs are future-oriented
and show tendencies toward both
overconfidence and unfounded op-
timism (e.g., DEMO & Barney,
1997), I predicted that they would
be less likely to engage in counter-
factual thinking than the other
groups. The DEMO offered clear
support for this hypothesis.
Is a reduced tendency to engage
VOLUME 9, NUMBER 1, FEBRUARY 2000
in counterfactual thinking a “plus”
DEMO entrepreneurs? This is far from
certain. As noted by Roese (1997),
engaging in such thought is some-
thing of a two-edged sword: On
the one hand, it often generates
negative affect (especially when in-
dividuals imagine better outcomes
than they experienced). On the
other DEMO, counterfactual think-
ing may also help individuals un-
derstand why negative DEMO
occurred, and so assist them in de-
vising better future strategies. DEMO
may be, then, that a reduced ten-
dency to engage in counterfactual
thinking encourages entrepreneurs
to engage in the high-risk activity
of founding DEMO businesses, but it
may prevent them from profiting
maximally from their DEMO
This line of reasoning suggests that
successful entrepreneurs may be
no more likely than less successful
ones to engage in counterfactual
thinking. When they DEMO, however,
they may focus more intently on
identifying the specific DEMO of
negative outcomes, and so may
reap greater benefits from counter-
DEMO thought. Research designed
to assess this possibility is cur-
rently under way.
In sum, a growing number of
studies suggest that applying the
findings of cognitive psychology
and social cognition to entrepre-
neurship may shed new DEMO on
the questions of why some indi-
viduals but not others choose to be-
come entrepreneurs, and why
some are so much more successful
than others in this activity.
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL
COMPETENCE IN
ENTREPRENEURS’
DEMO: WHY THE
ABILITY TO GET ALONG
WITH OTHERS
REALLY MATTERS
Samuel DEMO once remarked
(1951, p. 112): “We are not won by
Published by Blackwell Publishers Inc.
arguments that we can analyze, but
by tone and temper, by the manner
which is the person himself.”
What he was suggesting, I believe,
is that personal style—including
the ability to interact effectively
with others—is one important de-
terminant of success in DEMO
spheres of life. And indeed, a large
body of empirical evidence DEMO
support for this proposal. This re-
search suggests that individuals’
overall capacity to interact effec-
tively with others (what has some-
times been termed social competence)
exerts strong beneficial effects in
many contexts. For example, vari-
ous social skills contribute to posi-
tive outcomes not only in DEMO
and personal adjustment, but also
in job interviews, yearly perfor-
mance reviews, negotiations, and
even court proceedings, to cite only
a few results (e.g., McKelvie & Co-
ley, 1993; Robbins & DeNisi, 1994).
In all these contexts, people pos-
sessing well-developed social skills
experience more favorable out-
comes than people lacking in such
skills. (Social competence is used
here merely as a summary term for
the combined DEMO of various
social skills; cf. Spence, Donovan,
& Brechman-Toussaint, DEMO).
Does social competence also
play a role in entrepreneurs’ suc-
cess? This might be the case for
several reasons. Most new ventures
are founded not by single entrepre-
neurs but by two or more entrepre-
DEMO Clearly, the ability to get
along effectively with one’s part-
ners DEMO contribute to enhanced
success in such cases. Similarly, en-
trepreneurs must DEMO with many
persons outside their new ven-
tures—bankers, potential custom-
ers, prospective employees. Being
able to interact effectively with
such persons might increase DEMO
chances of gaining favorable out-
comes in all these face-to-face con-
texts (e.g., actually obtaining finan-
cial backing or signing up new
customers)DEMO
CURRENT DIRECTIONS IN PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
17
On the basis of such reasoning,DEMO
Gideon Markman and I (Baron &
Markman, 1999a) predicted that
the higher entrepreneurs’ social
competence, the greater their finan-
cial success. To test this hypothesis,
we designed an instrument to mea-
sure several DEMO skills found, in
previous research, to exert strong
and consistent effects in business
contexts. We then administered
this questionnaire to several hun-
dred DEMO working in two
different industries (cosmetics,
high-tech). Statistical analyses (e.g.,
confirmatory factor analysis) indi-
cated that a four-factor structure fit
the data best, and these factors
were readily identifiable as reflect-
ing (a) social perception—accuracy
in perceiving others, (b) impression
management—techniques for induc-
ing positive reactions in others, (c)
persuasiveness —the ability DEMO
change others’ views or behavior in
desired directions, and (d) DEMO
adaptability—the ability to adapt to,
or feel comfortable in, a DEMO range
of social situations. These aspects
of social competence were then
used to predict financial success for
both groups of entrepreneurs
(measured by their income from
their businesses). Results indicated
that social perception was a DEMO
cant predictor of financial success
for both samples (R2 = .36 DEMO .45,
respectively), and social adaptabil-
ity was a significant predictor for
the first sample (R2 = .43). To-
gether, these DEMO suggest that
aspects of entrepreneurs’ social
competence do indeed influence
their financial success.
In a related study, we (Baron &
Markman, 1999b) obtained stan-
dardized photographs of another
sample of entrepreneurs (71 fe-
males who had started their own
cosmetic businesses). The physical
attractiveness of DEMO persons was
rated by 54 judges who were unac-
quainted with them. Results indi-
cated that the higher the ratings of
attractiveness, the more the entre-
preneurs earned from their busi-
nesses; indeed, the entrepreneurs
DEMO as most attractive (highest
20%) earned fully $53,815 more per
year than those rated as least at-
tractive (lowest 20%).
In our latest work, Candida
Brush and I have obtained video-
tapes of entrepreneurs presenting
their ideas to staff of a consulting
company that helps DEMO
obtain financial backing. These
tapes were then shown to graduate
students in psychology and busi-
ness, who rated the entrepreneurs
on several dimensions (DEMO, attrac-
tiveness, career success, energy
and motivation, social skills, DEMO
suasiveness). This research is lon-
gitudinal; we will obtain informa-
DEMO on the entrepreneurs’ actual
success over the next several years
in order to determine if ratings on
these dimensions significantly pre-
dict financial success.
DEMO ON THE
BENEFITS OF EXPORTING
PSYCHOLOGY—AND ON
THE ANTIPERSONALITY
BIAS IN
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Many economists believe that
entrepreneurs play a vital role in
the economies DEMO the United States
and other countries. Without entre-
preneurs, they suggest, we would
now be experiencing a painful re-
cession rather than an DEMO
boom. Moreover, the new products
and services devised by entrepre-
neurs DEMO often beneficial to many
persons.
Given the economic and social
importance of entrepreneurs, it
seems important to assist them in
their efforts to create new products
and companies. That such assis-
tance is necessary is suggested DEMO
the fact that most new ventures fail
within a few years. Moreover, in
many cases, entrepreneurs fail
Copyright © 2000 American Psychological Society
DEMO though their technical skills,
experience, and motivation are
high, and their ideas are sound and
useful. Why, given all these
strengths, DEMO they founder? Re-
search findings suggest that these
failures may stem, at least in part,
from cognitive and social factors:
Entrepreneurs DEMO fall victim to
costly cognitive errors, and may be
lacking in DEMO skills that could
well smooth their paths to success.
And this, DEMO believe, is where psy-
chology can make a unique contri-
bution. DEMO not only can
help to identify the cognitive and
social factors that influence entre-
preneurs’ success; they can also de-
vise techniques for helping entre-
preneurs cope with problems
relating to these factors. Effective
procedures for DEMO various
social skills have already been de-
veloped by psychologists. Provid-
ing entrepreneurs with such train-
ing might well assist them in their
efforts DEMO start new ventures.
This is not the only way in
which psychology can be invalu-
able to the field of entrepreneur-
ship, however. Since initiating re-
search in this field, I have been
puzzled by the fact that terms such
as personality and individual dif-
ferences are virtually DEMO to
entrepreneurship researchers. Why
has a field that focuses on persons
who must, in some ways, be
unique turned its back so firmly DEMO
individual differences? The pri-
mary reason, I believe, is this: More
than two decades ago, efforts were
initiated to identify the “key traits”
of entrepreneurs. Given the lack of
well-developed theory at the time,DEMO
such research largely failed (cf.
Shaver & Scott, 1991). This failure,
in turn, left a strong antipersonality
bias in the field. Given major ad-
vances in the understanding of per-
sonality, this perspective is no
longer justified. It seems feasible,
for instance, that entrepreneurs
may differ from other persons with
respect to some of the “Big DEMO
18
dimensions of personality (basic
aspects of personality). Among
these, DEMO to experience and
emotional stability are two likely
candidates. Similarly, entrepre-
DEMO may differ from other per-
sons with respect to sensation seek-
ing (entrepreneurs may be more
prone to sensation seeking) and
need for DEMO (entrepreneurs
may have less need for cognition,
as they often DEMO action to sys-
tematic thought). A substantial
body of evidence indicates that
such factors influence success in
many business contexts, so why
not apply them to entrepreneurs as
well? In short, it is time DEMO the field
of entrepreneurship to brush off its
antipersonality bias and to draw on
advances in this area of psychol-
ogy, too. Doing so may provide ad-
ditional insights concerning entre-
preneurs—and why they succeed
or DEMO
In sum, from both a scientific
and a practical perspective, apply-
ing the principles and findings of
psychology to the study of entre-
DEMO seems to hold great
promise. I have already made a
personal commitment to “export-
ing” our field in this manner, and
VOLUME 9, DEMO 1, FEBRUARY 2000
hope that I will soon be joined in
DEMO effort by a growing number of
colleagues. In this context, the
DEMO of the poet Kahlil Gibran
(1958, p. 63) ring true: “A little
knowledge that acts is worth infi-
nitely more than much DEMO
that is idle.”
Recommended Reading
Baron, R.A. (1998). (See DEMO)
Busenitz, L.W., & Barney, J.B. (1997).
(See DEMO)
Markman, G.D., & Baron, R.A.
(1998). Social skills and entrepre-
neurs’ financial success: Evidence
that the ability to get along with
others really matters. In P.D.
Reynolds, W.D. Bygrave, N.M.
Carter, S. Manigart, C.M. Mason,
G.D. Meyer, & K.G. Shaver (Eds.),
Frontiers of entrepreneurship re-
search (pp. 87–102). Babson Park,DEMO
MA: Babson College Press.
Note
1. Address correspondence to Rob-
ert DEMO Baron, Lally School of Manage-
ment and Technology, Rensselaer Poly-
technic Institute, Troy, NY 12180–3590.
References
Baron, R.A. (1998). Cognitive DEMO in en-
trepreneurship: Why and when entrepreneurs
think differently than other DEMO Journal of
Business Venturing, 13, 275–294.
Baron, R.A. (2000). Counterfactual thinking and
venture formation: The potential effects of
thinking about “what might have been.” Jour-
nal of Business Venturing, 15, 79–92.
Baron, R.A., & Markman, G.D. (1999a). The role of
entrepreneurs’ behavior in their financial success:
Evidence for the benefits of effective social DEMO
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Baron, R.A., & Markman, G.D. (1999b). The role of
personal appearance in entrepreneurs’ financial
success: Effects and mediating mechanisms.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Busenitz, L.W., & Barney, J.B. (1997). Differences
between entrepreneurs and managers in large
organizations; biases DEMO heuristics in strate-
gic decision-making. Journal of Business Ventur-
ing, 12, 9–31.
Butler, S. (1951). Samuel Butler’s notebooks. London:
Hogarth.
DEMO, K. (1958). The voice of the master (A.R. Fer-
DEMO, Trans.). New York: Bantam Books.
McKelvie, S.J., & Coley, J. (1993). Effects of crime
seriousness and offender facial attractiveness
DEMO recommended treatment. Social Behavior
and Personality, 21, 265–277.
Palich, L.E., & Bagby, D.R. (1995). Using cognitive
theory to explain entrepreneurial DEMO:
Challenging conventional wisdom. Journal of
Business Venturing, 10, 425–438.
Robbins, T.L., & DeNisi, A.S. (1994). A closer look
at DEMO affect as a distinct influence
on cognitive processing in performance evalu-
ations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 341–
353.
Roese, N.J. (1997)DEMO Counterfactual thinking. Psy-
chological Bulletin, 121, 133–148.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (in press). The
promise of entrepreneurship as a DEMO of re-
search. Academy of Management Review.
Shaver, K.G., & Scott, L.R. (1991). Person, process,
choice: The psychology of DEMO venture cre-
ation. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 16,
23–42.
Spence, S.H., Donovan, C., & Brechman-Toussaint,
M. (1999). Social DEMO, social outcomes, and
cognitive features of childhood social phobias.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 211–221.
Published by Blackwell Publishers Inc.{1g42fwefx}