Journal of Personalityand SocialPsychology
1988.Vol. 54. No.4. 569-579
Copyright 1988 by the DEMO Association.Inc.
0022-3514/88/$00.75
Outcome Bias in Decision Evaluation
Jonathan Baron
University of Pennsylvania
John C. Hershey
Department of Decision Sciences
University of Pennsylvania
DEMO 5 studies, undergraduate subjects were given descriptions and outcomes of decisions DEMO by
others under conditions of uncertainty. Decisionsconcerned either medical matters or monetary
gambles. Subjects rated the quality of thinking of the decisions, the competence of the decision
maker,or their willingness to let the decisionmakerdecideon their DEMO that
they had all relevant information available to the decision maker. Subjects rated the thinking as
better, rated the decision maker as more competent, or indicated greater willingness to yield the
decisionwhen the outcome wasfavorable than when it wasunfavorable. In monetary gambles,sub-
jects rated the thinking as DEMO when the outcome of the option not chosenturned out poorlythan
when it turned out well. Althoughsubjectswho wereasked felt that they should not consider out-
DEMO makingtheseevaluations, they did so. This effectof outcomeknowledge on evaluationmay
be explained DEMO in terms ofits effect on the salienceof arguments for each side of the choice.
Implicationsfor the theory of rationalityand for practicalsituationsare discussed.
A fault DEMO but seldom avoided is the evaluation of the
intention of an act in terms of the act's outcome. An agent who
acted as DEMO as the foreseeable circumstancespermitted is cen-
sured for the ill-effects which come to pass through chance or
through malicious opposition or through unforeseeable circum-
DEMO Men desire to be fortunate as much as they desire to be
wise,but yetthey fail to discriminate betweenfortune and wisdom
or betweenmisfortune and DEMO . . Weare ingeniousin 'discov-
ering' the defect of character we believe would account for a per-
son's misfortune. (Arnauld, 1662/DEMO,p, 285)
Since good decisions can lead to bad outcomes (and viae versa)
decision makers cannot infallibly be graded by their DEMO
(Brown,Kahr,& Peterson, 1974,p. 4)
A good decisioncannot guarantee a good outcome. All real deci-
sionsare made under uncertainty.A decisionis DEMO bet, and
evaluatingit as goodor not must dependon the stakesand the DEMO,
not on the outcome.(Edwards, 1984,p. 7)
Evaluations DEMO decisions are made in our personal lives, in
organizations, in judging the performance of elected officials,
and in certain legal disputes such DEMO malpractice suits, liability
cases, and regulatory decisions. Because evaluations are made
after the fact, there is often information available to the judge
that was not available to the decision maker, including informa-
tion about the outcome of the decision. It has often been sug-
gested that such DEMO is used unfairly, that reasonable
decisions are criticized by Monday-morning quarterbacks DEMO
This work was supported by grants from the National Institute of
Mental Health (to Jonathan Baron, MH37241) and from the National
Science Foundation (to Jonathan Baron and John C. Hershey, SES-
8509807).
Wethank DEMO Spranca and several reviewers for many helpfulsug-
gestions.
Both authors are senior fellows of the Leonard Davis Institute for
Health Economics.
Correspondenceconcerningthis article should DEMO addressedto Jona-
than Baron, Psychology Department, University of Pennsylvania, 3815
DEMO, Philadelphia,Pennsylvania 19104-6916.
569
think they might have decided otherwise, and that decision
makers end up being punished for their bad luck (e.g., Arnauld,
1662/1964; Berlin, 1984; Nichols, 1985).
The distinction between a good decision and a good outcome
is a basic DEMO to all decision analysts. The quotation from Ed-
wards (1984) cited earlier is labeled by the author as "a very
familiar elementary point" (p. 7). In this paper, we explore how
well the distinction between decisions and outcomes is recog-
nized outside the decision-analysis profession.
DEMO that is available only after a decision is made is
irrelevant to the quality of the decision. Such information plays
no direct role in DEMO advice we may give decision makers ex ante
or in the lessons they may learn (Baron, 1985, chapter 1). The
outcome of a decision, by itself, cannot be used to improve a
decision DEMO the decision maker is clairvoyant.
Information about possible outcomes and their probabilities
falls into three relevant classes: actor information, known only
to the DEMO maker at the time the decision is made; judge
information, known only to the judge at the time the decision is
evaluated; and joint information. known both to the decision
maker at the time of DEMO and to the judge at the time of
evaluation. (In some DEMO, the decision maker and the judge
will be the same person, at different times.) In the cases we
consider, the judge has DEMO outcome information and the actor
does not.
Although outcome information plays no direct role in the
evaluation of decisions, it may play an appropriate indirect role.
In particular, it may affect a judge's beliefs about actor informa-
tion. A judgewho does not know the decision maker's DEMO
ities may assume that the probability was higher for an outcome
that occurred than for the same outcome had it not occurred.
(Note, DEMO, that outcome information tells us nothing
about the utilitiesof a decision DEMO, even if we have no other
information about them.) In the extreme, if we have no infor-
mation except outcome, it is DEMO reasonable prima facie hypothe-
sis that bad outcomes (e.g., space-shuttle accidents) result from









{1g42fwefx}