Beyond Social Capital: How Social Skills Can Enhance Entrepreneurs' Success
Author(DEMO): Robert A. Baron and Gideon D. Markman
Source: The Academy DEMO Management Executive (1993-2005), Vol. 14, No. 1, Themes: Forming
Impressions and Giving Feedback (Feb., 2000), pp. 106-116
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4165612
Accessed: DEMO/10/2010 15:46
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions DEMO Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
DEMO://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aom.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the DEMO or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon DEMO wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. DEMO more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Academy of Management is DEMO with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy
DEMO Management Executive (1993-2005).
http://www.jstor.org
? Academy of Management
Executive, 2000, Vol. 14, No. 1
.........................................................
...............................................................................................................
Beyond social capital: How
social skills can enhance
entrepreneurs' success
DEMO A. Baron and Gideon D. Markman
Executive Overview
Why are some entrepreneurs so much more successful than others in starting new
ventures? Previous efforts to answer this question have generally focused either on the
personality traits DEMO susceptibility to various cognitive errors of individual entrepreneurs,
or on such external factors as the number of competing businesses. We suggest that
entrepreneurs' social skills-specific competencies that help them interact effectively
with others-may also play DEMO role in their success. A high level of social capital, built DEMO
a favorable reputation, relevant previous experience, and direct personal contacts, DEMO
assists entrepreneurs in gaining access to venture capitalists, potential customers, and
others. Once such access is gained, the nature of the entrepreneurs' DEMO
interactions can strongly influence their success. Specific social skills, such as DEMO ability
to read others accurately, make favorable first impressions, adapt to a wide range of
social situations, and be persuasive, can influence DEMO quality of these interactions.
Moreover, by helping entrepreneurs expand their personal DEMO, social skills may
also contribute to their social capital. Because social DEMO can readily be enhanced
through appropriate training, entrepreneurs who take advantage DEMO such opportunities
may reap important benefits.
In 1993 and 1994 the first author of this article
obtained two patents for a new product-a desk-
DEMO unit that combined air filtration with such ad-
ditional features as noise control. Since he had
only limited manufacturing experience, he de-
cided that the best way to bring this invention to
market was to license DEMO patents to an estab-
lished business. The author contacted a number of
companies that appeared to be potential partners,
and was invited to DEMO several. The third company
he visited ultimately licensed both patents.
The events of the fateful visit to that company
are stamped indelibly on the DEMO's memory.
They began when he entered a room where the top
people in the company were already seated: the
president and CEO, DEMO COO, and the vice presi-
dents for engineering and marketing. After DEMO
introductions, the CEO turned to the author and
said: "Okay, Professor, show us what you've got."
The author then made a brief presentation, during
which he described the benefits of his invention
106
and demonstrated its major features. When he was
done, the president rose and announced: "We'll be
back in a few minutes." At -that point, he and the
other executives filed out of the room. Less than ten
minutes later they returned, and when the presi-
dent held out his hand and smiled, the author knew
that things had gone well. "Okay, Professor," the
president remarked, "we DEMO want your prod-
uct. I'll leave you to work out the details with Neville
and Stan" (the V.P. for engineering and the DEMO).
In the months that followed, the author got to
know DEMO president of the company quite well, and
on one occasion asked DEMO how he was able to
make a decision about the author's product so
quickly. His answer was enlightening: "Your pro-
totype was DEMO and I could see that you had
something new. But it was the way you handled
yourself during the meeting that mattered most. I
DEMO tell right away that you get things done-
that you're not just talk. And I could see that you
were someone I could DEMO with. I'd never make a
2000 Baron and Markman
deal with anyone if they didn't measure DEMO on
those dimensions."
But there was more: He went on DEMO explain that
the author would never have gotten in the door if
he hadn't been a professor at a well-known univer-
sity. In DEMO, the president revealed that his
company had done a background check DEMO the
author prior to his visit. After all, as the president
DEMO it, "We didn't know you from a hole in the wall,
and wanted to make sure that you were not some
DEMO of flake."
This personal anecdote illustrates two of the ma-
jor points of this article. First, social capital-the
actual and potential resources individuals obtain
from their relationships with others (through a fa-
vorable reputation, DEMO status, and personal re-
ferrals)- often helps entrepreneurs get through DEMO
door, to gain access to venture capitalists, poten-
tial customers, DEMO others. Second, once inside,
their ability to interact effectively with DEMO
their social skills-plays a key role in their subse-
quent success.
What is Social Capital and What Benefits Does It
Offer?
Social capital DEMO to the actual and potential
resources individuals obtain from knowing others,
being part of a social network with them, or merely
from being known to them and having a good rep-
utation.' In a sense, social capital provides indi-
viduals with an important type of credential-a
favorable social identity that can be converted into
significant, tangible benefits. What kind of bene-
fits does a high level of social capital yield? These
include enhanced access to information2-the
more people one knows, the more information, and
often, the more accurate information, one re-
ceives-and increased cooperation and trust from
others.3 After all, a friend-or even merely an ac-
quaintance of a friend-is easier to trust than a
total stranger. In DEMO, social capital has been
found to translate directly into financial outcomes;DEMO
it is positively related to the compensation re-
ceived by both managers and CEOs.4 That social
capital is also beneficial to entrepreneurs is sug-
DEMO by recent findings that entrepreneurs pos-
sessing high social capital based on networks, sta-
tus, personal ties, and referrals are more likely to
receive funds from venture capitalists than entre-
preneurs who are lower on DEMO dimension.5
The Importance of Social Skills
As important as social capital is, we believe it is
only part of the total story where entrepreneurs'
107
success is concerned. We propose that social
skills, too, DEMO an important role. Perhaps the
best means of illustrating this point is through
the following simple exercise. Consider this
question: How do organizations select new em-
ployees-especially those who will play a key
role? Is this function carried out solely on the
basis of the candidates' social capital, such as
their reputation and referrals? Probably not. In
most cases, we believe, this is a beginning
rather than an end to the selection process. Only
candidates possessing high levels of social cap-
ital are DEMO considered-persons with favor-
able reputations, an established record in the
field, a degree from one of the right schools, work
experience with good employers, and so on.
Once a short list of persons possessing high so-
cial capital is assembled, however, it is the im-
pression DEMO candidates make on the individuals
involved in the final selection that largely deter-
mines whether they are actually hired. Some
candidates for employment appear DEMO walk on
water prior to a visit, but once present in DEMO
flesh, quickly sink beneath the surface. Such in-
dividuals possess high DEMO of social capital,
but are lacking in skills that permit them to in-
teract effectively with others, and this becomes
readily apparent during face-to-face encounters
with them.
A number of specific skills play a role DEMO deter-
mining the capacity of individuals to interact ef-
fectively with others. These include the ability to
read other persons accurately, to make a good first
impression on them, and to persuade or influence
them.6 Several of these skills will be examined
below.7
A second reason for our DEMO on entrepre-
neurs' social skills is that, in our view, DEMO
capital is often the result of such skills. How, for
instance, does a good reputation originate?
What determines the breadth and depth DEMO an
individual's social network? The ability to inter-
act effectively DEMO others often provides an im-
portant foundation for these aspects of social
capital. Understanding the role of social skills in
entrepreneurs' success may contribute to our un-
derstanding of the origins and impact of social
capital. DEMO relationship between social capital
and social skills is analogous, in some DEMO,
to the relationship between resource stock and
resource flows in organizations.8 Social capital
can be viewed as an accumulated asset, while
skills in interacting with others are one factor
that influences the level of this DEMO
Third, the effects produced by social skills may
be broader or DEMO than those of social
108
capital. Social capital may well exert its primary
impact fairly early DEMO the process, determining
which entrepreneurs gain initial access to venture
capitalists, customers, and suppliers. In contrast,
The relationship between social capital
and social skills is analogous, in some
respects, to the relationship between
DEMO stock and resource flows in
organizations.
the effects of skill in interacting with others may
persist and continue to shape the nature of entre-
DEMO' relations with such persons on a long-
term basis. Capitalists, customers, or suppliers ul-
timately respond to the entrepreneurs' actual
behavior-what they DEMO or do-not solely to the
entrepreneurs' reputation or status. As the DEMO
novelist Samuel Butler put it9: "We are not won by
arguments that we can analyze, but by tone and
temper, by the DEMO which is the person him-
self." Social skills come into play DEMO many situa-
tions-especially ones that are tense or stressful.
Thus, their DEMO can be long-term and long-last-
ing, and may continue to shape DEMO between
entrepreneurs and other persons for as long as
they do business.
Which social skills are most important to entre-
preneurs' success? And DEMO do these skills influ-
ence entrepreneurs' efforts to start new business
DEMO?
To address the first question, we carefully re-
viewed the DEMO body of literature on social
skills with two criteria firmly in mind: relevance of
each social skill to outcomes in business settings,
and relevance to tasks performed by entrepre-
neurs. Four specific social skills were DEMO as
being most germane to entrepreneurs' success.10
These skills are social DEMO, impression
management, persuasion and influence, and so-
cial adaptability.
Social DEMO
Social perception refers to accuracy in perceiving
others, including perceptions of DEMO' motives,
traits, and intentions. It refers to the ability to cor-
rectly gauge current moods or emotions of others,
their underlying DEMO, and their personal char-
acteristics. This skill appears to be very DEMO in
many business contexts. For instance, interviewers
high in social perception DEMO better at choosing the
best job applicants than those who are lower in
this skill."l Managers who are more adept at read-
Academy DEMO Management Executive
February
ing their subordinates are better able to say
whether substandard performance is the result of
lack of motivation or resources or DEMO other
cause. Accurate identification of the causes of poor
performance is a necessary first step in selecting
effective corrective actions.'2
Skill in social DEMO is relevant to entrepre-
neurship in several ways. For example, consider
DEMO process of negotiation. Entrepreneurs engage
in this activity frequently, especially during DEMO
early days of their new ventures.'3 They must ne-
gotiate with partners, prospective employees, ven-
ture capitalists, suppliers, customers, and many
others. Individuals who are skilled at social per-
ception often find it DEMO to determine whether
their opponents are being honest or are bending
the truth to their own advantage. Because knowl-
edge of an opponent's DEMO break-even point
plays an important role in successful negotia-
tions,'4 DEMO in social perception may be an
important plus for entrepreneurs, and DEMO contrib-
ute significantly to their success. A concrete exam-
ple of this skill in action is provided by recent
negotiations between representatives of Tektronix,DEMO
Inc. and the owner of a Malaysian electronics fac-
tory. Economic turmoil in Asia had lowered the
price of the factory to the point DEMO the American
company viewed it as a potential bargain. During
face-to-face negotiations, however, one member of
the Tektronix team suspected that the Malaysian
DEMO was not being entirely candid about various
liabilities of his operation, DEMO as long-term debt.
This perception, based on subtle nonverbal cues,
DEMO out to be accurate-the owner was conceal-
ing several liabilities. Tektronix's negotiating
team held out for even better terms, and ultimately
purchased the factory for 20 percent less than its
own initial offer.'5
Social DEMO is also relevant to another key
task performed by entrepreneurs- choosing part-
ners and key employees. Individuals often attempt
to conceal their true motives DEMO intentions, and
usually strive to place themselves in a favorable
light. DEMO ability to cut through such subter-
fuge-to perceive others accurately despite their
efforts to conceal such information-can be in-
valuable to entrepreneurs when choosing DEMO
and hiring key employees. Being adept at perceiv-
ing others accurately can be of considerable ben-
efit in these contexts, and provide entrepreneurs
with an important competitive edge.
Impression Management
Impression management involves proficiency in a
DEMO range of techniques for inducing positive re-
2000
Baron and Markman
109
actions in others-from efforts to enhance one'DEMO
own appearance and image, through agreeing
with others, flattering them, DEMO giving them small
gifts during an initial meeting. Skill with respect to
impression management has been found to make
job applicants more likely to DEMO the job,'6 and to
boost the ratings received by employees DEMO annual
performance reviews.17 Skill at impression man-
agement may also be extremely helpful to entre-
preneurs in their efforts to obtain needed capital.
In DEMO how they go about making the deci-
sion to support or not support a particular project,'8
venture capitalists report how that entrepreneurs
present themselves during face-to-face meetings
and presentations is often a factor to which DEMO
give considerable weight.'9 For example, the first
author has worked DEMO a consulting firm in the
Boston metropolitan area that specializes in find-
ing financial backing for entrepreneurs. The first
step in the process is DEMO initial meeting between
entrepreneurs and staff of the consulting company,
during which the entrepreneurs are asked to de-
scribe their ideas and the DEMO they are seeking
financial support. After this meeting, the consult-
ing DEMO's staff meet to decide whether or not
to work with the entrepreneur. The quality and
feasibility of the entrepreneur's idea receive care-
DEMO attention; but the overall impression the entre-
preneur has made on DEMO of the consulting com-
pany usually carries the most weight.
The impressions of entrepreneurs formed by ven-
ture capitalists, prospective customers, and others
DEMO not entirely the result of conscious efforts at
impression management by the entrepreneurs. On
the contrary, the past experience, attitudes, and
personal characteristics of the people with whom
entrepreneurs interact play an important role.
Moreover, recent findings indicate that many fac-
tors influencing first impressions are not DEMO
under the voluntary control of the persons involved
and are not readily managed by them. These in-
clude certain aspects of their physical appearance
DEMO subtle features of their speech.20 In many
cases, however, overt efforts at impression man-
agement are effective, so being adept at this skill
can indeed yield important benefits for entrepre-
neurs.
Individuals vary greatly in DEMO ability to use such
tactics.22 Research findings indicate that such dif-
ferences are related to success in a wide range of
occupations, including sales, law, and medicine.23
Consider Paul Brown, an inventor who recently
devised a means for sending data over electric
power lines.24 A venture capital DEMO offered fund-
ing for his start-up company, but only if he DEMO
first conduct a successful field test. To meet this
requirement, Brown DEMO his powers of persua-
sion on his neighbors, and convinced 25 DEMO them to
convert their homes to his system so that all their
phone calls and Internet connections would be car-
ried over power lines. DEMO field test was success-
ful, and Brown, whose effectiveness at persuasion
was an important plus, received the funding he
sought.
The television documentary about the origins of
the personal computer industry, "Triumph of the
DEMO," offers another example of the potential
benefits for entrepreneurs of skill at persuasive-
ness. Describing why his company decided to ad-
vance millions DEMO dollars to a start-up venture
known as Apple Computer, a senior DEMO capi-
talist says he was impressed with the energy, in-
telligence, and especially the persuasiveness of its
young founder, Steve Jobs. Jobs' DEMO capital was
low, or nonexistent, and he dressed like a hippy,
but he expressed his ideas so forcefully and per-
suasively that DEMO got the funding he sought.
Social Adaptability
Persuasion and Influence
Social adaptability involves the ability to adjust to
a wide range of social situations DEMO to feel com-
fortable with individuals from diverse back-
grounds. People high in social adaptability are
able to talk to virtually anyone about almost DEMO
thing, can introduce themselves to strangers with
relative ease, and readily adjust to a wide range of
new social situations. In short, they can be de-
scribed as social chameleons, capable of adapting
their behavior in order to blend comfortably into
almost any social context. A large DEMO of research
findings suggests that persons high in such abili-
ties attain greater success and more rapid promo-
tions in many different contexts than DEMO low in
such abilities.25 Indeed, it has even been found
that DEMO high in social adaptability receive
higher ratings from their classes than those low in
social adaptability.
Social adaptability appears to be relevant to
activities DEMO by entrepreneurs that are cru-
cial to the success of their new ventures. For in-
stance, especially early on, entrepreneurs must
make many DEMO calls on strangers. These persons
Persuasion and influence are skills for changing
the attitudes or behavior of others in desired direc-
tions. Because other DEMO don't always share our
views, and often behave differently from DEMO way
we would prefer, most of us try to influence the
DEMO, beliefs, or behalvior of others every daly.
110
Academy of Management Executive
February
may be totally unfamiliar with the DEMO
and his or her company, yet entrepreneurs must
approach them and DEMO to form business rela-
tionships. A high level of social adaptability can
be very beneficial to entrepreneurs in this context.
Consider, for instance, DEMO efforts of Tace Chalfa, a
Seattle entrepreneur, to build a thriving business
in the resale of vintage sneakers.26 To obtain her
unusual merchandise, Chalfa approaches the
owners of scores of thrift stores and places hun-
DEMO of cold calls to people listed in back issues of
Runner's World magazine. She also randomly
phones employees of Nike and other large DEMO
manufacturers, because they often have discontin-
ued models from their companies. DEMO that
Chalfa is successful in these efforts is that her
store, DEMO Light, did over $1 million in business in
its first year DEMO operation.
In sum, accuracy in social perception, skill at
impression management, skill at persuasion and
influence, and a high level of social DEMO
may be relevant to important activities carried out
by entrepreneurs as they attempt to establish new
ventures and become successful. We should note
that, initially, we considered including an addi-
tional skill, emotional intelligence, within our
framework. This term refers to the ability to regu-
late one'DEMO own emotions and influence the emo-
tions of others, as well DEMO to motivate oneself and
restrain impulses.27 Although emotional intelli-
gence has received a great deal of attention in
research and the media, efforts to study it system-
atically suggest that its components may, in fact,
be largely independent, rather than part of a sin-
gle concept or cluster. Among these components,
skill at social perception is perhaps the DEMO im-
portant.28 Further, no measures of emotional intel-
ligence exist that DEMO accepted standards of reli-
ability. For these reasons, we felt that DEMO
emotional intelligence in the current framework
was not justified.
How Entrepreneurs' DEMO Skills Can Influence
Their Success
Having identified several social skills that may be
relevant to entrepreneurs' success, we will now
examine some of DEMO mechanisms by which these
skills work. Table 1 describes the potential rele-
vance of each of the social skills to the perfor-
mance of DEMO tasks faced by entrepreneurs.
Research findings29 indicate that a substantial
proportion-perhaps an actual majority-of new
ventures are founded by teams of entrepreneurs
rather than DEMO single individuals.30 For instance, in
a recent survey, Inc. magazine reported that 57
percent of its sample of 500 high-growth private
U.S. companies DEMO started by at least two
founders. To the extent that these partners possess
excellent social skills, face-to-face interactions be-
tween them should be facilitated and this, in turn,
may contribute to the success of their new ven-
tures.
The potential importance of such factors is noted
by DEMO Doerr, a partner of the venture capital firm,
Kleiner Perkins DEMO & Byers, and a prominent
figure in Silicon Valley. As Doerr DEMO it: "What
there is in our business is plenty of plans, plenty of
entrepreneurs, and plenty of money. What there's a
DEMO of is great teams. "3' This experienced
venture capitalist, who DEMO funded a large number
of successful new companies, rates close and DEMO
fective teamwork between founding partners as a
crucial ingredient in entrepreneurs' DEMO In our
view, such relationships are often encouraged by a
Table DEMO
Social Skills Potentially Relevant to Entrepreneurs' Success
Social skill
Social perception
DEMO management
Persuasion and social influence
Social adaptability
Description
Ability to perceive accurately the emotions,
traits, motives, and intentions of others
Tactics designed DEMO induce liking and a
favorable first impression by others
Ability to change others' attitudes and/or their
behavior in desired directions
Ability to adapt to, or feel comfortable in, a
wide range of social situations
DEMO of potential relevance
to entrepreneurial success
Making presentations to investors and
customers, attracting and selecting partners
and employees, conducting negotiations
Obtaining financing, attracting key
employees, dealing with customers and
suppliers
Obtaining financing, recruiting key
DEMO, dealing with customers and
suppliers, conducting negotiations
Establishing business relationships with
strangers (i.e., cold calls), and working with
people from diverse DEMO
2000
Baron and Markman 111
homes, hospitals, and public agencies. They DEMO
proach these organizations and explain their basic
strategy: by hiring employees DEMO live near pa-
tients, they can provide the kind of reliable DEMO
the nursing homes, hospitals, and public agencies
Recent findings suggest that a positive
relationship between the partners in
business alliances is often a DEMO
effective deterrent to opportunism and
exploitation than traditional legal
contracts.
want, DEMO cannot readily obtain. The Johnsons fur-
ther explain that their employees, DEMO of whom
have grown up in the neighborhoods they serve,
are willing to visit patients in locations where
even police officers sometimes fear DEMO go. They
also offer to take the cases nobody else typically
wants- quadriplegics, multiple sclerosis patients,
and people on ventilators who have been severely
damaged by a combination of alcohol and drugs.
The result is DEMO: The Johnsons have suc-
ceeded in establishing mutually profitable busi-
ness DEMO with many other organizations.
The Johnsons are so successful in part because of
their ability to form close, personal ties with rep-
resentatives of these companies and with prospec-
tive employees. They are deeply religious, and im-
press people with their sincerity and desire to help
the patients DEMO treat and to provide good jobs for
their employees. As Eric Johnson puts it: "The spir-
itual part is a very integral part DEMO this business.
Without caring, loving folks, we'd be headed for
disaster."
We suggest that social skills play an important
role in DEMO' success because such skills
facilitate effective relations between founding
partners, as well as with many people outside and
inside their companies, and assist entrepreneurs
in establishing business alliances that are very
valuable to their new DEMO
high level of social skills on the part of the entre-
preneurs.
A second way in which excellent social skills
may prove beneficial to DEMO involves
face-to-face interactions between the entrepre-
neurs and many persons outside their companies.
Effective interactions may assist entrepreneurs in
performing tasks that are crucial DEMO their success,32
such as raising needed capital, attracting and se-
DEMO competent employees, and persuading cus-
tomers and suppliers to do business DEMO their
company under favorable terms.33 The more effec-
tively they perform such tasks, the greater their
overall success.
A third important context in which social skills
can contribute to entrepreneurs' success involves
the formation of business alliances.34 Such alli-
ances are a growing source of competitive advan-
tage DEMO emerging firms.35 As entrepreneurs strive
to identify market inefficiencies, create new DEMO
ucts or services, gain access to financial resources,
acquire legitimacy, and capture market share, they
frequently recognize that alliances-particularly
ones with strong, existing companies-can en-
hance their odds of survival.36 Indeed, business
alliances DEMO been found to be positively associ-
ated with the rate of new product development and
the creation of shareholder wealth for new ven-
tures.37 DEMO alliances, in turn, often involve con-
siderable information sharing and technology
transfer between the participating companies-
conditions that require high levels of trust DEMO
cooperation. The success of such relationships of-
ten rests on the development of positive personal
relationships between the partners. Recent find-
ings suggest that DEMO positive relationship between
the partners in business alliances is often a more
effective deterrent to opportunism and exploitation
than traditional legal contracts.38 High levels DEMO
social skills on the part of key personnel in partic-
ipating companies may contribute to such positive
personal relationships between them, and hence
to the success of the alliances they have formed.
The potential role of DEMO' social skills
in their ability to form business alliances is illus-
DEMO by Gwendolyn and Eric Johnson, African-
American entrepreneurs who founded Geric DEMO
Health Care, a company specializing in providing
care for bedridden people DEMO inner-city neighbor-
hoods.39 Because most of the company's employees
are welfare mothers who live in the neighborhoods
they serve, the company appears to face a daunt-
ing set of problems. Despite this unusual employee
base, Geric has grown rapidly and is highly prof-
itable. Its success is DEMO, in part, to the Johnsons'
ability to form business alliances with nursing
The Benefits of Social Skills
Numerous findings and proposals in DEMO literature
on entrepreneurship indicate that entrepreneurs'
social skills can influence their success. For exam-
ple, it has been found that entrepreneurs whose
companies are successful engage in more commu-
nication with others, and are more effective in this
activity, than entrepreneurs whose companies
fail.40 Similarly, such DEMO may increase
when the entrepreneur and venture capitalist
112
Academy of Management Executive
February
0~
10
U) El~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
0 u~~~~~~~~~
> 0 0
t3)::-(
-
a)
~
0
DEMO
4-4
-5~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4
4~~~~~~~~~~~-
a
cn
0
~~~~~~~~~~~~-
.-
~~~~cn
0~~~~~~ ~
~
(L)~~~~~~~~0 ~
U
U
~~~~~~~~~~~
-
~
~
~
r
0
-4 0~~~~~~~
U)~~~~~~~~~~U
-
J
2000
Baron and Markman
113
share a positive social or business relationship.4'DEMO
Along the same lines, personal contacts and rela-
tionships are often DEMO on lists of the key
ingredients in new venture formation.42 Finally,
recent research designed to examine the impact of
social skills on entrepreneurs' success provides
clear support for the relationship we suggest. For
example, one study conducted with two different
groups of entrepreneurs found that two social
DEMO adaptability and social perception-
were significant predictors of the financial success
of founders of high-tech companies and founders
of cosmetics distribution organizations.43
The impact DEMO social skills on entrepreneurs'
success may be mediated by current feelings or
moods, as suggested by basic research on affir-
mative states. Positive moods, in turn, can lead
to enhanced judgments and decisions about DEMO
entrepreneur. (See Figure 1, which summarizes
these points and also illustrates the possible
impact of social skills on social capital men-
tioned earlier DEMO this article.) A substantial body
of evidence indicates that people who DEMO high in
such social skills as impression management
and enhancing their own personal appearance
induce higher levels of positive moods or feel-
ings in DEMO than people who are lower in such
skills.44 Other research indicates that positive
affective states can strongly influence judg-
ments and decisions, making these more favor-
able. This appears to be true even if the judg-
DEMO and decisions in question are totally
unrelated to the causes of the positive moods or
feelings.45 Combining these findings, socially
skilled entrepreneurs may well evoke higher lev-
els of positive affect among those with whom
they DEMO This, in turn, can lead others to
evaluate the entrepreneurs' DEMO plans,
products, or companies more favorably. In short,
because DEMO evoke higher levels of positive af-
fect in others,46 entrepreneurs who are high in
social skills gain important advantages in ob-
taining funding, attracting and hiring desirable
employees, establishing and maintaining effec-
tive relationships with co-founders, and conclud-
ing favorable business arrangements with cus-
tomers and suppliers.47
* Training in social skills can help many entrepre-
neurs succeed. Such DEMO would be espe-
cially valuable in cases where entrepreneurs'
ideas are sound, and where their experience,
technical competence, and motivation are DEMO
high, yet they fail in their efforts to start new
ventures. DEMO negative outcomes may stem
from a lack of social skills on the part of the
entrepreneurs. They are lacking, to some degree,
in the skills necessary to negotiate effectively
with others, to persuade them, DEMO to induce them
to share the entrepreneurs' beliefs about what
their DEMO venture can and will become.48 As a
result, entrepreneurs lacking in DEMO skills
make poor first impressions, fail to generate en-
thusiasm for DEMO ideas or business, and may
even annoy or irritate persons who DEMO the fate
of their new ventures in their hands. Equipping
such entrepreneurs with enhanced social skills
can assist them to avoid these pitfalls, and can
contribute to their ultimate success. Given the
important contribution to society DEMO by entre-
preneurs, such efforts appear to be well-justi-
fied.49
. DEMO in social skills is readily available-
and it works. Psychologists have offered social
skills training for decades to assist individuals
experiencing problems that interfere DEMO their
careers, marital relationships, or personal ad-
justment. Such training is highly effective, and
can be carried out within a short time frame. It
often involves very straightforward procedures,
such as showing clients videotapes DEMO their in-
teractions with others. When they view such
tapes, many DEMO gasp audibly, and utter such
comments as, "I had no DEMO I came across like
that!" or "I didn't realize I was doing that!" When
such experiences are coupled with guided prac-
tice in improved techniques for interacting with
others, rapid progress toward enhanced social
skills is often readily achieved.50
* Training in social skills is already DEMO in
the curricula of many business schools and is
used by many organizations. At our university,
and many others, all undergraduate business
majors must take a one-credit course on leader-
ship. This course focuses, in part, on practical
skills, such as performing well in job interviews,DEMO
and considers social skills, as well. Similarly,
many organizations train DEMO in sales
and customer relations in techniques for inter-
acting effectively with others. The success of
such efforts strongly suggests that entrepre-
neurs, too, may benefit from training designed to
enhcance their social skills.
Implications and Applications
Our assertion that social skills can play an impor-
tant role DEMO entrepreneurs' success has important
implications for entrepreneurs and for others wish-
DEMO to assist them in their efforts to start new ven-
tures. The most important of these implications are
as follows:
114
Academy of Management Executive
Enhanced social skills can contribute to entre-
DEMO' social capital. Individuals who inter-
act effectively with others leave a DEMO of
positive feelings and good will behind them.
This residue can help such persons expand their
personal networks and acquire excellent repu-
tations-important ingredients DEMO social capital.
Increased social capital can facilitate entrepre-
neurs' access to DEMO capital, information,
and markets. A clear illustration of the link DEMO
tween social skills and social capital is provided
by a recent experience of the senior author, who
team-teaches a course on the role of creativity in
entrepreneurship with a Nobel laureate, physi-
cist Ivar Giaever. Dr. Giaever recently served as
a judge for presentations by graduating MBAs at
DEMO nearby college. After this experience, he of-
fered two observations to DEMO senior author's
class. The MBA students who received the high-
est ratings were generally the ones who, be-
cause of excellent social skills, presented them-
selves most effectively while delivering their
talks. These students were also the ones who
benefited most from the networking session with
members DEMO the local business community in
that followed the presentations.
Training in social skills-or at least discussion
of this topic-should be part of all programs DEMO
entrepreneurship. The benefits of social skills
training might be especially helpful for women
and minorities-groups that face important ob-
stacles as entrepreneurs. Women and DEMO
are currently underrepresented among entrepre-
neurs, and face daunting barriers to DEMO
financing for new ventures. Statistics indicate
that in recent years, less DEMO two percent of
available venture capital funds has been
awarded to women.51 Enhanced social skills
might help them to overcome some of these ob-
DEMO
Entrepreneurs can be persuaded to seek such
training. That students can be exposed to dis-
cussion of and practice in social skills as part DEMO
their studies is apparent. And the popularity of
courses in leadership suggests that they are, in
fact, motivated to obtain such experiences. But
DEMO are also optimistic about the chances of at-
tracting practicing entrepreneurs to such train-
ing. Many successful entrepreneurs appear to be
aware of the DEMO role of effective social
skills in their own achievements. For instance,
the most recent winner of our university's Entre-
preneur of the DEMO award was asked, after her
formal presentation, to pinpoint the major
causes of her success. The first factor she men-
tioned and the DEMO she emphasized most
February
strongly-was: "My ability to get along with a
wide range of people-that was absolutely cru-
cial." Several members of the audience-both
current and would-be entrepreneurs-ap-
proached the senior author with requests DEMO in-
formation on how they might improve their own
social skills. The key, then, may simply lie in
getting the message out: Once entrepreneurs
recognize the importance of their face-to-face
interactions with others, they may quickly and
vigorously seek to act on this conclusion.
"My ability to get along with a wide
range of people-that was absolutely
crucial."
DEMO are certainly not alone in recognizing the
important role of social skills in personal success.
When asked to describe the conditions necessary
for a DEMO life, Albert Einstein52 replied with the
following equation: "If A DEMO success in life, then A =
x + y + z, where x = work, y = play, and z =
keeping DEMO mouth shut." By "keeping your mouth
shut," Einstein referred to specific social skills-for
example, the ability to read others accurately and
so avoid making statements that would annoy
them or produce a less-than-favorable first DEMO
sion. This article echoes Einstein's sentiment: So-
cial skills-what he DEMO "the z factor"-may
well be one ingredient in the complex DEMO of
variables that, acting together, determine entre-
preneurs' success.
Endnotes
DEMO Nahapiet, J., & Ghoshal, S. 1998. Social capital, intellectual
capital, and the organizational advantage. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 23:242-266.
DEMO Boissevain, J. 1974. Friends of friends. Oxford: Basil Black-
well.
3 Fukuyama, F. 1995. Trust: social virtues and the creation of
prosperity. DEMO: Hamish Hamilton.
4 Belliveau, M. A., O'Reilly, III, DEMO A., & Wade, J. B. 1996.
Social capital at the top: Effects of social similarity and
status on CEO compensation. Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 39:1568-1593.
'Shane, S., & Cable, D. 1999. Social capital and the financing
of new ventures. Manuscript submitted for publication, MIT,
Cambridge, MA.
6Duck, S. 1994. Meaningful relationships. Thousand Oaks,DEMO
CA: Sage.
7Kenney, D. A. 1994. Interpersonal perception. New York:
Guilford.
8 Cheng, J. L. C., & Kesner, I. F. 1997. Organizational slack and
responses to environmental shifts: The impact of resource allo-
cation patterns. Journal of Management, 23:1-18.
9 Butler, S. 1951. DEMO Butler's notebooks. London: Hogarth.
2000
Baron and Markman
115
0 Weber, A. L., & Harvey, J. H. 1994. Perspectives on close
relationships. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
11 Eder, R. W., & Ferris, G. R. 1989. The employment interview.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
12Heneman, R. O., Greenberg, D. B., & Anonyuo, C. 1989.
Attributions and exchanges: The effects of interpersonal factors
on the diagnosis of employee performance. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 32:466-476.
13 Carter, N. M., Gartner, W. B., & DEMO, P. D. 1996. Explor-
ing start-up event sequences. Journal of Business DEMO,
11:151-166.
14 Thompson, L. 1998. The mind and heart DEMO the negotiator.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
"5Zachary, G. P. 1998. Picking the bones: As Asian assets
dive, the bargain hungers DEMO in for the killings. Wall Street
Journal. June 22:Al, A15.
DEMO Stevens, C. K., & Kristof, A. L. 1995. Making the DEMO im-
pression: A field study of applicant impression management
during job DEMO Journal of Applied Psychology, 80:587-
606.
17 Giacalone, R. A., & Rosenfeld, P. 1989. Impression manage-
ment in the organization. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum As-
sociates.
18 Hall, J., & Hofer, DEMO W. 1993. Venture capitalists' decision
criteria in new venture evaluation. Journal DEMO Business Ventur-
ing, 8:25-42.
9 Zacharakis, A. L., & DEMO, G. D. 1995. The venture capital-
ist decision: Understanding process versus outcome. In J. Hor-
naday, F. Tarpley, J. Timmons, & K. Vesper (Eds.), Frontiers of
entrepreneurship research: 115-123. Wellesley, MA: DEMO
Center for Entrepreneurial Research.
20 Berry, D. S., Pennebaker, J. DEMO, Mueller, J. S., & Hiller, W. D.
1997. Linguistic bases of social perception. Personality and So-
cial Psychology Bulletin, 23:526-537.
21 Shavitt, S., & Brock, T. C. 1994. Persuasion: Psychological
insights DEMO perspectives. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
22 Cialdini, R. A. 1994. Interpersonal influence. In Shavitt &
Brock, op. cit., 195-218.
23Wayne, S. DEMO, & Ferris, G. R. 1990. Influence tactics and
exchange quality in supervisor-subordinate interactions: A lab-
oratory experiment and field study. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 75:487-499.
24Naik, G. 1998. Garage tinkering yields an DEMO
breakthrough. Wall Street Journal. July 1:B-1, B12.
25Kilduff, M., & Day, D. V. 1994. Do chameleons get ahead?
The effects DEMO self-monitoring on managerial careers. Academy
of Management Journal, 37:1047-1060.
26 DEMO, J. C. 1998. Don't throw out those old sneakers:
DEMO're a gold mine. Wall Street Journal, September 21: Al, DEMO
27 Goleman, D. 1995. Emotional intelligence. New York: Ban-
tam.
28 Davies, M., Stankov, L., & Roberts, R. D. 1998. Emotional
intelligence: In search of an elusive construct. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 75:989-1015.
29 Cooper, A. C., & Daily, DEMO M. 1997. Entrepreneurial teams. In
D. L. Sexton & R. W. Smilor (Eds.), Entrepreneurship 2000: 127-
150. The Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership DEMO at the Ewing
Marion Kauffman Foundation. Chicago: Upstart Publishing
Company.
30 DEMO, R. D., Tarpley, F. A. & Schwartz, R. G. 1986. Soft-
ware venture teams. In R. Ronstadt, et al. (Eds.), DEMO of
entrepreneurship research: 546-562. Wellesley, MA: Babson
College.
3' Heilemann, J. 1998. Letter from Silicon Valley: The net-
worker. The New DEMO, August 11:27-36. Quote on p. 33.
32 Carter, N. M., Gartner, W. B., & Reynolds, P. D. 1996. Explor-
ing DEMO event sequences. Journal of Business Venturing,
11:151-166.
33 Cable, DEMO M., & Shane, S. 1997. A prisoner's dilemma ap-
proach to entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships. Acad-
emy of Management Review, 32:142-176.
34 Deeds, D. L., & Hill, C. W. L. 1999. An examination of oppor-
tunistic action within research alliances: Evidence from the
biotechnology industry. Journal of Business Venturing, 14:141-
163.
35Deeds, D. L., & Hill, C. W. L. 1996. Strategic alliances,
complimentary assets and new product development: An em-
pirical study of entrepreneurial biotechnology firms. Journal of
Business Venturing, 11:41-55.
36 Schoonhoven, C. B., Eisenhardt, K. DEMO, & Lymman, K. 1990.
Speeding products to market: Waiting time DEMO first product in-
troduction in new firms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35:DEMO
177-207.
37 Park, S. H., & Kim, D. 1997. Market DEMO of joint ven-
tures: Joint venture characteristics and wealth creation. Journal
DEMO Business Venturing, 12:83-108.
38 Deeds & Hill, op. cit.
39 Petzinger, T., Jr. 1997. Nurse agency thrives by taking hard
cases DEMO the inner city. Wall Street Journal. September 26:B-1.
40 Duchseneau, DEMO A., & Gartner, W. B. 1990. A profile of new
venture success and failure in an emerging industry. Journal of
Business Venturing, 5:297-312.
41 Cable & Shane, op. cit.
42Vesper, K. H. 1990. DEMO venture strategies, 2nd ed. Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
43 DEMO, R. A., & Markman, G. D. 1999. The role of DEMO
neurs' behavior in their financial success: Evidence for the
benefits of effective social skills. Manuscript submitted for pub-
lication.
44 Kenrick, D. T., Groth, G. E., Trost, M. R., & Sadalla, E. DEMO 1993.
Integrating evolutionary and social exchange perspectives on
relationships: Effects of DEMO, self-appraisal, and involve-
ment level on mate selection criteria. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 64:951-969.
45 Forgas, J. P. 1995. DEMO and judgment: The affect infusion
model: AIM. Psychological Bulletin, 117:DEMO
46 Forgas, J. P. 1998. On feeling good and getting your DEMO:
Mood effects on negotiator cognition and bargaining strategies.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74:565-577.
47 Baron, R. A. 1993. Interviewer'DEMO moods and evaluations of
job applicants: The role of applicant qualifications. DEMO of
Applied Social Psychology, 23:254-271.
48 Gartner, W. B., DEMO, B. J., & Starr, J. A. 1992. Acting as if:DEMO
Differentiating entrepreneurial from organizational behavior.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 16:13-32.
DEMO Venkataraman, S. 1997. The distinctive domain of entrepre-
neurship research. In DEMO Katz (Ed)., Advances in entrepreneur-
ship, firm emergence, and growth, Vol. 3:119-138. Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press.
50 Nietzel, M. T., Speltz, M. L., McCauley, E. A., & Bernstein,
D. A. Abnormal psychology. Boston: Allyn & Bacon, Inc.
51 DEMO, P. 1999. Wall Street Journal. When Venus Talks to
Mars. February DEMO: Bi, B8.
52 Quoted in Observer, London, January 15, DEMO
116
Academy of Management Executive
February
Robert A. Baron is professor of
DEMO at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute. His cur-
rent research focuses on cogni-
tive and social factors in entre-
preneurship. He has been a
visiting fellow DEMO Oxford Uni-
versity and a program director
at the National Science Foun-
dation. He holds three U.S. pat-
ents and is the author of DEMO
ous books, including Behavior
in Organizations, 7th ed., and
Social DEMO, 9th ed. Con-
tact: baronr@rpi.edu.
Gideon D. Markman is an assis-
tant professor of entrepreneur-
ship at the Lally School of
Management and DEMO,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
He received his Ph.D. in entrepre-
neurship from the University of
Colorado at Boulder. His re-
search interests include innova-
DEMO management and techno-
logical entrepreneurship, parti-
cularly the adversity quotient,
DEMO mechanisms, and so-
cial skills of entrepreneurs. Con-
tact: markmg@rpi.edu.{1g42fwefx}