New Directions in Research on Venture Capital Finance
Author(s): Christopher DEMO Barry
Source: Financial Management, Vol. 23, No. 3, Venture Capital Special Issue (Autumn, 1994),
pp. 3-15
Published by: Blackwell DEMO on behalf of the Financial Management Association
International
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3665617
Accessed: 02/06/2009 14:03
Your use DEMO the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that DEMO
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire DEMO of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may DEMO content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
DEMO contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=black.
Each DEMO of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
DEMO is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work DEMO the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research DEMO that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Financial Management Association International and Blackwell Publishing are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Financial Management.
http://www.jstor.org
New Directions
Capital Finance
Christopher
B. Barry
Christopher
Finance at Texas
Worth,DEMO
B.
Texas.
Barry
is Lowdon
Christian
Professor
University,
of
Fort
in
Research
on
Venture
This
future
models
particularly
syndicates,
capitalists in
new
DEMO
research.
have
models
the
IPOs.
research is
surveys recent research
There is new empirical
resolved
and
process
on venture
evidence
The
empirical
of screening
DEMO,
needed.
some
the
issues.
work
paper
paper
about
investments,
identifies
and
field,
selectively
staging
and
some
capital
in the
the
of
DEMO
the
suggests
and
examines
of financing,
participation by
remaining
new
recent
the
issues
directions
theoretical
findings,
use
venture
for
for
of
which
DEMO The investment of venture capital funds in growing enter- And yet venture capital survives. Hellman (1993)
prises is a remarkable feat of financial engineering. Investors estimates that $2.5 billion of venture capital investments
in private DEMO capital funds place their money for long were made in 1992 from a pool of $33 billion in capital
periods of time in the DEMO of venture capitalists of uncertain committed to the venture capital industry. In the first half of
ability and who have committed only small amounts DEMO their 1994, $1.7 billion of new capital was committed to private
DEMO funds. The venture capitalists seek out promising ven- venture capital funds (DEMO Equity Analyst (1994)). The
tures, eventually placing money in DEMO ventures managed mere fact that venture capital exists bears testimony to the
by entrepreneurs whose skills are unknown and whose future adaptability of financial DEMO Because problems
efforts are not predictable. Such investments are often made encountered in venture capital investing are so challenging,
in firms that have DEMO yet registered one single dollar of the uncertainty so high, the DEMO of information so
revenues; have no products in existence at the DEMO of invest- great, and the opportunities so outstanding, venture capital
ment, only unproven and untested ideas; and do not have a finance DEMO us an opportunity to study modem financial
complete, experienced management team. DEMO entrepreneurs theory in a setting of extremes. In such a setting, DEMO of the
have information not possessed by the venture capitalists. issues often assumed away in other circumstances cannot be
The venture capitalists not only DEMO money to these ignored. Thus, we have the opportunity and the DEMO in
entrepreneurs, but they also commit weeks of their time venture DEMO to learn more about risk, uncertainty, and
assisting them. Despite the extensive monitoring, more than contracting technology.
one-third of the investments made by venture capitalists In spite of the intriguing issues in venture capital finance,DEMO
result in losses, and a sizable fraction results in loss of DEMO relatively little has been published on this subject in the most
entire original investment, often after years of waiting and influential finance journals. Why? Probably for two reasons.
after countless hours of handholding by the venture capital- First, the theoretical problems are complex, many-faceted,
ists. Venture DEMO is an area of finance in which issues we and difficult to solve. Second, the very nature of venture
encounter to a lesser degree in public companies can take on capital creates difficulties for the empiricist DEMO data on
extreme importance. private investment by private firms are not easily obtained.
author is grateful to Stan Block, Paul Nevertheless, significant progress DEMO been made recently
toward understanding the problems of venture capital
finance. New theories have been formulated and new
databases have been tapped or developed, shedding new light
on issues about which we knew very little as DEMO as the
1980s. The door has been opened, and opportunities abound
DEMO new work on venture capital finance.
The Gompers, Chris Muscarella, Rick
Smith, Mike Vetsuypens, and an anonymous referee for their numerous
insights DEMO comments that have considerably improved this paper. Josh
Lerner supplied many useful references as well as helpful comments about
the manuscript. The author is DEMO grateful to the past Editor and the current
Editors for supporting the development of a special section of Financial
Management in the area of DEMO capital and for encouragement in
developing this paper. The author is solely responsible for any omissions,
misinterpretations, or other errors that may remain.
Financial
Management,
Vol.
23, No. 3, Autumn
1994, pages 3-15.
4
The purpose of this paper is to provide a selective survey
DEMO synthesis of recent findings in venture capital research
and to put them into perspective, suggesting new avenues for
study. The goal of the paper is not to survey exhaustively all
published work on venture capital finance. DEMO recent
papers, taken together, provide a more comprehensive
overview of the field. One is Sahlman's (1990) paper that
explains venture capital DEMO its organizational setting. A
second is Norton's (1993) survey paper, which takes a more
managerial orientation than does Sahlman's paper. The two
papers contain 147 references on venture capital. In addition
to those DEMO, Gompers (1994b) provides an updated
history and an interesting analysis DEMO the venture capital
industry.
The present paper begins with an introduction to venture
capital in the first section. The second section discusses
recent findings DEMO current controversies in a variety of
topics on venture capital finance. The third section points to
unanswered questions and offers suggestions for further
research.
DEMO Introduction
to Venture
Capital
In most Spanish-speaking nations, there is no DEMO
term for venture capital; instead, the term "capital de
riesgo," or risk capital, is used. That term captures an
important dimension DEMO venture capital-it is capital invested
in highly risky ventures. But there is more to venture capital
than making high-risk investments. Venture capital also
entails DEMO active and motivated working relationship in
which the venture capitalists take on important roles within
their portfolio firms in which they have invested. Venture
DEMO, acting on behalf of third parties, actively monitor
the investments and sometimes assume important
managerial roles within the firm. Wame (1988) characterizes
DEMO capital as the combination of capital and consulting.
In brief, venture DEMO entails the investment of risk capital
within a firm in substantial blocks coupled with the close
monitoring of that investment.
Sahlman (1990) provides DEMO detailed description of the way
in which venture capital operates. There are various forms of
venture capital organizations, including publicly traded
corporations, captive DEMO of large banks or of
corporations, small business investment corporations
(SBICs), and private limited partnerships. The most
important
roughly two-thirds of venture DEMO invested in 1988.
In the limited partnership, the venture capitalists serve DEMO
general partners and typically put up about 1% of the funds
raised. The limited partners consist of private individuals,
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT / AUTUMN DEMO
pension funds, endowments, and insurance companies. The
limited partners rely on the general partners to make
investment decisions and to monitor the resulting
DEMO on their behalf. The partnership has a finite life
(usually ten DEMO), and the funds must be distributed to the
limited partners by the end of that period (subject to possible
extensions for up to three years). Thus, the continued
activities of the venture capitalists depend on creating a series
of limited partnerships that can attract new investment DEMO
An important aspect of the relationship between the
general and limited partners is the form of compensation. The
common form of compensation is an DEMO management fee
based on capital committed, which usually amounts to 2.5%
DEMO capital and a portion (typically 20%) of carried interest.
Carried interest refers to the investment gains realized by the
fund.1 Thus, the venture capitalists receive both a stated fee
to fund their operations and a DEMO in the upside potential of
the fund.
Venture capitalists typically screen hundreds of proposals
in a year but invest in only a few. Many DEMO capital firms
specialize, investing in firms at a particular stage of
DEMO (such as start-up or at product introduction) or
in particular industries. By specializing, venture capitalists
can better understand the industry in which the firm operates
and its technology. They may also have contacts with
suppliers, customers, or others with technical expertise in the
industry. Experienced venture capitalists will also have
experience with the process of going public, with the process
of selling or merging a portfolio firm, with the liquidation of
unpromising ventures, and with the replacement of
management. That experience is a key resource that the
venture capitalist brings to the table in helping DEMO nurture
developing firm.
Recent research has sought to understand the
relationships among the limited partners, venture capitalists,
and portfolio companies from both a theoretical and
empirical point of view. I turn now to some of DEMO important
issues addressed in the literature.
II. Recent Work in Venture Capital
Finance
What do it?
how well do they investigated
to the
DEMO's
but receives 20%
Gompers
stages
do venture capitalists do? How DEMO they And,
do it? Several papers have the
ICarried interest DEMO profits realized from the investments made by
the fund. The venture share of carried interest is disproportionate
to the percentage of capital invested since DEMO venture capitalist usually
invests only 1% of the capital of the gains as a carried
interest. See Sahlman (1990) and and Lerner (1994).
2Sahlman (1990) describes the of a company's development at DEMO
venture capital might be invested.
a
is the
limited
partnership
form,
which
accounts
for
BARRY /
NEW
DIRECTIONS IN RESEARCH
ON
VENTURE
CAPITAL
FINANCE
5
of venture
venture
although
recently
the activities
background, turn
deal with the wide
capital
A. What Do Venture Capitalists Do?
Gorman and Sahlman (1989) surveyed
and asked how they spend their time. They
capitalists spend roughly half of their time monitoring
average of nine portfolio companies. They an
DEMO 110 hours per year working with each
their most frequent activity is assisting the firm in raising
additional funds. Typical respondents said that they DEMO
replaced three chief executive officers in portfolio
companies during their careers as venture capitalists. This
finding is consistent with the broad view that key DEMO
of venture capitalists are identifying and recruiting members
to the management team of portfolio companies. Those same
venture capitalists identified weak management as the
DEMO cause of failure among their portfolio companies,
so it is natural that considerable emphasis would be placed
on management ability.
Venture capitalists typically DEMO by emphasizing a
particular industry, such as biotechnology, or by
emphasizing a particular stage of development, such as
startup companies or companies in the expansion stage. A
number of papers describe the specialization of venture
DEMO (see, for example, Gupta and Sapienza (1992),
Norton DEMO Tenenbaum (1993), and Ruhnka and Young
(1991)); some DEMO that the specialization of venture
capitalists makes it prudent for the venture capital investor
to diversify across venture capitalists to eliminate the
diversifiable risk DEMO in specialization. Barry,
Muscarella, Peavy, and Vetsuypens (BMPV) (DEMO) provide
a table showing the industry specialization of venture-backed
IPOs and DEMO that specialization aids in the monitoring
process. A number of papers by Lemer (1994a, 1994b, and
1994c) focus specifically on biotechnology ventures DEMO
provide details of the functioning of venture capital within
that industry.
Other papers have examined the activities of venture
capitalists in evaluating new opportunities. DEMO notable has
been the work of Tyebjee and Bruno (TB) (DEMO), who
venture
found
spend
portfolio
activities
Most
value as financial
assumption
and
of venture
to the more recent investigations
venture
examine
array
have
DEMO
of agency
decision-making
the
has been
(1990)). I begin here
capitalists and then, against
capital
a number
issues
and
taken
process
point of view that
intermediaries,
challenged
by looking at
that
of the DEMO of whether
plays a positive or negative role. Finally, I
of DEMO
confronted
studies
in a
that
venture
capitalists.
capitalists
even that
(see DEMO,
setting.
add
basic
Glosten,
capitalists
that
an
average
firm,
venture
and
examined 90 deals made by 41 venture capitalists. They point
DEMO five principal activities carried out by the venture
capitalists:
1. Deal origination
2. Deal screening
3. Deal evaluation
4. Deal structuring
5. Post-investment DEMO
Recent research on venture capital in the finance literature
has focused on steps four and five. A body of literature also
exists that focuses DEMO steps two and three (for example, see
Roberts (1991) and MacMillan, Zemann, and Subba-
narasimha (1987)).
In this issue DEMO Financial Management, Fried and Hisrich
(1994) present results of field DEMO and interviews with
venture capitalists to understand their activities better,
specifically their decision to invest. They show that, in the
average investment made by the 18 venture capitalists in their
sample, the venture capitalists spent three weeks of full-time
effort in evaluating and closing the deal and DEMO nearly 100
days elapse during this process. Fried and Hisrich examine
the investment decision-making process in order to identify
the activities venture capitalists undertake DEMO avoid the
adverse selection problem described by Amit, Glosten, and
Muller (1990). They argue that an intensive screening and
evaluation process allows the venture capitalists to gather
substantial amounts of information prior to investing DEMO that
this information reduces the adverse selection problem.
Lerner (1994b) finds another way in which venture
capitalists reduce the adverse selection problem: They tend
to syndicate their investments, i.e., venture capitalists tend to
invest DEMO other venture capitalists. Lerer investigated 651
rounds of investment in 271 biotechnology firms. He found
that syndication is common from the first investment round
DEMO investing, a fact that he argues is a part of the DEMO
process: Venture capitalists are more comfortable with a deal
when other DEMO capitalists of similar experience are
willing to invest as well.
The post-investment activities of venture capitalists are
also extensive. BMPV (1990) examined venture DEMO'
activities by studying prospectuses of IPOs by
venture-backed firms. They found that the average
venture-backed IPO had three venture capital investors
holding 34% DEMO the pre-IPO equity in the firm. The average
IPO had two venture capitalists serving as members of the
board of directors, and an average of 1.8 venture capitalists
remained on the board a full year after DEMO IPO. Surprisingly
few venture capitalists sold any of their shares in the IPO,
6
even though participating in the IPO is viewed as a key DEMO
strategy for the venture capitalists.
Lerner (1994a) examined the activities of venture
capitalists in providing oversight of their portfolio
companies. Lerner studied the DEMO between the
venture capitalists' degree of involvement and the need for
DEMO In particular, he found that venture capitalist
representation on boards of DEMO increased by 44% for
firms in which the chief executive officer (DEMO) had no prior
experience in running an entrepreneurial firm. Lerer also
DEMO the impact of a change in CEO. He refers to CEO
replacement as an instance of" organizational crisis" and as
an indication of DEMO need for more intense monitoring. He
found that on average venture capital investors added 1.75
board members between financing rounds when the CEO
was DEMO, versus an average increase of only 0.24 board
members between rounds DEMO which the CEO was not
replaced. Thus, the monitoring activities of DEMO
capitalists appear to intensify as the need dictates.
B. How Successful Are Venture Capitalists?
Venture capitalists manage other people's money to
achieve DEMO returns. In order to do so, they invest in risky
investment DEMO An important indicator of the
success of venture capital, therefore, is the realized rate of
return in relation to riskiness of investments in DEMO
capital funds: Have venture capitalists provided returns
adequate to compensate for DEMO risk incurred?
Huntsman and Hoban (1980) examined 110 investments
by three venture capital firms over the period 1960-1975.
They showed that venture DEMO returns depend on outliers.
While the average return over the period was 18.9%,
eliminating the top 10% of investments resulted in an
average DEMO of -0.28%. In other words, venture capital
success is highly dependent DEMO finding a few outstanding
investments, and diversification is vital. Huntsman and
DEMO provide
of their returns
Martin and
with mutual funds with a stated goal of maximum
They found that
average (measured
counterparts but
exhibited higher
(1992) provide a more
publicly traded funds,
corporations (SBICs) DEMO business
corporations
3SBICs are licensed
They receive federal
age their investment
no
respect
(1983) compared
growth.
funds were riskier on
dominated, i.e., DEMO also
Kleiman and Schulman
of the
business
development
(BDCs).3 They DEMO that SBICs have higher
under a program
government
to four
formal
with
Petty
by three
of the
to a formal model of returns.
publicly DEMO funds
the venture capital
by total risk) than their mutual fund
DEMO
on average.
analysis
small
that they
returns
recent
examining
tests
loan
of the
guarantees
times.
Business
that
BDCs are
Small
allow them
public
not
DEMO
or
inferiority
performance
investment
of
Administration.
to lever-
venture
capital
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT / AUTUMN 1994
returns and higher risk than BDCs but that the DEMO of SBICs
is largely unsystematic. SBICs dominated BDCs on the basis
of systematic risk in comparison to returns over the
1980-1986 period, although Kleiman and Shulman argue
that subsequent comparisons have not been so favorable.
Brophy DEMO Gunther (1988) studied the performance of
publicly traded venture capital funds. They constructed a
portfolio of such funds. They found that, although the
individual funds had high total risk, their systematic risk was
low, DEMO so a portfolio of such funds had low risk. On a return
versus total risk basis, they found the portfolio of venture
capital funds dominated mutual funds with maximum
growth goals and the S&P 500 DEMO
Chiampou and Kallett (1989) examined 55 private
venture capital funds, DEMO them into two groups. One
group consisted of 35 funds more than six years old; the other
group contained the 20 newer funds. Chiampou and Kallett
found that the investment returns of the 35 mature funds DEMO
the period 1978-1987 averaged 24.4% per annum against a
standard deviation of returns of 51.2%. The younger firms
performed much more poorly, averaging only 5.4% over
their shorter lives. However, the results for the younger funds
probably reflect two biases in the sample. First, venture
capital returns for the broad sample were lower in the middle
years of the 1980s DEMO in the earlier part of the sample, and
the newer firms' returns heavily reflected that period.
Second, it is difficult to measure the value of relatively recent
investments since their values are unlikely to have DEMO
realized through merger or public offering or other events.
Their values will often be reflected at cost rather than at
market value. The older DEMO will have more investments
whose values have been marked to market.
Gompers (1994b) presents an analysis of the pattern of
returns in the DEMO capital industry, explaining why
venture returns have fallen broadly since the DEMO 1980s.
Gompers points out that returns were relatively high,
generally greater than 20% on an annual basis, in the first
half of the 1980s. However, the early success of venture
capital, a hot IPO DEMO, and financial deregulation attracted
capital in record amounts from pension fund DEMO
managers. The larger quantity of capital placed pressure on
the industry to find deals, and so the valuation of venture
capital deals tended to rise. Also, many relatively
inexperienced venture capitalists entered the market. The
increase of institutional investors in the market, according to
Gompers, put pressure DEMO the venture capital funds to
demonstrate earlier the investment results that would be
companies, regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission, that
enjoyed DEMO tax treatment until the enactment of the Tax Reform
Act of 1986.
BARRY /
NEW
DIRECTIONS IN RESEARCH
ON
VENTURE
CAPITAL
FINANCE
7
reflected in the performance of the pension fund investment
managers. This pressure tended DEMO cause investment in
relatively later-stage investments, which could be harvested
more DEMO but which, involving less risk, would be
expected to produce lower average returns.
The
analysis
of venture
capital
performance
indicates
that
venture capitalists DEMO on high risks that appear to be
rewarded on average. Those risks tend to be unsystematic,
so that portfolios constructed by investing in DEMO variety of
venture capital funds will have much lower risk than will
investment in a single fund. The evidence regarding the
performance of those DEMO is mixed, so it remains to
be seen whether venture capital DEMO a superior form of
investment.
C. Venture Capital and the Going-public Process
One way to find data on venture capital activities is to
identify DEMO in which venture capitalists have been
investors in the offering firm. For example, using IPO
listings from Venture Economics, the major provider of DEMO
on the venture capital industry, BMPV developed an
exhaustive set of DEMO public offerings (IPOs) by
venture-backed companies over the period 1978-1987.
BMPV examined whether the presence of experienced
venture capitalists on the board of DEMO firm going public affects
the results of the offering. Evidence indicated that the market
recognized the quality of the venture capitalists because IPO
underpricing DEMO lower when the firm had more experienced
venture capitalists who had been investors.
The reputation and certification role of venture capital
was also confirmed DEMO a study by Megginson and Weiss
(1991). Their findings are DEMO with a recognized role
for the venture capitalists as monitors. Megginson and Weiss
used a matched sample of IPOs with venture backing and
IPOs DEMO venture backing. They found significantly less
underpricing in those issues with venture capital backing,
which is similar to other studies' findings that the quality of
the underwriter or auditor can influence IPO pricing.
Lin and DEMO (1994) developed a series of hypotheses to
describe the role of venture capital in the IPO process.
Because the venture capitalist is likely DEMO return to the IPO
market with future offerings of portfolio companies, DEMO
venture capitalist has reputational capital to protect, a factor
that may DEMO whether, when, and at what price the
company will go public. Lin and Smith argue that firms with
venture capital will be able DEMO come to the market earlier in
their development, backed by the DEMO with venture
capital. Gompers (1994a) notes, however, that the venture
capitalist may in fact choose to bring the portfolio firm public
earlier DEMO would be optimal for the entrepreneur in order to
attract new investment funds. Gompers calls that
phenomenon "grandstanding."
Lin and Smith go on to argue that the venture capitalist's
IPO selling decision will depend DEMO the venture capitalist's
reputation, the reputation of the underwriter, and the degree
of underpricing. In particular, high-quality venture
capitalists making offerings via high-quality underwriters
will be more likely to sell in an underpriced IPO, but unlikely
to sell in cases in which the IPO is overpriced. DEMO and Smith
find empirical support for all of these hypotheses.
Furthermore, DEMO role of monitoring can change after the
IPO due to the publication of information that was previously
private, i.e., informational asymmetries will decrease DEMO a
result of the offering and its accompanying disclosures.
Consistent with those points, Lin and Smith expect the value
of monitoring and control to decline, and they hypothesize
that ownership by venture capitalists will also decline
following the offering. (This is an implication of the Admati
and Pfleiderer (1994) model as well.)
Lerner (1994c) provides evidence that DEMO
venture capitalists can time the IPO market. In particular,
Lerner demonstrates that venture capitalists tend to bring
their portfolio firms public at times DEMO the market
valuation of those firms is particularly high, whereas
privately DEMO firms tend to go public at times when
market valuations are lower. These results suggest that the
venture capitalist provides a valuable service in DEMO the
entrepreneur in timing the market. They also suggest that
more experienced venture capitalists have greater ability
and/or greater incentives to time the DEMO than do their less
experienced
counterparts.
Gompers (1994a) shows that relatively less experienced
or less reputable venture capitalists have incentives to bring
a DEMO firm public prematurely. A related paper by
Gifford (1994) investigates the same phenomenon from a
theoretical perspective.
Many studies have examined the role DEMO the entrepreneur
as agent and the venture capitalist as principal. Conflicts arise
in such situations because the entrepreneur may have
information unknown to the DEMO capitalist and may
choose to shirk or overinvest, creating agency costs.
DEMO, we may also see the venture capitalist as agent for
the DEMO The entrepreneur brings in the venture
capitalist as a financial partner and consultant. The venture
capitalist may have incentives to offer bad consulting advice
DEMO the entrepreneur, i.e., advice that suggests a course of
action contrary to the interests of the entrepreneur, up to and
including the abandonment of an investment that has
economic value (see Sahlman (1990) for a discussion of the
abandonment
decision).
Premature
abandonment
may
come
8
about because the venture capitalist has a diversified
portfolio of opportunities DEMO a high opportunity cost of time,
whereas the entrepreneur fully committed to the venture
and in fact may choose to overinvest other people'DEMO money.
Hence, conflicts of interest may arise because of the
incentives DEMO venture capitalists to give advice counter to the
interests of their entrepreneur-partners. Gompers (1994a)
points out that one such area is in the timing of a public
offering. Instead of abandonment of a viable venture,DEMO
however, the venture capitalist encourages a premature
public offering in order DEMO achieve the visibility associated
with that offering and use that visibility in marketing the next
limited partnership. Since the value of the portfolio held DEMO
the venture capitalist is not normally updated to its current
market value in the absence of transactions, an IPO may
permit the venture capitalist to mark-to-market an
investment that previously was carried at a lower book DEMO
This opportunity may be especially pertinent if the venture
capitalist markets new funds to pension fund managers who
are concerned with reporting their own DEMO
performance. Gompers suggests that venture capitalists
without a substantial track record would be especially prone
to premature offerings.
Gompers' empirical results support these hypotheses.
Relatively inexperienced venture capitalists tend to bring
portfolio companies public earlier in DEMO life of the firm than
do established venture capitalists. They also tend to raise new
funds sooner after an IPO than do more experienced DEMO
capitalists. Finally, the IPOs tend to be more underpriced
than are DEMO by the more experienced venture
capitalists. This finding also coincides with Lerner's finding
concerning the timing of IPOs: Venture capitalists with their
own agendas may be less concerned about the optimization
of timing viewed from DEMO valuation perspective and may be
concerned instead with timing as it affects the marketing of
their own services.
Gompers' results are disturbing for another reason. In
addition to suggesting that the venture capitalists have
incentives to DEMO bad advice to their entrepreneurs in the
matter of IPO timing, DEMO premature IPO can also be harmful
to the venture capitalist's investors. That is, Gompers
suggests that the interests of investors in existing funds may
be compromised by the desire to find investors for an
additional DEMO That situation reflects a potential agency
conflict with existing investors as well as with entrepreneurs.
D. Contracting Technology between Venture
Capitalists and Entrepreneurs
Sahlman (1990) describes a myriad of agency conflicts in
venture capital. Sahlman explains why conflicts exist, and he
is
FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT /
AUTUMN
1994
DEMO the mechanisms to deal with such conflicts. There
are conflicts between the investors and the venture capitalists
as well as conflicts between managers of DEMO firms and
venture capitalists. Sahlman demonstrates that there is a
similarity in the mechanisms for addressing such conflicts,
and he relates agency costs DEMO a venture capital context to
agency issues in other settings.
One feature of contracts between entrepreneurs and
venture capitalists is that an entrepreneurs receive DEMO payoff
that is typically tied to performance in several ways. First,
entrepreneurs will have an equity interest (perhaps the
dominant equity interest) DEMO will benefit from value
creation. Further, it is common that the DEMO of dilution of
entrepreneurs' ownership interests is tied directly to
performance, so that entrepreneurs (venture capitalists)
receive a larger (smaller) fraction of a more successful
venture. Entrepreneurs commonly receive a relatively
modest salary DEMO that their success is tied to the success of
the venture. It is also common for venture capitalists to retain
sufficient control to be DEMO to fire or demote an ineffective
manager. The manager would typically suffer some loss of
equity interest in such an event in addition to DEMO a loss
in the value of human capital.
Most of the research on agency issues in venture capital
examines contracting technology between entrepreneurs and
DEMO capitalists, taking the narrow perspective of
analyzing agency conflicts in isolation DEMO other realities of
the venture capital process. Some of the more recent work
has attempted to take a broader perspective. For example,
Gompers' (1994a) "grandstanding" analysis recognizes that
the relationship between venture capitalist DEMO entrepreneur
is affected by the relationship between the venture capitalist
and investors. Nevertheless, most of what we know has been
developed
from
the narrower
perspective.
A conflict arises between venture capitalists and
entrepreneurs because entrepreneurs have DEMO
unavailable to venture capitalists and because entrepreneurs
make choices that are not fully known by venture capitalists.
For example, initially, an entrepreneur knows DEMO about his
or her product than will the venture capitalist. The
entrepreneur may be of unknown quality. Because
entrepreneurs are often committed to a DEMO venture and
venture capitalists have a portfolio of investment projects,
there are potential conflicts over the amount to invest in a
venture. Using DEMO people's money and having limited
liability, entrepreneurs may want to DEMO to invest even
after a project ceases to be viable. Such investment preserves
the option of the entrepreneurs on the upside potential of the
DEMO Entrepreneurs have expectations that are
incompletely known to the venture capitalists and, in the
BARRY /
NEW
DIRECTIONS IN RESEARCH
ON
VENTURE
CAPITAL
FINANCE
9
process of selling the venture, the entrepreneurs may investment and continuation decisions when capital is
overstate its likely outcomes. provided in stages. They identify the DEMO
Venture capitalists can design contracts to lessen these problem-the problem that an entrepreneur who can attract
concerns. Sahlman (1988, 1990) stresses the use of" staged" outside funds may continue to invest in the project DEMO when
capital commitment as one feature of such contracts, i.e., the it is no longer valuable based on the entrepreneur's inside
venture DEMO commits only a fraction of the capital information. Even if the information would show that a
needed for the ultimate development of a project. DEMO project has a negative net present value, as long as it DEMO some
financing is then tied to the successful completion of probability of being successful, the entrepreneur's
intermediate objectives. option-like position suggests he or she will continue as long
Staging the capital commitment creates an abandonment DEMO others will provide the financing. In principle, an external
option and DEMO increases the value of the investment. investor, such as a venture DEMO, can enter the picture,
Further, an entrepreneur's decision to accept such a contract invest, monitor, and become equally informed. However,DEMO
will provide information about the entrepreneur's beliefs in having become an insider, the venture capitalist may suffer
his or her own estimates and in the time and cost required to the same problem as the DEMO: Having invested and
develop the first stage. Subsequent capital commitments will DEMO learned that a project is not favorable, but has a
then DEMO from additional information. The venture probability of success, the venture capitalist DEMO have an
incentive to attract new outside funds as well.5
Thus, DEMO entrepreneurs nor venture capitalists can be
assumed to provide unbiased views concerning the prospects
of the investment. How can the issue be resolved? Admati
and Pfleiderer demonstrate that a contract in which venture
capitalists continue to DEMO the same fraction of equity
in subsequent financing rounds as they had in the earlier
round will resolve the conflict. This solution neutralizes the
DEMO capitalists' incentive to mislead. Admati and
Pfleiderer also show that their DEMO is robust in the sense
that minor changes in the set of possible outcomes will not
render the contract sub-optimal.
Lerer (1994b), in a companion paper in this issue of
Financial Management, provides empirical evidence in
support of the Admati and Pfleiderer model. Lerner studied
651 rounds DEMO financing for 271 biotechnology ventures. His
study focused on the process of syndication. He
demonstrates that the ownership stake of venture capitalists
frequently stays DEMO in later rounds of venture capital
financing.
The most common form of venture capital investment is
convertible preferred stock. The preferred stock gives the
DEMO capitalist a superior claim to cash flow and to
distributions in liquidation in the event that the venture is
unsuccessful. The conversion feature provides DEMO
on the upside. The conversion price is commonly a function
of performance, so that if a venture is unsuccessful, the
capitalist
will be DEMO
to reduce
risk
before
the second
round
of financing, and if DEMO goes well, the entrepreneur may
benefit from an increase in valuation, leading to less dilution
of his or her ownership interests in subsequent DEMO
Staged capital commitments also keep the entrepreneur
focused on the task at hand and may motivate a more rapid
pace of activity. Hellman (1993) points out that an
unintended consequence of this focus could be one of
myopia, i.e., the entrepreneur could lose sight of the big
DEMO in focusing too narrowly on meeting short-term
goals. A way around that problem is to design short-term
performance objectives that are essential as intermediate
DEMO towards a longer-term goal.
Gompers (1993b) further develops the notion of staging
and shows how it can deal with agency costs and can DEMO
a strategic option. He points out that the fraction of intangible
assets affects the level of agency costs and the need for
monitoring.4 Gompers DEMO empirical evidence on
staging from a database of 2,145 rounds of venture capital
financing for 795 firms. He finds that early stage investments
DEMO receive relatively small amounts of capital, that the
rate of capital DEMO (the "burn rate") increases as a
venture matures, and DEMO greater industry sales growth is
associated with capital commitments of longer durations.
Gompers measures the intensity of monitoring by the length
of the period DEMO successive capital commitments since
the decision to continue or abandon a project is the ultimate
measure of control.
Other recent papers have also addressed DEMO contracting
problem. Admati and Pfleiderer (1994) focus on the
4For
venture,
difficult
tangible
allowing the venture
investment. Intangible
to value.
example,
DEMO
can be liquidated
capitalist
assets are less easily disposed of and are more
in the
to recover
event
some part
of failure
of the DEMO
of the
5The
tion
venture
and they tend to syndicate
important
process.
participation
myopically
incentive
will be lower
capital investment
by virtue of their
DEMO venture
of other venture
optimal
Thus,
for
the
than
lead
that
process.
their
status
capitalist
capitalists
may
venture
for
Venture
investments. Their
as DEMO
the
prove
very
costly over
capitalist
entrepreneur
capitalists
reputational
players in the investment
has an incentive
in a bad deal. An action that is
DEMO longer
to provide
because
misleading
of the
depend
nature
on referrals,
capital
not to encourage
the
term.
informa-
of the
is
10
venture capitalist stands a better chance of recovering the
investment. At DEMO same time, the increased conversion price
following good performance increases the DEMO to the
entrepreneur.
Gompers (1993a) and Marx (1993) develop theoretical
models of venture capital contracting that explain the use of
convertible preferred DEMO Marx shows that convertible
preferred dominates pure equity and debt investments.
Gompers shows that convertible preferred can overcome
adverse selection and prevent excessive risk DEMO by
entrepreneurs.
E. Contracting Technology between Venture
Capitalists and Their Investors
Sahlman (1990) describes potential conflicts between
venture capitalists and their investors. The DEMO capitalists
may be of unknown quality. They invest in and monitor a
variety of ventures that are not known to the investors when
they DEMO their funds. Poor returns may be due to bad
outcomes of a random process, or they may reflect a lack of
skill or effort. An investor, like the venture capitalist
selecting ventures in which to invest, faces a sorting problem
(distinguishing good investment opportunities from bad) as
well as the problem of how to provide the proper incentives.
Sahlman'DEMO solution likens the investor's problem to those
of the venture capitalist. The venture capitalist receives a
contract in which he or she benefits DEMO the success of
investors. The benefit comes in the form of a fraction of
carried interest on the fund's investments. Like the
entrepreneur, the venture capitalist also receives a cash
inflow to fund operations while DEMO portfolio is being
developed. Like the venture capitalist, the investor retains DEMO
right to abandon by refusing to continue to meet
commitments to invest beyond the initial capital infusion,
although that decision is typically costly-it DEMO results
in the forfeiture of earlier investments. The investment funds
have finite lives, usually ten years, so that conflicts of interest
over the DEMO of gains are eliminated at some point.
Perhaps as importantly, the DEMO can refuse to invest in
future funds initiated by the venture capitalist. To avoid
self-dealing, most partnership agreements restrict the general
partner's ability to invest in companies in the portfolio. For
example, some agreements specify that the venture
capitalists cannot invest in portfolio companies for their own
DEMO at prices lower than those paid by the venture capital
partnership.
Gompers and Lerner (1994) investigate compensation in
venture capital partnerships. They develop DEMO set of
hypothesized relationships between aspects of the venture
capitalists, their DEMO portfolio environment, and their
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT / AUTUMN 1994
compensation. Using DEMO offering prospectuses from
venture capital funds formed between 1978 and 1992,
Gompers and Lerner examine the empirical features of
compensation against their model DEMO the process. They find
that compensation is highly clustered; 81% of DEMO sample
funds call for the venture capitalists to receive between 20
and 21% of the gains earned by the partnership, and most
receive exactly 20%. They find a tendency for older and
larger venture capital firms DEMO earn a larger share of their
income in this incentive form rather than in stated fees, and
indeed they find that stated fees based on a percentage of net
asset value have greatly diminished in importance DEMO recent
years.
Gompers and Lerner also examine the effects of the
environment in which the funds invest. For example, funds
that invest in higher technology areas or in earlier stage
ventures-ventures traditionally associated with higher
risk-receive DEMO base compensation as well as a greater
carried interest. In general, DEMO the amount of effort associated
with the investment increases, base compensation DEMO rises.
F. The Positive Role of Venture Capital
Does venture capital play a positive role in financial
markets? Not all scholars have been in agreement on this
basic issue. Chan (1983) developed a model that DEMO
the value of the venture capitalist as an intermediary. Chan
begins with a world where there are entrepreneurs with
projects and only uninformed investors, all of whom have
positive search costs. A "lemons" result occurs DEMO the sense
that only projects of low quality are offered to the investors,
and they accordingly pay a price that reflects low quality.
DEMO introduces the venture capitalist as an informed
intermediary. The venture capitalist solves the adverse
selection problem, and good projects can come to the market.
Recently, Amit, Glosten, and Muller (1990) have again
questioned the value of venture capital. They assume that
entrepreneurs know their own skill DEMO Although the
entrepreneurs need capital and want to share risk, the DEMO
capitalists cannot assess accurately the skill level of the
entrepreneurs. In equilibrium, less capable entrepreneurs
will choose to attract venture capital investment, whereas DEMO
more capable ones will develop their projects without the
participation of venture capitalists. The market appears to
break down. Amit, Glosten, and Muller DEMO that the dismal
investment returns of the 1980s are perhaps attributable to
the breakdown of the market in the manner their model
describes.
In DEMO, the market does not break down. Investment
returns were not strong DEMO the 1980s, but Gompers (1994b)
presents an alternative explanation based on changes in the
BARRY /
NEW
DIRECTIONS IN RESEARCH
ON
VENTURE
CAPITAL
FINANCE
11
make-up of the funds flowing into venture capital in the
1980s. Further, a theory like that of Amit, Glosten, and
Muller cannot be said DEMO have explained the poor returns of
the 1980s unless it can also account for the much better
returns of other periods of time, as Gompers' arguments do.
More importantly, Amit, Glosten, and Muller (1990)
ignore important aspects of the real world that deal with
exactly DEMO breakdown they describe.6 One aspect is the state
of contracting technology designed to deal with the adverse
selection problem, or the "sorting" problem as Sahlman
(1990) describes it. In particular, staged financing addresses
this problem precisely. In staged financing, venture
capitalists make a relatively small commitment initially and
only commit additional funds after the entrepreneurs have
been able DEMO demonstrate in deed rather than in words the
promises made to attract funds. Even in the second stage,
only a partial commitment is DEMO made. Thus, a
minimum of capital is placed at risk. The DEMO capitalists
essentially buy a call option on further investment, and the
DEMO are given powerful incentives to perform.
Additionally, entrepreneurs know that if DEMO mislead the
venture capitalists in the beginning, they may be " DEMO out"
before additional funds are committed. Thus, an
entrepreneur's DEMO to accept staged financing is a
signal of that entrepreneur's beliefs in the prospects of the
project.
A second point that is often DEMO in discussions
regarding the value of intermediaries is that the venture
capitalist can add value to a project. As discussed previously,
the venture DEMO is often a specialist in a particular
technology or stage of development and can offer strategic
guidance as well as money. Further, the venture capitalist is
a consultant with a stake in the outcome of the DEMO
consultant with incentives. In addition, at least some
entrepreneurs with narrow DEMO specialties may
recognize their limitations as captains of industry and may
welcome an incentivized investor who can help guide the
business toward public offerings DEMO a merger.
Finally, at the level of small, risky ventures, DEMO to
capital markets is restricted. Presumably, not all
entrepreneurs can self-finance DEMO projects, and not all can
find bankers or angels who will DEMO the shortfall. Venture
capital offers them a source of funds that is designed for use
in risky settings. The venture capitalists themselves perform
due DEMO prior to investing, and information gleaned in
that process can reduce DEMO adverse selection problem.
6The
ment
that
for
model ignores aspects of, DEMO example,
address
reader
the
should
conditions
note
needed
adverse
selection.
Amit, Glosten,
their
model
to
contracting
and
hold.
Muller
They
technology
(DEMO) fully docu-
also
that
note
that
their
could
In sum, while there are theoretical arguments that venture
capitalists may not add value or DEMO suffer from severe
adverse selection, the venture capital industry has engineered
DEMO to this problem. Contracting technology, the added
value created via consulting DEMO, and the
unavailability of suitable funds from other sources all act DEMO
add value in the venture capital process.
G. Summary
Recent research has shed new light on the venture capital
process. We have learned about DEMO venture
capitalist-entrepreneur relationship, but we know
considerably less about the venture DEMO
relationship and only very little about the interactions across
those two relationships. The problems are difficult
analytically, and empirical research of high quality is a
particularly difficult and labor-intensive process, as can be
seen in recent empirical papers. Among those papers, the
work of Lerner (1994a, 1994b, and 1994c), Gompers
(1993b), and Gompers and Lerner (1994) stand out as
examples of the efforts required to identify and collect data
on a large sample of observations. Empirical research in
venture capital DEMO not easy. There are few tapes to spin.
Because of that difficulty, comparatively little has been done,
and the opportunity to develop results that are novel and
important
is great.
III. Directions
Research on
encountered DEMO
approaches.
was virtually
is not easy to do, mainly
good examples
DEMO
for Future
Research
venture capital is in its infancy. The problems
not simple. Realistic treatments of the issues
faced in venture capital research will DEMO innovative
Further, empirical research on venture capital
non-existent before the decade DEMO the 1990s. It
because of lack of data, but some
do DEMO exist, and unanswered questions are
in abundance.
A. Angels and Venture DEMO
Angel investing is a process in which
a
wealthy
person
or
group places funds in a venture without taking on the
consulting role of DEMO capitalists. Sahlman (1990) argues
that " angels" invest an order DEMO magnitude more funds than
do venture capitalists, and yet we know DEMO less about angel
investing than we know about venture capital. How
successful is angel investing? Given that there is $33 billion
invested in venture capital in the United States, why do angel
investors choose to bypass venture capital and invest
directly? What motivates an entrepreneur to seek angel funds
rather than venture capital? (Presumably, control issues are
12
important in this decision. Likewise, an entrepreneur may
perceive no need for the advice and guidance of a venture
capitalist.) Are the terms of financing arrangements similar
to those of venture capital? Do they avoid adverse selection
in ways similar to those of venture capitalists? How do their
rates of return compare to those attainable through
investment in venture DEMO funds?
In many parts of the developing world, venture capital DEMO
virtually nonexistent; raising funds for new ventures from
private groups or DEMO members is common. The so-called
informal capital markets are often more important than the
formal markets, especially early in the life of a market
economy. Sometimes this process is a way of avoiding
disclosure and/or DEMO Understanding better the process of
angel investing in this country may shed light on the structure
of investing in developing economies as well. Likewise, the
process of informal market investing in developing markets
may offer insights DEMO will prove helpful in investigating the
angel market in the United States.
B. Do Venture Capitalists Add Value within the
Portfolio Firm?
While DEMO have examined the role of the venture capitalist
as an intermediary, DEMO related issue that has not been resolved
is whether or not venture capitalists add value within a
portfolio firm. We know that IPOs with DEMO backing are
often younger and less developed (see Lin and Smith (1994),
and see Gompers' (1994a) caveat) than are IPOs without
venture backing, but we don't know if the firms are more
successful. Do companies perform better when venture
capital is present than DEMO it is absent, all else equal? This
question ultimately suggests another: " Is more value created
when venture capital is present than when it is absent?"
Evidence based on the price-earnings (PE) multiples of
venture-backed IPOs is not adequate to address this issue
since the DEMO multiples could be a result of reputation and
signaling effects rather than improved performance per se.
C. The Interaction among Multiple Principals and
Agents
DEMO venture capital process is characterized by multiple
principal-agent relationships. There is the relationship
between investors and the venture capitalists and the
relationship between venture DEMO and entrepreneurs,
in addition to other obvious relationships that include
minority shareholders, employees, bankers, clients, and
suppliers. Focusing only on the DEMO major players (investor,
venture capitalist, and entrepreneur), we have already seen
Gompers' (1994a) example in which the need to attract
additional investors may cause the venture capitalist to offer
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT / DEMO 1994
advice counter to the interests of the entrepreneur. That
example further points out that the venture capitalist serves
a dual role as principal DEMO some respects and agent in other
respects in working with an entrepreneur.
These multiple agency relationships can play an
important role in determining the DEMO of venture capital
investing. For example, the extent to which a DEMO
capitalist is already committed because of monitoring
responsibilities in the management of existing funds may
influence the investment decisions of potential investors in
subsequent DEMO Is there a tendency to use less experienced
associates to share the burden so that more time is available
to solicit potential new investors? A new fund will typically
have ten years in which to create DEMO generate
management fees-whereas an older fund will have less
time, hence DEMO potential, to add value over its remaining
lifetime. For example, if the venture capitalist makes an
investment with the money from fund A DEMO company X, and
fund A has a relatively short remaining life, will that short
life influence the venture capitalist's advice and/or DEMO
with respect to company X? If so, then the entrepreneur and
limited partners may want to know the source of funds for a
DEMO investment. Do venture capital contracts with
investors and with entrepreneurs address this problem up
front? If so, how?
D. Exit Strategies and DEMO Maximization
Venture capitalists may exit an investment in a number of
ways. The most common avenues for exiting a successful
venture are via an DEMO or a merger. In other cases, exit may
occur through liquidation DEMO share repurchase. It appears that
exit via IPO is the most profitable form, although that does
not mean that investments that are harvested via merger
would have been better served by an IPO. What aspects of
DEMO ventures themselves or the market environment
(including the IPO market) characterize the decision to exit
by way of an IPO rather than by DEMO merger? Presumably,
venture capitalists and entrepreneurs make
value-maximizing exit decisions DEMO the time they are made,
but what factors influence this decision? Are merged
companies essentially not good candidates for an IPO? Do
DEMO occur earlier or later in a company's development
than would an IPO? Are there characteristics of the product
market that dictate the IPO-versus-merger decision?
E. Alternative Organizational Forms and Venture
Capital Performance
There are DEMO types of venture capital organizations.
This paper and most of the literature tends to stress the
limited partnership form, but there are others. There are, for
BARRY /
example, public venture capital funds, and there are captive
venture capital firms (such as Citibank Venture Capital or
Hambrecht and Quist). How do these different types of
organizations perform? How are they similar, and how do
they differ?
Sahlman's discussion of the agency conflicts and their
resolution in limited partnerships does not apply fully DEMO the
public or captive form. Captive venture capital firms, for
example, receive their funding from a single source and lack
many of the DEMO and issues that Sahlman discusses.
Presumably they would not inflict the grandstanding
phenomenon (discussed by Gompers (1994a)) on their
parent. On the DEMO hand, they bring their own issues to the
table. Hambrecht and DEMO, for example, was the most active
venture capital firm in the IPO sample of Barry, Muscarella,
Peavy, and Vetsuypens (1990), and Hambrecht and Quist's
investment banking group is also active as DEMO lead underwriter
in the IPO process.7
Because venture capitalists operating within different
organizational forms differ in their relationships with their
principal investors, their behavior may be expected to be
different: Their contracting technology may differ, DEMO
consulting role they play within a portfolio firm may differ,
they may follow different investment strategies, and they
may exhibit differences in performance. Also, this richness
of organizational forms provides an arena in which to
examine extant empirical results. For example, if the
grandstanding phenomenon is specific to limited
partnerships, we should not see that phenomenon in the
context of other organizational forms.
A related issue is whether organizational form is
DEMO with performance. One might expect both risk and
return to vary by the form of the organization. Bank-affiliated
venture capitalists are often thought to DEMO more conservative
in their strategy and, if so, that should affect risk and return.
Similarly, bank-affiliated venture capitalists are often
reputed to be less experienced on average, and a number of
papers have argued that the age or experience of the venture
capitalists can affect the investment DEMO
F. Risk and Return in Venture Capital
Is venture capital a superior form of investment? Is it
inferior? The answer appears to depend DEMO the time period in
question. Results are widely mixed, as is DEMO in
Gompers' (1994b) brief history of the venture capital
7In DEMO sample of venture-backed IPOs, Barry, Muscarella, Peavy, and
Vetsuypens (DEMO) noted 87 IPOs in which venture capital investors were
affiliates of DEMO and 19 cases in which the underwriter affiliate was
the lead underwriter in the IPO. There was no evidence that underpricing
was different for DEMO sample in which underwriter-affiliate venture capital-
ists were present than for the residual sample.
NEW
DIRECTIONS IN RESEARCH
ON
VENTURE
CAPITAL
FINANCE
13
industry DEMO as is obvious from reading the performance
results contained in a variety of studies of venture capital
(e.g., Bygrave and Timmons (1992), Brophy and Gunther
(1988), Chiampou and Kallett (1989), Kleiman DEMO
Schulman (1992), and Martin and Petty (1983)). The
DEMO of venture capital investing remains an open
issue. The results vary by time period, by type of fund, and
by the degree to DEMO the funds are combined into
portfolios. It is difficult to draw any general conclusions from
the mixed results obtained to date; therefore, additional
DEMO
is needed
to address
this issue.
IV. Conclusions
Much has been learned recently in the area of venture
capital finance. We understand more about DEMO contracting
technology that permits venture capitalists to manage their
dual roles as agents with respect to their limited
partner-investors and as principals with respect DEMO
entrepreneurs in their portfolio firms. Venture capitalists are
active, blockholding investors DEMO provide monitoring
services and whose contractual relations guard against
failure while permitting participation in the upside in their
ventures. They use some of the DEMO contractual mechanisms
for alleviating concerns on the part of their investors as they
apply themselves in their relations with the entrepreneurs in
whose ventures DEMO invest.
In a venture capital setting, adverse selection is an
especially DEMO concern. Investors do not wish to invest
with venture capitalists who shirk, and the contracting
technology gives the venture capitalists strong incentives to
perform on behalf of the investors. Similarly, venture
capitalists want to invest their funds in ventures that are
successful, and contractual mechanisms can assure that the
with whom they place their funds have strong
to perform. Further, the venture capitalists take a
of steps to avoid adverse selection, including their
own due diligence activities as well as investing through a
mechanism DEMO which the collective judgment of
members of the industry is brought to bear on the
decision.
All is not perfect. For example, venture capitalists have
incentives to realize gains in order to demonstrate
performance and
lead DEMO conflicts
with the
guidance
Empirical
develop
and their
into existing databases
entrepreneurs
incentives
number
syndicating
several
investment
raise
entrepreneurs
on matters
because
investments.
additional
DEMO interest
who
such
evidence on venture capital is not easy to
of the
Nevertheless,
and
funds.
with existing investors
rely on the venture
DEMO when to make a
private nature
recent
led to the development
Those
as well as
capitalists for
public offering.
of venture
work
capital
has
DEMO
tapped
of some
incentives
can
14
new ones, paving the way for further work. Recent evidence
details the process by which venture capitalists carry out their
responsibilities. Among the DEMO studies, we find evidence
of the participation by venture capitalists in DEMO portfolio
companies. For example, new evidence suggests that venture
capitalists can DEMO the IPO market, i.e., they tend to issue
IPOs close to market peaks and to avoid them at market
valleys. We also see DEMO on the form of compensation
and on investment behavior by venture capitalists.
The paper suggests a number of areas in which further
work is DEMO For example, although recent work explains
what venture capitalists do, it does not show whether those
activities in fact create value. Is a DEMO better off seeking
venture capital or finding other financing vehicles? When DEMO
one avenue better than the others? Why is angel investing so
DEMO? Do angel investors sacrifice return or take on
greater risk by DEMO the venture capital process?
Which approach is better, and under DEMO circumstances?
Do venture capital investments produce superior
investment returns? The DEMO to date has been mixed,
dependent on the time period in question and on
characteristics of the venture capitalists and the investment
environment. DEMO venture capital in fact add value for the
investor? Is venture DEMO an investment class into which
private investors should be attracted?
Related to both of these issues is a question about how
venture capitalists DEMO an exit strategy. We know that exit
or "harvesting" can come in various forms, but we don't
know if the chosen forms are ideal. What are the
circumstances under which mergers are superior to DEMO
References
Admati,
the
A.R. and
Role of Venture
P. Pfleiderer,
Capitalists,"
1994, "Robust
Journal
of
Financial
Finance
Contracting
(June),
and
371-402.
Amit, R., L. Glosten, and E. Muller, DEMO,
Investments, and Risk Sharing,"
1232-1245.
"
Management
Entrepreneurial
DEMO,
Science (October),
Venture
Barry, C.B., C.J. Muscarella, DEMO Peavy, III, and M.R. Vetsuypens, 1990,
"The Role of Venture Capital in the Creation of Public Companies:
Evidence from the DEMO Public Process," Journal of Financial
Economzics (October), 447-471.
Bygrave, W.B. and J.A. Timmons, Venture
Boston,
MA, Harvard
Business School
DEMO,
Funds:
Journal
D.J. and M.W. Gunther,
Implications
of Business
1988, "Publicly
for Institutional
Venturing
Chiampou,
Capital,"
G.F. and J.J. Kallett, 1989, "Risk/Return
Journal
of Business
Capital at the Crossroads,
Press, 1992.
Traded
"Fund of Funds" Investors,"
(March),
Profile of Venture
Venturing (January), 1-10.
187-206.
Venture
DEMO
FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT /
AUTUMN
1994
offerings? When is it optimal to terminate or liquidate a
venture? We do now know that there can be a conflict
between the venture capitalists and entrepreneur about this
latter DEMO, but we do not know how it is resolved or how
DEMO ought to be resolved.
Finally, one source of complexity in venture DEMO
investing is the existence of multiple principal-agent
relationships operating at the same time. The venture
capitalist has a set of investors in each fund DEMO is under
management, and the venture capitalist also has incentives
to DEMO soliciting new funds. Might the interests of one
principal (investor) be compromised in order to attract the
other? Might the advice given by the venture capitalist to the
portfolio firms be affected by the investor DEMO? We
have seen evidence that the multiple relationships can lead
to DEMO In view of those prospective conflicts, how can
we model the DEMO capital process more comprehensively
in order to reflect the realities of a multiple-principal,
multiple-agent market? Is the existing contracting locally
optimal but globally inadequate? New work is needed to
amplify our understanding in this area.
Venture capital is ripe for new research. Enough has been
learned recently DEMO scholars do not have to begin their work
in darkness, but DEMO issues remain that have not been
fully addressed or have barely been touched. Both theoretical
studies and empirical studies are needed. Such studies will
DEMO be easy to complete, but they can make an important
contribution DEMO our knowledge about venture capital. The
risks are high, but the DEMO rewards are enticing. U
Chan, Y., 1983, "On the Positive Role of Financial Intermediation in
Allocations of Venture Capital in a Market DEMO Imperfect
Information," Journal of Finance (December), 1543-1561.
Fried,
DEMO
28-37.
V.H. and
R.D. Hisrich,
Decision Making," Financial Maanagement (DEMO),
1994,
"Towards
a Model
of Venture
Capital
Gifford,
the
S., 1994,
Entrepreneur,"
"On
the
Relationship
Boston
Between
University
the
Unpublished
Venture
Capitalist
Manuscript.
and
Gompers, P.A., 1993a, "DEMO, Screening and Venture Capital: A Role
for Convertible Debt," University of Chicago Unpublished
Manuscript.
Gompers,
P.A., 1993b,
of Venture
Capital,"
"Optimal
University
Investment,
of Chicago
Monitoring,
Unpublished
and
DEMO
Manuscript.
Staging
Gompers,
P.A., 1994a,
University
of Chicago
"Grandstanding in the Venture
Unpublished
Manuscript.
Capital
Industry,"
Gompers,
P.A., DEMO,
of Chicago
"The
Unpublished
Rise and
Manuscript.
Fall
of Venture
DEMO,"
University
BARRY / NEW DIRECTIONS
IN RESEARCH ON VENTURE CAPITAL FINANCE
Gompers, P.A. and J. Lerner, 1994, "An Analysis of Compensation in the
U. S. Venture Capital Partnership," University of Chicago and
Harvard University Unpublished DEMO
Gorman,
M. and
Journal
W.A. Sahlman,
of Business
1989,
Venturing
"
(May),
What
Do Venture
231-248.
Capitalists
Do?"DEMO
Gupta, A.K. and H.J. Sapienza, 1992, "Determinants of Capital Firms'
Preferences Regarding the Industry Diversity and Geographic Scope
of their Investments," Journal of Business Venturing (September),
347-362.
Hellman,
Stanford
Huntsman,
Some
Financial
Kleiman,
Publicly
Policy,"
Lerner,
T., DEMO, "Financial
University
B. and J.P. Hoban,
Empirical Observations
Management
R.T. and J.M. Schulman, Attributes of
Traded Venture Capital: for Investors and DEMO
Journal of Business Venturing (March), 195-208.
J., 1994a,
Harvard
"Venture
University
Capitalists
Unpublished
Lerner, J., 1994b, "The Syndication
Financial
1992, "The Risk-Return
Implications
and the Oversight of Private Firms,"
Manuscript.
of Venture Capital
Management (Autumn), 16-27.
and the Decision
(DEMO), 293-316.
Investments,"
to Go Public,"
Lerner,
Journal
J., 1994c, "Venture
of Financial
Capitalists
Economics
Lin, T.H. and DEMO Smith, 1994, "The Unwinding of Venture Capital
Investments: Insider Selling During Equity IPOs," Arizona State
University
Unpublished
Manuscript.
MacMillan, I.C., DEMO Zemann, and P.N. Subbanarasimha, 1987, "Criteria
Distinguishing Successful from Unsuccessful Ventures in the Venture
Screening Process," Journal of Business Venturing (March),
123-137.
Structure
Unpublished
and
Manuscript.
Control
Jr., 1980, "Investment
DEMO
(Summer),
Risk,
Return,
44-51.
in Venture
Capital,"DEMO
and
in New Enterprise:
Market
Structure,"
15
Martin, J.D. and J.W. Petty, 1983, "An Analysis of the Performance of
Publicly Traded Venture Capital Companies," Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis (September), 401-410.
Marx, L.M., 1993, "Negotiation and Renegotiation of Venture DEMO
Contracts," Northwestern University Unpublished Manuscript.
Megginson, W.L. and K.A. Weiss, 1991, "Venture Capitalist Certification
in Initial Public Offerings," Journal of DEMO (July), 879-903.
Norton, E., 1993, "Venture Capital Finance: Review and Synthesis," in
C.F. Lee (ed.), Advances in Quantitative Analysis of Finance and
Accounting, Greenwich, CT, JAI Press.
Norton, DEMO and B.H. Tenenbaum, 1993, "Specialization versus
Diversification as a Venture DEMO Investment Strategy," Journal of
Business Venturing (September), 431-442.
Pence, C.C., 1982, How Venture Capitalists Make Investment Decisions,
Ann Arbor, MI, UMI Research Press.
Private Equity Analyst, 1994 (July), 15.
Roberts, E.B., 1991, "High Stakes for High-Tech Entrepreneurs:
Understanding DEMO Capital Decision Making," Sloan
Management Review (Winter), 9-20.
Ruhnka, J.C. and J.E. Young, 1991, "Some Hypotheses About Risk in
Venture Capital Investing," Journal of Business Venturing (March),
115-133.
Sahlman, W.A., 1988,
Investment,"
Sahlman, W.A., 1990, "The DEMO
Organizations," Journal
Tyebjee, T.T. and A.V. Bruno, 1984, "A Model of Venture
Investment Activity,"
Warne, K.F., 1988, Essays DEMO
Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation.
of Financial
Applied
and
of Financial
Management
the
" Aspects
Journal of
Governance
Economics
(October),
of Venture-Capital
473-521.
Science
(September),
Capitalist
1051-1066.
Venture
Capital
Market, Yale University
Corporate
Contracting DEMO Venture
Finance
(Winter),
Capital
23-36.{1g42fwefx}