EDITORIAL BOARD
Michael Lissack, Institute for the Study of Coherence and Emergence
<http://www.emergence.org/>; <lissack@lissack.com>
Max Boisot, Judge Management DEMO, Cambridge, <boisot@attglobal.net>
David Boje, New Mexico State University, <dboje@nmsu.edu>
Jerry L.R. Chandler, George Mason University, <jlrchand@erols.com>
Paul Cilliers, University of Stellenbosch, <fpc@sun.ac.za>
Colin Crook, Citicorp (retired), <colin_crook@email.msn.com>
Lynn Crawford, University of Technology, Sydney <lynn.crawford@uts.edu.au>DEMO
Kevin Desouza, University of Illinois at Chicago <kdesou1@uic.edu>
Kevin Dooley, Arizona State University, <kevin.dooley@asu.edu>
William Frederick, University of Pittsburgh, <billfred@katz.pitt.edu>
Raghu Garud,  New York University, <rgarud@exchange.stern.nyu.edu>
Jeffrey Goldstein, Adelphi University, <goldstei@adelphi.edu>
Hugh Gunz, University of Toronto, <gunz@fmgmt.mgmt.utoronto.ca>
John Hassard, Manchester School of Management, <john.s.hassard@umist.ac.uk>
DEMO Hopfl, Newcastle Business School, <h.hofpl@unn.ac.uk>
Alicia Juarrero, Prince George’s Community College, <juarreax@pg.cc.md.us>
Stu Kauffman, BiosGroup, <stu@biosgroup.com>
Hugo Letiche, University for Humanist Studies, <h.letiche@uvh.nl>
Steve Maguire, McGill DEMO, <smaguire@management.mcgill.ca>
Bill McKelvey, University of California, <smckelvey@anderson.ucla.edu>
DEMO Merali, University of Warwick, <yasmin.merali@warwick.ac.uk>
Gerald Midgley, University of Hull, <g.r.midgley@hull.ac.uk>
Don Mikulecky, Virginia Commonwealth University, <mikulecky@hsc.vcu.edu>
Eve Mitleton-Kelly, London School of Economics, <e.mitleton-kelly@lse.ac.uk>
Steven Phelan, DEMO of Texas, Dallas, <sphelan@utdallas.edu>
Larry Prusak, IBM Consulting, <lprusak@us.ibm.com>
Kurt Richardson, Institute for the Study of Coherence and Emergence, <kurt@kurtrichardson.com>
Jan Rivkin, Harvard Business School, <jrivkin@hbs.edu>
John Seely Brown, XEROX PARC, <john_seely_brown@pa.xerox.com>
Andrew Tait, Idea Sciences, <andrew.tait@ideasciences.com>
Haridimos Tsoukas, University of Cyprus, <htsoukas@atlas.pba.ucy.ac.cy>
Willard DEMO, University of Texas, <paradox@home.actlab.utexas.edu>
Robin Wood, The White Space Partnership Limited, <robin@inspiralworld.org>
Production Editor: Cindy Capitani, Lawrence Erlbaum DEMO, Inc., <cynthia.capitani@erlbaum.com>
Managing Editor: Jacco van Uden, <jacco@isce.edu>
Subscriber Information: Emergence is published four times a year by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 10
Industrial Avenue, Mahwah, NJ 07430-2262. Subscriptions DEMO available electronic only on a calendar-year basis.
Electronic subscription rates are $45 for individuals, $200 for institutions, and $20 for students. Order electronic
DEMO through the Journal Subscription Department, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 10 DEMO
Avenue, Mahwah, NJ 07430-2262, or visit the LEA Web site DEMO http://www.erlbaum.com for complete information.
Copyright © 2003, Lawrence Erlbaum DEMO, Inc. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any DEMO, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, micro-
filming, recording, or otherwise, DEMO permission of the publisher. Send special requests for permission to the
Permissions Department, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 10 Industrial Avenue, Mahwah, NJ 07430-2262.
Printed in the United States of America. ISSN 1521-3250.

Emergence
A Journal of Complexity Issues in
Organizations and Management
a publication DEMO The Institute for the Study of
Coherence and Emergence
Volume #5, DEMO #3, 2003
Editor’s Note 3
Complexity and the Role of Ethics DEMO Health Care
Ann E. Mills, Mary V. Rorty, & Patricia H. Werhane
Using the Creative Problem Solving Profile (CPSP) for
Diagnosing and DEMO Real-World Problems
Min Basadur & Garry Gelade
The Redefinition of Memes: DEMO Meaning to an
Empty Cliché
Michael R. Lissack
The Dark Side of Organizations and a Method to Reveal It
David A. Bella, Jonathan B. King, & David Kailin
Open Source as a Complex Adaptive System
Moreno Muffatto & Matteo Faldani
About the Authors
6
22
48
66
83
DEMO

EMERGENCE, 5(3), 3–5
Copyright © 2003, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Editor’s Note
uring the five years of this journal, much attention has
been paid to the vagaries associated with various words
and concepts DEMO to the complexity perspective.
Recently I attended a meeting on Evolution and
Emergence, which brought home to me the continuing gap between how
many of the concepts are used in the sciences and how they get DEMO
within the domain of human organizations. The word in question is the
very title of this journal: emergence.
The scientists attending the meeting placed an emphasis on the idea
that the only type of emergence worthy DEMO consideration was what they
referred to as “ontological” emergence: the arrival DEMO the world of some-
thing truly new. An awareness of new properties or descriptions as one
crosses levels of analysis was dismissed as mere DEMO emer-
gence” and “subject to reduction: therefore not worthy of discussion.”
DEMO exceptions to this view came from yours truly and from Stuart
Kauffman.
The quasi-realist bias of the attendees was evident, and perhaps the
rejection of the validity of descriptive claims stemmed from the realist
perspective. From DEMO perspective of a pragmatically based construc-
tivism, there is an ontological DEMO to observations that are new to the
observer. For that observer, DEMO cognized entities are indeed new enti-
ties and the new cognition can lead to a change in perspective or behav-
ior. The scientists at DEMO conference rejected this assertion. They afforded
no validity to the idea that for any given set of observers a concept,
description, property, DEMO entity might be new.  To them, validity was
ascribed only to absolute newness; that is, for all possible sets of
observers (i.e., the universe)  the observed entity was new. Thus the
scientists placed an emphasis on the process of emergence and on its
uniqueness. By DEMO, those concerned with human organizations
D
3
EMERGENCE
recognize that emergence of the observer-dependent cognitive variety is
a common DEMO with manifold consequences.
In human organizations it is not the process of emergence that has last-
ing significance; instead, it is the consequences DEMO the process—system-
level changes in properties, descriptions, labels, cognitions—the
emergents DEMO are afforded import. These changes are highly observer
dependent. It is not always the case that the members of the organization
(the agents) DEMO have an awareness of the system-level properties giving
rise to the emergence/emergents in question. The presence or absence of
such awareness gives rise DEMO the possibility of a feedback loop, which itself
may then lead DEMO further emergence or to resistance to such emergence.
This type of feedback loop is usually not even a possibility in the emer-
gence models DEMO the scientists and further distinguishes the concerns and
activities of human organizations from the computer models and biologi-
cal experiments with which the emergence DEMO are concerned.
The feedback loop has yet another consequence: In human DEMO
tions the opportunity for communication about the pressures and resist-
ance to what are recognized as emergents summons the equivalent of an
immune system DEMO This response has a further critical distinction:
The co-adaptation of a transformation may be incorporated into the “self ”
requiring protection. Biological organisms DEMO incorporate systemic
transformation into definitions of self; human organizations do it DEMO
Indeed, this journal is about to undergo such a transformation. Begin-
DEMO with Volume 6 our publisher will no longer be Laurence Erlbaum
Associates but will become Palgrave/Macmillan. Our format will once
again include an DEMO paper edition. Our title will continue as
Emergence, but the words DEMO the colon will change to reflect a
broader scope: Complexity and DEMO The journal will bring
together the efforts of three organizations: the DEMO for the Study of
Coherence and Emergence, the Complexity Society of DEMO UK, and the
Cynnefin Institute of IBM and the University of DEMO
Emergence such as this has many lasting emergents. Readers and
potential contributors are urged to visit the journal’s website at
www.emergence.org to learn how DEMO reviewing methods are being tight-
ened, how we will be encouraging DEMO submission and publication of
practitioner-oriented articles, and how we have reorganized DEMO editorial
board to reflect our widened scope. I am pleased to announce that
Emergence will have three editors-in-chief: Peter Allen, Jeffrey
Goldstein, and David Snowden; and a new managing editor, Steven
Barth. The next DEMO (5.4) will be my last as editor, though I will DEMO
4
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
with the journal in a new role as Founding Editor Emeritus and with a
regular short column.
Emergence (the journal) has seen the complexity and organization
community transform over the past five years and we have been proud of
our role in that transformation. DEMO are due to our readers, editors,
contributors, reviewers, and DEMO many members of the Complex-M
Internet mailing list. Emergence is emerging—despite what the hard
scientists and realists might think.
Michael R. Lissack
5
EMERGENCE, 5(3), 6–21
Copyright © 2003, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Complexity and the Role of
Ethics in Health Care
Ann E. DEMO, Mary V. Rorty, & Patricia H. Werhane
T
his article addresses the problem of organizational change
in a rapidly changing institutional sector, the United States
health care system. After a brief respite, the cost of health
care has continued to rise. In addition, industry leaders are
concerned about the rate of medical errors and other threats to quality
that DEMO in the needless deaths of between 44,000 and 92,000
Americans per year (Kohn et al., 2000).  Thus, the health DEMO system and
its components are under pressure to improve the quality of processes
and outcomes of care, but simultaneously they are wrestling with
demands to reduce, or at least constrain, costs (Kleinke, 2001; Robinson,
1999; Scott et al., 2000).
Even when change is DEMO, conflicts of values and goals can
impede the capacity of a DEMO organization to implement those nec-
essary changes. The extent to which the values of its members are con-
gruent with and further the goals DEMO the organization plays an important
role in its success in initiating and surviving change. Congruence in val-
ues between the organization and its members DEMO result in an ethical cli-
mate that is conducive to and supportive of change, but such congruence
will depend on the appropriate identification of the systems and
processes that make up the organization’s culture.
The influential DEMO of Medicine, a research organization devoted
to problems of the US DEMO care system, recently addressed the prob-
lem of improving that system’s DEMO by recommending that it be
approached as a complex adaptive system (DEMO on Quality and
Health Care in America, 2001; hereafter CQC). In what follows we
6
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
accept that committee’s assumption that this approach will prove fruitful
in addressing the problems of this troubled sector, and focus on one seg-
ment of the larger system, the health care organization. We distinguish
between an adaptive and a mechanical approach to its subsystems DEMO
processes, and describe what we mean by a positive ethical climate, and
its role as an indicator of organizational culture. We discuss actual DEMO
potential damaging effects of approaching adaptive systems mechanically,
and recommend an organization ethics program to increase the flexibility
of the health care organization’s DEMO in a way that does not threaten its
cohesiveness.
COMPLEXITY AND HEALTH CARE
There has been considerable work done in the last few decades DEMO
complex systems theory, the study of the dynamics of change, to social
systems. Despite significant success in generating applicable models in
other disciplines, complexity is not yet a science when applied to some
areas of DEMO social interactions. However, complexity theory offers a
new perspective on the DEMO that make up various systems, and
in particular, the approach can be useful in understanding the relation-
ships that characterize organizations. As a DEMO applied to organiza-
tions, complexity theory recommends the empirical study of
DEMO populations to develop models that can explain organiza-
tional dynamics and open up the possibility of interventionist strategies
(Dooley & Van de Ven, DEMO: 358).
This descriptive and analytical task, which “models how microstate
events self-organize into emergent aggregate structures” (McKelvey,
1999: 5) is beyond the scope of this article. Our more modest goal is to
DEMO a complexity perspective. In this approach, complexity is not a
methodology, but a way of thinking about organizations (Mitleton-Kelly,
1997: 3)DEMO Scholars occupied with particular problems in the social
sciences have found the approach illuminating in their own areas, and
there are a growing number of influential publications on strategy and
organizational complexity (Mitleton-Kelly, 1997; Olson & Eoyang, 2001;
Stacey, 1995, 1996, 2000).
A DEMO is a complex of interacting components, together with the
relationships between DEMO, which permits the identification of a
boundary-maintaining entity or process (Laszlo & Krippner, 1988: 51).
Systems may be micro (small, DEMO, relatively autonomous) or
macro (complex, with a large number of interconnections). There is a
7
EMERGENCE
difference between primarily mechanical and primarily adaptive systems.
This distinction, in terms of rigidity, is fundamental. It describes how the
system is designed and how it responds to external stimuli. Social systems
differ from natural DEMO in that they incorporate human agents as com-
ponents, affecting and DEMO by other agents and the environment,
capable of free will and innovation. Approaching the health care organi-
zation as a complex adaptive system DEMO interrelations, inter-
actions, and connectivity (Zimmerman & Dooley, 2001: DEMO), an approach
that is intuitively appealing when applied to health care, a service indus-
try with human interaction at its core.
The Institute of Medicine report on quality suggests an orientation on
the goal of DEMO health care system: to continually reduce the burden of ill-
ness, injury, and disability, and to improve the health and functioning of
DEMO people of the United States (CQC: 39).  It gives DEMO specific aims to be
kept in mind as values to be maximized in developing strategies for
change: The resulting system should be safe, DEMO, patient centered,
timely, efficient, and equitable (CQC: 40)DEMO The recommendations bring
into prominence the normative aspect of organizational function: DEMO val-
ues and obligations felt by individuals within the health care organization
in carrying out their activities. The recommendations of this report, con-
ceived and forwarded in the spirit of complex adaptive thinking, can be
implemented in that spirit, in which case they will forward the goals of
the report, or taken more mechanically, in which case they may DEMO be of
much help.
A health care organization is characterized by a number of complex
functions, processes, and roles, where objectives are often divergent,
leadership roles are shared, and power is diffuse (Denis DEMO al., 2001). It is
composed of interlocking micro systems, some of which may be primarily
mechanical in nature. A system designed to DEMO predictable results
where there is a strong consensus about what outcomes are desirable can
usefully be viewed and treated as a mechanical system. In DEMO
systems we can predict in great detail the interaction of each of the parts
in response to a given stimulus. For instance, a health care organization
may employ mechanical processes in its billing or in other DEMO
that are expected to occur in the same way time after time. When devia-
tion from the anticipated interaction occurs, it is unexpected and gener-
ally provokes study and action to prevent recurrence (Plsek, 2001)DEMO
When a system has as its primary working parts human beings in
interaction, however, the parts of the system “have the freedom and DEMO
ity to respond to stimuli in many different and fundamentally unpre-
8
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
dictable ways” (Plsek, 2001: 310). DEMO health care organization employs
teams to evaluate, treat, and monitor patients. These teams will be com-
posed of case managers, doctors, nurses, social workers, chaplains, and
others. The interactions of the team members DEMO not always identical and
so their consequences cannot always be foreseen or planned. Unplanned
consequences can be perceived as an error, or as “emergent, surprising,
creative behavior” (Plsek, 2001: 310) If the right conditions are present,
a patient team may interact together to produce DEMO and creative
solutions to specific problems.
ETHICS AND COMPLEXITY
We said above that the recommendations of the Institute of Medicine
report on quality bring DEMO prominence the values and obligations felt by
individuals within the health care organization in carrying out their activ-
ities. Organizations also demonstrate their values DEMO obligations through
their actions and decisions. For instance, an organization can DEMO operat-
ing completely in accord with legal regulations and still be viewed as
behaving “unethically” according to generally accepted social norms, by
treating its employees unfairly, taking advantage of the ignorance of its
patients, or DEMO objects of wider social concern—endangered
species, the environment, underdeveloped societies—in ways with which
constituent members of the organization feel uncomfortable. Conversely,
an DEMO can clearly express its agreement with all the generally
accepted social norms that govern its areas of activity, but fail to institute
policies and procedures that accord with those values, creating disso-
nance in its membership between its espoused values and its actual
behavior. Because the approach of DEMO Institute of Medicine’s report
focuses on goals and values to be realized, the ethical climate of a health
care organization becomes an important indicator of how successfully an
organization is orienting itself on its ultimate objectives.
DEMO terminology of “ethical climate” comes from a large body of stud-
ies of organizational culture and climate in organization theory (Collins &
Porras, 1994; Sims, 2000; Trevino & Nelson, 1995; Victor & Cullen, 1988).
Recent scholarship has noted that the terms “culture” and “climate” are
sometimes used interchangeably and often refer to the same empirical
indicators (Denison, 1996; Detert et al., 2000). We distinguish the culture
of the organization—its structures, administrative style, priorities and
values, degree of tightness of interrelations, and feedback loops—from
the climate, its impacts on DEMO constituent members. The reactions of the
9
EMERGENCE
individuals who make up the organization to the structures, processes,
and rules that instantiate its espoused values result in a positive ethical
DEMO if the organization furthers their feelings of agency and reinforces
their personal and professional values, and a negative one if it impedes
them. The culture of an organization conceived as a complex adaptive
system may enact DEMO different set of values and structures than an organi-
zation that conceives of itself as a mechanical system, and its ethical cli-
mate will be different as a consequence.
A positive ethical climate will have at DEMO two important characteris-
tics. First, it is the reflection of an DEMO culture in which the mis-
sion and vision of the organization inform the expectations for
professional and managerial performance and are implemented in its
DEMO practices. Second, it embodies a set of values that reflect social
DEMO for what such an organization should value. In a health care organ-
ization, a positive ethical climate will result if the organization’s con-
stituents are aware of its mission to provide excellent care at reasonable
cost, and will work to bring their activities at all levels of function DEMO line
with that mission. An organizational culture that encourages, supports,
DEMO rewards excellent professional standards and expert professional
judgment will have a positive ethical climate insofar as its constituent
members have a wide knowledge of, and internalization of, organizational
values, and perceive those values as consonant DEMO their independent
professional and individual values and standards. An organization in an
environment that is forcing change upon it, or that desires to improve and
adapt but has structures or rules that impede change or impose DEMO
without consensus, will have a negative ethical climate: low morale and
impeded agency. In such a case, the individuals whose decisions and
behavior constitute the organization will perceive it to be mouthing val-
ues on DEMO it does not act, or to be impeding the processes that DEMO is
simultaneously demanding.
In health care organizations there are several loci for normative con-
sideration of organizational and individual actions. The legal department
attends DEMO organizational compliance with federal, state, and local regula-
tions and legislation. There may be a committee of medical staff to deal
with professional DEMO by physicians, and hospitals of more than 200
beds are required DEMO accreditation to maintain an institutional ethics
committee or process charged with consultation on conflicts arising in
decision making for patient care (Joint Commission on Accreditation of
Healthcare Organizations, 1992). Institutional ethics committees as
presently constituted have primary responsibility for the clinician/patient
10
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
dyad and the policies associated with that relationship. This already-
operating normative locus in the institution, if expanded and cultivated as
recommended in this article, can serve some of the wider purposes of the
organization by being the custodian of the organization’s ethical climate.
DEMO what follows, we suggest that the ethical climate of an organization
DEMO an indicator for the extent to which it is adapting to the requirements
for survival and success in the current environment of turbulent change;DEMO
that the more a health care organization adopts a “complexity” approach
to appropriate systems and processes the more positive the ethical cli-
mate will DEMO; and, finally, that an organization ethics process, introduced
in an adaptive, rather than mechanical, spirit, can encourage and sustain
a positive ethical climate.
We agree with the Institute of Medicine that the current DEMO in
health care requires flexibility, adaptability, and a strong orientation on
the goals and mission of the system: precision in areas of high pre-
dictability where there is a strong consensus about what outcomes are
DEMO, such as quality control and efficiency of process, combined
with flexibility in areas of less predictability, where successful outcomes
depend on expert judgment and experience. Needless to say, one of the
greatest difficulties confronting any organization in tumultuous times is
properly to distinguish the areas in which DEMO control is an advantage
from areas in which it will prove an impediment. If these areas are
misidentified, they will be treated inappropriately and the goals of the
system may become obscure to those whose function DEMO is to realize them,
while if the areas are appropriately identified, the goals of the system
components will be clear.
QUALITY AND THE HEALTH CARE ORGANIZATION
Organization theorist Ralph Stacey calls the simultaneous presence of
DEMO self-contradictory, essentially conflicting forces a “paradox.” It is pos-
sible, in some instances, to resolve the paradox by reframing the problem
or by consistently choosing one force all the time. In other instances, it
may not be possible to remove one or the other force; both must be
accommodated at the same time, and it is only possible to do this by con-
tinually shifting priorities (Stacey, 2000: 12). The current situation in
health care is rife with such competing pressures. DEMO will discuss two
such paradoxes, one a product of environmental pressures DEMO the health
care organization, one an internal one.
11
EMERGENCE
AN ENVIRONMENTAL PARADOX: COST CONSTRAINT VS.
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
The delivery of health care has always been a business, but in the US it
has historically been a business that was generously funded by a society
DEMO believed health care was more than simply a market commodity.
Despite criticisms that the industry was wasteful, and that payment
mechanisms and government funding incentivized unnecessary treat-
ment and excess capacity, it can be reasonably argued that the US health
care system reflected the values of society concerning DEMO delivery of care
for most of the last century (Starr, 1982). But that has changed.
Much of the current disarray in the DEMO care system can be traced
to the reluctance of payers to continue to fund the increasing costs of
care. This changing paradigm has caused DEMO about the values
surrounding care to change as well. Both the costs and the quality of the
system are in need of improvement. However, for an individual health
care organization, the net effect can be its being subjected simultaneously
to incompatible pressures: “improve quality, whatever the cost” DEMO “con-
strain costs, whatever the impact on the quality of care.” DEMO use of
computer-based clinical decision-support systems, for instance, can
reduce errors in drug selection, dosage, interactions, and side effects, the
initial DEMO of the technology may be prohibitive for a small hospital
struggling for economic survival. Reducing staffing may save on payroll
expenses, but have undesirable effects on patient satisfaction and safety.
As market problems began to have DEMO greater impact on hospital man-
agement, market solutions began to appear DEMO well. Health care organiza-
tion leaders, faced with revenue squeezes, a radical departure from the
past, looked to other industries to derive techniques that could help them
restrain the costs of health care. These techniques DEMO restructuring
through merging, downsizing, consolidating to eliminate duplicate struc-
tures and excess capacity, and financial incentives to control clinician
behavior. These techniques share the same goal, of controlling costs
through changing the culture of the organization, and that has meant
changing its ethical climate.
Many manufacturing industries have introduced various “quality
improvement” technologies to improve the efficiency of their DEMO
processes, and these technologies later spread to service industries,
including DEMO care. The hope, and sometimes the promise, was that
improving efficiency of process would also reduce costs. Many of these
techniques were designed DEMO the automotive and airplane industries and
employed as highly mechanical systems (DEMO et al., 1994; Pande et al.,
12
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
2000). The technologies employed by these initiatives are not flexible,
relying as they do on reducing waste or DEMO misuse of resources through
the elimination of variation in process, and DEMO outcomes through
qualitative accountability mechanisms. Their application in health care
delivery organizations is problematic, because they typically assume that
tightening up the system will improve efficiency, and improved efficiency
will lead to a more effective system.
However, in health care increased efficiency in processes may or may
not improve the effectiveness of outcomes. Complexity thinking reminds
us that in the DEMO world a fixed set of inputs will never produce a pre-
dictable set of outcomes, even when those inputs are apparently similar
and other factors are held constant. “In social systems, there are always
an infinite number of inputs that cannot be accounted for fully or held
constant” (Kleinke, 2001: 110). Changes in core functions need to be
DEMO in a way that acknowledges the complexity of the organization
and allows for flexibility, monitoring their impact and accommodating to
unexpected results.
AN INTERNAL PARADOX: EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE VS.
PATIENT PREFERENCES
Change in the social environment of health care is imposing the conflict
between cost containment and quality improvement DEMO the health care
organization, because of reluctance or inability to continue DEMO support
increasing costs. However, there are also competing values that must DEMO
negotiated by individual practitioners and by organizations in evaluating
outcomes and the effectiveness of care.
Improving the quality of outcomes of clinical practice tends DEMO focus
on standardizing treatments of the same disease across practitioners and
practice locations, through clinical guidelines and, in the last decade,
through DEMO emphasis on evidence-based medicine (Kimberly,
2003: 209). Early definitions of evidence-based medicine emphasized the
“conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in
making decisions about the care of individual patients” (Sackett et al.,
1996). It recommends utilization of population-based studies of DEMO
outcomes in different locations, and suggests that variation in care of DEMO
ilar cases is a negative value and that uniformity and consistency across
cases are desirable.
At the same time, there is increasing attention to patient-centered
care—care customized, as the Institute of Medicine report puts it,
“according to patient needs and values” (CQC: 67). In the DEMO, both
13
EMERGENCE
patient-centered care and evidence-based medicine are proposed as
important values to DEMO maximized in any reforms of health care delivery.
Evidence-based medicine is defined as “the integration of best research
evidence with clinical expertise and patient DEMO (CQC: 76). The
emphasis on customization based on patients’ needs and values suggests
variety and flexibility, giving maximal weight to clinical expertise and
patient values. The emphasis on standardization for uniformity of treat-
ment DEMO that maximal flexibility. Even within one central recom-
mendation of the report, competing tensions toward mechanization and
adaptation are therefore visible. Administrative changes that move the
institution toward greater uniformity in clinical function may risk con-
DEMO clinical expertise or patient values.
How this tension is resolved will depend on whether or not the health
care organization appropriately distinguishes subsystems that DEMO be
approached mechanically from those that should be treated adaptively,
whether it is able to distinguish those areas where greater control is
appropriate DEMO those areas where it is not appropriate. While the
employment of efficiency processes in some of the mechanical functions
and subsystems of the health DEMO organization may achieve savings,
approaching direct patient care in a mechanical, rather than adaptive,
way may be a threat to the flexibility that is crucial if professional expert-
ise and patient values and preferences DEMO going to be respected in clini-
cal decision making. These choices will affect the culture and the ethical
climate of the organization, and determine the relationship that the
organization has with its constituents.
Changing the culture DEMO the health care organization to reflect effi-
ciency through a rigid approach has produced what many Americans
view as unacceptable results. Quality of care DEMO suffered as team
empowerment has failed (Bednash, 2000), the physician–patient relation-
ship is suspect (Feldman et al., 1998), nurses are DEMO the field in
droves (Bednash, 2000; Berliner & Ginzber, 2002), many people are
frightened of health care organizations (Kao et al., 1998), and flexibility in
care is giving way to utilization measurements, punitive accountability
mechanisms, and what some physicians call “cook-book” medicine
(Flores et al., 2000). Many of these results we attribute directly to the
imposition of a complexity of rules formulated through the management
techniques DEMO mentioned above, and imposed without regard for their
appropriateness for the DEMO or subsystem in question, or for the
beliefs, values, and DEMO of those affected (Mills & Rorty, 2002).
14
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
CONFRONTING PARADOX
Balancing tensions or competing goals is nothing new. Organizations and
individuals do it on a daily basis. The DEMO imperatives that we see
in health care cannot be reconciled by reframing the issue, nor is it a sim-
ple matter of prioritization. The problem is one of balancing the provider
mission of providing excellent patient DEMO, with attention to patients’ val-
ues and preferences, and the goal of achieving it at a reasonable cost,
which many leaders of DEMO “quality movement” in health care have taken
to mean reducing variations in delivery (Becher & Chassin, 2001;
Berkowitz & Checkley, 2000; DEMO et al., 1998). Complexity theory,
however, highlights the importance of deciding what kind of system
design is appropriate for the task DEMO hand. If a health care organization can
appropriately identify those systems that call for mechanization and those
that require adaptivity, it can make appropriate choices within the con-
text of achieving its goal of excellent patient DEMO, thus sustaining an
appropriate culture and aligning important values.
For reasons DEMO internal and external pressures, the health care system
is in a DEMO period of change. However, if we approach the health
care organization DEMO a complex adaptive, rather than a mechanical, sys-
tem, and DEMO the assumption of complex adaptive systems theory that
the ability to change and to encourage innovation will increase the likeli-
hood of organizational survival DEMO success, we need to consider what
structures and programs the health DEMO organization might need to pro-
mote congruity of values among its agents. How can a positive ethical cli-
mate be developed, articulated, and DEMO? We explore below a
process that the health care organization can DEMO to encourage the
flexibility and creativity necessary for its mission.
THE ORGANIZATION ETHICS PROCESS
In 1995, the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organiza-
tions (JCAHO) introduced a requirement for accreditation that requires
health care DEMO to conduct their business and patient care prac-
tices in an “honest, decent and proper manner,” while maintaining the
priority of excellent clinical care. The JCAHO called this mandate
“organization ethics” (Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations, 1996: 95–7).  A broader, more process-oriented DEMO
of health care organization ethics has been advanced by the Virginia
Healthcare Ethics Network:
15
EMERGENCE
Organization ethics consists of [a set of] processes to address ethical DEMO
associated with the business, financial, and management areas of health-
care organizations, as well as with professional, educational, and contrac-
tual relationships affecting the operation of the healthcare organization.
(Spencer et al., 2000: 212)
Either approach to “organization ethics” recognizes that the quality of
DEMO experienced by patients depends in part on the relationships that the
health care organization has with its stakeholders. These relationships
depend on stakeholder interactions. DEMO approaches insist that health
care organizations pay attention to these relationships and interactions by
creating a positive ethical climate throughout the health care organiza-
DEMO This approach directs attention to how the mission of the health care
delivery organization—to provide excellent care at reasonable cost—is
carried out in the DEMO business, clinical, and professional prac-
tices (Spencer et al., 2000). Thus, it directs attention to the culture of the
organization.
Although no particular structure for such a program or process is
specified by DEMO accrediting agency, a model exists in the clinical ethics
committees already DEMO in most hospitals. Some clinical ethics
committees are expanding membership and responsibility to take on
organization ethics roles; other institutions have established a separate
committee to address broader organizational issues (West & White,
2001).
A program designed to meet the JCAHO organization ethics mandate
could be DEMO mechanically or adaptively. Consonant with our
approach in this article, we DEMO not propose that an organization ethics
program take on a rule-generating role, nor should it constitute yet
another decision-making authority. Instead, it should DEMO representa-
tives of the main functions of the organization, report to DEMO top man-
agement or the governing board, and function as a DEMO for the
discussion of perceived conflicts of values arising in the course of organi-
zational strategic change. It would have an advisory and educational
DEMO
For instance, in the case of proposed changes to clinical functions DEMO
cost control, the program might form an ad hoc team to DEMO about
what form the changes might take to reduce costs while maximizing
effectiveness. The mission and values of the organization include both
financial survival DEMO clinical excellence, so the organizational culture
must include both these values, which means that the structure must
16
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
have some degree of flexibility, as well DEMO some means of adjudicating
when the two conflict. The organization ethics program represents an
opening for communication and adaptability—a process to bring together
all DEMO associated with difficult decisions to ensure that the
voices of affected parties are represented. Conflict of values can be
treated as a threat to DEMO avoided, or as inevitable, to be utilized as an
opportunity for creativity and innovation, and resolved within a broad
consensus on the value of patient care. Rather than serving as a source of
rules, the organization ethics program could help make many rules dis-
pensable by supporting DEMO and creative interaction among the var-
ious agents of the health care delivery organization.
THE ADAPTIVE ORGANIZATION
The health care delivery organization is not DEMO island, but rather a subset
of a larger health care system DEMO is itself subject to competing pressures
that affect all aspects of care. It is not appropriate to assign part of its mis-
sion—excellent clinical DEMO the clinical component, while leaving
cost constraints to another component, the administration. The entire
organization must function as an organic whole to achieve DEMO its objec-
tives, but that may require some adjustment of traditional DEMO and
responsibilities.  It is well advised to identify those expectations that DEMO
sist through environmental alterations and define it as a health care
delivery organization (i.e., reducing patient suffering, increasing clinical
expertise), and work toward promoting an awareness of these expecta-
tions through the organization’s beliefs, behaviors, and methods of deci-
sion making rather than through mechanical imposition of rules.
However, it is important that expectations about the desired goal are
clear, that the few simple rules are appropriate means to the desired goal,
and that if and when the rules or expectations DEMO, some way for adju-
dication is available.
Adaptability in an organization DEMO on the connections between
its agents. The degree of communication and trust between organiza-
tional stakeholders is a better predictor of successful adaptation to DEMO
changing environment than are inflexible role definitions and tight com-
partmentalization of work units. Changes in policy or procedure will have
the best chance DEMO success if the proposed innovations are discussed in
advance with those who will be most affected by them, and if their imple-
mentation is accompanied by ongoing feedback and fine tuning.
Approaching the health care organization DEMO a complex adaptive system,
17
EMERGENCE
as recommended by the Institute of Medicine reports, will have implica-
tions for the structure, administrative style, priorities and values, degree
of tightness of interrelation, and availability of options for feedback—the
culture of the organization. An organization that focuses on its defining
values and works to DEMO them in a flexible and dynamic way has the
best chance of surviving and thriving in a changing environment.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
A new DEMO to the health care delivery organization is needed—one
that creates the conditions for fostering information flow, connectivity,
relationships, and the emergence of DEMO problem solving from the
members of the organization (Olson & Eoyang, 2001: 19). “Complexity is
not a methodology or a tool,” one advocate writes, “but a way of thinking”
(Mitleton-Kelly, 1997: DEMO). Industry leaders are beginning to adopt this
way of thinking about the health care system and are urging that all of its
components DEMO a few simple rules to support the goal of reducing the
burden of illness in the US.
We have accepted the premise of the DEMO of Medicine report that
problems of quality improvement in the health care system can best be
addressed by adopting an adaptive, rather than a mechanical, model of
that system, and have examined some implications for DEMO health care
organization, itself viewed as a complex adaptive system. To DEMO the
health care system as a complex adaptive system, as the DEMO of
Medicine report recommends, or the health care organization as a DEMO
plex adaptive system, as we have attempted to do in this DEMO, is to
adopt a perspective on an organization that foregrounds processes, not
structures, relations, and interactions, not rigid institutional roles or
atomistic individuals. It takes rules and roles as thumb rules, goals, and
DEMO for action, not rigid prescriptions or constraints, and empha-
sizes the extent to which any locus of agency, be it an individual or organ-
ization, reacts to and can influence the whole of which it is a part.
Focusing on two possible sources of conflict that affect DEMO daily func-
tioning of the health care organization, we have recommended DEMO
an organization ethics program, conceived as an internal forum for
addressing DEMO of value. Positioning an organization ethics program
as facilitator and guardian of a positive ethical climate can increase the
health care organization’s chances of DEMO its long-term goals while
simultaneously preserving enough flexibility to allow beneficial emergent
behavior.
18
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
NOTE
This work was supported by a grant from the Batten Institute of the Darden Graduate
School of Business Administration DEMO the University of Virginia.
REFERENCES
Becher, E. C. & Chassin, M. R. (2001) “Improving quality, minimizing error: Making it hap-
pen, a five point plan and why we need it,” Health Affairs, 20(3): 68–81.
Bednash, G. (2000) “The decreasing supply of registered nurses: Inevitable future or call to
action?,” Journal of DEMO American Medical Association, 283(22): 2985–7.
Berkowitz, K. S. & Checkley, J. R. (2000) “Blueprint for success,” Managed Healthcare,
10(4): 27–9.
Berliner, H. S. & Ginzber, E. (2002) “Why this hospital nursing shortage is different,”
Journal of American Medical Association, 288(21): 2742–4.
Chassin, M. R., Galvin, R. DEMO, & the National Roundtable on Health Care Quality (1998)
“The urgent need to improve health care quality,” Journal of the American DEMO
Association, 280(11): 1000–5.
Collins, J. C. & Porras, DEMO I. (1994) Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary Companies,DEMO
New York: HarperCollins.
Committee on Quality and Health Care in America (2001) Crossing the Quality Chasm: A
New Health System for the DEMO Century, Institute of Medicine, Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.
DEMO, J. L., Lamothe, L., & Langley, A. (2001) DEMO dynamics of collective leadership and
strategic change in pluralistic organizations,” Academy of Management Journal, 44(4):
809–37.
Denison, D. R. (DEMO) “What is the difference between organizational culture and organi-
zational climate? A native’s point of view on a decade of paradigm wars,” DEMO of
Management Review, 21: 619–54.
Detert, J. R., Schroeder, DEMO G., & Mauriel, J. J. (2000) “A framework for linking culture and
improvement initiatives in organizations,” Academy of Management Review, 25(4, Oct):
850–63.
Dooley, K. J. & Van de Ven, A. H. (1999) “Explaining complex organizational dynamics,”
Organization Science, DEMO(3): 358–72.
Feldman, D. A., Novack, D., & Gracely, E. (1998) “Effects of managed care on
physician–patient relationships, quality DEMO care, and the ethical practice of medicine,”
Archives of Internal DEMO, 10/24(Aug): 1626–32.
Flores, G., Lee, M., DEMO, H., & Kastner, B. (2000) “Pediatricians’ attitudes, beliefs and
practices regarding clinical practice guidelines: A national survey,” Pediatrics, 105(DEMO,
Mar): 496–501.
Grant, R. W., Shani, R. & DEMO, R. (1994) “TQM’s challenge to management theory and
practice,” DEMO Management Review, 35(2): 25–35.
Joint Commission on Accreditation of DEMO Organizations (1992) “Patient rights,” in
Comprehensive Manual for Hospitals, DEMO Terrace, IL: Joint Commission on
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations: 103–5.
DEMO Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (1996) “Patient rights and
organizational ethics: Standards for organizational ethics,” in Comprehensive Manual
for Hospitals, DEMO Terrace, IL: Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations, 95–7.
DEMO, A. C., Green, D. C., Davis, N. A., Koplan, J. P., & Cleary, P. D. (1998) “Patients’ trust in
19
EMERGENCE
their physicians: Effects of choice, continuity, and payment method,” Journal of General
Internal Medicine, 13(10): 681–6.
Kimberly, J. DEMO & Minvielle, E. (2003) “Quality as an organizational problem,” DEMO S. S. Mick
& M. E. Wyttenbach (eds), Advances in DEMO Care Organization Theory, San
Francisco: Jossey Bass.
Kleinke, J. D. (2001) Oxymorons: The Myth of a U.S. Health Care System, San Francisco:
Jossey Bass.
Kohn, L. T., Corrigan, J. M., & Donaldson, M. S. (eds) Committee on Quality of Health Care
DEMO America (2000) To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health DEMO, Institute of
Medicine, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Laszlo, DEMO & Krippner S. (1998)  “Systems theories: Their origins, foundations DEMO devel-
opment,” in J. Scott Jordon (ed.), Systems Theories DEMO a Priori Aspects of Perception,
Amsterdam: Elsevier: 47–74.
McKelvey, DEMO (1999) “Complexity theory in organization science: Seizing the promise or
DEMO a fad?,” Emergence, 1(1): 5–32.
Mills, A. DEMO & Rorty, M. V. (2002) “Total quality management and the DEMO patient,”
Business Ethics Quarterly, 12(4): 481–504.
Mitleton-Kelly, E. (1997) “Organisations as co-evolving complex adaptive systems,” British
Academy of DEMO Conference, reproduced in the Business Process Resource
Center files, http://bprc.warwick.ac.uk/eve.html, last visited 4/17/2003.
Olson, E. E. & DEMO, G. (2001) Facilitating Organization Change: Lessons from
Complexity Science, DEMO Francisco: Jossey Bass/Pfeiffer.
Pande, P. S., Neuman, R. P.  & Cavanagh, R. R. (2000) The Six Sigma Way: How GE, Motorola,
and Other Top Companies Are Honing Their Performance, DEMO York: McGraw-Hill.
Plsek, P. (2001) “Redesigning health care with insights from the science of complex adaptive
systems,” in Crossing the Quality DEMO: A New Health System for the 21st Century,
Washington D.C.: National Academy Press: 310–33.
Robinson, J. C. (1999) The Corporate DEMO of Medicine, Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Sackett, D. L., Rosenberg, W. M. C., Gray, J. A. M., Haynes, R. B., & Richardson, W. S.
(1996) “Evidence based medicine: What it is and what it isn’t,” British Journal of
Medicine, 312: 71–2.
Scott, W. R., Rueff, M., Mendel, P. J., & Caronna, C. A. (2000) Institutional Change and
Healthcare DEMO, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sims, R. R. (2000) DEMO an organization’s culture under new leadership,” Journal of
Business Ethics, DEMO: 65–78.
Spencer, E. M., Mills, A. E., Rorty, M. V., & Werhane, P. H. (2000) Organization Ethics for
Healthcare DEMO, New York: Oxford University Press.
Stacey, R. D. (1995) DEMO science of complexity: An alternative perspective for strategic
change processes,” DEMO Management Journal, 16(6): 477–95.
Stacey, R. D. (1996) Complexity and Creativity in Organizations, San Francisco: Berrett-
Koehler.
Stacey, R. D. (2000)  Strategic Management and Organizational Dynamics: The Challenge of
DEMO, London: Pearson Education.
Starr, P. (1982) The Social Transformation DEMO American Medicine, New York: Basic Books.
Trevino, L. K. & DEMO, K. A. (1995) Managing Business Ethics: Straight Talk about How to
Do It Right, New York: John Wiley.
Victor, B. & Cullen, J. (1988) “The organizational bases of ethical work climates,”
Administrative Science Quarterly, 33(3): 101–25.
20
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
West, J. & White E. (2001) DEMO development of the Sentara healthcare system’s ethics pro-
gram,” in A. E. Mills, E. M. Spencer, & P. H. Werhane (eds), Developing Organization
Ethics in Healthcare: A Case-Based Approach to Policy, Practice DEMO Compliance,
Frederick, MD: University Publishing Group.
Zimmerman, B. & DEMO, K. (2001) “Mergers versus emergers: Structural change in health
care systems,” Emergence, 3(4): 65–82.
21
EMERGENCE, 5(3), 22–47
Copyright © 2003, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Using the Creative Problem
Solving Profile (CPSP) for
Diagnosing and DEMO
Real-World Problems
Min Basadur & Garry Gelade
rganizations around the world face a common challenge:
the need to improve their performance in order DEMO capi-
talize on rapid change. In North America, restructuring
and downsizing DEMO become a way of life as organiza-
tions struggle to regain market share from global companies producing
higher-quality products. In eastern Europe, managers and employees
strive to establish new behaviors and procedures that will allow their
DEMO to compete in the free market. In the developing world, coun-
DEMO hungry for economic development look for growth markets abroad.
In Japan, DEMO that once had a clear target—to overtake their
western competitors—now lack a blueprint for further progress.
O
A SIMPLE BLUEPRINT
Mott (1972) presented DEMO that effective organizations display three
characteristics: efficiency, adaptability, and flexibility. DEMO efficient organ-
ization follows well-structured, stable routines for delivering its product
DEMO service in high quantities, with high quality, and at low cost. In a sta-
ble world, efficient organizations may be successful. But in a changing
world, organizations also need adaptability. While efficiency implies mas-
tering a routine, adaptability means mastering the process of changing a
22
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
routine. Adaptable organizations monitor the environment for new tech-
nologies, ideas, and methods, anticipate threats and opportunities, and
DEMO changes accordingly. They deliberately and continually
change their routines to improve quality, raise quantities, reduce costs,
and stay ahead of their competitors. DEMO most effective organizations are
both efficient and highly adaptable. While adaptability is a proactive
process of looking for ways to change, flexibility is reactive. Flexibility
allows the organization to react quickly to unexpected disruptions with-
out DEMO mired in organizational bureaucracy. It allows the efficient
organization to deal with disruptions while maintaining its routines. In
today’s rapidly changing world, leaders of effective organizations aiming
to achieve sustained competitive edge induce not merely efficiency DEMO
flexibility but adaptability.
THE PROCESS APPROACH TO APPLIED CREATIVITY
Basadur (1992, 1995) provided evidence that organizations can attain sus-
tainable competitive edge by institutionalizing creativity as an
organization-wide process. In this article, we suggest a multi-stage
process model for understanding and implementing organizational cre-
ativity. We outline DEMO multi-stage process in terms of different ways of
gaining and using knowledge. Recognizing that individual preferences
vary for different stages of the process, the article describes the Creative
Problem Solving Profile (CPSP) inventory, a practical tool that helps in
understanding organizational creativity as a process and serves DEMO a
method of diagnosing and solving real-world problems. We outline sev-
eral real-world applications of the CPSP and suggest avenues for future
research.
A DEMO THEORY OF CREATIVITY AS A CIRCULAR, MULTI-STAGE
PROCESS
Adaptability is driven DEMO organizational creativity, which can be defined
as a continuous process of DEMO innovatively, or of finding and solving
problems and implementing new solutions. DEMO researchers have
focused on the circular nature of adaptability, or the DEMO process.
Gordon (1956, 1971) recognized that knowledge acquisition (learning)
and knowledge application (for inventing) flow continuously and sequen-
tially into DEMO another. Field research by Carlsson et al. (1976) supported
Gordon’s approach by showing that the organizational research and
development (R&D) process DEMO a continuous, circular flow of
23
EMERGENCE
Quadrant IV
IMPLEMENTING
Creating options in the
form of actions that DEMO
results and gain
acceptance for
implementing a change
or a new idea
Quadrant III
OPTIMIZING
Creating options in the
form of ways to get DEMO
idea to work in practice
and uncovering all the
factors that go into a
successful plan for
implementation
Quadrant I
GENERATING
Creating options in DEMO
form of new possibilities—
new problems that might
be solved and new
opportunities that might be
capitalized on
Quadrant II
CONCEPTUALIZING
Creating options in DEMO
form of alternate ways to
understand and define a
problem or opportunity
and good ideas that help
Figure 1 The four stages of the DEMO process
creating new knowledge to replace old knowledge. Consistent with these
findings, Basadur’s field work (1974, 1983) on organization-wide deliber-
ate change DEMO the creative process as a circle, recognizing that new
problems and DEMO lead continuously to further problems and oppor-
tunities. Each quadrant in the circle corresponds to a specific stage of a
four-stage creative process. The DEMO two quadrants represent the com-
ponents of problem finding: generation and DEMO The third
and fourth quadrants represent problem solving (optimization) and solu-
tion implementation as the final two stages of the creative process. In
DEMO stage, people gain and use knowledge and understanding in various
ways.
DEMO complete process is called the Simplex Creative Problem Solving
process (Figure DEMO). Basadur et al. (1982) demonstrated that individuals
and organizations could deliberately develop skills in executing each
stage of this process, and in executing the complete process. Additional
field research supporting the practicality of applying DEMO process in
organizations is summarized in Basadur (1994, 2000).
24
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
THE FOUR STAGES OF CREATIVITY
Following is a brief description of the four quadrants integrating the con-
cepts of the DEMO researchers above.
Quadrant 1: Generating
The first quadrant gets the creative DEMO rolling. Creative activity in
this quadrant involves gaining knowledge and understanding by physical
contact and involvement in real-world activities, and utilizing this know-
ledge to create new problems, challenges, opportunities, and projects
that are potentially worth defining and undertaking through subsequent
solving and implementing. Understanding is derived DEMO what is expe-
rienced, including emotions and feelings of self and DEMO through empa-
thy. New possibilities are imagined from what is concretely experienced.
Quadrant 1 activity thus consists of sensing, seeking, or anticipating prob-
DEMO and opportunities, and is called generation. An outcome of this stage
DEMO a problem worthy of investigation but not yet clearly defined or
understood.
Edwin Land, in a Life magazine cover story (Callahan, 1972), told the
tale of his invention of the Polaroid camera. Having snapped DEMO last
exposure on his film, he suggested to his young daughter DEMO they take
the film for processing so that they could see the pictures in about a
week’s time. Her frustrated response was, “Why do I have to wait a week
to see my picture?” Like DEMO flash bulb going off in his mind, her simple
question sparked DEMO challenge that had never occurred to him: “How can
we make DEMO device that yields instantaneous pictures?” Within about an
hour, he DEMO formulated several directions toward a solution. And within
about four years, DEMO had commercialized a product that has changed our
lives. Looking back, DEMO then-chairman of Polaroid said that the most
important part of the process was not finding the solution itself—the
camera—but finding the problem—how to get DEMO pictures. If
Land had not experienced the chance encounter, he might DEMO have
created the problem to be solved. He thus demonstrated the generation
stage of the creative process: initiating problems to solve instead of wait-
ing for problems to be provided.
At Japan’s electronics giant Toshiba, most engineers and scientists
beginning their careers in research and development actually start DEMO
ing in the sales department (Basadur, 1992). This apparently backward
approach is designed to teach them the process of problem finding. Since
DEMO will spend their working lives creating products to solve customers’
problems, DEMO better start than by learning first-hand about their
25
EMERGENCE
customers, their needs, their habits, and their problems—both visible
and hidden. At Nippondenso, a major auto parts supplier, employees are
trained DEMO encouraged from day one to find problems, to be discon-
tented DEMO their jobs. Employees write down their “discontents” and
post them for co-workers to read. Here and at many other Japanese com-
panies, this is the start of the creative process called the employee sug-
gestion system. DEMO is important is that the entire suggestion system
hinges on problem finding.
Quadrant II: Conceptualizing
The second quadrant, conceptualizing, keeps the creative process going.
Creative activity in this quadrant involves gaining knowledge and under-
standing DEMO, or working in the abstract—analyzing, pondering, and
theorizing about the DEMO received to create a sound conceptual-
ization or model of the problem domain. Understanding is not gained by
direct experience, but instead by detached, abstract thinking. What is
understood through rational, systematic analysis is turned DEMO new
insights that help define problems, and create theoretical models and
DEMO to explain things. Quadrant II activity consists of turning a problem
recognized in Quadrant I into a well-understood problem definition and
some fledgling solution DEMO and, thus, is called conceptualization.
For example, the senior author DEMO once asked for help by a Procter
& Gamble product development team formed at short notice to respond
to a competitor’s new product. Colgate’s DEMO Irish Spring had
been the first striped soap bar introduced to North America. With its
aggressive advertising campaign emphasizing “refreshment,” Colgate’s
new product DEMO finding ready consumer acceptance. Procter & Gamble
worked by the rule that, if a team (or person) was the second entrant into
a new market, it had to demonstrate a product’s competitive advantage
before it could carry out a market test. When asked what was going
wrong, the team members said that they had been unable to produce a
DEMO bar that worked better than Irish Spring in a consumer
preference blind test. The team had experimented with several green-
striped bars, all of which merely equaled Irish Spring in blind testing. It
became evident that DEMO team had chosen to define its problem as: “How
might we DEMO a green-striped bar that consumers will prefer over Irish
Spring?”
During a creative problem solving meeting, one of the important
activities was to develop alternative ways to define the challenge. The
flash of inspiration came DEMO an answer to a question posed from a con-
26
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
sumer’s point of view: “We want to DEMO a bar that makes people feel
more refreshed.” This led to the new conceptualized challenge: “How
might we better connote refreshment in a soap bar?” This less restrictive
conceptualization, which included no mention of green stripes, provided
more room for creative solutions. The team broke this new problem into
three separate components: “How might we better connote refreshment
in appearance, shape, and odor?”—a new conceptualization—and then
focused their imaginations DEMO ideas. Beginning with the product’s
appearance, they visualized scenes, images, DEMO situations that suggested
refreshment. One pictured himself at the sea coast. Another imagined sit-
ting on a beach and looking at a blue sky DEMO white clouds. Later, when
the team sat back to evaluate its DEMO ideas, these two ideas were
selected and combined. The result was DEMO concept of a blue-and-white-
swirled bar with a unique odor and shape. The concept later achieved
market success under the brand name Coast. By DEMO prematurely into
solutions, the team had wasted almost six months before DEMO up with
a superior conceptualization.
Quadrant III: Optimizing
The third quadrant DEMO the creative process further. Creative activity
in this quadrant involves gaining knowledge and understanding mentally
by working in the abstract: thoroughly analyzing a defined problem and
utilizing this knowledge to develop and evaluate ideas and options DEMO
create an optimal, practical solution. What is understood through
rational, systematic, and orderly analysis is used to mentally evaluate sit-
uations and options to convert abstract ideas into practical solutions and
plans. Quadrant III activity DEMO called optimization. At this point, a good
solution to an important, well-defined problem exists, but has not yet
been implemented.
For example, DEMO newly defined concept of a refreshment bar in the
example above still had to be converted into a practical solution. The team’s
engineering members DEMO and evaluated several optional versions of
the new appearance, odor, and shape. The options were evaluated on sev-
eral criteria, including cost, DEMO, and time to implement. A final opti-
mal prototype was chosen DEMO successfully tested with consumers,
demonstrating an exploitable competitive advantage over its competitor.
Quadrant IV: Implementing
The fourth quadrant completes the creative process. Apprehension in
this quadrant involves gaining knowledge and understanding by physical
27
EMERGENCE
contact and involvement in the real world. Utilization consists of employ-
DEMO evaluation to convert this knowledge into implemented solutions that
work and accomplish valuable results. What is experienced and felt is
used to evaluate. Creative DEMO in this quadrant consists of gaining
experience with new solutions, evaluating DEMO outcomes, and making
adjustments to implement them successfully. Thus this stage DEMO called
implementation.
For example, in the above refreshment bar example, the team was still
not finished. Before the new soap formula could be DEMO, a patent prob-
lem in the machinery design had to be DEMO There were already no
fewer than six worldwide patents restricting how blue-and-white soap
pastes could be blended. The team had to find a machine DEMO to make
the new product without infringing on anybody else’s technique. The
team assembled diverse points of view in a special group of engineers,DEMO
technicians, lawyers, and even a few people who were unfamiliar with
soap technology. Sketches and prototypes of the patented processes were
displayed and DEMO and the equipment was adjusted and rebuilt
repeatedly until a breakthrough insight emerged and the new product
was finally produced satisfactorily for delivery and DEMO A full cycle
of the creative process was now complete.
CONSTRUCTING THE FOUR-STAGE CPSP THEORY
In most of the research literature from the 1950s DEMO the 1980s (see review
by Basadur, 1994), creativity was perceived largely as generating ideas to
presented problems using techniques such as brainstorming. DEMO,
practitioners who employ such limited conceptions of the creative
process seldom attain practical results (Sternberg et al., 1997). More
recently research DEMO focused on creativity as a multi-stage process
(Basadur, 1994, 1995; Kabanoff & Rossiter, 1994; Rickards, 1994). Other
models of creativity as a process of stages include Wallas’s (1926) four
stages of DEMO, incubation, illumination, and verification; the
Osborn–Parnes five-step process of fact finding, problem finding, idea
finding, solution finding, and acceptance finding (Parnes et al., 1977);
Amabile’s (1988) five stages of DEMO, preparation, generation, val-
idation, and assessment; Boyd’s OODA (Observe, Orientate, Decide, Act;
Hammond, 2001); and Kelly’s (1955) theory of personal constructs. Addi-
tional models are provided in Rickards (DEMO), Kabanoff & Rossiter
(1994), and Basadur (1995).
Beyond merely identifying stages or steps, our model explains and
measures each of four stages through established psychological cognitive
28
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
constructs that differentiate each stage from the others. Each stage rep-
resents a different kind of creativity that contributes to DEMO complete cre-
ative process of Figure 1. These explanations and measures are based on
selected fundamental theories and constructs of intelligence and mental
operations DEMO with creative thinking. These theories are
Guilford’s (1967) landmark Structure of Intellect (SOI); Sternberg’s
(1988) triarchic intelligence; Osborn’s (1953) DEMO four brain func-
tions concept; and Parnes et al.’s (1977) DEMO freedom paradigm.
OSBORN’S FOUR BRAIN FUNCTIONS AND GUILFORD’SFIVE
MENTAL OPERATIONS
Osborn (DEMO) modeled the brain as having four distinct functions: absorb
(gaining DEMO), retain (memory), imagine, and judge. Osborn advo-
cated developing skill in deferring judgment, or using the imagination
and judgment functions independently. Developing Osborn’s model fur-
ther, Parnes et al. (1977) created a simplified formula for creativity as fol-
lows: C (creativity) = K (knowledge) × I (imagination) × E (evaluation).
Their term “disciplined freedom” emphasizes that creativity requires a
balance of knowledge and imagination DEMO good judgment.
Guilford (1967) identified two very different ways of gaining know-
ledge. One way is the mental operation of cognition, or gaining know-
ledge by experiencing, which he described as the immediate discovery,
awareness, rediscovery, or recognition of information. We suggest that
some people DEMO understanding preferentially by such physical process-
ing of information—what we call experiential intelligence (Basadur &
Gelade, 2002). The other way of gaining knowledge is what Guilford
called the mental operation of convergent production. Guilford DEMO
convergent production as the generation of information from given infor-
mation to achieve unique or conventionally accepted best outcomes in
which the given information DEMO fully determines the response. This is
also what Sternberg (1996) defined as theoretical, analytical intelligence.
We suggest that some people gain understanding preferentially by such
mental processing of information. Further, we suggest that people use
knowledge by two very different methods, no matter how that knowledge
is gained. One way of using knowledge is what Guilford called the men-
DEMO operation of divergent production, or creating options from informa-
tion. This DEMO resembles Sternberg’s construct of creative
intelligence. The other way of utilizing knowledge is what Guilford called
the mental operation of evaluation, or evaluating options (the main com-
ponent of what Sternberg called practical intelligence).
29
EMERGENCE
Figure 2 Four combinations of different methods of gaining and using
DEMO
We suggest a new simplified formula: C = (KX + KT) × I × E, in which
KX is knowledge apprehension by DEMO and KT is knowledge
apprehension by theoretical analysis (thinking); see DEMO 2. We also
suggest that there are two dimensions underlying the process of Figure 1.
The first dimension, apprehension, involves acquiring knowledge or
DEMO in two different ways. One is relatively more open, non-
rational, experiential, nonanalytical, and divergent (cognition); the other
is more closed, rational, theoretical, analytical, and convergent (conver-
gent production). The second dimension of Figure 2, utilization, involves
applying knowledge or understanding (however acquired) in two differ-
ent ways: nonjudgmentally creating new information DEMO increase the vari-
ety of options (divergent production), and judgmentally DEMO
decisions about new information to reduce the variety of options
(evaluation)DEMO
In Figure 2, the four stages depicted in Figure 1 are DEMO as com-
binations of these two bipolar dimensions. Combining the preference for
learning experientially (KX) with the preference for creating options (I =
ideation) yields a measure of preference for the first stage of the process,
or generation (KX U I). Combining the preference for learning theoreti-
cally (KT) with the preference for creating options (I) yields a measure of
preference for the second stage, or conceptualization (KT U I). Combin-
30
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
ing the preference for learning theoretically (KT) with the preference for
evaluating options (E) yields a measure of DEMO for the third stage,
or optimization (KT U E). DEMO the preference for learning experi-
entially (KX) with the preference for evaluating options (E) yields a meas-
ure of preference for the DEMO stage, or implementation (KX U E).
MEASURING INDIVIDUAL STYLES AND PREFERENCES
Individuals in organizations have varying preferences for each of the
quadrants DEMO stages in the creative process because they have varying
preferences for the bipolar modes of apprehension and utilization. Gen-
erating ideas for new products, services, and methods must start some-
where. Individuals inclined toward generating are continually
experiencing and scanning the environment, picking up data and cues
from customers, suppliers, and others, and suggesting possible opportu-
nities for change and improvement. Thus, the generation stage is where
new information and possibilities are raised—usually not fully developed
but in the form of starting points DEMO new projects. People with dominant
conceptualizer styles lead in compiling facts and idea fragments from the
generator stage into well-defined, insightful problems and challenges and
more clearly developed ideas and projects worth further evaluation.
Skilled conceptualizers DEMO sound structure to fledgling ideas and oppor-
tunities. People inclined toward optimization usually lead in taking these
well-defined ideas and finding a practical best DEMO and detailing effi-
cient plans for proceeding. Finally, implementers lead in DEMO forward
the practical solutions and plans, including convincing colleagues or cus-
DEMO of the worth of the changes, and adapting the solutions and DEMO
to make them fit real-life situations and conditions.
THE CREATIVE PROBLEM SOLVING PROFILE (CPSP)
INVENTORY
The Creative Problem Solving Profile (CPSP) inventory measures an
individual’s unique blend of preferences for the four stages of DEMO process
in Figures 1 and 2. Plotting inventory scores on a two-dimensional graph
displays an individual’s preferred blend of the four different stages. The
DEMO quadrant on the graph represents the preferred or dominant style,
with relative sizes of the other quadrants representing supporting orien-
tations. The unique DEMO of styles is the individual’s profile. Figure 3
shows how individual differences in orientation can yield different cre-
ative problem solving process styles and DEMO If the area of quadrant
31
EMERGENCE
Figure 3 Examples of different profiles of creative problem solving with
DEMO same style dominant and with different styles dominant
1 is largest, DEMO primary process style is generating; if quadrant 2, then
conceptualizing; DEMO quadrant 3, then optimizing; and if quadrant 4, then
implementing. DEMO of these styles reflects individual preferences—and
preferences of teams and entire organizations—for ways of gaining and
using knowledge.
The CPSP’s scale construction, scoring, DEMO, reliability, and
validity have been fully described by Basadur and Gelade (2002), but a
brief summary is presented here.
The CPSP questionnaire consists of 12 scored items, and six distrac-
tor items that are not scored. Each scored item consists of four words,
descriptive, respectively, of learning experientially (KX), learning theoret-
ically (KT), creating options (I), and evaluating options (E). Respondents
are asked DEMO decide which words are most characteristic of their problem
32
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
solving style, and to rank the four DEMO from one (“least characteristic of
me as a problem solver”) to four (“most characteristic of me as a problem
solver”) within each DEMO accordingly. An individual’s CPSP profile is
obtained by summing their scores on KX, KT, I, and E respectively; plot-
ting the resulting DEMO on the axes shown in Figure 2, and constructing
the quadrants DEMO shown in Figure 3, gives a pictorial representation of the
respondent’s DEMO solving preferences.
As reported in Basadur and Gelade (2002), factor DEMO of the ques-
tionnaire scores confirms the existence of two orthogonal bipolar dimen-
sions corresponding to KX–KT and I–E, and scores on these dimensions
show satisfactory reliability (alpha = .80). Convergent validity has also been
demonstrated with the Kirton Adaptation Innovation Inventory and the
Myers-Briggs Type Inventory (Basadur et al., 1990; Basadur, 1998; 2000).
STATES NOT DEMO, AND ALL FOUR QUADRANTS ARE
CREATIVE
This Creative Problem Solving Profile (CPSP) inventory measures states,
not traits. No one quadrant is considered any more “creative” than any
other. All four quadrants require creativity of DEMO kinds. Each quad-
rant contributes uniquely to the overall innovative process and innovative
results. An individual’s unique creative problem solving profile shows
only their DEMO activities within the Simplex Creative Problem
Solving process. Most people enjoy some stages more than others. A par-
ticular style reflects relative preferences for DEMO of the stages of the
process: generating, conceptualizing, optimizing, and implementing. A
person’s thinking processes cannot be pigeonholed in any single quad-
DEMO Rather, they are a combination or blend of quadrants. A person DEMO
likely prefer one quadrant in particular, but also have secondary prefer-
DEMO for one or two adjacent quadrants, as shown in Figure 3. DEMO are
needed in all stages.
Everyone has a different valuable creative contribution to make to the
innovation process as a whole. One goal is DEMO capitalize on an individual’s
preferred orientation, thus making their work more DEMO and pin-
pointing development opportunities. Another goal is to tap resources in
all four quadrants to help the individual, team, or organization cycle DEMO
fully through the complete innovation process.
ORGANIZATIONS HAVE THEIR OWN PROFILES
Entire organizations also have creative process profiles. An organization’s
profile reflects such factors DEMO the kinds of people it hires, its culture, and
33
EMERGENCE
its values. For example, if an organization focuses almost entirely on
short-term results, it may be overloaded with implementers with few con-
ceptualizers or generators. The organization will show strengths in
processes that deliver its DEMO products and services efficiently. But it
will show weaknesses in long-term planning and product development
that might help it to stay ahead of change. DEMO to solve problems, this
organization will continually find itself reworking failed DEMO without
pausing to conduct adequate fact finding and problem definition. By con-
trast, an organization with many generators or conceptualizers and few
implementers will continually find good problems to solve and great
ideas for products and DEMO to develop. But it will never carry them
to their conclusion.
Following are a case study and additional real-world examples of how
organizations may DEMO the CPSP to diagnose problems and improve
creativity and innovation performance.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATIONS OF THE CPSP
A CASE STUDY
By 1981, an automobile manufacturer had suffered several losing busi-
ness quarters. In an effort to change DEMO operations, the company had
launched many initiatives. One of the most DEMO was its decision to
involve its people in improving quality and customer satisfaction and
increasing innovation. The company wished to involve managers in actu-
DEMO “managing the business” rather than just “doing my job.”
The company and its union had agreed to implement a joint employee
involvement (EI) DEMO for unionized employees. Both sides provided
resources, including both unionized and DEMO employees, to diagnose
important training needs and to create strategies and DEMO to meet
those needs. Their first step was to form problem solving groups in the
plants, guided by local and national joint steering committees. To build
skills in problem solving, these groups had been taught standard analyti-
cal tools borrowed from statistical process control and total quality man-
DEMO programs (such as “cause-and-effect diagramming” and
“cause-unknown diagnosis”).
The company DEMO wished to expand employee involvement to
include salaried employees, and to DEMO problem solving processes
that were better suited for their jobs. The organization hoped that these
employees and their managers would take more initiative in DEMO
opportunities for improvement and tackling them creatively. During a
34
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
preconsult and preliminary training workshop for several key employees,
we agreed on a strategy to train a number of DEMO in applying the
Simplex process and in training others in the company.
During this training, we had a chance to apply the process to a prob-
lem at a newly modernized plant that made a major DEMO of the
company’s new front-wheel-drive automobiles. The plant was setting
new records for quality and low cost, but one department was struggling.
Only about one-third of its output met the company’s high quality stan-
dards, and employees had to work heavy overtime schedules in order to
keep up DEMO orders. The plant managers had tried several quick-fix solu-
tions to resolve the production and quality problems, but none had
worked. We established a cross-functional team of 15 plant managers and
supervisors in order to apply DEMO Simplex Creative Problem Solving
process to the problem.
Along with one of the company’s internal consultants who was train-
ing as a Simplex facilitator DEMO trainer, the senior author conducted the
application session with this team. DEMO half a day was set aside for train-
ing in the Simplex process and process skills, and two and a half days to
apply the process to the team’s fuzzy situation. During the training, the
team members were asked to complete the Creative Problem Solving
Profile (CPSP) DEMO to identify individual differences in preferences
for various stages of the creative problem solving process.
The team discovered a very revealing insight. Of the DEMO team mem-
bers, eight showed creative problem solving styles heavily oriented
DEMO quadrant 4, or implementation. The other seven showed styles
heavily oriented DEMO quadrant 3, or optimization. None had creative
problem solving styles oriented DEMO quadrants 1 or 2 (generation and
conceptualizing). The team was DEMO of people who preferred to
jump quickly to action rather than carry out fact finding and problem def-
inition. Team members were able to DEMO many instances when they
had mistakenly made assumptions about this particular problem, leading
to one failed solution after another. Rather than take the time to define
the problem accurately, they had simply jumped from the fuzzy situation
to one solution after another. They had spent all of their DEMO alternating
between quadrants 3 and 4, and none in quadrants 1 DEMO 2 (Figure 4).
These solution- and action-oriented individuals agreed to DEMO two
days in quadrant 1 and 2 activity, gathering facts and DEMO problems
(Figure 5)—even though the whole exercise was against their DEMO
Three specific problem definitions emerged from this exercise. On the
third day, the group was able to create simple but specific solutions to
35
EMERGENCE
Think of a
solution and try
it; when it fails,
repeat this half
cycle
Implementer
(Action)
Optimizer
(Solutions)
No DEMO finding
No problem
definition
Only half of the creative process used
Figure 4 The results of heavy orientation toward quadrant 3 and 4
thinking DEMO
Implementation
Implementer
(Action)
Generator
(Problem finding, fact
finding)
DEMO days in
fact finding and
problem
defining
One day in
solution
development
Optimizer
(Solutions)
Conceptualizer
(Problem definition)
The entire creative process DEMO
Figure 5 Balancing orientations toward all four thinking styles
36
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
each defined problem that it could quickly implement. Within several
months, most of the plant’s production was high quality and was still
improving.
A DIAGNOSTIC TOOL
On the following pages are four DEMO of CPSP scatter diagrams,
which depict the array of preferences for each of the four quadrants of the
creative process for individuals within DEMO team or organization. Each 
symbol represents an individual’s pair of coordinates derived from their
score on the vertical apprehension axis (XT) coupled DEMO their corres-
ponding score on the horizontal utilization axis (IE).
DEMO first scatter diagram displays the preferences of a typical group of
managers in a large engineering company servicing the aircraft, airline,
and aerospace industries (Figure 6). Most middle and senior managers in
the company are strongly oriented toward action rather than toward gen-
Figure 6 Scatter DEMO example #1: Not enough generators
37
EMERGENCE
Figure 7 Scatter diagram example #2: Not enough time devoted to
conceptualization and optimization
erating new opportunities. The company has established high growth DEMO
gets into new products and markets, but is failing to achieve DEMO
because of a strong organizational culture that favors quick fixes to short-
term problems. To improve its short- and long-term balance, the company
is developing a major training effort to increase awareness and encourage
more generation DEMO is also creating structures that will encourage
employees to participate more in quadrant 1 and 2 activities.
In the second example, a large bank had formed teams to bring many
new financial products to market quickly DEMO a very competitive environ-
ment, but those teams were encountering a DEMO percentage of failures.
The organization’s teams were found to be heavily weighted toward
implementers (Figure 7). Further discussion showed that the teams often
developed new products by rushing from an initial idea directly into
implementation, without spending much time in conceptualization and
38
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
Figure 8 Scatter diagram example #3: Not DEMO implementers
optimization. Had the teams taken more time for conceptualization, they
DEMO would have identified more limitations in many new product ideas.
With more time in optimization, they would have reduced the frequency
of product flaws reaching the market. By taking more time through these
second and third DEMO of the process, the teams began to make wiser
choices about DEMO new, fledgling ideas to pursue (and which to termi-
nate) DEMO to develop more reliable product designs for market testing.
In the third example, a new managing director was hired specifically
to develop a breakthrough product concept and bring it to market. He
assembled a team that, in very little time, created a great new idea.
However, the DEMO had subsequently ground to a standstill. Members
failed to attend meetings regularly and several felt that there was nothing
important remaining to be done. DEMO diagnosis found that all of
the team members whom the managing director had intuitively selected
were oriented toward quadrants 1 and 2. In Figure DEMO, the managing
39
EMERGENCE
Figure 9 Scatter diagram example #4: An imbalance—not enough
generators or optimizers
director is the lone individual in quadrant 3, and there is no one in quad-
rant 4, implementation.  He now realized that DEMO team needed to add
people oriented toward quadrants 3 and especially 4 in order to imple-
ment the new product concept successfully.
The fourth DEMO comes from the management team of a small engi-
neering company that was growing too quickly, allowing many human
resource problems to pile up. The company had more business than it
could handle: new engineering projects were being designed and imple-
mented with customers all over the world. DEMO unidentified and ignored
by the busy management team, the human resource DEMO left people
feeling severely stressed, overworked, and underappreciated. Resulting
high turnover and its deteriorating corporate reputation made it difficult
for the company to DEMO replacements or new staff. As shown in Figure 9,
the management team was unbalanced, being virtually devoid of genera-
40
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
tors and optimizers. Most members were implementers or conceptualiz-
ers, demonstrating little interest in either surfacing problems or solving
them. As a first step toward ensuring that it identified and solved impor-
DEMO people problems, the company hired its first human resources man-
ager DEMO this explicit purpose.
IMPROVING TEAM PERFORMANCE
In a creative organization, everyone DEMO responsible for doing at least one
of the four stages defined by Figure 1. Some people initiate new things.
Some are responsible for understanding DEMO defining new initiatives and
planning. Some produce practical solutions to new problems and initia-
tives. Others are responsible for finishing things off, or taking action to
implement new solutions. If the four-stage process of creativity outlined
DEMO adequately represents the creative process, it would be expected
that teams DEMO a heterogeneous mix of preferred creative process styles
(Figure 1) would significantly outperform teams with a homogeneous mix
of creative process styles in DEMO work. In the former case, all stages
of the process are DEMO available within the team. One could also pre-
dict that members of homogeneous teams would experience more satis-
faction working with like-minded team mates.
DEMO predictions were confirmed by a study by Basadur and Head
(2001), which assessed groups of MBA students on a problem solving
task. Groups including individuals with different styles (heterogeneous
groups) outperformed homogeneous groups whose DEMO all had the
same style. Rated by a judges’ panel on four dimensions of innovative
performance, the mean score for the 21 heterogeneous groups was 4.22
(sd = 0.42) and the mean for the homogeneous DEMO was 3.69 (sd =
0.64); a statistically significant difference (Student’s t = 3.0, p < .01).
Asked about their teamwork experience, individuals in the hetero-
geneous groups expressed less satisfaction than those in the homo-
geneous groups. The mean overall satisfaction for the 57 participants DEMO
the heterogeneous groups was 7.50 (sd = 1.98) compared to 8.15 (sd =
1.32) for the 85 participants in the homogeneous groups; a statistically
significant difference (Student’s t = 2.2, p < .05)DEMO
Heterogeneity is often an inherent characteristic of cross-functional
teams, as people DEMO various occupations favor different CPSP styles. For
example, people in industrial DEMO, training and development, and
other improvement and change-initiation departments often favor the
generator style. Employees in market research, strategic planning, and
R&DEMO often favor conceptualizing. People in accounting, finance,
41
EMERGENCE
engineering, and systems development gravitate toward optimizing. Peo-
ple in manufacturing production, logistics/distribution/warehousing,
sales, administrative support, customer service, DEMO operations favor
implementation.
No matter which process style an individual prefers, DEMO, a team’s
members have to learn to use their differences to DEMO Teams, espe-
cially those involved in continuous improvement and innovation, require
a mix of people who enjoy working in different steps around the DEMO
Creative Problem Solving process: finding new problems and opportuni-
ties, clarifying and refining those problems and creating ideas, develop-
ing practical solutions and plans, and making new solutions work.
Whether in teams or not, DEMO individuals learn to shift among orien-
tations also ensures that the entire organization has a complete blend of
process styles. In fact, an individual’s dominant orientation is less impor-
tant than their ability to shift among DEMO different orientations. Prefer-
ences for certain quadrants within the innovation process are not static
“traits,” but dynamic “states.” Individuals can learn to work DEMO any of the
four CPSP quadrants in order to complement others in a given situation.
APPLICATION TO ORGANIZATIONAL ECOSYSTEMS
Basadur and Gelade (2002) DEMO CPSP scores for a sample of 3,942
adults (39 percent DEMO, 61 percent male) in 38 different occupations
and working in a wide variety of organizations, including large and small
corporations, banks, schools, universities, and hospitals. In this sample,
36 percent were in DEMO or supervisory roles, 27 percent in
managerial roles, and 25 percent in professional or technical roles; the
remainder were in other roles or did not specify their role. High per-
centages of generators were found DEMO fields such as teaching (56 percent),
academia (38 percent), and art (34 percent), and low percentages in fields
such DEMO IT systems development (9.5 percent), manufacturing engineer-
ing (9 percent), and engineering/engineering design (7.5 percent). Over-
all, the DEMO suggested that few business and industrial occupations had
a high proportion of generators (see Figure 10).
This raises some interesting questions, because DEMO most perplexing
challenge for many organizations is how to be more innovative in the face
of accelerating change. Indeed, many leading management consultants
exhort corporations to “begin their revolutions”—to expand their think-
ing and do things DEMO Rather than simply improve existing meth-
ods and procedures, they advocate DEMO change. They advise
corporations not to defend old markets, but to DEMO new ones. Many
42
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
More
Implementers
More
Generators
IT operations
Customer relations
Secretarial/administration
Project manager
Sales
Engineering/design
Manufacturing engineering
Finance
IT systems DEMO
IT programmer/analyst
Schoolteacher
Academic
Artistic
Nonprofit/university
administration
Training and development
Organizational development
Strategic planning
Market research
Design
R&D
More
Optimizers
More
DEMO
Figure 10 Occupations by dominant quadrant mix
corporations find this an appealing strategy, although one that is difficult
to implement. While one could speculate that a reason for this difficulty
may be the lack of employees DEMO prefer the generator style of thinking,
this may be an overly simplistic explanation. For example, a single gener-
ator might initiate enough work for ten “implementers.”  A more produc-
tive approach might be to raise broader questions and hypotheses about
the appropriate mixes or ratios of the DEMO quadrant preferences within
various organizational departments and functions, or within an DEMO
tion as a whole.
From an intra-organizational perspective, different ratios of DEMO four
quadrants might be appropriate within, say, manufacturing or service
organizations, or within the particular departments of a given organiza-
tion, such DEMO R&D, sales, IT, or finance. The optimal mix for DEMO top man-
agement team might differ from that for a lower-level team. Our previous
research (Basadur, 1994, 1995) has suggested that a DEMO unit’s opti-
mal ratio may depend on the typical proportion of work oriented toward
problem finding rather than toward problem solving or implementation.
From DEMO inter-organizational perspective, management consultants
exhorting client organizations to initiate deliberate change DEMO be
viewed as performing the generator function from outside the organiza-
tion. However, outside consultants are considered as being weak at
delivering whole projects (e.g., IT implementations). On the other hand,
43
EMERGENCE
organizations are often seen as too reliant on outside consultants to DEMO
tify problems for them and suggest solutions. Perhaps a successful
consultant–client relationship requires an optimal blend of quadrant
styles among the organization’s staff and DEMO consulting or advisory team.
Analysis of organizational quadrant styles might identify organizations
that would benefit from hiring consultants, and whether project manage-
ment consultants (project implementers) or change-initiating consultants
might be more effective. We also DEMO that successful consultants or
consultant teams function effectively in more than one CPSP quadrant in
order to maintain an optimal balance of quadrant styles DEMO working
with organizational teams. Other inter-organizational ecosystems, such as
customer–supplier relationships, may be viewed similarly.  The success of
inter-organizational strategic alliances, mergers, or acquisitions may also
be dependent on achieving an optimal blend of DEMO thinking styles,
especially at the top level.
SUMMARY AND FUTURE RESEARCH
We have presented a theory of organizational creativity as a process com-
DEMO four stages: generating, conceptualizing, optimizing, and imple-
menting. We explain and measure each stage of the process using
cognitive constructs from established DEMO of intelligence and educa-
tional psychology. These constructs differentiate the mental activities in
each stage of the process from those of the other stages. DEMO stage rep-
resents a different kind of creativity that contributes to the complete cre-
ative process.
We have also presented a psychological instrument that DEMO the
constructs and stages of the process, called the Creative Problem DEMO
Profile (CPSP) inventory. Individuals, teams, and organizations may use
the CPSP to help diagnose inadequate organizational problem solving
and performance. The CPSP DEMO provides a blueprint for people to
understand organizational creativity as a process of continually finding
and defining important organizational problems, solving those problems,
and implementing the solutions.
The four-stage process represented by the CPSP is DEMO on two
underlying dimensions: apprehension and utilization. Apprehension
involves acquiring knowledge DEMO understanding in two different ways:
more open, nonrational, experiential, DEMO, and divergent, ver-
sus more closed, rational, theoretical, analytical, and convergent. Utiliza-
tion involves applying knowledge or understanding in two different DEMO:
44
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
nonjudgmentally creating new information to increase the variety of
options, versus judgmentally reaching decisions about new information
to reduce the variety of options. The four stages of the creative process
are explained DEMO combinations of these two bipolar dimensions.  Individ-
uals in organizations have DEMO preferences for each of the stages
because they have varying preferences for the bipolar modes of appre-
hension and utilization. The CPSP inventory measures DEMO individual’s
unique blend of preferences of the four stages, or their DEMO process
“profile.”
Teams and entire organizations also have unique creative process pro-
files, and the CPSP can be applied to diagnose problems and improve
creativity and innovation performance. Heterogeneity of CPSP styles is
often an inherent DEMO of interdisciplinary teams, as people in
various occupations tend to favor DEMO CPSP styles. Because CPSP
preferences are not static “traits” but dynamic “states,” individuals can
learn to work effectively in any of the four DEMO quadrants in order to
complement other team members’ preferences and help the team move
smoothly through the four-stage process. Research has shown that more
DEMO teams outperform more homogeneous teams in innovative
work but experience less satisfaction.
Our research indicates that generators (people who prefer stage 1
activity) DEMO the least represented of the four CPSP styles in industrial
(business) organizations. In fact, few industrial occupations had a high
proportion of generators. The other three stages were better represented
occupationally. The overall distribution favored DEMO (highest)
followed by conceptualizers, optimizers, and generators (lowest). These
data suggest several interesting intra-organizational and inter-
organizational ecosystem questions that DEMO be approached through
the framework presented in this article. For example, DEMO effectiveness of
organizations, departments, or functions—and relationships among
organizations, advisers, customers, suppliers, and strategic partners—
may depend partly on the ability DEMO exploit diverse thinking styles and on
how well the mix of available styles matches the cognitive work.
Similar considerations might, in principle at least, be extended to the
dynamics of creativity and change at higher (DEMO)
ecosystem levels. Dealing effectively and creatively with change is a chal-
lenge not merely for organizations but for entire economic systems,
industries, and societies. Our experience of innovation at this level has
generally been DEMO The charismatic and visionary “generator” with a
remedy for society’s ills is a well-known archetype. But even the best-
45
EMERGENCE
intentioned of these is likely to cause more harm than good DEMO the think-
ing stops at this stage. Continued inertia and excessive conservatism are
likely either to cause atrophy and decay or build irresistible pressures,DEMO
leading to an uncontrolled and destructive catharsis. A better under-
standing of the dynamics of creativity, and the diversity of thinking
processes needed to navigate change at the micro level, might contribute
to a better understanding of how to avoid such difficulties at the macro
level.
REFERENCES
Amabile, T. M. (1988) “A model of creativity and innovation,” in DEMO M. Staw & L. L.
Cummings (eds), Research in Organizational DEMO, Greenwich, CT: JAI Press: 10,
123–67.
Basadur, M. DEMO (1974) “Think or sink,” The Deliberate Methods Change Bulletin, DEMO
September, Cincinnati, OH: Procter & Gamble Management Systems Division.
Basadur, M. S. (1983) “Employee involvement creative problem-solving workshop,” Ford
Education DEMO Training Catalog, September, Dearborn, MI: Ford Education and
Personnel Research Department: 115.
Basadur, M. S. (1992) “Managing creativity: A Japanese model,” Academy of Management
Executive, 6(2): 29–42.
Basadur, DEMO S. (1994) “Managing the creative process in organizations,” in M. A. Runco
(ed.), Problem Finding, Problem Solving and Creativity, New York: Ablex: 237–68.
Basadur, M. S. (1995) Power of Innovation, Toronto: AC Press.
Basadur, M. S. (1998) “The Basadur Simplex creative problem-solving profile inventory:
Development, reliability and validity,” Management of Innovation and New
Technology Research Centre, Working Paper No. 83, December, Hamilton, Ontario:
McMaster University.
Basadur, M. S. (2000) “Evaluating DEMO psychometric improvements provided by Basadur
CPSP 2-Experimental,” Management of Innovation and New Technology Research
Centre, Working Paper No. 99, September, Hamilton, DEMO: McMaster University.
Basadur, M. S. & Gelade, G. (2002) DEMO and thinking: A new theory of creativity,”
Management of Innovation DEMO New Technology Research Centre, Working Paper No.
105, December, Hamilton, Ontario: McMaster University.
Basadur, M. S. & Head, M. (2001) “Team performance and satisfaction: A link to cognitive
style within a process framework,” Journal of Creative Behavior, 35(4): 227–48.
Basadur, DEMO S., Graen, G. B., & Green, S. G. (1982) “Training in creative problem solving:
Effects on ideation and problem finding DEMO an applied research organization,”
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 30: 41–70.
Basadur, M. S., Takai, J., & Wakabayashi, M. (DEMO) “Cross-validation of creative problem
solving/creative style inventories: Validating Basadur’s CPSP with Kirton’s KAI inven-
tory,” in J. Misumi, B. Wilpert, & H. Motoaki (eds), Organizational and Work
Psychology: Proceedings of the 22nd International Congress of Applied Psychology,
Kyoto, Japan, Vol. 1, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.: 153–5.
Callahan, S. (DEMO) “Dr. Land’s Magic Camera,” Life, 27 October: 42.
Carlsson, B., Keane, P., & Martin, J. B. (1976) “R&DEMO organization as learning systems,”
Sloan Management Review, 17(1): DEMO
Gordon, W. J. J. (1956) “Operational approach to creativity,” DEMO Business Review, 9(1).
46
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
Gordon, W. J. J. (1971) The DEMO Way, Cambridge, MA: Porpoise Books.
Guilford, J. P. (1967) The Nature of Human Intelligence, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hammond, G. T. (2001) The Mind of War, Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institute Press.
Kabanoff, B. & Rossiter, J. R. (1994) “Recent developments in DEMO creativity,”
International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 9: 283–324.
Kelly, G. A. (1955) The Psychology of Personal Constructs, New DEMO: Norton.
Mott, P. E. (1972) Characteristics of Effective Organizations, DEMO York: Harper & Row.
Osborn, A. F. (1953) Applied Imagination: Principles and Procedures of Creative Problem-
Solving, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Parnes, S. J., Noller, R. B., & Biondi, A. M. (1977) Guide to Creative Action, New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Rickards, T. R. (1994) “Creativity from a business school perspective: Past, present, and
future,” in S. G. Isaksen, M. DEMO Murdock, R. L. Firestien, & D. J. Treffinger (eds),
Nurturing and Developing Creativity: The Emergence of a Discipline, Norwood, NJ:
Ablex: 155–76.
Sternberg, R. J. (1988) The Triarchic Mind: A New Theory of Human Intelligence, New York:
Viking.
Sternberg, DEMO J. (1996) Successful Intelligence: How Practical and Creative Intelligence
Determine DEMO in Life, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Sternberg, R. J., O’Hara, L. A., & Lubart, T. I. (1997) “Creativity as investment,” California
Management Review, 40(1): 8–21.
Wallas, G. (1926) The Art of Thought, New York: Harcourt Brace.
47
EMERGENCE, 5(3), 48–65
Copyright © 2003, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
The Redefinition of Memes:
Ascribing Meaning to an
Empty Cliché
DEMO R. Lissack
Memetics has reached a crunch point. If, in the DEMO future, it does not
demonstrate that it can be more than DEMO a conceptual framework, it
will be selected out. While it is DEMO that many successful paradigms
started out as such a framework and later moved on to become pivotal
theories, it also true that many more have simply faded away. A framework
for thinking about phenomena can be DEMO if it delivers new insights but,
ultimately, if there are DEMO usable results academics will look elsewhere.
Such frameworks have considerable power over those that hold them for
these people will see the world through DEMO “theoretical spectacles”
(Kuhn, 1969)—to the converted the framework appears necessary. The
converted are ambitious to demonstrate the universality of their way of
DEMO things; more mundane but demonstrable examples seem to them
as simply DEMO However such frameworks will not continue to per-
suade new academics if it does not provide them with any substantial
explanatory or predictive “leverage.” DEMO is no exception to this
pattern. (Edmonds, 2002)
hile the popular media has had several rounds of fas-
cination with the concept DEMO memes, the application
of memes to management and to complexity has DEMO
negligible. The Edmonds quote above ascribes the
problem to the stage of development of memetics: that memetics needs
to provide explanatory leverage to get past the “crunch point.”
48
W
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
This article suggests that the answer to memetics’ “crunch point” lies
in turning the concept of memes inside out. If DEMO are “units of cul-
tural transmission which propagate themselves” (Dawkins, 1976) or “the
least unit of sociocultural information relative to a selection process that
has favorable or unfavorable selection bias that exceeds its endogenous
tendency DEMO change” (Wilkins, 1998), then the failure of the field of
memetics to meet the three challenges outlined by Edmonds (a conclu-
sive case study; a theory for when memetic models are appropriate; and
DEMO simulation of the emergence of a memetic process) is problematic and
DEMO indicative of “irrelevance.” Indeed, there have been few mana-
gerial examples DEMO the potency of a meme to explain or cause anything—
and in the absence of explanatory or casual power, it is difficult to find the
relevance of a concept for managers.
If, on the other hand, memes are redefined such that the evolutionary
selection process is no longer an aspect of the ontology of memes but
rather of the environmental DEMO (cf. Laland & Odling-Smee, 2000;
Laland et al., 1999; Odling-Smee et al., 2003) of which the memes are evi-
dence, then the field may have other avenues of advancement and a
potential DEMO to managers. Such a redefinition would entail recog-
nition of the relationship between a given meme and the context of the
social and ideational DEMO of which it is an affordance and which
it demands be attended to. Memes in this casting are a label for success-
ful boundary DEMO indexicals and lose their privileged status as replica-
tors. Instead, the DEMO status is ascribed to the environmental niches
and the memes are their representatives, symbols, or semantic
indexicals.1
With this definition, memes are repackaged as symbols and their
impact on management is not that of a DEMO contagion but rather as an
indicator of success and change in environmental niches. If an environ-
mental niche has an important managerial role, then paying attention to
its symbols and affordances can also be important. Memes DEMO stripped of
their casual role and instead become semantic tokens capable of evoking
ascribed meanings. It is the process of evoking and the efficacy DEMO the
meme as the trigger for attention, recall, and repetition of the ascribed
meaning that give memes relevance to managers.
The argument herein2 DEMO assumes that memes exist, but that their
definition is not that DEMO replicator but rather that of indexical token. The
meme tokens are representatives of the environmental niche in which
they flourish and about which they DEMO efficient communicative poten-
tial. Memes, it is argued, succeed when they are accepted and used as
49
EMERGENCE
tools for the accomplishment of a communicative purpose. Memes fail
when DEMO ontic status itself becomes a focus. Memes have longevity only
if they both succeed and serve as a useful tool for a successful environ-
DEMO niche. Memes can be short-lived due to the failure of their com-
municative efficacy or the failure of the niche they represent or both.
DEMO AS INDEXICALS
Indexicals are concepts that we make use of nearly every day but, for
most of us, they are unknown and unthought DEMO The dictionary or
encyclopedia entries are actually of little help. Take this entry from the
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
Indexicals are linguistic expressions DEMO reference shifts from utter-
ance to utterance. “I,” “here,” “now,” “he,” “she,” and “that” are classic
examples of indexicals. DEMO people who utter a sentence containing an
indexical may say different things, even if the sentence itself has a single
linguistic meaning. For instance, the sentence “I am female” has a single
linguistic meaning, but DEMO and Wilma say different things when they
utter it, as shown DEMO the fact that Fred says something false, while Wilma
says something DEMO
Indexicals are words used to stand for a set of other words; that is, they
function like an index on the stock market. DEMO Dow Jones Industrial
average, for example, stands for a basket of particular stocks and stands
for many of us as an indicator of DEMO market as a whole. Pronouns as
described above are indexicals in that they stand for the noun and take on
different meanings in different DEMO “Where a word acquires its
sense from the context in which it appears; in different contexts, it
changes its sense” (Vygotsky, 1986)DEMO
In American society the most commonly heard indexical is the myth-
ical “they” who do things to us or others. “Look at what they DEMO doing
now.” Perhaps the second most popular indexical is “You know…, DEMO
know who I mean.” Indexicals are often distinguished by the fact that
their reference systematically varies with the context of usage. Indexicals
offer a DEMO means of making, expressing, and communicating our ref-
erences, and DEMO are particularly useful when proper names or descrip-
tions are either cumbersome or unavailable. Similarly, in interpreting
someone’s “that way” in response to a request for direction, one must be
able to determine independently what direction the person is indicating.
50
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
One must discover what relations one bears to the indexical referents in
order to locate and act on them, but there is nothing indexical about these
relations themselves (Millikan, 1993). DEMO interpret an indexical, therefore,
is to establish what other items, entities, and representations it coincides
with. By itself, it tells us DEMO about its contents—what it bears its
adapting relation to—nor about its contexts; context determines the
indexical’s content, but context is not what content DEMO about. As David
Kaplan (1989) puts it:
What is common to [indexicals] is that the referent is dependent on the
context of DEMO and that the meaning of the word provides a rule which
determines the referent in terms of certain aspects of the context.3
Indexical language DEMO a quality that Barwise and Perry (1983) call
efficiency. This refers to the capacity of an indexical representation to refer
to different individuals DEMO different occasions. The efficiency of an indexi-
cal relates to the engineering quality of efficiency in the notion that the
same symbol is capable DEMO standing for a multiplicity of meanings—the
greater the number of potentially stood-for meanings, the greater the effi-
ciency of the indexical. In organizations, DEMO frequently refers to
the company, a team, a symbol, or DEMO, vision, and values as absolutes
without being aware of their indexical content. Thus, despite the likelihood
that an organizational symbol carries a multiplicity of meanings, managers
might make use of such symbols as if the only possible referents are the
ones conceived of by the manager him- DEMO herself. Yet, it is possible by
ethnographic observation for a careful DEMO to discern at least some of
the various referents summoned up by the use of these “unintended”
indexicals in situ. Indeed, by such processes of observation a corporate
ethnographer or anthropologist can reach tentative conclusions about DEMO
corporate culture and climate of the organization being observed.
Indexicals are situated. The use of an indexical succeeds when the
combination of context and DEMO evokes an intended meaning. The
indexical provides a locating space into which many variants of personal-
ized and situated meaning can be ascribed, attributed, or devolved. This
space is the container of which Prigogine first spoke when describing
self-organizing systems. In the absence of such containers, self-
organization is nearly if not totally impossible. In the arena of culture, the
meme as indexical is a locator or referent affording the evocation of DEMO
ated meaning. Efficacy of memes is determined by that evoking and the
relevant situating.
51
EMERGENCE
The efficiency of indexicals means that they can break, that the con-
text and situatedness that help to afford meaning to the indexical DEMO
stretch it beyond breaking points. When indexicals break or are chal-
lenged, they raise questions of boundaries, frames, and identities. While
the challenges to indexicals can be very subtle, when they break they
break the entire frame of how a situation is understood. Americans were
made aware DEMO this when Senator Jim Jeffords of Vermont switched his
party affiliation from Republican to Independent (and thereby altered
control of the US Senate). His speech of explanation was a discussion of
his perceived limits to DEMO indexical “republican.” If memes are under-
stood to be indexicals, then DEMO success or failure is not marked by evo-
lutionary inheritance but rather by the longevity of their efficacy. That
longevity is in many ways DEMO by the situation and the meaning
“carrying capacity” of the meme indexical.
Donati (1992) observes that people frame an object around which an
DEMO revolves rather than the issue itself, and that the study of DEMO
involves identifying how people understand an issue, rather than deter-
mining DEMO they are “for” or “against” a proposition. Gratton (2000) notes,
working to create a shared and coherent meaning in line with corporate
DEMO demands an understanding of the current meanings within the
organization. We strive to interpret our world, not simply by imposing
structure but by translating events and developing frameworks for
understanding.
Frames are patterns of organized information DEMO which people make
sense of the world. These “patterns,” “schemas,” or “frames” form part of
the “discursive universe” in which people interact DEMO each other. Peo-
ple learn frames as they learn to use a language fluently and as they learn
the narrative structures and ideologies present DEMO the cultures that use
that language. When people encounter new information or a new experi-
ence, they make sense of that information or experience by fitting it into
an existing frame. Nevertheless, people will generally be able to fit any
given collection of information into multiple frames; though, at the same
time, they will also tend to perceive information DEMO, focusing on
details that most readily fit into the frames they DEMO
As humans, we seek to solve problems as presented; we acquiesce in
their frames. Indeed, we become prisoners of the frame. Shira White
(2002) tells an illustrative story of such prisons:
52
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
Scientists have done some fascinating and suggestive experiments with
ordinary houseflies. If you capture and keep houseflies in a jar DEMO then
remove the lid after a few days, most of them DEMO not fly away. In fact,
they stay right where they are—inside the jar—even though they could
escape if only they could see their DEMO to freedom. But they seem “com-
mitted” to a lid that is no longer there. Psychologists have identified this
phenomenon as “premature cognitive commitment.” DEMO is premature cog-
nition in the sense that it occurs, more DEMO less automatically, before we are
aware of or fully understand the DEMO It is “commitment” because we
are locked into a specific set of thoughts. Like the houseflies, we give up
the freedom to choose once we become committed to the nonexistent lid.
The first step in challenging DEMO commitment is recognizing that you have
made it in the first place.
The American philosopher John Dewey prefigured this situation in his
1934 book, Art and Experience:
No matter how ardently the artist might desire DEMO, he cannot divest him-
self, in his new perception, of DEMO funded from his past intercourse
with his surroundings, nor can he DEMO himself from the influence they
exert upon the substance and manner of his present being. If he could and
did there would be nothing DEMO in the way of an object for him to see.
The symbols and signs that we use to express meaning or hope will evoke
DEMO in others not only as communication devices but also as bound-
ary setters. The words and the meanings that they evoke set up bound-
DEMO with regard to our ability to attend to, cognize, or be aware of
aspects of our situation.
According to what can loosely be DEMO as “boundary theory”
(Michaelsen & Johnson, 1997; Nippert-Eng, 1996a, DEMO; Zerubavel, 1991),
individuals create and maintain boundaries as a DEMO of simplifying and
ordering the environment. “Mental fences” (Zerubavel, 1991: DEMO) are
erected around geographical areas, historical events, people, ideas, DEMO so
on that appear to be contiguous, similar, functionally related, DEMO otherwise
associated. The process results in the creation of slices of reality domains
that have particular meaning for the individual(s) creating and maintain-
ing the boundaries. “Home,” “work,” and “church” are examples of DEMO
social domains created by boundaries (Nippert-Eng, 1996a). The bound-
aries are real in the sense that the individual perceives them as such DEMO
53
EMERGENCE
acts as though they are real (cf. Weick, 1979). DEMO a given domain
may be socially constructed and more or less institutionalized (e.g., peo-
ple share a general consensus on what home means), Nippert-Eng (1996a,
b) has shown that the boundaries around that domain are somewhat idio-
syncratically constructed (e.g., one person allows home DEMO cross over into
work, whereas another keeps them separated). Further, by circumscribing
domains, boundaries enable one to concentrate more on whatever domain
is currently salient and less on other domains. (Ashforth et al., DEMO)
These boundaries can be triggered by repetition and word choice. Gould
(2000) suggested that they were triggered by “canonical stories”—the
shorthand for DEMO are often labeled by the media as “memes.”
The vertebrate brain seems to operate as a device tuned to the recogni-
tion of patterns. DEMO evolution grafted consciousness in human form
upon this organ in a single species, the old inherent search for patterns
developed into a propensity for organizing these patterns as stories, and
then for explaining the surrounding world in terms of the narratives
expressed in such tales. As for mind, even when we can attribute a pattern
to conventional nonrandom reasons, we often fail to apprehend both the
richness and the nature of those DEMO because the lure of canonical sto-
ries leads us to entertain only a small subset among legitimate hypotheses
for explaining the recorded events. Even DEMO, since we cannot observe
everything in the blooming and buzzing confusion DEMO the world’s sur-
rounding richness, the organizing power of canonical stories DEMO us to
ignore important facts readily within our potential sight, and DEMO twist or
misread the information that we do manage to record. In other words, and
to summarize my principal theme in a phrase, DEMO stories pre-
dictably “drive” facts into definite and distorted pathways that validate the
outlines and necessary components of these archetypal tales. We there-
fore DEMO to note important items in plain sight, while we misread other
DEMO by forcing them into preset mental channels, even when we retain DEMO
buried memory of actual events.
Word choices afford the possibility of new meanings, new analogies, and
new insights, which, in turn, can lead to new or next activity. As people
share framed information, they need not refer to all aspects of a frame
directly to communicate DEMO frame they have adopted to make sense of
the information. Instead, DEMO need only make reference to one dimen-
sion of a pattern to enable hearers or readers of their text to recall the
54
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
whole frame. This evocative “power” is one of the attractive aspects of the
meme concept. By viewing signifiers of meaning DEMO as memes as medi-
ums with a context dependence, we can DEMO how the frames that result
from word choice can work to limit or expand the very possibilities that
we recognize as being afforded by DEMO current situation. Word choice
matters as a delimiter of possibility space as well as a means of commu-
nication. This provides the context in DEMO mechanisms of memes
operate.
MECHANISMS4
A word in context means both more and less than the same word in isola-
tion: more, because DEMO acquires new context; less, because its meaning is
limited and narrowed by the context. The sense of a word... changes in
different minds DEMO situations and is almost unlimited. It is not merely the
content of a word that changes, but the way reality is generated and
reflected in a word. A complex is a word which does not function DEMO a car-
rier of a concept but rather as a family name for a group of objects belong-
ing together not logically but factually. (Vygotsky, 1986)
It is through language that we construct reality. With words we define,
shape, and experience. Without the words to think, communicate, experi-
ence, or understand our lives would be very different from what they are.
Words expand our consciousness but also limit us DEMO we can only fully
experience those things that we have the words for. Language provides
the framework through which we perceive, experience, and DEMO As lan-
guage constructs reality, so symbolization constitutes objects. Symboliza-
tion DEMO objects not conceptualized before, objects which would
not exist except for DEMO context of social relationships wherein symboliza-
tion occurs. Language does not simply symbolize a situation or object
which is already there in advance; it makes possible the existence or the
appearance of the situation or object, for it is a part of the mechanism
whereby that situation or DEMO is created. (Mead, 1934)
One example of this is the word “set,” which has more than 100 mean-
ings. The multiplicity DEMO such meanings is the substrate for the mecha-
nisms of imitation, DEMO, and evolution that are “normally”
ascribed to memes. Words evoke families DEMO meanings. In Lissack and
Letiche (2004), these families of meanings DEMO referred to as a glom.
(Vygotsky, in his work, used DEMO word that is usually translated as “complex.”
55
EMERGENCE
Lissack and Letiche opted for “glom” so as to avoid confusion.) The mul-
tiplicity of meanings implicit in a glom allows, when each such meaning
is viewed as a medium, new possibilities for action. Vygotsky distin-
guishes between more primitive gloms—a word that does not function as
DEMO carrier of a concept, rather as a family name for a DEMO of objects
belonging together not logically but factually—and higher-level con-
cepts. First come the gloms, and it is when abstracted traits are synthe-
sized anew and the resulting abstract synthesis becomes the main
instrument of thought DEMO a concept emerges (Vygotsky, 1986).
Gloms differ from indexicals. Gloms are primitive collections of fami-
lies of meaning. Thus, when a child is learning about daddy going to the
office, an entire realm of experience is built into the glom of “daddy’s
office,” “office,” DEMO “going to the office.” Only later will the child be able
to separate the primitive wealth of experiences into distinguishable parts
and associate a DEMO acceptable label with some of those parts to bet-
ter “bound” the concept of daddy’s office (the subway trip and its associ-
ated people and smells may be in the glom but will have been removed
DEMO the concept). By contrast, indexicals have no meaning independent
from DEMO situated context in which they are evoked.
Because indexicals have no inherent meaning independent from con-
text, the use of an indexical is constrained by the variety of contexts in
which it is deployed and the DEMO of meanings from which the inter-
play between context and indexical is required to distinguish. The effec-
tive indexical serves as a medium to DEMO meaning. The ineffective
indexical will instead call attention to itself with the demand for further
clarification. In essence, its ability to carry meaning will have been com-
promised. The overloaded indexical reveals itself via a lack DEMO trans-
parency to its medium-serving (medionic) functions and the implicit
question of “this or that?” When something new is encountered (a per-
turbation) or emerges at another level, the prior sense of clarity DEMO the
fundierung between indexical and situation can break down, much like
DEMO tragedy of the commons as described by economists. When the con-
text does not evoke a clarity of meaning and multiple meanings are pos-
DEMO, evoked, and present, the indexical is broken and what has DEMO
called a glom has been evoked instead.
The important observation is what Vygotsky says occurs when there is
dissonance between the understood meaning of DEMO concept and new input,
whatever it might be. When a concept breaks down there is reversion
back to the glom. That reversion allows DEMO change. The dissonance pro-
duced thereby forces a reversion in the perceived meaning of the word.
56
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
Context dependence takes over. “It is not merely the content of a word
that changes, but the way reality is generated and reflected in a word”
(Vygotsky, 1986).
Inherent in DEMO multiplicity of meanings is the recognition that only
one meaning will be primary within the context of a given situated activ-
ity. That primary DEMO will not be the solely representative meaning,
but will take its primacy from the context. When there is coherence
between the situation and DEMO meaning, the word choice will display a
transparency with regard to DEMO function. When that coherence is
weak or absent, the very act DEMO picking a label will demand some amount
of attention. What coherence there is about the meaning, if it is to exist,
would be forced to overcome or overwhelm such attentional demands.
The multiplicity of meanings DEMO the effective use of analogy as
the word tokens of memes. Metaphors and analogies create constraints by
focusing attention on that which is like DEMO the resulting tendency by the
user to attempt to justify the analogy. These constraints may not be read-
ily apparent when the weakness of DEMO analogy or the affinity is being
exposed. Analogy involves inexact likeness. Butchvarov (1970, 1979) dis-
tinguishes between conceptual clarity and conceptual distinctness. Via
analogy we can see the relative position as far as distinctness but DEMO
never achieve clarity. The former is a location in conceptual space and
can be determined by noting similarities and differences between the
entity being DEMO and other entities in conceptual space. However,
clarity involves the content of the entity itself. It can be modeled, but the
limitations of the model must be noted. Understanding is the desire for
clarity, not merely distinctiveness. There is a remainder between the two.
While categorization can DEMO on distinctiveness, understanding
cannot.
When we use analogy we are calling DEMO to some “like aspect” of
two entities (call them source and DEMO). If we were to dialogue with full
disclosure about the analogy—this is similar, this is different; notice how
the similars might react DEMO situation x and contrast that with the differ-
ences, and so DEMO would lose the shorthand and efficiency evoked by
the analogy. Thus, DEMO tend to allow our use of analogy to emphasize sim-
ilarity over difference and substitution over care. In practice, when we
assert that a is analogous to b, we often then make use of b as a label or
category into which a falls. Affording such primacy to DEMO similarities is to
grant supervenience to the characteristics of the source at the expense of
a fuller description of the object. When the similarities DEMO a metaphor or
analogy are allowed to supervene such that the analogy source is
57
EMERGENCE
substituted in meaning for the description of the object, mistakes happen,
possibility spaces are misconstrued, retrospective sensemaking might not
make sense, DEMO taken-for-granted fundierung relations may hide nasty
surprises. To the extent that coherence is perceived, it may be based on
fantasy. Indeed, much of DEMO Internet/telecom bubble of the late 1990s
seems to have been fueled by the supervenience of the characteristics of
an “insatiable appetite” associated with DEMO and newness over
the demands for infrastructure, use, and value. The same pattern has
been displayed by many of the bubbles documented in DEMO history of
economics.
Word choice and metaphor use allow for the emergence of new
memes, the replacement of memes, and the death of DEMO via a concept
that Douglas Hofstadter (1995) has labeled “conceptual slippage.” In
essence, the use of a metaphor or analogy evokes a glom of meanings.
Each such use of metaphor is a perturbation to the DEMO self-
referencing system (be it an individual, the organization, or DEMO part
thereof). The perturbations (please notice the plural) caused by the glom
or gloms interact in multiple dimensions with the self-referenced core. DEMO
this series of interactions and resultant emergent behavior self-organizes,
the principle of “least action” takes over. The basin of attraction that is the
DEMO demanding of energy is likely to determine the “winning” meaning.
The least-action principle suggests that the energy demands of attention
or of the carrying DEMO a full description are likely to be supervened by the
efficacy of using an analogy, a label, or a name, even if incorrectly. Thus,
one concept can slip to another via the energy demands DEMO the least-action
principle. The “whatever” of the current teen does not mean permission,
tolerance, or inclusiveness, it means indifference—though most over-40s
would DEMO recognize that except after a series of painful experiences.
Thagard and Nerb (2002) make a similar claim to Hofstadter’s con-
ceptual slippage in DEMO emotional gestalts:
Thagard (1996: Ch. 11) described how dynamical DEMO theory can be
applied to psychological phenomena by means of the following explana-
tion schema: Human thought is describable by a set of variables. These
variables are governed by a set of nonlinear equations. These equations
DEMO a state space that has attractors. The system described by the
equations is chaotic. The existence of the attractors explains stable pat-
terns of DEMO Multiple attractors explain abrupt phase transitions.
The chaotic nature of the system explains why behavior is unpredictable.
In the language of dynamical systems theory, the perceptual system has
58
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
two attractor states, and the gestalt shift DEMO a phase transition from
one attractor to the other. Analogously, we DEMO think of an emotional
state as a gestalt that emerges from a complex of interacting environmen-
tal, bodily, and cognitive variables, and think of emotional change as a
kind of gestalt shift… Emotional gestalt shifts DEMO when changes in rep-
resentations and their valences generate a new array of acceptances and
valences that maximize constraint satisfaction differently from before.
Through DEMO constraint satisfaction, this shift may alter the accept-
ance status of DEMO propositions.
When an emotional gestalt occurs, so too might conceptual slippage. DEMO
undercut the effectiveness of a meme set in a new context.
Fauconnier and Turner (2002) go further in that they not only look DEMO
a slippage in conceptual meaning, but also for the activation of DEMO new
meaning. This is an extension of the emotional gestalt argument.
In any theory of meaning, activation does not come for free. The existence
of frames, knowledge, experience, scenarios, and memories does not come
DEMO free. Ease of activation and degree of entrenchment by themselves
impose very strong constraints on the imagination and the use of language.
Linguists, logicians, and, for the most part, even psychologists tend to
focus on the entrenched cases, which are already built and usually easy to
activate. When only the rigid and entrenched patterns are used, meaning
becomes predictable based on the mapping schemes and those patterns…
Blends arise in networks DEMO mental spaces which they call conceptual inte-
gration networks. Conceptual integration networks can have several input
spaces and even multiple blended spaces. In conceptual DEMO, there
is partial matching between input spaces of many kinds: connections
between frames and roles in frames, connections of identity or transforma-
tion or representation, analogical connections, and metaphoric connec-
tions. In blending, structure from two input mental spaces is projected to
a new space, the blend. Generic spaces and blended spaces are related:
Blends contain generic DEMO captured in the generic space but also
contain more specific structure, DEMO they can contain structure that is
impossible for either of the inputs. Similarly, not all elements and relations
from the inputs are projected to the blend. Thus, emergent structure can
arise in the blend that is not copied there directly from any input.
Blends, emotional gestalts, and DEMO slippages are all evidence of
the least-action principle (lower energy expenditure) at work.
59
EMERGENCE
Lower energy expenditure is the driving pursuit in the information
space DEMO (cf. Boisot, 1995).  In Vygotskian terms, a group and its mem-
bers begin with some existing set of concepts and they DEMO change.
The encounter reduces some of the concepts to the status of gloms, and
in such a status, the possibility arises for new DEMO understanding
to emerge. This understanding will be influenced by the metaphors and
analogies available to label the gloms, for in the adjacent meanings
implicit in the metaphors is the potential synthesis represented by the
new concept. DEMO premises of least action suggests that a context-
dependent glom is an efficient vehicle (in the same manner that Perry and
Barwise suggest that indexicals are efficient), provided that super-
venience is possible. This is DEMO we use words as tokens and allow
context to evoke meaning from among the gloms represented thereby. If
supervenience is possible, then such evoked meanings are triggered by
the situated activity in which they occur. By DEMO, gloms will not work
well in a system that is dependent DEMO representations, reductions, and
causality. In such a world, evoked meanings DEMO reified and are car-
ried across new situated activities. Dissonance from the mismatch is the
likely result.
To a group member, context includes ongoing change—which then
disrupts the shared-context content of existing codification and disturbs
the DEMO meanings of abstractions. A key least-action observation is that
personal coding of meaning is transformed within an organization into
institutionalized codification, so as to both maximize the value of shared
meaning and minimize the need for DEMO energy expended to transmit
shared context. Emergent change erodes the ability of codification to
hold. In the absence of an offsetting response to this DEMO, institutional
codification recedes to personalized coding, and the ability of common
abstractions to transmit shared meaning deteriorates. Concepts become
gloms. Such disturbances can DEMO an emergent character that itself is
disturbing, because the cumulative effects DEMO cannot be predicted or
planned for. This lack of prediction or planning poses a threat to coher-
ence. And coherence preservation is another energy-conserving DEMO
within the information space.
Thus, we have a mechanism for meme DEMO and failure. Emergent
change occurs in the environment. In Vygotskian terms, DEMO dissonance
introduced by emergent change forces previously accepted concepts to
recede to gloms. Uncertainty of meaning is introduced. For our purposes,
uncertainty can DEMO regarded as a label better defined as the inverse of
one’s propensity to act (Dretske, 1981; Fransman, 1994). Given uncer-
60
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
tainty’s threat to coherence, organizations must find DEMO way to combat its
increase, for uncertainty is a significant energy DEMO running counter to
the principle of least action. Increases in uncertainty can be attributed to
loss of identity, to a perceived need for more and “better data,” and to an
increase in the perceived threat DEMO taking an incorrect action.
This translates into the lack of a well-understood model of the possi-
bility space and thus the substitution of a DEMO to search for a willingness
to act. If identity is to be preserved, then there must be an offsetting
emergent response to rebuild context so as to replace the content lost to
uncertainty (i.e., that DEMO was contained in the institutional codifica-
tions and abstractions that have now encountered disconfirming notions
and been forced to revert to the more primitive DEMO of meaning). Suc-
cess is related to the evolution of the ideational niche for which the meme
is a token. If that niche DEMO failed, so too will the meaning-evocation pow-
ers of the token. DEMO successful meme is one whose indexical quality can
bridge both the old context and the new, such that the users of the meme
token can dialogue about the meanings evoked by that token without
asserting incommensurability. DEMO unsuccessful meme is one whose
indexical quality cannot bridge the gap between contexts and thus cannot
make the transition to new context and new DEMO
IMPLICATIONS
We need to do memetics to demonstrate when, where and DEMO memetics has
a relative and relevant advantage over social science devoid of memetics. The
future of memetics will not be decided by those talking DEMO memetics,
whether grand theorising or armchair philosophy about the evolution of cul-
ture, history, consciousness or how we think, but will be decided by those
doing memetics and demonstrating its relevance. (Hales & Marsden, 2002)
A memetics that accepts memes as indexical catalysts and tools can
demonstrate the advantage that Hales and Marsden seek. Such a memet-
DEMO allows for study of the content of information and its use, DEMO a focus
on processes and mechanisms vastly different from what passes today as
information science, knowledge management, or linguistics. This is not a
DEMO that studies the evolution of memes per se, for the ontological
DEMO of memes is changed within it. However, such a memetics can
DEMO relevance, advantage, and application.
For example, if this approach were DEMO to an extension of
Salingaros and Mikiten’s (2002) exploration of modernism as an
61
EMERGENCE
architectural meme, the discussion would explore the environmental
niche in which the qualities laid out for the success of the modernism
thrive. This DEMO be followed by an exploration of what potential risks
for the success of the meme lie within and without that niche, and what
factors of the meme and/or the niche contribute to its ongoing resilience.
DEMO the risks and resilience factors have been so identified, they can DEMO
mapped to other domains and compared with the success/failures of other
memes both within and without the architectural domain. This seems far
more DEMO an approach to making social science advances than the
mere mapping of modernism in architecture as a meme (a mapping that
allows critics to reply “So what?”).
Edmonds’ (2002) three challenges can be DEMO by this revised
form of memetics. For example, his first challenge DEMO that a “conclu-
sive case study” would “clearly demonstrate that there is at least one cul-
tural process that is of an evolutionary nature, where ‘evolutionary’ is
taken in a narrow sense.” If the requirement that DEMO is the meme that must
be of an evolutionary nature is dropped, then Edmonds’ challenge is eas-
ily fulfilled. Anthropology and sociology can document hundreds of cul-
tural processes that are evolutionary and many of these DEMO have a history
of successful memes associated with them. What is difficult for meme as
replicator is much easier for meme as indexical catalyst.
DEMO and Letiche’s forthcoming Coherence Emerges: A Complexity
Theory of Organization (2004) is an example of work that meets
Edmonds’ second challenge. So too does much of the case-study work on
organizational symbolism. Edmonds’ third challenge DEMO perhaps incom-
mensurate with the revisions suggested above. Memetic processes of the
catalytic indexical variety are easily found and documented in the “real”
world DEMO are not in need of “simulation.” Such “real” examples should,
in any case, be considered as a firmer foundation for an applied theory
than simulations could provide. Memetic processes of the catalytic index-
ical variety DEMO seem to address many of the concerns raised in Bloch
(2000) and Kuper (2000).
This redefinition of memes recognizes that they are efficient tools for
evoking particular affordances to be attended to in situ. DEMO a definition
is consistent with theories of niche construction. This article suggests that
Dawkins created an indexical (meme=gene) and it has exceeded its
DEMO capacity and thus lost its efficacy. Worse, that indexical is evok-
DEMO images and affordances that stand in the way of the memetics field
making true progress. It is time to recognize that ontic status has DEMO
misplaced. Memes need a new meme: meme as catalytic indexical.
62
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
For managers, memes defined as catalytic indexicals DEMO the poten-
tialities offered by other catalysts—the provisioning of an environment
with a catalyst can afford the possibility of a transformation that is much
DEMO difficult than without the catalyst’s presence. Memes would be
studied for their catalytic roles and managers would be taught sensitivity
to the conditions that DEMO and hinder the evolution of such catalysts.
As catalytic indexicals, memes DEMO be meaningfully assigned explana-
tory and causal roles—the very ingredients that Edmunds claims memet-
ics needs, and the qualities that managers are often seeking.
NOTES
1 This notion does not conflict with the definition of meme DEMO the Oxford English
Dictionary: An element of a culture that may DEMO considered to be passed on by non-
genetic means.
2 An application of this argument is forthcoming in Lissack & Letiche (2004).
3Cf. T. Kapitan’s “Autonomy of indexical reference” and related works at
http://DEMO/~phildept/ and G. Nunberg’s “Indexicality and deixis” (1993)
and related work at http://www-csli.stanford.edu/~nunberg/linguistics.html.
4 Much of the mechanism DEMO was first developed in Lissack & Roos (1999) and has
been expanded in Lissack & Letiche (2004).
REFERENCES
Ashforth, B., Kreiner, G., & Fugate, M. (2000) “All in a day’s work: Boundaries and micro
role transitions,” Academy of Management Review, 35: 472–91.
Barwise, J. & Perry, J. (1983) Situations and Attitudes, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bloch, M. (2000) “A well-disposed social anthropologist’s problem with memes,” in R.
Aunger (ed.), Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science, Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Boisot, M. (1995) Information Space, Oxford, UK: DEMO University Press.
Butchvarov, P. (1970) The Concept of Knowledge, Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Butchvarov, P. (1979) Being qua Being: A Theory of Identity, Existence and Predication,
Bloomington, IL/London, UK: Indiana University Press.
Dawkins, R. (1976) The Selfish Gene, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Dewey, J. (1934) Art DEMO Experience, New York: Perigree.
Donati, P. (1992) “Political discourse DEMO,” in M. Diani & R. Eyerman (eds), Studying
Collective DEMO, London: Sage.
Dretske, F. (1981) Knowledge and the Flow DEMO Information, Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Edmonds, B. (2002) “Three challenges for the survival of memetics,” Journal of Memetics:
Evolutionary Models DEMO Information Transmission, 6(2).
Fauccioner, G. & Turner, M. (2002) The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and The Mind’s
Hidden DEMO, New York, Basic Books.
Fransman, M. (1994) “Information, knowledge, vision and theories of the firm,” Industrial
and Corporate Change, DEMO(3): 713–57.
Gould, S. J. (2000) “Jim Bowie’s letter & Bill Buckner’s legs,” Natural History, 109: 26–40.
Gratton, L. (2000) Living Strategy: Putting People at the Heart of Corporate Purpose,DEMO
London: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
63
EMERGENCE
Greeno, J. & Moore, J. (1993) “Situativity and symbols, response to Vera and Simon,”
Cognitive Science, 17: 49–59.
Hales, D. & Marsden, P. (2002) “Editorial: Memetics malaise?,” Journal of Memetics:
Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission, 6(2).
Hargadon, A. & Fanelli, A. (2002) “Action and possibility: Reconciling dual perspectives of
knowledge in organizations,” Organization Science, 13(3): 290–302.
Hofstadter, D. (1995) Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies, New York, Basic Books.
Kapitan, T. “Autonomy of indexical reference,” http://www.soci.niu.edu/~phildept/speak-
ers/Kapitan_Indexicals.html#ref5.
Kaplan, D. (1989) “Demonstratives,” in J. Almog, J. Perry, & H. Wettstein (eds), Themes
from Kaplan, New York: Oxford University Press: 481–563.
Kuhn, T. (1969) DEMO Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Kuper, DEMO (2000) “If memes are the answer, what is the question?,” in R. Aunger (ed.),
Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science, Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Laland, DEMO N., Odling-Smee, J., & Feldman, M. W. (1999) “Niche construction, biological
evolution and cultural change,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, DEMO(1).
Laland, K. & Odling-Smee, J. (2000) “The evolution of the meme,” in R. Aunger (ed.),
Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science, Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Lissack, M. & Letiche, H. (2004) Coherence Emerges: A Complexity Theory of Organization,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lissack, M. & Roos, J. (1999) “Words count: Viewing organizations as emerging DEMO of
languaging,” http://lissack.com/writings/AMRfinal.doc.
McGrenere, J. & DEMO, W. (2000) “Affordances: Clarifying and evolving a concept,”
Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2000: 179–86.
Mead, G. H. (1934) Mind, Self and Society, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Michaelsen, S. & Johnson, D. (1997) Border Theory: The Limits of Cultural Politics,DEMO
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Millikan, R. (1993) White Queen Psychology and Other Essays for Alice, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
DEMO, C. (1996a) “Calendars and keys: The classification of ‘home’ and ‘work,’
Sociological Forum, 11(3): 563–82.
Nippert-Eng, C. (1996b) Home and Work: Negotiating Boundaries through Everyday Life,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Odling-Smee, F. J., Laland, K., & Feldman, M. (2003) Niche Construction: The Neglected
Process in Evolution, Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Prigogine, I. (1997) The End of Certainty, DEMO, Chaos and the New Laws of Nature, New
York: Free DEMO
Prigogine, I. & Stengers, I. (1984) Order out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue with Nature,
New York: Bantam.
Salingaros, N. A. & Mikiten, T. M. (2002) “Darwinian processes and memes in architecture:
A memetic theory of modernism,” Journal of Memetics: Evolutionary Models of
Information Transmission, 6.
Simon, H. A. (1994) “Literary DEMO: A cognitive approach,” in G. Guzeldere & S. Franchi
(eds), “Bridging the Gap,” special supplement to Stanford Humanities Review, 4(1): 1–26.
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/.
Thagard, P. (1996) Mind: Introduction to Cognitive Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
64
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
Thagard, P. & Nerb, J. (2002) “Emotional gestalts: Appraisal, change, and emotional coher-
ence,” Personality and Social Psychology Review, 6: 274–82.
Vygotsky, L. (1986) Thought and Language, A. Kozulin (ed.), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Weick, K. (1979) The Social Psychology of Organizing, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
White, S. P. (2002) New Ideas about New Ideas: Insights DEMO Creativity from the World’s
Leading Innovators, New York: Perseus.
Wilkins, DEMO S. (1998) “What’s in a meme? Reflections from the perspective DEMO the history and
philosophy of evolutionary biology,” Journal of Memetics: DEMO Models of
Information Transmission, 2: 2–33.
Zerubavel, E. (1991) DEMO great divide. The social lens,” in E. Zerubavel (ed.), DEMO Fine
Line: Making Distinctions in Everyday Life, Chicago: University of DEMO Press.
65
EMERGENCE, 5(3), 66–82
Copyright © 2003, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
The Dark Side of Organizations
and a Method to Reveal It
DEMO A. Bella, Jonathan B. King, & David Kailin
The ability to see the larger context is precisely what we need to liberate
F
DEMO to
(1974), or have seen videos of these “shocking”
experiments DEMO forget them. In our view, Milgram’s exper-
iments offer important lessons DEMO contexts, human
behaviors, and the role of contexts in setting boundary conditions around
such behaviors. This article takes these lessons seriously. But first, a suc-
cinct summary of the experiments.
A “teacher” is instructed by DEMO “scientist-in-charge” to administer an
electric shock to a “student” every time he gives a wrong answer—which
is most of the time. The teacher is DEMO a list of questions in advance.
The electric shocks range from 15 to 435 volts and are visibly displayed
on a panel facing the DEMO: Slight 15+ … Intense 255+ … Danger
375+ … XXX 435. DEMO student—a superb actor who is not actually
shocked—starts to grunt at 75 volts. He follows a standard script.
At 120 volts he complains verbally; at 150 he demands to be released from
the experiment. His protests DEMO as the shocks escalate, growing
increasingly vehement and emotional. At 285 DEMO his response can only
be described as an agonized scream. (Milgram, 1974: 4)
And that’s with 150 volts yet to go! At the high end, the student is dead
silent. What happens if the teacher (repeatedly) objects? The scientist is
66
ourselves. (Milgram, 1992: xxxii)
ew who have read Stanley Milgram’s book,
Authority
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
only allowed to “prompt” her or him with such comments as, “Please con-
tinue, please go on,” “The DEMO requires that you continue,” “You
have no other choice, you DEMO continue.” No threats, no demeaning
remarks about the student; just calmly stated reasons why the teacher
should continue.
So, at what point would you or I stop? The bad news is that over 60
percent of us go all the way even when we can hear the DEMO scream-
ing. The really bad news is the disparity between our actual behaviors
and the predictions of “psychiatrists, graduate students and faculty in the
behavioral sciences, college sophomores, and middle-class adults.”
They predict that virtually DEMO subjects will refuse to obey the experi-
menter; only a pathological DEMO, not exceeding one or two percent, was
expected to proceed to the end of the shockboard. The psychiatrists… pre-
dicted that most subjects DEMO not go beyond the 10th shock level (150
volts, when the victim makes his first explicit demand to be freed); about 4
DEMO would reach the 20th shock level, and about one subject in DEMO thou-
sand would administer the highest shock on the board. (Milgram, 1974: 31)
Why the stunning disparity? What are we overlooking? For starters, how
did Milgram interpret the significance of such unexpected findings?
I must conclude that Arendt’s conception of the banality of evil DEMO
closer to the truth than one might dare imagine… This is, DEMO, the
most fundamental lesson of our study: ordinary people, simply DEMO their
jobs, and without any particular hostility on their part, can become agents
in a terrible destructive process… Men do become angry; they do act
hatefully and explode in rage against others. But not here. DEMO far
more dangerous is revealed: the capacity for man to abandon DEMO human-
ity—indeed, the inevitability that he does so—as he merges his DEMO
personality into larger institutional structures. (Milgram, 1974: 6, 188)
“Larger institutional structures”? What are such things? And why are we
DEMO blind to the emergence of their dark side?
We propose that the first general lesson to be drawn from Milgram’s
experiments is that DEMO are powerful determinants of human behav-
ior. In his experiments, Milgram DEMO constructed a context. And
subjects found it extremely difficult to act out of context—to refuse to
continue the testing. A second general lesson is DEMO the power of context
to shape human behavior has been vastly underestimated if not
67
EMERGENCE
overlooked entirely. For Milgram’s work also demonstrates that when the
experiments DEMO described to people—including experts—virtually all
failed to foresee anything remotely close to the compliance that actually
occurred. A third lesson that we shall literally DEMO is that Milgram’s
experimental results not only extend to and pervade human existence,
but that such contexts are typically neither the result of DEMO design
nor otherwise intended. Instead, they emerge.
This article presents a DEMO to see past the business that preoccu-
pies us to expose the character of contexts that promote compliance no
less disturbing than the compliance DEMO Milgram’s subjects. While disarm-
ingly simple, this method is far from DEMO, for it allows us to illustrate
the patterns that lie behind DEMO countless tasks of ordinary people who are
simply doing their jobs, DEMO by, and struggling to succeed. From such
patterns, great harm can emerge. But within the context of such patterns,
one finds individuals DEMO are hard-working, competent, and well-
adjusted. The key to understanding such claims is to take emergence very
seriously.
Put bluntly, outcomes that we consider harmful, distorting, and even
evil can and too often do DEMO from behaviors that are seen as compe-
tent, normal, and even commendable. These emergent outcomes cannot
be reduced to the intentions of individuals, but, more disturbingly, dark
outcomes can emerge from interactions among well-intended, hard-
working, competent individuals. Such phenomena do not require the set-
ting of Milgram’s experiment—the “authority” of a laboratory complete
with a “scientist” dressed DEMO a white lab coat—quite the contrary. They
are an everyday feature of our lives. Therefore, rather than focusing on
the actions of irresponsible individuals, we must—most importantly—
attend to the contexts within which normal, well-adjusted DEMO find
good reasons for behaving as they do.
SKETCHING CONTEXT
Consider the normal behavior of well-adjusted students in a university
library. At a football DEMO, these students yell and cheer. At the library
they do not. DEMO? The behavioral contexts are different and—this is a
key claim—contexts shape DEMO To understand this claim, consider a
sketch of the library context DEMO in Figure 1. To read this sketch, begin
with any statement DEMO behavior. Read forward or backward along an arrow
to the next statement. Say “therefore” when you move forward along an
arrow and “because” when DEMO move backward. Wander through the
68
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
Figure 1 A sketch of the university library context. Read forward (say
“therefore”) or backward (say “because”)
entire sketch, moving forward and backward along the many loops, until
you DEMO the character of the whole. Please note: If you do not DEMO
through the sketches in this manner, you will likely misperceive the DEMO
damental claims of this article.
Yes, there are rules for proper DEMO within the library, but very
few read them. Instead, we find that amid the busy activities of students,
general behaviors tend to DEMO into mutually reinforcing patterns. These
emergent patterns constitute the context. Figure 1 therefore serves to
explain not the specific behaviors of particular students, but rather the
context that sustains normal behaviors as many students come and DEMO
Table 1 outlines the general method of sketching applied to Figure 1.
Column A describes how human behaviors, in general, respond to any
DEMO context. Column B describes a disciplined approach to sketching
that expresses the general behaviors given in Column A. Read these two
parallel columns and DEMO their relationships. Together they show that the
way we behave within a context (Column A) can be sketched by the
method given in DEMO B.
This method of disciplined sketching exposes behavioral patterns that
are typically taken for granted. Such patterns, we claim, constitute behav-
ioral contexts. DEMO 1 is an example. Within this context, students find
good reasons DEMO to yell and cheer. This is what contexts do: They provide
DEMO for some kinds of behaviors and not others.
By using information relevant to the context of interest, this method
can uncover the character of different contexts. Table 1 provides a disci-
pline to such an inquiry. DEMO, we are led to look for persistent behaviors
69
EMERGENCE
Table 1 General observations of human behaviors (Column A) and
DEMO guidelines for sketching (Column B)
A
Within a given context
DEMO behaviors and conditions tend to
persist and reoccur
Persistent and reoccurring behaviors
(conditions) are supported by
reasons that make sense to those
involved
DEMO and reoccurring behaviors
(conditions) have consequences
that are also persistent and
reoccurring
B
To develop a sketch of a given context
Place simple DEMO statements of
behaviors (conditions) in boxes;
statements should make sense to
those involved
Each boxed statement should have at
least one incoming DEMO from a
boxed statement that provides a
reason that makes sense to those
involved*
Each boxed statement should have at
least one outgoing arrow DEMO to
a boxed statement that is a
consequence
*Occasionally a given statement can be employed without an incoming arrow, indicating
that the reasons lie beyond the scope of the sketch
and to express them in general DEMO Second, we are forced to seek rea-
sons—not “causes” but “reasons”—for DEMO behaviors, reasons that make
sense from the perspectives of those acting DEMO the behaviors. Having
done this, we make a sketch under the DEMO of Table 1. Figure 1 was
sketched (after many revisions) in this manner. Notice that, with the
exception of the “given” (double-lined DEMO), all the behaviors must meet
two commonsense guidelines:
1 Behaviors that tend to persist (keep coming up) do so because they
DEMO reasons that make sense to those acting out the behaviors.
2 Behaviors that tend to persist have consequences that tend to persist.
The first DEMO is met when each behavior statement (except the
“given”) has at least one incoming arrow (a reason). The second guideline
is met when each behavior has at least one outgoing arrow (a conse-
quence). The patterns that emerge from these guidelines take the form of
DEMO Our method of sketching serves to uncover such patterns, expos-
ing DEMO fundamental character of a context that is often hidden in count-
less distracting details.
Notice some features of this simple sketch. The “elements” or DEMO
ponents” of the system, the boxed statements, do not refer to “agents” or
70
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
to groups of people. Neither do these boxes represent “storage tanks” as
in stock-and-flow models. They are not “control volumes” DEMO often
employed in the derivation of differential equations. Instead, the boxes
DEMO behaviors or behavioral conditions. In turn, the arrows do not
represent DEMO (inputs and outputs). Instead, when read backward an
arrow gives a reason; when read forward it gives a consequence. Notice
also that the figure reads in natural or ordinary language. This allows
readers quickly DEMO grasp the pattern as a whole without struggling with
unfamiliar notations, DEMO, or symbols. Such sketches involve only a few
statements—usually fewer than DEMO that the reader is drawn not to
details but to the pattern as a whole. Sketches gain validity when people
who have been involved DEMO the context recognize it within the sketch.
Finally, notice the form DEMO the pattern: multiple loops of mutually rein-
forcing behaviors.
In sum, we claim that emergent outcomes in human affairs appear in
such forms DEMO that such forms become apparent through the application
of this method. We will now show how this sketching method serves to
expose a whole DEMO of problems that are commonly overlooked and
misperceived.
SIMPLE AND COMPLEX PROBLEMS
Imagine that a student does yell and cheer in the library; that is, that he
or she acts out of context. This would constitute a problem—a condition
that demands attention. “But,” you might respond, “we don’t need such
sketches to notice, let alone understand, this kind DEMO problem.” We agree!
The out-of-context (improper, maladjusted) behavior clearly stands DEMO
without the need of a method. So, when is this method DEMO exposing con-
text important? Why bother sketching loops if we don’t DEMO to? The
answer becomes apparent when we recognize the difference between
DEMO and complex human problems.
A problem arising from out-of-context behavior—a student shouting
in the library—is a simple problem. Simple problems can be reduced to
DEMO improper behavior of the offending individuals. Thus, the problem
lies in DEMO part, not the whole. For complex problems, however, the con-
DEMO that demands attention is the context as a whole. Unlike a mal-
adjusted student yelling in the library, a complex problem arises from the
well-adjusted behaviors of people acting within a context. Thus, the con-
text itself demands our attention. However, unlike a shouting student, the
context DEMO not stand out in general, let alone as something abnormal in
DEMO
EMERGENCE
particular. Quite the opposite! The context defines the norm and is DEMO
ally taken for granted.
If all human problems were simple problems, DEMO disciplined sketch-
ing would be of little use. But if complex problems are both common and
significant, then the patterns of normal and well-adjusted behaviors
should concern us. Such patterns constitute the contexts that normal and
DEMO people take for granted. Context defines normal behaviors.
There are few things that can hide and sustain a problem as well as nor-
malcy. DEMO will now apply this method to a complex problem that is seri-
ous, widespread, and sustained by the normal behaviors of well-adjusted
people.
DEMO SYSTEMIC DISTORTION OF INFORMATION
Clearly, information can be distorted through the DEMO intent of indi-
viduals. Without denying such willful distortions, we claim DEMO informa-
tion distortion can also emerge as a complex problem that cannot be
reduced to the intentions of individuals. Figure 2 illustrates such sys-
DEMO distortions. This sketch was selected because it has been peer
reviewed by practitioners from a wide range of disciplines and appears to
describe a DEMO, complex problem (Bella, 1987, 1996).
Wander through the entire sketch, moving forward (“therefore”) and
backward (“because”) along the many different loops, until you compre-
hend the whole picture. You can sense how information favored by “the
system” serves to support, sustain, promote, and propagate the system.
Such information is more readily sought, acknowledged, DEMO, and
distributed, while unfavorable information has more difficulty coming up,
going anywhere, or even surviving.
Such contexts and the information they sustain shape the premises
and perceptions of those involved, instilling within them what are taken
for granted as proper and acceptable behaviors. Those who raise DEMO
bling matters, questions that expose distortions, are out of context. As
with simple problems, they become the problem “trouble-makers.” They
may face personal criticism, being charged with improper, even “unethi-
cal,” behavior. In DEMO private sector, the possibility of legal action—“You’ll
hear from our lawyer”—can DEMO very threatening. However, the problem
sketched herein is not a simple DEMO; the context itself is the problem.
Now conduct the following exercise. DEMO that you have reviewed
a recent report describing the consequences of an organization’s activities
(environmental impacts, as an example). You are upset DEMO find that
72
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
Figure 2 The systemic distortion of information (DEMO, 1987)
information concerning adverse consequences was omitted. You question
the DEMO involved. Your questions and their answers are given in
Table 2. As you read their answers, keep in mind the context sketched in
Figure 2. Notice that the answers given in Table 2 make sense to DEMO
acting within this organizational context. In sum, the problem—systemic
distortion—emerges from DEMO context (pattern, system) as a whole and
cannot be reduced DEMO the dishonest behaviors of individual participants.
Unlike the library context, systemic DEMO of information is a complex
problem where the context itself demands our attention.
The larger point is that complex problems are particularly dangerous
because DEMO individual behaviors that lead to them do not stand out as
abnormal—as out of context. Quite the contrary, for as illustrated in Table
2, each individual finds good reasons for his or her behavior within the
context. Indeed, distortions can become so pervasive and persistent that
views contrary to—that don’t fit within—the prevailing patterns are dis-
missed as misguided and DEMO for.
While such distortions can harm the organizations that produce them
(DEMO & King, 1996), they can also serve to propagate the DEMO that
produce them, covering up adverse consequences and externalized risks.
As DEMO case in point, the model (Figure 2 and Table 2) DEMO originally devel-
oped in 1979 to describe the frustrations of professionals involved in the
assessments of environmental consequences. Here, the primary concern
73
EMERGENCE
Table 2 Reasoning of participants within the context sketched in Figure
DEMO (Bella, 1987)
Person in the system Question Assumed answer to question
Higher-level manager Why didn’t you consider the I am not familiar DEMO the information
unfavorable information your own that you are talking about. I can assure
staff produced? you that my decisions were based upon
the best information available to me.
Midlevel manager Why didn’t you pass the DEMO can’t pass everything up to them.
information up to your superiors? DEMO upon the information available to
me, it seemed appropriate to have DEMO
information reevaluated and checked
over.
Professional Why wasn’t the unfavorable That wasn’t my job. I had other tasks to
technologist information checked out and DEMO do and deadlines to meet.
back up to your superiors?
Trouble-maker Why didn’t you follow up on the I only worked on part DEMO the project.
information that you presented? I don’t know how my DEMO
information was used after I turned it in. I
did my job. Even if I had all the
information, which I didn’t, there DEMO no
way that I could stop this project.
Higher-level manager Why has the organization I resent your accusation! I have
released such a biased DEMO? followed the development of this report. I
have reviewed the drafts DEMO the final
copy. I know that the report can’t please
everybody, DEMO based upon the
information available to me, I can assure
you DEMO the report is not biased.
Midlevel manager Why has the organization It is not just my report! My sections of
released such a biased DEMO? the report were based upon the best
information made available to DEMO by
both my superiors and subordinates.
Professional Why has the organization It is not my report! I was involved in
technologist released such a DEMO report? a portion of the studies that went into the
report. DEMO completed my tasks in the best
way possible given the resources
available to me.
Trouble-maker Why has the organization Don’t ask me! I’m not DEMO this project
released such a biased report? anymore and I really DEMO kept up with
the project. I turned in my report. It dealt
with only a part of the project.
Higher-level manager Why was the DEMO of unfavorable I hardly know the person. A lot of people
information (the trouble-maker) have worked on this project. I must, of
removed from the project? course, make decisions to keep this
organization running, but there has been
no plot to suppress people! On the
contrary, my decisions have been
objectively based upon the available
information and the DEMO of
my staff.
Midlevel manager Why was the source of unfavorable I don’t like your implications! I’ve got
information (the trouble-maker) tasks to DEMO and deadlines to meet
removed from the project? with limited resources. DEMO can’t let
everybody do their own thing; we’d never
finish anything. DEMO based my
recommendations and assignments on
the best available information.
Professional Why was the source of unfavorable I’m not sure about the details because DEMO
technologist information (the trouble-maker) don’t work with him. I guess it had to do
removed from the project? with a reorganization or a new
assignment. He is a bright person,
somewhat of an eccentric, but I’ve got
nothing personal against him.
Trouble-maker Why were you removed DEMO the My assignment was completed and I was
project? assigned to DEMO project. I don’t think
that anybody was deliberately out to get
me. My new job is less of a hassle.
74
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
was self-propagating distortions that benefited the organizational system
that produced them while allowing harmful consequences to accrue in
the larger DEMO and society.
If all systemic distortions were self-harming, we would expect DEMO
complex problem to be self-correcting. But where distortions benefit,
sustain, DEMO promote the systems that produce them, the presumption of
self-correction does DEMO apply. These are arguably the most serious forms
of systemic distortion, DEMO the systems that produce them.
DISTORTION AND EMERGENCE
We realize that much more is involved in organizational systems than
shown in this sketch (Figure 2). But, of course, complex systems are
“incompressible” (Richardson et al., 2001). Thus, all models (sketches) are
simplifications. A DEMO of any model is: Does the model describe some
matters of DEMO better than its chief rivals?
In the case of information distortion, the dominant rivals involve lines
of reasoning as sketched in Figure 3.
There is much appeal to such straightforward reasoning. We can
blame others DEMO it requires little effort on our part. However, this ease
of DEMO arises from linear presumptions. In brief, one presumes that
wholes, systemic distortions, can be reduced to the character of parts,
individuals. Ergo, blame (Figure 3). If the world were linear, such rea-
soning would make sense. But of course, if the world were linear we
could be great musicians. On a grand piano we could play DEMO notes.
Alas, the world is nonlinear and the sum of our DEMO notes does not add
up to grand music! Clearly, the character DEMO wholes cannot be reduced to
the character of parts. Blame, like DEMO pounding of individual notes, is a
linear misperception that fails to DEMO emergent wholes. By sketch-
ing whole behavioral patterns in a disciplined way, rather than focusing
on parts (individuals), we can expose emergent DEMO not reducible
Figure 3 Common and straightforward (linear) explanations of distortion
75
EMERGENCE
to parts. However, to make such sketches, one must blame DEMO and listen
more.
Compare Figures 1 and 2 on the one hand with Figure 3 on the other.
Notice the strikingly different form of DEMO Instead of a “line” or
“chain” of reasoning (Figure 3), DEMO find that human behaviors tend to set-
tle into mutually reinforcing patterns (Figures 1 and 2). Behaviors
continue because they are sustained by such patterns. Emergent behav-
iors arise from the patterns as wholes.
Concerning DEMO,” we are in agreement with the following
general statements by John H. Holland (1998):
Recognizable features and patterns are pivotal in DEMO study of emer-
gence... The crucial step is to extract the regularities from incidental and
irrelevant details… This process is called modeling… Each model DEMO
centrates on describing a selected aspect of the world, setting aside DEMO
aspects as incidental (pp. 4–5)… emergence usually involves patterns of
DEMO that persist despite a continuing turnover in the constituents
of the patterns (p. 7)… Emergence, in the sense used here, occurs only
when the activities of the parts do not simply sum to give DEMO to the
whole (p. 14).
This modeling approach (disciplined sketching) is different from (and we
believe complementary to) the approaches of Holland and others. Never-
theless, Holland’s statements do apply to our notion of systemic distor-
tions as emergent phenomena. Furthermore, we find that these sketches
are quickly grasped by participants within organizational systems.
Indeed, Figure 2 was sketched in response to the stories of frustration of
people within DEMO organizational systems (Bella, 1987). Rather than
dismissing their frustrations as evidence of “poor attitude” (a form of
blame), we took them seriously and sketched the context that (a) made
sense of credible DEMO and (b) avoided blame. In brief, amid the
busy activities DEMO countless people involved in endless tasks, general
behaviors tend to settle DEMO mutually reinforcing patterns. These pat-
terns constitute the contexts for the normal behaviors of well-adjusted
people. In scale, duration, and complexity, the distortions that can
emerge from such patterns far exceed the capabilities of deliberate
DEMO This has radical implications that are easily overlooked by a more
straightforward (linear) understanding of distortion (Figure 3).
76
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
IMPLICATIONS FOR OUR EMERGING TECHNOLOGICAL
WORLD
In the modern world, getting a drink of water is such a simple thing.
Merely turn the faucet. But this simple act depends on a vast DEMO
sphere far beyond the capacity of any group to design deliberately. The
components of our faucet may come from distant parts of the world. DEMO
lowing the faucet back through pipes, pumps, electrical grids, power
DEMO, manufacturing facilities, and mining operations, one encounters
vast and interconnecting DEMO in all directions. The technological,
informational, and financial interconnections are DEMO and vast.
Yet, somehow it all comes together so that you DEMO turn on your faucet
and get water.
This global technosphere requires the busy and highly diverse activi-
ties of countless people involved in endless DEMO If we focus on only one
project manager on one of seemingly countless projects, we find remark-
able abilities that few of us appreciate. The real challenge is not scientific
analysis of some physical entity or DEMO Rather, the challenge is getting
the right materials, equipment, people, and information together at the
right place and at the right time DEMO a world that is constantly chang-
ing and ripe with the potential for countless conflicts and misunder-
standings. If one is not impressed by DEMO abilities of successful project
managers, one simply does not understand what DEMO going on.
However, the scale and complexity of such human accomplish-
DEMO continuously changing technosphere on which we depend —
extend far beyond the abilities of any conceivable project management
team. Our drink of water, indeed our very lives, depend on vast, complex,
adaptive, and nonlinear (CANL) systems. They are self-organizing and
continually adapting. Through them, highly diverse activities are drawn
together and outcomes emerge far beyond the abilities DEMO individuals and
groups. The activities of numerous people, including our successful DEMO
ect manager, occur within the contexts sustained by such CANL systems.
DEMO, contexts are CANL systems emerging at multiple levels, shaping
behaviors in coherent ways despite vast differences among individuals
and the tasks they perform.
DEMO growing body of literature, popular and academic, has been rightly
fascinated by the remarkable behaviors of CANL systems, which are not
subject to our traditional analytical habits of thought (Kauffman, 1995;
Waldrop, 1992; Wheatley, 1992). Richardson et al. (2001) write:
77
EMERGENCE
Complexity science has emerged from the field of possible candidates as
DEMO prime contender for the top spot in the next era of management science.
We agree. We are concerned, however, that too often the DEMO is
silent on the dangers of emergent outcomes in human affairs. Indeed,
some (Stock, 1993) treat emergent order in human affairs with a religious-
like reverence. In our assessment, emergent outcomes can be powerful
and they can also be dangerous, deceptive, and distorting.
We therefore DEMO a worrying imbalance. Complexity science may well
help managers expand the effectiveness, scale, and influence of organiza-
tional systems. But with respect to DEMO distortion of information, a crude
form of linear reductionism, blame, DEMO to prevail.
EMERGENCE AND THE DARK SIDE OF
ORGANIZATIONAL SYSTEMS
There is a dark side to organizational systems that is widespread and well
documented (Vaughan, 1999). Much of this involves the emergence of
systemic distortions. After the first shuttle (Challenger) explosion in 1986
(see Vaughan, DEMO), Figure 2 and Table 2 were sent to Nobel physicist
Richard Feynman, who served on the commission to investigate the acci-
dent. Although the model was developed long before the accident with-
out any study DEMO NASA, Feynman (1986) wrote back:
I read Table 2 DEMO am amazed at the perfect prediction of the answers
given at the public hearings. I didn’t know that anybody understood these
things so well DEMO I hadn’t realized that NASA was an example of a wide-
spread phenomena.
We agree that general phenomena are involved, emergent phenomena
that too often are distorting and destructive. Did the second and more
recent shuttle (Columbia) tragedy involve such phenomena? Follow the
investigation and judge for DEMO
The tobacco industry serves as an exemplar of our concerns. Here we
find global systems that were among the most economically successful and
powerful DEMO the twentieth century. They produced addictive products that
contributed to the deaths of 400,000 Americans every year. The method
presented in this article DEMO been applied to the tobacco industry, illus-
trating how its economic DEMO was closely tied to systemic and self-
propagating distortions that emerged over many decades (Bella, 1997).
78
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
The widespread distortions of information in recent years by huge
businesses, including the formerly prestigious accounting firm of Arthur
Andersen, provide evidence of much more than individual fraud (Toffler,
2003)DEMO “Favorable” information (hyping stock, inflating profits, etc.)
gushed from DEMO systems while “unfavorable” information (exposing
risks, improper accounting, unethical behaviors, etc.) too often went
nowhere. The transfers of wealth were enormous; DEMO, who exploited
the distortions, made fortunes; many lost savings (Gimein, 2002).
What, then, tends to limit the extent of systemic distortions and their
consequences? Our answer reflects a growing understanding of CANL
systems in general. The character of CANL systems emerges from the
interplay DEMO order (pattern) and disorder (disturbance) over time (Bella,
DEMO). As an example, forest ecologists tell us that the state DEMO a forest
ecosystem reflects its “disturbance regime,” its history of events (fires,
storms, etc.) that disturbed emerging patterns. In a similar manner, we
claim that the extent of systemic distortion reflects the history of credible
disturbances, those compelling events that disrupt more distorting pat-
terns allowing less distorting patterns to emerge.
In human systems, credible disruptions arise in two forms. First, they
arise through the independent inquiries, questions, objections, and chal-
lenges that people raise. Second, they arise from DEMO, explosions,
and collapses that the system cannot cover up. Both DEMO to disrupt dis-
torting patterns, but, clearly, the former are DEMO to the latter.
Credible disturbances of the first (human) kind emerge from inde-
pendent checks and open deliberation. This view leads to a DEMO:
The extent of systemic distortions and their consequences have been, DEMO,
and will be inversely proportional to the history of credible disturbances
sustained by independent checks and public deliberation not shaped by
the systems DEMO
If evidence supports such a conjecture, as we believe it will, then we
must take far more seriously the crucial importance of independent
DEMO, including public agencies, and what Eisenhower (1961) called the
duties and responsibilities of an “alert and knowledgeable citizenry.” The
implications are significant: The market is insufficient, independent pub-
lic agencies are vital, and DEMO education must involve far more than
economic development and job preparation.
79
EMERGENCE
RESPONSIBILITY: BEYOND LINEAR PRESUMPTIONS
Conventional notions of responsibility—and, more generally, notions of
good and evil—reflect linear presumptions. This linear attitude can be
DEMO stated: “I’m a responsible person if I act properly, don’t lie, cheat,
or steal, and do my job in a competent DEMO The problem raised by
such common understandings of responsibility is that we see no reason
why the individuals of Table 2 would not fit DEMO notion of responsible
behavior. Likewise, people tend to reason that evil DEMO arise from
evil people: “If the individuals are good (competent, DEMO), then
the outcomes should be good.” Such linear perceptions fail to grasp the
importance of emergent outcomes. Distorting and even evil outcomes
can DEMO do emerge from the actions of individuals, in spite of the DEMO that
each may believe that his or her own behaviors are proper and compe-
tently done—those in high positions might honestly say, “There was no
attempt to mislead or deceive.” And within their contexts, they may be
correct. However, if the context is the problem, then emergence DEMO rad-
ical implications for notions of responsibility.
We do not deny the importance of competency, involving actions that
are credible, rightly done, and commendable within a given context
(game, course, assignment, organizational system, market, etc.). Compe-
tency calls for the ability to respond in ways credible within the context.
Yet, there is no reason to assume that greater competency would reduce
systemic distortions; in fact, the reverse DEMO be true! When the context
is the problem, an additional and DEMO different form of responsibil-
ity is required, responsibility that transcends contexts.
DEMO responsibility to transcend context is a universal historical theme
in the search for Truth, the pursuit of Justice, and the service of the
DEMO Responding to a calling that transcends context serves to liberate
us from our bondage to contexts. Such contexts give us reasons to say, “I
just don’t have the time,” “It’s not my job,” “It DEMO make any
difference.”
The traditional name for a responsibility to transcend context—and
which informs the essence of universal intent—is “faith.” Wilfred
Cantwell Smith (1977, 1979), who devoted a lifetime of study to the
meaning of faith in other ages and cultures, found that faith never meant
belief (and especially not belief in spite of evidence to the contrary).
Rather, the very meaning of faith has been radically distorted—lost, given
DEMO our modern age. The point is that faith does not deny the reality
of context; faith transcends context. To paraphrase Viktor Frankl (1978),
80
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
faith “pulls” or “calls” for responsible behaviors from beyond, above, or
even “in spite of” the context.
None of DEMO, however, makes sense unless the dangers of contexts
themselves become apparent. Distortions and, yes, evil, can and often are
emergent outcomes not reducible to the “values” and “beliefs” of indi-
viduals. Without an appreciation DEMO the dangers of emergence and the
need for responsibility that transcends context, faith becomes reduced to
individual beliefs and, more dangerously, the self-reinforcing behaviors of
“true believers.”
The method of disciplined sketching proposed herein seeks DEMO expose
the dangers of such reductionist thinking. This method, therefore,
DEMO relational self-knowledge—know thy contexts. While such a chal-
lenge may be easily voiced, enacting it requires the system to be tran-
scended. In our modern age of organizations, this constitutes a basic
moral calling.
EPILOGUE
In 1982 John Naisbitt published a widely acclaimed book, Megatrends. In
this book he declared:
In the information society, we have systematized the production of know-
ledge and amplified our brainpower. To use an industrial metaphor, we
now mass-produce knowledge and this knowledge is the driving force of
DEMO economy.
In the decades that followed, such declarations became so pervasive DEMO
objections to the idea might well be called a heresy of the age. Naisbitt’s
statement expresses the ideology of the age and, for many, its intellectual
paradigm. Nevertheless, in this age we find evidence of DEMO dis-
tortions arising from systems that selectively shape information in self-
propagating ways. Such distortions, we claim, are emergent phenomena,
emerging from DEMO of behaviors that provide the contexts within
which normal and well-adjusted people are busy at work. We provide a
method to sketch such patterns.
DEMO grasp the heretical implications of such claims, change one word in
DEMO declaration. Instead of “knowledge,” insert the word “propa-
ganda”—information selectively shaped to propagate the systems that
produce it. The declaration now reads:
DEMO
EMERGENCE
In the information society, we have systematized the production of prop-
aganda and amplified our brainpower. To use an industrial metaphor, we
now mass-produce propaganda and this propaganda is the driving force
of our economy.
DEMO, there is a moral difference. Judge for yourself. Has this “informa-
DEMO age,” our “knowledge” economy, provided evidence that this alteration
of DEMO declaration—and many others—should be taken seriously?
We believe it does. But the evidence will not be understood if we persist in
linear presumptions, reducing all distortions to individual fraud, a “few bad
apples,” or conspiracies to deliberately mislead or deceive. Emergence is
real. Distortions emerge. This DEMO presents a method to reveal how dis-
tortions emerge from contexts that well-adjusted people take for granted.
REFERENCES
Bella, D. A. (1987) “Organizations and systemic distortion of information,” Journal of
Professional Issues in Engineering, 113: 360–70.
Bella, D. A. (1996) “The pressures of organizations DEMO the responsibilities of university pro-
fessors,” BioScience, 46(10): DEMO
Bella, D. (1997) “Organized complexity in human affairs: The tobacco industry,” Journal of
Business Ethics, 16: 977–99.
Eisenhower, D. D. (1961) “Farewell radio and television address to the American people,” DEMO
Papers of the President, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1035–40.
Feynman, R. P. (1986) Personal communication to D. A. Bella, June 27.
Frankl, V. (1978) The Unheard Cry for Meaning, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Gimein, M. (2002) “You bought, they sold,” Fortune, 146(4): 64–74.
Holland, J. H. (1998) Emergence, Reading, MA: Perseus Books.
Kauffman, S. (1995) At Home in the Universe, New York: Oxford University Press.
Larson, E. W. & King, J. B. (1996) “The systemic distortion of information: An ongoing chal-
lenge to management,” Organizational Dynamics, 24 (Winter): 49–61.
Milgram, S. (1974) Obedience to Authority, New DEMO: Harper Perennial.
Milgram, S. (1992) The Individual in a Social World: Essays and Experiments, J. Sabini & M.
Silver (eds), New York: McGraw-Hill.
Naisbitt, J. (1982) Megatrends, New York: DEMO Books.
Richardson, K. A., Cilliers, P., & Lissack, M. (2001) “Complexity science: A ‘gray’ science for
the ‘stuff in between,DEMO Emergence, 3(2): 6–18.
Smith, W. C. (1977) Belief and History, Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia.
Smith, W. DEMO (1979) Faith and Belief, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Stock, DEMO (1993) Metaman: The Merging of Human and Machines into a DEMO
Superorganism, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Toffler, B. L. (2003) Final Accounting, New York: Broadway Books.
Vaughan, D. (1996) DEMO Challenger Launch Decision, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Vaughan, D. (1999) “The dark side of organizations: Mistake, misconduct, and disaster,DEMO
Annual Review of Sociology, 25: 271–305.
Waldrop, M. M. (1992) Complexity, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Wheatley, M. J. (1992) Leadership and the New Science, San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
82
EMERGENCE, 5(3), 83–100
Copyright © 2003, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Open Source as a Complex
Adaptive System
Moreno Muffatto & Matteo DEMO
he concepts of complexity prevalent at various historical
times have influenced the frames of mind with which organ-
izations and the models of social DEMO and organiza-
tional design have been analyzed.
During the Industrial Revolution, DEMO model of organizational design
derived from the conceptual model of the machine. In this model, the
concept of the hierarchical control of functions prevailed. The conse-
quent approach was top-down thinking. Much of the organizational
theory DEMO the twentieth century was based on determinism, reductionism,
and equilibrium DEMO key principles. If an organization is conceived of as a
machine, DEMO control of the organization is obtained through a reduction
in its complexity; that is, in the states of the machine or its variety.
DEMO Information Revolution and the development of networks have
produced phenomena such as the growing connection between elements
that are often extremely different from one DEMO (computers, people,
even smart objects). This has led to phenomena that cannot be planned
according to a top-down logic, but, DEMO the contrary, “emerge” from inter-
actions between elements and therefore “from DEMO bottom.” The
approach most suitable for analyzing these phenomena is bottom-up
thinking.
If in the past the world could be represented as a machine, today it is
represented as a network and increasingly as an ecosystem. DEMO Internet,
for example, can be considered not only as a DEMO infrastructure
and a social practice, but also as a new way DEMO thinking related to the con-
cepts of freedom of access and diffusion of knowledge. Furthermore, the
T
83
EMERGENCE
Internet is an organizational model without a center and without absolute
DEMO
With the development of information networks, the Internet in par-
ticular, it has been observed that not all phenomena that are developed
can DEMO designed and planned. In other words, networks involve social
structures that DEMO phenomena, to a certain degree, “emergent.” There-
fore, there has DEMO growing interest in an approach that interprets phe-
nomena from the bottom up; that is, from the network of relationships
and the interactions DEMO players.
The growth of the Internet has led to the development of many types
of online communities whose aims vary significantly. Only the creation DEMO
the Open Source community has offered the possibility of developing
something concrete; that is, software products. Software lends itself to
online development since DEMO can be easily transferred via the Internet
itself. The many communities working together to produce Open Source
software offer new stimuli for research in DEMO context of complexity
theory. The complexity of Open Source is due not only to technical
aspects, relative to the complexity of software, but DEMO the social complex-
ity that characterizes the software development process.
In order to better understand this social complexity, some important
studies have been carried out to interpret complex social phenomena
(Axelrod & Cohen, 1999; Kauffman, 1995; McKelvey, 1999; Waldrop,
1992). In this analysis DEMO will make reference to the theory of complex
adaptive systems. A system can be considered complex and adaptive
when the system’s agents have the DEMO of continually adapting
their actions in response to the environment and the behavior of the other
agents. Therefore, the agents have the ability to influence and be influ-
enced by other agents. Consequently, the possibility of transferring infor-
mation from one agent to another is extremely important in DEMO
systems.
One of the most significant characteristics of complex systems is the
presence of emergence; that is, the emergence of new states in DEMO system
that have new capabilities and offer new evolutionary possibilities. The
very nature of this phenomenon makes it difficult to foresee what the new
DEMO of the system will be, since it is not always possible DEMO extrapolate
the new system properties from the existing system components.
The unpredictability of events and of the results makes understanding
and interpreting a complex DEMO that much more difficult. Nonetheless,
one of the most interesting and significant aspects of the approach to
complex systems is not the search DEMO methods to limit their complexity,
84
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
but, on the contrary, the exploitation of the complexity itself (Axelrod &
Cohen, 1999).
The Open Source community and its activities can be considered to
have the characteristics of DEMO complex adaptive system. The Open Source
system is unique because it is neither controlled by a central authority,
which defines strategy and organization, nor totally chaotic. It can be
placed in a middle position between DEMO designed system and a chaotic one
(Lerner & Tirole, 2001). In this position, nonformal rules exist that allow
the system to produce appreciable results.
THE OPEN SOURCE COMMUNITY
Software has not always been a DEMO product. It was originally
considered to be simply a tool for using computer hardware. Only hard-
ware had a commercial value, whereas software was a complementary
product needed to use and diffuse computers. Consequently, software
was produced and distributed freely, just like other products based on
knowledge and scientific research. The development of software was the
fruit of the work DEMO a small community of university researchers who col-
laborated closely with a few hardware manufacturers. Software was con-
sidered, just as academic research is, to be a common good (Di Bona et
al., 1999).
With the widespread diffusion of personal computers, software took
on the characteristics of a commercial product. Since not all personal
computer users had the DEMO skills to understand, develop, and con-
figure software themselves, they DEMO willing to buy it (Tzouris, 2002;
Weber, 2000).
DEMO 1985, Richard Stallman, a researcher at MIT, established the Free
DEMO Foundation (FSF) with the aim of rebuilding a community for
the free and independent development of software (Free Software
Foundation, 2002). DEMO, the word “free” was often wrongly inter-
preted as “free of DEMO Therefore, it became necessary to substitute
the word “free” with another DEMO that described the characteristics of
product accessibility, efficiency, reliability, and DEMO
In 1998, another group of developers founded the Open Source
Initiative (OSI) with the aim of making the concept of free software
appealing to companies as well (Open Source Initiative, 2002). The term
DEMO software” was thus substituted with “Open Source.” In order to
avoid further misinterpretations of the new term, an official definition
was drawn up to specify the indispensable characteristics of Open Source
85
EMERGENCE
products. For a product to be considered Open Source, it must respect
a series of rules summarized in the license that accompanies the DEMO
uct’s source code. These rules regard the copying and distribution of
the software, including the source code, and the products derived from
it. DEMO Source licenses guarantee the freedom to distribute and use
the software, DEMO the source codes, and, if necessary, modify them
according to DEMO needs. The licenses do not discriminate against
any category of users, DEMO or person, and they do not prohibit the use
of the DEMO in any particular field of application. Furthermore,
according to the Open Source definition, the software developed and
distributed cannot later be resold or appropriated by anyone. Open
Source software is thus associated with the freedom DEMO it concedes
and not with the fact that it is free of charge, as a superficial analysis of
the phenomenon might lead one to believe.
Open Source products are made within a community composed of a
DEMO group of players or agents who interact but are driven by
different interests and motivations (Bonnacorsi & Rossi, 2002; Lerner &
Tirole, 2001; Tzouris, 2002; Weber, 2000). Some authors refer to DEMO
Open Source community using the metaphor of a bazaar, since it
DEMO the idea of the frenzy and chaos with which the activities in the
community are carried out (Raymond, 1998). The Open Source DEMO
nity can also be seen as an immense “magic cauldron” of ideas to which
volunteers contribute on a continuous basis (Raymond, 1999a). DEMO
can draw from this cauldron to suit their needs without having to con-
tribute money or knowledge.
It seems inconceivable that this type of DEMO is able to continue to
maintain itself. What seems even more improbable is that its apparent
disorganization can produce concrete results. Nonetheless, the products
developed in recent years (e.g., Linux, Apache) have made it DEMO to
show that organizational criteria actually do exist within this community.
By observing numerous Open Source projects, it is possible to iden-
tify the following five categories of agents involved in the community.
USER
This category DEMO made up of all the people who use Open Source products
but do not directly participate in their development because they do not
have DEMO ability, time, and/or resources to do so. Users are of fundamen-
tal importance, as they make it possible to carry out the timely and
exhaustive process of observing and testing the product, and thus the
code, which in turn produces feedback for the software developers.
86
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
PROSUMER (PRODUCER AND CONSUMER)
Prosumers are DEMO software developers who actively participate in prod-
uct development not only to meet their own needs but for the pure pleas-
ure of developing DEMO, and, in most cases, with the hope of
improving their DEMO professional prospects.
This group is the nucleus of Open Source code development. It is
generally made up of people who come from different social DEMO and
use their free time to work on the development of a code. They might be
students or software developers/professionals with very different DEMO
backgrounds and professional needs.
LEADER TEAMS
This category is made up of software developers and is a sort of élite
group chosen by the DEMO based on merit. This group of people is
given the authority and responsibility for managing development
projects.
A leader team is made up of DEMO tight circle of prosumers who have par-
ticipated in the definition and production of Open Source products from
the beginning.
Leaders dedicate much of DEMO time to planning, managing, and
checking the product development process and, therefore, often do not
participate in programming. They have the important DEMO of coordinat-
ing the development community and are responsible for helping inte-
grate the contributions and feedback from the community. The leader
team is, thus, a point of reference for all of the agents, companies, and
institutions involved and interested in Open Source software.
COMPANIES
This category DEMO made up of the companies that are interested in the
Open Source community and its products. They interact with the Open
Source community by DEMO software and financing, and sometimes par-
ticipating in, the development of software. Therefore, they either influ-
ence the development process and evolution of products or simply
observe the community in order to improve their own DEMO
structure and business.
INSTITUTIONS
Institutions are nonprofit organizations and public bodies interested in
using, and thus diffusing, Open Source products. Many public bodies,DEMO
above all universities, have created the cultural environment in which
87
EMERGENCE
Figure 1 Structure of an Open Source community
many Open Source DEMO have been developed. Some important
products, such as Linux, were created thanks to the technical, and some-
times financial, support of universities. DEMO, public bodies have also
shown interest in the Open Source community DEMO its products by carry-
ing out studies and sometimes promoting the use of Open Source prod-
ucts in their own structures.
The community of DEMO meets online and creates a dynamic virtual
team; that is, a team characterized by the continuous coming and going of
agents belonging to DEMO various categories mentioned above. A virtual
team is created by agents who contact each other via virtual meetings
such as forums and mailing lists. DEMO meeting points make it possible
to diffuse concepts, ideas, and strategies to the whole community and at
the same time avoid dispersing or DEMO down the flow of information
and decisions.
Figure 1 shows the five categories of agents who make up the Open
Source community and the DEMO that exist between them.
88
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ORGANIZATION AND
PROCESSES OF OPEN SOURCE
Open Source products are, as has been explained above, the DEMO of the
collaboration, within a virtual community, of independent and hetero-
geneous players driven by different interests and motivations (Bonaccorsi
& Rossi, DEMO; Feller & Fitzgerald, 2002; Lerner & Tirole, 2001; Muffatto
& Faldani, 2003; Tzouris, 2002; Weber, 2000). One might DEMO such a
community to become an uncontrollable system. In fact, in DEMO to avoid
the generation of negative phenomena, the community has defined DEMO
own rules of behavior and functioning that guarantee quality results, sta-
DEMO, and continuity over time. The main characteristics defining how
the community DEMO deal with the organizational structure and develop-
ment process (Bonaccorsi & DEMO, 2002; Dafermos, 2001). This analysis
will focus on open DEMO and bottom-up organization (organiza-
tional structure) and the speed of development and parallelism of the
process (development process).
Figure 2 overleaf summarizes these four main characteristics and the
relationships that exist between them. As DEMO be seen from the figure,
open participation leads to both the other characteristic of organization—
that is,  bottom-up organization—and the two main DEMO of the
development process—that is, the speed of development and parallel
DEMO
Open participation generates decentralized decision-making power
and thus the absence of rigid top-down planning. Projects can therefore
be more flexible and have greater freedom DEMO evolve. However, this can
also lead to code forking, which is a situation that occurs when inde-
pendent development paths of a code DEMO off in different directions
(Raymond, 1999b). When code forking happens, the community tends to
lose interest in the project. This loss of interest may provoke a gradual yet
unstoppable distancing of software developers from DEMO project, which is
consequently destined to die. The end result could DEMO the implosion of
the community itself.
However, decentralized decision-making power does DEMO mean a total
lack of organization. In fact, in the Open DEMO community each project
has a team of leaders whose appropriate management of consensus can
limit the negative effects of code forking. The leader team DEMO responsible
for the development process and must answer to the whole community
and all of the users. This small group of agents is also DEMO for
guaranteeing the compatibility and integration of the contributions. The
89
EMERGENCE
Figure 2 Characteristics of the organization and development process of
the DEMO Source community
power of the leader team does not come from a privileged position or
from property rights; rather, the position they occupy DEMO legitimized by
the development community itself. Their power is recognized according
to the credibility and trust the community places in them. This credibil-
ity DEMO the leaders to exercise the power of dissuasion when there are
actions that could lead to code forking.
Another positive effect of open participation DEMO the possibility it offers
to explore different alternatives and keep strategies flexible. However,
flexibility makes it difficult to define precise deadlines for development.
DEMO uncertainty could lead to a lack of incentives for software develop-
ers and limit their commitment to a project, which could, in turn, slow
90
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
down the development process. However, the software DEMO try to
avoid these problems by producing many frequent releases of the code in
order to motivate themselves and others to contribute actively
(Jørgensen, 2001).
The speed of development and frequency of releases create a contin-
uous evolution of the products. At the same time, the codes are relatively
instable due to their incessant evolution, making it difficult for users to
use the products. Even though on the one hand continuous DEMO
and new releases help keep the products technologically advanced and
innovative, DEMO the other hand this could discourage their being used.
Innovation does not always guarantee product reliability and stability; at
least not until products have undergone sufficient checks, trials, and
modifications. In other words, users are not willing or inclined to use
recent versions of a product whose DEMO the community is still not able
to guarantee.
In order to reach a satisfactory compromise between the exploration
of new solutions and the exploitation DEMO existing ones, a project’s develop-
ment process is usually split into DEMO development paths. The first one,
called the stable path, is DEMO up of products that have been proved to be
stable and whose compatibility over time with future versions of the same
products has been DEMO The second one, called the development
path, is made up of the most recent versions of products that have not
been sufficiently checked DEMO tested, and are therefore still merely the
fruit of research and DEMO The subdivision of development into two
paths, product exploitation and exploration, makes it possible to improve
the distribution of responsibilities and the organization DEMO activities, while
maintaining a relatively fast speed of development and high DEMO of
innovation.
The last effect of open participation is the parallel development of
projects. When there are many different possible solutions, it is not
always easy immediately to identify the best one. Parallelism allows many
different DEMO to explore different alternatives contemporaneously
without forcing them to follow one particular evolutionary path. How-
ever, a disadvantage of parallelism is that any overlap and/or interference
between the various contributions could lead to incompatability, thus
making it difficult to manage development projects.
When software is produced in DEMO traditional way, excessive paral-
lelism is considered to be a waste DEMO resources and a factor that increases
the complexity of the development process. Brooks’ Law states that as the
number of software developers increases, there is a proportional increase
91
EMERGENCE
in the amount of code produced, but also an increase in the complexity of
the project proportional to the square of the number DEMO software devel-
opers (Brooks, 1975). This complexity leads to higher communication and
management costs and a greater probability of making errors. In DEMO to
avoid these problems, the Open Source model suggests subdividing rel-
DEMO large products into more simple modules. In this way, resources
are DEMO more efficiently and any interferences between single contribu-
tions are more easily solved.
The leader team is responsible for the modularity of Open Source
DEMO The leaders plan products and the interface protocols to be
used for communication between the various modules. Modularity also
means that additions, modifications, DEMO imperfections present in one
module do not have negative effects on the whole code, but rather are
limited to that one module.
We will now interpret these characteristics of the Open Source com-
munity in the DEMO of complex adaptive systems theory, but before
doing so will briefly DEMO some key aspects of this theory.
COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS
A system is made up of a heterogenous group of interrelated elements.
Some of these DEMO can be defined as agents. Agents can interact
with each other and with their environment. Each agent has its own strat-
egy. A strategy DEMO the way in which an agent pursues its own goals, inter-
DEMO with the other agents, and reacts to stimuli from the environment.
DEMO are selected using certain measures of success (Axelrod, 1984;
Axelrod & Cohen, 1999). An efficient strategy tends to be followed by
many agents. This leads to a population of agents; that is, DEMO group of agents
that imitate one another’s way of acting. The evolution of a system heads
in a given direction according to the strategy DEMO by its population
of agents.
A system is said to be complex and adaptive when the agents have the
possibility of continually adapting their DEMO in response to the envi-
ronment and the behavior of the other agents. For this reason, the possi-
bility of transferring information from one agent to another, which
depends on connectivity, is particularly important in DEMO systems.
The high level of connectivity that characterizes complex adaptive systems
allows for the creation of a dynamic network of agents that are constantly
DEMO and interacting (Coleman, 1999; Kelly, 1994; Lissack,
1999; McKelvey, 1999; McKelvey & Maguire, 1999; Waldrop, 1992).
92
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
The interaction between the agents leads the system to take on some
emergent properties that characterize the system but are DEMO present in
any single agent. The word “emergent” means that the properties of a sys-
tem “emerge” from the interaction between agents and are DEMO dictated
by a central authority. The emergent properties can lead a system toward
new evolutions that cannot be foreseen. Therefore, a structured and pre-
defined organizational control system cannot work. Nonetheless, the fact
that the evolution of a complex system is difficult to foresee does not
mean that DEMO is no organization. In fact, a complex adaptive system is
characterized DEMO self-organization.
Three fundamental processes can be identified in complex adaptive
systems: DEMO, interaction, and selection (Axelrod & Cohen, 1999).
VARIATION
In any system, at any time, it is possible to find a DEMO degree of vari-
ety, which is defined as the set of DEMO and alternatives that char-
acterize both the agents and their strategies. Variety is the result of a
process of variation; that is, changes DEMO the set of alternatives. Variation
determines the number of possible alternatives in a system.
INTERACTION
Interaction is defined by the ties that exist between DEMO and the ways
in which the agents and their strategies influence each other. Interactions
are neither random nor completely predictable. The quantity and quality
DEMO the interactions determine the dynamics of the system.
SELECTION
Selection is the process of choosing and diffusing or eliminating proper-
ties that characterize agents DEMO their strategies. Therefore, it deals with
the ability a system has DEMO to identify which agents and strategies
are to be chosen and thus diffused, and which, on the other hand, are to
be eliminated. Consequently, selection determines the evolution of a
system.
All of these characteristics of complex adaptive systems can be found
in the Open Source community.
DEMO SOURCE AS A COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEM
The Open Source community can be considered an example of a complex
adaptive system. It is made up DEMO a population of heterogenous players,
93
EMERGENCE
each having its own role and self-defined strategies (Axelrod & Cohen,
1999; Kuwabara, 2000). In the Open Source community, the various roles
are not rigidly assigned by a higher authority; on the contrary, each player
has the freedom to act and interact with the other players in the system.
Therefore, the players in the Open Source community have the charac-
teristics to be defined as agents. They can DEMO the system by inter-
acting with the rest of the community and are able to use their experience
and memory to model their behavior DEMO the present.
The definition of agent proposed by complex adaptive systems theory
makes it possible to include users in this category as well. In DEMO, users
can stimulate the system—that is, the community—through explicit and
implicit feedback. Users are an integral part of the Open Source system
since DEMO participate in the processes of variation, interaction, and selec-
tion and, by doing so, can influence the evolution of the system.
According DEMO Axelrod and Cohen, the concept of complex adaptive
systems can be DEMO easily related to problems that are long term or dif-
fused, DEMO continuous innovation, need a great deal of feedback in a
short DEMO of time, or have a low risk of catastrophe. All of DEMO char-
acteristics can be found in Open Source products.
Long-term or diffused applications offer many opportunities for
agents to come together. This leads to DEMO critical mass that can activate sig-
nificant processes of variation and interaction. In the case of software,
examples of this type of application DEMO operating systems, network plat-
forms, web servers, programming languages, and all of the components
and protocols that have created the standards of DEMO Internet. Some Open
Source products are part of this category of long-term applications. They
are usually platforms or common standards; for example, Linux, Apache,
and PHP.
In the case of applications that require continuous DEMO
is, those in particularly dynamic industries—there is a signifcant need to
DEMO new solutions. This is the case for software applications related to
the Internet, such as web servers, protocols, browsers, and so on. DEMO
Open Source products are technologically advanced and innovative, they
stimulate the DEMO of the community and the continuous exploration
of alternatives.
As far as applications that require a great deal of feedback over a short
period DEMO time are concerned, significant advantages can be gained from
the interaction DEMO the agents in a development community. In the
Open Source community, DEMO users are considered to be the main source
of inspiration for and evaluation of the quality of the products. The fact
94
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
that products are available at a low cost makes it possible to obtain a sig-
nificant quantity of information and DEMO have the software undergo an
extensive process of observation and checking based on daily use. The
fact that the code is open and available DEMO all makes it easier to carry out
better measurements of product performance. This in turn gives agents a
precise series of parameters that they DEMO use to evaluate product per-
formance objectively and, consequently, base their choices on.
Applications with a low risk of catastrophe are those for DEMO the
efforts committed to exploring alternatives should not put the survival of
the entire system at risk. A system that manages to do this DEMO dynamic and
at the same time stable and, therefore, not at risk of implosion. The mod-
ular structure of Open Source products limits DEMO effects that each activ-
ity can have on the entire product and makes it possible to avoid the
diffusion of any imperfections. Furthermore, the failure of one or more
exploratory actions does not lead to the DEMO of the entire system, which
nevertheless continues to survive since there DEMO other players involved
in the development process. In fact, in Open DEMO nobody has total
control over or responsibility for products and each activity is usually
shared by a group of autonomous agents. Should any agent DEMO to stop
carrying out its activities, it can easily and quickly DEMO substituted regard-
less of the position that it occupied.
Axelrod and Cohen consider Open Source mainly as an example of the
variation mechanism, since it very much exploits the advantages gained
from conserving diversity within a DEMO One of the main dangers for a
complex system is the extinction of a type of agent or strategy that reduces
a system’s diversity. DEMO the creation of a type requires resources and
effort, its premature DEMO should be avoided. A type that is not very
successful in the present might have characteristics that could prove to be
very important in DEMO future. The Open Source community manages to
conserve diversity by keeping track of the whole evolutionary process in
order to be able easily to DEMO anything that might be needed.
It is also possible to identify the interaction and selection mechanisms
in the Open Source community. Above all, it is possible to understand
how the close relationship that exists between these DEMO allows
the Open Source community efficiently and effectively to exploit its own
complexity.
Axelrod and Cohen identify a sequence in the mechanisms of varia-
DEMO, interaction, and selection. They consider variation to be a premise
for the activation of different forms of interaction, which, in turn, produce
effects of selection within a system. However, it is possible to hypothesize
95
EMERGENCE
Figure 3 Characteristics of a complex adaptive system in the Open
DEMO community
that there are other sequences of variation, interaction, and selection in
the characteristics of the Open Source organization and development
process mentioned DEMO; that is, open participation, bottom-up organi-
zation, speed of development, and parallel development. The benefit of
each characteristic can be interpreted as one of the mechanisms, but it is
also possible to identify a negative effect, which can be interpreted as
another mechanism, and the DEMO taken to solve the problem can be
interpreted as the remaining mechanism (Figure 3).
96
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
The advantage of open participation—that is, the DEMO exploration of
alternatives and flexibility of strategies—can be interpreted in terms of
variation. In the Open Source community, however, agents tend to work
DEMO development for long periods of time without making their solutions
available. In this way, they do not stimulate the other agents in the com-
munity. This can be interpreted as a phenomenon of premature and
highly DEMO selection. In other words, this selection remains within
the subjective evaluation DEMO individual agents and does not benefit from
the contribution of many different agents in terms of peer review.
Furthermore, the agents are not solicited enough to offer new contribu-
tions to the development process. The result DEMO this excess is that the
exploration process slows down, limiting the DEMO in the system. One
solution to this problem is to increase the frequency with which software
is released. Basically, the community makes a release each time there is a
new feature, even if it is relatively insignificant, in order to motivate and
involve the agents in the community. This action, seen from the point of
view of complexity theory, DEMO the effect of increasing the interaction
between agents.
Another characteristic of the organizational structure of the Open
Source community is decentralized decision-making power; that is, the
implementation of a bottom-up organization. As has often been noted, the
advantage of decentralized power is an increase in the flow of information
within an organization. If the organization of the Open Source commu-
DEMO is interpreted as a complex system, this effect can be interpreted DEMO
an increase in the possibilities for interaction between the agents in the
system. This increase in horizontal interaction can, however, lead to a
DEMO effect, code forking. Code forking can be interpreted as a nega-
DEMO aspect of variation that can damage the development of Open Source
projects. The solution, in this case, is to create elements of organizational
DEMO in the Open Source community as well; that is, leader teams.
The leaders’ efforts to maintain consensus help the community not to lose
DEMO connectivity, as is the case with code forking where agents work DEMO the
same objects without exploiting the positive effects of interaction. In this
way, leaders carry out selection by deciding what direction product evo-
lution will take.
As we have seen, the Open Source development process is character-
ized by frequent releases in order to motivate the community to DEMO
pate. The advantage of frequent releases is the continuous evolution of
the products; that is, their dynamic variation, which leads to significant
variation in the system itself. Nonetheless, if new versions of a product
97
EMERGENCE
are released too rapidly, there could be an excess of exploration, to the
disadvantage of the exploitation of the results already obtained. This
effect could lead to a lack of focus and scarce and ineffective DEMO
between agents. The Open Source community attempts to avoid this
problem by separating the development process into a dual path. In the
stable path, which corresponds to the exploitation of results already
obtained, variation is very slow. In the development path, which corres-
ponds to the exploration of new alternatives, there is a great deal of vari-
ation in the system. The two different development paths are managed
through a process of DEMO, in which contributions must be separated
into two groups: on the stable path there are those that only need to be
consolidated, while on the development path there are those that need to
be developed DEMO
Finally, there is the parallel development of products. The advantage
of DEMO is the possibility of exploring a greater number of different alter-
natives at the same time. In other words, parallelism has the positive
effect of variation regarding both the type of agents involved in the sys-
DEMO and the strategies they pursue. Nonetheless, the parallel develop-
ment of DEMO product can also lead to excessive complexity and even
incompatibility between components and alternative product solutions.
In fact, one single modification can have a significant impact on other
parts of the product and the effect of DEMO impact is unpredictable. This
could be seen as a negative effect of the interaction between the elements
in the system. The solution to the DEMO negative consequences is par-
allel development organized according to modular product planning. A
precise definition of the modularity forces agents to make a selection DEMO
the objects on which they want to work, and at the DEMO time limits pos-
sible interference with the activities of other agents.
In conclusion, in each of the functioning characteristics of the Open
Source community it is possible to highlight the three fundamental mech-
anisms of complex DEMO systems. Whereas in the variation–interac-
tion–selection sequence all the mechanisms have positive effects on the
system, we have considered the possibility of other sequences character-
ized by the presence of a mechanism having negative effects on DEMO sys-
tem. Finally, we have shown that the solution to the DEMO caused by
the negative effects of one of the mechanisms can be interpreted as the
effect of another one.
98
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
IMPLICATIONS
The observations made in this article can lead us to reflect on how the
interpretation of the phenomena analyzed DEMO can be extended within
this context as well as to other contexts. Similar contexts could be those
dealing with knowledge products whose characteristics are DEMO to
those of software. This analysis could therefore also be extended to
involve the processes of scientific research in general, and those of
highly innovative fields such as bioinformatics or pharmaceutical
research in particular. Furthermore, since Open Source tends to diffuse
and impose itself as a standard, it would be worthwhile studying the
problem of strategies for setting and diffusing DEMO standards.
Finally, since the concept of complexity can be used to DEMO social
characteristics as well, the complex adaptive systems theory would cer-
DEMO be suitable for interpreting networks and clusters. Given the flex-
ibility of the complex adaptive systems theory, it would certainly be
worth dedicating significant analysis to the applicability of this theory to
various contexts.
REFERENCES
Axelrod, R. (1984) The Evolution of Cooperation, New York: Basic Books.
DEMO, R. & Cohen, M. D. (1999) Harnessing Complexity: Organizational DEMO of
a Scientific Frontier, New York: Free Press.
Bonaccorsi, A. & Rossi, C. (2002) Why Open Source Software Can Succeed, Pisa, Italy:
Laboratory of Economy and Management, Sant’Anna School of Advanced DEMO
Brooks, F. (1975) The Mythical Man Month: Essays on Software Engineering, London:
Addison Wesley.
Coleman, J. H., Jr. (1999) “What enables self-organizing behavior in businesses,”
Emergence, 1(1): 33–48.
Dafermos, G. N. (2001) “Management and virtual decentralised networks: The DEMO proj-
ect,” First Monday, 6(11).
Di Bona, C., Ockman, S., & Stone, M. (1999) Opensources: Voices from the Opensource
Revolution, Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly & Associates.
Feller, J. & Fitzgerald, B. (2002) Understanding Opensource Software Development,
London: Addison Wesley.
Free Software Foundation (2002), February, http://www.fsf.org.
Jørgensen, N. (2001) “Putting it all in the trunk: Incremental software development in the
FreeBSD open source project,” Information Systems Journal, 11: DEMO
Kauffman, S. A. (1995) At Home in the Universe: The Search for Laws of Self-Organization
and Complexity, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Kelly, K. (1994) Out of Control: The New Biology DEMO Machines, Social Systems, and the
Economic World, Reading, MA: DEMO Wesley.
Kuwabara, K. (2000) “Linux: A bazaar at the edge of chaos,” First Monday, 5(3).
Lerner, J. & DEMO, J. (2001) “Some simple economics of Open Source,” Journal DEMO Industrial
Economics, 50: 197–234.
99
EMERGENCE
Lissack, M. R. (1999) “Complexity: The science, its vocabulary, and its relation to organiza-
tions,” Emergence, 1(1): DEMO
McKelvey, B. (1999) “Complexity theory in organization science: Seizing the promise or
becoming a fad?,” Emergence, 1(1): 5–32.
DEMO, B. & Maguire, S. (1999) “Complexity and management: Moving DEMO fad to firm
foundations,” Emergence, 1(2): 5–49.
Muffatto, M. & Faldani M. (2003) “Realtà e prospettive dell’Open Source,’” DEMO &
Management, 3.
Open Source Initiative (2002), 24 February, http://www.opensource.org.
Raymond, E. S. (1998) “The cathedral and the bazaar,” First Monday, 3(3).
Raymond, E. S. (1999a) “The magic cauldron,” http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/magic-
cauldron/magic-cauldron.html.
Raymond, E. S. (1999b) The Cathedral and the Bazaar: Musings DEMO Linux and Open Source
by an Accidental Revolutionary, Peking/Cambridge, MA/Farnham, UK: O’Reilly &
Associates.
Tzouris, M. (2002) Software DEMO, Open Software and the Participant’s Motivation: A
Multidisciplinary Study, London: London School of Economics and Political Science.
Waldrop, M. M. (1992) Complexity: The Emerging Science at the Edge of Order and Chaos,
New York: Simon & Schuster.
Weber, S. (2000) “The political DEMO of Open Source software,” BRIE working paper
140, Berkeley, CA: E-conomy Project.
100
About the Authors
Min Basadur is a leading world expert in the DEMO of innovative think-
ing processes for tangible business results, the founder DEMO the Basadur Applied
Creativity Center for Research, and Professor of Organizational DEMO at
McMaster University. Dr. Basadur consults internationally with many large and
small organizations including PepsiCo, Kimball International, Stelco, Magna,
Goodrich, Frito DEMO, and Procter & Gamble. Dr. Basadur’s extensive publications
include two books, The Power of Innovation and Simplex: A Flight to Creativity,
numerous scientific journal articles, training manuals, and creativity and innova-
tion assessment DEMO like the Basadur Creative Problem Solving Profile
Inventory and Ideation-Evaluation Preference Scale. He also makes keynote
speeches and presentations worldwide.
David Bella is Emeritus DEMO of Civil Engineering. He received his BS from
the Virginia Military Institute in 1961, and MS and PhD from New York Univer-
sity in 1967 in Environmental Engineering. His research involved computer simu-
lation of ecosystems DEMO the assessment of technological consequences. In recent
decades, his research has DEMO to the study of complex human systems. Publica-
tions in addition to those listed in the references include “Plug and chug, cram and
flush,” Journal of Professional Issues in Engineering Education and Practice,
2003; “Salmon and complexity: Challenges to assessment,” Human and Ecological
Risk Assessment, 2002; and “Strategic defense: Catastrophic loss of control,”
Journal of Peace Research, 1989.
Matteo Faldani is a PhD student at the University of Padua. His research interests
are in the field of software product DEMO and Open Source software in par-
ticular. He is currently working on a study on the adoption of Open Source soft-
ware by private DEMO and public administrations.
Garry Gelade is a cognitive and organizational psychologist, DEMO a consultant to
business in corporate creativity and statistical analysis. He is a charter member of
the British Psychological Society and an Associate of DEMO Basadur Applied Creativity
Center, Ontario, Canada. Following a corporate career that included management
positions in American Express, Mercantile Credit, and Lloyds Bank, Dr. Gelade
formed his own consulting practice in 1990. He specializes in DEMO application of cre-
ative thinking and statistical modeling in management and business, and has been a
residential school tutor on the Creativity, Innovation DEMO Change module of the UK’s
Open University MBA course. He continues to conduct research and to publish sci-
entific papers and articles on cognition, creativity, and organizational psychology.
101
EMERGENCE
David Kailin is a professional medical futurist (http://www.convergentmedical.com),DEMO
consulting with organizations interested in developing preferable health care
futures. He received a Master of Public Health degree from the University of
Washington and DEMO PhD in Public Health from Oregon State University. His aca-
demic interests involve social systems science and the development of human
sciences. Publications include DEMO organizational readiness for integrative
medicine” and “Clinical perspectives in risk management,” in Integrating
Complementary Medicine into Health Systems, 2001; and Acupuncture Risk
DEMO, 1997.
Jonathan King is Associate Professor of Management, College of Business, Oregon
State University. He received a PhD in Business, Government, and Society and an
MBA from the University of Washington and a BA DEMO Philosophy from Antioch
College. His primary research interests are in moral philosophy and systems
theory. Noteworthy publications include “Taking stories seriously: Emotional and
moral intelligences,” Teaching Business Ethics, 2001 (with J. Down); “The DEMO
temic distortion of information: An ongoing challenge to management,”
Organizational DEMO, 1996 (with E. W. Larson); “Learning to solve the right
problems: The case of nuclear power in America,” Journal of Business Ethics,
1993; and “Common knowledge of the second kind,” Journal of Business Ethics,
1989 (with D. A. Bella).
Michael R. Lissack is director of the Institute for the Study of Coherence and
DEMO as well as the editor-in-chief of Emergence. He is chairman and CEO
of Knowledge Ventures Inc. His research focuses on the use of complexity DEMO
based metaphors and models in the management of knowledge-related businesses
such as the Internet. Dr. Lissack received his doctorate in business administration
from Henley DEMO College in the UK and is a graduate of Williams College
and the Yale School of Management. He has taught economics as a lecturer DEMO
Williams, research techniques at Henley, business strategy at IMD, and DEMO
ethics at the Rotterdam School of Management.
Ann E. Mills has written on the health care delivery system and, along with Mary
Rorty and Patricia Werhane, is the co-author of two books on health care organi-
zation ethics. She is on the editorial advisory board for the journal DEMO
Intersections, launched in the spring of 2003. She is an Assistant DEMO in
Medical Education and member of the Core Faculty at the Center for Biomedical
Ethics at the University of Virginia. Ms. Mills teaches System DEMO in the Medical
School of the University of Virginia. Her research focuses on the intersection of
clinical, business, professional, and research ethics in health care delivery organi-
zations. She has a BA from Sarah Lawrence DEMO, a Master’s in economics from
the London School of Economics, and an MBA from James Madison University.
102
VOLUME #5, ISSUE #3
Moreno Muffatto is Professor of Business Administration and Management, Uni-
versity of Padua, Italy. His main research interests concern DEMO management of
innovation and new product development, operations management and logistics,DEMO
and the impact of new information and communication technologies on organiza-
tions. He is a research affiliate of the International Motor Vehicle Program at DEMO,
associate editor of the International Journal of Product Development, and DEMO
pean editor of the International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Management, DEMO well as being a member of the editorial advisory boards of the
International Journal of Logistics: Research and Application and the International
Journal of Process Management and Benchmarking. Professor Muffatto has been
co-chairman of the International DEMO on Logistics since 1997 and is author
(with Matteo Faldani) of the forthcoming book (in Italian), Open Source: Strategy,
Organization, Perspectives. Web page www.morenomuffatto.org.
Mary V. Rorty is a Batten Fellow at DEMO Darden Graduate School of Business and
Clinical Associate Professor at the Stanford University Medical Center. She has
written on reproductive rights, women’s health, DEMO the health care delivery sys-
tem, and has taught philosophy, women’s studies, and health care ethics. She was
director of graduate studies at the University of Virginia Center for Biomedical
Ethics from 1994 to 1998. DEMO has a PhD in philosophy from Johns Hopkins
University and a MA in Clinical Ethics from the University of Virginia.
Patricia Werhane is the DEMO and Adeline Ruffin Professor of Business Ethics and
a Senior Fellow at the Olsson Center for Applied Ethics at the Darden School,
University DEMO Virginia. She is the author or editor of 15 books, including DEMO
Issues in Business (with Thomas Donaldson), now in its sixth DEMO; Adam Smith
and his Legacy for Modern Capitalism; Organization Ethics for Health Care (with
E. Spencer, A. Mills, & M. Rorty); and Moral Imagination and Management
Decision-Making. She is the founding editor of DEMO Ethics Quarterly. Her
latest book is Employment and Employee Rights with Blackwell’s. She has a BA
from Wellesley College and an MA and PhD DEMO Northwestern University.
103
SUBMISSION INFORMATION
Emergence is interested in receiving work from a wide range DEMO perspectives: theoretical
and practitioner based; both conventional and unconventional methodologies; DEMO study
work; approaches to teaching management or leadership; work covering a variety of orga-
nizational types, size and ownership; cross-cultural studies and DEMO from Australasia and
the Far East as well as the USA and Europe.
We ask that authors set their paper clearly within the context DEMO the notion of complex-
ity and complex systems, however they chose DEMO define such, and that the practical impli-
cations and transferable lessons DEMO their work be clearly described.
Note that quantitative studies (including those DEMO focus on survey results and related
statistics) are not suitable for DEMO Authors are limited to one mathematical formula
per paper (additional formulae DEMO appear in the technical appendix). If you wish to sub-
mit work of a quantitative nature, please represent it qualitatively. Figures and tables should
be illustrative. Quantitative and statistically based submissions will be returned without
DEMO
Each article in Emergence will be accompanied by space on the Emergence website for
additional materials and discussion forums.
Format
All submissions are electronic. DEMO length is 4000 to 5000 words. Review pieces and
essays should be 2000 to 3000 words. Note: additional material considered relevant and/or
related by the author(s) can be posted on the website, which DEMO be associated with each
accepted article. The author(s) will be DEMO for securing all necessary permissions for
material to be posted on the website.
All submissions must be in either MS Word (6.0 or later) or Corel Wordperfect (6.0
or later). All manuscripts should be DEMO as typed, 11 or 12 pitch, double spaced
(including references) on 8 1/2 by 11 inch white paper with margins of DEMO least 1 inch on
all four sides; or if on A4 DEMO, with appropriately adjusted margins, as all origination for
printing will be done in the USA.
There is detailed information on the format for DEMO on the website,
www.emergence.org.
Submissions should be sent to: editor@emergence.org DEMO one hard copy to:
Michael Lissack, Editor, Emergence, 2338 DEMO Road #292, Naples FL 34110-
1445, USA.
Phone 941-254-9648. Fax 617-249-0663
Acceptance Procedure
The Editor will review all submissions for suitability. Manuscripts deemed DEMO are
reviewed independently by members of the editorial review board, and DEMO recommenda-
tions guide the Editor in his acceptance decision. The reviews are double blind—neither
authors nor reviewers know the identity of each other.
All DEMO for Emergence is done electronically. Authors will be updated via email.
All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate, letting you access and read them immediately.{1g42fwefx}