THE ESCALATION OF COMMITMENT
IN SEQUENTIAL DECISION MAKING:
SITUATIONAL AND PERSONAL DEMO
AND LIMITING CONDITIONS*
Thomas S. Bateman
Department of Management, Rxas A&DEMO University, College Station, TX 77843
ABSTRACT
Ttvo laboratory studies manipulated variables in order to observe their effect on the
escalation of individuals’ commitment DEMO earlier investment decisions. The experimental
results indicated that escalation of commitment to a failing course of action is not a general
phenomenon. Information pertinent DEMO the future prospects of reinvestment and to deci-
sioii alternatives provided main effects. Neither study showed a main effect for initial suc-
cess vs. DEMO Decision-maker gender consistently influenced decisions in both studies
through interactions with success/failure feedback and through the communicated attribu-
tions of “powerful others” regarding DEMO causes of previous decision outcomes. Implica-
tions for theory and research are discussed.
Subject Areas: Decision Processes and Organizational Behavior.
INTRODUCTION
Extensive research and theory in the administrative sciences has tried to under-
stand managerial decision DEMO Many important decisions made by policymakers
in both the private and public sectors involve investing resources with the intention
of bringing about financial or DEMO improvement. Such decisions often are se-
quential in nature. The outcome of an initial decision to commit resources to a
course of action frequently DEMO the stage for subsequent decisions such as whether
or not to continue pursuing the original course of action or whether to increase,
maintain, or reduce the initial level of support. Research conducted by Staw and
DEMO [24] [27] [28] [13] [5] has begun to isolate some of the factors that influence
an individual’s escalation of commitment to a previously chosen DEMO of action.
Staw [26] recently described the existing research into decisions made incremen-
tally over time. Most studies have assumed that a decision maker DEMO chooses a
course of action and subsequently learns that the decision produces negative con-
sequences “throws good money after bad,” that is, commits new resources to a
losing course of action. The need to self-justify DEMO or to prove the rationality of
an earlier decision can interfere with economic rationality. In other words, the max-
imization of future utility, DEMO by traditional subjective expected-utility models,
often is overridden by the psychological influence of previous expenditures. The
result often is a poor and costly DEMO
In this paper we describe the results of two studies. These studies investigated
situational and personal moderators of the effect of success or failure DEMO previous
~
*The author wishes to thank David Rubenstein for his help with various aspects of the study
and Jerry Ferris for commenting on DEMO earlier draft of this manuscript.
33
34
Deckion Sciences
[Vol. 17
decisions on the subsequent commitment of additional DEMO The four ma-
nipulated variables were: (1) incoming information regarding DEMO probability of suc-
cess of further investment in the same course of action, (2) information regarding
alternative courses of action, (3) DEMO of the decision maker, and (4) attributions
of “powerful others” DEMO causes of the initial decision’s outcome.
RESEARCH BACKGROUND
Staw [24] developed a simulated business case in which participants played
the role of a corporate DEMO officer asked to allocate research and develop-
ment (R&D) funds to one of two operating divisions of the company. Subjects were
given DEMO results of their initial decision (either positive or negative) and then asked
to make a further allocation of funds. Staw [24] found main DEMO for: (1) more
additional funds allocated after failure than after DEMO and (2) more additional
funds allocated when the subject had been responsible for the decision personally
(is., the subject had made the DEMO decision) than if the earlier decision had been
made by another DEMO officer.
?ko subsequent studies that used the same type of decision DEMO [27] [28]
concluded that the motivation to justify an earlier bad decision does not necessarily
interfere with rational economic decision making. In the Staw DEMO Fox (271 study,
a consultant’s report which indicated a high DEMO of payoff for additional
investment led to subsequently higher commitment of funds than a less optimistic
report. Staw and Ross [28] found that subjects DEMO more funds when the in-
dicated cause of the initial setback was identified as exogenous (outside the system,
could not have been predicted, and unlikely to be present in the future) than when
the DEMO was identified as endogenous (part of the system and likely to DEMO).
The subjects also apparently were more sensitive and responsive to this type of in-
formation (regarding the cause of setbacks) after failure DEMO after success.
In these studies, then, economic rationality was not preempted by the need
to demonstrate retrospective rationality [26] created by failure feedback DEMO a prior
decision. In fact, Staw and Fox’s [27] results suggest DEMO failure may heighten eco-
nomic rationality in subsequent decisions. This is in contrast to the idea that failure
feedback necessarily leads to a poor DEMO marked by escalation of commitment.
The inappropriate use of (or failure DEMO use) information pertinent to an up-
coming decision may be evidence DEMO a biased, poorly conceived resource-allocation
decision caused by failure feedback and DEMO psychological commitment to self-
justification. However, as Northcraft and Wolf [21] DEMO out recently, most of
the experimental decision contexts used have not DEMO sufficient information
to determine the economic advisability (or inadvisability) of additional commit-
ment of funds. Hence, “only through examining decisions in situations in which
further resource commitment is demonstrably irrational can the psychologist hope
to DEMO to the explanatory power of economic accounts of resource allocation deci-
sion making” [21, p. 2271.
The fundamental indicator of a person’s prospective rationality (or lack thereof)
is how information regarding the probabilities of future outcomes, including
19861
Bateman
35
information pertaining to decision alternatives, is used. It is important to deter-
mine the conditions under which pertinent incoming information is DEMO effectively
or is overridden by the motivation to justify past behavior. Wo studies noted earlier
[27] [28] touched on these issues by incorporating variables DEMO contained infor-
mation about future outcomes. However, neither study compared the DEMO
of success and failure with a pure manipulation of information (in DEMO form of
future probabilities of successful reinvestment). In addition, neither DEMO provided
information regarding decision alternatives. The subjects typically faced decisions
that involved a common alternative to the reinvestment of additional funds-for
example, any monies (of a fixed available amount) not reinvested in the original
division DEMO be “reserved for other uses.”
This ambiguity about the nature of the decision alternative-held constant
across experimental conditions-is not inappropriate when the effects of DEMO situa-
tional variables on the decision criterion are of interest. However, DEMO the char-
acteristics of decision alternatives makes it possible to explore other likely contex-
tual effects on the decision to escalate (or de-escalate) DEMO to a previously
chosen course of action. Indeed, psycholgists increasingly emphasize DEMO need to
consider the consequences of alternative responses available in a given situation
I141 and the conditions that produce changes in behavior from one DEMO to
another [l].
A fuller understanding of the factors that influence escalating commitment
in sequential decision making can be reached by discovering not only DEMO pertinent
characteristics of the past decision and its present outlook [26] but also by consid-
ering the constraints and opportunities presented by the available DEMO For
instance, like the initially chosen course of action, an important characteristic of
the alternative would be its probability of future success. It DEMO be predicted that
the greater the probability is of successful investment in the decision alternative,
the lower the level of reinvestment in the DEMO course of action.
We also might predict a main effect due to the future probabilities of success
in the original alternative (as in Staw and Fox [27]). More important, an interac-
tion effect also is likely if Staw and Ross’s [28] conclusions generalize to the pres-
ent DEMO Staw and Ross explained the interaction between success/failure and
exogenous/endogenous cause by suggesting that failure sensitized subjects to in-
coming information regarding DEMO If this explanation is valid, then subjects who
fail can be DEMO to be influenced more strongly by incoming information re-
garding the probabilities of future success than subjects who succeed. Such an in-
teraction would DEMO the importance of any main effects.
The research of Staw and others has been based on the belief that failure feed-
back from an DEMO decision will trigger escalating commitment to the original
course of action. Some qualifications have been indicated, but Staw’s [26] model
and other perspectives indicate the need to investigate other moderators of the escala-
tion phenomenon. Study DEMO, reported below, manipulated the success or failure of
an initial decision, the effects of incoming information regarding the probability
of successful reinvestment in the original course of action, and the information
available about the future prospects of an alternative investment. A complex finding
36
Decision Sciences
[Vol. 17
from Study 1 was confirmed in Study DEMO, which investigated the interaction of gender
differences with the success or DEMO of the initial decision and the communicated
attributions of “powerful others” regarding the causes for these initial outcomes.
STUDY 1
Method
Subjects. The subjects DEMO Study 1 were 99 undergraduate students at a large
state university. Their participation in the study represented partial fulfillment of
a course requirement for DEMO upper-division management course in which they were
enrolled. Cell sizes were 12 or 13. Roughly equal proportions of males (n 5 1) and
DEMO (n=48) were assigned to the experimental cells. Assignment of the sub-
jects was random within this constraint.
As in most of the previous DEMO, the subjects were asked to work on Staw’s
[24] “Adams and DEMO Financial Decision Case.” Since the subjects were students
at a business school, they were experienced in working on written cases and in rec-
ommending courses of managerial action. They also displayed a generally high level
of DEMO and involvement in the case.
Decision Task. The Adams and Smith case places each subject in the role of
financial vice president. Information regarding DEMO financial history of the com-
pany indicates a recent decline in profitability, primarily due to shortcomings in
the company’s R&D program. The company’s board of directors has determined
that $10 million in additional funds should DEMO allocated to one of the company’s
two largest operating divisions. Each division is described. The subject is asked
to decide which of the two DEMO should receive the additional R&D investment.
In fact, neither division DEMO a better or more likely choice than the other.
After making this initial decision, each subject was exposed to the conditions
of one of eight experimental cells. These cells were created by independently ma-
nipulating three DEMO
Success/Failure Manipulation. After making their initial decision, half the sub-
DEMO were placed in the success condition. In this condition, feedback in DEMO form
of financial data indicated a steady improvement in the company’s earnings and
a return to profitability in the five years since the chosen DEMO received the extra
$10 million. Subjects in the failure condition received financial data indicating a
continued decline in the company’s earnings and increasing financial DEMO
Futue Probabilities Manipulations. More feedback (in the form of a memoran-
DEMO from the president) concerned a report from a consulting team that DEMO “per-
formed admirably for us many times in the past.” The team had provided an “ac-
curate. . .appraisal of our current status” and DEMO drawn conclusions about the
probabilities of profitability of additional R&D investment in the two operating
divisions. The use of a consulting report was DEMO to Staw and Fox’s [27] manip-
ulation of efficacy of resources except that probability estimates were provided for
investment in the previously rejected division DEMO well as for the previously selected
division. For each division, either DEMO 30 percent or a 70 percent probability of suc-
cess was indicated, resulting in four possible probability combinations.
=
19861
Bateman
37
Dependent Variable. Each subject had an additional $20 million DEMO be allocated
between the two divisions. The amount of funds reinvested in the original choice
served as the dependent variable of behavioral commitment. ?\No other possible
dependent variables-the amount of funds invested in the other division DEMO the
difference between the two investments-were not used because they would measure
the identical activity.
Manipulation Checks. In order to check the effectiveness of DEMO experimental
manipulations an 1 1-item questionnaire was developed and administered to all sub-
jects. Three of the items on the questionnaire addressed perceived success DEMO failure.
An example is, “In objective terms (that is, on DEMO ‘bottom line‘), my original deci-
sion was the correct one.” The manipulation of probabilities of future success for
the two divisions were tested DEMO four items each. For each probability, one item
was phrased in DEMO of explicit percentages and checked to see that the subject
was aware of the content of the consultants’ report (i.e., “What was the DEMO
that additional investment would reach an acceptable level of profitability?”). The
other three items did not contain explicit percentages and therefore more DEMO rep-
resented psychological states (i.e., perceptions of the general chances for success).
For example, subjects were asked the extent of their agreement with the statement,
“It was fairly certain that reinvesting more money DEMO the same division had a
high probability of paying off.’’
Experimental Design. The experiment thus employed a 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 DEMO
design. It manipulated success vs. failure, the probabilities of future success DEMO in-
vestment in the previously chosen division, and the probabilities of DEMO of in-
vestment in the other division. The effects of gender difference also were tested
because of their wide-ranging implications for achievement, performance, DEMO
to feedback, and other behaviors [6] [7]. The dependent variable was DEMO amount
of additional money committed to the previously chosen division.
Results
Manipulation Checks. The three manipulation checks had acceptably high in-
ternal reliabilities (coefficient alphas ranged from .80 to .90) and indicated that
the experimental variables had had their intended effects. The success/failure ma-
nipulation was significant DEMO t(97) = 6.34, p < .001; the probability manipulations
DEMO the initially chosen division and the other division were significant at t(97)=5.33,
pc.001 and at t(97)=3.43, p<.OOl.
Effects of Experimental Manipulations. Although significant interaction ef-
fects lessened their importance, two of the three main effects of the manipulated
variables were significant. Results DEMO the analysis of variance are summarized in
Table 1. Subjects invested more money when the probability of success for the
original division was 70 DEMO (F(1,83)=8.20, p=.005) than when it was 30 DEMO
cent (2=$12.56 million, SD=4.13 vs. 2=$10.10 million, SD=4.90). They DEMO in-
vested more money in the initially chosen division when the probability of success-
ful investment in the other division was 30 percent (F(1,83)=9.37, p=.OO3, explain-
ing 7 percent of the variance) than when it was 70 percent (F=$12.67 million,
38
Decision Sciences
[Vol. 17
TABLE 1
Study 1 ANOVA Summary Table
DEMO of Variation
df
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
83
89
MS
.126
143.269
163.784
DEMO
89.696
4.097
3.211
12.811
13.252
10.414
21.101
104.601
6.650
5.518
65.310
17.482
21.531
A. Success/failure
B. p[success in chosen division]
C. p[success in DEMO division]
D. Gender
AxB
AxC
AxD
BxC
BxD
CxD
AxBxC
AxBxD
AxCxD
BxCxD
AxBxCxD
Error
Total
F
.007
8.195
9:369
.062
5.131
.234
DEMO
.733
.758
.596
1.207
5.983
.380
.316
3.736
Significance
.933
.005
.003
.804
.026
.630
.669
.394
.366
.442
.275
.017
.539
.576
.057
DEMO vs. X=$10.02 million, SD=4.98). No main effect was shown for DEMO
cedfailure (F(1,83)=.01, p=.933; X=$11.35 million, SD=4.42 vs. X=$11.32
million, SD = 4.80).
Success and failure did affect decisions through interaction with the probability
of future success for the initially chosen DEMO (F( 1,83) = 5.13, p = .026, 3 DEMO
cent of the variance explained). This effect is shown in Figure 1. The highest levels
of additional resources were invested when failure on DEMO first decision was fol-
lowed by a high probability of subsequent success; failure followed by a lower prob-
ability of future success resulted in the lowest investment levels. In short, the infor-
mation about future probabilities had greater impact after failure than after success.
Gender Effects. In addition DEMO the above findings, a 3-way interaction effect
was found among gender DEMO the decision maker, success/failure, and the probabil-
ity of success with the initially selected division (F(1,83)=5.98, p=.O17). DEMO in-
teraction effect, which explained 4 percent of the variance, is depicted in Figures
2A and 2B. Females invested more money when the DEMO were higher, regardless
of the outcome of their initial decisions (Figure 2A). Males, on the other hand,
revealed an investment pattern that differed according to the results of their prior
decisions. After failure, males (like females) invested more money when the odds
of success DEMO higher. However, initial success led males to invest less money when
DEMO odds of future sucess were 70 percent than when the odds were 30 percent (Figure
2B).
19861
Bateman
39
Additional
$
Invested
x
I
, ,
13.56
(DEMO)
I /
/
/
/
11.12 (4.430) ,/
X
/
/
/
/
x
11.58
(4.396)
10m. --
x’
/
I
/
1
14m. --
13m. --
DEMO --
llm. --
9m. --
I
9.08
(4.664)
aMeans (standard deviations)
Discussion
llvo main effects showed that subjects generally made appropriate DEMO of in-
dependently provided information concerning the future probabilities of success.
The experience of success or failure and the gender of the decision maker DEMO con-
tributed, through interaction effects, to the level of investment in this decision task.
Main effects in factorial designs often are considered secondary DEMO importance
to interactive effects. However, it should be noted at least DEMO that both main
effects in Study 1 indicated a degree of economic rationality. The impact of the
probability of success with the second division DEMO the importance of incor-
porating decision alternative characteristics in the analysis of sequential decision
making. The relative attractiveness of decision alternatives can be assessed DEMO acted
on [ll] [31], just as other behavioral contexts can provide DEMO that differ
in attractiveness [I] [ 141. The differing characteristics of alternatives also may pro-
vide a tactful reason for withdrawing from a previously DEMO course of action
or may aid the decision maker in justifying the decision made [25].
The contributions of success and failure, via interaction effects, show the im-
portance of past decisions to present decisions 1261. The relative lack of informa-
tion use after success (when compared to failure) was consistent with the findings
of Staw and Ross [28] who manipulated information regarding the predictability
40
Decision Sciences
[Vol. 17
FIGURE 2
Interactive Effects of Gender on DEMO Decisions (Study l)a
A. Females
15m.
t
t
13.09 (4.337)
Additional
14m.
$
Invested
13m.
x
12.58 (5.123)
12m.
llm.
10m.
9m
(3.912)~~
X'
9.36
(5.256)
I
30%
DEMO of
1
70%
Future Success
B. Males
Additional
15m.
14m.
13m.
12m.
llm.
10m.
9m.
14.46
(1.278)
10.31
(4.027)
$
Invested
DEMO
-----
failure
aMeans (standard deviations)
30% 70%
Probability of Future DEMO
Bateman
41
and persistence of the (negative) outcome‘s cause. The present DEMO adds generality
to their results and supports their interpretation that prior failure sensitizes sub-
jects to those aspects of incoming information which are pertinent DEMO economic
rationality.
The 2-way interaction indicated a generally greater responsiveness to proba-
bility information after failure than after success, but this pattern did not hold
for all subjects. Females were unaffected by the results of their DEMO decisions and
consistently committed more funds when there was a higher probability of suc-
cess. On the other hand, males who succeeded were not only unresponsive to in-
formation about future probabilities; their decisions were contrary to those which
should have been suggested by the prospective odds. Males DEMO received success
feedback reinvested more money when the odds of future success were 30 percent
than when the odds were 70 percent. This clear DEMO from prospective rational-
ity (as suggested by the independently provided probability DEMO) differed
from the decisions of female subjects and those male subjects DEMO had failed in
their initial decisions.
The higher investment by males when success was followed by a threat of failure
(in the form of a low chance of future success) suggests a reactance effect [3]. Staw
and Ross I281 also used reactance theory to interpret their results. Reactance DEMO a
state of motivational arousal caused by a threat to an individual’s behavioral freedom
or a barrier to his or her desired outcomes [34]. DEMO faced with such a threat
restore their personal freedom by attempting to perform the forbidden behavior
or to attain the desired outcome. Thus subjects DEMO initially perform well on a
decision task but who then are presented with the possibility that continuing in
that course of action will result DEMO failure may attempt tG reaffirm their personal
control by pursuing that action further.
Unlike the male subjects, female subjects did not exhibit reactance. This may
be explained by referring to Staw and Ross’s [28] belief that DEMO is the arousal
of a competence motive (321 and the further DEMO that males are distinguished
from females by a cluster of competence-related traits [6]. Other research, including
that looking at attribution theory and learned helplessness [lo], also has noted
gender differences in response to performance feedback. These differences are elab-
orated and confirmed in our second study, reported below.
STUDY 2
While reactance theory can be used to account for the DEMO gender ef-
fects noted in Study 1, it was felt that DEMO second study, different in design but pre-
dicting a priori gender DEMO similar to those found in Study 1, would provide
additional support DEMO conclusions regarding how males and females respond dif-
ferently to feedback during sequential decision making.
Attribution theory [15] provides a useful perspective from which DEMO study gender
differences in the escalation of commitment. It may be used to provide Study 2
with predictions for female and male behavior based DEMO reactance theory and the
results of Study 1.
42
Decision Sciences
[Vol. 17
One part of attribution theory literature has DEMO on the behavior people
exhibit in response to what they themselves see as the causes of their own behavior
or performance [ 81. Surprisingly DEMO is known, however, about how individuals
respond to attributions regarding the causes of their performance made by others.
Munson and Kiesler [19] showed DEMO a person’s attitudes can be affected by the
attitudes attributed and communicated by others. The effects of communicated
performance attribution, however, have gone DEMO unstudied in adults.
Research with children has demonstrated that females are more likely than
males to show decreased persistence or impaired performance after failure DEMO
Girls are more likely to attribute their failures to lack of ability, which in turn leads
to learned helplessness (the belief that failure DEMO unavoidable). Moreover, girls are
more likely to exhibit learned helplessness DEMO the feedback on their task perfor-
mance is presented as an important measure of their personal ability [20], especially
when the evaluative feedback comes from adults [9]. Thus, the attributions com-
municated by an evaluator when delivering performance feedback affects girls more
than boys [lo]. Dweck and her DEMO [lo] further suggested that these differ-
ences may become stabilized and generalized later in life.
Learned helplessness and reactance allow us to predict a DEMO interaction
among the decision maker’s gender, decision feedback, and the causal attributions
of others regarding decision outcomes. Learned helplessness suggests that female
subjects DEMO withdraw support from a decision that fails, especially when power-
ful DEMO blame them for the failure. On the other hand, males-who are DEMO
ly unaffected by personal attributions of failure or by learned helplessness-might
be expected to display patterns of reactance similar to those shown in Study DEMO
The reactance that occurred among males in Study 1 after success feedback was
followed by a threat of failure also could be expected in DEMO 2 when success feed-
back is followed by attributions by others to external causes for the success. Here,
where the threat is the DEMO of powerful others to give the decision maker credit
for the success of a decision, reactance (as it did in Study 1) might take the form
of male subjects asserting their behavioral freedom by continuing DEMO the same course
of action.
Method
Subjects. The subjects in this experiment were 80 undergraduate students at
the same large state university used in DEMO 1. All were enrolled in upper-division
management courses. The subjects took part in the study on a voluntary basis and,
unlike the subjects DEMO Study 1, were paid $5 for approximately one hour of partici-
DEMO Each cell contained 10 subjects. Roughly equal proportions of males (n=44)DEMO
and females (n = 36) were assigned to the experimental conditions.
Decision Esk. As in Study 1 (and most of the other previous studies), sub-
jects were asked to work on Staw’s [24] “Adams DEMO Smith Financial Decision Case”
The case again generated a high level of interest among the students.
Experimental Manipulations. All subjects, after making their initial choice of
division, received financial feedback regarding the outcomes of their decisions. This
19861
Bateman
43
feedback was the same as that used in Study DEMO Subjects in the success condition
were given financial data that indicated a steady improvement and return to prof-
itability in the five years since DEMO division chosen received the extra $10 million
in investment money. In the failure condition, subjects received financial data in-
dicating a continued decline in earnings and an increase in financial losses.
Subjects also received a memorandum DEMO the president of the company which
referred to the outcome of their previous decision. This made the success or failure
of that decision more DEMO The memorandum also described the subject’s role
in the upcoming funding decision.
Manipulation of Attributions Made by Powerful Others. All subjects next
received another DEMO from the president of the company. In this memoran-
dum, the DEMO referred to discussions with members of the board of directors
and described their attributions for the causes of the initial investment decision’s
outcome. The DEMO either held the subject personally responsible for the out-
come (attributions DEMO internal causation) or felt that the results were due to causes
DEMO the subject’s control (attributions of external causation). Specifically, sub-
jects who received success feedback were informed either that the board was pleased
DEMO the outcome and felt that the success of their decision reflected well on the
subjects personally or that the board felt the division (and not the decision maker)
should get the credit (for using the funds so effectively). Those subjects who received
failure feedback were informed DEMO that the board blamed them personally for
the failure or that the board felt that the continued earnings decline occurred for
reasons that were DEMO and beyond the subjects’ control. In all cases, these
attributes were DEMO with a statement that the subject’s upcoming performance
evaluation would (in DEMO case of internal attributions) or would not (in the case
of external attributions) be affected.
Manipulation of IIZformation about the Probabilities of Future Success. A final
memorandum from the president concerned a report from a DEMO team de-
scribed in Study 1. The team provided their conclusions regarding the probability
that additional investment of funds into the same division would DEMO off. Either
a 50 percent or 80 percent probability of profitable outcome was indicated in the
report. These probabilities were used to convey ambiguously DEMO versus clearly
strong probabilities of success.
Dependent Variable. The dependent variable again was a measure of the sub-
ject’s commitment to the previously selected DEMO alternative. After receiv-
ing the above information, each subject was given DEMO additional $20 million to in-
vest. All, none, or any part of this money could be allocated to the same division
chosen earlier. DEMO remainder would be reserved for other uses. The amount of
funds invested in the initial division served as the dependent measure of behavioral
commitment.
DEMO Checks. The effectiveness of the manipulations was tested with
a postexperimental questionnaire. Three items (identical to those used in Study 1)
addressed perceived success and failure. Three other items (such as, “The Board
of DEMO believed that my decision had the results it did because of influences
outside my control”) assessed the subjects’ perceptions of the board of directors’
44
Decision Sciences
[Vol. 17
attribution of causes for the decision outcomes. DEMO manipulation of the probability
of future success in the original division was tested with three items that measured
the subjects’ perceptions of general chances DEMO success (e.g., high or low) and one
item that contained DEMO percentages. These items checked the subjects’ awareness
of the content of the consultants’ report.
Experimental Design. The experiment thus employed a 2 x 2x DEMO x 2 factorial
design. It varied the decision maker’s gender, success DEMO failure outcomes, attribu-
tions of decision performance by powerful others to DEMO or external causes,
and the probability of future investment success with the initially selected division.
The dependent variable was the amount of additional DEMO committed to the
previously chosen division.
Results
Manipulation Checks. Tests of the three manipulation checks revealed ac-
ceptably high internal reliabilities (coefficient alphas ranged from .77 to .85). The
tests also showed that all three DEMO manipulations had had their intended
effects. The success/failure manipulation was significant at t(78) = 4.96, p < .001;
the manipulation DEMO future probabilities was significant at t(78)=4.96, p <.001
Effects of Experimental Manipulations. The results of the analysis of variance
are summarized DEMO nble 2. The dependent variable (the amount of additional funds
invested DEMO the division initially chosen) was tested with a 4-way analysis of DEMO
TABLE 2
Study 2 ANOVA
Summary Table
Source of Variation
A. Success/failure
B. Internalkxternal
C. p[success in chosen division]
D. Gender
AxB
AxC
DEMO
BxC
BxD
CxD
AxBxC
AxBxD
AxCxD
BxCxD
AxBxCxD
Error
’Ibtal
df
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
DEMO
1
64
79
MS
.223
93.871
42.279
.263
9.660
4.855
8.854
.561
,827
.004
2.134
99.969
36.844
9.418
2.386
19.471
19.692
F
.011
4.821
2.171
.014
.4%
.249
.455
.029
.042
.Ooo
.110
6.134
1.892
.484
DEMO
Significance
.915
,032
.146
.908
,484
.619
.503
.866
337
.989
.742
.027
,174
.489
.727
19861
Bateman
45
Of particular interest in conjunction with the interactive gender DEMO seen in Study
1 were the interactions of .the experimental manipulations with gender differences.
One main effect (overridden in importance by an interaction effect) was signifi-
cant (F(1,64)=4.82, p=.O31): subjects whose decision outcomes were attributed
(by powerful others) to external causes out DEMO their control committed more addi-
tional funds to the original project (DEMO million, SD=3.79) than those sub-
jects whose decision outcomes were attributed to internal causes (E= $10.81 million,
SD=4.82). These attributions explained 5 percent of the variance in reinvestment.
The other main effects, and the interactions among the three manipulated variables,
were insignificant.
Gender Effects. DEMO major research question in Study 2 concerned gender dif-
ferences in response to the experimental conditions. A significant 3-way interac-
tion effect (F(1,64) = 5.13, p = .027) was found explaining 5 percent of the variance
in the dependent variable. The nature of this interaction DEMO shown in Figures 3A
and 3B. Any differential impact on the attributions made by others was shown in
the success condition for males (Figure 3B); it was shown in the failure condition
for females (Figure 3A). Male subjects who received success feedback allocated
the most additional DEMO when their success was attributed to causes beyond their
control. They allocated the least additional money when their success was attributed
to internal causes. DEMO subjects who were successful, on the other hand, were
relatively unaffected by whether their success was attributed to internal or to ex-
ternal DEMO In the failure conditions, the responses of male subjects did not DEMO
in response to the attributions of powerful others. However, the responses DEMO female
subjects did vary; females whose failures were attributed to internal DEMO invested
the least additional resources, while failure attributed to external causes DEMO
the highest level of additional investment.
Discussion
As in Study 1, DEMO and female subjects seemed to respond to different exper-
imental conditions using different mechanisms. Under failure conditions, the
behavior of female subjects was consistent with the predictions of reinforcement
theory and learned helplessness [lo]. Attributions of DEMO blame for failure,
and the accompanying threat of punishment, produced DEMO lower subsequent com-
mitments of resources than when no such blame was attributed.
Under success conditions, male subjects exhibited behavior consistent with
Brehm’s [3] theory of psychological reactance. Males who were informed that their
success had DEMO attributed to external causes beyond their control invested the
largest amounts of money. The attribution of success to internal causes, accom-
panied by praise, produced low levels of additional investment (contrary to the
predictions of DEMO theory). Again, that males but not females would re-
spond DEMO psychological reactance is consistent with Staw and Ross’s [28] belief
that reactance may be seen as the arousal of a competence motive [32] and DEMO
males are distinguished from females by a cluster of traits reflecting competence [61.
46
Decision Sciences
[Vol. 17
FIGURE 3
Interactive Effects of Gender on DEMO Decisions (Study 2Ia
A. Females
Additional
5
Invested
14m.
I-
11.32
DEMO'
I
12.5 (4.09)
14.0 (2.94)
13m.
.
0
0
9.25 (5.16)
12m.
llm.
1Om.
9m.
B. Males
Additional
s
Invested
14m. --
-- 13.6 (4.21) __ --_ -.
--
X-
DEMO
--
-
-'K
12.6 (4.21)
13m.
12m.
-
-I /
11.8 (6.29)
-- 9.44 (2.39)
---external attribution
-internal
DEMO
aMeans (standard deviations)
1
SUMMARY AND
CONCLUSIONS
Failure
These two DEMO examined some potential moderators of the decision to
escalate commitment to a past decision. The experimental results provide evidence
I
Success
x
llm.
10m.
DEMO
19861
Bateman
47
relevant to (1) the effect of information regarding DEMO future prospects of reinvest-
ment in a previously selected course of action, (2) the effect of decision alternative
characteristics, and (3) DEMO effect of gender in interaction with success/failure feed-
back and the communicated attributions of cause by powerful others.
Neither study found a main DEMO indicating more commitment after failure
than after success. Thus, there was DEMO indication that the escalation of commit-
ment to a failing course of action is a general phenomenon. Either other variables
in the two studies DEMO direct effects on commitment or, when success/failure did
have an DEMO, it was in interaction with situational and/or individual difference
moderators.
DEMO with all laboratory research, the question of how general the results DEMO
remains. At least two studies provide evidence for the external validity of this type
of decision research. Both studies [2] [29] found no difference DEMO the deci-
sion behavior of actual managers and undergraduate business students in similar
investment commitment tasks presented in a laboratory setting. Other studies discuss
DEMO utility of laboratory research in general and of laboratory decision research
in particular [4] [ 121 [ 131. Still, other samples and methods should be used to ex-
tend our understanding of the effects reported in DEMO studies (e.g., how women
and men change their respective approaches to decision making as they gain
experience).
We offer several observations in DEMO First, in Study 2 the subjects’ be-
havior was unaffected by DEMO information useful for analyzing future invest-
ment prospects. Perhaps the communicated attributions of others regarding previous
outcome success or failure interacted with the decision DEMO gender to override
the impact of this incoming information. Future research should continue to ex-
plore the factors affecting the use (or lack of use) of such pertinent information
in sequential decision making.
Second, the DEMO attributions of powerful others regarding the suc-
cess or failure of the decision outcome affected decision behavior. This aspect of
work relationships has far-reaching DEMO for the study of organizational
behavior and should not be neglected in future studies of attribution and motiva-
tion. While recent research has examined DEMO behavioral response of supervisors
to their own attributions of cause for subordinates’ behavior [18], the responses
of subordinates to the communicated attributions of cause (in decision or in other
performance contexts) has been explored only DEMO children and their teachers [lo].
While the manipulation used in Study 2 may not h.ave created a truly realistic power-
ful other for the DEMO sample in that laboratory context (and may therefore
have created a DEMO characteristic or experimenter effect), nevertheless its poten-
tial importance seems clear. That the experimenter was a powerful other in this
evaluative context and DEMO theory-based gender differences arose in reaction to
that manipulation argue for the continued exploration of this construct in other
investigative areas.
Third, consider that the female subjects in Study 2 invested the largest amount
of additional DEMO after their failure was attributed to an external cause, whereas
the DEMO subjects committed lower levels of funds after their success was attributed
to an internal cause. Future research should concentrate not only on conditions
48
Decision Sciences
[Vol. 17
that increase commitment to a losing course DEMO action, but also should consider
the causes of decisions characterized by DEMO retreat from a winning course of action.
Fourth, similar gender differences DEMO found in both studies. The study of
gender as an individual difference variable has shifted from attempts to identify
differentiating characteristics (i.e., main DEMO) to attempts to analyze the interac-
tions between gender differences and DEMO characteristics [6]. This shift reflects
a more general movement in psychological research as a whole [I61 and is particu-
larly relevant to organizational behavior DEMO [30]. The interactions shown in the
present studies are examples of such person-situation interactions.
By themselves, gender differences are not interesting from a theoretical stand-
point. They do not explain why behavior differs. While a reactance DEMO among
males but not females may explain the results of the present studies, further con-
firmation that this is the correct explanation is necessary. But regardless of the un-
derlying mechanism, a comparison of the validity, reliability, and accessibility of
the gender-difference variable with those of other DEMO difference measures
makes this variable’s practical utility readily apparent.
Finally, the DEMO impact of gender demonstrates that different theoretical
mechanisms are activated for different types of individuals under different types
of circumstances. This is consistent with DEMO implications of a number of authors.
Mayes [I71 called attention to the need for delimiting some of the boundary con-
ditions of different motivation DEMO Pinder and Moore [22] described the de-
velopment of middle-range organizational theories which could be developed sim-
ilarly for individual behavior. Staw and Ross DEMO emphasized the need to uncover
conditions that moderate or heighten various theoretical mechanisms during deci-
sion making. Conceptual and empirical work should continue to DEMO and identify
factors that arouse, limit, and moderate the effects of reactance, learned helpless-
ness, and other psychological mechanisms on escalating commitment DEMO sequen-
tial decision making. [Received October 15, 1984. Accepted: May 20, 1985.1
REFERENCES
Atkinson, J. W., & Birch, D. Introduction to DEMO New York: Van Nostrand, 1978.
Bateman, T., & Zeithaml. C. Experimental tests of a sequential model of stmtegic decisions. Un-
published manuscript, Texas A&M University, 1985.
Brehm, J. A theory of psychological DEMO New York: Academic Press, 1%6.
Caldwell, D. F., & O’Reilly, C. A., 111. Responses to failure: The effects of choice and responsibil-
ity in impression management. Academy of Management Journal, 1982, 25, 121-136.
Conlon, E., & Wolf, G. The moderating effect of strategy, visibility, and involvement on alloca-
tion behavior: An extension of Staw’s escalation paradigm. OrganizationalB ehavior and Human
&$ormance, 1980, 26, 176-192.
DEMO, K. Sex differences. In T. Blass (Ed.), Personality variables in social behavior. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1977.
Deaux, K. Sex and gender. In M. R. Rosenzweig & L. W. Porter (Eds.), Annual review of psychol-
ogy (Vol. 36). Palo Alto, DEMO Annual Reviews, Inc, 1985.
Dweck, C. The role of expectations DEMO attributions in the alleviation of learned helplessness.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975, 31, 674-685.
Dweck, C., & Bush, E. DEMO differences in learned helplessness: I. Differential debilitation with
peer and adult DEMO Developmental Psychology, 1976, 12, 147-156.
19861 Bateman 49
[lo] Dweck, C. S., Davidson, W., Nelson, S., & Enna, B. Sex differences in learned helplessness: 11.
The contingencies of evaluative feedback in the classroom; and 111. An experimental analysis.
Developmental Psychology, 1978, 14, 268-276.
[Ill Edwards, W. The theory DEMO decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 1954, 51, 380-417.
(121 Folger, DEMO, Rosenfield, D., & Hays, R. P. Equity and intrinsic motivation: The role of choice.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1978, 36, 557-564.
[13] Fox, F., gi Staw, B. The trapped DEMO: The effects of job insecurity and policy resistance
upon commitment to DEMO course of action. Administrative Science Quarter!y, 1979, 24, 449-471.
[14] DEMO, R. J. On the law of effect. Journal of Experimental Analysis DEMO Behavior, 1970, 13,
243-266.
[15] Kelley, H. Attribution in DEMO interaction. Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press, 1971.
[ 161 Magnusson, D., & Endler, N. Personality at the crossroads: Current issues in interactional psy-
chology. New York: Wiley, 1977.
[171 Mayes, B. Boundary considerations in the application of motivation models. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 1978, 3, 51-58.
[18] Mitchell, T., Green, S., & DEMO, R. An attributional model of leadership and the poor perform-
ing DEMO In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research DEMO organizational behavior
(Vol. 3). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1981.
[19] Munson, P., & Kiesler, C. The role of attribution by others in the acceptance of persuasive com-
munications. Journal of Personality, 1974, 42, 453-466.
[20] Nicholls, J. G. Causal attributions and other achievement-related cognitions: Effects of task out-
come, attainment value, and sex. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975,31,379-389.
[21] Northcraft, G., &Wolf, G. Dollars, sense, and sunk costs: A life cycle model of resource alloca-
tion decisions. Academy of Management Review, 1984, DEMO, 224-234.
[22] Pinder, C., & Moore, L. The resurrection of taxonomy to aid the development of middle range
theories of organizational behavior. DEMO Science Quarterly, 1979, 24, 99-1 18.
[23] Schneider, B. Interactional psychology and organizational behavior. In L. L. Cummings & B. M.
Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 5). Greenwich, CT DEMO Press, 1983.
[24] Staw, B. M. Knee-deep in the big muddy: A study of escalating commitment to a chosen course
of action. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1976, 16, 27-44.
[25] Staw, B. DEMO Rationality and justification in organizational life. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings
(Eds.), Research in organization behavior (Vol. 2). DEMO, CT JAI Press, 1980.
[26] Staw, B. M. The escalation DEMO commitment to a course of action. Academy of Management Review,
1981, 6, 577-587.
[27] Staw, B., &Fox, F. Escalation: Some determinants of commitment to a previously chosen course
of action. Human Relations, 1977, 30, 431-450.
[28] Staw, B., & Ross, J. Commitment to a policy decision: A multitheoretical perspective. Administmtive
Science Quarterly, 1978, 23, 40-64.
[29] Staw, B., &Ross, J. Commitment in an experimenting society: A study of the attribution of leader-
ship from administrative scenarios. Journal of Applied Psychology, 1980, 65, 249-260.
[30] Terborg, DEMO International psychology and research on human behavior in organizations. Academy
of Management Review, 1981, 6, 569-576.
[31] Vroom, B. Work and motivation. DEMO York: Wiley, 1964.
[32] White, R. W. Motivation reconsidered The DEMO of competence. Psychological Review, 1959,
66, 297-334.
[33] Wicklund, DEMO, & Brehm, J. Perspectives on cognitive dissonance. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates, 1976.
[34] Wortman, C., & Brehm, J. DEMO to uncontrollable outcomes: An integration of reactance
theory and learned helplessness. DEMO L. Berkowitz (EM.), Advances in experimental socialpsychology
(Vol. 8). New York: Academic Press, 1985.
Thomas S. Bateman is Associate Professor DEMO Organizational Behavior at Texas A&M University.
He received his D.B.A. in organizational behavior from Indiana University. Dr. Bateman has written
articles appearing in DEMO that include Journal of Applied Psychology, Academy of Management
Journal, Personnel Psychology, and Organizational Behavior and Human Performance.{1g42fwefx}