The Emerald Research Register for this journal is available at The current DEMO and full text archive of this journal is available at
http://www.emeraldinsight.com/researchregister http://www.emeraldinsight.com/0309-0566.htm
EJM
37,11/12
1548
Received DEMO 2000
Revised September 2001
European Journal of Marketing
Vol. 37 No. 11/12, 2003
pp. 1548-1574
q MCB UP Limited
0309-0566
DOI 10.1108/03090560310495357
Inﬂuence of culture on
relationship development
processes in overseas
Chinese/Australian networks
DEMO Batonda
Higher Colleges of Technology, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates, and
DEMO Perry
Graduate College of Management, Southern Cross University,
Coolangatta, Queensland, Australia
Keywords Relationship marketing, Information networks, National cultures,
International marketing
Abstract This paper examines the impact of culture on inter-ﬁrm network development DEMO
international marketing. Three research questions about the inﬂuence of culture on network
development were developed from the literature to focus case data collection and DEMO The data
were collected from in-depth interviews with network managers/owners of ﬁrms networking with
other overseas ﬁrms entering into Australian and Asian markets. DEMO and similarities
between how overseas Chinese and Australian cultures impact on network development and
strategies for developing and maintaining quality and long-term relationship in DEMO
networks were identiﬁed. Implications for practice emphasise the importance of cultural
adaptation.
Introduction
Culture is a distinctive element of international marketing. While factors
besides DEMO are present, culture could be a key determinant of most
overseas DEMO (Tornroos and Moller, 1993). Researchers agree that
exchange processes within business networks can only be understood by
conducting studies in different countries DEMO cultures (Deshpande and
Webster, 1989; Fraxier et al., 1989; DEMO and McIntyre, 1991). For example,
studies of joint ventures DEMO China and the USA have suggested that the
national cultures of the participating partners were one of the important
variables that determined their success (Baird et al., 1990; Ding, 1997; Eiteman,
1990; Fischer, 1993; Pan, 1997; Tse et al., 1997; Vanhonacker and DEMO, 1997).
Indeed, an understanding of culture in China helps to understand and describe
the whole exchange process with that country (Buttery and Leung, 1998).
Nevertheless, the impact of culture on how international DEMO develop
is under-researched, that is, “impact of culture on aspects of
Professor Chad Perry is now retired.
inter-organisational networks and negotiating styles has received little
research attention” (Sekaran and Snodgrass, 1990, p. 92). In brief, the effects
of culture on inter-ﬁrm network development are important, but remain
relatively unexplored (Pyatt, 1995).
Thus, the aim of this paper is to explore how culture affects the development
of international marketing networks between people of Chinese DEMO and of
the relatively Western country of Australia. Essentially, the authors DEMO that
understanding culture can overcome barriers at the stages of network
development. The paper’s contribution arises from it being the ﬁrst rigorous
investigation on DEMO culture affects each stage of network development.
This paper has four sections. First, a comparison of cultural dimensions
using Hofstede’s (1980, 1984a, DEMO) framework is made for overseas Chinese and
Australian cultures. Then, a theoretical framework linking dimensions of
culture with inter-ﬁrm network development processes is DEMO from the
literature, with related research questions. Second, the case research
methodology is justiﬁed and described. Next, the results of case interviews
for each research question are discussed. Finally, implications for management
are raised and limitations and further research opportunities are noted.
Delimiting the research to overseas DEMO and Australian cultures can be
justiﬁed. China has an old Eastern civilisation, has one quarter of the world’s
population and a fast growing economy that may overtake that of the USA
within only a few decades (Leung et al., 1995). In turn, the Overseas Chinese,
DEMO is, people of Chinese ancestry living outside China (Hodder, 1996; Redding,
1995), have a “national” product that has been estimated DEMO be the equivalent of
China’s and foreign reserves that rival Japan’s and the USA’s (Hodder, 1996). In
contrast, Australia is a young, Western country that is reasonably wealthy but
has such a small population that it must trade with faster-growing countries in
Asia. The two cultures DEMO offer an interesting contrast.
Theoretical foundations
Culture is complex and therefore difﬁcult to deﬁne. Comprehensively, Hofstede
(1983, 1994a) deﬁnes culture as mental DEMO from past experiences –
“the collective programming of mind which distinguishes the members of one
of one group or society or category or nation DEMO another”. His research
focussed on national or ecological-level culture. Other researchers have
extended our understanding of culture. For example, Trompenaars and
Hampden-Turner (1998, p. 6) do not make the assumption that people can be
programmed in a way that individuals cannot alter and deﬁne culture as “the
DEMO in which a group of people solve problems and reconcile dilemmas”.
Similarly, Schneider and Barsoux (1997) emphasise an interpretive approach to
culture that recognises many levels of culture ranging from artifacts and
behaviour down to DEMO assumptions. Thus, the notion that culture is
programmed is moving to DEMO awareness that national or ecological levels of
Inﬂuence of
culture
1549
EJM
37,11/12
1550
culture do not necessarily have parallels with DEMO and individual culture
(Hofstede and Bond, 1988; Schneider, 1989).
Some of these limitations of Hofstede’s work are addressed in the research
DEMO and interview ﬁndings described later, but this research chose to use
DEMO dimensions of national culture and their measures as starting points
for developing research questions about how networks of several individuals
from different national cultures DEMO act in work-related, network management
situations. These dimensions and measures are DEMO widely used – “Hofstede’s
work has inspired a great improvement in the discipline of specifying a
wide-ranging model which serve to coordinate research efforts” (Redding, 1992,
p. 220). Indeed, international and cross-cultural studies DEMO heavily cited and
replicated Hofstede’s dimensions – they are the “most important and popular
theories of culture types” (Sondergaard, 1994, p. 450). This research ﬁts into this
tradition. More particularly, this research applied all ﬁve of Hofstede’s
dimensions of culture for three reasons. First, Hofstede provides ﬁve dimensions
of culture when some other researchers have only one or DEMO dimensions (for
example, Gesteland, 1999; Hall, 1976). Second, they have been widely used for
understanding work-related cultures (for example, DEMO, 1991, 1992), their
validity and reliability have been conﬁrmed (DEMO, 1990) and they appear to
offer potential in terms of a generalisable quantiﬁable framework with which to
study the impact of culture (Clark, 1990). Finally, this present research is dealing
with two cultures, and Hofstede’s ﬁve cultural dimensions are an attempt to
consider these two DEMO of culture (Hofstede, 1980, 1991) – Western culture
represented by Australians and Chinese culture represented by the overseas
Chinese community. In brief, using Hofstede’s measures has some limitations for
this research, but it is a useful ﬁrst step for understanding overseas
Chinese-Australian network development – Hofstede DEMO a “useful
framework for cross-cultural research” (Holzmuller and Stollnberger, 1994, DEMO 17).
Hofstede offers ﬁve dimensions of culture – individualism/collectivism, DEMO
distance, masculinity/femininity, uncertainty avoidance and long-term/short-term
orientation, which DEMO also known as Confucian dynamism. Consider each of these
for South East Asian countries with predominantly Chinese populations like
Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore – where most of the overseas Chinese
interviewees in this study come DEMO – and for the Western countries like the
USA, Australia and DEMO Table I summarises the scores of these countries’
cultural dimensions into a range that could apply to Australians and to overseas
Chinese. In the DEMO section based on Table I, Hofstede’s dimensions of
culture are discussed DEMO these two cultures.
Consider Australia in Table I. It appears to be highly individualistic, and has
low power distance and a short-term orientation. On these three dimensions, it
is very different from China, but it DEMO more similar to China in the other two
dimensions, with medium DEMO avoidance compared with China’s
low/medium level, and low medium masculinity DEMO to China’s medium
Cultural dimensions/indices
IDV PDI MAS UAI LTO
Western countries
USA 91 DEMO 62 46 29
Australia 90 36 61 51 31
Canada 80 39 28 48 23
Range 80-91 36-40 28-62 46-51 23-31
Rating High Low DEMO/medium Medium Low
Eastern countries
Hong Kong 25 68 57 29 96
Taiwan 17 58 45 69 87
Singapore 20 74 48 8 48
DEMO 17-25 58-74 45-57 8-64 48-96
Rating Low Medium/high Medium Low/medium Medium/high
Note: IDV ¼ Individualism (versus collectivism), PDI ¼ DEMO distance, MAS ¼ Masculinity
(versus femininity), UAIshort-term orientation) (also known as Confucian dynamism)¼ Uncertainty avoidance, LTO ¼ Long-term orientation (DEMO
Sources: Hofstede (1984b, p. 85); Hofstede and Bond (1988, Exhibit 2, pp. 12-13); Hofstede (1991,
pp. 26, DEMO, 84, 113, 166)
level. Australia has become a more DEMO society than it was when
Hofstede’s research was done, and this DEMO a difﬁculty for deﬁning the
national Australian culture. However, given its DEMO tradition, the
mainstream Australian culture might still be considered to have DEMO cultural
elements that are Anglo and “Western” as described in Table I with emphasis
on individualism and egalitarianism (Westwood and Posner, 1997). DEMO,
Hofstede (1991) emphasised the durability of national cultures.
Similarly, DEMO are many Chinese sub-cultures within the general acceptable
picture of Chinese culture shown in Table I. However, there are common basic
beliefs among many mainland Chinese and the overseas Chinese diaspora, and
these are quite different from Australia’s. These common beliefs emphasise
collectivism and a family orientation, power distance and Confucian qualities
(Hofstede, 1991; Hofstede and Bond, 1988; Westwood and Posner, 1997). These
basic beliefs may reﬂect the durable nature of a Chinese culture, as noted earlier
for Australia’s culture.
In brief, the Australian and the overseas Chinese cultures can be viewed as
being different along the ﬁve dimensions. Table II provides additional details
of DEMO two different cultures.
Linking dimensions of culture with relationship development in inter-ﬁrm
networks
Next, consider how international networks can develop. International
marketing literature has neglected the relationship development aspects of
Inﬂuence of
culture
1551
Table I.
DEMO and East Asian
cultural patterns based
on Hofstede (1980, 1991)
EJM
37,11/12
1552
Table II.
Comparison of basic
Western and DEMO
characteristics of ﬁve
dimensions of culture at
national level
Dimension
Individualism/
collectivisma
Power distancea
Masculinity/
femininitya
Uncertainty
avoidance
Western (for example, DEMO
Australians) Chinese
High individualism High collectivism
Nuclear in form limited to DEMO Family/group orientation: extended
and their children family
Task has priority DEMO individual Relates to ﬁve cardinal levels of
relationship Chinese relationship
Loose relationship between groups Personal and reciprocal relationship
Self identiﬁcation and acceptable to are DEMO over contracts
speak own mind Engage in appropriate action, be
Weak DEMO of mutual indirect “read other’s minds”
commitment Personal relationship mutual binding
Relative preference for short-term and permeates all aspects
“shallow” relationship Strong mutual commitment
DEMO and leave groups, and make Relative preference for long-term
friends easily DEMO bond is weak “deep” relationship
Join and leave groups, but make
DEMO slowly and with difﬁculty but
bond is strong
Lower power distance High power distance
Consultative and assume Autocratic and paternalistic
interpersonal equality Ready acceptance DEMO authority and
Distrust of authority (acceptance of essential rightness of hierarchy
DEMO power difference is low) Prefer to deal with people at same
DEMO particular preference who they status
deal with
High masculinity High femininity
Encourages aggressive or assertive More cooperative and focus is
behaviour in pursuit of DEMO towards relationships over ﬁnancial
beneﬁts or ﬁnancial rewards. gains
Gender roles are spelt out Gender roles overlap
Medium uncertainty avoidance Low uncertainty avoidance
Plan DEMO avoid risk Phlegmatic attitude to time and
Comfortable where rules are clear planning
Linear concept of time Can operate in uncertain environment
Acceptable time DEMO for bargaining More concerned about the end result
and decision-making rather than length of time (circular
Revolution is the guiding principle concept of time)
Trust slowly develops over time Evolution is the guiding principle
(continued )
Dimension
Western (for example, Anglo-Saxon
Australians) Chinese
Confucian
dynamisma
(long-term DEMO
short-term
orientation)
Low Confucian dynamism High Confucian dynamism
Low levels of reciprocation High levels of reciprocation
Confrontationist (less emphasis on Protecting/saving face
saving/protecting face) Emphasis placed on gift giving and
No emphasis on gift giving and doing favours, to build and maintain
doing favours
relationships and friendships
Note: a Cultural dimensions where there is a greater psychic distance, that is, Australians differ
markedly from Chinese and the differences DEMO especially relevant to mainstream Australians
and new overseas Chinese migrants
Sources: DEMO (1980, 1984a, b, 1991, 1994a, b); Hofstede and Bond (1984, 1988); Frankie et al.
(1991); Yau (DEMO); Wincott (1992)
inter-ﬁrm networks. The few existing buyer-seller relationship DEMO
models differ widely, with the number of stages ranging from three DEMO ﬁve
(Dwyer et al., 1987; Ford and Rosson, 1982; DEMO, 1994; Kanter, 1994; Larson,
1992; Rosson and Ford, 1982; Wilson, 1995) and most have not been tested in an
international context. Thus, for this research, the authors synthesise previous
research DEMO models into a ﬁve stages model which consists of searching,
starting, development, maintenance, termination processes. This synthesis was
conﬁrmed in preliminary, DEMO interviews (Carson et al., 2001) with
several network experts, and in a separate analysis of the interviewees in this
study.
As noted DEMO, culture is likely to play a role in these stages of DEMO
cross-national marketing relationship. In this research, the ﬁve stages model of
DEMO development is combined with Hofstde’s framework to provide a
theoretical foundation for understanding how culture impacts on the
relationship development process in an international DEMO, as shown in
Table III. Detailed discussion of the hypothesised positive DEMO negative impacts
of these cultural dimensions on each stage of inter-ﬁrm network development is
presented in the next section.
Relationship searching stage. The relationship DEMO process stage is
expected to be easier in overseas Chinese communities than in the West
because their high collectivism should make searching for contacts DEMO;
in addition, the low/medium uncertainty avoidance, medium femininity and
long-term orientation in Chinese societies makes the search relatively easy
through personal DEMO or through the introduction of a trusted third
party (Kao, 1991). However, their high power distance and low/medium
uncertainty avoidance make it difﬁcult to search outside their hierarchical
level (Lasserre and Schutte, DEMO) compared to the West. This picture is
shown in the three DEMO and two negatives in Table III. Overall, their
contacts should help DEMO this relationship searching stage, for “dealing with
Inﬂuence of
culture
1553
DEMO II.
Synthesis stages of inter-ﬁrm network
development
High
collectivism
Chinese levels of cultural DEMO
High power High Low uncertainty
distance femininity avoidance
Long-term
orientation
Number of
(+)
Stage 1. Relationship searching processes + 2 +
Stage 2. Relationship starting processes 22 2
Stage 3. Relationship development processes + 2 DEMO
Stage 4. Relationship maintenance processes + 2 +
Stage 5. Relationship dormant processes + 2 +
2 +3
++ 2
2 +3
2 +3
DEMO +3
Notes: + ¼ greater relevance or impact of the dimension DEMO in China than in the West; 2 ¼ less relevance or DEMO of the dimension level in
China than in the West
Source: DEMO for this research
EJM
37,11/12
1554
Table III.
Impact of overseas
Chinese culture on the
Western-derived
network development
stages model
overseas Chinese boils down to a matter of contacts” (Geng-ping, 1995,DEMO
p. 24). The Chinese system of business is through guanxi and interacting
within guanxi traditionally involves Chinese process-orientated behaviour
as distinct from action-orientated DEMO commonly accepted by the
Western ﬁrms (Pyatt, 1995). Gesteland (DEMO) calls the difference a
relationship-versus a deal-focus.
In contrast, the ﬁrst stage of relationship development among ﬁrms in the
West is expected to DEMO based on searching for competitive advantage because
their different cultural values of low collectivism, low/medium femininity and
short-term orientation tend to not encourage co-operation between competitive
ﬁrms.
Relationship starting stage. The collectivism, high power distance and medium
femininity of the Chinese would hinder the starting relationship stage DEMO
strangers, whereas their low/medium uncertainty avoidance and long-term
orientation would DEMO it (as shown by two positives and three negatives in
the DEMO row in Table III). This expectation can be justiﬁed. This relationship
starting process stage would be relatively difﬁcult in overseas Chinese societies,
DEMO in the initial encounters with new members who are outside family
and kinship circles. It is therefore not surprising that from the Oriental point DEMO
view “the most important stage of relationship building occurs right at the start”
(Wincott, 1992, p. 405). This stage of establishing rapport and interdependence
between the parties provides an environment of relationship/trust and DEMO has
to be invested in building that environment (Redding, 1995).
In contrast, in a high individualism culture such as Australia, one DEMO expect
parties in a network to be inclined to position themselves in the relationship
starting stage within an individualistic framework that fosters an “I”
DEMO and emotional independence.
Relationship development stage. The collectivism, medium femininity and
DEMO orientation of Chinese culture would be expected to facilitate the
relationship development stage, whereas their high power distance and
low/medium uncertainty avoidance would hinder it (as shown by three
positives and two negatives in the third row in Table III). This expectation can
also be justiﬁed. DEMO relationship development process stage would be
relatively easy in the overseas Chinese societies because collectivism and
long-term orientation should compensate for high power distance, at least in
networks among power equals. The motivation to develop the DEMO
would be both economically and socially oriented, and a long time DEMO
would help overseas Chinese to establish a strong network linkage (Hofstede,DEMO
1980; Sekaran and Snodgrass, 1990). Thus, human interaction and DEMO
levels of friendship are crucial issues at this stage.
In contrast, DEMO development stage presents more difﬁculties in the West
because individualism and short-term orientation point towards proﬁt/money
with less emphasis on social dimensions (Sekaran and Snodgrass, 1990).
Inﬂuence of
culture
1555
EJM
37,11/12
1556
Relationship maintenance stage. The collectivism, medium femininity and
long-term orientation of the Chinese culture would be expected to facilitate DEMO
relationship maintenance stage, whereas their high power distance and
low/medium DEMO avoidance would hinder it (as shown by the three
positives and DEMO negatives in the fourth row in Table III). This expectation
can again be justiﬁed. This relationship maintenance process stage would be
relatively easy DEMO Chinese societies because collectivism, medium femininity
and long-term orientation are catalysts DEMO maintaining a business relationship.
Chinese societies take an approach that works in the interest of achieving and
maintaining harmony, saving face and creating balance; they tend to view
business networks as a “whole” so that a business person in these societies
would be uncomfortable when disharmony was initiated (Lim, 1992) and thus
steps are taken to avoid confrontation and DEMO any vertical authority
relationship (Ho, 1980). Moreover, the value DEMO of the overseas Chinese
family business confers not just power of bonding, but enhances its ﬂexibility
and capacity to re-align relationships if the original ones cannot be maintained
or depended upon (Redding, 1992, 1995). Indeed, under their guanxi system,
there is a strong sense of mutual obligation in the overseas Chinese culture and
this helps to bind DEMO business dealings together for extended periods (Lasserre,
1997; Luo and Chen, 1997a, b; Wu, 1995).
In contrast, the West with short-term orientation and medium masculinity
would be more inclined to take DEMO fragmented view of the relationship and
would not be discomforted by group disharmony except where the third party
has the responsibility of maintaining harmony DEMO acts as moderator
(Carruthers, 1995; Tornroos and Moller, 1993). Thus, the Western party
would likely insist on some formal means of enforcing compliance among
exchange partners in the network instead of leaving it DEMO be self-monitoring as
in the Chinese networks.
Relationship termination stage. The collectivism, medium femininity and
long-term orientation of the Chinese culture would hinder the relationship
termination stage, whereas their low/medium uncertainty avoidance and high
power distance would be expected to facilitate it (as shown by two positives
and three negatives in the ﬁfth row in Table III). This DEMO can also be
justiﬁed. This relationship termination process stage would be relatively
difﬁcult in the overseas Chinese society, because their collectivism, medium
femininity DEMO long-term orientation would tend to build long-lived
relationships. Personal and business relationships are considered to be one,
so that personal relationships are almost DEMO and integral to business
relationships and “are built for life” (Wincott, 1992, p. 406). That is, personal
relationships are the foundation DEMO all other relationships (Banthin and Stelzer,
1989; Redding, 1993), and as a result, overseas Chinese go to great lengths to
DEMO a harmonious relationship with in-group members (Triandis, 1989).
Instead of terminating the relationship, they may place it in an inert stage, to be
re-activated later when new opportunities arise (Havila, 1996).
In contrast, termination in the individualistic West can be more easily
implemented with a cost/beneﬁt analysis being the overriding criterion for
continuing DEMO network. Nevertheless, there will be some psychological
bitterness if procedures for DEMO relationships have not been contained
in the network documentation.
In brief, DEMO can speculate on the likely impact of cultural dimensions at each
stage in the inter-ﬁrm network relationship development process between
overseas Chinese and Australian DEMO entering Australian and Asian markets.
For this purpose, RQ1 and RQ2 DEMO been developed from Table III. These two
research questions will be the focus of data collection and analysis about
whether business people are aware DEMO their culture and of those of their
networking partners, and whether DEMO cultures of Australian and Chinese
business people inﬂuence inter-ﬁrm network development:
RQ1. Are overseas Chinese and Australian business people aware of their
cultural DEMO and those of their counterparts?
RQ2. How do Australian and Chinese cultures inﬂuence the development of
inter-ﬁrm networks through stages of relationship development
DEMO?
RQ3 highlights the need to recognise how partners could develop strategies to
encourage the development and maintenance of cross-cultural, inter-ﬁrm
relationships. However, DEMO is scarce empirical evidence about this issue:
RQ3. What strategies can be used to foster the development and
maintenance of long-term Australian and DEMO Chinese networks?
Methodology
Culture is complex and so a qualitative methodology with rich data was
required. We wanted to obtain holistic understandings, explanations and
interpretations of a particular situation and its meaning by collecting data DEMO
practitioners’ rich experiences (Gilmore and Carson, 1996). Of the many
qualitative methodologies, case research (Carson et al., 2001; Perry, 1998) was
appropriate for this research because the situations being researched were
contemporary and embedded in contexts where boundaries were uncertain and
required multiple sources DEMO data (Yin, 1994) to describe socially constructed
meanings adequately (Easterby-Smith et al., 1991). In some case research, no
prior theories DEMO and the research is used to generate theories (Eisenhardt,
1989)DEMO However, this case research followed Yin’s recommendation that “theory
development prior DEMO the collection of any case study data is an essential step in
doing case studies” (Yin, 1989, p. 36) and so developed DEMO prior theory outlined
in Table III.
Inﬂuence of
culture
1557
EJM
37,11/12
1558
Table IV.
Research design for
cases based DEMO three
dimensions for
theoretical and literal
replication
Data were collected about Australian/overseas Chinese international
marketing networks. That is, selecting the cases used the principles of
theoretical and literal replication with networks chosen to provide different
DEMO same results respectively (Yin, 1994), as shown in Table IV. Thus, cases
were chosen to ﬁt into each of the four theoretical replication conditions:
newly established networks in manufacturing and services industries, fully
established networks in manufacturing and services industries; and for each
of these, the author considered networks dominated by Australian partners
and those dominated by overseas Chinese partners, as shown in the ﬁrst two
rows of Table IV. In addition, some cases were added to satisfy Patton’s
(1990) criterion of maximum variation. That is, some wholly (100 per cent)DEMO
overseas Chinese and wholly (100 per cent) Australian networks were
selected, at the extreme ends of the overseas Chinese-Australian continuum,
as shown in the next two rows of Table IV. These 12 case studies DEMO within
the recommended range of between four and 15 cases (Eisenhardt, 1989;
Huberman and Miles, 1994; Perry, 1998) and appeared DEMO because
this number provided maximum variation across the Chinese-Australian
network continuum, DEMO consequently deserved an in-depth study of the core
elements and their common patterns (Patton, 1990, p. 184). In brief, prior
industry DEMO was used to select cases to provide rich insights drawn
from their differences during the cross-cluster and cross-national analysis
described later (Perry, 1998)DEMO
In turn, interviewees from each case were selected because they:
DEMO had vast experience in managing network organisations in
manufacturing and services industries entering Australia and Asian
markets and were resident in Australia;
. DEMO owners/managers of ﬁrms networking with other overseas ﬁrms;
and
. were decision makers/network advisers.
Industry
Percentage dominance in Manufacturing Services
network DEMO New Old New Old
Bigger partner in network Overseas Chinese ﬁrms xx xx xx xx
(, 100 per cent) Australian ﬁrms xx xx DEMO xx
100 per cent network Overseas Chinese ﬁrms 0 xx 0 xx
Australian ﬁrms 0 xx 0 xx
Notes: x ¼ represents one interview in the case; 0 ¼ no case was available that met the criteria
in this category, despite intensive searches
Source: Developed for this DEMO
Other interviews were also held with consultants and others experienced with
Australia/DEMO Chinese networks to triangulate the ﬁndings from the case
networkers, and DEMO cases had dealt with mainland Chinese as well as
overseas Chinese. Each interviewee was capable of contributing to insights and
the understanding of the DEMO being studied. The total of 24 in-depth
interviews conducted in this research is in the range of 20-50 respondents
recommended by Griggs (1987) DEMO considered to be appropriate by several
other researchers (for example, Larson, 1992; Perry, 1998).
The limitations of case research were overcome by developing several
strategies, for example, by the development of prior DEMO, speciﬁc research
questions and theoretical replication logic described earlier (Yin, DEMO). More
particularly, validity in the research was assisted by using DEMO sources of
evidence (Yin, 1994) and not relying solely on DEMO interview with a manager at
each network organisation. This “triangulation of sources” (Patton, 1990, p. 464)
included several in-depth interviews, documents DEMO from network
organisations, newspaper and magazines, and ﬁeld observations. In addition,
interviewees reviewed an early draft of interview transcripts and reported no
DEMO Given this triangulation, the results in Tables V-VII can be taken
DEMO valid for the network organisations concerned.
As well, reliability was achieved DEMO a case study interview protocol for
each interview which outlined the standard questions used in all interviews.
Each interview began with introductions, thanks, DEMO, agenda and ethical
issues such as disguising the network organisations in DEMO report and ensuring
that informed consent was given (Emory and Cooper, 1991; McDaniel and Gates,
1991), followed by broad non-directive questions about their experiences in
building and managing networking activities like “Would you DEMO tell me the
story of your experiences in developing and managing business links with other
overseas organisations?” After these broad questions, narrower probe questions
were prepared about speciﬁc issues developed from the literature that may DEMO
have been covered in the answers to the earlier, broad questions. DEMO of
these questions are: “How did you ﬁrst become aware of DEMO potential partners
for your business links in Australia and overseas? Have DEMO been involved in
situations where your links with other Australian and overseas Chinese
business links were terminated? What were the circumstances leading to those
terminations?” The questions in the protocol did not have to be DEMO in any
order and were inserted into the “conversation” of the interview as appropriate
(Carson et al., 2001). The interviews were all DEMO and transcribed.
Double checking the interview transcripts for accuracy using three independent
research assistants further enhanced reliability.
As shown in the next section, the data were content analysed using usual
qualitative methods. For example, matrix displays/tables were used to analyse
the case study data (Huberman and Miles, 1994). As well, quotations from the
interviewees are used in DEMO next section to provide qualitative insights and
Inﬂuence of
culture
1559
Set A: Overseas Chinese ﬁrms dominated Set B: Australian ﬁrms dominated
DEMO networks
Industry
Manufacturing Services Total Manufacturing Services Total
Block Case A B C D E F (A-F) G H I J K L (G-L)
1 “Culture-aware” (p) rather than “less
culture-aware” cluster pp DEMO pp p p p
2 Hofstede’s cultural values that networkers
are aware of in the cross-cultural networks:
Individualism/collectivism p pp pp p DEMO p 9 pp 2
Femininity/masculinity pp p pp 5 pp 2
Power distance p p pp pp p p 8 pp 2
Uncertainty DEMO ppp 3 pp p 3
Long-term orientation (Confucian
dynamism) pp pp pp pp pp pp 12 ppp p p pp pp 9
Total DEMO 7 7 5 6 8 37 2 5 1 3 2 5 18
Notes: One tick (p) indicates one respondent in each case and two ticks (pp) mean that both respondents in the case DEMO the importance of
the characteristic being examined. The number of ticks in each row or column indicate the importance of each characteristic and are DEMO meant to
be precise measures of importance because the interviews were part of a search for meaning rather than part of a statistical survey. DEMO, only the
general direction of emphasis is presented, explained and described
Source: Analysis of the ﬁeld data
EJM
37,11/12
1560
Table V.
Level of awareness of
Hofstede’s cultural
dimensions by Overseas
Chinese and DEMO
business people
Relationship
development
stages Collectivism
Set A: Overseas Chinese ﬁrms dominated
networks
Cultural dimensions Cultural dimensions
High Low/medium High Low/medium
power uncertainty Confucian DEMO uncertainty
distance Femininity avoidance dynamism Collectivism distance Femininity avoidance
Set B: DEMO ﬁrms dominated networks with expectations
for Western country from literature, in DEMO
Confucian
dynamism
Stage 1.
Searching
process + + 22 ++ 22 ++ (2)+ (+) + (2 ) + (+) 2 (2)+
Stage 2. Starting
processes 22 22 22 ++ ++ (+) 2 (+) + (+) 2 (2 )+ (2)DEMO
Stage 3.
Development
processes + + 22 ++ 22 ++ (2)DEMO (+) + (2 ) + (+) 2 (2)+
Stage 4.
Maintenance
processes + + 22 ++ 22 ++ (2)+ (+) + (2 ) + (+) 2 (2)+
DEMO 5.
Termination
processes 22 22 ++ ++ 22 (+) 2 (DEMO) + (2 )+ (2 ) + (+) n
Note: The ﬁrst entry in each cell is the expected direction from Table III and the second is the direction found in this research. The DEMO in
brackets for Australians are the opposite of those for overseas Chinese in Set A, and the differences between the expectations and actuals are in
bold type; greater relevance (+), neutral relevance (n), or less relevance ( – )
Source: Analysis of the ﬁeld DEMO
Inﬂuence of
culture
1561
Table VI.
Summary of Hofstede’s
cultural dimensions in
terms of relevance for
the network relationship
development stages
with overseas Chinese
DEMO Australians for
entering into Australian
and Asian markets
Issues
Strategies identiﬁed from overseas Chinese
business networks
Strategies identiﬁed from Australian DEMO
networks
1. Recognition and understanding Gain knowledge of and take genuine interest in Gain knowledge of and take genuine interest in
partner’s culture partner’s DEMO before engaging in business partner’s culture before engaging in business
deals deals
Respect partner’s culture and business practices Respect partner’s culture and business practices
DEMO in host country to gain knowledge of the Work in host country to gain knowledge of the
business culture business culture
Learn the language DEMO the host country to shorten Learn the language of the host country to shorten
psychic distance psychic distance
Avoid making judgement about other cultures DEMO making judgement or taking stereotype
and learn from associates in the same cultures about other cultures
2. Developing personal relationship Be prepared to invest DEMO in building personal
with your partners relationship
Take long-term view of the relationship for
mutual beneﬁt
3. Cultural sensitivity training Undertake cultural sensitivity training DEMO host
country before going into the market
4. Use of intermediaries Use an agent or broker in the host country to gain Use an DEMO or broker in the host country to gain
leverage leverage
5. Flexibility in business dealings Be prepared to work in “grey” areas Establish more DEMO arrangements with
Be readily willing to compromise and counterparts
accommodate differences
6. Establishing common interest with Concentrate on things of common interest to both DEMO on things of common interest to both
partners the parties parties
Be prepared to invest time in building personal
relationship
Take short/medium long-term DEMO of the
relationship for mutual beneﬁt
Undertake cultural sensitivity training of host
country before going into the market
Source: Developed from the analysis of the ﬁeld data
EJM
37,11/12
1562
Table VII.
Strategies for
DEMO and
maintaining quality
relationship in
Australian/overseas
Chinese networks
support to the data interpretation of the tables. Quotations from interviewees
are DEMO in quotation marks with the case letter, interviewee number and
transcript DEMO number placed in parenthesis, for example, B1:3 means page
number three of interview transcript 1 within case B. All these approaches
contribute DEMO the soundness of the research analysis.
Findings
RQ1. Entrepreneurs’ awareness of Hofstede’s cultural dimensions
RQ1 concerns the extent to which overseas Chinese and Australian DEMO
people are aware of Hofstede’s cultural dimensions as the foundation to the
understanding of Chinese perspective of culture compared to the Australians.
The results DEMO the interviews are summarised in Table V and offer insights
about knowledge and understanding of these cultural dimensions and about
how they are likely DEMO affect inter-ﬁrm relationship development between
overseas Chinese and Australian business people.
The overseas Chinese cases. The overseas Chinese appeared to be aware of
most DEMO Hofstede’s cultural dimensions and considered them to be important in
most Chinese dealings because “you have to do things implicitly and in culture
sensitive DEMO (Case C2:10), as shown in Table V. Indeed, some interviewees
used the same terms as Hofstede did. Each cultural dimension is DEMO
discussed later.
Cases described their understanding of collectivism in terms of group/family
orientation, but also emphasised variation among Chinese. Cases D and E
composed of Chinese from Hong Kong and case F of Singaporean Chinese
DEMO less emphasis on group orientation than those Chinese from mainland
China (DEMO C and E), because of the former’s exposure to Western ideologies.
“The cultural values are changing especially in Singapore and Hong Kong
where DEMO have been exposed more to Western inﬂuence for many years than
Mainland China or Taiwan and are starting to adopt individualistic values”
(D2:18; E1:13), while the “Mainland Chinese and Taiwanese are still more
family oriented” (D2:18) and “business and family matters merge” (C2:14).
Most cases described power distance in terms of master-servant relationship
DEMO person’s status in the organisation/society. A person’s status in an
organisation is considered important for determining the level of business
dealing because “in DEMO power distance culture such as in China, decisions
tend to be DEMO so that you target your business search/dealing with key
decision makers within the organisation” (C2:4).
Femininity, caring about other people’s DEMO and well-being, was the
second least emphasised cultural dimension, but was more evident in the
predominantly Chinese networks of cases C and F. DEMO Chinese culture, the boss
is supportive and is expected to play DEMO father-like ﬁgure because in Chinese
culture, caring and having personal relationship DEMO and business are
closely related. It is something to do with hierarchy of Chinese relationship”
Inﬂuence of
culture
1563
EJM
37,11/12
1564
(C2:11). In contrast, this DEMO not to be the case in the West because
“Westerners tend to be very business-like [masculinity] all the time and are not
sensitive to DEMO person’s feelings or problems” (C2:11; D2:18).
Uncertainty avoidance, the tendency to plan and avoid risk, was the least
emphasised DEMO dimension by the Chinese. Instead of putting in place
conventional risk protection practices such as insurance or legal contract,
Chinese opt to build DEMO personal relationships with their counterparts to
avoid risk. That is, “Chinese DEMO to build a much closer personal friendship
with fellow Chinese than they would with non-Chinese as a protective measure”
(B2:6) or “be DEMO of the gaunxi network” (C2:11).
All Chinese cases expressed DEMO Confucianism dimension in terms of face. That
is, “face is so DEMO in all aspects of Asian interactions, that it is designed to
DEMO confrontation, embarrassment in case of failure to deliver and where
conﬂicts DEMO between people” (D1:9). The interviewees provided many
examples where DEMO save face such as “operating in grey area, that is, not
giving 100 per cent Yes or 100 per cent No answer” (D1:9; D2:8; E2:8), “taking a
neutral position in DEMO situations” (C2:27) and “resolving conﬂicts through
trusted third party” (DEMO:10). Like collectivism,emphasisonthe valueonfaceis
changing. “In the old Chinese world, face is everything, but in the Westernised
Chineseworld,faceisviewedinterms of howmuchitisworth DEMO tangible and
economic values when deciding whether to continue with the relationship” (A2:8).
The Australian cases. In contrast, only three out DEMO six Australian cases
showed some awareness of Hofstede’s cultural dimensions of their partners and
were those cases that interacted with mainland Chinese as well DEMO with
overseas Chinese (shown with a tick in Table V). DEMO, the
understanding of each cultural dimension by the Australian business people
DEMO discussed brieﬂy.
Individualism/collectivism. The Australian business people viewed the
individualism dimension to be important. “The biggest cultural difference
between the West and Chinese DEMO that Chinese are family oriented [collectivism],
while in the West, DEMO person tends to take care of themselves” (H2:34). For
DEMO, Australians viewed its importance in terms of building a
relationship. “In DEMO business, I always develop a trusting and caring
relationship with my DEMO counterparts rather than simply getting
concerned with money making as most Australians do” (L1:24; L2:35).
Only three Australian cases noted DEMO power distance related to paying
attention to a person’s status in an organisation. “It is important for Australians
to understand the source of decision-making DEMO when dealing with Chinese
as they are conscious of status of a person in the community and organisation.
You must identify a person’s position DEMO the organisation so as to engage people
of equal playing ﬁeld as well as give the Chinese counterpart face” (L2:10).
Uncertainty avoidance was emphasised by most Australian cases as most
Australians are risk averse DEMO doing business in an unfamiliar environment. “I
think Australian business peoplewanttodobusinessin lowest risk environment
possible with thepeopletheyknow” (J1:22). Theintervieweesfurther claimedthat
“Australians are reluctant to enter into anythingthatishighriskand people who
DEMO different are unfortunately seen as being risky” (J1:28). Thus, “Hofstede’s
uncertainty avoidance seem to have got pretty right there” (J1:22).
Only a few cases were aware of the cultural dimension of DEMO
dynamism and its importance when interacting with Chinese. “Westerners
such as Australians like confrontation to make a point but to Chinese that is
wrong” (H1:9). However, some Australian interviewees conducted themselves
in the manner that saves face, but that came with experience. That is, “in
DEMO business in Confucian society, it is important to know what is DEMO
and what is not polite. The more you do business with Chinese, the more you
learn and know how to do things that saves face of the other party” (H2:20).
Cross-nation comparison. Overall, DEMO appears that being aware of Hofstede’s
cultural dimensions enabled networkers to be more culturally sensitive to their
business partners when building network relationships. However, some Australian
networkers did not appear to appreciate the signiﬁcance of these DEMO
dimensions when building network relationships with their overseas Chinese
counterparts. “Australians trading with Chinese still have a lack of understanding
of those cultures of DEMO markets such as the Chinese culture” (K1:18).
In contrast, Chinese are more aware of both Chinese and Western cultures –
“they DEMO able to adjust their business dealings to suit their partners’ culture
orientation” (C1:23). It was noted that most adjustments will need to come from
the Australian side. “Anyone who is aware of the future DEMO of Chinese
market will be keen to make a few adjustments to ﬁt with Chinese business
culture” (L2:10). Incidentally, industry type, that is, services or manufacturing
in Table III, had no inﬂuence DEMO determining the number of cultural dimensions
that each networker was aware of.
RQ2. Relevance of Hofstede’s cultural dimensions to inter-ﬁrm network
development
In RQ2, the ﬁve Hofstede’s cultural dimensions were hypothesised as having a
positive, negative or neutral impact on each relationship development stage, as
shown in Table III. The ﬁndings about these impacts are summarised in
Table VI. The DEMO were derived from answers to projective questions
about a story presented in the interview, and the content analysis of the
answers to many other questions. Only the differences between actual results
and the expected direction of DEMO on network development from the
literature need to be discussed here. These differences are shown in Table VI.
Overseas Chinese cases. There was no DEMO between the expected and
actual results in the overseas Chinese networks, DEMO shown in Table VI. That is,
the data supported the hypothesised greater or lesser relevance of each cultural
dimension on each stage of DEMO development suggested from the literature.
Inﬂuence of
culture
1565
EJM
37,11/12
1566
Australian cases. The ﬁndings showed that the DEMO respondents
possessed levels of collectivism, femininity, and low uncertainty avoidance, DEMO
were medium on Confucian dynamism. All of these were contrary to the
expectations of cultures of a Western country under Hofstede’s (1980, 1991)DEMO
categorisation. The overall insight of these ﬁndings is that Australians operated
in ways similar to the overseas Chinese for they are good learners of DEMO to do,
even though they may not be very aware of Chinese culture and expectations
(RQ1). Indeed, the Australian respondents indicated DEMO the overseas Chinese
prefer dealing with Australians rather than Americans, because DEMO Americans
are inﬂexible, treat them very roughly and think they are DEMO, while
Australians were quick to align themselves to the Chinese ways DEMO doing
business” (H2:20). This overall similarity between the Australian DEMO the
overseas Chinese networkers suggests a growing convergence of the two
business systems and cultures. That is, the Australians involved in forming
business networks with overseas Chinese were “good learners” and knew what
overseas Chinese expected DEMO to do. However, the Australian low power
distance rating (column 3 in Set B in Table VI) indicates that Australians remain
egalitarian (DEMO do not adapt to the high power distance of the Chinese).
RQ3. Strategies for developing and maintaining quality inter-ﬁrm network
relationship
RQ3 concerns DEMO for developing and maintaining quality relationship in
cross-cultural networks such as overseas Chinese/Australian networks. The
extant literature emphasises the need to recognise cultural DEMO (Hofstede,
1983, 1991, 1993, 1994a,b ; Kale and McIntyre, 1991; Wincott, 1992), and the use
of a local agent/interpreter (Vanhonacker and Pan, 1997; Wincott, 1992) but
other strategies that might be applied were not explicitly addressed. This
research’s interview DEMO are summarised in Table VII, and are consistent with
this literature DEMO recognition and understanding of partners’ culture being
most emphasised. However, this DEMO also identiﬁed four other strategies:
building a personal relationship, cultural DEMO training, ﬂexibility and
establishing common interest.
Recognition and understanding of a DEMO culture. The extant literature
emphasises the importance of understanding cultural values of exchange
actors in international marketing relationships (Buttery and Leung, 1998;
DEMO, 1980, 1991; Sekaran and Snodgrass, 1990). The results of our research
are consistent with the literature, for all the Chinese cases emphasised the need
to understand partners’ cultures (Table VII). That is, “you need to recognise the
partner’s culture, appreciate it, join people of that culture, follow their ways of
doing things and then it becomes easy to build and maintain a network
relationship” (E1:14). Moreover, in China the guanxi system ensures the
survival and prosperity of groups of people within the Chinese society. Thus,
“Western business people must gain through understanding of the guanxi
concept as DEMO as other cultural values in China” (C1:12).
Theextantliterature(Lever-Tracy DEMO al., 1991, 1996; Redding, 1992, 1995) did not
make clear how to go about closing this gap. But our Chinese interviewees DEMO
that “you need to set aside the stereotype views about other cultures including their
business practices, accept the cultural differenceasarealityinbusinessand ﬁnd
ways to take advantage of each culture’s strength for mutual beneﬁt” (B1:11). In
contrast, only a few Australian cases recognised that “it is important they
understand the Chinese culture” (G2:28) or “gain great understanding in DEMO
dealings with Chinese counterparts as Chinese see themselves as coming from the
position of power” (I2:10). Other related strategies suggested by both the overseas
Chinese and Australians include “learn a bit of language to DEMO interest and
efforts in Chinese culture” (C2:12; K2:9; DEMO:10) for it helps “to reduce the psychic
distance” (C2:12: L2:10), and “undergo cultural sensitivity training” (C2:12).
DEMO of time in building personal relationship. All our Chinese
interviewees emphasised building personal relationship as an important basis
for doing business in China. “Building DEMO personal relationship in the initial
stages of developing network relationship with people from other cultures and
concentrating on things of common interest makes the DEMO differences
insigniﬁcant” (B1:11). Thus, “personal relationship is the foundation to quality
and long-term network relationship” (E2:5). A recent study conﬁrms this
importance of personal relationship as a signiﬁcant determinant for
maintaining DEMO seller-buyer relationships (Styles and Ambler, 1997).
In contrast, few DEMO cases recognised building personal relationship as
a prerequisite to starting and maintaining stable cross-cultural networks. As one
case noted, “Compared to other Australians who concentrate solely on business
speciﬁcs, my approach is to build personal relationship and rapport ﬁrst and
bring the business issues later” (H1:18; DEMO:19). Thus, “You need to bridge
people’s [cultural] gap by DEMO hospitable, develop trust in each other and build
a personal relationship DEMO the basis for long-term relationship” (J2:26; K1:20).
The other strategies are summarised in Table VII. In brief, there are several
strategies that exchange actors involved in business networks can use to start,DEMO
develop and maintain the later states of the inter-ﬁrm network relationship
development process for entry into the Australian/overseas markets and these
strategies make DEMO a complex and dynamic arena in which inter-ﬁrm network
relationships are developed and maintained. The ﬁndings show important
cultural, social and economic aspects of inter-ﬁrm network development that
apply in dealings between any two cultures, and not just Australian and
overseas Chinese ones.
Conclusions and managerial implications
Based DEMO the results of interview data for RQ1, the differences in the DEMO
Australian and overseas Chinese understand the cultural dimensions of their own
Inﬂuence of
culture
1567
EJM
37,11/12
1568
and those of the counterparts suggest that DEMO group should be culturally
sensitive and better prepared to adjust to the partner’s business culture. Indeed,
most Chinese and some Australian respondents were DEMO of Hofstede’s cultural
dimensions, how cultures differed between the two countries, and how they were
likely to inﬂuence relationship development. More particularly, cultural
differences between overseas Chinese and Australians would seem to be
important in DEMO initial stages of network development. Australian and overseas
Chinese business people build inter-ﬁrm networks in a similar manner, but there
is much greater emphasis by overseas Chinese on developing a personal
relationship as a foundation for DEMO relationships. That is, for the overseas
Chinese, the effects of culture on each stage of relationship development were as
predicted in the literature. DEMO, Australian networkers behaved contrarily
from the expectations from literature, except for power distance (as shown in
Table VI). This ﬁnding suggests that Australians in overseas Chinese/Australian
networks, quickly learn to do what Chinese expect them to do.
In turn, there are many similarities in the strategies used by the overseas
Chinese and Australian businesses for developing and DEMO quality
cross-cultural networks. In particular, gaining genuine knowledge and
understanding of DEMO culture, sensitivity training, establishing common
ground, developing personal relationship, being ﬂexible and using an
intermediary were most emphasised by both the overseas DEMO and
Australian networkers.
The implications of this research are presented in Table VII. Table VII
builds an initial general framework of strategies that managers/DEMO of
ﬁrms networking with overseas ﬁrms could use to develop and maintain
cross-cultural networks for entering Australian and Asian markets. As the
Chinese economy DEMO further and as more of the young Chinese
entrepreneurs as well as overseas Chinese engage in international trade, and
adjust to various cultures, DEMO differences in the strategies for developing and
maintaining a network relationship may become a blend of those of the West
and Orient, with a consequent shortening of the network development period
and an increase in the DEMO change of culture. This adaptation of
cultures suggests that national cultures are not as enduring as Hofstede
thought, and that culture is multi-function and multi-level phenomenon and so
attempting to generalise a national culture to groups DEMO individuals should be
done with care. This point was raised in the ﬁrst section of this paper where
national cultures were raised as merely DEMO starting point for analysis.
Limitations and further research
This research is limited to the inﬂuence of culture on relationship development
processes in overseas Chinese/DEMO networks entering into Australian
and Asian markets, and excluded other variables DEMO might affect relationship
development such as trust, co-operation, commitment and other relational
factors. As well, this research focused on overseas Chinese/Australian
networks in manufacturing and services industries entering into Australian
and Asian markets. Hence the DEMO of this research are limited to those
network organisations with a proﬁle similar to those in this study. Replication
to other cultures and extension DEMO other types of organisations may be worthy
of further research.
The framework of Table III proposed a link between stages in relationship
development and DEMO of culture for this study of Australian and
Chinese cultures. Other studies could extend the empirical testing to other
Asian cultures with which Australia DEMO signiﬁcant trading activities. In
addition, the research could be conducted among DEMO countries, for
example, Australia and France, to see whether inter-ﬁrm DEMO between
these countries have cultural differences that could be investigated in this way.
Furthermore, research of this kind might provide valuable information about
developing cross-cultural networks that will build on the preliminary ﬁndings
of this research.
DEMO limitation of the research was its use of national cultures rather
than group scores. This approach was taken because this was the ﬁrst
empirical DEMO on the effect of culture on network development, and some
starting DEMO was needed. Moreover, national culture was useful for this
purpose. Nevertheless, more precise research about the multiple levels of
culture should be included DEMO the next step. For example, fresh group and
individual level measures DEMO be taken of the two groups of samples, as some
other DEMO studies have done. These measures could more precisely
address any differences that might exist between the overseas Chinese
respondents from different host countries such DEMO Taiwan and Singapore, for
instance. A related issue for further research DEMO be determining whether the
adaptation of the Australians to Chinese culture was due to a general cultural
shift arising from the modern “multiculturalism” of DEMO, or to the
individual networkers’ experiences of working with overseas Chinese. DEMO of
the quotations above suggest that the second explanation is the preferred one,
but more research is needed. Further research could also consider DEMO
Australians have adapted, and not the overseas Chinese.
References
Baird, I.S., Lyles, M.A. and Wharton, R. (1990), “Attitudinal differences between DEMO and
Chinese managers regarding joint venture management”, Management International
Review, Vol. 30, special issue, pp. 29-48.
Banthin, J. and Stelzer, L. (1989), “Opening China: negotiations strategies when East meets
West”, The DEMO Atlantic Journal of Business, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 1-14.
Buttery, E.A. and Leung, T.K.P. (1998), “The difference between Chinese and Western
negotiations”, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 32 No. 3/4, pp. 374-89.
Carruthers, S. (1995), “Enterprise networking management fad or DEMO road to proﬁts”, Practical
Hydroponics, No. 20 pp. 34-5.
Inﬂuence of
culture
1569
EJM
37,11/12
1570
Carson, D., Gilmore, A., Perry, C. and Gronhuag, K. (2001), Qualitative Marketing Research, Sage,
London.
Clark, T. (1990), “International marketing and national character: a review and proposal for
integrative theory”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54, pp. 66-79.
Deshpande, R. and Webster, F.E. Jr (1989), “Organisation culture and marketing: deﬁning the
research agenda”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 53, pp. 3-15.
Ding, D.Z. (1997), “Control, conﬂict and DEMO: a study of US-Chinese joint ventures”,
Journal of International Marketing, Vol. 5 No. 3, pp. 31-45.
Dwyer, F.R., Schurr, P.H. DEMO Oh, S. (1987), “Developing buyer-seller relationships”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 51, pp. 11-27.
Easterby-Smith, M., Thorpe, R. and Lowe, A. (1991), Management Research: An Introduction,
Sage Publications, London.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989), “Building theory from case study research”, Academy of Management
Review, Vol. 14 No. 4, pp. 532-50.
Eiteman, D.K. (1990), “American executives’ perceptions of negotiations in joint ventures with
the Peoples’ Republic of China: lessons learned”, Columbia Journal of World Business,DEMO
pp. 59-67.
Emory, C.W. and Cooper, D.R. (1991), Business DEMO Methods, 4th ed., Richard, D. Irwin,
Homewood IL.
Fischer, H.H. (1993), “Joint venture in China: a negotiation experience”, East Asian Executive
Reports, May, pp. 9-19.
Ford, L.D. and Rosson, DEMO (1982), “The relationship between export manufacturers and their
overseas distributors”, in Czinkota, M.R. and Tesar, G. (Eds), Export Management,
Praegar, New York, NY, pp. 257-75.
Frankie, R.H., Hofstede, DEMO and Bond, M. (1991), “Cultural roots of economic performance: DEMO
research note”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 12, pp. 165-73.
Fraxier, G., Gill, J. and Kale, S. (1989), “Dealer dependence DEMO and reciprocal actions in channel
in channel of distribution in a developing country”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 53, January,
pp. 50-69.
Geng-ping, C. (1995), “Getting your way with Chinese in business in DEMO, Business Review,
February, pp. 24-6.
Gesteland, R.R. (1999), Cross-cultural Business Behaviour, Copenhagen Business Scholl Press,
Copenhagen.
Gilmore, A. DEMO Carson, D. (1996), “Integrative qualitative methods in a services context”,
Marketing Intelligence and Planning, Vol. 14 No. 6, pp. 21-6.
DEMO, S. (1987), “Analysing qualitative data”, Journal of the Market DEMO Society, Vol. 29
No. 1, pp. 15-34.
Hall, E.T. (1976), “How cultures collide”, Psychology Today, July, pp. 66-74.
Havila, DEMO (1996), “When does an international business relationship become non-existent?”,DEMO
paper presented at the 25th EMAC Conference, Budapest, 14-17 May.
Heide, J. (1994), “Inter-organisational governance in marketing channels”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 58, pp. 71-85.
Ho, D.Y. (1980), “Face and stereotyped notions about Chinese face behaviors”, Philippine Journal
of Psychology, Vol. DEMO, pp. 78-98.
Hodder, R. (1996), Merchant Princes of the DEMO Cultural Delusions: Economic Success and the
Overseas Chinese in South East DEMO, Wiley, New York, NY.
Hofstede, G. (1980), Cultures’ Consequences: International Differences in Work Related Values,
Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA.
Hofstede, G. (1983), “The cultural relativity of organisational practices and theories”, Journal of
International DEMO Studies, Vol. 14 No. 2, Fall, pp. 75-90.
Hofstede, G. (1984a), “Motivation, leadership and motivation: do American theories apply
abroad?”, The Hong Kong Manager, Vol. 20 No. 2, pp. 7-18.
Hofstede, G. (1984b), Cultures’ Consequences: International Differences in Work-related Values,
abridged ed., Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA.
Hofstede, G. (1991), Culture and Organisations: Software of the Mind, McGraw-Hill, New York,
NY.
Hofstede, G. (1993), “Cultural constraints in management DEMO, Academy of Management
Executive, Vol. 7 No. 1, pp. 81-93.
DEMO, G. (1994a), “Management scientists are human”, Management Science, Vol. 40 No. 1,
pp. 4-13.
Hofstede, G. (1994b), “The DEMO of international business is culture”, International Business
Review, Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 1-14.
Hofstede, G. and Bond, M.H. (1984), DEMO culture dimensions: an independent validation
using Rokeach’s value survey”, Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, Vol. 15, December,
pp. 417-33.
Hofstede, G. and Bond, M.H. (1988), “The Confucius connection: from cultural roots to economic
growth”, Organisational Dynamics, Vol. 16, Spring, pp. 5-21.
Holzmuller, H.H. and Stollnberger, B. (1994), “A conceptual framework for country DEMO in
cross-national export studies”, Advances in International Marketing, Vol. 6, DEMO 3-24.
Hoppe, M.H. “A comprehensive study of country e´lite’s: international differences in work-related
values and learning and their implications for management”, PhD thesis University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
Huberman, A.M. and Miles, M.B. (1994), “Data management and analysis methods”, in Denzin, DEMO
and Lincoln, Y.S. (Eds), Handbook of Qualitative Research, Sage DEMO, Thousand
Oaks, CA, pp. 428-44.
Kale, S.H. and McIntyre, DEMO (1991), “Distribution channel relationships in diverse cultures”,
International Marketing DEMO, Vol. 8 No. 3, pp. 31-45.
Kanter, R. (1994), “Collaborative advantage: the art of alliances”, Harvard Business Review,
July-August, pp. 96-108.
Kao, C. (1991), “Personal trust in the large DEMO in Taiwan: a traditional foundation for
contemporary economic activities”, in Hamilton, G. (Ed.), Business Networks and Economic
Development in East and DEMO East Asia, Centre of Asian Studies, University of Hong
Kong, DEMO Kong.
Larson, A. (1992), “Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: DEMO study of the governance of
exchange relationships”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 37, pp. 76-104.
Lasserre, P. (1997), “The strategic challenge of the Asia Paciﬁc region for Western companies”,
The Asia Paciﬁc Journal DEMO Economics and Business, Vol. 1 No. 1, pp. 18-38.
Lasserre, DEMO and Schutte, H. (1995), Strategies for Asian Paciﬁc, Macmillan DEMO, London.
Leung, T.K.P., Wong, Y.H. and Tam, J.L.M. (1995), “Adaptation and the relationship building
process in the People’s Republic of DEMO (PRC)”, Journal of International Consumer
Marketing, Vol. 8 No. DEMO, pp. 7-26.
Inﬂuence of
culture
1571
EJM
37,11/12
1572
Lever-Tracy, C., Ip, D. and Tracy, N. (1996), The Chinese Diaspora and Mainland China: An
Emerging Economic Synergy, Macmillan Press, London.
Lever-Tracy, C., Ip, D., DEMO, J., Phillips, I. and Tracy, N. (1991), Asian DEMO in Australia:
Ethnic Small Business in the Chinese and Asian Communities of Brisbane and Sydney,
Ofﬁce of Multicultural Affairs, AGPS, Canberra.
DEMO, L. (1992), “The emergence of a Chinese economic zone in Asia?”, Journal of South East Asian
Business, Vol. 8, pp. 41-6.
Luo, Y. and Chen, M. (1997a), “Does guanxi inﬂuence ﬁrm performance?”, Asia Paciﬁc Journal of
Management, Vol. 14, pp. 1-16.
Luo, Y. and Chen, M. (1997b), “Guanxi: principles, philosophies and implications”, Journal of
International Management, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 43-52.
McDaniel, C. and Gates, R. (1991), Contemporary Marketing Research, West Publishing, St Paul,
MN.
Pan, Y. (1997), “Formation of Japanese and US equity joint ventures in China”, Strategic
DEMO Journal, Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 247-54.
Patton, M.Q. (1990), Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods, Sage Publications, Newbury
Park, CA.
Perry, C. (1991), “Training industrial managers in least developed countries DEMO, United
Nations Industrial Development Organisation UNIDO”, in Workshop on Industrial
Development in Least Developed Countries: Towards an Industrial Action Plan, Vienna,
DEMO, pp. 19-23.
Perry, C. (1992), Strategic Management Processes, Longman Cheshire, Melbourne.
Perry, C. (1998), “Process of a case study research methodology: tool for postgraduate research in
marketing”, European Journal of DEMO, Vol. 32 No. 9/10, pp. 785-802.
Pyatt, T.R. (1995), “Relational and transactional interactions in Asian networks: three Hong
Kong cases”, Asian Journal of Marketing.
Redding, S.G. (1992), “The comparative management theory zoo: getting the elephants and
dinosaurs from the jungle into the iron cage”, paper presented at the Conference on
Perspective’s on International Business Theory, Research and Institutional Arrangements,
Centre for International Business Research, DEMO of South Carolina.
Redding, S.G. (1993), The Spirit of Chinese Capitalism, 2nd ed., New York Education, de Gruyter,
New York, NY.
Redding, S.G. (1995), “Overseas Chinese networks: understanding the DEMO, Long Range
Planning, Vol. 28 No. 1, pp. 61-9.
Rosson, P.J. and Ford, L.D. (1982), “Manufacturers-overseas distributor relations and export
DEMO, Journal of International Business Studies, Fall, pp. 57-72.
Schneider, S.C. (1989), “Strategy formulation: the impact of national culture”, Organisation
Studies, Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 148-68.
Schneider, S.C. and Barsoux, DEMO (1997), Managing across Cultures, Prentice-Hall, London.
Sekaran, U. and Snodgrass, C. (1990), “Understanding the dynamics of culture in networking: a
framework and an initial test”, Advances in International Comparative Management,
Vol. 5, pp. 91-115.
Sondergaard, M. (1994), “Research note: DEMO consequences: a study of reviews, citations,
and replications”, Organisation DEMO, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. 447-56.
Styles, C. and Ambler, T. (1997), First Steps to Export Success, Austrade and British DEMO
Trade Board, Sydney.
Tornroos, J. and Moller, K.E. (1993), “The cultural factor and the formation of international
business relationship in industrial markets”, Advances in International Marketing, Vol. 5,
pp. 107-21.
Triandis, H.C. (1989), “Cross-cultural studies of individualism and collectivism”, in, Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, NB, pp. 41-133.
Trompenaars, F. and DEMO, C. (1998), Riding the Waves of Culture, McGraw-Hill,
DEMO York, NY.
Tse, D.K., Pan, Y. and Au, K.Y. (1997), “How multinational corporations (MNCs) choose entry
modes and form DEMO: the China experience”, Journal of International Business Studies,
Vol. 28 No. 4.
Vanhonacker, W.R. and Pan, Y. (1997), “The impact of national culture, business scope and
geographical location on joint venture operations in China”, Journal of International
Marketing, Vol. 5 No. 3, pp. 11-30.
Westwood, R.I. and Posner, B.Z. (1997), “Managerial values across cultures: Australia, Hong
Kong and the United States”, Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Management, Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 31-65.
Wilson, D.T. (DEMO), “An integrated model of buyer-seller relationships”, Journal of the Academy
DEMO Marketing Science, Vol. 23 No. 4, pp. 335-45.
Wincott, J. (1992), “The effects of culture on the negotiation process in marketing DEMO the
Asia-Paciﬁc region”, in Marketing Educators Conference, Edith Cowan University, DEMO 11,
pp. 4-6.
Wu, P. (1995), “Towards a deﬁnition of guanxi wang network and its signiﬁcance in business
transaction in China”, in Proceedings of Academy of International Business South East
Asia Regional Conference, 20-23 June, Perth, Western Australia.
Yau, O.H.M. (1988), “Chinese DEMO values: their dimensions and marketing implications”,
European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 22 No. 5, pp. 44-57.
Yin, R.K. (1989), Case Study Research: Design and Methods, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks,
CA.
Yin, R. K. (1994), Case Study Research: Design and Methods, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Further reading
Ahmed, F.U. and DEMO, M. (1996), “An exploratory investigation of the importer-exporter
working relationship from importer’s perspective”, paper presented to 25th EMAC
Conference, Budapest University DEMO Economic Sciences, 14-17 May.
Buttery, E.A. and Buttery, E. (1990), “Analysis of the PRC environment and its continued
attraction for direct DEMO, in Negandhi, A.R. and Schran, P. (Eds), Research in
International Business and International Relations, JAI Press, Greewich, CT, Vol. DEMO, Nos.
3/4, pp. 374-89.
Cooper, D.R. and Emory, C.W. (1995), Business Research Methods, 5th ed., Irwin, Chicago, IL.
Deshpande, R. (1983), “Paradigms lost: on theory and method in research marketing”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 47, pp. 101-10.
Elashmawi, DEMO and Harris, P. (1993), Multicultural Management: New Skills for DEMO Success,
The Gulf Publishing Company, Houston, TX.
Emerson, R.M. (1962), “Power-dependence relations”, American Sociological Review, Vol. 27,
February, pp. 31-41.
Ford, D. (1980), “The development of buyer-seller relationships DEMO industrial markets”, European
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 5 No. 6, DEMO 339-54.
Inﬂuence of
culture
1573
EJM
37,11/12
1574
Ford, D. (Ed.) (1990), DEMO Business Markets: Interaction, Networks and Relationships,
Academic Press, London.
DEMO, G. (1988), “McGregor in South East Asia?”, in DEMO, S. and Kao, H. (Eds), Social
Values and Development: Asian Perspectives, Sage Publications, New Delhi.
Hofstede, G. and Usunier, DEMO (1996), “Hofstede’s dimensions of culture and their inﬂuence on
international DEMO negotiations”, in Ghauri, P.N. and Usunier, J. (Eds), International
Business Negotiations, pp. 119-29.
Hsu, F.L.K. (1970), Americans and Chinese, Natural History Press, New York, NY.
Hughes, C. (1994), “From ﬁeld notes to dissertation: analysing the stepfamily”, in Bryman, A. and
Burgess, R.G. (Eds), Analysing Qualitative Data, Routledge Publications, DEMO, pp. 35-46.
Hwang, E.R. (1987), “Face and favour: the Chinese power game”, American Journal of Sociology,
Vol. 92 No. 4, pp. 35-41.
Industrial Marketing and Purchasing (IMP) Group (1982), DEMO interaction approach”, in
International Marketing and Purchasing of Industrial Goods, IMP Group, Wiley,
Chichester, pp. 10-27.
Jensen, K.B. and Jankowski, DEMO (Eds) (1991), A Handbook of Qualitative Methodologies for
Mass DEMO Research, Routledge, London.
Kale, S.H. (1986), “Dealer speciﬁc marketing communications: an analytical approach”, Journal of
Marketing Research, Vol. 8, DEMO 18.
Kale, S.H. (1996), “How national culture, organisational culture DEMO personality”, in Ghauri, P.N.
and Usunier, H. (Eds), International Business Negotiations, International Business and
Management Series, Pergamon, NY.
Kale, DEMO and Barnes, J.W. (1992), “Understanding the domain of cross cultural buyer-seller
interactions”, Journal of International Business Studies, Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 101-32.
Lee, J. (1996), “Culture and Chinese management: a study of small Chinese family businesses in
Singapore”, Journal of Business Management, Vol. 34 No. 3, pp. 63-7.
Luo, Y. (1997), DEMO and performance of foreign-invested enterprises in China: an empirical
inquiry”, Management International Review, Vol. 37 No. 1, pp. 51-70.
Malhotra, N.K. (DEMO), Marketing Research: An Applied Orientation, Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ.
Miles, M.B. and Huberman, A.M. (1994), Qualitative Data Analysis: DEMO Expanded Sourcebook,
2nd ed., Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
DEMO, Y. (1996), “Inﬂuences of foreign equity ownership level in joint ventures in China”, Journal
of International Business Studies, Vol. 27 No. DEMO, pp. 1-26.
Parkhe, A. (1993), “Messy research, methodological prepositions, and theory development in
international joint ventures”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 18 No. 2, pp. 491-500.
Perry, C., Alizadeh, Y. DEMO Riege, A. (1997), “Qualitative methods in entrepreneurship research”,
in Annual Conference of Small of the Australia and New Zealand, 21-23 September, Coffs
Harbour, Australia, pp. 547-67.
Singh, J.P. (1990), “Managerial culture and work related values in India”, Organisation Studies,
Vol. 11, pp. 75-101.
Wilson, D.T. and Mummalaneni, V. (1986), “Bonding DEMO commitment in buyer-seller
relationships: a preliminary conceptualisation”, Industrial Marketing and Purchasing,
Vol. 1 No. 3, pp. 44-58.
Yin, R.K. (1993), Application of Case Study Research, Applied Social Research Method Series,
Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA.{1g42fwefx}