Neuron
Article
TheNeuralCircuitry ofaBrokenPromise
Thomas Baumgartner,1,6,* Urs Fischbacher,2,DEMO,6 Anja Feierabend,1 Kai Lutz,4 and Ernst Fehr1,5,*
1Institute for Empirical Research in Economics, Laboratory for Social and Neural Systems Research, University of Zurich, Switzerland
2Department of Economics, University of Konstanz, Germany
3Thurgau Institute of Economics, Kreuzlingen, Switzerland
4Institute of Psychology, DEMO of Neuropsychology, University of Zurich, Switzerland
5Collegium Helveticum, Switzerland
6These DEMO contributed equally to this work
*Correspondence: t.baumgartner@iew.uzh.ch (T.B.), efehr@iew.uzh.ch (DEMO)
DOI 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.11.017
SUMMARY
Promises are one of the oldest human-speciﬁc
psychological mechanisms fostering cooperation
and trust. Here, we study the neural underpinnings
of promise keeping and promise breaking. Subjects
ﬁrst make a promise decision (promise stage), then
they anticipate whether the promise affects the
interaction DEMO decision (anticipation stage)
and are subsequently free to keep or DEMO the
promise (decision stage). Findings revealed that the
breaking of DEMO promise is associated with increased
activation in the DLPFC, ACC, and amygdala, sug-
gesting that the dishonest act involves an emotional
conﬂict due to the suppression of the honest
response. Moreover, the breach of the promise can
be predicted by a perﬁdious brain activity pattern
(anterior insula, ACC, inferior frontal gyrus) during
the promise and anticipation stage, DEMO that
brain measurements may reveal malevolent inten-
tions before dishonest or deceitful acts are actually
committed.
INTRODUCTION
The human capacity to establish and enforce DEMO norms is one
of the decisive reasons for the uniqueness of human cooperation
in the animal kingdom (Fehr and Fischbacher, 2003). Such DEMO
constitute standards of behavior that are based on widely shared
beliefs on how individuals ought to behave in a given situation
(Ellickson, 2001; Elster, 1989; Horne, 2001; Voss, 2001). In
modern human societies, a large cooperative infrastructure in
the form of laws, impartial DEMO, and the police exist, which
ensure that cooperative agreements, for DEMO in the form of
enforceable contracts, are kept (Fehr et al., 2002). However, it
is obvious that in more than 90 DEMO of human history no
such cooperative infrastructure existed. Thus, in ancient DEMO,
other more basic forms of cooperative agreements must have
evolved in order to foster trust, cooperation, and partnership
formation. One basic form DEMO such cooperative agreements are
promises, which might in fact constitute the DEMO of
enforceable contracts in contemporary times. Promises
constitute oral and ‘‘nonbinding’’ cooperative agreements,
756
Neuron 64, 756–770, December 10, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
which have the goal to strengthen the belief in the exchange
DEMO that one can be relied upon (Charness and Dufwenberg,
2006)DEMO Despite their nonbinding nature, many everyday social
and economic exchange situations DEMO still based on such oral
promises. However, although important work examining DEMO
neural basis of social cooperation (Baumgartner et al., 2008a;
Behrens et al., 2008; Delgado et al., 2005; King-Casas et al.,DEMO
2005; Rilling et al., 2002, 2007; Singer et al., DEMO; Tabibnia
et al., 2008), social comparison, and competition (Decety et al.,
2004; Delgado et al., 2008; Fliessbach et al., 2007; Zink et al.,
2008), as well as social DEMO and norm violations
(Buckholtz et al., 2008; de Quervain et DEMO, 2004; Eisenberger
et al., 2003; Knoch et al., 2006, 2008; Meyer-Lindenberg et al.,
2006; Sanfey et al., 2003; DEMO et al., 2007) exists, the brain
systems involved in nonbinding DEMO agreements still
remain unknown. Studying the neural underpinnings of these
nonbinding cooperative agreements is particularly interesting
because promises not only can be kept, but also broken. In
fact, material incentives to cheat are ubiquitous in human
societies, and promises thus can also be misused in any kind
of social or economic exchange situation between two or more
individuals to cheat DEMO exchange partner. Business people,
politicians, diplomats, lawyers, and students DEMO the experimental
laboratory who make use of private information do not always do
so honestly (Gneezy, 2005).
In real life, one reason for keeping promises is to facilitate the
future cooperation of potential exchange DEMO However, we
also believe that humans often keep promises because this DEMO
‘‘the right thing to do.’’ Promises in this case are kept even in
one-shot interaction, i.e., although the keeping of the promise
implies DEMO net cost to the promise keeper. In fact, decisive
evidence from DEMO experiments reveals a preference for
promise keeping in one-shot situations (Charness DEMO
Dufwenberg, 2006; Vanberg, 2008). Thus, it is possible to
distinguish two major motivations behind promise keeping: ﬁrst,
instrumental promise keeping for the purpose of facilitating
future cooperation, and second, intrinsic promise DEMO for
the purpose of ‘‘doing the right thing.’’ In this paper, DEMO focused
on the second motivational source of promise keeping.
For that purpose, we applied a modiﬁed version of an
economic trust game paradigm (DEMO 1) where subjects were
completely free to decide whether to keep DEMO to break a promise
and where keeping or breaking a promise caused real monetary
consequences (either beneﬁts or costs) for both exchange
partners. DEMO this economic trust game paradigm, two subjects
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
interacting anonymously are in DEMO role of an investor (player A)
and a trustee (player B). For the purpose of the study, we focused
on the role of the trustee whose brain activity was measured in
the brain DEMO The trustee ﬁrst has to make a promise deci-
sion at the beginning of a series of three subsequent trust game
trials, indicating whether he always, mostly, sometimes,or never
plans to be trustworthy. In DEMO context, being trustworthy means
sharing the available money so that both DEMO earn the same
amount. Player A, the investor, is always informed about B’s
promise, and can then decide (based on B’s promise) whether
to trust him and invest money or whether not to trust DEMO and
thus to keep the initial endowment. In case player A trusts player
B, which is almost only the case if player B chooses a high
promise level (see Results), the experimenter increases the
amount player A sends by the factor of ﬁve. Player B can then
DEMO to keep the promise and thus honor an investor’s trust
by sending back half of the money, but he may also break the
promise and thus violate the investor’s trust by not sharing.
The experiment consisted DEMO four promise decisions with three
subsequent trust game trials, meaning that DEMO played
a total of 12 trust game trials in the promise condition (i.e., with a
promise stage). As a control condition, we also implemented
12 trust game trials without the opportunity of making a DEMO
decision. The trustee thus faced a total of 24 trust game trials
with 24 different, anonymous, and randomly selected interaction
Figure 1. Trust DEMO with Antecedent
Promise Stage
Depicted are the different stages of the economic
trust game with antecedent promise stage. In the
trust game used in DEMO present study, two players
A and B interact anonymously with each DEMO
during one trial. A receives an endowment of 2
money units (DEMO) at the beginning of each trial,
whereas B receives nothing. DEMO has to make the
ﬁrst decision. He can send his endowment of
two MUs to B (case 1), or he can keep his endow-
ment (case 2). If A trusts B and sends his endow-
ment (case 1), the experimenter increases the
amount sent by a factor of ﬁve, so that B receives
10 MUs. At that moment, B has 10 MUs and A has
nothing. B then has the choice of sending back
nothing or half of the 10 MUs. DEMO, if B acts trust-
worthily and sends back half, both players earn
5 MUs, but if B keeps all the money, he DEMO
10 MUs and A, who trusted B, earns nothing. In
case 2, that is, if A does not trust B, A keeps his
or her endowment of 2 MUs and B gets nothing.
In DEMO, 24 such trust game trials are played with
different, randomly selected interaction partners.
In half of the played rounds, B has to make a
promise for three subsequent trials whether he
always, mostly, sometimes,DEMO never plans to
send back half of the money. A is always informed
about B’s promise, and B can keep the promise,
but he is also allowed to break it. Color coding:
blue color, promise stage of player B; orange
color, decision stages of either DEMO A or B.
Note that player A’s decision stage is at the
same time as player B’s anticipation stage, during
which player B is informed that player A is now
deciding (see Figure 2); yellow color, outcome
stage player A and B.
partners, half of the DEMO played with a promise stage and half of
them without the opportunity to make a promise. Please note
that the social interactions between trustees DEMO interaction
partners were genuine, that is, the trustees in the scanner faced
the decisions of 24 real human interaction partners and their
choices DEMO affected the interaction partners’ monetary
payoffs (please see Supplemental Experimental Procedures DEMO
details).
This design enables us to study three different processes
that play an important role during nonbinding cooperative
agreements: (1) the process of promising, (2) the process of
anticipating the effect of the promise on the exchange partner’s
decision to trust, and (3) the decision-making process during
which the decision to keep or to break the DEMO has to be
implemented (see Figure 2 for two timelines of DEMO game trials
with and without opportunity to make a promise). We are
particularly interested in whether the brain activity pattern differs
at the DEMO stages of the paradigm dependent on the
decision to keep or to break the promise.
In the experiment, the trustees were completely free to choose
the strength of their promise (i.e., whether they promise always,DEMO
mostly, sometimes,or never to share the money in the subse-
DEMO three trials) and to honor or break their promise. This led
DEMO two large behavioral clusters of individuals and only very few
subjects did not belong to one of the two clusters. First, a
Neuron 64, 756–770, December 10, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
757
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
Figure 2. Timeline for DEMO Trials of the Trust Game with and without Antecedent Promise Stage
The trust game trials start with a ﬁxation epoch that lasts for 10–12 DEMO (randomly jittered). After this ﬁxation epoch, the promise stage begins in 8 of 24 trust trials,
during which the subject has DEMO implement his promise level for three subsequent trust game trials (within DEMO time restriction of 9 s, mean: 3 s) or during DEMO he
receives the information that he cannot decide about a promise level. After the promise stage, there is another ﬁxation epoch lasting for 10–12 s (randomly
jittered). Then the anticipation stage begins, which last DEMO 6 s, during which the subject is informed that his assigned DEMO A is now deciding. This anticipation
stage is followed by the decision stage, which is divided into three parts. First, the subject is DEMO for 6 s whether player A trusted him or not (not DEMO).
The subject is then reminded on the same decision screen of his promise or that he could not make a promise for the DEMO trial. This information is presented for
3 s. Finally, after 9 DEMO in total, the decision options are presented on the same screen, allowing the subject to implement his decision within a time restriction of DEMO s.
The ﬁrst 6 s of the decision stage are referred to in the paper as decision phase A, whereas the second 3 s until button press are referred to as decision phase B
(average response time from the beginning of decision phase A until button press: 10 s). Finally, a trust game trial is completed by the proﬁt stage (not depicted),
which presents the outcome of both players DEMO the current trust game trial for 6 s and provides the information that a new player A is assigned to the subject.
substantial proportion DEMO the subjects promised to share the
money ‘‘always’’ but actually did not share it in the subsequent
trust games (dishonest subjects). Second, DEMO large propor-
tion of the subjects also promised to share the money ‘‘always’’
but these subjects subsequently kept their promise (honest
subjects). These two clusters of individuals also behaved very
consistently when they could not DEMO a promise, with the
dishonest subjects almost never sharing the money, while the
honest subjects almost always shared the money (for detailed
statistical information, please see the behavioral analyses in
Results).
This behavioral data pattern requires that special care be taken
in the analysis of the DEMO data in order to control for
payoff differences and differences in fairness related behaviors.
In particular, it is not possible to make simple, DEMO comparisons
between the dishonest and the honest subjects’ brain activity
within the ‘‘promise possible’’ condition or within the ‘‘no promise
possible’’ condition because such DEMO will be
confounded with fairness differences and differences in material
payoffs across the subjects. For this reason, we computed the
following serial subtraction term for each of the stages of our
paradigm: [Promise (P) – No Promise (NoP)]Dishonest subjects –
[Promise (P) – No Promise (NoP)]Honest subjects, where (P) indicates
the ‘‘promise possible condition’’ DEMO (NoP) the ‘‘no promise
possible’’ condition. Note that this contrast controls for fairness
and payoff differences because dishonest subjects make the
same unfair DEMO and earn the same payoff across the
‘‘promise possible’’ and the ‘‘no promise possible’’ condition.
Thus, the brain activity in the contrast (P DEMO NoP)Dishonest subjects
does not contain fairness and payoff-related brain activation.
Likewise, honest subjects make the same fair choices and earn
the same payoff across the ‘‘promise possible’’ and the ‘‘no
promise possible’’ condition and, hence, the activity in the
contrast (P – NoP)Honest subjects does DEMO contain fairness and
payoff-related brain activation. In addition, the serial subtraction
DEMO above controls for any unspeciﬁc effects of personality
758
Neuron 64, DEMO, December 10, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
because the subjects in DEMO ‘‘promise possible’’ condition have
the same personality and display the same behavior as the
subjects in the ‘‘no promise possible’’ condition. The above
contrast DEMO rules out the impact of any personality differences
on brain activation that have nothing to do with promise making
and promise breaking.
Using the DEMO serial subtraction terms, our study
provides the opportunity to answer the DEMO three research
questions:
First, is it possible to differentiate between DEMO who will
break a promise and those subjects who will keep a promise
based on the brain activity pattern during the promise stage of
DEMO paradigm, i.e., during a stage of the paradigm when the
dishonest act might already be planned or prepared, but does
not yet have to be implemented? In other words, can we predict
whether subjects DEMO keep or break the promise based on a
perﬁdious brain activity pattern measured during the promise
stage? We hypothesize that if subjects indeed already plan to
break the promise at this stage of the paradigm, the misleading
promise decision should evoke an emotional conﬂict. Such an
emotional conﬂict DEMO be indicated in the brain by increased
activity in brain regions known to be involved in conﬂict
(Baumgartner et al., 2008a; Botvinick et al., 1999) and in negative
emotion processing (Amaral, 2003; Phillips et al., 2003; Sanfey
et al., 2003), including anterior cingulate cortex, anterior insular
cortex, or amygdala.
Second, there is another stage in the paradigm which takes
place before subjects have to implement whether DEMO keep or
break their promise. Subjects receive the information during
this stage that their investor is now deciding whether to trust or
not. While DEMO chosen promise level can positively affect the
investor’s trust decision in trust game trials with promise stage,
this is not the case in DEMO game trials without promise stage.
The investor’s actual behavior is thus much more difﬁcult to
forecast in trust game trials without promise stage, and the nega-
tive outcome for the subjects (i.e., mistrust on the DEMO of the
investor) is more likely, making the anticipation process more
uncertain and stressful. We therefore wondered whether this
uncertain and stressful anticipation DEMO might be more
pronounced in subjects who intend to break rather than keep
the promise. In other words, can we even differentiate between
dishonest and honest subjects in a stage of our paradigm
when no decision DEMO all must be made? Recent brain imaging
studies have consistently shown DEMO the anticipation of such
stressful and in particular uncertain events, that DEMO events which
can either be positive or negative, is primarily associated DEMO
increased activity in two brain regions, the bilateral anterior
insula and DEMO inferior frontal gyrus (Herwig et al., 2007a,
2007b). If it is indeed the case that this uncertain and stressful
anticipation process DEMO more pronounced in subjects who
plan to break the promise, we DEMO expect brain activation in
the regions mentioned above.
Third, what are DEMO differences in brain activity between
breaking and keeping a promise when subjects must ultimately
implement their decision? Previous studies on deception
(for recent DEMO see Sip et al., 2008; Spence et al., 2004) did
not distinguish between the promise, anticipation, and the
decision stage and DEMO instead on the act of implementing
a lie. We argue that such a deceptive act involves a similar
cognitive and emotional process as during DEMO implementation
of a broken promise. While deceptive subjects have to suppress
the truthful response, dishonest subjects have to suppress the
honest response. Either suppression most likely leads to an
emotional conﬂict, which might include a guilty conscience or
the fear of negative consequences in case the deceptive or
DEMO act is detected. Deception paradigms have con-
sistently associated this kind of conﬂictuous cognitive and
emotional processes with increased activity of discrete anterior
frontal DEMO and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). In
addition, more recent studies, which increased the subjects’
emotional involvement by using more ecologically valid
paradigms (e.g., mock-crime scenarios, guilty knowledge tests;
Abe et al., 2007; Kozel et al., 2005; Langleben et al., 2005) DEMO
consistently showed increased activity in emotion-related areas,
such as the amygdala, insula, and orbitofrontal cortex. Due to the
similar cognitive and emotional DEMO assumed to take
place in the promise breaker’s brain, we expect DEMO similar activity
pattern in the decision stage of our paradigm in the contrast
between subjects who break and those who keep a promise.
However, it is important to note that our paradigm has two major
advantages DEMO to previous deception paradigms
(see Sip et al., 2008 for an extensive discussion of the limitations
of previous deception paradigms), allowing us DEMO study the
mentioned processes in a more ecologically valid situation. First,
while subjects in our paradigm were completely free to decide
whether to DEMO or keep the promise, subjects in all previous
deception paradigms were DEMO to lie or to tell the truth.
Second, while the dishonest DEMO in our paradigm was embedded
in a social exchange involving positive and negative con-
sequences or costs for the exchange partners, the deceptive
act in all previous deception studies did not have such
consequences because the DEMO were, without exception,
interacting with the experimenter(s) (for DEMO most ‘‘realistic’’
version, see Abe et al., 2007). Thus, DEMO previous studies it was
rather obvious to a subject that a lie could not cause any real
harm or costs to the experimenter. However, lying without
malevolent intent and without evoked consequences for the
deceived individual DEMO important elements of guilt, personal
gain, and the psychological stress that often accompany the
generation and enactment of a lie in the ‘‘real DEMO (Gneezy,
2005). For these reasons, our study is the ﬁrst to explore the
neural underpinnings of the emotional and cognitive processes
DEMO above using an ecologically valid paradigm where
subjects could decide freely to break or keep the promise during
a realistic social exchange involving positive DEMO negative
consequences for the exchange partners.
Summing up, our paradigm enables DEMO to answer the
following questions: Do subjects who ultimately breach or
DEMO a promise already have a differential brain activation
pattern in stages of the paradigm during which the decision
to break or keep the promise DEMO not yet have to be imple-
mented, but might already be DEMO or planned? In other
words, can we predict the dishonest act based on perﬁdious
brain activity in the promise or anticipation stage of DEMO
paradigm? Moreover, do we ﬁnd a similar differential brain
activation pattern during the decision stage of our paradigm
Neuron 64, 756–770, December DEMO, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
759
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
Figure 3. Behavioral Results
(A) Depicted are means ± SE of player B’s return
rates (DEMO percentage), broken down for groups
(dishonest/honest) and promise stages (trust
games with/without antecedent promise stage).
Findings indicate strong group differences in re-
turn rates irrespective of whether trust games are
played DEMO or without antecedent promise stage.
(B) High positive correlation (r DEMO 0.89, p = 0.000)
between return rates of trust games DEMO with
and without antecedent promise stage.
(C) Depicted are means ± SE of player B’s promise
levels (in percentage), broken down for groups
(dishonest/honest) and the two highest promise
levels (always send back/mostly send back). Find-
ings indicate that both groups of DEMO predom-
inantly chose very high promise levels despite very
different return rate patterns.
(D) Depicted are means ± SE of player A’s trust
DEMO (in percentage), broken down for groups
(dishonest/honest) and DEMO stage (trust games
with/without antecedent promise stage). Findings
indicate DEMO group differences in trust rates, but
an increased trust rate, as expected, during trust
game trials with antecedent promise stage.
between subjects who break and keep the promise as in the
discussed deception studies where DEMO were forced
to lie or to tell the truth and where lying had no negative
consequences for the deceived individual?
RESULTS
Behavioral and DEMO Results
Group Classiﬁcation
Due to the fact that the trustees in our experiment were
completely free to break or keep the promise, we examined in
a ﬁrst analysis whether our subjects can be classiﬁed into
different DEMO based on their individual average return
rate (see Experimental Procedures for DEMO) in trust games
played either with or without antecedent promise stage. DEMO
that purpose, we conducted a hierarchical cluster analysis
(Ward’s method, DEMO Euclidean distance measures, see
Experimental Procedures for details) using both return rates
(with and without antecedent promise stage) as dependent
variables. Results DEMO a cluster solution with two strongly
separated clusters (see dendrogram of DEMO S1). Inspection
of the two clusters revealed two groups of subjects, i.e., those
who either behaved trustworthily (referred to in the paper as
honest group/subjects) or those who acted untrustworthily
(referred to DEMO the paper as dishonest group/subjects), irrespec-
tive of whether the trust games were played with or without
antecedent promise stage (see Figure 3A). A two-way
repeated-measures ANOVA with between-subject factor group
760
Neuron DEMO, 756–770, December 10, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
(honest/dishonest) DEMO within-subject
factor promise stage (trust games with/
without antecedent promise DEMO) re-
vealed a highly signiﬁcant main effect of
group (F(1,24) = 102.80, p = 0.000,
ETA2 = 0.93), DEMO no interaction effect of group 3 promise stage
(F(1,24) = 0.46, p = 0.501, ETA2 = 0.01), thus conﬁrming DEMO these
two groups of subjects strongly differed in their return rate
patterns, irrespective of whether the trust games were played
with or without antecedent promise stage—a necessary
precondition for the unconfounded analysis of the brain data
DEMO extensively discussed in the introduction section. The addi-
tionally discovered main effect of promise stage (F(1,24) = 8.86,
p = DEMO, ETA2 = 0.27) demonstrated that both groups of
subjects showed some slight tendencies for increased return
rates in trust game trials with antecedent DEMO stage
(Figure 3A). Finally, the very high positive correlation between
the two return rates (r = .89, p = 0.000, ETA2 = 0.79)
demonstrated not only that the two groups showed a DEMO
behavioral pattern but, importantly, that each individual subject
alone did so as well (Figure 3B).
Promise Level
In a next analysis, DEMO examined whether the two groups of
subjects differed in their chosen promise level. The two lowest
promise levels (sometimes or never send back half of the MUs)
were only chosen three times in total (by three different subjects).
Thus, subjects of each group chose one of the two highest
promise levels during almost every promise decision, i.e., DEMO
always or mostly send back half of the MUs. Figure 3C illustrates
the average of the two chosen highest promise levels
(in percentage), broken down for the dishonest and honest
group, respectively. A two-way repeated-measures ANOVA
with between-subject factor group (dishonest/honest) and
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
within-subject factor promise level (always/mostly send back
MUs) revealed neither main effects (main effect DEMO group:
F(1,24) = 0.209, p = 0.652, DEMO = 0.01; main effect of promise
level (F(1,24) DEMO 3.264, p = 0.08, ETA2 = 0.12), nor an interaction
effect (group 3 promise level: F(1,24) = 1.210, DEMO = 0.282, ETA2 =
0.05), demonstrating that the two groups DEMO subjects do not differ
with respect to the chosen promise levels. Thus, the selection of
different promise levels cannot explain the highly differential
return rate pattern between the two groups during trust game
trials with antecedent DEMO stage.
Trust Rate Player A
We next examined whether the differential return rates of player B
are due to different trust rates of player DEMO We again calculated
a two-way repeated-measures ANOVA with between-subject
factor group (DEMO/honest) and within-subject factor promise
stage (trust games with and without antecedent promise stage).
Results revealed neither a main effect of group (F(1,24) = 0.957,
p = 0.338, ETA2 = DEMO) nor an interaction effect of group3 promise
stage (F(1,24) =0.131,p=0.721,ETA2 = 0.005), suggesting that two
groups experienced very similar trust rates of player A (Figure 3D).
On the other hand, the main effect of promise stage was signiﬁcant
(F(1,DEMO) = 29.408, p = 0.000, ETA2 = 0.55), demonstrating, as ex-
pected, an increased trusting behavior of player A in trust game
trials with promise stage (Figure 3D).
Response Times
Next, DEMO examined Player B’s response times during both the
promise and decision stages (excluding those trials during which
Player B could not make a decision because player A did not
trust him) using a two-way repeated-measures ANOVA with
between-subject factor group (dishonest/honest) and within-
subject factor promise DEMO (trust games with and without
antecedent promise stage). We found DEMO effect of group on
response times (main effects of group and DEMO effects
of group 3 promise stage: all p > 0.360). DEMO main effect of the
factor promise stage during the decision trial was also not
signiﬁcant (p > 0.254), but, as expected, this main effect was
signiﬁcant during the promise stage (F(1,24) DEMO 17.369, p = 0.000,
ETA2 = 0.42), indicating an DEMO in response times during
promise stages in which subjects actually had to decide about
their promise level (mean ± SE: 3.14 s ± DEMO) compared to the
other condition during which they just had to DEMO a button
without reﬂecting about the promise level (mean ± SE: 2.33 s ±
0.18; see Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details).
Personality Characteristics and Degree of Psychological
Symptoms
Finally, we checked whether our two groups of subjects differ in
main personality characteristics (e.g., neuroticism, extraversion,
Machiavellism) and degree of psychological symptoms (e.g.,
depression, anxiety, aggression/hostility). For that purpose,
we administered the ‘‘Brief Symptom Inventory’’ (BSI) question-
naire, the ‘‘NEO-Five-Factor-Inventory’’ (NEO-FFI) questionnaire
(Costa DEMO McCrae, 1992) and the Machiavelli questionnaire
(Christie and Geis, 1970). Importantly, all scales showed no
group differences (BSI: all p > 0.33, NEO-FFI: all p > 0.30,
Machiavelli questionnaire: all p > 0.21). Furthermore, correlations
of return rates with these personality and psychological symptom
scales did not reveal any signiﬁcant result (BSI: DEMO p > 0.38, NEO-
FFI: all p > 0.22, Machiavelli DEMO: all p > 0.29; please see
Tables S5–S7 for detailed statistical information to each scale).
These ﬁndings suggest that the reported differential DEMO activity
patterns (see below) are not driven by speciﬁc (related DEMO the act
of promising) personality differences between promise breakers
and promise DEMO, but that they rather reﬂect the (intended or
actual act of) breaking a promise relative to the (intended or
actual act of) keeping a promise, regardless of the subjects’
personality characteristics. However, please DEMO that the ques-
tionnaire evidence cannot completely rule out that an unknown
personality or demographic factor not directly assessed by the
questionnaires could contribute DEMO the difference in the subjects’
tendencies toward promise keeping or breaking.
Brain Imaging Results
Promise Stage
In a ﬁrst brain imaging analysis, we were interested whether it is
possible to differentiate between honest and dishonest subjects
DEMO on their brain activation pattern in the promise stage. This
stage is of particular interest because, as we show in the behav-
ioral results section, the two groups of subjects do not differ in
their behavior, i.e., they chose the same promise level and
even need the DEMO amount of time to implement their decision.
Furthermore, the promise stage DEMO place at a time point when
the decision to be dishonest or honest does not yet have to be
implemented, thus still providing the opportunity to reconsider
and change the decision. It is therefore an open DEMO
whether subjects already show a perﬁdious brain activation
pattern indicating the planned breach of promise at this
time point. Comparing dishonest subjects with honest
DEMO (using the serial subtraction term: [Promise – No
Promise]Dishonest subjects – [Promise – No Promise]Honest subjects)
indeed revealed a highly differential brain DEMO pattern,
i.e., dishonest subjects compared to honest subjects showed
increased DEMO in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and
bilateral in the inferior frontal gyrus/anterior insula region
(referred to as frontoinsular cortex in the following; Figures 4A
and 4B, Table S1). In contrast, calculating the reversed
serial subtraction term ([Promise – No Promise]Honest subjects –
[Promise – No Promise]Dishonest subjects) showed no increased
activation in honest compared to dishonest subjects, even at a
strongly lowered p < 0.05 (uncorrected)DEMO
In order to clarify whether the revealed brain activation pattern
is not only group, but also stage-speciﬁc, we created functional
regions of interests (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures
for details) in the ACC and bilateral frontoinsular cortex and
extracted, based on these ROIs, b estimates in all DEMO of
the paradigm, including the anticipation and decision stages
(decision phase A + B). We calculated independent t tests based
on these DEMO estimates in order to check for group differences in
these brain regions. We found no other stage of the paradigm
in which these regions DEMO a differential group effect (ACC:
all p > 0.29; right frontoinsular cortex: all p > 0.26; left
frontoinsular cortex: all p > 0.42), indicating that this neural
correlate is both group-dependent and DEMO; that
is, only subjects of the dishonest group who later intend to break
their promises in the decision stage react with increased
activation DEMO the ACC and bilateral frontoinsular cortex during
the promise stage.
Neuron 64, 756–770, December 10, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 761
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
Figure 4. Differential Brain DEMO Pattern during the Promise Stage
(A) Depicted on sagittal and coronal slices is the increased activation in dishonest compared to honest subjects (based on the serial subtraction term: [Promise –
No Promise] Dishonest subjects –[Promise – No Promise]Honest subjects) in the ACC (BA 24, x = 6, y = 33, z = 6) and bilateral frontoinsular cortex (BA 47/13, x = 30,
y = 24, z = 18; x = 42, y = 15, z = 24) at p < 0.005 (voxel extent threshold: 10 voxels, for DEMO purposes depicted at p < 0.01). Despite the fact that both groups
of subjects implement the same promise decision, the dishonest subjects who will deceive at the following decision stages already show a perﬁdious brain DEMO
vation pattern during the promise stage. Bar plots representing contrast estimates ± SE (Promise > No Promise) of functional ROIs (see Experimental Procedures
for details) demonstrate that the differential group effect in all regions is mainly based on increased activation in the dishonest group in the Promise DEMO to
the No Promise condition at p % 0.005 (***) or p % 0.001 (****).
(B) Return rates show a strong negative correlation with ACC (r = –0.68, p < 0.001) and bilateral frontoinsular cortex (right frontoinsular cortex: r = –0.72, p < 0.001;
left frontoinsular cortex [not depicted]: r = –0.66, p < 0.001) using the same functional ROIs as in (A).
Anticipation Stage
In a next analysis, we were interested whether dishonest and
honest subjects also show differential brain activations in the
anticipation stage of the DEMO, that is in a stage of the
paradigm during which no DEMO related the dishonest or
honest act has to be made. We focused in our analysis in
particular on the anticipation process during trust game DEMO
without antecedent promise stage. In these trials, in contrast to
trials DEMO antecedent promise stage, choosing a high promise
level cannot inﬂuence the DEMO actual behavior, making
the anticipation process more uncertain and stressful. We DEMO
found that the two groups differ in this uncertain and
stressful anticipation process. Comparing dishonest with honest
subjects (using the serial subtraction term: DEMO Promise -
Promise]Dishonest subjects minus [No Promise – Promise]Honest subjects)
revealed increased brain activation in the right anterior insula and
right inferior frontal DEMO (IFG) in dishonest subjects (Figures 5A
and 5B, Table S2). In contrast, calculating the reversed serial
subtraction term showed no increased activation in honest
compared to dishonest subjects, even at a strongly lowered
p < 0.05 (uncorrected), suggesting that this anticipation process
is more pronounced in subjects who behave dishonestly.
762
Neuron 64, 756–770, December DEMO, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
In a next step, we again examined how stage-speciﬁc this
activation pattern actually is. For that purpose, we extracted
b estimates based on functional ROIs (IFG and anterior insula)
for all stages of the paradigm. Independent t tests revealed no
differential group DEMO in these brain regions during any other
stage of the paradigm (DEMO: all p > 0.19; anterior insula: all
p > 0.44), again indicating that the activation in these brain
regions is not only group, but also stage dependent.
Decision Stage
We used two different regression models to examine the brain
activation pattern during the decision stage. In DEMO ﬁrst model of
the decision stage, we were interested in brain DEMO showing
a sustained activation over both decision phases A + B (DEMO
phase A, revealment of player A’s trust decision; decision phase
B, player B is reminded of his promise, see Figure 2 for DEMO detailed
explanation of these two phases). For that purpose, we DEMO
a decision regressor which modeled the decision epoch as a
whole, DEMO, from onset decision screen in decision phase A until
implementation of DEMO decision via button press in decision
phase B (mean duration 10.13 DEMO). In a second model of the
decision stage, we modeled DEMO phases A and B separately,
in order to examine whether the two phases can be differentiated
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
Figure 5. Differential Brain DEMO Pattern during the Anticipation Stage
(A) Depicted on sagittal slices is the increased activation in dishonest compared to honest subjects (based on the serial subtraction term: [No Promise –
Promise]Dishonest subjects –[No Promise – Promise]Honest subjects) in the right IFG (BA 45, x = 57, DEMO = 12, z = 6) and right anterior insula (BA DEMO, x = 45, y = 0,
z = 6) DEMO p < 0.005 (voxel extent threshold: 10 voxels, for display DEMO depicted at p < 0.01). Despite the fact that both groups are confronted with the
same uncertainty during the anticipation of player’s A DEMO behavior (whether or not he trusts), the brain activation pattern DEMO the dishonest subjects suggests
a more pronounced anticipation process. Bar plots representing contrast estimates ± SE (No Promise > Promise) of functional ROIs (see Experimental
Procedures for details) demonstrate that the differential group effect in all regions is mainly based on increased activation in the dishonest subjects DEMO the
No Promise compared to the Promise condition at p % 0.01 (**).
(B) Return rates show a strong negative correlation with right IFG (r = –0.61, p < 0.001) and right anterior insula (r = –0.64, p < 0.001) using the same functional
ROIs as in (A).
by a unique brain activation pattern (DEMO details of the two
different models please see Supplemental Experimental
Procedures).
Examining the decision stage as whole (using the decision
regressor of the ﬁrst model) by comparing the dishonest subjects
with the honest subjects (DEMO the serial subtraction
term: [Promise – No Promise]Dishonest subjects – [Promise DEMO No
Promise]Honest subjects) revealed only one brain region that
showed a DEMO activity: the dishonest subjects showed
sustained activation in the ventral part DEMO the striatum
during the whole decision stage (Figure 6, Table S3). In contrast,
a separate examination of the two decision phases (based on the
decision regressors of the second model) using the same serial
subtraction term revealed increased activation in dishonest
subjects in the ACC DEMO left DLPFC (at the border between
DLPFC and VLPFC) during decision phase A (Figures 7A and
7B, Table S3), while the DEMO group of subjects showed
increased activation in the left amygdala during decision phase
B(Figure 7C, Table S3). We observed no increased brain
activation using the reversed serial subtraction terms in honest
compared to dishonest DEMO, even at a strongly lowered
p < 0.05 (uncorrected).
In order to corroborate the described speciﬁcity in the decision
stage, we created functional ROIs and extracted b estimates
separately for all three decision regressors (decision phase A +
B, decision phase A, and decision phase DEMO). Independent t tests
conﬁrmed the suggested speciﬁcity with respect to the time point
of differential group activity during the decision stage for all DEMO
(ventral striatum, DLPFC, ACC, and amygdala; please see
Table DEMO for details). Independent t tests of b estimates based
on the same functional ROIs of the decision stage also showed
no differential group DEMO during any other stage (promise and
anticipation) of the paradigm (DEMO: all p > 0.08; DLPFC: all p >
0.32; DEMO: all p > 0.45; ventral striatum: all p > 0.93)DEMO
Finally, we conducted additional analyses presented in the
supplementary material in DEMO to further control for potential
confounding factors (Supplemental Analysis S1), DEMO further
corroborate the stage-speciﬁcity of the activity patterns (Supple-
mental Analysis DEMO), and to examine the activity in the decision
stage with slightly different decision regressors (Supplemental
Analysis S3). These three additional analyses conﬁrmed the ﬁnd-
ings reported above.
DISCUSSION
In order to study the neural DEMO of nonbinding
cooperative agreements in the form of promises, we used DEMO
social-interaction paradigm derived from game theory in which
subjects were completely free to decide whether to break or to
keep the promise and in DEMO breaking or keeping a promise
Neuron 64, 756–770, December 10, DEMO ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
763
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
Figure 6. Differential Brain DEMO
Pattern during the Decision Stage with
Combined Modeled Decision Phases A
and B
Depicted on a coronal slice is the increased activa-
tion in DEMO compared to honest subjects
(based on the serial subtraction term: [Promise –
No Promise] Dishonest subjects –[Promise – No
Promise]Honest subjects) in the right ventral striatum
(x = 24, y = 12, z = 0) at p < 0.005 (voxel extent
threshold: 10 voxels, DEMO display purposes de-
picted at p < 0.01). This ﬁnding suggests that
dishonest subjects have increased activity in the
ventral striatum during the DEMO decision
process. Bar plots representing contrast
estimates ± SE (Promise > DEMO Promise) of func-
tional ROIs (see Experimental Procedures for
details) DEMO that the differential group
effect is mainly based on increased activation in
dishonest subjects in the Promise compared to
the No Promise condition at DEMO % 0.005 (***). The
scatter plot demonstrates that the return DEMO
are negatively correlated with activity in the right
ventral striatum (r DEMO –0.49, p < 0.01) using the
same functional ROI.
caused monetary consequences (beneﬁts or costs) for both
exchange partners. We found that DEMO stages of the paradigm
revealed a highly speciﬁc brain activation pattern, DEMO us
to differentiate between subjects who break a promise and those
who keep a promise (see Figures 4–7). Importantly, the applied
serial DEMO term analysis (see Introduction and Results
section) rules out the impact of any personality differences on
brain activation that have nothing to do DEMO promise making
and promise breaking. Furthermore, the obtained questionnaire
evidence favors DEMO view that the reported differential brain
activity patterns are also not driven by speciﬁc (related to the
act of promising) personality differences between DEMO
breakers and promise keepers, but rather that they reﬂect
the (intended or actual) act of breaking a promise relative to
the (intended DEMO actual) act of keeping a promise, regardless
of the subjects’ personality characteristics. However, please
note that the questionnaire evidence does not completely rule
out that other unknown personality factors, which are not directly
assessed by the questionnaires, contribute to the difference in
the subjects’ tendencies toward promise keeping or breaking.
Two stages of the paradigm allow us to look DEMO differences in
brain activity between honest and dishonest subjects during
time points when the subjects do not yet have to implement
the decision to DEMO or to keep the promise. The stage of
particular interest in this regard is the promise stage of the
paradigm because behavioral ﬁndings in DEMO study showed
764
Neuron 64, 756–770, December 10, 2009 ª2009 DEMO Inc.
that dishonest and honest subjects do
not differ with regard to their chosen
promise level, and even the response
times for implementing the promise deci-
sion are equal. Nevertheless, the brain
activation pattern is highly differential,
that is subjects who will break their
promise at later DEMO of the paradigm already show increased
activation in the ACC and bilateral frontoinsular cortex. The ACC
has been demonstrated to be consistently implicated in DEMO
monitoring and cognitive control both during social (Baumgart-
ner et al., 2008a; Delgado et al., 2005) and nonsocial paradigms
(Botvinick et DEMO, 1999, 2001; Carter et al., 1998). The insula
(DEMO frontoinsular cortex) has been shown to be involved
in the mapping DEMO body-related sensations, including tempera-
ture, pain, proprioception, and viscera (DEMO review see Craig,
2002). Consistent with this mapping hypothesis, DEMO activa-
tions were mainly found during aversive emotional experiences
associated with strong visceral and somatic sensations such
as the experience of unfairness (Sanfey et al., 2003; Tabibnia
et al., 2008; Tabibnia et al., 2008), the threat of punishment (Spit-
zer et al., 2007), DEMO the anticipation of negative and unknown
emotional events (Herwig et al., 2007a, 2007b). Taken together,
the increased activation in the ACC and bilateral frontoinsular
cortex suggests that subjects who behave dishonestly already
form DEMO intent to break the promise during the promise stage.
We assume that this intention leads to a decision conﬂict and
associated (aversive) emotional DEMO, represented in the
brain in the ACC and frontoinsular cortex. The DEMO emotional
experience might include the guilty conscience toward the
exchange partner whom the promise will intentionally mislead.
Interestingly, both of these brain regions are thought to belong
to a reﬂexive, automatic system of social cognition proposed
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
Figure 7. Differential Brain DEMO Pattern during the Decision Stage with Separately Modeled Decision Phases A and B
Depicted on sagittal and coronal slices is the increased activation in DEMO compared to honest subjects (based on the serial subtraction term: [Promise –
NoPromise]Dishonest subjects –[Promise – No Promise]Honest subjects) during decision phase A or B at p < 0.005 (voxel extent threshold: 10 voxels, for display purposes
depicted at p < 0.01). In decision phase DEMO, increased activation was found in the (A) ACC (BA 24, x = 6, y = 27, z = 18) and (B) left DLPFC (BA 10/46, x = 39,
y = 54, z = 15), whereas inestimates ± SE (Promise > No Promisedecision phase B) of functional ROIs (seeincreased activity was found in the (C) left amygdala (x =Experimental Procedures for details) DEMO this suggested activity pattern by illustrating the30, y = 0, z = 21). Bar plots representing contrast
group-dependent and phase-dependent activity of DEMO brain regions during the two phases of the decision stage. Asterisks indicate signiﬁcantly increased
activity in dishonest subjects in the Promise compared to the DEMO Promise condition at p % 0.01 (**) or p % 0.005 (***). Finally, the scatter plots demonstrates
that the return rates DEMO negatively correlated with activity in the ACC (r = –0.41, p < 0.05) and left DLPFC (r = –0.40, p < 0.05) during decision phase A as well
as left amygdala (r = DEMO, p < 0.05) during decision phase B.
by Lieberman and colleagues (Lieberman, 2007; Satpute and
Lieberman, 2006). We thus speculate DEMO due to the reﬂexive
mode of operation of these brain regions, DEMO might be rather difﬁ-
cult or even impossible for dishonest subjects to suppress this
reaction pattern in the brain voluntarily, i.e., not to DEMO their
planned breach of promise with a perﬁdious brain activation
pattern.
Another stage of the paradigm takes place before the
dishonest act has to DEMO implemented. During this stage, the
subjects do not even have to DEMO a decision, they are merely
informed that their exchange partners are DEMO deciding whether
to trust or not and the subjects can thus do nothing but anticipate
the outcome of the investor’s trust decision. Interestingly, the
two groups (dishonest/honest) do not differ in hypothesized
regions of DEMO during anticipation trials with antecedent
promise stage (see Table S2 for DEMO two small differences in other
regions). In these trials, choosing DEMO high promise level can
inﬂuence the investor’s trusting behavior (and all DEMO did
so), thus reducing the probability that the investor will not trust.
In contrast, the investor’s trusting behavior cannot be affected
in trials without antecedent promise stage and the outcome of
the trust decision is DEMO much more difﬁcult to forecast,
making the anticipation trial more emotional and stressful.
Recent brain imaging studies (Herwig et al., 2007a, 2007b,
2009) have shown that the anticipation of such negative and
unforeseeable (either negative or positive) emotional events is
mainly associated with increased DEMO in the bilateral
anterior insula and right IFG. Moreover, these studies DEMO
Neuron 64, 756–770, December 10, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
765
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
that personality traits of DEMO and neuroticism, both of
which are associated with negative expectations toward DEMO
events, correlate positively with these brain regions during the
anticipation trials, i.e., the higher the score in these personality
measures, the higher DEMO activation in the bilateral anterior insula
and right IFG. We found that similar to subjects with higher
depressive or neuroticism scores, subjects who behaved
dishonestly reacted to the unpredictable and thus emotional
and stressful anticipation stage DEMO our paradigm with increased
activation in the same brain regions (right DEMO insula and right
IFG). This suggests that social exchange situations associated
with a lack of control and uncertainty are more pronounced
and more DEMO experienced in subjects who intend to
behave dishonestly, which might indicate DEMO they more strongly
anticipate a negative outcome (e.g., mistrust on the part of the
investor) in unpredictable social situations than subjects who
intend to behave honestly. Taken together, our ﬁndings
demonstrate that the dishonest subjects can be differentiated
from honest subjects even in stages of the paradigm DEMO
which no decision related to the dishonest act has to be made.
The stage during which the dishonest or honest act actually
has to DEMO implemented revealed an activity pattern in accor-
dance with our assumption that the breaking of a promise and
the telling of a lie involve DEMO cognitive and emotional
processes and associated brain activation patterns. In detail,
we argued that while deceptive subjects have to suppress the
truthful response, dishonest subjects have to suppress the
honest response. In line with this DEMO, our study, along
with most deception paradigms (e.g., Abe et al., 2006; Kozel
et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2005; Nun˜ ez et al., 2005; Phan et al.,
2005; DEMO et al., 2001, 2008), revealed increased activity in
brain regions of the lateral PFC which are known to play an
essential role DEMO the control and suppression of (inappropriate)
cognitions and behaviors (e.g., Aron, 2007; Baumgartner et al.,
2006, 2008b; Beeli et al., 2008; Ja¨ ncke et al., 2008; Spitzer
et al., 2007). Furthermore, we argued that the suppression of
both the truthful and the honest response most likely leads to
an emotional conﬂict in DEMO deceptive and dishonest subjects.
Again corroborating this assumption, our study and DEMO of
previous deception studies (e.g., Abe et al., 2006; Kozel et al.,
2005; Langleben et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2005; Nun˜ ez et al.,
2005; Phan et al., DEMO; Spence et al., 2001) demonstrated
increased activity in the ACC, which constitutes the brain region
most consistently associated with cognitive and emotional
DEMO processing and resolving (e.g., Baumgartner et al.,
2008a; Botvinick DEMO al., 1999; Etkin et al., 2006). Taken together,
DEMO paradigm, which substantially improved previous deception
paradigms (subjects in our paradigm were free to decide
and their decisions caused both positive and negative DEMO
quences for the exchange partners, see Introduction), conﬁrmed
the activation DEMO the aforementioned brain regions during the
assumed cognitive and emotional processes involved in the
implementation of the deceptive or dishonest acts. Moreover,
our DEMO also substantiated the assumption that truthful
responding comprises a relative baseline in human cognition
and communication (i.e., truthful responding compared to lying
does DEMO require an activity increase in any single brain region,
Spence et al., 2004), because, similar to most deception para-
766
Neuron DEMO, 756–770, December 10, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
digms, we did not ﬁnd any activity increase during the decision
stage of our paradigm DEMO subjects who behaved honestly
compared to those who behaved dishonestly. Furthermore, DEMO
could extend these negative ﬁndings to all other stages of our
paradigm (promise and anticipation stages). Thus, in spite of
the fact DEMO our honest subjects freely chose to keep their
promises in a ‘‘realistic’’ social exchange, no speciﬁc neural
correlate of honesty was observed in any stage of the paradigm,
even at a strongly lowered signiﬁcance threshold.
DEMO increased activity in the ACC and DLPFC, the
amygdala demonstrated increased DEMO during the breaking
of a promise in the decision stage of our paradigm. Whereas
activity in the ACC and DLPFC belong to the most DEMO
ﬁndings in neuroimaging studies on deception, up to now only
three DEMO the deception studies reported increased activation of
the amygdala—a brain region widely acknowledge to play an
important role in emotion (Phan et al., DEMO; Phillips et al.,
2003) and in particular fear processing (DEMO et al., 2005;
Amaral, 2003; Baumgartner et al., 2008a). In two of these
studies, subjects had to detect deceptive intentions; the ﬁndings
indicated that the crucial factor for amygdala activation is the
subject’s involvement, that is, amygdala activation was only
observed if the DEMO was the target of the deceit (Gre` zes
et al., 2004, 2006). Only one study, which focused on the neural
activities DEMO those telling lies, reported activation of the
amygdala. Of all conducted DEMO studies, this study
(Abe et al., 2007) used a paradigm that might get closest to
real life deception by introducing a clever DEMO in the paradigm.
This twist consisted of having a second experimenter tell the
subject to disobey the ﬁrst experimenter, i.e., when the ﬁrst
DEMO instructed the subject to tell the truth, the second
experimenter secretly DEMO the subject to deceive. Thus, we
conclude that increasing the subjects’ DEMO involvement
by creating a ‘‘realistic’’ social situation seems to trigger the
amygdala response in the study by Abe and colleagues (2007)
and our paradigm—notably in a very similar ventral part of the
left amygdala. Furthermore, the time point of amygdala
activation in our paradigm provides some additional DEMO
as to which process might have evoked the amygdala activation
in both studies. This evidence can be derived from the fact that
we only DEMO increased activation of the amygdala during
decision phase B, i.e., when subjects were reminded of their
promise they were going to break. This DEMO that it is not
the dishonest or deceptive act per se (DEMO the inhibition
of the honest/truthful response and associated conﬂict), but
rather the deliberate confrontation with the promise toward the
interaction partner, which might drive the amygdala activation.
Whereas subjects in our paradigm explicitly had DEMO make a
promise toward the interaction partner, the promise was more
DEMO in nature in the study of Abe and colleagues (2007),
i.e., subjects implicitly promised the ﬁrst experimenter to obey
his instructions. Taken together, we argue that the spontaneous
(study of Abe et al.) or triggered (our paradigm) reminder of
a promise one is not DEMO (study of Abe et al.) or willing (our
paradigm) to keep evokes an emotional response in deceptive
or dishonest subject, which might include a guilty conscience
toward the interaction partner and/or a fearful DEMO that the
deceptive or dishonest act will be detected.
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
Finally, we found increased activation in the right ventral stria-
tum during the breaking of a DEMO in the decision stage of our
paradigm. Similar to the observed activity of the amygdala, only
very few of the discussed deception studies reported activations
in the striatum (e.g., Nun˜ ez et al., 2005); these activations are
commonly observed during tasks that require individuals to
suppress DEMO prepotent or frequent response (Aron et al., 2007;
Casey et al., 2002). Thus, the activity in the striatum may reﬂect,DEMO
similar to the activation in the left DLPFC, the inhibition of DEMO
impulse to answer truthfully or honestly. However, we suggest
an alternative DEMO for the striatum activation in our
paradigm for the following reasons. First, in contrast to the
DLPFC activation, which was restricted to phase DEMO of the
decision stage, we observed sustained activation in the ventral
DEMO during the entire time window of the decision stage,
suggesting a different cognitive or affective process. Second,
in contrast to the few DEMO studies which reported
activation in this brain region, our study used DEMO social exchange
paradigm in which subjects deliberately decided to break the
promise with the goal of increasing their monetary payoff at the
expense of DEMO exchange partner. Due to the well-known role
of the striatum in social (e.g., Fliessbach et al., 2007; Rilling
et al., 2004) DEMO nonsocial (Delgado et al., 2004; Liu et al.,
2007) reward processing and its strong impact on decision
making (de Quervain et al., 2004; Delgado et al., 2005, 2008;
for a DEMO review, Fehr and Camerer, 2007; King-Casas
et al., 2005; DEMO et al., 2007), we thus speculate that the
activation in DEMO striatum might represent the motivational, appe-
titive component of the dishonest DEMO In other words, subjects
might be motivated to break the promise DEMO the activation
in the ventral striatum reinforces the dishonest act and thus
might act as a counterbalance against the aversive emotions
(e.g., guilty DEMO) and potential negative consequences
in case the deception should be detected. DEMO suggest designing
future studies that allow examining whether the former, the DEMO,
or both interpretations for the striatum activity apply.
Summing up, DEMO study explored the neural correlate of
nonbinding cooperative agreements in the form of a promise—
one of the oldest human-speciﬁc psychological mechanisms
fostering trust, cooperation, and partnership formation. In order
to study this psychological mechanism, DEMO applied a social
interaction paradigm derived from game theory in which
subjects were completely free to decide whether to keep or
break the promise DEMO in which the dishonest act included
both beneﬁts for the subjects and costs for the exchange part-
ners. Findings revealed that each of the DEMO processes playing
an important role during nonbinding cooperative agreements is
associated with a unique brain activation pattern, allowing us
to discriminate dishonest from honest subjects. In detail, we
found (1) that the implementation of the dishonest act is associ-
ated with increased activity in brain regions known DEMO be involved
in cognitive control and conﬂict processing, including the DLPFC
DEMO ACC. In addition, we also demonstrated (2) increased
activation during DEMO stage of the paradigm in emotion-related
brain regions, including amygdala and DEMO striatum.
We suggest that the amygdala activation may represent the
guilty conscience or the fear that the deceptive act could be
detected, whereas the activity in the ventral striatum might
represent the motivating and driving force DEMO the deceptive
act. Finally, one of the most important ﬁndings concerns (3) the
predictive power of ‘‘perﬁdious’’ brain activation patterns in
the ACC, bilateral frontoinsular cortex, and right IFG during the
promise or the DEMO stages for the ﬁnal decision whether
to keep or break the promise. Even though during the promise
stage the behavior of those subjects who DEMO cheat their
exchange partner and those who ﬁnally keep their promise
does not differ—both types of subject promise to keep the
informal agreement—the brain DEMO of the ‘‘cheaters’’
and the ‘‘promise keepers’’ show very distinct patterns during
the promise stage. These ﬁndings contribute to a recent debate
about whether DEMO from neuroscience are relevant for sciences
such as economics that are primarily interested in understanding
and predicting behavior (Camerer et al., 2005; Glimcher and
Rustichini, 2004). The fact that the cheaters’ brain activations
during the promise and anticipation stages differ unambiguously
from those of the promise DEMO, even though both of them
perform the same behavior, means that the brain activations
alone and not just the observed behaviors are capable DEMO
predicting the dishonest act. Thus, our study shows that data
from DEMO can provide important insights into behavior
that extend beyond that which purely behavioral data can detect.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Subjects
A total of 34 healthy DEMO students from different universities in Zurich
participated in the study. Eight of the participants had to be excluded from
the analyses; one subject due to scanner malfunctions and another seven
subjects due to design constraints (see Supplemental Experimental Proce-
dures for details), resulting in 26 male subjects (mean age ± SD, 23.5 ± 2.5)
for the analyses of the behavioral and brain imaging data. All subjects were
free of chronic DEMO, mental disorders, medication, and drug or alcohol
abuse. The study DEMO carried out in accordance with the Declaration of
Helsinki principles and approved by the institutional ethics committee. All
subjects gave written, informed consent and were informed of their right to
discontinue participation at any time. Subjects DEMO a lump sum payment
of CHF 40 for participating in the experiment plus the additional money earned
during the trust game trials (exchange rate 10 money units = 2.5 Swiss Franc,
that is about $2.50)DEMO
Design
In total, subjects played 24 trust game trials in the DEMO of a trustee (player B)
against 24 different and anonymous DEMO interaction partners in the role of
an investor (player A, see Figures 1 and 2 and Supplemental Experimental
Procedures for details). In DEMO of these trials, subjects had to make a promise
for three DEMO played trust game trials whether they always, mostly,
sometimes,or DEMO plan to send back half of the money so that both players
earn the same amount. Importantly, player A was always informed about B’s
promise, and B could keep the promise, but he was also DEMO to break it.
In total, player B made four promise decisions DEMO each of these decisions
held for the three subsequent trust game trials. There were also four instances
during which player B was informed that DEMO could not decide on a promise
level; the three succeeding trust DEMO trials were thus played without promise.
Trust game trials with and without antecedent promise stage were presented
counterbalanced and pseudorandomized.
Behavioral Analysis
We created DEMO return rate indexes for the behavioral data (return decisions)—
one DEMO trust game trials with antecedent promise stage and one for trials
without antecedent promise stage. The index measures player B’s average
return rate for DEMO trust game trials in which player A trusted, i.e., the
Neuron 64, 756–770, December 10, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 767
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
percentage of cases in DEMO B proved trustworthy and equalized payoffs.
Using these two behavioral indexes, DEMO performed a hierarchical cluster
analysis based on the Ward method (using DEMO squared Euclidean distance
measure) in order to classify our subjects into DEMO subgroups. This cluster
analysis revealed a cluster solution with two strongly separated clusters (see
dendrogram of Figure S1). Inspection of the two clusters revealed two groups
of subjects, i.e., those who either behaved trustworthily (referred to in the
paper as honest group/subjects) or those who acted untrustworthily (referred
to in the paper as dishonest group/subjects). Please see Supplemental
Experimental Procedures section for further information on the analyses DEMO
the behavioral data, including promise levels, response times and trust rates
of player A.
fMRI Acquisition
The experiment was conducted on a 3 DEMO Philips Intera whole-body MR
Scanner (Philips Medical Systems, Best, The DEMO) equipped with
an eight-channel Philips SENSE head coil. Structural image acquisition DEMO
sisted of 180 T1-weighted transversal images (0.75 mm slice thickness). DEMO
functional imaging, a total of 380 volumes were obtained using a DEMO
Encoded (SENSE; Pruessmann et al., 1999) T2*-weighted echo-planar
imaging sequence with an acceleration factor of 2.0. Forty-two axial slices
were acquired covering DEMO whole brain with a slice thickness of 3 mm; no in-
DEMO gap; interleaved acquisition; TR = 3000 ms; TE = 35 DEMO; ﬂip angle =
77, ﬁeld of view = 220 mm; DEMO size = 80 3 80. We used a tilted acquisition
in an oblique orientation at 30 to the AC-PC line in order to optimize DEMO
sensitivity in orbitofrontal cortex and medial temporal lobes.
fMRI Analysis
Data were preprocessed and statistically analyzed using SPM5. For
preprocessing, all images were realigned to the ﬁrst volume, corrected for
motion artifacts and time of acquisition within a TR, normalized into standard
stereotaxic space (template provided by DEMO Montreal Neurological Institute),
and smoothed using an 8 mm full-width-at-half-maximum DEMO kernel.
For statistical analysis, we performed random-effects analyses on the
functional DEMO for the promise, anticipation, and decision stage. For that
purpose, DEMO estimated two general linear models (GLMs) and computed linear
contrasts of regression coefﬁcients at the individual subject level. In order to
enable inference DEMO the group level, we calculated second-level group
contrasts using independent t DEMO with factor group (dishonest/honest
group), separately for each stage DEMO the paradigm. We applied an uncorrected
p value of 0.005 combined with a cluster-size threshold of 10 voxels to our
apriori regions of interests (see Introduction). Furthermore, we checked
whether our a priori regions of interests survive small volume family-wise-error
(FWE) corrections at p < 0.05. DEMO, all our regions of interests survived this
correction procedure. Please see DEMO Experimental Procedures for
additional information on all conducted statistical analyses, including DEMO more
detailed description of the applied GLMs and multiple comparison corrections.
SUPPLEMENTAL DATA
Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Procedures, four
tables of brain activity, three tables of questionnaire measures, one ﬁgure of
the cluster analysis (Dendrogram) and three analyses of brain activity and
can be found with this article online at http://www.cell.com/neuron/
supplemental/S0896-6273(09)DEMO
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is part of Project 9 of the National Competence Center for Research
(NCCR) in Affective Sciences. The NCCR is ﬁnanced DEMO the Swiss National
Science Foundation. E.F. also gratefully acknowledges support from the
research priority program at the University of Zurich on the ‘‘Foundations of
DEMO Social Behavior.’’
Accepted: November 5, 2009
Published: December 9, 2009
768
Neuron 64, 756–770, December 10, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
REFERENCES
Abe, N., Suzuki, M., Tsukiura, T., Mori, E., DEMO, K., Itoh, M., and Fujii, T.
(2006). Dissociable roles of prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices in
deception. Cereb. Cortex 16, 192–199.
Abe, N., Suzuki, M., Mori, E., Itoh, M., and Fujii, T. (2007). Deceiving others:
distinct neural responses of the prefrontal cortex and amygdala in simple fabri-
cation and deception DEMO social interactions. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 19, 287–295.
Adolphs, R., Gosselin, F., Buchanan, T.W., Tranel, D., Schyns, P., and
Damasio, A.R. (2005). A mechanism for impaired fear recognition after
amygdala DEMO Nature 433, 68–72.
Amaral, D.G. (2003). The amygdala, social behavior, and danger detection.
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1000, 337–347.
Aron, A.R. (2007). The neural basis of inhibition in cognitive control.
Neuroscientist 13, 214–228.
Aron, A.R., Durston, S., Eagle, D.M., Logan, G.D., Stinear, C.M., and Stuphorn,
V. (2007). Converging evidence for a fronto-basal-ganglia network for
inhibitory control of action and cognition. DEMO Neurosci. 27, 11860–11864.
ncke, L. (2006). Neural correlate
of DEMO presence in an arousing and noninteractive virtual reality: an EEG and
DEMO study. Cyberpsychol. Behav. 9, 30–45.
Baumgartner, T., Heinrichs, M., DEMO, A., Fischbacher, U., and Fehr, E.
(2008a). Oxytocin shapes the neural circuitry of trust and trust adaptation in
humans. Neuron DEMO, 639–650.
Baumgartner, T., Speck, D., Wettstein, D., Masnari, O., Beeli, G., and Jancke,
L. (2008b). Feeling DEMO in arousing virtual reality worlds: prefrontal brain
regions differentially orchestrate presence DEMO in adults and children.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 2,8.
ncke, DEMO (2008). Modulating
presence and impulsiveness by external stimulation of the DEMO Behav. Brain
Funct. 4, 33.
Behrens, T.E., Hunt, L.T., DEMO, M.W., and Rushworth, M.F. (2008).
Associative learning of social value. Nature 456, 245–249.
Botvinick, M., Nystrom, L.E., Fissell, DEMO, Carter, C.S., and Cohen, J.D. (1999).
Conﬂict monitoring DEMO selection-for-action in anterior cingulate cortex.
Nature 402, 179–181.
Botvinick, M.M., DEMO, T.S., Barch, D.M., Carter, C.S., and Cohen, J.D.
(2001). Conﬂict monitoring and cognitive control. Psychol. Rev. 108, 624–652.
Buckholtz, J.W., Asplund, C.L., Dux, P.E., Zald, D.H., Gore, J.C., Jones, O.D.,
and Marois, R. (2008). The DEMO correlates of third-party punishment. Neuron
60, 930–940.
Camerer, C., Loewenstein, G., and Prelec, D. (2005). Neuroeconomics: How
neuroscience can DEMO economics. J. Econ. Lit. 43, 9–64.
Carter, C.S., Braver, T.S., Barch, D.M., Botvinick, M.M., Noll, D., and Cohen,
J.D. (1998). Anterior cingulate cortex, error detection, and the online
monitoring of performance. Science 280, 747–749.
Casey, B.J., Thomas, K.M., Davidson, M.C., Kunz, K., and Franzen, P.L.
(2002). DEMO striatal and hippocampal function developmentally with
a stimulus-response compatibility task. J. Neurosci. 22, 8647–8652.
Charness, G., and Dufwenberg, M. (2006). Promises and partnership.
Econometrica 74, 1579–1601.
Christie, R., and Geis, F. (1970). Studies in Machiavellism (New York:
Academic Press).
Costa, P.T., and McCrae, R.R. (1992). Revised NEO Personality Inventory
(NEO PI-R) and NEO Five Factor Inventory. Professional Manual (Odessa,
DEMO: Psychological Assessment Resources).
Craig, A.D. (2002). How do DEMO feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiolog-
ical condition of the body. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 655–666.
de Quervain, D.J., Fischbacher, DEMO, Treyer, V., Schellhammer, M., Schnyder,
U., Buck, DEMO, and Fehr, E. (2004). The neural basis of altruistic DEMO
Science 305, 1254–1258.
Baumgartner, T., Valko, L., Esslen, M., and Ja¨
Beeli, G., Casutt, G., Baumgartner, T., and Ja¨
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry of a Broken Promise
Decety, J., Jackson, P.L., Sommerville, J.A., Chaminade, T., and Meltzoff, A.N.
(2004). The neural bases of cooperation and competition: an fMRI
investigation. Neuroimage 23, 744–751.
Delgado, M.R., Stenger, V.A., and Fiez, J.A. (2004). Motivation-dependent
responses in the human caudate nucleus. Cereb. Cortex 14, 1022–1030.
Delgado, M.R., Frank, R.H., and Phelps, E.A. (2005)DEMO Perceptions of moral
character modulate the neural systems of reward during the trust game.
Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1611–1618.
Delgado, M.R., Schotter, A., Ozbay, E.Y., and Phelps, E.A. (2008).
Understanding overbidding: using the neural circuitry of reward to design
economic auctions. Science 321, 1849–1852.
Eisenberger, N.I., Lieberman, M.D., and Williams, K.D. (2003). DEMO rejection
hurt? An FMRI study of social exclusion. Science 302, 290–292.
Ellickson, R.C. (2001). The evolution of social norms: a perspective from the
legal academy. In Social Norms, M. Hechter and K.D. Opp, eds. (New York:
Russell Sage Foundation), pp. 35–75.
Elster, J. (1989). The Cement of Society - A Study of Social Order (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press).
Etkin, A., Egner, DEMO, Peraza, D.M., Kandel, E.R., and Hirsch, J. (2006)DEMO
Resolving emotional conﬂict: a role for the rostral anterior cingulate cortex DEMO
modulating activity in the amygdala. Neuron 51, 871–882.
Fehr, E., DEMO Camerer, C.F. (2007). Social neuroeconomics: the neural circuitry
of DEMO preferences. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 419–427.
Fehr, E., and Fischbacher, U. (2003). The nature of human altruism. Nature
425, 785–791.
DEMO, E., Fischbacher, U., and Ga¨ chter, S. (2002). Strong reciprocity, human
cooperation, and the enforcement of social norms. Hum. DEMO 13, 1–25.
Fliessbach, K., Weber, B., Trautner, P., DEMO, T., Sunde, U., Elger, C.E., and
Falk, A. (2007). Social comparison affects reward-related brain activity in the
human ventral DEMO Science 318, 1305–1308.
Glimcher, P.W., and Rustichini, A. (2004)DEMO Neuroeconomics: the consilience of
brain and decision. Science 306, 447–452.
Gneezy, U. (2005). Deception: The Role of Consequences. Am. Econ. Rev. 95,
384–394.
Gre` zes, J., Frith, C., and Passingham, R.E. (2004). Brain mechanisms for
inferring deceit in the actions of others. J. Neurosci. 24, 5500–5505.
zes, J., Berthoz, S., and Passingham, R.E. (2006). Amygdala activation
when one is the target DEMO deceit: did he lie to you or to someone else?
DEMO 30, 601–608.
hl, A., Kottlow, M.,
ncke, L., and Rufer, M. (2007a). Modulation
of anticipatory emotion and perception DEMO by cognitive control.
Neuroimage 37, 652–662.
ncke, L. (2007b). DEMO
correlates of a ‘pessimistic’ attitude when anticipating events of unknown
emotional valence. Neuroimage 34, 848–858.
Herwig, U., Bru¨
ncke, L. (2009). Neural correlates of ‘pessimistic’ attitude in depression.
Psychol. Med., in press. Published online September 9 2009. 10.1017/
S0033291709991073.
Horne, C. (2001). DEMO perspectives on the emergence of norms. In
Social Norms, M. Hechter DEMO K.D. Opp, eds. (New York: Russell Sage Foun-
dation), DEMO 3–34.
ncke, L., Brunner, B., and Esslen, M. (2008). Brain activation during fast
driving in a driving simulator: the role of the lateral prefrontal cortex.
Neuroreport 19, 1127–1130.
King-Casas, B., Tomlin, D., Anen, C., Camerer, C.F., Quartz, S.R., and
DEMO, P.R. (2005). Getting to Know You: Reputation and Trust DEMO
a Two-Person Economic Exchange. Science 308, 78–83.
Knoch, D., Pascual-Leone, A., Meyer, K., Treyer, V., and Fehr, E. (2006).
Diminishing reciprocal fairness by disrupting the right prefrontal cortex.
Science 314, 829–832.
Ja¨
Ja¨
Gre`
Schreiter-Gasser, U., Abler, B., Ja¨
Herwig, U., Kaffenberger, T., Baumgartner, T., and Ja¨
Herwig, U., Baumgartner, T., Kaffenberger, T., Bru¨
hl, A.B., Kaffenberger, T., Baumgartner, T., Boeker, H., and
Knoch, D., Nitsche, DEMO, Fischbacher, U., Eisenegger, C., Pascual-Leone, A.,
and Fehr, E. (2008). Studying the neurobiology of social interaction with trans-
DEMO direct current stimulation—the example of punishing unfairness. Cereb.
Cortex 18, 1987–1990.
DEMO, B., Rick, S., Wimmer, G.E., Prelec, D., and Loewenstein, G. (2007).
Neural predictors of purchases. Neuron 53, 147–156.
Kozel, F.A., Johnson, K.A., Mu, Q., Grenesko, E.L., DEMO, S.J., and George,
M.S. (2005). Detecting deception using DEMO magnetic resonance
imaging. Biol. Psychiatry 58, 605–613.
Langleben, D.D., Loughead, J.W., Bilker, W.B., Ruparel, K., Childress, A.R.,
Busch, S.I., and Gur, R.C. (2005). Telling truth from lie in individual subjects
with fast event-related fMRI. Hum. Brain Mapp. 26, 262–272.
Lee, T.M., Liu, H.L., Chan, C.C., Ng, Y.B., Fox, P.T., and Gao, J.H. (2005).
Neural correlates of feigned memory impairment. Neuroimage 28, 305–313.
Lieberman, M.D. (2007). Social cognitive neuroscience: a review of core
processes. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 58, 259–289.
Liu, X., Powell, D.K., Wang, H., Gold, B.T., Corbly, DEMO, and Joseph, J.E.
(2007). Functional dissociation in frontal and DEMO areas for processing of
positive and negative reward information. J. Neurosci. 27, 4587–4597.
Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Buckholtz, J.W., Kolachana, B., Hariri, DEMO, Pezawas, L.,
Blasi, G., Wabnitz, A., Honea, DEMO, Verchinski, B., Callicott, J.H., et al. (2006).
Neural mechanisms of genetic risk for impulsivity and violence in humans.
Proc. Natl. DEMO Sci. USA 103, 6269–6274.
ez, J.M., Casey, B.J., Egner, T., Hare, T., and Hirsch, J. (2005). Intentional
false responding shares neural substrates with response conﬂict and cognitive
control. Neuroimage 25, 267–277.
Phan, K.L., Wager, T., Taylor, S.F., and Liberzon, I. (2002). Functional
neuroanatomy of emotion: a meta-analysis of emotion DEMO studies in
PET and fMRI. Neuroimage 16, 331–348.
Phan, K.L., DEMO, A., Ziemlewicz, T.J., Fitzgerald, D.A., Green, C., and
Smith, W. (2005). Neural correlates of telling lies: a functional magnetic
resonance imaging study at 4 Tesla. Acad. Radiol. 12, 164–172.
Phillips, M.L., Drevets, W.C., Rauch, S.L., and Lane, R. (DEMO). Neurobiology of
emotion perception I: The neural basis of normal DEMO perception. Biol.
Psychiatry 54, 504–514.
Pruessmann, K.P., Weiger, M., DEMO, M.B., and Boesiger, P. (1999).
SENSE: sensitivity encoding DEMO fast MRI. Magn. Reson. Med. 42, 952–962.
Rilling, J., Gutman, D., Zeh, T., Pagnoni, G., Berns, G., and Kilts, C. (2002).
A neural basis for social cooperation. Neuron 35, 395–405.
Rilling, J.K., Sanfey, A.G., Aronson, J.A., Nystrom, L.E., and Cohen, J.D.
(2004). Opposing BOLD responses to reciprocated and unreciprocated
altruism in putative reward pathways. Neuroreport 15, 2539–2543.
Rilling, J.K., Glenn, A.L., Jairam, M.R., Pagnoni, G., Goldsmith, D.R., DEMO,
H.A., and Lilienfeld, S.O. (2007). Neural correlates of DEMO cooperation and
non-cooperation as a function of psychopathy. Biol. Psychiatry 61,
1260–1271.
Sanfey, A.G., Rilling, J.K., Aronson, J.A., Nystrom, L.E., and Cohen, J.D.
(2003). The neural basis of economic decision-making in the Ultimatum
Game. Science (New York, N.Y 300, 1755-1758. Satpute, A.B., and
Lieberman, M.D. (2006). Integrating Automatic and Controlled DEMO
into Neurocognitive Models of Social Cognition. Brain Res. Rev. 1079, 86–97.
DEMO, A.B., and Lieberman, M.D. (2006). Integrating Automatic And
Controlled Processes Into Neurocognitive Models Of Social Cognition. Brain
Res. 1079, 86–97.
Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J.P., Stephan, K.E., Dolan, R.J., and Frith,
C.D. (2006). Empathic neural responses are DEMO by the perceived
fairness of others. Nature 439, 466–469.
Sip, K.E., Roepstorff, A., McGregor, W., and Frith, C.D. (2008). Detecting
deception: the scope and limits. Trends Cogn. Sci. 12, 48–53.
DEMO, S.A., Farrow, T.F., Herford, A.E., Wilkinson, I.D., Zheng, Y., and
Woodruff, P.W. (2001). Behavioural and functional anatomical DEMO of
deception in humans. Neuroreport 12, 2849–2853.
Nun˜
Neuron 64, 756–770, December 10, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
769
Spence, S.A., Hunter, M.D., Farrow, T.F., Green, R.D., DEMO, D.H., Hughes,
C.J., and Ganesan, V. (2004). DEMO cognitive neurobiological account of
deception: evidence from functional neuroimaging. Philos. Trans. DEMO Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 359, 1755–1762.
Spence, S.A., Kaylor-Hughes, C., Farrow, T.F., and Wilkinson, I.D. (2008).
Speaking of secrets and lies: the contribution of ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
to vocal deception. Neuroimage 40, 1411–1418.
Spitzer, M., Fischbacher, U., Herrnberger, B., Gro¨ n, G., and Fehr, E. (2007).
The neural DEMO of social norm compliance. Neuron 56, 185–196.
Tabibnia, G., Satpute, A.B., and Lieberman, M.D. (2008). The sunny side
of fairness: preference for fairness activates reward circuitry (and disre-
770
Neuron 64, 756–770, December 10, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
Neuron
The Neural Circuitry DEMO a Broken Promise
garding unfairness activates self-control circuitry). Psychol. Sci. 19,
339–347.
Vanberg, C. (2008). Why do people keep their DEMO? An experimental test
of two explanations. Econometrica 76, 1467–1480.
Voss, DEMO (2001). Game theoretical perspectives on the emergence of social
norms. DEMO Social Norms, M. Hechter and K.D. Opp, eds. (New York: Russell
Sage Foundation), pp. 105–138.
Zink, C.F., Tong, Y., DEMO, Q., Bassett, D.S., Stein, J.L., and Meyer-Linden-
berg, DEMO (2008). Know your place: neural processing of social hierarchy in
humans. Neuron 58, 273–283.{1g42fwefx}