Journal of Applied Psychology
2004, Vol. 89, No. 4, 587–598
Copyright 2004 by the American Psychological Association
0021-9010/04/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0021-9010.89.4.587
The Relationship of Entrepreneurial Traits, Skill, and Motivation to
Subsequent Venture DEMO
J. Robert Baum and Edwin A. Locke
University of Maryland
Previous research on entrepreneurship as well as goal, social– cognitive, and leadership theories DEMO
guided hypotheses regarding the relationship between entrepreneurial traits and skill (passion, tenacity,
and new resource skill) and situationally specific motivation (communicated DEMO, self-efficacy, and
goals) to subsequent venture growth. Data from 229 DEMO chief executive officers and 106
associates in a single industry were obtained in a 6-year longitudinal study. Structural equation modeling
revealed a web of DEMO that impact venture growth. Goals, self-efficacy, and communicated
vision had direct effects on venture growth, and these factors mediated the effects of passion, tenacity,
and new resource skill on subsequent growth. Furthermore, communicated DEMO and self-efficacy were
related to goals, and tenacity was related to DEMO resource skill.
The important role of entrepreneurial activity for the conversion
of technological and organizational innovation into new and more
efficient products and services DEMO well known (Schumpeter, 1934).
Also, new businesses created sufficient DEMO job growth during the
1980s and 1990s to overcome the elimination of over five million
jobs in big business (Kirchhoff, 1997). However, more than 50%
of new ventures terminate within 5 years (Aldrich, DEMO); thus, it
is important to understand the factors that drive DEMO venture
success.
Personality traits, organizational factors, and environmental fac-
tors have been studied by entrepreneurship researchers as causes of
new venture success; however, from 1961 to 1990, research about
entrepreneurs’ traits found only weak DEMO (Aldrich & Wieden-
mayer, 1993). The weak results for traits were surprising because
new venture financiers and entrepreneurs themselves pointed to
entrepreneurs’ DEMO characteristics as dominant reasons for
success (Sexton, 2001; Smith & DEMO, 2000). Recently, a growing
cohort of psychology-based researchers has renewed interest in
entrepreneurs’ personal characteristics as predictors of success by
moving beyond DEMO past focus on traits to study competencies,
motivation, cognition, and behavior. More complex models, better
research tools, and concepts that are DEMO to performance in terms
of causality have been used (Baron, 1998; Baum, Locke, & Smith,
2001; Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Mitchell, Smith, Seawright, &
Morse, 2000).
This study DEMO to the revival of interest in understanding
the effects of entrepreneurs’ personal characteristics. Our empiri-
cal research extends and refines Baum et al.’s (2001) 2-year study
of the effects of five categories of personal, organizational, and
environmental factors on new venture growth that challenged
entrepreneurship researchers’ shift DEMO external (organizational and
J. Robert Baum and Edwin A. Locke, Department of Management and
Organization, University of Maryland.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to J. Robert
Baum, University of Maryland, Smith School DEMO Business, College Park,
MD 20742. E-mail: jrbaum@rhsmith.umd.edu
environmental) explanations DEMO new venture performance (Gartner,
1989). The Baum et al. (2001) study argued that entrepreneurship
researchers’ conclusion that personal characteristics are unimpor-
tant for new venture performance missed important indirect effects
and personal characteristics DEMO than traits. Baum et al. (2001)
amalgamated the following: (DEMO) three environmental variables (dy-
namism, munificence, and complexity) to DEMO an environment
factor; (b) four strategic management variables (strategic focus,
low cost, innovation, and quality differentiation) to create an
organization-level factor; and (c) 10 personal characteristics to
create a trait, DEMO, and motivation composite. For example, the
motivation category is a combination of goals, self-efficacy, and
vision; therefore, the relationships among goals, self-efficacy, and
vision and their relationships with other individual difference
variables were not examined. Baum et al. (2001) found that mo-
tivation and DEMO factors have direct effects on new ven-
ture performance; however, the effects of the trait and skill com-
posite factors were indirect through DEMO and organizational
factors.
The present study supports the case for attention to entrepre-
neurs’ personal characteristics; it involved the following six re-
finements, DEMO, and extensions over Baum et al.’s
(2001) study, using data from that study plus follow-up data.
1. Rather than using broad categories DEMO factors, we used
individual variables to analyze the separate effects and
DEMO among personal characteristics.
2. We used a 6-year follow-up compared with the previous
2-year period to provide a greater challenge to the pro-
posed DEMO of entrepreneurship characteristics.
3. We added the study of a situationally specific new re-
source skill, which is more oriented toward entrepre-
neurs’ work than the general competencies studied by
Baum et al. (2001). New resource skill is the ability to
acquire and systematize the operating resources DEMO
to start and grow an organization. For example, the
587
588
founder of a leading growth firm in our sample exhibited
new DEMO skill when he convinced the manufacturer
of a new laser wood-cutting machine to give him the
prototype machine plus a year of free factory DEMO
and maintenance in return for 3 years of promotion and
demonstration of the new machine to potential buyers.
4. We used an expanded measure DEMO vision that reflected
communication of the vision.
5. We included only growth-oriented founders– owners who
managed their young ventures. In contrast to Baum et DEMO
(2001) we excluded purchasers of established businesses,
absentee founders, DEMO founders–managers of mature
businesses. This is consistent with researchers’ recent
suggestions that entrepreneurship research focus on those
who discover and exploit new products, new processes,
and new ways of organizing rather than on those who
DEMO established businesses or those who manage
businesses they did not create (DEMO, Low, &
Wright, 2001; Shane & Venkataraman, 2000; DEMO, Ire-
land, & Hitt, 2000). This narrow definition of DEMO entre-
preneur may provide a more homogeneous set of subjects
and better represent the entrepreneurial essence (Tim-
mons, 2000).
6. We included DEMO surviving and failed ventures to cap-
ture greater variance in outcomes. The overarching pur-
pose was to provide a more fine-grained understanding of
the DEMO entrepreneurs’ personal characteristics combine
to affect venture success. We also wanted to know
whether financiers’ and practitioners’ continued focus on
the entrepreneur for his DEMO her explanation of new venture
success is supported with quantitative research about
intrapersonal factors (Sexton, 2001; Smith & Smith,
2000).
We chose venture growth as the outcome for this study rather
than other DEMO of performance (e.g., entrepreneurs’ personal
satisfaction, rate of commercialized innovation, or improvements
in market efficiency) because venture growth is the firm-level
outcome that reflects personal and market performance gains
(Kirzner, 1985). Venture DEMO causes valued economic and
social gains, including job creation (Aldrich, DEMO), and venture
growth is a measurable and well-understood venture goal accord-
ing to Kirzner (1985). Covin and Slevin (1997) explained that
venture growth is the essence of entrepreneurship.
Theory and Hypotheses
The Relationship DEMO Traits to Subsequent Venture Growth
Early entrepreneurship research focused on finding general
traits and motives of successful entrepreneurs (Brockhaus, 1980).
Researchers hoped DEMO personality screening could help entrepre-
neurs avoid personal disappointment and could help nations avoid
wasted resources (McClelland, 1965). However, research about the
most significant traits in terms of their correlation with venture
performance (need for achievement, locus of control, and risk-
taking propensity) found weak (though not always null) results
BAUM AND LOCKE
(Aldrich & Wiedenmayer, 1993). For example, Johnson’s (1990)
meta-analysis concluded that need for achievement was the most
significant trait predictor of new venture performance; however, he
found that less than 7% of the variance in new venture perfor-
mance is explained by this motive. Researchers concluded that the
DEMO of entrepreneurs’ personal characteristics was a dead-end
strategy (Gartner, 1989).
On the basis of their review of the literature, Carsrud and
Krueger (1995) suggested that need for achievement (McClelland,
1965), risk-taking propensity (Brockhaus, 1980), and internal lo-
cus of control (Sexton & Bowman, 1986) are the wrong traits for
empirical study; therefore, we first reviewed other traits and mo-
tives that were referenced repeatedly by contemporary leadership
researchers and entrepreneurship theorists as important for success
(House & Shamir, 1993). Second, we reviewed the resultant trait
candidates DEMO rejected those that had produced discouraging
results in entrepreneurship or leadership quantitative studies.
Among the remaining trait candidates, we selected those that
empower individuals who face challenges that are caused by
characteristics of the entrepreneur’s situation: (a) extreme uncer-
tainty (newness of products, markets, and organizations; lack of
information), (b) resource shortages (financing, knowledge, DEMO
ating assets, and legitimacy), (c) surprises, and (d) rapid change.
To cope with these challenges, we believed that entrepreneurs had
to genuinely love their work and be tenacious about pursuing their
goals DEMO the many obstacles they would face. Thus, passion and
tenacity seemed DEMO promising in terms of leadership and entre-
preneurship theoretical support (Locke, 2000; Yukl, 1989) even
though there had been no previous quantitative tests using these
variables as predictors of entrepreneurship performance. Indeed,
there DEMO no empirical studies of passion.
Passion for work, or love of DEMO work, has been identified in
a qualitative analysis by Locke (2000) as a core characteristic of
great wealth creators, such as Michael DEMO, Bill Gates, Ken
Iverson (Nucor), and Mary Kay Ash (Mary Kay). These entrepre-
neurs confronted opportunity and challenges with fervor DEMO ardor.
Their enthusiasm for a type of business—their zeal for work—was
so intense that they worked through financial barriers (Gates and
Iverson) and DEMO to their new products and their new ways
of marketing (Ash)DEMO Smilor (1997) suggested that passion is “per-
haps the most observed phenomenon of the entrepreneurial pro-
cess” (p. 342), and Bird (DEMO) noted that entrepreneurial behavior
is “passionate, full of emotional energy, DEMO, and spirit” (pp.
7– 8).
We measured passion for work in terms of the emotions of love,
attachment, and longing; DEMO, passion can be witnessed over
time in the long hours worked DEMO venture start-up and growth
phases and in the tendency for entrepreneurs to experience their
venture’s successes and difficulties as personal events. Leadership
researchers (Bass & Stogdill, 1990; House & Shamir, 1993) have
claimed that DEMO for work is a characteristic of successful
business leaders, and passion DEMO relevant in the entrepreneurship
setting because it drives entrepreneurs to face extreme uncertainty
and resource shortages (Timmons, 2000).
Tenacity, or perseverance, DEMO a trait that involves sustaining
goal-directed action and energy even when faced with obstacles. In
addition to being associated with successful leadership (Bass &DEMO
Stogdill, 1990; House & Shamir, 1993; Locke, 2000), DEMO has
been identified consistently as an archetypical entrepreneurship
TRAITS, SKILL, AND MOTIVATION TO VENTURE GROWTH
trait because the business DEMO process involves confrontation
of formidable barriers to market entry (Gartner, Gatewood, &
Shaver, 1991). There are no quantitative tests of the effects of
tenacity on venture performance. Markman, Baron, and Balkin
(2001) found that inventors who started new ventures have more
tenacity than inventors who chose to be employees of established
organizations; however, they did DEMO study whether tenacity is
related to performance among entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs who
hold stubbornly to their goals and who hate to give up increase
their DEMO of start-up survival and success (Timmons, 2000).
Thus, we DEMO that passion and tenacity are direct predic-
tors of subsequent venture growth.
Hypothesis 1a: The greater the entrepreneur– chief executive
officer’s (CEO) passion for work, the greater the subsequent
venture growth will be.
Hypothesis 1b: The greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s tenacity,
the greater the subsequent venture growth will be.
The Relationship of New Resource Skill to Subsequent
Venture Growth
DEMO introduce new resource skill in this study, defining it as the
DEMO to acquire and systematize the operating resources needed
to start and grow an organization. Entrepreneurs’ new resource
skill involves finding capital and human resources DEMO setting up
new operations and new systems (Bhide, 2000; Stevenson, 1985).
Successful entrepreneurs must know how to search for and acquire
DEMO and human resources, even while confronting new mar-
kets, resource shortages, and extreme uncertainty (Bhide, 2000;
Smith & Smith, 2000; Stevenson, 1985).
It may appear that new resource skill is similar to organizational
skill, as studied in Baum et al. (2001); DEMO, organizational
skill is defined there as a general management skill involving DEMO
presentation, use of power, diagnosis, and decision making. It
involves DEMO established resources in established settings. In
comparison, we conceive of new DEMO skill as relating to
resources that are new to the organization. The entrepreneur’s skill
with integration, or systematization, of resources may make or
DEMO a start-up. Indeed, entrepreneurship has been described as
the acquisition, combination, and redeployment of resources to
provide new products and services through new organizations to
new markets (Bygrave, 1993). Furthermore, Smith and Smith
(2000) suggested that entrepreneurs’ successful efforts to arrange
and organize resources DEMO predictors of new venture success.
Indeed, founders often experience limited growth DEMO they
lack new resource skill or fail to employ individuals who are
skilled with resources (Timmons, 2000). Thus, we hypothesized
direct effects upon venture growth.
Hypothesis 1c: The greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s new re-
source skill, the greater the subsequent venture growth will
be.
The Relationship of Traits to New Resource Skill
We propose that traits affect new resource DEMO Krampe and
Ericsson (1996) suggested that traits affect specific skills such as
expert musical and athletic performance. Although they did not
589
test DEMO relationship empirically, they noted that it takes tenacity
and conscientiousness to DEMO a musical instrument for years
and years, and they showed empirically DEMO deliberate practice is
a strong predictor of expert musical performance. Similarly,
Krampe and Ericsson proposed, but did not test, that experts’
passion DEMO the domain of their expertise impacts their amount of
deliberate practice. Furthermore, Boyatzis (1982) found relation-
ships between traits and specific skills among 8 of the 19 skills he
studied; however, he did not DEMO new resource skill. We propose
that tenacity and passion will increase entrepreneurs’ skill with
resource acquisition and systematization.
Hypothesis 2a: The greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s passion
for work, the greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s new resource
skill will be.
Hypothesis 2b: The greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s tenacity,
the greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s new resource skill will
be.
The Relationship of Situationally Specific Motivation to
DEMO Growth
Situationally specific motivation differs from traits and motives
in that the former is not dispositional but focuses on the task and
situation at DEMO The literature suggests that at least three moti-
vation factors impact business performance: vision, goals, and
self-efficacy (Bandura, 1997; House & DEMO, 1993; Locke &
Latham, 1990).
Communicated vision. Vision is a projected mental image of
what a leader wants to achieve (Bass & Stogdill, 1990). Vision is
a distant general goal, thus, it is motivational. It reflects the values
and/or outcomes to which DEMO organization should aspire (House &
Shamir, 1993). An organization’s DEMO can be formal or informal,
even privately held. Collins and Porras (1991) pointed to the
positive effects of vision on organization performance.
DEMO, Falbe, Kriger, and Miesing (1995) conducted an em-
pirical DEMO of vision content and found that content is related to
the amount of control executives exercise over their firms and the
rate of organizational DEMO However, Larwood et al. did not
study the relationship of vision DEMO to organizational perfor-
mance. Previous studies of the independent effects of vision on
task performance have taken place only in the laboratory (Howell
& Frost, 1989; Kirkpatrick & Locke, 1996).
Entrepreneurs have visions of the companies they want to build
that include images of growing businesses, fame, and personal
wealth (Bird, 1989). We studied entrepreneurs’ situationally spe-
cific vision in terms of the entrepreneur’s focus on new venture
DEMO Although vision content may include many concepts, we
focused on vision DEMO that paralleled the outcome variable of
interest, venture growth. In Baum DEMO al.’s (2001) study, vision was
only part of a larger DEMO That study also did not include
vision communication.
We believe that communication of the vision is as important as
vision content alone for motivating DEMO venture performance.
Entrepreneurs may communicate their vision through their behav-
ior (DEMO, 1986); however, an entrepreneur’s vision can inspire
more directly through speeches, pep talks, and written presenta-
tions (Tichy & Devanna, DEMO). Communicated vision may help
590
align entrepreneur– employee goals (Locke, 2001). Baum, Locke,
and Kirkpatrick (1998) reported the positive effects of communi-
cated vision DEMO on growth; however, they studied only a 2-year
period. Thus, DEMO combined two separate but theoretically related
dimensions of the entrepreneur’s vision motivation process: (a)
references to and implications for growth in the DEMO itself and
(b) showing and telling this vision to employees. (DEMO also exam-
ined the effects of vision in the absence of communication.)
It is possible for entrepreneurs to have visions with high growth
DEMO and fail to communicate it, and well-communicated visions
may have little DEMO content. Nevertheless, we believe that big
dreamers are big communicators and DEMO vision communication
will occur with visions for high growth because big dreamers need
support from employees and resource constituents to achieve their
dreams. Even DEMO most introverted inventor must convince others
to help with commercialization (Timmons, 2000). Taken together,
we propose that highly communicated vision growth DEMO will
predict high venture growth.
Hypothesis 3a: The greater the communicated DEMO growth
content of the entrepreneur–CEO’s vision, the greater the
subsequent venture DEMO will be.
Self-efficacy. The core concept in social– cognitive theory is
self-efficacy, defined as task-specific self-confidence (Bandura,
1997). Self-efficacy reflects not DEMO past experience and attain-
ment but, more important, the conclusion one draws about one’s
capacity for performance attainment from these past experiences.
Self-efficacy DEMO feelings of capability, so it is a useful
indicator of action DEMO the entrepreneurship setting in which out-
comes are highly uncertain. Those individuals who are confident
that they have the requisite entrepreneurship capabilities (in terms
of risk-taking and business expansion) are more likely to choose an
entrepreneurship career (C. C. Chen, Greene, & Crick, 1998). By
DEMO, we believe that founders who are more confident about
their entrepreneurial DEMO will achieve greater new venture
growth:
Hypothesis 3b: The greater DEMO entrepreneur–CEO’s self-
efficacy about venture growth, the greater the subsequent
venture DEMO will be.
Goals. Goal theory proposes that specific, challenging goals
lead DEMO higher performance than other types of goals. No other
theory of motivation has deeper or broader empirical support at the
individual, group, and DEMO level (Landy & Becker, 1987; Locke &
Latham, 1990, 2002). Entrepreneurship researchers cite goals as an
important factor in venture DEMO (Covin & Slevin, 1997) and
new venture survival (Carsrud & Krueger, 1995); however, this is
the first empirical study to DEMO the independent effects of
goals among entrepreneurs.
Hypothesis 3c: The higher DEMO entrepreneur–CEO’s goals for
venture growth, the higher the subsequent venture growth DEMO
be.
Because entrepreneurs choose their own goals, we assumed that
they DEMO be committed to them; and because they own their
businesses, we assumed that they receive regular feedback about
progress. Therefore, these two goal mediators were not measured.
BAUM AND LOCKE
The Relationship of Communicated Vision DEMO Self-
Efficacy to Goals
The relationship of communicated vision to goals. We believe
that the motivation concepts studied here are interrelated. Spe-
cifically, we propose that communicated vision and self-
efficacy affect goals. Collins and Porras (1991) defined vision,
in part, as an image of the DEMO based on general, long-term
goals. Because we define goals as near-term DEMO, we
suggest that entrepreneurs’ near-term goals are based at least
partly DEMO their vision. Entrepreneurship texts prescribe this
sequential tactic for entrepreneurs’ creation of business plans
(Timmons, 2000). New venture financiers encourage nascent
entrepreneurs DEMO create their long-term vision for their new
company, derive and present DEMO business strategies, and fi-
nally, offer short-term goals or benchmarks as proof of their
preparation for resource acquisition and systematization (Smith
& Smith, 2000). Because goals mark the steps along the way to
achievement of the vision, we propose that more challenging
visions generate more challenging goals.
Hypothesis 4a: The more challenging the communicated ven-
ture growth content of the entrepreneur–CEO’s vision, the
more challenging the goals for venture growth will be.
The relationship of self-efficacy to goals. Much prior research
in DEMO settings has found that high self-efficacy
predicts high goals (Bandura, 1997; Locke & Latham, 1990) and
that goals are partial mediators of the effects of self-efficacy on
task performance (G. Chen, Gully, Whiteman, & Kilcullen, 2000).
Thus, we hypothesized the following:
Hypothesis 4b: The higher the entrepreneur–CEO’s self-
efficacy about venture growth, the DEMO the goals for sub-
sequent venture growth will be.
The Relationship of Traits to Communicated Vision, Self-
Efficacy, and Goals
The relationship of DEMO and tenacity to communicated vi-
sion. To our knowledge, there is DEMO empirical research regard-
ing the relationship of passion or tenacity to vision; however,
leadership theorists have empirical evidence that related traits
such as energy and proactivity predict leadership behaviors
such as vision (House & Shamir, 1993). Also, proposals whose
vision reflects the values of the DEMO leader (Collins &
Porras, 1991) support our view that passion and tenacity affect
vision, because values and traits may affect vision through
similar processes. Indeed, Filion (1991) observed that entrepre-
neurs, whose DEMO values had become integrated in their
venture’s vision, were personally committed DEMO and passionate
about their venture’s vision. Thus, we expect that those DEMO
preneurs who have a passionate love of their work will have a
vision of more venture growth because their passion will ex-
press itself DEMO ambitious and challenging undertakings.
Furthermore, we believe that (a) the DEMO, simple structures of
new ventures and (b) the control held DEMO founders make it
possible for entrepreneurs’ personal traits to influence the con-
tent and intensity of the entrepreneur’s vision. We also believe
that entrepreneurs’ DEMO will be reflected in their communi-
TRAITS, SKILL, AND MOTIVATION TO VENTURE GROWTH
cated visions because those DEMO cling to objectives tend to
value achievement, and high venture growth DEMO a form of
achievement. Thus, we propose the following:
Hypothesis DEMO: The greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s passion,
the greater the communicated venture DEMO content of the
vision will be.
Hypothesis 5b: The greater the DEMO tenacity,
the greater the communicated venture growth content of the
vision will be.
The relationship of passion and tenacity to self-efficacy. Ban-
dura (1997) argued against using omnibus traits as sole predictors
of action because they are not situationally specific. In his view,
trait effects are DEMO through their effects on more specific
processes such as self-efficacy. Those who passionately love their
work are likely to acquire skill at it, which enhances their efficacy
beliefs. Similarly, tenacious striving should improve capability and
therefore self-efficacy. Thus, we propose the following:
Hypothesis 6a: The greater DEMO entrepreneur–CEO’s passion
for work, the higher the self-efficacy about venture growth
DEMO be.
Hypothesis 6b: The greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s tenacity,
the higher DEMO self-efficacy about venture growth will be.
The relationship of passion and tenacity to goals. Locke
(2001) has shown that situationally specific goals can DEMO
the effects of general traits on performance outcomes. Entre-
preneurship theorists propose that the entrepreneur’s goals are
reflections of his or her personality (Naffziger, 1995). Some
traits (value for achievement, self-esteem, and locus DEMO control)
have shown relationships to goal difficulty, commitment, and
self-set goals (Locke & Latham, 1990); however, the relation-
ship of goals to passion and tenacity has not been tested. We
propose that DEMO who have a passion for work derive pleasure
from challenging goals and will set higher goals for venture
growth. Furthermore, we propose that tenacious people will set
higher goals because their toughness and persistence signal
their DEMO in high achievement.
Hypothesis 7a: The greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s passion,
DEMO higher the goals for subsequent venture growth will be.
Hypothesis 7b: DEMO greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s tenacity,
the higher the goals for subsequent venture growth will be.
The Relationship of New Resource Skill to Communicated
Vision, Self Efficacy, and Goals
The relationship of new resource skill to communicated vision.
Entrepreneurs’ new resource skill involves the ability to acquire
financing, assemble a team, acquire facilities and equipment, and
set up systematic operations DEMO exploit a new business idea. We
propose that entrepreneur–CEOs with high new resource skill will
create and communicate visions with high venture growth content
DEMO their images of a better future are generated with more
591
confidence based on having necessary competencies. Thus, pos-
session of new resource skill removes constraints on the scale of
the dream that is captured in DEMO vision.
New resource skill also includes ownership of an array of
strategies to acquire resources including the knowledge that big
dreams must be communicated DEMO resource providers, including
financiers and employees. These strategies include inspirational
vision DEMO to constituents who can contribute to real-
ization of the dream (DEMO & Shamir, 1993). For example, an
entrepreneur who is skilled in attaining financing is probably better
able to envision a high-growth company DEMO an entrepreneur who
does not know where to look for the first round of debt or equity
financing. Furthermore, successful acquisition of new venture fi-
nancing involves hours of communication including creation of
business plans that DEMO vision statements. Finally, entrepre-
neurs who are skilled at hiring new DEMO exploit candidates’
attraction to growing companies with images of opportunity-laden
futures.
Hypothesis 8a: The greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s new re-
source skill, the greater DEMO communicated venture growth
content of the vision will be.
The relationship of new resource skill to goals. An entrepre-
neur who recognizes that he DEMO she has insufficient new resource
skill to create a growing venture may reflect the deficiency by
setting lower goals. Those who believe they have DEMO levels of
skill should be confident enough to set high goals. We propose the
following:
Hypothesis 8b: The greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s new re-
source skill, the greater the goals for subsequent venture
growth will be.
The relationship of new resource skill to self-efficacy. Central
in social– cognitive DEMO is the proposition that self-efficacy is
affected by enactive mastery, that DEMO, skill through practice (Ban-
dura, 1997). At the root DEMO this proposition is that people are more
confident about task performance when they believe they have
sufficient skill due to experience or deliberate practice. DEMO expect
that entrepreneur–CEOs who have new resource skill will recog-
nize their competency and hold beliefs about their ability to create
and guide their DEMO to growth.
Hypothesis 8c: The greater the entrepreneur–CEO’s new re-
source DEMO, the greater the self-efficacy for subsequent ven-
ture growth will be.
DEMO hypotheses (and results) are shown in Figure 1. In Figure 1,
we propose that the trait and skill variables shown in the DEMO
column (passion, new resource skill, and tenacity) have direct
effects on venture growth and indirect effects on growth through
the motivation variables DEMO are shown in the middle column
(communicated vision, goals, and DEMO). The motivation
variables are mediators, but they also have direct DEMO on venture
growth. The hypothesized paths among the trait and skill variables
and among the motivation variables are also shown. The four
control variables DEMO arrayed in the right column.
592
BAUM AND LOCKE
Figure 1. Structural equation results: Entrepreneurial traits, DEMO, and motivation to subsequent venture growth
model. Fit statistics: 2(49, N  229)  66.12, p  .01; independence model: 2(49, N  229)  1,241.16;
goodness-of-fit index DEMO .93; adjusted goodness-of-fit index  .90; root-mean-square error  .049; DEMO
square error of approximation  .067; expected cross-validation index  .89. DEMO  hypothesis;  control
variables; *p  .05.
Sample
Method
North American architectural woodwork firms comprised the population
for the study (standard industrial classification 2421, 2431, and 2434).
These firms employ architects, skilled woodworkers, applied technologists,
high-tech machinery operators, carpentry installers, managers, DEMO sales-
persons. A complete list of industry members was formed from data
provided by the Architectural Woodwork Institute in Centreville, Virginia,
and the National Hardwood Lumber Association in Washington, DC. In
1993, the industry’s DEMO CEOs were asked to return a response card if they
were willing to participate, and they were asked to identify a subordinate
employee with whom they worked directly. Four hundred forty-two CEOs
(442/849  52%) and 202 (202/849  24%) employee-participants (EPs)
agreed DEMO participate.
1993 questionnaire. A questionnaire was mailed in 1993 to each of the
CEOs and EPs who had agreed to participate. The CEO questionnaire
DEMO measures of the six predictor concepts (passion, tenacity, new
resource DEMO, communicated vision, goals, and self-efficacy), four control
variables, and 1991 and 1992 performance data (the 1991 performance data
were collected for calculation of the past venture growth control variable.).
The measures had DEMO developed and tested using a trial of a draft
questionnaire by 16 industry CEOs and the suggestions they made during
subsequent structured interviews. All DEMO the data for measurement of latent
independent variables were collected in 1993. EPs received a questionnaire
that included measures of the predictor concepts (except for CEOs’ self-
efficacy, which is privately held).
We received 414 CEO responses (414/849  49% of the population) and
189 DEMO responses (189/849  22% of the population). We performed DEMO
tests of the mean number of employees and the mean sales volume of the
414 respondents versus the means of the population of 849. DEMO tests
showed no significant difference between (a) the mean number of employ-
ees (z  .32; p  .38) or (b) the mean sales volume (z  1.00; p  .16).
DEMO were no significant differences in employment or sales among the
189 CEOs for whom we had EP responses and the 225 for whom we DEMO
no EP responses.
1999 questionnaire. A second questionnaire was mailed in 1999 to the
1993 CEO participants to collect 1998 performance data. Taking the DEMO
questionnaires together, we disqualified 185 CEO responses from (a)
single-employee firms, (b) CEOs who had not founded their businesses, (c)
founders who did not intend to grow their business, (d) founders who were
not the same active owner–manager for the 6-year study DEMO, (e)
founders who had established their businesses more than 6 years before
1993, (f) founders who sold or merged their firms to others, and (g) those
who supplied incomplete predictor data.
Thus, the elimination of 185 CEO responses from the 414 received
yielded a sample of 229 entrepreneur–CEOs for this study (229/849  27%
of the population or 229/414  55% of the respondents). The DEMO
participant had 6 employees in 1993 and 20 in 1998. Average sales
increased from $0.8 million in 1993 to $2.4 million in 1998. We DEMO
106 responding EPs (46% of the qualified entrepreneur–CEO sample of
229) because they had worked with their matching qualified entrepreneur–
CEOs for 12 DEMO or more, had submitted complete data, and had
reported that they knew their CEO well. The average CEO–EP relationship
was 6 years, so it is likely that accepted EPs could evaluate their CEO’s
passion for DEMO, new resource skill, tenacity, vision, and goals. (We
guaranteed DEMO to the CEOs and their EPs.)
Measures
Table 1 summarizes the measurement model latent variables, number of
measurement items, measurement description and DEMO, and composite
reliability (CR). CR is a structural equation model (SEM) reliability
statistic (LISREL 8 and PRELIS 2) that is DEMO similar to alpha
(see Note b of Table 1); it DEMO exceed .60 for exploratory model testing
(Hayduk, 1987). The format and content of the measurement items were
guided by the research cited DEMO each latent variable and adapted follow-
ing the 16 industry CEO interviews. Typical measurement items are
presented in the following text, and the complete questionnaire is available
from J. Robert Baum.
Venture growth. Venture growth was DEMO with two items using
data from the 1993 and 1999 questionnaires (DEMO  .94): (a) the compound
annual sales-growth rate from year-end 1992 to year-end 1998, which
covers 6 years, and (b) DEMO compound annual employment-growth rate from
year-end 1992 to year-end 1998. Despite follow-up efforts, 18 of the
entrepreneur–CEOs who qualified for the sample in all other respects had
incomplete 1992 performance data and 10 had incomplete 1998 DEMO These
cases were completed with data supplied by Dun and Bradstreet (DEMO,
2001). The accuracy of the raw performance data was confirmed by
checking the agreement of a random sample of 25 of the DEMO with Dun
and Bradstreet (1994) reports about 1992 performance. (the DEMO tests revealed
no significant differences between the CEO reports and the Dun and
TRAITS, SKILL, AND MOTIVATION TO VENTURE GROWTH 593
Table 1
Measurement DEMO
Latent variable No. of items Formata CRb Research reference
Venture growth 2 6-year sales & employment .94 Low & MacMillan (1988)
Passion 5 5-point scales .86 Locke (1993)
Tenacity 5 5-point scales .83 Gartner, Gatewood, & Shaver, (1991)
New resource skill 5 5-point DEMO .73 Stevenson (1985)
Communicated vision 2 2 ratings plus 2 DEMO or no questions .83 Baum, Locke, & Kirkpatrick (1998)
DEMO 2 8-point scales .89 Bandura (1997)
Goals 2 (1995/1993) 1.0 .75 Locke & Latham (1990)
Age 1 1992–year founded 1.00 Low & MacMillan (1988)
Size 1 1992 employees 1.00 Pugh, Hickson, Hinings, & Turner (1968)
Regional munificence 4 5-point DEMO .70 Hambrick & Finkelstein (1987)
Past venture growth 2 (1992/1991)  1.0 .89 Low & MacMillan (1988)
Note. aSee DEMO section for details. b Composite reliability (CR), an indication of DEMO consistency, is the sum of the square roots of the
item-squared DEMO correlations squared and divided by the same quantity plus the sum of the error variances (Werts, Linn, & Jo¨reskog, 1974).
Bradstreet DEMO) Zero percentage sales and employment growth were skills, write a number from the confidence scale ranging from 0 (no
assigned to 58 firms that had closed after their 1993 participation. confidence at all)to7(complete DEMO), to show how sure you are that
Passion for work. Five 5-point scales ranging from 1 (strongly dis- you can beat each listed percentage change in annual sales from year-end
agree to5(strongly agree), DEMO used to measure passion for work (CR  1992 to year-end DEMO The respondents recorded their confidence in
.86). Examples are “I love my work” and “I look forward to returning to achieving average annual DEMO of growth from –25% or more to 100% or
work when I am away from work.” These statements were derived from more (Bandura, DEMO). We used a parallel scale for employment. The
descriptions of real entrepreneurs’ passion in Locke’s (1993) study. scores entered on the scale DEMO sales were summed to yield the first
Tenacity. Tenacity was measured with five 5-point scales ranging from measure of self-efficacy, and the employment scores were summed to yield
1(strongly disagree)to5(strongly agree;CR  DEMO). Examples are “I can the second measure. The two sums were used in the measurement model.
think of many times when I persisted DEMO work when others quit” and “I Controls. Age and size variables consistently exhibit significant rela-
continue to work hard on projects even when others DEMO me” (Gartner tionships with firm performance (Pugh, Hickson, Hinings, & Turner,
et al., 1991). 1968), although they seldom DEMO so in studies of very early-stage new
New resource skill. New resource skill was measured with five 5-point ventures (i.e., 0 – 4 DEMO old; Low & MacMillan, 1988). Nevertheless, we
scales ranging DEMO 1 (strongly disagree)to5(strongly agree;CR  .73). wanted DEMO isolate any variance that may not have been involved in the
Examples are “I am good at finding money and people to start a DEMO relationships between the independent and dependent variables of the
organization or new program” and “I know how to find the resources that study. Thus, venture age was measured as the number of years from
we need” (Stevenson, 1985). founding to the end of 1992, and venture DEMO was measured with the
Communicated vision. Respondents were asked to write out their com- number of full-time equivalent employees at the end of 1992. DEMO intro-
pany vision or to enclose a copy or it. An author and a PhD student duced a control variable for regional industry munificence. DEMO is
interested in vision research and experienced in terms of written content the environment’s support for organizational growth in terms of market
analysis both DEMO the vision statements using an 11-point scale that demand, community support, availability of financial resources, and com-
reflected the degree of reference to growth. An author provided guidelines petitive threats (Hambrick & Finkelstein, 1987)DEMO Munificence was mea-
for the raters to score visions as follows: DEMO that referred directly to sured with CEO responses that used four 5-point scales ranging from 1
high growth of sales, employment, facilities, market share, or financial (strongly disagree)to5(strongly agree;CR  .70)DEMO A typical scale item
strength were scored 8, 9, or 10. Visions with implications of growth or is “Our region is rich in DEMO capital.” We were concerned that the
references to moderate growth were scored 4, 5, 6, or 7. Visions with no 6-year venture growth studied may have been an artifact of past venture
implications of or DEMO to growth were scored 0, 1, 2, or 3 (Baum et growth, so we included two items to isolate the variance of past venture
al., 1998; the blind coder correlation was .77, p  .001). In addition, the growth (CR  .89): (a) the percentage change in sales between 1991 and
respondents completed two items about vision communication: “Does your 1992 [(1992/1991) –1.0], and (b) the percentage change in employment
company have a written DEMO?” and “Have you talked to your employees between 1991 and 1992 [(1992/1991) –1.0]. (For firms founded during
about your vision DEMO the company in the last 6 months?” The ratings of the 1991, 12-month 1991 sales and employment data were imputed from
two content raters were added and standardized. The questionnaire re- monthly data.) We also conducted a single-industry study to avoid con-
sponses to the two communication DEMO were added (yes  1; no  0) founding by DEMO conditions.
and standardized. The two resulting standardized scores were the two items
that reflected the latent-variable communicated vision (CR  .83; the size
DEMO the item coefficients was similar:   .82 and .86; both  / standard Results
error  2.0).
Goals. In 1993, we had CEOs report their annual goals for sales and
employment for 1993, 1994, and 1995. We measured goals with (a) the
average annual sales growth-rate goal based on the reported sales goals and
(b) DEMO average annual employment growth-rate goal based on the reported
employment goals (DEMO  .75; Locke & Latham, 1990).
Self-efficacy. Entrepreneur–CEO self-efficacy was measured in 1993
with two 8-point self-assessment scale questions (CR  .89; one each for
sales and number of employees). Examples are “Thinking about your
The measurement model had eight latent variables with CR 
DEMO and three latent variables with CR between .70 and .79, and DEMO
measurement-item coefficients were significant ( 2.0; p  .05).
Taken together, these statistics suggest that the measurement items
are reliable reflections of their latent variables (Hayduk, 1987).
There were three statistical indications DEMO the measurement
model had discriminant validity:
594
1. We subjected the scale items to a principal-components
analysis using DEMO rotation (Harman, 1967). From
this exploratory factor analysis, six DEMO emerged with
average item loading  .75. (The factors represented
passion, tenacity, new resource skill, vision communica-
tion, self-efficacy, and munificence.) The remaining
measurement-model items were either objective (goals,
company age, DEMO sales, and historic employment) or
were scored by raters (vision DEMO).
2. For each latent variable, the average variance extracted
by DEMO latent variable’s measures was larger than the
latent variable’s shared variance with any other latent
variable (Fornell & Larcker, 1981).
3. The DEMO bivariate correlation between predictor vari-
ables was .42 (See Table 1; Jones, Lanctot, & Teegen,
2000).
Common-source bias was checked DEMO two procedures:
1. We conducted a confirmatory factor analysis using the
229 CEO responses by linking a common latent variable
with the measures. DEMO resultant coefficient ( .03; t 
.31; p  .74) indicated that common variance was less
than 2%. 2. The principal components DEMO rotation
of the scale items that were reflections of six latent
variables had only three cross loadings above .25. (The
highest was .37.) DEMO appeared to be little threat that
common-source bias was a problem.
We checked the statistical similarity of responses from CEOs
and their EPs for DEMO 106 matching cases to support our claim that
the latent variables were measured with convergent validity. We
used univariate homogeneity testing of the 106 DEMO re-
sponse pairs (PRELIS 2 HT; Aish & Jo¨reskog, 1990) to yield
chi-square statistics for the 23 measurement items for passion,
DEMO, new resource skill, communicated vision, goals, and
regional munificence that were collected from both CEOs and EPs.
Only one chi-square had p DEMO .05, and the average was p  .41,
which supported DEMO claim that the 106 CEO responses were
corroborated by their associates. Furthermore, we used multiple
BAUM AND LOCKE
sample analysis (LISREL MSA) of the 106 CEO and 106 EP
latent-variable matrices to analyze the similarity DEMO covariance
matrices across samples (Jo¨reskog & So¨rbom, 1993). We set the
lambda, iota, and theta matrices equal to zero for both DEMO,
which forced variances into the phi matrix. We then tested the
hypothesis that the phi matrices were equal by minimizing the fit
function DEMO the two. A 2(6, 2)  7.96 resulted. With the
equality constraint relaxed, the chi-square value dropped to 4.82,
so the hypothesis of equal latent-variable relationships was tena-
ble. This process is similar DEMO one that would involve comparison
of a single descriptor of a set of relations derived from pooled data
with a single descriptor of a DEMO of relations derived from indepen-
dent data. If there is little difference between the two descriptors,
similarity is indicated.
Following the LISREL MSA DEMO, we also found statisti-
cal similarity across the covariance matrix responses DEMO CEOs
with EPs (n  106) and without EPs (n DEMO 123). The fit function
with the equality constraint produced 2(6,  2)  8.44. With
the equality constraint lifted, the chi-square value dropped to 5.04,
so the equality hypothesis was supported.
The DEMO that the covariance matrices of the responses from
the 106 CEOs and the 106 EPs are similar is not surprising given
the strong univariate DEMO results. Because the matrices of the
responses from CEOs with and without EPs are similar, we would
expect univariate similarity between the response matrices from
the 123 CEOs and their EPs had we collected matching EP DEMO
Taken together, these tests support our claim that the CEOs offered
DEMO representations of their personal and venture characteristics.
The descriptive statistics (means, standard deviations, and cor-
relations) of the study variables are shown DEMO Table 2. The results,
including the lambda coefficients, of testing DEMO hypothesized
(research) model are shown in Figure 1. Fifteen of the 19 hypoth-
esized paths had significant coefficients. The fit statistics for the
DEMO model (including the hypothesized but insignificant
paths) fit the data well: goodness-of-fit-index  .93; adjusted
goodness-of-fit index  .90; root-mean-square residual  .049;
root-mean-square error of approximation  .07; and expected
cross-validation index  .89. Also, the chi-square statistic for the
model, 2(28, N  229)  66.12, p .00, was significantly
smaller than was the chi-square statistic for the structural null
model in which the DEMO among the study’s variables were all set
Table 2
Means, Standard DEMO, and Correlations
Variable
MSD
12 3 4 56 7 8 9 DEMO 11
1. Venture growth 0.11 0.36 —
2. Passion 3.73 0.49 .10 —
3. Tenacity 3.45 0.33 .07 .36*** —
4. New resource skill DEMO 0.99 .18** .04 .16* —
5. Communicated vision 2.91 1.16 .27*** .18** .11 .18** —
6. Self-efficacy 3.63 0.50 .30*** .19** .20** .16* .24** DEMO
7. Goals 0.16 0.40 .27*** .17* .18** .24** .42*** .30*** —
8. Age 3.58 1.15 .04 .04 .05 .07 .12 .01 .02 —
9. DEMO 6.28 5.17 .05 .06 .07 .12 .08 .09 .08 .20** —
10. Regional munificence 3.73 0.51 .06 .02 .04 .08 .15 .12 .03 .00 DEMO —
11. Past venture growth 0.07 0.15 .16** .10 .06 .07 .13 .25** .13 .05 .10 .06 —
Note. N  229.
* p DEMO .05. ** p  .01. *** p  .001.
TRAITS, SKILL, AND MOTIVATION TO VENTURE GROWTH
595
to equal zero, 2(49, N  229)  1,241.16. Thirty five percent DEMO
the variance is explained. Furthermore, the fit of the model was
DEMO better than a model with direct effects only, which
explained 31% DEMO the variance; 2(41, N  2)  102.07, p  .00;
goodness-of-fit index  .90; adjusted goodness-of-fit index  .86;
root-mean-square residual  .05; root-mean-square error of ap-
proximation  .086; expected cross-validation index  .82. As
expected, fit statistics improved when DEMO paths were
removed from the model; however, we present the hypothesized
model in Figure 1, complete with insignificant hypothesized paths,
to help us emphasize the importance of the indirect effects of traits
and skill.
DEMO were no significant direct paths ( p  .05) from passion,DEMO
tenacity, or new resource skill to venture growth; thus Hypotheses
1a, 1b, and 1c were not supported (trait and skill direct effects).
Passion was unrelated to new resource skill, thus failing to support
Hypothesis 2a; however, Hypothesis 2b was supported in that
tenacity was DEMO related to new resource skill ( .14).
Communicated vision ( .22), goals ( .26), and self-efficacy
( .34) had significant paths to venture growth, thus supporting
Hypotheses 3a, 3b, and 3c. The paths from vision (  .28) and
self-efficacy (  .22) to goals were also significant, thus sup-
porting Hypotheses DEMO and 4b. Finally, all paths from traits and
skill to the DEMO variables were significant. To repeat in
detail, the paths from passion ( .13), new resource skill (
.24), and tenacity (DEMO .12) to vision; the paths from passion (
.14), DEMO resource skill ( .21), and tenacity ( .15) to DEMO;
and the paths from passion ( .23), new resource DEMO ( .19),
and tenacity (  .22) to self-efficacy were all significant, thus
supporting Hypotheses 5a, 5b, 6a, 6b, 7a, 7b, 8a, 8b, and 8c.
We present totally standardized DEMO results, so the relative size
of the lambda coefficients points to DEMO relative size of the effects.
Of course, measurement quality affects the DEMO of effects, and it is
not appropriate to focus on one DEMO in a recursive indirect-
effects model as if the other coefficients were fixed. Nevertheless,
with caution, it is interesting to note that self-efficacy had the
strongest direct effect on venture growth among the predictor
variables. DEMO, there was no stronger relationship among any of
the study variables. DEMO and goals were also highly significant
predictors of venture growth ( p  .01), and vision had a highly
significant relationship with goals. DEMO summary, the motivation
cluster studied here is a highly significant predictor DEMO subsequent
venture growth. The relationships between passion and tenacity
and self-efficacy and between new resource skill and vision stand
out as very significant but DEMO as significant as the motivation to
venture growth effects.
Our vision variable was composed of measures of venture
growth content and separate measures of DEMO communication.
We reran our analysis to see how well vision growth content alone
predicted growth, and we found a reduction in the standardized
lambda coefficient between vision and venture growth and a
statistically significant reduction in DEMO chi-square fit statistic.
Also, the correlation between the vision growth content DEMO (a
standardized combination of the two rater scores) and the vision
communication item (a standardized combination of the two ques-
tions about communication) was high (r  .51; p  .001), and the
two-item CR was .79. Taken together, we found that entrepreneurs
who tend to have dreams of significant growth tend to communi-
cate their dreams, and we found that the joint tendency predicts
venture growth better than DEMO vision content or vision commu-
nication alone.
Goals that are set too high inspire risk taking that may lead to
reduced performance (Knight, DEMO, & Locke, 2001). Thus, we
checked for a U-shaped DEMO between goals and venture
growth. We ran a regression analysis, with DEMO sales growth as
the dependent variable and both sales-growth goals and sales-
growth goals squared as independent variables to test for nonlin-
earity. The DEMO goals squared term did not develop a
significant coefficient ( .025; t  0.24; p  .81).
Discussion and Conclusion
There are seven theoretical and applied contributions of this
study. The most important finding DEMO this study is that specific
component variables of entrepreneurs’ traits, skill, and motivation
categories are significant direct or indirect predictors of venture
growth DEMO a period of 6 years following initial measurement. Such
long-term follow-up periods are quite rare in industrial–
organizational psychology. A notable exception is the DEMO by
Howard and Bray (1988), who were able to predict DEMO
promotions over a 25-year period. However, the only motivational
predictor of DEMO in their study was a personal ambition factor that
focused on how many managerial levels the managers wanted to
move up in their organization DEMO than on organization perfor-
mance. In the present study, in contrast, we found that a variegated
but interrelated set of motivational traits and DEMO (along with
skill) work in concert to affect performance. Findings that the
situationally specific motivation concepts studied here have strong
direct effects on DEMO growth are fully consistent with previous
applied psychology and social psychology research (Bandura,
1997; Baum et al., 1998; Locke & Latham, 1990). The positive
effects for goals and self-efficacy are consistent with DEMO results of
hundreds of performance studies. Of course, at times goals DEMO be
set so high that risk taking is increased; although increasing DEMO
may sometimes lead to high performance (Knight et al., 2001), it
can also lead to disaster when the risks are foolish. Similarly,DEMO
self-efficacy is usually beneficial to performance (Bandura, 1997),
but DEMO can be harmful when it is based on conditions
and assumptions that no longer hold true (Audia, Locke, & Smith,
2000).
Second, the findings for communicated vision are of particular
interest. Although the concept of vision is widely discussed in the
leadership literature, this is the first study in which communicated
vision was shown to be independently DEMO quantitatively related to
performance in a field setting over a multiyear period. Vision had
not only an indirect effect on growth through specific goals DEMO
also a direct effect. Vision in our study was measured in terms of
growth aspirations or imagery—which were most logically related
to the dependent DEMO Firm growth, however, is not the only
outcome measure of relevance to CEOs, regardless of whether they
are entrepreneurs. Profitability, survival, career satisfaction, and
innovation are other potential dependent variables that could be
studied in future research. Obviously CEO visions could be ex-
plored in more DEMO, possibly through interviews, and different
scoring criteria could be applied, DEMO when other dependent
variables are of interest.
It should be noted that in the literature, the term vision is used
in a wider sense than as just a general goal. Locke (2000) defined
596
BAUM AND LOCKE
vision as foresight, seeing the potential of some market, technol-
ogy, product, or service; by implication, vision includes strategic
vision— how the company competes successfully in the market.
This aspect DEMO vision clearly requires study. Indeed, vision has
been defined from various DEMO, and its meaning in common
usage is evolving. Therefore, it is important to note that our
findings for vision relate to business vision DEMO our respondents
understood the concept. Furthermore, we measured one specific
feature DEMO the respondents’ vision—the references and implications
for distant future growth. Thus, DEMO measured vision as a long-term
goal, and the positive findings of DEMO study for vision must be
interpreted as support for the use of long-term goals.
Third, the finding that passion and tenacity had no direct effect
on venture performance suggests that the weak results of previous
studies DEMO entrepreneurial traits may not have been caused by
studying the wrong traits but by the fact that the traits have indirect
rather than direct DEMO In this respect, our results agree with
Baum et al.’s (2001), in which aggregated trait effects were indi-
rect. These results are DEMO in concert with Locke’s (2001) review
(mostly of laboratory studies) in which he found that personality
and other general motivational effects on DEMO are medi-
ated by the situationally and task-specific factors of goals and
self-efficacy. Thus, it is not the case that traits have small or no
explanatory power but that their effects are through specific,
nontrait DEMO, such as goals, efficacy, and vision.
If traits affect action DEMO through other variables, it could be
worthwhile to study both additional DEMO and additional mediators.
This is especially relevant considering that the LISREL model
accounted for only 35% of the variance in performance. For
example, it may be useful to study some of the Big Five person-
ality DEMO, including those that have been identified as “entrepre-
neurial” (Lumpkin & Dess, 1996). Extraversion, which is related
to energy and ambition, would seem especially relevant. Consci-
entiousness might also play a role in DEMO growth even though it is
not a specifically entrepreneurial trait. Core evaluations, which
form a singly higher order factor consisting of self-esteem, general
DEMO, internal locus of control, and nonneuroticism, have
been found to DEMO a variety of relationships with satisfaction, job
and task choice, and performance (Erez & Judge, 2001), but core
evaluations have not DEMO been studied in relation to entrepreneurs.
A fourth contribution of the present study is that it was con-
ducted at the macro level. The DEMO variable was not indi-
vidual performance but the performance of the venture as a whole.
Of course, in the case of relatively small companies like those used
in the present study, the entrepreneur–CEO tends to have direct
influence on every aspect of the business. Thus, what the
entrepreneur–CEO thinks and wants tends to affect organizational
outcomes more directly than in DEMO case of larger organizations.
The same may be true of entrepreneur–CEO skills. Here, new
resource skill worked through motivational mechanisms, but such
skill DEMO also operate through situationally specific skills as well.
In large organizations, DEMO contrast, there may be many more links
among the CEO’s vision, traits and goals, and organizational
performance in that the actions of thousands or hundreds of thou-
sands of employees and many management layers have DEMO be
coordinated to achieve the desired outcomes.
Fifth, these results have DEMO implications for facilitating
venture growth. The trait findings are relevant to selection that
could be relevant to venture capitalists who have to decide which
DEMO to fund. Self-efficacy is best developed through enactive
mastery (Bandura, 1997) that comes from training and experience.
Such experience can be deliberately chosen by the potential en-
trepreneur to build needed skills or it can DEMO mandated by venture
capitalists as a condition of funding. Visioning and goal-setting
skills can be trained.
Sixth, we added to knowledge about entrepreneurship with this
first empirical study of new resource skill. Our finding that new
DEMO skill inspires more challenging visions of new venture
growth, higher growth DEMO, and self-efficacy points to the im-
portance of new resource skill DEMO entrepreneurs’ motivation, and
motivation variables are direct predictors of venture growth. DEMO
cause experience is a known predictor of skill, our results for DEMO
resource skill may support a more complete explanation of why
serial and habitual entrepreneurs are more reliable founders of
successful businesses (Wright, Westhead, & Sohl, 1998).
Organization skill was used in an earlier version of this study,
but we replaced it with new resource skill, a related concept,
because new resource skill is more relevant to DEMO new venture
situation. That is, organization skill involves management of es-
DEMO resources rather than skill in assembling and organizing
new resources. Nevertheless, DEMO found in the earlier version that
organization skill is a significant indirect predictor of venture
growth through goals and self-efficacy. Results in this study DEMO
that new resource skill is a much stronger predictor of subsequent
venture growth because of more significant indirect effects
through vision, goals, and DEMO In addition, new resource
skill is a significant direct predictor of DEMO growth at p  .10,
whereas organization skill had no significant direct effects at any
acceptable level of significance. Details about measurement of
DEMO skill and its effects on venture growth are available
from J. Robert Baum.
Seventh, the significant correlation between tenacity and orga-
nizing skill also deserves further study in the entrepreneurship
setting. Indeed, Boyatzis (1982) proposed that managers’ traits are
manifested in their competencies because traits affect behavior DEMO
repeated behaviors build skill. For example, it would be useful to
DEMO out whether tenacious entrepreneurs develop increased orga-
nizing competency because they work harder and longer than those
with less tenacity. This would be consistent DEMO findings about the
relationship between personality and skill development.
Limitations
First, DEMO of a single industry provides control of industry
effects and may add richness and clarity; however, entrepreneur-
ship researchers have found that industry DEMO affect
venture performance (Bhide, 2000). Thus, other industries should
DEMO studied. Second, we used SEM because it addressed our need to
DEMO multiple mediating paths, multiple measures of observed
variables, unobserved variables, DEMO measurement error. Never-
theless, we used regression analysis to test the DEMO U-shaped
relationship between goals and venture growth because SEM as-
sumes linear relationships. Future research may uncover additional
nonlinear effects that we did not DEMO
Third, a larger sample of CEO–EP pairs would have allowed us
DEMO check our model with a fully verified set of CEO responses; DEMO
hope that future studies will respond to this shortcoming. Further-
more, DEMO difference between the fit of the direct-effects model and
TRAITS, SKILL, AND MOTIVATION TO VENTURE GROWTH
597
the total-effects model DEMO statistically significant but moderate in
absolute terms. Although our finding provides confidence that the
indirect model is a better description of our data than DEMO direct-
effects model, the moderate absolute difference (35% explained
variance vs. 31%) suggests that practitioners should be cautious
about application of the indirect effects found here. Larger samples
may mitigate the need for caution. However, practitioners may be
confident about the findings from this study’s sample that DEMO
vation variables are important direct predictors of subsequent
venture growth and that entrepreneurs’ personal characteristics
matter for venture growth. Fourth, although we reviewed various
literatures in search of relevant specific traits and skill for study,
DEMO traits and skills, as noted above, may be important. Fifth, DEMO
was a correlational study and not an experimental study. The
longitudinal design combined with controls for past performance,
company age, and company size gives some plausibility to a
predictor interpretation of the results; however, DEMO cannot rule out
the possibility that our variables both affected and were affected by
past performance (e.g., goals); thus, the causal relationships may
be reciprocal.
Sixth, convenience motivated our choice of a 6-year time lag to
challenge the model of entrepreneurship characteristics. Future
research should look DEMO other time lags to be certain that our
findings are not unique to a 6-year follow-up period. Seventh, we
chose to study venture growth to represent the force of dynamic
capitalism; however, as we noted, there are other indicators of
performance (personal satisfaction, survival, innovation, DEMO
ble assets) that must be studied. Eighth, there may be control
variables relevant to firm performance that were not measured in
our study. DEMO example, regional variables such as investment
capital and availability of skilled DEMO might favor certain
regions over others. Ninth, the data were based DEMO self-reports, but
the measures did show convergent validity with EP reports, and a
random sample of the performance data was validated against Dun
DEMO Bradstreet (1994, 2001) reports, suggesting that the self-report
data were valid.
In conclusion, this 6-year study of the effects of traits, DEMO, and
motivation offers support for recent research interest in personal
characteristics DEMO an explanation of new venture performance. We
found that entrepreneurs’ passion, DEMO, and new resource skill
affect venture growth through communicated vision, goals, and
self-efficacy. The finding that personal characteristics matter
opens significant opportunities for research exploration centered
on the study of traits, skills, and mediators, and it points to the
opportunities for psychology researchers within the entrepreneur-
DEMO setting. Furthermore, personality assessment and skills and
motivation training may have DEMO role in development of entrepre-
neurs. Entrepreneurship education programs ought to teach vision-
formation communication and goal setting. This study also con-
firms the DEMO of financiers’ interest in entrepreneurs’
personal characteristics.
References
Aish, A. M., & Jo¨reskog, K. G. (1990). A panel model for political DEMO
and responsiveness: An application of LISREL 7. Quality and Quantity,
DEMO, 405– 426.
Aldrich, H. E. (1999). Organizations evolving. London: Sage.
Aldrich, H. E., & Wiedenmayer, G. (1993). From DEMO to rates: An
ecological perspective on organizational foundings. In J. A. DEMO &
R. H. Brockhaus Sr. (Eds.), Advances in entrepreneurship, DEMO emer-
gence, and growth (pp. 45–195). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Audia, P. G., Locke, E. A., & Smith, K. G. (2000). The paradox of success:
An archival and laboratory study of strategic persistence following
radical environmental change. Academy of Management Journal, 43,
837– 853.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of DEMO and action: A social
cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice DEMO
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New DEMO:
Freeman.
Baron, R. A. (1998). Cognitive mechanisms in entrepreneurship: Why and
when entrepreneurs think differently than other people. Journal of Busi-
ness Venturing, 13, 275–294.
Bass, B. M., & Stogdill, R. M. (1990). Bass & Stogdill’s handbook of
leadership: Theory, research, and managerial implications. New York:
Free Press.
Baum, J. R., Locke, E. A., & Kirkpatrick, S. (1998). A longitudinal DEMO
of the relation of vision and vision communication to venture growth in
entrepreneurial firms. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 43–54.
Baum, J. R., Locke, E. A., & Smith, K. G. (2001). A multidimensional
model of venture growth. Academy of Management Journal, 44, 292–303.
DEMO, A. V. (2000). The origin and evolution of new businesses. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Bird, B. (1989). Entrepreneurial Behavior. Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman
& Company.
Boyatzis, R. E. (1982)DEMO The competent manager. New York: Wiley.
Brockhaus, R. H., Sr. (1980). Risk-taking propensity of entrepreneurs.
Academy of Management Journal, 23, DEMO –520.
Busenitz, L. W., & Barney, J. B. (1997). Differences between entrepre-
neurs and managers in large organizations: Biases and heuristics in
strategic decision-making. Journal of Business Venturing, 12, 9 –30.
Bygrave, W. D. (1993). Theory building in the entrepreneurship paradigm.
Journal of Business Venturing, 8, 255–280.
Carsrud, A. L., & Krueger, N. F., Jr. (1995). Entrepreneurship and social
psychology: Behavioral technology for the new venture initiation pro-
cess. In J. A. Katz & R. DEMO Brockhaus, Sr. (Eds.), Advances in entre-
preneurship, firm emergence, and growth (pp. 73–96). Greenwich, CT:
JAI Press.
Chen, C. C., Greene, P. G., & Crick, A. (1998). Does entrepreneurial
self-efficacy distinguish entrepreneurs from managers? Journal of Busi-
ness Venturing, 13, 295–316.
Chen, G., Gully, S. M., Whiteman, J., & Kilcullen, R. N. (2000). Exami-
nation of relationships among trait-like individual differences, state-like
individual differences, and learning performance. Journal of DEMO
Psychology, 85, 835– 847.
Collins, J. C., & Porras, DEMO (1991). Organizational vision and visionary
organizations. California Management Review, 34, 30 –52.
Covin, J. G., & Slevin, D. P. (1997). High growth transitions: Theoretical
perspectives and suggested directions. In D. L. Sexton & R. W. Smilor
(Eds.), Entrepreneurship 2000 (pp. 99 DEMO). Chicago: Upstart.
Davidson, P., Low, M. B., & DEMO, M. (2001). Low and McMillan ten
years on: Achievements DEMO future directions for entrepreneurship re-
search. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 25, 5–16.
Dun & Bradstreet. (1994). Business credit services
Dun & Bradstreet. (2001). Business credit services.
Erez, A., & Judge, T. DEMO (2001). Relationship of core self-evaluations to
goal setting, motivation, DEMO performance. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 86, 80 –92.
Filion, DEMO J. (1991). Vision and relations: Elements for an entrepreneurial
metamodel. International Small Business Journal, 9, 112–131.
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models
with observable variables and measurement error. Journal of Marketing
Research, 18, 39 –50.
598
BAUM AND LOCKE
Gartner, W. B. (1989). “Who is DEMO entrepreneur?” is the wrong question.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 13, 47– 68.
Gartner, W. B., Gatewood, E., & Shaver, K. G. (1991). Reasons for starting
a business: Not-so-simple answers to DEMO questions. In G. E. Hills &
R. W. LaForge (Eds.), Research at the marketing/entrepreneurship
interface (pp. 90 –101). Chicago: DEMO of Illinois at Chicago.
Hambrick, D. C., & Finkelstein, S. (1987). Managerial discretion: A bridge
between polar views of organizational outcomes. In L. L. Cummings &
B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research DEMO organizational behavior (pp. 369 – 406).
Greenwich, CT: JAI DEMO
Harman, H. H. (1967). Modern factor analysis (2nd ed.)DEMO Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Hayduk, L. A. (1987)DEMO Structural equation modeling with LISREL: Essen-
tials and advances. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
House, R. J., & Shamir, B. (1993)DEMO Toward the integration of transforma-
tional, charismatic and visionary theories of DEMO In M. Chemers
& R. Ayman (Eds.), Leadership theory and DEMO: Perspectives and
directions (pp. 81–107). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Howard, A., & Bray, D. (1988). Managerial lives DEMO transition: Advancing
age and changing times. New York: Guilford Press.
Howell, J. M., & Frost, P. J. (1989). A laboratory DEMO of charismatic
leadership. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
43, DEMO
Johnson, B. (1990). Toward a multidimensional model of entrepreneurship:
The case of achievement motivation and the entrepreneur. Entrepreneur-
ship Theory and DEMO, 14, 39 –54.
Jones, G. K., Lanctot, A., Jr., & Teegen, H. J. (2000). Determinants and
performance impacts of external technology acquisition. Journal of
Business Venturing, 16, 255–283.
Jo¨reskog, K. G., & So¨rbom, D. (1993). LISREL 8 user’s reference guide:
Multi-sample analysis (pp. 261–280). Chicago: Scientific Software
International.
Kirchhoff, B. (1997). Entrepreneurship economics. In W. B. Bygrave
(Ed.), DEMO portable MBA in entrepreneurship (pp. 38 –52). New York,
DEMO
Kirkpatrick, S. A., & Locke, E. A. (1996). Direct and indirect effects of
three core charismatic leadership components on performance and DEMO
tudes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 36 –51
Kirzner, I. DEMO (1985). Discovery and the capitalist process. Chicago:
University of DEMO Press.
Knight, D., Durham, C. C., & Locke, E. DEMO (2001). The relationship of
team goals, incentives, and efficacy DEMO strategic risk, tactical implemen-
tation, and performance. Academy of Management Journal, 44, 326 –
339.
Krampe, R. T., & Ericsson, K. A. (1996). Maintaining excellence: Delib-
erate practice and elite performance DEMO young and older pianists. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 125, DEMO
Landy, F. J., & Becker, W. S. (1987). Motivation theory reconsidered. In
L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organization behav-
ior (pp. 1–38). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Larwood, L., Falbe, C. M., Kriger, M. P., & Miesing, P. (1995). Structure
and meaning of organizational vision. Academy of Management Journal,
38, 740 –769.
Locke, E. A. (1993). The traits of American business heroes. Manuscript in
preparation, University of Maryland.
Locke, E. A. (2000). The prime movers. New York: Amacom.
Locke, E. A. (2001). Self-set goals and self-efficacy as DEMO of
incentives and personality. In M. Erez, U. Kleinbeck, & H. Thierry
(Eds.), Work motivation in the context of a globalizing economy (pp.
13–26). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal setting and DEMO
performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2002). Building a practically useful theory
of DEMO setting and task motivation: A 35-year odyssey. American
Psychologist, 57, DEMO
Low, M. B., & MacMillan, I. C. (1988). Entrepreneurship: Past research
and future challenges. Journal of Management, 14, 139 –151.
Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. (1996). Clarifying DEMO entrepreneurial
orientation construct and linking it to performance. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 21, 135–172.
Markman, G. D., Baron, R. A., & Balkin, D. B. (2001, August). Adversity
quotient: Perceived perseverance and new venture formation. Paper
presented at the meeting of the Academy DEMO Management, Washing-
ton, DC.
McClelland, D. C. (1965). N achievement and entrepreneurship: A longi-
tudinal study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1, 389 –
392.
Mitchell, R. K., Smith, B., Seawright, L. W., & Morse, E. A. (2000).
Cross-cultural cognitions and the venture creation decision. Academy of
Management Journal, 43, DEMO –993.
Naffziger, D. W. (1995). Entrepreneurship: A person-based theory DEMO
proach. In J. A. Katz & R. H. Brockhaus Sr. (Eds.), Advances in
entrepreneurship, firm emergence, and growth (pp. 21–50). DEMO,
CT: JAI Press.
Pugh, D. S., Hickson, D. J., Hinings, C. R., & Turner, C. (1968). An
empirical taxonomy of structures of work organizations. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 14, 115–126.
DEMO, J. (1934). Capitalism, socialism, and democracy. New York:
Harper and Row.
Sexton, D. L. (2001). Wayne Huizenga: Entrepreneur and wealth creator.
Academy of Management Executive, 1, 40 – 48.
DEMO, D. L., & Bowman, N. B. (1986). Validation of a personality index:
Comparative psychological characteristics analysis of female entrepre-
neurs, managers, entrepreneurship students and business students. In R.
Ronstadt, J. A. DEMO, R. Peterson, & K. H. Vesper (Eds.), Frontiers
of DEMO research (pp. 40 –51). Wellesley, MA: Babson
College.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as
a field of research. Academy of Management Review, 25, 217–226.
Smilor, R. W. (1997). Entrepreneurship: Reflections on a subversive ac-
tivity. DEMO of Business Venturing, 12, 341–346.
Smith, J. K., & Smith, R. L. (2000). Entrepreneurial finance. New York:
Wiley.
The DEMO of Small Business: A Report to the President, (1995). DEMO
ton, DC: U. S. Government Printing Office.
Stevenson, H. H. (1985). A new paradigm for entrepreneurial management.
In J. J. Kao & H. H. Stevenson (Eds.), Entrepreneurship: What it is and
how to teach it (pp. 30 – 61). Boston: Harvard Business DEMO
Tichy, N. M., & Devanna, M. A. (1986). The transformational leader. New
York: Wiley.
Timmons, J. A. (2000). New venture creation: Entrepreneurship 2000 (5th
ed.). Homewood, IL: Irwin.
DEMO, C. E., Linn, R. L., & Jo¨reskog, K. (1974). Interclass reliability
estimates: Testing structural assumptions. Educational and Psychologi-
cal Measurement, 34, 25–33.
Wright, M., Westhead, P., & Sohl, J. (1998). Habitual entrepreneurs and
angel investors. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, DEMO, 5–22.
Yukl, G. A. (1989). Leadership in organizations (2nd ed.). Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Zahra, A. Z., DEMO, R. D., & Hitt, M. A. (2000). International expansion
by new venture firms: International diversity, mode of market entry,
DEMO learning, and performance. Academy of Management
Journal, 43, 925–950.
Received DEMO 25, 2002
Revision received July 17, 2003
Accepted August 4, DEMO {1g42fwefx}