PERSPECTIVES ON PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Psychology as the Science of
Self-Reports and Finger
DEMO
Whatever Happened to Actual Behavior?
Roy F. Baumeister,1 Kathleen D. Vohs,2 and David C. Funder3
1Florida State University, 2Marketing Department, DEMO School of Management, University of Minnesota, and
3University of California, DEMO
ABSTRACT—Psychology calls itself the science of behavior,
and the American Psychological Association’s current
‘‘Decade of Behavior’’ was intended to increase awareness
and appreciation DEMO this aspect of the science. Yet some
psychological subdisciplines have never directly studied
behavior, and studies on behavior are dwindling rapidly in
other subdisciplines. We discuss the eclipse of behavior in
personality and social psychology, in which direct obser-
vation of behavior has been increasingly supplanted by
introspective DEMO, hypothetical scenarios, and
questionnaire ratings. We advocate a renewed commit-
ment to including direct observation of behavior whenever
possible and in at least DEMO healthy minority of research
projects.
For decades now, psychology students have DEMO taught from the
ﬁrst day of class that psychology is the science of behavior and
that its ultimate goal is to describe and explain DEMO people do.
Is that a fair description? The answer varies with DEMO speciﬁc
area of psychology. Neuroscience and cognitive psychology have
never had much to say about the meaningful activities people
perform in their daily lives, nor have they really intended to.
These ﬁelds are more interested in DEMO the internal
workings of the mind and brain rather than behavioral outcomes.
In contrast, animal learning and developmental psychology
have consistently focused on behavior, perhaps because
participants studied by these ﬁelds generally cannot ﬁll out
Address correspondence to Kathleen Vohs, Suite 3-150, 321 19th
Avenue South, Marketing Department, Carlson School of Manage-
ment, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, DEMO 55455; e-mail:
vohsx005@umn.edu.
questionnaires or read prompts on a computer DEMO, and
their studies have ranged from bar pressing as a function DEMO
rewards to behavioral coordination between small children and
their parents.
The ﬁelds of social and personality psychology, however, offer
a special and discouraging DEMO Both of these related ﬁelds have
a mandate to study the important social behaviors that compose
the very texture of human life, with personality psychology fo-
cusing on individual differences in those behaviors and social
psychology DEMO situational inﬂuences. But personality
psychology has long relied heavily on questionnaires in lieu of
behavioral observation, a state of affairs that has begun to
change only recently and ever so slowly, at that. Even worse,
social psychology has actually moved in the opposite direction.
At one time DEMO on direct observations of behaviors that
were both fascinating and important—a focus that attracted
many researchers to the ﬁeld in the ﬁrst place—social psy-
DEMO has turned in recent years to the study of reaction times
and questionnaire responses. These techniques, which prom-
ised to help to explain behavior, appear instead to have largely
supplanted it. The result is that current research in social and
personality psychology pays remarkably little attention to the
DEMO things that people do.
The 1990s was named the ‘‘Decade of the Brain’’ by the
American Psychological Association (APA). This widely-ad-
vertised rubric, promoted heavily by the APA, focused attention
on the importance of DEMO advances in research on brain pro-
cesses. It was wildly successful, DEMO the extent that many funding
agencies jettisoned many other research priorities as they
poured money into expensive brain research and articles and
conference sessions DEMO brain studies proliferated. Brain
researchers have always been more interested in brain and
nervous system functioning than in behavioral implications.
396
Copyright r 2007 DEMO for Psychological Science
Volume 2—Number 4
Roy F. Baumeister, Kathleen D. Vohs, and David C. Funder
Ironically, however, their research has beneﬁted hugely from the
conviction by funding agencies and the public at large that
anything a neuron does must be DEMO important. Such
relevance has been demonstrated once in a great while (DEMO, in
the work by Damasio, 1994, on the interaction between DEMO
tional and cognitive systems in decision making), but more often
it has merely been taken on faith. Meanwhile, the increase in
study of the brain has helped erode interest in the actual ob-
servation of DEMO
It seemed an extremely wise move therefore when, impressed
by the DEMO of the brain decade, APA came up with the idea of
DEMO the ﬁrst decade of the new century ‘‘The Decade of
Behavior.’’ The goal was to focus attention on the contributions
of psychology toward understanding DEMO affecting important
behaviors and consequent life outcomes, thereby adding rele-
vance, credibility, and (one hoped) big research budgets to the
enterprise. This emphasis was—or at least should have been—
especially welcome to social and DEMO psychologists,
whose research programs would seem to be in a position to
beneﬁt greatly from a renewed recognition of the importance of
behavior.
DEMO is now past halfway through the putative Decade of Behavior
and is therefore a fair time to ask, ‘‘How’s it going?’’ In particular,
how are social and personality psychologists doing? To antici-
pate our answer, we think they are doing ﬁne in many respects—
but not in respect to studying behavior.
LOOKING FOR BEHAVIOR
With that question in DEMO, we picked up a recent (January
2006) issue of the DEMO of Personality and Social Psychology
(JPSP), by consensus the premier DEMO in our subdisciplines
(we are all social and personality psychologists). DEMO is undeniably
a ﬁne issue, offering important advances in the topics DEMO arti-
cles address. The methods are rigorous, and the discussions are
DEMO The editors, reviewers, and authors did their jobs
well.
But behavior is hard to ﬁnd. Or if it is there, it is rather
different than what we had imagined it to be. If this issue DEMO a
representative sample, then human behavior is almost always
performed in DEMO seated position, usually seated in front of a
computer. Finger movements, as in keystrokes and pencil
marks, constitute the vast majority of human action.
In fact, a remarkable amount of ‘‘behavior’’ turns out to be
really just marks on a self-report questionnaire. Sometimes
these questionnaires ask people DEMO report what they have done,
will do, or would do. DEMO often, they ask people to report what
they think, how they feel, or why they do what they do. In other
words, DEMO personality and social psychological studies gather
self-reports of inner states.
Nisbett and Wilson (1977) thought they had discredited in-
trospection back in the DEMO, when they demonstrated that the
factors that drive behavior are often DEMO to the people who
Volume 2—Number 4
perform it. As their title expressed, most introspective reporting
involves ‘‘telling more than we can know.’’ Although aspects of
this research became controversial, it is abundantly clear from
their studies, other research, and everyday observation that
people have not always DEMO what they say they have done, will
not always do what DEMO say they will do, and often do not even
know the DEMO causes of the things they do. These discrepancies
mean that self-reports of past behaviors, hypothetical future
behaviors, or causes of behavior are not DEMO accurate.1
Nonetheless, self-report appears to have all but crowded out
all DEMO forms of behavior. Behavioral science today, at least as
represented in DEMO, mostly involves asking people to report on
their thoughts, feelings, DEMO, and attitudes. Occasionally
they are asked to report on recent or DEMO actions. Or,
somewhat differently (and more rarely), reaction times, implicit
associations, or memory recall might be assessed in the service
of illuminating a cognitive process. But that is as close as most
research DEMO Direct observation of meaningful behavior is
apparently passe´.
This is certainly quite an ironic turnabout from Nisbett and
Wilson’s (1977) critical stance. In DEMO, Wilson’s more recent
work has shown that when people introspect to DEMO the
reasons for their actions, they often mislead themselves (Wilson,
2002). In a choice rhetorical ﬂourish, he advises people who
seek self-knowledge to eschew direct inspection and instead
consult books on social psychology. DEMO the books on social
psychology are increasingly based on research that itself is
heavily based on introspection.
The move from behavior to an emphasis DEMO introspective self-
report and hypothetical responses to imagined events is poten-
tially a hugely important shift in the very nature of psychology.
Psychological science DEMO out in the 1800s with introspec-
tion (e.g., Wundt, 1894)DEMO One major development of the 20th
century was the shift from introspection to direct observation
of behavior, widely regarded as an advance in the development
of scientiﬁc methodology. Did someone, somewhere, decide that
that had DEMO a mistake and that we should now go back to in-
trospection?
Let’s take a closer look at this recent issue of JPSP, which
was chosen only for convenience and is presumably represen-
tative. It DEMO 11 articles reporting 38 studies. The closest
thing to direct observation of behavior in the dependent mea-
sures of any of these studies was DEMO participant making a decision.
That is, one study asked participants to DEMO between two
stimulus persons (who were made known to participants via
DEMO) to give them the postexperimental interview. Apart
from that borderline case, not a single one of those 38 studies
contained direct observation of DEMO The dependent mea-
sures consisted entirely of ratings, either on paper DEMO
1This does not mean they are never accurate, but rather that DEMO is no way to
know whether they are accurate or not without direct observation of behavior.
397
Eclipse of Behavior
naires or computer-administered stimuli. The ratings were
mainly introspective DEMO
Some of the procedures included hints of behavior along the
way. One study had participants read a ﬁctional police report
about a violent act DEMO express a (nonbinding) opinion as to the
appropriate prison sentence for the perpetrator. (So at least they
read about someone else’s behavior, DEMO ﬁctional behavior.)
Four studies had participants take tests: one for DEMO purpose of
legitimizing bogus feedback, the other three as a basis DEMO as-
sessing the accuracy of self-ratings of performance. Some of the
questionnaires asked people to report on their past behaviors.
Several asked people to DEMO things, such as descriptions of
hypothetical behavior. One study had participants DEMO out all
instances of the letter e in a page of printed text.
So that is behavior today in the leading journal of social DEMO
personality psychology: ratings and more ratings, occasionally
making a choice, DEMO and taking a test, and crossing out
the letter e.
Behavior DEMO only slightly better in the previous issue: Out
of 38 studies DEMO 13 articles, there was one that measured nego-
tiation moves (Bowles, Babcock, & McGinn, 2005) and one that
studied ‘‘how an DEMO actually behaves during an induced
conﬂict’’ (quoted from Knee, Lonsbary, DEMO, & Patrick,
2005, p. 998). Note the authors’ use of the term ‘‘actually,’’ which
illustrates their awareness of how unusual DEMO was to observe
behavior directly.2 That study induced and videotaped a dis-
agreement between romantic partners and then coded for un-
derstanding versus defensive DEMO (mainly speech acts;
Knee et al., 2005). Those two studies are about real behavior, but
again they are only 2 out of 38 studies. One additional study
included a behavioral independent variable (of sorts) that con-
sisted of people reading their e-mail message aloud before
sending it (as opposed to just sending it; Kruger, Epley, DEMO,
& Ng, 2005). There was also a study that DEMO a questionnaire for
self-report of behavior.
We do not doubt that other surveys would yield similar
numbers. Social and personality psychologists do not report
DEMO actual behavior in their premier journal or elsewhere.
WAS IT ALWAYS THUS?
Our impression is that this trend has been building for a DEMO
In what psychologists from the baby-boom generation may re-
member as a golden age, social psychology for a time was
characterized by studies that directly observed important be-
haviors in vividly evocative contexts (see Aronson, DEMO, &
Carlsmith, 1985). We suspect that more than one DEMO psy-
chologist was inspired onto his or her career by an undergrad-
uate class lecture on John Darley’s and Bibb Latane´ ’s studies
of DEMO intervention (e.g., Darley & Latane´ , 1968) or on
2Since DEMO wrote this, we have noticed the increasing frequency with which
behavior DEMO called ‘‘actual behavior,’’ presumably to distinguish from the other,
more commonly studied kinds or perhaps just to dramatize its rarity.
398
Stanley DEMO (1975) obedience studies, which put real
people into emotionally powerful DEMO and then watched
what they did. Even many classic studies of inner variables such
as attitudes and guilt contained dramatic behavioral experi-
ences prior DEMO the self-reporting of inner states (e.g., Aronson &
Mills, 1959; Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959). Studies like this
faded from view, however, when the ﬁeld embraced the cognitive
revolution in the 1980s, DEMO the success (and apparent rigor and
prestige, see Rozin, 2001) of cognitively-framed studies may
have encouraged many researchers to concentrate on the DEMO
report measures that were appropriate for those studies rather
than struggle for difﬁcult and expensive behavioral observation.
The impressively successful Decade of the Brain, as we have
already noted, also demonstrated to researchers the success,
prestige, and funding that could accrue to studies exploring
inner psychological processes while postponing, perhaps
indeﬁnitely, examination of the behavioral results of these
DEMO
In personality psychology, meanwhile, the interest in behavior
was weaker all along in some ways, especially given the core
emphasis on measurement of traits, for which self-report has
long been the prominent method. Although sophisticated psy-
chometric methods have been developed, the primary method
for validating a personality questionnaire is still to demonstrate
how it correlates with other questionnaires (Funder, 2001).
Hundreds of studies on the ‘‘structure of personality’’ seek that
structure amongst the correlations between questionnaires. One
major recent project that DEMO to compare the utility of several
major personality inventories in their ability to predict behavior
did so by seeing how well each one predicted DEMO of
behavior (in other words, yet another questionnaire). Even
personality psychologists who evince skepticism about person-
ality traits are not immune; their research, too, is based almost
exclusively on self-reports or hypothetical predictions, with only
rare (and therefore highly notable) exceptions (e.g., Wright &
Mischel, 1987). In recent years, a few personality psychologists
DEMO begun to look again at behavior in the laboratory (e.g.,
DEMO, Riemann, Angleitner, & Spinath, 2001), assess be-
havioral residue (e.g., the condition of a student’s dorm room or
a worker’s DEMO cubicle; see, Gosling, Kos, Mannarelli, &
Morris, 2002), and develop methods to code directly observed
behavior along meaningful dimensions (DEMO, the Riverside Be-
havioral Q-sort; Funder, Furr, & Colvin, DEMO). These efforts
remain rare, however, and have not been particularly inﬂuential
so far. The dominant method throughout personality psychology,
to this DEMO, is the questionnaire (Funder, 2001).
We were moved by DEMO questions and reﬂections to take a
slightly more systematic and quantiﬁed look at behavior in JPSP
over the decades. Two of the authors went DEMO libraries and se-
lected issues from 1966, 1976, 1986, 1996, and 2006 for coding.
We used our birth months (March and May) for each year, and
we coded all studies reported in the DEMO as to whether they
included any direct observation of behavior. Coding was
Volume 2—Number 4
Roy F. Baumeister, Kathleen D. Vohs, and David C. Funder
deliberately DEMO, such that a study qualiﬁed as having be-
havior if any DEMO involved behavior—that is, if the study
used any manipulation, any dependent measure, or even used
behavior as the conduit for manipulating the independent
variable (e.g., taking a test and getting feedback on it). DEMO,
each study in each paper had a score of 0 (DEMO behavior) or 1 (one
or more behavioral element). Some articles were not included
in the ﬁnal tally because there were no empirical DEMO reported,
such as in conceptual or statistical papers or commentaries.
Self-reports of past behaviors or of hypothetical behaviors did
not count. The use DEMO archival behavioral data (e.g., crime sta-
tistics; donating blood) qualiﬁed. Reading about someone else’s
behavior was not counted as behavior.
The two DEMO for each same year furnished quite similar
numbers except for 1966, DEMO which the very young journal had
several peculiar features (including mostly DEMO papers
and some short reports, one of which oddly reported four DEMO
and very similar studies that were ultimately counted as one),
DEMO so we coded two additional issues for that year to furnish a
broader base; in addition, one of the originally coded issues was
DEMO because of catastrophic computer failure. In all, we coded
304 studies DEMO the 11 issues of JPSP.
Figure 1 shows the results of this coding. Back in 1966, when
most articles contained only a single study, about half of these
involved actual behavior. The study of behavior increased its
share of the journal into the 1970s. But the use and DEMO of
behavior dropped sharply in 1986, and the subsequent decades
have DEMO a continued downward trend. Apparently, the study of
behavior has been DEMO a steady decline since the early 1980s.
CAVEAT
We want to be very clear that we see nothing wrong with what
social and personality DEMO are doing, as far as it goes.
90
80
70
60
DEMO
40
30
20
10
0
1966
1976 1986 1996 2006
Year
Fig. 1. Percentage of studies from Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology that DEMO behavior (1966–2006).
Volume 2—Number 4
Self-reports of behavior, emotion, DEMO, and thoughts
are often illuminating, may be the appropriate method for
certain topics (e.g., studies of attitudes or emotional experi-
ence), DEMO sometimes are all that is possible. Such measures can
and do lead to important and interesting knowledge that will
advance theory. But the restriction DEMO methods also serves to
constrain the topics that are addressed in the ﬁrst place (Rozin,
2001). In other words, our chief DEMO is with what social
and personality psychologists, and perhaps others in DEMO ﬁeld,
are not doing.
Surely some important behavior involves standing up?
Or actually talking to another live person, even beyond
getting instructions about how to sign a consent form and
activate the computer program? Whatever happened to help-
ing, hurting, playing, working, taking, eating, risking, waiting,
ﬂirting, gooﬁng off, showing off, giving up, screwing up,
compromising, selling, persevering, pleading, tricking, out-
DEMO, sandbagging, refusing, and the rest? Can’t psychol-
ogy ﬁnd ways to observe and explain these acts, at least once
in a while?
WONDERING WHY
There are probably many reasons for the sorry state DEMO behavioral
study during these last few years of the Decade of Behavior. For
example, sometimes direct behavioral observations are unethi-
cal, unfeasible, or impossible. For the foreseeable future, most
studies of everyday behaviors ranging from eating to sexual
behavior and from exercise habits to drug use will DEMO to rely
primarily on self-report despite the obvious disadvantages.
Moreover, if DEMO wants to know what a participant is thinking or
feeling, there DEMO little alternative but to ask. And even under the
best of circumstances, observing actual social behavior is more
difﬁcult, challenging, and inconvenient than just asking for
ratings or sitting a participant in front of a DEMO screen and
measuring his or her keystrokes or reaction times. The ﬁeld is
highly competitive, and the top journals require multiple stud-
ies, DEMO the struggle to observe behavior, even when it would be
possible, may well make it harder to crank out the volume of data
DEMO academic success now requires. Moreover, the sad fact is
that many DEMO fail to show meaningful signiﬁcant differ-
ences. A failed behavioral study is an expensive failure and
could even be a major career setback. Last, and perhaps most
centrally, journals do not seem to give extra points or consid-
eration to studies that observe behavior instead of just getting
DEMO, so why bother?3
Our data on JPSP across the years DEMO to the early 1980s as
the beginning of a huge decline for observed behavior in studies.
Several things had changed in the journal between DEMO and
3One of the authors of this article, in his previous DEMO as Associate
Editor of one personality journal and as Editor of another, did follow an (un-
advertised) policy of trying very hard to accept any article that included any
direct measurement of behavior, but he received very few such submissions.
399
Eclipse of Behavior
1986. First, the journal had been split into three sections, and
they were allocated in ways that might be taken as at best in-
different to behavior. Second, editorial policy changed toward
explicitly favoring articles with multiple studies, and as we have
suggested, it DEMO far easier to do many studies by seating groups in
front of computers or questionnaires than to measure behavior
over and over. To be DEMO, other trends in the ﬁeld at that time
may also have DEMO These would include the cognitive
revolution (itself a strong push to DEMO on inner process and
downplay so-called actual behavior) and the steady DEMO in
restrictive Institutional Review Boards (IRBs).
IRBs may be more DEMO to raise objections to behavioral
measures than to ratings. From an IRB perspective, it seems far
less intrusive to ask someone what she would eat than to observe
how much she actually eats.4 The problem is, of course, that
hypothetical behavioral responses may be wildly inaccurate,
and in any case, there is no way to know unless actual behavior is
also measured. In a similar vein, it may seem less intrusive to
measure ‘‘prejudice’’ as indicated by speed of key presses in
response DEMO prompts on a computer screen than to actually see
how a person interacts with a person against whom he or she
might or might DEMO be biased. And it is certainly easier. But, as
psychologists bow DEMO pressure from the IRBs to avoid anything
that might have the remotest chance of slightly upsetting their
research participants and to competitive pressures to DEMO
lots of studies per paper, they sacriﬁce the scientiﬁc quality of
DEMO discipline. Not to mention abandoning its original goal of
being the science of behavior.
Ratings, reaction times, and similar measures are surely
necessary. DEMO maturation of the ﬁeld has required a great rise of
interest in inner process. In the 1960s, a researcher could ma-
nipulate independent variables, measure behavior, and simply
speculate about the internal mediating process. Now DEMO re-
searcher is required to demonstrate the inner process as well.
Adding ratings surely made for better science. But in principle,
the ratings DEMO self-reports were supposed to shed light on the
behavior, not replace DEMO
To put it another way: Once upon a time, perhaps, DEMO
gists observed behavior and reported what they saw, along
with their DEMO about why it happened. The emergence of
competing theories, and therefore DEMO explanations, led
psychologists to push each other to show what happened DEMO
the person to produce the behavior. Gradually the focus shifted
on these debates about inner processes, and journals started
publishing studies that made signiﬁcant contributions about
demonstrating inner processes. Somewhere along the way, it
became acceptable to publish data on inner processes without
4One of the authors of DEMO article spent part of her career studying how much
ice cream dieters and nondieters would eat under different conditions. One
university’s IRB feared that DEMO eating behavior—namely, having to
admit to participants that their eating was DEMO recorded—might cause dieters
to go into a tailspin and develop disordered eating habits.
400
any real behavior included at all, which eventually became
the norm.
WHAT’S THE PROBLEM?
One might ask, ‘‘Is there anything wrong with learning about
inner process?’’ We think not. But behavior matters DEMO It
cannot be blithely assumed that responding to questionnaires
is enough to tell us all we need to know about actual life. It is
DEMO to study actual behavior sometimes. For example,
West and Brown (DEMO) conducted the same experiment two
different ways: once by asking people what they would do in this
situation, and once by actually staging the event. The experi-
ment involved an ostensible accident victim standing on DEMO
street, asking passersby for money to help pay for medical care
DEMO a nearby clinic. Actual and hypothetical behavior differed in
two major ways. First, the levels of help were dramatically
different. Asked how they would react to such a request, par-
ticipants said they would give fairly generously, but when the
experiment was conducted live, actual donations averaged
DEMO over 10 cents in some conditions.
The other difference is even more important for psychology’s
goal of building sound theories about behavior. The victim’s
DEMO did not have a signiﬁcant effect on hypothetical
donations, but it DEMO have a signiﬁcant effect on real donations.
This occurred despite the lower overall generosity in actual
behavior (hence, overcoming any possible ﬂoor effect)DEMO A re-
searcher who followed the common contemporary method of
relying solely on hypothetical behavior would draw a false
conclusion that would omit an DEMO and signiﬁcant con-
tributor to actual behavior.
In recent years, the DEMO for doubting self-reports and the
resulting need to observe actual behavior have increased.
Affective forecasting studies systematically show the inaccu-
racies of people’s predictions DEMO how they will react and feel
(e.g., Wilson & Gilbert, DEMO). Studies on judgment and deci-
sion making have likewise shown that people’s predictions are
inaccurate and that hypothetical decisions do not reliably match
DEMO ones. For example, in hypothetical decisions, people are
moderately risk averse regardless of the amount of money they
imagine is at stake, but when actual money is used, people
become dramatically more risk averse as amounts increase (Holt
& Laury, 2002).
This issue has arisen DEMO During the 1960s and 1970s,
both personality traits and attitudes came under vigorous attack
on precisely these grounds. Mischel (1968) wrote a DEMO and
inﬂuential critique arguing that personality trait measures sel-
dom have appreciable correlations with measures of actual be-
havior. Wicker (1969) went so DEMO as to suggest that attitudes,
which had been touted by Gordon Allport as social psychology’s
most important concept, should be abandoned. The ﬁelds re-
sponded with impressive programs designed to show that, yes,
one could predict some of the people’s behavior some of the time
Volume DEMO 4
Roy F. Baumeister, Kathleen D. Vohs, and David C. Funder
from DEMO and trait scales (e.g., Ajzen, 2000; Glasman &
Albarracı´n, 2006, Kenrick & Funder, 1988).
The issues remain today, and indeed the question of attitude–
behavior consistency and behavioral predictability remain im-
DEMO research topics. But in a recent class devoted to exam-
ining articles published in JPSP, the students were surprised to
ﬁnd that the latest article on attitude–behavior consistency did
not bother measuring behavior—it asked participants to DEMO
ine what they might do in hypothetical situations. Similarly, we
have DEMO mentioned how at least one study has sought to
assess the predictive validity of personality trait questionnaires
via their correlations with a measure of DEMO that was itself
a questionnaire. This hardly seems fair. Social psychologists
cannot claim that attitudes or personality predict behavior if by
behavior they do DEMO really mean behavior.
The problem goes even deeper. Although self-reports, reac-
DEMO times, implicit associations, and the like are good and even
ideal methods for examining certain topics, we believe that
psychology has tilted towards examining precisely those topics
for which these methods are appropriate and away DEMO every-
thing else (Rozin, 2001). This leads us to wonder, in the rush to
test competing theories of internal processes as our discipline
moves away from the description of important behavioral phe-
nomena, what goes missing? What questions are researchers
forgetting to even ask? A DEMO list is not difﬁcult to generate:
How do people with different degrees of a personality trait
behave differently?
How do situational variables DEMO as physical aspects, social
relationships, and cultural structures affect what people do?
How do prejudiced individuals actually treat the objects of
their DEMO?
How do those who have been discriminated against respond
behaviorally?
How and when do women and men act differently in situations
ranging DEMO the ﬁrst date to leading a meeting?
The reader is invited to make his or her own additions to this
list—it is not DEMO to do. Again, our point is not that topics
like these DEMO or never were addressed (e.g., see Nisbett &
Cohen, 1996, for fascinating studies of the relationship between
culture and aggressive behavior), but that they are neglected
relative to the study of cognitive process DEMO certainly relative to
their intrinsic importance. This is why APA’s Decade of Behavior
risks becoming a laughingstock for those in social and person-
ality DEMO, the ﬁelds that should beneﬁt the most from
this initiative.
Also, it is very possible that the abandonment of behavior
could be seriously DEMO to the ﬁeld’s goals and broad
inﬂuence. A recent president of the Society for Personality and
Social Psychology articulated in the society newsletter that
DEMO ﬁelds are suffering from failing to get their message across
to outsiders. They are seen as not making much interesting
progress, even though insiders know that the conferences and





Volume 2—Number DEMO
journals are ﬁlled with exciting new work. But perhaps scholars
in other ﬁelds and even undergraduates ﬁnd it difﬁcult to ap-
preciate the excitement DEMO the work when it rests on correlations
among questionnaire items or signiﬁcant differences in reaction
times. The dramatic behaviors of the early years of DEMO psy-
chology experiments are still featured in the textbooks, and
probably DEMO good reason.
TODAY’S DILEMMA
Ironically, psychologists who study behavior today ﬁnd DEMO
selves at a disadvantage. Everyone would probably agree that
the ideal paper would report both direct observation of behavior
and measurement of inner processes DEMO mediate and produce
those behaviors. But if you only have one without the other,
preferences are lopsided. Data on behavior without inner pro-
DEMO are regarded as unpublishable by most journals. Grant
reviewers often behave similarly. One of the present authors
submitted a grant proposal for a behavioral DEMO that a reviewer
criticized on the grounds that it did not include ‘‘psychological
variables,’’ apparently meaning internal process measures.5 By
this deﬁnition, behavior is not even a psychological variable!
Behavior by itself is regarded as DEMO a beginning, an unsolved
puzzle. Meanwhile, however, a study of DEMO process without
behavior is acceptable.
When confronted with a study reporting behavior but not inner
process, reviewers will immediately ask, why did this DEMO?
Researchers need to show what goes on inside. But when con-
fronted with a study reporting inner process but no overt be-
havior, reviewers almost never ask, ‘‘Would this actually alter
behavior?’’ Inner process is considered interesting and impor-
tant in its own right, without any proof that it has any implica-
tions for what people do.
Given DEMO unequal contingencies, it is not surprising that
researchers have turned away DEMO behavior. It is apparently
more trouble than it is worth. Ratings are the keys to success,
and they are publishable with or without DEMO Behavior,
meanwhile, is not publishable by itself without ratings, and
moreover, behavior often has a nasty way of complicating the
cleaner, DEMO elegant picture that one can get from ratings alone.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION FOR ACTION?
We wish to suggest, gently and respectfully,6 that social and
personality psychology try to put a bit more behavior back into
DEMO science of behavior (as psychology still advertises itself).
There is DEMO need to stop asking for ratings or analyzing reaction
times, but DEMO psychologists could all push themselves to
include an occasional study that includes direct observation
5 This is not just sour grapes; the study was funded despite a negative review,
which is itself an unusual outcome.
DEMO attentive reader can tell by now that we are nothing if not gentle and
respectful.
401
Eclipse of Behavior
of what Knee et al. (2005) poignantly called DEMO behavior.’’
To be sure, behavioral observation is not always ethical or DEMO
sible, as we have mentioned. But when it is, why not include it?
Researchers could put a bit more effort into developing DEMO
for observing behavior directly (e.g., Furr & Funder, 2007). DEMO
could do more to build on efforts such as the behavioral batteries
for personality assessment designed by Jack and Jeanne Block
(Block, 1993), the behavior-sampling technologies pioneered by
Matthias Mehl and his colleagues (Mehl, Gosling, & Penne-
baker, 2006), behavioral observations in real life DEMO as those
used by James Dabbs, Chris Fraley, and their colleagues (Dabbs,
Hargrove, & Heusel, 1996; Fraley & Shaver, 1998), work on
performance as a function of approach–avoidance frames
by Andrew DEMO and Carol Dweck (e.g., Elliott & Dweck, 1988),
self-regulation work by Baumeister and colleagues (e.g.,
Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven, & Tice, 1998; Vohs,
Baumeister, & Ciarocco, 2005), the studies on eating behavior
by Heatherton and colleagues (Heatherton, Herman, & Polivy,
1991; Vohs & Heatherton, 2000), and speech-sampling methods
DEMO as those developed by Lisa Feldman Barrett, James
Pennebaker, Lisa Fast, and their colleagues (Fast & Funder, in
press; Feldman Barrett, Williams, & Fong, 2002; Pennebaker,
Mehl, & Niederhoffer, 2003).
Perhaps reviewers, editors, and granting agencies could even
give a DEMO extra preference to studies that contain behavior, in
the spirit of DEMO action for the promotion of method-
ological diversity. If others share our view that the current sys-
tem discourages scientists from observing behavior, then
perhaps more vigorous changes can be made to redress the
imbalance. Maybe DEMO new section of JPSP could be earmarked for
studies of behavior. Or perhaps one of the new journals that the
Association for Psychological Science DEMO introducing could be
devoted to behavioral work. Having such a devoted outlet would
reduce the (apparently crippling) demand that behavioral
studies must compete DEMO space with the easier-to-conduct, and
therefore correspondingly more rigorous and plentiful, studies
that use only ratings.
Let us stress that we are not DEMO APA’s initiative on the
Decade of Behavior. We support the goal wholeheartedly. But if
social and personality psychology has given up on behavior, how
can the ﬁeld expect society as a whole to embrace it? In fact,
even if society (or funding agencies at least) were DEMO embrace the
Decade of Behavior idea, would that beneﬁt the ﬁeld? The
saddest outcome would be for the powerful and fund-granting
authorities to DEMO that behavior is important after all and then
to use that as a reason to disrespect the ﬁeld. They might say, and
not without reason, ‘‘We want to support the study of human
behavior, but DEMO and social psychologists don’t study
behavior.’’
Acknowledgments— Portions of this article were originally
published by Roy F. Baumeister and Kathleen D. Vohs in
402
DEMO, the newsletter for the Society for Personality and
Social Psychology (incorporated from Division 8 of the Ameri-
can Psychological Association). Preparation of DEMO article was
supported in part by National Institute of Health Grant MH
57039 to Roy F. Baumeister, McKnight Land-Grant Professor-
ship funds to Kathleen D. Vohs, and a Visiting Research
Fellowship from the Max Planck Institute for Human Develop-
ment, Berlin, and by National Science Foundation Grant
DEMO to David C. Funder.
REFERENCES
Ajzen, I. (2000). Nature and operation of attitudes. Annual Review of
Psychology, 52, 27–58.
Aronson, E., Brewer, M., & Carlsmith, J.M. (1985). Experimentation in
social psychology. In G. Lindzy & E. Aronson (Eds.), Handbook of
social psychology (3rd ed., Vol. 1., pp. 441–486). New York:
Random House.
Aronson, E., & Mills, J. (1959). The DEMO of severity of initiation on
liking for a group. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
59, 177–181.
Baumeister, R.F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D.M. (1998).
Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1252–1265.
Block, J. (1993). Studying personality the long DEMO In D.C. Funder,
R.D. Parke, C. Tomlinson-Keasey, & K. Widaman (Eds.),
Studying lives through time: Personality and development (pp. DEMO
41). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Borkenau, P., Riemann, R., Angleitner, A., & Spinath, F.M. (2001).
Genetic DEMO environmental inﬂuences on observed personality:
Evidence from the German observational study of adult twins.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 655–668.
DEMO, H.R., Babcock, L., & McGinn, K.L. (2005). Constraints and
triggers: Situational mechanics of gender in negotiation. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 951–965.
Dabbs, J.M., Jr., Hargrove, M.F., & Heusel, C. (1996). Testosterone
differences among college fraternities: Well-behaved vs. ram-
bunctious. Personality and Individual Differences, 20, 157–161.
Damasio, A.R. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason, and the hu-
man DEMO New York: Putnam.
Darley, J.M., & Latane´ , B. (1968). Bystander intervention in emer-
gencies: Diffusion of responsibility. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 28, 377–383.
Elliott, E.S., & Dweck, C.S. (1988). Goals: An approach to motivation
and achievement. Journal of DEMO and Social Psychology,
54, 5–12.
Fast, L.G., & Funder, D.C. (in press) Personality as manifest in word
use: Correlations with self-report, acquaintance-report, and be-
havior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
DEMO Barrett, L., Williams, N.L., & Fong, G.T. (2002). Defensive
verbal behavior assessment. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 28, 776–788.
DEMO, L., & Carlsmith, J.M. (1959). Cognitive consequences of
forced compliance. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
58, 203–210.
Fraley, DEMO, & Shaver, P.R. (1998). Airport separations: A naturalistic
study of adult attachment dynamics in separating couples.
Journal of Personality and Social DEMO, 75, 1198–1212.
Volume 2—Number 4
Roy F. Baumeister, Kathleen D. Vohs, and David C. Funder
Funder, D.C. (2001). Personality. Annual Review of Psychology, 52,
197–221.
DEMO, D.C., Furr, R.M., & Colvin, C.R. (2000). The Riverside Be-
havioral Q-sort: A tool for the description of social behavior.
Journal of Personality, 68, 450–489.
Furr, R.M., & Funder, D.C. (2007). Behavioral observation. In R.
Robins, C. Fraley, & R. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research
methods in personality psychology (pp. DEMO). New York:
Glasman, L.R., & Albarracı´ n, D. (2006). Forming attitudes that predict
future behavior: A meta-analysis of the attitude-behavior rela-
tion. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 778–822.
Gosling, S.D., Kos, S.J., Mannarelli, T., & Morris, M.E. (2002). A room
with a cue: Personality judgments based on ofﬁces and bedrooms.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 379–398.
Heatherton, T.F., Herman, C.P., & Polivy, J. (1991). The effects of
physical threat and ego threat on eating. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 60, DEMO
Holt, C.A., & Laury, S. (2002). Risk aversion and incentive effects
(Andrew Young School of Policy Studies Research Paper Series
No. 06-12). Retrieved July 14, 2007, from http://ssrn.com/
DEMO
Kenrick, D.T., & Funder, D.C. (1988). Proﬁting from controversy:
Lessons from the person–situation debate. American Psycholo-
gist, 43, 23–34.
DEMO, C.R., Lonsbary, C., Canevello, A., & Patrick, H. (2005). Self-
determination and conﬂict in romantic relationships. Journal of
Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 89, 997–1009.
Kruger, J., Epley, N., Parker, J., & Ng, Z. (2005). Egocentrism over e-
mail: Can we communicate as well as we think? Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 89, 925–936.
Mehl, M.R., Gosling, S.D., & Pennebaker, J.W. (2006). Personality in
its natural habitat: Manifestations DEMO implicit folk theories of
personality in daily life. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 90, 862–877.
Milgram, S. (1975). Obedience DEMO authority. New York: Harper & Row.
Mischel, W. (1968). DEMO and assessment. New York: Wiley.
Guilford Press.
Nisbett, R.E., & DEMO, D. (1996). Culture of honor: The psychology of
violence DEMO the south. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Nisbett, R.E., & Wilson, DEMO (1977). Telling more than we can know:
Verbal reports DEMO mental processes. Psychological Review, 84,
231–259.
Pennebaker, J., Mehl, M., & Niederhoffer, K. (2003). Psychological
aspects of natural language use: Our words, our selves. Annual
Review of Psychology, 54, DEMO
Rozin, P. (2001). Social psychology and science: Some lessons DEMO
Solomon Asch. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 5,2–
14.
Vohs, K.D., Baumeister, R.F., & Ciarocco, N. (2005). Self-regulation
and self-presentation: Regulatory resource depletion impairs
impression management and effortful self-presentation depletes
regulatory resources. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 88, 632–657.
Vohs, K.D., & Heatherton, T.F. (2000). Self-regulatory failure:
A resource-depletion approach. Psychological Science, 11,
249–254.
West, S.G., & Brown, DEMO (1975). Physical attractiveness, the severity
of the emergency and helping: A ﬁeld experiment and interper-
sonal simulation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 11,
531–538.
Wicker, A.W. (1969). Attitudes vs. actions: DEMO relationship of verbal
and overt behavioral responses to attitude objects. Journal of
Social Issues, 25, 41–78.
Wilson, T.D. (2002). Strangers to DEMO: Discovering the adaptive
unconscious. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, T.D., & Gilbert, D.T. (2003). Affective forecasting. In M.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 35,
pp. DEMO). New York: Elsevier.
Wright, J.C., & Mischel, W. (DEMO). A conditional approach to
dispositional constructs: The local predictability of DEMO
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53,
1159–1177.
Wundt, W. (1894). Lectures on human and animal psychology (J.E.,
DEMO & E.B., Titchener, Trans.). New York: Macmillan.
Volume 2—Number DEMO
403{1g42fwefx}