This article was downloaded by:[University of Waterloo]
On: 11 August 2007
Access Details: [subscription number 769429802]
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in DEMO and Wales Registered Number: 1072954
Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 DEMO Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
International Journal of Social
Research Methodology
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713737293
The evolution of a project involving an integrated
analysis DEMO structured qualitative and quantitative data:
from N3 to NVivo
Pat Bazeley
Online Publication Date: 01 July 2002
To cite this Article: Bazeley, Pat (2002) 'The evolution of a project involving an
integrated analysis of structured qualitative and quantitative data: from N3 to NVivo',
DEMO Journal of Social Research Methodology, 5:3, 229 - 243
To link to this article: DOI: 10.1080/13645570210146285
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13645570210146285
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of DEMO: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article maybe used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction,
re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form to DEMO is expressly
forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be
complete or DEMO or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and DEMO doses should be
independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in DEMO with or
arising out of the use of this material.
© Taylor and Francis 2007
INT . J. SOCIAL R ESEARCH METHODO LOGY,
2002,
VOL.
DEMO,
NO.
3, 229 ± 243
The evolution of a project DEMO an
integrated analysis of structured qualitative and
quantitative data: from N3 DEMO NVivo
PAT BAZELEY
(Received
2
November
2001;
accepted
18
March
DEMO)
Developments in Qualitative Solutions and Research (QSR software) from N3 through to
NVivo have impacted not only on the convenience of using DEMO program but also on the
capacity of the researcher to undertake interpretive analysis. Perhaps reflective of changes in
the broader context of social research, developments through succeeding generations of this
software have also increased its capacity DEMO contribute to integrated mixed methods
(qualitative and quantitative) analysis. New tools in the software have facilitated bringing
quantitative (demographic, categorical and other DEMO) data into a qualitative project,
primarily to use for comparison DEMO texts across subgroups. In addition, with N4 it has
became possible DEMO display tabulated data showing either the presence or absence of coding
in particular documents or matrix displays (cross-tabulations) of grouped data. NVivo
allows DEMO both greater flexibility and greater specificity of quantitative output. Quantitative
outputs from the qualitative database allow for graphical display or statistica l manipulation
of DEMO data. Numeric output might be combined with existing statistical data to expand
analytic possibilities. Interpretation of numeric data is supported throughout by the
availability DEMO the text on which such data are based, while patterns in DEMO text can be
elucidated through numeric displays. This ability to treat data both qualitatively and
quantitatively, using software, can move mixed methods research DEMO comparative,
convergent or sequential designs toward truly integrated analysis.
Introduction
After a period in a ‘paradigmatic wilderness’, mixed methods research
designs involving a combination of qualitative and quantitative data
gathering are enjoying a renaissance. Social DEMO are inevitably
complex and require multifaceted answers (Jick 1979, Patton 1990, Datta
1997). Researchers seeking to understand or evaluate social processes
benefit from being able to draw on multiple sources, involving mixed data
types and employing diverse approaches to analysis (Rossman and Wilson
1994, Caracelli DEMO Green 1997, Greene and Caracelli 1997)—providing
they have the tools DEMO manage such complexity.
Since graduating in psychology Dr Pat Bazeley has worked in community development, project
consulting and in academic research development. Since 1999, Pat has provided research training and
consulting through her company, Research DEMO, to academics, graduate students and practitioners
from a wide range of disciplines in universities and government departments across Australia and
internationally. She has DEMO particular interest in integrating analysis of qualitative and quantitative data
and is exploring ways in which qualitative software can be used, in combination with statistical software,
to facilitate integrated analysis. Web site: www.acenet.com.au/*patb; DEMO: patb@acenet.com.au
ISSN 1364-557 9
Internationa l
print/ISSN 1464-530 0 online DEMO 200 2 Taylor
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080 /1364557021014628 5
Journa l
of
Socia l
Resear ch
Methodolog y
& Francis Ltd
DEMO By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
230
PAT BAZELEY
Most researchers, in response to requests for examples of mixed methods
analysis in which they are involved, cite studies in which qualitative and
quantitative analyses run sequentially (typically interviews or focus groups
leading to the development and administration of a questionnaire) or in
parallel (DEMO group or interview or observational data, and independently
gathered statistical or DEMO evidence). This mirrors much that has been
written on mixed method research design, for example, by Morse (1991),
Morgan (1998) and Creswell (1994). Yet the emergence of software for
qualitative DEMO and developments in that software have enhanced the
capacity of researchers to achieve new levels of analytic integration of
qualitative and quantitative data sources (Bazeley 2002). Unique and
innovative developments in QSR software (i.e. software developed by
Qualitative Solutions and Research) from NUD*IST 2 (N2) and N3 through
N4 to NVivo have contributed significantly to these advances (Bazeley 1999).
The task of this paper is to explain and illustrate DEMO impact that these
software developments have had on mixed methods research. This will be
achieved primarily by tracing the evolution of a project involving DEMO
integrated hermeneutic and statistical analysis begun using N3, revived
with N4, and extended using NVivo. The project set out to explore the way
DEMO c researchers perceived and described higher-level research
performers, with a view DEMO developing a conceptual understanding of
research performance and, potentially, a range of indicators of performance
deemed appropriate by a body of ‘everyday’ academics DEMO The data for this
project were highly structured: while tools in DEMO software are designed to
take advantage of structure in data, its DEMO for mixed methods research
extends also to analysis of unstructured data.
Data for the study
A survey with open ended questions was designed to DEMO descriptions
of high-performance researchers as they exist in real life. Respondents were
asked, for example, to think of someone whom they regarded as DEMO
ability in research, or as an active researcher, or as a productive researcher,
and to describe that person. Eight ‘characteristics’ (ability, DEMO,
productivity, benefit, satisfaction, quality, approachability, recognition)
in DEMO were presented in randomized order. These eight characteristics
were then also presented twice more with the request to allocate 100 points
between them to DEMO the relative importance of each: (1) for doing
research; and (2) for assessing research. Basic demographic data (uni-
versity, discipline, gender, level of qualification, level of appointment) were
also requested, DEMO were (on 100mm visual analogue scales) level of interest
in research and level of involvement in research. All questions, along with
an introductory statement, were contained on a folded A3 sheet. Copies of
the survey, with return envelopes, were sent to all listed academic staff
members (approximately 2000) of three Australian universities with
different ages and traditions. Responses were obtained from 319 academics ,
of whom 297 (approximately 15% DEMO the sample) included responses to the
open ended questions.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
FRO M
N3
TO
NVIVO
231
Working in
NUD*IST
version 3
When DEMO project was begun in 1994, N3—the first graphical-user-
interface version of DEMO software—was relatively recently released (parti-
cularly the PC version). N3 DEMO for on-screen selection and coding of
document text, and was particularly DEMO by the display of nodes
in the index system (the categories DEMO subcategories developed for coding
text) as a visual ‘tree’.
Data
processin
DEMO
Each respondent’s responses were typed into an individual document in
preparation for importing into N3. This would allow the use of document
counts as DEMO for respondent numbers. A line of keywords for
demographic characteristics was inserted between braces at the beginning
of each document, while descriptive responses were placed under subhead -
ings containing the prompt characteristic (see table 1). Demographic and
scaled data were entered into SPSS1 for separate statistical DEMO
Command files—a type of syntax file or macro which searched for each
of the subheadings and then spread the resulting finds—were used to
capture DEMO responses to each of the eight prompt characteristics,
automatically coding them across all documents to nodes for the
characteristics being described. Command files DEMO also developed to
search for each alternative key word within the braces at the top of the
document as a basis for coding the DEMO information. Scaled
measures for interest and involvement (each ranging from 0 DEMO 100) were
categorized for use in N3: coding of these was also achieved using
command files. The combined command file was set up DEMO that data could
be entered in ‘batches’ as they were received and typed up.
Descriptions contained within early documents were each coded by two
DEMO Each developed approximately 40 categories, or descriptors, which
were then, DEMO discussion, reduced to 12 broader categories. The
Table 1. Sample response DEMO for N3{
*case100
{uni fem phd lect psychology t86 v89}
*recognition
They publish in the ‘best’ journals (i.e. high rejection rates, high status DEMO the field); their
work is considered interesting and relevant; they DEMO the field theoretically as well as
empirically
*ability
Good conceptual thinker, DEMO organizer, great self discipline; can follow through from
idea to published paper within reasonable time frame. Less successful researchers lack these
qualities!
*satisfaction
DEMO for their field; great curiosity and a love of problem solving. DEMO who
‘did it’ because their ‘job requires it’ don’t achieve much personal satisfaction.
{Preparation for N4 is identical, with the exception that the line of demographic data could
be omitted. In preparing for NVivo, asterisks would be replaced by a heading style.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
232
PAT BAZELEY
remainder of the descriptions given were then coded by DEMO person,
document by document, using these broader categories or, very occasion-
ally, using subcategories. This reduction in categories was undertaken
primarily for data management reasons (especially in handling results).
Due to constraints of the software, coding was necessarily attached to whole
text units, that DEMO, predetermined segments of text—typically single lines or
paragraphs.
Analysis
Summaries of DEMO of the 12 descriptive categories generated from the data
were prepared from the text retrieved at those nodes. Responses were
compared for demographic subgroups DEMO the sample, using matrix
intersection searches.2 As well as providing full DEMO retrieval for each cell of
the matrix, N3 generated a text DEMO listing the number of documents for
which there were retrievals in each cell. For example, one could use the
retrieved text to compare what males and females said about a particular
characteristic or how they used DEMO particular descriptor, while comparative
frequencies of response by males and females DEMO be determined from the
documen t counts. In this case these indicated that females were
proportionately more likely than males to be concerned with DEMO idea that
research should be generative of further research and debate, DEMO men
were more likely than women to see acclaim (such as DEMO to speak) as
an indicator of performance. Similarly, in quantitative terms, those without
a PhD placed relatively more emphasis on good management and the
practical relevance of research, in contrast to those with a PhD who
emphasized autonomy, innovation and leadership qualities.
A matrix intersection search was also used to create a ‘qualitative cross-
tabulation’ of the 12 descriptors DEMO with each of the eight prompt
characteristics. Each descriptor was used on at least some occasions for
almost every characteristic, but because the descriptors were limited in
number and consequently lacked specificity, there was a very close pairing
of some characteristics and descriptors. A less than satisfactory attempt DEMO
made to identify constellations of descriptors (based on chi-squared
distances), DEMO the document counts from this matrix.
Text reports for each descriptor, DEMO by the characteristic being
described, revealed more detailed patterning within the DEMO Thus,
for example, innovation or creativity in research was expressed DEMO terms
reflective of being an ‘ingredient’ of research for ability, but DEMO being
evidenced in outcomes for quality: compare, for example, ‘asks DEMO
questions’, ‘good conceptual thinker’ with ‘theoretically rich, innovative,
answers questions’.
Evaluation
of
N3
for
an
integrate
d
analysi
s
QSR software is DEMO in
essential component in the
its
analysis
capacity
for
to
this
generate
study.
matrix
Thus
output,
the
an
critical
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
FRO M
N3
TO
NVIVO
233
advantage provided by N3 was its DEMO to sort coded texts in relation to
other codes or variables and to provide as output both the detail of those
sorted texts and DEMO statistics. These latter allowed examination of
comparative trends based on grouped data, while the former allowed for
more detailed examination of the discourse for different groups. Inter-
pretation of the text was limited to the extent DEMO it was not easy to review
the coded segments in the context of other points made by the respondent.
The availability in N3 of DEMO command language which could be used for
‘autocoding’ both demographic data and whole responses to questions,
while not critical, certainly improved the efficiency of data handling.
Manual transfer of figures generated by the program to DEMO
software for further analysis was tedious, however, encouraging some
limitations on analysis. Text reports of responses within categories or cells
of matrices were DEMO by extensive details regarding the source of
each segment—useful for a qualitative analysis but not relevant when one is
simply looking to compare forms DEMO expression of ideas across groups using
data derived from anonymous survey respondents.
QSR software, as is suggested by its acronym, was designed for DEMO
with non-numeric unstructured data (NUD). Nevertheless, from its
beginning, DEMO developers recognized the importance of including demo-
graphic data within the qualitative database, and of being able to easily
compare the responses of subgroups such as those based on demographic
variables. Intentional links with quantitative data DEMO analysis were limited,
however, to such inputs. Thus, the generation of numbers from a matrix
analysis (such as was used in this study) was as a by-product of the text
analysis, and the DEMO of reports containing individual coding
information in any form suitable for statistical analysis was simply not
possible.
Working in
NUD*IST
version 4
The release DEMO N4, in April 1997, provided for qualitative analysis a much
greater flexibility in working with data stored at nodes through the
provision of DEMO live node browser. But additional new features in N4 also
recognized that increasingly users of the software were building quantita-
tive survey data as DEMO as demographics into their qualitative projects and
that they were using counts (either of documents or of volume of text as
represented by text units) to examine patterns or trends in their data.
Data
processin
g
In N4, the ability to import demographic and other quantitative data
directly from table-based software made for greatly improved efficiency in
entering and using DEMO data. Importing data (which had required 47 text-
search based commands DEMO N3) now took a few minutes only, did not
demand the same level of skill in setting up pattern searches, and avoided
errors or omissions based on mistyping of the raw document text. In the
DEMO By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
234
PAT BAZELEY
present study a command file was still used, however, for autocoding the
descriptions given of researcher s with specified characteristics (DEMO
document sections).
Where data is structured, as in this case, it is often more helpful to focus
attention on particular topics or DEMO (as reflected in the questions asked)
than on what each DEMO has said in response to all questions. Such an
approach can generate increased awarenes s of the dynamics of a particular
topic or issue DEMO encourages reflective memoing on that issue. Where
responses to questions have been already coded to a set of nodes for those
questions (typically using an autocoding procedure based on text search)
the ability to code-on DEMO the node browser (a window offering a ‘live’
view of data DEMO coded at a particular category) allows for this
alternative approach to DEMO Furthermore, while the software always
allowed whole categories to be rearranged, the availability of a live node
browser makes it possible also to DEMO rethink the content of the
categories being developed from the data.
Because of this greater flexibility in approaching the coding task as well
as DEMO options for quantitative output, I decided to recode the data in
DEMO research performance study using much more detailed descriptive
categories than had been used with the N3 version. Sixty descriptors were
generated, categorizing the data given in response to the eight character-
istics.
Analysis
Qualitatively, the text of responses could be analysed as before. Variations
in expression across comparative DEMO (e.g. for different genders, or
disciplines) and in response to DEMO prompt characteristics were
reviewed. Quantitative output could now be generated not only for results
of matrix searches, but also for coding of individual documents (although
technically limited to production for one ‘branch’ of nodes at a time). These
types of output could now be provided either as DEMO tabular screen display
(figure 1) or as a tab-delimited text file, the latter making it possible to
transfer the data directly to a spreadsheet or statistical program.
Numeric results (document counts) from matrix nodes DEMO exported
to Excel3 and amalgamated there to create a 480 cell crosstabulation of all
60 descriptors by all eight characteristics. Numbers in each cell DEMO
the number of respondents who used a particular descriptor for a particular
characteristic. This table was then transferred to SPSS to allow statistical
analyses DEMO the data. The goal of the statistical analysis was to identify
dimensions in the data and to review clustering of descriptors as ways of
DEMO the essential components of ‘research performance’.
Cluster analysis, based on measured DEMO in the patterning of
responses was found to be particularly useful in reviewing the results.
Results, displayed most clearly as a dendrogram (figure DEMO) in which the
points (from left to right) at which DEMO are ‘joined’ reflect the
distance between them, revealed that there was DEMO quite similar pattern of
descriptors used for productivity and recognition, that DEMO and
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
FRO M
a
N3
TO
NVIVO
235
b
Figure
output.
1.
Export
DEMO
generated
in
N4.
(a)
Individual
coding
table
(b)
Matrix
satisfaction were associated, that ability and quality were associated
although to a lesser degree than the former pairs, and that approachability
stood way out on its own.
Cluster analysis on an inverted matrix, while limited by a ‘sample’ of
just eight characteristics, prompted some thought about meaningful
grouping of descriptors. For example, a number of descriptors focusing
around personal benefit to the researcher ‘hung together’, as did (in
contrast) humility, DEMO and being experienced; having a practical,
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
236
PAT BAZELEY
Figure 2. Clustering of eight characteristics based on descriptors DEMO Dendro-
gram using Average Linkage (Between Groups), based on squared DEMO
distances calculated from similarities in the frequency with which up to 47
descriptors were used by 297 respondents for researchers demonstrating each
characteristic.
applied DEMO was linked with benefit to society and also to an ability to
reach goals and generate new knowledge.
Correspondence analysis was applied to the DEMO matrix of results.
This makes it possible to see which categories of the variables are related
through the graphical plotting of chi-squared distances4 of DEMO in a
multidimensional space. The results in this case lacked the statistical power
(level of explanation of variability) that one might expect from DEMO
correspondence analysis, but were nevertheless able to be interpreted in a
DEMO way. Approachability and its related descriptors, accounting for just
32% of DEMO variability in responses, defined the first dimension in the
analysis. The DEMO dimension, strongly influenced by benefit, was about
whose interest the research served (self vs other), the third dimension
described content (substance DEMO appearance ) while the fourth was about
process (intrinsic-performer vs extrinsic-performance) (figure 3). These
together explained a further 50% of variance. While the cluster analysis
provided some support for the common perception of a DEMO versus
quantity division in views of research performance, the ability of
DEMO analysis to reveal multiple dimensions, in association with
a reading of DEMO text for many of the descriptors across the characteristics,
provided a much richer perspective. Both pointed to the outlier status of
approachability (included in the original list of characteristics as a
consequence of my role DEMO academic research development at the time).
As indicated above, in DEMO to N3, in N4 it was possible to generate
a numeric DEMO indicating the presence or absence of coding at each node,
for each individual document in the database (cf. figure 1). Again, DEMO had
to be fairly tediously generated one branch at a time, DEMO each separate
export file had to be converted into SPSS format before it could be
combined, using an add variables routine, into a DEMO file with data from
earlier branches and the demographic and scaled data—but at least it could
be done.5 In this particular project these data DEMO less useful than the
matrix data (because the focus of the DEMO was on characteristics of the
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
FRO M
2D
input
standardization:
plot
of
column
table
coordinates;
(Rows Columns):
row
and
column
dimension:
47 8
profiles
3 4
ACTIV E
SATISFAC
B ENE FIT
AB ILITY
PRODUCTI
0.4
QUA DEMO
0.6
0.8
AP PROACH
RECOGNIT
1.0
1.2
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Dimension
3;
Eigenvalue:
0.26007
(17.22%
of
Inertia)
Figure 3. Characteristics across two dimensions as revealed DEMO correspondence
analysis. Column variables shown only, for clarity of presentation. This DEMO, for
example, that Activity is strong on the process dimension (DEMO intrinsically
motivated performer) but it is irrelevant to the content dimension (to either
substance or appearance of research), while Recognition is indicative DEMO both a
focus on appearance (rather than substance) and extrinsic motivation.
N3
TO
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
NVIVO
237
researchers being DEMO rather than the person making the descrip-
tions). In other projects, this type of data output has facilitated statistical
analyses allowing, for DEMO, testing of the meaning and/or usefulness of
scaled measures, prediction of quantitative or categorical outcomes and/or
explanation of contributions to an DEMO variable (Bazeley 1999).
Evaluation
of
improvements
in
N4
for
an
DEMO
analysis
There were a number of significant developments
available in N3, DEMO enhanced N4’s usefulness for
form data and integrated analysis.
The most obvious of these for this type of data
export functions for tabular data. DEMO it did not
analyses, the import table function provided by N4 DEMO made light
work of entering and coding demographic and other quantitative variables.
The export table function, in contrast, made feasible the production of DEMO
in N4, beyond those
projects using mixed
were the import and
DEMO new capacity to
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
Dimension 4; Eigenvalue: 0.18230 (12.07% of Inertia)
238
PAT BAZELEY
forms of quantitative output in the form of individual DEMO data, as well
as greatly simplifying the production of matrix data. DEMO output could
also be generated in N4 from a restricted set of data (allowing for the
inclusion of a third variable in the analysis), but individual coding data
could not. The remaining problem here was DEMO each of these types of data
had to be generated in small sets—one for each branch of the index tree—
and then amalgamated into DEMO single table to allow statistical analysis of the
data.6 Neither the inclusion nor the generation of tabular data in a mixed
methods project assumes DEMO qualitative data; these tools can be
applied equally well to data DEMO from free-flowing interviews or other
qualitative sources.
Of more subtle importance for highly structured data such as those
used in the research performance study DEMO the ability to focus coding
through one issue at a time, DEMO than coding across all issues for each
respondent. The introduction of the live node browser, which made this
possible, was critical also for DEMO the coding categories that were being
developed. Furthermore, the new capacity DEMO restrict a search to text
already coded at a node (rather DEMO simply to whole documents with
coding at a node) opened new DEMO for using text search to check the
use of particular expressions within the context of a specific characteristic
or descriptor.
Overall, then, N4 DEMO new opportunities for integrated qualitative
and quantitative analysis of data, although DEMO of quantitative
output sometimes involved tedious processing. In this study, the DEMO
to export coding for statistical analysis (cluster and correspondence
analysis) meant greatly enriched understanding of the dimensions of
research performance.
N5 has been DEMO since this work was done, with the principal
changes from N4 DEMO to do with clarity and convenience in using the
program. N5’s capacity to automatically format sentence-based text units
would have been helpful, but as there were no changes in tools for or output
from analyses it DEMO no new features of particular relevance for integrated
analysis. New features in N6 (released in 2002) do, however, offer
improvements for the DEMO methods researcher. Coding data for
individual documents can be generated for nodes at all levels of a particular
tree at one time; it can be produced for a restricted set of documents (only
those also coded at . . . ); and one can choose whether or not to exclude cases
for which there is no coding at any of DEMO selected nodes. Matrix data
continues to be generated for one branch (DEMO a single level) at one time, but
the dialogue displaying output from a matrix search is significantly
improved, making it much easier to generate table data and also to review
the contents of any particular DEMO in the matrix.
Working in NVivo
NVivo, as a new generation DEMO qualitative data analysis (QDA) software,
offers many new features to enrich qualitative analysis. Not all of these are
so critical for an DEMO analysis of the type being described here.
Downloaded By: [University of DEMO At: 17:57 11 August 2007
FRO M
N3
TO
NVIVO
239
Principally, improvements for an integrated analysis are increased
flexibility and convenience in generating quantitative output, with this in
turn fostering increased analytical activity.
The project created in N4 could be DEMO directly into NVivo,
though some ‘tidying up’ of memos was required. Because the data were
already coded, changes in the software that were relevant to this already
established project were primarily to do with the DEMO of the output that
could be obtained.
Data
processin
g
NVivo lacks command files used for automation of routine coding of text
and running DEMO repetitive analyses. It provides, instead, a section coder that
instantly codes structured documents based on the use of headings which
delineate sections within DEMO documents.
NVivo allows for creation and/or modification of text within the
program. In addition, coding in NVivo is character (rather than text DEMO)
based. Problems associated with text unit structure of the documents in the
current project could therefore be corrected by editing the documents and
DEMO problematic sections in them (a limited amount only of this was
DEMO). The move to a new program, combined with availability of DEMO
results from N4, did prompt a review of the descriptor nodes, and some
amalgamations and recoding as a consequence.
NVivo, like N4, DEMO for demographic and other quantitative
information to be imported from table-based software (such as a
spreadsheet), but rather than storing the information in nodes, NVivo
stores such information as attributes (in this case, of the documents).
Unlike N4, continuous variables can be read and used as real numbers. For
the current project, therefore, demographic variables were DEMO from the
trees and reimported to become attributes of the documents. The scaled
quantitative (percentage allocation) data (previously not considered in
direct association with the text) were imported also, as number attributes of
the DEMO
Analysis
The flexibility of being able to include selected nodes from any tree in any
analysis or profile of coding (NVivo’s version of an individual coding table)
stood out as being an important modification for DEMO generation of
quantitative output from the qualitative database. Selective inclusion of
nodes from different levels of a tree in a matrix allowed for subcategoriza-
DEMO within trees without loss of flexibility in conducting analyses. The ease
of generating complete tables in NVivo thus prompted a series of analyses
to DEMO the stability of the inferred underlying structure of the data
across different subgroups—whether, for example, clusters and dimensions
in the data varied depending DEMO whether the respondents had a PhD or not,
were scientists or social scientists, and so on. These were achieved by
Downloaded By: DEMO of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
240
PAT BAZELEY
scoping the matrix searches to sets of documents based DEMO attributes in
those documents.
Of most analytical significance is the format of the output for a matrix
node (figure 4). In N3, DEMO and N5, cells of a matrix were combined for
reporting purposes DEMO a single, non-browsable node. Thus, to use the text
in any cell of a matrix in a further search in those versions, it was necessary
to regenerate that cell as a ‘live’ node by intersecting DEMO the two nodes
which created it. NVivo (as did N2) creates each cell of a matrix as a
separate (child) node. Storing DEMO of a matrix as independen t nodes allows
for more sophisticated manipulation of data through using them as a set in
further matrix searches DEMO/or for generation of individual coding tables.
For example, in the DEMO project it becomes possible to create a profile of
coding for each individual document which records each time a descriptor
is used for each DEMO the prompt words (rather than overall, as in N4). This
then allows for those individual records (now in a statistical database) DEMO be
weighted by the level of importance assigned by that respondent to the
characteristic for which the descriptor was used, as a way of eventually
generating a weighted value for each descriptor across the sample. This
DEMO then, for example, reduce the contribution of approachability (the
lowest DEMO characteristic) and its related descriptors in comparison
with, say quality (DEMO highest scoring characteristic).
Fresh textual analyses in the current study, DEMO possible by the
inclusion of additional numeric attributes, examined the relationship
DEMO a respondent’s rating of a characteristic as being important or
not important in doing/assessing research (using the newly imported
number attributes) and DEMO way in which they described a researcher with
that characteristic. Thus, DEMO example, it was found that those who rated
approachability as being DEMO irrelevant to research performance described
Figure 4.
NVivo matrix display.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
FRO M
N3
TO
NVIVO
241
the communication style of approachable researchers DEMO quite different
terms from those who suggested it warranted 10 per cent or more
consideration.
With regard to text analysis more generally, output from NVivo does
not differ in content from that available through N4, although, again,
convenience can play a part. With survey data, where DEMO does not
necessarily want information about the source document with the text
output, but rather, just everything that is said that fits certain DEMO, it is
convenient to be able to filter the unwanted information DEMO of reports: this
is easily achieved for NVivo coding reports using DEMO word processor.
Evaluation
of
NVivo
for
integrate
d
analysi
s
The advantages NVivo offers to the mixed methods researcher are, in the
first instance, enhanced flexibility and convenience. A serious integrated
study will also benefit from being able to more finely scope searches and
from being able to DEMO reincorporate results of matrix searches into
further searches or coding profiles.
These advantages could be progressed even further with a number of
relatively minor DEMO to the program, such as ensuring that matrix
output is presented DEMO nodes ‘in order’, and with coding reports of matrix
nodes labelled DEMO at least the addresses of the intersecting nodes, if not
their DEMO
What has
meant for
having software (particularly
integrated analysis?
QSR
DEMO)
Without developments in the field of QDA software, the integration DEMO
textual and statistical analyses in a project using mixed form data, DEMO
retaining the full hermeneutic richness of that data, would be virtually
DEMO Statistical analysis of the data would have required that it be
category-coded into a database without opportunity to rethink the
categories being used or DEMO to relevant text for further interpretation.
Sorting of text for interpretive or discourse analysis would be limited.
Further, while some QDA software other than that developed by QSR can
incorporate variable data into a qualitative database DEMO/or produce limited
coding output in tabular form (e.g. reporting the DEMO/s on each individual
segment of text), the extensive use of matrix output in the project described
above was absolutely dependent on the DEMO of N4, N5 or NVivo to
produce both numeric and text DEMO based on the cross tabulation of
groups of codes.
The most significant developments in the capacity of QSR software to
support integrated analyses came DEMO the release of N4, notably its
capacity to import and, especially, to export both individual coding and
matrix tables. Exported coding tables allow individual coding data to be
added to a quantitative database to enrich DEMO analysis there. The export of
matrix data provides the basis for analysis of patterns across the broad
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: DEMO:57 11 August 2007
242
PAT BAZELEY
sweep of data, which can then be supplemented by more detailed analysis of
patterning in the form of expression used in DEMO text. The use of various
clustering or dimensionalizing techniques, based on DEMO coding or
matrix output, assist researchers in construing critical concepts in DEMO
data.
Developments since N4 (in a minor way, N5, but DEMO particularly, N6
and NVivo) have substantially increased the convenience of using the
programs for these purposes. These developments, however, have built on
DEMO refined rather than noticeably improved the analytical capacity of the
programs.
Use of QDA software for integrated analyses is often, in the developers’
eyes, a misuse of carefully constructed tools designed for meaningful,
interpretive, DEMO analysis of text. Precious tools for qualitative
analysis are neglected, and DEMO are used in unintended ways. But the
tools provided—and the consequent capacity to link qualitative with
quantitative data and qualitative interpretation of text with DEMO
of numeric analyses—do, nevertheless, make possible an entire new range
of analyses that have the potential to greatly enrich our understanding of
the DEMO and behavioural world. The developers of QSR software, while
still focusing DEMO on tools for qualitative analysis, have been open to
these new DEMO in integrating qualitative with quantitative analyses.
These developments are relatively recent, DEMO there is considerable scope to
extend and refine both the tools and the analytic processes they make
possible. The season is open for creative DEMO thinking.
Notes
1. SPSS—Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (www.spss.com).
DEMO A matrix intersection search creates a cross-tabulation of data based on the cooccurrence of codes
referencing the same text. Because demographic coding is applied DEMO whole documents, any other
coding must intersect with it. Similarly , DEMO coding for each prompt characteristic was applied to
the whole of each response, coding for specific descriptors always intersected with coding for the
prompt characteristic.
3. Microsoft Excel spreadsheet software.
4. Unlik e for normal chi-squared DEMO, multiple response across categories is not a problem for
correspondence analysis.
DEMO This procedure was contingent upon the fact that SPSS allowed the matching of additional variables
for an incomplete set of cases. N4 did not DEMO cases in its output table if they did not record a ‘hit’
on at least one node in the branch being exported, making it impossible to combine the data from a
number of branches, for example, in Excel.
6. I have since developed a ‘workaround’ that allows the analyst to efficiently export all required nodes
at one time (or indeed, the inclusion of all desired nodes in a single matrix), in a format which is
appropriately labelled for SPSS variables.
References
Bazeley, P. (1999) The bricoleur with a computer: piecing together qualitative and quantitative data.
Qualitative Health Research, 9, 279 – 287.
Bazeley, P. (DEMO) Computerized data analysis for mixed
Teddlie (eds) Handbook of Mixed DEMO for the
Oaks, CA: Sage), pp. 385 – 422.
methods research. In A. Tashakorri and C.
Social and Behavioural Sciences (Thousand
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007
FRO M
N3
TO
NVIVO
243
Caracelli, V.J. and Greene, J.C. (1997) Crafting mixed-method evaluation designs. In J.C. Greene and
V.J. Caracelli (DEMO) Advances in Mixed-Method Evaluation: The Challenges and Benefits of
Integrating Diverse Paradigms (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass), pp. 19 – 32.
Creswell, J.W. (1994) Research Design: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches (Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage).
Datta, L. (1997) A pragmatic basis for mixed-method designs. In J.C. Greene and V.J. Caracelli (eds)
Advances in Mixed-Method Evaluation: The Challenges and Benefits of Integrating Diverse
Paradigms (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass).
Greene, J.C. and Caracelli, V.J. (1997) Defining and DEMO the paradigm issues in mixed-method
evaluation. In J.C. Greene and V.J. Caracelli (eds) Advances in Mixed-Method Evaluation: Th e
Challenges and Benefits of Integrating Diverse Paradigms (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass), pp. 5 – 18.
DEMO, T.D. (1979) Mixing qualitative and quantitative methods: triangulation in action. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 24, 602 – 611.
Morgan, D.L. (1998) Practical strategies for combining qualitative and quantitative methods:
applications to health DEMO Qualitative Health Research, 8, 362 – 376.
Morse, J.M. (1991) Approaches to qualitative-quantitative methodological triangulation. Nursing
Research, 40, 120 – 123.
Patton, M.Q. (1990) Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods (Newbury Park: Sage).
Rossman, G.B. and Wilson, B.L. (1994) Numbers and DEMO revisited: being ‘shamelessly eclectic’.
Quality and Quantity, 28, 315 – DEMO
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 17:57 11 August 2007{1g42fwefx}