A Contingency Model for the Selection of Decision Strategies
Author(s): DEMO Roy Beach and Terence R. Mitchell
Source: The Academy of Management DEMO, Vol. 3, No. 3 (Jul., 1978), pp. 439-449
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/257535
DEMO: 21/10/2009 13:12
Your use of the JSTOR archive DEMO your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available DEMO
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained DEMO permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal DEMO multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the DEMO archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher DEMO any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aom.
Each copy of any part DEMO a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit DEMO that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We DEMO information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy
of Management Review.
http://www.jstor.org
Symposium: Contingency Theory
A
Contingency
of
Model
Decision
for
Strategies
the
Selection
LEE ROY BEACH and
TERENCE R. MITCHELL
University of Washington
A model DEMO why decision makers choose different decision
strategies in dealing with different decision problems. Given the mo-
tivation to choose the strategy which requires the DEMO investment for
a satisfactory solution, the choice of strategy should depend DEMO the
type of problem, the surrounding environment, and the personal
characteristics of the decision maker.
People use a variety of strategies for making
DEMO Because these strategies are frequent-
ly suboptimal (25), a substantial DEMO of re-
search has been devoted to developing tech-
niques (decision DEMO) for improving decision
making effectiveness. While improved effective-
ness is an DEMO goal, we also must seek to
understand human decision making as DEMO is, not
merely as it might be (18, 19). DEMO latter endeavor
entails finding out why decisions are made in the
ways they are and devising a framework that can
Lee Roy Beach (Ph.D. - University of Colorado) is Professor
of Psychology, and Terence R. DEMO (Ph.D. - University
of Illinois) is Professor of Management and Organization and
of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
Received 6/3/77; Accepted 8/4/77; Revised 9/19/77.
439
accommodate DEMO variety of strategies that in-
trospection and observation suggest exist.
This article describes a framework for ex-
amining individuals' selection of strategies for
decision making. A decision strategy consists of:
(a) the set of DEMO that the decision maker
engages in when attempting to select among al-
ternative courses of action, and (b) a decision
rule that dictates how the results of the engaged-
1 This research was supported by DEMO of Naval Research
Contract N00014-76-C-0193 (Terence R. Mitchell and Lee Roy
DEMO, Investigators). The authors thank Dr. Paul Slovic and
our students, particularly Mr. Jay Christensen-Szalanski and
Mr. L. Clark Johnson for their comments DEMO advice. Reprints
may be obtained from Professor Lee Roy Beach, Department
DEMO Psychology (NI-25), University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195.
440
Stage 1 -- 2 -----
Activity Problem Evaluation
Recognition of Task
DEMO 1. A Typical Model
in procedures will be used to make the actual
decision. For example, in the familiar Subjective
Expected Utility strategy, DEMO procedures are the
computation of product sums of subjective
probabilities and utilities for each alternative and
the decision rule is maximization - selection of
DEMO alternative with the maximum product sum.
Other strategies involve other procedures and
decision rules.
The proposed framework is based on the as-
sumption that DEMO selection is contingent
upon both the characteristics of the decision task
and the characteristics of the decision maker.
Models of this kind, called contingency models,
are evident in many areas of management (e.g.,
leadership, organizational design, participation
in decision making), but with some limited DEMO
ceptions (4, 17, 19, 28), such an approach has not
been explored for decision psychology.
The development of a contingency model
DEMO four steps which are jointly evolved as
research progresses. First, the DEMO behavior
of interest must be identified; the behavior must
vary across DEMO and across tasks, thereby im-
plying that the characteristics of each DEMO influ-
ence it. Second, a taxonomy of the task environ-
ment DEMO be developed, using those task char-
acteristics that account for variance DEMO the behav-
ior of interest. Third, personal characteristics of
the people DEMO engage in the behavior must be
identified, characteristics that account for DEMO
ance in that behavior. Fourth, links must be de-
vised to DEMO the task characteristics and the
personal characteristics to the behavior of inter-
est.
A Contingency Model of Decision
Strategy Selection
Most models of individual DEMO making
include a series of distinct stages (see Figure 1).
DEMO Contingency Model for the Selection of Decision Strategies
3 ---
4
5 ----
6
Strategy
Selection
Information
Processing
Strategy
Implemen-
tation
Choice
of Individual DEMO Making.
The first stage involves problem recognition,
where the problem is defined as a discrepancy
between what is desired (e.g., targets, goals, ob-
jectives) and what currently exists. This discrep-
ancy, if important, moves the decision maker to
Stage 2 - evaluation of the decision task and its
demands. At this stage the decision maker also
asks DEMO questions as "What do I need to
know?" or "What are the parameters of the
problem?" In Stage 3, a strategy is selected to
solve the problem, and in Stage 4 the decision
maker uses various heuristics (32) to process in-
formation prior to DEMO the decision
strategy; processing involves searching for and
evaluating information. Stages DEMO and 6 involve
the actual implementation of a decision strategy
and a choice among alternatives.
While all of the stages are of potential inter-
DEMO, what follows is limited to Stages 2 and 3. Our
central DEMO is in the task characteristics and
personal characteristics that cause the decision
maker to select one kind of strategy rather than
another. We will DEMO with an examination of
some of the kinds of decision strategies that are
potentially available to the decision maker. Then
the important task and DEMO maker charac-
teristics will be considered. Finally, we will link
these DEMO to strategy selection.
One note of clarification: while much of the
DEMO literature focuses on decision units and
the process that goes into group decision mak-
ing (6, 14, 26, 33), we will DEMO our discussion to
the individual decision maker. We feel that this
is appropriate due to the differences in the two
kinds of decisions and DEMO contingency
models of group decision making already exist
(23, 27).
Decision Strategies
All of us possess repertoires of decision strat-
Academy of Management Review - July
1978
egies; we have numerous ways to deal with de-
cision problems even if they are not all DEMO
effective. Moreover, there are characteristics
that are shared by various strategies DEMO, for the
purposes of discussion, permit the division of
them into categories and the ordering of them
within those categories. We have chosen DEMO use
three categories: aided-analytic, unaided-analyt-
ic, and nonanalytic. We will DEMO each of these
and give a few examples of their contents. The
examples are not intended to constitute an ex-
haustive list but to DEMO merely as illustrations.
Aided-Analytic Strategies - This category
contains strategies that require the decision
maker to apply a prescribed procedure utilizing
tools such as DEMO and paper, mathematics,
calculator or computer, etc., in a DEMO, sys-
tematic attempt to analyze the decision and
evaluate its components. DEMO strategies always
require training or invention, and frequently a
technician is DEMO to help. Decision analy-
sis (and the aid of a decision DEMO) is in this cat-
egory as are all normative decision models DEMO
sidered optimal in some sense or other in eco-
nomics, statistics, operations analysis, etc. More-
over, this category contains many complex pro-
DEMO that may or may not be optimal, such
as some that DEMO used in siting of highways, pow-
er plants, and similar large-scale institutional de-
cisions. The latter are not necessarily optimal but
they are DEMO, prescriptive approaches to
immensely complicated and information-laden
decisions and are, therefore, within the defini-
tion of the aided-analytic category.
We are all familiar with examples of some
of these strategies. In the business environment
there DEMO are available rather complex
forecasting models which are designed to help
the decision maker (2). Somewhat less grand,
but still within the aided-analytic category, are
strategies involving the listing and evaluation of
outcomes that could occur if each alternative
were selected. These strategies typically involve
decomposition DEMO the problem through use of
decision trees. Finally, there are strategies DEMO
simply involve the listing of pros and cons of al-
441
ternatives and some sort of balancing or weight-
ing of these consequences (called "moral alge-
bra" by Benjamin Franklin). While not as com-
DEMO as decision trees," "moral algebra" still
represents an aided-analytic strategy.
Unaided-Analytic Strategies - This category
contains strategies for which an attempt is DEMO
to explore the dimensions of the problem but
for which no tools are used, and the decision
maker restricts processing to the confines of his
or her mind; these are the decision strategies
that have been studied most by psychologists
using the normative models from the aided-
analytic DEMO as comparison models.
Examples of fairly structured unaided-ana-
lytic strategies are the various approximations to
the Subjective Expected Utility strategy (SEU) that
decision DEMO perform entirely in their heads.
In these strategies, the decision maker DEMO
to think about the outcomes that could result
from the available choices as well as the chances
of those outcomes occurring and then chooses
DEMO alternative that seems in some rough way to
offer the best potential. Gray (9) found that third
grade children's choices of arithmetic DEMO
to solve appeared to be arrived at by this strat-
egy, DEMO Tversky (29), Shanteau and Anderson
(22), Shanteau (21), Holmstrom and Beach (11),
and many others have found that adults fre-
quently use something quite like it too. Research
stemming from DEMO models (8, 15)
(which are similar in conception to DEMO SEU
model) reinforces the conclusion that people
sometimes attempt such strategies (16).
Most utility maximization strategies are
compensatory in nature: less of one aspect of
an outcome can be compensated for by more
of DEMO aspect. This characteristic makes
them, quite cumbersome for the unaided deci-
DEMO maker because each outcome must be
evaluated separately for each of its aspects, and
then the utility of each aspect must be summed
to arrive at the outcome's overall utility. Strate-
gies are available that DEMO less demanding but
still compensatory in nature, such as Tversky's
DEMO difference model (30). A well known
442
noncompensatory strategy is Simon's (24) "satis-
ficing" strategy DEMO which the decision maker se-
lects the first decision alternative that exceeds
some "minimum aspiration level". This strate-
gy's procedure consists of comparing the vari-
ous aspects of outcomes to predetermined cri-
teria rather DEMO evaluating each of them, sum-
ming, and then comparing the summaries; the
decision rule is sufficiency rather than maximi-
zation. Related strategies have been proposed
by Coombs (3), Dawes (5), and Einhorn (7).
Similar yet simpler noncompensatory strat-
egies are the Elimination by DEMO strategy (31)
and the Lexicographic strategy (30). When using
the former, the decision maker selects one as-
pect of the decision alternatives, eliminates all
alternatives that do not possess that aspect, se-
DEMO another aspect, eliminates alternatives, etc.
until only one alternative remains. When using
the Lexicographic strategy, the decision maker
selects the most important aspect of the alterna-
tives and eliminates all alternatives except the
one that DEMO superior to all the others on it; if none
are superior DEMO that aspect the decision maker
drops it and moves to the next most important
aspect, etc. These kinds of strategies have the ad-
vantage of reducing information processing by
restricting attention to only part of the DEMO
information about the alternatives, but they have
the disadvantage of introducing DEMO irra-
tionalities such as intransitivity of preference (30).
Payne (19) examined some of the conditions
that lead decision makers to shift from compen-
satory unaided-analytic strategies to noncom-
pensatory ones. His task required participants DEMO
gather information in order to arrive at a prefer-
ence among alternative apartments to rent. The
results were that as task complexity increased
(i.e., as the number of decision alternatives and
the amount of information about them in-
creased), there was a shift from compensatory
strategies to DEMO strategies that in-
volved elimination of alternatives on the basis of
a subset of information. Moreover, having elim-
inated some alternatives in this way, thereby hav-
ing reduced task complexity, some decision
A Contingency Model DEMO the Selection of Decision Strategies
makers returned to a compensatory strategy to
decide among the remaining alternatives. The
importance of these findings to the DEMO
model will become apparent later.
Finally, the least formalized of the DEMO
analytic strategies involves the construction of
mental movies or "scripts" (DEMO) in which the de-
cision maker imagines how things might be DEMO
this or that decision alternative were chosen and
then picks the alternative for which the script
turns out best. The scripts can be simple DEMO
sketchy or elaborate and detailed but the princi-
ple is the same for all of them - imagine how
things would be if x DEMO y or z were the chosen al-
ternative, and choose the DEMO for which the im-
agined result is best.
Nonanalytic Strategies - This category con-
tains fairly simple, preformulated rules that are
applied by rote to decision tasks. They differ
from aided- and unaided-analytic strategies in
that DEMO information is procured or processed,
little time is needed, and DEMO rules do not require
that the decision be decomposed nor that its
multiple aspects be considered. Examples are
"Eeny, meeny, miney, mo DEMO .," flipping a coin,
or basing action selection such as whether to go
sailing or not on "Red sky at night - sailors' de-
light; red sky in morning - sailors take warn-
DEMO". Such homiletic rules frequently are heard
in organizational settings. Both "DEMO safe than
sorry" or "A bird in the hand is worth two in the
bush" represent conservative strategies in con-
trast to the riskier strategy of "Nothing ventured,
nothing gained". Of course, DEMO is the difficulty
that these rules often are quoted as rationaliza-
tions for decisions based on other strategies, par-
ticularly when the decision maker does not rec-
ognize or does not wish to defend his or DEMO ac-
tual strategy. But quite frequently, simple rules
do serve as DEMO strategies, especially when
they apply to specific tasks; many rules are ac-
quired to deal with specific tasks through expe-
rience, training, DEMO instruction. Familiar exam-
ples of the latter are the lists of helpful hints in-
cluded in the instruction booklets that accom-
pany appliances, tools, cameras or the like, or
Academy of Management Review - July
1978
the "tips to homemakers" DEMO in newspa-
pers.
More idiosyncratic rules might be such
things as alternating daily between wearing a
blue suit and brown suit or always going DEMO the
restaurant that one has visited least recently. Not
having the same kind of meat for dinner as one
had for lunch is another DEMO
Other nonanalytic strategies involve compli-
ance with convention. This may be conscious
(explicit) or unconscious (inexplicit); we each
know the rules of our culture and subculture,
but we do not always know that DEMO know them
even though we may abide by them (10). DEMO,
for example, we may consciously elect to com-
ply with DEMO new conventions of word use and
refer to people as "chairpersons", and we may
unconsciously comply with culture's conven-
tions of leaving a stool between ourselves and
the next person at a cafe counter DEMO maintaining
rather specific speaking distances between our-
selves and others of different social status or sex.
Finally, the most nonanalytic strategy of all
is habit. Habit is not to be scorned merely be-
cause it is DEMO extreme example of rote applica-
tion of a rule. After all, DEMO is efficient, and it pos-
sibly may be the product of DEMO earlier, more
reasoned strategy which has become mechani-
cal in order DEMO realize the economy of not having
to go through the whole strategy selection proc-
ess each time the decision task is encountered.
Because the DEMO of decisions are mundane
and made repeatedly, habit is a valuable DEMO
gy. Moreover, neither habit nor any of the non-
analytic
qualities
DEMO maker is to recognize that the present de-
cision task is sufficiently similar to previous ones
for which the rule has been successful enough DEMO
warrant using it again. This is why habit and the
other nonanalytic strategies are true strategies
and not just decision rules; they require at least
a little processing prior to actually making the
decision.
Differences and DEMO - The major
difference among these three categories is in the
strategies
- some
is completely without analytic
analysis is necessary if the de-
DEMO
differing degrees of analysis that their constituent
strategies require, and, as a result, the amount of
required resources (time, effort, and/DEMO mon-
ey). Aided-analytic strategies use formal proce-
dures to lay out the problem and to decompose
it into subparts for subanalyses. They often DEMO
quire extensive information procurement; they
rely on application of often complex DEMO pro-
cedures, usually mathematics, to decompose
the problem and to recompose it again and to
provide summary statements to which a deci-
sion DEMO can be applied in some precise man-
ner. All of this is done using tools and at a cost.
Unaided-analytic strategies require attempts
to DEMO least consider different components of the
decision problem, but in part DEMO no tools
are used, the degree to which this is done DEMO
tematically and thoroughly is dictated solely by
the abilities and desires of the decision maker.
The limits of unaided human information proc-
essing preclude DEMO problems or pro-
cedures, and even simpler ones require sus-
tained DEMO work. The strategy of using scripts as
a basis for decisions may be the most informa-
tion rich procedure in this category because it
DEMO uses both auditory and visual imagery.
But, even though they are DEMO to use, scripts
seldom are systematically composed, and they
run the danger of biased selection of informa-
tion for inclusion (wishful thinking or "catastro-
phizing"), thus emphasizing the trade-off be-
tween ease of DEMO and general accuracy.
Nonanalytic strategies require very little anal-
ysis short of mere verification that the rule is ap-
plicable to the decision task DEMO hand. How similar
or dissimilar the present task has to be to past
tasks before a rule is tried has been studied as
transfer DEMO training and stimulus generalization
by learning psychologists. Nonanalytic strategies
are quick and require little in the way of resource
expenditure although the behavioral alternative
DEMO upon may itself be quite complicated.
There are some similarities among the three
categories but they are fewer than the differ-
ences. First, the strategies in all three have deci-
sion rules. This is not merely DEMO strategies
444
are defined that way but because no decision is
possible without DEMO decision rule. Some process
guides our action. Second, all three categories
DEMO pre-decision procedures; aided-analytic
strategies tend to involve a lot and nonanalytic
DEMO tend to involve relatively little.
Third, within each category, the strategies
can be ordered from what, for want of better
terms, we DEMO call formal to informal. In the
aided-analytic category, strategies range from
DEMO blown decision analysis through strategies
like simplified decision trees to "moral DEMO"
in the unaided-analytic category, they range
from approximations to subjective DEMO
utility maximization through noncompensatory
alternative-eliminating strategies to the produc-
tion of mental scripts. In the nonanalytic cate-
gory, they range from rule-of-thumb through
adherence to convention to simple habit. With-
in each category, this range of strategies reflects
differences in the number of resources required
to use them; the resource requirements gener-
ally decrease both as one goes from the DEMO
analytic to the unaided-analytic to the nonana-
lytic categories and as one goes from formal to
informal strategies within a category.
Why then would DEMO ever choose a strategy
that requires much analysis and the investment
of a great deal of time and energy? The answer
lies in the characteristics of the task and of the
decision maker.
Characteristics of the DEMO Task
Because strategy selection is a subjective
process, the influence of DEMO characteristics on
it is mediated by the decision maker's percep-
tion of those characteristics. Thus, while it is not
possible to entirely disentangle task characteris-
tics and decision maker characteristics, it is pos-
sible to separate them conceptually by defining
task characteristics as the decision maker's DEMO
terpretations of the demands and constraints of
the specific task at hand and by defining deci-
sion maker characteristics as enduring aspects of
the DEMO maker that are not task specific.
Task characteristics can be further divided into
A Contingency Model for the Selection of Decision Strategies
two groups: those that are inherent in the deci-
sion problem itself (e.g., DEMO number of possible
alternative courses of action that must be con-
sidered) and those that describe the decision en-
vironment (e.g., the significance of the deci-
sion). Both contribute to strategy selection.
The Decision DEMO - While the number
of characteristics that might differentiate specific
decision problems is no doubt greater than we
presently envisage, we can at least sort out some
general ones that are likely to prove important.
Unfamilarity DEMO Is the degree to which the
decision problem is foreign to the decision
maker. Past experience with the same or similar
problems can, on the one hand, provide either a
specific strategy that has been used successfully
before or, on the other hand, it can rule out DEMO
successful strategies. Lack of such experience
means that the decision maker must take more
care in approaching the problem.
Ambiguity - Is the degree DEMO which the
problem is unclear to the decision maker. This
includes the ambiguity of the goals, decision al-
ternatives, constraints, etc. as well as the unavail-
ability, unreliability, and imprecision of relevant
information.
Complexity DEMO Is the number of different
components of the decision problem: number
DEMO alternatives to be considered and amount of
relevant information to be considered (recall the
above discussion of Payne (19) as well as number
of criteria on which the decision will be judged,
etc. Also DEMO in complexity is the degree to
which the problem will influence future deci-
sions; if one must choose the best alternative
early on and also anticipate the consequences of
these decisions on later events, the situation is
complex.
Instability - Is the degree to which the cri-
teria, goals and constraints of the problem
change during and after the decision, particular-
ly if those changes are difficult to predict.
Many of the DEMO characteristics have been
reviewed and discussed by others. Although
MacCrimmon and Taylor (13), for example, dis-
cuss problem uncertainty and complexity in
Academy of Management Review - July
1978
some detail and the various DEMO that can be
used to deal with these problems, they do DEMO
provide a rationale for why one strategy is likely
to be preferred over another, nor do any other
authors dealing with these characteristics at the
individual decision making level.
The Decision Environment - Besides the
specifics DEMO in the decision problem, there
are also more general, situational factors that in-
fluence the selection of a strategy. These charac-
teristics, which have generally been omitted
from the decision literature, are:
Irreversibility - Most decisions are not all-
or-none; the decision maker usually can make
the decision, monitor its effects, and reverse the
decision if things DEMO poorly. But when this cannot
be done, it increases the stress DEMO making the de-
cision by increasing pressure to be correct or
having to live with the negative consequences.
Significance - The significance of the DEMO
lem is determined both by the magnitudes of
the outcomes
involved and the breadth of the
decision's ramifications for other parts of the DEMO
cision maker's life, e.g., making a correct deci-
sion may be important in and of itself and may
also influence future promotions, self-esteem,
etc.
Accountability - This is the degree to which
the DEMO maker is to be accountable for the
results of the decision. One kind of accountabil-
ity is personally imposed and results from per-
sonal DEMO with the decision and the out-
comes related to it. Another kind is externally
imposed and results from being accountable to
others for the DEMO's results rather than for
the quality of the procedure used to make the
decision. High accountability increases the pres-
sure to be correct.
DEMO and/or Money Constraints - Some-
times decision tasks allow ample time for delib-
eration and processing, but more often there are
deadlines. There are few opportunities that do
not expire, few decisions that must not be re-
solved before things can progress, few other per-
sons willing to tolerate prolonged indecisive-
ness. When time is limited, an upper limit is
445
placed on the resources that can be expended
and, therefore, some strategies are eliminated
from consideration. By the same token, if DEMO
are limits on the money one is permitted to
spend on information procurement and/or de-
cision technology, some strategies cannot be
used.
Characteristics of the Decision Maker
While the list certainly is not exhaustive, it
seems that the following personal characteris-
tics probably influence strategy selection. Note
DEMO we have omitted most of the "personality"
variables that might DEMO expected to be included
(e.g., risk-taking and risk-aversion). This is be-
cause few solid data exist that reliably relate per-
sonality characteristics DEMO specific decision strat-
egies.
Knowledge - Probably the greatest influ-
ence on strategy selection is the decision mak-
er's knowledge, or lack of it, about the available
strategies and their relative promise of success.
Usually, aided-analytic strategies are only avail-
able through training; most of the DEMO strate-
gies are developed in the course of experience,
which also is a source of knowledge.
With knowledge about the existence of
strategies DEMO opinions about their appropri-
ateness and their relative likelihoods of yielding
a "correct" decision. Only decision scientists fo-
cus on making decisions correctly DEMO than on
making correct decisions; most people would
find little consolation DEMO knowing that they fol-
lowed the right procedure, gambled, and lost.
In general, people in our culture regard
the more formally analytic strategies as the ones
most likely to yield correct decisions even if they
DEMO or never use them - the explictness and
prescriptive authoritativeness of such strategies
make them defensible and give the impression
of thoroughness and logical DEMO Of course, this
faith is misplaced if the wrong strategy is DEMO
to the problem, but the point here is the deci-
sion DEMO's perception.
Ability - Knowledge of and faith in strate-
gies is fundamental, but the ability to exercise
446
that knowledge is quite as important. For some-
one who lacks DEMO ability, the time and effort
that must be expended in the DEMO of a particular
strategy is greater for someone who has the abil-
ity. In short, the less able person must devote
more of his or her personal resources of time
and effort to using strategies and DEMO can
be expected to be less willing to select strategies
with high personal resource requirements. The
more intelligent, cognitively complex, and ana-
lytic DEMO individual is, the easier it should be to
use analytic rather DEMO nonanalytic strategies
and, within a given category, formal rather than
informal strategies (20).
Motivation - Whatever their intelligence,
cognitive complexity, DEMO characteristic approach
to problems, people making decisions strive to
expend the DEMO personal resources compatible
with the demands of the decision task. It is not
merely that they are lazy: often there are other
demands; DEMO there is a personal need
to appear resolute and decisive, and DEMO there
is a tendency to avoid the emotional aspects of
prolonged deliberation - what William James
called "the impatience of the deliberative state"
(12). Of course, countering impetuousity is what
James called "the dread of the irrevocable" (ir-
reversibility), but unless the latter DEMO fairly strong,
the press to decide, to get the matter DEMO and
to cease working on it often is a powerful moti-
vator for selecting the fastest and easiest strate-
gies within reason. This motivation DEMO as the
mechanism for linking the parts of the model we
have described thus far.
Linking the Parts
At this point, the model consists of the fol-
lowing proposition: the selection of different
decision strategies (DEMO, unaided-ana-
lytic, and nonanalytic) is contingent upon the de-
cision DEMO (the characteristics of the task
and the environment)
and the DEMO maker
(his or her knowledge, ability, and motivation).
Given DEMO motivation to choose the strategy
which requires the least investment for a satis-
factory solution, different strategies will be
A Contingency Model for the Selection of Decision Strategies
chosen depending upon the type of problem,
DEMO surrounding environment, and the personal
qualities of the decision maker. The DEMO step is
to link these parts.
The Decision Task - To facilitate discus-
sion, we are going to impose some oversimpli-
fications. First, DEMO will deal with the character-
istics of the decision task only in terms of the ex-
treme (e.g., high in ambiguity, complexity, DEMO
stability, and unfamiliarity or low on these di-
mensions). Second, we will assume that there
always is ample time and money to DEMO
whatever strategy the decision maker would
prefer to use. Third, we DEMO assume that the re-
lationship between the felt pressure to use a
more analytic technique and the task or person-
al characteristics is positive DEMO linear. Increased
task demands, situational demands, or knowl-
edge and ability should increase the pressure to
use analytic procedures. (While this generally
linear relationship is posited to hold in most cir-
cumstances, it probably breaks down at ex-
tremes. For example, when the problem be-
comes too complex, too ambiguous, unfamiliar
and unstable, the individual may just give up or
revert to a simpler decision strategy.) We will
discuss some of these points more thoroughly
after the following examples.
When we consider DEMO tasks that are
consistently high or low in these task character-
istics, the predictions are rather simple. Unfa-
miliar, complex, uncertain, irreversible, and sig-
nificant decisions should demand more from the
decision maker. Analytic DEMO are more
likely to be used. The opposite of this setting (DEMO
g., simple, certain, reversible, insignificant prob-
lems) should result DEMO less analytic procedures
being used.
In some cases, the variables might DEMO
a more complex mix. Consider a task in which
the problem is unfamiliar, ambiguous, complex,
and unstable, but reversability exists, the DEMO
sion is of little significance, and there is low ac-
countability. DEMO task demands would suggest
an analytic procedure, but the environmental
demands DEMO not. The leniency of the envi-
Academy of Management Review - July
1978
ronment and the muddle of DEMO problem might
encourage selection of the least analytic strategy
that will result in a satisfactory answer; since the
decision is not very important, DEMO should one
spend a lot of time trying to analyze this difficult
and complex problem?
Finally, consider a decision task in which the
problem is familiar, unambiguous, simple, and
stable, but the environment DEMO irreversa-
bility, high significance, and high accountability.
Here the task characteristics are such that a non-
analytic or informal unaided-analytic strategy
might be DEMO (e.g., use an old solution), but
the environmental demands are sufficiently
stringent to encourage caution and use of a
more analytic approach.
DEMO decision tasks would involve a range
of states of their constituent characteristics, and
different characteristics would be in different
states. But these examples may serve to convey
the general idea that the choice is contingent on
DEMO characteristics of the problem and its sur-
rounding environment.
The Decision Maker - Continuing the use
of extremes and assuming no time or money
DEMO, consider a decision maker who is
highly knowledgeable about decision strategies
(perhaps even understands and has faith in deci-
sion analysis), who DEMO highly intelligent and capa-
ble of applying his or her knowledge about strat-
egies, who is cognitively complex and given to
systematic, analytic DEMO and who, there-
fore, has the ability to use analytic strategies
without expending too much in the way of re-
sources. Call this DEMO an A person and
the opposite a B person.
Again, using DEMO extremes we would expect
that individual A will typically select analytic over
less analytic strategies and formal over informal
ones within a given analytic DEMO Individual B,
on the other hand, should prefer less analytic
DEMO to analytic ones and informal strate-
gies to formal ones.
The Model - As can be inferred from the
foregoing, strategy selection is viewed as a com-
promise between the press for more decision
447
accuracy DEMO the demands of the decision task in-
crease and the decision maker's resistance to the
expenditure of his or her personal resources.
We DEMO attempt to make this more explicit but
first an important caveat: DEMO the variables
we are combining are not wholly independent,
but we are treating them as such and using an
additive formulation. Both assumptions DEMO re-
quire modification, but as a first step this may
provide DEMO approximation that can be made
more precise as research proceeds.
The demand of the decision problem (D dp)
is the weighted (W) sum of the problem's un-
familiarity (Uf), ambiguity (Am), complexity (C),
and instability (Is). High Ddp represents DEMO de-
mand for a strategy that will help clarify the prob-
lem and make it tractable.
Ddp = WUf Uf + WAm Am + DEMO +
W s Is.
The demand of the decision environment
(D DEMO) is the weighted (W) sum of the decision's
irreversibility (Ir), significance (S), and the deci-
sion maker's accountability (Ac). Time con-
straints, while they are part of the DEMO envi-
ronment, are not included in this equation be-
cause they DEMO a separate role that will be de-
scribed later. The quation is:
Dde = W Ir lr + Ws S + WAc Ac.
DEMO Dde represents a demand for a strategy
that will yield a correct decision.
Task demand (TD) is the weighted (W) sum
of DEMO demands of the decision problem (D dp)
and the decision DEMO (D de).
TD = Wdp Ddp + Wde Dde.
The DEMO seven statements link the task
demands with other parts of the model:
1. The decision maker's utility for making
a correct decision, Uc, is an increasing
monotonic function of Dde.
2. For a given strategy, the probability of a
448
A Contingency Model for the Selection of Decision Strategies
3.
4.
DEMO
6.
7.
correct decision, Pc, is a decreasing
monotonic function of Ddp. Generally,
analytic strategies are perceived as hav-
ing a higher DEMO of yielding a cor-
rect decision than nonanalytic strategies,
and formal-informal strategies are sim-
ilarly perceived.
The decision maker's disutility for per-
DEMO resource expenditure, Ue, is an in-
creasing monotonic function of amount
of expenditure.
The cost of resources (Ue) is a positive-
ly DEMO function of the perceived
probability of being correct (P ). Use of
a less analytic strategy requires, on the
average, less expenditure DEMO personal
resources than does use of a more ana-
lytic strategy (DEMO, the former are quick-
er and easier).
For a given DEMO of Ddp all strategies in
a decision maker's repertory can be
evaluated in terms of: first, the per-
ceived probability that they DEMO yield a
correct decision, and second, an esti-
mate of the amount of personal re-
sources they may require in their exe-
cution.
DEMO a given level of utility for a correct
decision associated with a given level of
Dde, the tendency toward selecting
strategies of ever increasing probability
of being correct is checked by the dis-
utility for increased DEMO expend-
iture. Thus, the difference between the
expected benefit (Pc Uc) and the ex-
pected cost (Ue) is the expected net
gain. The strategy that maximizes ex-
pected net gain is the strategy that DEMO
be selected, i.e., the strategy associated
with the Pc and Ue which determine
the maximum.
Environmentally imposed time and
money constraints automatically ex-
DEMO some strategies from considera-
tion (although compensation for one
constraint by DEMO expenditure of
the other may limit the number of ex-
cluded strategies). Both constraints ex-
clude those strategies that require a high
degree DEMO analysis, and they thereby ex-
ercise their effects primarily on strate-
DEMO that have a high perceived proba-
bility of success. This may force selec-
tion of a strategy that yields less than the
maximum gain.
DEMO summarize, strategy selection is contin-
gent upon a (cost/benefit) DEMO be-
tween the decision maker's desire to make a
correct decision and his or her negative feelings
about investing time and effort in DEMO decision
making process. The desire to be correct is seen
as contingent upon the demands of the task en-
vironment. Environmentally imposed time and
DEMO constraints reduce the number of strate-
gies that can be selected. The choice of a strategy
also reflects the decision maker's characteristics,
DEMO knowledge of and faith in the various
strategies, as well as DEMO or her opinion about the
resources each requires for implementation.
The decision maker's knowledge determines
the strategies in the repertory, while faith can be
seen as the decision maker's perception of the
probability that DEMO strategy could lead to a cor-
rect decision of it were selected. The estimated
resource requirement is the price the decision
maker thinks will DEMO to be paid to use any par-
ticular strategy. The strategy that is perceived as
yielding the maximum net gain is the one se-
DEMO; one that costs more would be a bad in-
vestment of DEMO, and one that costs less
would unnecessarily increase the risk of DEMO in-
correct decision.
Obviously this is a complex model. We have
also used a number of assumptions to simplify
things. The next step is DEMO test empirically the
general propositions of the model. But stimu-
lation of research was only one of the goals of
this article. The other DEMO was to prompt inves-
tigators to consider a general theoretical reap-
praisal of decision making research. Instead of
Academy of Management Review - July 1978
449
the current focus on DEMO models and de-
cision aids, we suggest that understanding what
strategies DEMO actually used and why they are
used is an equally important task.
REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
DEMO
13.
14.
15.
16.
Abelson, R. P. "Scrip Processing in Attitude Formation
and Decision-Making," in J. S. Caroll, and J. W. Payne
(Eds.), Cognition and Social Behavior (New York: Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates, 1976).
Brown, R. V., A. S. Kahr, and DEMO R. Peterson. Decision
Analysis: An Overview (New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, 1974).
Coombs, C. H. A Theory of Data (New York: Wiley,
1964).
Davis, J. H. "Group DEMO and Social Interaction: A
Theory of Social Decision Schemes," Psychological DEMO
view, Vol. 80 (1973), 97-125.
Dawes, R. M. "Social Selection Based on Multidimen-
sional Criteria," Journal of Abnormal and Social DEMO
ogy, Vol. 68 (1964), 104-109.
Delbecq, A. L., A. H. Van de Ven, and P. Gustafson.
Group Techniques for Program Planning, A Guide to
Nominal and Delphi Processes (Glenview, Illinois: Scott,DEMO
Foresman, 1975).
Einhorn, H. I. "The Use of Nonlinear, Noncompensatory
Models in Decision-Making," Psychological Bulletin, Vol.
73 (1970), DEMO
Fishbein, M., and I. Ajzen. Belief, Attitude, and Behavior:
An Introduction to Theory and Research (Reading,
Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1975).
Gray, C. A. "Factors in Students' Decisions to Attempt
Academic Tasks," Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, Vol. 13 (1975), DEMO
Hall, E. T. The Hidden Dimension (New York: Anchor,
DEMO).
Holmstrom, V. L., and L. R. Beach. "Subjective Expected
DEMO and Career Preferences," Organizational Behavior
and Human Performance, Vol. 10 (1973), 201-207.
James, William. The Principles of Psychology, Vol. 2 (New
York: Holt, 1890; reprinted by Dover, New York, 1950).
MacCrimmon, K. R., and R. N. Taylor. "Decision Making
and Problem Solving," in M. D. Dunnette (Ed.), Hand-
book of Organizational and Industrial Psychology (Chi-
cago: Rand McNally, 1976), 1397-1454.
Maier, N. R. F. "Assets and Liabilities in Group Problem
Solving: The Need for an Integrative Function," Psycho-
logical Review, Vol. 47 (1967), 239-249.
Mitchell, T. R. "Expectancy Models of Job Satisfaction,
Occupational Preference and Effort: A Theoretical,
Methodological, and Empirical DEMO," Psychological
Bulletin, Vol. 81 (1974), 1053-1077.
Mitchell, T. DEMO, and B. W. Knudsen. "Instrumentality The-
ory Predictions of Students' DEMO Towards Business
and Their Choice of Business as an Occupation." Acad-
DEMO of Management Journal, Vol. 16 (1973), 41-52.
17. Nutt, DEMO C. "Models for Decision Making in Organiza-
tions and Some Contextual DEMO which Stipulate
Optimal Use," Academy of Management Review, Vol. 1
(April 1976), 84-98.
18. Payne, J. W. "Alternative Approaches to DEMO Mak-
ing under Risk: Moments Versus Risk Dimensions," Psy-
chological DEMO, Vol. 80 (1973), 439-453.
19. Payne, J. W. "Task Complexity and Contingent Process-
ing in Decision Making: An Information Search and
Protocol Analysis," Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, Vol. 16 (1976), 366-387.
20. Schroder, H. H., M. J. Driver, and S. DEMO Human In-
formation Processing (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Win-
DEMO, 1967).
21. Shanteau, J. "Component Processes in Risky Decision
DEMO," Journal of Experimental Psychology, Vol. 103
(1974), 680-691.
22. Shanteau, J., and N. H. Anderson. "Test of a Conflict
Model for Preference Judgment," Journal of Mathemat-
ical Psychology, Vol. 6 (DEMO), 312-325.
23. Shull, F. A., A. L. Delbecq, and DEMO L. Cummings. Organi-
zational Decision Making (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970)DEMO
24. Simon, H. A. Models of Man (New York: Wiley, 1957).
25. Slovic, P., B. Fischoff, and S. Lichtenstein. "DEMO
Decision Theory," Annual Review of Psychology, Vol. 28
(1977), 1-39.
26. Summers, T., and D. E. White. "Creativity and the Deci-
sion Process," Academy of Management Review, Vol. 1
(1976), 99-108.
27. Thompson, J. Organizations in Action (New York: Mc-
DEMO, 1967).
28. Thorngate, W., and J. Maki. Decision Heuristics DEMO the
Choice of Political Candidates, Technical Report 76-3
(Alberta, Can.: Department of Psychology, University of
Alberta, Spring 1976).
29. Tversky, A. "Additivity, Utility and Subjective Probabil-
ity," Journal of Mathematical DEMO, Vol. 4 (1967),
175-202.
30. Tversky, A. "Intransitivity DEMO Preferences," Psychological
Review, Vol. 76 (1969), 31-48.
31. Tversky, A. "Elimination by Aspects: A Theory of
Choice," Psychological Review, Vol. 79 (1972), 281-299.
32. Tversky, A., and D. DEMO "Judgment under Uncer-
tainty: Heuristics and Biases," Science, Vol. DEMO (1974),
1124-1131.
33. Wood, M. "Power Relationships and Group Decision
Making in Organizations," Psychological Bulletin, Vol.
74 (1973), DEMO{1g42fwefx}