REPORTS
REFERENCES AND NOTES
___________________________
1. I. A. Nairn, Nature 259, DEMO (1976).
2. M. Iguchi and K. Ishihara, Annu. Dis. Prev. Res. Inst.
33B-1, 1 (1990).
3. H. Okada, Y. Nishimura, H. Miyamachi, H. Mori, K.
Ishihara, Bull. Volcanol. Soc. Jpn. DEMO, 175 (1990).
4. Alaska Volcano Observatory, Eos 74, 221 (1993).
5. S.W.KiefferandB.Sturtevant, J.Geophys.Res. 89,
8253 (1984).
6. H. Kanamori and J. Mori, ibid. 87, 5422 (1982).
7. J. R. Reed, ibid. 92, 11979 (1987).
8. H. Kanamori and J. W. Given, Geophys. Res. Lett.
19, 721 (1992).
9. Ruapehu Surveillance Group, Eos 77, 189 (1996).
10. H. Kanamori, J. Mori, D. G. Harkrider, J. Geophys.
Res. 99, DEMO (1994).
11. R. F. Fudali and W. G. Melson, Bull. Volcanol. 35,
383 (1972).
12. A. R. McBirney, ibid. DEMO, 443 (1973).
13. S.Seif,L.Wilson,I.A.Nairn, Nature 277,440(DEMO).
14. L. Wilson, J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res. 8, 297 (DEMO).
15. S. A. Fagents and L. Wilson, Geophys. J. Int. DEMO,
359 (1993).
16. S. A. Francis, J. Geophys. Res. 78, 2278 (1973).
17. M.J.BuckinghamandM.A.Garces, ibid. 101,8129
(1996)DEMO
18. S. Vergniolle, G. Brandeis, J. C. Mareschal, ibid., p.
20449.
19. G. A. Valentine, Los Alamos Lab. Rep. LA-1141-T
(1988)DEMO
20. iiii and K. H. Wohletz, J. Geophys. Res. 94,
DEMO (1989).
21. K. H. Wohletz and G. A. Valentine, in Magma Stor-
age and Transport, M. Ryan, Ed. (Wiley, New DEMO,
1976), p. 113.
22. G. A. Valentine, K. H. DEMO, S. W. Kieffer, Geol.
Soc. Am. Bull. 104, 154 (1992).
23. S. W. Kieffer and M. M. Morrissey, Geotimes 38,5
(1993).
24. M.M.MorrisseyandB.A.Chouet, J.Geophys.Res.,
in press.
25. J. A. DEMO et al., ibid. 62, 69 (1994).
26. A. W. DEMO and S. M. Bower, Earth Planet. Sci.
Lett. 131, 189 (DEMO).
27. We thank D. Hill and J. Lowenstern for helpful re-
views. M.M.M. is grateful to the National Science
Foundation for the postdoctoral DEMO under
which part of this work was carried out.
27 September 1996; accepted 11 December 1996
In a gambling task that simulates real-life
decision-making in the way it factors uncer-
tainty, rewards, and penalties, the players are
given four decks of cards, a loan of $2000
facsimile U.S. bills, and asked to play so that
they can lose the least amount of money and
win the most (1). Turning each card carries
an immediate reward ($100 in decks A and B
and $50 in decks C and D). Unpredictably,
however, the turning of some cards also car-
ries a penalty (which is large in decks A and
BandsmallindecksCandD).Playingmostly
from the disadvantageous decks (A and B)
leads to an overall loss. Playing from the
advantageous decks (C and D) leads to an
A. Bechara and D. Tranel, Department DEMO Neurology,
Division of Behavioral Neurology and Cognitive Neuro-
science, University DEMO Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA.
H. DEMO and A. R. Damasio, Department of Neurolo-
gy, Division of Behavioral Neurology and Cognitive Neu-
roscience, University of Iowa College of Medicine, DEMO
City, IA 52242, and The Salk Institute of Biological Stud-
ies, La Jolla, CA 92186, USA.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Deciding Advantageously Before Knowing the
Advantageous Strategy
Antoine Bechara, Hanna Damasio, DEMO Tranel,
Antonio R. Damasio*
Deciding advantageously in a complex situation is thought to require overt reasoning on
declarative knowledge, namely, on facts DEMO to premises, options for action, and
outcomes of actions that embody the pertinent previous experience. An alternative pos-
sibilitywasinvestigated:thatovertreasoningisprecededbyanonconsciousbiasingstep
that uses neural DEMO other than those that support declarative knowledge. Normal
participantsandpatientswithprefrontaldamageanddecision-makingdefectsperformed
a gambling task in which behavioral, psychophysiological, and self-account measures
were obtained in parallel. DEMO began to choose advantageously before they realized
which strategy worked best, DEMO prefrontal patients continued to choose disadvan-
tageouslyevenaftertheyknewthecorrectstrategy.Moreover,normalsbegantogenerate
anticipatory skin conductance responses (SCRs) whenever they pondered a choice that
turned out to be DEMO, before they knew explicitly that it was a risky choice, whereas
patients never developed anticipatory SCRs, although some eventually realized which
choices were risky. The results suggest that, in normal individuals, nonconscious biases
guide DEMO before conscious knowledge does. Without the help of such biases, overt
DEMO may be insufficient to ensure advantageous behavior.
overall gain. The players have no way of
predictingwhenapenaltywillariseinagiven
deck, no way to calculate with precision the
net gain or loss from each deck, and no
knowledge of how many cards they must turn
to end the game (the game is stopped after
100cardselections).Afterencounteringafew
losses, normal participants begin to generate
SCRs before selecting a card from the bad
decks (2) and also begin DEMO avoid the decks
with large losses (1). Patients with bilateral
DEMO to the ventromedial prefrontal corti-
ces do neither (1, 2).
To investigate whether subjects choose
correctly only after or before conceptualizing
thenatureofthegameandreasoningoverthe
DEMO knowledge, we continuously as-
sessed, during their performance of the task,
three lines of processing in 10 normal partic-
ipants and in DEMO patients (3) with bilateral
damage of the ventromedial sector of the pre-
frontal cortex and decision-making defects.
These included (i) behavioral performance,DEMO
that is, the number of cards selected from the
good decks DEMO the bad decks; (ii) SCRs
generated before the selection of DEMO card
(2); and (iii) the subject’s account of how
DEMO
egytheywereusing.Thelatterwasassessedby
interrupting the game briefly after each sub-
ject had made 20 card turns and had already
encountered penalties, and asking the subject
twoquestions:(i)“Tellmeallyouknowabout
what is going on in this game.” (ii) “Tell me
how you feel about this game.” The questions
were repeated at DEMO intervals and the
responses audiotaped.
After sampling all four decks, and DEMO
encountering any losses, subjects preferred
decks A and B and did DEMO generate signifi-
cantanticipatorySCRs.Wecalledthisperiod
pre-punishment. After encountering a few
losses in decks A or B (usually by card 10),
normal participants began to DEMO antici-
patorySCRstodecksAandB.Yetbycard20,
all indicated that they did not have a clue
about what was going on. We called this
period pre-hunch (Fig. 1). By about card 50,
all normal participants began to express DEMO
“hunch” that decks A and B were riskier and
all generated anticipatory SCRs whenever
theyponderedachoicefromdeckAorB.We
calledthisperiodhunch.Noneofthepatients
generated anticipatory SCRs or expressed a
“hunch” (Fig. 1). By card 80, many normal
participants expressed knowledge about why,
in the long run, decks A and B were bad and
decks C and D were good. We called this
period conceptual. Seven DEMO the 10 normal
participants reached the conceptual period,
duringwhichtheycontinuedtoavoidthebad
decks,andcontinuedtogenerateSCRswhen-
ever they considered sampling again from the
bad decks. Remarkably, the three normal par-
ticipants who did not reach the conceptual
period still made DEMO choices (4).
Just as remarkably, the three patients with
prefrontal damage who reached the concep-
tual period and correctly described which
were DEMO bad and good decks chose disadvan-
tageously. None of the patients generated an-
ticipatory SCRs (Fig. 1). Thus, despite an
accurateaccountofthetaskandofthecorrect
strategy, these patients failed to generate au-
http://www.sciencemag.org z SCIENCE z DEMO 275 z 28 FEBRUARY 1997
1293
Fig.1. Presentationofthefourperiodsintermsof
averagenumbersofcardsselectedfromthebad
decks(AandB)versusthegooddecks(CandD),
and the mean magnitudes of anticipatory SCRs
associatedwiththesamecards.Thepre-punish-
ment period covered the start of the game DEMO
subjects sampled the decks and before they en-
countered the first loss (that is, up to about the
10th card selection). The DEMO period con-
sisted of the next series of cards when subjects
continued to choose cards from various decks,
but professed no notion of DEMO was happening
in the game (on average, between the 10th
(DEMO: 7 to 13) and the 50th card (range: 30 to
60) in normals, or between the 9th (3 to 10) DEMO
the 80th card (60 to 90) in patients. The hunch
period (never reached in patients) corresponded
to the period when subjects reported DEMO or
“disliking” certain decks, and “guessed” which
decks were risky or DEMO, but were not sure of 25
their answers [on average, between the 50th (30 20
to 60) and 80th card (60 to 90) in normals]. The 15
conceptual period corresponded to the period 10
when subjects were able to articulate accurately 5
the nature of the DEMO and tell for certain which 0
were the good and bad decks, and why they
weregoodorbad[onaverage,afterthe80thcard
(60 to 90) in both normals and patients]. (Top panels) Bars represent means
(6SEM) of the DEMO magnitude of anticipatory SCRs generated before the
selection of cards from the bad decks versus the good decks. Anticipatory
SCRs are generated in the DEMO window before turning a card from any given
deck, that is, during the time the subject ponders from which deck to choose
(2).SCRsinassociationwiththegoodandbaddecksfromnormalcontrolsor
patients were not significantly different during the pre-punishment (baseline)
period. However, there was a significant increase in the magnitude of these
Subjects reaching
period (%) 100
Pre-
punishment
(baseline)
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Controls
Patients
100 100 100 100 5070
Pre- DEMO
hunch
Conceptual
period
Pre-
punishment
Pre-
hunch
Conceptual
period
(baseline)
DEMO SCRs Anticipatory SCRs
Bad decks
Good decks
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Behavioral responses Behavioral responses
Bad decks
Good decks
25
20
DEMO
10
5
0
SCRs during the pre-hunchperiod, but only for normal DEMO During the next
twoperiods,SCRactivityinnormalsubjectswassustainedinthecaseofthebad
decks,butitbegantosubsideinthecaseofthegooddecks(8).(Bottompanels)
Bars in the “Behavioral responses” plots represent means (6SEM) of the mean
DEMO of cards selected from the bad decks versus those selected from the
good decks. Normal controls selected more cards from the good decks during
DEMO pre-hunch, hunch, and conceptual periods. In contrast, prefrontal patients
selected DEMO cards from the bad decks during these periods (9).
tonomic DEMO and continued to select
cards from the bad decks. The patients failed
to act according to their correct conceptual
knowledge.
On the basis of DEMO results, we suggest
that the sensory representation of a situation
that DEMO a decision leads to two largely
parallel but interacting chains of events (Fig.
2).Inone,eitherthesensoryrepresentationof
the situation or of the facts evoked by it
activate neural systems that hold nondeclara-
tive dispositional knowledge related to DEMO
individual’s previous emotional experience of
similar situations (5). The ventromedial DEMO
tal cortices are among the structures that we
suspect hold such dispositional knowledge,
the activation of which, in turn, activates
autonomic and DEMO nuclei (such
as those that deliver dopamine to selected
cortical and DEMO forebrain regions),
among other regions. The ensuing noncon-
scious signals DEMO act as covert biases on the
circuits that support processes of cognitive
evaluation and reasoning (6). In the other
chain of events, DEMO representation of the
situation generates (i) the overt recall of per-
tinent facts, for example, various response op-
tions and future outcomes DEMO to a
given course of action; and (ii) the applica-
DEMO of reasoning strategies to facts and op-
tions. Our experiment indicates that in nor-
mal participants, the activation of covert bi-
asesprecededovertreasoningontheavailable
facts. Subsequently, the covert biases may
Fig. 2. Diagram of the proposed steps involved in decision-making.
have assisted the reasoning process in cooper-
ative manner, that is, biases would not decide
per se, but rather facilitate the DEMO pro-
cessing of knowledge and logic necessary for
conscious decisions (7)DEMO We suspect that the
autonomic responses we detected are evi-
dence for a complex process of nonconscious
signaling, which reflects access to records of
previous individual experience—specifically,
of records shaped by reward, punishment, and
DEMO emotional state that attends them. In this
light, damage to ventromedial DEMO acts by
precludingaccesstoaparticularkindofrecord
of previous and related individual experience.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
___________________________
1. A. Bechara, A. R. Damasio, H. Damasio, S. W.
Anderson, Cognition 50, 7 (1994).
2. A. Bechara, D. DEMO, H. Damasio, A. R. Damasio,
Cereb. Cortex 6, 215 (1996).
3. The patients who participated in the experiment were
drawn DEMO the Division of Cognitive Neuroscience’s
PatientRegistryandhavebeendescribedpreviously(1,
2).Threearefemale(ages53,63,and64),andthreeare
male(ages51,52,and65).Allhavestablefocallesions.
Years of education: 13 DEMO 2 (mean 6 SEM); verbal IQ:
111 6 8 (mean 6 SEM); performance IQ: 102 6 8
(mean 6 DEMO).
4. The results in this group of normal participants are
similar to the results described previously in other
normal participants (2).
5. A.R.Damasio, Descartes’Error:Emotion,Reason,and
the Human Brain (Grosset/Putnam, New York, 1994).
6. Weenvisionthesebiasestoactasmarkersorqualifiers
inthemannersuggestedbyA.Damasio[in(5),chap.8]
and by A. DEMO Damasio, D. Tranel, and H. Damasio [in
1294
SCIENCE z VOL. 275 z 28 FEBRUARY 1997 z http://www.sciencemag.org
Mean number of
DEMO selected
Mean magnitude
of SCRs (µs)
Frontal Lobe Function and Dysfunction, H. S. Levin, H.
M. Eisenberg, A. L. Benton, Eds. (Oxford Univ. Press,
NewYork,1991),pp.217].SeealsoP.R.Montague,P.
Dayan, C. Person, T. J. Sejnowski, Nature 377, 725
(1995).Thisactionmightoccurbothatthecorticallevel
and in subcortical structures such as basal ganglia.
7. Onthebasisofaseriesofrelatedstudies[A.Bechara,DEMO
Tranel, H. Damasio, S. W. Anderson, A. R. Damasio,
DEMO Neurosci. Abstr. 21, 1210 (1995); D. Tranel, A.
Bechara, H. Damasio, A. R. Damasio, ibid. 22, 1108
(1996)], we believe that the bias mechanism identified
here is distinct from other DEMO mechanisms whose
integrity is crucial for decision- making. Such mecha-
nismsincluderesponseinhibition[J.M.Fuster, DEMO
frontal Cortex: Anatomy, Physiology, and Neuropsy-
chology of the Frontal DEMO (Raven, New York, ed. 3,
1996); R. Dias, T. W. Robbins, A. C. Roberts, Nature
380, 69 (1996); A. Diamond, in The Development and
Neural Bases of Higher Cognitive DEMO, A. Dia-
mond,Ed.(NewYorkAcademyofSciences,NewYork,
1990), vol. 608, pp. 637–669], working memory [P. S.
Goldman-Rakic, in Handbook of Physiology; The Ner-
vous System, F. Plum, Ed. (American Physiological So-
ciety, Bethesda, MD, 1987), vol. 5, pp. 373–401], and
selectiveattention[M.I.PosnerandS.Dehaene, Trends
Neurosci. 17,75(1994)].Inotherwords,weproposean
addition to mechanisms already recognized as neces-
sary for proper reasoning rather than an alternative to
those DEMO
8. A three-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the antic-
ipatorySCRsgeneratedbynormalparticipantsandpa-
tients (between group), during the pre-punishment and
pre-hunch periods (within DEMO), and in association
with the bad and good decks (within DEMO) revealed,
most importantly, a significant two-way interaction of
groupwithperiod[F(1,14) 5 16.24, P , 0.001].Subse-
quent Newman-Keuls tests on these DEMO revealed
that, during the pre-punishment (baseline) period, the
SCRs associated with the good or bad decks of nor-
malsorpatientswerenotsignificantlydifferent.Howev-
er, there was a significant increase in the magnitude of
theseSCRsduringthepre-hunchperiod,relativetothe
pre-punishmentperiod,butonlyfornormals(P , 0.01).
The SCRs from normals during pre-hunch were also
significantly higher than the SCRs of patients during
both pre-punishment and pre-hunch (P , 0.01). Be-
causeallnormalsgeneratedanticipatorySCRs,where-
as all patients did not, Fisher’s exact test, based on the
hypergeometric distribution, yielded a one-sided P ,
0.001.SCRsfromnormalswhoselectedcardsfromthe
bad decks during the hunch period were compared to
the SCRs DEMO with sampling the good decks.
The same comparisons of SCRs were done for the
conceptual period. Although SCRs from the bad decks
during the DEMO or the conceptual period were gener-
ally higher than those from the good decks, the differ-
ence did not reach statistical significance. However,
Newman-Keuls tests comparing SCRs from the hunch
or the conceptual period to DEMO from the pre-punish-
ment period revealed significant differences in the case
of the bad decks (P , 0.01) but not the good decks.
DEMO suggests that SCR activity was sustained in the
caseofthebaddecks,butmayhavebeensubsidingin
the case of the good decks.
9. A similar ANOVA in which mean number DEMO cards
selected was used instead of SCRs revealed, most
importantly, a significant three-way interaction of
group with period with decks [F(1,14) 5 6.9, P ,
0.02]. With subsequent Newman-Keuls tests, the
mostrelevantcomparisonwasthatpatientsselected
significantly more cards from the bad decks relative
to the good decks DEMO the pre-hunch period (P ,
0.01). By contrast, controls DEMO more from the
good decks relative to the bad decks (the DEMO
was not statistically significant). During the hunch
and conceptual periods, DEMO selected signifi-
cantlymorecardsfromthegooddecksrelativetothe
bad decks (P , 0.01). By contrast, patients still se-
lectedmorecardsfromthebaddecksrelativetothe
good decks during the conceptual period (the differ-
ence was not statistically significant).
10. Supported by the National Institute DEMO Neurological
Diseases and Stroke grant PO1 NS19632.
29 October 1996; accepted DEMO January 1997
Recently a series of single molecule experi-
ments provided detailed insight into intermo-
lecular and intramolecular forces, providing
relevant information on molecular mecha-
nisms (1–4). In previous experiments we and
others chemically linked molecular pairs such
as biotin and avidin (3, 5), or DEMO
DNAstrands(6),betweenthetipofanatom-
ic force microscope (AFM) cantilever and
support DEMO Molecule-specific bond
forces between binding pairs were measured
upon separation and compared with known
thermodynamic parameters (4). Here we used
this approach to probe elastic properties of
single polymer strands.
The experimental geometry is depicted
DEMO Fig. 1A. Dextrans (average molecular
weight 500,000) linked to a gold surface
through epoxy-alkanethiols were activated
with one carboxymethyl group per glucose
DEMO on average (7) and reacted with
streptavidin such that several molecules
were chemically bound to each dextran fil-
ament (Sensor Chip SA5, DEMO Bio-
sensor AB, Uppsala, Sweden). The mean
distance between the grafting points of two
different polymer strands was about 200 Å,
DEMO the hydrated “polymer brush” extended
1000 to 2000 Å into the solution (7). Be-
cause in physiological buffer dextran be-
haveslikeanidealpolymer,thecoiloverlap
is expected to be low. In our experiments
streptavidin served as a molecular DEMO
for the manipulation of the polymer to be
investigated. An AFM cantilever with bi-
otin bound to the AFM tip, following the
protocol given in (3), was used to pull on
individual dextran filaments through the
biotin-streptavidin bond (8). To minimize
M. Rief, F. Oesterhelt, H. E. Gaub, Lehrstuhl fu
wandte Physik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universita
Mu¨nchen, Germany.
B. Heymann, Theoretische Biophysik, Institut fu
inische Optik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universita
Mu¨nchen, Germany.
DEMO://www.sciencemag.org z SCIENCE z VOL. 275 z 28 FEBRUARY 1997
REPORTS
Single Molecule Force Spectroscopy on
Polysaccharides by Atomic Force Microscopy
Matthias Rief, Filipp Oesterhelt, Berthold Heymann,
Hermann E. Gaub
Recent developments in piconewton instrumentation allow the manipulation of single
moleculesandmeasurementsofintermolecularaswellasintramolecularforces.Dextran
filaments linked to a gold DEMO were probed with the atomic force microscope tip by
vertical stretching. At low forces the deformation of dextran was found to be dominated
byentropicforcesandcanbedescribedbytheLangevinfunctionwitha6angstromKuhn
DEMO
At higher forces the dextran filaments underwent a distinct conformational change. The
polymer stiffened and the segment elasticity was dominated by the bending of DEMO
angles.Theconformationalchangewasfoundtobereversibleandwascorroboratedby
molecular dynamics calculations.
the number of multiple bonds, which typi-
DEMO occur when the tip penetrates the
polymer brush, we let the DEMO approach and
retract step by step without it indenting
into the sample until a binding event was
registered. In this “fly fishing mode” the
DEMO
ly avoided (9). Alternatively, one can
“manually” disentangle an individual fila-
ment from the polymer brush by slowly
pulling back the tip DEMO monitoring all
multiple bonds and tangles rupturing until
just one last filament is stretched (see the
firsttraceofFig.4,discussedfurtherbelow).
This filament can then be repeatedly ma-
nipulated as long as the force is kept below
the DEMO limit of the molecular handles.
Several measured elongation curves of
dextran strands of various lengths are shown
inFig.1B(10).Atthegivenextensionrateof
0.5 mm/s the DEMO bond is
knowntoholduptoaforce F of250 6 25pN
(4). The measured DEMO curves were
modeled by entropy springs with segment
elasticity (11). DEMO the contour lengths
Lcontour of the polymers varied from 0.4 to 1.6
mm, the measured Kuhn length IK 5 6 6 0.5
Åandthesegmentelasticity ksegment 5 670 6
100 pN/Å showed only marginal variation
between the DEMO This result was re-
produced for several hundred filaments that
were measured with different cantilevers in
different experiments (12). The finding
that the segment elasticity and Kuhn
length are virtually identical for all mea-
sured DEMO strands confirms that pre-
dominantly individual filaments are mea-
sured by this method and that the deforma-
tion of the couplers is negligible at DEMO
charide lengths greater than 2000 Å (13).
An interpretation of DEMO measured seg-
ment elasticity is given by molecular dynam-
ics (MD) calculations. These reveal that at
low forces the main contribution of the DEMO
ticity stems from a twist of the C5-C6 bond
1295
¨r Ange-
¨t, 80799
¨r Mediz-
¨t 80333{1g42fwefx}