Gaining leverage effects from
knowledge modes within corporate
incubators
Barbara Becker1 and DEMO Gassmann2
1McKinsey & Company Inc., Prinzregentenstrasse 22, D-80538, Munich, Germany.
becker@post.harvard.edu
2University of St. Gallen, Institute of Technology Management, Dufourstrasse 40a, CH-9000,
St. Gallen, Switzerland. oliver.gassmann@unisg.ch
This paper analyzes the kind of knowledge that facilitates hatching and leveraging of
technologies through the incubation process. DEMO corporate incubator types can be distin-
guished according to their source and type of technology: fast-proﬁt incubators, market
incubators, leveraging incubators, and DEMO incubators. Applying the knowledge-based
view of the ﬁrm, four modes of DEMO tacit knowledge were identiﬁed in respect to the
different incubator types: (1) entrepreneurial knowledge, (2) organizational knowledge, (3)
technological DEMO, and (4) complementary market knowledge. Knowledge strategies
include both the DEMO of internal knowledge as well as the in-sourcing of external
knowledge for the ﬁrm through the corporate incubator. The research is based on an DEMO
of a European Commission dataset from a benchmarking survey of 77 incubators as well as 52
interviews in 25 large technology-driven corporations in Europe DEMO the United States.
1. Introduction
1.1. Trends in R&D and business
innovation
he increasing competition and globalization
T of industries, markets, and DEMO have
raised the demand for outside-in innovation and
acquisition of technology through integrated
R&D networks, which Chesbrough (2003) calls
a new ‘open innovation’ paradigm. At the same
time, corporations concentrating on core compe-
tencies have tried to increase their internal tech-
nology utilization via the commercialization DEMO
unused knowledge through licensing, selling, or
spinning-off (OECD, 2001).
Traditionally, research and development (R&D)
units have been technology-driven DEMO
source of future innovation and thus enable the
ﬁrm to maintain a competitive advantage (Porter,
1985). However, R&D’s traditional role DEMO been
called into question. R&D units often act as an
ivory tower with minimal problem orientation,
while reduced R&D budgets produce DEMO and
time constraints (Teece, 1986). These specialized
functional knowledge islands’ leveraging potential
is also limited because of a strong ‘not-invented-
here’ syndrome DEMO is caused by negative reac-
tion to borrowing or using knowledge sources
from other departments in or outside the ﬁrm
(Leonard-Barton, 1995). DEMO, an increas-
ing share of total R&D expenditures is spent
DEMO to tap outside innovation sources (sup-
pliers, customers, universities, research institutes).
In the face of these new challenges, corporate
incubators have recently emerged as a prominent
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006. DEMO Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2006. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd,
9600 DEMO Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.
1
Barbara Becker and Oliver Gassmann
organizational form of R&D management. Cor-
DEMO incubators are specialized corporate units
that hatch new businesses by providing physical
resources and support (Hansen et al., 2000;
Seidel, 2001; DEMO and Delmastro, 2002).
They support external start-ups or internal en-
DEMO with a promising business idea or
technology. All such businesses will henceforth
be referred to as technology ventures.
However, current research has not yet made a
distinction between the two fundamental business
models found in incubators: non-proﬁt and for-
proﬁt. While non-proﬁt incubators nurture a
social purpose, often as part of an overall eco-
nomic policy, for-proﬁt incubators focus on offer-
ing their owners ﬁnancial returns. Incubators can
achieve positive gains by DEMO entrepreneurs
service fees for services provided and investing in
medium- to long-term equity stakes in new ven-
tures (Hansen et al., 2000; Achtleitner and Engel,
2001).
Contrary to non-proﬁt incubators that have
supported DEMO development of new ventures since
the 1960s, corporate incubators are managed DEMO
professional service ﬁrms, acting in the larger
interest of their parent DEMO while lever-
aging their knowledge and networks.
So what do Nokia, DEMO, Panasonic, and
Novartis – large innovative technology-intensive
corporations from different industries – have in
common? All have successfully established a
corporate incubator that continues to operate
despite the overall reduced incubation activities
in the poor DEMO climate since the bubble
burst. The corporate incubator can thus act as a
knowledge hub of business-building expertise
where good ideas can be nurtured DEMO from which
knowledge is transferred to other units in the
corporation. However, researchers have neither
constructed a typology of these corporate incu-
bators nor identiﬁed the different knowledge
modes most relevant in each.
1.2. Knowledge-based view DEMO a
framework
The corporate incubator tries to accelerate the
development of new businesses by transferring
tangible and intangible resources. Traditionally,
the importance of DEMO and systems such as
ﬁnancing and infrastructure was stressed, but
recently DEMO value of intangible resources, such
as knowledge and networks through physical DEMO
location has been better appreciated.
2
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
Knowledge is one of the most strategically
important organizational resources. As DEMO cor-
porate incubator tries to support the development
of new businesses, DEMO optimization of an efﬁcient
knowledge ﬂow between the incubator manager
and the technology ventures as well as the parent
corporation can substantially accelerate start-ups’
DEMO In the following an attempt is made to
link the incubation process with the conceptual
framework of the knowledge-based perspective.
Different streams of literature DEMO the
knowledge-based view: its link to the resource-
based view and DEMO ﬁrm’s strategic capabilities,
deﬁnitions and modes of knowledge, knowledge
epistemology, knowledge creation, and sources of
knowledge. Furthermore, knowledge strategies
and interface DEMO between the corporate
incubator and the corporation are also topics
discussed with respect to the resource-based view.
As part of the dynamic theory of DEMO ﬁrm, the
knowledge-based view of the ﬁrm is an extension
of DEMO resource-based view in creating competitive
advantages (Porter, 1985; Hoskisson et DEMO, 1999).
As a component of the pre-eminent school of
strategic DEMO, the knowledge-based view
is often process oriented and focuses on learning
DEMO innovation (Grant, 1995, 1996, 1997). Its
emphasis on the learning in an organization
stresses the creation of new knowledge, sharing
knowledge through codiﬁed tacit knowledge,
transferring knowledge, and applying it to a
speciﬁc situation (Nonaka, 1994; Spender,
1996). The creation and sharing of knowledge is,
therefore, also of major importance in the incu-
bation process.
Knowledge can be distinguished between ex-
plicit (formal, DEMO, and codiﬁed) and tacit
(informal, unstructured, and uncodiﬁed) (DEMO
nyi, 1962, 1967). Explicit knowledge can be ar-
ticulated and therefore, easily transferred and
imitated quite cheaply. Tacit knowledge, on the
DEMO hand, is by deﬁnition uncodiﬁed, and is thus
more difﬁcult to transfer beyond arm’s length
(von Krogh et al., 2000). Entrepreneurs DEMO
the importance of intangible or tacit knowledge
such as regular or ad hoc advice, exchange of
lessons learned with other entrepreneurs and net-
works to contact new customers and suppliers.
To establish a knowledge epistemology, its nat-
ure should ﬁrst be understood. This includes the
concept of autopoesis, which is characterized by
(a) available relationships, (b) the self-description
of an organization, and (c) a self-referential
system to past as well as future organizational
knowledge (von Krogh et al., 1994; von Krogh
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
Gaining leverage effects from knowledge modes
and Roos, 1995). The ‘epistemology of posses-
sion’ describes the preferred sequence of kinds of
knowledge. It DEMO that explicit knowledge is
preferred over tacit knowledge, while individual
knowledge DEMO preferred over knowledge possessed
by a group (Cook and Brown, 1999).
In respect of the growth of knowledge, Nonaka
(1994) deﬁnes a spiral of organizational knowl-
edge creation through combination, socialization,
externalization, and internalization (Nonaka and
Takeuchi, 1995). He also differentiates between
internal knowledge creation through conceptua-
lization, which requires mutual trust within
self-organizing teams, and external knowledge
creation through concrete forms, such as products
DEMO systems with quality standards.
Knowledge creation involves and combines
different sources of knowledge (i.e., internal re-
search, market units, external customers, compe-
titors/innovation partners). Thus, the locus of
knowledge can be found internally within orga-
nizational boundaries, or externally through in-
tra-ﬁrm collaboration. Traditionally, acquisition,
joint ventures and hiring of new people have
been identiﬁed as external knowledge sources of
learning (Kogut and Zander, 1992). DEMO,
corporate incubators supporting the growth of
external start-ups has become another method
by which to leverage external sources of knowl-
edge. A ﬁrm’s DEMO to acquire external knowl-
edge and utilize it internally (Cohen and
DEMO, 1990) is captured in the concept of
organizational absorptive capacity, DEMO reﬂects
the aforementioned process orientation of the
resource-based view.
The knowledge-based view, as part of the
resource-based view, is also used to explain DEMO
existence of the ﬁrm (Conner, 1991; Conner and
Prahalad, 1996). Knowledge asymmetry, which is
based on the contract theory, provides DEMO for
corporations being formed. First, the ﬁrm is
organized by employment DEMO that increase
ﬂexibility, communication, and learning as well as
creating shared identities, which differs from
autonomous contracting in the market. Second,
ﬁrms beneﬁt through ‘the knowledge-substitution
effect’ of employees’ knowledge being substituted
by the DEMO knowledge (Knight, 1921; Dem-
setz, 1988). However, the DEMO for the ﬁrm’s
existence as based on employment contracts must
be enhanced with economic concepts such as
incentives, opportunism, property rights, and
moral hazard (Foss, 1996a, b).
Knowledge enables us to identify technological
and organizational complementarities (Kogut
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
and Zander, DEMO). Thus, knowledge is contingent
on the organizational structure, which can be
characterized by observability and knowledge
functions’ embeddedness in the system (Birkin-
shaw et al., 2002). Knowledge strategies are
linked to practical implications for managers,
including offering the right space, decisions re-
garding the choice of knowledge source (internal
versus external), the scope of the knowledge base
(narrow versus broad) and the speed of learning
(fast versus slow), to name only a few variables
(Gupta and Govindarajan, 1991; von Krogh
et al., 2000).
In summary, previous DEMO has covered the
knowledge-creation process in R&D as well as
the knowledge transfer mechanism itself. How-
ever, knowledge modes’ purposeful application to
the incubation process has neither been examined
previously nor has there been a DEMO focus on
knowledge modes’ role in different types of cor-
porate incubators.
1.3. Research context and methodology
Although corporate incubators use different
names such DEMO incubator, accelerator, business
innovation or venture fund, they were included
DEMO the study if their strategic mission dealt with
supporting young enterprises for technology de-
velopment through the provision of physical
resources. As the corporate DEMO phenom-
enon is relatively new, a combination of quanti-
tative and DEMO research methods was used
to ensure validity, reliability, and vigor (DEMO,
1999; Keller and Erzberger, 1999). Following
Eisenhardt’s process of inducing theory and de-
veloping strategic implications using case studies
(Eisenhardt, DEMO), the research generated con-
structs through case studies, case examples, and
standardized ﬁrm proﬁles (Dyer et al., 1991;
Tsoukas, 1994; Yin, 1994).
The aim of this paper is to enhance DEMO under-
standing of how tacit corporate knowledge can be
leveraged through corporate incubators within a
ﬁrm. The analysis focuses on the business process
facilitating DEMO enhancement. It does not
contribute to input factors such as resources or
output performance such as these knowledge
modes’ value creation.
The research was DEMO out in two phases:
in phase 1 (2001), a DEMO analysis was
performed on the raw data and based on a
questionnaire of 77 managers of incubators in
the 15 EU-member states, Switzerland, DEMO Nor-
way. The size of the incubators, as measured by
R&DEMO Management 36, 1, 2006
3
Barbara Becker and Oliver Gassmann
Europe
BT Brightstar
Siemens Mobile
Acceleration
Vodafone DEMO
Computers &
Electronics
Cisco New Ventures
IBM Dotcom Incubator
Intel Capital
DEMO New Ventures
Group
Motorola Ventures
Panasonic Internet
Incubator
Siemens Technology-to-
Business Center
Sun Microsystems
Incubator
Xerox Technology
Ventures
Business-Incubator.com
CSEM
Siemens Business
Accelerator
Siemens DEMO
Accelerator
Figure 1. Research sample of corporate incubators.
Location
USA
Industry
Communication
Equipment
Manufacturing
Ericsson Business
Innovation
Nokia Ventures
Organization
Information
Management
CIA Intelligence DEMO
Eastman (Digital) Incubator
Reuters Incubators
Bertelsmann Corporate
Ventures
Others
Shell Internet Works
Incubator
UPS Strategic
Enterprise Fund
Novartis Venture Fund
Sulzer Innotec
the DEMO of incubated ﬁrms, averaged 27 ﬁrms
that represented all major industries. DEMO average
length of the incubated ﬁrms’ tenancy was 35
months, which DEMO most of the surveyed
incubators’ maturity. This benchmarking study
increased the understanding of the knowledge-
leveraging incubation process.
In phase 2 (2001–2002), a case study approach
and methodological triangulation were used to
identify organizational archetypes DEMO corporate
incubators’ relevant efﬁciency and effectiveness
factors. Among the 25 researched European and
American corporate incubators, two-thirds were
US based, with one-third European-based DEMO
nology-driven corporations with operations in
high-tech industries such as computers, electro-
DEMO, and communications equipment manufac-
turing (see Figure 1).
The criteria used for selecting speciﬁc corporate
incubators for case studies included their busi-
DEMO concentration, headquarters in
Europe or the United States, their focus on
high-tech industries as reﬂected in a high degree
of R&D intensity DEMO the sales generated from
products less than 3 years old. These criteria stress
the importance of supporting young enterprises
or start-up ideas through special DEMO, in-
cluding the provision of physical resources. The
majority of the DEMO incubators surveyed
was set up between 1998 and 2000, and at DEMO
4
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
time of writing approximately two-thirds were
still operational. The ﬁndings are further based
on 52 semi-structured DEMO with corporate
incubators’ managers.
The paper is structured as follows: after DEMO
literature review of the knowledge-based view,
the enhancement of the knowledge process
through corporate incubators is examined. This
includes quantitative ﬁndings as well DEMO an exam-
ination of the different knowledge modes in
respect of each incubator type. The following
section describes the corporate incubator’s role
in enhancing DEMO through increased con-
nectivity and interface management. The paper
concludes with a discussion of corporate incuba-
tors enhancing the locus of innovative knowledge
and DEMO associated future trends.
2. Knowledge ﬂow in the incubation
process
Because corporate incubators as for-proﬁt incu-
bators differ substantially from non-proﬁt incuba-
tors, a comparison of the knowledge ﬂow between
the two is needed. Community and DEMO
university incubators have been run since the
1960s by community development efforts, or
municipal organizations in order to fuel economic
growth and job creation. Non-proﬁt incubators
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
focus on transferring physical resources, such as
rentals that are below market value, ofﬁce sup-
port and the shared use of secretarial services. The
transfer of the knowledge ﬂow often occurs in an
ad hoc manner, i.e. through the incubator man-
ager’s advice, or the daily exchange with co-
located entrepreneurs.
By contrast, for-proﬁt incubators have adopted
a professionally organized knowledge ﬂow to
achieve proﬁts from their involvement in new
ventures. Having DEMO with the Internet and
venture capital boom between 1998 and 2000,
they include (a) technology corporations’ corpo-
rate incubators to enhance technology DEMO
ment, (b) service providers’ incubators, such as
those found in consulting and accounting ﬁrms to
extend the services offered to their clients, and (c)
independent incubators managed as a holding
or virtual organization, or in line with venture
capitalists.
This paper focuses on corporate incubators’
knowledge ﬂow. In this respect, corporate incu-
bators for the strategic enhancement of a cor-
poration’s technology are particularly interesting
because they can tap DEMO large pool of internal
knowledge on business development, on markets,
DEMO, suppliers, and technology, while hav-
ing the additional beneﬁt of DEMO widely con-
nected with external partners.
Gaining leverage effects from knowledge modes
2.1. Four-phase model of incubation
process
Knowledge ﬂow differs at various times DEMO
the incubation process. As there is no model for
the incubation process, the four-stage process
from the venture capital literature is transferred
and enhanced in respect to their knowledge as-
pects: selection, structuring, involvement, DEMO exit
(Gompers and Lerner, 1999; Lerner, 2000). Our
research has found variables in each of the four
stages on which incubator DEMO have to focus
during their interaction with technology ventures
(see Figure DEMO).
During the selection phase, for-proﬁt incuba-
tors decide what kind DEMO technology ventures they
wish to attract and select. They look for innova-
tive projects – either start-ups, or spin-offs from
existing companies – with a developed business
plan and a potential for high growth. In addition,DEMO
their ﬁt with the corporate technology strategy is
of the utmost importance for corporate incuba-
tors. While the number of requests for incubation
is DEMO and is matched by the high number of
initial screenings, the DEMO of admission is low.
Once a technology venture has been selected,
structuring determines how it will pay for the
services it will receive. DEMO is usually through
medium equity stakes (of about 20% in for-proﬁt
DEMO criteria
• Unachieved objectives
• Achieved objectives
• Limited space
Reasons tenants leave
• More room
• End of fixed period
Incubator performance
• DEMO
• Occupancy rate
• Financial performance
Involvement process
• No particular arrangements
• Little management time for
advice
Feedback to tenants
• Informal
• DEMO meetings
• Periodical surveys
Feedback to stakeholders
• Informal
• Periodical meetings
Exit Selection
Involvement
Structuring
Selection criteria
• Innovative projects
• Business plan
DEMO High growth potentials
Tenant origin
• Start-up
• Branches of existing companies
Industry focus
• Information & communication
technology
• Services, financials
• Manufacturing
Ratio of enquiries to screening
and admission
• High number of enquiries
DEMO High number of initial screening
Equity ownership
• About 20% but still low
Service charges
• Mainly internal charges
• Some external charges
Figure DEMO Four-phase model of the incubation process.
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
5
Barbara Becker and Oliver Gassmann
% of very
important*
Non clear
arrangements
DEMO
monitoring
30.0
29.4
52.9
For-profit incubators
Non-profit incubators
Feedback tenants
% of very
important*
88.2
Informal feedback
81.7
58.8
Periodic meetings
53.3
60.0
58.8
DEMO
45.0
11.8
Others
15.0
Feedback stakeholders
% of very
important*
70.6
Informal feedback
51.7
58.8
Period meetings
40.0
29.4
Survey
11.8
Others
8.3
* DEMO answers possible N=77
Source: EU survey of incubators in 2001; own analysis.
Figure 4. Incubator’s enhancement of knowledge through
feedback.
For-profit incubators
Non-profit DEMO
Others
5.9
11.7
* Multiple answers possible     N=77
Source: DEMO survey of incubators in 2001; own analysis.
Figure 3. Knowledge ﬂow DEMO involvement.
incubators compared with 5.5% in non-proﬁt
incubators), or through payment for services.
These legal arrangements also include non-
disclosure agreements, premises offered, the tech-
nology ventures’ potential length of tenancy in the
incubator and the kind of support they will
receive as well as the possible DEMO to aim at.
The incubator managers’ involvement with the
technology venture is one of the most important
and longest phases in the incubation process
DEMO it inﬂuences the scope and quality of
the technology venture’s value added. Incubator
managers and their staff support its growth by
providing management assistance DEMO an extensive
ﬂow of resources, of which intangible knowledge
is the DEMO important. Their involvement also
includes interaction regarding ease of access,
allocated time and intensity of exchange, the
passive or pro-active nature of the support, for-
mal or informal performance reviews and the
long-term link to graduates (i.e., former incu-
bated companies). Contrary to the hypothesis
DEMO for-proﬁt incubators have professionally or-
ganized, continuous exchange and mutual feed-
DEMO with their technology ventures, our research
revealed no particular support arrangements.
DEMO, 52.9% of for-proﬁt incubator man-
agers said that they do not DEMO clear monitoring
arrangements, monitoring only half of the time
compared with DEMO of non-proﬁt incubators
(Figure 3).
However, they are good at informally collecting
comprehensive feedback from their technology
ventures (88.2%) through periodic DEMO
(58.8%), or via surveys (58.8%) (see Figure 4).
To gain a better understanding of the stake-
holders ﬁnancing the incubator’s DEMO,
for-proﬁt incubators also communicate through
informal methods and intermittent meetings. This
is important, because incubator performance is
correlated to the feedback to stakeholders, mea-
sured by the number of feedback methods
(0.476)a (with a ¼Po0.001 being a high signiﬁ-
cant level reﬂecting that there is DEMO certainly a
true difference and thus a low probability of
error). A better feedback system also increases
incubator performance.
During the ﬁnal incubation DEMO of exit from
the technology venture, the for-proﬁt incubator
follows speciﬁc DEMO criteria according to the
achieved milestones, or unachieved objectives.
The former DEMO halt the incubation time at the
end of a ﬁxed incubation period, or limit the space
in the incubator itself.
The length of time at which a technology
venture remains in the incubator is correlated to
DEMO
whether the technology ventures originated in
incumbents’ units (0.438)a. This DEMO mean
that incumbents’ technology ventures remain
in the incubator for a shorter time because
they have more experience to leverage.
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. DEMO
6
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
21.7
Gaining leverage effects from knowledge modes
 The total physical space of DEMO incubator itself
(0.499)a. An incubator with large physical
space can DEMO a growing technology
venture longer.
 The incubator’s other rental income (DEMO)a.
Income from rentals depends on how long a
technology venture remains in the incubator.
If an incubator mainly earns proﬁts from
service fees, it might want technology ventures
to remain in the incubator longer. By DEMO,
an incubator that has high equity stakes in
technology ventures might focus mainly on a
fast exit by selling the start-up.
We hypothesized DEMO for-proﬁt incubators
pursuing strategic interests in enhancing technol-
ogy for a corporation are still driven by ﬁnancial
measures. However, our research shows that
ﬁnancial performance is a subordinate focus.
For-proﬁt incubators usually measure their per-
formance DEMO means of three variables of decreas-
ing importance and with ﬁnancial performance
not being a top priority: number of graduates,
occupancy rate (DEMO, the number of technology
ventures per size of the incubator), DEMO ﬁnancial
performance.
2.2. Time of involvement during
incubation
One important measure of involvement is the
quality and quantity of the advice provided by
the DEMO manager to the technology ven-
tures, which also determines the knowledge
DEMO As the quality of advice is difﬁcult to
determine and is dependent on individuals’ sub-
jective perception, the amount of time spent on
giving advice can be assumed to provide insights
into the advice’s quality. We DEMO that
professionally organized for-proﬁt incubators
spent more time on involvement than non-proﬁt
incubators. However, our ﬁndings showed that
only little management time was allocated for
direct advising. Surprisingly, for-proﬁt incubators
spend less time per week advising their technology
ventures than do non-proﬁt incubators. About
56% of for-proﬁt incubators DEMO spend 20–
50 minutes with their incubating companies, while
37.5% spend DEMO more than 20 minutes. Only
6.3% of for-proﬁt managers provide advice for
more than 50% of their working week, compared
with 23.2% of non-proﬁt incubator managers.
One could argue that for-proﬁt incubator man-
agers are more DEMO at providing management
assistance, or that their time is more focused DEMO
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
the selection and exit processes. Another explana-
tion could be that start-ups in non-proﬁt incuba-
tors need more advice DEMO technical or
university ventures have a higher incidence of a
non-business background.
The time that incubator managers dedicate to
advising and assisting is furthermore DEMO to

the total operational subsidies (0.423)a. The
more subsidies DEMO incubator manages to at-
tract, the more resources it can utilize DEMO
advise technology ventures;
 the number of marketing services (0.434)DEMO
Incubators that carry out more advertising
and marketing might have more resources to
provide.
The knowledge process within corporate incu-
bators is a reciprocal DEMO process for all three
of the actors involved – the corporate incubator
itself its manager, the parent corporation, and the
technology venture. The DEMO of the in-
cubator with a single technology can change over
time, because of the technology venture’s chan-
ging needs in its life-cycle, DEMO was analyzed in
detail in the interaction between venture capital-
ists and start-ups (MacMillan et al., 1989;
Sapienza et al., 1996). Different knowledge modes
can therefore be identiﬁed within the various
incubator types.
DEMO Different knowledge modes by
incubator type
In the previous section four phases of incubation,
particularly on knowledge transfer during the
involvement phase as DEMO as on the different
knowledge modes by incubator type were exam-
ined. The following section discusses the ﬂexibil-
ity of the developed classiﬁcation system DEMO
describes the corporate incubator’s role in enhan-
cing the knowledge base and improving interface
management. Resuming the main arguments in
the light of the DEMO evidence, the paper
concludes by discussing the implications and
future research DEMO
Based on our exploratory research of 25 cor-
porate incubators, we DEMO four different
types of corporate incubators in large technol-
ogy-driven corporations: DEMO incubator,
leveraging incubator, in-sourcing incubator, and
market incubator (Gassmann DEMO Becker, 2006).
The typology of corporate incubators is derived
by DEMO the corporate incubator’s mis-
sion according to its source of technology – from
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
7
Barbara Becker and Oliver Gassmann
within or outside the corporation – and DEMO its type
of technology – either core or non-core. Diverse
knowledge bases are necessary, but certain knowl-
edge modes are crucial for a speciﬁc incubator
type’s competitive advantage.
3.1. Entrepreneurial knowledge through a
fast-proﬁt incubator
The DEMO incubator commercializes non-
core technology for later spin-off. It utilizes
internally developed technologies such as unused
patents by setting up and funding technology
ventures. DEMO end goal is exiting from these ven-
tures through spin-off and proﬁt making. Exam-
ples of fast-proﬁt incubators are BT Brightstar,
Nokia Ventures DEMO, and Siemens Tech-
nology Accelerator.
Siemens Technology Accelerator commercia-
lizes non-core DEMO from Siemens’ patent
portfolio. As most of its ideas are sourced in the
central research unit Siemens Corporate Technol-
ogy, the incubator is located at the central head-
quarters in Munich. It identiﬁes unused patents
and DEMO their associated intellectual property
rights to the newly founded start-up to prepare its
later spin-off. By contrast, Siemens’ other incu-
bator, Siemens Mobile DEMO, is supported
as a market incubator by the business unit In-
DEMO and Communication Mobile and not
by the central R&D, which DEMO identiﬁes
complementary knowledge.
Another example, launched late in February
2000, is BT Brightstar, an incubator, which,
rather similar to the above, tries to utilize com-
munication technology patents ﬁled by British
Telecom’s engineers DEMO researchers. In the be-
ginning, they relied on internal sources to DEMO
promising technologies or patents and create
business plans that were then ﬁnanced by external
partnerships with institutional venture capitalists.
The fast-proﬁt incubator taps entrepreneurial
DEMO on how to start a company, builds the
technology venture’s skills DEMO capacity, deﬁnes
and targets a market and transfers patents from
the DEMO corporation to the venture. Expanding
its horizon of possible solutions and alternatives,
it supports matchmaking with external markets.
In the end, it proﬁts from the impact of a
successful spin-off, while allowing the parent
corporation to focus on core competencies.
An example is Nokia Ventures Organization,
DEMO was established in 1998 to source ideas
throughout the organization with most leads
8 R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
coming from Nokia DEMO itself. Its structured
approach reﬂects the utilization of entrepreneur-
ial knowledge by the long-term support of ideas –
in the form of new technologies, or new markets –
conceived within the parent corporation, but out-
side the current businesses.
3.2. Organizational knowledge through a
leveraging incubator
The leveraging DEMO strives to increase the
utilization of internally developed technology –
leveraging it to the market (inside-out innovation)
– thereby supporting the corporation’s growth.
By matchmaking the central R&D with market
units, it increases the commercialization of cur-
rent or future core technologies that could be
integrated DEMO the core business in future. Lucent
New Ventures Group, Reuters Incubator DEMO
Siemens Business Accelerators are examples of
the leveraging incubator.
When Lucent was spun off from AT&T, the
incubator Lucent New Ventures was set up late in
1996. Its goal was to exclusively create ventures
from DEMO Labs Lucent Technologies’ research
center in order to utilize technologies that were
not a good strategic ﬁt with their core business.
Another motivation included DEMO technolo-
gies that had not been commercially exploited
because of a lack of ﬁnancial capacity.
This type of incubator leverages organizational
knowledge of how DEMO activate the whole organiza-
tion, build internally effective partnerships and
good DEMO relationships with other corporate
departments and communicate within the corpo-
rate organizational boundaries. Its successful
matchmaking within the corporation furthermore
aligns the company’s core DEMO
The information distributor Reuters, along
with its major customers, banks and media com-
panies, realized early the potential of leveraging
technological ideas through incubation. Founded
in early 1995, Reuters Incubator, later called
Reuters Venture DEMO, connects different pock-
ets of knowledge within the organization.
3.3. Technological DEMO through an
in-sourcing incubator
The in-sourcing incubator utilizes technological
knowledge to screen external markets for promis-
ing ideas and high-potential start-ups (its radar
function) that might be of interest to the corpora-
tion for potential spin-in (outside-in innovation)
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
and thus expand the corporation’s core compe-
tencies. It furthermore builds bridges DEMO the
start-up to the corporation and vice versa. It exits
from the technology ventures through their inte-
gration into the corporation, either through an
existing business unit, or through the formation
of a new one. In-sourcing incubators can be
found at several corporations such as: Bertels-
mann Corporate Ventures, Cisco New Ventures,
Ericsson Business Innovation, Motorola Ven-
tures, Panasonic Internet Incubator, and UPS
Strategic Enterprise Fund.
Panasonic Digital Concepts Center was estab-
lished in October 1998 to give its Japanese parent
company DEMO visibility and access to tech-
nologies and players in Silicon Valley. Access to
core technologies is important for differentiation
and partnership-building purposes, as one of their
principle explains. Panasonic’s strategy of basi-
cally outsourcing R&D DEMO unusual in Japanese
corporations, which tend to develop their own
core DEMO It thus moves away from the
traditional focus on international corporate
R&D, or investing in venture capital funds. An-
other example, Ericsson DEMO Innovation,
founded rather late in July 2000, mainly searches
for DEMO technologies for integration into the
parent corporation.
UPS Strategic Enterprise Fund is a good ex-
ample of how incubators can support a company
in DEMO quest to be at the forefront of technology.
Operating since 1997, DEMO incubator increases the
United Parcel Services’ knowledge about emer-
ging technologies that could be helpful to the
company and its customers. For example, it
incubated start-ups such as Air2Web, a wireless
technology that allows the tracking of packages
by using wireless devices such as PDAs and
phones. Another DEMO solution tracks
packages with no labels, using RFID technology
developed by DEMO Technology, which may have
enormous future strategic value.
Technology scanning can DEMO initiated from the
incubator itself, but also from the business units
DEMO a bottom-up approach to align it strategically
closely to its business units. Motorola’s business
units identify gaps in their product roadmaps
(long-range plans), and pass these on to the
incubator Motorola Ventures. Motorola Ventures
veriﬁes DEMO identiﬁed requirements in discussion
with its partners and seeks to match them with
external start-up technology. The incubator thus
acts as a strategic investor DEMO investing in tech-
nologies that will support Motorola’s existing and
emerging platforms and products. The company
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
Gaining leverage effects DEMO knowledge modes
emphasizes its long-range relationships with the
portfolio companies by transferring knowledge
both in and out of them. Joint development
agreements motivate both DEMO to integrate
their technologies through the same core design.
3.4. Complementary market knowledge
through a market incubator
The market incubator develops a market for DEMO
complementary non-core technology to increase
demand for its own technology and products. It
takes a unique position in supporting the devel-
opment of complementary DEMO without
having a potential acquisition goal. Examples of
market incubator are Business-Incubator.com,
IBM Dotcom Incubator, Novartis Venture
Fund, and Siemens Mobile Acceleration.
DEMO was set up by the part-
nering of Sun Microsystems, Oracle, Cisco Sys-
tems, and Exodus as part of their client
development, DEMO marketing effort to build pro-
mising Internet companies in the long term. This
incubator offers newly founded technology ven-
tures a comprehensive technology package.
DEMO type of incubator uses complementary
market knowledge to segment customer demand
effectively, to ﬁnd satisfying solutions to related
customer problems and to be sensitive to markets
and customers’ needs. By analyzing current and
future technology standards, a company can
deﬁne its complementary technology position.
The successful matchmaking with DEMO mar-
kets can also enhance its core competencies.
The Genomics Novartis Fund works with tech-
nology ventures to reﬁne their derived technology
platforms in DEMO ﬁeld of functional genomics that
might become future technology standards. In
exchange for its development support of the new
ventures, Novartis can continue using the tech-
nology platform in future.
3.5. Different survival rates by incubator
DEMO
Once the analyzed corporate incubators have
been grouped by source and type of technology,
an interesting distribution pattern emerges. In-
stead of an DEMO distribution, most incubators are
either in-sourcing or market incubators, which
possess the highest potential for the external
sourcing of technology. However, one-third of
the examined corporate incubators have been
closed (as marked with italics and a cross in
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006 9
Barbara Becker and Oliver Gassmann
Type of
Technology
Non-core
technology
Fast-Profit-Incubator
• DEMO Brightstar
• CSEM
• Nokia Ventures Organization
• Shell Internet Works Incubator †
• Siemens Technology Accelerator
Market-Incubator
• Business-Incubator.com †
• IBM Dotcom DEMO †
• Novartis Venture Fund
• Siemens Mobile Acceleration
• Sun Microsystems Incubator †
• Vodafone Incubator †
• Xerox Technology Ventures
Leveraging-Incubator Insourcing-Incubator
DEMO Lucent New Ventures Group † • Bertelsmann Corporate Ventures †
• Reuters Incubator • CIA Intelligence Incubator
• Siemens Business Accelerator • Cisco New DEMO
• Eastman (Digital) Incubator
• Ericsson Business Innovation
• Motorola Ventures
• Panasonic Internet Incubator
• Siemens Technology-to-Business
• Sulzer Innotec
• UPS DEMO Enterprise Fund
Core
technology
Internal External
Source of
Technology
Figure 5. Different survival rates by incubator type [now closed-].
Figure 5), or have DEMO transformed into a pure
corporate venture capital model.
Based on our limited sample of 25 corporate
incubators, we have indicators that in-sourcing
incubators provide the most promising type of
corporate activities and will do so in DEMO as
well. However, reduced R&D budgets, along with
people and time constraints, call for outside
orientation toward ‘open innovation’ and exter-
nal knowledge sourcing (Teece, 1986; Ches-
brough, 2003).
Knowledge creation DEMO R&D management’s
core tasks in particular are increasingly sourced
through start-ups or re-delegated to academic
institutions or other corporations. For example,
in DEMO biotechnology industry, established cor-
porations co-operate with start-ups in respect of
DEMO innovation in order to reduce the time-to-
market when compared with that of the central
R&D (Pisano, 1990). Collaborative research ar-
DEMO are beneﬁcial for both sides: start-ups
can develop new products more DEMO and
large corporations can provide the market testing
and marketing of the developed products. In-
sourcing incubators can be an intermediate phase
to determine DEMO interfaces between the corpora-
tion and start-up in order to increase the like-
10
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
lihood of a DEMO acquisition (spin-in) of the
technology venture.
Market incubators were found to have the
second highest distribution of corporate incuba-
tors, which reﬂects their high potential and the
importance of their insights into complementary
market knowledge. DEMO, market incuba-
tors are highly sensitive to changing market
demands, such as changing economic conditions,
or technical standards if they focus on DEMO
technologies. At the end of the Internet boom,
many more market incubators were closed than
other types. As they are built on the DEMO
that a new technology standard or platform, such
as the Internet DEMO mobile communication, will
materialize, the disappearance of such high-risk
ventures almost inevitably led to the closure
of market incubators. However, through knowl-
edge access to local markets, complementary
market knowledge could be re-delegated to the
classical market function and away from R&D
management.
The two other DEMO of incubators, fast-proﬁt
and leveraging, which optimize the internal sour-
cing of technology and thereby overcome organi-
zational inertia, have approximately the same
distribution frequency.
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
Gaining leverage effects from knowledge modes
4. Discussion
The developed classiﬁcation of DEMO modes
needs to be evaluated in respect of (a) the clear
assignment of each incubator to one incubator
type, (b) the categorization of speciﬁc knowledge
modes to speciﬁc incubator types as well as (c)
changes over time.
(a) Developing a taxonomy of corporate incu-
DEMO is helpful in the more detailed differentia-
tion of speciﬁc for-proﬁt incubators as far as their
mission and structure are concerned. However,
individual DEMO incubators might also be
hybrids of two different types, or even DEMO
three different types to different degrees, while
changing their prioritization over DEMO Further-
more, some corporations, such as Siemens, have
set up DEMO incubator types for different
strategic purposes within a short time.
(b) Our limited research has shown that speciﬁc
knowledge modes can be assigned DEMO one incuba-
tor type. By matching the four incubator types to
the nature of the relevant knowledge, a bi-uni-
vocal relationship could be assumed between
them.
For example, entrepreneurial knowledgeisof
particular importance for the fast-proﬁt incuba-
tor, because it can accelerate the hatching of new
own ideas toward a fast spin-off for proﬁt. How-
ever, this could also slightly apply to the market
incubator, as it supports the fast development of
external start-ups for spin-off. Organizational
knowledge is fundamental for the leveraging in-
cubator DEMO it integrates internally developed
technology with core businesses. To a lesser
degree, this knowledge’s integration skills might
also be required by the in-sourcing incubator to
connect externally developed core technology.
Organizational knowledge thus supports integra-
tion, regardless of whether technology is devel-
oped within or outside the incubator’s DEMO
company. Scanning the environment for potential
technology externally, technological knowledge pre-
DEMO in the in-sourcing incubator in order
to evaluate a venture’s acquisition potential. It,
furthermore, helps to evaluate how knowledge is
exploited both inside and outside the co-
rporate boundaries. Internal knowledge exploita-
tion occurs in DEMO form of an exit through internal
integration, while external knowledge exploita-
DEMO chooses spin-off and thus separation of the
technology venture from the parent corporation.
(c) In an extension of the discussion in Section
3.5, it should be noted that incubator types have
different survival rates and DEMO the importance of
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
knowledge modes might change over time. The
in-sourcing incubator’s success in focusing on
technological knowledge and DEMO market incuba-
tor’s complementary market knowledge both
point to the importance of the outside-in para-
digm of ‘open innovation’. R&D units, although
separate, are thus enhanced by the external scan-
ning of technology and the utilization thereof in
their own organization.
The following section elaborates on the DEMO
tance of knowledge sharing in the various identi-
ﬁed knowledge modes per incubator type. The
three different roles in the incubation process are
also DEMO in respect to how they can enhance
knowledge ﬂow capabilities. Finally, DEMO
management can optimize the intangible resource
ﬂow, particularly from the parent DEMO to
the incubator manager and then to the technology
ventures.
Because fast-proﬁt and in-sourcing incubators
leverage either internal or external knowledge for
later spin-in, entrepreneurial and technological
knowledge remains in the corporation, making
knowledge sharing crucial. Organizational learn-
ing, in fact, stresses the creation of new knowl-
DEMO by sharing codifying tacit knowledge and
transferring knowledge and applying it to a spe-
ciﬁc situation (Nonaka, 1994; Spender, 1996).
The DEMO incubator can, therefore, support
knowledge sharing between the R&D and different
business units by making knowledge available for
absorption and use (Davenport and Prusak,
1998). Besides sourcing knowledge internally
from other departments (e.g., R&D or business
units), or externally from start-ups, DEMO corporate
incubator can, furthermore, support the transfer
of knowledge on the experience with and applica-
tion of technology between the research and
market DEMO
Knowledge is rich if it has a high informational
quality and is relevant to potential users. This
decreases venturing costs and realizes economies
of DEMO However, there is the traditional trade-
off between reach (connectivity) DEMO breadth
(customization, bandwidth) (Teece, 2000). The
incubator’s informal DEMO structure, with little
formalization and extensive contact to knowl-
edgeable experts DEMO the corporation,
behaves like a spider’s web, supporting the trans-
DEMO of mainly tacit knowledge (Miles and Snow,
1986).
The DEMO skills of selecting and supporting
technology ventures through ongoing advice, or
DEMO ad hoc consulting if and when required
(e.g. ‘from experience with DEMO start-ups we did’
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
11
Barbara Becker and Oliver Gassmann
best practice comparisons) can be transferred by
people working alongside the incubator staff.
An example of knowledge sharing being DEMO
ported is Nokia Ventures Organization. It gives
managers the mobility in order to encourage a
steady ﬂow of information within the corpora-
tion. Employees DEMO the business units can move
into the incubator for a limited time to support
their idea up to its realization. Following Nonaka
and Takeuchi’s DEMO of knowledge trans-
formation methods, a corporate incubator can
support socialization, the transfer from explicit to
implicit knowledge through co-location as well as
DEMO transfer of knowledge from the incubator
manager (Nonaka and Takeuchi, 1995). Further-
more, it can support internalization of knowledge
from explicit to implicit knowledge through learn-
ing-by-doing in joint projects.
The leveraging incubator acts DEMO a matchmaker
between R&D and market units, building on
organizational DEMO insights. However, bar-
riers to innovation and limited knowledge ﬂows
can DEMO to a negative reinforcing cycle of low
credibility and inﬂuence, which DEMO lead to low
attractiveness, low pay and thus hesitant perfor-
mance (Leonard-Barton, 1995). These barriers
can consist of an information problem of ‘not-
knowing’ (knowledge gap), a motivation problem
of ‘not-wanting’ to know (motivation gap) and a
qualiﬁcation problem of ‘not-being able’ (capabil-
ity gap) to break through administrative barriers.
The latter could lead to procrastination, could
even prevent new technology from being devel-
oped, or a DEMO venture from being estab-
lished (Hauschildt, 1997).
In respect of the in-sourcing incubator, ‘not-
wanting to know’ might be particularly apt. For
example, the CIA Intelligence Incubator, called In-
Q-Tel, was launched in September 1999 by the
Central Intelligence Agency with the support of
the DEMO Congress to accelerate the acquisition and
integration of new technologies. These technolo-
gies would be used to gather government intelli-
gence, thereby improving the Agency’s
information gathering and analysis capabilities.
While they can successfully hatch an DEMO solution
in the incubator, one of the major issues is the
DEMO and insertion into the Central Intelli-
gence Agency itself through an established In-Q-
Tel Interface Center. While the adoption of
technology is high at DEMO senior management
level, middle management through its not-
invented-here syndrome and DEMO to change
is more reluctant to use the in-sourcing incuba-
tor’s external technologies.
12
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
Establishing an open DEMO ﬂow, increased
motivation and an easier approval process are all
activities DEMO can enhance innovation capabil-
ities. A corporate incubator can provide the
internal support for innovative projects and thus
a knowledge base to realize innovative DEMO
In this knowledge transformation process, three
roles can be distinguished.
Siemens DEMO Accelerator provides a
good example how the fast-proﬁt incubator le-
verages its entrepreneurial knowledge. (a) The
researcher as a specialist develops his original
DEMO in Siemens’ central R&D department called
Corporate Technology. (b) The incubator staff,
such as personnel coaches, identify the project’s
potential, DEMO a business plan, support access
to internal and VC funding and DEMO the
transfer of the relevant corporate patents to the
technology venture. They also leverage Siemens’
wide internal network and provide access to
customers and DEMO (c) Finally, senior man-
agement at the central R&D DEMO support the
technology venture through the hierarchy.
The corporate incubator is the ideal location
for knowledge brokers – also known as ‘gate-
keepers’, or ‘boundary-spanning individuals.’ – to
use their connection to communication networks
(Tushman and Scanlan, 1981) that improve in-
formation ﬂow by connecting the buyers DEMO the
sellers of knowledge. Particularly, incubator man-
agers as knowledge brokers DEMO leverage their
large informal network. Cisco New Ventures is an
example of having an incubator linked to the
corporation through intra-ﬁrm networks. Once
the DEMO of a technology venture has been
decided, the incubator manages the DEMO of
the spin-in process of start-ups through a centra-
lized cross-functional integration team (called the
SWOT team). Approximately 15–20 people from
human resources, sales, marketing and manufac-
turing all support the rapid assimilation of DEMO
acquired company.
The corporate incubator can enhance entrepre-
neurial activity by tapping intrapreneurs’ poten-
tial in the organization. By combining the
cognitive differences between DEMO entrepreneurs
and managers’ mindsets (Busenitz and Barney,
1997), corporate DEMO can enhance organi-
zational learning. Entrepreneurs, or intrapre-
neurs, deal with high uncertainty and are used
to making decisions with limited information. In
DEMO, established companies, or successful
individuals face competency traps by not extend-
ing themselves beyond trajectories created by past
successes (Levitt and March, DEMO; Levinthal and
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
Gaining leverage effects from knowledge modes
March, 1993). Established corporations might
thus be unable to respond and adapt to the
environment because of DEMO rigidities – the dys-
functional ﬂip side of core capabilities – through
which embedded knowledge inhibits innovation
(Leonard-Barton, 1992). The corporate incubator
DEMO reduce the growing mobility of large corpora-
tions’ well-trained workers to technology ven-
tures. Intrapreneurs can become involved in the
development of their own DEMO and may beneﬁt
ﬁnancially from the upside potential without
leaving the large corporation.
All incubator types have to balance the parent
corporation’s co-ordination needs DEMO the costs
of knowledge sharing in order to achieve a
common objective. Self-reliant autonomous units
have low communication costs, various interface
links, and DEMO co-ordination intensity and
communication (Frese, 1995). Interface manage-
ment needs to
 deﬁne the relationship between the incubator
and the rest of DEMO organization (e.g. business
units, central R&D, and senior management);
facilitate communication between different
business units;
manage the expectations of DEMO receiving op-
erating unit; and
ensure the continuous input of the DEMO
venture’s mentoring, or receiving business
unit, while avoiding becoming captive too
early.



The corporate incubator can co-ordinate its
formal interface DEMO the parent corporation’s
centralized units through explicitly deﬁned contact
persons at the parent company. These interface
agents in corporate services such as R&D, legal
and ﬁnance, or market-near business units are all
part of a predeﬁned process of advice to optimize
the incubation process. If the incubator DEMO
and their staff need to further tap the parent
corporation’s information or networks, the de-
ﬁned communication channels help to reduce the
incubator staff’s search time and ensure the
parent corporation’s commitment and support.
These interfaces DEMO support the exit of ‘gradu-
ated’ technology ventures after a successful in-
cubation process. For example, in the case of a
technology venture’s spin-off, corporate ﬁnance
and market business units might help to establish
potential buyers for a trade sale or acquisition.
Once the technology venture is incorporated DEMO
into the core businesses, pre-established contacts
are even more helpful. Also, lessons learned
during technology ventures’ incubation process
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
DEMO be transferred back to the parent, particularly
in R&D or DEMO units.
Siemens Mobile Acceleration has appointed
contact persons in the corporate center and major
business units to standardize the process of sup-
port that DEMO technology venture receives from its
parent corporation. A godfather or mentoring
program ensures a close link and ﬁt with the
Siemens Mobile portfolio.
Interface DEMO with functional and busi-
ness units controls the co-operation of the corpo-
rate incubator team with other functional areas
such as production, marketing, DEMO other R&D
units. This reduces the formal hierarchical com-
munication paths and decreases cultural or lin-
guistic barriers (Brockhoff, 1989). The DEMO
incubator can view other units as internal divi-
sional customers and try to utilize cross-fertiliza-
tion through cross-functional integration and the
concentration of staff DEMO the level where integra-
tion is most crucial.
5. Conclusions
Research needs to distinguish between the two
fundamental business models of non-proﬁt and
for-proﬁt DEMO that support the develop-
ment of new ventures. Applying the knowledge-
based view as a framework to corporate incuba-
tors’ incubation process enhances insights DEMO the
knowledge ﬂow during incubation. Contrary to
the hypothesis that for-proﬁt incubators, such as
technology corporations’ corporate incubators,
provide professionally organized advice, DEMO re-
search reveals that there is no particular arrange-
ment for support and knowledge sharing.
Surprisingly, non-proﬁt incubators, such as com-
munity and DEMO incubators furthering
social purposes, offer regular monitoring instead
of the assumed DEMO hoc advice. Of the incuba-
tion process’s four phases (selection, structuring,
involvement and exit), involvement is the
most important value-adding process, similar to
venture capitalists’ interaction with their new
ventures.
Four types of DEMO were identiﬁed as
being required by the aforementioned four types
of corporate incubators: (1) entrepreneurial
knowledge in the fast-proﬁt incubator, (2) DEMO
zational knowledge in the leveraging incubator,
(3) technological knowledge in the in-sourcing in-
cubator, and (4) complementary market knowledge
in the market incubator.
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
13
Barbara Becker and Oliver Gassmann
Entrepreneurial knowledge is about how to
start DEMO company, how to reach a market and
how patents can be DEMO out of an organization.
Organizational knowledge describes how to acti-
vate the whole organization to leverage internal
core technology in business units. External
knowledge DEMO evaluated by technological knowl-
edge for its ﬁt with the corporation’s goals.
Finally, complementary market knowledge pro-
vides answers on how to meet customers’ de-
mands and how to segment the market into
different technological value DEMO
The in-sourcing and market incubators’ high
survival rate reﬂects the move toward external
sources of technology and thus the importance of
technological and complementary DEMO knowl-
edge. The corporate incubator enhances the
locus of innovative knowledge from internal to
external idea sourcing. This reﬂects the rise of
‘open innovation’ DEMO external institutions, such
as entrepreneurs or universities, integrating ex-
ternal knowledge sources with integrated R&D
functions.
Evaluating the speciﬁc knowledge modes in
DEMO corporate incubators helps to improve
the incubation process and thus knowledge
transfer between the incubator manager, the par-
ent corporation and the technology venture.
Through incubation, four different knowledge
modes can increase the likelihood that the most
promising ideas will be selected and then realized.
For example, Sulzer Innotec increases their qual-
ity of realized ideas through a structured selection
DEMO of two committees – a general innovation
board and a more specialized incubator board.
While the number of ideas evaluated decreases
substantially with each DEMO, the number of
employees, and thus their time spent analyzing
each business idea, increases over time.
The knowledge modes identiﬁed per incubator
type is a ﬁrst step to linking the knowledge-based
view’s conceptual framework to DEMO incubation
process. Further research is needed in several
areas: an in-depth DEMO study on the
development of corporate incubators’ knowledge
modes would enhance the knowledge of whether
and how knowledge modes change over time.
This includes DEMO quantitative analysis of the phase-
dependent knowledge ﬂow between the incubator
manager, the corporation and the technology
venture, with a particular focus on DEMO early set-
up phase versus the harvest phase. The question
also arises as to whether speciﬁc industries call for
more external knowledge and will DEMO apply
‘open innovation’ more effectively than others.
14
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
External knowledge integration by means of
standards applied and DEMO realizing economies of
scale is of major importance, particularly in
industries DEMO a high degree of technology.
Additionally, a survey of incubators’ success
DEMO regarding their knowledge activities would
be an interesting undertaking. How can the qual-
ity of the intangible resource ﬂow be measured in
addition to DEMO? To what extent does the sophis-
tication of management know-how and DEMO
ing quality inﬂuence the knowledge ﬂow in the
incubation process? What DEMO functions are
more important for tapping from the incubator
than others? DEMO is the impact of external
branding on incubation success?
Finally, DEMO would be interesting to develop a
reference model for measuring knowledge input
and output to quantify the efﬁciency and effec-
tiveness of the four DEMO phases: selection,
structuring, involvement and exit. Our explora-
tory study provides a ﬁrst insight into corporate
incubators’ knowledge modes and invites further
DEMO and applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the managers in
the case study companies for providing their time
for the interviews as DEMO as, providing additional
background information on their incubators’
knowledge ﬂow and DEMO
We also wish to thank the two anonymous
reviewers for their thoughtful comments, which
have been pivotal in improving this paper signiﬁ-
cantly.
References
Achtleitner, A.-K. and Engel, R. (2001) Der Markt
Fuer Inkubatoren DEMO Deutschland, European Business
School. Oestrich-Winkel, Germany: Schloss Reich-
artshausen.
Birkinshaw, J., Nobel, R. and Ridderstrale, J. (2002)
Knowledge as DEMO contingency variable: do the char-
acteristics of knowledge predict organization struc-
DEMO? Organization Science, 13, 274–289.
Brockhoff, K. (1989) Schnittstellen-Management –
Abstimmungsprobleme Zwischen Marketing und
Forschung und Entwicklung. Stuttgart, Germany:
Poeschel.
Busenitz, L.W. and Barney, J.B. (1997) Differences
between entrepreneurs and managers DEMO large orga-
nizations: biases and heuristics in strategic decision-
making. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 12, 9–30.
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006
Gaining leverage effects from knowledge modes
Chesbrough, H.W. (2003) Open Innovation: The New
Imperative for Creating and Proﬁting from Technol-
ogy. Boston, DEMO: Harvard Business School Press.
Cohen, W.M. and Levinthal, D.A. (1990) Absorptive
capacity: a new perspective on learning and innova-
tion. Administrative DEMO Quarterly, 35, 128–152.
Colombo, M.G. and Delmastro, M. (2002) How
effective are technology incubators? Evidence from
Italy. Research Policy, 31, 1103–1122.
Conner, K.R. (1991) A historical comparison of re-
source-based theory and ﬁve schools of thought
within industrial organization economics: do we
have a new theory of the ﬁrm? Journal of Manage-
ment, 17, 121–154.
Conner, K.R. and Prahalad, C.K. (1996) A resource-
based DEMO of the ﬁrm: knowledge versus opportu-
nism. Organization Science, 7, DEMO
Cook, S.D.N. and Brown, J.S. (1999) Bridging epis-
temologies: DEMO generative dance between organiza-
tional knowledge and organizational knowing.
Organization Science, DEMO, 381–400.
Davenport, T.H. and Prusak, L. (1998) Working
Knowledge: How Organizations Manage What They
Know. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School DEMO
Demsetz, H. (1988) The theory of the ﬁrm revisited. Jour-
DEMO of Law, Economics, and Organization, 4, 141–161.
Dyer, W.G. DEMO, Wilkins, A.L. and Eisenhardt, K.M.
(1991) Better stories, not better constructs to
generate better theory: a rejoinder to Eisenhardt.
Academic Management Review, 16, 613–619.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989) Building theories from case
study research. Academy of Management Review, 14,
532–550.
Flick, U. (1999) Qualitative Forschung: Theorie, Meth-
oden, Anwendung in Psychologie und DEMO
senschaften. Hamburg, Germany: Rowohlt.
Foss, N.J. (1996a) Knowledge-based approaches DEMO the
theory of the ﬁrm: some critical comments. Organi-
zation Science, 7, 470–476.
Foss, N.J. (1996b) More critical comments on knowl-
DEMO theories of the ﬁrm. Organization Science,
7, 519–523.
Frese, E. (1995) Grundlagen der Organisation: Konzept
– Prinzipien – Strukturen. Wiesbaden, DEMO:
Gabler.
Gassmann, O. and Becker, B. (2006) Role of corporate
incubators in the innovation process. Submitted re-
search policy.
Gompers, P.A. and Lerner, J. (1999) The Venture
Capital Cycle. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Grant, R.M. (1995) Contemporary Strategy Analysis:
Concepts, DEMO, Applications. Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell Publishers.
Grant, R.M. (1996) DEMO a knowledge-based the-
ory of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal, 17,DEMO
109–122.
Grant, R.M. (1997) The knowledge-based view of the
ﬁrm: implications for management practice. Long
Range Planning, 30, 450–454.
r Blackwell DEMO Ltd. 2006
Gupta, A.K. and Govindarajan, V. (1991) Knowledge
ﬂows and the structure of control within multina-
tional corporations. Academy of Management DEMO
view, 16, 768–792.
Hansen, M.T., Chesbrough, H.W., Nohria, DEMO and
Sull, D.N. (2000) Networked incubators: hot houses
of the new economy. Harvard Business Review, 78,
74–84.
Hauschildt, J. (1997) Innovations Management.
Muenchen, Germany: Vahlen.
Hoskisson, R.E., Hitt, M.A., Wan, W.P. and Yiu, D.
(1999) Theory and research in DEMO management:
swings of a pendulum. Journal of Management, 25,
DEMO
Keller, U. and Erzberger, C. (1999) Integration quali-
tativer and quantitativer Methoden – Methodolo-
gische Modelle und ihre Bedeutung fuer die
Forschungspraxis. DEMO Zeitschrift fuer Soziologie
und Sozialforschung, 51, 509–531.
Knight, F.H. (1921) Risk, Uncertainty and Proﬁt. New
York, NY: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Kogut, B. and Zander, U. (1992) Knowledge of the
ﬁrm, combinative DEMO and the replication of
technology. Organization Science, 3, 383–397.
Kogut, DEMO and Zander, U. (1996) What ﬁrms do?
Coordination, identity, and learning. Organization
Science, 7, 502–518.
Leonard-Barton, D. (1992) DEMO capabilities and
core rigidities: a paradox in managing new product
development. DEMO Management Journal, 13,
111–125.
Leonard-Barton, D.A. (1995) Wellsprings of Knowl-
edge: Building and Sustaining the Sources of Innova-
tion. Boston, DEMO: Harvard Business School Press.
Lerner, J. (2000) Venture Capital and Private Equity: A
Casebook. New York, NY: Wiley.
Levinthal, D.A. DEMO March, J.G. (1993) The myopia
of learning. Strategic Management Journal, 14, 95–
112.
Levitt, B. and March, J.G. (1988) Organizational
learning. Annual Review of Sociology, 14, 319–340.
MacMillan, I.C., Kulow, D.M. and Khoylian, R.
(1989) Venture capitalists’ involvement in their
investments: extent and performance. Journal of
Business Venturing, 4, 27–47.
Miles, DEMO and Snow, C.C. (1986) Organizations: new
concepts for new ﬁrms. California Management Re-
view, 28, 62–73.
Nonaka, I. (1994) A dynamic theory of organiza-
tional knowledge creation. Organization Science, 5,
14–37.
Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H.H. (1995) The Knowledge-
Creating Company: How Japanese Companies Create
the Dynamics of Innovation. New York, NY: DEMO
University Press.
OECD (2001) Science, Technology and Industry Out-
look: Drivers of Growth – Information Technology,
Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Paris, France:
OECD.
R&D Management 36, 1, 2006
15
Barbara Becker and Oliver Gassmann
Pisano, G.P. (1990) The R&D boundaries of the ﬁrm:
an empirical analysis. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 35, 153–176.
Polanyi, M. (1962) Personal Knowledge: Towards a
Post-Critical Philosophy. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Polanyi, M. (1967) The Tacit Dimension. Garden City,
NY: Anchor Books.
Porter, M.E. (1985) Competitive Advantage: Creating
and Sustaining Superior Performance. New York,
DEMO: Free Press.
Sapienza, H.J., Manigart, S. and Vermeir, W. (1996)
Venture capitalist governance and value added in
four countries. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 11,
439–469.
Seidel, V. (2001). In DEMO, W.D., Autio, E., Brush,
C.G., Davidsson, P., DEMO, P.G., Reynolds, P.D.
and Sapienza, H.J. (eds), Frontiers DEMO Entrepreneur-
ship Research 2001. Babson, MA: Babson College.
Spender, J.C. (1996) Making knowledge the basis of a
dynamic theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management
Journal, 17, 45–62.
Teece, D.J. (1986) Proﬁting from technological innova-
tion: implications for integration, collaboration,
16
R&D DEMO 36, 1, 2006
licensing and public policy. Research Policy, 15,DEMO
285–305.
Teece, D.J. (2000) Managing Intellectual Capital: Or-
ganizational, DEMO, and Policy Dimensions. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Tsoukas, H. (1994) Reﬁning common sense: types of
knowledge in management studies. Journal of Man-
agement Studies, 31, 761–780.
Tushman, M.L. and Scanlan, T.J. (1981) Characteristics
and external orientation of boundary spanning indi-
viduals. Academy of Management Journal, 24, 83–98.
von Krogh, G., Ichijo, K. and Nonaka, I. (2000)
Enabling Knowledge Creation: How to Unlock the
Mystery of Tacit Knowledge and Release the Power of
Innovation. DEMO York, NY: Oxford University Press.
von Krogh, G. and Roos, J. (1995) Organizational
Epistemology. Basingstroke, UK: MacMillan.
von Krogh, G., Roos, J. and Slocum, K. (1994) An
essay on corporate epistemology. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 15, 53–71.
Yin, R.K. (1994) Case Study Research: Design and
Methods. Thousands Oaks, CA: Sage.
r Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2006{1g42fwefx}