This article was downloaded by: [155.247.166.234] On: 20 August 2015, At: 12:39
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Organization Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
Academic Entrepreneurs: Organizational Change at the
Individual Level
Janet Bercovitz, Maryann Feldman,DEMO
To cite this article:
Janet Bercovitz, Maryann Feldman,  (2008) Academic Entrepreneurs: Organizational Change at the Individual Level.
Organization Science 19(DEMO):69-89. http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1070.0295
Full terms and conditions of DEMO: http://pubsonline.informs.org/page/terms-and-conditions
This article may be used only DEMO the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use
or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited DEMO explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, DEMO, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or DEMO to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright © 2008, INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
INFORMS is DEMO largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research, management
science, and analytics.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org
OrganizationScience
Vol. 19, No. 1, January–February 2008, pp. 69–89
issn 1047-7039 eissn 1526-5455 08 1901 0069
informs®
doi 10.1287/orsc.1070.0295
©2008INFORMS
Academic Entrepreneurs: Organizational Change
at the Individual Level
Janet Bercovitz
College of Business, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Champaign, Illinois 61820,
jbercov@uiuc.edu
Maryann Feldman
DEMO for Higher Education, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30606, mfeldman@uga.edu
his study explores the process of organizational change by examining localized social DEMO in organizational sub-
T units. Speciﬁcally, we examine participation in university DEMO transfer, a new organizational initiative, by track-
ing 1,780 faculty members, examining their backgrounds and work environments, and following their engagement DEMO
academic entrepreneurship. We ﬁnd that individual adoption of the new initiative may be either substantive or symbolic.
Our results suggest that individual attributes, while important, are conditioned by the local work environment. In terms
of personal attributes, individuals are more likely to participate if they trained at institutions that had accepted the new
initiativeandbeenactiveintechnologytransfer.Inaddition,weﬁndthatthelongerthetimethathadelapsedsincegraduate
training, the less likely the individual was to actively embrace the new commercialization norm. Considering the localized
DEMO environment, we ﬁnd that when the chair of the department is DEMO in technology transfer, other members of the
department are also likely DEMO participate, if only for symbolic reasons. We also ﬁnd that technology DEMO behavior is
calibrated by the experience of those in the relevant cohort. If an individual can observe others with whom they identify
engaging in DEMO new initiative, then they are more likely to follow with substantive DEMO Finally, when individuals
facedissonance,asituationwheretheirindividualtrainingnormsarenotcongruentwiththelocalizedsocialnormsintheir
work environment, they will conform to the local norms, rather than adhering to the norms from their prior experience.
Key words : organizational change; entrepreneurship; localized learning; technology transfer
History : Published online in Articles in Advance December 11, 2007.
Change, through the pursuit of new strategic initia-
tives, is essential to DEMO survival (Van de
Ven 1986). All too often, however, DEMO fail to
adapt to exogenous shifts in their environment (Kotter
1996, Christensen and Bowers 1996). The literature
highlights the forces that favor DEMO stabil-
ity and resistance to change (Hannan and Freeman
1984, Leonard-Barton 1992, Nelson and Winter 1982,
Tolbert and Zucker 1983). Even when top manage-
ment recognize the need to change, publicly announce
new strategic initiatives, modify incentives, and divert
signiﬁcant resources to develop supportive DEMO
tionalstructures,thepersistenceofexistingroutinesand
older norms of behavior frequently impede organiza-
tional transformation. The challenge of change is even
more daunting for organizations embedded in highly
DEMO
established norms of behavior (DiMaggio and Powell
1983, Kraatz and Moore 2002). However, some organi-
zationsdoadapt,survive,andprosper.Understandingthe
differentialcapabilityoforganizationstochangeremains
a central, DEMO research question in organizational
theory (see Greenwood and Hinings 2006 for DEMO review).
Recent research suggests that understanding variation
in organizational response to external pressure requires
69
examining intraorganizational dynamics and the actions
ofindividualsincontext(GreenwoodandHinings1996)DEMO
The mere presence of macrolevel pressures does not
guarantee that new initiatives will be embraced. The
ability of organizations to change depends on the
DEMO of individuals to adopt supportive norms,
routines, and behaviors (Whelan-Berry et al. 2003).
Organizationalchangeoccursviatheindividualas“pres-
sures are interpreted, given meaning, and DEMO
to by actors within organizations” (Dacin et al. 2002,
p. DEMO). Individual behavior may be inﬂuenced by prior
experience and by new information gained from phys-
ical space proximity or professional relationships that
provide DEMO opportunity to observe and learn. Thus, pro-
fessional imprinting and localized DEMO context are
material microlevel inﬂuences (Schien 1985, DiMaggio
and Powell 1983, Bandura 1977). However, in the pro-
cess of organizational change, individuals may ﬁnd
themselves in situations of dissonance where social
imprintingconﬂictswiththenormsoflocalenvironment
(Festinger 1957). Ultimately, resolution will involve
trade-offs between competing inﬂuences and reﬂect the
individual’s choice to either engage in substantive com-
pliance,ormerelymakeasymbolicgesture.Understand-
ingthedecisionsmadebyindividualsabouttheadoption
DEMO from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 DEMO For personal use only, all rights reserved.
70
of a new initiative requires consideration of the local-
ized social DEMO and professional imprinting, while
controlling for ﬁnancial incentives and opportunities.
Currently, there is a gap in our knowledge, as few
empirical studies link individual actions and the inﬂu-
ence of organizational subunits to the implementation
DEMO strategic initiatives. This paper addresses that gap
in the context of an initiative adopted by American
researchuniversitiestopromoteactivetechnologytrans-
fer and research commercialization. Traditionally, aca-
demic institutions operated under Mertonian norms that
emphasizedtheopendisseminationofresearchdiscover-
iesandescheweddirectcommercialactivity(Powelland
Owen-Smith 1996, Nelson 2001). Because of a con-
vergence of technical, legal, political, and economic
factors that culminated with the passage of the Bayh-
Dole DEMO in 1980, an alternative archetype of academic
entrepreneurship that encourages commercial DEMO
hasbeenarticulated(Moweryetal.1999).Slaughterand
Leslie(1997)describeinitiativesinsupportofthesenew
normsas“academiccapitalism,”whileEtzkowitz(1983)
coins the descriptive term “entrepreneurial universities.”
However, for universities, the process of organizational
DEMO has been challenging. Although, by 1998, every
Carnegie I and II American Research University had
technology transfer ofﬁces (TTOs) and were moving
DEMO standard technology transfer practices (Feldman
et al. 2002), there remained DEMO noted performance gap
in the realization of these new technology transfer ini-
tiatives (Siegel et al. 2003). The decisions by individ-
ual faculty members to actively engage in technology
transfersignaltheiracceptanceoftheuniversity’sinitia-
tive for academic entrepreneurship. Our DEMO of those
decisions offers the rare opportunity to gauge the fac-
tors inﬂuencing the adoption of an organizational initia-
tiveattheindividuallevel,withinanintra-organizational
context.
This study DEMO the behavior of 1,780 faculty
members in 15 matched departments at the medical
schools of two prominent research universities. Medi-
cal schools were DEMO as they are a key venue for
academicactivitywithcommercialpotential.Ourresults
suggest that the decision to participate in strategic ini-
tiatives is inﬂuenced by both social learning DEMO to
anindividualjoiningtheorganization,andsubsequently,
by the individual’s exposure to relevant peer behaviors
within the organizational subunit. We ﬁnd that those
individuals who trained at DEMO at the forefront
of technology transfer benchmarking, or who completed
their DEMO recently, are more likely to participate in
academic entrepreneurship. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that,
when the chair of the department is active in DEMO
ogy transfer, other members of the department are also
likelytobeactive,ifonlyforsymbolicreasons.Wealso
DEMO evidence of localized learning, as technology trans-
fer behavior of individuals DEMO calibrated by the activity
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the DEMO Level
OrganizationScience19(1),pp.69–89,©2008INFORMS
of their peers. If an individual DEMO observe participation
by peers at the same academic rank in their department,
thentheyaremorelikelytofollowwithsubstantivecom-
pliance, other things being equal. Finally, we ﬁnd that
DEMO an individual has been imprinted with norms that
conﬂict with the norms of their local environment, it is
the latter that tends to dominate in the choice of sub-
sequent behavior. In sum, our empirical study illumi-
natestheintraorganizationaldynamicsthatarecriticalto
orchestrating organizational change.
The paper proceeds as follows. We begin DEMO an
overview of the technology transfer process and details
on the context we study. The second section draws on
the literature and the results DEMO interviews with technol-
ogytransfermanagersandfacultymemberstodevelopa
set of hypotheses about the individual faculty member’s
decision to disclose new inventions. The third section
of the paper introduces DEMO data and methodology. The
fourthsectionprovidesempiricalresults.Discussionand
reﬂective conclusions are offered in section ﬁve.
Faculty Participation in Technology
Transfer
The decision of individual faculty members to DEMO
entrepreneurial academics and engage in commercial
activity with industry begins when an invention disclo-
sureisﬁledwiththeuniversity’sTTO.Whiletheuniver-
sity’s success with entrepreneurial activity is measured
withavarietyofindicatorssuchasthenumberofpatents
applied DEMO and received, the number of licenses and the
amountoflicensingrevenue,andthenumberofstart-up
companies, these outcomes are only possible if individ-
ual faculty members disclose their DEMO to the univer-
sity TTO. Filing an invention disclosure is the initiating
stage of the technology transfer process, and all of the
subsequent measures of the university’s progress toward
this new organizational initiative depend on individual
DEMO disclosing their research results.
Atfacevalue,thedecisiontodiscloseresearchresults
should be straightforward. First, increased DEMO
transfer activity has become an articulated goal of the
university administration and is espoused as a strategic
initiative. Royalty-sharing incentives have been adopted
and DEMO have been organized to actively encourage
faculty participation. Second, disclosing research DEMO
to the TTO is a stipulation of federal research grants,
whichconstitutethelargestsourceofuniversityresearch
funding. Faculty may be driven to disclose to remain in
compliance with, and thus eligible for, future govern-
ment grants. Third, the costs DEMO with disclosing
an invention are negligible, and forms are readily avail-
DEMO online. Fourth, any idea may be disclosed, as there
are no objective standards that faculty discoveries are
requiredtomeettowarrantﬁlinganinventiondisclosure
with the TTO.1 Indeed, technology transfer managers
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),DEMO,©2008INFORMS
activelytrytoencouragefacultytodiscloseallideasthat
may qualify as inventions because the number of fac-
ulty disclosures is one criterion used to evaluate TTO
performance.2
Thursby et al. (2001) argue that invention disclo-
sures represent only a subset of university research with
commercial potential. Thursby and Thursby (2002) dis-
cuss reasons DEMO faculty would choose not to disclose
research results. First, faculty may DEMO disclose because
they are unwilling to spend time on the applied R&D
required to interest businesses in licensing the inven-
tion.Thisclaimisperhapscounteredbythetrendtoward
patenting basic DEMO results from projects like the
human genome which, though basic, may have imme-
diate commercial potential. Second, faculty may not
disclose because they are unwilling to risk publication
delays, which may be required to allow prospective
licensees to initiate the patenting process.3 Our inter-
views with both DEMO members and TTO ofﬁcials,
however, indicate that this is more DEMO perceptual prob-
lem than reality. There are strategies to accommodate
bothacademicandcommercialinterestsandexperienced
peers can help navigate the process. Finally, faculty
members may not disclose because they believe that
commercial activity is inappropriate for an academic.
This view DEMO an older norm of open academic
science. However, to the extent DEMO members do dis-
closeinventions,academicnormsappeartobechanging
(Krimsky 2003).
An additional concern DEMO that faculty may behave
opportunistically,bypassingthetechnologytransferpro-
cess, and not disclosing inventions DEMO commercialize
them without university involvement. Our interviews
indicatethatthisisnotasubstantialconcernascommer-
cial interests are cognizant of the potential for disputes
over intellectual property and generally require evi-
DEMO of ownership before committing funds. Potential
investors conduct due diligence to clarify the origins of
anidea,andconﬁrmthatifintellectualpropertyisbeing
claimed by the inventor, the inventor, DEMO the university,
holds the rights to the invention. In contrast to soft-
wareorelectronicdevices,biomedicalinventionsrequire
infrastructure that would be difﬁcult for an individual
or DEMO company to assemble. Furthermore, universi-
ties are increasingly active in claiming DEMO defending
their rights to intellectual property developed by faculty
under federal grants or with the use of university facili-
ties.Owen-SmithandPowell(2001b)suggestthatincen-
tivesfavordisclosureinthelifesciences,aslicensingof
DEMO patents is a demonstrated way for faculty to
earneconomicreturnsandprotectacademicfreedomfor
follow-on research. Of course, faculty participation will
be inﬂuenced by the perceptions of the competence and
capabilities of the university TTO (Colyvas et al. 2002).
These perceptions, in turn, are shaped by institutional
history and environments.
71
DEMO schools account for the majority of univer-
sity invention disclosures (Mowery DEMO Ziedonis 2002)
and are the focus of our analysis. The two universities
we study are similar in a number of ways. Both have
DEMO and renowned medical schools with a
strong emphasis on research and knowledge creation.
Both had little experience with patenting and licensing
prior to the DEMO of the Bayh-Dole Act. Both estab-
lishedTTOsinthemid-1980sand,by1991,hadadopted
similar royalty-sharing incentives for faculty inventors.
Moreover, beginning in the late 1980s and accelerating
during the 1990s, the administration of both institutions
articulated technology transfer activities as a strategic
initiative.
Yet, even within institutions, we observe signiﬁcant
differencesinfacultyparticipation.Table1demonstrates
DEMO in disclosing behavior by faculty members
in 15 matched academic departments within the med-
ical schools at these two universities.4 In most cases,
DEMO universities have a similar number of faculty mem-
bers within each department. The exceptions being Cell
Biology (Cell Anatomy and Biology) with 53 DEMO
members at University A and 19 at University B; Oph-
thalmology DEMO 34 at University A and 112 at Uni-
versity B; and DEMO (Neuroscience) with 42 at
University A and 70 at University B.
Technology transfer activity is concentrated within
certain departments at the medical schools, as demon-
strated by the number of faculty members ﬁling disclo-
sures. DEMO might expect that technological opportunity
would be greater in some ﬁelds than in others and that
thesehigh-opportunitydepartmentswouldhaveasimilar
share of faculty who disclose inventions.5 This DEMO not
appeartohold.Whatisratherstrikingisthevariationin
thenumberofdisclosuresnormalizedbydepartmentsize
or stated as the number of invention disclosure events
perfacultymember.6 Inaggregate,therewere0.384dis-
closures per faculty member at University A and 0.414
DEMO,therewassubstantialvariation
between similar departments across the two universities.
Forexample,ophthalmologyfacultymembersatUniver-
sity B averaged 1.2 disclosures each, while individual
University A ophthalmology faculty averaged 0.38 dis-
closures.Conversely,surgeryfacultymembersatUniver-
sityAwereapproximatelytwiceaslikelytobeinvolved
withdisclosingastheUniversityBsurgeryfaculty.Con-
sidering the eight departments across both universities,DEMO
where disclosure events per faculty members are rela-
tively high (greater DEMO 0.75), we see that only 50%
of the time do the similar departments at both univer-
sities fall within this set. Further, only 30% of the dis-
closure events in our data set originate from DEMO four
high-opportunity departments. While technical opportu-
nity matters, it is clearly DEMO the only driver of faculty
disclosure behavior.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
72 OrganizationScience19(1),pp.69–89,©2008INFORMS
Table 1 Invention Disclosures Are Concentrated in Different Departments Within Medical Schools
Number of faculty Number of invention
members who have ﬁled DEMO events
Number of invention disclosures
faculty Disclosure Disclosure
members Percentage of Percentage of events events
disclosing disclosing per faculty per faculty
University A University DEMO A B A faculty (%) B faculty (%) A member B member
Anesthesiology Anesthesiology 76 88 12 736 13 743 270355 23 DEMO
Cardiology Cardiovascular 43 39 11 67510 57126 0605 48 1231
division
medicine
Cell biology Cell anatomy 53 19 13 798 5 286 49 0925 DEMO 0474
and biology
Genetics Molecular 12 25 7429 4 229 23 191753 2120
biology and
genetics
Immunology Immunology 40 16 14 859 9 514 DEMO 1050 18 1125
Microbiology Biological 3737 5 3074 229 13 0351 11 0297
chemistry
Ophthalmology Ophthalmology 34 112 5 30717 97113 0382 130 1161
DEMO Pathology 62 91 11 67520 1143 25 0403 70 0769
Pharmacology Pharmacology 38 25 13 798 13 743 43 1132 40 1600
and molecular
DEMO
Radiology Radiology 61 84 8 491 10 57113 0213 270321
Neurobiology Neuroscience 42 70 14 859 22 1250 32 0762 53 0757
OB/GYN DEMO/Gyn 85 85 5 3071 0578 0094 8 0094
Pediatrics Pediatrics 121 246 11 67519 1086 14 0116 28 0114
Psychiatry Psychiatry 158 191 DEMO 552 5 286 19 0120 170089
Surgery Surgery 194 258 25 1534 23 1314 58 0299 39 0151
Total 1 056 1 386 163 DEMO 175 10000 405 0384 574 0414
Weexpectthatfacultywouldberesponsivetoﬁnancial
incentives and that there would be a direct relationship
between licensing royalty distribution rates and the
amountoftechnologytransferactivityacrossuniversities
(Lach and Schankerman 2003). Our focus on depart-
mentswithininstitutionsholdstheseratesrelativelycon-
stantbecausethereisaconvergenceinincentivesduring
the DEMO period we studied. Both universities have a
similar distribution rate with one-third of future rev-
enue going to the individual faculty member, one-third
going to the central administration, and one-third to the
department.8
Though the expected value of individual inventions
may vary, two factors limit the differentiating inﬂuence
this may have on faculty disclosure behavior. First, as
noted by Lowe and Ziedonis (2006), most faculty mem-
bers, as with other DEMO of entrepreneurs, greatly over-
estimate the value of their ideas. American DEMO
arealsoknownforbeingintenselycompetitive(Whitley
2003). Slaughter and Rhoades (2004, pp. 152–153) DEMO
that professors are familiar with stories of the success
of academic licenses and start-up companies, and liken
these stories to fairytales that can capture the imagina-
tionandsetexpectationsofpotentialvalue.Second,his-
tory has shown the payoff distribution of faculty DEMO
tions is both uncertain and highly skewed with less than
The question thus becomes: Who discloses in the
faculty, what are their characteristics, and to what
types of incentives do they respond? This intraorganiza-
tionalheterogeneityinparticipationintechnologytrans-
fer among academic departments suggests that accep-
tance of the new norms DEMO academic entrepreneur-
ship are highly localized. As such, an understanding
of DEMO individual actions as inﬂuenced by their local
social context is arguably key to promoting change at
the organizational level (Greenwood and Hinings 1996,
pp. 1023–1024). To develop hypotheses, we rely on
interviews with technology transfer ofﬁcials and fac-
ulty members.7 Every individual in the medical school
DEMO expected to conduct novel research that could yield
publications and might generate inventions with com-
mercial potential. High-prestige publications and patent
productivity increasingly are DEMO (Blumen-
thal et al. 1996, Powell and Owen-Smith 1998). Of
course, individuals differ in their inventive capacity, but
it should be DEMO that inventive capacity differs
from entrepreneurial propensity (Bercovitz and Feld-
man DEMO). While we may expect that certain ﬁelds of
researchwouldbemoreamenabletodisclosure,thelack
of objective standards indicates disclosure is an individ-
ual decision.
Downloaded from informs.org DEMO [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal DEMO only, all rights reserved.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),DEMO,©2008INFORMS
45% of active licenses receiving any licensing revenue
at all. Of those licenses that earn royalties, only 1.5%
generateanannualreturngreaterthan$1milliondollars
(AUTM 2003). DEMO, the decision to participate in tech-
nologytransfermaybeviewedasanoptiononpotential
future wealth rather than DEMO direct payoff.
Given that opportunity to disclose appears not to be
dictatedsolelybytechnologicalﬁeldandgiventhatroy-
alty distribution rates are relatively constant, this paper
focuses on the role of social interaction in the decision
of faculty members to disclose their DEMO Speciﬁ-
cally,thedecisiontodiscloseappearstobeinﬂuencedby
three categories of social interaction and organizational
learningthatwetermtrainingeffects,leadershipeffects,
and peer effects. Each of these is described below. Fur-
ther, when faced with strategic initiatives, individuals
have a variety of response options. We explore the reso-
lution of possible conﬂict between professional imprint-
ing DEMO localized norms, as well as factors underlying
variation in individual response.
DEMO Effects. Many authors have argued that
social institutions, with educational institutions DEMO a
key subset, mold individual perspective by promoting,
both implicitly DEMO explicitly, a particular set of norms
andvalues(Schein1985,Locke1985,Haas1992,Calori
DEMO al. 1997, Biglaiser 2002). DiMaggio and Powell
(1983, p. DEMO) emphasize the role universities play in
thissocializationprocess,statingthatthose“drawnfrom
the same universities DEMO ﬁltered on a common set of
attributes,  will tend to DEMO problems in a similar
fashion,seethesamepolicies,proceduresandstructures
asnormativelysanctionedandlegitimated,andapproach
decisions in much the same way.”9 Support for these
argumentsexistsacrossacademicdomains.Forexample,
in a series of DEMO, Frank et al. (1993) ﬁnd evidence
that economics students, particularly those trained by
an instructor with research interests in game theory, are
more likely to adopt self-interested behavior than their
peers.Similarly,recentworkinpoliticaleconomyshows
that the DEMO of U.S.-trained economists is a key
predictor of the adoption of various types of neoliberal
reform(forexample,tariffratereduction,capitalaccount
liberalization)inemergingmarkets(BiglaiserandBrown
2003, Chwieroth 2003). In sum, the empirical evidence
suggests that professional training can imprint a partic-
ular set of norms. Acting according to these norms, stu-
dents may serve as a critical conduit for the diffusion of
DEMO ideas and practices.
In our context, the logic of imprinting implies DEMO
individuals trained at institutions where participation in
technology transfer was actively practiced will be more
likelytoadoptthesepracticesintheirowncareers.Inter-
views support this conjecture. For example, one profes-
soractiveintechnologytransferindicatedthathelearned
about disclosing from his graduate school mentors, and
73
thisinﬂuencedhisexpectationsforaprofessionalcareer.
While he recognized that the academic culture did not
support technology transfer when DEMO joined the fac-
ulty, he believed that participating in technology trans-
DEMO would provide a vehicle for implementing his ideas.
Similarly, the current DEMO of one of the institu-
tions we studied, started as assistant DEMO in 1972.
This individual learned about technology transfer dur-
ing graduate study at Stanford University, in a very
active department in terms of involvement with indus-
try. At the current institution, he continued to actively
disclose inventions and subsequently started a company.
His expectation was that technology transfer DEMO be
part of his career. In contrast, faculty who received their
DEMO school training at institutions where technology
transfer was not perceived as a legitimate activity often
question the long-term impacts of this activity, both on
their careers and on the broader pursuit of science. Sev-
eral, including the chair of one department who trained
at Cornell, had no intention of disclosing inventions and
expressed strong sentiments against technology transfer
pursuits even DEMO this activity was supported by the
university administration. This foundation of theoreti-
cal logic and anecdotal evidence leads to the following
testable hypothesis:
DEMO 1 (H1). Individuals whose graduate train-
ing incorporated technology transfer DEMO will be
more likely to participate in technology transfer initia-
tives by disclosing innovations.
The length of time an individual has been out of
DEMO is also likely to inﬂuence their disclosure deci-
sions. As Ryder (DEMO) notes, individuals are imprinted,
to some degree, by the DEMO events that occur and
accepted norms that are prevalent during their forma-
tive stages of development. The doctoral and/or medical
trainingexperienceisclearlyaformativeperiodforaca-
demicresearchers(Cartwright1979)DEMO
(1991) conﬁrm the importance of timing in a scien-
tist’s training ﬁnding that vintage, based on the year of
doctorate degree award, DEMO scientiﬁc productivity
in their study of the research productivity of academic
scientists.10
Though never static, views about the proper role of
academic scientists in commercialization activities have
evolved considerably in the recent past, both as drivers
of, and in response to, the 1980 Bayh-Dole Act. The
historic DEMO of open science, with the goal of pub-
lication and wide DEMO of ﬁndings, was pre-
viously dominant in academic communities. Recently,
DEMO, both academic institutions and individual sci-
entists have accepted that they DEMO a responsibility to
become entrepreneurial and to work with industry to
leverageacademicresearchforcommercialpurposesand
broader economic growth. Recent studies show that it
Downloaded from informs.org by DEMO on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use DEMO, all rights reserved.
74
is becoming increasingly common for academic admin-
istrators and individual scientists DEMO consider commer-
cialization as a key part of their missions (Zucker DEMO al.
1998, Thursby and Thursby 2002, Murray 2004).
The training and exposure received by medical and
doctoral students were likely colored by DEMO evolution
in thought (Cartwright 1979). The earlier an individ-
ual DEMO her training, the more likely she is to
havebeenexposedto,andadopted,thetraditionalnorms
DEMO science that do not favor disclosing. Conversely, the
more recently trained DEMO scientist, the more likely she
encountered an environment supportive of commercial-
DEMO activity. Thus we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 2 (H2). The likelihood DEMO an individual
will engage in technology transfer through invention dis-
closure will increase the more recent the vintage of their
last graduate degree.
Leadership DEMO Leaders inﬂuence behavior in
organizations both by building culture and by acting as
role models. The visible behavior of those in leader-
shiprolesdrivesorganizationalculturebysignalingwhat
actions DEMO expected, valued, and likely to be rewarded
(House 1977, Schein 1985). Furthermore, given that
individual behavior is shaped by the observation and
imitation of others in a social context, subordinates
vicariously learn what activities are deemed legitimate
and worthy of emulation by observing the actions DEMO
theleader(Bandura1977,1986).Speciﬁcally,thestance
taken by a leader motivates a particular set of behav-
iors that inﬂuence the value systems of the followers
(Shamir et al. 1993). Culture and role-modeling cues
aremostpertinentinenvironmentsbesetwithambiguity.
For example, when the criteria for advancement are not
clearlydelineated,individualstendtoadjusttheirexpec-
tationsrelativetothebehavioroftheirleaders.Individu-
alsmayfollowtheirleaders’cuesnotonlybecausethey
haveadjustedtheirattitudesbutratherbecausetheyseek
DEMO avoid disfavor and potential sanctions.
In academic departments, the department chair DEMO the
leader. In medical schools, the power and inﬂuence of
the DEMO is particularly strong and appointments are
of long tenure. The chair plays a direct and powerful
role in reviewing and evaluating individual performance
related DEMO promotion and tenure. One contentious issue
is how technology transfer activity is treated in those
decisions.11 The rules appear to be subjective and the
DEMO for individual faculty members is to discern
how activity will be evaluated.12
One signal that the chair is predisposed to consider
technology transfer as DEMO legitimate activity would be the
observed behavior of the chair. If the chair is active in
technology transfer as demonstrated by his or her DEMO
disclosures, then he or she sends a signal that tech-
nology DEMO is a valid activity. In this case, other
members of the DEMO may be more likely to
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at DEMO Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),pp.69–89,©2008INFORMS
disclose.13 Wemightexpectthatthesesocialcueswould
be stronger for DEMO faculty members who face greater
uncertainty about expectations regarding promotion and
tenure. However, our interviews suggest that senior fac-
ulty members also benchmark their performance against
the department chair.
Hypothesis 3 (H3). Individuals in departments where
the chair is actively involved in technology transfer are
more likely DEMO engage in technology transfer activities.
LocalPeerEffects. Inadditiontoleaders,peergroups
also act as a reference point. When faced with uncer-
tainty about the proper course of DEMO, social learn-
ing theory posits that individuals will model the behav-
DEMO of referent others (Bandura 1986). Numerous prior
studies provide evidence DEMO learning activity occurs
within a cohort of peers, as individuals draw DEMO
about value by observing the choices of similar oth-
ers (Duﬂo DEMO Saez 2000, Sorensen 2002). There is an
expectation that individuals DEMO similar characteristics
will face similar payoffs from engaging in comparable
activities(EllisonandFudenberg1993).Moreover,indi-
vidualsmaylearnfromthosewithwhomtheyfrequently
interact—a localized effect in which the ability to take
DEMO a new activity is deﬁned by spatial and social prox-
imity(WrightandMischel1987).Indeed,weexpectthat
knowledge spillovers will more easily ﬂow along corri-
dors and DEMO those with frequent social interaction.
For scientists, both industrial and academic, local refer-
encegrouporpeernormshavebeenshowntoplayasig-
niﬁcantroleindeterminingindividualbehavior(Kenney
and Goe 2004, Louis et al. 1989, Pelz and Andrews
1976, Stuart and Ding 2006).
We expect DEMO individuals will be more likely to en-
gage in technology transfer activities when they observe
individuals with similar characteristics in their depart-
mentsdisclosing.Inacademiccommunities,peergroups
DEMO form based on professional rank within
departments. Social proximity in the work environment
is reinforced by spatial proximity. Having entered the
institution at a DEMO time, and facing similar issues in
managingtheircareers,thoseofsimilarranktendtolook
to each other DEMO information, advice, and examples.
Hypothesis 4 (H4). Individuals are DEMO likely to
disclose their inventions if their local peers engage in
technology transfer activities.
Whenfacingpressuretoadoptneworganizationalini-
tiatives,individualshaveavarietyofresponseoptions.If
alloftheinﬂuencesarealigned,thechoiceappearstobe
relativelysimple:theindividualwilleitherparticipate,or
not, according to the inherent logic. However, when the
training effects and organization inﬂuence are opposed,
the individual faces trade-offs. A coherent response to
these DEMO signals requires resolution that can occur
in one of two ways. First, individuals may resolve this
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights DEMO
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),DEMO,©2008INFORMS
dissonance by updating their beliefs and wholeheartedly
responding to localized social inﬂuences. In this case,
they would either engage in disclosing or DEMO, based on
the prevailing departmental logics. Second, those indi-
viduals who feel ambivalent about technology transfer
may respond symbolically—moderating their behavior
just enough DEMO gain legitimacy. This suggests two addi-
tional hypotheses that investigate individual resolution
of these conﬂicting norms.
Dissonance. Individuals may be subjected to con-
ﬂicting DEMO Speciﬁcally, there may be tension
between beliefs instilled through professional imprint-
DEMO(macro)andnormssupportedbylocal(micro)social
inﬂuences. According to dissonance theory, there is DEMO
tendency for individuals to seek consistency in their
beliefs, attitudes, and behavior (Festinger 1957).14 Rec-
onciling diverse exposures to select a particular behav-
ior requires that individuals engage in intersubjective
sensemaking (Wiley 1988, DEMO 1995). Sensemak-
ing involves a conversational and narrative process that
is likely to be mediated between those with frequent
interaction (Gephart 1993, DEMO and Johnson 2005).
Because intensity of interaction with current peers is
likely to be greater than intensity of interaction with
those associated with DEMO professional situations, it
may be argued that dissonance will often be DEMO
through conformation with the localized social norms
(Deutsch and Gerard 1955, Festinger 1957, Festinger
et al. 1950, Chattopadhyay et al. 1999).
DEMO subjected to conﬂicting inﬂuences is a com-
mon occurrence for faculty regarding technology trans-
fer issues. For example, faculty members who trained at
universities with a strong technology transfer norm may
ﬁnd themselves in departments that DEMO not actively pur-
sue commercialization. Conversely, an individual who
trained under DEMO norms may be situated with
peers who are actively engaged in technology trans-
fer. Exposure to such mixed messages can create dis-
sonance. As DEMO and Powell (2001a, pp. 221,
137)note,facultyoftenholdcontradictoryvaluessimul-
taneously, DEMO some values that ﬁt with tradi-
tional Mertonian science, while other DEMO ﬁt with the
new entrepreneurial norms. Dissonance, being psycho-
logically uncomfortable, motivates the person to take
action to reduce the discord. This can DEMO accomplished
by discounting the arguments of the group to rationalize
one’s established position or by altering current beliefs
to match those of the dominant DEMO
One of our interviews with an individual who had
been trained with the newer commercialization norms,
but had joined a department that followed DEMO older aca-
demic norms, provided a clear example of dissonance.
This DEMO disclosed immediately after arriving on
campusbutneverdisclosedsubsequently.Theinitialdis-
closure is noteworthy as it converted to a patent, was
75
subsequentlylicensedandgeneratedlicensingrevenue—
seemingly an outcome that would encourage additional
disclosure.Thisfacultymember,havingjoinedadepart-
ment that did not value commercialization efforts, was
ﬁrmly told that patenting was not an appropriate activ-
ity for faculty in DEMO department. While this individual
believed that ﬁling the disclosure was appropriate given
his prior training, he found himself at odds with the
expectations of his new position. This led him to ques-
tion his initial position, and subsequently, he chose to
adhere to the values of his peer group, directing his
attention to the more traditional academic outlets.
Both the theoretical logic and our interviews sug-
gest that localized social norms may DEMO the individ-
ual norms instilled via professional training when these
norms are in conﬂict. As such, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 5 (H5). DEMO individuals are faced with
a situation where their individual training norms are not
congruent with the localized social norms in the work
environment, they will conform to the localized, rather
than individual, norms.
Symbolic Compliance. DEMO
close inventions indicates compliance with the uni-
versity’s technology transfer initiative. However, this
observedbehaviormayormaynotindicatethattheindi-
vidual has adopted the new norms of behavior: They
DEMO simply be going through the motions and comply-
ingattheminimumlevel.AlvessonandWillmott(1992)
ﬁnd that, in the face of new organization initiatives,
some employees experience what they term microeman-
cipation,agenuinevaluereorientation,becomingalmost
evangelical in their pursuit of DEMO organizational initia-
tive. This may be regarded as a substantive adoption of
new norms and signals a change in the individual’s atti-
tude. However, it is also possible that social pressure
may induce only symbolic compliance: Some individu-
als may comply with organizational initiatives simply to
avoid sanctions (O’Reilly et al. 1991).15 For example, a
recent study of responses to new National Institutes of
Health (NIH) requirements for ethics training DEMO that
life science faculty take minimal action so as to appear
tofollowthenewguidelineswhile,intruth,resistingthe
real change the initiative seeks (Smith-Doerr 2006).
Individualswhoengageinsymboliccompliancewould
be expected to disclose nominally, perhaps only once
a period. In contrast, DEMO who have undergone
microemancipationwoulddisclosefrequently.Weexpect
that these two groups may respond to different motives
in their disclosure decision. Substantive disclosers are
likely to be strongly DEMO by peers as congru-
encebetweenindividualandorganizationalvaluesisone
product of social identiﬁcation (O’Reilly and DEMO
1986). Symbolic disclosers, on the other hand, may
be less responsive to the localized pressure from their
cohort, but may be more inﬂuenced by the possibility
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August DEMO, at 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
76
of organizational sanctions. Our interviews suggest that
symbolic individuals are more DEMO to legal rules
andauthority.Certainly,inourexample,individualswith
NIH grants may engage in symbolic compliance to con-
form to agency guidelines. Further, we would expect
symbolicdiscloserstotakeheedofthepositionofthose
with authority to enforce the rules—in our context this
would be the DEMO chair. Thus we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 6 (H6). Symbolic compliers DEMO respond
more to formal organizational mandates than substan-
tive adopters.
Data, DEMO, and Methods
Our empirical analysis uses an original database com-
piled DEMO administrative records at two prominent
researchuniversitieswithmedicalschools.Wehavedata
for faculty members across 15 matched departments in
the two medical schools for the academic years 1991–
1999. DEMO selection of departments was constrained by
the degree to which departments were present at both
universities. Under the advice of medical school faculty,
DEMO selected closely aligned departments—that is, places
wheresimilarworkwasbeingdonedespiteslightdiffer-
ences in the name DEMO the academic departments.
The15departmentsusedinouranalysisarepresented
in Tables 1 and 2. We examined basic science depart-
ments such as cell biology, genetics, and immunology.
These DEMO high-opportunity departments in which we
expect basic scientiﬁc discoveries that may easily lead
to invention disclosures. Our analysis also included a
set of clinical DEMO that provide primary patient
care and are oriented toward a speciﬁc specialty such
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),pp.69–89,©2008INFORMS
as cardiology, ophthalmology, pediatrics, or psychiatry.
These departments DEMO the largest number of medi-
cal school faculty. While the department names suggest
a primary focus on patient care, the expectation is that
faculty members also have an active research program.
Finally,ourselectionincludeddepartmentssuchasanes-
thesiology, pathology, DEMO, and surgery that are
orientedtowardprovidingpatientservicesandareancil-
larytootherdepartments.Thesedepartmentsaretermed
nexus departments. Our interviews suggest DEMO faculty
in these departments may be in a position to engage
in greater inventive activity because they consult with
multiple departments and may have DEMO opportunity
to learn from other faculty members. In addition, our
interviews DEMO that nexus departments have a prac-
tical problem-solving focus that promotes user-deﬁned
inventions.
Table2demonstratesthegreatvariationintherankof
facultymemberswhodiscloseineachdepartment.16 For
example, at University A Medical School, nearly DEMO
of the junior faculty in Pharmacology disclosed in the
three-year period, DEMO only about a quarter of senior
faculty disclosed. Yet, in the DEMO Department, all
senior faculty members disclosed, while only just over
a quarter of junior faculty members disclosed. Table 2
provides information on department DEMO who had dis-
closuresinthepriortimeperiod.AtUniversityAMedi-
calSchool,9ofthe15chairshadahistoryofdisclosing,
while 7 of the 15 chairs had a history of disclosing at
University B.
We model the DEMO of disclosing in the current
timeperiodasafunctionofactivityobservedduringthe
prior time period. We have a simple two-period model.
Thedecisiontoﬁledisclosuresattime t isafunctionof
Table 2 Difference in Disclosures by DEMO School Faculty by Department
University A faculty disclosing: University B faculty DEMO:
1996–1998 1996–1998
Percentage of faculty Percentage of faculty
disclosing (%) disclosing (%)
Chair Full Associate Assistant Chair Assistant Associate Assistant
Department Type discloses professor professor professor discloses professor professor professor
Anesthesiology Nexus No DEMO 24 15 No 20 19 13
Cardiology Clinical Yes 33 31 17Yes 29 46 25
Cellbiology Basic Yes 270 39 No 17 25 60
DEMO Basic No 100 100 29 Yes 54 50 50
Immunology Basic Yes 54 20 25 Yes 60 5775
Microbiology Basic Yes 38 0 25 DEMO 45 17100
Ophthalmology Clinical Yes 38 0 16 No 28 14 15
Pathology Nexus Yes 25 10 13 Yes 2726 35
Pharmacology Basic Yes DEMO 25 47Yes 69 100 66
Radiology Nexus No 24 5 12 Yes 31 23 10
Neurobiology Basic Yes 30 38 33 No 41 58 DEMO
OB/GYN Clinical No 0 33 5 No 29 0 2
Pediatrics Clinical Yes 21 12 2 No 13 177
Psychiatry Clinical No 10 DEMO No 5 5 3
Surgery Nexus No 13 29 8 No 26 15 7
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),DEMO,©2008INFORMS
77
individualattributesandthebehaviorofthelocalcohort timingeffectassociatedwiththeindividual’straining,or
experienceyears,wemeasurethenumberofyearssince
the faculty member received their last advanced degree.
To explore the inﬂuence of key leadership on fac-
DEMO propensity to disclose, we include a dummy vari-
ableindicatingwhetherornotthechairhasdisclosedan
inventiontotheTTOinthe1991–1995timeperiod.This
variable DEMO coded 1 for yes, and 0 for no. It should be
DEMO that the chairs of the medical school departments
typically hold this leadership position for extended peri-
ods of time and there was no turnover DEMO the chair in
any of the departments during the period studied. We
deﬁne an individual’s cohort as those individuals of the
same rank in DEMO same department. The cohort effect is
measured as the percentage of faculty at the same rank
within the department who disclosed in the 1991–1995
DEMO period.17
Weincludeseveralcontrolvariablesintheestimation.
First,academicscientistsmayonlyﬁledisclosureswhen
they have results to disclose. Research productivity will
matter.Tocontrolforthisvariation,wecollecteddataon
thetotalnumbersofpublicationsinthe1991–1995time
periodforeachofthescientistsinourdatabaseusingISI
WebofScience.Next,disclosurebehaviormaybeinﬂu-
enced by the quality of the DEMO faculty member
and the overall quality of the department. One measure
ofacademicqualityisresearchawardsfromNIH,which
is the most prominent source of medical school and life
sciences DEMO in the world. These research awards
are highly competitive and may be interpreted as a sign
of ability to conduct high-quality research. To control
DEMO the potential effect of individual ability, we include
a dollar measure DEMO NIH funding received by each fac-
ulty member in the previous time period. To control for
departmental quality, we use the amount of NIH fund-
ing received by the department in 1998, normalized by
department size.18
In addition, we also include two controls for indi-
vidual inventive capacity. Entrepreneurial research has
shownthatindividualswithinterdisciplinaryeducational
backgroundsarebetterpositionedtorecognize,andthen
act upon, innovation opportunities (Venkataraman DEMO,
Shane 2000). One sign of a breadth of knowledge is the
subsequentappointmentofafacultymembertomultiple
departments. As such, we include a boundary-spanning
dummy variable, DEMO 1, if the faculty member is
associated with more than one DEMO department.
A second indication of breadth of knowledge is the
attainmentofmultiplegraduatedegrees.Individualswho
hold both a Ph.D. and an M.D. are expected to have
training that DEMO research and practical appli-
cation. In this respect, they may be DEMO an advantageous
position to develop new inventions with an eye to the
commercial potential. Thus we include a dummy vari-
able,codedas1,tocapturethoseindividualshavingboth
M.D.’s DEMO Ph.D.’s. We also control for the number of
observed in the time period, t − 1. Our dependent vari-
able indicates disclosure activity in the academic year
1996–1997 through the academic year 1998–1999. We
usedathree-yearwindowtotrackdisclosures,chosento
DEMO a reasonable time period during which an indi-
vidual faculty member might have results to disclose.
The dependent variable is equal to zero if DEMO individ-
ual did not ﬁle an invention disclosure in the three-year
windowfor1996–1998.Thedependentvariableisequal
to one if the individual ﬁled one or more invention dis-
closures.Theprobabilityofdisclosingisestimatedusing
DEMO probit model (Maddala 1983).
The independent variables are measured for DEMO prior
time period, academic year 1991–1992 through aca-
demicyear1995–1996.Thisstudyperiodreﬂectsatime
of relative DEMO in terms of technology transfer poli-
cies at both institutions. Both TTOs opened in the late
1980s and had become established by 1991. Personnel
DEMO, university course catalogues and archival data
wereusedtobuildrecordsforfacultymembers.Dataon
disclosures are from the DEMO of the TTOs at the two
universities.
To test our hypothesis, DEMO ﬁrst estimate the training,
leadership, and cohort effects on the DEMO ﬁling of
disclosures. We use three variables to investigate train-
ing effects. The ﬁrst two variables capture the technol-
ogy transfer culture of the DEMO where the faculty
member received their graduate training. Certain uni-
versities have historically had greater receptiveness to,
andgreaterinvolvementin,technologytransferactivities
than others. The intensity DEMO a university’s technology
transfer culture can be proxied using the institution’s
patenting history (Mowery and Ziedonis 2002). We cal-
culatethetotalnumberofpatentsappliedforbyanindi-
vidual’s graduate institution in the ﬁve years preceding
the date of the faculty member’s graduate DEMO This
is intended to capture the activity at the time that the
individualwasintrainingattheinstitution.Totheextent
thatindividuals’attitudestowardtechnologytransferare
inﬂuenced by norms that they are exposed to during
training,DEMO
tiesactiveinpatentingwillhaveagreaterpredisposition
toward technology transfer, ceteras paribus. Stanford,
mentionedseveraltimesinfacultyinterviews,standsout
as DEMO well-known example of a protechnology transfer
university with a strong history of patenting activity. As
such,wecodeaStanforddummyvariableequaltooneif
an individual has an advanced degree from DEMO, as
a simple alternative measure of protechnology transfer
imprinting.
Our third DEMO of protechnology transfer exposure
explicitly captures the era in which the faculty member
was trained. As noted earlier, the acceptance of technol-
ogy transfer activities at most universities has increased
substantially over the past few decades. DEMO capture the
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, DEMO 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),DEMO,©2008INFORMS
The range was from 0 to 114, a highly skewed DEMO
bution with a mean of 5.33 and a standard deviation of
9.96. To provide sufﬁcient representation in each quad-
rant, the threshold used to characterize protech transfer
training environments was 19 patents at the graduate
institution (mean +15 standard deviations). There were
147transfer norms.25 + 122 individuals DEMO trained with protech
The majority of the academics are aligned toward the
traditional norms. Cell IV, individuals whose training
andsocialsituationarealignedandprovidenoincentive
to engage in invention disclosure, is the most populous
in the database. Cell I, the DEMO transfer alignment
cell, has the fewest members. These 25 individuals both
DEMO with tech transfer norms and were located in
cohortsthatwereactivelydisclosing,reﬂectinganalign-
ment of training and local environment. As expected,
virtually all of these individuals DEMO and were
amongthemostactivedisclosersinourstudy.Bothcells
that reﬂect individuals facing dissonance are populated
at a moderate level. Cell III captures individuals who
trained with the newer norms DEMO academic entrepreneur-
ship, but now face local cohorts who are not DEMO
engaged in technology transfer. We coded dummy vari-
ables to reﬂect which quadrant the individual inhabited.
To test H6, the differences between symbolic and
substantive disclosers, we deﬁne new dependent vari-
ables. Symbolic is a dummy variable equal to one for
thoseindividualswhodisclosedonceinthecurrenttime
periodandhadnomorethanonedisclosureintheprevi-
ous time period. Substantive is DEMO dummy variable equal
to one if the individual had more than one disclosure
in the current time period. There were 168 symbolic
individuals and DEMO individuals who were considered
substantive.
DescriptivestatisticsarepresentedinTable3andcor-
relations are in Table 4. Correlations are generally low
tomoderate.Multicollinearityisgenerallynotaproblem
for the estimations.
Results
Table5providesresultsformedicalschoolfacultymem-
bers in the DEMO departments at the two medical
schools.20 Model (1) provides a baseline model. The
number of publications in the prior time period has a
DEMO
sity to disclose in the current time period p < 001.
This ﬁnding, in line with prior research, suggests that
commercializationactivityandtraditionalacademicpub-
lication activity DEMO complementary (Powell and Owen-
Smith 1998, Stuart and Ding 2006, DEMO et al. 1998).
als 25 + 181 in cohorts where technology transfer had Each additional publication increases the likelihood of
disclosing by 0.1%. DEMO number of disclosures in the
prior time period also has a strong and statistically sig-
niﬁcant effect on the propensity to disclose in the DEMO
rent time period. This is, of course, to be expected as
78
Figure 1 Alignment Between Training Norms and Localized
Social Norms
Localized
DEMO norms Tech transfer norms No tech transfer norms
Training
Cohort active I. Alignment toward II. Pressure to
in disclosing disclosure n = 25 disclosure DEMO = 181
New norms = 1 Pressured=1
Cohort not active III. Pressure to revert IV. Alignment toward
in disclosing toward traditional traditional norms
norms DEMO = 122n=1452
Leading edge = 1 Traditional norms =1
previousdisclosuresforeachfacultymember;weexpect
thoseindividualswhohavedisclosedinthepasttolikely
continue this behavior.
As a rough measure of technical opportunity, we
includedummyvariablestocontrolfordepartmenttype,
basic science and nexus, with clinical as the omitted
variable. We add rank dummy variables to control for
faculty rank and a non-U.S. DEMO to capture the
effects of having been trained at a foreign institution.
Finally, we include a university dummy variable to con-
trol for heterogeneity between the two TTOs and other
institutional differences between the two universities.
DEMO test H5, the effect of dissonance, we include a set
ofindependentvariablestoconsiderhowtheindividual’s
training experience may be situated in a local environ-
ment.AccordingtothematrixinFigure1,therearefour
potential DEMO depending on whether the indi-
vidual had been exposed to technology transfer norms
during his or her professional training and whether the
individual was DEMO of a cohort that was active in dis-
closing. In the two groups along the diagonal, the train-
ing norms and local norms are aligned (Cells I and IV),
and in the other two DEMO, these norms are in conﬂict
(Cells II and III).
To characterize the local work environment, we con-
sider cohort participation in the prior time period.19 The
mean cohort participation was 0.176 with a standard
DEMO of 0.154. We used the mean plus one stan-
darddeviationasthethresholdforasufﬁcientnumberof
individualsparticipatingintechtransfertocreatealocal
work environment that favored the new norms of active
technology transfer. If one-third DEMO more of the cohort
participated in tech transfer, we consider the DEMO work
environment to be favorable toward technology trans-
fer.Iflessthanone-thirdofthecohortparticipated,then
the traditional norms prevail. There were 206 individu-
gained traction.
Next,tocharacterizetheindividual’strainingenviron-
ment, we use patenting activity at the graduate institu-
tion in the ﬁve years DEMO the individual was training.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights DEMO
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),DEMO,©2008INFORMS
Table 3 Descriptive Statistics
Variable Mean Std. dev. Min. Max.
Disclosure ﬁled in current time period 0170 0376 0 1
Number of disclosures, current time period 0391 1475 0 36
Years since last graduate degree DEMO 9401 3 60
Graduate institution patent activity 5325 9959 0 114
Stanford graduate degree dummy variable 0014 0118 0 1
Chair discloses, prior time period 0375 0484 0 1
Cohort disclosures, prior time period 0176 0154 0 1
Outside cohort disclosures, prior time period 0191 0135 0.020 0.830
Number of papers 13892 21583 0 470
Number of previous disclosures 0515 DEMO 0 31
Non-U.S. degree 0113 03170 1
Boundary-spanning individual 03370473 0 1
Dual degree, holds both Ph.D. and M.D. 0074 0262 0 1
Full professor 0260 0439 0 1
Assistant professor 0458 0498 0 1
Individual DEMO awards ($1,000) 614991 1,864.046 0 19,597
Department NIH awards ($1,000) 157667297726 2.955 2,000
Basic science department 0142 DEMO 0 1
Nexus science department 0411 0492 0 1
University dummy variable 0496 0500 0 1
Symbolic participant in invention disclosures 0094 0292 0 DEMO
Substantive participant in invention disclosures 0076 0265 0 1
Leading edge (DEMO 1: Cell III) 0069 0253 0 1
Pressured (Figure 1: Cell II) 0102 0302 0 1
79
individuals tend to repeat established behaviors. Those
whohavepreviouslydisclosedarelikelytocontinuethis
behavior if the experience was reasonable. Interestingly,
the DEMO of individual NIH funding is not statisti-
cally signiﬁcant in this estimation. Individual quality, as
captured by individual NIH awards, does not appear DEMO
play a deterministic role in promoting disclosure activ-
ity. However, we DEMO ﬁnd that department quality, as
captured by departmental NIH awards, is positively and
signiﬁcantly related to disclosure activity p < 001.
Faculty members DEMO higher quality academic depart-
mentsaremorelikelytoparticipateintechnologytrans-
fer activities. Faculty trained outside the United States
are also signiﬁcantly more likely to disclose inventions
thanthosetrainedintheUnitedStates p < DEMO
ﬁnding is consistent with other studies that document
highlevelsofentrepreneurialactivityinmanyimmigrant
communities (Aldrich DEMO, Saxenian 2002).
Measures of training breadth also contribute explana-
tory DEMO First, the coefﬁcient on the dual-degree
dummy variable is positive and DEMO p < 0001.
Individuals having earned both an M.D. and a Ph.D.
show a greater propensity to disclose than colleagues
with single degrees. Holding DEMO degrees increases
the probability of disclosing by 13%. We also ﬁnd a
strongpositiverelationshipbetweenoccupyingabound-
ary position at the medical school and the likelihood of
disclosure. DEMO spanning individuals, those with
appointments in more than one academic department,DEMO
are 4% more likely to disclose. Faculty in basic science
and nexus departments are signiﬁcantly more likely to
disclose than faculty in clinical departments, the omit-
ted category. This may reﬂect the more patient-oriented
nature of DEMO like pediatrics and psychiatry,
however, it should be noted that DEMO in these
departments do disclose inventions, and the expectation
at prominent DEMO schools is that all faculty conduct
research. Academic rank, using the DEMO of associate
professorastheomittedcategory,isnotstatisticallysig-
niﬁcant in this speciﬁcation. Finally, we ﬁnd DEMO signiﬁ-
cant differences between the two universities.
Model (2) builds on the basic speciﬁcation by adding
the training (social imprinting) variables. The DEMO
tory power of the model increases signiﬁcantly with
the addition of the independent variables of theoretical
interest. A likelihood ratio test comparing Model (2) to
Model (1) is signiﬁcant with a p -value less than 0.01.
Experience years, calculated as the number of years
since the last graduate degree, is negatively and sig-
niﬁcantly related to participation in technology trans-
fer p < 0001: the probability of disclosing decreases
by 1% for each year since the completion of gradu-
ate study. This result, which supports H2, indicates that
the earlier an individual completed her training, the less
likely she was to pursue commercialization opportuni-
ties. Model (DEMO) also adds in the inﬂuence of completing
graduate training at historically DEMO transfer
institutions. The coefﬁcient on the institution patent
activity variable is positive and signiﬁcant p < 005.
A 1% increase in patenting activity at DEMO institution
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at DEMO:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
Table 4 Correlations
Variable 1 23456789 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 DEMO 21 22 23
1 Disclosure ﬁled in 100
current time period
2 Years since last −015 100
graduate degree
3 Graduate institution 015 −049 DEMO
patent activity
4 Stanford graduate 016 −005 021 100
degree
5 Chair discloses, 019 001 001 008 100
prior time period
6 Cohort discloses, prior 026 008 003 011 048 100
time period
7Outsidecohortdiscloses, 017 DEMO 006 013 057032 100
prior time period
8 Number of papers 023 000 005 003 012 029 005 100
9 Number of previous 039 DEMO 006 011 014 028 013 038 100
disclosures
10 Non-U.S. degree 005 001 −018 −004 −001 000 −003 −006 −002 100
11 Boundary-spanning 016 DEMO 004 004 013 026 010 024 015 000 100
individual
12 Dual degree, holds 016 −010 012 011 012 016 010 007008 −001 016 100
both Ph.D. and M.D.
13 Full professor 010 039 −020 001 DEMO 039 −004 034 016 −002 018 001 100
14 Assistant professor −011 −031 017 −003 −014 −043 003 −033 −015 000 −024 −008 −054 DEMO
15 Individual NIH 016 010 −004 001 012 024 005 038 024 −002 015 006 032 −023 100
awards ($1,000)
16 Department NIH 009 −005 003 000 036 018 016 006 004 −002 −008 DEMO 008 −009 004 100
awards ($1,000)
17Basicscience 020 −002 DEMO 013 048 037029 011 015 −006 017009 016 −016 017009 100
department
18 Nexus science 001 −004 000 −004 −012 008 004 001 000 DEMO 008 000 −001 002 −004 −023 −034 100
department
19 University dummy
variable
20 Symbolic participation 071 −010 009 004 010 009 009 011 DEMO 001 010 006 005 −007010 005 009 003
in invention disclosures
21 Substantive 063 −011 012 018 016 027014 020 045 006 012 017009 DEMO 011 008 019 −002
participation in
inventions disclosures
22 Leading edge 007 −032 075010 −005 −009 −001 003 000 −010 000 004 −016 017 DEMO 003 002 000
23 Pressured 018 010 −007010 042 068 033 017019 003 022 009 027 −025 021 008 033 −001
−005 008 −013 DEMO 014 −014 004 −009 −006 −005 −023 −007 −001 009 −003 −005 006 −001 100
−003 100
−003 −009 1.00
−008 n/a n/DEMO 100
−010 n/a n/a −009 1.00
80
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),pp.69–89,©2008INFORMS
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),DEMO,©2008INFORMS
81
Table 5 Probability of Disclosing
Probit model: Dependent variable DEMO disclosure ﬁled 0 1
Variables Model (1) Model (2) Model (3) Model (4) Model (5) Model (6)
Years since last −0031
graduate degree 0006
Graduate institution 0010∗ 0010∗∗ 0009∗ 0009∗
DEMO activity 0004000400040004
Stanford graduate degree 0880∗∗
0294
Chair discloses, prior time DEMO 0112
period 01030111
Cohort disclosures, prior 0553∗ 0558∗
time period 03150305
DEMO cohort disclosures, 0422
prior time period 0310
Number of papers 0005∗∗ DEMO 0003+ 0003+ 0004∗ 0004∗
000200020002000200020002
Number of prior 0362∗∗∗ 0348∗∗∗ 0339∗∗∗ 0342∗∗∗ 0336∗∗∗ 0335∗∗∗
disclosures 003300330033003300340034
Non-U.S. degree 0351∗∗ 0446∗∗∗ 0394∗∗∗ 0438∗∗∗ 0428∗∗∗ 0432∗∗∗
DEMO
Boundary-spanning 0190∗ 0183∗ 0188∗ 0166+ 0189∗ 0193∗
individual 008800900090009000900090
Dual degree, DEMO both 0500∗∗∗ 0418∗∗∗ 0413∗∗ 0406∗∗ 0407∗∗ 0403∗∗
Ph.D. and M.D. 012901310132013101310132
Full professor −0070 0196+ 0189 0202+
0108011601170117
Assistant professor −0011 −0202+
00980104
Individual DEMO awards 0011 0020 0021 0019 0026 0027
002100220022002200210021
Department NIH awards 0396∗∗∗ 0338∗∗ 0348∗∗ 0228+ 0264∗ 0294∗
012301240124013801380129
Basic science department 0623∗∗∗ 0537∗∗∗ 0524∗∗∗ DEMO 0422∗∗ 0438∗∗∗
011501180119013401350129
Nexus science department 0250∗∗ 0225∗ 0230∗ 0195∗ 0166+ 0157
009300960096009700980099
University dummy variable −0020 0049 0033 00270035 0050
008200850084008600870085
Constant −1696∗∗∗ DEMO −
01140191
−0188+ −0205∗
01040104
0867∗∗∗ −1043∗∗∗ −1319∗∗∗ −1376∗∗∗
0172019201680172
∗∗∗ −0037∗∗∗ −0032∗∗∗ −0025∗∗∗ −0024∗∗∗
0006000600060006
N
Log likelihood
Pseudo R2
1,780 1,DEMO 1,780 1,780 1,780 1,780
−632685
−607346
−605560
−605587
−609124
−608715
0221 0252 0254 0254 0250 0251
Note. Two-tailed tests for DEMO, one-tailed tests for hypothesized variables.
+p<010, ∗ p<005, DEMO<001, ∗∗∗p<0001.
where an individual received his or her graduate DEMO
ing is associated with a 0.2% increase in the proba-
bility that the individual will disclose. In Model (3),
we use the DEMO measure of protechnology cul-
tureimprinting—receivingagraduatedegreefromStan-
ford. The effect of training at Stanford University, an
institutionthatisparticularlyprotechnologytransferwas
mentioned in several interviews. The coefﬁcient on the
Stanforddegreedummyispositiveandsigniﬁcant.Hold-
ingaStanforddegreeincreasestheprobabilityofengag-
ingintechnologytransferby27%,allotherthingsbeing
equal. Thus, H1 is also supported: individuals whose
DEMO
tives are more likely to disclose inventions.
Though generally consistent, there DEMO one notewor-
thy change to the control variables between Model (1)DEMO
and Models (2) and (3). With the addition of DEMO social
imprinting variables, the rank controls become signiﬁ-
cant with full DEMO more likely, and assistant pro-
fessors less likely to disclose, as compared to associate
professors.Theseresultsareinlinewiththehumancap-
ital argument that those individuals who are well DEMO
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:DEMO . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
82
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),pp.69–89,©2008INFORMS
Table 6 Probability of Disclosing: Department Fixed Effects
Probit DEMO: Dependent variable = disclosure ﬁled 0 1
Variables Model (1) DEMO (cont’d.) Model (1)
Years since last graduate degree
Graduate DEMO patent activity 0
Chair discloses, prior time period 0
Cohort disclosures, prior time period 0499+ (0.364) Genetics department 0489+ (0.284)
Outside cohort disclosures, prior time period 0193 (0.402) Immunology department 0334 (DEMO)
Number of papers 0004 (0.002) Neurobiology department 0300∗∗ (0.230)DEMO
Number of prior disclosures 0334∗∗∗
Non-U.S. degree 0427∗∗∗
Boundary-spanning training 0164+ (DEMO) Pathology department 00135 (0.207)
Dual degrees, both M.D. and DEMO 0
Individual NIH awards 0
Department NIH awards 0227(0.290) Psychiatrydepartment
DEMO dummy variable 0044 (0.091) Radiology department
Constant −1180∗∗∗ (0.211)
DEMO 1,780
Log likelihood
Pseudo R2
−0024∗∗∗ (0.005) Anesthesiology department 0168 (0.171)
008∗ (0.004) Cardiology department −0103 (0.435)
100 (0.153) Cell biology department 0028 (0.250)
(0.034) Obstetrics department DEMO (0.229)
(0.123) Ophthalmology department 0187(0.190)
407∗∗ (0.133) Pediatrics department −0096 (0.155)
030 (0.021) Pharmacology department 0053∗∗ (0.285)
−0440∗ (0.188)
−0079 (0.200)
−603251
0.257
Note. DEMO tests for controls, one-tailed tests for hypothesized variables.
+p<010, ∗ p<005, ∗∗p<001, ∗∗∗p<0001.
lished in their academic careers DEMO be more likely to
leverage their reputations for commercial gain (Stephan
DEMO Levin 1992).
Model(4)investigatestheeffectofthechair’sdisclos-
ing behavior and ﬁnds some evidence of a leadership
effect p < 005.Itappearsthat,toasigniﬁcantdegree,
individualfacultymodeltheirtechnologytransferbehav-
ior on DEMO example set by their department chair. As
showninModel(4),ifthechairhasdisclosedanyinven-
tions DEMO the TTO in the past ﬁve years, then the prob-
ability DEMO the faculty member will disclose increases
by4%.Thus,H3alsoreceivesinitialsupport.Model(5)
considerstheinﬂuenceanindividual’scohorthasondis-
closure activity. The coefﬁcient on the cohort variable
is positive and signiﬁcant (p<005), suggesting that an
individual’sdisclosurechoiceisswayedbytheactionsof
thoseofsimilarrankwithinthedepartment,aspredicted
by H4. We ﬁnd DEMO a 1% increase in the percentage
offacultydisclosingwithintherelevantcohortincreases
the probability of an individual disclosing by 12%.
Model (5) includes all independent variables of inter-
DEMO The coefﬁcients remain consistent for most vari-
ables, however, the chair effect is no longer statistically
signiﬁcant. This may be because of multicolinearity
DEMO(rho =048).The
effect of cohort appears to dominate over the inﬂuence
of the chair.
Robustness Checks. Though the result in Model (5)
is supportive of a local peer effect, it is possible that
this ﬁnding arises because of shared unobserved char-
acteristics of the department. Common DEMO
couldleadtocommonalityofbehaviorwithoutimitation
(Bikhchandanietal.1992).Manski(2000)notesthatone
problem that plagues social learning research DEMO unob-
served heterogeneity, the ability to distinguish endoge-
nous interactions from DEMO effects. To investigate
this issue, we ran an additional model that DEMO
an other cohort variable, those individuals in the same
department but DEMO a different rank, as well as the own
cohortvariable.Speciﬁcally,inModel(6),weinvestigate
whether an individual’s disclosure decision is differen-
tiallyinﬂuencedbytheactionsofindividualsinsidever-
susoutsidethefocalcohort.Underthisspeciﬁcation,the
coefﬁcient DEMO own cohort remains positive and signiﬁ-
cant, while the coefﬁcient for DEMO other cohort variable,
although positive, does not reach statistical signiﬁcance.
DEMO that only own cohort effects are important indi-
catesthatsociallearning,ratherthandepartmentalunob-
served variables, is driving our results.
The results hold when we include departmental ﬁxed
effects. Table 6 estimates the model with departmental
ﬁxed effects. Fourteen academic DEMO are listed
with surgery as the omitted department.
As a further robustness check, we estimate a nega-
tive binomial model with the count of the number of
disclosures in the second time period, as the dependent
variable.Thenumberofcurrentdisclosuresrangedfrom
0 to 36, with overdispersion (mean =039 and standard
effects DEMO for the number of disclosures that an indi-deviation = 148). Table 7 demonstrates that the basic
vidual ﬁles.
Analternateexplanationforourﬁndingscouldbethat
selection,ratherthansocialization,drivesthedepartmen-
tal DEMO Speciﬁcally, it could be argued that instead
of being inﬂuenced by DEMO action of leaders and peers,
individuals predisposed to technology transfer are hired
in departments supportive of this activity. To test for
Downloaded from DEMO by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For DEMO use only, all rights reserved.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),DEMO,©2008INFORMS
Table 7 Number of Disclosures
Negative binomial model: Dependent
variable DEMO number of current disclosures
Variables Model (1)
Years since last DEMO degree −0088∗∗∗ (0.018)
Graduate institution patent activity 0020+ (0.013)
Chair discloses, prior time period 0357(0.386)
Cohort disclosures, prior DEMO period 2445∗∗ (0.964)
Outside cohort disclosures, prior −0209 (1.058)DEMO
time period
Number of papers 0004∗ (0.002)
Number of prior DEMO 0795∗∗∗ (0.055)
Non-U.S. degree 1394∗∗∗ (0.382)
Boundary-spanning individual 0478+ (0.284)
Dual degree, both Ph.D. and M.D. 1196∗∗ (0.402)
Individual NIH awards 0096 (0.063)
Department NIH awards 1020∗ (0.433)DEMO
Basic science department 1182∗∗ (0.423)
Nexus science department 0600+ (0.317)
University dummy variable 0340 (0.274)
Constant −4196∗∗∗ (0.589)
DEMO 1,780
Log likelihood −1165384
Pseudo R2 0.164
Notes. Two-tailed tests for controls, one-tailed tests for
hypothesized variables.
+p<010, ∗ p<005, ∗∗p<001, ∗∗∗p<0001.
selection effects, we looked at the 190 DEMO that
were hired by either of the two universities in 1991, DEMO
ﬁrst year of our panel. If selection was, in fact, a dom-
inant determinant of the disclosure dynamic, we would
expect to ﬁnd evidence that department chairs with a
history of disclosure would want to DEMO technol-
ogy transfer activity and might hire individuals whose
training suggested that they might be more inclined to
engage in commercial activity. An independent DEMO
t test showed that there was no statistically signiﬁcant
difference(t =1605; p>010)inthelikelihoodthatan
individual having a dual (both Ph.D. and M.D.) degree
would be hired into a department in which the chair
activelydisclosed,DEMO
didnotparticipateintechnologytransferactivities.Simi-
larly,inasecondindependentsamples t test,thehypoth-
esis that the means of the patenting activity of the new
hires’ graduate institutions were equal across depart-
DEMO,ledbytechnologytransferactiveversusnonactive
chairs, could not be rejected (t =1638; p>010)DEMO
As an additional test for selection effects, we ran the
analysis DEMO faculty who earned their degree prior to
1980 and joined the faculty prior to 1985. Before the
passage of the Bayh-Dole Act in 1980, neither univer-
sity in our sample had active technology transfer pro-
grams—thoughbothestablishedTTOsinthelate1980s.
DEMO the schools did not operate with commercial-
izationintentpriorto1985,thereislittleriskthatbefore
thispointnewfacultywereselectedbasedonbeingpre-
83
Table 8 Faculty Members Facing Conﬂicting Norms
Probit model: Dependent variable = disclosure ﬁled 0 1
Negative binomial model: Dependent
variable = number of current disclosures
Negative
Probit model binomial model
Variables Model (1) Model (2)
Leading edge 0190 0245
01520246
Pressured 0210+ 0414∗
01320195
Years since DEMO −0027∗∗∗ −0048∗∗∗
graduate degree 00050009
Number of papers 0004∗ 0014∗∗
00340043
Non-U.S. degree 0385∗∗∗ 0842∗∗∗
01180182
Boundary-spanning individual 0216∗ 0279+
00910145
Dual degree, both Ph.D. and M.D. 0415∗∗ 0668∗∗∗
02100210
Individual NIH awards 0023 0048
00210040
DEMO NIH awards 0368∗∗ 0639∗∗∗
01250192
Basic science department 0476∗∗∗ 0850∗∗∗
01260195
Nexus science department 0215∗ 0451∗∗
00960162
University dummy variable 0051 0284∗
00850138
Constant DEMO −1850∗∗∗
01500259
N 1,755 1,755
Log likelihood −599522 −1032011
Pseudo R2 0235 0149
Notes. Two-tailed tests for controls, one-tailed tests for hypothe-
sized variables.
+p<010, ∗ p<005, ∗∗p<001, ∗∗∗p<0001.
disposedtowarddisclosing.Thus,ifwerestrictoursam-
ple to those hired before technology transfer became an
organizational DEMO, we can reduce the concern that
our ﬁndings reﬂect selection rather DEMO socialization.
When we run the analysis on this subset, we ﬁnd DEMO
trainingandcohorteffectsremainstatisticallysigniﬁcant
in the expected direction.
Dissonance. Table8presentsresultsforfacultymem-
bers facing conﬂicting norms. Model (1) is a probit
model with the dependent variable of current DEMO
that we have used previously. We run our basic speciﬁ-
cation with dummy variables for those individuals who
have not been trained with tech DEMO norms but now
ﬁnd themselves in an active technology transfer cohort
(DEMO),andthoseindividualswhohavebeentrained
with technology transfer norms but are now in inactive
cohorts (leading edge), as deﬁned in Figure 1. Given
Downloaded from informs.org DEMO [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal DEMO only, all rights reserved.
84
that the categories were constructed using cohort and
graduateinstitutioninformation,wedonotincludethese
variables DEMO the model. There are 25 individuals whose
training and cohort activity are aligned with the new
norms.Wedroppedthisgroupfromestimationtoallowa
comparison of individuals in conﬂict against those DEMO
viduals whose training and cohort activity are aligned
withthetraditionalacademicnorms.21 Thusouromitted
category is category IV in Figure 1.
The basic results for the control variables DEMO consis-
tent with our earlier models. We ﬁnd that the coefﬁcient
on the leading-edge dummy variable is positive but not
statisticallysigniﬁcant.Thisindicatesthatthoseindivid-
uals who trained DEMO the new norms, but do not face
localizedsocialnormsinsupportofsuchbehavior,revert
to the DEMO norms and are not differentiated from
those individuals in the reference category of traditional
norms. The coefﬁcient on the pressured dummy vari-
able is DEMO and statistically signiﬁcant p < 010.
Individuals who are not trained to the new commer-
cialization norms but who work under localized social
norms DEMO the new activity are more likely to dis-
close than those individuals with a similar training who
do not face this pressure. Indeed, location in an active
cohort increases propensity to disclose by 5%, holding
other variables constant.
Model (2) is a negative binomial with the count
DEMO current disclosures. Again, the control variables are
consistent with our robustness DEMO As in Model (1),
leading-edge individuals do not disclose at a greater
rate than our reference group—those aligned toward the
traditional academic DEMO Those individuals who are
under pressure to disclose, translate this into DEMO higher
and statistically signiﬁcant level of disclosing. These
results suggest that individuals are more responsive to
immediate local social pressure than previous profes-
sional DEMO
SymbolicBehavior. Table9providestheresultsofthe
analysis of the symbolic and substantive adopters of the
organizational technology transfer initiative. Symbolic,
equal to one for those individuals who DEMO once
in the current time period and had no more than one
disclosure in the previous time period, is the dependent
variable in Models (1)–(3). Substantive, equal to one if
the individual DEMO more than one disclosure in the cur-
rent time period, is DEMO dependent variable for Models
(4)–(6).
The models build DEMO and follow the same
logic for symbolic and substantive disclosers. Models
(DEMO)and(4)includethefullslateofcontrolvariablesand
the inﬂuence of leader activity. Models (2) and (5) add
in the inﬂuence of cohort disclosures in the prior DEMO
period. Models (3) and (6) include the effect of other
cohort disclosures as a robustness check.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),pp.69–89,©2008INFORMS
In support of H6, DEMO ﬁnd that symbolic and sub-
stantive disclosers appear to respond to different inﬂu-
ences. The dollar amount of individual NIH awards is
positiveandstronglystatisticallysigniﬁcant p < 0001
for individuals who engage in symbolic disclosing.
This suggests that individuals who engage in symbolic
compliance are following the rules as dictated by DEMO
guidelines.Similarly,theactivityofthedepartmentchair
is also signiﬁcantly associated with symbolic compli-
ance. Neither individual NIH funding, nor chair activ-
ity, is statistically signiﬁcant for individuals DEMO appear
to have internalized the new norms as seen in Mod-
els(4)–(6).Incontrast,thesubstantivedisclosersappear
to be more responsive to local social DEMO The coef-
ﬁcient on the cohort variable is positive and statistically
signiﬁcant p < 0001. Thus the disclosure behavior
of the two groups appears DEMO be subject to differ-
ent inﬂuences. Substantive disclosers are more strongly
inﬂuenced by their local peer groups, an illustration
of the link between individual and organization values
reﬂecting strong social identiﬁcation. The inﬂuence of
a non-U.S. DEMO, or status as a dual-degree holder,
is statistically signiﬁcant in DEMO substantive regressions,
while not signiﬁcant for the symbolic individuals.
Discussion and Reﬂective Conclusions
The process of organizational change is neither straight-
forward nor DEMO This challenge is exacerbated when
the organization itself is embedded within a thick insti-
tutional context (Meyer and Rowan 1977, DiMaggio
and Powell DEMO). Certainly, this is the case in our
study. University medical DEMO, like other academic
settings, constitute an organizational ﬁeld that is highly
institutionalized and seen as resistant to change. The
Mertoniannormsofopensciencehavelongprovidedthe
archetypeortemplateforacademicsandacademicinsti-
tutions(DiMaggioandPowell1983)DEMO
environmentchangedbecauseofaconvergenceoflegal,
political, and economic factors, an alternative archetype
ofacademicentrepreneurshipwasarticulated.Theemer-
gence of this alternative template was the ﬁrst step, but
not a sufﬁcient condition for institutional or organiza-
tional change (Greenwood and Hinings 1993). Attempts
toincreaseuniversityinteractionwithindustryandfacil-
itate the commercialization of academic research have
been ongoing for DEMO 25 years. Although virtually
all universities have created formal TTOs, policies, and
procedures, there have been great variations in real-
ized commercial activity. Rather than solely a func-
tion of resources, these organizational outcomes appear
to reﬂect differences in the organization’s ability to
move away from the DEMO, more established norms and
embrace new norms of academic entrepreneurship.
Understanding DEMO roots of this difference requires a
greaterfocusonintraorganizationaldynamics,asorgani-
zationsareheterogeneousentitiescomposedofdifferen-
tiated groups. This study explores individual actions in
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 DEMO 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),DEMO,©2008INFORMS
Table 9 Probability of Disclosing: Symbolic vs. Substantive Participants in DEMO Disclosures
Probit model: Dependent variable = disclosure ﬁled 0 1
Symbolic DEMO
Variables Model (1) Model (2) Model (3) Model (DEMO) Model (5) Model (6)
−0023∗∗∗ −0017∗∗ −
00070006
Graduate institution patent activity 0008∗ 0006+ 0007+
000500050005
Chair discloses, prior time period 0223∗ 0220+
01190142
1380∗∗∗
0397
Outside cohort disclosures, 0205 0052
prior time period 04090445
Number of papers 0002 0003 0003 0003 0003 0003
000200020002000200020002
DEMO of prior disclosures 0293∗∗∗
0029
Non-U.S. degree 0196 0195 0182 0634∗∗∗
0143014201430151
Boundary-spanning individual 0084 0134 0122 0092 0077 0081
010601040104012001210121
Dual degree, both Ph.D. and M.D. 0229 02570250 0605∗∗∗ 0552∗∗∗ 0552∗∗∗
015601560157015201540154
Full professor 0036 DEMO
01360157
Assistant professor −0243∗ −0025
01170145
Individual NIH awards 0056∗ 0061∗∗
00240023
Department NIH awards 0031 0191 0071 0271 0272∗ 0311+
016701530167017201600176
Basic science DEMO 02370406∗∗ 0285+ 0470∗∗ 0392∗∗ 0425∗
015501480158017301630177
Nexus science department 0178 0208+ 0188+ 0154 00570064
011001110112013801400142
University dummy variable −0015
0099
Constant −1172∗∗∗ −1406∗∗∗ −
DEMO
Years since last graduate degree
Cohort disclosures, prior time period
0017∗∗ DEMO −0026∗∗∗ −0026∗∗∗
0006000900080008
0008+ 00070007
000600060006
0
0
165 −0086
1360166
−0255∗∗∗ −0236∗∗∗ −0240∗∗∗
007000700071
0279∗∗∗ 0279∗∗∗
00290029
0632∗∗∗ 0637∗∗∗
01500151
0062∗∗ −0018 −0010 DEMO
0023002900280028
−0010 −00470079 01370150
00980100011401150118
1425∗∗∗ −1798∗∗∗ −1979∗∗∗ −1987∗∗∗
0195027302370242
−00193 −0273 1305∗∗∗
036903890347
N
Log likelihood
Pseudo R2
1,780 1,780 1,DEMO 1,780 1,780 1,780
−432072
−436455
−434350
−322792
−319721
−319582
0072 0062 00670325 0331 0331
Notes. Two-tailed tests for controls, one-tailed tests for hypothesized variables.
+p<010, ∗ p<005, ∗∗p<001, ∗∗∗p<0001.
85
theorganizationalcontexttounderstandthelinkbetween
intraorganizational dynamics and organizational change.
Speciﬁcally,weexamineparticipationinuniversitytech-
nology transfer DEMO a new organizational initiative. Our
work relies on tracking a large sample of individuals,
examining their backgrounds and work environments,
andfollowingtheirinventiondisclosureactivities,which
DEMO their engagement with academic entrepreneur-
ship. We ﬁnd that adoption of the new initiative by
individuals may be either substantive or symbolic. Our
results DEMO that individual attributes, while impor-
tant, are conditioned by the local work environment.
In terms of personal attributes, individuals are more
likely to disclose inventions if they trained at institu-
tions that have long established DEMO relatively success-
ful technology transfer operations. In addition, we ﬁnd
that DEMO longer the elapsed time since graduate train-
ing, the less likely DEMO faculty member was to actively
embrace the new commercialization norm. Considering
the localized social environment, we ﬁnd that when the
chair of the department is active in technology transfer,
other members of the department are DEMO likely to dis-
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
86
close, if only for symbolic reasons. We also ﬁnd that
technology transfer behavior is calibrated by the expe-
rience of those in a DEMO position, in terms of aca-
demic rank and departmental afﬁliation. If DEMO
can observe others at their academic rank disclosing,
thentheyaremorelikelytofollowwithsubstantivecom-
pliance, DEMO things being equal. Finally, when indi-
viduals face dissonance, a situation where their individ-
ual training norms are not congruent with the localized
DEMO norms in their work environment, they will con-
formtothelocalizednormsratherthanstickingwiththe
norms from DEMO prior experience.
Our results imply that social learning and local con-
textinﬂuenceanindividual’sdecisiontofollowstrategic
initiativesandparticipateinnewactivities.However,we
donotinterprettheseresultsasjustifyingtheconclusion
that selection plays no role in the adoption dynamic.
DEMO, both selection and socialization may be material
in promoting organizational change (Kraatz and Moore
2002). The challenge for future research is to DEMO
glethecontributionsofthesealternativedriverstobetter
understand under what circumstances one is likely more
pertinent than the other. Another challenge is clarifying
what individuals speciﬁcally learn through social inter-
DEMO The decision to accept the institution’s strategic
initiative and actively participate in technology trans-
fer may be driven by the legitimization of the practice
DEMO comes from the internalization of local behavioral
norms. On the other hand, the decision to disclose may
reﬂect a lowering of the cost to the faculty member of
adopting this organizational innovation, because of the
enhanced operational knowledge gained through expo-
suretotheprocess.Ourinterviewssuggestthatbothfac-
torshavebeeninﬂuential.However,thequestionremains
as to whether the DEMO received differs systemati-
cally across individuals, and/or over time, and how this
affectsthediffusionoftheinitiative.Futureresearchthat
investigates these issues is clearly warranted.
Insum,introducingstrategicinitiativesrequiresthink-
ingcreativelyabouttheprocessoforganizationalchange
DEMO the inﬂuence of microorganizational social pro-
cesses. Although the academic environment is unique in
many respects, the ﬁndings of this study should have
valueforotherorganizationsattemptingtoembracenew
initiatives. Our study provides insights into the multi-
level attributes of the DEMO process, the importance
of departmental (or subunit) composition and localized
DEMO in promoting organizational change, and the
tensions faced, and the response mechanisms employed,
when individuals are subject to new expectations. Indi-
vidualcharacteristicsmatter.However,DEMO
fullydeterministic,asindividualsrespondtoleadersand
theirlocalcontext.Evenifsubunitleadersdonotpartici-
pateinthestrategicinitiatives,thisisnotaninsurmount-
ableobstacle,asindividualsmayadoptthenewbehavior
when they are able to observe their peers participating.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),pp.69–89,©2008INFORMS
The importance of localized learning through interac-
tion with cohorts of similar individuals is provocative
and suggests that internal DEMO within the orga-
nizationmatters.Promotingnewinitiativesmaybemore
likely when individuals are concentrated in the same
work units, and thus able to support each other.
Additional insight can be gained, and prescriptions
offered, by considering the role of dissonance DEMO sym-
bolic compliance in the change process. Individuals
have multiple motives in their job performance and the
management of their careers. Individuals facing con-
DEMO norms may resolve discord by reverting to the
prevalent localized norms. The need for a concentra-
tion in cohort activity, in combination with the poten-
tial reversion of leading-edge individuals, exacerbates
thechallengeofpromotingorganizationalchange.How-
ever,theoptionofsymbolicdisclosuresuggestsapoten-
tial strategy: An early emphasis on, and enforcement
of, organizational rules may be beneﬁcial in forestalling
reversion to the prevailing norms, while also generat-
ing new symbolic compliers. In turn, this may create
a critical mass that legitimizes the new initiative and
provides the traction necessary to convert previously
DEMO compliers into substantive compliers. Through
this process organizational initiatives may be success-
fully realized, as the new archetype becomes the domi-
nantnorm.Ourresultssuggestthatsuccessfullyadopting
strategic initiatives requires understanding organization
heterogeneity, subunit dynamics, and the factors that
inﬂuence DEMO compliance. This is suggestive of a
more bottoms-up approach to organizational change and
may mean rethinking how resources are allocated when
implementing new initiatives.
DEMO
The authors wish to acknowledge support from the Andrew
W. Mellon Foundation as part of a larger project on evolving
university-industry relationships, as well as additional fund-
ing from the National Science Foundation. The authors thank
DEMO,researchadministrators,and
medical school faculty at the two universities studied for gen-
erously sharing their time and expertise in identifying salient
issues. The authors DEMO acknowledge and appreciate the valu-
able suggestions of the editor and reviewers.
Endnotes
1 Jensenetal.(2003)titleapaper“TheDisclosureandLicens-
ing of University Inventions: Doing the Best We Can with the
S∗∗ t We Get to Work With”—the title DEMO from an interview
with a technology transfer administrator who was bemoaning
differential quality of faculty disclosures.
2 Mowery et al. (1999) note that DEMO 20% of disclosures
were patented after six years, indicating that greater DEMO
accompanies the postdisclosure stage of the technology trans-
fer process.
3 It is common for the TTO at both institutions to delay initia-
tion DEMO the patenting process for an individual disclosure until
a ﬁrm has signed on as a licensee. This helps with the ofﬁce’s
Downloaded from informs.org DEMO [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal DEMO only, all rights reserved.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),DEMO,©2008INFORMS
cash ﬂow, as the licensing ﬁrm is then required to DEMO the
patenting costs.
4 Other individuals, such as staff, graduate students, and post-
doctorates may disclose inventions, but this is a small DEMO
centage of activity. Disclosures that do involve nonfaculty
are likely to have at least one faculty member listed as an
inventor.
5 Thenumberoffacultymemberswhohaveﬁledinventiondis-
closures DEMO those who have disclosed in the three-year
period, 1996–1998. This does DEMO correspond directly to the
absolute count of disclosures because more than one faculty
membermaybelistedonasingledisclosure.Ifafacultymem-
ber appeared on an invention disclosure, they are counted as
having ﬁled a disclosure.
6 We use the term invention disclosure events DEMO capture the
number of times that an individual was listed on an invention
disclosure.
7 Weconductedmorethan50interviewswithtechnologytrans-
ferofﬁcials,universityadministrators,andfacultymembersas
background for this study.
8 DEMO may sweeten the deal by distributing a share
of their third of the royalties to the inventing faculty mem-
bers’lab.Thispracticewasﬁrstusedtoencouragetechnology
transfer; however, it DEMO now a well-established practice across
departments at both universities.
9 In a similar vein, Finnemore and Sikkink (1998, p. 905)
argue: DEMO training does more than simply transfer
technicalknowledge;itactivelysocializespeopletovaluecer-
tain things above others.”
10 In another context, Schewe and Meredith (1994) highlight
vintage effects showing that an individual’s attitude toward
jobs, money, and savings is DEMO inﬂuenced by the
conditions encountered when the individual ﬁrst becomes an
“economic adult.”
11 This was mentioned as a problem in several interviews.
While DEMO university may promote technology transfer, if the
department has not embraced DEMO, then the individual will face
difﬁculties. There is no hard and DEMO rule for evaluating tech-
nology transfer activity relative to academic work. We have
been told that the MIT electrical engineering department val-
ues a DEMO as much as an academic article in a high-quality
journal, although DEMO does not appear to be any quantiﬁca-
tion of these trade-offs at the two universities examined here
(Agrawal and Henderson 2002).
12 Thechairhasaroleinhiringdecisionsandcouldselectindi-
viduals with similar technology transfer attitudes. Interview
evidence revealed that criteria other DEMO technology transfer
are more important in hiring decisions. Robustness tests were
conductedtoconﬁrmthatselectionbiaseswerenotsigniﬁcant
inthiscontext.Thesetestsaredescribedindetailintheresults
section of the paper.
13 Insum,facultyusesocialcuestodiscernwhattypeofbehav-
ior to pursue. This DEMO is not inconsistent with individual
utility maximization.
14 Festingerconsideredthesocialgroupasanimportantsource
of dissonance noting, “The open expression of disagreement
inagroupleadstotheexistenceofcognitivedissonanceinthe
members. The knowledge that some other person, generally
like oneself, holds one opinion is dissonant with holding DEMO
contrary opinion.” (Festinger 1957, pp. 261–262).
87
15 This type of symbolic response by an individual is akin
to the adoption of DEMO structures by organizations in
response to changes in the legal environment (DEMO 1990,
1992).Theactionschosenmaybethosethatconferlegitimacy
while being minimally disruptive to the status quo.
16 A paired sample t -test of the equivalence of the percentage
DEMO faculty reveals that there are statistically signiﬁcant differ-
ences at the two institutions (t =−2441, 44 d.f.).
17 We used the rank DEMO the faculty member in 1993, the mid-
point of the ﬁrst DEMO, to construct the cohort variables.
Giventherelativelylongtenureprocessinmedicalschools,we
ﬁnd that few faculty DEMO in the database changed ranks
in the 1991–1995 period. Results are robust to using alterna-
tive anchors such as the rank at the beginning DEMO end of the
time period.
18 The Association of American Medical Colleges uses NIH
funding to differentiate quality among departments across
schools. http://DEMO/medicalschools.htm.
19 When the faculty is segmented by cohort and training, DEMO
is not substantial variation among the disclosure behavior of
thechairinthestudytimeperiod.Unfortunately,therewasnot
enough variation to consider the three-way conﬂict between
training, cohort, and leadership DEMO
20 The sample size varies from the total reported in Table 1
because of missing data and movement of faculty.
21 Thisyields1,755observationsforourestimationinTable8.
References
DEMO, A., R. Henderson. 2002. Putting patents in context: Explor-
ing DEMO transfer from MIT. Management Sci. 48(1)
44–70.
Aldrich,H.E.1999. OrganizationsEvolving.SagePublications,Lon-
don, UK.
Alvesson, M., H. C. Willmott. 1992. On the idea of emancipation
in management and organizational studies. Acad. Management
Rev. 17(DEMO) 432–464.
AUTM. 2003. The AUTM Licensing Survey: FY 2002. Association of
University Technology Managers, Northbrook, IL.
Balogun,J.,G.Johnson.2005.Fromintendedstrategiestounintended
outcomes: The impact of change recipient sensemaking. Organ.
Stud. 26(11) 1573–1601.
Bandura,A.1977. SocialLearningTheory.Prentice-Hall,Englewood
Cliffs, NJ.
Bandura, A. 1986. Social Foundations of Thought and DEMO:
ASocialCognitiveTheory.Prentice-Hall,EnglewoodCliffs,NJ.
Bercovitz, J., M. Feldman. 2007. Academic entrepreneurs and
technology transfer: Who participates and why? F. Malerba,
S. DEMO, eds. Perspectives on Innovation. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK.
DEMO, G. 2002. Guardians of the Nation? Economists, Generals,
and DEMO Reform in Latin America. University of Notre
Dame Press, Notre Dame, IN.
Biglaiser, G., D. Brown. 2003. What’s the big idea? An ideational
explanation for tariff reform in Latin America, 1981–1995.
Annual Meeting of American Political Science Association,
Philadelphia, PA.
Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, I. Welch. 1992. A theory of fads,
fashions,custom,andculturalchangeasinformationalcascades.
J. Political Econom. 100 992–1026.
Blumenthal, D., E. G. Campbell, N. Causino, K. S. Louis. 1996. Par-
ticipation of life science faculty in research relationships with
industry. New England J. Medicine 335(23) 1734–1739.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
88
Calori,R.,M.Lubatkin,P.Very,J.Veiga.1997.Modellingtheorigins
of nationally-bound administrative heritages: A historical insti-
tutional analysis of French and British ﬁrms. Organ. Sci. 18(6)DEMO
681–696.
Cartwright, D. 1979. Contemporary social psychology in historical
perspective. Soc. DEMO Quart. 42 82–93.
Chattopadhyay, P., W. H. Glick, C. Miller, G. P. Huber. 1999. Deter-
minantsofexecutivebeliefs:Comparingfunctionalconditioning
and social inﬂuence. Strategic Management DEMO 20(8) 763–789.
Christensen, C. M., J. L. Bowers. 1996. DEMO power, strategic
investment and the failure of leading ﬁrms. Strategic Manage-
DEMO J. 17 197–219.
Chwieroth, J. 2003. Neoliberal norms and capital account DEMO
tion in emerging markets: The role of domestic-level knowl-
edge-based experts. DEMO Political Science Association,
Philadelphia, PA.
Colyvas, J., M. Crow, A. Gelijins, R. Mazzoleni, R. R. Nelson, N.
Rosenberg, B. DEMO 2002. How do university inventions get
into practice? Management Sci. 48(DEMO) 61–72.
Dacin,M.T.,J.Goodstein,W.R.Scott.2002.Institutionaltheoryand
institutional change: Introduction to the special research forum.
Acad. Management J. 45(1) 45–57.
Deutsch, M., H. B. Gerard. 1955. A study of normative and informa-
tional social inﬂuences DEMO individual judgement. J. Abnormal
Soc. Psych. 51 629–636.
DiMaggio, P., W. Powell. 1983. The iron cage revisited: Institutional
isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational ﬁelds.
Amer. Sociol. Rev. 48(2) 147–160.
Duﬂo, E., E. Saez. 2000. Participation and investment decisions in a
retirement plan: The inﬂuence of colleagues choices. Working
Paper 00-07 MIT Department of Economics, Cambridge, DEMO
Edelman, L. 1990. Legal environments and organizational gover-
nance: The expansion of due process in the American work-
place. Amer. J. Sociol. 95 DEMO
Edelman, L. 1992. Legal ambiguity and symbolic structures: Orga-
nizational mediation of civil rights law. Amer. J. Sociol. 97
1531–1577.
Ellison, G., DEMO Fudenberg. 1993. Rules of thumb for social learning.
J. Political Econom. 101(4) 612–643.
Etzkowitz,H.1983.Entrepreneurialscientistsandentrepreneurialuni-
versities in American academic science. Minerva 21 1–21.
Feldman, M. P., P. Desrochers. 2004. Truth for its own sake: Aca-
demiccultureandtechnologytransferattheJohnsHopkinsUni-
versity. Minerva 42(2) 105–126.
Feldman, M. P., I. Feller, J. E. L. Bercovitz, R. M. Burton. 2002.
Equity and DEMO technology transfer strategies of American
research universities. Management Sci. 48(1) DEMO
Festinger, L. 1957. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford Uni-
versity DEMO, Stanford, CA.
Festinger,L.,S.Schachter,K.Black.1950. Social Pressures in Infor-
mal Groups: A Study of Human Factors in Housing. Stanford
University Press, DEMO, CA.
Finnemore, M., K. Sikkink. 1998. International norm dynamics and
DEMO change. Internat. Organ. 52(4) 887–918.
Frank, R., T. Gilovich, D. Regan. 1993. Does studying economics
inhibit cooperation? J. Econom. Perspectives 7(2) 159–171.
Gephart,R.P.1993.Thetextualapproach:Riskandblameindiasters
sensemaking. Acad. Management J. 18 583–622.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),pp.69–89,DEMO
Greenwood,R.,C.R.Hinings.1993.Understandingstrategicchange:
The contribution of archetypes. Acad. Management J. 36(5)
1052–1081.
Greenwood, R., C. R. Hinings. 1996. Understanding radical DEMO
zational change: Bringing together the old and the new institu-
tionalism. DEMO Management J. 21(4) 1022–1054.
Greenwood, R., C. R. Hinings. DEMO Radical organizational change.
S. Clegg, C. Hardy, T. Lawrence, W. DEMO Nords, eds. The Sage
Handbook of Organizational Studies, Sage Publications Ltd.,
London, UK, 814–842.
Haas, P. 1992. Introduction: Epistemic communities DEMO international
policy coordination. Internat. Organ. 46(1) 1–35.
Hannan, M., DEMO Freeman. 1984. Structural inertia and organizational
change. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 48 149–164.
House, R. J. 1977. A 1976 Theory of charismatic leadership.
J. G. Hunt, L. L. Larson, eds. Leadership: The Cutting Edge.
Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale, IL.
Jensen, R. A., J. G. Thursby, M. C. Thursby. 2003. The disclosure
and licensing of university inventions: Doing the best we can
with the S∗∗ t we get to work DEMO Internat. J. Indust. Organ.
21(9) 1271–1300.
Kenney, M., W. DEMO Goe. 2004. The role of social embeddedness in
professional entrepreneurship: A DEMO of electrical engi-
neeringandcomputerscienceatUCBerkeleyandStanford. Res.
Policy 33(5) 691.
Kotter, J. 1996. Transforming organizations. Executive Excellence
13(9) 13.
Kraatz, S., J. Moore. 2002. Executive migration and institutional
change. Acad. Management J. 45(1) 120–143.
Krimsky, S. 2003. Science in the Private Interest. Rowman & Little-
ﬁeld Publishers, Lanham, MD.
Lach, S., M. Schankerman. 2003. Incentives DEMO invention in univer-
sities. NBER Working Paper 9727, Cambridge, MA.
Leonard-Barton,D.1992.Corecapabilitiesandcorerigidities. Strate-
gic Management J. (Summer) 111–125.
Levin, S. G., DEMO E. Stephan. 1991. Research productivity over the
lifecycle:Evidenceforacademicscientists. Amer.Econom.Rev.
81(1) 114–132.
Locke, R. 1985. The relationship between higher educational man-
agement DEMO in Britain and West Germany: A compara-
tive analysis of higher DEMO from a historical perspective.
P. Joynt, M. Warner, eds. Managing in Different Cultures. Page
Bros. Ltd., Norwich, UK, 96–127.
Louis,K.S.,D.Blumenthal,M.Gluck,M.Stoto.1989.Entrepreneurs
in academe: An exploration of behaviors among life scientists.
Admin. Sci. Quart. 34 110–131.
Lowe, R. A., A. Ziedonis. 2006. Overoptimism DEMO the performance
of entrepreneurial ﬁrms. Management Sci. 52(2) 173–186.
Maddala, G. S. 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables
in Econometrics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Manski, C. F. 2000. Economic analysis of social interactions.
DEMO Econom. Perspectives 14(3) 115–136.
Meyer,J.W.,B.Rowan.1977.Institutionalizedorganizations:Formal
structure as DEMO and ceremony. Amer. J. Sociology 83(2) 340–
363.
Mowery,D.C.,DEMO
tity before and after the Bayh-Dole Act in the United States.
Res. Policy 31(3) 399–418.
Mowery,D.,R.Nelson,B.Sampat,A.Ziedonis.1999.Theeffectsof
the Bayh-Dole Act on U.S. university research and technology
transferinindustrializingknowledge.L.Branscomb,F.Kodama,
R. Florida, eds. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 269–306.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use only, DEMO rights reserved.
Bercovitz and Feldman: Organizational Change at the Individual Level
OrganizationScience19(1),DEMO,©2008INFORMS
Murray, F. 2004. The role of academic inventors in entrepreneurial
DEMO: Sharing laboratory life. Res. Policy 33(4) 643–659.
Nelson, R. DEMO Observations on the post-Bayh-Dole rise of patent-
ing at American Universities. J. Tech. Transfer 26(1–2) 13–19.
Nelson, R., S. Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic
Change. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
O’Reilly, C., J. Chatman. 1986. Organizational commitment and psy-
chologicalattachment:Theeffectsofcompliance,identiﬁcation,
and internalization on prosocial behavior. J. Appl. Psych. 71(3)
492–499.
DEMO, C., J. Chatman, D. F. Caldwell. 1991. People and orga-
DEMO culture: A proﬁle comparison approach to assessing
perosn-organization ﬁt. Acad. Management DEMO 34(3) 487–516.
Owen-Smith,J.,W.W.Powell.2001a.Topatentornot:Facultydeci-
sions and institutional success DEMO technology transfer. J. Tech.
Transfer 26 99–114.
Owen-Smith, J., W. W. Powell. 2001b. Careers and contradictions:
Faculty responses to the transformation of DEMO knowledge and
its uses in the life sciences. S. Vallas ed. The Transformation
of Work: Research in the Sociology of Work, Vol. 10, Elsevier
Science, Ltd., Oxford, UK.
Pelz, D., F. Andrews. 1976. Scientists in Organizations: Productive
Climates for Research and Development. Institute for Social
Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
Powell, W. W., J. Owen-Smith. 1998. Universities and the market for
intellectual property in the DEMO sciences. J. Policy Anal. Man-
agement. 17(2) 253–277.
Ryder,N.1965.Thecohortasaconceptinthestudyofsocialchange.
DEMO Sociol. Rev. 30 843–861.
Saxenian, A. 2002. Silicon Valley’s new immigrant DEMO
entrepreneurs. Econom. Development Quart. 16(1) 20–31.
Schein, E. H. 1985. Organizational Culture and Leadership: A Dy-
namic View. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.
Schewe, C. D., G. E. Meredith. 1994. Cohort effects and DEMO insur-
ance. Marketing Management 3(3) 25.
Shamir,B.,R.J.House,M.B.Arthur.1993.Themotivationaleffects
DEMO charismatic leadership: A self-concept based theory. Organ.
Sci. 4(4) 577–594.
Shane,S.2000.Priorknowledgeandthediscoveryofentrepreneurial
opportunities. Organ. Sci. 11(4) 448–469.
Siegel,D.,D.Waldman,A.Link.2003.Assessingtheimpactoforga-
nizational practices on the productivity of university technology
transfer ofﬁces: An exploratory study. Res. Policy 32 3–30.
Slaughter,S.,L.Leslie.1997. AcademicCapitalism:Politics,Policies
and DEMO Entrepreneurial University. Johns Hopkins University
Press, Baltimore, MD.
89
Slaughter, DEMO, G. Rhoades. 2004. Academic Capitalism and the New
Economy:Markets,State,DEMO
University Press, Baltimore, MD.
Smith-Doerr,L.2006.Learningtoreﬂectordeﬂect?U.S.policiesand
graduate programs’ ethics training for life scientists. S. Frickel,
K. Moore, eds. The New Political Sociology of Science: Insti-
tutions, Networks, and Power. University of Wisconsin Press,
Madison, WI, 405–431.
Sorensen, A. T. 2002. Social learning in the demand for employer-
sponsoredhealthinsurance.Mimeographed.JohnsHopkinsUni-
versity Press, Baltimore, MD.
Stephan, P. E., S. G. Levin. 1992. Striking the Mother Lode in Sci-
ence: The Importance of Age, Place, and Time. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, New York.
Stuart, T., W. Ding. 2006. When do scientists become entrepreneurs?
The social structural antecedents of commercial activity in aca-
DEMO life sciences. Amer. J. Sociol. 112 97–144.
Thursby, J. G., M. C. Thursby. 2002. Who is selling the ivory tower?
Sources of DEMO in university licensing. Management Sci.
48(1) 90–104.
Thursby,J.G.,R.Jensen,DEMO,character-
istics and outcomes of university licensing: A survey of major
DEMO universities. J. Tech. Transfer 26(1–2) 59–72.
Tolbert, P. S., DEMO G. Zucker. 1983. Institutional sources of change
in the formal structure of organizations: The diffusion of civil
service reform, 1880–1935. Admin. Sci. Quart. DEMO(1) 22–39.
Van de Ven, A. H. 1986. Central problems in the management of
innovation. Management Sci. 32(5) 591–607.
Venkataraman, S. DEMO The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship
research: An editor’s perspective. J. Katz, R. Brockhaus, eds.
Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and Growth.
JAI Press, Greenwich, CT.
Weick,K.E.1995. SensemakinginOrganizations. SagePublications,
Thousand Oaks, CA.
Whelan-Berry, K., J. Gordon, C. R. Hinings. 2003. Strengthening
organizational change processes. J. Appl. Behavioral Sci. 39(2)
186–207.
Whitley, R. 2003. Competition and pluralism in the public sciences:
The impact of institutional DEMO on the organization of
academic science. Res. Policy 32 1015–1029.
Wiley, DEMO 1988. The macro-micro problem in social theory. Sociol.
Theory 6 254–261.
Wright, J. C., W. Mischel. 1987. A conditional approach to dispo-
sitional DEMO: The local predictability of social behavior.
J. Personality Soc. Psych. 53(DEMO) 1159–1177.
Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darby, M. B. Brewer. 1998. Intellectual human
capital and the birth of U.S. biotechnology enterprises. Amer.
DEMO Rev. 88 290–306.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 20 August 2015, at 12:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.{1g42fwefx}