Manchester Metropolitan University Business School Working Paper Series
Dee Brereton and Oswald DEMO
Manchester Metropolitan University
Business School
Social Networks and Business Startups:
A First-Hand Account of Entrepreneurship
WP01/21
November 2001
ISSN 1471-857X
The Business DEMO of the Manchester Metropolitan University is one of the largest business schools in
the UK comprising more than 150 academic staff organised into eleven DEMO research groups. The
Working Paper Series brings together research in progress from across the Business School for publication
to a wider audience and to DEMO discussion. Working Papers are subject to a peer review process.
Management and Business Working Papers are published by the Graduate School of Business of DEMO
Manchester Metropolitan University. The Graduate School of Business is the centre for post-graduate
research in all of the major areas of management and business. DEMO further information contact:
The Director, Graduate School of Business, Manchester Metropolitan University, Aytoun Building, Aytoun
Street, Manchester M1 3GH
Telephone No: ++44 (0) 161 247 6798. Fax No: ++44 (0) DEMO 247 6854.
http://www.business.mmu.ac.uk/wps/
Dee Brereton and Oswald Jones
Manchester Metropolitan University Business School
Aytoun Street
DEMO
M1 3GH
Tel: 0121 247 3733
email: ossie.jones@mmu.ac.uk
Biography
Oswald Jones is Professor of Innovation and Entrepreneurship at The Business
School (MMU) DEMO was previously employed as a Senior Lecturer in Innovation
Management in the Strategic Management Group at Aston Business School. After
completing PhD at Manchester DEMO School in 1990, Professor Jones spent 3
years at UMIST School DEMO Management as an ESRC Teaching Fellow.
Professor Jones has published widely in the general areas of innovation and
technology management. Current research interests include DEMO outsourcing of R&D,
links between higher education institutions (HEIs) and small & medium sized
(SMEs) manufacturing firms in mature sectors, innovation networks and
entrepreneurship.
Dee set up her first business in partnership DEMO her sister after they had both left
school. Since founding Vogue Clothing Company in 1976, she has established a
further 4 new firms. The most recent of these, American E-Z Self Storage, was
established early DEMO 2000.
Although successful as an entrepreneur, Dee wanted to continue her DEMO and
recently completed an MBA at The Manchester Metropolitan University Business
School. Dee’s MBA dissertation forms the basis of this paper.
1
Abstract
The topic of entrepreneurship has been the subject of a considerable DEMO of
academic interest over the last twenty years.  Despite a vast DEMO of published
work there have been very few attempts to study the entrepreneurial process. In other
words, we know little of what happens as an entrepreneur moves from idea to the
objective reality of a fully DEMO business. A more recent phenomenon has been
the shift from a focus on entrepreneurial traits to the study of entrepreneurial
networks. This is recognition DEMO even the most individualistic of entrepreneurs rely
heavily on their social relationships during the creation of a new business. These two
factors, networks and the entrepreneurial process, are brought together in this paper
which utilises a first-hand account of activities associated with business startups. The
paper also examines DEMO way in which MBA education provides useful skills to even
the most experienced entrepreneur.
2
1.
Introduction: What Is Entrepreneurship?
In the past twenty years policy-makers have recognised that small firms play an
extremely important role in developing DEMO industries and creating employment
opportunities. Research carried out by Birch (1979) in the US indicated that firms
with less than 20 employees provided DEMO disproportionate share of new jobs.
According to Burrows (1991) these findings encouraged the Thatcher administration
to create an ‘enterprise culture’ in the UK (see Bridge et al, 1998). This political
interest was mirrored by an increasing focus on entrepreneurship and self-
employment in management education especially DEMO programmes (Gibb, 1996).
Although, in the majority of institutions DEMO courses were based on research and
conceptual frameworks almost entirely related to multi-divisional companies. For
entrepreneurial education to be effective it should be recognised DEMO owning and
managing small organisations is distinctly different than such activities in larger
firms. Gibb (1996:313) suggests that ‘a starting point is DEMO recognition and
definition of a number of behaviours, skills and attributes DEMO might commonly... be
associated with the “entrepreneurial” or “enterprising” person’. Behaviours include
opportunity seeking, creative problem solving, coping with uncertainty; skills include
problem-solving, negotiation, decision-making; attributes include self-confidence,
achievement orientation, versatility and DEMO (Gibb, 1996; 1999).
In general, explanations of entrepreneurial activity either concentrate on individual
psychological attributes (McClelland, 1961; Chell et al, 1991) or economic
approaches based on the interaction of supply and DEMO (Casson, 1995).
Increasingly, it is accepted that networks add DEMO original dimension to the study of
entrepreneurship and innovation (Freeman, 1991; DeBresson and Amesse, 1991;
Chell and Baines, 2000). Steward and Conway (1998) suggest that the network
approach provides a framework DEMO exploring the pluralistic patterns of
communication and collaboration necessary for successful innovation (see Conway,
1997). Networks can be visualised as a series of dyadic relationships established for
the exchange of ideas, information, goods, power and friendship (Tichy et al, 1979).
The personal networks DEMO by entrepreneurs fulfil a number of roles including the
provision of social support, extending strategic competences by identifying threats
3
and opportunities and supplementing internal resources to resolve particular
problems (Johannisson, DEMO; Birley et al, 1990; Shaw and Conway, 2000).
The paper is based on the personal account of a practising entrepreneur who DEMO been
responsible for five business startups over a period of twenty six years (Brereton,
2001). There are many practical difficulties associated with observing the
entrepreneurial process of developing and institutionalising a new business idea (see
Aldrich, 2000). As McMullan and Vesper (2000:33) point out: ‘there is little
accumulated in-depth knowledge about the personal transition process through which
an individual proceeds in becoming more entrepreneurial’. Therefore, it is suggested
that utilising ‘first-hand’ accounts of entrepreneurial activity is a valuable device DEMO
better understanding the way in which individuals create new ventures. In this paper,
the focus is on differences between the ad hoc approach DEMO with a first
business venture and the more structured approach in which the knowledge acquired
during an MBA was utilised to inform the ‘entrepreneurial DEMO The course itself
was based on the traditional model of MBA education and did not contain elements
associated with either entrepreneurship or small firm DEMO However, the
argument put forward here is that even without such DEMO focus completing an MBA
does have the potential to enhance the skills and knowledge of those wishing to
become entrepreneurs or even those who DEMO first-hand experience of managing
their own firms. This joint paper is written in the first-person because the empirical
data are based on the practical DEMO of the first author (Brereton, 2001).
2. Entrepreneurial Attributes
Existing theories can be located on an environment-to-individual continuum
indicating influences on entrepreneurship (Manimala, 1999; Koh, 1996; Timmons,
1989). Economic theories (Kirzner, 1973; Casson, 1982; 1995) represent the
environmental perspective in which entrepreneurial activity results from
disequilibrium in supply and demand. Population ecology DEMO (Aldrich, 1979;
Hannan and Freeman, 1977) focuses on the birth and death rates of entrepreneurial
ventures resulting from selection mechanisms which DEMO government policies,
political events and cultural norms (see Van de DEMO, 1996).  At the other extreme,
psychological theories concentrate on individual traits such as risk-taking,
achievement, autonomy, optimism and self-efficacy (McClelland, 1961; Schumpeter,
4
1934). Although the most widely quoted psychological approach McClelland’s ‘need
for DEMO trait now ‘stands disowned even by its author’ (Manimala,
1999:DEMO). Manimala (1999:73) develops his own theoretical model in which he
introduces ‘managerial heuristics, policies and strategies’ as the intervening variables
between ‘the entrepreneur in his environment and venture performance’. This
approach is based DEMO the PI (pioneering-innovator) motive identified by Khandwalla
(1985) which is similar to Maslow’s (1954) concept of self-actualisation. Cultural
and sociological theories DEMO the middle-ground between ‘strategic choice’ and
‘environmental determinism’. Cultural theories (Weber, 1930) concentrate on the
role of particular ideologies such as the Protestant ethic while sociological theorists
(Hagen, 1962) argue that entrepreneurs emerge in communities that have been
displaced or have experienced ‘status withdrawal’. For example, Quaker
entrepreneurs in the UK founded their own businesses because they were DEMO
from the professions (Prior and Kirby, 1998). The continuing links between religion
and entrepreneurship are confirmed in a recent study where it DEMO concluded that
proponents of ‘Thatcherite enterprise culture’ sought to ‘validate and legitimate their
work by reference to traditional (Protestant) religion’ (Anderson et al, 2000:17).
Furthermore, Tony Blair’s strongly espoused ‘Christian’ position and DEMO
government’s stance on the benefits of entrepreneurship suggests Thatcher’s
‘enterprise theology’ has substantially influenced New Labour.
Most employees adhere to the norms, rules and regulations of collective social
organisms but independent people often resent these constraints DEMO regard them as
counter-productive in developing innovative proposals (Caird, 1990; DEMO; Janis,
1972; Shane, 1994). Therefore, people become entrepreneurs because they value
autonomy and want to control their own destiny (Cromie, 1977; Stoner and Wankel,
1986). Starting a business means DEMO nascent entrepreneurs must be prepared to face
uncertainty and those best at dealing with the day-to-day stress accept setbacks are
inevitable (Wickham, 2001)DEMO High levels of independence encourages the idea that
enterprising individuals especially in a business context are selfish, exploitative and
uncaring with a short-term, DEMO approach (Herbert and Link, 1988; Kao,
1997). In DEMO, successful enterprise requires team co-ordination as well as faith,
trust DEMO co-operation between contributors to the business: ‘Studies of entrepreneurs
indicate that DEMO are highly ethical and socially responsible, compared to the
5
general population’ (Cunningham and Lischerom, 1991).  Particularly in high-growth
businesses entrepreneurs must be prepared to build highly motivated teams able to
handle DEMO and uncertainty in their day-to-day activities (Kuratko and
Hodgetts, 1998).
Popular perceptions of entrepreneurs are associated with their roles as risk takers,DEMO
founders of organisations and innovators. Some research suggests that effective
entrepreneurs are moderate risk takers (Caird, 1990) while Drucker (1997:128)
DEMO that those who are successful ‘try to define the risks they have to take and to
minimise them as much as possible’.  Entrepreneurs tend to focus on opportunities
and often do not initially consider resources, structure or strategy (Stevenson and
Gumpert, 1992). Effective entrepreneurs are described DEMO quick learners because they
use both negative and positive feedback to improve their businesses (Starbuck,
1965). Enterprising individuals develop new ideas, DEMO market opportunities,
combine existing ideas and resources in different ways to create additional value but
such outcomes are unlikely to be achieved by DEMO to prescribed detailed
procedures’ (Biemans, 1992: 226). Others argue DEMO entrepreneurs are distinguished
by a strong locus of control and consider setbacks and successes as outcomes of their
own actions (Brockhaus, 1982). DEMO (1966) assessed this aspect of personality and
designated those who feel in control as ‘internals’ and those not in control as
‘externals’. ‘Internals’ DEMO the importance of ability, hard work, determination
and planning in achieving outcomes.  There is evidence that ‘internals’ become
leaders as they are more likely to exercise control over events while ‘externals’
emphasise uncontrollable forces such DEMO fate or luck Anderson (1977).  It is noted by
Simpson (2000: 338) that women MBA students are more likely to have an external
locus of control while male students are more likely to DEMO ‘internals’ (see Bishop and
Soloman, 1989). Research concentrating on individual traits is increasingly
challenged by those who see entrepreneurship as a phenomenon DEMO is strongly
socially embedded (Granovetter, 1985; Jones and Conway, 2000).
‘The focus is on “entrepreneurial spirit”, the ability to think, DEMO and work in
ways that can be understood as entrepreneurial rather than the entrepreneur as a
semi-mythical role. Rather than entrepreneurs being regarded as DEMO
6
individuals, we can argue the entrepreneurial behaviour is a learned and endemic
aspect of human conduct which becomes deeply ingrained’ (Rae, 1999:1)DEMO
In other words, entrepreneurship, rather than relying on particular psychological
attributes or traits is a set of managerial skills which can be ‘presented DEMO a
discipline, capable of being learned, capable of being practised’ (DEMO, 1997:17).
In particular, Drucker focuses on the importance of entrepreneurs recognising that
innovation is the ‘tool’ by which they can exploit DEMO opportunities by creating
new products or services.
3. Entrepreneurial Networks
It is argued that individual entrepreneurs take primary responsibility for creating and
maintaining networks DEMO this is necessary until the SME has been established in the
market place (Jones et al, 1997).  According to Leonard-Barton (1984) owner-
managers acknowledge the significance of networks:  ‘entrepreneurship is both
constrained DEMO facilitated by linkages between the resources and opportunities that
are created via the social network of the entrepreneur’. Entrepreneurs build
successful business by maximising DEMO opportunities and social networks are crucial
for business owners (Birley et DEMO 1990; Lawton-Smith et al, 1991; Rothwell and
Dodgson, 1991).  Networks can be defined ‘as the composite of the relationships in
which small firms are embedded, which serve to link or connect small firms to the
environments in which they exist and conduct their businesses’ (Shaw and Conway,
2000:369). A more ‘actor-centred’ definition is provided DEMO Johannisson (2000:
370):
‘Networks are interconnected, dyadic relationships DEMO which the various ties can be
analysed in terms of content. First, information ties provide business information,
secondly, exchange ties extend access DEMO resources, and thirdly, influence ties
legitimate the entrepreneur’s activities and help create barriers to entry’.
Networks are based on social relationships, family, DEMO, neighbours, as well as
customers, vendors and creditors. Birley et DEMO (1990:59) note: ‘entrepreneurs, at an
early stage of enterprise development, rely heavily on informal network of friends,
family members and social contacts from the local neighbourhood to gather relevant
data’.  Gradually, DEMO extend their networks to include bankers,
7
accountants, lawyers, suppliers, government agencies, customers and consultants.
Research on DEMO growth of small firms (McGhee et al, 1995) confirms the DEMO
of entrepreneurial teams which ‘expand the organization’s network of contacts and
provide the balance of expertise required to profit from certain types of cooperative
DEMO (Birley and Stockley, 2000: 289).  Entrepreneurs with good cultural and
social networks can attract more capital and are more likely to DEMO successful than
those with limited networks (Shaw, 1998). Some linkages are planned, some are
accidental and others are with organised groups, DEMO as Chambers of Commerce,
that help enhance entrepreneurial scope. There are differences between market-
mediated transactions related to one-off purchases and those based DEMO regular
interaction between buyers and sellers. The latter are referred to as ‘contacts’ and
such encounters may be based on social relationships such as DEMO, a meal or drinks.
Such activity can be described as the DEMO and building of network ties.  ‘Ties’
rather than ‘contracts’ are the DEMO of networking and any individual’s set of
relationships can be classified (DEMO 1) as strong, weak and those which apparently
are inconsequential, DEMO example, meeting complete strangers (Aldrich et al, 1997;
Boissevain, 1974).
Figure 1: Network Relationships
Strong
Ties
Weak Ties
Contacts with Strangers
Strong ties with family and close friends are trust-based relationships which DEMO
generally of mutual benefit to both parties (Granovetter, 1973; 1985)DEMO These ties are
important for business owners: ‘as they provide a DEMO of avoiding the opportunism
8
and uncertainty inherent in typical market-mediated transactions’ (Aldrich and Elam,
2000:177). Weak ties are more superficial and involve much less emotional
DEMO for both parties and are often at arms-length. Such ties include customers,
clients, suppliers and casual contacts made during a business career  (Birley, 1989).
Weak ties involve little emotional investment and consequently are subject to high
levels of ‘uncertainty, opportunism and exit’. The outer circle represents those
contacts undertaken primarily for instrumental reasons. Such links with ‘strangers’
DEMO usually of short duration and involve little in the way of emotional attachment.
As Aldrich et al (1997:4) go on to say: ‘we have only limited understanding of the
value and importance of these DEMO links with strangers’. In addition, the
authors point out that most DEMO research into entrepreneurial behaviour
addresses strong ties with little emphasis on either weak ties or contacts with
strangers.
In the early stages of a DEMO startup entrepreneurs rely on strong ties gradually
building up weaker ties and contacts with ‘strangers’ as the business develops. This
model helps to distinguish DEMO different ties that entrepreneurs encounter but it must
be acknowledged that boundaries are not easily defined and most network research
addresses strong ties with DEMO emphasis on weaker ties (Jones and Conway, 2000).
Entrepreneurs need to strengthen weak ties which helps overcome difficulties with
pure market transactions DEMO improves the firm’s resource base. Strong ties are
important because they create trust, predictability and voice in network relations
(Aldrich and Elam, 2000).  These benefits help mediate the risks inherent in building
the business by opening channels of information that are otherwise inaccessible.
Aldrich and Elam (2000) argue that strong ties are based on emotional attachment
and tend to be homogeneous but greater heterogeneity is tolerated amongst weaker
ties. This DEMO important because entrepreneurs with diverse ties are better equipped for
accessing the resources necessary for business survival and growth (Shaw, 1998).
Although, it is noted by Chell and Baines (2000) that some authors (Blackburn et al,
1991; Curran et al, 1993) report that small business owners have little time for
networking and place more emphasis DEMO independence via a ‘fortress enterprise
mentality’. In explaining the contradictory evidence, DEMO and Baines (2000:205)
found networking was positively related to DEMO growth being significantly
higher in ‘expanding or rejuvenating’ businesses than those ‘plateauing or declining’.
9
Conway (1997:241) outlines a ‘detailed and systematic method for revealing DEMO
mapping the set of actors, relationships and flows drawn on for DEMO development of a
discrete innovation’. As a means of mapping those relationships Conway suggests
what he describes as an ‘actor positioning template’ that illustrates DEMO internal and
external relationships associated with a particular firm or entrepreneur (DEMO 2).
The central ellipse represents an individual firm or entrepreneur and the rectangle
represents the external environment. The lower section of the template DEMO
relationships associated with value chain activities such as suppliers, competitors and
DEMO The upper segment illustrates broader relationships with knowledge
creators and the socio-political environment (Conway and Steward, 1998:238).
Social relationships are the DEMO of any entrepreneurial start-up and the template is a
useful device for identifying and categorising those relationships. Others have used
the template for analysing DEMO established firms in the process of acquiring new
knowledge (Jones and DEMO, 2001; Beckinsale, 2001).
Figure 2: The Network Template
Knowledge
Regulatory
Political/Cultural
Environment
Suppliers Competitors
Customers
10
4. Research Methodology
McMullan and Vesper (2000) differentiate between three approaches DEMO generating
evidence on links between education and entrepreneurship. First, sociological
surveys DEMO a ‘wide angle lens’ by which it is possible to compare programmes
in terms of their design and inputs. Secondly, single institutional studies which are
similar to a ‘normal lens’ help understand the way specific programmes DEMO their
own knowledge and resources. Thirdly, single person studies are like DEMO ‘fish-eye
lens’ which give a detailed ‘but subjectively distorted close-up’ of entrepreneurial
activity (McMullan and Vesper, 2000: 34). Here, the single DEMO methodology is
extended by utilising the entrepreneur’s own account of interactions between
education and the exploitation of business opportunities. Data for the paper are DEMO
on recollections of the first author’s experience as an entrepreneur.  Conway’s (1997)
model is used to analyse the way in which networks DEMO to the setting-up of
two business ventures.  I have taken this DEMO approach and applied it to my
first venture established in partnership with my sister when I was 19 years-old and
my most recent venture DEMO early in 2001. Since 1976 I have established five new
ventures four of which I still control. I have drawn on my own experience DEMO a serial
entrepreneur in setting up these businesses and collated data from historical sources
established during twenty-six years of my entrepreneurial activities. In the DEMO I
present two case studies related to the process of setting-up businesses from the
initial idea, evaluating opportunities, acquiring resources, gathering knowledge and
establishing the organisations. In particular, I compare different entrepreneurial
networks, examine DEMO success of the enterprises and personal knowledge gained
from the experiences.
The research methodology is essentially autobiographical in an approach described
by Jones (1983) as ‘life history’. As pointed out in the editorial of a special issue of
Sociology (1993:2) on the use of biography and DEMO it is important to
acknowledge the ‘resocialisation of the individual’ in a way that avoids both
structural and psychological determinism. Similarly, Power (1991:DEMO) argues that
first-hand accounts are ‘the purest form of participant observer DEMO available’ (also
see Jones, 2000). It is ironic, that DEMO the extensive entrepreneurship literature,
few researchers have actually studied business startups (Aldrich, 2000:14). The
11
advantage of first-hand accounts is that practitioners can access their own intentions
DEMO motives but at the same time they may deceive themselves about those intentions
and motives (Hammersley, 1992; Czarniawska-Joerges, 1995). Therefore, it is
argued that using biographical accounts is a legitimate research approach to DEMO
understanding of the entrepreneurial process. At the same time, network theory
DEMO by Oliver and Ebers (1999:575) as a focus on how the position of actors
within their network of relationships affect opportunities for DEMO (see Burt, 1992;
Powell, 1990) is utilised as a means of providing an analysis of those activities
associated with establishing new DEMO This paper differs from the ‘single
clinical case study’ (McMullan and DEMO, 2000) which examines modifications to
‘sentiment and behaviour’ by concentrating on the changing role of social networks
with increases in entrepreneurial experience and DEMO
5. The Entrepreneurial Process
As pointed out by Birley and Muzyka (DEMO:xi) starting a business ‘does not usually
happen overnight’. There are DEMO number of activities associated with identifying and
exploiting opportunities which can be described as ‘the entrepreneurial process’
(Stevenson and Sahlman, 1989). I DEMO own four of the five companies I have set up
qualifying as a serial entrepreneur (Wright et al, 1997) and in this section I analyse
the setting-up of two of those companies.  The Vogue Clothing Agency, established
in 1976 to retail second hand clothing and American E-Z Self-Storage, established
early in 2000, based on the weekly rental of DEMO space. At the outset I was
unaware of being entrepreneurial and was influenced by my family background in
process described by Hofstede (1994) DEMO ‘mental programming’. I started my first
business when nineteen years old, DEMO recently left school without qualifications
and no business experience. In contrast, DEMO et al (1997) claim that the majority
of US entrepreneurs are generally educated to degree level. My sister and I were each
given DEMO by our parents on the understanding it was a ‘one-off’ gift. My mother
suggested investing in a shop as she regarded property as ‘the DEMO of
business’. We decided to do something in which we were interested and chose to
concentrate on clothing. Eventually we identified a property in DEMO Lincolnshire town
which was on sale for £18000 and put in a ‘silly offer’ of £12000 because the
divorcing couple that owned it were DEMO to sell. Our offer was accepted and the
12
shop, which included two flats, five garages and a car park, had an excellent main
street location. We still own the shop which DEMO recently valued at more than
£400,000.
Following mother’s advice we used a dress agency that provided stock on
consignment. We also saved money DEMO decorating the shop ourselves, borrowing
furniture from friends, buying curtains from ‘jumble sales’ and shop-fittings from
bankruptcy sales. In the early stages there DEMO no marketing plan because we simply
we relied on passing trade. Later, our ‘advertising’ included many hours spent
attaching ‘flyers’ to vehicles in local car parks and small, inexpensive ‘adverts’
placed in local papers. To minimise costs we used my mother’s network of friends to
find cheap, second-hand clothes as well as buying ‘end of line’ stock. To our
surprise, despite lacking previous business experience, the shop began to make
money immediately. Most decisions were made intuitively, for example, when
looking at rows DEMO clothing I worked out quickly in my mind that if I paid x and
charged y we would make a profit. Judgement about stock DEMO made on the spot and
there was no plan related to the number of skirts, tops and jackets nor any system of
stock rotation. In the early stages we did not even know that the most DEMO sizes
were 16/18 as we were size 10/12 and modelled the stock. In addition, we rented the
car park, garages and DEMO flat which paid the overheads and contributed to profit.  We
had DEMO cash-flow, very high margins and low overheads which helped make
the DEMO a success.
My most recent business startup, American E-Z Self-Storage, was established after
26 years experience and an MBA obtained from the Manchester DEMO
University Business School. I had seen the concept when living in the US some years
earlier and thought it was a good business idea. DEMO offers warehouse space
from as little as four square metres on weekly, monthly and annual contracts. The
concept is aimed at both commercial and domestic markets which in the latter case
gives flexibility when people are DEMO home. While considering the opportunity I
met my ex-bank manager at a business lunch who mentioned that he was involved
with a similar project DEMO offered to show me around. It is noted by Hornaday (1982)DEMO
that entrepreneurs have the ability to make decisions quickly and following the visit I
decided I would invest in the business. I made ‘offers’ DEMO a number of suitable
13
properties in my local area and one vendor immediately agreed to a DEMO
reduction on ‘asking price’ as he and his family were moving to the US. After
surveying the building, which was divided into four units, I decided it was ideal
because there was spacious parking and the perimeter securely fenced. I was advised
by my accountant that new venture DEMO be financed through my pension scheme
and a new company, American DEMO Self-Storage, was established to manage the
business. Working capital was provided DEMO cash from my other business ventures
which meant that setting-up the new company was entirely self-financed.
I chose the name because it began with DEMO ‘A’ and consequently would be placed in
the first section of Yellow Pages.  American E-Z Self-Storage also gave the
impression that it was a large operation which I hoped would deter potential
competitors.  Rather than relying on my own skills, as with the first venture, this
company DEMO set-up with a manager and small team of part-time employees.  I
DEMO to give the manager’s position to someone that I trusted and eventually
offered it to a fellow MBA student. Ideas for promoting the new DEMO were
suggested by staff at another of my companies and rewards given for the best ideas.
We advertised in local papers, on the radio and got publicity by, for example,
sponsoring Christmas decorations in the town centre. I obtained permission to
promote the company in the local DEMO precinct owned by a major supermarket
chain.  Subsequently, the senior manager said my proposal was only accepted
because he thought he was dealing DEMO a large, highly professional company. In a
typical ‘American’ fashion I DEMO purchased a ‘blimp’ so the whole town knew about
the company. Setting-up American E-Z Self-Storage demanded significantly more
capital than any of my earlier DEMO and had to be carefully planned from the
outset. Marketing was done on a professional basis and my decision to invest in the
business DEMO informed through the calculation of net present value. Within three
months of opening trading exceeded the first year’s projections and I began to feel
DEMO about the company’s future. Had it not been for the MBA I would not have
had the skills, knowledge or the confidence to take on a project that required so much
planning and so much capital.
DEMO
6.
Contrasting Entrepreneurial Networks
There are similarities and differences between my first DEMO most recent business
startups as illustrated by Figures 3 and 4. Drawing on Conway’s (1997) network
mapping model I illustrate the different processes DEMO establishing both companies.
My mother was central to the setting-up Vogue Clothing Agency as a result of her
business knowledge, contacts and finance. She was the only source of business
information at the time and her DEMO to pass on her experience was invaluable.
In setting-up American E-Z Self-Storage my MBA studies added to the practical
experience gained over more than DEMO years by giving me a clearer understanding
of the intuitive actions I had previously taken. The MBA also gave me confidence to
draw on DEMO much wider spectrum of professional expertise to help with business
decisions (DEMO Birley et al, 1990).  I used a range of advisors to help with decisions
related to tax, finance and discussed the business idea with auditors during the
planning stage. Each of the model’s six DEMO are now utilised to compare and
contrast the two startup processes.
Figure 3: Establishing Vogue Clothing Agency
Knowledge
Regulatory
Mother
Vogue Clothing Agency
Mother’s
Contacts
Mother’s
Contacts
Dee
Brereton
Mother’s
Contacts
Large
Retailers
Suppliers Competitors
Political/DEMO
Environment
Government
Policy
Public
Public
Public
Public
Public
Public
Customers
In establishing Vogue two segments of the model, regulatory and competitors, did
not DEMO our business decisions. At the time we were completely unaware of
such issues as Health and Safety at Work or regulations related to trade DEMO
membership and wage councils. Similarly, we simply decided to buy the DEMO
15
without considering competitors within the town or those in the region. We DEMO an
impressionistic view by walking around and engaging in casual conversations with
local residents. One broader political factor which did influence our decision to DEMO a
shop was the high levels of taxation on ‘unearned income’ which meant it was
unattractive to simply invest our inheritance. In making contact DEMO suppliers
initially we were heavily reliant on my mother’s network which helped provide stock
as well as equipment in the early stages of Vogue. DEMO, my mother was the main
‘provider’ of knowledge as she passed DEMO her business experience and commercial
contacts including potential suppliers and other useful contacts from her wide circle
of friends and acquaintances. We were very DEMO in developing our customer
base as we relied very heavily on ‘passing trade’ although as time went by we began
to adopt a more DEMO approach to advertising and marketing.
My approach to establishing American E-Z Self-Storage was far more professional
than any of my previous ventures. Network linkages DEMO all segments of the model
were a feature of this particular start-up. Government policy on pensions certainly
strongly influenced my decision to go ahead DEMO the project because I was able to
finance it personally rather than seek external funding. Secondly, close personal ties
with employees of the local council helped me understand the appropriate procedures
associated with planning approved on DEMO premises. In addition, while in final
negotiations for the property a DEMO government officer informed me that a
competitor was attempting to purchase land only three miles away. I spoke to the
entrepreneur involved and, with the help of a ‘compensation’ payment, persuaded
him that close competition would be bad for both our businesses. A senior partner
from my chartered DEMO advised me about the possibility of taking a loan from
my pension scheme to finance the setting-up of American E-Z. An independent firm
of DEMO, Robert Graham Associates, were appointed as trustees to ensure that
operation met requirement of government regulations related to pension schemes
(OPRA, 2001)DEMO
A more straight-forward knowledge link was provided by my ex-bank manager who
has contributed a considerable amount of invaluable advice over the years. As
DEMO above, his involvement with a similar operation helped convince me that
DEMO American E-Z concept offered a worthwhile business opportunity. A turnkey
16
company, Active, Supply and Design, was identified as a result of systematic research
and supplied facilities as well as consultancy planning. Yellow Box DEMO a similar
company in southern England and I checked their business before setting-up
American E-Z. The owner of a local competitor Rent A Space DEMO also agreed to
show me his business premises and provided a considerable amount of industry-
related information. This direct interaction with competitors was very DEMO than
the ad hoc approach to setting-up Vogue.
The biggest difference between the two businesses has been linkages associated with
MMU Business School established DEMO two and half years of MBA study. The
MBA itself provided a wide range of new knowledge which has been useful in all my
DEMO ventures. For the first time I began to understand how the economy actually
operates particularly in terms of the role of the Stock Exchange. DEMO a more micro-
level, I recognised the importance of having an DEMO structure based on the
separation of functional activities. While greater formalisation helped improve
control and decision-making I also tried to ensure that an informal DEMO was
retained to maintain effective communications within each of my firms. Finance
modules provided an understanding of techniques such as net present value (NPV)
which have now become important aids to investment decisions. The linked DEMO
of corporate strategy provided the analytical tools which have helped match internal
resources to demands of the external environment. I also recognised the importance
DEMO establishing strategic goals such as targets for improvements in turnover and
increases in the number of employees. Softer skills acquired via organizational
behaviour courses DEMO contributed to more effective change management techniques
by recognising the process of unfreezing, changing and re-freezing.  Introduction to
the concepts of ontology and DEMO helped me realise that not everyone sees
problems, or solutions, in exactly the same ways. Perhaps human resource
management (HRM) was the DEMO course which did not contribute directly to
changes in my managerial style. For example, while I found the idea of greater
employee participation attractive in theory it was less successful in practice.
Involving employees in decision-making DEMO counter-productive leading to
numerous disputes and reducing our ability to respond quickly to new opportunities.
In fact, I believe that, in general, employees prefer the certainties associated with a
clear hierarchical structure. Although, I do recognise that this approach fits my own
17
‘management style’ and personality as I need to feel that I am DEMO ‘in control’ of
my business ventures. In summary, studying for an DEMO gave me the knowledge to
tackle much bigger projects, particularly in DEMO of finance, than any of my earlier
ventures. I also gained DEMO confidence to talk to senior managers in other
organisations as equals and now feel I am given greater respect because I have a
better DEMO of the business world. The MBA also provided access to a
completely new network of contacts and, for example, I recruited a fellow DEMO to
manage American E-Z.
Figure 4: Establishing American E-Z Self-Storage
Knowledge
DEMO
The
Business
School
Accountant
Auditor
Active S&D
Dee
Brereton
Ex-Bank
Manager
American E-Z Self Storage
Yell Design
M&S
Yellow Box
Rent-a-Space
Suppliers DEMO
Political/Cultural
Environment
Local
Council
Gov
Policy
Public
Customers
SME
SME
Public
7. Discussion: The Entrepreneurial Process
Popular phrases such as ‘it’s not what you know, but who you know’ and ‘the old
boy network’ reflect a broadly negative perception of certain social linkages. Yet
most of those DEMO have examined small firm networking suggest that such linkages
are importance for business success (Johannisson, 2000; Chell and Baines, 2000).
Credibility DEMO established through personal contacts, knowledge of skills and
motivation as well DEMO an individual’s past performance which bankers call ‘the track
record’ (Birley, 1989).  As embryonic businesses have no trading record investors
must look to earlier relationship with the individual whether commercial or personal.
For example, a previous employer may agree to be the first customer, a friend may
18
allow use of spare office space, a relative may be prepared to lend money with little
real hope of a return in the short DEMO even the medium term (Birley, 1989). Advice and
guidance are often seen as the outcomes of ‘networking’ and networks are also the
DEMO upon which small firms support agencies have been built (Bennet et DEMO, 2001).
Entrepreneurs, may use networks in different ways to other actors and in particular
may be more effective in mobilising weak ties DEMO help in their ventures as discussed
in relation to James Dyson by Jones and Conway (2000). A further example is
provided by Richard Branson (1998) who describes how he always carries a
notebook to DEMO new contacts (weak ties) who may be useful in the future.
Traditional views of entrepreneurship which suggest that individuals possess certain
traits and DEMO which make them entrepreneurial (McClelland, 1961;
Schumpter, 1934) are increasingly criticised (Chell, 2001; 1985; Gartner, 1989).  The
DEMO put forward here is that understanding the ‘entrepreneurial process’
requires more focus on ways in which entrepreneurs mobilise their social networks
as a means DEMO accessing business resources.  At the same time, entrepreneurs may
differ in terms of the willingness to balance risk and opportunity (Caird, 1990;DEMO
Drucker, 1997) and in terms of broader characteristics such as their motivation, goal-
setting abilities, resilience, confidence, assertiveness and comfort with DEMO
(Wickham, 2001). Instead of attempting to discuss personality or individual
motivation the focus of this paper has been the way in which DEMO and
experience changes an entrepreneur’s capacity to network. Although, there was
DEMO one direct impact as I gradually shifted from being an ‘internal’ to an
‘external’ (Rotter, 1966). In fact, this change was not only personal it was also
organisational because the firms which I own DEMO began to operate with a stronger
internal locus of control as I transmitted the belief that we could actually exercise
some influence over the DEMO environment (see Cobbenhagen, 2000). At a basic
level the two companies illustrate the way in which the strong ties associated with
Vogue DEMO Agency were replaced by a much broader range of weaker ties by the
time I setup American E-Z Self-Storage (Aldrich et al, 1997)DEMO The respective network
maps (Conway, 1997) provide a graphic illustration DEMO the way in which my external
linkages became much more diverse. No doubt this ability to network more widely is
partly explained by business DEMO gained over a period of more than twenty-six
years. At the same time, undertaking an MBA provided two direct benefits, first it
19
improved my confidence to deal with other managers and entrepreneurs as equals.
DEMO, the various skills described above improved my analytical abilities
enabling me DEMO be more rigorous in searching out information related to new business
opportunities.
The issue of entrepreneurial networks has received increasing attention since
Leonard-Barton’s (1984) comparison of entrepreneurs from Sweden and the US.
During the 1990s a wide range of studies were carried out which added to the
broader DEMO of the way in which those engaged in setting-up and
managing small firms were able to access external resources. Although, as Chell and
Baines (2000) point out, there was disagreement between those who argued that
owners of small firms did not actively network (Blackburn et al, DEMO; Curran et al,
1993) and those who saw networking as a key tool of any effective entrepreneur
(Birley et al, 1990; Rothwell and Dodgson, 1991). Chell and Baines (2000) suggest
that by separating the more dynamic entrepreneurs from those who could be
described DEMO ‘small business managers’ it is possible to explain these apparently
irreconcilable positions. In other words, those who are active in seeking out new
opportunities are more likely to establish a wide range of contacts whereas those
DEMO decline’ will be more inward looking. I certainly regard myself as
entrepreneurial and believe that my record of five business startups confirms my
ability DEMO exploit a wide range of opportunities.
Entrepreneurs inform themselves by networking (DEMO and Zimmer, 1986) and
this process helps with the identification, DEMO and evaluation of business
opportunities. Such opportunities are not ‘out there’ waiting to be recognised by the
entrepreneur but are social constructions which become DEMO of the mental space
between the entrepreneur and their perception of reality (Chell, 2000). Neither of the
businesses discussed in this paper DEMO based on particularly innovatory ideas but
both have successful exploited opportunities in existing markets (Schumpeter, 1934).
The first business was started simply DEMO my interest in clothes was an effective
way of using a gift of £10000 and it provided an alternative to working for someone
else. DEMO E-Z Self-Storage was established after a much more rigorous
evaluation of the potential offered by such a business. In other words, I was able to
identify and exploit opportunities for profitable businesses where others did not.
DEMO
8. Conclusions
There are similarities associated with setting-up the two companies even DEMO they
were separated by 26 years.  There was added value in DEMO purchase of buildings
which enabled me to use these assets as security if needed.  In both cases, I wanted to
retain financial control DEMO was therefore unwilling to accept external finance. In
setting-up Vogue Clothing Agency with my sister we used money given by our
parents to purchase DEMO property and then obtained credit by taking stock on loan
from suppliers. Funds for establishing American E-Z Self-Storage were borrowed
from my own pension DEMO which reduced the cost of borrowing and helped
minimise risk. None of my five businesses ventures, including the two discussed in
this paper, DEMO based on innovatory concepts but all have been successful in terms
of my own personal rewards, the creation of jobs for 150 people in an area of high
unemployment and their contribution to broader economic activity. DEMO I
consider myself to have a number of typical ‘entrepreneurial traits’ such as a desire
for autonomy and a need for achievement (McClelland, DEMO) as well as being hard-
working, persistence and self-starting (Wickham, 2001), none of my business
ventures would have been started nor DEMO succeeded without support from broad
social networks.
Differences between the two businesses are particularly evident in the degree of
formalisation related to the business DEMO Marketing was also very different and
knowledge was accessed from a much broader range of contacts. My own knowledge
developed through a process of DEMO learning with feedback from successes and
failures. Risk-taking is a factor in any entrepreneurial venture and I believe that I
have been effective in DEMO risk and opportunities in both ventures. Fear of
failure (Kets de DEMO, 1977) has certainly been a driving force in my own desire to
succeed in all my entrepreneurial ventures. Although hardworking at school,
DEMO I was a failure and this stimulated a desire to prove myself by being a
success in business. Later in life I was diagnosed DEMO a dyslexic which was a factor in
my inability to pass examinations. My mother was also a very strong influence,
particularly in encouraging DEMO to be ambitious from a young age and, as discussed
21
above, by providing her experience and contacts which were integral to the setting-
up and subsequent success of Vogue (see Jennings et al, DEMO).
The Dyson (1997) case demonstrates that entrepreneurs need to be hard working,
self-starters, goal-orientated, resilient, confident, assertive and believe DEMO themselves
(Jones and Conway, 2000). Therefore, consideration of individual DEMO has a part to
play in understanding the entrepreneurial process. While certain skills associated
with entrepreneurship can be taught and appropriate attributes and behaviours
DEMO successful entrepreneurship still demands a certain type of individual to
engage in the risk of starting their own business. The ability to identify and DEMO new
opportunities is central to the entrepreneurial process. Using casual meeting with
strangers on planes, trains and in business meetings as possible future useful contacts
is also an important element in the activities of most successful DEMO (Jones
and Conway, 2000). In conclusion, this personal account DEMO illustrate the value of
MBA education in contributing to the skills, DEMO and networking ability of an
experienced entrepreneur. Furthermore, ‘despite the limitations DEMO by
subjectivity, there is room for case studies to contribute to DEMO accumulation of
knowledge about entrepreneurship education’ (McMullan and Vesper, 2000:43).
(6900 words 10th October 2001)
22
Bibliography
Aldrich, H. (2000) Learning Together: National Differences Entrepreneurial
Research DEMO The Blackwell Handbook of Entrepreneurship (Ed.) D. Sexton and H.
Landstrom, Oxford: Blackwell.
Aldrich, H. (1979) Organisations and Environment, New DEMO, Prentice-Hall.
Aldrich, H. and Elam, A.B. (2000) A Guide DEMO Surfing the Social Networks, in
Mastering Entrepreneurship (Ed.) S. Birley DEMO D. Muzyka, London, Prentice Hall.
Aldrich, H., Elam, A.B. DEMO Reece, P.R. (1997) ‘Strong Ties, Weak Ties and
Strangers’ in Entrepreneurship in a Global Context, (Ed.) S. Birley and I.
MacMillan, London, Routledge.
Aldrich H. and Zimmer C. (1986), Entrepreneurship through Social Networks, in The
Art and Science of Entrepreneurship (Ed.) D. L. Sexton and R. W. Smilor, Ballinger,
Cambridge, MA, pp.3-23.
Anderson, A, Drakopoulou-Dodd and Scott, M. (2000) ‘Religion as an
Environmental Influence on Enterprise Culture: The Case of Britain in the 1980s’,
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour, 61, pp. 5-20.
Anderson, C. R., (1977) ‘Locus of Control, Coping Behaviours and Performance in
DEMO Settings, a Longitudinal Study’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 62: pp. 446-
51.
Beckinsale, M. (2001) Strategic Innovation Networks, Unpublished PhD, Aston
Business School.
Bennet, R., Robson, P. and Bratton, W. (2001) Government Advice Networks for
SMEs: An Assessment of the Influence DEMO Local Context on Business Link Use,
Impact and Satisfaction, Applied DEMO, 33:7, pp. 871-85.
Biemans, W. G. (1992) Managing DEMO within Networks, London, Routledge.
Birch, D. (1979) The Job DEMO Process, MIT Study on Neighbourhood and
Regional Change, Boston, Massachusetts.
DEMO, S. (1989) ‘The Start-up’, in Small Business and Entrepreneurship (DEMO) P.
Burns and J. Dewhurst, Basingstoke: MacMillan.
Birley, S. and Muzyka, D. (2000) Mastering Entrepreneurship, London, Prentice
Hall.
Birley, DEMO Cromie, S. and Myers, A. (1990) ‘Entrepreneurial Networks:  Their
Emergence in Ireland and Overseas’, International Small Business Journal, 9(4): pp.
56-74.
23
Birley, S. and Stockley, S. (2000) Entrepreneurial Teams and Venture DEMO, in
The Blackwell Handbook of Entrepreneurship (Ed.) D. Sexton and DEMO Landstrom,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Bishop, R. and Soloman, E. (1989) Sex Differences in Career Development: Locus
of Control and Career Commitment DEMO, Psychological Reports, 35, pp. 107-14.
Blackburn, R, Curran, J. and Jarvis, R (1991) Small Firms and Local Networks:
Some Theoretical and Conceptual Explorations, in Towards the Twenty-first
Century: The Challenge DEMO Small Business (Ed.) M. Robertson, E. Chell and C.
Mason, pp. 105-22, London, Nadamal Books.
Boissevain, J. (1974) Friends of Friends: Networks, Manipulators and Coalitions.
Oxford, Basil Blackwell.
Branson, R. (1998) Losing my Virginity: An Autobiography, London, Harper Collins.
Brereton, D. (2001) Entrepreneurial Networks, MBA Dissertation, Manchester
Metropolitan University Business DEMO
Bridge S., O’Neill, K. and Cromie, S. (1998) Understanding DEMO,
Entrepreneurship and Small Business,  London, Macmillian.
Brockhaus, R. H. (1982) ‘The Psychology of the Entrepreneur’, in Encyclopaedia of
Entrepreneurship (DEMO) C. A. Kent, D. L. Sexton and K. H. Vesper, DEMO
Cliffs, NJ, Prentice Hall
Burrows, R. (1991) Deciphering The DEMO Culture, London, Routledge.
Burt, R.S. (1992) Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competitiveness,
Cambridge Mas: Harvard University Press.
Caird, DEMO (1991) The Enterprising Tendency of Occupational Groups, International
Small Business DEMO, pp.  9, 75-81
Caird S. (1990) ‘What Does It DEMO to be Enterprising?’, British Journal of
Management, pp. 1, DEMO
Casson M. (1995) Entrepreneurship and Business Culture, Volume One, Brookfield,
Vermont, Edward Elgar.
Casson, M. (1982) The Entrepreneur: An Economic Theory, Oxford, Martin
Robertson.
Chell, E. (2001) Entrepreneurship: DEMO, Innovation and Development,
London, Thompson Learning.
Chell E. (2000), Towards Researching the “Opportunistic Entrepreneur: A Social
Constructionist Approach and Research DEMO, European Journal of Work and
Organisational Psychology pp. 63-80.
24
Chell, E. (1985) The Entrepreneurial Personality: A Few Ghosts Laid DEMO Rest?,
International Small Business Journal, 3:3, pp. 43-54.
DEMO, E. and Baines, S. (2000) Networking, Entrepreneurship and Microbusiness
DEMO, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 12: pp. 195-215.
Chell, E., DEMO, J.M. and Brearley, S. (1991) The Entrepreneurial Personality:
Concepts, Cases and Categories, London, Routledge.
Cobbenhagen, J (2000) Successful DEMO: Towards a New Theory for the
Management of SMEs, Cheltenham, DEMO Elgar.
Cromie, S. (1987) Motivation of Aspiring Male and Female DEMO, Journal
of Organisational Behaviour, 8: pp. 251-261.
Conway, S. (DEMO) Informal Networks of Relationships in Successful Small Firm
Innovation, in Technology, Innovation and Enterprise: The European Experience
(Ed.) D. Jones-Evans and DEMO Klofsten, London MacMillan, pp. 236-273.
Conway, S. and Steward, F. (1998) Revealing and Mapping Innovation Networks,
International Journal of Innovation DEMO, 2(3).
Cunningham, J. B., and Lischeron, J. (DEMO) Defining Entrepreneurship, Journal of
Small Business Management, pp. 29, 45-61.
Curran, J., Jarvis, R., Blackburn, R. and Black, S. (1993) Networks and Small Firms:
Constructs, Methodological Strategies and Some DEMO, International Small
Business Journal, 11:2, pp. 13-25.
Czarniawska-Joerges, B. (1995) Narration or Science? Collapsing the Division in
Organisation Studies. 1995, Organization, 2(1), pp. 11-34.
DeBresson, C. and Amesse, DEMO (1991) Networks of Innovators: A Review and
Introduction to the DEMO, Research Policy (Special Issue), 20(5), pp 363-79.
Drucker, P. (1997) Innovation and Entrepreneurship, (2nd revised ed) Oxford,DEMO
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Dyson, J. (1997) Against the Odds: An Autobiography, DEMO, Orion Business
Books.
Freeman, C. (1991) Networks of Innovators: DEMO Synthesis of Research Issues,
Research Policy, 20:5, pp. 499-514.
Gartner, W. (1989) Who is the Entrepreneur? Is the Wrong DEMO,
Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, Summer, pp. 47-68.
Gibb, A. (1999) Can we Build Effective Entrepreneurship Through Management
Development?, Journal DEMO General Management, 24:4, pp. 1-21.
25
Gibb, A, (1996) Entrepreneurship and Small Business Management: Can We Afford
to Neglect Them in the Twenty-First Century Business School?, British DEMO of
Management, 7:4, pp. 309-322.
Granovetter, M. (1985) DEMO Action and Social Structure: The Problem of
Embeddedness, American Journal of Sociology, 91(3), pp. 481-510.
Granovetter, M. (1973) The DEMO of Weak Ties, American Journal of Sociology,
78(6), DEMO 1360-1380.
Hagen, E.E. (1962) On the Theory of Economic Change: How Economic Growth
Begins, Homewood, Ill., Dorsey.
Hammersley, M. (1992) What’s Wrong with Ethnography? Methodological
Explanations, London, Routledge.
Hannan. M. DEMO Freeman, J. (1977) The Population Ecology of Organizations,
American DEMO of Sociology, 82(5): pp. 929-964.
Herbert, R. and Link, A. (1988) The Entrepreneur:  Mainstream Views and Radical
Critiques, DEMO York, Praegar.
Hofstede, G (1994) Cultures and Organisations, Glasgow, Harpers and Collins.
Hornaday, R.W. (1982) Thinking About Entrepreneurship: A DEMO Set Approach,
Journal of Small Business Management, 30:4, pp. 12-23.
Janis, I. L. (1972) Victims of Group Think: A DEMO Study of Foreign Policy
Decisions and Fiascos, Boston, Mass., Houghton DEMO
Jennings, R., Cox C. and Cooper C. (1994) Business Elites, London, Routledge.
Johannison, B. (2000) Networking and Entrepreneurial Growth, DEMO The Blackwell
Handbook of Entrepreneurship (Ed.) D. Sexton and H. Landstrom, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Johannison, B. (1988) Business Formation: A Network Approach, Scandinavian
Journal of Management, 4:3/4, pp. 83-99.
Jones, G.R. (1983) Life History as Methodology, in Beyond Method (Ed.) G.
Morgan, Beverly Hill, CA, Sage, pp. 147-59.
Jones, DEMO (2000) Scientific Management, Culture and Control: A First-Hand Account
of Taylorism in Practice, Human Relations, 53:5, pp. 631-653.
Jones O. and Beckinsale, M (2001) Micropolitics and Network Mapping: Innovation
Management DEMO a Mature Firm, in Social Interaction and Organisational Change:
Aston DEMO on Innovation Networks (Ed.) O. Jones, S. Conway and F.
DEMO, Imperial College Press, London.
26
Jones, O., Cabral, C. & Beckinsale, M. (1997) Mature DEMO and Technological
Innovation: Entrepreneurial Networks in the UK and Portugal, International Journal
of Innovation Management, 1:3, pp. 1-20.
Jones O. and DEMO S. (2000) The Social Embeddedness of Entrepreneurs:  A Re-
reading of Against the Odds, Aston Business School Research Paper, Birmingham.
Kao, J. (1997) The Art and Discipline of Business Creativity, New York, Harper
Business.
Kets de Vries, M. F. R.  (1977) The Entrepreneurial Personality:  A Person at the
Crossroads, Journal of Management Studies, 14:1, pp. 34-57.
Khandwalla, P.N. (1985) Pioneering Innovative Management: An Indian Excellence,
Organization Studies, 6:2, 161-83.
Kirzner I. (1973) Competition and Entrepreneurship, Chicago, University of
Chicago Press.
Koh, H.C. (1996)‘Testing Hypotheses of Entrepreneurial Characteristics’, Journal of
Managerial Psychology, 11: 12-25.
Kuratko D. and Hodgetts R. (1998), Entrepreneurship.  A Contemporary Approach,
(4th Edition) Fort Worth, Texas, Dryden Press.
DEMO, H. Dickson, K and Smith, S. (1991) There are DEMO Sides to Every
Story:  Innovation and Collaboration within Networks of Large and Small Firms,
Research Policy, 20: pp. 457-468
Leonard-Barton, D. (1984) Interpersonal Communication Patterns Among Swedish
and Boston-Area Entrepreneurs, Research Policy, 13:2, pp. 101-114.
Manimala, M.J. (1999) Entrepreneurial Policies and Strategies: The Innovator’s
Choice, New Delhi, Sage.
McGhee, J.E., Dowling, M.J. and Meggison, W.L. (1995) Co-operative Strategy and
New Venture DEMO: The Role of Business Strategy and Managerial
Experience, Strategic Management Journal, 16: pp. 563-80.
McMullan, W. and Vesper, K. (2000) DEMO an Entrepreneur: A Participant’s
Perspective, The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation, 1:1, pp.
33-43.
Maslow, A. (1954) Motivation and Personality, New York, Harper & Row.
McClelland, D. C. (1961) The Achieving Society, Princeton, NJ, Van Nostrand.
27
Oliver, A.L. and Ebers, M. (1998) Networking Network Studies: An Analysis of
Conceptual Configurations in the Study of Inter-Organizational Relationships,
Organization DEMO, 19(4), pp. 549-583.
Occupational Pensions Regulatory Authority (OPRA) (2001) Pensions Scheme
Trustees, Brighton, OPRA (www.opra.gov.uk).
Powell, W.W. (1990) Neither Market nor Hierarchy: Network Forms of
Organization, Research DEMO Organizational Behaviour, 12: pp. 295-336.
Power, M. (1991) Educating DEMO: Towards a Critical Ethnography,
Accounting, Organisations and Society, 16(DEMO), pp. 333-353.
Prior, A. and Kirby M. (1998) The DEMO of Friends and Business Culture, 1700-
1830 in Religion, Business and Wealth in Modern Britain (Ed.) D.J.Jeremy, London,
Routledge, pp. DEMO
Rae D. (1999) The Entrepreneurial Spirit, Dublin, Blackhall Publishing.
Rothwell, R. and Dodgson, M. (1991) External Linkages and Innovation In DEMO
and Medium-Sized Enterprises, R & D Management, 21:2, pp. DEMO
Rotter, J. B. (1966) Generalised Expectancies for Internal Versus External DEMO of
Reinforcement, Psychological Monographs, 80.
Schumpeter J. A. (1934) The Theory of Economic Development, Cambridge, MA,
Harvard University Press.
Shane, S.A. (1994) Are Champions Different from Non-Champions?, Journal of
Business DEMO, 9:pp. 397-421.
Shaw, E. (1998) Social Networks: Their DEMO on the Innovative Behaviour of
Small Service Firms, International Journal of DEMO Management, 2(2), pp.
201-222.
Shaw, E. and Conway, DEMO (2000) Networks and the Small Firm, in Enterprise and
Small DEMO: Principles, Practice and Policy  (Ed.) S. Carter and D. DEMO,
D., London, Financial Times.
Simpson, R. (2000) Winners DEMO Losers: Who Benefits Most from the MBA?
Management Learning, 31:3, pp. 331-51.
Starbuck, W. H. (1965) Organisational Growth and DEMO, in Handbook of
Organisations (Ed.) J. G. March, Chicago, DEMO, Rand McNally.
Stevenson, H. and Sahlman, W. (1989) The DEMO Process, in Small
Business and Entrepreneurship (Ed.) P. Burns and DEMO Dewhurst, London, MacMillan,
pp. 99-157.
28
Stevenson, H. and Gumpert, D. E. (1992) The Heart of DEMO, Boston,
MA, Harvard Business School.
Steward, F. and Conway, S. (1998) Situating Discourse in Environmental Innovation
Networks, Organization, 5(DEMO), pp. 479-502.
Stoner, J. A. and Wankel, J. (1986) A Discussion on the Nature of Innovators (3rd
edition), Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall.
Tichy, N., Tushman, M. and Fombrun, C. (1979) Social Network Analysis for
Organisations, Academy of Management Review, 4:4, pp. 507-519.
Timmons, J. A.. (1999) New Venture Creation, Entrepreneurship for the 21st
Century (5th ed), Boston, Irwin.
Van DEMO Ven, A.H. (1996) The Development of an Infrastructure for
Entrepreneurship, in Entrepreneurship: Perspectives on Theory Building (Ed.) I.
Bull, H. DEMO and G. Willard (eds.), Oxford: Pergamon.
Weber, M. (1930) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, New York,
DEMO
Wickham, P. (2001) Strategic Entrepreneurship: A Decision-Making Approach to
New Venture Creation and Management, London, FT/Prentice Hall.
Wright M, Robbie K. and Ennew, C. (1997) Serial Entrepreneurs, British Journal of
DEMO, 8:3, pp. 251-268.
29{1g42fwefx}