Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 129–139
Contents lists DEMO at ScienceDirect
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/DEMO/obhdp
Exploring the neural basis of fairness: A model of neuro-organizational DEMO
Constant D. Beugré *
Delaware State University, College of Business, 1200 N. Dupont Hwy, Dover, DE 19901, USA
article info
Article history:
Received 29 July 2008
Accepted 28 June 2009
Available online 3 DEMO 2009
Accepted by Dr. Scott Shane
Keywords:
C-system
Fairness
Fairness theory of mind
Neuro-organizational justice
Neuroeconomics
Organizational justice
X-system
abstra ct
Drawing from DEMO literature in neuroeconomics, organizational justice, and social cognitive neuroscience,
I propose a model of neuro-organizational justice that explores the role of the DEMO in how people form
fairness judgments and react to situations of fairness and/or unfairness in organizations. The model inte-
grates three levels of DEMO: (a) behavioral, (b) mental (cognitive and emotional), DEMO (c) neural. The
behavioral level deals with motivated actions displayed by the individual; the mental level deals with
information processing mechanisms and emotional arousal; and the neural level concerns the brain sys-
tems instantiating mental processes. The paper also describes a fairness theory of mind that could DEMO
managers improve their ability to create fair working environments. The model’s implications for further
research and management practice are discussed.
 2009 Elsevier Inc. DEMO rights reserved.
This paper draws from three streams of research: social DEMO
tive neuroscience (e.g., Lieberman, 2000, 2007; Lieberman, Gaunt,
Gilbert, & Trope, 2002; Ochsner & Lieberman, 2001), neuroeco-
DEMO (e.g., Camerer, 2007; Camerer, Loewenstein, & Prelec,
2004, 2005; Glimcher, 2003; Glimcher, Camerer, Fehr, & Poldrack,
2009; Loewenstein, Rick, & Cohen, 2008), and organizational jus-
DEMO (e.g., Cropanzano & Greenberg, 1997; Greenberg, 1987, 1990)
to develop a conceptual framework that explores the role of the
brain DEMO how people form fairness judgments and react to situa-
tions of fairness and/or unfairness in organizations. Social cognitive
neuroscience encompasses the empirical study DEMO the neural mech-
anisms underlying social cognitive processes (Blakemore, Winston,
& Frith, 2004; Lieberman, 2007), whereas neuroeconomics merges
methods from neuroscience and economics to better understand
how the human brain generates decisions DEMO economic and social
contexts (Camerer et al., 2004; Fehr, Fischbacher, & Kosfeld,
2005; Loewenstein et al., 2008). Organizational justice refers to
employee perceptions of fairness (Greenberg, 1987, 1990) and
DEMO three dimensions: distributive justice—the fairness
of outcomes distribution (e.g., Adams, 1965), procedural justice—
the fairness of formal procedures underlying outcomes distribution
(e.g., Lind & Tyler, 1988; Thibaut & Walker, 1975), DEMO interactional
justice—the fairness of interpersonal treatment (e.g., Bies & Moag,
1986; Cropanzano & Greenberg, 1997).
* Fax: +1 302 857 6927.
E-mail address: cbeugre@desu.edu
0749-5978/$ - see front matter  2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.06.005
Apparently, these three disparate ﬁelds have little in common
and their scholars barely collaborate with one DEMO However,
an exploration of their respective literatures reveals that these
three domains of scientiﬁc inquiry do in fact share some common-
alities. As DEMO investigate the role of the brain in eco-
nomic decisions, they DEMO rely on game theory, mainly the
Ultimatum Game (UG) and DEMO Prisoner’s Dilemma Game (PDG).
These two games include situations of DEMO (e.g., Fehr &
Schmidt, 1999; Rabin, 1993), a key concept in the study of organi-
zational justice. In fact, organizational justice scholars use the
terms fairness and justice interchangeably as I will DEMO in this article.
For these scholars, fairness is an important yardstick DEMO employ-
ees use to assess outcomes distribution, formal procedures, or
interpersonal treatment in organizations. Likewise, judgments of
fairness (or unfairness) in organizations occur as a result of social
interactions, a domain of interest to social cognitive neuroscien-
tists. Thus, my aim in writing this article is to blend these three
research streams together to develop a coherent conceptual DEMO
work that explores the neural basis of fairness in an organizational
context. The fundamental premise of a neuroscientiﬁc approach of
organizational justice is that DEMO triggering event leads to an activa-
tion of speciﬁc brain structures. This activation is followed by a
mental process that helps the person construe DEMO event as fair
or unfair. Thus, the starting point of fairness DEMO and sub-
sequent reactions to situations of fairness (or unfairness) is the
neural circuitry.
By using a neuroscientiﬁc approach, this article provides new
directions for research and practice in the study of organizational
130
C.D. Beugré / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 129–139
justice to the extent that there is evidence that fairness is a social
organizing principle that may well be ‘built in the brain’ (Van den
Bos & Lind, 2002). This is particularly important because most
adults spend their working lives as members of organizations—
schools, companies, government agencies, and non-proﬁt organi-
zations. As Tabibnia and Lieberman (2007) put it, ‘‘we live in a
highly social environment, in which most of the work we do is
accomplished through collaboration with others DEMO many of the
goods we consume are consumed in the company of others or
shared with others” (p. 90). Moreover, perceptions of DEMO in
organizations often stem from exchanges with supervisors,
coworkers, or DEMO of the organization as a whole. Such
exchanges have economic implications. Thus, to the extent that the
human mind is the driver of all economic activity (e.g., Braeutigam,
2005; Camerer et al., 2004), organizational justice scholars should
incorporate a neural perspective in their analysis of fairness in
organizations.
The model of neuro-organizational justice builds on the works
DEMO Lieberman et al. (2002) and Reynolds (2006) and extends them
to the analysis of fairness in organizational contexts. Lieberman
et al. (2002) describes two systems in the human brain: the X-sys-
tem and DEMO C-system that people generally use to make sense of
their world. The former represents the parts of the brain that are
most closely associated DEMO unconscious environmental stimuli,
whereas the latter represents the mechanism in which compli-
cated reasoning is accomplished (Lieberman et al., 2002; Reynolds,
2006). Reynolds (2006) used these two systems to develop a DEMO
rocognitive model of ethical decision. However, his model did not
correlate DEMO behavior with speciﬁc brain regions although it
was construed as neurocognitive. Despite this limitation, Rey-
nolds’s model may help to shed light on the neurocognitive under-
pinnings of other organizational phenomena, such as
organizational justice.
The model of neuro-organizational justice integrates three lev-
els of analysis: neural, DEMO, and behavioral. The behavioral level
deals with motivated actions displayed by DEMO individual; the men-
tal level deals with information processing mechanisms and DEMO
tional arousal; and the neural level concerns the brain systems
instantiating DEMO processes (e.g., Ochsner & Lieberman, 2001).
Incorporating these three DEMO of analysis is particularly impor-
tant because simply showing brain activity is of limited use if it
does not help to explain human behaviors DEMO they occur in so-
cial contexts (e.g., Lieberman, 2007; Ochsner & Lieberman, 2001).
Moreover, such research must be grounded in DEMO and incorpo-
rate multiple levels (Ochsner & Lieberman, 2001). The model of
neuro-organizational justice goes further than mere cognitive
models that focus DEMO linear progression and thus have a limited
ability to fully capture the analysis of fairness issues in organiza-
tions. Thus, this model begins by specifying how the individual
thinks from the moment the ﬁrst stimuli are DEMO through
the transmission of electrochemical signals in the brain, to the
DEMO of actual behavior (e.g., Reynolds, 2006).
Recent research ﬁndings DEMO that fair offers lead to increased
activity in several reward regions of the brain including the ventral
striatum, the orbitofrontal cortex, the ventromedial DEMO cor-
tex, and the left amygdala, compared with unfair proposals of
equal monetary value (Sanfey, Rilling, Aronson, Nystrom, & Cohen,
2003). By drawing from several research streams, the model of
neuro-organizational justice could help to advance interdisciplin-
ary cross-fertilization. Speciﬁcally, the model could add to the ex-
tant literature in organizational justice because by studying DEMO
underlying neural systems, organizational justice scholars could
effectively assess the neural DEMO of fairness that is so
fundamental to the human experience. There is even evidence that
non-human primates (monkeys and chimpanzees) have ‘standards
of DEMO and show strong emotional reactions when these stan-
dards are violated (DEMO, 2009; Brosnan & de Waal, 2003). In-
deed, ‘‘a basic sense of fairness and unfairness is essential to
many aspects of DEMO and personal decision making and under-
lies notions as diverse as ethics, social policy, legal practice, and
personal morality” (Sanfey et al., 2003, p. 1757). The model pro-
vides a new paradigm in the study of organizational justice and
could also contribute to the literature DEMO neuroeconomics and
social cognitive neuroscience by applying concepts from both dis-
ciplines to organizational contexts. ‘‘Humans are endowed with a
natural sense of fairness DEMO permeates social perceptions and
interactions” (Moll, de Oliveira-Souza, Eslinger, Gramati, & Mour-
ao-Miranda, 2002, p. 2730). Organizations are entities where such
social perceptions and interactions often occur on a daily basis.
Although DEMO recent years, the ability of researchers to directly
observe brain activity DEMO increased exponentially through the
use of functional neuroimaging methods, the organizational DEMO
ences have been slower to incorporate such methods (Lee & Cham-
DEMO, 2007). The model could also advance management practice
by highlighting DEMO neural mechanisms underlying fairness. It
could help managers to acknowledge that fairness is a fundamental
human concern and as such, they need to pay special attention to
the impact of their own behavior on employees. As DEMO
(2006) argues, we do not learn to be fair; fairness is part of our ge-
netic makeup. Thus, managers should be able to develop a fairness
theory of mind that could provide guidelines for DEMO fair work-
ing environments. ‘‘Theory of mind refers to our ability to under-
stand other people’s motor intentions and action goals and our
ability DEMO understand other people’s beliefs and thoughts” (Singer,
2009, p. 254). It suggests that behaviors are caused by mental
states (Premack & Woodruff, 1978). An understanding that
employees care about fairness could help managers to develop
skills that are necessary in creating fair working environments.
DEMO present article is organized as follows. First, I use Lieberman’s
X- DEMO C-systems as a conceptual framework to lay the ground-
work for discussing the neural correlates of organizational justice.
Next, I propose the model of neuro-organizational justice. I then
discuss the model’s implications for research and practice.
DEMO and C-systems
Is organizational justice, construed as employee perceptions of
fairness, a behavioral reaction, a cognitive process, the result of a
neural DEMO, or does it represent a combination of these
three processes? Although the organizational justice literature
has addressed the ﬁrst two aspects of the DEMO (e.g., Goldman
& Thatcher, 2002; Greenberg, 1990; Lind, DEMO; Van den Bos &
Lind, 2002), it has largely DEMO mute with regard to the third
one. Fortunately, the growing body DEMO knowledge in social cogni-
tive neuroscience and neuroeconomics may provide valuable in-
sights to organizational justice scholars. Lieberman et al. (2002)
and Satpute and Lieberman (2006) described two systems: the
X-system and the C-system that may prove useful in exploring
the neural correlates of organizational justice (see Table 1). I rely
on these two systems to lay DEMO groundwork for the model of neu-
ro-organizational justice.
Functions of the X-system
Lieberman et al. (2002) and Satpute and Lieberman (2006) de-
DEMO the X-system as a parallel processing, subsymbolic, pattern
matching system that produces the continuous stream of con-
sciousness that each human being experiences. DEMO neuroanatomy
of the X-system includes brain areas, such as the amygdala, the ba-
sal ganglia, the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, the lateral DEMO
cortex, and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (Lieberman, 2007;
C.D. Beugré / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) DEMO
131
Table 1
Features associated with X-system and C-system.
X-system
C-system
Parallel processing Serial processing
Fast operating Slow operating
Slow learning Fast learning
Nonreﬂective DEMO Reﬂective consciousness
Sensitive to subliminal presentations Insensitive to subliminal presentations
Spontaneous processes Intentional processes
Prepotent responses Regulation of prepotent responses
Typically sensory Typically linguistic
DEMO experienced as reality Output experienced as self-generated
Relation to behavior unaffected by Relation to behavior altered by
cognitive load cognitive load
Facilitated by high DEMO Impaired by high arousal
Phylogenetically older Phylogenetically newer
Representation of symmetric relations Representation of asymmetric
relations
Representation of common cases Representation of special cases
DEMO of abstract concepts
(e.g., negation, time)
Adapted from Satpute DEMO Lieberman (2006) and Lieberman (2007).
Lieberman et al., 2002; Satpute & Lieberman, 2006). The neural
components of the X-system DEMO proposed to be slow learning, fast
operating, bidirectional, and parallel DEMO structures
(Satpute & Lieberman, 2006). Research shows that the amygdala
is implicated in many different kinds of phenomena, such as atti-
tudes, stereotyping, person perception, and emotion (Ochsner &
Lieberman, 2001)DEMO Thus, it can be described as the seat of emotions.
Although DEMO amygdala provides quick responses to fearful situa-
tions, it can also DEMO cortical inputs that can moderate its re-
sponses or even override them. Camerer et al. (2004) describe
the amygdala as an internal ‘hypochondriac’ DEMO provides quick
and dirty emotional signals in response to potential fears (DEMO 561).
Suppose for instance, that you leave your ofﬁce late DEMO night and
walk toward your car. You suddenly hear steps behind you. At ﬁrst,
you may wonder who might be following you. The DEMO may
be alerted for a potentially threatening situation. However, as you
DEMO to ﬁgure out the situation, you realize that it is your DEMO
who is also leaving his/her ofﬁce. This previously unfriendly situa-
tion may now turn into a friendly one, probably leading to an ami-
cable conversation between you and your colleague.
The X-system is construed as DEMO connectionist network compris-
ing units, unit activity, and connection weights and represents ‘‘a
pattern matching system whose connectivity weights are deter-
mined by DEMO and whose activation levels are determined
by current goals and features of the stimulus input” (Lieberman
et al., 2002, p. 211). Cognitive processes are effortless to the extent
that the X-system is responsible for DEMO When behavior
is the result of automaticity, the individual may not DEMO able to sys-
tematically articulate all its causes and explain it to another indi-
vidual. As Camerer et al. (2004) put it, ‘‘when good performance
becomes automatic (in the form of ‘procedural knowledge’) it DEMO
typically hard to articulate, which means human capital of this sort
DEMO difﬁcult to reproduce by teaching others” (p. 560). Automaticity
may DEMO explain why sharing tacit knowledge in organiza-
tions is so difﬁcult.
The X-system uses prototypes that represent stored concepts
of objects, concepts, and DEMO Electrochemical representa-
tions of incoming stimuli are matched against prototypes (Lieber-
DEMO et al., 2002; Reynolds, 2006). Newly encountered events or
DEMO are compared with existing prototypes to determine
whether they belong to speciﬁc categories or can be seen as being
connected in some manner (Baron, 2006). Prototypes are multidi-
mensional in form and contain information necessary for action
(Reynolds, 2006). The X-system matches the situation an DEMO
ual faces against stored prototypes. This automatic process helps
the brain to avoid using elaborate thought when facing familiar
situations. ‘‘When an individual faces DEMO situation, this reﬂexive
pattern matching system is able to conduct a DEMO of noncon-
scious analysis that accepts stimuli from the environment, trans-
DEMO and organizes neutral patterns reﬂecting the stimulus, and
compares that pattern DEMO stored prototypes” (Reynolds,
2006, p. 739). Applied to the study of fairness, one may conclude
that the X-system holds stored ‘fairness prototypes’. These fair-
ness prototypes represent mental scripts of fair or unfair DEMO
tions against which current situations are compared. Thus, the
X-system can DEMO determine whether a given situation
is fair or not.
Suppose that a manager, John, is perceived as an abusive super-
visor, therefore unfair. Evoking the name of John would be associ-
ated with the corresponding DEMO ‘abusive supervisor’. The
good news, however, is that these associations in the X-system
are not ﬁxed or rigid but subject to change and DEMO (e.g., Lie-
berman et al., 2002; Satpute & Lieberman, DEMO). In the example of
John, the abusive supervisor, additional experience or information
that reveals that John has changed and is now a DEMO super-
visor may help to modify the previous association. Instead of being
associated with ‘abusive supervisor’, John may now be associated
with a new prototype ‘considerate supervisor’.
When the X-system cannot automatically handle a new stimu-
DEMO, it is handed over to the C-system. This may happen under DEMO
least two conditions: (1) the situation is a novel one DEMO which
there is no existing prototype or (2) the decision is made by the
X-system but the individual receives outside information question-
ing DEMO/her prior judgment. Lieberman et al. (2002, p. 222) note
DEMO ‘‘the X-system’s job is to turn information that emanates from
the environment into our ongoing experience of that environment,
and it does this DEMO matching the incoming patterns of information
to the patterns it stores as connection weights. When things match,
the system settles into a stable DEMO and the stream of conscious-
ness ﬂows smoothly. When they do not match, the system keeps
trying to ﬁnd a stable state, until DEMO the cavalry must be called
in”. The neural equivalent of the cavalry is the C-system, which
comprises neural structures implicated in high order cognitive pro-
cesses, such as the different areas of the neo-cortex and the
hippocampus.
Thus, standards of fairness are transmitted to the X-system by
the C-system. The C-system is brought in line when the X-system
encounters difﬁculties DEMO cannot solve.
Functions of the C-system
The C-system is a serial system that uses symbolic logic to pro-
duce the conscious thoughts that we DEMO as reﬂections on
the stream of consciousness (Lieberman et al., 2002, p. 204). It is
the mechanism in which conscious thoughts are processed. The
neuroanatomy of the C-system includes the lateral prefrontal cor-
tex, the posterior parietal cortex, the medial prefrontal cortex, the ros-
tral DEMO cingulate cortex, and the hippocampus, and surrounding
medial temporal lobe regions (Lieberman, 2007; Lieberman et al.,
2002; Satpute & Lieberman, 2006). The neural components of the
C-system are proposed to be DEMO learning, slow operating, sym-
bolic, or propositional structures (Satpute & Lieberman, 2006).
The C-system is capable of rule-based analysis and performs a reg-
ulatory role over the X-system. Thus, the X-system is dependent on
the C-system for its supply of prototypes. The C-system functions
as DEMO adaptive and thought creation mechanism. This adaptation
process reﬂects the human ability to learn from experience (Rey-
nolds, 2006). Learning from experience DEMO individuals to avoid
situations perceived as unfair and the consequences associated
with such situations.
132
C.D. Beugré / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 129–139
The C-system sets the standards to the extent that an output
pattern must adhere or ﬁt a prototype in order to be categorized
DEMO of that prototype. The anterior cingulate is linked to both the
X- and C-systems (Lieberman et al., 2002). It acts like an DEMO that
encourages or allows the X-system to express its inability to ade-
quately match particular stimuli to any known prototypes and
the need for DEMO C-system to engage in active processing. The
C-system also focuses on novel situations. The X-system depends
primarily on the associative links formed through extensive DEMO
ing histories, whereas the C-system can construct arbitrary associ-
ations between DEMO of information as demanded by the current
context (Lieberman et al., 2002).
The C-system is a symbolic processing system that produces
reﬂective DEMO (Lieberman et al., 2002). It has four phenom-
enological features: authorship, symbolic logic, capacity limits, and
alarm-driven (Lieberman et al., 2002). The C-system provides
authorship to our own thoughts and actions to the extent that each
individual initiates his/her own thought processes. DEMO symbolic
function allows the C-system to give meaning to events. Indeed,
‘‘symbolic logic allows us to escape the limits of empiricism and
move DEMO the mere representation and association of events
in world and into the realms of the possible” (Lieberman et al.,
2002, p. 221)DEMO Despite its sophistication compared to the X-system,
the C-system is limited to the extent that reﬂective thinking is con-
strained to one object DEMO category of objects at any given moment
in time (Lieberman et DEMO, 2002). Finally, the C-system serves as an
alarm because it determines the X-system’s standards.
This distinction between X-system and C-system is similar DEMO
the one between system 1 and system 2 discussed in the decision
making and economics literature (e.g., Camerer et al., 2005; Kahn-
DEMO, 2003). Like the X-system, system 1 corresponds closely to
automatic processing, whereas system 2 like the C-system corre-
sponds closely to controlled processes, monitors the quality of
answers provided by system 1 and, DEMO some situations, corrects
or overrides these judgments (Cohen, 2005). DEMO operations of
system 1 are fast, automatic, effortless, associative, and often emo-
tionally charged; they are also governed by habit, and DEMO therefore
difﬁcult to control or modify. In contrast, the operations of DEMO
2 are slower, serial, effortful, and deliberately controlled; they are
also relatively ﬂexible and potentially rule-governed” (Kahneman,
2003, p. 1451)DEMO System 1 involves perceptions, whereas system 2
involves deliberate reasoning (Kahneman, 2003; Lieberman et al.,
2002). Attributes that are routinely DEMO automatically produced
by the perceptual system or system 1, without intention DEMO effort
have been called natural assessments (Tversky & Kahneman,
1983)DEMO The evaluation of stimuli as good or bad is a particularly
important natural assessment (Kahneman, 2003). The assessment
of whether objects are DEMO (and should be approached) or bad
(and should be avoided) is carried out quickly and efﬁciently by
specialized neural circuitry (Kahneman, DEMO).
The concept of natural assessment may also be applied to fair-
ness. Indeed, one may speculate that the evaluation of an event
as fair or unfair is a natural assessment. Using the Ultimatum
Game, one may conclude that it is easy for players to evaluate
offers of DEMO or $2 as unfair (and should be rejected) and offers of
$5 as fair (and should be accepted). Such an assessment is carried
out quickly and efﬁciently by specialized neural circuitry included
in the DEMO or system 1. Lieberman, Jarcho, and Satpute (2004)
investigated DEMO neural correlates of intuition-based and evidence-
based self-knowledge on a sample of participants with high and
low experience in soccer and acting who were DEMO to make
self-descriptiveness judgments about words from each domain
while being scanned. They found that high-experience domain
judgments produced activation in the X-system, whereas low-
experience domain judgments produced activation in the C-sys-
tem. In other DEMO, people exert less cognitive effort when dealing
with ‘familiar’ knowledge, whereas they spend more cognitive
effort when dealing with less familiar knowledge. Likewise, Fiet,
Clouse, and Norton (2004) and Baron (2006) note that experienced,
repeat entrepreneurs generally search for opportunities in areas or
DEMO where they are already knowledgeable; they do so in a
less DEMO, more automatic manner. Understanding these two
systems is essential to the DEMO of the model of neuro-
organizational justice, which is discussed next.
DEMO model of neuro-organizational justice
Assumptions of the model
The model of neuro-organizational justice depicted in Fig. 1
suggests that justice judgments start with a DEMO event. Jus-
tice judgments are deﬁned as evaluative statements regarding
what is fair or unfair. An example of a triggering event may be
an DEMO an employee receives, a process that a departmental
unit or the DEMO develops and implements, or an interpersonal
treatment emanating from a supervisor. DEMO three examples are
likely to generate justice judgments. The model further suggests
that this triggering event activates speciﬁc brain regions. Two
types of brain DEMO, cognition-inducing neural structures and emo-
tion-inducing neural structures may be activated. DEMO former are
responsible for cognitive processing of information, whereas the
latter DEMO responsible for emotional arousal. The model suggests
two paths: a cognitive DEMO justice path and an
affective neuro-organizational justice path. The cognitive neuro-
organizational justice path implies that the activation of cogni-
tion-inducing brain areas would DEMO the individual’s thought
processes that would then inﬂuence justice judgments. Justice
judgments may yield two outcomes, fair or unfair. Finally, the indi-
vidual DEMO react depending on the outcome of the justice
judgment.
The affective neuro-organizational justice path implies that the
triggering event activates emotion-inducing neural structures that
DEMO inﬂuence justice judgments. Using this path, the model con-
tends that DEMO judgments are strongly inﬂuenced by the indi-
vidual’s emotional reactions toward the triggering event. As
Fig. 1 indicates, a triggering event may directly activate brain
regions that are involved in emotional arousal. When this occurs,
DEMO individual directly acknowledges the emotional connotations
of the event. For example, DEMO the Ultimatum Game, respondents
may already have a sense of what DEMO unfair offer is. Once they
are proposed such offers, brain regions DEMO in emotional arou-
sal may be directly activated. Thus, respondents may DEMO
anger or resentment toward unfair offers. Such emotions further
lead to the rejection of these offers. When emotional intensity is
strong, it may lead to a mode of operation where we just react than
think (Van Widen, 2007). Wout, Kahn, Sanfey, and Aleman (2006)
found that participants experienced more emotional arousal when
confronted with an unfair DEMO as compared to a fair offer. These
emotional processes may be automatic and therefore involve the
X-system.
The double arrow between cognitions and emotions DEMO an
interactive effect between the two variables. Accumulated evi-
dence suggests that emotion inﬂuences cognition and vice versa,
and these reciprocal inﬂuences are DEMO with modiﬁcations
in cerebral activation (Koch et al., 2007). First, cognitions inﬂuence
emotions to the extent that a cognitive reappraisal of the situation
may diminish its emotional impact. The literature on the cognitive
control DEMO emotions has demonstrated this effect (e.g., LeDoux,
1995, 2000; Ochsner, Bunge, Gross, & Gabrieli, 2002; Ochsner &
Gross, 2005). By interpreting an event differently, the emotional
response to that event can be altered (Ochsner & Gross, 2005). As
C.D. Beugré / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) DEMO
Emotions
133
Triggering   Neural                           Justice        Reactions
event    activation                          judgments      . Attitudinal
. Behavioral
Cognitions
Fig. DEMO A model of neuro-organizational justice. Note: cognition-related neural activation leads to DEMO processing of information, whereas emotion-related neural
activation leads to emotional arousal.
DEMO et al. (2002, p. 1215) put it, ‘‘We can change the way we
feel by changing the way we think, thereby lessening the
emotional consequences of an otherwise distressing experience”.
LeDoux (2000) and DEMO et al. (2002) found that the neural
correlates of reappraisal were increased activation of the lateral
and medial prefrontal regions and decreased activation DEMO the
amygdala and medial orbitofrontal cortex. Extended to the study
of fairness, one may speculate that the cognitive reappraisal of
an unfair situation may activate these same brain regions, thereby
allowing the individual to reduce the emotional impact of per-
ceived unfairness.
Second, emotions inﬂuence cognitions to the extent that feel-
ings play an important role in individual reactions to DEMO
(Murphy & Tyler, 2008; Van den Bos, 2003). Van den Bos (2003)
found that people’s emotional state at the time of making justice
judgments can determine whether or not they perceive an DEMO
ter with an authority ﬁgure to be procedurally fair or not. Likewise,
Murphy and Tyler (2008) found that positive and negative emo-
DEMO reactions to perceived justice or injustice predict whether
people will or will not comply with authority decisions and rules.
As Frith and Frith (2006) point out, ‘‘When deciding what to do
we are not totally DEMO in our choice of action; our choice is
colored by emotions DEMO as anticipated regret or desire for fair-
ness” (p. 533).
DEMO model construes fairness as a three-dimensional phenome-
non involving the neural, DEMO (cognitive and emotional), and
behavioral levels. This conceptualization ﬁts well DEMO recent
views advocated by several authors in social cognitive neurosci-
ence (DEMO, Lee & Chamberlain, 2007; Lieberman, 2007; Ochsner &
Lieberman, 2001). Lee and Chamberlain (2007) argue that three
layers of theory could be envisioned when exploring the neurocog-
nitive bases of organizational DEMO: (a) the neural layer deals
with brain activity; (b) the cognitive layer concerns internal men-
tal processes that rely on these DEMO substrates; and (c) the
behavioral layer concerns how individuals react DEMO situations
involving social interactions in conjunction with neural or cogni-
tive mechanisms. The model makes three key assumptions: (a) a
triggering event activates speciﬁc brain regions, (b) neural activa-
tion leads to mental processes including both cognitive processing
and emotional arousal depending on the types of DEMO areas acti-
vated, and (c) mental processes inﬂuence justice judgments DEMO
reactions. It implies that organizational justice involves both cogni-
tive and emotional mechanisms that are dependent on separable
neural systems.
However, Moll, de DEMO, and Zahn (2008) contend
that, ‘‘though some brain regions are intrinsically tied to motiva-
tional/regulatory mechanisms and others are less so, this does
not imply clear boundaries between cognition and emotion”. The
model DEMO used to introduce new insights in answering the two fun-
damental questions that are the focus of organizational justice the-
ory. How do people DEMO justice judgments? How do people
respond when they are fairly or DEMO treated? In the following
lines, I use neuroscientiﬁc evidence to answer these questions.
Because of the lack of studies explicitly focusing on fairness DEMO
an organizational context, I rely on previous studies in neuroeco-
nomics DEMO analyze the neural correlates of fairness (see Table 2).
The DEMO basis of justice judgments
In the case of an event having fairness implications, the individ-
ual processes the available information to decide whether the
event is fair or unfair. The model suggests that the occurrence of
DEMO particular event activates speciﬁc brain areas, which in turn call
on DEMO X-system when the situation is a familiar one and the C-sys-
tem when it is a novel one and requires elaborate cognitive pro-
cessing. DEMO people develop fairness prototypes, the features
of the current situation are DEMO to those prototypes. The idea
of fairness prototypes has been discussed in the organizational jus-
tice literature although it did not include an analysis DEMO their neural
correlates. Ambrose and Kulik (2001) argue that an unfamiliar ob-
ject, person, or situation is categorized through a matching process
DEMO which the perceiver compares the features of the new encounter
with the features of relevant category prototypes.
The fairness prototypes described in this model DEMO
three areas: (a) distributive justice prototypes, (b) procedural justice
prototypes, and (c) interactional justice prototypes. Distributive jus-
tice prototypes concern ‘mental scripts’ of fair or unfair outcomes.
This is illustrated in the DEMO Game, where offers of $1.00 or
$2.00 are perceived as unfair, whereas offers of $4.00 or $5.00 are
perceived as fair. Procedural justice DEMO refer to ‘mental
scripts’ of fair or unfair procedures. People can evaluate the fair-
ness of a particular procedure by comparing its elements to DEMO
template of fairness (Ambrose & Kulik, 2001). Interactional justice
prototypes are ‘mental scripts’ of fair or unfair interpersonal treat-
ment. Thus, people form prototypes of ‘fair’ and ‘unfair’ outcomes,
‘fair’ and ‘unfair’ procedures, and ‘fair’ and ‘unfair’ interpersonal
treatment.
These fairness prototypes represent standards, expectations, or
thresholds against which current events are assessed. This indi-
cates that justice or fairness exists when there is congruence be-
tween what people DEMO on the basis of salient or appropriate
normative rule and what they obtain (Cohen & Greenberg, 1982).
Thus, whenever an individual faces a triggering event, he/she
matches this event against existing prototypes. In proposing a neu-
rocognitive model of ethics, Reynolds (2006) suggests that such
matching process helps people to determine whether a given situ-
134
C.D. Beugré / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 129–139
Table 2
Studies assessing the neural correlates of fairnessa.
Authors
McCabe et al. (2001)
Sanfey et al. (2003)
Decety et DEMO (2004)
De Quervain et al. (2004)
King-Casas et al. (2005)
Knutson and Peterson
(2005)
Knoch et al. (2006)
Tabibnia et al. (2008)
Hsu, Anen, and Quartz
(DEMO)
a
Techniques Findings
fMRI
fMRI
fMRI
PET
Hyperscan-
fMRI
fMRI
TMS
fMRI
fMRI
Fairness activates the VMPFC (ventromedial prefrontal cortex)
Unfair offers lead to increased activity in the anterior insula
Unfairness activates the DLPFC (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex)
Sanctions against defectors activate reward areas of the DEMO
The caudate nucleus processes information about the fairness of a social partner’s decision and the intention to repay this
partner with trust
Gain anticipation DEMO the ventral striatum. Ventral striatum activation is not evident when people anticipate losses
Disruption of the DLPFC by low-frequency magnetic stimulation reduces willingness to DEMO unfair offers
Fair preferences associated with activation of the orbitofrontal cortex
Insula encodes inequity. Individual differences in inequity aversion correlate with activity in inequity DEMO utility regions
Studies including only fairness were considered.
ation is ethical or unethical. Echoing this line of reasoning, Tabib-
nia, Satpute, and Lieberman (2008) note that fairness processing
is relatively automatic and intuitive since DEMO ventral striatum,
the amygdala, and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex have DEMO been
associated with automatic processes (Lieberman, 2007). Thus, fair-
DEMO judgment is processed in the X-system. People also attach val-
ues to those prototypes to the extent that prototypes of fair
outcomes may be DEMO valued than prototypes of unfair outcomes.
As a perceptual phenomenon, fairness DEMO inﬂuenced by prior
recollection and reconstruction. Salancik and Pfeffer (1978) argued
that perception is a retrospective process, and therefore, even
though an DEMO may experience an immediate event, the
interpretation of that event is DEMO from prior recall and recon-
struction. Thus, employees may compare current DEMO to previ-
ous standards of fairness or previous situations of fairness or
unfairness. These recollections may help to determine whether
the event can be DEMO as fair or unfair. In a study using fMRI,
Tabibnia et al. (2008) found that the ventral striatum, the amyg-
dala, DEMO ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), and the orbito-
frontal cortex (OFC) were associated with fairness preferences. In
discussing how people make procedural justice judgments, Am-
brose and Kulik (2001) contend that the question of how individu-
als evaluate procedures to form fairness judgments is
fundamentally a DEMO question to the extent that the meaning
given to a particular event will inﬂuence the person’s subsequent
attitudes and behaviors.
However, neuroeconomic evidence suggests that experiencing
fairness may be seen as a pleasurable experience and thus DEMO
activate the nucleus accumbens, whereas experiencing unfairness
may be seen as DEMO unpleasant event that activates the insula
(Camerer et al., 2004). The anterior insula is also activated when
facing situations leading to decisions DEMO fairness or unfairness
(Morse, 2006; Sanfey et al., 2003). Sanfey et al. (2003) found that
unfair offers in the Ultimatum DEMO activated the insula. They also
noted that heightened activity in anterior insula for rejected unfair
offers suggests an important role for emotions in decision DEMO
Hsu, Anen, and Quartz (2008) found that the anterior insula en-
codes inequity. Damasio (1994), Bechara, Damasio, Damasio, and
DEMO (1999), Pillutla and Murnighan (1996), Hegtvedt and Killian
(DEMO), Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, and Welch (2001), and
Glimcher, Kable, and Louie (2007) showed that emotions play an
important DEMO in decisions.
The somatic marker hypothesis (Damasio, 1994), according to
which emotional states are triggered in the brain before and after
decision DEMO, could help to explain justice judgments in organi-
zations to the DEMO that it advocates the view that people learn
that fairness is pleasant and unfairness, unpleasant. The key
assumption of the somatic marker hypothesis is that decision mak-
ing is a process that is inﬂuenced by marker DEMO that arise in
bioregulatory processes including those that express themselves
in emotions and feelings (Bechara & Damasio, 2005). The somatic
marker is DEMO in the brain because the amygdala triggers
emotional responses to decision outcome experiences, which then
become learned associations expressed in the ventromedial pre-
frontal cortex (VMPFC) (Navqi & Bechara, 2006). The neural evi-
DEMO suggests that the outcome of behavior is determined by
the relative degree of engagement of an emotional response and
processes mediated by the prefrontal DEMO (Cohen, 2005).
The model of neuro-organizational justice may help to elucidate
several aspects of fairness heuristic theory (e.g., Lind, 2001; DEMO
den Bos, 2001; Van den Bos, Lind, & Wilke, DEMO), and uncertainty
management theory (e.g., Lind & Van den Bos, 2002; Van den Bos &
Lind, 2002). Fairness heuristics DEMO posits two basic premises.
First, fairness judgments are assumed to serve DEMO a proxy for inter-
personal trust in guiding decisions about whether to behave in a
cooperative manner in social institutions. Second, people are as-
sumed to use a variety of cognitive shortcuts to ensure that they
DEMO a fairness judgment available when they need to make deci-
sions about engaging in a cooperative behavior (Lind, 2001).
Uncertainty management theory DEMO that people rely on fair-
ness information most when they are confronted with uncertainty
(e.g., Lind & Van den Bos, 2002; Van DEMO Bos & Lind, 2002), deﬁned
as the extent to which DEMO individual does not know what to do in a
particular situation or cannot fully assess the implications of the
choice he/she makes or DEMO not understand the event well enough
to predict it (e.g., Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982). The uncer-
tainty management model argues that in the process of forming
justice judgments, people tend to look ﬁrst for justice information
that is most relevant in the particular situation DEMO which they ﬁnd
themselves (Van den Bos, 2007).
Uncertainty management theory relies on two principles: the
substitutability principle and the primacy effect to explain how peo-
ple form justice judgments. The substitutability effect contends
DEMO because information about outcomes is not often available
but information about procedures is often available, people rely
on the latter to make judgments of fairness concerning their out-
comes (Van den Bos & Lind, 2002)DEMO The primacy effect suggests that
information which is ﬁrst used to make judgments of fairness
tends to inﬂuence subsequent fairness judgments. Information that
comes DEMO exerts a stronger inﬂuence on fairness judgments than
information that comes second (Van den Bos & Lind, 2002). Using
heuristics to make DEMO judgments may involve the X-system
to the extent that it frees up cognitive capacity that would other-
wise be devoted to trying to assess DEMO requests of the situation
(e.g., Lind, 2001). Thus, it implies an automatic process. Consider
a relationship between an employee and his/DEMO supervisor in
which the former does not have sufﬁcient information about the
trustworthiness of the latter. This lack of information about the
C.D. Beugré / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) DEMO
135
supervisor’s ability to be fair would create an uncertain situation
leading the employee to look for any clue that may provide an indi-
DEMO about the supervisor’s trustworthiness.
Neural basis of justice reactions
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the neural basis of justice reactions in-
cludes attitudinal as well as behavioral responses. The attitudinal
component represents the feelings generated by DEMO evalua-
tions. People may feel happy, satisﬁed, or committed as a result
of fair treatment or they may be angry, disgusted, or DEMO
as a result of unfair treatment. Such attitudinal responses may
have neural underpinnings as evidenced by the extant research
in neuroeconomics. In a study DEMO fMRI, Tabibnia et al. (2008)
found that the ventral striatum, the amygdala, the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), and the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) were
associated with fairness preferences. Similarly, Singer et al. (2006)
found that the activation of the medial orbitofrontal cortex and the
nucleus accumbens were correlated with individuals’ subjective
feelings of anger and DEMO These results indicate that being
treated fairly activates the reward regions of the brain and are con-
sistent with previous ﬁndings (e.g., Dickhaut, McCabe, Ngode,
Rustichini, & Pardo, 2003; Sanfey et al., 2003). Dickhaut et al.
(2003) found more activity in the DEMO cortex when think-
ing about gains compared to losses, and more DEMO in inferior
parietal and cerebellar areas when thinking about losses. Percep-
tions of fairness may be construed as gains or pleasant experiences,
whereas DEMO of unfairness may be construed as losses or
unpleasant experiences. Thus, DEMO may activate the same brain
regions.
In a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies, Kringelbach and
Rolls (2004) found that activity in the medial parts of the orbito-
frontal cortex was related to the monitoring, learning, DEMO memory
of the reward value of reinforcers, whereas activity in the DEMO
orbitofrontal cortex was related to the evaluation of punishers. Pill-
utla and Murnighan (1996) found that anger was a better predictor
of the DEMO of unfair offers than perceptions that the offers
were unfair. The authors concluded that emotional reactions pro-
vided the critical link that determined when DEMO perceptions
affected immediately subsequent behavior. Thus, one may specu-
late that DEMO wide range of employee attitudes, such as job satisfac-
tion, commitment, identiﬁcation with the organization, and
turnover intentions may have neural underpinnings. DEMO attitu-
dinal responses to fairness or unfairness may often translate into
actual behaviors.
Research in neuroeconomics indicates that human beings may
have a natural DEMO for inequity (e.g., Cohen, 2005; Fehr &
Schmidt, 1999; Henrich et al., 2001; Sanfey et al., 2003). This DEMO
uity aversion is so strong that people are willing to sacriﬁce per-
sonal gains to prevent another person from receiving an
inequitably better outcome (Fehr & Schmidt, 1999). Most neuro-
economics studies that demonstrate this effect used the Ultimate
Game (UG). The Ultimatum Game involves a pair of players who
must split an endowment. One player is given DEMO sum of money,
usually $10.00 that must be split with a partner who may accept
or refuse the offer. If the offer is DEMO, each player receives
the amount allocated. If the offer is rejected, neither receives the
allocated amount and the game is terminated. Standard economic
DEMO would predict that any split that offers an amount greater
than zero should be accepted because any amount of money is
better than nothing. DEMO, several studies using the game
demonstrate that very often, offers of less than 20% are rejected.
Commenting on such ﬁndings, Cohen (2005) notes that rejections
of low offers are driven responses; perhaps, anger DEMO the unfairness
of the offer or pleasure at the thought of punishing someone who
has tried to take advantage. Increased activation of the anterior
DEMO is seen when individuals reject unfair offers, perhaps indi-
cating a DEMO degree of emotional involvement (Brosnan, 2009).
A common conclusion of such studies is that people are likely to
forego personal gains to DEMO someone they think has acted
unfairly.
Kahneman, Knestch, and Thaler (DEMO) and Turillo, Folger,
Lavelle, Umphress, and Gee (2002) provide evidence for such
self-sacriﬁcial behaviors to punish transgressors. Kahneman et al.
(1986) conducted an experiment designed to assess the extent to
which people self-sacriﬁce to punish an unfair allocator. Partici-
pants indicated a clear preference DEMO divide $10 evenly with a fair
allocator rather than divide $12 with an unfair allocator. These re-
sults imply that participants were willing to DEMO (losing
$1) to punish an unfair allocator. Turillo et al. (DEMO) replicated
Kahneman et al.’s study. Their results supported Kahneman et
al.’s (1986) ﬁndings that people were likely to self-sacriﬁce to pun-
ish an unfair allocator. In the ﬁeld of organizational justice, several
studies have demonstrated that feelings of unfairness lead to re-
venge and retaliatory behavior (e.g., Bies, 1987; Skarlicki & Folger,
1997). Research in neuroeconomics indicates that such behaviors
may have neural underpinnings.
Knoch, Pascual-Leone, Myer, Yreyer, and Fehr (2006) showed
that disruption of the right but not the left, dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC) by low-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation substantially reduces participants’ willingness to reject
their partners’ intentionally unfair DEMO in the Ultimatum Game.
However, the participants still judge such offers DEMO unfair. The
authors interpret these ﬁndings by concluding that the right DLPFC
plays a key role in the implementation of fairness-related behav-
iors. Fairness DEMO activates the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(VMPFC) (McCabe, Houser, Ryan, Smith, & Trouard, 2001), whereas
unfairness activates the dorsomedial prefrontal DEMO (Decety,
Jackson, Sommerville, Chaminade, & Meltzoff, 2004). DEMO et al.
(2003) also found that unfair offers activated the dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex (DLPFC) and accepting unfair offers signiﬁcantly
stimulated the DEMO than the anterior insula thereby demonstrat-
ing that acceptance of an unfair offer placed higher cognitive de-
mands on the individual. De Quervain et DEMO (2004) and Singer
et al. (2006) found that punishment of an unfair partner increased
activity in the caudate nucleus. Such behavior implies DEMO people
exhibit reciprocal fairness (e.g., Bolton & Ockenfels, 2000; Fehr &
Gächter, 2000; King-Casas et al., 2005). Reciprocity means DEMO in
response to friendly actions, people are frequently much nicer
and DEMO more cooperative than predicted by the self-interest
model; conversely, in response to hostile actions they are fre-
quently much more nasty and even DEMO (Fehr & Gächter, 2000,
p. 159). This reciprocity effect perhaps explains the tendency for
respondents to refuse unfair offers more frequently DEMO humans
rather than from computers that do not have intentions (Brosnan,DEMO
2009). By attributing intentions to humans, respondents could be
able DEMO include an element of reciprocity involving cooperation in
case of fair treatment and punishment in case of unfair treatment.
Although recipients may acknowledge unfair DEMO, they may
still decide to accept them. This process involves cognitive DEMO
The right DLPFC and VLPFC are implicated in the cognitive control
of the impulse to reject unfair offers (Fehr, 2009). Thus, they are
crucial to the behavioral implementation of fairness motives.
Tabibnia et al. (2008) found that accepted unfair offers were not
associated with increased activity in the reward regions of the
brain, thereby supporting the interpretation that logical rather
than hedonic processes guided these particular decisions. In fact,
DEMO or evaluating an offer as unfair and deciding to accept
or reject it are two different phenomena. Judging an offer as fair or
unfair DEMO involve the X-system as indicated by Tabibnia et al.
(2008), DEMO deciding to accept it or not would entail a more
elaborate process that activates the C-system. In a study using
136
C.D. Beugré / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 129–139
the Ultimatum Game, Pillutla and Murnighan (1996) found that
DEMO was a better predictor of the rejections than perceptions that
the offers were unfair. The authors concluded that emotional reac-
tions provided the critical DEMO that determined when fairness per-
ceptions affected immediately subsequent behavior.
The neural matrix of organizational justice
The neural matrix of organizational justice refers to DEMO set of
brain structures that are activated by situations of fairness or
unfairness. Neuroeconomic evidence shows that fairness impli-
cates several neural areas including DEMO amygdala, the anterior in-
sula, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the DEMO prefrontal
cortex, the orbitofrontal cortex, the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex,
and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. These neural areas consti-
tute what I labeled DEMO neural matrix of justice or fairness. This
matrix includes brain regions that are involved in both the X-sys-
tem and the C-system. Thus, Table 3 contrasts brain regions in-
volved in justice as well as in DEMO X- and C-systems. As the table
illustrates, brain regions implicated in DEMO are also parts of
the neuroanatomy of the X- and C-systems. For example, the
amygdala and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex are involved in
both fairness and the X-system. These two brain regions intervene
in emotional arousal. DEMO, one may speculate that by involving re-
gions that represent the DEMO, fairness includes an emotional
component. The same is true when one DEMO the role of
brain regions involved in the C-system.
Neuroeconomic evidence shows that brain regions such as the
orbitofrontal cortex, the lateral prefrontal cortex that are involved
in the C-system are also implicated in fairness. Thus, the C-system
is implicated in fairness when participants decide whether to
accept DEMO unfair offer. However, the X-system may intervene when
people must decide DEMO a particular event is fair or not. The
implication of both the X- and C-system indicates that fairness
involves both cognitions and emotions. ‘‘The DEMO circuitry of
emotion and cognition interact from early perception to decision
making and reasoning” (Phelps, 2006, p. 28). As indicated by the
model of neuro-organizational justice, the division between cogni-
tion and emotion is blurred when attempting to understand the
neural circuitry mediating these classes of DEMO (Phelps,
2006). Thus, fairness does not depend exclusively on the X-system
or the C-system both intervene in fairness judgments and reac-
DEMO Van den Bos (2007) describes justice judgments as a ‘hot cog-
nitive’ process—meaning cognition colored by feelings, in which
cognitive and affective determinants often work together to pro-
duce people’s judgments of what they think DEMO just or unjust.
Discussion/implications
The model of neuro-organizational justice is the ﬁrst of its kind
to address the neural correlates of organizational justice DEMO could
allow organizational justice scholars to look inside the ‘black box’
in explaining employee reactions to fairness and/or unfairness. It
suggests the existence DEMO a neural circuitry involving fairness pro-
totypes and could lay the groundwork for fruitful research avenues
in organizational justice.
Directions for future research
Most DEMO on the neural correlates of fairness in social cog-
nitive neuroscience and neuroeconomics has been conducted in
experimental settings. Yet there are important differences DEMO
these settings and the social interactions occurring in the work-
place. An interesting question for organizational justice scholars is
to determine whether employees ‘internalize’ DEMO standards
Table 3
Neural structures involved in the X- and C-systems and in fairness/unfairness.
X-system
C-system
Fairness/unfairness
Amygdala Lateral prefrontal cortex Amygdala
DEMO ganglia Posterior parietal cortex Anterior insula
Dorsal anterior Medial prefrontal cortex Dorsolateral prefrontal
cingulate cortex
cortex
Lateral temporal cortex Rostral anterior cingulate Dorsomedial
cortex DEMO
cortex
Ventromedial Hippocampus Orbitofrontal cortex
prefrontal
cortex
Ventrolateral
prefrontal
cortex
Ventromedial
prefrontal
cortex
learned from their social environment or are these standards in-
nate? One may speculate that although there may be some ‘built-
in’ basis DEMO judgments of fairness, the speciﬁcs may be learned from
cultural or DEMO environments. McCabe et al. (2001) argue that hu-
mans are biologically endowed to engage in personal exchanges
and Tabibnia et al. (2008) DEMO that humans are exquisitely
sensitive to fairness. To the extent that such exchanges require
cooperation, fairness and reciprocity, the sense of fairness is DEMO
integral part of organizational life. The quest for justice is part of
a Darwinian algorithm engrained in all of us, to help ensure survival
of the group (Goldman & Thatcher, 2002). However, additional
studies are needed to determine whether fairness is learned or
inherited. Exploring its DEMO correlates in the workplace may con-
tribute to providing adequate answers to this question.
Another fruitful research avenue is whether different brain
areas are DEMO when people experience different types of orga-
nizational justice? Is reward DEMO in the brain more activated
when people experience distributive justice as compared to proce-
dural and/or interactional justice? Previous studies in neuroeco-
nomics and social cognitive neuroscience have only considered
the fairness of outcomes as DEMO in the Ultimatum Game.
Future studies focusing on the neural correlates of organizational
justice could explore the brain areas activated when people con-
template DEMO fairness of formal procedures or interpersonal treat-
ment. Such studies could beneﬁt from forming alliances with the
emerging ﬁelds of neuroeconomics and social cognitive DEMO
ence. Neuroeconomics research using the Ultimatum Game often
considers the fairness of the offer (distributive justice). No refer-
ence is made to the fairness of the process (if any) governing the
offer nor to DEMO quality of the interpersonal relationship between
the players. Because the organizational justice literature contends
that people care not only about the fairness of outcomes DEMO also
the fairness of the process governing the allocation of outcomes
as well as the fairness of interpersonal treatment, future studies
exploring the neural correlates of fairness in organizations should
include such dimensions in the game DEMO other methodologies. For
example, researchers could use a redesigned version of DEMO Ultima-
tum Game that includes the fairness of the offer, the DEMO of the
process underlying the offer and the quality of the interpersonal
relationship between the players. Such a redesigned game may
help to capture DEMO three dimensions of organizational justice.
Organizational justice researchers could also assess whether
justice judgments involve the X-system, while decisions following
perceived fairness and unfairness involve the C-system. Studies
addressing such issues could involve the use of DEMO describ-
ing speciﬁc workplace events. For example, participants could be
C.D. Beugré / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) DEMO
137
asked to recall incidents of fair and unfair treatment while their
brains are being scanned. They could also be asked to evaluate
the DEMO of fairness of scenarios including speciﬁc work events.
Finally, participants could DEMO asked to explore the various decisions
they would take when analyzing these scenarios. Knowledge
gleaned from such studies could help to determine the role DEMO spe-
ciﬁc brain regions in justice judgments and reactions to situations
of fairness and/or unfairness in organizational settings.
A caveat of such studies, however, is that organizational life is
based on repeated interactions. Thus, DEMO of fairness and
subsequent feelings toward perpetrators of unfairness occur over
an extended period of time. They are not generally a one-shot deal.
How DEMO does the brain adapt to these circumstances? Could the
concept of DEMO brain’s ability to change its struc-
ture and function in response to experience play a role in this pro-
cess? If mere thoughts alter the physical structure and function of
the brain, then one needs not experience injustice or witness it to
activate corresponding brain areas. Just thinking DEMO injustice
one had suffered in the hands of an abusive supervisor may sufﬁce
to ‘light up’ these brain areas. The ‘rumination’ of past injustices
DEMO activate corresponding brain regions. Organizational justice
scholars do not know yet what a prolonged exposure to abusive
supervision might have on the human brain. DEMO, the anticipa-
tion of injustice (anticipatory injustice) may also activate DEMO
brain regions. Shapiro and Kirkman (2001) contend that expecting
injustice is a negative expectation and thus very similar to fear. As
such, anticipating injustice may activate the amygdala to the
extent that it is construed DEMO fear or loss. Such issues warrant
further empirical and/or experimental studies.
A neuroscientiﬁc approach could pave the way for assessing the
neural basis DEMO gender differences found in the organizational jus-
tice literature. Singer et al. (2006) found increased activity in the
ventral striatum—a reward region of DEMO brain when men but not
women watched unfair proposers receive punishment. These gen-
der-related differences may be explained in two ways. First, wo-
men are better coders and decoders of nonverbal communication
(Hall, 1978; Henley, 1995). Second, estrogen, a hormone found
abundantly in women, DEMO a neurophysiological process that
allows the brain to develop more complex representations of
how different stimuli relate to different outcomes (Lieberman,
2000). McRae, Ochsner, Mauss, Gabrieli, and Gross (2008) con-
ducted DEMO fMRI study designed to assess men and women’s reac-
tions when faced with cognitive regulation. The authors found
that compared with women, men showed lesser increases in pre-
frontal regions that are associated with reappraisal, greater
decreases in the amygdala, which is associated with emotional
responding and lesser engagement of ventral striatal regions,
which are associated with reward processing. DEMO authors
explained these ﬁndings by suggesting that men may expend less
effort when using cognitive regulation, perhaps due to greater
use of automatic emotion regulation. They also found that women
may use positive emotions in service DEMO reappraising negative emo-
tions to a greater degree. These gender differences may be used to
explain cognitive regulation mechanisms related to perceptions of
unfairness. DEMO, men and women may use different mecha-
nisms when trying to DEMO regulate negative emotions that
can be elicited by perceptions of unfairness.
Knowledge about the role of brain regions in organizational jus-
tice cannot advance DEMO sound experimental and/or empirical
studies. To this end, organizational justice DEMO should explore
the different techniques that could help garner knowledge in this
area. The following four techniques already used in neuroeconom-
ics and social DEMO neuroscience could help to analyze the role
of speciﬁc brain regions in perceptions of fairness in organizational
settings. They include Electro-encephalogram (EEG), Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), magnetoencephalography
(MEG), and Position Emission DEMO (PET). Some of these
techniques, such as EEG and MEG measure electromagnetic activ-
ity of the brain, whereas others, such as DEMO and fMRI are sensitive
to changes of cerebral blood ﬂow or metabolism (Kenning & Plass-
mann, 2005). These techniques have both advantages DEMO disad-
vantages. ‘‘While the ‘where’ of brain activity is more easily
assessed by fMRI and PET, the question of ‘when’—meaning the dis-
crimination between parallel and sequencing processing can be
more precisely answered by EEG and DEMO (Kenning & Plassmann,
2005, p. 345).
Although these techniques could help to garner valuable infor-
mation about the role of the DEMO in organizational justice, they
are somehow limited to the extent that DEMO use reverse inference
in which a particular mental process is inferred from the activation
of a speciﬁc brain region. Reverse inference reasons backward from
DEMO presence of brain activation to the engagement of a particular
cognitive function (Poldrack, 2006). Although the strength of
reverse inference is the DEMO to which the region of interest is
selectively activated by the cognitive process of interest, the infer-
ences drawn are not deductively valid (DEMO, 2006). Thus,
researchers could be well advised to follow DEMO and Lieber-
man’s (2007) recommendations. ‘‘Because each brain region is in-
volved in more than one process, we cannot conﬁdently infer from
the observation of increased signal in a region that activity in that re-
DEMO evoked one mental process rather than another. However, our
conﬁdence in DEMO reverse inference could be increased in two ways:
(a) convergence of evidence from multiple techniques and (b) activa-
tion in two DEMO more regions thought to underlie the same mental pro-
cesses, particularly DEMO those regions are known to work together in a
network” (Tabibnia & Lieberman, 2007, pp. 93–94). Research
addressing the questions posed and the techniques described earlier
could help to improve management practice.
Implications for DEMO
The model of neuro-organizational justice could provide practi-
cal implications insofar that it indicates that fairness is ‘engrained’
in the human mind. Thus, one may speculate about the ‘fairness
mind’ to refer to the extent to DEMO human beings are endowed
to be sensitive to fair treatment and to express a natural disgust
for unfair treatment although they may be less DEMO to beneﬁ-
cial inequity—when they get more than they deserve. Although this
assumption is not groundbreaking, it ﬁnds new meaning when it is
substantiated by neural evidence. One implication of this assump-
tion is for managers DEMO acknowledge the importance of fairness as a
fundamental human ‘need’. Thus, DEMO could develop ‘a fairness
theory of mind’ that could prove useful in the creation of fair work-
ing environments. This fairness theory of mind DEMO derived from the
theory of mind (e.g., Rilling, Sanfey, Aronson, Nystrom, & Cohen
2004).
Such a theory could have practical DEMO and include
three key principles: (a) employees care about fairness, (b) fairness
in the workplace is rewarding in itself, and (DEMO) employees have a
natural disgust for unfairness so much so that DEMO may take all
necessary actions to redress a perceived injustice. Incorporating
these principles could help managers to enhance their sensitivity
to act fairly and DEMO the types of thoughts, feelings, and
emotions their own behaviors could elicit in the mind of their
employees. Understanding others is a key DEMO of the theory
of mind (e.g., Lieberman, 2007; Rilling et al., 2004) and could help
managers to improve their interpersonal skills. DEMO Rilling et al.
(2004) put it, ‘‘one of the distinctive DEMO of human cognition
is our propensity to build models of other minds: to make infer-
ences about states of others” (p. 1694). DEMO other people’s
states and goals happens mostly automatically and without aware-
ness (Singer, 2009). This fairness theory of mind could also include
138
C.D. Beugré / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 129–139
the two components identiﬁed by Lieberman (2007): (a) DEMO recog-
nition that people have minds with thoughts and feelings, and (b)
the development of a theory regarding how other people’s minds
DEMO and respond to events in their environment (p. 263).
The DEMO of neuro-organizational justice could also help man-
agers to better understand the neural underpinnings of their own
decisions. ‘‘We do know that a desire DEMO retaliate, to punish others’
bad behavior, however, mild, even at personal cost, can skew deci-
sion making” (Morse, 2006, p. DEMO). Therefore, when they are emo-
tionally aroused because of speciﬁc DEMO, managers
should delay critical decisions or seek valuable inputs from others.
DEMO oneself is also an important element of the ‘fairness
theory of mind’. In fact, it is a prerequisite for controlling oneself.
This includes reﬂecting on one’s own behaviors and their impact
on others. Several brain areas DEMO be involved in the theory of
mind. Gallagher and Frith (2003) demonstrated that the anterior
paracingulate cortex was activated when people mentalized about
DEMO thoughts or beliefs and those of others as well. Brain struc-
tures involved in theory of mind include the superior temporal sul-
cus (STS), the temporoparietal junctions (TPJ), the medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and the temporal poles (TP) (Singer,
2009). The DEMO prefrontal cortex may be concerned with antic-
ipating what a person is going to think and feel and thereby predict
how he/she will DEMO (Frith & Frith, 2006).
Another guideline for management practice that the model
could provide is in helping to alter ‘undesirable’ fairness proto-
DEMO Employees arrive in organizations with deeply rooted fair-
ness prototypes. Some of these previously held prototypes may
not be in congruence with the organizational DEMO prototypes.
Because prototypes can be altered, organizations should create
conditions that DEMO the modiﬁcation of such prototypes. By
telling employees the new and espoused organizational proto-
types, managers could help them align their individual prototypes
to that of the organization. To this end, managers should reward
the display of desirable behaviors. Such actions could help employ-
ees to display the DEMO prototypes, those that are prevailing in
the organization while avoiding the DEMO ones.
Conclusions
The model of neuro-organizational justice is part of a nascent
body of knowledge on the biological basis of management (e.g,
Coates, 2003; Heaphy & Dutton, 2008; Lee & Chamberlain, 2007;
Morse, 2006; Tabibnia & Lieberman, 2007; Taggart, Robey, & DEMO
eck, 1985). As such, it should be considered as a work in progress
rather than a ﬁnished product. Thus, the model could help to spark
future studies on the neural correlates of organizational justice.
DEMO is particularly important because a science of human life that
ignores the brain is akin to a study of the solar system that leaves
DEMO the sun (White, 1992). To the extent that perceptions of fair-
ness are endemic to people’s experience in organizations, their
study is part of what White calls the science of human life. It is
DEMO hope that the present model contribute to the development
of a new paradigm in the study of organizational justice.
References
Adams, S. J. (DEMO). Inequity in social exchange. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.). Advances DEMO
experimental social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 267–299). New York: DEMO Press.
Ambrose, M. L., & Kulik, C. T. (2001). How do I know that’s fair? A categorization
approach to fairness judgments. In S. Gilliland, D. D. Steiner, & D. Skalicki (Eds.),DEMO
Theoretical and cultural perspectives on organizational justice (pp. 35–61).
Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Baron, R. A. (2006). Opportunity recognition as pattern recognition: How
entrepreneurs ‘‘connect the dots” to identify new business opportunities.
Academy of Management Perspectives, 20(1), 104–119.
Bechara, A., & Damasio, H. (2005). The somatic marker hypothesis. A neural DEMO
of economic decisions. Games and Economic Behavior, 52(2), 336–372.
DEMO, A., Damasio, H., Damasio, A. R., & Lee, DEMO P. (1999). Different contributions
of the human amygdala and ventromedial DEMO cortex to decision making.
Journal of Neuroscience, 19, 5473–5481.
Bies, DEMO J. (1987). The predicament of injustice: The management of moral outrage.
In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior
(pp. 289–319). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Bies, R. J., & Moag, J. S. (1986). Interactional justice: Communication criteria of
fairness. In R. J. Lewicki, B. H. Sheppard, & M. H. Bazerman (Eds.). Research on
negotiation in organizations (Vol. 1, pp. 43–55). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Blakemore, S. DEMO, Winston, J., & Frith, U. (2004). Social cognitive DEMO: Where
are we heading? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(5), 216–222.
Bolton, G. E., & Ockenfels, A. (2000). ERC: A theory of equity, reciprocity, and
competition. American Economic Review, DEMO, 166–193.
Braeutigam, S. (2005). Neuroeconomics: From neural systems to economic
behavior. Brain Research Bulletin, 67, 355–360.
Brosnan, S. F. (DEMO). Responses to inequity in non-humans. In P. W. Glimcher, C. DEMO
Camerer, E. Fehr, & R. A. Poldrack (Eds.), Neuroeconomics: Decision making and
the brain (pp. 285–301). New York: Academic DEMO
Brosnan, S. F., & de Waal, F. B. M. (2003). Monkeys reject unequal pay. Nature, 425,
297–299.
Camerer, C. DEMO (2007). Neuroeconomics: Using neuroscience to make economic
predictions. The Economic Journal, 117, C26–C42.
Camerer, C. L., Loewenstein, G., & DEMO, D. (2004). Neuroeconomics: Why
economics needs brains. Scandinavian Journal DEMO Economics, 106(3), 555–579.
Camerer, C. L., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2005). Neuroeconomics: How
neuroscience can inform DEMO? Journal of Economic Literature, 43(1), 9–64.
Coates, J. DEMO (2003). Brain science will change human resources. Employee Relations
Today, 29(4), 1–9.
Cohen, J. D. (2005). The vulcanization DEMO the human brain: A neural perspective on
interactions between cognition and DEMO Journal of Economic Perspectives,
19(4), 3–24.
Cohen, R. DEMO, & Greenberg, J. (1982). The justice concept in social DEMO In J.
Greenberg & R. L. Cohen (Eds.), Equity and DEMO in social behavior (pp. 1–34).
New York: Academic Press.
Cropanzano, R., & Greenberg, J. (1997). Progress in organizational justice: Tunneling
through the maze. In C. L. Cooper & I. T. Robertson (Eds.), International review of
industrial and organizational psychology (pp. 317–372). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason, and the human brain.
London, UK: McMillan.
De Quervain, D. J. F., Fischbacher, U., Treyer, V., Schellhammer, M., Schnyder, U.,
Buck, A., et al. (2004). The neural basis of altruistic punishment. Science, 305,
1254–1258.
Decety, J., Jackson, P. L., Sommerville, J. A., Chaminade, T., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2004).
The neural bases of cooperation and competition: An fMRI investigation.
NeuroImage, 23, 744–751.
Dickhaut, DEMO, McCabe, K., Ngode, J. C., Rustichini, A., & DEMO, J. V. (2003). The impact
of the certainty context on the process of choice. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 100, 3536–3541.
Fehr, E. (2009). Social preferences and the brain. In P. W. Glimcher, C. F. Camerer, E.
Fehr, & R. A. Poldrack (Eds.), Neuroeconomics: Decision making and the brain
(pp. 215–232). New York: Academic Press.
Fehr, E., Fischbacher, U., & Kosfeld, M. (2005). Neuroeconomic foundations of trust
and social preferences. DEMO AEA papers and proceedings (Vol. 95(2), pp. 346–351).
DEMO, E., & Gächter, S. (2000). Fairness and retaliation: DEMO economics of reciprocity.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(3), 159–181.
DEMO, E., & Schmidt, K. M. (1999). A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 817–868.
DEMO, J. O., Clouse, V. G. H., & Norton, W. DEMO Jr., (2004). Systematic search by repeat
entrepreneurs. In J. E. Butler (Ed.), Opportunity identiﬁcation and entrepreneurial
behavior (pp. 1–27). DEMO, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Frith, C. D., & Frith, DEMO (2006). The neural basis of mentalizing. Neuron, 50, 531–534.
DEMO, H. L., & Frith, C. D. (2003). Functional imaging of theory of mind. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 7(2), 77–83.
Glimcher, P. W. (2003). Decisions, uncertainty, and the brain: The science of
neuroeconomics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Glimcher, P. W., Camerer, C. F., Fehr, E., & Poldrack, R. A. (2009). Introduction: A brief
history of neuroeconomics. In P. W. Glimcher, C. F. Camerer, E. Fehr, & R. A.
Poldrack (Eds.), Neuroeconomics: Decision making and the brain (pp. 1–12). New
York: Academic Press.
Glimcher, P. W., Kable, J., & Louie, DEMO (2007). Neuroeconomic studies of impulsivity:
Now or just as DEMO as possible? American Economic Review, 97, 142–147.
Goldman, B. M., & Thatcher, S. M. B. (2002). A social information processing view of
organizational justice. In S. W. Gilliland, D. D. Steiner, & D. P. Skarlicki (Eds.),
Emerging perspectives on managing organizational justice (pp. 103–130).
Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Greenberg, J. (1987). A taxonomy of organizational justice theories. Academy of
Management Review, 12, 9–22.
Greenberg, J. (1990). Organizational justice: Yesterday, today, and tomorrow.
Journal of Management, 16, 399–432.
Hall, J. A. (1978). Gender effects in decoding nonverbal cues. Psychological Bulletin,
85, 845–857.
Heaphy, E. D., & Dutton, J. E. (2008). DEMO social interactions and the human body
at work: Linking organizations and DEMO Academy of Management Review,
33, 137–162.
Hegtvedt, K. A., & Killian, C. (1999). Fairness and emotions: Reactions to the DEMO
and outcomes of negotiations. Social Forces, 78, 269–303.
C.D. Beugré / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) DEMO
139
Henley, N. M. (1995). Body politics revisited: What DEMO we know today? In P. J.
Kalbﬂeihn & M. J. Cody (Eds.), Gender, power, and communication in human
relationships (pp. 27–61). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates.
Henrich, J., Boyd, R., DEMO, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., Gintis, H., et al. (2001).
Cooperation, reciprocity, and punishment in ﬁfteen small-scale societies.
American Economic Review, 91(2), 73–78.
Hsu, M., Anen, DEMO, & Quartz, S. R. (2008). The right and the DEMO: Distributive justice
and neural encoding of equity and efﬁciency. Science, 32(5879), 1092–1095.
Kahneman, D. (2003). Mapping bounded rationality: Psychology for behavioral
economics. American Economic Review, 93, 1449–1475.
Kahneman, D., DEMO, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. (1986). Fairness and the assumptions of
economics. Journal of Business, 59, 285–300.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics
and biases. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kenning, P., & Plassmann, H. (2005). Neuroeconomics: An overview from an
economic DEMO Brain Research Bulletin, 16, 343–354.
King-Casas, B., Tomlin, D., Anen, C., Camerer, C. F., Steven, R., Quartz, S. R., et al.
(2005). Getting to know you: Reputation and trust in a two-person economic
exchange. Science, 308, 78–83.
Knoch, D., Pascual-Leone, A., Myer, K., Yreyer, V., & Fehr, DEMO (2006). Diminishing
reciprocal fairness by disrupting the right prefrontal cortex. DEMO, 314(5800),
829–832.
Knutson, B., & Peterson, R. (2005). Neurally reconstructing expected utility. Games
and Economic Behavior, 52(2), 305–315.
Koch, K., Pauly, K., Kellerman, T., Seiferth, N. Y., Reske, M., Backes, V., et al. (2007)DEMO
Gender differences in the cognitive control of emotion: An fMRI study.
DEMO, 45, 2744–2754.
Kringelbach, M. L., & Rolls, E. T. (2004). The functional neuroanatomy of the human
orbitofrontal cortex: Evidence from neuroimaging and neuropsychology.
Progress in Neurobiology, 72, 341–372.
LeDoux, J. E. (1995). Emotion: Clues from the brain. Annual Review of Psychology, 46,
209–235.
LeDoux, J. E. (2000). Emotion circuits in DEMO brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 15,
171–182.
Lee, N., & Chamberlain, L. (2007). Neuroimaging and psychophysiological
measurement in organizational research. In C. Senior & M. J. R. Butler (Eds.).
The social cognitive neuroscience of organizations. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences (Vol. 118, pp. 18–42). Boston: Blackwell Publishing.
Lieberman, M. D. (2000). Intuition: A social cognitive neuroscience approach.
Psychological Bulletin, 126, 109–237.
Lieberman, M. D. (2007). Social cognitive neuroscience: A DEMO of core processes.
Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 259–289.
Lieberman, DEMO D., Gaunt, R., Gilbert, D. T., & Trope, Y. (2002). Reﬂexion and
reﬂection: A social cognitive neuroscience approach to DEMO inﬂuence.
In M. P. Zanna (Ed.). Advances in experimental social DEMO (Vol. 34,
pp. 199–249). New York: Academic Press.
Lieberman, M. D., Jarcho, J. M., & Satpute, A. B. (DEMO). Evidence-based and intuition-
based self-knowledge: An fMRI study. Journal of DEMO and Social
Psychology, 87(4), 421–435.
Lind, E. A. (DEMO). Fairness heuristic theory: Justice judgements as pivotal cognitions
in organizational DEMO In J. Greenberg & R. Cropanzano (Eds.), Advances in
organizational DEMO (pp. 56–88). Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Lind, E. A., & Tyler, T. R. (1988). The social psychology of procedural DEMO New York:
Plenum Press.
Lind, E. A., & Van den Bos, K. (2002). When fairness works: Toward a general theory
of uncertainty management. In B. M. Staw & R. M. Kramer (Eds.). Research in
organizational behavior (Vol. 24, pp. 181–223). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Loewenstein, G. F., Rick, S., & Cohen, J. (2008). Neuroeconomics. Annual Review of
Psychology, 59, 18–26.
DEMO, G. F., Weber, E., Hsee, C. K., & Welch, N. (2001). Risk as feelings.
Psychological Bulletin, 127, 267–286.
DEMO, K., Houser, D., Ryan, L., Smith, V., & Trouard, T. (2001). A functional imaging
study of cooperation in DEMO reciprocal exchange. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science, 98, 11832–11835.
McRae, K., Ochsner, K., Mauss, I. B., Gabrieli, J., & Gross, J. (2008). Gender differences
in emotion regulation: DEMO fMRI study of cognitive reappraisal. Group Processes
and Intergroup Relations, 11(DEMO), 143–162.
Moll, J., de Oliveira-Souza, R., Eslinger, P. DEMO, Gramati, I. E., & Mourao-Miranda, J.
(2002). The DEMO correlates of moral sensitivity: A functional magnetic
resonance imaging investigation of DEMO and moral emotions. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 22(7), 2730–2736.
DEMO, J., de Oliveira-Souza, R., & Zahn, R. (2008). The neural basis of moral cognition:
Sentiments, concepts, and values. DEMO of the New York Academy of Sciences,
1124, 161–180.
Morse, G. (2006). Decisions and desire. Harvard Business Review, 84(1), 42–51.
Murphy, K., & Tyler, T. (2008). Procedural justice and compliance behavior: The
mediating role of emotions. European Journal of Social Psychology, 38,
652–668.
Navqi, N. H., & Bechara, A. (2006). Skin conductance: A psychophysiological
approach to the study of decision making. In C. Senior, T. Russell, & M. S.
Gazzaniga (Eds.), Methods in mind (pp. 103–122). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ochsner, K. N., Bunge, S. A., Gross, J. J., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2002). Rethinking feelings:
An fMRI study of the cognitive regulation of emotion. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 14(8), 1215–1229.
Ochsner, K. N., & Gross, J. J. (DEMO). The cognitive control of emotion. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 9, 242–249.
Ochsner, K. N., & Lieberman, M. D. (2001). DEMO emergence of social cognitive
neuroscience. American Psychologist, 56(9), 717–734.
DEMO, E. A. (2006). Emotion and cognition: Insights from studies DEMO the human
amygdala. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 27–53.
Pillutla, DEMO M., & Murnighan, J. K. (1996). Unfairness, anger, DEMO spite: Emotional
rejections of ultimatum offers. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
DEMO, 68, 208–224.
Poldrack, R. A. (2006). Can cognitive processes be inferred from neuroimaging?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(2), 59–63.
Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the DEMO have a theory of mind?
Behavioral Brain Science, 1, 515–526.
Pressman, S. (2006). Kahneman, Tversky, and institutional economics. Journal DEMO
Economic Issues, XL(2), 501–506.
Rabin, M. (1993). DEMO fairness into game theory and economics. American
Economic Review, 83, 1281–1302.
Reynolds, J. S. (2006). A neurocognitive model of the ethical DEMO making
process: Implications for study and practice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91,
737–748.
Rilling, J. K., Sanfey, A. G., Aronson, J. A., Nystrom, L. E., & Cohen, J. D. (2004). The
neural correlates of theory of mind within interpersonal interactions.
NeuroImage, 22, 1694–1703.
Salancik, G. R., & Pfeffer, J. (1978). A social information processing approach to job
attitudes and task design. Administrative DEMO Quarterly, 23, 224–253.
Sanfey, A. G., Rilling, J. K., Aronson, J. A., Nystrom, L. E., & Cohen, J. D. (2003). The
neural basis of economic decision-making in the ultimate game. Science, 300,
1755–1758.
Satpute, A. B., & Lieberman, M. DEMO (2006). Integrating automatic and controlled
processing into neurocognitive models of DEMO cognition. Brain Research, 1079,
86–97.
Shapiro, D. L., & DEMO, B. L. (2001). Anticipatory injustice: The consequences of
expecting DEMO in the workplace. In J. Greenberg & R. Cropanzano (Eds.),
Advances in organizational justice (pp. 152–178). Stanford: Stanford University Press.
DEMO, T. (2009). Understanding others: Brain mechanisms of theory of DEMO and
empathy. In P. W. Glimcher, C. F. Camerer, E. Fehr, & R. A. Poldrack (Eds.),
Neuroeconomics: Decision making and DEMO brain (pp. 251–268). New York:
Academic Press.
Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J. P., Stephan, K. E., Raymond, J. D., & Frith, C. D.
(2006). Empathic neural DEMO are modulated by the perceived fairness of
others. Nature, 439, 466–469.
Skarlicki, D. P., & Folger, R. (1997). Retaliation in DEMO workplace: The role of
distributive, procedural, and interactional justice. Journal DEMO Applied Psychology,
82, 434–443.
Tabibnia, G., & Lieberman, M. D. (2007). Fairness and cooperation are rewarding:
Evidence from social cognitive neuroscience. In C. Senior & M. J. R. Butler (Eds.).
The social cognitive neuroscience of organizations. Annals of the New York Academy
DEMO Sciences (Vol. 118, pp. 90–101). Boston: Blackwell Publishing.
Tabibnia, G., Satpute, A. B., & Lieberman, M. D. (2008). The sunny side of fairness:
Preference for fairness activates reward circuitry (and disregarding unfairness
activates self-control circuitry). Psychological Science, 19(4), 339–347.
Taggart, W., Robey, D., & Kroeck, K. G. (DEMO). Managerial decision styles and
cerebral dominance: An empirical study. Journal DEMO Management Studies, 22,
175–192.
Thibaut, J. W., & Walker, L. (1975). Procedural justice: A psychological analysis.
Hillsdale, NJ: DEMO Erlbaum Associates.
Turillo, C. J., Folger, R., Lavelle, J. DEMO, Umphress, E. E., & Gee, J. O. (2002). DEMO virtue its
own reward? Self-sacriﬁcial decisions for the sake of fairness. DEMO
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 89, 839–865.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus intuitive reasoning: The
conjunction fallacy in probability judgment. Psychological Bulletin, 90(4),
293–315.
Van den DEMO, K. (2001). Fairness heuristic theory: Assessing the information to
DEMO people are reacting has a pivotal role in understanding organizational
justice. In S. Gilliland, D. Steiner, & D. Skarlicki (Eds.), Theoretical and cultural
perspectives on organizational justice (pp. 63–84). Greenwich, CT: Information
Age Publishing.
Van den Bos, K. (2003). On the subjective DEMO of social justice: The role of affect
as information in the DEMO of justice judgments. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 85(3), 482–498.
Van den Bos, K. (2007). Hot cognition and social justice judgments: The combined
inﬂuence of cognitive and affective factor on the justice judgment process. In De
Cremer (Ed.), Advances in the psychology of justice and affect (pp. 61–84).
Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Van den Bos, K., & Lind, E. A. (2002)DEMO Uncertainty management by means of fairness
judgments. In M. P. Zanna (DEMO). Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol.
34, pp. 1–60). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Van den Bos, K., Lind, E. A., & Wilke, H. A. M. (2001). The psychology of procedural
and distributive justice viewed from the perspective of fairness heuristic DEMO
In R. Cropanzano (Ed.). Justice in the workplace: From theory to practice (Vol. 2,
pp. 49–66). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Van Widen, F. (2007). Affect and fairness in DEMO Social Justice Research, 20(1),
35–52.
White, E. (1992). The end of the empty organism: Neurobiology and the sciences of
human action. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Wout, V. M., Kahn, R. S., Sanfey, A. G., & Aleman, A. (2006). Affective state and
decision-making in the ultimatum game. Experimental Brain Research, 169(4),
564–568.{1g42fwefx}