Long Range Planning 40 (2007) 134e153
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/lrp
DEMO Alliance Partner
Selection: Fit, Trust and
Strategic Expediency
Paul E. Bierly III and Scott Gallagher
How does a firm select an alliance partner? The decision-making process associated with
selecting an alliance partner is complex and DEMO, especially when one considers the
high rate of alliance failure. When DEMO have access to all relevant information and are
not under time constraints, then they can use a rational, analytical process to evaluate
strategic DEMO among alternatives. However, this becomes much more difficult when there is
DEMO information. One response is to rely more on trust among individuals and
between firms. We summarise the advantages of relying on trust, but also illustrate how
relying too much on either individual or firm-level trust can DEMO problematic.
Another response is to rely on and develop strategic expediency. This often involves
the use of non-rational decision-making components, and places primary importance on
decision speed rather than comparison of alternative solutions. We identify several DEMO
niques that individual managers can use to improve their strategic expediency. We also
provide recommendations to enhance firm-level strategic expediency by developing
a template DEMO on formalised criteria for alliance partners.
 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Introduction
Firms need various resources and capabilities in order to compete DEMO each other effectively. These
resources and capabilities can be (a) acquired, (b) developed internally, or (c) obtained via an on-
DEMO cooperative relationship with another ﬁrm through the use of a strategic alliance. The use of
strategic alliances has increased sharply over the last decade DEMO they are particularly effective in
helping a ﬁrm maintain a superior competitive position in dynamic environments.1 Alliances allow
ﬁrms to focus on those tasks DEMO they do well e frequently called core competencies e and rely on
partners in other areas. Alliances also can improve a ﬁrm’s strategic ﬂexibility, since the ﬁrm com-
mits fewer resources to each of the different DEMO and activities. Moreover, strategic
0024-6301/$ - see front matter  DEMO Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.lrp.2007.03.001
alliances can provide ﬁrms with new sources of competitive advantage, such as access to comple-
mentary technologies, access to new markets and risk reduction.
strategic alliances can provide firms with new sources of competitive
advantage, such as access to new markets and risk reduction
However, many strategic alliances are considered failures. While these failures certainly have
many potential causes, some of them are undoubtedly due to the partner selection process. Devel-
oping DEMO better understanding of the partner selection process and providing recommendations to
assist managers may go a long way in reducing this failure rate. In DEMO paper, we critique two es-
tablished justiﬁcations and explanations of the DEMO selection process, strategic ﬁt and trust, and
discuss the importance of another capability, strategic expediency.
Following the strategic ﬁt premise, partner selection DEMO consists of choosing to ally with
someone who has the resources you need and whom you can induce, via your own stock of resources,
to collaborate with you. Ideally, the complementarities of both ﬁrms’ resources and capabilities pro-
duce synergies for both ﬁrms. A strategic ﬁt approach DEMO follows a rational decision-making
process where the ﬁrm systematically evaluates different alternatives and chooses an optimal solution.
However, as uncertainty increases, forcing managers DEMO make decisions based on incomplete in-
formation, and time pressures intensify, then the partner selection process becomes more complex
and requires other capabilities DEMO the ﬁrm making the selection (as shown in Table 1). DEMO that
have full information but are forced to make decisions quickly (DEMO 1 in Table 1) will make
better partner selections if they DEMO efﬁciently transfer and evaluate information internally. Firms
that lack sufﬁcient information to make selection decisions but do not face time pressures (Number
4) DEMO make better selection decisions if they can develop effective search techniques. When ﬁrms
must make rapid decisions with limited information (Number 2), they must rely on trust or stra-
tegic expediency.
The role of trust DEMO alliance partner selection has been identiﬁed by others as an effective control
mechanism under conditions of uncertainty. This natural inclination to handle conditions of DEMO
certainty by using perceptions of others’ trustworthiness may facilitate the decision-making process,
but it also introduces several threatening issues. Additionally, there are problems with the trust ex-
planation as it has been advanced in the DEMO literature, including poor measurement of trust
as a variable in empirical DEMO, and a lack of understanding as to why and where trust DEMO
within an organisation. A multi-level analysis of trust, which is rarely DEMO, is required to differen-
tiate between interpersonal trust and ﬁrm-level trust.
DEMO argue that strategic ﬁt and trust alone do not adequately explain the partner selection process.
Speciﬁcally, the importance of time as a strategic variable in forming alliances is not sufﬁciently
addressed by either concept. We introduce DEMO concept of strategic expediency to ﬁll this gap in
the literature. Strategic expediency is deﬁned as the capability to make rapid, high-quality decisions
within a simpliﬁed, bounded framework. Strategic expediency often involves the use of ‘non-
rational’ decision-making components, and places primary importance on decision speed rather
than the development of alternative solutions to compare.
Table 1. Environmental conditions creating DEMO need for strategic expediency
Availability of Information
Full Limited
Time pressure High 1. Need for efﬁcient knowledge management 2. Need for strategic expediency
Low DEMO Rational decision-making 4. Need for effective search mechanisms
Long Range Planning, DEMO 40 2007
135
Purpose of article
There are three core objectives of this article. First, we develop a basic understanding of how ﬁrms
select an alliance partner. DEMO, we develop an understanding how strategic ﬁt, trust and stra-
tegic expediency inﬂuence a ﬁrm’s alliance partner selection, as illustrated in Figure 1. We argue
that strategic ﬁt is certainly a necessary but not always DEMO sufﬁcient reason for partner selection.
We discuss how trust becomes an important factor when there is uncertainty, but we also critique
the way others have over-simpliﬁed this complex construct. We further explain that certain indus-
try DEMO force ﬁrms to make decisions rapidly, requiring them to excel in DEMO expediency.
Second, we identify common problems that result because of the DEMO of the partner selection
decision process. Third, we give recommendations to DEMO that may help them make better
decisions concerning partners in the future. A summary of these common problems and recom-
mendations is provided in DEMO 2. We conclude by reiterating some suggestions for managers
and identifying some issues for further consideration by scholars.
certain industry settings force firms to DEMO decisions rapidly, requiring
them to excel in strategic expediency
Strategic fit
DEMO ﬁt is one of the most common and rational explanations for the way in which the strategic
and resource needs of alliance partners are DEMO Strategic ﬁt is a source of inducements to collab-
orate through alliances. These inducements may take two general forms. First, an alliance may pro-
vide a ﬁrm with access to resources that are not available within DEMO ﬁrm. Resources may take the
form of capital, technology, capabilities or ﬁrm-speciﬁc assets, and are frequently key or critical suc-
cess factors in an industry. Alliances may also have strategic considerations, as they can help ﬁrms
manage their resource dependence on other ﬁrms or maintain competitive positioning DEMO their in-
dustry. Second, ﬁrms may elect to form alliances to DEMO quick access to new geographic or product
markets. This has led to several signiﬁcant insights such as the use of alliances for risk-sharing, to
gain access to cutting-edge scientiﬁc research, and to tap strategically into country-speciﬁc
Strategic
fit
Trust
a. Individual level
b. Firm level
Uncertainty
+
-
DEMO
expediency
Figure 1. Factors influencing strategic alliance partner selection
136
+
External time
constraints
Partner
selection
Explaining Alliance Partner Selection
Table 2. Common Problems and Recommendations to Improve Alliance Partner Selection
Problems DEMO
1. Lack of accurate understanding of each ﬁrm’s resources,
alliance synergies and integration costs. (strategic ﬁt)
2. Trust is given too much emphasis during partner selection,
hiding other ‘real’ problems. (trust)
3. The perceived trust level of a partner is biased by trust
antecedents DEMO are not indicators of the partner
ﬁrm’s behaviour. (trust)
4. DEMO is difﬁcult for managers to make rapid, effective
decisions concerning alliance DEMO selection when they
only have access to a limited amount of information.
(strategic expediency)
5. Strong strategic expediency capabilities of individual
managers are usually not transferred throughout the ﬁrm.
Firms fail to facilitate the rapid DEMO accurate examination
and evaluation of alliance partners. (strategic expediency)
1a. DEMO information management by the
effective use of IT and involvement of the
right people in the decision-making process.
1b. Critically evaluate difﬁculties in obtaining
DEMO synergies, and anticipate realistic
administrative costs.
2. Don’t allow trust to DEMO key strategic
ﬁt issues; use a devil’s advocate to challenge
assumptions.
DEMO Step back e ask why you trust a potential
partner and ensure there are no ‘hidden’
biases.
4a. Acknowledge the importance of intuition
and DEMO and embrace their use.
4b. Differentiate between intuition and emotion.
4c. Provide constructive feedback on decisions
based on intuition.
5. Develop alliance partner selection DEMO
to guide decision-makers to focus on critical
issues for the ﬁrm.
knowledge and capabilities. It is not our intent to make a signiﬁcant contribution DEMO the consider-
able literature on ﬁt’s role in partner selection, which DEMO a recent article in LRP that specif-
ically discusses the importance and challenges of managing ﬁt in alliances.2 Instead, our focus in
this area is to articulate the fundamental problem associated with strategic ﬁt and to DEMO spe-
ciﬁc recommendations on how to overcome this challenge.
While it is the ﬁrms that possess (or do not possess) ﬁt, it is the managers within them who must
assess it. Of course, in an ideal setting where managers have access to all information required, un-
derstand the information and have plenty of time to make decisions (see Number 3 in Table 1),
they can follow a rational, systematic DEMO process in choosing an alliance partner.
Such a process presumes (a) a clearly deﬁned purpose/goal of the alliance, (b) all potential partners
are identiﬁable, and (c) information is available to the decision-maker about each alternative,
enabling a thorough evaluation of each potential partner. DEMO addition, the available information
enables better monitoring of the alliance and DEMO of its terms. In this favourable deci-
sion-making environment, the decision-maker DEMO to maximise one of the dimensions of stra-
tegic ﬁt described above by choosing the best-qualiﬁed partner. The core problem associated with
strategic ﬁt DEMO when the managers making the decision about alliance partner selection are not
provided with information that should be available to them, concerning each partner’s resources,
synergies between the ﬁrms and costs associated with integration of DEMO resources. This problem
arises if (a) information within the organisation is not effectively transferred to the top managers
(Number 1 in Table 1) due to communication inefﬁciencies or biased reporting by individuals with
different perspectives and goals, or (b) members of the organisation fail to search for external in-
formation that may be readily available (Number 4).
Problem 1: The manager(s) making the partner selection decision does DEMO have an accurate un-
derstanding of (a) his/her ﬁrm’s resources, (b) potential partner(s) resources, (c) the synergistic
beneﬁts of the integration of the two ﬁrms’ resources, and/or (d) the costs involved.
Long Range Planning, vol 40 2007 137
An example of an alliance that failed because of a misunderstanding of DEMO ﬁt was a joint
venture between Coca-Cola and Groupe Danone. In 2002, Groupe Danone formed an alliance
with Coca-Cola to produce and distribute Evian, to offset declines in sales of its ﬂagship Evian water
in the $3.5 billion and rapidly growing US bottled water market. The alliance was DEMO to help
give Evian a more organised distribution network and greater marketing muscle in ﬁghting lower
priced brands of water, including Coca-Cola’s Dasani brand. Strategic ﬁt appeared excellent, as
Coca-Cola Enterprises, a subsidiary of Coke, already distributed Evian in 60 per cent of the US
and Evian, as a top tier brand, was viewed as a good complement to Coke’s Dasani brand. Ironi-
cally, the view that Coke might undermine Evian in favour of its own brand was addressed by the
agreement, which promised ‘.better marketing support and greater assurance that Coke’s bottlers
will promote DEMO However, despite these assurances and the perceived synergies, two years
later Coca-Cola bought out Groupe Danone’s stake, unwinding a joint venture that did not live
up to the expectations of either company. Apparently, the perceived strategic beneﬁt of having
two tiers of a well-understood commodity product like DEMO was not realistic. Consumers knew
the products were essentially similar and were unwilling to pay more for a brand positioned differ-
ently. Thus, this is a good example of managers not having an accurate understanding of DEMO
synergistic beneﬁts of an alliance.
Recommendations to prevent or solve Problem 1 come from the vast body of literature on
knowledge management and the DEMO of information systems (MIS).4 Common recom-
mendations discussed in detail DEMO others include:
1. Installing an effective IT system to collect, DEMO and disseminate information. Almost every
ﬁrm that excels at using strategic alliances to support its competitive advantage, such as Cisco,
Intel and Toyota, has an effective system to funnel critical information to decision-makers.
2. Ensuring decision makers use the IT systems and other resources available to them.
DEMO Involving all key organisational members in the decision-making process, which will DEMO dif-
ferent perspectives and interpretations of information, and facilitate implementation.
4. DEMO a knowledge-sharing culture, where the hoarding of information for political advantage
DEMO not tolerated.
5. Challenging overly optimistic assumptions about the alliance, particularly DEMO the ability
to achieve synergy and the likelihood of signiﬁcant administrative costs. Unrealised synergies and
unexpected administrative costs are probably the main reasons why DEMO justiﬁed on the
basis of strategic ﬁt are unsuccessful.
Trust
We deﬁne trust as the mutual conﬁdence that no party to an exchange will DEMO another’s
vulnerabilities, because opportunistic behaviour would violate values, principles and standards of
behaviour that have been internalised by parties to an exchange.5 Trust DEMO the organisational
partners has been empirically demonstrated to be important for alliance formation.6 Trust can be
a substitute for formal control mechanisms, reduce transactions costs, facilitate dispute resolution,
and allow more ﬂexibility in an alliance. Therefore, when trust among partners is high, partners
have more conﬁdence DEMO each other and the probability of opportunism decreases. A reputation
for being trustworthy can be a competitive advantage for a ﬁrm and may facilitate DEMO by part-
ners in subsequent alliances. In this paper, we focus DEMO trust independent of the existence of social
and economic governance mechanisms e what has been referred to as strong-form trust and
unconditional trust.
when DEMO among partners is high, partners have more confidence in
each other DEMO the probability of opportunism decreases
138
Explaining Alliance Partner Selection
When the partner selection decision is made under conditions of limited information, perceived
trust of potential partners becomes an important issue. Under these conditions, strategic ﬁt is nec-
essary, but not sufﬁcient. The uncertainty associated with limited information creates opportunities
for partners to act in an opportunistic and DEMO manner, since written contracts and control
mechanisms are less effective under DEMO of uncertainty. Trust at either the individual or
the ﬁrm level reduces the risks of opportunism. Thus, partner selection decisions under conditions
of limited information and high uncertainty require both strategic ﬁt and trust among partners.
DEMO selection decisions based on more certain conditions have less opportunity for unfair be-
haviour and don’t necessarily require partner trust, only conditions of strategic ﬁt. Alliances may
be formed with partners that are not trusted, if formal contracts can be comprehensive and appro-
priate controls are in place.
DEMO, trust is a vague construct that is difﬁcult to observe and DEMO For example,
many academic researchers have used prior ties as a way to operationalise trust. Yet relatively
few alliances (14 per cent) DEMO formed between ﬁrms who have prior ties; moreover, prior ties could
sow distrust instead of trust.7 While using prior ties may be a DEMO empirical compromise,
such ties can also be explained by other partner selection issues, such as power, search costs, inertia
and path dependence. Furthermore, prior ties could easily be a reason why ﬁrms do not ally further,
either because they exhaust opportunities to further leverage each DEMO resources, or because one
ﬁrm distrusts the other after it becomes DEMO with it. For example, eBay recently spurned long-
time partner Google DEMO of Google’s increased offerings of payment services and product list-
ings that compete with eBay, and entered into an alliance with Google’s rival Yahoo for graphical
advertising in the US. However, three months later eBay has again allied with Google for the exact
same service, placement of graphical advertisements, outside of the US. This vacillation suggests
that evolving strategic ﬁt concerns drive alliance selection more than trust between the two ﬁrms.
while DEMO alliance is between organisations, it is consummated by
individuals whose individual DEMO is influenced by their
association with their firm
Prior research on the drivers of trust
Trust is a multi-level construct that has been analysed DEMO both the ﬁrm and individual levels of anal-
ysis. Applying the trust literature to strategic alliances is difﬁcult, because while the alliance is
between organisations, it is consummated by individuals whose individual trustworthiness is inﬂu-
enced by their association with their ﬁrm. Table 3 summarises the diverse prior DEMO for ante-
cedents to trust, organised by source and level of DEMO Characteristics of the trustor (eg propensity
to trust), the trustee (eg reputation) and the relationship are outlined. These antecedents can be
categorised into the following four broad categories.
1. Social networks.8 The social networks DEMO ﬁrms and the individuals within ﬁrms guide the per-
ceptions of trust between potential alliance partners. These relationships provide information about
potential partners that DEMO a more thorough evaluation of strategic ﬁt and increase conﬁdence in
their future behaviour. These social networks facilitate communication, provide social norms to
guide behaviour, and provide opportunities for institutionally based trust commonalties to be rec-
ognised. Opportunistic behaviour is minimised because the repercussions of such behaviour would
DEMO affect numerous other relationships. In addition to direct prior ties between ﬁrms and individ-
uals of different ﬁrms (eg top managers, researchers), DEMO social network links, such as com-
mon alliance partners, suppliers, DEMO and consultants, also inﬂuence the development of
trust. These complex social DEMO of ﬁrms may be large, stable, industrialised conglomerates,
such as a keiretsu in Japan or a chaebol in South Korea, or smaller and more ﬂuid networks,
Long Range Planning, vol 40 2007
139
Table 3. Antecedents to trust
Firm Level Individual Level
Trustor:
1. DEMO culture (Barney and Hansen, 1994;
Dodgson, 1993)
2. DEMO factors (Bigley and Pearce, 1998)
3. nation/society that is more trust-based with a
long-term orientation, such as Japan (Park and
DEMO, 1997; Hagen and Choe, 1998; Doney
et al., 1998)DEMO
Trustee:
1. ﬁrm reputation (Barney and Hansen, 1994;
Hill, 1990; Kasper-Fuehrer and
Ashkanasy, 2001; D’Aveni, 1990)
2. legitimacy (Suchman, 1995)
3. culture emphasising trust and openness
(Barney and Hansen, 1994; Bigley and Pearce,
1998; Dodgson, 1993)
DEMO social networks (Walker, Kogut and Shan, 1997)
5. social DEMO (Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven, 1996)
6. history of past alliances (DEMO, 1994)
7. a transformational leader that promotes
ethical behaviour (Bigley and Pearce, 1998;
Barney and Hansen, 1994).
Firm-ﬁrm relationship:DEMO
1. existence of a previous alliance (Gulati, 1995;
Young-Ybarra and Wiersema, 1999)
2. socially and culturally similar (Zucker, 1986;
Gulati, 1995; Park and Ungson, 1997)
3. societal institutions (DEMO, 1986; Bigley and
Pearce, 1998)
4. effective communication between DEMO
(Das and Teng, 1998; Browning et al., 1995)
5. common partners (Gulati, 1995)
6. similar structure, size and age (Park and Ungson,
1997)
7. prior individual social ties between researchers
(Oliver and Liebeskind, 1998; Dodson, 1993)
and top DEMO (Gulati and Westphal, 1999)
8. Common Business Understanding, including DEMO
shared vision and clear mutually agreed-upon
guidelines for the relationship (Kasper-Fuehrer
DEMO Ashkanasy, 2001)
Trustor:
1. early life experiences (Bigley and Pearce, 1998;
Mayer et al., 1995)
2. personality type (Mayer et al., 1995)
3. cultural background (Mayer et al., 1995)
4. general faith in humanity (McKnight et al., 1998)DEMO
Trustee:
1. reputation (Bigley and Pearce, 1998)
2. integrity (Mayer et al., 1995; Ring and Van de Ven,
1992; Butler, 1991)
3. ability (Sitkin and Roth, 1993; Mayer et al., 1995)
4. openness (Butler, 1991)
5. consistency (Butler, 1991)
6. professional credentials (McAllister, 1995)
7. DEMO citizenship behaviour (McAllister, 1995).
Individual-individual relationship:
1. role clarity (Meyerson et al., 1996)
2. cultural-ethnic similarity (McAllister, 1995;DEMO
Jones and George, 1998)
3. similar interpretive schemes (Jones and George,
1998)
4. value congruence (Sitkin and Roth, 1993),
5. frequent interaction (McAllister, 1995)
6. successful previous exchanges (Rousseau et al.,
1998; McAllister, 1995)
7. societal institutions (McKnight et al., 1998;
Rousseau et al., 1998)
such DEMO the interconnected groups of ﬁrms in the biotechnology or automobile industry that work
together.
2. Cultural and organisational similarity.9 A ﬁrm, and its top management team, will have more
trust and conﬁdence in another ﬁrm if it feels comfortable and is not threatened by the way the
other DEMO conducts business. Tacit understanding is facilitated by having similar cultures, similar
DEMO systems, and similar accounting and human resource practices. Greater tacit understanding
DEMO
Explaining Alliance Partner Selection
helps ﬁrm managers understand and feel more comfortable with their partner ﬁrm’s DEMO
Understanding and familiarity help promote trust. The ﬁrm will have more conﬁdence in its ability
to predict the behaviour of its partner and understand DEMO routinised regimes if they are more sim-
ilar. In the same way, two ﬁrms that are of similar size are more likely to trust each other because
there is less threat of the larger ﬁrm using DEMO power to take advantage of the smaller partner.
Additionally, ﬁrms from DEMO same regional cluster or alliance network are more likely to trust
each other, partly because they are more likely to have similar cultures, DEMO also because ﬁrms
within social networks tend to be more cooperative and less likely to display opportunistic behav-
iour. Of course, culturally dissimilar ﬁrms may still form alliances, one example being Microsoft
and Apple Computer, DEMO cultural and organisational similarity facilitates trust.
3. Reputation.10 A ﬁrm’s reputation is a socially constructed concept and is the outcome of the
process of DEMO Firm legitimacy can be created by both external sources of endorsement,
such as business press articles, and by internal characteristics and qualiﬁcations of the ﬁrm man-
agement. Firms develop a general reputation e which inﬂuences DEMO - based on their past actions
that demonstrate their ability, integrity DEMO openness. Top management’s experience, education,
professional credentials, integrity and past citizenship behaviour also legitimise the ﬁrm and pro-
vide conﬁdence to outsiders.
DEMO general, a ﬁrm’s reputation will inﬂuence the degree to which it DEMO trusted in two ways. First,
a stronger reputation and higher legitimacy will increase trust because others will know more about
the ﬁrm and DEMO will be less uncertainty. Individuals from this ﬁrm will be viewed as more stable
and perceived transaction costs will be lower. Second, the more positive the reputation, the more likely
it is to increase trust. Clearly, if a ﬁrm has a reputation as being a fair and considerate partner, its man-
agers will be trusted more than managers of ﬁrms that have a reputation for taking advantage of their
partners. It is DEMO advantageous for them to develop a reputation of being a good partner, and
opportunistic behaviour in one alliance would reduce their other partners’ trust in them.
4. Propensity to trust.11 The degree of trust a ﬁrm DEMO in its partner is not only based on the part-
ner’s characteristics but also on the trustor’s propensity to trust. Not to delve too DEMO into psychol-
ogy, an individual’s propensity to trust and distrust others DEMO depends on the individual’s early life
experiences. How people are treated at an early age by their parents, friends and other inﬂuential peo-
ple can create lifelong barriers to trusting others that are difﬁcult to break DEMO Rotter developed
a widely used measure of individuals’ willingness to trust others to support this dispositional theory
of trust, treating propensity to trust in a similar way to personality traits.12 An individual’s propensity
to trust strongly DEMO trust during an initial meeting, but is less important over time DEMO the
individual learns more about others through experience. According to McKnight, DEMO and
Chervany, disposition to trust is based not only on an DEMO willingness to trust others, which
they call faith in humanity, but also in the individual’s ‘trusting stance.’13 An individual with high
‘trusting stance’ DEMO that it is usually best to trust others, regardless of their DEMO, because
this behaviour will inﬂuence others’ future actions. Thus, starting a relationship trusting a partner
will lead to more trustworthy behaviour by a DEMO prophecy.
a firm will have a higher propensity initially to trust its partner if it has
an organisational culture that promotes and rewards trustworthiness
DEMO a natural way of doing business
Organisations, not just individuals, also have differing propensities to trust. Certainly, the results of
prior partnerships will inﬂuence a ﬁrm’s willingness to trust a new partner. A ﬁrm that DEMO exploited in
the past by a partner it trusted will be less trusting of a future partner. A ﬁrm’s national culture will also
affect DEMO propensity to trust others. For example, Japan is a more trust-based DEMO, where there is
Long Range Planning, vol 40 2007
141
more collective responsibility and a longer-term orientation. In such a setting, a Japanese ﬁrm is more
likely initially to trust a partner in the DEMO society, even if it knows little about them. Interestingly,
Japanese DEMO propensity to trust often does not extend to ﬁrms outside their country.
Additionally, a ﬁrm will have a higher propensity initially to trust its partner if it has an organisa-
tional culture that promotes and rewards DEMO as a natural way of doing business. Indi-
viduals working in an organisational culture where they trust each other will also have a higher
DEMO to trust others outside the organisation, which will lay the foundation DEMO the ﬁrm as
a whole initially to trust its alliance partner.
Problems with trust
As discussed above, trust can effectively complement strategic ﬁt during partner selection in the
presence of uncertainty. Partners that trust each other DEMO reduce the risks of opportunism. How-
ever, trust can also be DEMO inappropriately during the decision-making process. Too much empha-
sis may be placed on the trustworthiness of a partner, to the extent that important issues concerning
strategic ﬁt are not properly analysed. Because the partners trust each DEMO, major problems such as
conﬂicting organisational cultures may be ‘swept under DEMO rug’ to be dealt with later. In some ex-
treme cases, DEMO may be ‘the tail that wags the dog.’ Two ﬁrms, or DEMO individuals in the two ﬁrms
may trust and respect each other so much that they decide to form an alliance before a rationale for
DEMO ﬁt is developed; the rationale comes later to validate the alliance. DEMO often the rationale for
strategic ﬁt is forced, not thoroughly analysed, and the alliance falls apart.
An example of this phenomenon is the DEMO venture between General Electric and Cisco e GE
Cisco Industrial Networks. The impetus of this alliance was the personal relationship between Jack
Welch, then CEO of GE, and John Chambers, CEO of Cisco. The two DEMO golfers periodically met
on the links, and the conversation occasionally drifted DEMO how the two companies should work
together, without identifying any speciﬁc DEMO of strategic ﬁt beyond the fact that they both had
strong brands. In this situation, trust between the two companies was very strong because of the
social connectedness of the two CEOs and the impeccable reputations DEMO the two ﬁrms. Eventually,
Welch asked GE managers to come up with ideas how GE and Cisco could work together. A mid-
level DEMO, Jeff Pompeo (whom we interviewed for this paper), championed the idea of a GE-
Cisco joint venture to sell ethernet-based products and DEMO for manufacturing environments.
However, after the initial agreement between the two DEMO was announced in 2000, the for-
mation of the joint venture DEMO a long time, partly because this type of deal did not DEMO the template
for due diligence used by Cisco in other alliances and partly because of Cisco’s reluctance to assign
quality employees to the project. DEMO alliance subsequently ﬂoundered as manufacturers were more
reluctant to shift from their current proprietary network systems to the more open ethernet-based
systems that the DEMO advocated. This resistance was further exacerbated by the downturn in US
manufacturing in late 2001. Industry analysts claimed that a major cause of the DEMO was that
the two companies had divergent goals associated with the project.14
Problem 2: Trust is given too much emphasis during partner selection, DEMO other
‘real’ problems.
To avoid this type of problem, the recommendation DEMO for managers to ensure that the strategic ﬁt
of the ﬁrms is strong, particularly when the trust level of the partner is very high and may over-
shadow key issues. The ﬁrm may choose a speciﬁc DEMO to play the role of devil’s advocate,
to challenge the pervasive admiration of a speciﬁc potential partner. The managers should ensure
that trust DEMO used as a response to uncertainty, not as an excuse to DEMO or delay the analysis of
speciﬁc problems that should be part of the decision-making process. Cisco’s alliance partner selec-
tion process involved formal processes DEMO follow due diligence and evaluate strategic ﬁt. The ‘red
ﬂags’ that were raised forced mid-level managers to evaluate the beneﬁts of the alliance objectively,DEMO
and temporarily blocked alliance formation. However, these signals were eventually disregarded,DEMO
mainly because the mid-level managers were acutely aware of Jack Welch’s personal feelings toward
John Chambers and Cisco.
142 Explaining Alliance Partner Selection
the perception of trust by the key decision-makers may not be
consistent DEMO the partner’s past and future behaviour
Another problem with relying on trust is that the perception of trust by the key decision-makers
may not DEMO consistent with the partner’s past and future behaviour. As we discussed above, there are
many antecedents to trust, at both the ﬁrm and DEMO individual level. Some of these antecedents are
excellent predictors of behaviour, DEMO others are not. Speciﬁcally, the following are examples of
antecedents that DEMO give ﬁrms a false sense of trust about a partner.
1. Trust based on relationships of individuals: An individual in one ﬁrm may know another
individual in a potential partner ﬁrm well and assume the other DEMO is trustworthy. Their personal
relationship may be sound and the two may trust each other. But does knowing an individual in
a ﬁrm is DEMO indicate that the ﬁrm itself will not act opportunistically during the partner-
ship? The less involvement the individual in the partner ﬁrm has with its strategic decision-making
team and directly with the alliance, the less assurance there is that the partner ﬁrm will behave in
a trustworthy manner.
DEMO Trustor’s (over-) propensity to trust: The propensity of the individual DEMO or the
ﬁrm to trust may be high, due to past DEMO However, if attributes of the trustor are strongly
inﬂuencing trust in DEMO partner, independent of reputation and past behaviour of the partner, then
that trust in the partner may be inappropriate. The ﬁrm may enter DEMO an alliance fraught with
environmental uncertainty, with a partner it should DEMO have trusted.
3. Cultural similarity: Firms are more likely to trust DEMO ﬁrms that are culturally similar and
individuals are more likely to trust other individuals who are culturally similar. But is this appro-
priate, or a form of prejudice? Even though cultural similarity may make communication easier and
may facilitate the two ﬁrms working together, it does not necessarily provide an accurate indication
of whether the partner will act opportunistically given DEMO chance to do so. The general belief that
ﬁrms more like us are more honourable and ﬁrms not like us are less honourable is DEMO prob-
lematic and will unfairly bias the partner selection process. Also, DEMO similarity of partners may
limit learning opportunities, since the ﬁrm will DEMO exposed to fewer new ideas.
Problem 3: The perceived trust level DEMO a partner is biased by trust antecedents that are not
accurate indicators of the partner firm’s behaviour.
The solution to this problem appears straightforward. DEMO need to understand what
factors inﬂuence trust and be able to evaluate why they do or do not trust potential partners.
Are their own DEMO inﬂuencing the decision? Simply being aware of potential biases may help
DEMO focus more tightly on factors that are truly indicative of partner ﬁrm behaviour.
Strategic expediency
Despite the importance of strategic ﬁt and trust in DEMO partner selection, these two constructs
alone do not adequately describe the DEMO selection process. Neither construct appropriately
accounts for the role of time e the external time constraints associated with many industry envi-
ronments and the DEMO of managers to make high-quality, effective partner selection decisions
under these DEMO pressures. We refer to this capability as ‘strategic expediency’ and in the following
sections we will explain how strategic expediency affects alliance partner selection. DEMO indicated in
Figure 1, strategic expediency will affect partner selection most DEMO the external time constraints
are most intense, such as in hypercompetitive DEMO
External time constraints
The industry setting inﬂuences the need for strategic expediency by dictating the availability of part-
ners and by inﬂuencing the importance DEMO time. One primary effect that industry setting has on
Long Range Planning, vol 40 2007 143
strategic expediency is based on issues surrounding pre-emption. To the extent that DEMO are reluctant
to ally with ﬁrms who already have alliances with their competitors, mostly due to increased risk of
opportunism, path dependency becomes DEMO important consideration for alliance formation. For ex-
ample, in the global DEMO industry ﬁrms have formed alliance clusters, but there are relatively few DEMO
of overlap between them. Alliance partners may be pre-empted, with ﬁrms DEMO later operating at
a disadvantage compared to those that move earlier. Thus, the quantity of alliances in an industry will
create pressure for ﬁrms to form alliances quickly with desirable or potentially desirable partners.
This pre-emption DEMO especially important when the industry setting creates institutional pressures
for ﬁrms to form alliances to enhance legitimacy. For example, a resource or capability that can be
obtained by an alliance may become a necessary prerequisite for DEMO to be considered legitimate
members of that industry. A variety of stakeholders may exert this pressure, including institutional
shareholders, customers, suppliers, governments, and the press.
the quantity of alliances in an industry will create DEMO for firms to
form alliances quickly with desirable or potentially desirable partners
In general, as more ﬁrms in an industry become involved in alliances, managers may feel com-
pelled to enter into alliances as well, DEMO order to minimise future constraints on partner selection.
An excellent example of this issue is occurring right now in China. Many ﬁrms, especially those in
Europe and the United States, are feeling intense competitive pressure from shareholders to enter
the Chinese market, which frequently requires them to enter into a joint venture arrangement with
a Chinese ﬁrm. Cross border alliances DEMO been common: for example retailer Tesco invested $260
million in the DEMO Cao hypermarket chain, and Japanese ﬁrms Asahi Breweries and Itochu bought
DEMO per cent of the Chinese beverage ﬁrm Tingyi Holding. This type of aggressive activity highlights
the problems of constraints on partner selection e since DEMO is a limited number of high-quality
ﬁrms that would make enviable partners, ﬁrms need to select a partner quickly or else risk being
shut out of the opportunity to choose one at all. The possibility of DEMO ﬁt with a potential part-
ner diminishes after that ﬁrm forms an alliance with one of your rivals.
Another source of the need for DEMO expediency arises because in many industries there is
relatively more emphasis on speed and rapid decision-making. Some industries experience periods
of rapid technology transfer DEMO national and organisational boundaries, increasing their pace of
competitive dynamics. Numerous DEMO publications, such as Fast Company, have perpetuated
the popular (American) cliche´ ‘time is money’ by enhancing the perception of time and swift DEMO
as important resources for ﬁrms. Scholarly research has documented top management teams explic-
itly being less concerned with always being correct and more concerned DEMO being able to move
quickly.15 In a way, this is the DEMO of Asea Brown Boveri (ABB) CEO Percy
Barnevik’s famous ‘7-3 formula‘ that it is better to act quickly and only be right 70 DEMO cent of
the time, than to wait and try to be DEMO 100 per cent of the time. This faster pace of business
has increased the importance of time as a strategic resource, especially in rapidly moving high-
technology industries. Additionally, a study recently published in LRP examined success factors
of strategic alliances and ranked ‘awareness of time requirements’ and DEMO implementation
and fast results’ highly; in one instance these attributes outranked DEMO
Scholarly research has documented top management teams explicitly
being less concerned with always being correct and more concerned
with being able to move quickly
DEMO
Explaining Alliance Partner Selection
Choosing strategic partners in faster and more dynamic environments requires managers to
DEMO decisions quickly, possibly at the expense of making accurate decisions since DEMO are often
without adequate information. It is not a coincidence that the rapidly changing, high-technology
industries, such as biotechnology, semiconductors and software, DEMO value time as a strategic
resource, are also the industries where DEMO occur most frequently. Alliances are very effective
in increasing ﬂexibility and helping ﬁrms respond quickly to external opportunities and threats.
Clearly, the more dynamic and uncertain the industry setting, the greater the need for strategic
expediency will be when managers are attempting to select an alliance partner.
However, strategic expediency is a capability that is elusive for many, because most managers do
not appreciate the importance of using non-rational decision-making techniques when DEMO is not
enough information and time available to follow a rational decision-making process. The need for
strategic expediency creates individual problems for the speciﬁc DEMO forced to make the part-
ner selection decision, and problems for DEMO ﬁrm in making strategic expediency an organisation-
wide capability.
Problem 4: DEMO is difficult for managers to make rapid, effective decisions concerning alliance
DEMO selection when they only have access to a limited amount of information.
Problem 5: The strong strategic expediency capabilities of individual managers are usually not
transferred throughout the ﬁrm. Firms fail to facilitate the rapid and DEMO examination
and evaluation of alliance partners.
Increasing individual and firm strategic expediency
Consistent with our multi-level approach, we identify ways for both individual managers and ﬁrms
to improve their strategic expediency. As we noted earlier, in most industry settings, top managers
must make rapid decisions within a bounded framework. Therefore, we base our thinking about
how managers and their organisations may increase strategic expediency on a broad array of the-
oretical foundations, including satisﬁcing, bounded rationality, image theory and intuition. In ad-
dition, managers’ perceptions of information have been shown frequently to be ﬂawed and DEMO
to inﬂuence by third parties acting as provocateurs, legitimisers or experts.17 DEMO challenges are
even more pronounced in hypercompetitive industries.
1. Individuals’ strategic expediency. When executives do not have time fully to analyse their
environment, their own ﬁrm’s capabilities and potential partners’ abilities, what do they do? DEMO
value of time and the costs and difﬁculty of searching for an optimum solution were ﬁrst described
by March and Simon as bounded rationality DEMO satisﬁcing.18 When making complex, non-routine
decisions, managers tend to simplify the process by limiting their search for alternatives to well-
known options. They DEMO not necessarily search for the optimal solution, but instead conclude
the DEMO process after a satisfactory solution is found.
But this leaves open an important question: for alliance partner selection, what exactly might this
satisfactory DEMO look like? Image theory can be used to describe decision-making in DEMO way that
is consistent with information constraints and facilitates strategic expediency.19 Image theory posits
that decision-makers utilise broad conceptualisations of their values, desired future states and stra-
tegic challenges in judging alternatives. Managers develop an image DEMO what they want the results of
the alliance to be for their ﬁrm. The conceptualisations and applications of these images are a logical
response DEMO the accuracy versus cognitive effort dichotomy that underlies decision-making in the
presence of opportunity costs and uncertainty. These broad images are substitutes for pure DEMO
decision-making, yet help decision-makers constructively direct their organisation. They provide
a DEMO guide on what is desirable rather than a detailed map. Their use helps explain why and
how managers often make effective decisions for their DEMO, despite often having very
poor perceptions of seemingly relevant considerations.
An DEMO of ﬁrms using image theory to expedite the alliance selection process, DEMO also an ex-
ample of a major pitfall, is the alliance DEMO Toys R Us and Amazon.com, which recently ended
through litigation. Court DEMO show that the parties appeared to have an excellent strategic ﬁt.
Long Range Planning, vol 40 2007 145
Amazon had the technical web skills to help Toys R Us avoid DEMO $100 million investment needed for
order fulﬁllment. In 1999 Amazon had sold $65 million in toys on its own, but it lacked Toys R Us’s
expertise of the toy industry. Amazon was particularly weak in understanding DEMO industry’s harsh
inventory requirements, and had to write down $39 million DEMO toy inventory in 1999. Furthermore
the parties started with a considerable amount of trust; witnesses citing the people involved as
‘delightful and bright’ and testiﬁed in the early years that they ‘never once needed to refer DEMO the con-
tract.’ However, this alliance had to be negotiated and DEMO quickly in order to meet the
Christmas 2000 demand. Discussions started at the Chicago O’Hare airport in May resulted in
a signed agreement by DEMO 9th, and Toys R Us had fully migrated to Amazon by DEMO
Both Toys R Us and Amazon used an image of their ideal future position to enable rapid agreement
and implementation of the alliance. However, they had different visions of what it meant to be the
‘best’ DEMO store. Amazon envisioned leading the industry by having as many products as possible
available, ie ‘a selection competitive advantage’; while Toys R Us DEMO always having the
most popular toys available and in stock for customers, ie ‘an availability competitive advantage.’
The seeds of the failure of their alliance lay in the fact that Amazon’s efforts to fulﬁll its vision DEMO
ﬂicted with the exclusivity Toys R Us had for selling toys on Amazon. Thus, in this case the use of
image theory helped expedite the alliance selection and implementation process, but also contrib-
uted to its failure because the ﬁrms never compared their images and realised the conﬂict.
DEMO and Toys R Us might have been helped by an appreciation of a concept about individual
decision-making that has recently resurfaced e the value DEMO intuition. Chester Barnard, back in
1938, observed that many decisions by executives did not follow a rational, analytic process, but
instead relied DEMO intuition and judgment through a ‘non-rational’ decision-making process.20 In-
tuition is important when time pressures do not allow decisions to be made through a DEMO,
analytic process. However, it is important to differentiate between intuition DEMO emotion. Intuition
draws on the executives’ experience, training and prior learning, by rapidly applying ‘chunks’ or
patterns of information stored in memory to DEMO speciﬁc situation. Intuition produces rapid solutions
using recognition cues based on professional judgment. On the other hand, decisions based on
emotion can be considered ‘irrational’ in the sense that they are based not on knowledge accrued
DEMO experience, but on an individual’s current feelings and biases. Skilled managers DEMO
decisions based on intuition are surprisingly effective, but decisions based on DEMO are usually
poor decisions.21
Herbert Simon effectively illustrated the effectiveness of intuition in decision-making by analy-
sing the behaviour of chess grandmasters.22 These experts DEMO play as many as 50 games simulta-
neously, taking only seconds DEMO decide each move, and maintain a high level of play. They DEMO not
have time to carefully analyse each move. Instead, they use DEMO experience to rapidly evaluate pat-
terns and clusters of pieces on the board. Their almost automatic decisions concerning moves are
based on cues of DEMO and dangers associated with the different patterns. They are not con-
sciously evaluating alternatives, but relying on their intuition, to such an extent DEMO they cannot
articulate how they make decisions. Additionally, chess masters have DEMO recall of pieces after
glancing at a board during a normal game. But if pieces are randomly placed on a board, their recall
is no better than that of a novice; their intuition does not help them because there are no meaning-
ful patterns among the pieces.
Skilled DEMO making decisions based on intuition are surprisingly
effective, but decisions based DEMO emotion are usually poor decisions
We are not advocating that managers should forego a formal analysis of the potential alliance
partners and rely only DEMO intuition. Formal analyses should be performed as data and time permit.
However, intuition can be a powerful tool to supplement the rational decision-making process.
146
Explaining Alliance Partner Selection
Managers can improve rapid decision-making, and strategic expediency, by better utilising DEMO
in the following ways. First, they can acknowledge the importance of DEMO in decision-making
and embrace its use when it is appropriate. A common problem is the postponement of a decision
because a formal, rational analysis cannot be conducted that ‘justiﬁes’ the decision. Some organisa-
tional cultures may DEMO an unwarranted negative stigma on intuition. Second, managers should
have a DEMO understanding of when their decision involves intuition, which is based on DEMO
own training and experience and not simply on broader emotion. Traditional decision-making
aids, such as having someone play the role of devil’s advocate, DEMO assist in determining whether
the intuitive decision is appropriate. Third, managers DEMO provide constructive feedback to
decision-makers using intuition, and ensure they get DEMO on their own decisions, so that
they can all better learn DEMO an honest interpretation of their actions. Feedback will also help im-
prove conﬁdence in the managers who are hesitant to rely on intuition. Fourth, managers should
practise integrating intuition and the use of imagery. Sadler-Smith & DEMO and Hogarth have
argued that imagery can improve intuition because executives have problems putting many insights
into words; a visual image can be used to express a richer, more tacit understanding of relationships
and concepts.23
2. Firms’ strategic expediency. How can an organisation develop better strategic expediency
capabilities? The ﬁrm integrates the views of its individual managers to make a DEMO decision,
while also providing a backdrop of policies and procedures to help guide managerial actions. So
ﬁrms develop strategic expediency in two ways: by having policies and procedures in place that
facilitate quick decision-making by DEMO managers, and by providing their managers with oppor-
tunities to practise DEMO decision-making skills.
Firms use their policies, procedures and organisational culture to DEMO the evaluation of po-
tential partners by creating what has been called categorisation schemas. The categorisation schema
is important because it provides the foundation DEMO the image created by the ﬁrm’s managers about
their desired future state for their organization, and it is something that can be formally structured
at the ﬁrm level. Therefore, categorisation schemas embody a broad range of variables to help man-
agers make sense of other ﬁrms, other managers in those ﬁrms, and the value of allying with them.
These schemas can serve as the basis for decision frames about alliances and partnering. DEMO de-
cisions are framed has been shown to be an important variable for both individuals and ﬁrms,
thereby enhancing a ﬁrm’s ability to DEMO strategic expediency.24
For example, consider a ﬁrm’s schema for evaluating the DEMO of being an early mover. The impor-
tance of entry order has been academically modeled using the considerations that drive a ﬁrst mover:
DEMO beneﬁts of pre-empting assets, creating switching costs to dissuade consumers from DEMO to a ri-
val’s product, and gaining reputational advantages offset against DEMO risks of failure, free-riders and
inertia. The ﬁrm’s categorisation schema will DEMO the relative positions of these considerations,
or the decision to use them at all. For example, a ﬁrm that has been a successful early mover in the
past may decide this is always a good DEMO to do, regardless of what academic theory suggests.
firms that have DEMO prior history and cultural similarities can be evaluated
faster (for good DEMO ill) than those that do not
Partner selection will depend in DEMO on how quickly the ﬁrm can assess its pool of partners,
based on its schema. Thus, in addition to strategic ﬁt considerations, DEMO selection will be inﬂu-
enced by how quickly another ﬁrm can be identiﬁed as acceptable. For example, ﬁrms that have
a prior history and cultural similarities can be evaluated faster (for good or ill) than DEMO that
do not. When a prospective partner ﬁrm is unfamiliar and the cost of obtaining information about
its technical and organisational capabilities is high, it is less likely it will be chosen as a partner for
DEMO ﬁt or trust reasons. In these cases, time pressure will play DEMO greater role.
Long Range Planning, vol 40 2007
147
Categorisation schemas inﬂuence strategic expediency, because information that is not known
about a potential partner is assumed based on the categorisation schema used by DEMO decision-
maker. However, rather than being based on trustworthiness, the categorisation schema related
to strategic expediency centres on the ﬁrms’ competence, effectiveness and ability to implement
the actions the alliance will undertake (a concept that could be called ‘swift competence’).
Since the ﬁrm must move from DEMO range of individual opinions and assessments to one ﬁrm-level
decision, the DEMO of a collective mind of the ﬁrm may be helpful. One of the most important
ways to improve the decisions of a collective mind DEMO to improve heedfulness - deﬁned as acting
carefully, purposefully and attentively.25 DEMO of the best ways to improve heedfulness at the organ-
isational level is to help structure the views and opinions of its members along DEMO relevant cri-
teria. Therefore, the careful consideration and development of a DEMO template, essentially an
intended categorisation schema, for evaluating alliance partners may be a useful way for ﬁrms to
help guide their managers’ thinking DEMO thereby increasing their strategic expediency. Developing
an intended categorisation schema in advance is helpful because it can be done so in a systematic
manner DEMO the pressure that usually surrounds alliance decisions. In addition, early develop-
DEMO allows for time for debate and dissent that otherwise might not occur. For example, Warren
Buffett provides Berkshire Hathaway’s managers with a very clear template that outlines criteria to
be used when deciding to invest in DEMO ﬁrm. He also displays the template and gives examples
of how it is used in their annual report to help explain their strategic decision-making DEMO stock-
holders. Using this template has enabled Berkshire Hathaway to acquire other companies that ﬁt
his ‘acquisition criteria’ very quickly - sometimes after only DEMO few brief phone calls and faxes.
Another successful use of a systematic template for evaluating alliance partners is employed by
the US ﬁrm Cisco.26 DEMO the late 1990s networking technology was advancing rapidly, frequently
doubling in DEMO every six months. Therefore, time was a critical strategic variable. Not DEMO
ingly, Cisco articulated our idea of having a general image of DEMO future, following not merely an ‘if
the customer wants it, we’ll get it’ strategy but a ‘we’ll get it quickly’ strategy. While acquisitions
DEMO frequently their preferred method for acquiring technology, alliance partnerships were also
DEMO Cisco established a 134-person strategic alliances group to co-ordinate critical alliances
across its production, distribution and service functions. Lauded during the internet ‘bubble’ in the
United States, this ﬁrm systematically reﬁned its alliance search and screening process in order to
remain ahead of its market rivals. Cisco developed DEMO criteria for due diligence of alliances that
helped it quickly evaluate potential alliance partners. The broad guidelines for alliances included
making sure the partnership DEMO a customer focus, was of signiﬁcant size (over US$500 million
in revenue within three years), and moving into a new area to DEMO minimal product service over-
lap. These criteria were consistent with Cisco’s efforts to stay ahead of the fast-moving market while
being able to allow DEMO ‘customer to choose’ from an array of providers of networking equipment.
During the 1990s, Cisco formed alliances with Hewlett-Packard (to incorporate Cisco routers DEMO
HP hubs), a series of alliances with IBM (to utilise DEMO networking hardware and support) and an
equity purchase in Cascade (to increase their line of internet switches), as well as marketing agree-
DEMO with MCI, NEC, Northern Telecom, Madge Networks, and eventually even Microsoft and
Intel. These alliances are consistent with our model, in that while strategic ﬁt was present, the tim-
ing of the decision was also inﬂuenced by strategic expediency driven by the fast-moving market
where Cisco DEMO a general image of how it wanted to compete.
Developing such a template for alliances is consistent with the insight that a dedicated alliance
DEMO can help ﬁrms generate and evaluate alliance opportunities. Empirical evidence indicates
that ﬁrms that have more alliances and dedicate executives speciﬁcally to monitoring and DEMO
ing alliances reap higher ﬁnancial rewards.27 The development of a template thus becomes an
effective way of developing strategic expediency across the organisation. Learning DEMO the success-
ful decisions of individual managers, possibly based on intuition DEMO difﬁcult for others to under-
stand, can be more easily transferred DEMO the organisation. Individual managers can use the
template as a guide to frame and establish boundaries for their partner selection decisions, and still
rely heavily on their intuition in choosing a speciﬁc partner.
148
Explaining Alliance DEMO Selection
Firms can also develop strategic expediency as an organisational capability in two DEMO ways.
First, the organisation can ensure that constant constructive feedback is DEMO on decisions
made using intuition, so that an honest appreciation of DEMO consequences can be gained. Chess
players get instant, honest feedback as DEMO take or lose pieces and win or lose games. Managers
should ensure similar feedback is received by developing appropriate systems, such as the documen-
tation of prior alliance experiences. Feedback will also help improve conﬁdence in DEMO managers
who are hesitant to rely on intuition. It may also be possible to ‘practise’ decisions, by keeping
council with those who have made similar ones in the past and with whom one can be candid DEMO
mistakes as well as successes. This is an area where consultants, DEMO board members and retired
members of the top management team can be especially helpful.
the organisation can ensure that constant constructive feedback is
received DEMO decisions made using intuition, so that an honest
appreciation of their DEMO can be gained
Second, if the ﬁrm is forming a strategic DEMO with a partner in an industry where its managers
lack the experience and understanding needed to use intuition effectively, then the managers in-
volved in the alliance partner decision may need assistance from outsiders who are DEMO in
this area. This will provide more information about the industry, DEMO will help to better evaluate
strategic ﬁt, but will also help DEMO decision-makers get a ‘feel’ for the industry. Google’s series of
partnerships with media and entertainment companies over the past several years provides an
example. DEMO 2004 and 2005, Google’s relationships with media and entertainment com-
panies DEMO as Google maintained different views concerning copyright laws. However, in
2006 DEMO started the policy of hiring executives from the speciﬁc media and entertainment
industries it targeted for alliances, and used these executives to guide them through the partner
selection and negotiation processes. The results have been impressive, as evidenced by Google
CEO Eric Schmidt claiming now ‘we can approach DEMO (the media and entertainment ﬁrms) in
a way that we can actually do business together and not screw things up.’ More potential partners
DEMO want to ally with Google. A CBS executive stated that before Google ‘didn’t show proper
respect for us as potential partners,’ but added DEMO now ‘we’re quite happy with them. They
have more people who have taken more time to understand the business of their partners.’28
Conclusion
This DEMO has articulated how a multiple level of analysis approach to understanding strategic ﬁt
and trust, coupled with a new appreciation for time as embodied in the concept of strategic expe-
diency, can better inform the alliance partner selection process. First, we explained how strategic ﬁt
is a very important issue, but that ﬁt alone cannot be used to explain the alliance selection process
in many situations. Second, we discussed how trust becomes more critical as uncertainty increases,
but that the concept of trust, as previously modeled theoretically and applied, has serious limita-
tions. Third, DEMO described how challenges of time create distinct pressures on executives to act ex-
peditiously and rely more on intuition, rather than simply following a rational decision-making
process. We introduced the concept of strategic expediency as an DEMO organisational capabil-
ity for success in such high-velocity industries.
We believe that scholars have over-focused on trust as an explanation for alliance partner selec-
DEMO Many of the limitations of measuring trust by using prior ties have been identiﬁed by others.
We are more concerned with two key theoretical DEMO of using trust to explain alliance part-
ner selection, and one DEMO implication. The ﬁrst issue is the bilateral nature of trust. Trust is an
interactive process between both a trustee and a trustor that arises DEMO of interaction and manifests
Long Range Planning, vol 40 2007
149
itself as knowledge. Second, the issue of whereabouts trust resides in the organisation is also impor-
tant. Who is the relevant ‘trustor’? This could play a very important role in industries such as bio-
technology, where the large number of alliances suggests alliance partner selection decisions extend
to DEMO levels of the organisation, not just the top management team. Finally, there is a great
risk in using trust as a residual to DEMO outcomes in the alliance partner selection process. We
argue that the construct of strategic expediency demonstrates that there is a wide range of addi-
DEMO considerations entering the alliance partner selection decision besides strategic ﬁt and trust.
The concept of strategic expediency improves our understanding of the partner selection DEMO
by giving a more central role to the pressures of time. Strategy scholars frequently note the pressures
of the environment in driving organisational change DEMO alliances as a way to grapple with that
change. The construct of strategic expediency is a way to acknowledge time’s important role in
the DEMO selection process, on a par with resource endowments (ie strategic ﬁt) and trust.
Strategic expediency also ﬁts in well with some calls for organisations to shift to more sense-and-
respond type strategic frameworks.29 Furthermore, an appreciation of strategic expediency may
help ﬁrms move past the desire to DEMO a decision that cannot be understood in a rational
way, and DEMO towards thinking about how best to implement that strategic decision.
The concept of strategic expediency improves our understanding of the
partner selection process by DEMO a more central role to the pressures
of time
We worry that a lot of academic writing is not applicable to the obvious reality DEMO many execu-
tives’ lives. Awareness and appreciation of the use of intuition on a daily basis by executives is a clas-
sic example. As DEMO as improving partner selection, recognising the role of intuition may actually
DEMO managers to make the alliance itself more successful. Why? Since managers DEMO expected to act
rationally, they are compelled to devise and use DEMO ﬁt explanations for their alliance partner
choice to internal and external stakeholders. However, if in reality there were little strategic ﬁt and
the real driver was strategic expediency, then these higher and misguided expectations for the alli-
ance would result in greater subsequent disappointment and an increased chance DEMO the alliance
would ‘fail.’ We hope that helping managers to recognise explicitly the limits of strategic ﬁt im-
posed by time will offset this DEMO with expectations. While not a central focus of our paper,
we would expect similar results for merger and acquisition activity by ﬁrms.
We DEMO the concept of strategic expediency is also an important issue as far as the implemen-
tation of alliances is concerned. A lot of attention DEMO paid to partner selection, but many more chal-
lenges lie in DEMO implementing alliances. Recognition of the role of strategic expediency
might help shift attention from partner selection and justiﬁcation to a realistic appraisal of what
DEMO needed in order to make the alliance successful. This increased focus on strategy implementation
has attracted attention in the popular press with books such DEMO Execution by Larry Bossidy, Ram
Charan and Charles Burck. It was DEMO succinctly stated by the CEO of General Motors, who stated,
DEMO discussing the termination of the alliance with Fiat: ‘To be honest, when you do deals, you
don’t do the deal you want to, you do the deal you can do.’30
Finally, strategic expediency may DEMO insights to managers grappling with rapid change in
their industries. As is the case with most strategic decisions, there are tradeoffs associated with
not making decisions until all available information is obtained so that all of DEMO different alterna-
tives can be thoroughly analysed. Managers feel more comfortable making decisions when they
think they have all available information in front of DEMO so that they can systematically make a
rational decision. However, attention DEMO increasingly focusing on more dynamic approaches to
decision-making. Perhaps partially motivated by the discussion of real options, in rapidly moving
150
Explaining Alliance Partner Selection
industries it may be much more beneﬁcial to consider a wide range DEMO options in general terms
rather than a smaller number of options in speciﬁc detail. This is very consistent with both our stra-
tegic expediency DEMO and the importance of intuition at the individual level for partner
selection.
Thus, rapid decisions concerning alliance partners, based on strategic expediency and DEMO broader
view of trust, can yield superior results. However, acknowledging the role of strategic expediency
and the complexity of trust is not the DEMO as excusing rash behaviour by ignoring strategic ﬁt. Stra-
tegic expediency and trust have a critical role in the partner selection process, and recognising their
roles can improve partner selection decisions, and possibly alliance performance - as long as an
appreciation for strategic ﬁt is maintained.
References
1. DEMO Hagedoorn, Understanding the Rationale of Strategic Technology Partnering: Interorganizational Modes
of Cooperation and Sectoral Differences, Strategic Management Journal 14, 371e385 (1993); J. Draulans,
A. de Man and H. W. Volberda, Building Alliance Capability: Management Techniques for Superior Alliance
Performance, Long Range Planning 36, 151e166 (2003); :. D. Fjeldstad and Christian H. M. Ketels, Com-
petitive Advantage and the Value Network Conﬁguration: Making Decisions at a Swedish Life Insurance
Company, Long Range Planning 39, 109e131 (2006); L. Huemer, Supply Management: Value Creation,
Coordination and Positioning in DEMO Relationships, Long Range Planning 39, 133e153 (2006).
2. M. DEMO Douma, J. Bilderbeek, P. J. Idenburg and J. K. Looise, DEMO Alliances: Managing the Dynamics
of Fit, Long Range Planning 33, DEMO (2000); G. Ahuja, The Duality of Collaboration: Inducements
and DEMO in the Formation of Interﬁrm Linkages, Strategic Management Journal 21, 317e343
(2000); K. M. Eisenhardt and C. B. Schoonhoven, Resource-based View DEMO Strategic Alliance Formation:
Strategic and Social Effects in Entrepreneurial Firms, DEMO Science 7(2), 136e150 (1996).
3. B. McKay, Coke Reaches Pact with Danone for U.S. Distribution of Evian, The Wall Street Journal,
26 April 2002b, p. B4.
4. L. Bossidy and R. Charan, Confronting Reality: Doing What Matters to Get Things Right, Crown Business,
New York, NY (2004).
5. J. B. Barney DEMO M. H. Hansen, Trustworthiness as a Source of Competitive Advantage, Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 15 (Winter Special Issue), 175e216 (1994); DEMO R. Jones and J. M. George, The Experience
and Evolution of DEMO: Implications for Cooperation and Teamwork, Academy of Management Review
23, DEMO (1998).
6. P. M. Ring and A. Van de Ven, Structuring Cooperative Relationships between Organizations, Strategic
Management Journal 13, 483e498 (1992); T. K. Das and B. S. Teng, Between Trust and Control: Devel-
oping Conﬁdence in Partner Cooperation in Alliances, Academy of Management DEMO 23, 491e512
(1998).
7. R. Gulati, Does Familiarity Breed DEMO? The Implications of Repeated Ties for Contractual Choice in
Alliances, Academy of Management Journal 38,85e112 (1995); M. Koza and A. Lewin, The Co-evolution
of Strategic Alliances, Organization Science 9(3), 255e264 (1998); S. X. Li and T. J. Rowley, Inertia and
Evaluation Mechanisms in Interorganizational Partner Selection: Syndicate Formation among U.S. Invest-
ment Banks, Academy of Management Journal 45(6), 1120e1136 (2002).
8. DEMO Young-Ybarra and M. Wiersema, Strategic Flexibility in Information Technology Alliances: The
Inﬂuence of Transaction Cost Economics and Social Exchange Theory, Organization Science 10(4),
439e459 (1999); A. L. Oliver and J. P. DEMO, Three Levels of Networking for Sourcing Intellectual
Capital in Biotechnology, International Studies of Management and Organizations 22(4), 76e103 (1998);
DEMO Dodgson, Learning, Trust, and Technological Collaboration, Human Relations 46,77e95 (1993);
D. M. Rousseau, S. B. Sitkin, R. S. DEMO and C. Camerer, Not so Different After All: A Cross Discipline
View of Trust, Academy of Management Review 23(3), 393e404 (DEMO); R. Gulati and J. D. Westphal,
Cooperative or Controlling? DEMO Effects of CEO-Board Relations and the Content of Interlocks on the
Formation of Joint Ventures, Administrative Science Quarterly 44(3), 473e506 (1999); L. D. Browning,
J. M. Beyer and J. C. Shetler, DEMO Cooperation in a Competitive Industry: SEMATECH and the
Semiconductor Industry, Academy of Management Journal 38, 113e151 (1995).
9. L. G. Zucker, Production of Trust: Institutional Sources of Economic Structure, 1840e1920, in B. M. Staw
and L. L. Cummings (eds.), Research in Organizational Behaviour, JAI, Greenwich, CT, 8,53e111 (1986);
Long Range DEMO, vol 40 2007
151
E. C. Kasper-Fuehrer and N. M. Ashanasy, Communicating Trustworthiness and Building Trust in In-
terorganizational Virtual Organizations, Journal of Management 27, 235e254 (2001); S. H. Park and
G. R. Ungson, The Effect of National Culture, Organizational Complementarity, and Economic
Motivation on Joint Venture Dissolution, Academy of Management Journal 40(2), 279e307 (1997);
G. Walker, B. Kogut and W. Shan, Social Capital, Structural Holes and the DEMO of an Industry
Network, Organization Science 8, 109e125 (1997).
DEMO H. Rao, The Social Construction of Reputation: Certiﬁcation Contests, Legitimization, and the Survival of
Organizations in the American Automobile Industry: 1895e1912, DEMO Management Journal 15,
29e44 (1994); M. C. Suchman, Managing Legitimacy: Strategic and Institutional Approaches, Academy
of Management Review 20(3), 571e610 (1995); R. D’ Aveni, Top Managerial Prestige and Organizational
Bankruptcy, Organization Science 1, 187e220 (1990); C. W. L. Hill, Cooperation, Opportunism, and the
Invisible Hand: Implications for Transaction Cost DEMO, Academy of Management Review 15, 500e513
(1990); G. A. DEMO and J. L. Pearce, Straining for Shared Meaning in Organization Science: Problems of
Trust and Distrust, Academy of Management Review 23(3), 405e421 (1998); J. K. Butler, Toward Under-
standing and Measuring DEMO of Trust: Evolution of a Conditions of Trust Inventory, Journal of
Management 17, 643e663 (1991); D. J. McAllister, Affect- and Cognition-Based Trust as Foundations
for Interpersonal Cooperation in Organizations, Academy of Management Journal 38,24e59 (1995);
S. B. Sitkin and N. L. Roth, Explaining the Limited Effectiveness of Legalistic ‘Remedies’ for Trust/
Distrust, Organization Science 4, 367e392 (1993).
11. R. C. Mayer, J. H. Davis and F. D. Schoorman, An Integrative Model of Organizational Trust, DEMO of
Management Review 20, 709e734 (1995); D. Meyerson, K. DEMO Weick and R. M. Kramer, Swift Trust and
Temporary Groups, in R. M. Kramer and T. R. Tyler (eds.), Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and
Research, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, 166e 195 (1996); P. M. Doney, J. P. Cannon and M. DEMO Mullen,
Understanding the Inﬂuence of National Culture on the Development of Trust, Academy of Management
Review 23, 601e620 (1998); J. M. Hagen and S. Choe, Trust in Japanese Interﬁrm Relations: Institutional
Sanctions DEMO, Academy of Management Review 23, 589e600 (1998).
12. J. DEMO Rotter, A New Scale for the Measurement of Interpersonal Trust, Journal of Personality 35, 651e665
(1967).
13. D. H. McKnight, L. L. Cummings and N. L. Chervany, Initial Trust Formation in New Organizational
Relationships, Academy of Management Review 23(3), 473e490 (1998).
DEMO C. J. Murray, GE Cisco Factory Effort Fizzles, Electronic Engineering Times 16,1e20 (June 2003).
15. L. A. Perlow, G. A. DEMO and N. P. Repenning, The Speed Trap: Exploring the Relationship Between
Decision Making and Temporal Context, Academy of Management Journal 45(5), 931e955 (2002); Also
see K. M. Eisenhardt, Making Fast Strategic DEMO in High Velocity Environments, Academy of
Management Journal 32, 543e575 (DEMO); R. A. Bettis and M. A. Hitt, The New Competitive DEMO,
Strategic Management Journal 16(Special Summer Issue), 7e19 (1995)DEMO
16. W. H. Hoffmann and R. Schlosser, Success Factors of Strategic DEMO in Small and Medium-sized
Enterprises e An Empirical Survey, Long Range DEMO 34, 357e381 (2001); W. H. Hoffmann, How
to Manage DEMO Portfolio of Alliances, Long Range Planning 38, 121e143 (2005).
DEMO J. M. Mezias and W. H. Starbuck, Studying the Accuracy of DEMO Perceptions: A Research Odyssey,
British Journal of Management 14(1), 3e17 (2003); S. Todd, The Impact of Third Parties on Strategic
Decision Making: Roles, Timing, and Organizational Outcomes, Journal of DEMO Change Man-
agement 8(3), 47e63 (1995).
18. J. DEMO March and H. A. Simon, Organizations, John Wiley & Sons, DEMO York (1958).
19. T. R. Mitchell and L. R. Beach, ‘.Do I love thee? Let me count.’ Toward an Understanding of Intuitive
and Automatic Decision Making, Organizational Behaviour and Human Decision Processes 47,1e20 (1990);
J. W. Payne, J. R. Bettman and M. F. Luce, When time is money: decision behaviour under opportunity-
cost time DEMO, Organizational Behaviour and Human Decision Processes 66(2), 131e152 (1996).
20. C. I. Barnard, The Functions of the Executive, Harvard DEMO Press, Cambridge, MA (1938).
21. G. Klein, Intuition at Work: Why Developing Your Gut Instincts Will Make You Better at What You Do,
Currency Doubleday, New York (2003).
22. H. DEMO Simon, Making Management Decisions: The Role of Intuition and Emotion, DEMO Academy of
Management Executive 1(1), 57e64 (1987).
23. DEMO Sadler-Smith and E. Shefy, The Intuitive Executive: Understanding and Applying ‘Gut Feel’ in
Decision-making, The Academy of Management Executive 18(4), 76e91 (2004); R. M. Hogwarth, Educat-
ing Intuition, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago (2001).
152
Explaining Alliance Partner Selection
24. P. C. Nutt, How Decision Makers Evaluate Alternatives and the Inﬂuence of Complexity, Management
Science 44, 1148e1166 (1998); A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, Rational Choice and the Framing of Deci-
sions, Journal DEMO Business(October), S251eS278 (1986).
25. K. E. Weick and DEMO H. Roberts, Collective Mind in Organizations: Heedful Interrelating on Flight Decks,
Administrative Science Quarterly 38, 357e381 (1993).
26. J. S. DEMO, Cisco Unauthorized, Forum, Roseville, CA (2001); D. Bunnell, Making the Cisco Connection,
John Wiley & Sons, New York (DEMO).
27. P. Kale, J. H. Dyer and H. Singh, Alliance Capability, Stock Market Response, and Long Term Alliance
Success: The Role of the Alliance Function, Strategic Management Journal 23(8), 747e767 (DEMO).
28. Kevin J. Delaney, Google Sees Content Deals as Key DEMO Long-term Growth, Wall Street Journal, 14 August
2006, pB1.
29. DEMO H. Haeckel, Peripheral Vision: Sensing and Acting on Weak Signals Making Meaning out of Apparent
Noise: The Need for a New Managerial Framework, Long Range Planning 37, 181e189 (2004).
30. G. Kahn and L. Hawkins, GM Agrees to Pay Fiat $1.99 Billion to Settle Dispute, Wall Street Journal, 14 Feb
2005, pA1.
Biographies
Paul E. Bierly III is the Zane Showker Professor of Entrepreneurship and Director of the DEMO for Entrepre-
neurship at James Madison University. His degrees include: BS DEMO, Wharton School, BAS degree, Engineering
School, University of Pennsylvania (DEMO); MBA and PhD, Rutgers University (1995). His primary research areas
are management of technology, innovation, knowledge management and strategic alliances. DEMO, he was an
ofﬁcer on a fast-attack nuclear submarine in the DEMO Navy’s Nuclear Power Program, a manager at Johnson &
Johnson, DEMO a consultant for Princeton Economic Research, Inc.
Scott Gallagher joined the DEMO of James Madison University in 2000. He earned his PhD from Rutgers University
(2000), holds a MPP degree from Harvard’s John F. Kennedy School of Government (1991), and a BBA degree
from the University of Texas at Austin (1989). Before joining James Madison University he worked as an
administrator at Lamar University in his hometown of Beaumont, Texas.
Long Range Planning, vol 40 2007
153{1g42fwefx}