ORGANIZATIONAL
BEHAVIOR
AND HUMAN
PERFORMANCE 31, 331-352 (1983)
Measures of DEMO and Noncompensatory
Models of Decision Behavior: Process Tracing
versus Policy Capturing
DEMO S. BILLINGS AND STEPHEN m. MARCUS
The Ohio State University
While a variety of techniques have been used to infer compensatory ver-
sus noncompensatory DEMO making, few studies have used multiple
measures in order to evaluate DEMO validity. Using a sample of 48 college
students, this study examines DEMO measures from a search task (the variability
and pattern of search DEMO an information board) and three measures from a
rating or judgment DEMO (nonlinear regression modeling, ANOVA measures of
interaction and curvilinearity). The validity of these measures is assessed by
their sensitivity to a manipulation DEMO information load and their extent of con-
vergence with one another. The variability of search on the information board
and the ANOVA measures of DEMO and curvilinearity all indicated an
increase in noncompensatory decision making under high information load,
while the regression modeling measure did not. There was DEMO convergence
between the regression and ANOVA indices, but no relation between DEMO
search task and rating task measures. It is concluded that the ANOVA mea-
sures of interaction and curvilinearity are more sensitive measures than the
DEMO regression procedure. The information board and ANOVA measures
are apparently both valid indices of noncompensatory decision making; they
may lack convergence because they represent different parts of the decision
process (information acquisition vs combination) or DEMO different re-
sponses (choice vs judgment).
Research on decision making DEMO used a variety of techniques for mak-
ing inferences about the decision process. One of the oldest and most
widely used techniques is that DEMO policy capturing, wherein the model
guiding the decision process is inferred DEMO the relationships between the
cues provided and the judgment of the subject. While linear regression is
most commonly used, the relationships between cues and judgments can
be assessed through a variety of techniques, such as ANOVA (e.g.,
Slovic, 1969; Anderson & Shanteau, 1977) or nonlinear regression (e.g.,
Goldberg, 1971). A newer technique is the DEMO board (e.g., Payne,
1976). Here, inferences about a DEMO's decision processes are based on
the search pattern evidenced by the subject. For example, a linear, com-
pensatory model is inferred if DEMO subject searches for information within
Requests for reprints should be sent to Robert S. Billings, 404C West 17th Avenue,
Department of Psychology, DEMO Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210.
331
0030-5073/83 $3.00
Copyright © 1983 by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
332
BILLINGS AND MARCUS
alternatives and looks at a constant amount of DEMO for each alter-
native.
While there have been several calls for the examination of multiple
indices of the decision process (Einhorn & Hogarth, DEMO; Payne,
Braunstein, & Carroll, 1978; Svenson, 1979) few multimethod decision
making studies have been reported. One such example is a DEMO by
Einhorn, Kleinmuntz, and Kleinmuntz (1979). Using two judges DEMO two
different tasks, the authors built a regression model of each DEMO and also
formulated process-tracing models based on verbal protocols elicited
while the subjects made the judgments. Both types of models showed
similar predictive ability DEMO were concluded to be valid representations
at their own level of detail. While these results are encouraging, more
research is needed, using more DEMO and larger samples of subjects,
to insure that conclusions can be generalized across different measures.
The research reported here pursues this same general DEMO: Do
different measures or representations of the decision process produce the
DEMO results? The measures examined include the following: the variabil-
ity of search and search pattern obtained from the information board
procedure (e.g., DEMO, 1976); the relative fit of linear and nonlinear re-
gression DEMO obtained through the usual judgment procedure (e.g.,
Einhorn, 1970); the extent of interactive use of cues, obtained by an
ANOVA on a fractional replication design (e.g., Slovic, 1969; Slovic,
Fleissner, & Bauman, 1972); and a measure of the curvilinear use of cues
which has not been previously applied to decision making research. Ex-
DEMO for the measure of curvilinearity, each of these measures has been
DEMO in numerous studies to infer the use of a compensatory versus non-
compensatory decision strategy. The validity of such inferences is exam-
ined in DEMO study by collecting all measures on the same sample of sub-
jects and evaluating their sensitivity to a manipulation of information load
and their DEMO with one another.
Before presenting the results of this experiment, a DEMO of issues
must be discussed. The differences between compensatory and noncom-
pensatory decision models will be explored, followed by a discussion of
the five measures employed in this study. The procedures to be used to
evaluate DEMO measures are explained next. Finally, comes a discussion of
the variations DEMO the task that are needed to obtain the measures to be
studied.
DECISION MODELS AND OPERATIONAL MEASURES
Models
While a number of decision models DEMO been described in the litera-
ture, a basic distinction is between DEMO and noncompensatory
PROCESS TRACING VERSUS POLICY CAPTURING
333
models. Noncompensatory models such as the DEMO or
elimination-by-aspects (EBA; Tversky, 1972) models would be indicated
by the interactive use of cues. The search pattern of someone following a
DEMO strategy would show a variable amount of information
examined and/or used for each alternative. This variable pattern occurs
because a low score on DEMO dimension cannot be compensated for by a
high score on another dimension, causing that alternative to be elimi-
nated.
Compensatory strategies generally refer to the linear model, although
the additive difference model is compensatory when the difference func-
tions are linear (Tversky, 1969, p. 43). Along with an absence of interac-
tive use of cues, compensatory strategies imply the search for and use of a
constant number of cues for DEMO alternative.
Measures and Their Relation to Models
Information board. The different techniques examined in this research
have been used to indicate the use of DEMO versus noncompen-
satory decision strategies. The information board (e.g., Bettman & Kak-
kar, 1977; Payne, 1976) generally contains information about alternatives
DEMO cards which must be taken out of envelopes or turned around to be
viewed. A typical format would have alternatives in rows and dimensions
DEMO attributes in columns. The subject is instructed to examine those cards
that are felt to be necessary to select one alternative. Different search
patterns DEMO used as indicators of decision strategies: compensatory
strategies would be indicated DEMO interdimensional search using a constant
amount of information per alternative (linear DEMO) or by an intradimen-
sional, constant pattern (additive difference). DEMO
strategies would be indicated by using a variable amount of information
per alternative and searching interdimensionally (conjunctive) or in-
tradimensionally (EBA).
Regression modeling. Various regression models have been used to
infer the use of DEMO decision processes. Einhorn (1970;
1971), has suggested a specific DEMO that approximates the conjunctive
strategy. Defining the judgment for each alternative as Y and the attri-
butes as X1, X2 .... Xn, judgments DEMO on a conjunctive strategy should
be predicted well by
or
log Y=alogXi
X~
+blogX2 + ... +klogXn.
If a conjunctive strategy is being used, Einhorn argues that
should fit the data better than the linear regression DEMO
Y
=
. x~
.
.
.
.
. x~,,
(1)
this function
334
BILLINGS AND MARCUS
ANOVA---interaction. ANOVA offers an alternative to regression,
DEMO the primary advantage being the direct indexing of interactive use of
cues. When cues are orthogonal, either through a fully crossed design
(e.g., Anderson, 1962; Hoffman, Slovic, & Rorer, 1968) or a DEMO
replication design (e.g., Anderson, 1964; Slovic, 1969), the DEMO of
interaction can be indexed by the variance accounted for by the interac-
tion terms.
ANOVA--curvilinearity. The final measure of the decision process re-
DEMO some explanation. Curvilinearity in the use of cues has often not
been clearly distinguished from interaction. Curvilinearity occurs when
the values of a single DEMO do not show a linear relation to the judgments.
This nonlinear relationship may take a number of forms, such as various
types of step functions. The most extreme curvilinearity occurs when a
moderate amount of the DEMO is most preferred, creating a nonmonotonic
function. Interaction and curvilinearity may DEMO separately or together.
The distinctions are often blurred, however, as both are commonly re-
ferred to as nonlinearity.
While noncompensatory models imply interactive DEMO of cues and com-
pensatory models imply lack of interaction, the DEMO of these
models for curvilinearity are less clear. The linear model implies no cur-
vilinearity, but the additive difference model allows for curvilinear prefer-
ence functions. Tversky (1969) presents this model as one that can DEMO
for intransitivity of preference if some difference functions are nonlinear,
implying that curvilinearity may exist, although it is not necessitated.
With regard to noncompensatory models, the conjunctive model im-
plies curvilinearity because cutoffs are an inherent part of the model.
While Tversky (1972) does not discuss DEMO, the EBA model
seems to imply curvilinearity, as alternatives are eliminated if below a
cutoff and, presumably, all scores above the cutoff DEMO treated as equal in
desirability. In summary, while there is some DEMO, compensatory
models tend to imply lack of curvilinearity and the presence DEMO cur-
vilinearity would be an indication of noncompensatory models.
EVALUATING MEASURES OF THE DECISION PROCESS
Effects of Information Load
One way to evaluate measures DEMO compensatory versus noncompensa-
tory decision processes is to manipulate a variable which should affect the
decision process and observe the effect on each measure. DEMO variable
which is widely assumed to affect the decision process is the information
load placed on the subject. The usual line of reasoning is DEMO noncompen-
satory strategies are easier to use than compensatory strategies, and
DEMO are more likely to be used by a subject as the amount of infor-
mation to process increases or the time available decreases.
PROCESS TRACING VERSUS POLICY CAPTURING
335
Several studies have investigated the effects DEMO information load on
decision processes. Using an information board, Payne (1976)
operationalized information load as both the number of alternatives and
dimensions. DEMO found that an increase in number of alternatives led to
greater use of noncompensatory strategies, but that number of dimensions
had no such effect. Wright (1974) varied the time available to make judg-
ments on DEMO objects (cars). Judgments were modeled using
a linear model and DEMO "negative bias" model, with the latter being quite
similar to DEMO's conjunctive model. As time pressure increased, the
negative bias model DEMO better than the compensatory model. Einhorn
(1971) varied the number of dimensions per alternative and assessed the
fit of the linear, conjunctive, DEMO disjunctive models in two judgment
tasks. Contrary to predictions, subjects did DEMO appear to use a noncom-
pensatory strategy to a greater extent under higher information load.
However, there was some evidence from postquestionnaires that subjects
used complex, multistage models more often under greater information
load. Finally, DEMO (1979) used verbal protocols to measure decision
processes and varied the number of alternatives and number of dimen-
sions. As the number of DEMO increased, there was a change from a
single stage strategy to DEMO two-stage strategy with elimination of some
alternatives through a noncompensatory strategy, DEMO by a compen-
satory process to evaluate the remaining alternatives. Number of dimen-
sions affected how dimensions were weighted, but did not produce non-
compensatory behavior.
In summary, the hypothesis that increased information load produces
noncompensatory decision making has been supported with several
operationalizations of information load and DEMO different techniques for
measuring decision process. Further, it appears as if DEMO effect occurs
more reliably when information load is operationalized as time pressure or
number of alternatives, as compared to number of dimensions. Accord-
ingly, these manipulations will be used and an observed effect on a deci-
sion measure will be taken as evidence of the construct validity of DEMO
measure.
Convergence among Measures
Another major technique for evaluating the construct validity of various
measures involves assessing the extent of convergence among different
measures DEMO the same construct. As discussed above, more extensive use
of a DEMO decision process is indicated by (1) greater vari-
ability in the information searched per alternative, (2) more variance ac-
counted for by the log model (Eq. (1)) than the linear model, (DEMO) a larger
amoung of variance accounted for by interaction terms, and (4) a larger
amount of curvilinearity.
336
BILLINGS AND MARCUS
PROBLEMS DUE TO VARIATIONS IN THE TASK
As DEMO are typically used, the measures to be evaluated in this research
DEMO slightly different tasks and operationalizations. The major differ-
ence among the information board, regression modeling, and ANOVA
procedures involve the format for presenting DEMO, the relationship
among cue values, the phase of the decision process examined, the type of
response elicited from the subjects, and the DEMO of infor-
mation load.
The typical method of presenting stimuli with the information board is
to put pieces of information on cards, place the cards in an alternatives by
attribute matrix, and have the subjects view the information sequentially
as they turn over the desired cards. Model fitting, either through ANOVA
or regression, generally involves the presentation of all information on an
alternative (or on all alternatives) on a single sheet DEMO paper. While these
procedures differ in several ways, one important underlying DEMO is
in whether information is presented sequentially or in summary format.
This variable has been shown to affect the use of information in other
DEMO For example, summary presentation leads to more accurate
judgment of the DEMO of covariation of two variables (Crocker, 1981).
Similarly, a DEMO list of unit prices has been shown to increase the use
of this information (Russo, 1977)'. One study (Bettman & Kakkar, 1977)
using information boards has examined presentation format by comparing
a DEMO format with an alternative format (separate booklets for each
alternative containing DEMO) and an attribute format (booklets containing
all the cards for a given attribute). This manipulation of format affected
the search pattern (inter vs intradimensional), and the number of alterna-
tives, attributes, and DEMO cards examined; variability of search was not
reported. Apparently, then, DEMO format affects some decision be-
havior, and, although it has not been directly studied, the type of format
difference existing here might affect behavior indicative of compensatory
versus noncompensatory strategies.
The degree of correlation among DEMO cue values has not been a salient
issue with information boards. The typical application would use all pos-
sible combinations of cues, although some studies (e.g., Payne, 1976)
have deleted alternatives with certain combinations of cues (e.g., when all
dimensions are very positive). Although DEMO systematically studied with
the information board, this issue of correlation among DEMO has been an
ongoing concern in research which fits models to judgment data (e.g.,
Anderson & Shanteau, 1977; Dudycha & Naylor, DEMO). Studies which
use regression generally have correlated cues, while ANOVA DEMO
orthogonal cues. Furthermore, Einhorn, Kleinmuntz, and Kleinmuntz
PROCESS TRACING VERSUS POLICY CAPTURING
337
(1979) argue that discrimination between DEMO conjunction and linear model
is facilitated by negative correlation among cues.
Although all of these procedures are presented in the literature as at-
tempts DEMO measure the decision process used, the information board and
modeling procedures DEMO with regard to what part of the entire decision
process is the focus. The information board examines acquisition or in-
formation search, while the other techniques concern the evaluation
phase, as they attempt to model how information is combined to form a
judgment. The models presented in the DEMO (e.g., conjunctive, EBA)
imply effects on both phases of DEMO decision process, although, as Einhorn
and Hogarth (1981) point out, the psychological processes underlying the
different phases of the decision process may vary and be affected by
different external factors.
The response obtained from DEMO subject also differs in the usual appli-
cations of these techniques. The information board asks the subject to
choose one alternative, while the modeling paradigms ask for an explicit
evaluation of each alternative. While evaluation may DEMO occur before
choice, it does not always do so. As pointed DEMO by Einhorn, Kleinmuntz,
and Kleinmuntz (1979), choice and evaluation are likely to result from the
same process only under certain conditions (e.g., when time is sufficient,
when the task is important). While the distinction between choice and
judgment should be pursued empirically, it is important to note that the
procedures studied here vary in this DEMO and may produce different
results simply because they require different responses.
Finally, the operationalization of information load has generally varied
for these techniques. As noted above, the most common and successful
manipulation of information load has been number of alternatives for the
information board and time pressure for DEMO capturing.
These differing procedures present something of a dilemma. If the usual
procedures were followed to gather each measure, then different tasks
and manipulations would be demanded. On the other hand, in order for all
measures to be calculated from the same data, the procedures would have
to be dramatically altered. In this study the decision was made to use DEMO
procedures typically employed in the literature, so the results would be
DEMO to the existing research which uses these techniques. Accord-
ingly, subjects DEMO two tasks, a search task using an information
board and requiring DEMO choice of one alternative, and a rating task which
required an DEMO of each alternative. The content and the values of
the cues were the same in both tasks, however. In order to compute the
ANOVA index of interaction, a fractional replication design (Slovic, 1969)
was used. This meant that cues were uncorrelated, which may have re-
duced the ability of the regression models to accurately discriminate be-
tween compensatory DEMO noncompensatory use of the data.
338
BILLINGS AND MARCUS
METHODS
Subjects
The subjects were 48 undergraduates who DEMO as part of a
course requirement in an introduction to psychology class.
Procedure
Each subject was run individually in a 1-hr session. There were DEMO
separate tasks, a search task using an information board and a DEMO task.
The order of these tasks was counterbalanced across subjects.
Search task. Subjects were told they would be presented with a number
of alternatives, each representing a different one-bedroom furnished
apartment. Information concerning four aspects of DEMO apartment
(cleanliness, distance, rent, and size) was available on DEMO backs of the
index cards found in the envelopes on the wall in front of them. They were
to choose the apartment they preferred DEMO themselves based on the in-
formation provided and as many or as few cards as they liked could be
turned over. Subjects were told DEMO they should work at their own pace,
as there was sufficient time for the task.
Information load was manipulated by varying the number DEMO alterna-
tives a subject was presented with. Each subject faced four decision situ-
ations. These consisted of 2, 5, 8, and 12 alternatives and four dimensions
of information per alternative. The order of presenting the DEMO situa-
tions was counterbalanced across subjects. The 27 alternatives were the
same as those used in the rating task (see below) and the DEMO of presen-
tation of the alternatives was randomized for each subject.
A practice set of alternatives (three apartments) was given prior to the
DEMO trial to familiarize the subjects with the procedures. There was a
short rest break after choosing an apartment before a new set of apart-
DEMO was presented. During the rest break the subjects sat with their
backs facing the wall with the envelopes, to prevent them from seeing the
experimenter put the next set of alternatives in place. Also during this
DEMO, the subjects responded to a question about the amount of infor-
DEMO which was available in the situation they just faced. This proce-
dure was repeated until all four decision situations were completed.
Rating task. In DEMO portion of the experiment, subjects evaluated two
sets of 27 apartments. DEMO were told to rate each apartment individually
on a 7-point desirability scale. Once a rating was completed, they were
unable to go back and change it. To keep the subjects from seeing their
previous rating another DEMO of paper with a section cut out was placed
over the rating form. This top sheet was moved down the rating form as
each DEMO was evaluated so it covered the previous ratings while
allowing the subjects to rate the next apartment.
PROCESS TRACING VERSUS POLICY CAPTURING
339
There were two conditions of information DEMO for each subject in this
part of the experiment. In the low information load condition, the subjects
were given as much time as necessary to complete the ratings. Under high
information load the subjects had only DEMO min and 30 sec to complete all the
ratings. They were told that they would have to work quickly, as this
allowed them approximately 5 sec per apartment. After every 30 sec the
subjects were told DEMO many apartments they should have rated by then
and to speed up if behind schedule. If the subject had not rated all 27
apartments DEMO the allotted time, he/she was told to speed up and DEMO given
approximately 5.5 sec per apartment for the remaining ones. Immediately
following each information load condition, the subjects responded to
questions concerning perceived information load, felt time pressure, and
how rushed they felt while rating DEMO apartments.
The same set of 27 apartments was used under both information load
conditions, but the order of the alternatives differed. The two rating forms
were counterbalanced across the two conditions of information load and
the DEMO of presenting the two conditions of information load was coun-
terbalanced across subjects.
Stimuli
The stimuli in both tasks consisted of descriptions of one-bedroom,DEMO
furnished apartments. Four dimensions and three levels per dimension
were used: DEMO rent ($110, $140, $170), size (small, moderate, large),
cleanliness (poor, fair, good), and walking distance to DEMO (10, 20, 30
min). Three levels were necessary to DEMO examination of curvilinearity,
as explained below.
In order to obtain an unambiguous measure of interactive use of data, it
would be desirable to have all possible combinations represented. How-
ever, this would produce a prohibitively large number of alternatives (81).
Accordingly, a fractional replication design DEMO used (Slovic, 1969). A 1/3
fractional design reduced the number of stimuli to 27 and still allowed for
the estimation of DEMO effects and first-order interactions (Connor &
Zelen, 1959, p. 11). In this particular design, main effects are confounded
with higher order interactions, but not with first-order interactions, and
some first-order interactions are DEMO with other first-order and
higher order interactions. If it is assumed that higher order interactions
are negligible (Goldberg, 1968; Slovic, 1969), DEMO the proportion of total
variance can be calculated separately for total main effects and for total
first-order interactions.
Measures of Decision Process
Search task. DEMO measures were abstracted from the information board
task--variability of search and search pattern. Variability of search was
340
BILLINGS AND MARCUS
operationalized as the percent of information searched per DEMO and
then computing the standard deviation of these percentages for the 2, 5, 8,
or 12 alternatives on each board. This measure DEMO treated both as a
continuous score and dichotomized into constant (standard DEMO of
zero, meaning that the same amount of information was searched DEMO all
alternatives) or variable (standard deviation greater than zero). The
search pattern--interdimensional versus intradimensional--was calcu-
lated in the same manner as Payne (1976). Each move to a new piece of
information which was DEMO the same alternative and across dimensions
was classified as an interdimensional move, while a move within a dimen-
sion and across alternatives was labeled as intradimensional. Moves to
both a different alternative and a different dimension DEMO labeled shifts.
The search pattern variable was defined as the number of interdimen-
sional moves minus the number of intradimensional moves divided by the
DEMO of these two numbers. This index was calculated separately for each
board and was treated as a continuous measure and also dichotomized
into interdimensional (positive values) and intradimensional (negative
values).
The search pattern and DEMO variability of search were also combined to
yield an indication of the decision model apparently used by each subject
on each board. The two DEMO models would be indicated by an
interdimensional, constant pattern (linear model) or an intradimensional,
constant pattern (additive difference). Two noncompensatory DEMO
would be indicated by interdimensional, variable (conjunctive) and in-
tradimensional, variable (EBA).
Rating task---regression indices. As argued by Einhorn (1970, 1971) the
use of a conjunctive strategy would be indicated when the log transforma-
tion model (see Eq. (1)) predicts judgments better DEMO the linear regres-
sion model. Accordingly, both models were applied to DEMO subject's
judgments on the rating task, under both high and DEMO information load,
and the amount of variance accounted for (R DEMO) was determined. When the
R 2 for the linear model exceeded DEMO from the log model, the subject was
classified as compensatory, while the opposite pattern was labeled non-
compensatory. A continuous measure of the DEMO of noncompensatory
use of the information was also desired. While the R 2 for the log model
could be used in this way, it is necessary to control for the amount of
variance accounted for by DEMO linear model. It was dxpected that these
two measures would be highly correlated, because subjects who were
more consistent in their use of information would be fit well by both
models. (In fact, the two DEMO 2 measures correlated .88 under low informa-
tion load and .93 under high information load.)
Rating task---ANOVA index of interaction. The fractional replication
DEMO allows for the estimation of total variance due to all first-order
PROCESS TRACING VERSUS POLICY CAPTURING
341
interactions. This estimate is confounded with DEMO order interactions,
but not with main effects. Accordingly, eta squared (72 ) values were
computed for the six first-order interactions and summed DEMO create an
index (labeled ~/]) of amount of interactive use of the data. This estimate
of variance due to interaction can be DEMO by the total variance ac-
counted for (~] + ~], where M stands for main effects), to yield a
second index of DEMO of interactive use of the data.
The amount of variance due to interaction correlated negatively with
the amount of linear variance accounted for (-.86 under low information
load and -.84 under high). Therefore, as was the case with the log trans-
form index, the R 2 from the linear model will be partialled out of the
interaction measure in DEMO subsequent analyses. While this procedure
provides a continuous measure of the extent of interactive use of the data,
it does not automatically allow DEMO of subjects as interactive
versus noninteractive. As this fractional replication design does not aUow
for a significance test of the interactions, a median split on the ~ ~/] index
was used. The median score on DEMO ~ index, disregarding conditions,
was. 1045.
Rating task---index of curvilinearity. DEMO curvilinear use of data was
indexed by calculating eta squared (72 ) between each cue and the sub-
ject's judgment. As this measure includes both linear and nonlinear vari-
ance accounted for, it is necessary to subtract the linear variance (r ~) from
~72 to obtain DEMO index of the degree of curvilinear use of data. This differ-
ence, often referred to as deviation from linearity, can be tested for DEMO
nificance (Blalock, 1972, pp. 408-413).
To obtain a continuous DEMO of extent of curvilinearity, the differ-
ence score was summed across DEMO four dimensions for both conditions of
information load. This measure is negatively correlated with the linear R z
(-.44 and -.61, under low DEMO high information level). Accordingly, the
linear R 2 will be DEMO out of this measure, following the same logic as
for R DEMO for the log model and the interaction measure.
In order to categorize subjects as curvilinear or not, the deviation from
linearity was tested for significance. As this test is somewhat underpow-
ered, a liberal alpha level of. 10 was used. A subject was classified as
curvilinear if one DEMO more dimensions showed significant deviation from
linearity.
Order Effects
RESULTS
Several multiple ANOVAS were computed on the dependent variables
to examine effects due to DEMO of tasks (search vs rating), order of condi-
tions (low vs high time pressure in the ratings task and number of alterna-
342 BILLINGS AND MARCUS
tives in the search task), order of DEMO form, and their interactions. The
only significant effect was the interaction DEMO task order by rating form
under high time pressure, with R DEMO for the log model being the only depen-
dent variable affected. This effect was not easily interpreted. Given that
the number of effects was DEMO fewer than would be expected by chance, it
was concluded that DEMO effects are not significant, and these variables
were disregarded in all DEMO analyses.
Manipulation Checks
The results for the manipulation check in the search task are presented
in Table 1. A repeated measure ANOVA showed a DEMO effect due
to a number of alternatives (F(3,141) = 16.76, p < .001). Post hoc tests
using Dunn's procedure indicated significant (p < .01) differences be-
tween 2 alternatives and DEMO others, and between 5 and 12 alternatives.
Thus, as the number of alternatives increased beyond two apartments the
perceived information load increased, but as the number increased from 5
to 8 to 12, the increase in perceived information load was more gradual.
The results for the manipulation DEMO for the rating task are presented
in Table 2. Because the three measures are highly intercorrelated, a
MANOVA was conducted, with the F DEMO derived from Rao's
transformation of Wilks' lambda (Tatsuoka, 1971)DEMO The result showed that
the time pressure manipulation strongly affected felt time pressure, feel-
ing of being rushed, and perceived information load, with the multivariate
F(3,45) = 200.77 (p < .001).
DEMO of Conditions on Low versus High
Information Load in Search Task
Collapsing the four conditions into low versus high information load
would simplify the DEMO and facilitate the examination of convergence
among the measures. The manipulation check (Table 1) shows a clear
TABLE 1
PERCEIVED INFORMATION LOAD BY DEMO OF ALTERNATIVES
IN THE SEARCH TASK
Number of
alternatives
2
5
8
12
Perceived information load
Mean
3.50
4.08
4.42
4.67
SD
1.44
1.16
DEMO
1.49
Note. N = 48. Responses to this item were made on a 7-point scale. Overall F(3,141) =
16.76; p < DEMO Post hoc test showed 2 < 5, 8, 12, and DEMO < 12.
PROCESS TRACING VERSUS POLICY CAPTURING 343
TABLE 2
MANIPULATION CHECKS BY CONDITION DEMO THE RATING TASK
Perceived
Felt time Feeling of information
pressure being rushed load
Condition Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD
Low time
pressure 1.88 DEMO 1.50 .72 3.33 1.33
High time
pressure 5.70 1.08 5.60 1.18 4.50 1.58
Note. N = 48. Responses to all three items were made DEMO 7-point scales.
difference between two alternatives and the other conditions, but DEMO
one significant difference among the three other conditions. There are no
significant differences among these three conditions (5, 8, and 12) for DEMO
measures of variability of search or search patterns when these are treated
as continuous measures or when treated as dichotomous (constant vs
variable and inter- vs intradimensional). No information is lost and no
conclusions are DEMO if the two-alternative condition is classified as
low information load and 5, 8, and 12 alternatives are classified as high.
Accordingly, the scores for variability of search and search pattern are
averaged across these three DEMO
TABLE 3
DECISION PROCESS INDICES BY INFORMATION LOAD CONDITION FOR THE SEARCH TASK
Information load
t for
Low High differences
Number of subjects classified DEMO
Compensatory
Linear 20 6
Additive difference 19 2
Total 39 8
Noncompensatory
Conjunctive 9 20
Elimination by aspects 0 20
Total 9 40
Scores DEMO decision indices
Variability of search M .050 .231 9.33***
SD .109 .123
Search pattern M .119 .040 0.93 ns
SD .707 .603
Note. N DEMO 48.
***p < .001.
344
BILLINGS
AND
MARCUS
Effects of Information Load on Decision Indices
Search DEMO The results for the decision indices from the search task
are shown in Table 3. When subjects are classified into one of the four
DEMO models, a clear difference between compensatory (linear and
additive difference) DEMO noncompensatory models (conjunctive and EBA)
occurs as a function of DEMO load. Eight subjects were compensa-
tory under both conditions, nine were DEMO under both, and
no subjects were noncompensatory under low and compensatory DEMO
high information load. The remainder (31) were compensatory under low
and noncompensatory under high. The appropriate statistical test is the
McNemar test (Marascuilo & McSweeney, 1977), which tests the sym-
metry among scores that change. The asymmetry here is highly significant
(31/31; p < DEMO) and in the predicted direction, with subjects exhibiting
noncompensatory strategies under high information load. Separate
examination of the two continuous decision indices in DEMO 3 confirms
this conclusion. Variability of search, which is the indicator DEMO compen-
satory versus noncompensatory processes, is affected by information
load, but search pattern (inter/intradimensional) is not.
It is noteworthy that this DEMO in decision processes occurred in a
within-subjects design with the information load manipulation counter-
balanced for order. The large majority of subjects shifted their DEMO
back and forth between compensatory and noncompensatory either once
(when the DEMO trial was at the start or finish) or twice (when
the two-alternative trial was second or third).
Rating task. Tables 4 and DEMO contain the results for the regression
analysis of the rating task. Using Einhorn's log transformation model
resulted in approximately half of the subjects DEMO classified as conjunc-
tive in each condition (23/48 under low, 28/48 under high). This measure
indicates that only 19 subjects DEMO strategies, with 12 being in the
predicted direction. The McNemar test DEMO that this proportion is not
significantly different from chance (p = DEMO 180).
The results for the continuous measures of R 2 for the linear and con-
junctive model are presented in Table 5. If DEMO measure were to indicate
an increase in the use of conjunctive model under high information load,
the conjunctive R 2 would be greater DEMO the linear R 2 in that condition.
This did not occur. The linear and conjunctive R2's were very similar
under both conditions, and the difference between the two R 2 values was
not affected by DEMO load. Further, the fit of both the linear and
conjunctive model DEMO better under low as compared to high information
load. The conclusion is that an increase in information load did not cause
an increase in DEMO behavior--as indexed by Einhorn's measure.
The results for the ANOVA measures of curvilinearity and interaction
are also given in Tables 4 and 5. DEMO measure of curvilinearity does not
PROCESS TRACING VERSUS POLICY CAPTURING
345
TABLE 4
CLASSIFICATION OF SUBJECTS AS DEMO VERSUS NONLINEAR FOR
THREE INDICES ON THE RATING TASK, UNDER LOW DEMO HIGH INFORMATION LOAD
Low information
load
Linear
Conjunctive
Total
Linear
Curvilinear
Total
Linear
Interactive
Total
Linear
13
7
20
Linear
27
5
32
Linear
DEMO
3
19
High information load
Regression index
Conjunctive
12
16
28
ANOVA----curvilineafity
Curvilinear
9
7
16
ANOVA--interaction
Interactive
14
15
29
Total
25
23
DEMO
Total
36
12
48
Total
30
18
48
TABLE 5
REGRESSION AND ANOVA INDICES FOR THE RATING TASK, UNDER
LOW AND HIGH INFORMATION LOAD
Information
load
Low
High
t
R 2 Linear
M
.776
.674
6.09**
DEMO
.101
.149
Regression indices
R 2 Conjunctive
M
SD
.767 .107
.673 .160
4.85**
ANOVAindices
R~ - R~
SD
0.95
M
.009
.001
.052
DEMO
Curvilinearity
M
SD
Low
High
t
Note. N = 48.
*p < .05.
** p < .001.
.059
.078
2.21"
.045
.052
E
DEMO
SD
.102 .054
.157 .107
4.23**
Interaction
M
.110
• 175
+
SD
4.57**
.061
.122
346
BILLINGS
AND
MARCUS
show an effect of information load when subjects DEMO categorized into
linear versus curvilinear (Table 4), as only 9 DEMO of 14 (p = .212) subjects
shifted in the predicted direction. However, the continuous measure of
curvilinearity (Table 5) is apparently more sensitive. This measure--the
difference between 72 and r 2 summed over the DEMO cues--showed a sig-
nificant increase in curvilinear use of information as information load
increased.
The ANOVA measure of interaction shows the strongest effect. Almost
DEMO of the subjects are categorized as linear under low information
load, DEMO nearly as many are classified as interactive in the high condi-
tion (Table 4). This shift in the use of information (14/DEMO, in the predicted
direction) is highly significant (p < .001)DEMO Both continuous measures of
interactive use of cues (Table 5) are strongly affected by information load.
The amount of variance accounted for by DEMO first-order interactions in-
creased from around 10 to nearly 16%, and DEMO percentage of total vari-
ance explained went from 11 to 17.5%. This pattern occurred because the
increase in interactive use of cues was matched DEMO a corresponding de-
crease in noninteractive use of cues; the ~)DEMO for the main effects decreased
from .835 to .752 as information load increased. (Note that this measure
includes both noncurvilinear and curvilinear variance.) DEMO, the
total amount of variance explained (total 72 for interaction and main ef-
fects) was not affected by information load. This measure of linear, cur-
vilinear, and interactive use of cues was .937 under DEMO information load
and .907 under high information load.
Convergence among Measures
Table 6 presents the correlations among the decision indices for both
low and DEMO information load. As discussed earlier, the rating task mea-
sures are DEMO correlated with the amount of linear variance. Accord-
ingly, the linear DEMO has been partialled out of all correlations.
TABLE 6
PARTIAL CORRELATIONS AMONG DECISION INDICES, WITH LINEAR VARIANCE CONTROLLED
Search task
Rating task
Pattern
Variability
R ~ conjunctive
Curvilinearity
Interaction
Pattern
Variability
R 2 conjunctive
Curvilinearity
Interaction
DEMO
- .35* *
-.08
.23
-.24"
.23
--
-.18
-.32**
.14
.09
.18
--
.38**
-. 14
- .03
- .01
-.04
--
DEMO" *
*
- .21
- .07
.46***
- .41"*
--
DEMO Low-information load in upper triangle; high-information load in lower triangle. N DEMO 48.
*p < .05.
**p < .01.
***p < .001.
PROCESS TRACING VERSUS POLICY CAPTURING
347
Four of the measures are meant DEMO indicate compensatory versus non-
compensatory decision processes: variability in the search DEMO, R z for the
conjunctive model, curvilinearity, and interaction. A DEMO correlation
between any two of these measures, with linear variance controlled,DEMO
would indicate convergence in the expected direction. No specific pre-
dictions were made with regard to the relations between pattern of search
(intra- vs interdimensional) and the other measures.
Under low information load, the search DEMO measures are neither re-
lated to each other nor related to the rating task measures. Under high
information load, variability and pattern of search are negatively corre-
lated, meaning that greater variability is associated with a stronger in-
tradimensional pattern. The two significant correlations between search
and rating DEMO under high information load are not as expected. The
correlation between search pattern and interaction means that an inter-
dimensional pattern is associated with DEMO interaction. No necessary
relationship was predicted here and the meaning of this correlation is not
entirely clear. The second negative correlation suggests that more DEMO
ability is associated with less curvilinearity, while just the opposite pat-
DEMO was predicted.
Turning to the relations among the rating task measures, DEMO is some
evidence of convergence between the regression and ANOVA measures.
The R 2 for the conjunctive model shows moderate convergence with in-
teraction DEMO low information load and with curvilinearity in the high
condition. The other two correlations (R 2 conjunctive with curvilinearity
under low and with interaction under high) do not differ from zero,
however.
Contrary to expectation, the ANOVA measures of curvilinearity and
interaction are negatively correlated in both conditions. Although the
usual decision models imply either that both occur (e.g., conjunctive) or
that neither occurs (e.g., linear), these results DEMO that those subjects
showing more curvilinearity tend to show less interaction.
The inverse relationship between curvilinearity and interaction is
further demonstrated by categorizing subjects, using the decision rules
described above. Under high information load, 25 subjects were classified
as interactive but not curvilinear, and 12 were curvilinear but not interac-
tive. Seven were neither and only four were both interactive DEMO cur-
vilinear. These results, combined with the results on the effects DEMO infor-
mation load, suggest that some subjects responded to high information
DEMO by using information in a curvilinear fashion, while other subjects
responded DEMO using information interactively. In contrast with the models
that lump these two types of nonlinearity together, a significant number of
subjects (37/48; p < .001) simplified the situation by becoming either
configural or curvilinear, but not both.
348
BILLINGS AND MARCUS
In summary, there is no evidence of convergence between the search
and rating task measures of noncompensatory behavior. The nonlinear
DEMO measure and the ANOVA measures show some convergence,
and the two ANOVA measures show an unexpected negative correlation.
DISCUSSION
This study examined the DEMO of policy capturing and process tracing
measures of decision making. Using a within-subjects design, four indices
of compensatory versus noncompensatory decision behavior were
gathered on a search task, using an information board, and on a DEMO
task, using regression and ANOVA measures. The effect of information
load DEMO each measure was taken as one indication of the validity of the
measures. Here, all measures except one showed the predicted effect of
greater noncompensatory decision making under high information load;
the variability of search DEMO the information board, and the extent of cur-
vilinear use of DEMO and the amount of variance due to interaction from the
ANOVA on the rating task all showed the effect, while the log transform
regression model did not.
It should be noted that information load affected the DEMO of
search on the information board, but not the pattern of DEMO (inter- vs
intradimensional). In other words, shifting from an interdimensional pat-
tern (linear or conjunctive) to an intradimensional one (additive difference
or EBA) or vice versa apparently does not help subjects deal with an
increased number of alternatives, while moving from a compensatory to a
noncompensatory strategy does. When a subject is faced with a moderate
to DEMO number of alternatives, the strategy seems to be to eliminate
alternatives DEMO Accordingly, noncompensatory strategies are used
and a variable search pattern is DEMO as alternatives are eliminated
when a cutoff is not met.
Returning to the issue of validity of these measures, a second indication
of validity is the extent of convergence among the measures. The infor-
mation board DEMO did not show the expected convergence with the
rating task measures; DEMO two of the 12 correlations were significant and
these were not in the expected direction. The three rating task measures
showed some convergence. The DEMO positive correlation occurred
for two out of the four correlations between the log transform regression
measure and the ANOVA indices: with the interaction measure under low
information load and with the curvilinear measure in the high DEMO
Surprisingly, the measures of curvilinearity and interaction were nega-
tively correlated DEMO both information load conditions.
These results suggest the following conclusions. Einhorn's (1970) log
transformation model would seem to be the least sensitive DEMO, as it
was not affected by information load but did show DEMO convergence with
PROCESS TRACING VERSUS POLICY CAPTURING
349
the ANOVA indices. This conclusion of DEMO lack of sensitivity should not be
surprising, because this regression model DEMO to fit a continuous
function which only approximates a multiple cutoff model. In contrast,
the ANOVA indices give a much more direct and DEMO measure of cur-
vilinear and interactive use of cues. Further, even DEMO true conjunctive
function, being conditionally monotone, is well represented by the linear
model, particularly when it contains error in the predictors (Dawes &
Corrigan, 1974). Under these conditions, which may have occurred DEMO this
experiment, the linear model may fit as well as the DEMO transform model.
In addition, the log transform regression model is most DEMO to
actual nonlinear use of cues when the cues are negatively correlated with
each other (Einhorn, Kleinmuntz, & Kleinmuntz, 1979). As DEMO to
orthogonal cues, this pattern produces more alternatives that sharply dif-
DEMO between linear and nonlinear models (e.g., high value on one
cue and low on the rest). Because orthogonal cues were needed in DEMO
study to conduct the ANOVA, conditions were not ideal for Einhorn'DEMO
measure. While this may have "stacked the deck" against this measure, it
does question the usefulness of the technique when cues are orthogonal,
as they are in many experiments, and, by extension, to most real-world
decision tasks, where cues are likely to be either uncorrelated or posi-
tively correlated.
The validity of the measures of curvilinearity, interaction, and variabil-
ity of search was demonstrated in one sense, because DEMO were all af-
fected by the manipulation of information load. However, DEMO did not
converge as expected. This means that those subjects who were noncom-
pensatory on one task were just as likely to be compensatory DEMO noncom-
pensatory on the other task. Given the within-subject design, this DEMO
means that some subjects were affected by information load on the search
task, while other subjects were affected by the manipulation on the rating
task.
As there were several differences between the two tasks, there are
several explanations for these findings. The information board examines
acquisition of information, while the rating task involves the combination
of information to produce a DEMO Perhaps some subjects can cope
with an increase in information load during one phase of the decision
process, but not the other. The lack of convergence within each informa-
tion load condition further suggests that some DEMO use different pro-
cesses in the acquisition versus combination phase. For example, a sub-
ject might look at the same number of cues for each alternative (and
appear to be compensatory), but combine those cues in an interactive
fashion (and appear noncompensatory). Most models of decision making
(e.g., conjunctive, linear, EBA) may be too simplistic in this regard, for
they all assume that acquisition and use of information show the same
patterns.
350
BILLINGS AND MARCUS
This conclusion is consistent with studies that have DEMO an increase in
the use of a two-stage decision process as the number of alternatives
increases (e.g., Olshavsky, 1979; Payne, 1976). These studies have found
evidence of an initial phase in which noncompensatory DEMO are used
apparently to reduce the number of alternatives, followed by DEMO phase
using compensatory strategies to evaluate the remaining alternatives and
make a choice. While these two phases are not precisely the same as
acquisition DEMO combination of information, the general conclusion is
the same: different decision strategies may be used during various phases
of the decision process.
Another DEMO for the lack of convergence between the two tasks
in this experiment may have to do with the different responses required
(choice vs judgment). The distinction between choice and judgment is
often blurred; for example, policy capturing studies demand explicit
judgments on each alternative, but are DEMO generalized to all decision
making tasks. Furthermore, judgment does not always DEMO choice
and the two may involve different psychological processes. (See Einhorn,DEMO
Kleinmuntz, & Kleinmuntz, 1979, for discussion on this point). DEMO
there are other possible explanations, the lack of convergence between
the DEMO tasks in this study may mean that decision making behavior is
affected by the response required by the task. However, it is important to
point out that the observed pattern was not as one might expect. DEMO
et al. (1979) imply that, in general, compensatory behavior might be ex-
pected with a judgment task and noncompensatory behavior with a DEMO
task. In contrast, this study found that both types of behaviors DEMO in
both tasks, but for different subjects, and information load shifted sub-
jects toward noncompensatory behavior, but different subjects were af-
fected. The effects of choice versus judgment may be complex and should
be the DEMO of future research.
Moving to the two ANOVA measures of curvilinearity and interaction,
it was surprising to find that they were negatively correlated DEMO one
another, even though both were affected by information load. The DEMO
was very clear; as information load increased, some subjects simplified
the task by using information in a curvilinear fashion, other moved toward
interactive use of cues, but very few subjects did both.
While consistent with the general hypothesis that nonlinear decision
behavior increases as information load increases, these findings are not
supportive of the usual models of decision behavior. DEMO models (e.g.,
conjunctive, EBA) imply that the two types DEMO nonlinear use of informa-
tion occur together. For example, the conjunctive DEMO includes cutoffs
(hence, curvilinearity) that are used multiplicatively (interaction). The
strong negative correlation between these two elements of the conjunctive
model DEMO a basic assumption of that model. Classifying subjects as
PROCESS TRACING VERSUS POLICY CAPTURING
351
either conjunctive or nonconjunctive may result DEMO a loss of important
information.
It is worth noting that the subjects in this experiment showed remark-
able flexibility and adaptability in their decision DEMO Information
load was manipulated in two different ways in a within-subjects design,
yet there were no meaningful order effects. Subjects moved back and
DEMO between compensatory and noncompensatory decision styles, as the
information load dictated. DEMO research demonstrated that subjects can
change their decision behavior as the demands change, even after a cer-
tain strategy has been adopted.
Finally, DEMO inevitable question is raised with this type of research:
which is the best way to measure noncompensatory decision behavior--
process tracing or policy DEMO? This research suggests that both can
produce valid measures. However, the relationships among the various
measures appear to be more complicated than was DEMO The re-
lationship found between curvilinear and interactive use of information
questions the assumptions behind some widely used decision models.
Further, the results caution us to attend to the stage of the decision
process we are DEMO and to the type of response demanded by the
task.
REFERENCES
Anderson, N. H. Application of an additive model to impression formation. Science, DEMO,
138, 817-818.
Anderson, N. H. Test of a model for number-averaging behavior. Psychonomic Science,
1964, 1, 191-192.
Anderson, N. H., & Shanteau, J. Weak inference with linear models. Psychological Bulle-
tin, 1977, 84, 1155-1170.
Bettman, J. R., & Kakker, P. Effects of information presentation format on consumer
information acquisition strategies. Journal of Consumer DEMO, 1977, 3, 233-240.
Blalock, H. M. Social statistics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1972, 2rid ed.
Connor, W. S., & Zelen, DEMO Fractional factorial experimental designs for factors at three
levels. National Bureau of Standards Applied Mathematics Series, 1959, 54, 1-37.
Crocker, J. Judgment DEMO covariation by social perceivers. Psychological Bulletin, 1981, 90,
272-292.
Dawes, R. M., & Corrigan, B. Linear models in decision making. Psychological Bulletin,
1974, 81, 95-106.
Dudycha, A. L., & Naylor, J. C. The effect of variations in the cue R matrix upon DEMO
obtained policy equation ofjudges. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 1966,
26, 583-603.
Einhorn, H. J. The use of nonlinear, noncompensatory models in DEMO making.
Psychological Bulletin, 1970, 73, 221-230.
Einhorn, H. J. Use of nonlinear, noncompensatory models as a function of the task and
amount of information. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1971,
6, 1-27.
DEMO, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. Behavioral decision theory: Processes of judgment and
choice. Annual Review of Psychology, 1981, 32, 53-88.
352
BILLINGS AND MARCUS
Einhorn, H. J., Kleinmuntz, D. N., & Kleinmuntz, B. Linear regression and process-tracing
models of judgment. Psychological Review, 1979, 86, 465-485.
Goldberg, L. R. Simple models or simple processes? Some research on clinical judgments.
American Psychologist, 1968, 23, 483-496.
DEMO, L. R. Five models of clinical judgment: An empirical comparison between linear
and nonlinear representations of the human inference process. Organizational Behavior
and DEMO Performance, 1971, 6, 458-479.
Hoffman, P. J., Slovic, P., & Rorer, L. G. An analysis-of-variance model for the assessment
of DEMO cue utilization in clinical judgment. Psychological Bulletin, 1968, 69,
338-349.
Marascuilo, L. A., & McSweeney, M. Nonparametric and distribution-free methods for the
social sciences. Monterey, Calif.: Brooks/Cole, 1977.
OIshavsky, R. DEMO Task complexity and contingent processing in decision making: A repli-
cation DEMO extension. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1979, 24,
300-316.
Payne, J. W. Task complexity and contingent processing in decision making: An DEMO
search and protocol analysis. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1976,
DEMO, 366-387.
Payne, J. W., Brannstein, M. L., & Carroli, J. S. Exploring predecisional behavior: An
alternative approach to decision research. Organizational Behavior and Human Per-
formance, 1978, 22, 17-44.
Russo, J. DEMO The value of unit price information. Journal of Marketing Research, 1977, 14,
193 -201.
Slovic, P. Analyzing the expert judge: A DEMO study of a stockbroker's decision
processes. Journal of Applied Psychology, DEMO, 53, 255-263.
Slovic, P., Fleissner, D., & Bauman, DEMO S. Analyzing the use of information in investment
decision making: A DEMO proposal. Journal of Business, 1972, 45, 2837301.
Svenson, O. Process descriptions of decision making. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 1979, 23, 86-112.
Tatsuoka, M. M. Multivariate analysis: Techniques for educational and psychological DEMO
search. New York: Wiley, 1971.
Tversky, A. Intransitivity of preferences. DEMO Review, 1969, 76, 31-48.
Tversky, A. Elimination by aspects: DEMO theory of choice. Psychological Review, 1972, 79,
281-299.
Wright, DEMO The harassed decision maker: Time pressures, distractions, and the use DEMO evi-
dence. Journal of Applied Psychology, 1974, 59, 555-561.
RECEIVED: December 23, 1981.{1g42fwefx}