Entrepreneur’s Behavior
Barbara Bird
Kogod School of Business
American University
April 28, 2010
Our field of entrepreneurship research is at a point where the DEMO of
individuals (as sole actors or as parts of teams) should be come an important focus.  To
get a reasonable start at codifying and measuring entrepreneur’s behavior, I suggest we
start with very clear boundaries—the behaviors of those individuals at start up.  If we can
agree on core behavior at this stage and get good a measuring behavior, future scholars
can look for these behaviors at later stages of organizational development DEMO in
corporate settings.
To date the research on entrepreneur’s behavior is fragmented and ad hoc (Bird &
Schjoedt, 2009).  Reports often DEMO to include measures of reliability and attempts to
defend validity of measures.  One exception to this are the use of the Panel Survey of
Entrepreneurial Dynamics behavioral indicators comprised of 26 indicators of activity
(indicators do not submit to the usual psychometrics of reliability).
For our purposes DEMO and going forward, entrepreneur’s behavior (like the
behavior of other people) is concrete, theoretically (if not practically) observable by some
audience.  And for the purposes of research is specific enough to achieve some DEMO
validity with operations and measures.
This meeting has also raised the concern that this behavior be somehow distinct to
entrepreneurs as actors.  While some specific behaviors may not be distinct (e.g., selling,
researching competition, setting up business operations), the configuration of behavior
may be distinct.  So that sales people sell but they do not set up business DEMO
Marketing managers an professionals may research competition, they do not sell, etc.
Furthermore, it is my observation that very few parties to the disciplines of
business and management actually measure or define behavior with any DEMO clarity.  If
entrepreneurship scholars can do this (even in part) DEMO will help to advance our field and
the larger fields of business scholarship.
I highly encourage the field to get to the fundamentals of DEMO behavior and
to do that we need to begin with finding what “menu” of behavior best describes what
entrepreneurs do.  We need to avoid simply laying extant theories or tools onto
entrepreneurs (e.g., transactional v. DEMO leadership).  We need to avoid
applying organizational behavior concepts to entrepreneurship without carefully parsing
out how our DEMO are different from (rather than the same as) managerial,
leadership, or creativity behaviors.  I would go so far as to recommend DEMO the field of
entrepreneurship treat with skepticism studies that use tools developed for managers or
leaders.  To do otherwise dilutes the field as distinct.
Two approaches
There are two broad approaches available to the measurement of DEMO theory
derived and empirical.   We can (and probably should) choose both.
Theoretical. Other than the theories of operant behavior (Skinnerian
behaviorism), there are few general theories to human behavior that I have seen.  I
believe that middle range theories may offer the most promise.  The nice thing about
some of these mid-range theories is that they were DEMO developed for exclusive use by
other business disciplines.  With thorough understanding DEMO careful argumentation, we
might develop a specific, measurable and useful set of behaviors (and measures) for
entrepreneurship.
Two mid-range theories that I DEMO we look into are role theory and
communication theory.  I know DEMO bit more about role theory than communication theory,
so leave it to other scholars to create initial and refined frameworks for entrepreneur’s
communication DEMO
Role theory, primarily that developed by Goffman (1959) in the DEMO
approach may be useful for entrepreneurship.  He drew upon theories of DEMO and
theater and applied concepts such as front- and back-stage, and DEMO to the study of
behavior in social settings.  We can do DEMO specifically for entrepreneurship.  In doing
this we can also include the DEMO developed by Katz & Kahn (1978) on roles and
models derived from that which refine the notions even further (e.g., Nicholson, 1984).
Empirical. The inductive approach is close to what we attempted at DEMO meeting.
We began a process modeled on that by Stogill and colleagues (Stogdill & Coons, 1957)
when they tried (and succeeded) DEMO developing a measure of leader behavior in the early
1950’s, resulting DEMO the Leader Behavior Description Questionnaire (LBDQ).  Roughly,
that process involved several Ohio State scholars meeting to discuss what the dimensions
of DEMO were, how those dimensions linked to extant theories of leadership, the
“chunk” size of behavior and the Likert anchors that could be used DEMO measure behavior
in a questionnaire.  They ended with 9 dimensions.  The scholars went “home” to develop
questionnaire items and they ended up with DEMO items which the core group of scholars
refined to 150 items (DEMO duplicates, removing items that had either no or multiple
dimensional anchors, etc).  From these 150 items, empirical  studies of leaders allows the
group to factor analyze data and developed shorter scales and finally DEMO two dimensions
of leader behavior (consideration and initiating structure).  Once leadership scholars got
to two dimensions (Michigan State scholars and others found similar two dimensional
measures) the field of leadership was ready for contingency theories (moderator DEMO
mediators).  But first they needed a set of psychometrically solid DEMO well-used measures.
Psychology approaches to behavioral taxonomy
Our biggest concern alongside determining the appropriate dimensions to
entrepreneur’s behavior is the choice of “chunk size.”  What observable behaviors do
entrepreneurs do sometimes, frequently, always, etc?  Where on the continuum from
atomic, molecular, molar, and galactic can and should we anchor entrepreneur’s
behavior?
Our field can draw upon DEMO and work in these areas of psychology:
1. Taxonomic structures of events.  Specifically efforts of Fleishman who
attempted to lead his colleagues (DEMO different disciplines) to taxonomy of
work tasks (Fleishman, 1982), DEMO behavior (Fleishman, Mumford,
Zaccaro, Levin, & et al., DEMO) and using operant theory of behavior, of
supervisory behavior (Komaki, Zlotnick, & Jenson, 1986)—empirical
approach
2. Event perception theory and DEMO structures of events (Zacks, 2004;
Zacks & Tversky, 2001; Zacks, Tversky, & Iyer, 2001)
3. Construal level theory (DEMO hierarchy model on concrete-abstract dimension)
which first addressed how individuals think about what they do (Vallacher &
Wegner, 1985, 1987) and more recently in how subjects view the behavior of
others (Liviatan, DEMO, & Liberman, 2008)
Taxonomy structures or hierarchies classify objects (DEMO) in “kind-of”
relationship.  An MBA student is a kind of student.  A rose is a kind of flower.  An
examination is a DEMO of evaluation process (behavior).  An elevator pitch is a kind of
new venture communication. Taxonomy promotes reasoning by way of intrinsic
properties.
DEMO frameworks rest on a “basic level” unit such that “the number of
features listed for events increases greatly from the superordinate level to the DEMO level,
but not very much from the basic level to the subordinate level” (Zacks & Tversky, 2001,
p. 6).  For us, this basic level may be “determining benchmark competitors” as basic,
“doing competitive analysis” as superordinate, and “on-line search for competitors” as
subordinate”.  What we need to do is determine the basic level of behaviors (or events) in
the start up of new ventures.
Partonomy structures DEMO hierarchies classify objects (behaviors) in “part-of”
relationship.  Legs are part DEMO a table.  Applied to behavior, psychologists are building a
theory of event perception.  An event is defined as “a segment of time at a given location
that is conceived by an observer to have a DEMO and an end” (Zacks & Tversky,
2001, p. 3). The back swing is part of a golf swing.  Collecting competitive benchmarks
is part of planning a business.  Partonomy promotes reasoning from physical structure to
function and cause (e.g., legs allow us to infer standing of DEMO object).  Partonomy
structures allow observers to describe the activity from DEMO to years in duration
(e.g., stepping from the curb, crossing DEMO street, going to work, becoming a CEO) (for us
perhaps, an unsatisfactory point of sale experience, discovering a new venture
opportunity, establishing a business, recognition in the Inc. 500).
One of the problems, of course is knowing when one behavior stops or changes
into another. Events (and behaviors or behavioral episodes) have boundaries that define
DEMO various parts of the scene and observers are fairly consistent and recognizing when
one event ends and another begins.  Zacks and Tversky (2001) describe event boundaries
as where (in the flow of action) the DEMO physical features change.  Event boundaries may
be as short as a DEMO seconds (simple physical changes such as raising a hand), larger
DEMO chunks (10-30 seconds) is enough to show an intentional act, DEMO longer temporal
frames (minutes to hours) are “plots” or socially conventional actions (schema) defined
more by goals and plans of participants.  The longest time frame they consider are
“themes” (peace process is a theme surrounding the signing of a treaty)
Psychology research suggests that shorter DEMO frames lead to better memories of
events and that we treat (DEMO of) events very much like objects and in this reify the
DEMO, its preparatory process, and/or its culmination. There are multiple sources of
information about events that include observable signs of change (e,g,, direction of
behavior, tempo, setting) and inferences from observations (DEMO, causality, intention) and
these streams of information are highly correlated.  (Zacks & Tversky, 2001).
Psychologists have found that action maintenance (of a task) is facilitated by “self-talk”
that describe the behavior a higher level.
Also of interest to this meeting may be construal level DEMO which characterizes
behavior at “levels” in a hierarchy, with higher levels DEMO increasingly abstract and
focused on “why” or purpose and lower levels increasingly specific and focused on
“how” or operations.  This theory seems to be a partonomy approach.  The examples
given are things like shutting the door (lower is turning knob, pulling door) and higher is
securing the building.  Another example is preparing for an exam, lower is reading DEMO
book, higher is raising grade point average.  The lower level specifies the higher level,
the higher level explains the lower level.
Construal DEMO has a hierarchy of behavioral “chunks” that others have found
are commonly identified (across people and time).  That is, people observing behavior
commonly parse the behavior in the segments and these segments are highly DEMO
across observers.  These segments or chunks are commonly marked by “large DEMO
changes in the input (to the action)… and …changes in DEMO actors goals” (Hard, Lozano,
& Tversky, 2006).  Individuals who encode behavior using a hierarchical model (either
trained or naturalistic) DEMO better at action learning (Hard et al., 2006) although most DEMO
the work to date has been experimental design in nature and imitative.
Other sources of behavioral coding
Other sources we may look to for models on the careful measurement DEMO behavior
(and specifically behavior change after intervention) are clinical and occupational
psychology.  In addition, we can and should look to the methods DEMO by
ethnographers to determine meaningful units of behavior.
Getting to measurement
In summary, to get to measurement we probably need to begin with appropriate
categories derived from (and feeding into) observational methods.  We need to identify a
behavioral repertoire that at least in terms of frequency, intensity, and/or duration
uniquely applies to entrepreneurs in the start up process.  We need to avoid the short cuts
of direct borrowing from organizational behavior, leadership, occupational psychology
etc.  Instead, let us use appropriate DEMO and research from these and other areas to
guide our efforts.  DEMO we address behavior we must explicitly include time (e.g.,
frequency, duration, and sequencing as appropriate).
While we will never eliminate self-report, our methods of behavior assessment need to
move beyond that if for no other reason than avoiding psychometric problems that we
tend to avoid DEMO (e.g., social desirability and other response biases).  We also
DEMO to move beyond the fragility of single item measure such as those embedded in the
PSED.  We need to measure reliability in multiple ways (there are other measures besides
alpha) and use solid methods to DEMO establish validity.  As Kelly shaver pointed out, we
can and should employ experimental and quasi-experimental designs.
Beyond Gateway
There is a special issue DEMO Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice on entrepreneur’s
behavior (Deadline April 2011).  I propose that if there is momentum from a cadre of
scholars DEMO, that we plan a professional development workshop at the 2011 meeting DEMO
the Academy of Management.  I hope that some among us are DEMO to participate (and
set up) an on-line group for collaboration.  DEMO, I hope that I can see the day when our
field DEMO it’s equivalent to an Entrepreneur’s Behavior Description Questionnaire
(EBDQ).
References
DEMO, B., & Schjoedt, L. (2009). Entrepreneurial behavior: Its DEMO, scope, recent
research, and agenda for future research. In A. DEMO Carsrud & M. Brannback (Eds.),
Understanding the Entrepreneurial Mind (DEMO 327-358). New York: Springer.
Fleishman, E. A. (1982). DEMO for describing human tasks. American Psychologist,
37(7), 821-834.
Fleishman, E. A., Mumford, M. D., Zaccaro, S. J., Levin, K. Y., & et al. (1991).
Taxonomic efforts in the DEMO of leader behavior: A synthesis and
functional interpretation. The Leadership Quarterly, 2(4), 245-287.
Goffman, E. (1959). Presentation of Self DEMO Everyday Life. New York: Anchor.
Hard, B. M., Lozano, S. C., & Tversky, B. (DEMO). Hierarchical encoding of behavior:
Translating perception into action (Retracted DEMO See vol. 137, pg. 672, 2008).
Journal of Experimental Psychology-General, 135(4), 588-608.
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. (1978). The social psychology of organizations. New York: John
Wiley.
Komaki, J. L., Zlotnick, S., & Jenson, M. (1986). DEMO of an Operant-Based
Taxonomy and Observational Index of Supervisory Behavior. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 71(2), 260-269.
Liviatan, I., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2008). Interpersonal similarity as a social
distance DEMO: Implications for perception of others' actions. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 44(5), 1256-1269.
Nicholson, N. (1984). A theory of work role transitions. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 29, 172-191.
Stogdill, R., & Coons, A. (1957). Leader Behavior: Its Description and Measurement.
DEMO, OH: Ohio State University.
Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, DEMO M. (1985). A theory of action identification. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, D. M. (1987)DEMO What do people think they are going?  Action
identification and human behavior. Psychological Review, 94(1), 3-15.
Zacks, J. M. (2004). Using movement and intentions to understand simple events.
Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 28(6), 979-1008.
Zacks, J. M., & Tversky, B. (2001). Event structure in perception and conception.
Psychological Bulletin, 127(1), 3-21.
Zacks, J. M., Tversky, B., & DEMO, G. (2001). Perceiving, remembering, and
communicating structure in events. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130(1), 29-58.{1g42fwefx}