Chapter 15
Entrepreneurial Behavior: Its Nature, Scope,
Recent Research, and Agenda for Future
Research
Barbara Bird and Leon Schjoedt
An action is DEMO perfection and publication of thought.
Ralph Waldo Emerson
The end of all the cognition and motivation of entrepreneurs is to take some action
in DEMO world, and by doing so, give rise to a venture, DEMO organization. Thoughts,
intentions, motivations, learning, intelligence without action does DEMO create eco-
nomic value. The very nature of organizing is anchored in actions of individuals as
they buy, sell, gather and deploy resources, work, etc. The values created by exploit-
ing of opportunity undoubtedly include some that are intrapsychic and personal, but
those we study, those DEMO value to the readers of this book, are inherently interper-
sonal DEMO social and thus observable and learnable. This chapter provides a brief
overview of entrepreneurial behavior using a limited but hopefully representative
lens on recent DEMO We call for more research on what entrepreneurs do and
that this research be both more rigorous than what we currently have and also DEMO
creatively sourced.
15.1 The Nature and Scope of Entrepreneurial Behavior
Entrepreneurial behavior as an academic interest is the study of human behavior
involved in DEMO and exploiting entrepreneurial behavior opportunity through cre-
ating and developing new venture organizations. Entrepreneurial behavior is the
proximal outcome of the cognitions and emotions DEMO entrepreneurial actors; it is
also the proximal individual-centric cause of venture DEMO The major goals
of research are to explain, predict and control (change and change) behavior of
individuals and teams. Knowledge of entrepreneurial behavior has value to actors
– entrepreneurs as it allows them to shape DEMO change their behaviors for bet-
ter outcomes and to venture stakeholders, DEMO as investors, local governments,
and employees, insofar as entrepreneurial outcomes meet their respective goals.
B. Bird (B)
Kogod School of Business, American University, Washington, DC 20016, USA
e-mail: bbird@american.edu
A.L. Carsrud, M. Brännback (eds.), Understanding the Entrepreneurial Mind,
 Springer DEMO Media, LLC 2009
International Studies in Entrepreneurship 24, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-0443-0_15,
C
327
328 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
Knowledge of entrepreneurial behavior is important to educators, students, news
media, and creative writers. Entrepreneurial behavior eventually results in the cre-
ation of innovations, new competition, new jobs, and new revenue streams, and
scholars from several disciplines such as economics, DEMO, psychology, social
psychology, and organizational design may ﬁnd interest as DEMO
Entrepreneurial behavior as a research construct is the concrete enactment of
individual or team tasks or activities required to start and grow a new DEMO
tion. As we will argue, behaviors are best understood as discrete DEMO of action that
can be observed by others and which are “sized” to be meaningful. These activities
are consciously chosen by individuals with the DEMO of ﬁnding and exploiting
an opportunity and forming an organization of human, ﬁnancial, physical, social,
and intellectual resources. Examples of such activities are illustrated in a study
by Carter et al. (1996). The resulting organization may be for proﬁt or not, may
vary on a continuum of virtuality and size, but it contributes economic and social
value to its surroundings (Davidsson et al. 2006; Mitchell et al. 2007)DEMO This behavior
(these actions) draws upon the experience, knowledge, skills, abilities, cognitions,
intelligence, learning, intentions, and motivations of entrepreneurial individuals and
teams. Behavior is visible, auditory, and/or kinesthetic and DEMO others are present,
social or potentially interpersonal in nature. Thus deciding is a cognitive process
invisible to others and is different from the DEMO of writing down the decision,
orally communicating the decision, or DEMO other action to implement the deci-
sion. In the same way, DEMO is a cognitive process and objective assessment of
learning results from behaviors.
15.1.1 Differentiating Concepts
First, entrepreneurial behavior is individual behavior, not ﬁrm DEMO Thus work
on entrepreneurial orientation (Lumpkin et al. 2009; Wiklund and Shepherd 2003)
and the operationalization of Stevenson’s dimensions (which items are also attitudi-
nal and ipastive) do not fall into our purview (DEMO et al. 2001).
At the individual level of analysis, often DEMO and certainly students and
laypeople fail to differentiate behavioral terms. Behaviors are actions and therefore
also activities of individuals (entrepreneurs). Responses are behaviors that follow
from and presumably caused or evoked by some preceding stimulus. DEMO
is usually understood as results achieved by an action and when measured is often
a complex aggregation of many behaviors (e.g., a high-performing DEMO com-
bines reading, writing, exam-taking, critical thinking, life-management behaviors,
and many other behaviors).
Ability is a relatively stable broad characteristic DEMO individuals that underlies
their maximum performance and would include various forms of intelligence and
physical attributes, such as strength or height. In general, DEMO are difﬁcult to
change; however, they can be enhanced over time with education and experience.
For example, intellectual ability refers to individuals’ all-around effectiveness in
activities directed by thought, such as thinking, reasoning, and problem solving,
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 329
and in one approach (Sternberg 1988) has DEMO facets: (1) analytic intelligence (g),
(2) practical DEMO (“street smarts”) which is domain speciﬁc, and (3) cre-
DEMO intelligence which is the ability to produce something that is, both, novel and
useful. Skills are abilities to perform speciﬁc tasks and can DEMO either broadly or
narrowly construed (e.g., general skill at negotiation or more speciﬁc skill at bluff-
ing). Knowledge is information the individual DEMO in speciﬁc areas (e.g., knowledge
about a market or how to make an oral presentation) acquired through education and
experience. Knowledge can be either explicit or tacit and general or speciﬁc. Com-
petence may be DEMO as abilities, knowledge, skills, traits, and concepts of self
such as self-efﬁcacy beliefs that are “causally related to criterion-referenced effec-
tive and/DEMO superior performance in a job or situation” (Spencer and Spencer 1993)DEMO
These capacities (abilities, skills, knowledge, and competencies) enable behaviors
DEMO are not behaviors themselves.
Processes may involve behavior but not necessarily. Decision making is a pro-
cess that is largely cognitive and which leads DEMO a choice among alternatives and
may result in some action. Creativity is also a process often largely cognitive, of
producing something new or partially new (Amabile 1996). Searching for oppor-
tunity is a process that may share elements of cognition, creativity, learning, and
behavior (Corbett DEMO; Sternberg 2004).
Whereas behavior is observable, performance, capacities, and processes are
derived by inference from behaviors. For capacities to result in DEMO, motivation
and opportunity must also be present for behavior. For processes DEMO have an impact
in adding economic and social value, action or DEMO must follow.
15.2 Recent Research on Entrepreneurial Behavior
15.2.1 Conceptual Efforts
In assessing the recent research on entrepreneurial behavior, we reviewed concep-
tual and theoretical articles that aim squarely at our topic. Action theory advanced by
DEMO (2007) builds on the cybernetic control model of Miller et al. (1969) and links
the chapters which deﬁne this book to “action.” DEMO model, as well as that discussed
by McMullen and Shepherd (2006), describes the judgmental processes which pre-
cede action or behavior and DEMO cognitions which either enable or impede individuals
from acting entrepreneurially when faced with an opportunity. Both models deﬁne
action as consciously chosen (intentional) DEMO of individuals. While Frese
(2007) focuses on behavioral control through planning, feedback, cognitive regu-
lation, and traits of individuals such as initiative, McMullen and Shepherd (2006)
focus on how decision uncertainty is DEMO and impacts entrepreneurial action
(which they leave undeﬁned). Thus both DEMO these efforts discuss action, address pre-
cursors to action but offer DEMO insight into the action or behavior itself.
An initial effort to bring the ﬁeld of organizational behavior to entrepreneurship
came in 1989 when the DEMO author (Bird 1989) summarized the then extant research
pertaining to entrepreneurial behavior, deﬁning it as “opportunistic, value-driven,
330 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
value-adding risk-accepting, creative activity where ideas DEMO the form of orga-
nizational birth, growth or transformation” (p. 5). The book included chapters on
the person-centered variables (i.e., experience, education, motivation, values, and
emotions), social and political contexts of entrepreneurial behavior, careers, teams,
stafﬁng, governance, leadership, competencies, DEMO learning. Following that, Gart-
ner et al. (1992) had one DEMO the earliest journal articles that attempted to map
organizational behavior onto emerging (compared to existing) organizations. They
reviewed managerial work as a ﬁeld DEMO research, hoping for guidance in fram-
ing entrepreneurial behavior but found DEMO work literature to be as athe-
oretical as entrepreneurship at the time. They recommended richer description of
entrepreneurial behavior. It is interesting to note DEMO this article has been cited
only 43 times in the past 10 years and of these only 16 reference the behavior
of entrepreneurs. A DEMO recent effort to extend this bridge from organizational
behavior to entrepreneurship was forged by Baron (2002). His review addressed the
basic OB model (found as a framework in most textbooks) of individual, interper-
sonal, and organizational/social factors at three phases of the entrepreneurship pro-
cess (pre-launch, launch, and operations). Much of his contribution here and else-
where (Baron 2008) anchors on individual cognition and decision making DEMO he has
also introduced OB links for some speciﬁc person-centric predictors of outcomes
that include learning from a mentor, social competence, successful and DEMO
intelligence, charismatic, visionary, and situational leadership, inﬂuence processes,
and group dynamics of teams. In same vein, Shook et al. (2003) review behav-
ioral research in entrepreneurship with a focus on judgment (cognition) but pointing
to emerging interest in individuals who engage in active search for opportunities
(see discussion on active search below) brieﬂy mentioning opportunity DEMO
tion activities. Shook and colleagues observe: “Perhaps the most under-researched
aspect DEMO individual and venture creation is exploitation activities. We know very
little about the role of the individual in acquiring resources and organizing the
company” (p. 390). We concur.
Several scholars have postulated behaviors that are DEMO to opportunity
exploitation without testing or measuring these. For example, Shepherd DEMO al. (2000)
suggest venture survival depends on organizing activities such DEMO specifying tasks,
allocating people to tasks, deﬁning authority structures, and building communica-
tion channels. The next section of this chapter offers a DEMO review of recent empir-
ical research that includes entrepreneurial behavior. Following that, we attempt to
frame entrepreneurial behavior concretely and call for better measurement. Finally,
we offer ﬁve research areas wherein entrepreneurship scholars can build DEMO the
foundation of organizational behavior.
15.2.2 Empirical Efforts
To examine contemporary entrepreneurial behavior research, we reviewed empiri-
cal papers published over the last 3 years (2005–2007) in two top entrepreneurship
journals – Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO and Journal of Business Venturing.
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 331
While we recognize that research on entrepreneurial behavior DEMO published in other
journals, like Journal of Applied Psychology (Baum and Locke 2004), and Man-
agement Science (Baron and Ensley 2006), we chose to focus our attention on
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice and DEMO of Business Venturing as they, in
our view, represent the two most recognized entrepreneurship journals and should
provide a reasonable approximation of the DEMO and ﬁndings of scholars. We
identiﬁed articles pertaining to behavioral constructs at the individual and group
levels. To focus on research addressing the entrepreneur, we excluded research
addressing strategic ﬁrm decisions such as competitive stance or DEMO poli-
cies, corporate entrepreneurship including that of small organizations, older ﬁrms,
and venture capital, and other stakeholders. We included only empirical papers
as these efforts show operationalizations of behavioral constructs, which we con-
sider important in assessing the state of entrepreneurial behavioral research. A
total of DEMO empirical articles that address behavior are shown in Table 15.1. The
total number of articles published in these two journals was 223+, so empiri-
cal studies of behavior constituted about 12% of published efforts in this DEMO
period.
This limited review of the literature is insufﬁcient for a theory-based approach to
entrepreneurial behavior but it does serve to highlight the relative DEMO of attention to
behavior in recent entrepreneurship literature. This is surprising insofar as individual
and group levels of analysis remain a strong focus in DEMO While there
has been some fertilization from organizational behavior, with its DEMO research
(Gatewood et al. 2002; Vecchio 2003b), much more could be done. To illustrate
the fragmented nature research on entrepreneurial behavior, we have divided the
articles into four groups – entrepreneurial behavior as a DEMO for sampling, as an
independent variable, as a dependent variable, DEMO description of behaviors based
on social theories.
Behavioral precision began with the initiation of a national panel study of star-
tups in the United DEMO where the ﬁrst data collection and test of the sampling
procedure was done in 1992 with the adult population in Wisconsin (Reynolds
2000; DEMO and White 1997). Eventually, this led into the Panel Study DEMO
Entrepreneurial Dynamics (PSED) conducted by telephone and mail from 1998 to
2000. See Garnter et al. (2004) and Reynolds (2000) for DEMO on methods and
sampling. This was followed by similar studies internationally as part of the Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor (Arenius and DeClercq 2005; Langowitz DEMO Minniti
2007). Embedded within the survey two questions were designed to identify nascent
entrepreneurs: (1) Are you, alone or with others, now trying to start a business? (2)
Are you, alone or with others, now starting a new business or new venture for your
employer?
Together the telephone interview and mail questionnaire provided informa-
DEMO on a broad range of topics including activities of individuals that might be
related to success in organizing an entrepreneurial business. There are two DEMO
mary advantages to the PSED data set. First, the data were DEMO contemporane-
ously with the new venture creation process, unlike samples based DEMO retrospective
accounts. Second, the PSED data set allows for generalizations to DEMO United
332 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
Table 15.1 Summary of literature
I, DEMO, C
Year/journal Citation variable Exemplar behaviors
2005/ETP Corbett (2005) ? Market testing, selecting options, ﬁnalizing
choices
Forbes (2005) I Implied delegation, consulting with
outsiders, scanning, analysis, planning
Fiegener (2005) D Involvement of board
Rauch et al. (2005) I Training/development of employees,
encourage others to participate initiate,
communicate goals
(Singh and Lucas D Prepare business plan
2005)
Hite (2005) ? DEMO for partner, problem solving,
communicating
2006/ETP Orser et al. (2006) D Apply for external capital
Alsos et al. (2006) I Adding, hiring a new team member
Forbes et al. (2006) D Adding, hiring a new team member
Vanaelst et al. (2006) ? Joining or leave team, roles
2007/ETP Schjoedt and Shaver C Trying to start a business
(2007)
Hanlon and Saunders I Receiving support
(2007)
DeTienne and D Self-reports on behavior sequences
Chandler (2007)DEMO
Langowitz and Minniti C Trying to start
(2007)
Cloninger and DEMO D/C Internationalize
(2007)
JBV/2005 Talaulicar et al. (2005) I Decision-making processes
Grandi and Grimaldi ? Articulation of roles, interaction DEMO
(2005) external agents
Chrisman and Hall I Guided preparation in the research,
(2005) planning and “activities” by advisors
JBV/2006 Kolvereid DEMO Isaksen D Starting up a self-employment entity
(2006)
Ebben and DEMO D Bootstrapping such as delaying payments,
(2006) joint utilization
Ensley et al. (2006b) I Transformational and transactional
behaviors
Lichtenstein et al. DEMO/D Strategic organizing – many behaviors
(2006) talking with friends, DEMO book
JBV/2007 (Watson 2007) I “Networking”
Gruber (2007) I Market mix planning
Tornikoski and I/D Categories of activities
Newbert (2007)
Lichtenstein et al. I Activities
(2007)
Haber and Reicheil I Writing business plan
(2007)
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 333
States as a whole when post-sampling stratiﬁcation weights DEMO employed as these
make the aggregate sample match the population in sex, race, age, and education
level.
Subsequent research with this data set has developed a behavioral criterion for
when an individual is a “nascent” DEMO by whether or not they have engaged
in a number of behaviors, such as having developed a product/service, established
credit with suppliers, ﬁled a tax return for a new business, hired employees for pay,
or invested own money (Garnter et al. 2004). Other studies categorize a respondent
as having an operating business based on some of DEMO behaviors (e.g., Edelman
et al. 2008). In this way, DEMO are a sampling criterion.
Entrepreneurship research uses behavior as an independent variable. Here spe-
ciﬁc behaviors such as locating the business in a speciﬁc DEMO, writing a busi-
ness plan, opening a business bank account, DEMO outside advice (Haber and
Reicheil 2007; Lichtenstein et al. 2007; DEMO and Newbert 2007), or the degree
of improvisation or number or pacing of activities (Hmieleski and Corbett 2008;
Lichtenstein et al. 2007) might predict something, usually venture outcomes. In
other studies, behavior is less speciﬁc and more cognitive to include self-reports
of planning and time DEMO on planning (Alsos et al. 2006; Chrisman and Hall 2005;
Gruber 2007) or initiating investor relationships measured in part by a self-report
of conﬁdence in “identifying sources of ﬁnance” (Alsos et al. 2006). Often behav-
ior is global in nature (e.g., as an indicator DEMO transformational leadership, “pro-
vides vision,” Ensley et al. 2006b). DEMO as often, it is global in nature and poorly
measured. For DEMO, employees reported “support for personal initiative” and
“communicating business goals” using DEMO items (Rauch et al. 2005). In most
cases, the entrepreneur’s behavior is self-reported, but in other cases (as with Rauch
et DEMO 2005) it is captured through the perception of a stakeholder such DEMO a member
of the venture team. Usually the focus is individual behavior of the self-reporting
entrepreneur, but occasionally the focus is team behaviors such as decision-making
processes (Forbes 2005; Talaulicar et al. 2005).
Other DEMO seeks to predict behavior, treating behavior as a dependent vari-
able. DEMO some cases demographic variables that reﬂect human capital and individual
differences such homemaker status, sex of entrepreneur, and prior experience are
used to DEMO self-reported behaviors (e.g., preparing business plans, choosing a
location, or seeking funding, Orser et al. 2006; Singh and Lucas 2005; Wright et al.
2008). For example, DeTienne and Chandler (2007) using sex and human capi-
tal as predictors, asked CEOs of young ﬁrms to choose among four sequences of
actions those they themselves or their DEMO took in ﬁnding and acting on
their start-up opportunity. In other cases, categories of context such as organiza-
tional size, board composition, need for strategic decision making, or operations
predict CEO (entrepreneur) behavior such as bringing issues to the board of direc-
tors (Fiegener 2005) DEMO deciding to open foreign operations (Cloninger and Oviatt
2007). Organizational DEMO was used to predict bootstrapping behaviors (Ebben and
Johnson 2006). DEMO less frequent cases, cognitions such as beliefs and intentions as
well DEMO individual differences predict nascent behaviors such as those developed
by PSED or the GEM (Langowitz and Minniti 2007) or a self-reported measure
334 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
of “working” in a start up (DEMO and Isaksen 2006). In some cases, the actual
entrepreneur is DEMO wholly visible as decision maker or implementer (Cloninger and
Oviatt 2007)DEMO
While prediction is the focus of most studies, some only seek DEMO describe or
explain behavior in the context of extant social theories. For example, Forbes and
his colleagues (2006) sought to explain new venture hiring of new team members
based on theories of attraction and resource DEMO In another example, using
a single in-depth case study, Lichtenstein and his colleagues (Lichtenstein et al.
2006) observed three modes of organizing DEMO of which are clearly behaviorally
anchored: organizing the vision (expressing a strong vision) but also less behav-
iorally (changing thoughts and vocabulary DEMO the opportunity); strategic organiz-
ing (tangible events such as formatting DEMO book, deciding to publish as book or web
page; committing personal funds, and coping with non-venture responsibilities); and
tactical organizing (developing DEMO product/service, establishing credit with suppliers,
ﬁling a tax return DEMO a new business, hiring employees for pay, or investing own
money).
In most cases, the behaviors are self-reports and are broad and unspeciﬁc in
nature (e.g., initiating investor relationships, preparing a business plan, articulating a
business idea). These behavioral constructs are not necessarily linked to observable
objective behaviors and could be interpreted in very different ways DEMO different audi-
ences, but these kinds of constructs are often used DEMO entrepreneurship research. For
example, in the DeTienne and Chandler (2007) DEMO, behaviors were self-reports of
action sequences, which included “I/we found or developed a product or technology
then looked for a market”. A DEMO or even successful entrepreneur might have
some understanding of concrete referents for “product or technology” but may not
differ widely on what is done DEMO “look for a market.” Another example is the use of
self-reports by entrepreneurs of their strategic actions of exploration and exploita-
tion (e.g., DEMO are usually one of the ﬁrst companies in our industry to use new,
breakthrough technologies”; “We frequently adjust our procedures, rules, and poli-
cies to make things work better” [Bierly and Daly 2007). DEMO suspect that differ-
ent audiences will concretely interpret “use of new, DEMO technology” and
“adjusting rules” in behaviorally very different ways.
In only one case in our review did an empirical article include behavior as both DEMO
independent and a dependent variable. Tornikoski and Newbert (2007) used PSED
data for both independent and dependent variables. They looked at venture impro-
DEMO (prepare business plan, start marketing, apply for patent, project ﬁnancial
statement, open bank account, list in phone book), resource combination (develop
prototype, purchase raw materials, purchase facilities), and networking (ask for
funds, establish credit, received outside assistance) as predictors of organizational
emergence (make a sale, hire employees, received external funding).
Finding a paucity of empirical research and a lack of conceptual clarity
on DEMO behavior, we propose further reﬁnement of our behavioral
research methods. Following DEMO we propose four broad organizational behavior
areas from which entrepreneurship scholars can borrow, as long as we borrow
wisely.
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 335
15.3 Behavioral Research Methods for Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurial behaviors DEMO discrete units of individual activity that can be
observed by an “audience” and that have a meaning that is likely to be shared
between DEMO and audience. By this deﬁnition, teams and organizations do not
behave DEMO individuals comprising them do. By this deﬁnition making a decision
is not a behavior, announcing a decision is a behavior.
Many of the “behaviors” of entrepreneurship research are not discrete but com-
plex and often ill DEMO Planning a business is not a discrete unit of activity but
a complex set of activities, some done sequentially, most done iteratively, almost
always with interruptions for other activities, some done alone and others done
by outsiders, such as consultants or teams of local college students. The behav-
iors embedded in “planning” might include consulting a text or template DEMO busi-
ness plan components (market size, competition, costs, legal protection, potential
ﬁnancing sources, board of advisors, etc.) and gathering information DEMO various
plan components through the discrete acts of web search, telephone DEMO, business
meetings, etc. Planning also includes codifying and prioritizing the information and
sense making through writing and speaking of the plan.
Bhide (2000) in his review of the process new ventures take to become large
and enduring organizations draws on data from these large ﬁrms (no longer start
up, nascent, or entrepreneurial by most deﬁnitions). He sees DEMO tasks” for new
ventures to include articulating audacious goals, formulating strategy, and imple-
menting strategy which are likely comprised of many different behaviors DEMO indi-
viduals (or teams). Only in his discussion of implementation DEMO strategy does Bhide
give hints at what behaviors one might want to engage to grow a venture (e.g., ﬁnd-
ing speciﬁc store locations, negotiating leases). Unfortunately other implementation
behaviors are quite broad (e.g., DEMO resources, build infrastructure).
Behaviors need to be distinguished from their DEMO Asking for funds is a
behavior (from whom, how, and DEMO might usefully be speciﬁed), whereas receiv-
ing funds is a result. Writing a business plan is a behavior, having a written business
plan is a result. In this particular case, entrepreneurs who hire others to write their
plan are behaviorally distinct from those who write their own DEMO When we use
results as a surrogate for behavior, we infer DEMO Sometimes this is sensible, but
it leaves the audience to our DEMO to imagine what the entrepreneur actually did
to achieve the result.
15.3.1 Molarity Issues
Just how speciﬁc should our behavioral variables be? Early behavioral psychologists
applied the term “molarity” to behavior to focus attention on meaningful DEMO
behavioral units or activities. Just as in chemistry a “mole” is a unit of matter that is
often more useful and an atom or DEMO, the meaningful unit of behavior is more
useful than its component DEMO For example, using the Internet for 4 hours to
research markets DEMO competition is more useful than the speciﬁc ﬂexing muscles,
336 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
moving joints or in our example, DEMO These “molecular” behaviors are less
visible and combine together to make the observable behavior qualitatively different
from underlying physiological processes (W. Baum 2002; DEMO 2006). We apply
the concept here to focus attention on the wildly divergent sizes of behavioral units
that are reported in the entrepreneurship DEMO Whereas behavioral psycholo-
gists (e.g., Edward Toleman and others) differentiated DEMO units of behavior from
reﬂexive, simple stimulus–response connections, entrepreneurship scholarship errs
in making our behavioral units far too galactic in size.
Behavior is DEMO, not abstract. To pass the test of being behavior, it must be
theoretically, if not practically observed by someone (or something in DEMO case of
a recording) other than the actor. It refers to DEMO action or set of actions that can
be seen, heard, or measured. Many of the behaviors of entrepreneurship research
are under-speciﬁed and operationalizations DEMO to the particular manuscript and
purpose (and far too often based DEMO self-reports and single-items). A respondent,
another researcher or a student wishing to learn to act as an entrepreneur, may not
know what speciﬁc action is called for.
The behaviors listed in the PSED/GEM DEMO come close to the speciﬁcity we
may need; some moreso than DEMO For example, one PSED behavior is “applied
for patent.” We may DEMO need to know that the entrepreneur read the requirements
and completed and submitted the paper work and paid the fees for patent or that
DEMO hired a patent attorney to do this for them. However, other DEMO behaviors
remain less speciﬁed. What speciﬁcally does one do to “deﬁne market opportuni-
ties/customers, competitors”?
We do not expect or suggest that entrepreneurship scholars drill down to
keystrokes or “molecular” behaviors. We do think DEMO just as scholars recognized
the need to collect and report demographic data on respondent individuals and ﬁrms
(so that context and comparisons could be made), we need to present greater unity
on how we measure DEMO One step is ﬁner granularity and another to begin to
use similar if not identical operationalizations of key behaviors.
15.3.2 Need to Move Beyond DEMO Methods
Since the behaviors of interest to entrepreneurship scholars are consciously under-
taken, individual actors can reasonably report on their behaviors. But as is true in
other research critiques (e.g., Chandler and Lyon, 2001), self-reports are limited
by recall and social desirability bias. Self-reports of behavior DEMO be more reliably
and accurately obtained with any variant of an experience sampling diary (beeper)
method (Spain et al. 2001) to capture frequency, sequence, duration of behaviors
within and across entrepreneurs. These methods DEMO from being intrusive but
could provide us with a ﬁner grain on what entrepreneurs actually do. Behavior
can be assessed with other methods including DEMO both in the ﬁeld and in
the laboratory. Field observations are done and done well (Lichtenstein et al. 2007;
Lichtenstein et al. 2006) but suffer from the inability to gather sufﬁcient sample sizes
to generalize. Laboratory studies (using experimental designs) in entrepreneurship
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 337
are few and none, to our knowledge, DEMO behavior. Often these types of studies
use students (not entrepreneurs) as subjects (Grichnik 2008), are often time consum-
ing, and require DEMO subject to be in a laboratory environment. It might also be possi-
ble to obtain unobtrusive measures of behaviors (Webb et al. 2000) DEMO entrepreneurs
could reasonably be expected to show up at a conference, DEMO, or web site.
This type of measure could count clicks, visits, or even employ photography or
video methods. Finally, of course, is ask others who observe entrepreneurs to report
on their observations, a method best used if triangulation (multiple observers) is
employed.
As a ﬁeld DEMO research, let us move beyond self-reports as our primary way to
DEMO behavior. If we must use self-reports, control for social desirability, which
is the tendency to report socially desirable but possibly untrue results (Arnold and
Feldman 1981). Let us employ the rigorous methods of other DEMO scientists.
15.3.3 Need to Move Beyond Single Items
One of the most serious threats to research on entrepreneurial behavior, which was
evident in the early research on entrepreneurial traits, is poor construct measure-
ment. Considering the relatively complex nature of new venture creation and of
entrepreneurial behavior, quality measurement is crucial (Boyd et al. 2005; Godfrey
and Hill 1995)DEMO While advanced statistical methods allow single items to serve in
statistical models, a real question must be raised about not only reliability but also
validity since a single-tem measure can be ambiguous with respect to the DEMO
meaning and can be changed by the context of previous items. Reliance on single-
item measures at the exclusion of multi-item measures weakens results. DEMO than
two decades ago, marketing researchers (Churchill 1979; Jacoby 1978) critiqued the
use of single-item measures to assess constructs. As Jacoby puts DEMO:
Given the complexity of our subject matter, what makes us DEMO we can use responses to
single items (or even to two DEMO three items) as measures of these concepts, then relate these
scores to a host of other variables, arrive at conclusions based on such an investigation, and
get away calling what we have done Quality research? (1978, p. 93).
Considering the majority of research in entrepreneurship, even recent research, in
the context of Jacoby’s comment, how can we, as entrepreneurship scholars, claim
that we have advanced the literature DEMO of adding clutter to our collective under-
standing of entrepreneurship.
Reliability of measurement is better assured and often obtained through psycho-
metric development of DEMO comprised of multiple items. Reliability is a require-
ment for self-reports and other reports of behavior but also a requirement for
measures of cognitive, motivational, attitudinal, and perceptual constructs. Relia-
bility refers to the extent DEMO which a measure is repeatable (Nunnally and Bernstein
1994) and consistent (Torabi 1994). Since reliability is a necessary condition for
validity, DEMO measures lessen the observed correlation between measures.
Consequently, if the correlation DEMO two construct measures is low, it is not
338 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
possible to determine whether there is no relationship between the two constructs or
whether the measures are unreliable (Peter 1979). A single item to assess behavior
not only is psychometrically DEMO, but often grossly over-simpliﬁes behavior.
A good example of a study DEMO used multiple items for all independent and
dependent variables is offered by Baum and Bird (forthcoming). Of particular inter-
est here is the behavior scale of “multiple improvement actions” which used eight
items such as DEMO frequently experiment with product and process improvements”
and “Continuous improvement of our products and processes is a priority”.
15.3.4 Need to Include Time
There DEMO critical time lag issues in translating cognitions into behavior and behav-
ior into results. There are issues of how long a behavior takes to DEMO (when
it begins and when it is ﬁnished and a new DEMO begins). In the experimental
design framework, the time between an DEMO variable change and a depen-
dent variable measurement for the effects of that change is subject to “errors” that
include history. Things happen between DEMO formation of an intention and action
based on that intention, especially DEMO dealing with complex and relatively “galac-
tic” behaviors such as deﬁning markets and competition. These historical effects are
likely to be more confounding the DEMO the behavior takes to complete. When
does the entrepreneur begin planning and when is she ﬁnished? When does she
begin to ask for funds and when does she get an answer (or the funds)? When does
she approach her ﬁrst customer and when does she make the DEMO sale? These are
identiﬁable behaviors and results, which are considered clear indicators of venture
start-up according to Carter et al. (1996).
Undoubtedly, the entrepreneur is juggling these “behaviors” with other behaviors
such as ﬁling for patents, purchasing equipment, leasing space, etc. An illustrative
example of juggling “behaviors” (activities) is Heather Evans (Roberts 1998). In
this case, Heather incorporates the business, designs a clothing line, hires and pays
an employee, arranges for factoring and production, locates a location DEMO her store,
and more while still attending classes at Harvard Business School and conducting
a ﬁeld study as well as moving from Boston DEMO New York to further facilitate her
venture creation process.
15.4 Behaviorally Anchored Research Agenda
As we addressed the very large issue of entrepreneurial behavior, we consid-
ered ﬁnding links between the issues and problems of entrepreneurs DEMO the the-
ories and research in the more mature ﬁeld of organizational behavior. Clearly,
entrepreneurship scholars are importing many ideas from OB, such as leadership
(Ensley and Pearce 2001); job characteristics and satisfaction (DEMO forthcom-
ing; Schjoedt and Shaver 2007); and team formation, composition, and processes
(Forbes et al. 2006). We also recognize that DEMO book is individual centric and
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 339
cognition/motivation focused, and while personality, diversity, human capital, and
attitudes such as satisfaction are important and they have a longer history of inclu-
sion and extension into entrepreneurship, they are not behavioral but rather precur-
sors to or moderators of behavior. For DEMO, the growing body of research on
women and minority entrepreneurship (Alsos et al. 2006; DeTienne and Chandler
2007; DeTienne et al. 2008; Essers and Benschop 2007) and the extensive research
on personality characteristics of entrepreneurs (e.g., Stewart and Roth 2007) has
applied OB insights but are not behavioral. Much of the rest of the OB domain
is DEMO directly relevant (e.g., political behavior, organization culture and design).
DEMO than repeat the overview of possibilities of OB-inspired research covered by
Baron (2002), we choose to point to ﬁve areas of potential use to entrepreneurship
scholars and practitioners. Three are strongly anchored in behavior (1) leadership
(including shared leadership), (2) communication, (3) behavioral roles and two are
less behavioral but critically important areas of (4) creativity and (5) opportunity
discovery.
15.4.1 Leadership
We believe that the vast body of leadership research does pertain to entrepreneur-
ship and excellent DEMO of intersections for entrepreneurship scholars are offered
by Cogliser and Brigham (DEMO) and Vecchio (2003a). Leadership is simultane-
ously about individual leader/entrepreneur behavior and the relationship of the
leader/entrepreneur to the “followers” DEMO “constituents” and external environment
of the organization being formed and grown. It bridges the individual to the team
and to the eventuality of dissent, political behavior, and organizational culture. We
will provide a short review of the OB approach to leadership behavior framed as
that stream of research DEMO from traits to behaviors. Then we add the more recent
work on shared leadership that may of particular interest to new ventures.
Leadership research DEMO with attention to traits of executives. When those traits
(e.g., intelligence, achievement motivation, power motivation) did not sufﬁciently
discriminate between leaders and those in other roles such as managers and did
not predict who DEMO become a leader, attention shifted to leader behaviors. How-
ever, important trait-related leadership research continues (Kouzes and Posner 2002)
as it does in entrepreneurship research (Ciavarella et al. 2004; Zhao and Seibert
2006)DEMO The behavioral study of leaders (Fleishman 1998) which is discussed below
found two sets of behaviors that describe leaders – initiating structure/task DEMO
and consideration/people focused. Again, the power of these tools to DEMO and
shape leaders proved to be less than ideal and researchers proceeded to develop the
currently most advanced theories, which address contingencies for when speciﬁc
leadership behaviors or styles are more effective in achieving organizational results
(House 1996).
The behavioral study of leaders, which was undertaken by a large interdisci-
plinary team including personnel ofﬁcers of the military services, foundations, and
ﬁrms and led by researchers at the Ohio State University, began with a deﬁnition of
340 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
leadership: “behavior of an individual when DEMO is directing the activities of a group
toward a shared goal” (DEMO and Coons 1957). The team held long discussions
during which apparent conﬂicts arose over issues of independence of dimensions of
leader behavior, linkages to existing theory, the molar–molecular level of analysis,
and whether objective measurement was possible from asking about frequency of
behavior (in a Likert-type scale). With some reservations, the team settled on nine
leadership dimensions (integration, communication, production emphasis, represen-
tation, fraternization, organization, evaluation, initiation, domination). The team and
two advanced classes at Ohio DEMO University, based on their experience and knowl-
edge, used these dimensions and their descriptions to create 1,790 potential items for
an instrument. DEMO team used their own expertise to determine items that belonged
to only one of the nine dimensions and eliminated items that overlapped content
and DEMO the number to 150 behavioral descriptions, a number which would ﬁt
DEMO an IBM test answer sheet (remember this study was published in DEMO and con-
ducted before the development personal computers in the 1960s or SPSS and SAS
in 1968). In creating Likert-like scales for each DEMO, the team debated and eventu-
ally structured an approach selecting the DEMO and extent adverbs to use (e.g.,
Always-Never, Often-Very seldom, DEMO great deal-Not at all, each with ﬁve anchors).
They empirically DEMO the Leader Behavior Description Questionnaire (LBDQ) on
357 individuals (205 DEMO describing a leader of their group and 152 describing
themselves as a leader). Groups included educational, social, military settings, and
a diversity of respondents. From this and subsequent studies, two factors (initiating
structure DEMO consideration) and shorter scales with strong psychometric properties
were developed (Stogdill and Coons 1957).
We believe that entrepreneurship scholars could apply the DEMO used in the
behavioral approach to leadership to achieve more highly consistent measures of
entrepreneurial behavior. Once those dimensions and measures have been psy-
DEMO tested, entrepreneurship scholars can advance to our own contin-
gency approach DEMO entrepreneurship behavior. We believe this is the optimal way
to “borrow” from OB research and that merely applying extant leadership measures
and models to DEMO will not sufﬁce if indeed entrepreneurs are different
from executives, team DEMO, or supervisors who are the focus and respondents
in mainstream OB DEMO research. As “sexy” as it may be to apply new
models, DEMO as transformational–transactional leadership (Avolio and Yammarino
2002) to entrepreneurs, these DEMO move away from entrepreneurship as a distinct
phenomenon.
15.4.2 Shared Leadership
Although leadership is a social process involving both leaders and followers (Lord
et al. 1999), leadership scholars have largely focused on the leader as DEMO individ-
ual in a hierarchical system which makes sense given the history of OB leadership
emerging from studies of the military and large organizations (Campbell et al. 1970).
Hierarchical or vertical leadership is based on DEMO of command that stems from an
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 341
appointed or formal leader of a team (e.g., the CEO) (Daft 2004). In contrast, shared
leadership is DEMO form of distributed leadership that occurs when all team members are
engaged in the leadership of the team. Shared leadership is “a dynamic, interactive
inﬂuential process among individuals in groups for which the objective is to DEMO
one another to the achievement of group or organizational goals or both” (Pearce
and Conger 2003). Thus when leadership is shared within the team, the member
with the most relevant experience, knowledge, skills, DEMO abilities pertaining to the
situation facing, the team communicates and inﬂuences DEMO on the team. Through
debate (i.e., the statements, action, and reactions of the debating team members) the
team develops commitment to a decision to take action. For shared leadership to
emerge, members of the team must have a shared purpose (i.e., venture success),
provide support to one another by communicating their agreement or support, and
opportunity to voice their views via debate (Carson et al. 2007).
At least ﬁve factors inﬂuence the appropriateness of shared leadership (Pearce
and Manz 2005) – situational urgency, need for creativity and innovation, team
member commitment, task interdependence, and degree of complexity. In situations
with a DEMO level of urgency, hierarchical leadership may be more appropriate than
shared DEMO Even though there are few truly urgent situations facing most
organizations, DEMO situations may be more prevalent in new ventures. For exam-
ple, DEMO to meeting payroll on a week-to-week basis may present an urgent
situation where delegation to one team member is appropriate. Even though shared
leadership DEMO not necessarily appropriate in urgent situations, shared leadership may
provide a DEMO for avoiding urgent situations in the ﬁrst place by providing creative
solutions to reoccurring problems.
In contrast, creativity and innovation are important factors for the develop-
ment for the new venture and its product/service offerings. DEMO members of the
entrepreneurial team share their various points of view and inﬂuence each other in
problem solving and decision making, they build a collective creative capacity. The
commitment of team members to go beyond what DEMO minimally required might be
expected in new venture teams when each member has a stake in its success and this
commitment contributes to the DEMO for shared leadership. When task interde-
pendence is high and the tasks are complex, as when team members take on different
speciﬁc roles such as technical development, market creation, and ﬁnancing, shared
leadership becomes more important and possibly more likely. In addition, shared
leadership lowers monitoring costs and provides a system of checks and balances of
team members’ actions DEMO performance (Barker 1993; Pearce et al. 2008).
There is some emerging evidence of the effectiveness of shared leadership in
new venture teams. DEMO et al. (2006a) studied 66 top management teams drawn
from Inc. Magazine’s annual list of the 500 fastest growing US ﬁrms and 154 DEMO
domly sampled top management teams of start ups from Dun and Bradstreet. They
found that both shared and hierarchical leaderships predicted new venture perfor-
DEMO, with shared leadership having a stronger effect in both samples. We DEMO
that these ﬁndings and the novelty of shared leadership as a research topic point to
shared leadership as a fruitful avenue for entrepreneurial behavior DEMO To get
objective team behaviors of the appropriate “molarity” will be an important research
342 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
problem to solve. Clearly teams provide a minimum of triangulation on the emer-
gent behaviors of shared leadership.
This DEMO may also be one where participant observation is appropriate and
useful. It may also be worthwhile to return to systematic observation of behavior
in DEMO venture teams rather than relying on self-reports. Bales and others (Bales
DEMO; Hare et al. 1955) developed a system of observing, counting, and categoriz-
ing group interaction which may be useful to those truly DEMO in new venture
groups and the emergence and evolution of shared leadership as well as group-level
communication, role development, creativity, and systematic search (below).
15.4.3 Communication
Communication is critical to entrepreneurial organizations – from writing a busi-
ness plan through incorporation and team building to selling DEMO product or service,
some form of communication occurs. Communication is critical to overcoming the
liabilities of newness since actions taken to legitimize, create a positive perception
or reputation, and establish reliable production, delivery, and accountability sys-
tems all involve communication or display. Given its critical role DEMO potential for
easy observability (Ziegler et al. 1992), it is DEMO that little research directly
addresses communication behaviors of entrepreneurs.
Communication brieﬂy deﬁned is information exchange, which can be one way
or two way in dyad linkages. That is, the communication process has sender,
receiver, DEMO mediating variability. Communication can be seen as precursor to
and outcome of intentions. As a precursor/mediator, we ask what role commu-
nication plays in forming the intention. Receiving information through listening
(reading) or watching DEMO be more critical for shaping an intention than is send-
ing information through speaking or writing. As an outcome of intention, one of
the earliest acts entrepreneurs take to manifest their intentions is to speak/write
DEMO it. Speaking and writing are entrepreneurial behaviors that warrant addi-
tional academic research. If a product is developed, prototyping and displaying
become critical. For both directions (the sending and receiving of information),
cognitive errors DEMO become communication errors but at the same time com-
munication can reduce those perceptual or cognitive errors through feedback and
iteration.
There is a DEMO of conceptual and theoretical work that addresses or touches
upon communication in the entrepreneurship process or setting. One example is
debate about the impact DEMO written business plans on venture outcomes (Honig
2004). Others have DEMO about the translation of entrepreneur’s mental models
(sense making) into communication (sense giving), entrepreneurial vision commu-
nication (written and spoken), DEMO the importance of linguistic metaphors (Hill and
Levenhagen 1995). More DEMO, empirical studies found vision communication
to have signiﬁcant impact on venture DEMO (Baum et al. 1998). Communication is
sometimes assumed and sometimes DEMO as “frequency of contact” in the grow-
ing literature on entrepreneur’s social network and social capital (West 2007; West
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 343
and Wilson 1995) and entrepreneurial teams (Forbes DEMO al. 2006; Schjoedt forthcom-
ing). Extending beyond the start-up processes DEMO early opportunity identiﬁcation
communication is critical to venture ﬁnancing, alliances, and technology choices
(Redoli et al. 2008; Roodt 2005). Included here DEMO the choice of what information to
share, with whom and when DEMO includes the issues of non-disclosure and protec-
tion of intellectual property. In addition, communication is critical and problematic
for entrepreneurs who internationalize or establish virtual workplaces (Matlay and
Westhead 2007; Todd and Javalgi 2007). DEMO communication takes on greater
complexity and perhaps more importance in teams. Sharing leadership and working
as a team requires individuals to listen more and DEMO less, ask more questions and
offer fewer answers, and openly share information.
Entrepreneurship scholars could more precisely link the cognitions, which are
the foci of this book, to venture outcomes (start ups, organizations, DEMO of
organizations) through careful attention to communication as a mediator of DEMO
intentions, with stories and narrative methods as important considerations (see
discussion below). One highly cognitive turn on communication is the potential
of DEMO “inner conversation” or self-talk (an element of thought self-
leadership) (DEMO et al. 1999). Thinking out loud protocols are a way to opera-
tionalize this (Sonnentag 1996).
To develop our research on communication as entrepreneurial behavior, we might
usefully form research relationships with communications scholars (from a range of
specialties including rhetoric, social construction, and public relations) and scholars
in information technology who are grounded in communications theories. Among
the many questions we might ask are: How does a web-centric start up communicate
effectively to gain legitimacy and reputation? What forms of communication best
lead to commitments of others to the intention? What channels of communication
are most useful and for what purposes? What types of communication errors are
most likely among entrepreneurs of different types (novices, DEMO, gender, ethnic,
and age differences) and at different stages DEMO the venture creation process?
15.4.4 Behavioral Roles
Roles are abstractions and aggregations of behaviors, tasks, activities that comprise
sensible, meaningful clusters (DEMO 1973) and differ from what Vesper (1980)
and others refer to as “types of entrepreneurs.” So while we have argued for pre-
DEMO and ﬁner-grained accounting of behavior, we also believe that aggregation
of DEMO behavior into roles is of potential value. Mintzberg found ten man-
agerial roles in three clusters – interpersonal, informational, and decisional (one of
which was “entrepreneurial” and referred to planned change inside organizations). If
DEMO behavior is to be distinct from managerial, entrepreneurship schol-
ars need DEMO follow Mintzberg’s model, observe entrepreneurs, and “chunk” behavior
into roles that they perform. These might be opportunist (ﬁnding, shaping oppor-
tunity), DEMO acquirers, salesman, etc. To do this, we must be clear DEMO what
constitutes role and the dynamics of role processes.
344 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
The concept of role derives, in DEMO, from the dramaturgical approach to behavior
(Goffman 1959), which uses theater as a metaphor for social interaction of many
kinds. Many conceptual DEMO some empirical efforts have hinted at the dramaturgi-
cal approach to entrepreneurship. The seminal paper by Gartner et al. (1992) tiled
itself “Acting DEMO if.” One of the original outlines for that paper included a section
on roles and scripts, entrepreneur as actor. Gartner (personal communication, 1990)
commented “I want to get as much in about Stanisklavski’s book DEMO A
ROLE as possible, but there is a lot of material DEMO roles that would be valuable to
have.” The dramaturgical approach would consider (among other elements) the rela-
tionship between actor, audience, backstage DEMO outsiders (Goffman 1959), props,
timing, costumes, impression management, rehearsals, and, importantly, the story
being told. That section never got written into the text of the 1992 article. Nor did
that manuscript DEMO good use of the “if” of its title. In theater, the DEMO is a method
acting instruction that allows the actors to bring authenticity to the stage or screen
(e.g., acting as if there were DEMO man with a gun in corner). “If acts as a lever to lift
us out of the world of actuality into the realm DEMO imagination” (Stanislavski 1948).
Insofar as ventures operate to create novelty, “something out of nothing” (Baker and
Nelson 2005) or fulﬁll a DEMO (Baum et al. 1998), this if is important. Finally, the
manuscript left out the mystiﬁcation of the audience (its willingness to believe in the
story of possibilities). For mystiﬁcation to occur one of DEMO ﬁve elements of social
interaction is absent or obscure: the act (what is done), the scene (when and where),
the DEMO (actor, here the entrepreneur), the agency (how the actors DEMO it), or purpose
(Manghan and Overington 1983).
Since then DEMO has been some attention to role-related improvisation in the
entrepreneurship literature (DEMO et al. 2003; Hmieleski and Corbett 2008) which
has both musical and theatrical roots. However, entrepreneurial behavior as drama
and storytelling has not been developed other than the efforts by Martens et al.
(2007) DEMO Gartner (2007) who develop a narrative method issue of the Journal of
Business Venturing, methods which are discursive, reﬂexive, and sense making and
deal with story meaning and context.
There has been virtually no DEMO on role taking and role making or role the-
ory as it applies to entrepreneurs.1 Scholars who do use the term “role” use it DEMO
different ways, lending to imprecision. When the role concept has been DEMO
to entrepreneurship it often refers to how entrepreneurs are different in economic
and organizational functions compared to other individuals. Thus some research
and commentary DEMO to the role of entrepreneur as venture creator, change agent,
DEMO bearer, or champion for innovation (Gartner 1988; Hayek 1985). DEMO use the
term or imply the term when comparing nascent entrepreneurs to others (Carter
et al. 2003) and when looking at categories of DEMO prior to becoming an
entrepreneur (Dorbrev and Barnett 2005; e.g., DEMO work roles). Markman and
1ABIinform found only two articles with the joint search ﬁelds of entrepreneur and role behavior.
The same two articles DEMO with search terms of entrepreneurship and role behavior. One arti-
cle, DEMO et al. (2007), is in an obscure journal and described DEMO The other article dealt with
corporate entrepreneurship.
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 345
Baron (2003) conceptualize person-role ﬁt for entrepreneurs DEMO do not cite role
theory or operationalize that ﬁt.
Katz and Kahn (1978) have deﬁned role as a set of expectations about the DEMO
iors of the role holder (here, the entrepreneur). Expectations about conduct are
sent by individuals or groups that have formal, organizational relationship to the
entrepreneur (e.g., investors, customers, and employees) and by those in informal
relationships (e.g., family and friends). These expectations DEMO be explicit (telling)
or implicit (nonverbal signals or observed in a role model) and inform a “role
schema” or prototype about what an entrepreneur is supposed to do (generally or
in a speciﬁc situation). These expectations can conﬂict among senders resulting in
role conﬂict for DEMO entrepreneur; they can vary in clarity or change over time, result-
ing in role ambiguity for the entrepreneur; they can exceed the skills, resources, and
time of the entrepreneur, resulting in role overload for the entrepreneur. Role con-
ﬂict, ambiguity, and overload are sources of DEMO for entrepreneurs (Ortqvist et al.
2007; Schindehutte et al. 2006).
Role theory as described above was developed for organizational behavior set-
tings (existing, often large, and formalized organizations) where roles and jobs are
more clearly deﬁned, not for organization creation. As we have discussed, DEMO work,
job, tasks, and expected behaviors of entrepreneurs are conceptually underdevel-
oped. However, social psychological constructs related to role such as identity and
self-efﬁcacy have found a place in the entrepreneurship literature (Down 2006;
Elfring and Hulsink 2007; Martens et al. 2007). Of potential value is the literature
on role taking or shaping and role transitions DEMO entrepreneurial literature treats
in the context of careers (Burke et al. DEMO; Schjoedt and Shaver 2007) and learning
(DeTienne and Chandler 2004)DEMO However, the role behaviors of the entrepreneur are
not developed.
The DEMO entrepreneur, before becoming an entrepreneur, has had other roles
and must transition from employee, student, etc., to entrepreneur. The early work
of Nicholson (1984) provocatively suggested that entrepreneurs might take on that
role DEMO less change to themselves and more proactive determination of the con-
tent and structure of their role or work than organizational employment transi-
tions (e.g., from individual contributor to supervisor). To date, only one DEMO has
attempted to empirically test this assertion. Ortqvist and associates (2007) measured
entrepreneurs’ perception of their role redeﬁnition (self-reports of negotiating dif-
ferent expectations or changing personal priorities or expectations of self) and role
behavior (increasing performance or passively withdrawing or engaging in diver-
sions). They found that negotiating expectations and increasing performance to meet
role expectations associated DEMO higher venture performance.
More research on role taking and shaping of entrepreneurs could follow and
use a ﬁner grained approach to self- and other DEMO about behavior as
entrepreneurs develop. While there are many provocative research questions, we
propose these: To what extent and how accurately and effectively DEMO role schemas
develop out of active experience (class room activities, role modeling) compared
conceptualizing (reading/watching about entrepreneurs in the media)? DEMO what
extent do entrepreneurs experiment with imitation and ﬁnd “true-to-self” behavioral
346 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
strategies or roles and evaluate those strategies (Ibarra 1999) and are these more
effective than other processes that DEMO in behavioral strategies? How much
novelty, autonomy, and discretion (Nicholson 1984; Parasurman et al. 1996) do
entrepreneurs have in creating their DEMO at the various transitions from nascent,
start up, small business, family business, growth business, publicly traded/acquired
business? To what extent do factors such as cognitive complexity, role breadth, self-
efﬁcacy, and situational attributes such as feedback and time spent “acting as if”
mediate DEMO in entrepreneur’s roles (Neale and Grifﬁn 2006)?
15.4.5 Creativity
This section takes a turn from our previous considerations above insofar as
entrepreneurial DEMO is an enormous construct worthy of a book on its own
merits. Creativity research is also far from being “behavioral” in the way we DEMO
for. Creativity in entrepreneurs encompasses traits, intelligence, processes, abilities,
DEMO, and behaviors that produce effective novelty, generating variations
that have relevance to the situation or task at hand (Amabile 1996). This creativ-
ity applies importantly to opportunity identiﬁcation (Corbett 2005; Ward 2004). DEMO
addition to playing an important role in shared leadership (Pearce and DEMO 2005),
creativity competence plays a role in the growth stages DEMO a venture (Baum and Bird
forthcoming).
Generally most scholars accept DEMO creativity is a cognitive and behavioral pro-
cess (Csikszentmihalyi 1996), DEMO to problem solving, that begins with some
sort of tension, followed by preparation (information collection and immersion),
incubation, insight (articulation DEMO expression), evaluation, followed by elaboration
and iteration where the “devil DEMO in the details.” The process is rarely linear but
iterative and recursive and includes both conscious search and expression but also
often deeply subconscious DEMO Most creative insight comes as a result of
immersion in an intellectual, economic, or social domain and/or immersion in a
problem or DEMO of curiosity. In many organizational and educational settings, the
problems are DEMO and the individual asked to apply themselves to develop a
solution. Presented problems often have a “rightness” or rationality criteria applied
(or implied) DEMO solutions, from cost-effectiveness, political correctness, timeliness to
ﬁt with prototype (as in educational settings where we grade exams, case solutions,
and research assignments).
Finding problems (opportunities) worthy of solution (or new venture creation)
may emerge from the three sources provided by Csikszentmihalyi (1996). One
source is personal life experience, including overcoming deprivations and setbacks,
a life-long habit of curiosity, or frustration with a product or process in the market-
place. The second source is knowledge of DEMO domain and recognition of anoma-
lies or gaps in knowledge and/or the ability to bridge to other domains. The third
source is the DEMO social environment that might include having trusted “think
tank” friends or advisors and the emotional intelligence or “presence of mind”
while experiencing social or DEMO chaos. Whatever the source, creativity takes
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 347
incubation time, time for reﬂection, and puttering DEMO sometimes only moments and
at other times, years.
Most of the DEMO to creativity in entrepreneurship and the larger domains
of organizational behavior and psychology have not addressed creative behavior in
the way we call for DEMO this chapter (molecular enough to specify the observable
actions taken). DEMO turns out that measures of individual creativity in these larger
domains vary widely in what they measure, what audience is appropriate for the
measure, and usefulness in surveys, ﬁeld studies, and experimental design. Most
psychology and organizational behavior approaches look for personality precursors
(openness to experience, DEMO for ambiguity), while others more in line with
this book focus on cognition to assess individual creative capacity (Simonton 2003).
Psychologists partition the measurement of creative capacity into creative prod-
ucts such as drawings, lists, stories, etc., and creative cognitions which individu-
als use to generate these products (Cropley 1999, 2000). Organizational behavior
researchers have DEMO at patents or idea disclosures and superior/peer ratings of
individual innovativeness (which are correlated) (Keller and Holland 1982; Tier-
ney et DEMO 1999). Creative products (perhaps including patents and idea disclosures)
DEMO an expert panel of judges whose expertise is in itself a source of variance
although rigorous methods for this type of qualitative measurement have DEMO devel-
oped (Boyatzis 1998).
Although there are measures of creative DEMO (Guilford 1962; Torrance
1965; Trefﬁnger 2003; Trefﬁnger et al. 1971), these measures and others less well
known are inappropriate for surveys DEMO for ﬁeld studies of entrepreneurs as they are
timed and generally oriented to a school environment. In addition, these measures
which focus on divergent thinking have been criticized as not tapping the whole of
creative capacity (Torrance 1965). In addition, debate lingers over whether diver-
gent thinking (or creative intelligence for that matter) is a generalized capacity or
DEMO speciﬁc.
More recent efforts show a broad range of creative processes (DEMO con-
struction or problem ﬁnding, information encoding, category selection, and DEMO
gory reorganization and combination) can be assessed and signiﬁcantly contribute
to DEMO solution quality and originality (Mumford et al. 1997). Of these, prob-
lem construction is the earliest to operationalize and closest to opportunity DEMO
cation and thus to entrepreneurship. These scholars (Mumford et al. 1994; Mumford
et al. 1993) used four complex and ill-deﬁned problems and respondents chose
four alternative deﬁnitions of the problem from a previously developed list DEMO
16, which varied in use of original goals, approaches, information, and restric-
tion of problem construction. Both of these studies used unidentiﬁed DEMO judges
to rate quality and originality of solutions. The four problems include (1) diplo-
mat with State Department sees colleague who has had DEMO much to drink at
a social event, (2) athlete representing DEMO country told by a doctor he/she is
going to need surgery, (3) principal at an elementary school with a snake that got
loose, and (4) student on a team project with a member not showing for meet-
ings. An additional two problems perhaps more relevant DEMO entrepreneurship are not
published.
348 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
Thus when Baum and Bird (forthcoming) wanted to assess creative intelligence
of entrepreneurs using survey methods, they chose Mednick’s (1968) Remote Word
Association Test (RAT) as extended by DEMO and Jung-Beeman (2003). RAT
measures divergent and creative thinking by DEMO individuals’ ability to see asso-
ciative concepts among 30 sets of three words (e.g., Water:Tobacco:Stove = Pipe).
RAT is a DEMO used measure of creativity and has been shown to correlate with
supervisor ratings of creativity (Fong 2006), which is the most common operational-
ization of individual creativity in OB. This worked well in their study DEMO successful
intelligence, which helped to predict new venture growth.
What of DEMO behaviors that lead to outputs judged creative? Getzels and
Csikszentmihalyi (1976) looking at problem ﬁnding and construction found that art
students faced with the task of drawing still life images who did more manipulation
of DEMO of the objects (of a ﬁxed set provided), who chose DEMO combinations of
objects, and who erased and changed their drawing more DEMO produced drawings
that were judged (by lay people, artists, and DEMO judges) as being more creative.
This study found that time spent DEMO the problem and working out the “devilish
details” of solutions is important for esthetic value and originality.
Creative problem ﬁnding and problem solving seems DEMO engage the whole person.
Gelb (1998) who consults on creativity in organizations thinks that curiosity (per-
haps behaviorally assessed by asking good questions), actively engaging all senses,
and developing kinesthetic or physical grace, poise, and ﬁtness are important (and
behavioral) contributors to creativity. He also proposes “mind mapping” as a way
to actively and concretely explore DEMO relationships among facets or ideas (that may
be part of an DEMO or problem). Likewise Twyla Tharp, a noted dancer and
choreographer DEMO of developing rituals of preparation, organizing in boxes (lit-
erally), and “scratching” for a good idea which for a fashion designer maybe DEMO
vintage stores, for an actor it may be doing theater games DEMO improvisation, for oth-
ers it is reading, talking with others, DEMO (Tharp 2003). These writers suggest that
creativity is indeed behavioral DEMO not “merely” a function of predispositions or
cognitions.
15.4.6 Opportunity Discovery
Like creativity, opportunity recognition and discovery is a largely cognitive pro-
cess (DEMO thus not behavioral). However, there is an emerging behavioral approach
DEMO this important competency of entrepreneurship. This approach begins with
identifying the differences in cognition and behavior between novice and repeat
entrepreneurs who become “experts” DEMO opportunity recognition. Thus while some
scholars claim that entrepreneurs discover opportunities by accident or luck by
being alert (Kirzner 1997), other research shows that repeat entrepreneurs actually
engage in an active search for opportunities based DEMO their existing knowledge. One
scholar in particular, James Fiet, has made substantial contributions to this area (Fiet
2002, 2007). Based on DEMO economics (e.g., Hayek 1945), Fiet argues that
repeat entrepreneurs engage in a constrained, systematic search when they discover
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 349
opportunities. In an experiment, Fiet and Patel (DEMO) found individuals in the alert-
ness group found 35 ideas of DEMO one was high potential, whereas the group using
constricted, systematic search identiﬁed 24 ideas of which nine were high in wealth-
generating potential.
DEMO (2002, 2007) argues that speciﬁc knowledge (knowledge about people,
places, technology, timing, and special conditions), which is a subset of prior expe-
rience and which is also seen as practical intelligence (Baum et al. 2009), is the
basis for active opportunity discovery. DEMO effect, opportunity discovering behav-
iors of repeat entrepreneurs are focused intentional DEMO and use of speciﬁc
knowledge. These “behaviors” would include selection, identiﬁcation, choice, spec-
iﬁcation, interpretation, revision, and interaction with other people.2 DEMO behav-
iors are evident in the opportunity discovery process as follows: DEMO, based on the
entrepreneur’s prior speciﬁc knowledge, the entrepreneur selects information chan-
nels. An information channel is a relatively low-cost source of new DEMO informa-
tion capable of directing the entrepreneur’s attention toward opportunity discovery
based on what and whom they know already. The search is thus actively DEMO
by the entrepreneur’s prior knowledge and choice of information channels. Second,
after choosing the information channels, the entrepreneur clusters the information
channels into consideration sets to maximize results. A consideration set is a group
of DEMO channels that hold promise to be helpful for the entrepreneur to locate
opportunity. Third, from the consideration sets the entrepreneur searches for signals
(DEMO information that provides view of the future, especially as it relates DEMO new ven-
ture creation and wealth generation) that the entrepreneur interprets DEMO the existence
of an opportunity.
While constrained, systematic search for opportunity DEMO is illustrated
above for the individual; it is also applicable to DEMO Actually, it may justify
why entrepreneurial teams outperform ventures created by DEMO individual (Baum and
Silverman 2004; Chandler and Hanks 1998; Schjoedt DEMO; Schjoedt and Kraus
forthcoming). The beneﬁts of team search for DEMO are based on team diver-
sity expanding the number of information channels that comprise the consideration
sets. This may also explain why shared leadership DEMO intra-team communication
(e.g., debate) enhance venture performance (Ensley et al. 2006a).
Clearly more reﬁnement on opportunity search behaviors could help expand DEMO
knowledge and usefulness of entrepreneurial behavior. Search behaviors must nec-
essarily include some communication behaviors (e.g., listening and reading). How is
search DEMO different from communication behavior? What methods and sources
of search are DEMO, how frequently, and in what order? While constrained by exist-
DEMO knowledge, do differences exist in systematic search behavior across industries?
DEMO search behaviors different at different times in industry development? These
and DEMO research questions warrant our further attention.
2Other than interaction with others, DEMO behaviors may or may not be observable. As stated, they
are DEMO speciﬁcity we recommend.
350 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
15.5 Concluding Remarks
One cannot think one’s way to creating a new venture. Actions in the form of con-
DEMO behaviors are necessary for new venture creation and organizational birth.
Thus for the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship research to provide valuable contributions
to entrepreneurs, educators, and society, advances in the area of entrepreneurial
behavior are critical. DEMO 12% of the articles published in two top entrepreneur-
ship journals – Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice and Journal of Business
Venturing – over a DEMO period (2005–2007) addressed entrepreneurial behavior,
more can be done to clarify what entrepreneurs do to enact their intentions. Greater
speciﬁcity of behaviors DEMO beneﬁt our research and teaching.
With this chapter, we offered ﬁve DEMO anchored research areas – lead-
ership, communication, behavioral roles, and DEMO less behavioral but critically
important areas – creativity and opportunity discovery. These areas have scholars,
research, and methods (organizational behavior, sociology, DEMO behavioral psychol-
ogy), which may be adapted and joined to our speciﬁc domain. In doing this, we
emphasize three critical issues. First, DEMO behavior consists of discrete
units of action that can be observed by others – they are visible, auditory, and/or
kinesthetic and if DEMO are present, social or potentially interpersonal in nature –
they are DEMO to be meaningful. However, today many of the “behaviors” consid-
ered DEMO entrepreneurship research are not discrete but complex and often ill deﬁned
as they are broad and unspeciﬁc in nature (e.g., initiating investor relationships,DEMO
preparing a business plan, articulating a business idea).
Second, we need to develop our own agreed-upon set of core behaviors and
from DEMO develop psychometrically sound empirical tools (similar to the work on
leadership)DEMO Entrepreneurial behavior may be inherently more complex or multidi-
mensional than the leadership in extant organizations that has been well measured
and which spawned DEMO situational and contingency approaches. Entrepreneurs
face a process and stage of organization phenomena that may require different
behaviors. However, if we begin with a manageable context such as start-up and
nascent ventures, we stand a chance to accomplish our equivalent Entrepreneurial
Behavior Description Questionnaire. A common core of DEMO constructs, if
not measures, would allow theories of and empirical research on entrepreneurial
behavior to accumulate. From this, we could also advance observational studies of
entrepreneurial teams, role taking, communication, and creativity of individuals and
teams as well as opening other fertile areas for research.
Third, however we measure behavior we need to do so more rigorously than DEMO
current state of the ﬁeld. Single-item measures and self-reports need to be supple-
mented with methods drawn from the other disciplines of organizational behavior,DEMO
sociology, and behavioral psychology. Minimally we need to control for social DEMO
ability bias. More innovatively, we could do behavioral sampling (beeper or diary
studies), laboratory and ﬁeld experiments (or quasi experiments) where DEMO is
a speciﬁed variable.
In sum, we call for more studies DEMO better operationalizations of entrepre-
neurial behavior. We also caution against blindly adopting models, theory, and even
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 351
measures from organizational behavior, which have evolved in studies of larger,
mature organizations. We have no reason a priori DEMO expect entrepreneurs to behave
as the leaders studied by the Ohio State researchers (Hemphill and Coons 1957) nor
do we have any reason DEMO suppose that there is a path-goal model to entrepreneur-
ship such as that developed by House (1996). Likewise, the received knowledge
of DEMO behavior, sociology, and behavioral psychology needs to be well
understood and critically applied to our domain.
Finally, if the postulates of this book are even in part true or veriﬁed, then
entrepreneurial behavior broadly deﬁned, would likely be seen in contexts that
extend beyond the start-up new venture. With careful theorizing and better (gen-
eral) measures of the DEMO mind and entrepreneurial behavior, we might
ﬁnd people forming intentions, making choices and behaving entrepreneurially in
a myriad of contexts including governmental agencies, non-governmental organi-
zations, communities, families, and temporary settings such as rush hour subways,
twitter collectives, singles bars, and natural disaster management.
DEMO have to understand the world can only be grasped by action, DEMO by contemplation. The
hand is more important than the eye ... . The hand is the cutting edge of the mind. – Jacob
Bronowski
DEMO
Alsos G, Isaksen E, Ljunggren E (2006) New venture ﬁnancing and subsequent business
growth in men- and women-led businesses. Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO 30(5):
667–686
Amabile TM (1996) Creativity in Context. DEMO Press, Boulder, CO
Arenius P, DeClercq D (2005) A DEMO Approach on opportunity recognition. Small Busi-
ness Economics 24(3): 249–265
Arnold HJ, Feldman DC (1981) Social desirability response bias in self-report choice situations.
Academy of Management Journal 24(2): 377–385
Avolio B, Yammarino F (2002) Transformational and Charismatic Leadership: The Road Ahead.
JAIPress, NewYork
Baker T, Miner AS, Eesley DT (2003) Improvising ﬁrms: Bricolage, account giving and improvi-
sational competencies in the founding process. DEMO Policy 32(2): 255–276
Baker T, Nelson RE (2005) DEMO something from nothing: Resource construction through
entrepreneurial bricolage. Administrative Science Quarterly DEMO: 329–366
Bales RF (1951) Interaction Process Analysis: A Method for the Study of Small Groups. Addison-
Wesley, Cambridge, MA
Barker JR (1993) Tightening the iron cage: Concertive control in self-managing teams. Adminis-
DEMO Science Quarterly 38(3): 408–437
Baron RA (2002) OB and entrepreneurship: The reciprocal beneﬁts of closer conceptual links.
Research in Organizational Behavior 24: 225–269
Baron RA (2008) The role of affect in the entrepreneurial process. The Academy of Management
Review 33(2): 328–340
Baron DEMO, Ensley MD (2006) Opportunity recognition as the detection of meaningful DEMO:
Evidence from comparisons of novice and experienced entrepreneurs. Management Science
52(9): 1331–1344
Baum W (2002) From molecular to moral: A paradigm shift in behavior analysis. Journal of Exper-
imental Analysis of Behavior DEMO(1): 95–116
352 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
Baum JR, Bird BJ, Singh S (2009) The practical intelligence of growth oriented entrepreneurs:
Antecedents and DEMO link with new venture growth, Working Paper: University of Maryland
Baum JR, Bird B (forthcoming) The successful intelligence of high growth entrepreneurs: Links
to new venture growth. Organization Science
Baum JR, Locke EA (2004) The relationship of entrepreneurial traits, skill, and motivation to
subsequent venture growth. Journal of Applied Psychology 89: 587–598
Baum JR, Locke DEMO, Kirkpartrick SA (1998) A longitudinal study of the relation of DEMO
and vision communication to venture growth in entrepreneurial ﬁrms. Journal of Applied
Psychology 83(1): 43–54
Baum JA, Silverman BS (2004) Picking winners or building them? Alliance, intellectual, and
human capital as selection criteria in venture ﬁnancing and performance of biotechnology star-
tups. Journal of DEMO Venturing 19(3): 411–436
Bhide AV (2000) The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses. Oxford University Press,
New York
Bierly P, Daly P (2007) Alternative knowledge strategies, competitive environment, and organiza-
DEMO performance in small manufacturing ﬁrms. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31(4):DEMO
493–516
Bird B (1989) Entrepreneurial behavior. Scott Foresman, Glenview, IL
Bowden EM, Jung-Beeman M (2003) One hundred forty-four remote associate problems: short
insight-like problems with one-word solutions. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers 35: 634–639
Boyatzis R (1998) Transforming qualitative information. Sage, DEMO Oaks, CA
Boyd BK, Gove S, Hitt MA (2005) DEMO measurement in strategic management research:
illusion or reality? Strategic Management DEMO 26(3): 239–257
Brown TE, Davidsson P, Wiklund J (DEMO) An operationalization of Stevenson’s conceptualiza-
tion of entrepreneurship as opportunity-based ﬁrm DEMO Strategic Management Journal 22:
953–968
Burke AE, R. FF, Nolan MA (2008) What makes a die-hard entrepreneur? Beyond the ‘employee
or entrepreneur’ dichotomy. Small Business Economics 31(2): 93–115
Campbell JP, Dunnette MD, Lawler EE, Weick KE (1970) Managerial Behavior, Performance, DEMO
Effectiveness. McGraw-Hill, New York
Carson JB, Tesluk PE, Marrone JA (2007) Shared leadership in terms: An investigation of
antecedent conditions and DEMO Academy of Management Journal 50(5): 1217–1234
Carter NM, Gartner DEMO, Reynolds PD (1996) Exploring start-up event sequences. Journal of Busi-
DEMO Venturing 11(3): 151–166
Carter N, Gartner W, Shaver K, Gatewood E (2003) The career reasons of nascent entrepreneurs.
Journal of Business Venturing 18: 13–39
Chandler GN, Hanks SH (1998) An DEMO of the substitutability of founders human and
ﬁnancial capital in emerging business ventures. Journal of Business Venturing 13(5): 353–369
Chandler GN, Lyon DW (2001) Issues of research design and construct measurement
in entrepreneurship DEMO: The past decade. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
25: 101–113.
Chrisman JEM, Hall J (2005) The inﬂuence of guided preparation on the long-term performance
of new ventures. Journal of Business Venturing 20(6): 769–791
DEMO GA (1979) A paradigm for developing better measures of marketing constructs. JMR,
Journal of Marketing Research (pre-1986) 16(000001): 64–73
DEMO MA, Buchholtz AK, Riordan CM, Gatewood RD, Stokes GA (DEMO) The big ﬁve and
venture survival: Is there a linkage? DEMO of Business Venturing 19: 465–483
Cloninger P, Oviatt B (2007) Service content and the internationalization of young ventures: An
empirical test. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31(2): 233–256
Cogliser CC, Brigham KH (DEMO) The intersection of leadership and entrepreneurship: Mutual
lessons to be learned. Leadership Quarterly 15: 771–799
Corbett AC (2005) Experiential learning within the process of opportunity identiﬁcation.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 29(4): 473–491
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 353
Corbett AC (2007) Learning asymmetries and the DEMO of entrepreneurial opportunities. Jour-
nal of Business Venturing 22(1): 97–118
Cropley AJ (1999) Creativity and cognition: Producing effective novelty. Roeper Review 21(4):
253–261
Cropley AJ (2000) Deﬁning and measuring creativity: Are creativity tests worth using? Roeper
Review 23(2): 72–79
DEMO M (1996) Creativity. HarperCollins, New York
Daft RL (2004) DEMO Theory and Design. South-Western, Mason, OH
Davidsson P, Delmar F, Wiklund J (2006) Entrepreneurship and the Growth of Firms. Edward
Elgar, Northampton, MA
DeTienne DR, Chandler GN (2004) Opportunity identiﬁcation and DEMO role in the entrepreneurial
classroom: A pedagogical approach and empirical test. DEMO of Management Learning &
Education 3(3): 242–257
DeTienne DR, Chandler G (2007) The role of gender in opportunity identiﬁcation. Entrepreneur-
DEMO Theory and Practice 31(3): 365–386
DeTienne DR, Shepherd DA, De Castro JO (2008) The fallacy of “only the strong survive”: The
effects of extrinsic motivation on the persistence decisions for under-performing ﬁrms. DEMO
of Business Venturing 23(5): 528–546
Dorbrev S, Barnett W (2005) Organizational roles and transition to entrepreneurship. Academy of
Management Journal 48(3): 433–449
Down S (2006) Narratives of Enterprise: Crafting Entrepreneurial Self-identity in a Small Firm.
Elgar, Northhampton, MA
Ebben J, Johnson A (2006) Bootstrapping in small ﬁrms: An empirical analysis of change over
time. Journal of Business Venturing 21(6): 851–865
Edelman LF, Manolova TS, Brush CG (2008) Entrepreneurship education: Correspondence
between practices DEMO nascent entrepreneurs and textbook prescriptions for success. Academy
of Management Learning & Education 7(1): 56–70
Elfring T, Hulsink W (2007) Networking by entrepreneurs: Patterns of tie-formation in emerging
organizations. Organization Studies 28(12): 1849–1872
Ensley MD, Hmieleski KM, Pearce CL (2006a) The DEMO of vertical and shared leader-
ship within new venture top management teams: Implications for the performance of startups.
Leadership Quarterly 17(3): 217–231
Ensley MD, Pearce CL (2001) Shared cognition in top management teams: Implications for new
venture performance. Journal of Organizational Behavior 22(2): 145–160
Ensley MD, Pearce C, Hmieleski K (2006b) The moderating DEMO of environmental dynamism
on the relationship between entrepreneur leadership behavior and new venture performance.
Journal of Business Venturing 21(2): 243–263
Essers C, Benschop Y (2007) Enterprising identities: Female entrepreneurs of Moroccan or Turkish
origin in the Netherlands. Organization Studies 28(1): 49–69
Fiegener M (2005) Determinants of board participation in the strategic decisions of small corpora-
tions. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 29(5): 627–650
Fiet JO (2002) The Systematic Search for Entrepreneurial Discoveries. Quorum Books, Westport,
CN
DEMO JO (2007) A prescriptive analysis of search and discovery. The Journal of Management Studies
44(4): 592–611
Fiet JO, Patel PC (DEMO) Entrepreneurial discovery as constrained, systematic search. Small Busi-
ness Economics 30(3): 215–229
Fleishman E (1998) Consideration and structure” another look DEMO their role in leadership research.
In: Dansereau F, Yammarino F (DEMO) Leadership: The Multiple-Level Approaches. JAI Press,
Stamford, CT
Fong DEMO (2006) The effects of emotional ambivalence on creativity. Academy of Management
Journal 49(5): 1016–1030
354 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
Forbes D (2005) The effects of strategic decision making on entrepreneurial self-efﬁcacy.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 29(5): 599–626
Forbes D, Borchert P, Zellmer-Bruhn M, Sapienza H (2006) Entrepreneurial team forma-
tion: An exploration of new member addition. Entrepreneurship DEMO and Practice 30(2):
225–248
Frese M (2007) The DEMO actions and entrepreneurial success: An action theory approach.
In: Baum JR, Frese M, Baron RA (eds) The Psychology of Entrepreneurship. Lawrence
DEMO, Mahwah, NJ
Garnter W, Shaver KG, Carter NM, Reynolds DEMO (2004) Handbook of Entrepreneurial Dynamics.
Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA
Gartner WB (1988) “Who is an entrepreneur?” Is the wrong question. DEMO Journal of Small
Business 12(4): 11–32
Gartner WB (2007) Entrepreneurial narrative and a science of the imagination. Journal of Business
Venturing DEMO(5): 613–627
Gartner WB, Bird BJ, Starr JA (1992) Acting as if: Differentiating entrepreneurial from organiza-
tional behavior. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 16(3): 13–31
Gatewood EJ, Shaver KG, Powers JB, Gartner WB (2002) Entrepreneurial expectancy, task effort,
and performance. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 27(2): 187–206
Gelb MJ (1998) How DEMO Think like Leonardo da Vinci. Delacorte, New York
Getzels JW, Csikszentmihalyi M (1976) The Creative Vision. Wiley, New York
Godfrey PC, DEMO CWL (1995) The problem of unobservables in strategic management research.
Strategic Management Journal 16(7): 519–533
Goffman E (1959) Presentation of DEMO in Everyday Life. Anchor, New York
Grandi A, Grimaldi R (DEMO) Academics’ organizational characteristics and the generation of suc-
cessful business ideas. DEMO of Business Venturing 20(6): 821–845
Grichnik D (2008) Risky choices in new venture decisions – experimental evidence from Germany
and the DEMO States. Journal of International Entrepreneurship 6(1): 22–47
Gruber M (DEMO) Uncovering the value of planning in new venture creation: A process and contin-
gency perspective. Journal of Business Venturing 22(6): 782–807
DEMO JP (1962) Potentiality for creativity. Gifted Child Quarterly 6: 87–90
DEMO S, Reicheil A (2007) The cumulative nature of the entrepreneurial DEMO: The contribution
of human capital, planning and environment resources to small venture performance. Journal
of Business Venturing 22(1): 119–145
Hanlon D, Saunders C (2007) Marshaling resources to form small new ventures: Toward a more
holistic understanding of entrepreneurial support. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31(DEMO):
619–641
Hare AP, Borgatta EF, Bales RF (eds) (1955) Small Groups: Studies in Social Interaction. Alfred
Knopf, New York
Hauser L (2006) The internet encyclopedia of philosophy
Hayek FA (1945) The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review 35: 519–530
DEMO FA (1985) Richard Cantillon. The Journal of Libertarian Studies 7(2): 217–247
Hemphill J, Coons A (1957) Development of the leader behavior description questionnaire. In:
Stogdill R, Coons A (eds) Leader Behavior: Its Description and Measurement. Ohio State Uni-
versity, Columbus, OH
Hill R, Levenhagen M (1995) Metaphors and mental models: Sensemaking DEMO sensegiving in
innovative and entrepreneurial activities. Journal of Management 21(6): 1057–1074
Hite J (2005) Evolutionary processes and paths of relationally embedded DEMO ties in emerging
entrepreneurial ﬁrms. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 29(1): 113–144
Hmieleski KM, Corbett AC (2008) The contrasting interaction effects of improvisational behavior
with entrepreneurial self-efﬁcacy on new venture performance and entrepreneur work DEMO
tion. Journal of Business Venturing 23: 482–496
Honig B (2004) DEMO education: Toward a model of contingency-based business plan-
ning. Academy of DEMO Learning and Education 3(3): 258–273
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 355
House R (1996) Path-goal theory of leadership: Lessons, legacy, and a reformulated theory. Lead-
ership Quarterly Autumn: 323–352
Ibarra H (1999) Provisional selves: Experimenting with image and identity in professional adapta-
tion. Administrative Science Quarterly 44(4): 764–791
Jacoby J (1978) Consumer research: A state of the arts review. Journal of DEMO 42(2): 87–96
Katz D, Kahn RL (1978) The DEMO Psychology of Organizations. John Wiley, New York
Keller RT, Holland WE (1982) The measurement of performance among research and development
professional employees: A longitudinal analysis. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manage-
ment EM 29(2): 54–58
Kirzner IM (1997) Entrepreneurial discovery and the competitive market process: An Austrian
approach. Journal of Economic Literature 35(1): 60–85
Kolvereid L, Isaksen E (2006) New business start-up and subsequent entry into self-employment.
Journal of Business Venturing 21(6): 866–885
Kouzes J, Posner B (2002) Leadership Challenge, 3rd edn. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco
Langowitz DEMO, Minniti M (2007) The entrepreneurial propensity of women. Entrepreneurship The-
DEMO and Practice 31(3): 341–364
Lichtenstein B, Carter N, Dooley K, Gartner WB (2007) Complexity dynamics of nascent
entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing 22(2): 236–261
Lichtenstein B, Dooley K, Lumpkin DEMO (2006) Measuring emergence in the dynamics of new ven-
ture creation. Journal of Business Venturing 21(2): 153–175
Lord RG, Brown DJ, Freiberg SJ (1999) Understanding the dynamics of leadership: The role DEMO
follower self-concepts in the leader/follower relationship. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 78(3): 167–203
Lumpkin GT, Cogliser CC, Schneider DR (2009) Understanding and measuring autonomy:
An entrepreneurial orientation perspective. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 33(1):
47–69
Manghan IL, Overington MA (1983) Dramatism and the theatrical metaphor. In: Morgan G (ed)
Beyond Method: Strategies for Social Research. Sage, Beverly Hills, CA
Markman GD, Baron RA (2003) Person – entrepreneurship ﬁt: Why some people DEMO more suc-
cessful as entrepreneurs than others. Human Resource Management Review 13: 281–301
Martens ML, Jennings JE, Jennings D (2007) Do the stories they tell get them the money they
need? The role of entrepreneurial narratives in resource acquisition. Academy of Management
Journal 50(5): DEMO
Matlay H, Westhead P (2007) Innovation and collaboration in virtual DEMO of e-entrepreneurs:
Case evidence from the European tourism industry. International Journal of Entrepreneurship
and Innovation 8(1): 29–36
McMullen J, Shepherd D (2006) Entrepreneurial action and the role of uncertainty in the theory DEMO
the entrepreneur. The Academy of Management Review 31(1): 132–152
Mednick SA (1968) Remote associates test. Journal of Creative Behavior 2: 213–214
Miller A, Galanter E, Pribram K (1969) Plans and the DEMO of Behavior. Holt, London
Mintzberg H (1973) The Nature of DEMO Work. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ
Mitchell R, Busenitz L, Bird B, Gaglio C, McMullen J, Morse E, et al. (2007) The central question
in entrepreneurial cognition research 2007. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31(1): 1–27
Mumford M, Baughman WA, Supinski EP, Costanza DP, Threlfall KV (1994) Cognitive and
metacognitive skill development: Alternative DEMO for predicting leadership potential (No.
Tech. Rep. No. MRI 93-2). DEMO, MD: Management Research Institute
Mumford M, Baughman WA, Supinski EP, Threlfall KV (1993) Cognitive and metacognitive skill
development: Alternative measures DEMO predicting leadership potential (No. rep. No. SBIR A92-
154, US Army research Institute for Behavioral and Social Sciences). Bethesda, MD: Manage-
DEMO Research Institute
Mumford M, Supinski EP, Baughman WA, Costanza DP, Threlfall KV (1997) Process-based mea-
sures of creative problem-solving skills: V. overall prediction. Creativity Research Journal
10(6): 73–85
356 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
Neale M, Grifﬁn MA (2006) DEMO model of self-held work roles and role transitions. Human Perfor-
mance 19(1): 23–41
Neck CP, Neck HM, Manz CC, Godwin J (1999) "I think I can: I think I can": DEMO self-leadership
perspective toward enhancing entrepreneur thought patterns, self-efﬁcacy, and performance.
Journal of Managerial Psychology 14(6): 477–501
Nicholson N (1984) A DEMO of work role transitions. Administrative Science Quarterly 29:
172–191
Nunnally J, Bernstein I (1994) Psychometric Theory. McGraw Hill, New York
Orser DEMO, Riding A, Manley K (2006) Women entrepreneurs and ﬁnancial capital. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice 30(5): 643–665
Ortqvist D, Drnovsek M, Wincent J (2007) Entrepreneurs coping with challenging role expecta-
tions. Baltic Journal of Management 2(3): 288–304
Parasurman S, Purohit YS, DEMO VM (1996) Work and family variables, entrepreneurial
career success, and psychological well-being. Journal of Vocational Behavior 48:
275–300
Pearce CL, Conger JA (2003) Shared Leadership: Reframing the Hows and Whys of Leadership.
Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA
Pearce CL, Manz CC (2005) The new silver bullets of leadership: The importance of self- and
shared leadership in knowledge work. Organizational Dynamics 34(2): 130–140
Pearce CL, Manz CC, Sims HP (2008) The roles of vertical and shared leadership in the enactment
of executive corruption: Implications for research and practice. Leadership Quarterly 19(3):
353–359
Peter PJ (1979) Reliability: A DEMO of psychometric basics and recent marketing practices. Jour-
nal of Marketing Research 16(000001): 6–7
Rauch A, Frese M, Utsch A (2005) Effects of human capital and long-term human resources devel-
opment and utilization on employment growth of small-scale businesses: A causal analysis1.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 29(6): 681–698
Redoli J, Mompo R, Garcia-Diez J, Lopez-Coronado M (2008) A model for the assessment and
development of DEMO information and communication services in small and medium
enterprises. Technovation 28(7): 424–435
Reynolds PD (2000) National panel study of US business DEMO ups: Background and methodology.
Databases for the Study of Entrepreneurship 4: 153–227
Reynolds PD, White SB (1997) The Entrepreneurial Process: Economic DEMO, Men, Women,
and Minorities. Quorum Books, Westport, CT
Roberts MJ (1998) Heather Evans. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Publishing
DEMO J (2005) Self-employment and the required skills. Management Dynamics 14(4): 18–33
Schindehutte M, Morris M, Allen J (2006) Beyond DEMO: Entrepreneurship as extreme
experience. Small Business Economics 27(4–5): 349–368
DEMO L (2009) Deﬁning entrepreneurial teams and modeling team performance. In: DEMO M,
Kraus S (eds) The Management of Small and Medium Enterprises. London, Routledge
Schjoedt L (forthcoming) Entrepreneurial job characteristics: An DEMO of their effects on
entrepreneurial satisfaction. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
Schjoedt L, Kraus S (forthcoming) Entrepreneurial teams: Deﬁnition and performance factors.
Management DEMO News
Schjoedt L, Shaver KG (2007) Deciding on an entrepreneurial DEMO: A test of the pull and push
hypotheses using the panel DEMO of entrepreneurial dynamics data 1. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice 31(5): 733–752
Shepherd D, Douglas E, Shanley M (2000) New venture DEMO: Ignorance, external shocks, and
risk reduction strategies. Journal of Business DEMO 15: 393–410
Shook C, Priem R, McGee J (2003) DEMO creation and the enterprising individual: A review and
synthesis. Journal of DEMO 29(3): 379–399
Simonton DK (2003) Scientiﬁc creativity as constrained stochastic behavior: The integration of
product, person, and process perspectives. Psychological Bulletin 129(4): 475–494
15 Entrepreneurial Behavior 357
Singh R, Lucas L (2005) Not just domestic engineers: An exploratory study of homemaker
entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 29(1): 79–90
Sonnentag S (1996) Planning and knowledge about DEMO: their relationship to work character-
istics is software design. Behaviour & DEMO Technology 15(4): 213–225
Spain JS, Eaton LG, Funder DC (2001) Perspective on personality: The relative accuracy of
self versus others for the prediction of emotion and behavior. Journal of Personality 68(5):
837–867
Spencer LM, Spencer SM (1993) Competence at Work: DEMO for Superior Performance. John
Wiley & Sons, New York
Stanislavski K (1948) An Actor Prepares. Theatre Arts, New York
Sternberg R (1988) The Triarchic Mind. Viking, New York
Sternberg R (2004) Successful DEMO as a basis for entrepreneurship. Journal of Business
Venturing 19: 189–202
DEMO WH, Roth PL (2007) A meta-analysis of achievement motivation differences DEMO
entrepreneurs and managers. Journal of Small Business Management 45(4): 401–421
Stogdill R, Coons A (1957) Leader Behavior: Its Description and DEMO Ohio State Uni-
versity, Columbus, OH
Talaulicar T, Grundei J, Werder A (2005) Strategic decision making in start-ups: the effect of
top management team organization and processes on speed and comprehensiveness. Journal of
DEMO Venturing 20(4): 519–541
Tharp T (2003) The Creative Habit. Simon & Schuster, New York
Tierney P, Farmer SM, Graen GB (1999) An examination of leadership and employee creativity:
The relevance DEMO traits and relationships. Personnel Psychology 52(3): 591–620
Todd PR, DEMO RG (2007) Internationalization of SMEs in India. International Journal of Emerg-
ing Markets 2(2): 166–180
Torabi MR (1994) Reliability methods DEMO number of items in development of health instruments.
Health values: the DEMO of Health Behavior, Education and Promotion 18(6): 56–59
Tornikoski DEMO, Newbert S (2007) Exploring the determinants of organizational emergence: A legit-
imacy perspective. Journal of Business Venturing 22(2): 311–335
Torrance DEMO (1965) Rewarding Creative Behavior: Experiments in Classroom Activity. Prentice-
hall, Englewood Cliffs, NH
Trefﬁnger DJ (2003) Assessment and measurement in creativity and creative problem solving. In:
Houtz JC (ed) The Educational DEMO of Creativity. Hampton Press, Cresskill, NJ
Trefﬁnger DJ, Renzulli JS, Feldhusen JF (1971) Problems in the assessment of creative thinking.
Journal DEMO Creative Behavior 5: 104–111
Vanaelst I, Clarysse B, Wright M, Lockett A, Moray N, SJegers R (2006) Entrepreneurial team
development DEMO academic spinouts: An examination of team heterogeneity. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice DEMO(2): 249–271
Vecchio RP (2003a) Entrepreneurship and leadership: Common DEMO and common threads.
Human Resource Management 13: 303–327
Vecchio RP (2003b) Entrepreneurship and leadership: common trends and common threads.
Human Resource Management DEMO 13: 303–327
Vesper KH (1980) New Venture Strategies. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ
Ward TB (2004) Cognition, creativity, and entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing 19(2):
173–188
Watson J (2007) Modeling the relationship between networking and ﬁrm performance. Journal of
Business Venturing 22(DEMO): 852–874
Webb EJ, Campbell DT, Sechrest L, Schwartz R (2000) Unobtrusive Measures. Sage, Thousand
Oaks
West GP (2007) Collective DEMO: When entrepreneurial teams, not individuals, make deci-
sions. Entrepreneurship Theory DEMO Practice 31(1): 77–102
West GP, Wilson E (1995) DEMO simulation of strategic decision making in situational stereotype
conditions for entrepreneurial companies. Simulation & Gaming 26(3): 307–327
358 B. Bird, L. Schjoedt
Wiklund J, Shepherd D (2003) DEMO resources, entrepreneurial orientation, and the
performance of small and medium-sized businesses. Strategic Management Journal 24(13):
1307
Wright M, Liu X, Buck T, Filatotchev I (2008) Returnee entrepreneurs, science park location
DEMO and performance: An analysis of high-technology SMEs in China. Entrepreneurship
Theory DEMO Practice 32(1): 131–155
Zhao H, Seibert SE (2006) DEMO big ﬁve personality dimensions and entrepreneurial status: A meta-
analytical review. DEMO of Applied Psychology 9(2): 259–271
Ziegler M, Rosenzweig B, Ziegler P (1992) The Republic of Tea: Letters to a Young Zentrepeneur.
Currency Doubleday, New York{1g42fwefx}