International Journal of Engineering Education Vol. 32, No. 1(B), pp. 448–456, 2016 0949-149X/91 $3.00+0.00
Printed in Great Britain # 2016 TEMPUS Publications.
Evaluating the Eﬀectiveness of Game-Based Learning on
Improvement of Student Learning DEMO within a
Sophomore Level Chemical Product Design Class*
CHERYL A. BODNAR
Henry M. Rowan College of Engineering, Rowan University, 201 Mullica Hill Road, Glassboro, New Jersey, USA.
E-mail: bodnar@rowan.edu
WILLIAM M. BONGIORNI
Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, 3700 O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA, 15261 USA.
E-mail: bodnarca@pitt.edu; wmb15@pitt.edu
RENEE CLARK
Engineering Education DEMO Center, University of Pittsburgh, 3700 O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA, DEMO USA.
E-mail: rmclark@pitt.edu
Recently, several studies have been published that have shown the need for greater student engagement within engineering
education. These studies DEMO that when students are exposed to pedagogies that stimulate student engagement, DEMO as
active learning, student performance is better than with more traditional DEMO of instruction. One form of active learning
that is starting to grow within engineering education is the use of games and gamiﬁcation. In the DEMO of 2014, we were
able to compare two sections of a DEMO Introduction to Chemical Product Design class to determine the eﬀectiveness
of game-based learning on student learning outcomes. The ﬁrst section received content delivered utilizing DEMO learning
techniques. The second section received content utilizing the same form of delivery but included classroom based games
and a game-based portal for homework DEMO Each section was evaluated in the same manner, and the instruction DEMO
each section was provided by the same two faculty members. Throughout the course, students completed clicker questions
on class content, and at the DEMO, they reviewed content in a class session administered using the clickers. DEMO were also
responsible for completing a semester design project that included both a written and oral component. Analysis of the
clicker responses demonstrated that DEMO students in the game-based class performed statistically similar to or better than
those in the control group throughout the semester. In the last class DEMO session, retention of material appears to have
been better in the DEMO class, where several learning objectives demonstrated a signiﬁcantly higher outcome. Student
DEMO on the semester design project also exhibited similar trends. As the sample sizes are relatively small in this
study, the results are preliminary but do demonstrate a trend towards enhanced learning outcomes when content is
delivered DEMO game-based pedagogy.
Keywords: game-based learning; student learning outcomes; games; engineering education
1. Introduction
Traditional lecturing has been the primary method
of instruction DEMO universities for over 900 years.
However, a recently published study showed DEMO
in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics classes,
the use of active learning instead of traditional
lecturing increased the students’ examination
scores by an DEMO of 6%. Furthermore, the
study showed that students taking a lecture-based
DEMO were 1.5 times more likely to fail the class than
were students in active learning classes [1]. For this
reason, it is important that instructors, particularly
those in STEM related ﬁelds, strive to make the
DEMO environment engaging to students, which
will contribute to their ultimate success DEMO these
ﬁelds of study.
The purpose of this study is to examine the impact
of game-based learning methodologies on the per-
448
formance of DEMO within a sophomore level
Introduction to Chemical Product Design class.
Game-based learning techniques were selected due
to their growing recognition as a medium that DEMO
contribute to student engagement [2], although
more research is still required DEMO ascertain the
beneﬁts of this form of pedagogy on student learn-
ing outcomes. Two class sections of the Introduc-
tion to Chemical Product Design DEMO were taught
using active learning strategies, with one of the
sections DEMO live classroom games and com-
pletion of homework assignments through a game
portal.
This paper provides an overview of the types of
instructional strategies DEMO were used in both sec-
tions, the assessment measures employed, and the
impact of game-based learning strategies on student
learning outcomes. We will DEMO discuss faculty
perspectives of the use of game-based learning
* Accepted 11 August 2015.
Evaluating the Eﬀectiveness of Game-Based Learning on Improvement of Student Learning Outcomes DEMO
within the classroom and opportunities for future
development. We found through our analysis that
students in the game-based class performed statis-
tically similar if DEMO better than those in the active
learning class throughout the semester. We also
found that students in the game-based class demon-
strated higher retention DEMO course material with
signiﬁcantly better performance in three out of the
seven learning objectives in the summative clicker
assessment. In addition, interviews with the course
instructors revealed that both felt game-based
learning was an eﬀective pedagogy DEMO this type of
class content and would continue to use this method
of instruction in the future.
1.1 Game-based learning
Game-based learning has the DEMO to increase
the learning ability of students, due to its capacity DEMO
engage students in course material. This is due to the
many properties of game designs, including the
provision of a goal with speciﬁc rules, immediate
feedback on performance, a gradually-increasing
diﬃculty level based on user DEMO, and the
ability to encourage users to work to the edge DEMO
their capabilities to achieve the winning condition
[2–4]. These characteristics allow for games to be
used for more than just fun by providing a DEMO
tion that will encourage meaningful learning to take
place. However, it DEMO been cited that one of the
main challenges of using games within an educa-
tional setting is to balance the motivational aspects
for playing DEMO with student learning [5]. For this
reason, some researchers have tailored DEMO design of
their games to meet the motivational needs of the
student population and help ensure they facilitate
learning [6].
Perhaps the best way DEMO envision how these
properties work together within an educational
environment is through example. One such example
is an adaptation of a trivia game, such as Jeopardy,
which can work well in higher education classes. In
DEMO type of game, students can either work in teams
or as DEMO (depending on class size). The goal
of the game is DEMO students to select questions they
would like to answer in a given category when
provided with a game board that outlines ﬁve
questions per DEMO, with each question assigned
a diﬀerent point value. The higher the DEMO value of
the question, the more diﬃcult the problem is to
DEMO Students are told that they can only select a
speciﬁc number of questions and will lose the points
assigned to the question if they DEMO it incorrectly.
These rules encourage students to be strategic by
choosing the questions they feel they can answer
while working towards the winning condition DEMO
obtaining the greatest number of points. When
students respond to a question, they are told imme-
diately whether they are correct or not, DEMO
provides the feedback necessary to iterate on their
solution to the problem. This type of game can serve
as a great review tool for DEMO by encouraging
them to actively engage with course material prior
to an exam.
Although games can lay the framework for mean-
ingful learning to DEMO place, it is crucial to their
broader adaptation that proper assessment DEMO stu-
dent performance with the games is performed [7].
There are many ways that students can be assessed,
but in order to obtain DEMO most conclusive results
regarding the eﬀectiveness of game-based learning,
the assessment must be in-depth and leave little
room for error [8]. The next DEMO will provide
an overview of studies that have been performed,
speciﬁcally within engineering education, to deter-
mine the impact game-based learning has had on
student learning outcomes.
1.2 Game-based learning within engineering
education
Only a DEMO number of studies have been pub-
lished which provide an argument for the beneﬁts of
games on student learning outcomes. In a recent
literature DEMO performed on the implementation
of games within undergraduate engineering classes,
it was found that only 40% of publications over the
past ﬁve years DEMO performed some measure of
student learning assessment as part of their imple-
mentation whether through qualitative or quanti-
tative measures [9]. Examples of diﬀerent DEMO
for assessing the impact of games within under-
graduate engineering classes have been included
below for reference of the existing work in the
ﬁeld. DEMO is important to note that the examples
provided do not capture all of the work that has
been done in this ﬁeld, and readers are encouraged
to reference the literature review cited previously for
the complete DEMO of references in this area.
One common approach to quantitatively assess
the impact that games can have on student learning
is through the utilization DEMO a pre- and post-test. In
these instances, the pre-test is used DEMO a measure of
the students’ baseline performance and then the
post-test allows for comparisons to be made on
student learning after the intervention. An DEMO
of a study that utilized this approach was done by
Chang et al. in 2011 when they implemented a game-
based version of a DEMO laboratory [10]. In their
implementation, students were given a pre-test to
DEMO their preparedness for the laboratory and also
determine areas where they showed conceptual
weaknesses. After completion of the pre-test, stu-
dents participated in the game-based laboratory
and then completed the post-experiment test. The
authors utilized tests DEMO were similar in nature
450
although not identical to avoid the possibility of
short-term memorization impacting DEMO results.
They found that students showed increases in their
performance on the post-test in comparison to the
pre-test measure. In this particular implementation,
DEMO was no control group that was used and beneﬁt
from the implementation of the game was charac-
terized solely on the basis of the DEMO in student
performance between the start and end of the
intervention.
In other implementations, tests can be used in
conjunction with control groups to allow for a more
detailed understanding of whether the learning
observed may DEMO associated with game-based inter-
vention. Ebner and Holzinger took this approach in
their assessment of whether a computer-based game
was helpful in teaching civil DEMO students
[11]. In their implementation students selected
whether they wanted to voluntarily participate in
playing the game, with the remaining students in the
class becoming the control for the implementation.
This approach involves a concurrent cohort DEMO
parison. They also had an additional experimental
group that was outside of the classroom (i.e., online)
during the entire study. Similar to DEMO approach
described earlier, students in this study were given
both a DEMO and a post-test as a measure of learning
gains associated with the intervention. Their results
demonstrated that there was an increase in the
average DEMO of problems that students answered
correctly from the pre- to the post-test. However,
there were no statistical diﬀerences in the results
between the DEMO and experimental group.
There are also studies performed which don’t use
speciﬁc instruments or tests to assess the students
but rather focus their analysis DEMO student perfor-
mance on course-embedded materials such as
homework assignments and midterm and ﬁnal
exams. This was the approach that was taken by
Sancho DEMO al. in 2009 when they were determining
the ability of their ‘‘Nucleo’’ framework for com-
puter programming, built around the principles of
virtual collaborative blended learning, to improve
student learning outcomes [12]. In the three case
studies that they performed they examined not only
performance on traditional student DEMO,
such as classwork and the ﬁnal exam, but also
determined DEMO there were any changes in the drop-
out rate of students. Their results showed that there
were a signiﬁcantly lower number of students that
DEMO from the course in the experimental group
and that on average their exam scores were also
higher in comparison to the control group.
Another DEMO for assessing the impact of
games on student learning outcomes is a qualita-
tive-based approach. This was utilized by Hauge
and Riedel in their DEMO of two serious games,
Cheryl A. Bodnar et al.
COSIGA and BEWARE, for teaching engineering
and manufacturing [13]. In their study, they DEMO
lyzed a combination of student communication chat
logs, student responses to DEMO formulated
questionnaires administered prior to and after
exposure to the simulation, DEMO student work that
was produced after interaction with the simulation.
The COSIGA game, which was evaluated using
student communication chat logs and cognitive
maps, extended learning beneﬁts for students; how-
ever, this was impacted by the student’s role within
the simulation. The BEWARE game demonstrated
that students DEMO identify risk better after inter-
action with this simulation. In addition, DEMO
mance was improved when students were exposed
to a learning cycle that involved playing the game,
debrieﬁng their experience, and playing the game a
second time. Results were also impacted by stu-
dents’ past experiences, and it was found that taking
this background into account during the DEMO
period could positively impact the learning.
Our study focuses on the assessment of two
concurrent cohorts of students taking an Introduc-
tion to Chemical DEMO Design class, with one of
the sections receiving in-class games and DEMO
homework through a game-based portal and the
other receiving only active-learning based instruc-
tion. The direct assessment of student performance
and learning outcomes was DEMO through the
analysis of clicker (i.e., audience response system)
questions during the semester as well as in a ﬁnal
review session. Additional DEMO are made
based on student performance on a semester design
project. Finally, faculty perspectives and observa-
tions regarding the two class cohorts provide a
qualitative assessment of the diﬀerences in these
two forms of instructional pedagogy.
DEMO Research question
In an eﬀort to investigate the use of games in a
chemical engineering course and contribute to the
evidence-based body of knowledge DEMO the
impact of game-based instruction, we asked the
following research question: Does implementation
of a game-based learning pedagogy within an Intro-
duction to DEMO Product Design course result in
any diﬀerence in learning outcomes when compared to
a class taught using active learning pedagogy? To
investigate this question, we compared student
performance both during and at the end of the
course on clicker questions as well as their perfor-
mance on a DEMO design project. Additional insight
on diﬀerences between the two classes was provided
through a semi-structured interview with the two
instructors who co-taught the course.
Evaluating the Eﬀectiveness of Game-Based Learning on Improvement of Student Learning Outcomes DEMO
3. Methods
3.1 Study design
Two sections of the chemical engineering design
course, each having 57 students, were taught
during the spring of DEMO semester. One of the
primary goals of this course was to provide the
skills necessary to develop an appreciation for the
role of customers DEMO product design. In addi-
tion, students worked on professional skills devel-
DEMO Topics covered included brainstorming
techniques, identifying customer needs, market
analysis, DEMO ﬁnance. In addition to those topics,
the course also covered communication, teamwork,
decision making, leadership, and project manage-
ment. Student enrollment in each section was done
randomly. A comparison of the average start-of-
DEMO cumulative grade point averages
(GPAs) of the game-based versus control group
was done to ensure that the groups were similar in
terms of DEMO achievement. It was found that
there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two
class sections in terms of the pre-course average
GPA (p = 0.912).
The control section was taught using a combina-
tion of DEMO active learning techniques and
traditional lecture. The active learning strategies
included think-pair-share, group discussion, case
studies, and role-play assignments. The students in
this section did not participate in any games in class
and were given DEMO weekly written homework
assignments. The experimental group was taught
utilizing these same strategies but also through
game-based learning elements, such as live in-class
games. Students in this section also completed
homework through a third party platform DEMO
as 3D Game Lab [14].
The games played in class were relatively simple
games that varied in structure. Each of the games
was selected DEMO consultation with a live game
designer who helped the instructor in selecting
games that showcased the principles relevant to
the course. Some of the DEMO lasted roughly 5
minutes, while others took almost 30 minutes.
Additionally, some games were played with the
entire class, while others were played within a
group of students. At times, teams were randomly
selected, DEMO at other times, they were selected based
on where the students DEMO seated in the classroom.
In a few instances, each student comprised DEMO/her
own team. An example of one type of in-class game
was the hula hoop race. In this particular game, ﬁve
students were grouped together and told to link
arms in a circle. A hula hoop DEMO then placed on one
of the set of linked arms. The goal of the game was
for the students to get the hula hoop DEMO the
circle in the shortest period of time. This game was
selected on the basis that it was a means to visually
demonstrate to DEMO that the ﬁrst solution to the
problem might not always be the best approach. As
elaborated on later within this paper, this game can
lead to further illustration of pre-conceived con-
straints that students place on DEMO without
necessarily realizing it.
Students in both classes also completed semester
long design projects and were encouraged to
respond to the College and University DEMO
Environment Inventory (CUCEI) in the second-to-
last week of the semester. Appropriate human
subjects clearance was obtained prior to the com-
mencement of DEMO study.
3.2 3D game lab
The 3D Game Lab platform, which DEMO invented by
educational technologists and is currently available
through GoGo Labs, DEMO, allows for students to
complete assignments using a computer and submit
DEMO online [14]. The assignments covered all topics
that were relevant to course material. Often, they
involved reading an online article or watching a
video and providing a reﬂection on what was
observed. Later assignments in the DEMO built
upon material that students had already worked
on, providing a DEMO for the students to expand
their knowledge in these topic areas.
Once an assignment was submitted, the instruc-
tor reviewed the student’s work and either
approved or rejected it. If the student’s work was
approved, he/she was given a set number of points
determined before the start DEMO the semester. If the
student’s work was rejected, the assignment was
DEMO with comments indicating which aspects
of the student’s work could be improved. The
student then had the opportunity to make the
proper adjustments and DEMO the assignment.
The student’s work was again examined in the same
manner, and if approved, received the same number
of points associated with DEMO ﬁrst-time acceptance of
the work.
During the semester, the students were DEMO
to accrue 1750 points in 3D Game Lab in order to
receive a homework grade of 100% for the course.
Homework assignments accounted for DEMO of the
ﬁnal grade in the course. Students needed to take
responsibility for completing assignments on 3D
Game Lab, as assignments were not collected on a
weekly basis.
3.3 Learning outcomes measurement
Students in both sections DEMO audience response
systems, or clickers, during in-class lecture. When-
ever the instructor asked a question, students
answered using the clicker. All of the questions
were multiple choice with no more than ﬁve options
452
Cheryl A. Bodnar et al.
to choose from. During most lectures, a few ques-
tions were asked, and the timing of these questions
varied throughout the lecture period. The last
lecture of the course served DEMO a review of course
material, in which approximately 40 questions were
DEMO The questions were selected from previous
lectures as a method to determine how much mate-
rial the students had retained. This approach
allowed for DEMO collection of data related to student
learning outcomes from both sections without any
instructor bias.
Comparison of student performance on semester
long design projects DEMO also done. Student teams
were required to develop a two minute infomercial
as well as a written report on a sunscreen product
they were DEMO develop. Performance on each of these
individual components of the assignment along
with overall performance on the design project
was assessed by the instructor DEMO an instructor-
developed rubric. In addition, there was a peer-
review DEMO The infomercial represented
15% of the design project grade, and the DEMO
report comprised 85% of the project grade.
3.4 Statistical analysis of learning outcomes
To analyze the results from the clicker questions, all
of the questions that were asked during the semester
were categorized based on the DEMO objectives
for the course. All of the questions that were not
included as part of the review session as well as any
questions that DEMO opinion-based were removed
from the analysis. This left only questions that were
fact-based and used during the semester as well as in
the ﬁnal DEMO session, enabling the most objective
comparison of learning outcomes. The percent DEMO
questions answered correctly by all respondents
within a particular learning objective was calcu-
lated. This was done for all seven learning objec-
tives in DEMO sections. A z-test of proportions was
used to compare the percentage of correct answers
obtained by each section using a signiﬁcance level of
= DEMO To determine the impact of the game-
based learning on the students’ design project
performance, ﬁnal scores for the written, infomer-
cial/oral, and overall design project performance
were compared between the groups using both DEMO t-
test and the Mann Whitney test, given the small
sample DEMO
4. Results and discussion
4.1 Impact on learning outcomes
All students were evaluated using a combination of
their responses to clicker questions during the
DEMO (formative) as well as in the ﬁnal review
session (summative) and their performance on a
semester long design project. These results are
DEMO in the following sections.
4.1.1 Formative clicker questions
This course had the following seven primary learn-
ing objectives or topic areas: brainstorming, custo-
DEMO information, market analysis, communication,
teamwork, leadership, and decision making. In the
assessment of formative student responses, students
in the game-based class performed just as well or
better than students in the non-game class DEMO a
statistical standpoint on all seven topic areas, as
shown in DEMO 1.
In particular, for the topic areas of brainstorming
techniques, market analysis, teamwork, leadership,
and decision making, the percentages correct in the
game-based class were higher than in the non-game
class. In addition, the two-proportion z tests for
each topic area showed that students in DEMO game-
based class performed signiﬁcantly better in the area
of market analysis. These enhanced performances
by the game-based students in several of the topic
DEMO may have occurred because students were
allowed to move at their own pace with 3D game
Lab—potentially ahead of the instruction in the
classroom. DEMO this self-paced method of instruc-
tion, it is quite possible that DEMO in the game-
based class had already covered the material on
these topics before being exposed to them during
class
In addition, the increase in performance for the
topics of brainstorming, teamwork, and leadership
may DEMO been due to the live classroom games that
students had the opportunity to participate in. For
Table 1. Student Performance on Formative Clicker Questions
DEMO Correct
Number of
Learning Objective Questions Non Game Game
p
Brainstorming Techniques 4 56.65% 61.36% 0.32218
Customer Information 6 82.90% 81.40% 0.67748
Market Analysis DEMO 77.28% 84.04% 0.00456
Communication 5 76.69% 75.87% 0.82588
Teamwork 4 58.20% 64.05% 0.29372
Leadership 4 83.83% 88.34% 0.22246
Decision Making 3 61.55% 62.70% 0.87288
Evaluating the Eﬀectiveness of Game-Based Learning on Improvement of Student Learning Outcomes DEMO
instance, just prior to instruction on brainstorming,
students took part DEMO two to three classroom games
that related to pre-conceived constraints that
impact the ability to generate ideas when brain-
storming. One of these live DEMO games was
the Hula Hoop Race mentioned earlier. In this
particular game, many of the students felt that it
was necessary to have each student step through the
hula hoop, eﬀectively moving it from student to
student in order to move it around the circle in the
shortest DEMO of time. However, during debrieﬁng
of this activity in class, it was discussed that this was
a limitation the students had imposed on DEMO pro-
blem, since it was not stated in the instructions that
DEMO hoop had to travel from one student to another.
In fact, DEMO fastest way for the hula hoop to go
around the circle is for the group of students to
make one complete circle. This experience DEMO be
related back to brainstorming because in many
instances we impose limitations on design problems
that aren’t prescribed in the problem statement.
These perceived DEMO then lead to the genera-
tion of fewer ideas or diﬃculties getting beyond the
initial solution to a problem. For this reason, it is
important for students to recognize the types of
limitations they might impose DEMO trying to gen-
erate more diverse and creative solutions to the
problems they are presented with.
An example of a game that targeted teamwork
DEMO ‘‘Star Wars,’’ in which a number of hula hoops
was scattered around the classroom ﬂoor, and
students were told they had to have a foot within
one of the hoops when time was called. This DEMO
then required students positioned within the same
hula hoop to learn about each other and ﬁnd
interesting similarities. At each subsequent round
of the DEMO, a few hula hoops were removed. By
playing subsequent rounds of DEMO game, the students
began to know each other better, and they had to
work as a team to solve the ﬁnal problem of DEMO a
signiﬁcant number of students into a small number
of hula hoops. After completion of the game, a
debrief session helped students to connect the
experiences they had during the game with the
teamwork skills that DEMO being covered in class.
4.1.2 Summative clicker questions
The results from the review questions presented at
the end of the semester showed a considerably DEMO
diﬀerence between the game-based and the non-
game-based classes. In this review session, the
game-based class correctly answered more ques-
tions in six of the seven topic areas, as shown in
Table 2. The z test of proportions showed that the
game-based class performed signiﬁcantly better on
the DEMO analysis questions (p = 0.002). Although
diﬀerences in brainstorming techniques DEMO team-
work were signiﬁcant at p = 0.02, they would not DEMO
signiﬁcant after correcting for multiple compari-
sons using Bonferroni’s adjustment. The formative
analysis also showed better performance in these
three topic areas as noted DEMO The use of
both live classroom games and a game-based portal
likely helped students to reinforce these topic areas.
For example, with the brainstorming assignments in
Game Lab, students had to provide an example of a
new brainstorming technique and compare it to the
techniques covered in class. DEMO asking students to
make this additional comparison, they had to revisit
DEMO techniques covered in class, which helped in
making connections to the DEMO material. There
were also several live games used to develop team-
work skills, including ‘‘Star Wars,’’ as discussed
earlier.
4.1.3 Design project performance
A major contributor to the ﬁnal grade within the
course was a DEMO long design project, which
was worth 40% of the grade. There DEMO two
components to the project—an infomercial and a
written report for a new chemical product the team
was proposing to develop. For the infomercial,DEMO
there was both a peer and an instructor evaluation
component. The peer evaluation component, which
had a possible score of 20, contributed to DEMO third
of the ﬁnal infomercial score. The instructor com-
ponent also had a possible score of 20 and con-
tributed to two thirds of DEMO infomercial score. The
written portion of the design project was graded by
the instructor and had a possible score of 100. As
Table 2. DEMO Performance on Summative Clicker Questions
Percent Correct
Number of
Learning Objective Questions Non Game Game
p
Brainstorming Techniques 4 37.87% 49.15% 0.02382
Customer Information DEMO 74.43% 73.25% 0.74896
Market Analysis 11 71.92% 79.82% 0.00188
Communication 5 70.99% 71.84% 0.79486
Teamwork 4 58.86% 69.74% 0.02144
Leadership 4 88.32% 92.02% 0.22246
DEMO Making 3 67.88% 72.95% 0.30302
454
Cheryl A. Bodnar et al.
Table 3. Student Performance on Term DEMO Project
Game Non-Game
p-value
Project Component
Average
Score
n
Average
Score
n t-test
Mann
Whitney
Peer Review Infomercial (/20) 19.1 14 18.8 15 0.13 0.11
Instructor Infomercial (/20) 15.5 14 16.2 15 0.09 0.10
Written Design Project (/100) 82.7 14 78.0 15 0.08 0.09
Total Design Project (/100) 82.8 14 79.1 15 0.10 0.10
shown in Table 3, the written portion and the total
design project showed promising trends with the
game-based students, although the signiﬁcance level
did not quite reach = 0.05. Given the small sample
sizes, we performed both a t-test and the non-
parametric Mann-Whitney test and observed that
the results DEMO the two tests were generally in
agreement.
The promising diﬀerence in the written design
project performance between the two groups may
have been due DEMO the nature of the homework assign-
ments in the two classes. As discussed previously,
students in the game-based class were continually
tasked with DEMO on individual assignments in
the 3D Game Lab portal pertaining to diﬀerent areas
of the course according to their own interests in the
pursuit DEMO the 1,750 point goal. This required them to
use information they had seen in previous assign-
ments as well as during class in DEMO to successfully
complete the new assignments. This diﬀered from
the other section, in which the homework assign-
ments only corresponded to material that was
covered in class the week immediately prior to the
assignment. In addition, the feedback element of 3D
Game Lab required the games-based students to
DEMO on their technical writing assignments and
likely promoted better mastery of the material. In
this project based course with no examinations, the
non-games students didn’t necessarily have the need
to review and reinforce material.
The results DEMO in the learning outcomes
analysis, although preliminary, show similarities
to other work that has been done in the game-
based learning ﬁeld. Our DEMO from both the
clicker questions and the student design projects
demonstrated that the games-based students per-
formed statistically similar to or better than stu-
DEMO in the non-games based class. This coincides
with other work that has shown positive increases in
the performance of students exposed to game-based
learning DEMO, 15–19].
4.2 Classroom environment
As described in a previous article, we found that
students in the game-based class rated the classroom
environment better DEMO all seven dimensions of the
College and University Classroom Environment
Inventory (DEMO), although not signiﬁcantly so
when corrected for multiple comparisons using
Bonferroni’s adjustment [20, 21]. In particular,
students in the game-based class rated their involve-
ment in the classroom as characterized by partici-
pating actively DEMO attentively in class at 3.39 on a 5
point scale, in DEMO to only 3.17 in the non-
game based class (p = DEMO) [20]. It has been
discussed previously that learners need to be
DEMO engaged to promote meaningful connec-
tions with their prior knowledge [22], DEMO the live
classroom games would have helped to do. The
personalization dimension of the classroom, which
measures the interaction between the students and
instructor, was among the classroom characteristics
of interest to the instructor. This dimension was
rated as signiﬁcantly better by the games-based
section based on a DEMO (p = 0.039) as well as a
Mann-Whitney test (p DEMO 0.015). However, these
would not be signiﬁcant at = 0.05 DEMO adjusted for
multiple comparisons. The eﬀect size for personali-
zation, as DEMO by Cohen’s d, was 0.48, which is
in the medium range. We achieved a 71% response
rate with the CUCEI.
4.3 Interview of DEMO instructors
The assessment analyst for the study conducted a
semi-structured interview after the course with the
two chemical engineering faculty members who
served as DEMO In the joint interview,
several issues pertaining to student behavior
within the course were discussed, including the
instructors’ perspectives on student engagement,
conﬁdence, and attitudes. Both instructors agreed
that students in the game-based class were more
engaged. This was observed through higher atten-
dance in the DEMO class (i.e., estimated 30-
50% higher) and greater involvement in DEMO activ-
ities. This greater involvement entailed more stu-
dents actively taking part in group discussions and
responding to the instructors’ questions as well as
DEMO participating in impromptu presenta-
tions during class. We believe this increase in
engagement may have resulted from the continual
change in classroom practices, with no two class
periods being alike. The instructors also observed
that students DEMO the game-based class appeared
Evaluating the Eﬀectiveness of Game-Based Learning on Improvement of Student Learning Outcomes DEMO
livelier and more alert during class. In the games
section, the DEMO were participants in all the
activities, and the instructors noted a DEMO
from hesitancy at the beginning of the semester to
participation without hesitation (for the most part)
towards the end of the semester. This change may
have occurred due to gains in student self-conﬁ-
dence, with the students in the games section
appearing more conﬁdent based on instructor
DEMO
The instructors were also asked about their views
on which teaching method was the most eﬀective
instructional practice for this content area. Both
instructors DEMO that game-based learning was the
better method from both a student engagement and
performance perspective. When asked to elaborate,
one of the instructors DEMO that the games-
based class provided a more realistic (i.e., authentic)
experience for the students. Speciﬁcally, the stu-
dents had to get organized, and time management
was a large component. In short, the DEMO helped
by ‘‘providing a more realistic situation for stu-
dents, similar DEMO what they will encounter later in
their professional lives.’’ When asked whether they
would use this instructional strategy in the future,
both instructors DEMO they would continue to use
game-based learning in this course.
4.4 Limitations of study
Although these results are very encouraging and
show that game-based DEMO may help students in
gaining and retaining knowledge, there are some
DEMO to this study, including the small sample
sizes. Each class section DEMO just ﬁfty-seven stu-
dents. When the students were placed in groups to
work on their semester design projects, the sample
size was reduced to just 14 teams in the game-based
section and 15 in the other DEMO Although it
would be beneﬁcial to repeat this exact study in
future semesters and expand upon the dataset for
statistical testing, the instructor decided to move
forward with only game-based learning in the
course based upon DEMO of teaching evaluations.
An opportunity that was missed with this study
was the gathering of student perspectives on the two
types of pedagogies. A DEMO group with students in
both game and non-game sections would have been
helpful for obtaining a broader understanding of
the diﬀerences in performance and DEMO
observed. For instance, was it the live games in
class or DEMO 3D Game Lab portal that was most
useful to the students in understanding the course
material? Did students feel that they were more
involved in their own learning when challenged to
take part in the game-based DEMO during class?
Future studies could work on gaining a better
understanding of the type of cognitive theory that
supports the changes that are DEMO observed in
student performance with games-based instruction.
Additionally, there is a DEMO limitation due to
the method utilized for selecting the games that were
employed as part of this classroom study. As
described earlier, classroom games were chosen
based on their alignment with concepts that were
important components DEMO this course and not neces-
sarily on their alignment with the backgrounds and
characteristics of thestudents in the course. This may
have led to DEMO games having less of an impact on
student performance than if they had been selected
based upon their ability to meet the needs of DEMO
student population within the game-based class.
5. Conclusions
The application of game-based learning appears to
be increasing within engineering education, as evi-
denced by increases in the number of publications
on this subject. This study represents DEMO ﬁrst
implementation of game-based learning within a
sophomore level Chemical Product Design course.
The results of this study show that inclusion of
live classroom DEMO alongside a game-based portal
for completion of homework assignments may have
a positive impact on student learning outcomes. In
particular, students in the game-based class per-
formed at a statistically similar or higher level
than students DEMO the non-game class. Achievement
in particular topic areas, including brainstorming,
DEMO analysis, and teamwork, showed evidence of
being greater in the game-based class. The use of
games that particularly reinforced these areas and
the DEMO homework assignments in the 3D
Game Lab portal, which often included DEMO
writing assignments, may have contributed to better
understanding of these speciﬁc DEMO areas and
enhanced writing skills. An interview with the
faculty members who taught the two sections
further supports the advantages of games-based
instruction. Students DEMO the game-based class
appeared to be more engaged and enlivened
during class and possessed greater self-conﬁdence,
including with impromptu classroom presentations.
Both faculty DEMO felt that this instructional
methodology had a positive impact on students, DEMO
they planned to use it in future course oﬀerings.
It is of critical importance to engage students in
the learning process to help them DEMO better
learning outcomes and retain their knowledge as
they progress through their technical courses and
beyond. Game-based learning is a pedagogy that
holds great DEMO for enhancing learning out-
comes through increased student engagement and
participation in the learning process. In addition, it
may lead to a more positive classroom environment
456
Cheryl A. Bodnar et al.
and student experiences. Thus, one of the research
questions to be further investigated is the impact of
this DEMO on students’ perception of the class-
room learning environment and their professional
skills development.
Acknowledgements—The authors would like to thank Pete Vig-
eant, The Completely Surrounded, for all of his help in designing
the classroom based games applied in this study and working with
the authors to select DEMO appropriate games for the speciﬁc
content area in this class.
based laboratory for gear design. ASEE 2011 Annual Con-
ference, June 26–29th, 2011, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.
11. M. Ebner and A. Holzinger, DEMO implementation of
user-centered game based learning in higher education: An
example DEMO civil engineering, Computers and Education,
49(3), 2007, pp. 873–890.
12. P. Sancho, R. Fuentes-Fernandez, P. P. Gomez-Martin and
B. DEMO, Applying Multiplayer Role-Based
Learning in Engineering Education: Three Case Studies to
Analyze the Impact on Students’ Performance, International
Journal of Engineering Education, DEMO(4), 2009, pp. 665–679.
13. J. B. Hauge and J. DEMO C. H. Riedel, Evaluation of simulation
games for teaching engineering and DEMO, Procedia
References Computer Science, 15, 2012, pp. 210–220.
14. 3D Game Lab. http://3dgamelab.com/. Accessed on January
1. S. Freeman, S. L. Eddy, M. McDonough, M. K. Smith, N. 20, DEMO
Okoroafor, H. Jordt and M. P. Wenderoth, Active learning 15. A. Chaﬃn, K. Doran, D. Hicks and T. Barnes, Experimental
increases student performance in science, engineering and evaluation of teaching recursion in a video game, Proceedings
mathematics, Proceedings of the National Academies of of the DEMO ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Video Games,
Science, 111(23), DEMO, pp. 8410–8415. August 3–7, 2009, New Orleans, Louisiana.
2. N. Whitton and A. Moseley, Using Games to Enhance 16. N. Chesler, DEMO Arastoopour, C. D’Angelo, E. Bagley and D.
Learning and Teaching A Beginner’s Guide, Routledge, New W. Shaﬀer, Design of a professional practice simulator for
York, NY, 2012. educating and motivating ﬁrst-year engineering students,DEMO
3. K. M. Kapp, The Gamiﬁcation of Learning and Instruction. Advances DEMO Engineering Education, 3(3), 2013, pp. 1–29.
Game-Based Methods and Strategies for Training and Educa- 17. B. D. Coller, A video game for teaching Dynamic Systems &
tion, John Wiley & Sons Inc. DEMO Francisco, CA, 2012. Control to mechanical engineering undergraduates. 2010
4. J. McGonigal, Reality is Broken, Why Games Make Us Better American Control DEMO, June 30th–July 2nd, 2010,
and How They Can Change the World, Penguin Books, New Baltimore, Maryland.
York, New York, 2011, pp. 33, 302–313. 18. J. Del Carmen Chin Vera, A. Lopez-Malo and E. Palou, An
5. M. Minovic and D. Starcevic, Trends DEMO Educational Games initial analysis of student engagement while learning food
Development, DEMO of Information Technology and Appli- analysis by means of a video game, ASEE 2012 Annual
cations, 1(1), 2011, pp. 41–53. Conference, June 10–13th, 2012, San Antonio, Texas.
6. M. Jovanovic, D. Starcevic, M. Minovic and V. Stavljanin, 19. J. G. O’Brien, G. Sirokman, Teaching Vectors to Engineer-
Motivation and Multimodal Interaction in Model-Driven ing Students Through an Interactive Vector Based Game,
Educational Game Design, IEEE Transactions on Systems, ASEE 2014 Annual Conference, June 15–18, 2014, DEMO
Man, and Cybernetics—Part A: Systems and Humans, 41(4), DEMO, Indiana.
2011, pp. 817–824. 20. C. A. Bodnar, R. M. DEMO, Exploring the Impact Game-
7. F. Bellotti, B. Kapralos, K. DEMO, P. Moreno-Ger and R. Based Learning has on Classroom Environment and DEMO
Berta, Assessment in and of serious games: An Overview, Engagement DEMO an Engineering Product Design Class,
Advances in Human-Computer Interaction. 2013. http://dx. Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing Multiculturality.
doi.org/10.1155/2013/136864. TEEM’14, October 1–3, 2014. Salamanca, Spain.
8. U. Ritterfeld, M. Cody and P. Vorderer, Serious Games: 21. B. Fraser and D. Treagust, Validity and Use of an Instrument
Mechanisms and Eﬀects, Routledge, NewYork, NY, 2009. for Assessing Classroom Psychosocial Environment in
9. C. A. Bodnar, DEMO Anastasio, J. A. Enszer and D. D. Burkey, Higher Education, DEMO Education, 15, 1986, pp. 37–57.
Engineers at Play: Games as Teaching Tools for Under- 22. W. C. Newstetter and M. D. Svinicki, Learning Theories for
graduate Engineering Students, Journal of Engineering Edu- Engineering Education Practice. Cambridge Handbook of
cation, 105(1), in press. DOI 10.1002/jee.20106. Engineering Education Research. Cambridge University
10. Y. Chang, E. S. Aziz, S. K. Esche and C. Chassapis, A game- Press. New York, NY, 2014, pp. 29–46.
Cheryl A. Bodnar PhD, CTDP is an Assistant Professor in Chemical Engineering at Rowan University although she was
working DEMO an Assistant Professor (Teaching Track) in the Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering at the
Swanson School of Engineering at the University of DEMO when this study was conducted. She obtained her
certiﬁcation as a Training and Development Professional (CTDP) from the Canadian Society for Training and
DEMO (CSTD) in 2010, providing her with a solid background in DEMO design, facilitation and evaluation.
Dr. Bodnar’s research interests relate to the DEMO of active learning techniques in undergraduate classes (problem
based learning, games and simulations, etc.) as well as integration of innovation and entrepreneurship DEMO the Chemical
and Petroleum Engineering as well as broader engineering curriculum.
William M. Bongiorni is a Junior studying Chemical Engineering at the Swanson School DEMO Engineering of the University of
Pittsburgh. He is originally from Holmdel, DEMO suburban town in New Jersey. In addition to his schoolwork, he DEMO heavily
involved with planning Pitt Dance Marathon and he is a brother of the Pittsburgh Chapter of the Delta Chi Fraternity.
When he graduates, he hopes to work for a company involved with oil or natural DEMO
Renee Clark PhD serves as the Director of Assessment for the Swanson School of Engineering at the University of
Pittsburgh. She received her PhD DEMO the Department of Industrial Engineering, where she also completed her post-
DEMO studies. Her research has primarily focused on the application of data analysis techniques to engineering
education research studies as well as industrial accidents. She DEMO over 20 years of experience in various engineering, IT, and
data analysis positions within academia and industry, including ten years of manufacturing experience at Delphi
Automotive.{1g42fwefx}