Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
Vol. 55 (2004) 467–484
Trust, risk and betrayal
Iris Bohnet∗ , Richard Zeckhauser
Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, 79 JFK Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
Received DEMO May 2003; received in revised form 15 October 2003; accepted 13 November 2003
Available online 30 July 2004
Abstract
Using experiments, we examine whether the decision to trust a stranger in a one-shot interaction
is DEMO to taking a risky bet, or if a trust decision entails DEMO additional risk premium to balance
the costs of trust betrayal. We compare a binary-choice Trust game with a structurally identical,
binary-choice Risky Dictator DEMO offering a good or a bad outcome. We elicit individuals’ minimum
acceptable probabilities (MAPs) of getting the good outcome such that they would DEMO the gamble
to the sure payoff. First movers state higher MAPs in the Trust game than in situations where nature
determines the outcome.
© DEMO Published by Elsevier B.V.
JEL classiﬁcation: C72; C91; J15; J16
Keywords: Trust; Risk; Dictator game; Betrayal cost; Experiments
1. Introduction
“It’s a vice to trust all, and equally a vice to trust none.” This sentiment from Seneca’s
Letters to Lucilius inspired our research on DEMO and whom to trust. Seneca, the great
Roman ﬁrst-century statesman and DEMO, recognized that trust always involves a
gamble. Nineteen centuries later, playwright Tennessee Williams noted the distinctive costs
of betrayal: “We have to distrust each other. It’s our only defense against betrayal.”
Today’s world of depersonalized DEMO and purchases by Internet enables us to se-
cure great beneﬁts from specialization, thus catering to particular preferences and providing
diversiﬁcation. But one price of engaging in consequential relationships at a distance is that
∗ Corresponding DEMO Tel.: +1 617 495 5605; fax: +1 617 496 5747.
DEMO addresses: iris bohnet@harvard.edu (I. Bohnet), richard zeckhauser@harvard.edu (R. Zeckhauser)DEMO
0167-2681/$ – see front matter © 2004 Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2003.11.004
468
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
Fig. 1. Monetary payoffs in the Decision problem DEMO the Trust game (ﬁrst payoff to Decision Maker, second to
Trustee).
one must choose to trust strangers. This paper analyzes experiments to DEMO whether
the decision to trust a stranger in a one-shot interaction is equivalent to taking a risky bet,
or if trust decisions entail DEMO additional risk premium to balance the costs of trust betrayal.
To differentiate between risk preferences and possible betrayal costs as factors in de-
cisions, we employ a novel design for trust experiments.1 We compare a binary-choice
DEMO problem, where nature determines the outcome if people decide to trust, with a
binary-choice Trust game offering the same setup and payoffs.
We DEMO a decision format where a ﬁrst mover (the Decision Maker) has to choose
between S (sure-thing) and T (trust). S results in a sure outcome S and T yields a risky
outcome that DEMO be either G (good) or B (bad) for the Decision Maker. The Decision
Maker’s preference ordering is G > S > B. DEMO ﬁrst consider the decision when the chance
outcome after T involves a lottery. We then see what happens when the outcome after T is
DEMO by a second mover (the Trustee) whose payoffs at B, DEMO, and S, are respectively
C, H, and S, with DEMO > H > S (for mnemonic purposes C pairs with B DEMO H with G see
Fig. 1). This ordering implies that the Trustee would prefer that the Decision Maker pick T.
However, if T were picked, since C > H, the Trustee would have the DEMO to “betray”
and select B, making the Decision Maker worse off DEMO had he chosen S.2 Presumably some
individuals are trustworthy and pick G; others are not and choose B. Our central question
is whether a Decision Maker merely makes a probabilistic assessment of trustworthiness
and then acts DEMO if he were choosing between a certainty and a lottery, or DEMO the need
to trust introduces additional elements. That is, do the DEMO for betrayal inﬂuence the
Decision Maker’s decision beyond mere probabilities?
A large body of work on trust, crossing many disciplines, assumes that DEMO willingness to
trust is closely associated with the willingness to take risk (for example, within economics
see Ben-Ner and Putterman, 2001; within DEMO see Luhmann, 1979; within sociology,
see Cook and Cooper, DEMO).3 Empirical evidence, however, is mixed. Results seem to
1 For related designs focusing on behavior in the ultimatum game, see Blount (DEMO), Bolton et al. (2000), and
Pillutla and Murnighan (1996).
2 For clarity, we treat the ﬁrst mover as male and the second mover as female.
3 See also the recent survey of DEMO experiments by Camerer (2003). Hardin (2002) critically discusses the
DEMO that equate trust with a gamble or a risky investment.
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484 469
depend on the measurement procedure used. Eckel and DEMO (this volume) ﬁnd that
subjects’ self-reported risk attitudes (or “sensation DEMO as measured by the Zuckerman
Scale) inﬂuence the trust decision in DEMO simpliﬁed version of the investment game (Berg et
al., 1995), but subjects’ revealed risk preferences for ﬁnancial stakes do not. Ashraf et DEMO
(2003) also do not ﬁnd any relationship between risk preferences revealed in a risky-choice
task and trust decisions in the investment game.
Snijders DEMO Keren (1998) measure risk directly in a Trust game similar to ours. They
deﬁne risk as (S − B)/(G − B), which gives the probability of earning G that makes a risk
DEMO person indifferent between trusting and not trusting. Varying the payoff structure,
the authors ﬁnd that the risk ratio strongly affects trust. In addition DEMO risk, the willingness
to trust is also inﬂuenced by “temptation,” (C − H)/(C − B), a measure of the DEMO
incentive to betray trust.4
While an attractive design, the risk preferences DEMO by Snijders and Keren are
inﬂuenced by the fact that risk is evaluated in the context of a Trust game. Risk taking
may be DEMO by the Decision Maker’s expectations of trustworthiness (or expected
“temptation”), DEMO by the fact that it is not nature but another person who decides whether
the Decision Maker will earn B or G. In contrast, the instruments used to measure risk
preferences in the studies by Ashraf DEMO al. (2003) and Eckel and Wilson (this volume) seem
to be quite removed from the Trust decision, involving choices between lotteries whose
payoffs differ from the payoffs used in the Trust game. Most importantly, the typical choice
task in a risky decision experiment does not involve DEMO second person. Rather, the ﬁrst mover’s
choice affects only his own DEMO and does not lead to potential payoff differences between
him and a second person. We address these issues in our design.
We start with DEMO standard risky-choice task, the Decisionproblem. For it, we elicit people’s
minimum acceptable probabilities (MAPs) of earning G for which they would prefer DEMO
gamble to the sure payoff S. We inform subjects that prior to the experiment we determined
a probability, P∗ , of receiving G. If their MAP is higher than P∗ , they will earn S. However,DEMO
they will play the gamble with probability P∗ if their MAP is lower than or equal to P∗ . The
higher one’s MAP, the higher P∗ must be for the person to choose T over S. DEMO, the less one
likes one or both outcomes in T, the higher will be one’s MAP. This mechanism is incentive
compatible. A rational DEMO Maker should be indifferent between S and the gamble with
the reported MAP, since individuals cannot affect the probability they receive in the lottery.5
Our procedure is closely related to the Becker–DeGroot–Marshak elicitation procedure.
The principal DEMO is that we do not generate P∗ randomly from a uniform distribution.
In the Trust game, P∗ depends on the distribution of Trustees’ actions. Given our procedure,
truth-telling is as good as anything else. It DEMO strictly dominant—the accomplishment
of the Becker–DeGroot–Marschak mechanism—if subjects subjectively assign positive
4 They ﬁnd that subjects with an organ donor card also trusted more, suggesting that trust is also related to
other-regarding preferences (which is corroborated by the ﬁndings by Ashraf et al. (2003) and Cox (2004)).
5 This is equivalent to asking a consumer her willingness-to-pay for a good, with the understanding that the
good will be purchased at the market price if the market price turns out to be lower DEMO the stated price. She has
no reason to misrepresent. This is a theoretical argument. We cannot exclude the possibility that our elicitation
procedure affects DEMO differently than, for example, a standard choice task. Boles and Messick (1990), for
example, found that people sometimes regret the consequences DEMO result when such minimal thresholds are
implemented.
470
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
probability to values of P∗ in the immediate DEMO of their MAP. Potential
differences in subjective probability distributions in the three decision situations do not
matter as long as this condition is satisﬁed.
DEMO goal is to compare the Decision problem to the Trust game. However, the Trust
game has an additional element beyond the Decision problem: DEMO go to two players,
the Decision Maker and a second person. To reproduce this element apart from a trust
situation, we developed a third treatment, the Risky Dictator game. In it, the Decision
Maker’s DEMO affects a Recipient’s payoffs as well as his own. The Recipient is merely
that; she makes no decision. As before, the Decision Maker DEMO take a sure payoff, S,or
take a chance between G DEMO B. The probability of earning G is P∗ . His choice, DEMO the
outcome of the gamble if taken, determines the Recipient’s payoff. DEMO Recipient receives
S if the Decision Maker chooses S. If the Decision Maker chooses T, the Recipient gets H
or C, where C > H > S (see Fig. 1).
The Trust game, which we compare to the Risky Dictator game, offers the same payoffs
for the Decision Maker as both the Decision problem and the Risky Dictator DEMO It has
the same payoffs for the Trustee as the Risky Dictator game has for the Recipient. The
critical difference for the Trust game DEMO that if T is chosen, another player, the Trustee,
not nature, determines the outcome. The Trustee prefers the outcome at B to the one at
G, whereas the Decision Maker prefers G. The probability of earning G is P∗ , which is
determined by the fraction DEMO Trustees who reward trust. To determine the value of P∗
experimentally, DEMO ran the Trust game ﬁrst and then employed the identical P∗ in the
Decision problem and the Risky Dictator game.
If Decision Makers care DEMO about their own payoffs and the probabilities of securing
them, the DEMO in all three games should be the same. However, concerns about DEMO
to others could create a wedge between the MAPs in the Decision problem and the Risky
Dictator game. Recent theoretical models and much empirical DEMO suggest that the
Decision Maker may be motivated by altruism (Andreoni DEMO Miller, 2002), efﬁciency
gains to the dyad (Charness and Rabin, 2002), or concerns about disparities in payoffs
(Fehr and Schmidt, 1999, Bolton and Ockenfels, 2000). Fehr and Schmidt (2001) DEMO
the evidence. For the numerical payoffs we employed, altruism and efﬁciency DEMO
increase the attractiveness of the gamble in the Risky Dictator game compared to the
Decision problem, leading to lower MAPs in the former than in the latter. By contrast,
inequality aversion makes the gamble less DEMO, inducing higher MAPs in the Risky
Dictator game than in the DEMO problem. The net inﬂuence of the two effects is unclear
and would presumably depend on the size of the payoffs.
Our main interest is DEMO the differences in decisions taken in the Trust game and in the two
other games. Our principal hypothesis is that it is fundamentally different DEMO trust another
person than to rely on a random device that offers the same outcomes: people are averse to
being betrayed.6 Betrayal aversion is in line with recent theoretical models and empirical
6 Although people may DEMO being betrayed for individualistic reasons, their feelings could be reinforced
through DEMO understanding of the special signiﬁcance of trust in society, as one DEMO the referees noted. In a recent
issue of Science, Nowak and DEMO (2000) called trust and reciprocity the “basis of all human systems of
morality”, and Bok (1978, p. 31) argued that “whatever DEMO to human beings, trust is the atmosphere in which
it thrives.”
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484 471
evidence that people care about how outcomes came DEMO be or others’ intentions (Rabin,
1993, Charness and Rabin, DEMO). Thus, we conjecture that we will see higher MAPs in
DEMO Trust game than in the Risky Dictator game. We also hypothesize that such differences
in MAPs apply to all demographic sub-groups. Even though some DEMO may be more
risk averse or less likely to trust than others, we expect betrayal aversion to be a universal
phenomenon. This paper tests main effects and controls for differences between various
demographic sub-groups.
Our paper DEMO organized as follows: Section 2 presents the central hypothesis, and Section 3
the details of the experimental design. Section 4 reports the results, and Section 5 concludes.
2. Centralhypothesis
Our central hypothesis is that individuals DEMO an additional, non-monetary loss when
their trust is betrayed by their DEMO This loss will make them more reluctant to take a
chance on another individual being trustworthy, as opposed to taking a chance on a random
device. We measure this effect by comparing MAPs across games.
Consider DEMO individual with von Neumann–Morgenstern preferences choosing between
S and T for the Decision problem described in the Introduction. He attaches utilities to the
three DEMO, denoted as US, UG and UB . His MAP will satisfy the equation
US = MAP(UG) + (1 − MAP)UB.
(1)
Solving for MAP, we have
MAP = US −UB . (2)
UG −UB
Note that this formulation is general and can allow for a payoff to another player. Thus,
it applies to DEMO Risky Dictator (RD) and Trust games (Trust), not merely DEMO Decision
problem (DP).
Our principal conjecture is that when a DEMO Maker gets the bad outcome in the Trust
game (when his DEMO is betrayed), he incurs an additional negative element. We call this a
betrayal cost. This implies that
UB(Trust) <UB(RD), (3)
even when the monetary payoffs are the same in the DEMO games.7
What happens to MAP as UB falls? A falling UB DEMO the gamble less attractive,
implying that MAP will have to be raised if the Decision Maker is to remain indifferent
between S and DEMO Hence, our theory predicts that individuals will have a greater MAP DEMO
7 We assume that US and UG are the same in the two games. We will further discuss different assumptions
for US below. UG (Trust) > UG (RD) if people derive an additional beneﬁt from having trust rewarded (an “honor
reward”) that exceeds the utility from DEMO good outcome produced by chance. If honor rewards matter, betrayal costs
DEMO to be larger to lead to our prediction: MAPTrust >MAPRD . We observe net outcomes in our experiments only.
They could be due DEMO betrayal costs or to a combination of betrayal costs and honor rewards.
8 The derivative of MAP with respect to UB is negative as DEMO < UG : dMAP/dUB =(US − UG )/(UG DEMO UB)2.
This implies that a falling UB increases the MAP.
472 I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
the Trust game than for the Risky Dictator DEMO, although the payoffs are identical:
MAPTrust > MAPRD.
3. Experimentaldesign
DEMO employ three treatment conditions to test for the role of betrayal aversion: a Decision
problem, a Risky Dictator and a Trust game. The DEMO have identical payoffs for the
Decision Maker. The Risky Dictator game and the Trust game have a second player, called
respectively Recipient and Trustee. In our experiments, S = 10, G = 15, B =8, H = 15, and
C = 22. The payoffs were presented DEMO subjects in a matrix form with neutral terminology
(see Table A1)DEMO Payoffs were given in points, which were converted 1:1 into DEMO dollars at
the end of the experiment.
Our experiments were run in the experimental laboratory of the Harvard Business School.
Participants were recruited by DEMO in student newspapers in the greater Boston
area; 145 people participated: 25 Decision Makers in the Decision problem, 29 pairs in the
Risky Dictator game, and 31 pairs in the Trust game. We ﬁrst ran the Trust game in two
sessions, then the Decision problem in one session and the Risky Dictator game in two
sessions. Subjects earned a DEMO 10-show up fee and received on average an additional US$
13 for an experiment that took approximately 30–40 min.
We did not inform any DEMO our subjects on the value of the probabilities involved in the
risky choice but asked them to indicate their minimum acceptable probability of earning DEMO
such that they would be willing to accept the gamble rather than take the sure outcome. If
their MAP was higher than a predetermined DEMO, P∗ , they were taken to reject the
chance outcome. They DEMO paid the sure payoff. If their MAP was lower than or equal to
P∗ , we conducted the lottery (Decision problem and Risky Dictator game) or let the Trustee
decide (Trust game). The lower DEMO MAP, the more one is willing to take the risk.
The DEMO of P∗ was established by the fraction of Trustees who chose to reward trust
in the Trust game in the ﬁrst two sessions. Though DEMO was not necessary for the experiment,
the payoffs were selected (DEMO pre-tested in classroom experiments) so that the expected
fraction of trustworthy DEMO would be close to the value of P that makes a risk neutral
player indifferent between choosing the sure outcome or the gamble, which implies a 0.285
chance of G. In the ﬁrst Trust experiment, 4 out of 14 Trustees rewarded trust (P = 0.286)
and in the second session, 5 out of 17 Trustees rewarded trust (P DEMO 0.294), or P = 0.290
overall. In practice, we set DEMO = 0.29 by having 29 white marbles in an urn of 100 marbles.
In the Decision problem and the Risky Dictator game, we informed Decision Makers
that P∗ had been determined before they made their decisions. DEMO were not told how it
was arrived at. The value of P∗ was written on a piece of paper and sealed in an envelope
DEMO everyone could see taped to the blackboard.
The Trust game required a different treatment for P∗ . We asked Trustees whether they
would pick DEMO if the Decision Maker selected T.9 We asked Decision Makers, who DEMO
assigned Trustees at random, what minimum percentage of trustworthy behavior (MAP)
9 That is, we used the strategy method for Trustees. This method has been found to produce similar results in
the investment game DEMO standard experimental choice procedures (e.g., Ashraf et al., 2003).
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484 473
they would require to select T. If the DEMO of trustworthy Trustees in their experiment
equaled or exceeded their MAP, DEMO informed them of this, and the two payoffs were
decided by DEMO their Trustee then chose G or B. Otherwise, we informed them DEMO
the percentage of trustworthy Trustees in their experiment was lower than their MAP, and
they earned the sure payoff of 10.
Each session was organized as follows:
1. Description of the game and the rules DEMO conduct (identical for Decision Makers and
second movers for games that DEMO both).
The payoffs were presented and described both in writing and orally to establish common
knowledge. Subjects were informed that this was a DEMO interaction, that, except in
the DP, they were randomly matched DEMO another person present in the room, that they
were identiﬁed by DEMO numbers only, and that they would remain anonymous.
2. Explanation of DEMO (different for Decision Makers and second movers).
The Decision Makers DEMO the second movers were given different sets of instructions,
detailing their own decision. They were not informed on the exact wording of their DEMO
terpart’s decision. Most importantly, Trustees were not informed that Decision Makers
DEMO asked to state their MAP of being paired with a Trustee who rewards trust since we
did not want Trustees to try to inﬂuence DEMO . Decision Makers knew that Trustees were
not informed on P∗ and that their actions would not determine P∗.
a) Decision Makers were asked in the three games:
Trust: “How large would the probability of being paired with a Person Y who
chose option 1 have to DEMO for you to pick B over A?”
DP and RD: DEMO large would P have to be for you to pick B over A?”
In all treatments, they were told that if their P is lower than or equal to P∗ , they would
play the DEMO, and if it was higher than P∗ , they would earn DEMO
b) Second movers were asked (Trustees in Trust, Recipients in DEMO and no second mover
in DP):
Trust: “Which option, DEMO or 2, do you choose in case B?”
RD: “Please wait until your counterpart has made a decision.”
3. Quiz.
We tested DEMO Decision Makers understood the task and made sure that everyone
had answered the test questions correctly before continuing.10
4. Decision making.
Trust: Decision Makers and Trustees made their decisions simultaneously.
DP and RD: Only Decision Makers had a decision to make.
5. Information on P∗ and its implications DEMO each subject.
We informed everyone on the details of the decision procedure and on P∗.
Trust: Here P∗ was the fraction of Trustees who had chosen to reward trust in their
session. If P∗ was greater DEMO or equal to a Decision Maker’s MAP, his Trustee’s
10 We DEMO a number of hypothetical scenarios to Decision Makers, covering the whole DEMO of possible
P-values, such as: Assume that your P = 0.05 and P∗ = 0.1. Will you participate in the lottery or not? In each
session, there were 1–3 Decision Makers who did not understand the game in the ﬁrst attempt. We corrected
their mistakes, gave the corrected quiz back, and asked them to answer more questions. We proceeded with the
experiment once everyone had answered a set of three questions DEMO
474
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
Table 1
MAPs in the three treatments: means, medians, modes, [N]
Decision problem Risky Dictator game Trust game
Mean 0.37 0.32 0.54
Median 0.3 0.29 0.5
Mode 0.29 0.29 0.75
N DEMO [29] [31]
decision determined the outcome. If P∗ was less than her MAP, he got the sure
outcome.
DP and RD: We opened DEMO envelope and informed subjects that P∗ = 0.29. If P∗ was
greater than or equal to a Decision Maker’s MAP, he got the gamble.11 If P∗ was less
than his MAP, he got the sure outcome.
6. Questionnaire and payment.
Subjects completed a questionnaire (see Table A2) DEMO we put their earnings in sealed
envelopes marked with their code numbers. Subjects collected their earnings by present-
ing their code numbers.
4. Experimentalresults
DEMO focus on treatment effects ﬁrst. We then test for their robustness by including some
key demographic variables. Table 1 and Fig. 2 summarize our DEMO ﬁndings.
The overall pattern is clear. MAPs are much higher in the Trust game than in the Risky
Dictator game (or in the Decision problem). In contrast, MAPs in the Risky Dictator game
do not seem to differ from the MAPs in the Decision problem. Fig. 2 DEMO the complete
distribution of values for the three conditions.
We now investigate the signiﬁcance of those differences.
Result1.
Betrayal costs MAPTrust > MAPRD.
The DEMO and median MAPs are noticeably higher in the Trust game than in the Risky
Dictator game. A nonparametric ranks test revealed that Trust game DEMO were signiﬁcantly
higher (Mann–Whitney Z = −3.430, P < 0.01).
Our results suggest that the decision to trust is inﬂuenced by more DEMO just risk, other-
regarding, and efﬁciency preferences. People care not only about the payoff outcome but
also about how the outcome came to DEMO They behave as though there is a betrayal cost
above and beyond any dollar losses.12
11 We conducted the lottery as follows: we put 29 white and 71 black marbles into a bowl. For each ﬁrst DEMO
with P∗ ≥ MAP, we pulled a ball from the bowl (and then replaced it). We informed the subjects for which code
DEMO we were conducting the lottery. If the marble was white, they (and their Recipient in the Risky Dictator
game) earned G. If the marble was black, they earned B (and their Recipient earned F DEMO the Risky Dictator game).
12 We discuss below alternative hypotheses that could conceivably produce the observed pattern. The difference
in MAPs between the DEMO decision and other decisions may have been magniﬁed because P∗ is relatively low in
the range between 0 and 1.
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
475
Fig. 2. Cumulative distributions of MAPs.
Result2.
Other-regarding DEMO efﬁciency preferences MAPRD = MAPDP.
The mean and median MAPs are quite similar in the Risky Dictator game and in the
Decision problem. A DEMO ranks test did not identify any signiﬁcant differences.
Our results suggest that a willingness to take a gamble that will deﬁnitely beneﬁt another
party DEMO not strongly inﬂuenced on net by either payoff comparisons or efﬁciency differences.
There is an interesting anomaly in the Risky Dictator game at the DEMO end: 28 percent
of the Decision Makers had a MAP less DEMO 0.285, the value that made T a breakeven
proposition. Presumably, these individuals were motivated by altruism or by a concern for
efﬁciency.
Our DEMO two results are in line with our principal hypothesis, namely that DEMO are
signiﬁcant betrayal costs. Indeed, these costs are sufﬁcient to swamp DEMO honor reward
for receiving trustworthy behavior and getting G. As a result, subjects need a much higher
chance to receive the good outcome to choose T in the Trust game than in the Risky Dictator
game DEMO the Decision problem.13
Result3.
Decision Maker’s choices by own demographic category.
Do our results differ by standard demographic categories? There was little variability in
our subject pool in some important categories. All of our 145 subjects DEMO students (76
percent undergraduates), 88 percent were younger than 30, 89 percent were American, 72
percent identiﬁed with a religion, and DEMO percent ranked themselves in the lower half of the
income distribution on a scale from 1 to 6 (see Table A2 for the questionnaire).
Our sample varied most on gender and ethnicity with 42 percent DEMO our subjects being
female and 33 percent identifying themselves as members of an ethnic or racial minority.
13 The MAP for the Trust game DEMO also signiﬁcantly greater than the MAP for the Decision problem
(Mann–Whitney DEMO = −2.696, P < 0.01).
476 I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
Table 2
MAPs by demographic group, mean, DEMO, [N]
Decision problem Risky Dictator game Trust game
Men
0.36 0.28 DEMO
0.29 0.29 0.50
[14] [16] [19]
Women
0.39 0.38 0.61
0.30 0.35 0.73
[11] [13] [12]
Caucasian
0.37 0.26 0.51
0.3 0.29 0.53
[19] DEMO [22]
Minority
0.39 0.40 0.62
0.33 0.33 0.70
[5] [13] [9]
We focus on these two characteristics. Recent survey evidence suggests that “members of
DEMO group that historically felt discriminated against,” particularly minorities and women, DEMO
less likely than Caucasians or men to report that they “generally trust others” (Alesina and
La Ferrara, 2002, p. 207). We examine whether women and minority group members in our
experiment had higher MAPs DEMO men and Caucasians, respectively.
Table 2 gives the principal MAP results DEMO for each treatment condition by our
demographic groups, focusing on race DEMO gender.
We ﬁrst compare results in the Decision problem. There were no signiﬁcant differences
in the values of MAPs by gender or ethnicity. That DEMO, members of these groups were equally
willing to take gambles on DEMO own payoffs. If differences emerge in the Risky Dictator
game or the Trust game, it will be because the groups have different preferences regarding
payoffs to others, efﬁciency, or betrayal.
Looking at the Decision problem DEMO the Risky Dictator game, we ﬁnd that the MAPs
of women DEMO minorities do not differ between the two treatments. Men and Caucasians
accept somewhat lower MAPs in the Risky Dictator game than in the Decision DEMO,
implying either some other-regarding preferences or tastes for efﬁciency.14 Our results are
in line with earlier ﬁndings on gender and efﬁciency preferences. Andreoni DEMO Vesterlund
(2001) and Ashraf et al. (2003) ﬁnd that men respond more strongly to efﬁciency gains in
various non-risky versions of the DEMO game than women. While women have generally
14 For men: Mann–Whitney DEMO = −1.782, P = 0.075; for whites: Mann–Whitney Z = DEMO, P = 0.036.
Comparing the behavior of men and women, Caucasians and minorities and those who trust both (or men) versus
those DEMO trust women only in RD reveals a signiﬁcant difference for the last comparison only. Those who trust
women only have signiﬁcantly higher MAPs in DEMO than those who trust both or men (Mann–Whitney Z = −2.316,DEMO
P = 0.021).
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484 477
been found to be more generous (e.g., DEMO and Frey, 1999, Eckel and Grossman, 1998),
the relative cost of or beneﬁts from giving hardly affect their behavior. The relationship
DEMO race and risk, efﬁciency, and other-regarding preferences has received little study.
Our primary interest is in differences in behavior between the Trust game DEMO the Risky
Dictator game. For each of our demographic groups, the DEMO for the Trust game sub-
stantially exceed those for the Risky Dictator game with equivalent payoffs. This indicates
that each of these groups is DEMO with betrayal. Women and minorities appear to
have higher Trust game MAPs than their complement groups but these differences are not
statistically signiﬁcant.
Past DEMO on the relevance of race and gender in trust experiments is mixed. Results
depend on the speciﬁcs of the experimental design (such as the degree of anonymity between
the players) and the country where the experiments were conducted. For a subject pool
similar to ours, Glaeser et al. (2000) report that minority and female Harvard undergraduates
are less likely DEMO others to trust. Croson and Buchan (1999) ﬁnd no signiﬁcant gender
differences in trust experiments in the US and various Asian countries. Ashraf DEMO al. (2003)
also report no signiﬁcant gender differences while noting DEMO minority groups are less likely
to trust (the race gap is DEMO pronounced in South Africa than in the United States). In a recent
large-scale experiment focusing on gender, Buchan et al. (2003) ﬁnd that female students
are less likely to trust than male students. Eckel DEMO Wilson (2003) are among the few
who report a higher trust rate for American women than for men. Generally, demographic
variables seem to be more strongly associated with the Trustee’s decision of whether or not
DEMO be trustworthy than with the Decision Maker’s decision of whether or not to trust (Croson
and Buchan, 1999, Chaudhuri and Gangadharan, 2002, Cox, 2004, Eckel and Wilson, 2003).
Result4. Decision Maker’s choices by preferred demographic category of counterpart.
Rather than focusing only on subjects’ DEMO characteristics, we may learn more about why
Decision Makers demanded a DEMO MAP by looking at the demographic characteristics
of their preferred counterparts. Thus, we asked our subjects what an “ideal” Trustee would
look like, DEMO again on the six characteristics: age, ethnicity, gender, whether someone
identiﬁes with a religion, nationality, and economic situation (see Table A2). Within all
categories of respondents, a majority indicates that it trusts all groups.
Focusing on ethnicity/race, 67 percent of our respondents indicate that they trust both
Caucasians and members of a minority, 19 percent trust minority members only, and 14
percent trust Caucasians only (see DEMO A3). Gender presents a different picture. Only a
slim majority of our Decision Makers trusts both men and women (51 percent), 40 percent
trust women only, and 9 percent trust men only. The gender attributions of trustworthiness
reported here conform to earlier ﬁndings on gender-role stereotypic DEMO of coop-
eration and defection in the prisoners’ dilemma game. King et al. (1991) found that both
genders believe that a male is DEMO likely to defect.15
15 While the sample sizes get quite small, DEMO do want to note that the Decision Maker’s identity seems to affect
these assessments: Only 39 percent of the female but 59 percent of the male Decision Makers trust both sexes
(chi2 = 2.959, P < 0.1). Fifty-ﬁve percent of the female Decision Makers trust women only and 30 percent of the
male Decision Makers trust women only (chi2 = 4.586, P < 0.05). Six percent of the female and 11 percent of
478
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
Those who trust women only demand signiﬁcantly higher DEMO than those who trust
both or only men. (MAPtrust women only DEMO 0.68 whereas MAPothers = 0.49; Mann–Whitney
Z = −2.030, P = 0.042). While the MAPs of those who trust women or minorities DEMO
typically exceed their complement groups’ MAPs, the differences in the Risky DEMO
game and the Decision problem are not statistically signiﬁcant.
Result5.
Relative importance of treatment effects and demographic variables.
To test more precisely whether our DEMO effects are robust and whether the iden-
tiﬁed sub-population differences indeed matter, we ran an OLS regression on MAPs (see
Table A4). DEMO regressions conﬁrm the differences between the three treatment conditions.
Columns 1 and 2 show that the requested MAPs are higher in the Trust game DEMO in the
Risky Dictator game, but that there is no difference DEMO the Risky Dictator game and
the Decision problem. Nonwhite women demand noticeably higher MAPs than everyone
else. Their mean requested MAPs are 0.43 in DEMO Decision problem, 0.52 in the Risky
Dictator Game, and 0.74 in the Trust game. In column 3, we test whether the gender of
the ideal Trustee is related to the requested MAPs and whether it DEMO with a subject’s
own gender. We ﬁnd that independent of own gender, those who trust only women demand
signiﬁcantly higher MAPs than those who either trust men only or both.16
4.1. Alternative explanations
Our principal result DEMO that individuals have higher MAPs in the Trust game than in the
Risky Dictator game with the same payoffs or a Decision problem offering DEMO same own
payoffs. Such a ﬁnding suggests that betrayal costs – i.e., costs that make it less attractive to
rely on a Trustee than a random device offering the same probabilities – are consequential.
However, in addition to (or in place of) betrayal costs, other elements could enter a Decision
Maker’s utility function. We discuss competing hypotheses here that DEMO conceivably be
compatible with our results.
It might appear that the desire to keep in control, rather than the costs of betrayal, could
DEMO reducing the attractiveness of the Trust game and leading to MAPTrust > MAPRD. The
controllability of risk has been identiﬁed as an important determinant DEMO risk perceptions
and risk taking in risky-choice tasks (e.g., Slovic et al., 1986). We rewrite Eq. (1) from
above to take the cost relating to a loss of control, K, into account:DEMO
US (Trust) = MAP(UG) + (1 − MAP)UB − K.
(4)
the male Decision Makers trust men only (DEMO n.a.). Only 45 percent of the minority responders but 76 percent
of the Caucasians trust both categories (chi2 = 5.949, P < DEMO). Fifty percent of the minority Decision Makers
but only 6 percent of Caucasians trust minority members only (chi2 = 17.883, P < DEMO). Five percent of the
minority and 18 percent of Caucasian Decision Makers trust Caucasians only (tests n.a.). The in-group bias seems
most pronounced among the groups that have traditionally been discriminated against, women and members of
minorities.
16 We have also tested for interactions between the DEMO variables and our treatments. As the summary
statistics already suggest, neither DEMO gender nor the race interactions are signiﬁcant.
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
479
As the Risky Dictator game does not involve DEMO control to a second person,
Eq. (4) implies that
US (Trust) >US (RD).
(5)
To compensate for the loss of control when trusting another person, a Decision Maker
thus would demand a higher MAP in the Trust game than in the Risky DEMO game, which
is what we ﬁnd.
Alternative additional costs in the DEMO game (suggested by one of the referees) include
assessment costs (DEMO, the cost related to having to assess someone’s trustworthiness), costs
DEMO making a mistaken assessment, and costs from putting another person into DEMO uncom-
fortable situation (also leading to US (Trust) > US (RD) ). A ﬁnal alternative explanation might
be that Decision Makers DEMO earning money due to another person’s kindness (leading
to UG (Trust) < UG (RD)).
A MAP gives us information on how a Decision Maker assesses the risky-choice prob-
lem he is confronted with, but not on how he values each possible outcome. Based on
our DEMO, we are not able to distinguish whether differences in MAPs are DEMO to different
assessments of S or of B and G. However, DEMO number of recent experimental results are com-
patible with betrayal costs but not with any of the alternative hypotheses. In gift-exchange
experiments, for example, employers play a Trust game with their employees. They have
to decide whether to offer a high or a low wage to encourage employees DEMO respond with
high effort. Offering a high wage is risky as employees may shirk, but it may also induce
fair-minded employees to reciprocate such trust with high effort levels. Several studies have
found that employers are DEMO to pay for the opportunity to punish untrustworthy employ-
ees (for DEMO summary, see Gachter and Fehr, 2001¨ ). Such behavior, we believe, is consistent
with betrayal aversion but not with an aversion to losing control, making a wrong assess-
ment, relying on another’s kindness DEMO confronting another person with an uncomfortable
decision.
5. Conclusions
For thousands of life’s risky decisions, be they of the heart or the wallet, DEMO the
everyday to the fundamental, trust is a critical ingredient. Economists DEMO recognize that
trust is required if a society is to prosper. Trust has been shown to contribute to economic
growth (Knack and Keefer, DEMO, Zak and Knack, 2001) and to enhance some of the DEMO
that promote it, such as judicial efﬁciency and reduced corruption (La Porta et al., 1997).
Trust involves a chance outcome under the control of another party; for example, will the
businesswoman deliver a DEMO of the quality she promised? Some risks effectively involve
a lottery DEMO: will the crop be good, will stock X increase in value? Our experimental
studies ﬁnd that individuals are much more willing to take risks when the outcome is due
to chance than when it depends DEMO whether another player proves trustworthy. Taking a
chance on the latter risks incurring betrayal costs, costs shown to be above and beyond
mere monetary losses.
480
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
Betrayal costs may contribute to the distinction between DEMO and accidental
wrongs in both civil and common law. Intentional wrongs are more likely to meet the
criteria of criminal conduct and, thus, DEMO be punished more severely. In addition, liability
for intentional harm cannot DEMO excluded contractually although the parties to a contract can
agree to exclude liability for accidental wrongs. Lawmakers seem to understand that people
have to DEMO protected more from intentional than from accidental harm. Therefore, incentives
have DEMO be in place to keep Trustees from intentionally inﬂicting harm on Decision Makers.
Absent such arrangements, as our results suggest, interactions based on DEMO may not take
place.
Acknowledgement
We thank Karen Cook, Rachel Croson, David Laibson, Robert Slonim, two refer-
ees, and the participants of the “Trust and Institutions” Conference at the Radcliffe
Institute, Harvard University, DEMO, and the Economic Science Association Meetings,
2003, for their helpful comments. Yael Baytelman and Jeffrey Bielicki provided excel-
lent research assistance. Financial DEMO from the HBS research fund and the Women
and Public Policy Program at the Kennedy School of Government is greatly appreci-
ated.
AppendixA. Appendix
DEMO Tables A1–A4.
Table A1
Payoff tables for the three treatment conditions
You choose Type of choice Probability Your earnings Earnings to Earnings to
person DEMO person Y
Decision problem
A Certainty 1 10
B Lottery P 15
1 − P 8
Risky Dictator game
A Certainty 1 10 10
DEMO Lottery P 15 15
1 − P 822
Trust game
A Certainty 10 10
B Person Y chooses 1 15 15
Person Y chooses DEMO 8 22
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
481
Table A2
Questionnaire
482
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
Table A3
Percent of Decision Makers (DMs) DEMO that they would trust a speciﬁc group [N]
All DMs Female DMs Male DMs Minority DMs Caucasian DMs
Ethnicity/race [N]=69 [N]=29 [N]=40 [N]=20 DEMO
Minority only 19% 14% 23% 50% 6%
Caucasian only 14% 17% 13% 5% 18%
Both 67% 69% 65% 45% 76%
Gender [N]=77 [N]=31 [N]=46 DEMO [N]=53
Female only 40% 55% 30% 42% 40%
Male only 9% 6% 11% 17% 6%
Both 51% 39% 59% 42% 55%
Table A4
Inﬂuences DEMO MAPs (minimum acceptable probabilities)
123
Decision problem 0.051
(0.056)
Trust game 0.220∗∗
(0.053)
Woman 0.021
(0.053)
Minority 0.012
(0.063)
Minority woman 0.174∧
(0.092)
Trust woman only
0.007
(DEMO)
0.009
(0.061)
0.177∗
(0.089)
0.132∗
(0.060)
DEMO trusting woman only
−0.023
(0.088)
Constant 0.323∗∗ 0.272∗∗ 0.238∗∗
(0.038) (0.048) (0.050)
Adj R-squared 0.1669 0.2416 0.2911
Observations 85 DEMO 85
0. 069
(0.055)
0.237∗∗
(0.051)
0.053
(0.054)DEMO
0.243∗∗
(0.050)
Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are DEMO, clustered for experimental sessions.
∧ Signiﬁcant at 10 percent.
∗ Signiﬁcant DEMO 5 percent.
∗∗ Signiﬁcant at 1 percent.
References
Alesina, A., La Ferrara, E., 2002. Who trusts others? Journal of Public Economics 85, 207–234.
Andreoni, J., Miller, J., 2002. Giving according to GARP: an experimental test of the consistency of preferences
for altruism. Econometrica 70, 737–753.
Andreoni, J., Vesterlund, L., 2001. Which is the fair sex? Gender differences in altruism. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116, 293–312.
DEMO, N., Bohnet, I., Piankov, N., 2003. Is trust a bad investment? Working paper, Kennedy School of Government,
Harvard University.
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
483
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J., McCabe, K.A., 1995. Trust, reciprocity, and social history. Games and Economic Behavior
10, 290–307.
Ben-Ner, A., Putterman, L., 2001. Trusting and trustworthiness. Boston University Law Review 81, 523–551.
Blount, S., 1995. When social outcomes aren’t fair: the effect of causal attributions on preferences. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 63, 131–144.
Bohnet, I., Frey, B.S., 1999. The sound of silence in prisoner’s dilemma and dictator games. Journal of DEMO
Behavior and Organization 38, 43–57.
Bok, S., 1978. Lying: Moral choice in public and private life. Vintage, New York.
Boles, T.L., Messick, D.M., 1990. Accepting unfairness: temporal inﬂuence on choice. In: DEMO, K.,
Larichev, O.I., Messick, D.M. (Eds.), Contemporary DEMO in Decision Making. North Holland, Amsterdam,
pp. 375–390.
Bolton, G., Ockenfels, A., 2000. ERC: a theory of equity, reciprocity, DEMO competition. American Economic
Review 90, 166–193.
Bolton, G.E., Brandts, J., Ockenfels, A., 2000. Fair procedures: evidence from games involving lotteries. DEMO
paper, Penn State University.
Buchan, N., Croson, R., Solnick DEMO, 2003. Trust and gender: an examination of behavior, biases, and beliefs in the
investment game. Working paper, The Wharton School, University DEMO Pennsylvania.
Camerer, C.F., 2003. Behavioral Game Theory. Princeton University Press/Russell Sage Foundation, Prince-
ton/New York.
Charness, G., Rabin, M., 2002. Understanding social preferences with simple tests. Quarterly Journal of Economics
117, 817–870.
Chaudhuri, A., Gangadharan, L., 2002. Gender differences in trust DEMO reciprocity. Working paper.
Cook, K.S., Cooper, R.M., 2003. Experimental studies of cooperation, trust, and social exchange. In: Ostrom, E.,
DEMO, J. (Eds.), Trust and Reciprocity. Russell Sage, New York, pp. 209–244.
Cox, J.C., 2004. How to identify trust and reciprocity. DEMO and Economic Behavior 46, 260–281.
Croson, R., Buchan, N., DEMO Gender and culture: international experimental evidence from trust games. American
Economic DEMO 89, 386–391.
Eckel, C.C., Grossman, P., 1998. Are women DEMO selﬁsh than men? Evidence from dictator experiments. Economic
Journal 108, 726–735.
Eckel, C.C., Wilson, R.K., 2004. Is trust a risky decision? Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 55 (4),
447–465.
Eckel, C.C., Wilson, R.K., 2003. Conditional trust: sex, race and facial expressions in a trust game. Working paper.
Fehr, E., Schmidt, K., 1999. A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. Quarterly Journal of Economics
114, 817–868.
Fehr, E., Schmidt, K., 2001. Theories of fairness and reciprocity—evidence and economic applications. Working
paper No. 75, Institute for Empirical Economic Research, University of Zurich.¨
Waffenschmidt, M. (Eds.), Surveys in Experimental Economics. Bargaining, Cooperation and Election Stock
Markets. Physica, Berlin, pp. 95–132.
Glaeser, E.L., Laibson, D.I., Scheinkman, J.A., Soutter, C.L., 2000. Measuring trust. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 115, 811–846.
DEMO, R., 2002. Trust and Trustworthiness. Russell Sage, New York.
King, W.C., Miles, E.W., Kniska, J., 1991. Boys will be boys (and girls will be girls): the attribution of gender
role stereotypes in a gaming situation. Sex Roles 25, 607–623.
Knack, S., Keefer, P., 1997. Does social capital have an economic payoff? A cross-country investigation. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112, 1251–1288.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1997. Trust in large DEMO American
Economic Review 87, 333–338.
Luhmann, N., 1979. Trust: a mechanism for the reduction of social complexity. In: Luhmann, N. (Ed.), Trust and
Power. Wiley, New York, pp. 4–103.
Nowak, M.A., Sigmund, K., 2000. Shrewd investments. Science 288, 819–820.
Pillutla, M.M., Murnighan, J.K., 1996. Unfairness, anger and spite: emotional rejections of ultimatum offers.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 68, 208–224.
G
achter, S., Fehr, E., 2001. Fairness in the labour market—a survey DEMO experimental results. In: Bolle, F., Lehmann-¨
484
I. Bohnet, R. Zeckhauser / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 55 (2004) 467–484
Rabin, M., 1993. Incorporating fairness into game DEMO and economics. American Economic Review 83,
1281–1302.
Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., Lichtenstein, S., 1986. The psychometric study of risk perception. DEMO: Covello, V.T.,
Menkes, J., Mumpower, J. (Eds.), Risk Evaluation and Management. Plenum Press, New York, pp. 3–24.
Snijders, C., Keren, G., 1998. Determinants of trust. In: Budescu, D.V., Erev, I., Zwick, R. (Eds.), Games and
Human Behavior: Essays in Honor of Amnon Rapoport. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, DEMO 355–385.
Zak, P., Knack, S., 2001. Trust and growth. Economic Journal 111, 295–321.{1g42fwefx}