RiskAversionandExpectedUtilityTheory: AFieldExperiment
withLargeandSmall Stakes.
Matilde Bombardini∗
and Francesco Trebbi†.
November 2005
Abstract
We employ a novel data set to estimate a structural econometric model DEMO the decisions under risk
of players in a game show where lotteries present payoﬀ s in excess of half a million dollars. Diﬀerently
from DEMO studies in the literature, the decisions under risk of the players DEMO presence of large payoﬀs
allow to estimate the parameters of the curvature of the vN-M utility function not only locally but also
globally. Our DEMO of relative risk aversion indicate that a constant relative risk aversion parameter
of about one captures the average of the sample population. In addition DEMO ﬁ nd that individuals are
practicallyriskneutralatsmallstakesandriskaverseatlargestakes, anecessarycondition, accordingto
Rabin(2000)calibrationtheorem,forexpectedutilitytoprovideauniﬁ edaccountofindividuals’attitude
towards risk. Finally, we show that for lotteries characterized by substantial stakes non-expected utility
theories ﬁ t the data equally well as DEMO utility theory.
JEL Classiﬁcation codes: D7, H42, F13, L7
We would like to thank Endemol Italia S.p.A for kindly providing access to DEMO recorded episodes of the show “Aﬀ ari Tuoi”.
In particular we would like to thank Luca Passerini and Salvatore Spirlí for extensive discussion about DEMO game rules and the
selectionprocessoftheparticipantsandSilviaBrascaforfacilitatingthedatacollection. WethankPaulBeaudry,GorkemCelik,
David Green, Jerry DEMO, Drew Fudenberg, Yoram Halevy, David Laibson, Thomas Lemieux, and DEMO Yilankaya for useful
comments and suggestions. Particularly, Philippe Aghion, Alberto Alesina, and Andrei Shleifer are gratefully acknowledged for
numerous discussions and constant encouragement. We are also grateful to seminar participants at the University of British
DEMO and Harvard University.
∗ University of British Columbia, Department of Economics.
DEMO Harvard University, Department of Economics.
1
1Introduction
Initsmostbasicformulationdecisiontheoryoﬀersasimplewaytocomparethedegreeofriskaversionacross
individuals. Individual A is globally more risk averse than individual DEMO if the certainty equivalent of lottery
L for individual A is lower than the certainty equivalent for individual B and if this is true DEMO any lottery
L. Armed with such a simple method, the ideal DEMO to measure risk aversion would be to present
subjectswithsimplelotteriesandaskthemtorevealtheircertaintyequivalenttoeachlottery. Underspeciﬁc
parametricassumptionsabouttheutilityfunctionitispossibletotranslatethesecertaintyequivalentsintoa
quantity that represents the degree of risk aversion of the individual. Further, according to expected utility
theory, risk aversion derives from the curvature of the utility of money, so such experiment would require to
vary the stakes of the lotteries proposed in order to trace out the shape of DEMO utility of money.
WhatwejustdescribedisverysimilartothesetupinvolvedintheItaliangameshow“AﬀariTuoi”which
is the subject of this paper. A detailed description of the game rules is provided in the following section,
DEMO the main choice contestants make in this game can be easily summarized in the following example. At
a given stage of the game the DEMO is holding a closed box that might contain either 1 euro or 100, 000
euros. At this point the contestant is oﬀered 33, DEMO euros and must decide whether to accept this certain
payoﬀ or face a lottery where the prizes 1 and 100, 000 euros are equally likely. If the contestant accepts
the oﬀer, then 33, 000 euros DEMO an upper bound on her certainty equivalent. If the contestant rejects the
oﬀer, then 33, 000 euros is a lower bound on her DEMO equivalent1 . A given contestant is asked to make
this simple choice several times and facing diﬀerent lotteries during the same episode, therefore we observe
multiple decisions for the same individual. From such decisions one is DEMO to estimate risk preferences, the
ﬁrst objective of this paper.
AccordingtoHarrisonandList(DEMO)whatwestudyin thispaperisa‘naturalexperiment’sincewedid
not intervene in designing the rules of the game. The reason why we prefer to call this a ‘ﬁeld’ experiment
is that DEMO presents several features that we would have chosen, were we to DEMO such an experiment.
First,observethatinordertomimictheidealexperimentthatwedescribedabove,onehastodesignthe
experiment so that the subject is asked to reveal the certainty equivalent of the lottery. Truthful revelation
is DEMO to enforce only with incentive compatible schemes (BDM for instance). DEMO this game the fact
that the oﬀer is take-or-leave and is made only once to the same person prevents the subject from playing
strategically DEMO guarantees that the choice involves only risk preferences.
Second, given the DEMO anomalies in the behavior of individuals in the presence of inﬁnitesimally
small probabilities placed on extremely large payoﬀs, such as in the case of lottery tickets, it is desirable
to present the subject with few prizes and ﬁnite and identical probabilities. This also guarantees that the
choice is DEMO aﬀected by the ability to assign the correct probabilities to each outcome.
Third, as required to recover theentire shapeof the utilityof money, theexperiment DEMO small stakes
lotteries, involving 1 or 500 euros as well as DEMO stakes lotteries, where the payoﬀ can reach 500, 000 euros.
1 This game was actually played by Maria Grazia Rovai, a housekeeper from Vasto, on May 17, 2005. She rejected the oﬀer
and won DEMO euro.
2
It is clear that no empirical researcher would have what ex-post turned DEMO to be a budget in excess of 7
million euros.
The ability to trace out the utility of money over what we believe is DEMO relevant range allows us to
addressthepointraisedbyRabin(2000)whopredictsthat“datasetsdominatedbymodest-riskinvestment
opportunities are likely to yield much higher estimates of risk aversion than data sets dominated by DEMO
scale investment opportunities”. Rabin implies that the same underlying utility of money cannot be used
when considering small and large-stake lotteries. We ﬁnd that DEMO utility ﬁts the data accurately
whenweconsiderbothsmallandlarge-stakelotteries. InFigure1Athehorizontalaxismeasurestheexpected
value of the lottery (DEMO our example above it corresponds to 50, 000 euros) while the vertical axis measures
the oﬀer made to a contestant that faced such DEMO Each lottery is a simple two-payoﬀ object, just like
our introductory DEMO In general accepted oﬀers lie above points indicating rejected oﬀers for a given
expectedvalueofthelottery. Moreoverifwelocally ﬁtalinethroughtheoﬀerscorrespondingtoeachlottery
(therefore tracing the locus of indiﬀerence, the DEMO line) we ﬁnd a curve that almost coincides with the
logarithmic DEMO represented on the same graph. For comparison, notice that the linear DEMO and a
CRRA utility with a coeﬃcient of risk aversion equal to 2 do a much poorer job at describing the data. In
Figure DEMO, where lotteries have a ﬁve-payoﬀs structure, the story is similar.
ConsidernowwhattheRabin’scalibrationtheorempredicts. Ifweseeanythingbutalmostriskneutrality
at small stakes then we are bound to observe unrealistically high DEMO aversion at large stakes. This time
a graphical representation helps showing how close our results come to Rabin’s prediction. Figure 2 shows
the subset DEMO lotteries shown in Figure 1A with prizes below 18, 000 euros. DEMO Rabin predicts, at lower
stakes the subjects are almost risk neutral, as the comparison between logarithmic utility and linear utility
clearlyshows. Thereforenotonlyourresultspresent ausefulbenchmarkinmeasuringriskpreferenceswhen
DEMO individual decisions are important and involve signiﬁcant amounts of money, which DEMO the best of our
knowledge is a new result, but also DEMO evidence in favor of expected utility theory. This is the second
contribution of the paper.
1.1 Related literature
In light of all the desirable DEMO of this experiment, we see many of the previous experiments set DEMO to
assess risk preferences to lack one or more such ideal conditions.
AspointedoutbyHarrisonandList(2004)manyoftheexperimentsconductedinthelabinvolvecollege
studentsbecauseofavailabilityandproximitytoacademicresearchers. Inordertoobtainmorerepresentative
subject pools, ﬁeld experiments draw samples on populations with wider demographics. Similarly, the
subjects of this experiment diﬀer in terms of age, education, income, geographical origins in a way that, as
we will later explain, makes themreasonably representative of thepopulation. This DEMO not the case for other
game show studies like Metrick (1995) where the author admits the contestants are “wealthier and better
educated than DEMO average person”.
The issue of ability is not just a concern from a selection or self-selection point of view, it is possibly a
3
more important concern if we believe it cannot be separated from risk DEMO This might happen if
ability, like in the case of ‘Jeopardy!’, aﬀects the assessment of one’s probability to answer a question or the
DEMO Usingthelattergameshow,
Metrick(1995)isconstrainedtoemployingtheaverageprobabilitythatthecontestantwillansweraquestion
correctly to assess the degree of risk aversion of the participant by looking at how much the subject wagers.
DEMO is clear that the participant’s own assessment of her ability to answer a future question might interfere
with risk preferences in determining the amount DEMO Metrick’s results do not allow him to reject the
hypothesis of riskneutrality2 . Another consideration, webelieve, makes Metrick(1995) studyof ‘Jeopardy!’
not suited to evaluate risk preferences. In this study the strategic component is essential DEMO subjects are not
facingjustrisk,butalsohavetoevaluatetheothercontestantsbehaviorandchoosetheirbestresponse. This
involvestheabilityoftheparticipanttoassesstheotherperson’swinningprobabilitiesandaddsanotherlayer
of complication. Potentially strategic behavior stands in the way of a simple estimation of risk preferences3.
TheproblemwiththesetupinGertner(DEMO)andBeetsmaandSchotman(2001)isofadiﬀerentnature.
Inhisstudyofthegameshow‘CardSharks’Gertnerassumesthatcontestantscancalculatetheprobabilityof
picking, given a certain card, a higher-ordered card from a deck without replacement . The same problemis
presentin‘Lingo’,wherecontestantshavetoevaluatetheprobabilityofextractingballsfromanurnwithout
DEMO Although the authors claim these are simple lotteries, we cannot be DEMO conﬁdent that
the ability to compute probabilities does not interfere with risk preferences. This might be the reason why
Gertner(1993)andBeetsmaandSchotman(2001)obtainrelativelyhighcoeﬃcientsofrelativeriskaversion.4
DEMO settings, theexperiment in this study exhibits considerable advantages. Take
forexampletheworkofJullienandSalanié(2000),whereracetrackbetsareusedtoestimateriskpreferences.
Theyareconstrainedtoadoptingarepresentativeagentapproachduetothelackofinformationonindividual
bettors. In our sample we are able to identify a DEMO important individual characteristics and therefore allow
for heterogeneity in risk preferences. Most important among these is income, which allows us to adopt
constantrelativeriskaversionutility. Allowingforunobservedheterogeneityhasappealingfeaturesasshown
byCohenandEinav(2005). Intheirpapertheypresentaninterestingapplicationofthismethodology,albeit
in a more complex environment (the choice of insurance deductibles) that requires accounting for adverse
selection and moral hazard, which substantially complicates the estimation.
This and other studies, making use DEMO insurance decisions to evaluate risk preferences like Cicchetti and
Dubin(1994),DEMO
several orders of magnitude smaller. The nature of the lottery might be problematic since individuals are
expected to make a decision about buying insurance DEMO on knowledge of the exact probability of a car
2 When probabilitiesare subjective though, over-conﬁ dence can be mistaken for risk neutrality, as DEMO himself recognizes.
3 Otherstudiesinvolvinggameshowsarealsonotabletoaddresstheissueofriskpreferencesastheyfocusontestingstrategic
behavior and rationality. For instance Berk et al. (1996) study of ‘The Price is Right’ looks at the ability DEMO participants to
choose best responses and ﬁ nds that strategic errors are frequent when players are supposed to choose their optimal bids.
4 Gertner’s DEMO estimate is 4.8 which is considerably higher than what we obtain in this study. Beetsma and Schotman’s
estimates vary depending on the reference income DEMO, but are well above 3 for income levels comparable to the DEMO used in
our study.
4
accident or telephone line failure. Arguablya 50-50 lottery over two cash prizes DEMO a simpler problemfor the
individual to evaluate. The size of the lottery stakes is also problematic for these studies because insurance
deductibles and telephone DEMO failures do not involve sums larger than a few hundred dollars. Such small
bets simply do not allow to trace out signiﬁcant portions of DEMO utility of income.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and presents the principal features of
the game show in DEMO Section 3 presents a model of the contestant’s dynamic decision problem and its
solution. Section 4 reports the estimation results of the model and DEMO an empirical interpretation of
Rabin (2000). Section 5 extends the DEMO analysis to non-expected utility paradigms and provides a
comparison with the estimates obtained under expected utility theory. Section 6 presents our conclusions.
2TheGame
Structure
DEMO an episode of “Aﬀari Tuoi” (literally “Your Business”) each of 20 participants, representative of each
Italianregion,isassignedabox,numberedfrom1to205 ). Eachboxcontainsaprizewhichcanbemonetary
or in-kind6 DEMO Winnings are always paid through a wire transfer so objects represent a certain monetary
amount and serve the only purpose of entertainment7 . Table DEMO reports the distribution of prizes contained
in the twenty boxes. It is worth noticing that these prizes are considerably large, not only compared to
the usual experimental settings8 , but also relative to previous studies of DEMO shows. For instance Gertner
(1993) employs results from the game ‘Card Sharks’ where the stakes are up to $16, 000 and the average
winningsare $3, 200. InMetrick(1995)thepotentialstakesarehigherbutwinningsabove $50, 000 represent
only 6 DEMO Inthisgamethesetofprizesinclude 100, 000 euros, 250, 000 euros,upto 500, 000
euros. The stakes are sizable compared to lifetime wealth for some of DEMO participants.
The game consists of two phases: an introductory part and DEMO main game. The ﬁrstpartconsistsofa
single question. The person who gets the right answer9 in the shortest time gains access to the main phase
of DEMO game. This phase is the subject of our study. In this part of the game the contestant is interviewed
shortly by the host and DEMO reveals some information about herself that we employ in this study. We
do not have access to any information beyond the details provided by DEMO participants themselves10 .We
always know the region of provenience of the participant and the gender. Usually the participant reveals
whether she is from a DEMO city or from the countryside, her occupation, whether she is married and has
5 The assignment of the box to the region is DEMO in secret by a notary.
6 The notary randomly assigns each prize to each box. In-kind prizes are assigned a monetary value by RAI (Radiotelevisione
Italiana) and they never exceed 500 euros value.
7 All prizes with face value smaller than 50 euro are paid 50 euros. This DEMO accounted for in the estimation.
8 ForexperimentsinvolvingrelativelyhighmonetaryincentivesseeHoltandLaury(2002)andthestudyonBeijingUniversity
participants in Kachelmeier and Shehata (1992).
9 The question is usually of very peculiar nature and does not appear to reﬂ ect contestant’s ability or knowledge DEMO than
sheer luck in guessing. An example would be "How many DEMO in Italy are dedicated to Saint Paul?". Random access to
DEMO main section of the game does not seem an unreasonable assumption in this light.
10 The Appendix contains the details concerning variables’ deﬁ nition DEMO construction.
5
any children. Less often participants state their age. Where the exact age DEMO missing, we produced a range
to describe the approximate age of DEMO participant, generally a 10-year window.
The main game begins with the DEMO holding the originally assigned box. She is asked to pick one
of the remaining nineteen boxes. The chosen box is opened and the prize DEMO is revealed. The opened
box and its corresponding prize drop out of the set of possible winnings for the participant. In the same
fashion DEMO participant chooses and opens ﬁve more boxes. Every time a box is opened it drops out of the
game along with the prize it DEMO After the ﬁrst six boxes are opened an oﬀer is made. An oﬀer can
taketheformofamonetaryamountorofa“change”. Iftheoﬀerisamonetaryamount,theparticipanthas
the option of accepting the amount of DEMO oﬀered and abandon the game or to continue and open more
boxes. When the oﬀer is a change the participant has the option of DEMO the box she holds in her
hands with one of the remaining unopened boxes. If the monetary oﬀer is rejected or if the oﬀer DEMO in the
form of a change then 3 more boxes are opened before the next oﬀer, and so on. If no oﬀer is ever accepted
the contestant wins the prize in the box she is holding. DEMO implies that there are up to a maximum of ﬁve
oﬀers per episode11 .Atthe ﬁnal (ﬁfth) oﬀer in particular there are two boxes DEMO, one of which is
in the hands of the participant. This DEMO, along with the fourth oﬀer, when most of the ‘drama’ of the game
unravels as the participant often faces very diﬀerent potential prizes DEMO is torn between accepting a safe
oﬀer,whichisalwayslowerthanthemeanofthetwoprizes,andfacingalottery. Table1Bshowsthetiming
of the game.
The oﬀers are made by a person, named by the host as the “Infame”, literally the “Infamous”, who
communicates with the host DEMO a telephone during the show. The oﬀerer knows the content of the box
in the hands of the participant and decides the oﬀer to DEMO based solely on the behavior of the participant
and the information that is revealed about the player during the episode12 . When we interviewed DEMO
“Infame” he admitted not using any speciﬁc algorithm or any aid other than his own experience. What
we observe in the data is that DEMO is a positive correlation between the content of the box held by the
contestant at the time the oﬀer is made and the amount DEMO money oﬀered, controlling for the size of the
lottery. Forinstancethecorrelationbetweenthemonetaryoﬀer(relativetotheexpectedvalueofthelottery)DEMO
andtherelativecontentoftheboxheldbythecontestantis 0.36 atthe ﬁfthoﬀerand 0.32 atthefourthoﬀer.
This positive correlation suggests that the oﬀerer ﬁnds it proﬁtable to “convince” the contestant to forego
ahighprizebyoﬀering a DEMO high amount more frequently than when the contestant has nothing in
her hands. In Appendix A we suggest a theoretical framework to describe the DEMO behavior of the
oﬀerer. In the empirical estimation we take the behavior of the oﬀerer as given and use the equilibrium
strategy that we DEMO
Selection
The show “Aﬀari Tuoi” which means literally ‘your business’ aired for the ﬁrst time on the Italian
television channel RAI 1 on October, 13th 2003 and has been on the air for four seasons14 .Theshowwas
DEMO There are only few exceptions to thispattern. In some episodesoﬀ ersaremademore frequently i.e. afterone box is opened.
12 The host himself is not aware DEMO the content of the box held by the contestant.
13 Further discussion of the advantages of such approach is provided in the following section.
DEMO The four seasons correspond to Fall 2003, Spring 2004, Fall 2004, Spring 2005.
6
interrupted for the summer on June, 3rd 2005 and resumed in the fall of 2005 with a new host15 .Endemol,
theproducingcompanyandaDutchmultinational,istheowneroftheshow’sformatandholdstherightsto
produce DEMO lease the format to the various TV stations. The show is vastly popular in Italy with peaks of
shareof40percentinprimetime. Thisleavesnodoubtastowhethertheparticipantsobservedthestructure
of the show and DEMO aware of the choices involved in the game.
We collected information about the participants selection by interviewing one of the three authors of
the DEMO Before the show started the game was unknown and no ads had been run. Endemol contacted
severalassociationsandculturalgroupsthatmightsuggestthenameof possibleparticipants. Afterthe ﬁrst
seasoncandidatesstartedapplyingandselectionsweremadefromthepoolofapplicants. Theinterviewwas
limited to DEMO few minutes and did not involve any questions regarding risk attitudes or previous gambling
experiences. Throughout the four seasons the only two criteria followed DEMO select participants were telegenic
look and ‘average’ income. According to the ﬁrst criterion people were selected who showed an entertaining
personality and/or looks. DEMO to the second criterion participants that were believed to have high
incomes were rejected. As one of the authors puts it: “We would not select the wife of a jeweler”. While we
believe the former criterion DEMO not create severe selection bias, the latter criterion might make the DEMO
not representative of the population. This feature of the selection also limits the extent to which we can
compare risk attitudes across income levels DEMO this study. As we admit this potential problem, we should
report DEMO the intention of the authors was to select the “average Italian” so that the audience could relate
to the participant. However, based on observables, participants appear close to the median of the general
population, withsomeevidentdiﬀerenceonlyintheover-representativenessof DEMO(bothrelatively
rich, like Valle D’Aosta, and relatively poor, like Basilicata DEMO Molise).
Self-selection is a concern in this set-up where participation is entirely voluntary and where there is
certainly a cost for participating. In DEMO one might suggest that the show might attract relatively
more risk-loving subjects and this would bias the estimate of risk aversion downwards. To address DEMO
concern, we asked the authors what seemed the main motivation behind DEMO participants’ applications.
Many reported the “desire to be on TV” as the main reason for applying, followed by “the need for some
cash”. Moreover, as described above, participants were contacted by the producers in the DEMO season. This
allows us to test whether self-selection is an issue in the subsequent seasons employing a contrast of time
indicators orconsideringthepresence of timetrends DEMO ourestimates. Self-selection wouldalsobeaconcern
if this show required a speciﬁc skill or a relatively high level of education. The lack of requirements along
this dimension DEMO self-selection not an issue in this respect.
3 The Model
Thissectionmodelsthestructureofthecontestantdecisionproblemexplicitly,asrequiredbytheestimation
procedure. Inordertopresenttheindividualproblemconciselywedescribetwonestedalternativesconcern-
15 Given the success of the show the previous host, Paolo Bonolis, successfully negotiated a multimillion contract with a
diﬀ erent broadcaster.
7
ing the informational content of the oﬀers. Under the ﬁrst alternative oﬀers DEMO nothing concerning the
content of the box held by the contestant at the time of the oﬀer. Under the second alternative we discuss
the DEMO where oﬀers have informational content. The contestant optimally makes use of such information.
Finally we present some remarks concerning the role of the oﬀerer.
DEMO The contestant’s decision problem
3.1.1 Preferences
For each game show played by a contestant t =1,...,T,16 let ut(yt) indicate t’s vN-M utility function where
yt represents t’swealthandthe contestantisassumedtobehaveasanexpectedutilitymaximizer. Weallow
forheterogeneityinthecontestants’preferencesforriskandparameterize ut(yt) byarandomvector θt joint
normally distributed N(Mt, Σt) and independently across DEMO An (important) benchmark example we will
employthroughout is ut(yt) DEMO relativeriskaversion (CRRA),i.e. ut(yt)= yt1−γt /(1 −γt), with
γt ∼ N(µt ,σt).
3.1.2 The optimization problem
Let us consider theproblem of contestant t (indexes are omitted). Deﬁne a stage s of the game as thephase
of the game when an DEMO is made and the contestant has to decide to accept or reject the oﬀer. From the
description in Section 2 we set s ∈ DEMO, 2, 3, 4, 5}. At stage s the contestant faces a lottery characterized by a
set of prizes Ks and corresponding probabilities DEMO .Theset Ks = {ki} consists of prizes not yet discovered
at stage s and Ps consists of the probabilities assigned to each of those DEMO being held by the contestant:
Ps = {pi|ki ∈ Ks} ,DEMO
with Ppi =1, so for instance at s =1,pi =1/DEMO Denote also the (unknown) prize contained in the
0
contestant’s box as
ki ∈ Ks.
Suppose now that at every stage s the DEMO is presented with a (positive) monetary oﬀer17 ,that
we indicate DEMO ms . The contestant’s decision consists of either accepting the oﬀer, DEMO terminating
the game and renouncing the option value of playing, or DEMO the oﬀer and proceeding to the next stage
s +1. Accepting an oﬀer is therefore an absorbing state. Indicate the decision by the contestant DEMO stage s
as ds ∈ {0, 1} , where ds =1 DEMO the oﬀer is accepted and ds =0 if the oﬀer is rejected.
At s the contestant compares the utility from the monetary oﬀer ms DEMO the continuation value from
rejecting the oﬀer and therefore faces a dynamic optimization problem where the value function of the
16 Given that each DEMO plays only one game we let the index t indicate both the contestant and the game played.
17 Thepossibilitythattheoﬀ erconsistsofanchangeofboxesisnotrelevantforthecontestant’sproblem undertheassumption
A1 (below), as it will become clear in the following section. For this reason DEMO this section we consider only monetary oﬀ ers in
the game. This simpliﬁ es the exposition and the analysis. The Appendix contains the formulation DEMO of the “change”
option.
i
8
monetary oﬀer V at s is the maximal:
Vs(Ps,Ks,DEMO) (1)
=max {dsu(y +ms )+(1 −ds)Es DEMO(Ps+1,Ks+1,ms+1)|Ωs,Ks,Ps]} .
ds∈{0,1}
In (1) Es [·] indicates the expectation operator conditional on the information set at DEMO, Ωs, and the state
ofthegame (Ks,Ps). Theexpectation E DEMO
openings and over the distribution of oﬀers conditional on the lottery faced by the contestant at the next
stage s+1.Let
s +1 of the DEMO
of triplets of prizes out of the remaining set Ks . For instance, since K4 is composed of ﬁve prizes, then the
numberofpossiblepathsfollowedbyopeninganythreeboxesanddiscoveringthreeprizesinHence, H5 =10 and the realizations q (hs+1) K4 is ¡ ¢ DEMO
path hs+1 beingfollowed. Let s+1 bea(discrete)randomvariabledistributedaccordingtotheprobability
h˜s+1 beadiscreterandomvariablethatindicatesthepathfollowedbetweenstage s andstage
h˜s+1 has support of dimension Hs+1,where Hs+1 is the number of DEMO combinations
5
2
. Indicate with the probability of a speciﬁc
h5 ∈ {1, 2,..., 10}
m˜
distribution fs+1 (ms+1|hs+1).Thatis, DEMO(.) is the distribution of the oﬀer at stage s +1,DEMO
function of the path followed between s and s +1, and DEMO the equilibrium strategy of the oﬀerer. The
discreteness assumption of s+1 is made solely for consistency with our empirical implementation.
The continuation value of DEMO game at stage s +1 is given by:
m˜
(2)DEMO
Es [Vs+1(Ps+1,Ks+1,ms+1)|Ωs,Ks,Ps]
P q (hs+1) mP+1 fs+1 (ms+1 | hs+1) Vs+1 (Ps+1 (hs+1) ,Ks+1 (hs+1) ,ms+1) .
=
h
s+1 s
whereweusethenotation Ps+1 (hs+1) and Ks+1 (hs+1) to emphasize that they depend on the actual DEMO
followed. The player information set Ωs at s includes the distributions q(.) and fs+1(.). The expression (2)
relies on DEMO assumption:
s follows a probability distribution fs (ms|hs) independent of the prize held ki0 ∈ Ks.
A1: Oﬀer m˜
Given A1 the probability of each path considered by the contestant is constant at any DEMO:
q (hs )=1/Hs
and so are the probabilities assigned to each remaining prize:
1 ki
Ps = ½pi = n(DEMO) | ∈ Ks¾, (3)
where the function n(Ks) simply indicates the number of elements of Ks . The expression (3) presents a
trivial form of updating (i.e. counting the boxes remaining)DEMO Moreover, given that the opening of the boxes
is performed by DEMO uninformed contestant, there is no Monty Hall’s problem18 in the computation DEMO Ps.
18 Please refer to the Appendix B for a detailed discussion of Bayesian updating in a Monty Hall type of problem and the
DEMO erences from this game’s structure under A1.
9
3.1.3 Solution and estimation of the dynamic model
The solution of the DEMO is numerical. Consider an oﬀer at the last stage of the game, s =5, when only
prizes K5 = {ki ,kj} are left and the probability of the participant having prize ki in her box DEMO pi =1/2.
The maximal (1) can be rewritten as:
V5(P5,K5,m5)
=max {d5u(y +m5 )+(1 −d5)[u(y +ki)pi +u(y +kj )(1 −pi )]} .
d5∈{0,1}
Therefore the ﬁnal decision is:
d5 = I [u(DEMO +m5) > (u(y +ki )+ u(y +kj ))/2] . (4)
In (4), I [·] is an DEMO function taking value 1 if the expression in brackets is true, DEMO otherwise. For any
possible pair of prizes in the set K4 such decision can be calculated. It follows that (1) can be solved DEMO
backward recursion. For instance, when oﬀer m4 ¢ =10 possible ending DEMO at stage 5
to be considered in the choice made at 4. is made there are ¡
Within an episode a contestant is assumed DEMO solve the model above. Data consist of her observed
choices for each actual oﬀer and the complete evolution of theprize distribution. Since the opening DEMO boxes
producesrandomlyindependentdrawsandthereforetheevolutionoftheprizedistributionisexogenous,the
probability of any sequence of choices for stages ≤ 5,where
Pr[d1 (5)
5
2
S¯
1,..., S¯ DEMO the ending stage, is given by:
S¯
]= Q
s=1 DEMO,Ks,ms] .
,...,dS¯
The likelihood contribution of the game DEMO by a contestant t is therefore given by (5) with the addition
of the appropriate indexing by t of decisions, oﬀers, and DEMO Hence, the log likelihood of the model for
the T game DEMO recorded is given by:
log L = P log ÃQ¯t Pr£d ,ms¤!
P log ¡Pr £d
T S
t t t
s
t=1 s=1 |Ps ,Ks t
(6)
S¯
P ,Ks,ms¤¢ .
T
t
t t
s
|Ps t t
=
t=1 s=1
3.1.4 DEMO and estimation of the static (myopic) model
Finally, consider the DEMO of a static contestant, that is a myopic player who disregards DEMO continua-
tion value of (1) and at every stage decides according to a static rule depending exclusively upon her risk
preferences:
1 (7)
ds = I "u(y +ms) > n(Ks) Xu(y +ki)#
where the summation is over the remaining prizes DEMO Ks . Notice that ignoring the dynamic component of
the game does not change the likelihood contribution (5) nor the log likelihood (6). Since at each stage
of the game the contestant exclusively evaluates DEMO and lotteries according to her taste for risk, she
also disregards DEMO form of strategic interaction within the game. The following two subsections describe
incorporating strategic interaction in the dynamic problem of a more sophisticated contestant.
DEMO
i
3.2 The contestant’s decision problem with informative oﬀers
Let us now relax DEMO A1 and consider:
s follows a probability distribution fs (ms|hs,DEMO = ki) ,ki ∈ Ks,
A10 : Oﬀer m˜
where the likelihood of the signal “oﬀer” is fs . We assume that DEMO (dynamically optimizing) contestant
now takes into account that the monetary oﬀer ms received is correlated with the prize contained in the
box held DEMO the time of the oﬀer. The probability distribution fs is assumed identical for all t andinthe
empiricalsectionwewillapproximateitwiththeempiricalequilibriumplayweactuallyobserveinthedata.
In addition we assume that:
A2: Every contestant updates her priors by Bayes rule.
By Bayes rule it DEMO that the posterior probabilities assigned by the contestant to each remaining
prize are:
Ps (ms) (8)
⎨⎪⎧ pi (ms)= DEMO (ms|hs,ki = k ∈ Ks⎬⎪⎫
where pi (ms−1) indicates DEMO prior held before the o⎩⎪ ¡ms|hs,kﬀerj = k0 ¢ pj (DEMO,hs) | ki ⎭⎪
i0) pi (ms−1,hs)
=
DEMO
m is made19 , but after a new triplet of prizes has
s
dropped out20 . Note that both (8) and (3) DEMO on the path followed hs but that in general will diﬀer
under A10 and A2.
Under assumptions A10 and A2 the choice set of DEMO contestant can be expanded in two dimensions.
First, it is now DEMO to incorporate in the model the behavior of the contestant when the oﬀer made is
a “change” and not only a monetary oﬀer. At DEMO the probability πs of receiving a change instead of an oﬀer
is assumed independent of ki0 ∈ Ks and hs (condition that we verify in the data at every stage21 ). In a
change at stage s no signal is given, but the player can decide to swap boxes before continuing. The fact
that monetaryoﬀers are uninformative under A1 and DEMO ∈ Ps are constant makes considering changes in the
decision problem(1) irrelevant (since each box has the same probability of containing each DEMO). However,
under A10 and A2 each pi is not constant and critically depends on the informativeness of the previous
monetary oﬀers (if any). If the probability assigned to holding a high prize in DEMO is low, then by changing
the box held with another one DEMO contestant increases the chances of ending up holding a higher prize.
Second,thedecisionofwhichboxtoopenbetweenstagescanbecomerelevant. Considerhavingaccepted
achangeat s and rejected an (informative) oﬀer ms−1. Is DEMO optimal to open the old box the contestant was
19 In case no previous oﬀer ms−1 exists it holds that pi(ms−1)= pi DEMO/n(Ks−1) .
⎨⎧20piNote that Bayesian updating upon opening of a DEMO and dropping out of prize(ms,h00)= p (m ,hs) | ki ∈ K00⎬⎫ where Ks = kr ∪K00 kr implies that Ps (ms,h00)=
⎩is the updated history).jP=r pj(sm−s1−1,hs) ⎭
s
(K00 the set of prizes remaining from the original DEMO and h00
i
s
s
21
Results available from the authors upon request.
11
s
s
Pfs
s
j
holdingbeforethechangeortoopenonlyboxesforwhichtheposteriorsarethesame? Thedecisiondepends
on the solution of a dynamic programming problem that extends (1) to the case of informative oﬀers and
can be found DEMO Appendix B.
3.3 Remarks on the oﬀerer’s decision problem
Someimportantremarksareinorderconcerningtheroleofthe“Infamous”withinthebehavioralframework
above.
First, by relying on the estimated equilibrium strategy of the oﬀerer, fs(DEMO) for s =1,..., 5,itispossible
to abstract from modeling explicitly any component of the oﬀerer’s decisional problem in order to close the
DEMO There are tworeasonswhywefollowthisapproach. The ﬁrstissimplicity. Theobjectivefunctionof
the oﬀerer is multi-dimensional and this complicates its formalization substantially (for instance, it depends
on: the length of the episode, the amount disbursed relative to the show’s per-episode production budget,
the history of payments). Second, our approach seems appealing on the grounds that the multiplicity
of equilibria of the dynamic game DEMO the informed oﬀerer (a long-run player) and the uninformed
contestant (DEMO short-run player who observes the entire history of the show) could DEMO resolved only under
relatively arbitrary reﬁnements. Our solution is to rely on the data concerning which equilibrium is played.
In Appendix A we propose DEMO simple framework to represent the interaction between the oﬀerer and the
contestant and we show that the optimal strategy of the Infamous depends on DEMO assumption about the
behavior of the contestant. We assume that the oﬀerer is risk neutral and the contestant is risk averse. We
modeltheinteractionasareputationgamewithaseries ofshort-runplayers(DEMO)observingthe
behavior of the long-run player (the oﬀerer). We consider DEMO strategies where the Infamous varies the
oﬀer according to the content of the box in the contestant’s hands and we conclude that if the DEMO
updatesherbeliefsaboutthecontentoftheboxheld ki0 ,theoptimalstrategyfortheInfamous(theonethat
minimizes the expected payout to the contestant) is to oﬀer a constant amount (the certainty equivalent of
the lottery). If the contestant were risk neutral then the oﬀerer’s expected payout DEMO the contestant would
be equal to the expected value of the lottery, as the oﬀerer would be indiﬀerent between making an oﬀer
correlated with the content of the box held and making a constant oﬀer. Since DEMO contestant is risk averse,
the least-cost strategy for the oﬀerer is to fully insure her and signalling the content of the box through DEMO
oﬀer is suboptimal as it stands in the way of full insurance. We show that it is optimal for the oﬀerer to
make an DEMO m that is positively correlated with the content of the box held by the contestant only when
the contestant does not optimally update her DEMO based on the oﬀer received, when she does not employ
(8). In that case making a relatively higher oﬀer guarantees acceptance on DEMO part of the contestant and
saves the Infamous the high prize. Conversely, a low oﬀer is rejected and the low prize is paid. Although
we realize that the example in Appendix A postulates the total absence DEMO Bayesian updating, we believe
imperfect Bayesian updating can justify the observed DEMO between the oﬀer made and the prize held
by the contestant.
Employing the empirical likelihood of the oﬀer instead of a theoretical best response DEMO the contestants’
12
problem has clearly potential shortcomings. Particularly, it may act as a confounding factor in disentan-
gling the relative role of rationality in the strategy DEMO by the contestant and of risk preferences in the
estimation procedure. In order to address this issue we employ the following strategy. We begin DEMO esti-
mating a behavioral model for the contestant that relies exclusively on risk preferences and abstracts from
anystrategiccomponent: thestaticmodel assuming (7). Wethenaddprogressivelayers DEMO sophistication in
the contestant’s behavioral model (we estimate the uninformative and DEMO the informative oﬀers dynamic
model) and observe the variation in the DEMO If estimates do not change substantially as the model
assumed for the contestant approximates a more sophisticated behavior, then it is possible to argue that
the estimates of risk preferences are not excessively sensitive to the DEMO assumption and the strategic
component does not appear to be ﬁrst order.
Aﬁnalremarkrelatestothecomputationalimplementation. Empiricallytheoﬀerer’sequilibriumstrategy
appears to be independent on the parameterization of the individual DEMO, that is
oftheindividualcharacteristicsofthecontestant. Whilethebehavioralframeworkabovedoesnotrelyupon
this assumption in any fundamental way, it is worth noting that the estimation strategy turns out to lose
substantial DEMO burden. We will refer to this assumption in what follows as A3.A3’s empirical
content is validated in the reduced-form analysis available from the authors DEMO request.
m˜
s is independent
4 Estimation results
This section presents the estimation results for the model. Under the distributional assumption concerning
individual preferences, estimation by Maximum Likelihood is feasible. This allows us to estimate the DEMO
ditional moments of the distribution from which the individual risk aversion parameters are drawn. Under
thenormalityassumption, the ﬁrsttwomomentsofthedistributionof θ characterizetheentiredistribution.
4.1 CRRA parameterization
We begin by introducing a parametrization for the contestant t’s utility over wealth. DEMO ut(yt) be constant
relative risk aversion, ut(yt)= yt1−γt /(1 −γt). Consistently with previous research22 , let us assume DEMO the
initialreferencepointfor t’sindividualwealth yt isherannuallaborincome. Wedonotobserveannuallabor
income directly, but we are DEMO to approximate it by matching the information concerning job and city of
provenience provided by the contestant during the game show with the Italian DEMO of census relevant
sources. The relative risk aversion parameter follows γt ∼ N(µt,σt) and in particular for observation t:
γt = x0 β +ηt
t
ηt ∼
=exp(zt0 δ),
2
N(0,σt )
2
σt
22 See for instance Gertner (1993) and Cohen and Einav (2005).
(9)
13
where both xt and zt are vectors inclusive of individual and time DEMO The individual covariates we
are able to recover from the game show tapes are: gender, age, city and region of provenience, employment
DEMO (employed or not, type of job), household characteristics (married, divorced, or not married,
number of children, age and sex DEMO children). We do not have access to any private information regarding
the contestants. The time covariates include date and broadcasting season of the DEMO indicators.
At each stage s of each game t, it is DEMO calculate the continuation value of playing the game as a
functionoftheRRAparameter γ ,givenallpossiblefutureboxopenings,theempiricaldistributionoffuture
oﬀers as a function of expected value of the lottery, the optimal behavior at future oﬀers, the empirical
probabilityofchangeversusmonetaryoﬀers. Thecontinuationvalueisamonotonic,decreasing,DEMO
function of γ and therefore there exists a unique level of γ at which the contestant is indiﬀerent between
the oﬀer and continuing the DEMO If the contestant is more risk-averse than what the threshold implies
(DEMO the RRA parameter γt falls above the threshold) she accepts the DEMO If the contestant is less risk-
averse, i.e. the RRA parameter DEMO falls below the threshold, the contestant rejects. This reasoning implies
that DEMO acceptance/rejection behavior on the show imposes (stochastic) bounds on γt : an upper bound
γ s,t,H in case of a DEMO or a lower bound γ s,t,L in case of an acceptance. However, since accepting
an oﬀer is an absorbing state, there DEMO at most one γ S,t,L¯ , while there can be multiple γ s,t,H at diﬀerent s.
Underassumption A3 theprocessgeneratingthestochasticboundsallowstopartitionthesetofobservations
into DEMO groups: TR, individuals for which only rejections are observed; TA DEMO for which only an
acceptance is observed; TAR , observations for DEMO both rejections and an acceptance are observed. Under
thisparameterizationtheloglikelihoodof themodel(6)forthe T gameshowsrecordedcanberewrittenas:
= ∈PAR ln[Φ(ht −µt∗) −Φ(lt −µt∗)]
+t∈PR ln[Φ(ht −µt∗
=min©γ s,t,Hx0 β| s> 2ª
log L
t T
PA ln[1 −Φ(lt −µt∗)]
)]+
t∈T
T
and γt,H
= γt,H γ
σt ,lt = t,L ,µt∗ = t and where for computational feasibility we restrict our
wherewedeﬁne ht σt σt
attention only to the ﬁnal 3 stages of the DEMO
The computation of the stochastic thresholds diﬀers between the uninformative and informative oﬀers
case. Whilethecontestantemploysconstantprobabilitiesintheformer,sheemploystheequilibriumstrategy
of the oﬀerer in the latter. We obtain DEMO empirical signal (oﬀer) likelihoods from the data, for each stage
DEMO> 2 and for each box held by the participant at stage DEMO (relative to remaining boxes). We discretize
the support of the DEMO in terms of percentages of expected value (due to data restrictions DEMO allow for
23 Empirically we observe always a change at s =1 (with one exception, an oﬀ er of irrelevant amount that was DEMO). At
this stage such decision is always uninformative, as the DEMO begins the game with ﬂ at priors (we verify empirically that DEMO
randomization of the boxes’ content is implemented). We exclude stage 2 from the analysis for two reasons. First m2 is always
amonetaryoﬀ er DEMO irrelevant amount as the producers of the game try to avoid an excessively premature ending. Second, the
computational burden for this early stage is extremely intense. However we choose to employ the decisions at stage 2 DEMO two
particular instances where substantial inconsistencies in the choice set were identiﬁed.
14
5 segments: 0-20, 20-40, 40-60, 60-80, 80-100) and obtain DEMO empirical frequency of oﬀers at stage s as a
functionoftheboxheldbythecontestant(threelikelihoodmatrices,oneforeachstage). Theinformativeness
of the oﬀer also varies with the expected value of DEMO lottery and empirically is the strongest for lotteries
with mean above 20, 000 euros. We therefore model the signal as uninformative below such amount. The
contestant thus performs Bayesian updating of her priors conditional on the DEMO observed at every stage
and along all future lottery and possible oﬀer paths. The empirical likelihoods are reported in Table A3 in
the Appendix.
DEMO, noticethat thecomputationof thestochastic thresholds isthesimplest inthestaticcontestant’s
problem, that is an individual deciding on the basis of (7), as option values are disregarded.
4.2 CRRA results
4.2.1 Reduced-form calculations
Tobuildintuitiononthequantitativeimplicationsofourmodelwebeginbybrieﬂyconsideringanextremely
reduced-formcalculation. Table2AreportstheexpectedvalueoftheinitiallotteryofTable1A.Itis 52, 560
euros. Supposeallthecontestantsdointhisgameshowistobuyinsurance. Then,giventhattheytakehome
an average ﬁnal payoﬀ of 29, 436.09 euros, DEMO is the CRRA parameter estimates such that this amount
is the exact certainty equivalent? For a representative contestant with annual labor income around 18, 000
euros (the mean of our sample24 )itis γ =0.53. The certainty equivalent for a γ =1 contestant would be
insteadlower,around 18, 000 euros. Foracontestantemployingasareferencepointforwealthatenpercent
annuity of her future annual labor income (i.e. a lifetime wealth around 180, 000 euros) calculation shows
that γ =1.62. DEMO mean parameter of constant relative risk aversion around 1 is an estimate that concords
with the majority of the theoretical literature, see for instance the discussion in Weitzman (2005). This
result is also in accord with recent empirical calibrations derived from labor supply decisions such as those
DEMO(2005). Wewillkeeptheseback-of-the-envelopecalculationsinmindwhendiscussingthe
structural estimates below, as we would be wary DEMO large discrepancies from these intuitive results.
Another coarse, but intuitive way DEMO look at the data is to focus on the ﬁfth stage of the game. All
the contestant does at this point is to choose DEMO a monetary oﬀer m5 and a lottery consisting of two
prizes. Abstract fromanysophistication in the updating of the subjectiveprobabilities and assume that the
average DEMO ﬁnds the two prizes with probability 1/2. What is the CRRA parameter that maximizes
the score of correctly predicted decisions in the observed DEMO? Table 2B indicates that out of the 78
episodes reaching s DEMO a parameter γ ∈ (1, 2) performs the best in DEMO actual decisions. Again a
quantity that seems reasonable. For the interested reader Table 2C reports a random sample of the actual
and predicted decisions (about 1/3 of the overall data available).
24 The Purchasing DEMO Parity over GDP for Italy in 2000 as reported by the Penn World Tables (Mark 6.1)is 1, 709.11
Italian lira with and DEMO lira/euro parity is 1936, 27. This implies a PPP adjusted DEMO annual labor income of 18, 000 euros
to be equivalent to DEMO 20, 392.40 US dollars.
15
4.2.2 Structural-form static results
Table 3A presents the maximum likelihood estimates of DEMO
(7). This is the simplest behavioral model for an individual DEMO, as it relies exclusively on
risk preferences. We employ three diﬀerent DEMO of the conditional density for unobserved taste
heterogeneity. In column (1) we begin by estimating a model where risk preferences γt are normally DEMO
with mean µ and standard deviation σ, that is both x DEMO z are assumed constant. The mean CRRA
parameter is estimated at 0.8834 with an asymptotic standard error of 0.0473 while the standard deviation
is DEMO at 0.5341 with an asymptotic standard error of 0.0329. Both estimates are very precise and
indicate that a log utility approximates the mean preferences DEMO our contestants quite well. Particularly, the
estimateforthemeanaccordstosensibletheoreticalpredictionsandtocommonperceptionintheliterature.
At the same time DEMO uncover substantial variation in taste heterogeneity for the population, a dimension
DEMO has received little attention in the empirical research of choice under risk25.
In column (2) we allow the conditional mean of the unobserved DEMO parameters to depend on a set
of observable characteristics of the individual, the contestant’s income level, and a set of time covariates.
Beginning DEMO the set of individual covariates we are able to test if risk preferences diﬀer with respect to
a polynomial in age, gender, or DEMO of provenience. We do not observe systematic diﬀerences in terms
of age, a result common to the majority of the literature. The F-test p-value for joint signiﬁcance of the
age polynomial is however not very high: 0.11. More interestingly, we do not ﬁnd female contestants to
present levelsof constant relativeriskaversion diﬀerent frommaleplayers. If anything, theopposite. Albeit
part of the literature seems to support the view of a gender diﬀerential in risk attitudes, results are either
mixed or not robust to alternative speciﬁcations (for instance in Cohen and Einav (2005)). A standard
asymptotic chi-square test DEMO cannot reject a null joint eﬀects of regional dummies on the mean. Atest on
the coeﬃcient of individual income cannot reject a null correlation DEMO unobserved risk preferences and
income. This is a reassuring result, given DEMO constant relative risk aversion assumption under which we are
operating.
Consider the coeﬃcients for the time trend (based on the date the show was broadcast) and the coeﬃ-
cients on the seasonal indicators, as they DEMO a speciﬁc interpretation in terms of the contestants’ selection
process26 . Arguably, the sample of contestants we employ is more representative of the general population
than samples of participants in laboratory experiments, but it is still necessary to produce a test of the
hypothesis that our sample is DEMO representative of the overall population. Indeed, it would not
been unreasonable DEMO argue that more risk-loving individuals could self-select on the game show. For this
purpose we rely on a shift in the selection process with DEMO contestants were admitted to the show. The
show organizers indicated to us that the selection of the participants changed during the ﬁrst season from
DEMO process in which they would be inviting members of various cultural associations to one in which people
watching the show on TV would call DEMO ask if they could participate. At that point in time, if DEMO
25 An exception in this respect are Cohen and Einav (2005)DEMO However their results are particularly puzzling, even with respect
to the DEMO of γ. Their estimates exceed eighty for the CRRA case.
26 Also see Section 2 for this point.
16
more risk-loving individuals were beginning to self-select into the pool of participants, we should observe
a negative and signiﬁcant trend in the levels of DEMO aversion of the contestants. This would imply a cor-
responding negative dynamic on the coeﬃcients of the seasonal indicators27 . Thisisnotobservedinthe
data. The coeﬃcient DEMO the time trend is positive (12.7240)andinsigniﬁcant (s.e. 16.7935), while no clear
patternisrecognizableinthe(jointlyinsigniﬁcant)seasonaldummies28 . Basedonthesetestswedonot ﬁnd
evidence of preferences-based selection DEMO the data.
For column (2) calculation of the predicted mean of the model conﬁrms the results from column (1)
=0.8843),asdoestheestimatedstandarddeviationofthedistribution(DEMO 0.4633
with a s.e. of 0.0434).
Incolumn(3)ofTable3Athemodelmaintainsthesamespeciﬁcationfortheconditionalmeanascolumn
(2)DEMO γt todependonobservables. Previousresults
for the mean of the RRA parameters are substantially conﬁrmed. With respect to σt the main ﬁnding is
a mild diﬀerence DEMO the dispersion of risk preferences with respect to the trend. The trend variable has a
negative coeﬃcients, suggesting a reduction in the dispersion of preferences over time and is signiﬁcant at
the ﬁve percent level. The DEMO of robustness of this result to further speciﬁcation checks prevents us from
givingitaclearerinterpretation. Ingeneralweconclude that,albeitsubstantialdispersionofpreferencesfor
risk is present (the average predicted
for dispersion in tastes.
(µˆ
σˆt is 0.4161), no single individual covariate seems to account robustly
4.2.3 Dynamic results and Bayesian updating of the contestant
DEMO 3B presents maximum likelihood structural estimates for the uninformative oﬀer dynamic model.
We follow the same outline of Table 3A. In column (1) DEMO estimated mean of γ increases to 1.0879 with
asymptotics.e. 0.1014. Althoughtheparameterispreciselyestimated,wecannotrejectthatitissigniﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the static model. Thus, it accords with the intuitive reduced-form calculations we performed.
An estimated standard deviation of 1.07650 with s.e. 0.0523 DEMO however larger relative to the mean than in
thestaticcase. Table3Cpresentsmaximumlikelihoodestimatesunderassumptions A10 and A2.Extending
the model in this direction allows to account for the informational DEMO that we empirically observe in
monetaryoﬀers. Similarlytocolumn(1)ofTable2,incolumn(1)weassumetheRRAparameterstobei.i.d.
The estimate of the mean of γ is 1.3688 with a s.e. DEMO 0.1254 and the estimate for the standard deviation is
1.2800 (s.e. DEMO). Again both estimates are signiﬁcant, below the 1 percent critical DEMO In addition,
is larger and statistically diﬀerent from the estimate of Table 3B for the same speciﬁcation.
Concerning columns (2) and (3), the estimates conﬁrm the ﬁndings of Table 3A-3B both in the DEMO
where the mean of γt depends on observables and in the case where both mean and standard deviation do.
Again we reassuringly ﬁnd neither DEMO eﬀect of income on the mean, nor evidence of selection. In
DEMO, although the season dummies become signiﬁcant in columns (2) and (3) for the mean, there is no clear
path of self-selection DEMO For instance, in Table 3C, column (2), the season DEMO dummy presents an
µˆ
27 We thank Luigi Zingales for suggesting us this additional test.
28 Coeﬃ cients and s.e. not reported, but available upon request.
17
estimated coeﬃcient of 1.6183 with s.e. of 2.0604,season2is 1.5101 (s.e. 1.3789), season 3 −0.0346 (s.e.
0.6541). But for column (3) coeﬃcients are respectively: 1.3805 (s.e. 0.9277), 1.6349 (s.e. 0.6245), 0.4120
(s.e. 0.3533).
Remark on testing for Bayesian updating. Even if monetary oﬀers are informative, it is not necessarily
the case that contestants employ Bayesian updating when deciding under risk. Is it possible to discriminate
DEMO? Wehavealreadyobservedhowthisisunfeasibleinpresenceofmonetaryoﬀers
alone. However, under the assumption of informative oﬀers it is possible to test for Bayesian updating by
observing if box-changing behavior conforms DEMO theory. If for any constant relative risk aversion parameter
contestants decide to change their box following informative oﬀers, this would suggests that indeed their
subjective probabilities have been updated incorporating such informational content.
A striking feature DEMO the data in this respect. Oﬀers preceding changes are generally uninfor-
mative. Conditional on a change at s0 > 2 the null fs (ms|hs,ki0 = ki )= fs (ms|hs) for the oﬀer likelihoods
cannot be rejected at any standard statistical levels. Our explanation is the following. DEMO are random
for given history of the game, but for games DEMO lose all large prizes at the onset changes become more
likely. Sinceoﬀersareuninformativeatrelativelylowstakes,thismakesBayesianupdatinguntestablealong
this direction.
4.2.4 Lifetime wealth measures
In the empirical analysis up DEMO this section we have employed average labor income as an approximation of
the individual’s wealth. We propose two alternative reference points in order to DEMO the robustness
of our results.
First, we employ, as a measure of wealth, average labor income multiplied by a factor of 10.Thisis
reasonableiftheindividualdiscountrateisrelatively low. Foragivenconcaveutilityfunction,byincreasing
the reference point we necessarily consider a range over DEMO the utility function is relatively less concave.
Therefore,inordertoexplainthechoicesobservedin thedata,theutilityfunctionneedstobemoreconcave
than the one we estimate for the case of a reference point equal DEMO annual labor income. For the speciﬁc
caseoftheCRRAutilityfunctionthisintuitionisconﬁrmedasweobserveanestimateof γ around 3 forthe
three models presented (static, uninformative oﬀer, informative oﬀer).
Second,weemployzerowealthasareferencepoint. Contrarytothepreviouscase,wearenowconsidering
a lower range of values over which a given function will DEMO relatively more concave. Therefore, in order to
generate the observed set DEMO choices, the degree of concavity must be lower than the case DEMO annual labor
income as reference point. Indeed, the CRRA coeﬃcient γ DEMO precisely estimated at around 0.5 for all three
models considered.
The main result in this section is that we obtain mean values of the DEMO parameters in a sensible,
lower single-digit range under diverse assumptions relative to wealth. Notice also that the log likelihoods in
columns (1) DEMO Tables 3A-C are substantially higher than the ones reported in Table 4 for quite comparable
number of observations, favouring our initial choice of reference point29.
29 Thediﬀ erencesin thenumberofobservationsaredueto inconsistenciesinthechoicesets(discussed inthefollowing section)
18
4.3 Consistency of the choice set
The unobserved heterogeneity assumption under which DEMO operate requires consistency in the choice set of
each individual, a DEMO that we now discuss. Table 5 reports the number of inconsistent thresholds
found in the analysis of the static, the uninformative, and the DEMO oﬀer model respectively. Each
behavioral model provides upper bounds, lower bounds, or both, for each episode of the game show. A
pair of inconsistent thresholds indicates an empty interval of RRA parameters, i.e. two choices by the same
contestant implying an upper bound for rejection lower than DEMO lower bound for acceptance. Out of a total
252 episodes, the DEMO of games in which we ﬁnd inconsistencies is 11 for the static model, 8 for the
uninformative oﬀer model, and 15 for the DEMO oﬀer model. The number of inconsistent choices is
alwayssmallerthan 6 percentofthetotalnumberofregisteredchoicesovermonetaryoﬀersinthesample30.
We can distinguish inconsistencies further, depending on the distance between the acceptance and the
rejection thresholds. Let us deﬁne a large inconsistency as an acceptance DEMO bound higher of more than
1 CRRA unit than the lowest rejection upper bound. Table 5 reports 4 large inconsistencies for the static
model(DEMO inconsistentthresholds), 4 fortheuninformativeoﬀermodel,and 11 fortheinformativeoﬀermodel.
Hence, a substantial fraction DEMO the inconsistencies are mild behavioral discrepancies.
There are two important implications of this result. First, the number of inconsistencies is suﬃciently
small to justify our modeling strategy based on unobserved heterogeneity. Random utility models could
incorporate DEMO the inconsistent observations by allowing for some random “error” in the execution of
the contestant’s decision, of which it would be possible to estimate the distribution. This would increase
the computational burden substantially however. By ﬁrst DEMO for the stochastic bounds on the risk
preferences’ parameters and then estimating an interval regression model we avoid solving for the stochastic
boundsinthedynamicproblemateveryiterationoftheMLestimator. Underunobservedheterogeneityand
DEMO A3, MLE is consistent, asymptotically eﬃcient and asymptotically normal. Had the threshold-
ﬁnding routine embedded in the ML optimization, the CPU-time could become almost prohibitive (a single
iteration for the informative oﬀer model exceeds 12 CPU-hours on a fast microcomputer).
Second, the data do not seem to reject contestants being expected utility maximizers, quite the contrary
especially in the static and in the uninformative oﬀers model. Assuming that individuals decide DEMO
exclusively on their marginal utility of wealth seems suﬃcient to explain observed behavior in a simple and
consistentmatter. Expectedutilityissuﬃcient toprovideaplausiblerepresentationoftheindividualchoice
under risk without producing DEMO behavior.
and the presence of 4 outliers, 1 in the static DEMO 3 in the informative oﬀ er model.
30 Even if compared to the number of episodes presenting both acceptance and rejections (across the various models we
register 86, 90, and 86 “interval” observations that are DEMO, as reported in Tables 3A-C) such numbers are not large.
Notice however that the correct reference point is the total number of episodes, not the total number of “interval” episodes
since no restriction on the DEMO of the contestant is imposed at the onset of the game.
19
4.4 A discussion of Rabin (2000)
Aspeciﬁc feature of this game show is its substantial variety in monetary payoﬀs, some of which are orders
of magnitude apart. Although every episode begins with the same set DEMO prizes reported in Table 1A, the
stochastic evolution of the game DEMO wide diﬀerences in the set of lotteries each player faces later on
in the show. Some players see small prizes dropping out early in DEMO game and end up facing extremely
attractive lotteries. Other contestants reach the ﬁnal stages of the game facing lotteries consisting of trivial
amounts of DEMO if compared to their lifetime wealth31 . We exploit such variation to investigate the
presence of substantial behavioral deviations from expected utility theory. The DEMO result of this section is
that contestants on the show seem to behave as expected utility maximizers.
Rabin(2000)’s calibrationtheoremstates that an expected DEMO whorejects asmall actuar-
ially favorable gamble for a wide range of initial wealth levels, will reject almost any large bet and therefore
exhibit an unrealistically high degree of risk aversion over large-stake gambles. This is because DEMO con-
cavity of the utility of wealth implies that marginal utility is decreasing at a paradoxically fast rate. The
theoremhasthreerelatedconsequences, thatweaddress. The ﬁrstimplicationis that acommonunderlying
concave utility of wealth cannot explain attitudes toward risk both over DEMO gambles and small gambles.
The second implication is that, if we DEMO to employ expected utility theory to explain such attitude, we
are DEMO to ﬁnd higher levels of risk aversion at small stakes than at large stakes. The third implication
is that, in order for an expected utility maximizer to have a reasonable degree of risk aversion over large
DEMO, she must be almost risk neutral over small gambles.
The ﬁ DEMO issue was addressed in the introduction where we showed that a logarithmic utility function
does a reasonably good job in explaining the acceptance and DEMO pattern across diﬀerent gamble sizes.
In this section we address the second and the third implications of the calibration theorem and we ﬁnd
that DEMO small gambles the estimates of the coeﬃcient of risk aversion is smaller than over large gambles
and, more speciﬁcally, utility is almost linear DEMO small stakes.
Table 6A-C report results concerning our basic i.i.d. speciﬁcation for unobserved heterogeneity in risk
preferences in the CRRA case (i.e. the speciﬁcation in column (1) of Tables 3A-C) at large and small
stakes. With“large-stakes”weindicateadecisionmadeinthepresenceofalotteryimplicatingasubstantial
departure from lifetime wealth. We consider to be a large-stake lottery DEMO that includes at least one prize
inexcessof 250, 000 euros(indicatedasmaxoption)DEMO, alternatively, alotterywithmeanpayoﬀsofatleast
75, 000 euros(meanoption). Conversely,with“small-stakes”weindicateadecisionmadeinthepresenceofa
lotteryimplicatingatbestafairlymodestdeparturefromlifetimewealth. DEMO
prize in excess of 25, 000 euros (min option) or, alternatively, a lottery with mean payoﬀsofatmost 18, 000
euros (mean option). For each speciﬁc behavioral model we analyze (static, uninformative, and informative
oﬀer) we sample exclusively those decisions made under the speciﬁed deﬁnitions. Each table presents the
benchmark results of column (1) in Tables DEMO (indicated as “All stakes”), and results in each of the DEMO
subsamples.
31 Consider however that 50 Euros (the minimum payment the DEMO receives) is in the high range of payoﬀsoﬀ ered in
laboratory DEMO settings.
20
We report two results. First, the parameters of the distribution of γ can be estimated precisely by
employing decisions made at large stakes only DEMO a constant relative risk aversion parameter of about
one captures the average of the sample population and its standard deviation precisely. Second, in all
speciﬁcations restricted the small-stake lotteries it is not possible to reject the DEMO of risk neutrality at the
mean (µ =0)atanystandardconﬁdence level. Notice DEMO this second result conﬁrms the well-known
proposition that expected-utility maximizing risk averse individuals should be locally risk neutral, which is
also at the basis of Rabin (2000) calibration theorem.
Areasonable criticismtothe subsampling approach we follow DEMO that large-stakelotteries aremorelikely
to appear earlier in the game while small-stake lotteries are typically limited to latter stages s =4, 5.This
implies selection into continuation of the game, as more risk loving individuals are potentially more likely
to reach the ﬁnal stages of the game. In order to DEMO this issue we show the corresponding s =4, 5
subsample results DEMO each large-stake lottery. With the exception of the static model we in fact observe
mildly lower estimates of the mean. However, we can still reject risk neutrality at the 1 percent conﬁdence
level32 for the large-stake DEMO
Table 7 reports reduced-form results of small and large-stake lotteries similar to those of Table 2B for
s =5. The aim here is no DEMO to show what γ maximizes the score of correctly predicted choices in each
subsample, but the performance of risk neutrality, γ =0, relative to such point. While risk neutrality
predicts correctly 19/32 of the DEMO lotteries vis-a-vis a 23/32 at γ =1, risk neutrality fares DEMO
worse in the large-stake case with a relative “score” of 9/25 vis-a-vis 21/25.Thistableoﬀers an intuitive
illustration of why we fail to reject DEMO neutrality at small stakes.
This set of empirical results contradicts a crucial point of departure in Rabin (2000) and Rabin and
Thaler (2001), but it is not completely unexpected. Palacios-Huerta, Serrano and Volij (DEMO) oﬀer several
intuitive illustrations of local risk neutrality. Metrick (1995) DEMO to reject risk neutrality in a relatively
small-stake game show (although DEMO the caveats we report in the introduction).
Finally, let us DEMO return to the small set of inconsistent choices described in the previous section.
We are interested in investigating whether such inconsistent behavior conforms to DEMO predictions. We
deﬁne a “Rabin’s observation” an individual characterized by the following decisions:
i. Rejection of an oﬀer when facing a large-stake lottery (determining a large-stake upper bound γL );
s,t,H
ii. DEMO(determiningasmall-stakelowerbound γS );
s,t,L
iii. The large-stake upper bound is lower than the small-stake lower bound γL <γS .
s,t,H s,t,L
Among the 8 inconsistencies found in the previous DEMO for the uninformative oﬀer case, we ﬁnd 3
“Rabin’s observations”33 . DEMO the anomaly raised by Rabin seems to be relevant in 3 out of 43 (35
consistentsmall-stake,minoptionlotteries+ 8 inconsistentones)instanceswhereindividualsface ﬁrstlarge-
32 Notice also that sample sizes between the large and small-stakes lotteries become more comparable DEMO restricting the
former to s =4, 5.
33 An example of DEMO observation of this type is given in Table 2C for the episode dated 3/12/2004.
21
stake lotteries and subsequently small-stake lotteries, all situations where such anomaly could potentially
arise.
5 Non-expected utility theories
Inthissectionweincorporateaspeciﬁcdeviationfromexpectedutilitytheory. Particularly, weassumethat
contestantsbehaveunderriskaccordingtoCumulativeProspect Theory(CPT),introducedbyTverskyand
Kahneman(1992)asasubsequentmodiﬁcationofKahnemanandTversky(1979). Diﬀerentlyfromexpected
utility theory, CPT postulates DEMO individual behavior under risk depends on: i) the evaluation of gains
and losses, v(.), and not on the ﬁnal wealth levels; ii) on the decision-weight function through which an
individualtransforms theprobabilities of DEMO weights tobeused inthedecision, ϕ(.) mappingthe
unit interval into itself34 . Speciﬁcally consider a static decision maker similar to the one illustrated by (7)
under expected utility. The stage-decision under CPT can be represented DEMO:
ds = I "v(ms) > Xϕ(pi) v(DEMO)#
and pi = 1 (10)
n(Ks)
where DEMO summation is over the remaining prizes in Ks . On the onset we need to specify that, since the
game show does not present losses relative to the initial wealth level at which the participant begins DEMO
game but only gains, our results are going to be silent DEMO respect to loss aversion, a speciﬁc condition on
the asymmetry of DEMO value function v(.) over losses and gains dominions of substantial DEMO .Letus
assume v(k)= k1−γ/(1 −γ) for γ> DEMO and γ =1, and v(k)=lnk for γ =1.
In DEMO section we will concentrate on the probability weighting function ϕ(p) DEMO In principle the same
asymmetry CPT postulates over the value function is also present in the weighting function, with diﬀerent
weighting functions for gains and losses. Again a direct test of such hypothesis is precluded by DEMO data.
We focus instead on the fact that (10) nests (DEMO) for the case of ϕ(.) linear and wealth level 0 (speciﬁcally
column 2 of Table 4 for the static model). The functional form we assume for the probability weights is a
power function, ϕ(p)= pα. This assumption is convenient as it produces an DEMO indiﬀerence function
on the (γ,α) plane of the form:
ki γ 1 , (11)
α =lnÃXµms ¶1− ! ln(n(Ks))
where for points (γ,α) above the function there is acceptance and below rejection. The expression (11)
is derived by solving for α the condition in the indicator function of (10) DEMO equality. We maintain the
assumption of unobserved heterogeneity as in (9), a condition that we now extend to:
34 Editing rules for the decision weights and memory of the decisional process are also typical DEMO within the prospect
theory framework from which we abstract. See Thaler (DEMO) for a discussion. Our approach is similar in this respect to DEMO
one followed by Jullien and Salanié (2000).
35 For discussion DEMO structural econometric applications see Cicchetti and Dubin (1994) and Jullien and Salanié (2000).
22
i
i
ηt
εt
Table 8 reports the MLE for the static model incorporating DEMO made according to (10) by individ-
uals with preferences given by (12) for both an i.i.d. speciﬁcation in which the conditional means DEMO γ and
α are constant and a speciﬁcation with conditional means depending on a set of covariates similar to those
employed in column (2) of Tables 3A-C (with the exclusion of regional and season of DEMO show ﬁxed eﬀects).
The estimate of the mean of γ in the i.i.d. speciﬁcation is 0.6543 (s.e. 0.2022) while the standard deviation
DEMO γ is 0.2421 (s.e. 0.1407). These estimates do not diﬀer DEMO from column (2) of Table 4 nor of
Table 3A, DEMO the relatively larger standard errors (all results remain signiﬁcant however). DEMO additional
parameters of interest are the mean of α, 0.9168 (s.e. 0.0595), and the standard deviation estimated at
0.0878 (s.e. 0.1042). Theestimateofthecovariancebetween the weighting function exponent α and γ is
⎝⎛
γt = DEMO β +ηt
αt = xt0 δ +εt
⎝⎛⎝⎛
0
0
⎠⎞
∼ N
⎠⎞
,
⎝⎛
σ2
η ση,ε
σ2
ση,ε ε
⎠⎞⎠⎞
−0.0087 (s.e. 0.0342). The null that the mean of α is equal to 1 cannot be rejected at standard conﬁdence
levelstendstolendsupporttotheclaimthatexpectedutilitytheory(whichimplieslinearweights)DEMO
sensibly underperform CPT in this setting. The null that the standard deviation of α is equal to 0 cannot
be rejected at standard conﬁdence DEMO tends to support the claim that no excessive dispersion in the α
is disregarded under EUT. Overall a similar picture arises from the second DEMO in which additional
individual covariances are considered.
(12)
6Concludingremarks
Thecontributionofthispapertotheempiricalliteratureondecisionmakingunderriskstemsfromthenovel
DEMO set employed, where individuals face lotteries with payoﬀs in excess of DEMO a million dollars. We are
not awareof anyexperimentalsettingswheresuchpayoﬀsarepaidwithnon-inﬁnitesimalprobabilities. The
large variation in the stakes involved allows us to address two key issues.
First, we make use of the wide variation over ﬁnal payoﬀs and estimate the DEMO of risk aversion of
contestants in the game show. We ﬁnd the mean of the unobserved distribution of constant relative risk
aversion parameters to DEMO precisely estimated slightly above one and therefore conclude that logarithmic
utility provides a suitable description of individual preferences. We also ﬁnd substantial dispersion in DEMO
preferences, as we estimate the standard deviation of the RRA parameter DEMO be around one.
Second, we address the concern, raised by Rabin (2000), that expected utility might not be suitable
to explain the diﬀerent behavior of individuals facing small and large-stakes gambles. As Palacios-Huerta,
DEMO and Volij (2004) point out, Rabin’s calibration theorem and therefore DEMO prediction of unrealistic
levels of risk aversion over large-stake lotteries, relies DEMO the rejection of small gambles for a wide range of
wealth levels. Similarly to the results reported by Palacios-Huerta, Serrano, and Volij (2004) we ﬁnd that
23
t
in a real-life experiment small gambles are accepted, indicating that a local estimate of the degree of risk
aversion for small-stakes lotteries reveals almost DEMO neutrality. Since Rabin himself suggested that “almost
risk-neutrality”oversmallgamblesistherequirementfor ﬁndingreasonableriskaversionlevelsathighstakes
we do not consider our ﬁndings in contrast with Rabin’s theorem. In fact, within the same experiment, we
are not able to reject risk neutrality at low stakes, yet our estimates start picking up some curvature in
the utility of income only when we move to larger lotteries. We believe this DEMO an encouraging result as it
suggests that the risk attitudes towards small-stake and large-stake lotteries can be derived from the same
underlying utility of DEMO
24
References
[1] Beetsma, Roel M. W. J., and Peter C. Schotman (2001), “Measuring Risk Attitudes in a Natural
Experiment: Data from the Television Game Show Lingo,” TheEconomicJournal, 111, 821-48.
[2] Berk, J. B., E. Hughson, and K. Vandezande (1996) “The Price Is DEMO, but Are the Bids? An
Investigation of Rational Decision Theory,” American Economic Review, 86(4), 954—70.
[3] Chetty, Raj (2005) “Labor Supply and Risk Aversion: A Calibration Theorem,” mimeo, UC Berkeley.
[4] Cicchetti, Charles J., and Jeﬀrey A. Dubin (1994) DEMO Microeconometric Analysis of Risk Aversion and
the Decision to Self-Insure,” Journal of Political Economy, 102(1), 169-86.
[5] Cohen, Alma, andLiranEinav(2005)“EstimatingRiskPreferencesfromDeductibleChoice,”National
Bureau of Economic Research, W.P. No. 11461.
[6] Gertner, Robert (1993) “Game Shows and Economic Behavior: Risk-Taking on ‘Card DEMO,” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, 108(2), 507-21.
[7] DEMO, Glenn W., and John A. List (2004) “Field Experiments,” Journal of Economic Literature 42,
1009—55.
[8] Holt,CharlesA.,andSusanK.Laury(2002)DEMO,” AmericanEconomic
Review, 92(5), 1644-1655.
[9] Jullien,Bruno,andBernardSalanié(DEMO)“EstimatingPreferencesunderRisk: TheCaseofRacetrack
Bettors,” Journal of Political Economy, 108(3), 503-30.
[10] Kachelmeier, Steven J., and Mohamed Shehata (1992) “Examining DEMO Preferences under High Mon-
etary Incentives: Experimental Evidence from the People’s DEMO of China,” American Economic
Review, 82(5), 1120-1141.
[11] DEMO,Daniel,andTversky,Amos(1979)“ProspectTheory: AnAnalysisofDecisionunderRisk,”
Econometrica, 47, 263-91.
DEMO Metrick, Andrew (1995) “A Natural Experiment in ‘Jeopardy!’,” American DEMO Review, 85(1),
240-53.
[13] Palacios-Huerta, Ignacio, Roberto Serrano, and Oscar Volij (2004) “Rejecting Small Gambles Under
Expected Utility,” mimeo, Brown University.
[14] Rabin, Matthew(2000) “RiskAversionandExpectedUtilityTheory: ACalibrationTheorem,” DEMO
metrica, 68(5), 1281-92.
[15] Rabin, Matthew, and Richard DEMO Thaler (2001) “Anomalies: Risk Aversion,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 15(1), 219-32.
25
[16] Thaler, Richard H. (1991) Quasi Rational Economics (Russell Sage DEMO, New York.)
[17] Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman (1992) “Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representa-
tion of Uncertainty,” Journal DEMO Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297-323.
[18] Weitzman,MartinL.(2005)“AUniﬁedBayesianTheoryofEquity‘Puzzles’,”mimeo, HarvardUniver-
sity.
26
7 Appendix A: Analysis of the oﬀerer’s behavior
In this appendix we lay out a simpliﬁed framework to interpret the game between the “Infamous” (the
oﬀerer) and the contestants on the game show “Aﬀari Tuoi”. We can see the “Infamous” as a long-run
playerfacingaseriesofshort-runplayers,thecontestants,whichcanobservetheoﬀerer’spreviousbehavior.
We make DEMO following assumptions about the Infamous objective function and behavior:
AA1-TheInfamouscancommittoagivenstrategy
AA2 - The Infamous is risk neutral. The objective function of the Infamous DEMO to minimize the expected
payout to the contestants.
We analyze the case s =5 of the game where only two prizes are left and DEMO take the two prizes to be 1
and 2 for simplicity. We assume that the Infamous knows the utility function of the contestants
u(DEMO)= x1−γ
1 −γ
andforsimplicitywetakeallcontestantstobeidentical. Simplifyingmattersconsiderthreetypesofstrategies
the oﬀerer might choose:
Let k0 ∈ {1, 2} be the prize held by the contestant in the closed box and m the oﬀer by the Infamous.
Let r DEMO the payout of the Infamous to the contestant. Let θ be the state of the world, where θ =1 is the
state of the world where the contestant holds the box with prize 1. The Infamous DEMO the state of the
world θ and the contestant does not. The payout is equal to the oﬀer m if the oﬀer is accepted DEMO is equal
to k0 if the oﬀer is not accepted. The three types of strategies and resulting equilibria that we analyze are
as follows.
DEMO 1− The ﬁrsttypeofequilibriumisoneinwhichtheInfamousalwaysoﬀers andthecontestant
accepts the oﬀer. The optimal oﬀer is the certainty equivalent of a lottery that assigns probability 1/2 to
the DEMO 1 and 1/2 to the payoﬀ 2.
m¯
m¯
27
• Strategy 1: the Infamous oﬀers the same amount of money regardless of the amount held in the box
by the contestant.
• Strategy 2: the Infamous makes two kinds of oﬀers, a high oﬀer and a low oﬀer. When the contestant
holds the high prize, the high oﬀer is made more often than the low oﬀer and the opposite happens
DEMO the contestant holds the low prize. Both the high oﬀer and the low oﬀer are such that the
contestant always accepts them.
Strategy 3: the Infamous makes two kinds of oﬀers, a high oﬀer and a low oﬀer. When the contestant
holds the high prize, the high oﬀer is made more often than the low oﬀer and the opposite happens
DEMO the contestant holds the low prize. The high oﬀer is such that the contestant always accepts it,
the low oﬀer is such that DEMO contestant always rejects it.
•
m¯
1
= ∙2
¡1+21−γ¢¸
1
1−γ
If the contestant believes this is the equilibrium strategy then she will DEMO the oﬀer and the expected
payout for the Infamous, E1 (r) is
contestants always refuses.
m¯
. Note that the oﬀerer this way avoids an equilibrium where the
Strategy 2− The second type of equilibrium DEMO one in which the Infamous makes two types of oﬀers, a
DEMO oﬀer mH and a low oﬀer mL according to the following likelihoods:
Pr(mH | θ =1) = q
Pr(mL | θ =1) = 1−q
Pr(mH | θ =2) = p
Pr(DEMO | θ =2) = 1−p
with p>q . We construct DEMO equilibrium in which the contestant accepts both the high oﬀer mH and the
low oﬀer mL . The contestant accepts mH if:
u(DEMO) ≥ Pr(1|mH) u (1)+Pr(2|mH) u (2)DEMO
and accepts mL:
u(mL) ≥ Pr(1|mL) u (DEMO)+Pr(2|mL) u (2)
where posterior probabilities are found using Bayes rule:
(13)
(14)
Pr(mH|1)Pr(1)DEMO
Pr(1|mH )= Pr(mH|1)Pr(1)+Pr(mH|2)Pr(2)DEMO
Pr(1|mL)= Pr(mL|1)Pr(1)
Pr(mL|1)Pr(1)+Pr(mL|2)Pr(2)
Priorsare ﬂat,thatis Pr(1)=Pr(2)DEMO/2 therefore Pr(1|mH )= q/ (q +p) and Pr(1|mL )=(1 −q) / (2 −q −p).
The lowest mH that the contestant will accept is found solving (13) with DEMO:
q u (1)+ p u (2)
u(mH )= q + q +
p
p
The lowest mL the contestant will accept is found solving (14) with equality:
u(mL)DEMO 1 −q u (1)+ 1 −p u (2)
2 −q −p 2 −q −p
Substituting for the vN-M utility function of DEMO contestant we ﬁnd mH and mL to be a function of the
parameter of risk aversion and the likelihood of oﬀers q and p:DEMO
mH = µ1+ q ¡21−
µ1+ 1 −−p p ¡21−γ −
γ
−1¢¶
p
+p
=
2 −q
mL
The expected payout of the DEMO under strategy 2 is:
1
1−γ
1¢¶
1
(15)
DEMO
(16)
1 [(p +q) mH
E2 (r)= DEMO
+(2 −p −q) mL]
(17)
28
Replacing (20) in (21) we obtain the expected payout under DEMO 2 as a function of p, q and γ:
+q DEMO
E2 (r)= µp 2 ¶µ1+ q +p ¡21− −1¢¶1−γ +µ1 DEMO
−1¢¶
p +
2 q ¶µ1+
1 1
2 1 −p p ¡21−
γ 1−γ
γ
−q −
Ifwecan ﬁndvaluesof q and p forwhich DEMO (r) <E1 (r) thenthetypeofequilibriumunderstrategy 2 yields
ahigherpayoﬀ for the DEMO
Proposition 1 The expected payout to the contestant under Strategy 2 is always larger than or equal to the
payout under Strategy 1 : DEMO (r) ≥ E1 (r) ∀ p,q,γ.
Proof. The result follows directly from convexity of the function f (x)= x1−1γ .
Strategy 3− ThethirdtypeofequilibriumisoneinwhichtheInfamousmakestwotypesofoﬀers,ahigh
oﬀer mH and a low oﬀer mL DEMO to the following likelihoods:
Pr(mH | θ =1) = DEMO
Pr(mL | θ =1) = 1−q
Pr(mH | θ DEMO) = p
Pr(mL | θ =2) = 1−p
with p>q . We construct an equilibrium in which the contestant accepts the DEMO oﬀer mH and rejects the
low oﬀer mL . The contestant accepts mH if:
(18)
u(mH) ≥ Pr(1|mH) u (1)+Pr(2|mH) u (2)
and rejects mL:
u(mL) ≤ Pr(1|mL) u (1)+Pr(2|mL) u (2) (19)
where posterior probabilities are found using Bayes rule:
DEMO(mH|1)Pr(1)
Pr(mH|1)Pr(1)+Pr(mH|2)Pr(2)
Pr(1|mH )=
Priors are ﬂat, that is Pr(1) = Pr(2) = 1/2 therefore Pr(1|mH)= q/ (q +p) .We can set mL low enough
that the participant will always reject it. This does not aﬀect the payoﬀ of the Infamous, as in equilibrium
this oﬀer is rejected. The lowest mH that the DEMO will accept is found solving (18) with equality:
q u (1)+ p u (2)
u(mH )= q +p q +p
Substituting for the vN-M utility function of the contestant we DEMO mH to be a function of the parameter
of risk aversion and the likelihood of oﬀers q and p:
p
mH = µ1+ DEMO +p ¡21−γ −1¢¶
1
1−γ
(20)
Note that under our DEMO mH > m.¯ The expected payout of the Infamous under strategy 2 is:
1 (21)
E3 (r)= 2 £(p DEMO) mH +(1 −p)2+1 −q¤
29
Replacing (20) in (21) we obtain the expected payout under DEMO 2 as a function of p, q and γ:
E3 (r)= p +q p γ
Proposition 2 The expected payout to DEMO contestant under Strategy 3 is always larger than or equal to the2 µ1+ q +p ¡21− −1¢¶
1
1−γ + 1
2 ((1 DEMO)2+1 −q)
payout under Strategy 2 : E3 (r) ≥ E2 (r) ∀ p,q,γ.
Proof. The result follows from DEMO following inequality:
2 −1 −p −p 2+ 2 1 −q q ≥ µ2 1 −q p + 2 1 −p p21−γ¶
which is DEMO for any γ ≥ 0.
According to Proposition 1 and Proposition 2 the Infamous’ optimal strategy to minimize the payout to
the contestant is DEMO make a constant oﬀer, irrespective of the content of the box DEMO by the contestant.
Assume now that the rationality of the contestant is violated in a speciﬁc way, that is the contestant
does not update her priors on the prize held according to Bayes rule. Consider the DEMO strategy:
Strategy 4 - The Infamous oﬀers
Intheabsenceof updatingthecontestant will accept oﬀer
strategy 4 is:
m¯
−p −
−q − −q −
DEMO
1−γ
when the θ =2 and oﬀers mL < when θ =1.
m¯ and reject mL . Theexpected payout under
m¯
Proposition 3 IfthecontestantdoesnotupdateherpriorsaccordingtoBayesrule,DEMO
to the contestant is lower under strategy 4 than under strategy 1: E4 (r) <E1 (r).
Proof. Since
m>¯
1 the result follows immediately.
8 Appendix B: Value functions
Uninformative oﬀers
Consider ﬁrst how the value function for the case with uninformative monetary oﬀers (1) needs to
be modiﬁed when we incorporate box changes in the contestant’s problem. By introducing an exogenous
probability πs+1 of a change being DEMO at s +1 we can rewrite (1) as:
Vs(Ps,Ks,ms)
⎬⎫
)Es [Vs+1(Ps+1,Ks+1,ms+1)] the contestant’s priors⎭
,
⎨⎧
where expectations are taken conditionally to⎩
=max
ds∈{0,1}
dsu(y +ms )+(1 −ds)πs+1Es [Cs+1(Ps+1,Ks+1)]
+(1 −ds )(1 −πs+1
Ω
. Notice that since under A1
,K ,P
s s s
are always ﬂat, a "change" DEMO to a stage whereno decision is possible36 . Hence, the value DEMO for
a change at s,indicatedby Cs(Ps,Ks), can be written as:
36 Changes may happen even in the presence of DEMO nformative oﬀ ers for idiosyncratic reasons, such as personal taste or
DEMO They are however features that would require a substantial and not straightforward extension of the behavioral
model. We disregard them in the present setting
DEMO
q
E4 (r)= 1
2
m¯
+ 1
2
Cs(Ps,Ks)= πs+1Es [Cs+1(Ps+1,Ks+1)]+(1 −πs+1)Es DEMO(Ps+1,Ks+1,ms+1)] .
Informative oﬀers
We now derive the value functions for the problem with informative oﬀers, starting from the value of a
monetary oﬀer at s. The value function of a monetary oﬀer DEMO is the maximal:
Vs(Ps(ms),Ks,ms) (22)DEMO
⎬⎫
Es [Vs+1(Ps+1 (ms+1) ,Ks+1,ms+1)] ⎭
⎨⎧
DEMO,1} ⎩
dsu(y +ms )+(1 −ds)πs+1Es [Cs+1(Ps+1 (ms) ,Ks+1)]
+(1 −ds )(1 −πs+1)
=max ,
where expectations are now taken conditional to Ω ,K ,P (m ) ,Z . Note the introduction of the state
s s s s s
variable Zs, which we now deﬁne. The continuation values and path choices are slightlyless straightforward
in the case of informative oﬀers. DEMO see why, just note that the decision whether to open a DEMO previously
in the contestant’s hands or another box that was not in her hands has to be taken into account when
computing the set DEMO possible continuation paths. The probability of ending on a speciﬁc path becomes a
choice variable. The variable Zs is deﬁned as:
⎨⎧ 1 DEMO (ds =1∧ ms = change ∧ ds−1 =0∧∃l<s : ms−l DEMO) ∨ (Zs−1 =1)
and indicates the presence of (the⎩ DEMO otherwise
Zs =
ﬁrst) change of boxes performed after an informative DEMO had been
previously made. Z indicates if in the set of boxes not held by the contestant there is a box she previously
hold DEMO her hands after having received at least one informative oﬀer. In a setting where s ≤ 5 and under
the assumption that monetary oﬀers DEMO stage 3 are always uninformative, Z4 =1 if there is a DEMO
oﬀer at 3 and a change of boxes at 437.
At s the value function of a change is the maximal:
−dsππss+1+1)EEss££CVs+1
DEMO,1}
ne the new set of probabilities for the box at hand after a change decision: ⎭
p¯i (ms)=
Cs(Ps (m⎧s−1) ,Ks)
=max ⎨ +ds(1
⎪⎪
s+1
(P¯
s+1
(DEMO) ,Ks+1)¤ )¤
(P¯
s+1 (m ) ,K ,DEMO
s+1
s+1 s+1
+(1 −ds)πs+1Es [Cs+1(Ps+1 (ms−1) ,DEMO)]
+(1 −ds )(1 −πs+1)Es [Vs+1(Ps+1 (ms+1) ,Ks+1,ms+1)]
⎪⎪
⎩
⎪⎪
1 −pi (ms)
n(DEMO) −1 ¾
37 We derive this restriction for the contestant’s problem DEMO presence of informative oﬀ ers directly from the data. Therefore,
it is not necessary to generalize to the case where more than one DEMO is performed after an informative oﬀ er is made.
wherewedeﬁ
P¯s (DEMO)=
½
31
(23)
⎫
⎬,
⎪⎪
and where expectations are taken conditionally to Ωs,Ks,Ps (ms−1) ,Zs.
The continuation value in case of an oﬀer at stage s DEMO in (22) and (23) is given by:
(24)DEMO
Es [Vs+1(Ps+1(ms+1),Ks+1,ms+1)|Ωs,Ks,Ps(ms),Zs]
= hP+1 q (hs+1,Ps (ms) ,Zs) ∗
ÃmP+1 fs+1 (ms+1 | hs+1,ki0 = ki) Vs+1 (Ps+1 (hs+1,ms+1) ,Ks+1 (hs+1) ,ms+1)!.
with ki ∈ Ks+1.If Zs =0 DEMO (24), the probability of each path considered by the contestant DEMO any s under
s
s
A10 and A2 is given by:
q (hs+1,Ps (ms) , 0)
pj (ms)
DEMO j|ki∈P
Theprobabilityof eachpathissimplydeﬁnedbyBayesrulewheneverno"informed"change hasbeenmade¡ −1¢ .
Ks+1
)
n(DEMO
3
before (i.e. Zs =0). If Zs =1 the contestant DEMO thesequenceof boxes {x,y,z} sothatforallpaths hs+1
the sequence produces probabilities of following each path such that:
q (hs+1,Ps (ms) , 1)
=max{ P
q0
q0 hs+1 {x,y,z} ∗
Ã DEMO fs+1 (ms+1 | hs+1,ki0 = ki) Vs+1 (Ps+1 (hs+1,ms+1) ,Ks+1 (hs+1) ,ms+1)!}.
m
s
9 Appendix C: Variables description
Age = age of the participant (in years). DEMO age that the individual declares during the game show. If
no indication of age is directly given, the individual is assigned to an age bracket. Approximating from
the appearance of the player we assign him or DEMO to a more precise bracket (20-25, 25-30, 30—35, ...) DEMO
to a wider bracket (20-30, 25-35, 30-40, ...) solely DEMO the basis of appearance. The corresponding age is
the mid-point of the range. This procedure was necessary in the majority of cases (209 out of 254). This
approximation procedure was required by the fact that DEMO were not allowed to access the personal ﬁles of
the players (DEMO of the following covariates present similar instances at times).
Employed = discrete variable taking value 1 if the participant is currently employed, value -1 if the
participant is unemployed, value 0 if the participant is out of the labor force (retired, student...). The job
and DEMO status the individual declares during the game show is recorded for 217 participants. For
each participant for which a job is recorded we deﬁne DEMO dummy variables: Agriculture, Manufacturing,
Construction,andServices,thattakevalueequalto1iftheparticipantisemployedinanyofthefoursectors,
0otherwise.
32
Female = dummy variable taking value 1 if the participant is female, 0 otherwise.
Income = income of the participant (in Euros). In order to assign an income level to a participant we
employ two DEMO of information: the type of job he or she declares on DEMO show (available for 217 out of
254 episodes) and the city/province/region of residence (region is always available and the city/province is
available for 224 shows). We match the individual to the DEMO annual labor income by type of job and
then adjust for the province value added relative to the national average to proxy for local DEMO level
of income. Source of both data sets is the Italian national bureau of statistics (ISTAT). For annual labor
income we employ "DEMO 4.12 ISTAT (Lavoro e Reddito)" which includes national labor income DEMO type
of job (measured in Italian Lire and averaged between white DEMO blue collar within type of job) in 2001.
The data are DEMO converted in Euros using the exchange rate for the EU parity. We use value added data
broken down by province in 2001 (measured in Euros) from Table "Tavola ISTAT - CONTI PROVINCIALI
2004 Valore Aggiunto DEMO Unita’ di Lavoro". We correct for inﬂation from 2001 to 2004 (2001-2 = 2.5%;
2002-3 = 2.7%; 2003-4 = 2.2%) employing "Tabella 6. Indice generale nazionale dei prezzi al consumo per
l’intera collettività, NIC". For individuals with only regional provenience available we employ the average
annual income in the region.
Marital status = single, married or divorced. The status that the individual declares during the game
show. It DEMO available for 217 participants.
Not-main-city = dummy variable taking value 1 if the participant resides in the main city of his or
her province, 0 otherwise. The city is the individual declares during the game show DEMO recorded for 227
participants.
Number of children = number of children of the participant as declared during the game show. Sex and
ageofchildrenarealsosometimesavailablealthoughforasmallerportionofthesample. Numberofchildren
DEMO available for 203 participants.
Region = set of 20 dummy variables for the region of which the participant is resident.. There are some
rare DEMO in which the player represents the region of birth, but currently DEMO in another region. The
list of regions in the North is: DEMO D’Aosta, Piemonte, Liguria, Lombardia, Veneto, Friuli-Venezia Giulia,
Trentino-Alto DEMO, Emilia-Romagna; in the Center: Toscana, Marche, Lazio, Umbria, DEMO, Molise; in
the South: Campania, Puglia, Basilicata, Calabria, DEMO, Sardegna.
Season=setof6dummyvariablesfortheshowseasonduringwhichtheshowwasaired. The ﬁrstseason
was broadcast during the fall of 2003.
DEMO 0correspondsto01January1960. Dateemployedforcomputing
thetrendisthedatetheshowwasairedontelevision, not the day it was actually recorded. The DEMO of the
recording was not available in the tapes.
33
Figure 1a
Nonparametric Fit for Reject/Accept Decision: Stage 5
0
0
100000
200
3 00000
E(Lottery)
000
4000 00
Rejected Offer
DEMO fit offer
CE gamma=2
Accepted Offer
C E gamma=1
C E gamma=0
Figure 1b
Nonparametric Fit for Reject/Accept Decision: Stage 4
50 0000
50000
10 000 0
E(Lottery)
Rejected Offer
Lowess fit offer
DEMO gamma=2
15 0000
Accepted Offer
C E gamma=1
C E gamma=0
2000 00
0
50000
Offer
100000 1 50000 200000
1 0000 0
Offer
DEMO
Figure 2
Nonparametric Fit for Reject/Accept Decision: Stage 5 Small stakes
0
500 0
1000 0
E(Lottery)
Rejected Offer
Lowess fit DEMO
CE gamma=2
15000
Accepted Offer
CE gamma=1
CE gamma=0
20000
5000
Offer
15000
TABLE 1A
Distribution of prizes in the game show "Affari Tuoi"
0.01 5,000
0.20 10,000
0.50 15,000
1 20,000
DEMO 25,000
10 50,000
50 75,000
100 100,000
250 250,000
500 500,000*
Note: *The largest prize was different for the evening series of the
game show. In each evening series episode DEMO rounds (i.e. complete
games) were played. The maximum prize is 500,000 euros in the first
round, 750,000 in the second round and 1,000,000 euros in the third
round. Each round is DEMO to a prime time episode. There are 3
evening shows.
TABLE 1B
Timing of the game show "Affari Tuoi"
Host Contestant
Start Random box assigned to contestant from set of 20
Open 6 of 20 DEMO
Stage 1 Offer 1 (always a change) Yes/No
Open 3 of 14 boxes
Stage 2 Offer 2 (always monetary offer) Yes/DEMO
Open 3 of 11 boxes
Stage 3 Offer 3 (change/monetary DEMO) Yes/No
Open 3 of 8 boxes
Stage 4 Offer 3 (change/monetary offer) Yes/No
Open 3 of 5 boxes
Stage 5 Offer 3 (change/monetary offer) Yes/No
Open box in hand DEMO 2 boxes
Note: Each offer consists of a change possibility (i.e. swapping the currently held
box with one of the unopened boxes) or a monetary offer (i.e. a sum of money
offered to abandon the game). Prizes discovered drop out from the game and cannot
be DEMO
TABLE 2A
Back-of-the-envelope Calculation - 252 episodes,
CRRA
Expected value of DEMO lottery
Average Final Payoff (AFP)
Average income of contestant
γ DEMO which AFP is CE
CE for γ=1
γ for which AFP is CE
[income*10]
52560.00
29436.09
17875.82
0.53
18003.50
1.62
Note: Monetary amounts expressed in euros. Consider
the lottery at the beginning of the game with DEMO
probable payoffs of [50 50 50 50 50 50 50 100 250 500
5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 50000 75000 100000
250000 500000]. All DEMO nominally below 50 Euros
in Table 1A are paid 50 euros.
TABLE 2B
Scores for episodes reaching stage 5 with moneatry offers at different DEMO
parameters
Number of correctly Fraction of correctly
predicted decisions predicted decisions
γ=0 35 44.87%
γ=1 54 69.23%
γ=1.5 57 73.08%
γ=1.8 59 75.64%
γ=2 DEMO 74.36%
γ=3 57 73.08%
γ=4 52 66.67%
γ=5 51 65.38%
Total* 78 100.00%
Note: * 91 shows reach 5 stages with monetary offers but in 13 cases both
prizes have equal value (50 euros). This leaves 78 episodes.
Date of episode
(D/M/Y)
TABLE 2C
Randomly selected episodes reaching stage 5 with moneatry offers.
Prize Not in Prize in Monetary DEMO Would
Contestant's Contestant's offer at s=5 accepts. (1 γ=0
DEMO Box Yes/ 0 No) accept?
13/10/2003 25000 10000
16/10/2003 15000 50
17/10/2003 50 10000
20/10/DEMO 250 50
31/10/2003 50000 100000
5/11/2003 250000 75000
14/11/2003 75000 50
24/11/2003 25000 50000
5/12/DEMO 10000 15000
20/4/2004 100 250
5/5/2004 5000 50000
25/5/2004 100 50
29/9/2004 250 50
6/10/DEMO 750000 50000
20/10/2004 250 100
29/10/2004 50 50000
8/11/2004 250000 75000
15/11/2004 10000 5000
17/11/DEMO 100000 50
3/12/2004 50 5000
7/12/2004 50 15000
23/12/2004 15000 20000
27/12/2004 50 250
12/4/DEMO 500000 75000
2/5/2005 75000 10000
25/5/2005 50 250000
Note: Monetary amounts expressed in Euros.
12000
50
150
100
75000
100000
21000
37500
12500
175
25000
50
125
100000
200
25000
100000
8000
DEMO
1500
7000
17500
125
150000
32500
70000
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
DEMO
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
DEMO
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
Would
γ=1
accept?
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
DEMO
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
Would
γ=2
accept?
0
0
0
0
1
0
DEMO
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
CRRA
MEAN
µ
Individual Covariates:
Age
(Age)2
(Age)3
DEMO
Constant
Regional F.E. (p-value)
Income(/10,000)
Time Covariates:
Time trend
Season of the show F.E. (p-value)
STANDARD DEVIATION
σ
Individual Covariates
Age
(Age)2
(Age)3
Female
Constant
Income(/10,000)
Time Covariates
Time trend
TABLE 3A
MLE: Unobserved Risk Preferences in the Static Model
Dep. Variable: γ Dep. Variable: γ
(1) (2)
Coef. Std. Err. Coef. Std. Err.
0.8834
0.0473
DEMO
-0.0165
-0.0007
0.00001
-0.0250
-20.4564
--
0.4187
12.7240
--
0.4633
--
0.2431
0.0057
0.00004
0.1300
27.8139
[0.7566]
0.4037
16.7935
[0.1975]
0.5341
0.0329
0.0434
Dep. DEMO: γ
(3)
Coef. Std. Err.
0.8883
-0.0681
0.0010
-3.29e-6
0.0062
-15.6332
--
0.2756
10.2451
--
--
0.2116
0.0050
-3.87e-5
0.0959
18.9354
[0.2904]
DEMO
12.0591
[0.0688]
0.4161
0.4883
-0.0110
0.0001
-0.0044
13.1877
0.6414
-13.5666
--
0.6889
0.0156
0.0001
0.2453
17.8708
0.9319
6.5326
Log Likelihood -177.7120 -158.9505 -152.1448
No. DEMO 518 518 518
No. Obs. 237 237 237
No. Left-censored Obs. 130 130 130
No. Right-censored Obs. 21 21 21
No. Interval Obs. 86 DEMO 86
chi-squared [df, p-value] -- 37.5200 [28, 0.1078] 39.8800 [28, DEMO
Note: The distributional assumption is that the unobserved γ is N(DEMO,σ). OPG asymptotic standard errors in column on
the right for columns (1) and (2). For columns (2) and (DEMO) the predicted mean of the distribution of γ is calculated at DEMO
mean of the covariates. For column (3) the predicted standard deviation of γ is calculated at the mean of the covariates.
For regional DEMO seasonal fixed effects we include the p-values of the chi-squared statistics for joint significance. * total
number of thresholds including empty intervals (see Table 4).
CRRA
MEAN
µ
Individual Covariates:
Age
(Age)2
(Age)3
DEMO
Constant
Regional F.E. (p-value)
Income(/10,000)
Time Covariates:
Time trend
Season of the show F.E. (p-value)
STANDARD DEVIATION
σ
Individual Covariates
Age
(Age)2
(Age)3
Female
Constant
Income(/10,000)
Time Covariates
Time trend
TABLE 3B
MLE: Unobserved Risk Preferences in the Uninformative Offers Model
Dep. Variable: γ Dep. Variable: DEMO
(1) (2)
Coef. Std. Err. Coef. Std. Err.
1.0879
DEMO
1.0871
-0.0332
-0.0009
0.00002
-0.0545
-44.9222
--
0.3281
28.7294
--
0.9516
--
0.4920
0.0115
0.0001
0.2518
50.2362
[0.6548]
0.7407
30.1198
[0.0738]
1.0765
0.0523
0.0781
DEMO Variable: γ
(3)
Coef. Std. Err.
1.0875
-0.0477
0.0004
1.17e-6
-0.0742
-9.1447
--
0.0944
7.1336
--
--
0.4318
0.0102
0.0001
0.1813
32.4073
DEMO
0.4973
20.2197
[0.0053]
0.8118
0.6716
-0.0172
0.0001
0.4635
6.0922
0.7477
-9.8800
--
0.6452
0.0149
0.0001
0.3132
14.8282
0.8617
6.8247
Log Likelihood -172.9480 -153.8920 -144.0787
DEMO Thresholds* 518 518 518
No. Obs. 241 241 241
No. Left-censored Obs. 130 130 130
No. Right-censored Obs. 21 21 21
No. Interval Obs. DEMO 90 90
chi-squared [df, p-value] -- 38.1100 [28, 0.0963] 42.6500 [28, 0.0376]
Note: The distributional assumption is that the unobserved γ is DEMO(µ,σ). OPG asymptotic standard errors in column on
the right for columns (1) and (2). For columns (2) and (3) the predicted mean of the distribution of γ is calculated DEMO the
mean of the covariates. For column (3) the predicted standard deviation of γ is calculated at the mean of the covariates.
For DEMO and seasonal fixed effects we include the p-values of the chi-squared statistics for joint significance. * total
number of thresholds including empty intervals (see Table 4).
CRRA
MEAN
µ
Individual Covariates:
Age
(Age)2
(Age)3
DEMO
Constant
Regional F.E. (p-value)
Income(/10,000)
Time Covariates:
Time trend
Season of the show F.E. (p-value)
STANDARD DEVIATION
σ
Individual Covariates
Age
(Age)2
(Age)3
Female
Constant
Income(/10,000)
Time Covariates
Time trend
TABLE 3C
MLE: Unobserved Risk Preferences in the Informative Offers Model
Dep. Variable: γ Dep. Variable: DEMO
(1) (2)
Coef. Std. Err. Coef. Std. Err.
1.3688
DEMO
1.3514
-0.1809
0.0043
-0.00003
-0.1239
-51.5455
--
0.7785
32.9423
--
1.1282
--
0.5628
0.0130
0.0001
0.2934
65.7595
[0.6293]
0.8427
39.7442
[0.0748]
1.2800
0.0842
0.1062
DEMO Variable: γ
(3)
Coef. Std. Err.
1.3140
-0.8064
0.0192
-0.0001
-0.3107
-48.8788
--
0.3331
36.6249
--
--
0.4436
0.0106
0.0001
0.1862
27.3729
DEMO
0.4227
17.5469
[0.0028]
0.9773
2.1016
-0.0498
0.0004
0.3636
-24.1237
1.7102
-4.2717
--
0.7522
0.0177
0.0001
0.2871
13.3156
0.6557
5.8627
Log Likelihood -190.1919 -171.0048 -163.8269
DEMO Thresholds* 517 517 517
No. Obs. 233 233 233
No. Left-censored Obs. 126 126 126
No. Right-censored Obs. 21 21 21
No. Interval Obs. DEMO 86 86
chi-squared [df, p-value] -- 38.3700 [28, 0.0915] 61.2200 [28, 0.0001]
Note: The distributional assumption is that the unobserved γ is DEMO(µ,σ). OPG asymptotic standard errors in column on
the right for columns (1) and (2). For columns (2) and (3) the predicted mean of the distribution of γ is calculated DEMO the
mean of the covariates. For column (3) the predicted standard deviation of γ is calculated at the mean of the covariates.
For DEMO and seasonal fixed effects we include the p-values of the chi-squared statistics for joint significance.  * total
number of thresholds including empty intervals (DEMO Table 4).
Model:
Wealth
measures:
MEAN
µ
STD. DEV.
σ
Static model
DEMO income *
10
Coef. Std.
Err.
3.4130
0.3382
3.4652
0.1764
TABLE 4
MLE: Alternative measures of individual wealth
Uninf. Offer Uninf. Offer Inf. Offer Inf. Offer
Static model Model Model Model Model
Labor income * Labor DEMO * Labor income * Labor income * Labor income *
0 10 0 10 0
Coef. Std. Coef. Std. Coef. Std. Coef. Std. Coef. DEMO
Err. Err. Err. Err. Err.
0.3797
0.0196
3.1538
0.0248
0.4338
0.0303
4.0323
0.0272
0.5062
0.0317
0.2305
0.0173
0.6507
0.0047
0.3595
0.0296
0.6410
0.0054
0.3583
DEMO
Log Lik.
No. Obs.
-203.2
239
-208.01
236
-554.40
244
-186.45
241
-410.98
232
-185.53
226
Note: The distributional assumption is that the unobserved γ is N(µ,σ). OPG asymptotic standard errors in
column DEMO the right. The static model required the exclusion of 1 influential observation and the Informative offer
model required the exclusion of 3 influential observations. DEMO differences in the number of observations across
the different models are due to inconsistent observations, see text for a discussion.
CRRA
No. Inconsistent choices
Fraction inconsistencies
Average payoffs at acceptance
CRRA
TABLE DEMO
Consistency of the Choice Set
Rejection Rejection
Threshold < Threshold at 0
Acceptance
Threshold (Upper
bound < Lower
bound)
Large Total
Inconsistencies Number of
(Upper bound - Choices in
Lower  bound Sample
< -1)DEMO
Static Model
22
0.0425
50,835
2
0.0039
--
8
0.0154
10,999
518
--
31,775
Uninformative Offer Model
No. Inconsistent choices
Fraction DEMO
Average payoffs at acceptance
CRRA
16
0.0309
41,723
2
0.0039
--
8
0.0154
10,999
Informative Offer Model
518
--
31,775
No. DEMO choices
Fraction inconsistencies
Average payoffs at acceptance
30
0.0580
49,147
10
0.0193
--
22
0.0426
22,987
517
--
31,775
Note: Payoff amounts are reported in Euros. The choice set includes decisions on monetary
DEMO only at stages s > 2 . The total number of stages is 756 (=252 episodes*3 stages). Missing
and changes amount to 224 (see Table A1 in Appendix). Of the remaining 532 monetary offers,
13 were made at s = 5 with 2 prizes of DEMO value and are dropped , leaving 519 choices.
The threshold-finding routine did not converge in 1 (resp. 2) occasion for the static and
DEMO (resp. informative) offers model producing the totals in the last column. Only
observations that present inconsistent behavior are dropped. The number of inconsistent
DEMO is the number of inconsistent choices divided by 2.
CRRA
MEAN
µ
Stage 4,5: µ
STD. DEV.
σ
Stage 4,5: σ
Dep. Variable: γ
All stakes
Coef. Std. Err.
TABLE DEMO
MLE: Static Model at Large and Small Stakes
Dep. Variable: γ Dep. Variable: γ Dep. Variable: γ
Large stakes Large stakes Small DEMO
(Mean) (Max) (Mean)
Coef. Std. Err. Coef. Std. DEMO Coef. Std. Err.
0.8834
--
0.5341
--
0.0473
--
0.0329
--
0.9440
0.04786
0.9106
0.97573 0.06313 0.9412
0.29835 0.04556
0.2633
0.35818 0.07668
0.3258
0.04257
DEMO
0.0446
0.0913
0.5290
--
1.2618
--
0.2958
--
0.3579
--
Dep. Variable: γ
Small stakes
(Min)
Coef. Std. Err.
0.4363
--
1.7447
DEMO
0.5161
--
0.9631
--
Log Likelihood
No. Obs.
Stage 4,5: DEMO L
Stage 4,5: No. Obs
-177.71
237
--
--
-48.92
DEMO
-37.24
65
-40.21
91
-31.41
54
-24.35
69
--
--
-13.21
35
--
--
Note: The distributional assumption is that the unobserved γ is N(µ,σ). OPG asymptotic standard errors in
column on the DEMO We define 'Large stakes' : 1) a lottery including at DEMO one prize in excess of 250,000 Euros
(max option); DEMO) a lottery with mean payoffs of at least 75,000 Euros (mean option). We define 'Small stakes' : 1)
a DEMO including no prize in excess of 25,000 Euros (min option); 2) a lottery with mean payoffs of at most
18,000 DEMO (mean option).  Stage 4,5 indicates that the sample is restricted to those stages.
CRRA
MEAN
µ
Stage 4,5: µ
STD. DEV.
σ
Stage 4,5: σ
Dep. Variable: γ
All stakes
Coef. Std. Err.
TABLE DEMO
MLE: Uninformative Offer Model at Large and Small Stakes
Dep. Variable: γ Dep. Variable: γ Dep. Variable: γ
Large stakes Large stakes DEMO stakes
(Mean) (Max) (Mean)
Coef. Std. Err. Coef. DEMO Err. Coef. Std. Err.
1.0879
--
1.0765
--
0.1014
--
0.0523
--
1.1631
1.0986
0.8192
0.4741
0.1404
0.0808
0.1367
0.1097
1.1527
1.0653
0.8704
0.4614
DEMO
0.0834
0.1374
0.1272
0.2119
--
2.5149
--
0.6407
--
0.5402
--
Dep. Variable: γ
Small stakes
(Min)
Coef. Std. Err.
0.4604
--
DEMO
--
0.5705
--
1.0782
--
Log Likelihood
No. Obs.
Stage 4,5: log L
Stage 4,5: No. Obs
-172.95
241
--
--
DEMO
99
-39.86
67
-53.38
94
-34.65
56
-27.17
70
--
--
-13.14
35
--
--
Note: The distributional assumption is that the unobserved γ is N(µ,σ). OPG asymptotic standard errors in
column on DEMO right. We define 'Large stakes' : 1) a lottery including DEMO least one prize in excess of 250,000 Euros
(max option); 2) a lottery with mean payoffs of at least 75,000 DEMO (mean option). We define 'Small stakes' : 1)
DEMO lottery including no prize in excess of 25,000 Euros (min DEMO); 2) a lottery with mean payoffs of at most
18,DEMO Euros (mean option).  Stage 4,5 indicates that the sample is restricted to those stages.
CRRA
MEAN
µ
Stage 4,5: µ
STD. DEV.
σ
Stage 4,5: σ
Dep. Variable: γ
All stakes
Coef. Std. Err.
TABLE DEMO
MLE: Informative Offer Model at Large and Small Stakes
Dep. Variable: γ Dep. Variable: γ Dep. Variable: γ
Large stakes Large stakes DEMO stakes
(Mean) (Max) (Mean)
Coef. Std. Err. Coef. DEMO Err. Coef. Std. Err.
1.3688
--
1.2800
--
0.1254
--
0.0842
--
1.3306
1.2732
0.7375
0.5874
0.1207
0.1002
0.1378
0.1395
1.2865
1.2189
0.7585
0.5812
DEMO
0.1058
0.1293
0.1474
0.5788
--
2.2697
--
0.6486
--
0.5128
--
Dep. Variable: γ
Small stakes
(Min)
Coef. Std. Err.
0.6757
--
DEMO
--
0.6660
--
1.0432
--
Log Likelihood
No. Obs.
Stage 4,5: log L
Stage 4,5: No. Obs
-190.19
233
--
--
DEMO
95
-43.65
66
-54.95
90
-38.57
55
-22.97
68
--
--
-8.41
32
--
--
Note: The distributional assumption is that the unobserved γ is N(µ,σ). OPG asymptotic standard errors in
column on DEMO right. We define 'Large stakes' : 1) a lottery including DEMO least one prize in excess of 250,000 Euros
(max option); 2) a lottery with mean payoffs of at least 75,000 DEMO (mean option). We define 'Small stakes' : 1)
DEMO lottery including no prize in excess of 25,000 Euros (min DEMO); 2) a lottery with mean payoffs of at most
18,DEMO Euros (mean option).  Stage 4,5 indicates that the sample is restricted to those stages.
TABLE 7
Scores for Large ans Small Stakes episodes reaching stage 5 DEMO moneatry offers at different CRRA
parameters
Small stakes (Min) Large stakes (Max**)
Number of correctly Fraction of correctly Number of correctly Fraction of correctly
predicted decisions predicted decisions predicted decisions predicted decisions
γ=0 19 DEMO 9 36.00%
γ=1 23 71.88% 19 76.00%
γ=1.5 22 68.75% 20 80.00%
γ=1.8 22 68.75% 21 84.00%
γ=2 21 65.63% 21 84.00%
γ=3 21 DEMO 20 80.00%
γ=4 20 62.50% 17 68.00%
γ=5 20 62.50% 16 64.00%
Total* 32 100.00% 25 100.00%
Note: * For small stakes: 32 DEMO the 78 episodes in Table 2B have both payoffs less or equal to 25,000
Euros. For large stakes: 25 of the 78 episodes in Table 2B have at least a payoff greater or equal to
DEMO,000 Euros. **We change the definition for large stakes from Table 5 in order to make the
sample sizes comparable.
CRRA
MEAN
µι     ι=γ,α
Individual Covariates:
Age
(Age)2
(Age)3
Female
Constant
Income(/10,000)
Time Covariates:DEMO
Time trend
STD. DEV.
σι    ι=γ,α
σαγ
TABLE 8
DEMO Model and CPT with Power Function.
Dep. Variable: γ
Coef. Std. DEMO
Dep. Variable: α
Coef. Std. Err.
Dep. Variable: γ
Coef. Std. Err.
0.6543
0.2022
0.9168
0.0595
0.6461
--
0.5543
-0.3650
-0.1945
-0.5149
-1.1427
DEMO
0.4454
6.0880
13.8660
10.7007
2.1262
16.9433
0.7665
8.1389
0.2421
-0.0087
0.1407
0.0342
0.0878
--
0.1042
--
0.3120
0.0150
2.9204
0.1763
Dep. Variable: α
Coef. Std. Err.
0.9001
-0.0010
-0.2195
0.3854
-0.0303
0.3076
0.2467
0.1470
--
2.3017
DEMO
4.9588
0.2942
5.0913
0.7202
3.6673
0.1007
--
0.5762
--
(1)
(2)
Log Likelihood -259.7074 -336.7649
No. Obs. 250 250
Note: The distributional assumption is that the unobserved (γ,α) are joint N(DEMO,Σ). OPG asymptotic standard errors in
column on the right for columns (1) and (2). For columns (2) the mean of the distribution of γ and α are calculated at the
mean DEMO the covariates.
TABLE A1
Stage Choices Tabulation
s =3 Value Count Percent Percent on DEMO
Missing 2 0.79% --
Change 24 9.52% --
Reject m 216 85.71% 95.58%
Accept m 10 3.97% 4.42%
Tot. 252 100% 100%
s =4 DEMO Count Percent Percent on m
Missing 12 4.76% --
Change 25 9.92% --
Reject m 147 58.33% 68.37%
Accept m 68 26.98% 31.63%
Tot. DEMO 100% 100%
s =5 Value Count Percent Percent on m
Missing 81 32.14% --
Change 80 31.75% --
Reject m 47 18.65% 51.65%
Accept DEMO 44 17.46% 48.35%
Tot. 252 100% 100%
Note: Reject/Accept refers DEMO monetary offers only. The 252
episodes present a monetary offer 532 times.
TABLE A2
Equilibrium Likelihoods of offers relative to E(Lottery): Informative DEMO Model and E(Lottery)>20,000 Euros
Rank 2.00 1.00
Likelihood DEMO = Offer is 0-20% 0.03 .0189/2
Offer is 20-40% 0.15 .0189/2
Offer is 40-60% 0.13 0.09
Offer is 60-80% 0.44 0.17
Offer DEMO 80-100% 0.26 0.72
Rank
Likelihood 4 =
Rank
Likelihood 3 =
Offer is 0-20%
Offer is 20-40%
Offer is 40-60%
Offer is 60-80%
Offer DEMO 80-100%
Offer is 0-20%
Offer is 20-40%
Offer is 40-60%
Offer is 60-80%
Offer is 80-100%
8.00
0.01
1-.04
0.01
0.01
0.01
7.00
0.32
DEMO
0.01
0.01
0.01
6.00
0.39
0.53
0.03
.0526-.01
0.01
5.00
0.22
.7778-.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
4.00
0.43
.575-.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
3.00
0.35
0.61
DEMO
0.01
0.01
2.00
0.14
0.79
.069-.02
0.01
0.01
1.00
0.13
0.67
0.13
0.04
0.04
Note: The table presents the stage likelihoods of the various offers conditional on the rank of the box held by the
contestants.  Higher rank means higher prize. The expressions in Italics mean that we DEMO part of the likelihood over the
missing events cells in order to avoid dealing with zero-probability events (indicated in the boxes). This solution does not
seem to affect our results. A three-way split of the DEMO range was also tried and the likelihoods are available from the
authors. In expectation the mid-point of the offer relative to the expected values DEMO the lottery is taken. The likelihood
above is obtained from the full set of offers to maximize the number of cells but employed only DEMO E(lottery)>20,000
Euros.
5.00
0.08
0.60
0.28
.04/2
DEMO/2
4.00
0.07
0.54
0.34
.0488/2
.0488/2
3.00
0.09
0.49
0.35
.0702/2
.0702/2
2.00
0.04
0.63
0.23
0.08
0.02
1.00
DEMO
0.25
0.48
0.18
0.08{1g42fwefx}