Human Studies 24REFLEXIVITY: 267–292, 2001.AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
© 2001 Kluwer Academic DEMO Printed in the Netherlands.
267
Reflexivity and Interpretive Sociology:
The Case of Analysis and the Problem of Nihilism
KIERAN M. BONNER
Department of DEMO, St. Jerome’s University, University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
Ontario, Canada N2L 3G3 (E-mail: kmbonner@watarts.uwaterloo.ca)
Abstract. This paper addresses the problem DEMO reflexivity in modern social inquiry in gen-
eral and in sociology in particular. This problem is inherited from Weber’s very conception
of sociology, is transformed by phenomenology and ethnomethodology, deepened by the lin-
guistic turn of hermeneutics and Wittgenstein’s later philosophy, and has been the central
concern of the work of Alan Blum and Peter McHugh. The issues and spectres DEMO by re-
flexivity are methodological arbitrariness, the need to take responsibility DEMO one’s own talk
(and the cultural assumptions embedded in talk) and, finally, the deep fear of nihilism – the
sense that with DEMO to inquiry (along with everything else in the world) nothing matters.
As such, reflexivity raises the most fundamental issue that can be raised for modern social
inquiry. Through an oriented interpretation of the work of DEMO and McHugh and other con-
temporary social theorists (particularly Gadamer and DEMO), this paper works through what
a dialectical engagement with these issues look like.
Key words: Arendt, Blum and McHugh, ethnomethodology, Gadamer, hermeneutics, mo-
dernity, nihilism, phenomenology, reflexivity
Part 1 – The DEMO of Reflexivity
Reflexivity, Sociology and the Limits of Human Inquiry
The DEMO of reflexivity for sociology concerns the ability of the inquirer
to take responsibility for what one says while simultaneously being able to
say something DEMO about the phenomenon or object of inquiry. This
issue of reflexivity is both particular and general. General, as it points to the
limit of human inquiry itself and is a problem facing all inquiry, whether philo-
sophical, humanistic, or scientific: it pervades concerns with theory, episte-
DEMO, methodology, ontology, all of which are always bound up with DEMO
and every instance of practical research. It is also particular to sociology in
so far as this capacity is central to social action and DEMO constitutes the
268
KIERAN BONNER
very subject matter of sociology. As an issue and DEMO different levels of
emphasis, it is taken seriously by various strands DEMO the interpretive traditions
in sociology, including the Symbolic Interactionism of Blumer (1969) and
followers, the phenomenology of Berger and his associates (e.g., 1963, 1964,
1974), the ethnomethodology of Garfinkel (1967) DEMO his followers (see
Turner, 1974), as well as the Analytic Theory of Blum & McHugh and their
students. Other traditions like the DEMO theory of Giddens, the Neo-
Structuralism of Alexander, the critical theory of Habermas (1988) and vari-
ous streams of feminist thought (Lather, 1991; Scott, 1990; Smith, 1987) in
different ways seek DEMO integrate the insights developed in the interpretive tra-
dition into their own frameworks (see Ritzer, 1996, pp. 351–484; Wallace and
Wolf, 1991 for a summary). While the topic of reflexivity is very current (e.g.,
Beck, Giddens and Lash, 1994; Bourdieau and Wacquant, DEMO) the problem
of the danger of ‘vortex’ (to use Giddens’ terminology) does not occupy the
mainstage of contemporary sociology, as it could DEMO argued it did in the 1970s;
it is, nonetheless, one that is intrinsic to the enterprise of sociology. And, as
Sharrock and Anderson (1986) say about ethnomethodology, just because the
problems raised by a reflexive sociology are not fashionable does not mean
that they have DEMO dealt with.
Weber’s (1947, p. 88) famous definitions of sociology DEMO social action
make the question of reflexivity central to the sociological method and con-
stitutive of the discipline itself. Sociology, he says, concerns DEMO interpretive
understanding of social action” and social action is behaviour which, DEMO
“of the subjective meaning attached to it by the acting individual (DEMO individu-
als), it takes into account the behaviour of others and is thereby oriented in its
course.”1 “On this view,” as the DEMO Dictionary of Sociology states (1995,
p. 550), “reflexivity is DEMO capacity possessed by social actors which is decisive
in distinguishing human actors from animals.” Thus, Weber passes on to so-
ciology the problem of how adequately to take into account an acting indi-
vidual whose own DEMO is predicated on the subjective meaning the actor
attaches to it. As McHugh et al. (1974) put it in their Motive paper, the Weberian
legacy concerns the issue of formulating behaviour which itself is oriented DEMO
the very same environment it constitutes. The member is reflexive insofar as
his or her action is oriented by taking into account the behaviour DEMO others.
The sociologist, whose task it is to interpret this action, needs to reflect both
on the member’s reflexivity and on his/her DEMO reflexivity.
In Webster’s dictionary, the etymological root of the word ‘reflex’ DEMO
to bend back and its meaning resonates with a bending back or turning back
on oneself. For example, the sentences, ‘I surprised myself,DEMO or ‘I thought to
myself’ are reflexive sentences because the subject and object of the sentence
are the same person. Even at this early DEMO in recognising the linguistic
possibility of reflexivity, a possibility which for DEMO (1934) is what consti-
tutes the self as social, as DEMO an ‘I’ and a ‘me,’ we can also sense a danger
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
269
of making reflexivity a central focus. It DEMO only risks an excessive self-ab-
sorption on the part of the inquirer but also risks getting caught up in a vi-
cious and endless DEMO This very real danger leads many to the conclusion
that trying to deal with the problem of reflexivity is like trying to stand back
DEMO one’s shadow. Adequately dealing with the problem of reflexivity, from
this DEMO of view, is beyond the limits of human capacity; it is, fundamentally,
an impossible problem – we can reflect on the human capacity for reflection,
and reflect on our reflection of the capacity DEMO reflection, and reflect on our
reflection of our reflection on the DEMO capacity for reflection, and so on.
The issue of reflexivity opens DEMO a Pandora’s Box of issues which, on the
surface, seems to make it either narcissistic or foolhardy to confront this prob-
lem directly. DEMO is this danger which led Giddens (1976, p. 166) to DEMO mocking
conclusion that Blum and McHugh and their colleagues are “intrepid travellers
all, now left swirling helplessly in the vortex of the hermeneutic whirlpool.” Yet,
there is a cost to ignoring this issue; it lies at the very core of sociology and
pervades and threatens to undermine DEMO analytic integrity of its claims. Thus,
as Heidegger (1967, pp. 3–4) says of the Thales story, ‘swirling helplessly’ is
what those DEMO undertake to address this important problem risk.2
In this paper I will address the work of Blum and McHugh in light of this
issue DEMO reflexivity. Along the way I will show what their perspective shares
with, and how it differs from, other perspectives – in sociology in DEMO
lar (e.g., ethnomethodology) and in contemporary interpretive theory (e.g.,
poststructuralism, hermeneutics) in general. This paper is not a description
of DEMO work of Blum and McHugh, nor is it a response to DEMO critics. Rather,
I am going to read their work as my way of working through this issue. That
is to say, I read their work as, in Gadamer’s (1975, pp. 325–341) terms, an
answer to a question. This requires a dialogical engagement with their texts
DEMO the sociological tradition in order to recover the question to which that
dialogue (i.e., the dialogue between the Analysis and the sociological tradi-
DEMO) is an answer to. Thus, and in the spirit of Analysis (sometimes called
Analytic Theory and which I [1997] have called dialectical analysis), this paper
is my way of working out the problem of DEMO as I work through their
solution to this problem. The paper is an example or icon of what coming to
terms with the problem DEMO reflexivity looks like and so tries to do what it says
both Analysis and Gadamer’s hermeneutics are trying to do.
Blum and McHugh are DEMO often treated as sociologists who aim to push
further the reflexive developments initiated by ethnomethodology. Sharrock
and Anderson (1986, p. 110), for DEMO, say that they “show some com-
prehension of and sensitivity to DEMO concerns” of ethnomethodology and as
such “are aware of places at which it is vulnerable.” Analysis, Sharrock and
Anderson say (p. 111), DEMO ethnomethodology as “misrepresenting as
theoretical and empirical problems, what are in DEMO problems of community and
authority, of seeking sounder sociological investigations when DEMO is needed
270
KIERAN BONNER
is a reconstruction of a whole form of intellectual DEMO, of pursuing methodo-
logical objectives when an authentic relation with others DEMO be sought.” In
describing Analysis in this way, Sharrock and Anderson DEMO that this attempt
to push the “examination of the assumptions” of one’s own inquiry to the roots
is more radical than ethnomethodology’s expression in DEMO enterprise.
As well as showing a recognition of the intellectual influences on Blum and
McHugh (in particular, ethnomethodology and Heidegger’s hermeneutical
transformation of DEMO phenomenology), Sharrock and Anderson also
show an understanding of the focus of Analysis. For Analysis, the examina-
tion of the assumptions of one’s own inquiry (reflexivity) requires that one
deal with problems of community DEMO authority as against just theory and em-
piricism, reconstruct intellectual life DEMO against just seek sounder sociologi-
cal investigations, and seek an authentic DEMO with others as against pursue
methodological objectives. To anyone familiar with the writing corpus of Blum
and McHugh, this description resonates with what Analysis is about.
Yet, it raises as many questions as it answers. Is there something about
modern sociological investigations which requires the reconstruction of in-
DEMO life? What does social inquiry have to do with community and DEMO
thority or with an authentic relationship with others? Are these not DEMO
and practical concerns rather than matters concerning the place of reflexivity
in social inquiry? What does understanding the way acting individuals take
their own action into account have to do with community, authority or authentic
relationship with others? It seems that the problem of reflexivity is as much a
matter of practice (community, authority, authentic relationship, and recon-
DEMO intellectual life) as it is of theory.
This paper will show DEMO the problem of reflexivity, inherited from We-
ber’s very conception of DEMO, is transformed by phenomenological and
ethnomethodological developments in sociology. To demonstrate, I will take
up the everyday example of motive talk and Blum DEMO McHugh’s analysis
of this practice. The influence of the linguistic turn of hermeneutics and
Wittgenstein’s (1958) later philosophy enables another transformation in the
DEMO of what is involved in taking responsibility for our own talk,
bringing to the fore the issue of nihilism. The paper argues that DEMO taking into
account the problem of nihilism, we can gain a DEMO understanding of the
work of Blum and McHugh and, more importantly, understanding the devel-
opments in dialectical analysis can help to recognise and DEMO the sig-
nificant problem of nihilism.
Reflexivity as methodological arbitrariness: motive DEMO
As stated, the problem of reflexivity is intrinsic to the being DEMO sociology, as
this has been articulated by Weber’s concept of Verstehen. DEMO to the act
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
271
of understanding social action involves understanding the DEMO
of social actors because the self-understanding of social actors constitutes
action as social in the first place. Motive talk is one example of the DEMO ordi-
nary people go about making sense of their environment. Weber (DEMO, p. 98)
defines motive as follows: “A motive is a complex of subjective meaning which
seems to the actor himself or to DEMO observer an adequate ground for the con-
duct in question.” (This DEMO with his earlier definition of social action.)
Webster’s, (1975) DEMO defines motive as “something (as a need or de-
sire) that causes a person to act.” If motive talk is an omni-relevant feature
(see any daily newspaper) of the way ordinary social actors understand each
others actions – whether it be doing greetings, raising children, organizing
DEMO relief or the pope’s visit to Cuba – then to understand this discourse is
to understand a paradigmatic example of the reflective practices of DEMO
actors.
While acknowledging that ordinary social actors do motive talk as a way
of making sense of actions, scientists and theorists of science like Abel (1977)
and Rudner (1977) argue that such a procedure could not be relied upon by
sociologists because it depended too much DEMO the “personal experience and
introspective capacity” of the sociologist.” (Dallmayr & DEMO, 1977, p.
79) For example, in order to understand what is going on inside of Castro’s
mind to account for his invitation DEMO the pope to Cuba, observers have to rely
on their introspective DEMO This reliance has two problems. Because the
observer sociologist needs to recreate “psychological states” (Rudner) in or-
der to make the “observed behaviour DEMO (Dallmayr & McCarthy,
p. 79), the discipline of sociology DEMO dependent on psychology (and the
way the science of psychology provides DEMO knowledge about motivational
states). More importantly, this procedure introduces a DEMO of arbitrariness
concerning the connection between the behaviour and the ascribed motiva-
tional state. How can we know for sure what is going on DEMO of another
person’s head? We ask them, but do people know their own motivations?
Drawing on the resources of empathy and sympathy, as Weber (1947, pp. 88–
115) suggests we do, can DEMO the sociologist imagine what is going on. But,
again, this DEMO seems arbitrary.
Initially then, Weber’s idea of Verstehen was commonly accepted DEMO mean
that sociologists make use of “personal experience” and the capacity for “in-
trospection” as a way of getting inside peoples heads.3 The problem DEMO this
idea of reflexivity, is that it renders the sociologist’s account DEMO, an
account as much imposed by the sociologist as belonging to DEMO the soci-
ologist is talking about. “So,” argues Abel, “introspective DEMO . . . could
not be a method of verification” but, DEMO best, a heuristic “aid in preliminary
explorations of a subject.” (p. 79). Reflexivity may aid in speculating about
and exploring a subject DEMO it could not be relied upon to produce knowledge
of the subject. In the last analysis, the probability of a connection between
272
KIERAN BONNER
the action and the source of its impulse can DEMO established only by means of
“objective, experimental, and statistical tests” (DEMO & McCarthy, p. 79).
This formulation of motive follows the DEMO positivistic tradition.
That is, motives are conceived “as private internal characteristics DEMO persons
which impinge upon and coerce these persons into various behaviours. In this
view, motives are seen simultaneously (1) as ‘causal’ antecedent variables . . .,
and (2) as characteristic of ‘states’ of DEMO engaging in behaviour” (McHugh
et al., 1974, p. 33). DEMO example, Castro’s motive is seen as going on in
his mind DEMO as a cause for the action of inviting the pope to Cuba. When
Maclean’s (January 19, 1998, p. 41) magazine says that DEMO motive for
inviting the pope is to “help to counter American efforts to isolate Cuba,” such
an explanation may be an adequate ground DEMO the ordinary person but it can-
not be treated as reliable sociological knowledge.
Under the influence of phenomenology, Alfred Schutz was the first to chal-
lenge this reading of Weber’s Verstehen. Schutz critiques the positivist inter-
DEMO of Weber and the positivist understanding of reflexivity as introspection
because it excludes much of social life from sociological investigation (Schutz,
1977, DEMO 229). Reflexivity, he says (p. 220), “involves neither mere observa-
tion of external behaviour, nor private introspection, nor a process DEMO psychic
identification.” Rather, as a method peculiar to the human sciences, it refers
to the what Husserl calls the Lebenswelt, or the life-world, “within which all
scientific and even logical concepts originate.” This is to say “that any knowl-
edge of the world, in common sense thinking and in science, involves mental
constructs, syntheses, generalizations, formulations, idealizations, specific to
the level of the thought organization.” (Schutz, p. 232) This kind of knowl-
edge forms the basis of the life-world and is taken-for-granted by both com-
mon sense and science.
The “Motive” paper DEMO motive from this life-world perspective. Thus,
motive talk is treated as (to use a Foucauldian term) a discursive practice.
When competent everyday DEMO engage in motive talk they are following
very precise communal rules about what is to count as adequate motive talk.
So we would not DEMO to read in Macleans some reporter speculating that
Castro invited the pope to Cuba because he (Castro or the pope) had a sore
DEMO; such a speculation would invite us to question the competence of DEMO re-
porter because it would show that he or she did not seem to understand what
is involved in doing adequate motive talk. In DEMO idiom of Blum and McHugh
(1974) motives are not a stimulus going on in somebody’s head but rather show
members formulating themselves and DEMO environment. In order to be able
to do this kind of formulating and to demonstrate to each other that we are
able to do DEMO, we, as competent everyday members of society, are required
to DEMO specific rules and grammar.
Life-world theorizing, both done and taken-for-granted by DEMO actors,
provides the substance that positivism both investigates and also takes for
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
273
granted. The “Motive” paper (McHugh et al., 1974) argues, that in accepting
motive as a ‘causal’ antecedent variable characteristic of a person’s internal
psychic state, social scientists take on the very assumptions of the everyday
life-world that need to be examined. The DEMO reasonability and intelligibility
of motive talk, the fact that there are DEMO specific rules for doing the practice
of motive talk, which, in turn, provide a sense of a world composed of people
whose actions are understood in terms of their motive, are all taken for granted
in the positivist understanding.
Thus, the “social life-world” (see Berger et DEMO, 1973, p. 63 for a descrip-
tion of this notion) DEMO the starting point of all investigations, a starting point
which is DEMO unacknowledged and required by science, natural and social,
because (as ethnomethodology has shown in many detailed ways) it is the
social life-world which provides for a world to be investigated in the very first
DEMO Motive talk is an instance of an ordinary member’s reflexive practice,
a practice which provides for a world of persons (e.g., Castro) who are for-
mulated as owning their experiences (e.g., a history DEMO opposing the U.S.)
which, in turn, is seen as providing the ground or grammar for connecting
events (inviting the pope) with DEMO designations (counteracting). In short
form, what life-world analysis demonstrates is that everything known requires
a knower and that knowledge is the product DEMO a transaction between a knower
and a known. “What mediates between a knower and a known, then, is a per-
spective, and knowledge is always coloured by that perspective.” (Littlejohn,
1989, p. 9)DEMO
It is now clear that, far from introducing a methodological arbitrariness DEMO
sociology (as positivists like Abel and Rudner argue), reflexivity must DEMO part
of a rigorous social analysis. If any social scientist excludes from examina-
tion the way the social life-world structures how a phenomenon is DEMO
in the first place, he or she unreflectively takes on the DEMO as-
sumptions of the everyday member precisely when these are what need to be
examined. From the perspective of the recognition of the shaping DEMO of
the Lebenswelt, it would be fundamentally incomplete for a sociologist DEMO to
make reflexivity an essential component of social analysis. This recognition,
therefore, is the first step in taking responsibility for what one says while si-
multaneously establishing knowledge about the ordinary practices of every-
day DEMO Would it not be irresponsible if the sociologist were now to
ignore the reflexive practices of the ordinary social actor, practices which
themselves constitute the world which all social scientists investigate?
Reflexivity, practical accounts and the responsibility of the inquirer
When the “Motive” paper was reprinted in DEMO book On the Beginning of Social
Inquiry, an “Addendum” was added, where Blum, McHugh and their collabo-
274
KIERAN BONNER
rators Raffel and Foss, point to the limitations of this version of reflexivity.
They say that despite the epistemological advance which DEMO
represents on conventional social science, their analysis is not self-reflective
enough DEMO they exempt their own talk about motive from a rigorous re-
flexive examination. They critique themselves for not examining the inquir-
er’s interest in DEMO for the self-reflective practices of the member. Thus,
they say, DEMO more fundamental question remains to be asked: “What kind of
world DEMO make motive talk intelligible and interesting?” That is, a more
DEMO and stronger version of reflexivity should include the require-
ment that (DEMO, p. 44) “we address our own interest in motive talk, DEMO we
address the fact that we find such talk interesting.” Their interest in reflexiv-
ity is now being pushed to another level and includes DEMO kind of “bend-
ing back.” At this level, the inquirer asks DEMO the inquirer’s own interest in
accounting for the reflexive practices of the member. While their description
of members’ practices (e.g., motive talk) are more adequate and complete than
the discourse which operates from within a DEMO epistemology, they do
not account for why this should be done DEMO the first place. (Are we now peer-
ing into the “hermeneutic DEMO again?).
In specifying their self-critique, they say (p. 44), motive is interesting be-
cause it “represents an occasion of collectability” and so the interest in
collectability needs to be theorized. That is, the very idea of motive can be
interpreted as an everyday attempt to DEMO for a reasonable world. To use
the language of their later work, it is a solution to the problem of the need and
desire to live in a reasonable world. Yet, this problem was not theorized by
them. The problem with the “Motive” paper, they now say, DEMO that the interest
in the talk is conflated with the member’s interest but that interest is not ad-
dressed or critically examined.5 The issue DEMO is that while motive talk col-
lects and therefore appears to make sense of various instances of behaviour,
is such sense-making deeply reasonable? Might not motive talk, as an exam-
ple of finding a cause (e.g., Castro’s need to counter the American embargo),
be as much an attempt to bring thinking and theorizing to an end as DEMO is to do
theorizing. Just because members, through the doing of DEMO motive talk,
reasonably collect the invitation by Castro with (the DEMO of) his interest in
counteracting the American economic embargo – and DEMO such theoriz-
ing constitute a world of ‘types of persons’ with biographies such persons are
said to own, and so on, – just DEMO theorizing is done in this way does not
make such theorizing deeply reasonable.
The bending back of reflexivity now raises a deeper, a more problematic,
and a more fundamental problem, that is, the very DEMO of reasonability itself.
Can the reasonability of the inquirer’s theorizing be provided for as the theo-
rist seeks to understand the reasonability of the DEMO being addressed?
The idea of inquirers taking responsibility for their own talk now involves re-
flecting on the socio-historical situation which privileges some DEMO of in-
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
275
quiry over others. For example, if the idea of cause connotes a powerful but
dumb force (e.g., the DEMO of gravity), is it deeply reasonable to be fascinated
with a powerful but dumb force? – to be satisfied with a world (DEMO et
al., p. 45) “where there is a continual process of clarifying the things one is
with by making reference to things outside DEMO them (things that are before,
after, or external)”? DEMO does this say about us as social inquirers if this is
what dominates our theorizing? Of course, in calling into question the deep
DEMO of an inquiry which seeks to find the causes of action, DEMO are
calling into question the reasonability of science itself as a form of life. And,
in doing that, one is simultaneously calling into question the modern life-
world which gives such a version of theorizing DEMO appearance of eminent
reasonability.
It is interesting to think of a similar development Gadamer makes in
Truth and Method, which was translated into English around the same time.
Gadamer’s (1975) notion of “effective history” makes DEMO same general point
of the process of understanding. Gadamer’s idea (1975, p. xix) that “under-
standing is never subjective behaviour toward a ‘given object,’ but towards
its effective history – the history of its DEMO; in other words, understand-
ing belongs to the being of that which is understood.” A perspective (e.g., sci-
ence) is not just conceptual (Gadamer, pp. 5–39) but is also existential in that
it reveals a way of action and a way of life, that is, a way of being in the world.
This means that “observation, DEMO and understanding are never objectively
pure; they are always coloured by DEMO and community” (Littlejohn, p. 140).
Blum and McHugh, in DEMO more aggressive and polemical (should I say – more
American?) DEMO, are now raising the issue of science’s way of being in DEMO
world. They push the problem of reflexivity to the need to question the con-
ventions which support the scientific mode of inquiry. They ask, are these con-
ventions, these assumptions worth agreeing with?
It is at this point in my narrative that the need to go behind DEMO texts be-
comes an issue.6 What deep question moves the Analysis project to raise these
concerns? The deep question animating the rigorous pursuit of the problem
of reflexivity in social inquiry is, I suggest, the DEMO of nihilism. In the
“Introduction” to the 1974 book, McHugh et DEMO specifically address the issue
of the adequacy of inquiry by reflecting on the adequacy of their own inquiry.
They say (3): “In speaking we are denying that we are doing an inadequate
activity. Otherwise our DEMO would be no different that chatter, than silence,
than what DEMO calls nihilism.” What if the world of science, though it may
DEMO epistemologically consistent, is a feature of and contribution to the sense
DEMO nothing, neither talk nor action, makes a real difference? This DEMO dis-
cursive move (questioning the conventions which support modern inquiry)
DEMO seem to put Analysis outside of sociology (insofar as the latter DEMO
stands itself as a science); yet, it has a continuity DEMO the questions Weber
(1946) first raised in “Science as a Vocation,” questions that pervade much of
276
KIERAN BONNER
Weber’s work, especially his famous Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capi-
talism (1958). That is, what can sociology DEMO to the Tolstoyian questions,
“What should we do?” and “How should we live?” Weber recognizes that
the role of science is DEMO to clarifying the goals and purposes one has
already, but is DEMO able to otherwise substantively contribute to the issue of
the good. And this, according to Weber, is the fate the scientist must bear.
DEMO, can clarity be conceived as an ultimate purpose and how can DEMO be
provided for?
Part 2 – Reflexivity and the Problem of Nihilism
The Problem of Nihilism
The interest in pursuing the problem of DEMO is (I interpret) a response
to a deep concern with the question of nihilism.7 This theme is noted passingly
in the Dallmayr (1988) and Roche (1988) reviews of Self-Reflection in the Arts
and Sciences and it helps us understand why in that book (1984, pp. DEMO),
the actions of Camus’ Meursault are taken to be “a DEMO example” of the prob-
lem of modern theory. They quote Meursault as follows: “Nothing, nothing
had the least importance . . . all DEMO ideas that people had tried to foist on me.
. . . What difference could they make to me.” What is interesting about this
DEMO taken from fictional literature is that it mirrors a very similar ques-
tion Dallmayr and McCarthy (1977, p. 1) ask in another context:
While man’s empirical knowledge in our century has expanded at an DEMO
ponential rate, however, his sense of purpose or direction seems to have
atrophied: although more knowledgeable about the world than any of his
forebears, man today is more ignorant or at a loss as to what he and his ac-
cumulated knowledge are all about. Confronted with DEMO rationally function-
ing but ultimately silent universe, he asks the question: what is the point?
Viewed in this context, contemporary methodological issues reveal their
salience and underlying agony: the concern with ‘understanding’ as a type
of inquiry results from a crisis of human understanding.
The question DEMO problem of developing an inquiry which can take responsi-
bility for what it says while saying something substantial about the world has
now deepened. DEMO order to take responsibility for one’s inquiry, one must be
able DEMO give a sense of its purpose or point. To claim that it is a more rigorous
account of members’ accounting practices than positivistic sociology (as
ethnomethodology does), merely raises the question of the purpose of DEMO
ing for the rigorous accounting of members accounting practices. In other
words, inquirers need to show a taking of responsibility for their own prac-
tice of inquiry, a responsibility which involves, at some point, raising the is-
sue of point or purpose. To fail to raise such DEMO question is to fail to live up to
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
277
the demand inherent in the notion of DEMO, a demand that now means
addressing the issue that “nothing, nothing has the least importance.”
Meursault embodies the spirit of an age which, though it has greater em-
pirical knowledge than any age previous to DEMO, is, in the words of Dallmayr
and McCarthy, more “at DEMO loss as to what this knowledge is all about.” Nihil-
ism, DEMO embodied by Meursault, is the positive embrace of the recognition of
DEMO universe which is “rationally functioning but ultimately silent.” Nihilism
embraces futility and treats such an embrace as strong insofar as it has the
courage DEMO face the recognition of the pointlessness of the universe. We are
now beginning to glimpse why questions of sound sociological investigations
require the reconstruction DEMO social life and why questions of sociological
procedure connect with questions of authenticity. They do so when the atten-
tion to reflexivity demanded of DEMO social inquiry by phenomenology is reflex-
ively turned on the one who would put forward this demand.
This focus adds an ethical and political DEMO to what should, from a
framework which accepts the epistemological implications DEMO science, be
narrowly theoretic and methodological. And while such a development
DEMO the identity of sociology, that is, its conventional place as one more
discipline among many (with its own intellectual territory mapped out), self-
reflexive integrity means that such boundaries can no longer be passively
DEMO But, as Sharrock and Anderson say about the impulse which sus-
DEMO ethnomethodology, to now ignore these questions would be an act of DEMO
faith, a denial of scholarly standards and reflexive integrity. Of course, to put
the whole tradition of sociology to question does not, as some have suggested,
have to mean that one has put oneself DEMO the discipline. Rather, I argue,
it expands the parameters of DEMO discipline in the same way as asking what
does it mean to be human expands the parameters of humanity. Again, this
development in Analysis mirrors the “extension of hermeneutic procedures
to the domain of social inquiry” DEMO also involves “a rethinking of accepted
[disciplinary] boundaries.” (Dallmayr and McCarthy, 1977, p. 285).
Reflexivity, science and morality
If nihilism is DEMO deep question raised by Analysis, in what way can their texts
DEMO be interpreted as responses to this question? In On The Beginning DEMO Social
Inquiry, McHugh et al. (1974) examine various cultural practices DEMO Snubs,
Bias, Travel and bring to the fore the tensions DEMO negations revealed and
concealed by those practices while simultaneously showing (and DEMO re-
sponsibility for) the grounds which makes their own analysis possible. DEMO their
own words, to do analysis is to serve as a DEMO “of the ways in which the
conventions of ordinary thought have become segregated from their grammati-
cal grounds” (McHugh et al., p. 11)DEMO Analysts question the worth of standing
278
KIERAN BONNER
or holding onto such grounds while simultaneously calling attention DEMO the
grounds which make their own analysis possible.
For example, the DEMO paper (drawing on the influence of Wittgenstein)
shows that the DEMO of finding bias is a specific move in a language game,
in particular, the language game (or life-world) of science. However, DEMO
within the perspective of the (taken for granted) positivist life-world, DEMO is
thought of as a particular and identifiable thing which flaws research, a thing
which, it follows, should be eliminated in order for the research to be accept-
able. In turn, the criteria of validity and reliability are the socially sanctioned
ways to ensure the elimination of DEMO from practical sociological research.
The question is: what are the epistemological DEMO cultural assumptions that
are embedded in and ground this intellectual practice?
To invoke bias is to name a trouble, because, from within DEMO life-world of
science, speech and knowledge are assumed to be about DEMO world which is in-
dependent of knowers. The self-understanding of science is that its own speech
is a thing which copies nature. Ideal speech DEMO therefore anonymous speech,
the speech of any person. The “intelligibility of bias as a charge or accusation
makes necessary reference to the rule DEMO the charge violates, and the rule
in this case is a DEMO of objectivity which is itself grounded in an ideal of
communality and of impersonal speech.” (p. 56). Because the reality of the
world is assumed to exist independently of mind, of language, or of DEMO
knower, bias as a thing is identifiable because the speakers or DEMO can
be identified in what they say? “To see bias” therefore, “is to see the pur-
ported inquiry as more intelligible by making DEMO to the contingent
personal position of the inquirer than to the nature of the objects he claims
to describe.” (p. 59).
Bias, DEMO, is a charge that the knower did not overcome self-inter-
est, by transforming what he or she knows into that which anybody could
DEMO By virtue of that inability or unwillingness, the claims of the DEMO
will not be accepted by the community of scientists. The charge of bias, is
a rule-guided charge ground in the theoretic community of science with a
grammar of the unnecessarily private. It is seen as a DEMO claim which is
actually based on a private interest that could not be shaken off. Thus, as is
pointed out, the charge of DEMO has moral overtones and it demonstrates that
the scientific orientation not only references conformity to a certain episte-
mology but also, more deeply, DEMO an ontology, i.e., a moral commu-
nity. Thus, as with DEMO other form of inquiry, the observation of a problematic
bias in DEMO shows that “observation, reason and understanding are never
objectively pure; they are always coloured by history and community.”
(Littlejohn, p. 140).
DEMO summarize, as a move in a language game, there are certain rules which
have to be followed if the process of finding bias DEMO to be recognised as the
normative intelligible activity it is. The process of identifying bias in a speech
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
279
is no longer seen as merely conforming DEMO an epistemology for correctly pro-
ducing knowledge but also as a cultural practice. Reflexive analysis requires
analyzing the relevant (culturally and historically specific) DEMO (in this
case, modern science) of the phenomenon (Bias) DEMO investigated. Yet, given
that all knowledge production (including Analysis and hermeneutics) is ground
in cultural practices what is the particular problem with the positivist life-
world?
The problem with the positivist mode of inquiry DEMO the way the ontological
implications and the moral claims it carries are concealed by the attempt of
the epistemology to treat its own claims DEMO neutral and objective. The further
problem with this orientation (as George DEMO, Hannah Arendt and Gadamer
have, in their different ways, also DEMO to light) is that by requiring that
inquirers treat themselves as DEMO and neutral instruments, the very ques-
tion of the authority for DEMO speech and its appearance as a socio-historical ac-
tion is rendered invisible. Science, as a community, requires a commitment to
the apparent non-commitment DEMO method and then it treats that commitment as
though it were not a commitment at all.
Scientific method is now understood as an oriented (if unreflective) avoid-
ance of taking responsibility for one’s own talk, DEMO avoidance which can only
be sustained by an unwillingness to face the contradictions embedded in one’s
inquiry.8 Thus, it is not an accident that the scientific life-world makes a con-
cern with reflexivity appear both unproductive DEMO (if we accept the revolu-
tion brought about by the Protestant DEMO and the Spirit of Capitalism) morally
irresponsible. From the scientific life-world, self-reflective analysis appears
as unnecessarily self-aggrandizing, compared with the acceptance of “an ef-
facement of self in the search for understanding” (Berger, 1963, p. 166) re-
quired by scientific methodology. Yet, the irony is DEMO the self-effacement
required by science is actually a concealing from awareness, DEMO the way its
own procedures influence the production of the truth, DEMO making its conclu-
sions seem like a neutral description of what is. McHugh et al. conclude (p.
75), that their analysis seeks to draw attention of others away “from a [nar-
row] concern with facts DEMO details to which the talk [of science] is oriented
– the question of practical decisions and constraints – to a concern with the
commitments DEMO all speech and with their rational and moral status.
We have tried to make the commitment underlying biased speech show itself
intelligibly as a DEMO to protect this very question (the question of com-
mitment) from being explored. In this sense we have asked whether such a
life DEMO worth living, whether such a world is worth our commitment, and we
have brought an alternative world to view.”
The correlation of the DEMO in scientific knowledge and the atrophying
of a sense of purpose (DEMO by Dallmayr and McCarthy, 1977, p. 1) is now
not DEMO coincidental. Science and the enlightenment ideal which supports
and promotes science, DEMO the question of commitment from being ex-
280
KIERAN BONNER
plored – including and especially its own commitment to DEMO speech.
The lack of oriented reflexivity, which is a crucial feature DEMO the empirical
method, is now not just itself methodologically arbitrary (with regard to the
study of social life): it contributes to the DEMO deferral of questions of
purpose and point. Thus the enlightenment prejudice against prejudice
(Gadamer, 1975, pp. 241–253) or the scientific bias against DEMO, while use-
ful in establishing precise empirical knowledge, has dangerous political and
ethical implications. Given the spread of Western science in this age DEMO glo-
balization, such political and ethical dangers are now more pressing.
DEMO and Nihilism
After the influence of the post-structuralism of Foucault and Derrida, the
hermeneutics of Gadamer and contemporary post-structuralist feminisms (e.g.,
Lather, 1991; Scott, 1990), it is now more plausible to understand DEMO as
a kind of moral community, even though that violates science’s DEMO self-un-
derstanding (as neutral and detached); it also sounds less DEMO to say that
resisting the dominance of positivism involves one not only in epistemologi-
cal battles but also in ontological battles. As Lather (1991, p. 14) states, “con-
temporary history and philosophy of science, DEMO of knowledge, and
movement in science itself, all have combined to impress upon us the inter-
dependence of method, theory and values.” The dominance of positivism,
which is now struggling to deal with the DEMO of the post-modern cri-
tique (Lather, pp. 102–122), was much more pervasive, and pervasively ac-
cepted in the early 1970s. Remembering Gadamer’s claim that understanding
is necessarily intertwined with history and community and now DEMO the ben-
efit of the superiority of subsequent understanding, we can DEMO why
some of the writing in On the Beginning of Social Inquiry polemically over-
states in an either/or way the line in the DEMO between science and Analytic
Theory.
As stated, Blum, McHugh and colleagues’ pursuit of the issues surround-
ing reflexivity can be usefully interpreted as DEMO with the problem of
nihilism. They are not alone in their concern here. “The elimination of the idea
of final purpose from the scientific DEMO of the human and non-human things”
according to George Grant (1969, pp. 37–40) “not only led to the progress of
science and the improvement of conditions but also had consequences on the
public understanding of DEMO it was to live. . . . Consequently, the corrosions
of DEMO occur in all parts of the community. . . . For those who stay within
the central stream of our society and are therefore DEMO in its institutions,
the effect of nihilism is the narrowing to an unmitigated reliance on technique.”
In going on to analyze the cultural DEMO between the modern uni-
versity curriculum and modern technological society, modern DEMO has led,
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
281
he says (Grant, 1969, p. 131), to a tight circle: “The tight circle then in which
we live is this: our present forms of existence have sapped the ability to think
about the standards of excellence and yet at the same DEMO have imposed on
us a standard in terms of which the human good is monolithically asserted.”
That one standard monolithically proclaimed is the desire DEMO master human
and non-human nature. Such a mastery, furthered through scientific DEMO
edge and technology, both assumes and defers the question: “what is the
point?”
Blum and McHugh, on the other hand, show DEMO the tight circle is only
tight and vicious (and therefore the DEMO for pessimism and lament) when
one is not reflective with regard DEMO what makes one’s own analysis possible.
Unlike other social inquirers addressing the same problems (e.g., Arendt,
Grant, Weber), Blum and McHugh’s work does not seem overwhelmed by the
pervasiveness and depth of the DEMO of modernity. Rather, they reflexively
acknowledge that the Language which allows DEMO the life-world (language
game) of science also enables a dialectical resistance to the contradictions
inherent in that life-world, thus enabling a confident if even aggressive con-
frontation with a dominant modernity. If they show a DEMO confrontation
with the contradictions inherent in a dominant modernity, in what DEMO can
this theoretic development be used to help address the spectre of nihilism?
The nihilism of Meursault does not defer but rather embraces DEMO recogni-
tion that “nothing, nothing makes a difference.” Meursault can be DEMO
because of his apparent lack of ‘bad faith.’ When he says (DEMO, pp. 118–119)
“What difference could they make to me, the death of others, or a mother’s
love or his God; or DEMO way one decides to live, the fate one thinks one chooses,DEMO
since one and the same fate was bound to ‘choose’ not only me but thousands
of millions of privileged people, who, like him, called themselves my broth-
ers”- he is facing the only ‘point’ in DEMO that humans can be certain about, our
mortality. This nihilism of DEMO is strong because, instead of fearfully
denying the increasing sense of DEMO, he embraces the “privileged
equality” which his acknowledgement creates. “Every man DEMO was privi-
leged; there was only one class of men, the privileged class. All alike would
be condemned to die one day.” We DEMO recognise a display of honesty and
courage in his acknowledgement that “nothing, nothing had the least impor-
tance” even if we want to disagree with the acknowledgement.
Yet, openly “apprehending” and acknowledging “what is as chaos” (Grant,
1969, p. 38), assumes the worth of that DEMO and acknowledgment.
The raw, unironic honesty of nihilism does not take DEMO account that, in speak-
ing in this way, one’s actions show that something matters (e.g., the act of ap-
prehending and acknowledging, the honesty and courage of facing a rationally
functioning but ultimately silent DEMO) while one is saying that “nothing
had the least importance.” Contemporary DEMO is a risk of those who think
deeply and honestly about our contemporary situation yet, in concluding that
282
KIERAN BONNER
nothing matters, nihilism denies the thinking and honesty needed to come to
such a conclusion. An embrace of nihilism does not DEMO account for
its own need to speak, to apprehend, to acknowledge. In this sense, nihilism
is self-contradictory. On the other hand, Analysis DEMO (1974, p. 3)
that: “In speaking we are denying DEMO we are doing an inadequate activity.
Otherwise our speech would be no different than chatter, than silence, than
what Rosen calls nihilism.”
Nihilism: The Risk of Reflexive Thinking
Much of what McHugh et al. say DEMO the 1974 book exudes a sense of moral
superiority. In the “Bias” paper, they show that positivism has a shallow rela-
tion to the principles which authorize its knowledge-production. In “Travel”
they say: “The concretisation of self and consequent identification of coming
to know with an exchange of DEMO presupposes a nihilistic actor as the para-
digmatic social participant.” (McHugh DEMO al., p. 153) In “Snubs” they show
how a snub denies the collaboration which a greeting invites but it needs to
collaborate in DEMO to deny that collaboration. Thus, it too is self-contradic-
tory. They DEMO (p. 136): “The same form of life that is bothered DEMO snubs
allows them to occur. Suffice it to say that it is possible to conceive of other
worlds.” That is, if one really understood snubs one would recognize that
they don’t and therefore should not hurt. DEMO, Lather arguing from a
postmodern feminist position (1991, p. 116) says that the problems of rela-
tivism “and its seeming attendant, nihilism” become a “non-issue” when it is
recognised that they are the “mirror DEMO of totalization in the ideologies of
objectivity.” Thus, showing the interrelation DEMO theory and ethics, which both
postmodern feminism and Analysis do, enables the issue of nihilism to be
confronted and exposed rather than deferred.
DEMO, the problem with this solution (i.e. a reflexivity which privileges
the superiority of theorizing and the inevitable and necessary recognition of
one’s own DEMO and political standpoint) is that it appears as though the
examined DEMO is not vulnerable or subject to the limits of social life and cul-
ture. Reflexive theorizing does not seem to have any life-world problem DEMO
its own. Correspondingly, it seems that the life-world of positivism is DEMO
in a demonic and un-redeeming unreflectiveness. In Gadamer’s terminology
(1975, p. 331), the dialectic of the 1974 book acknowledges the power of DEMO
committed reflexivity but the latter does not appear as if it is itself subject to
the fundamental finitude of human understanding.
The 1984 book, Self-Reflection in the Arts and Sciences, can be read as a
response to some of these problems. In this book, self-reflection is now both
a topic and a problem. Developing a solution to the problem of DEMO
is no longer a matter of showing the way practices and various social theories
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
283
are forgetful of, or in contradiction with, the grounds that make them possi-
ble. The 1974 stage affirms theorizing and through that affirmation shows how
the lack of reflexivity of science (everyday life, modernity) can be defeated
by its own self-contradiction; their 1984 work seeks to show the vulnerabil-
ity of theorizing. If this DEMO so, then the problem of nihilism developed here needs
revising. As DEMO have argued here, the problem of nihilism, a problem which is
endemic to modern social theory, makes one self-conscious about the danger
that reasoning and analysis itself may be seen as pointless. Perhaps nihilism,
DEMO than being an interlocutor defeated by an oriented reflexivity (Analy-
sis) or standpoint theory (feminism), is actually a feature and risk of a com-
mitment to such inquiry. That is, is it a risk of the life committed to the
examination of life.
The key development DEMO their 1984 work is that all theorizing, whether
everyday, scientific or classical, is seen as a solution to the problem of need-
ing to speak reasonably about what cannot be captured by reason. The prob-
DEMO of taking responsibility for one’s own inquiry while simultaneously saying
something about the world, is now addressed of self-reflection itself. Theo-
rizing is no longer the privileged and secure phenomenon which enables the
exposure of the DEMO commitments of others; rather, it is itself sub-
ject, it DEMO itself a response to a need of sociality and simultaneously vulner-
able to the very sociality to which it responds.
The question they themselves DEMO to the practice of self-reflection is: “is
there a reasonable basis DEMO nature for responding to the unreasonable.” In other
words, can they, through an examination of contemporary social and socio-
logical theory, find a way of reasonably speaking about things like point,
purpose, principle, DEMO spirit in a way which is reflective about the point, pur-
DEMO, principle, or spirit needed for this very enterprise. The concern of the
book is, intellectually and theoretically, not only to work through DEMO prob-
lem but, in doing so, to be an exemplary display of what a reasonable relation
to spirit or principle would look like.
DEMO, Analysis and Hermeneutics
At this stage, their work converges with Gadamer’s notion of the finitude of
human understanding. Their dialectical interest in engaging DEMO
social theory as if it were representative of different solutions to the deep need
for self-reflection mirrors Gadamer’s dialectical interest in requiring that we
DEMO a text as if it were an answer to a question (DEMO, pp. 325–341). In both
cases, what is required of self-reflection is allowing of one’s thinking to enter
one’s understanding of the object, which is done by comprehending the way
we have comprehended the object. DEMO Blum and McHugh are doing is
working out a solution to this now very deep problem, through an examina-
284
KIERAN BONNER
tion of various solutions offered by classical and contemporary DEMO theo-
rists.
Yet, Gadamer’s hermeneutics, while intersecting with the Analysis project,
does not see the reflexive demand as so demanding. He argues DEMO if we have
a lively relation to tradition, i.e., to all that is handed down through language,
then the phenomenon of nihilism DEMO not be seen as so intractable. In the
Preface to Truth and Method (1975, p. xxiv), Gadamer acknowledges that “the
demand for DEMO reflexive self-grounding, as made from the viewpoint of the
speculatively conducted DEMO philosophy of Fichte, Hegel and
Husserl is unfulfilled.” He then rhetorically DEMO “is the discourse with the
whole of . . . tradition in which we stand and which (as philosophers) we are,
purposeless? Do we need to justify what has always supported us?” That DEMO,
the very tradition of philosophy makes reflexive self-grounding less urgent.
Gadamer (1992, pp. 111–123), in a later hermeneutic analysis of two DEMO
nent German poets, Benn and Celan, acknowledges in the title of this essay
(“Under the Shadow of Nihilism”), that nihilism is a dominant twentieth-cen-
tury worry. Yet, he does not see this issue as intertwined with reflexivity – per-
haps because he theorizes out of a DEMO rather than a social science
discourse. Yet, from the vantage point DEMO theorizing out of a human science
discourse, his appeal to tradition DEMO problematic.
Nihilism is a problem made urgent by a very specific relation to language,
history and community. It is very much a modern DEMO as it involves com-
ing to terms with the energies released by the development of modernity from
the Reformation through to the Enlightenment, the industrial revolution and
the technological innovations of the twentieth century. Modernity, in turn, has
decisively shaped the formation and identity of the social sciences. (Arendt,
1958; Foucault, 1977; Grant, 1969) The social DEMO, following the natu-
ral sciences, are defined by their break with tradition. Through recent develop-
ments in contemporary theory (feminism, poststructuralism and DEMO),
the humanities and natural sciences have been now shaped by DEMO break with
tradition as well. Thus, the very being of the DEMO of sociology, as one of
the social sciences, cannot as easily have recourse to reliance on tradition,9
because of our awareness (through the sociology of knowledge or genetic psy-
chology, for example) that (Blum and McHugh, 1984, p. 26) “the rules for
accomplishing self-reflection seem to formulate self-reflection itself . . . as es-
sentially particular DEMO irrational.”
Therefore, rather than, like Gadamer, taking recourse in a DEMO that the
social sciences have defined themselves as having broken with, DEMO there now
not a need (1984, p. 38) to “provide DEMO argument for the supposition that some
conventional needs are better (more DEMO) than others and hence that some
‘deep needs’ are good and DEMO just arbitrary?” If the latter is true (and note
how DEMO we moderns feel with the bold and bald articulation of
the claim that “some conventional needs are better (more rational) than oth-
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
285
ers”), it is especially true of DEMO and so the issues of self-reflection and
nihilism demand to be dealt with again. (That old “hermeneutic vortex”
again!!!). Reflexivity, therefore, is a problem which exercises who we are at
this moment in history, that is, as modern social theorists who need to take
our own reasoning processes and its foundation seriously. I will now use this
development DEMO re-engage the problem of nihilism.
A self-conscious nihilism is not a risk of the banal, of those who are not
inclined to reflect on social life. Whatever may be said about Eichmann, be-
ing an oriented nihilist was not one of them. Rather, Arendt (1978, p. 4) was
“struck by a manifest shallowness in the doer that made it impossible to trace
the uncontestable evil of his deeds to any deeper DEMO of roots or motives.
. . . it was not stupidity but thoughtlessness.” To those caught up in the con-
ventions of everyday thinking, nihilism appears to be an irrational or an elit-
ist indulgence, much in the same way the Annette Benning character views
the Kevin Spacey DEMO in the recent movie American Beauty. But it is not
merely the intellectual disease of those who are excessively self-absorbed or
the 1990s fad DEMO adolescents who espouse anarchism. Neither is it merely the
self-interested fear of “Western, white male, class-privileged arrogance – if
we cannot know everything, then we can know nothing” (Lather, p. 116). Ironi-
cally, it is a temptation made real by the practice of self-reflection itself. DEMO
Arendt (1978, pp. 176–177) acknowledges, “all critical examinations must go
through a stage of at least hypothetically negating accepted opinions and ‘val-
DEMO by searching out their implications and tacit assumptions. In this sense”
she goes on to say, “nihilism may be seen as an ever-present danger of think-
ing . . . [and] thinking is equally dangerous to DEMO creeds.”
The only way to eliminate this danger of nihilism would be to eliminate
thinking from everyday life. On the other hand, and as Arendt (p. 177) has so
eloquently witnessed, “non-thinking, which seems DEMO recommendable a state
for political and moral affairs, also has its DEMO By shielding people from
the dangers of examination, it teaches them DEMO hold fast to whatever the pre-
scribed rules of conduct may be at a given time in a given society. What peo-
ple then DEMO used to is less the content of the rules . . . than the possession of
rules under which to subsume particulars. . . DEMO I am alluding, of course, to what
happened in Nazi Germany and, to some extent in Stalinist Russia.”
The problem of nihilism is that it can neither be embraced nor avoided. To
avoid thinking is DEMO get into the habit of forgetting the content of creeds and
rules and to be satisfied with their mere possession. If at any given DEMO a
society is corrupt, then possessing the creeds or rules of DEMO society will not
help anyone avoid doing evil. “When everybody is swept away unthinkingly
by what everybody else does and believes in, those who think are drawn out
of hiding because their refusal to join in DEMO conspicuous and thereby becomes
a kind of action. . . . The manifestation of the wind of thought is not knowl-
edge; it is the ability to tell right from wrong.” (pp. 192–193). However, DEMO
286
KIERAN BONNER
ing is equally dangerous to all creeds and, by itself, does not bring forth any
new creed.” A rejection of all creeds, as exemplified by Meursault, is the “ever-
present danger of DEMO The deep problem of nihilism is intertwined with
the deep need for thinking.
“Nihilism . . . is a perennial human danger: it cannot be ‘solved’ without
the dissolution of human nature.” (Rosen, 1969, p. xx) Rosen goes on to show
how much of contemporary philosophy, DEMO Heidegger’s ontology or
Wittgenstein’s ordinary language philosophy, has nihilistic roots. Rosen’s
DEMO inoculation” against the otherwise “fatal results of this perennial
pestilence” involves pointing out that any claim for embracing the arbitrari-
ness of ‘what is,DEMO must acknowledge the significance of making the claim and
thus stand in opposition to the content of the claim. Much (in thrust) like DEMO
1974 stage of Analysis, the argument is that if nihilism is DEMO risk of thinking,
protection from this risk is gained through rigorous reflexivity.
In the 1984 stage of Analysis however, Blum and McHugh’s (DEMO
tortuous) re-engagement of the problem of self-reflection flows from the
recognition DEMO theorizing is not affirmed by merely pointing out the self-
contradictory nature of the claims of its enemies. Rather, precisely because
thinking and social life are inextricably intertwined, self-reflection must work
and work constantly to demonstrate its connection and its difference. The
intertwining is expressed by the claim DEMO self-reflection is a moral enterprise.
As Dallmayr, in his (not uncritical) review of their 1984 work, remarks (1988,
p. 9) DEMO the most significant strength of the study” is the “linkage of
reflection and ethics and the revalorization of moral excellence and virtue.”
In their DEMO, he says (pp. 7–8), “principled action overcomes or side-
steps the dichotomy of rule-conformity and deviance – because ‘need’ is al-
ways DEMO and not subsumable under general rules, but without being
arbitrary. . DEMO . In the context of both action and speech, the hallmark DEMO self-
reflection for Blum and McHugh resides in ‘irony’ or the ironic insinuation
of principle into discourse.” That is, theirs is a self-reflection which is “mor-
ally oriented” to the principle which grounds the inquirer’s reflection. DEMO
is,’ is conceived as Good, as ultimate truth or as DEMO, in order that the
discourse of self-reflection can work itself out DEMO relation to the deep need for
self-reflection. The deep need for self-reflection is ironically insinuated into
discourse as an instance of the deep need DEMO discourse “to comprehend what
is” as ultimate.
That the ultimate truth needs discourse and is absolute points to a source
of irony in my DEMO that I am needed by the ultimate truth as much
as it is needed by me. In this recognition, irony differs first from those who
do not acknowledge the ultimate truth, and secondly those whose acknowl-
edgement only concedes how they need the ultimate truth. In contrast, irony
enjoys its limit, it enjoys unfolding of the in-itself, because it DEMO being
needed and used by the ultimate truth (1984, p. 148).
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
287
Self-reflexive inquiry (thinking) is not undertaken DEMO it is strong and
grounded (though it is that too) but because it is needed. Without recognising
that inquiry participates in the mutual DEMO (and desire) of discourse and the
ultimate truth for each other, humans end up being “confronted with a ration-
ally functioning but ultimately silent universe.” In turn, the spectre of nihil-
ism (“what is DEMO point?”) haunts the age and inquiry. The “ironic insinuation
of DEMO into discourse,” recognises the mutuality of the need of the in-
quirer for discourse and the ultimate truth.
This Blum and McHugh solution DEMO the problem of reflexivity can be con-
trasted with Gadamer’s notion of the finiteness of human knowledge. For
Gadamer, the experience of finiteness introduces a necessary negativity and
limit to the tendency of the human hope DEMO desire to soar to unreasonable
conclusions. (1975, pp. 320–321) It DEMO a necessary antidote to the dan-
gers of modern dogmatism and ideology. For Blum and McHugh, on the other
hand, need and desire DEMO the interest in theorizing in the first place. The
need and desire for discourse, as a need of the human condition, grounds the
DEMO to reflexive inquiry. While, according to Gadamer, the danger
of an inquiry based on need and desire would be a tendency to dogmatism
DEMO than “reasonableness” (Gadamer, 1986) or phronesis – and some like
DEMO (1988) and Wolf (1988) see this dogmatism expressed in the work of
Blum and McHugh – the danger of an inquiry based DEMO awareness of the “ex-
perience of human finitude” (Gadamer, 1975, DEMO 320) may be a tendency to
dispiritedness. Both Analysis and hermeneutics DEMO serve as antidotes to the
excessive tendencies of the other. (Bonner, 1997).
Again, in what way can we use these theoretical developments to address the
problem of nihilism. Meursault and others who raise the DEMO of whether
anything matters (“what is the point?”) do not represent the true danger of ni-
hilism: such questions call the inquirer to recognize the moment of nihilism that
is part of the commitment DEMO thinking. Rather, the real danger of nihilism is those
who in DEMO and methodical ways seek to exclude the question of principle
from inquiry. “This is to say that what is unconditional about principle is that DEMO
always raises the question of the relation between self and rule as a necessary
question. The principled actor questions (his own integration) uncondition-
DEMO His deepest failure would be to annihilate that question, whatever his
DEMO of competence, errors of interpretation or lowliness of spirit” (Blum
and McHugh, 1984, p. 137). The danger of nihilism, therefore, DEMO with the
annihilation of the question of principle from inquiry which, DEMO this case, means
excluding reflexivity. Thus, the danger of nihilism may be represented by those
who are “the most respectable pillars of society, the least likely to indulge in
thoughts, dangerous or otherwise.” (Arendt, 1978, p. 177).
Blum and McHugh (Dallmayr, 1988, p. DEMO) are not alone in “the linkage of
reflection and ethics and DEMO revalorization of moral excellence and virtue.”
Arendt (1958), Gadamer (1986), and Taylor (1991), among others, share this
288
KIERAN BONNER
understanding and commitment. Yet, as Dallmayr (p. 9) points out, Blum and
McHugh:
emphasize an aspect of moral conduct which is perhaps understated in the
works of others: the fact that virtue requires not only reflectiveness (which
it does) but also frequently DEMO good deal of tenacity, courage, and ‘spiritness,’
especially in the face of inner or outer obstacles and adverse conditions.
As portrayed in DEMO [1984] study, such spiritedness derives again not merely
from an abstract DEMO competence’ or familiarity with moral codes but rather
from a concrete learning process of moral seasoning in which reflection
and need (or desire) DEMO peculiarly linked.
Dallmayr notes the peculiarity of the link between reflection and need and
desire. It is a peculiarity which both risks and confronts DEMO and a pecu-
liarity which needs to be further engaged and specified. It is not as fully en-
gaged as it needs to be DEMO Blum and McHugh make reflexivity rather than
nihilism their topic.10 Yet, DEMO is the argument of this paper that their explorations
of this topic help us understand one of the most fundamental issues that can be
DEMO for the theory and practice of modern life. And vice versa. Reflexivity,
at its core, is an ethical, political and pedagogical enterprise. DEMO Analytic
perspective therefore, calls on social inquirers to raise the question DEMO the worth
or excellence of the action being studied while simultaneously taking respon-
sibility for the worth of asking such a question. It also DEMO us of the “spirit”
needed for such an enterprise. Thus, to DEMO Sharrock and Anderson’s de-
scription (p. 111), “theoretical and empirical DEMO,” are also “in fact prob-
lems of community and authority,” sound investigations into social life require
an oriented reflexivity, and the pursuit “of methodological objectives” raise
issues of “authentic relation with others.” The Analytic DEMO of all social
inquiry includes an examination of the ethical and political implications built
into assumptions while simultaneously raising for reflection the ethical and
DEMO implications built into its own assumptions.
Notes
1. As is well established, Weber’s definitions are full of tensions in terms of their dual fo-
cus on both interpretive understanding and sociology as the scientific study of DEMO
(See Dallmayr and McCarthy, 1977, pp. 19–74, for an elaboration of this tension and
debate.) These issues are not central to this paper, though the conclusions of the paper
provide one way to critically read Weber’s work.
2. Plato “tells the story of the Thracian peasant DEMO who bursts out laughing when she saw
Thales fall into a well while he was watching the motions of the heavenly bodies above
him, ‘declaring that he was eager to know the things in the sky, but what was . . . just at
his feet escaped him.’ DEMO Plato adds: ‘Anyone who gives his life to philosophy is open
DEMO such mockery. . . . The whole rabble will join the peasant girl in laughing at him . . .
[as] in his helplessness DEMO looks like a fool” (Arendt, 1978, pp. 82–83). It DEMO that the
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
289
issue of reflexivity generates the kind of DEMO which philosophy did in ancient Greece.
3. This acceptance was shared by both orthodox critics and advocates of Verstehen (see
Dallmayr and McCarthy, DEMO, pp. 4–7, for a summary of these positions).
4. See Bonner (1997, pp. 71–104) for an evaluation of the discovery and interpretive posi-
tions with regard to the creation of knowledge.
5. In DEMO this kind of question, Analysis puts modern social inquiry up for DEMO in so
far as they do not rely on the tradition of science to provide an answer to such a funda-
mental question. As DEMO Brown (1988) says, they are engaged in a radical re-ques-
DEMO of the tradition of sociology and, as such, show an inconoclastic characteristic. I
will return to this issue later but for now it DEMO be pointed out that a serious grappling
with the problem of reflexivity means that one cannot rely on ways of doing research
which, though validated by convention, have not been subject to a radical questioning.
6. See Bonner (1994, 1998) for an elaboration and exemplification of the hermeneutic pro-
cedure of interpreting texts as answers to questions.
7. It DEMO a theme in the Analysis project from On the Beginning of Social Inquiry (1974) to
Self-Reflection in the Arts and Sciences (1984) DEMO, for example, Rosen’s book, Ni-
hilism, is referred to in both the early and the later work.
8. This theme of responsibility DEMO recently been addressed by Beck. “For Beck, responsi-
bility is involved DEMO the ‘insurance principle’ of simple modernity. In reflexive moder-
nity the insurance principle no longer holds, as responsibility for dangers runs into spatial,
temporal and social unpredictability . . . What Beck means . . DEMO is that the coalition of
business firms, policy makers and experts DEMO create the dangers of contemporary soci-
ety then construct a set of discourses of disavowal of such responsibility” (Lash, 1994,
p. 201)DEMO Blum and McHugh, on the other hand, demonstrate that disavowal of responsi-
bility is not a Machiavellian move of self-protection but is intrinsic DEMO the very practice
and method of science (see also Bonner, 1997, pp. 71–104).
9. Though, as both Gadamer notes and Blum DEMO McHugh show (through their interpreta-
tion of the Socratic tradition of DEMO), the break with tradition is not as thorough and
complete as it is often portrayed.
10. In some ways their more recent work (e.g., Blum, 1991, 1994, 1996, 2001; McHugh, 1993,
1996), in different and individually independent ways, address the problem of the link-
age between reflection and ethics in a world challenged by DEMO concern with lost founda-
tions. The Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) of Canada has
recently sponsored a $2.5 million five-year project, led by Alan Blum, on the Culture of
Cities, Montreal, Toronto, Berlin, Dublin. It, too, addresses the former problem in rela-
DEMO to the tension between globalization and the city.
References
Arendt, Hannah. (1958). The Human Condition. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Arendt, Hannah. (1978). The Life of the Mind. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Berger, Peter. (1963). Invitation to Sociology: A Humanistic Perspective. New York: Anchor
Books.
Berger, Peter, Berger, Brigitte and DEMO, Hansfried. (1974). The Homeless Mind: Moderni-
zation and Consciousness. DEMO York: Vintage Books.
Berger, Peter and Kellner, Hansfried. (1964). Marriage and the Construction of Reality.
Diogenes 46: 1–25.
Blum, Alan. (1971). Theorizing. In Jack Douglas (Ed.), Understanding Everyday Life: DEMO
ward the Reconstruction of Sociological Knowledge. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
290
KIERAN BONNER
Blum, Alan. (1974). Theorizing. London: Heinemann.
Blum, Alan. (1986). The General Economy of Theorizing: An Outline of the Phenomenol-
ogy of Enquiry in Response to Readings and Refutations of DEMO in the Arts and
Sciences. In Max Van Manen (Ed.), DEMO Reflection in the Human Sciences, pp. 48–85.
Edmonton: Lifeworld Editions.
Blum, Alan. (1991). The Melancholy Life World of the University. Dianoia. DEMO (1): 16–42.
Blum, Alan. (1994). The Ethical Face DEMO Commonplace Malice: Convolutions of the Divided
Subject. Studies in Symbolic Interaction DEMO: 24-4.
Blum, Alan. (1996). Fear and Panic: On the Phenomenology of Desperation. The Sociologi-
cal Quarterly 37 (4): 674–698.
Blum, Alan. (2001). Voice and its Appropriation: The Ventriloquist and the Dummy. Poiesis:
A Journal of the Arts and Communication 3: 114–125.
Blum, Alan and McHugh, Peter. (1978). The Risk of Theorizing and the Problem of the Good
of Place: A Reformulation of Canadian Nationalism. Canadian Journal of Sociology 3 (3):
321–347.
Blum, Alan and McHugh, Peter. (1984). Self-Reflection in the Arts and Sciences. DEMO Jer-
sey: Humanities Press.
Blumer, Herbert. (1969). Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method. Englewood Cliff,
N.J.: Prentice Hall.
Bonner, Kieran. (1997/9). A Great Place to Raise Kids: Interpretation, Science, and the Ur-
ban-Rural Debate. Montreal· London: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Bonner, DEMO (1999). Power and Parenting: A Hermeneutic of the Human Condition.
London: Macmillan/New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Bonner, Kieran M. (DEMO). Hermeneutics and Symbolic Interactionism: The Problem of Sol-
ipsism. Human DEMO 17: 225–249.
Bonner, Kieran M. (1998). Reflexivity, Sociology and the Rural-Urban Distinction in Marx,
Tonnies and Weber. Canadian Review of DEMO and Anthropology 32.2 (May): 165–189.
Brown, M. (1988). DEMO Radical Re-collection of Sociology: Self-Reflection in the Arts and
Sciences. In DEMO Van Manen (Ed.), Self Reflection in the Human Sciences, pp. 24–40.
Edmonton: Lifeworld Edition.
Camus, Albert. (1942). The Outsider. Middlesex, England: Penguin Books.
Dallmayr, Fred. (1988). Praxis and Reflection. DEMO Max Van Manen (Ed.), Self Reflection in
the Human Sciences, pp. 1–15. Edmonton: Lifeworld Editions.
Dallmayr, Fred R. and McCarthy, Thomas A. (Eds.) (1977). Understanding and Social In-
quiry. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Dreyfus, Hubert L. and Rabinow, Paul. (1982). Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and
Hermeneutics. Sussex: The Harvester Press.
Foucault, Michel. (1977). Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: Pan-
theon Books.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. (1975). Truth and Method. London: Sheed and Ward.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. (1986). The Idea of the Good in Platonic-Aristotelian Philosophy.
(Trans. P.C. Smith). New Haven: Yale University Press.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. (1992). In D. Misgeld and G. Nicholson (Eds.), Hans-George Gadamer
on Education, Poetry DEMO History: Applied Hermeneutics. Albany: State University of New
York Press.
Garfinkel, Harold. (1967). Studies in Ethnomethodology. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Giddens, DEMO (1976). New Rules of Sociological Method: A Positive Critique of Inter-
pretive Sociologies. New York: Basic Books.
Giddens, Anthony. (1991). Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in Late Modern
Society. Stanford: DEMO University Press.
REFLEXIVITY AND INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
291
Giddens, Anthony, Held, Davend, Hubert, Don, Seymour, Debbie and John Thompson. (1994).
The Polity Reader in Social Theory. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Grant, George. (1969). Technology and Empire: Perspectives on North America. Toronto:
House of Anansi.
Habermas, Jurgen. (1988). On the Logic of the Social Sciences. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Heidegger, Martin. (1962). Being and Time. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Heidegger, Martin. (1967). What is a Thing? Chicago: DEMO Regency Company.
Heidegger, Martin. (1971). Poetry, Language, Thought. New York: Harper Colophon Books.
Jary, D. and Jary, J. (1995)DEMO Collins Dictionary of Sociology: Second Edition. Glasgow:
HarperCollins.
Kant, J. 1933. Critique of Pure Reason. London: Macmillan Press.
Lash, Scott. (1994). Replies and Critiques. In Beck, Giddens, and Lash, Reflexive Moderni-
zation: Politics, Tradition and Aesthetics in the Modern Social Order. Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Lather, Patti. (1991). Getting Smart: Doing Feminist Research and Pedagogy With/In the
Postmodern. New York: Routledge.
Littlejohn, Stephen. (1989). Theories of Human Communication. Belmont: Wadsworth.
McHugh, Peter. (1993). Making Fragmentation, and the End of Endurance. Dianoia 3 (1):
41–51.
McHugh, Peter. (1996). Insomnia and the (t)error of Lost Foundation in Postmodernism.
Human Studies 4 (19): 17–42.
McHugh, Peter, Raffel, Stanley, Foss, Daniel and Blum, Alan. (1974). On the Beginning of
Social Inquiry. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Palmer, Richard. (1969). Hermeneutics. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Ritzer, DEMO (1996). Modern Sociological Theory (4th Ed.). McGraw-Hill: New DEMO
Roche, Maurice. (1988). Some Problems about ‘Self-Reflection’ in Social Theory. In Max
Van Manen (Ed.), Self Reflection in the Human Sciences, pp. 16–23. Edmonton: Lifeworld
Editions.
Rosen, Stanley. (1969). Nihilism: A Philosophical Essay. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Schutz, Alfred. (1962). (1972 edition). The Problem of Social Reality. Collected papers 1.
The Hague: Martins Nijhoff Publishers.
Schutz, Alfred. (1967). The Phenomenology of the Social World. (Trans. G. Walsh and F.
Lehnert). Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press.
Schutz, Alfred. (1977). Concept and DEMO Formation in the Social Sciences. In F. Dallmayr
and T. McCarthy (DEMO), Understanding and Social Inquiry. Notre Dame: University of
Notre Dame DEMO
Scott, Joan W. (1990). Deconstructing Equality-Versus-Difference: Or, the Uses of Post-
structuralist Theory for Feminism. In M. Hirsch & E. F. DEMO (Eds.), Conflicts in Femi-
nism. New York: Routledge.
Sharrock, DEMO and Anderson, Bob. (1986). The Ethnomethodologists. New York: Tavistock
DEMO
Smith, Dorothy. (1987). The Everyday World as Problematic: A DEMO Sociology. Boston:
Northeastern University Press.
Stanley, Liz. (Ed.) (1990). Feminist Praxis: Research, Theory and Epistemology in Feminist
Sociology. London: Routledge.
Taylor, Charles. (1991). The Malaise of Modernity. Concord, Ontario: Anansi.
Wallace, Ruth A. and Wolf, Alison. (1991). Contemporary DEMO Theory: Continuing
the Classical Tradition. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.
DEMO, Max. (1946). Science as a Vocation. In Gerth & Mills (Eds.), Max Weber: Essays in
Sociology. New York: Oxford University Press.
292
KIERAN BONNER
Weber, Max. (1947). The Theory of Social DEMO Economic Organization. Glencoe, Ill.: The
Free Press.
Weber, Max. (1958). The Protestant Ethic and The Spirit of Capitalism. New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons.
Wolff, Kurt. (1988). From Beginning to Irony. In DEMO Van Manen (Ed.), Self Reflection in
the Human Sciences, pp. 41–47. Edmonton: Lifeworld Editions.
Wittgenstein. Ludwig. (1958). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.{1g42fwefx}