LOCUS OF CONTROL, TRUST,
AND DECISION MAKING*
Thomas V. Bonoma, DEMO of Pittsburgh
Wesley J. Johnston, The Ohio Stale University
ABSTRACT
A DEMO connection was proposed between certain social personality variables,
namely locus of control (Internal or External) and trust (High and Low) and DEMO formal
decision-making model of Subjective Expected Utility (SEU). Rather than DEMO the
traditional definition of these variables as “generalized expectancies” for behavior of self
and others, locus of control and trust were reconceptualized as intrapersonal tendencies to
favor, prefer, or otherwise bias the subjective probabilities entering DEMO a decision com-
putation.
S’s high in external control orientation did not differ from internals overall, but ex-
ternal males were more risk averse under certain choice conditions (female-sex-role ap-
propriate dilemma, probability-estimate form). DEMO S’. were also more risk averse
than high-trust S’s, overall. Low-trust DEMO generated maximally risk-averse choice solu-
tions under the choice condition of feminine role problem appropriateness and probability
estimation. In general, female S’s made choices that were more consistent with SEU-
predicted solutions than males.
INTRODUCTION
A DEMO overlooked but potentially interesting connection can be drawn
between some social learning correlates of personality and formal decision
models. For example, the social learning variable of locus of control (Inter-
nal/External Control [ 181) DEMO traditionally defined as a somewhat amorphous
“generalized expectancy” which an individual holds with regard to reinforce-
ment. Internally oriented people are said to believe DEMO they themselves primarily
control their decisional outcomes; externally oriented individuals, that “fate” or
“luck” largely determines their behavioral reinforcers. Consistent with this
“generalized DEMO definition, the locus of control construct seems an ex-
cellent way DEMO which to capture some systematic intrapersonal differences in
*These data were collected while the first author was at the Institute for Juvenile Research, Illinois
Department of Mental Health. We’d like to thank Alan Benton, University of Illinois Chicago Circle,
for facilitating subject recruitment, Helen Rosenberg for collecting and analyzing the data, and Patty
Coyne and Beverly Penn for secretarial assistance. The authors wish to thank Susan Feldman, the
assistant editor, DEMO her valuable comments and constructive criticisms on an earlier version. Prepara-
tion of the final manuscript was partially supported by grants from the Marketing DEMO Institute
and Graduate School of Business, University of Pittsburgh.
39
40
DECISION SCIENCES
[Vol. 10
individuals’ decision styles. Specifically, it appears to offer an empirical measure
of an individual’s probabilistic cognitive biases about how DEMO his or her own
actions generally modify the decision-consequence links that make up acts of
choice. While substantial work has been done using the DEMO of control construct
to explain variations in behavior during probability matching, DEMO of aspiration
[20], and information-evaluation tasks [7], only a few examinations of the more
general issue of locus of control as a personality DEMO into risky or uncertain
decision making can be cited [ 151.
A similar “generalized expectancy’’ construct has been offered for the trust
(191 variable, both as it is used within and without social learning theory [8]. For
Rotter, trust is a generalized expectancy referring to how much other people’s
statements about environmental decision-consequence links can be relied upon.
Schlenker et DEMO [21] restrict the range of the construct to risky situations in which
the person who trusts has something significant to lose; and Deutsch [8] provides
a means for conceptualizing trust by observing that trust most appropriately
DEMO to risky situations in which A’s reliance on B’s work will bring A more
harm if disconfirmed than good if confirmed.
The potential relation DEMO these “generalized expectancies” to formal decision
models (see [ 141 for DEMO review) becomes clearer when it is remembered that (a) such
DEMO view much of human behavior as a “series of decisions” [6, DEMO 3831,
(b) the consequences of these decisions may be scaled in terms of their (subjec-
tive) worth or utility, and (DEMO) the relation between any decision and its potential
consequences are ordinarily DEMO probabilistic (again, subjectively) and not cer-
tain. (See [lo] or [14] for a good introduction.) In the subjective expected utility
(SEU) model, for example, a decision maker is assumed to evaluate the DEMO of
the various consequences associated with his decisions as well as the probabilities
of the decision-consequence links comprising the set of choice alternatives. Each
DEMO is weighted by its subjective probability (multiplicatively) to determine a
“subjectively expected utility’’ for that choice; the decision maker is then
assumed to act as if he were trying to maximize the net SEU available DEMO his choice
set.
What Rotter, Deutsch, and others hypothesize about personality (i.e., cross-
situation decisional consistency) when they reference what individuals “generally
expect” is translatable in decision theory terms to mean that classes of DEMO
distinguished by such personality correlates may hold some subjective probability
values as more likely, favorable, or just as more frequently occurring than others
DEMO they go about making choice decisions. That is, “expectancies” in the
DEMO sense are just probabilistic frames on one’s world. It is not
unreasonable to suggest that certain general forms of probability preference
characterize certain classes DEMO individuals (e.g., optimists). There is evidence [91
from lottery and betting studies that such biases or preferences do occur regular-
ly. Then, locus of control and trust can be redefined from the vantage of DEMO
models by saying that these personality correlates represent a consistent tendency
of individuals to “bias” or “distort” the subjectively generated probabilities
they compute as DEMO link between their decisions and hoped-for or feared
19791
LOCUS OF CONTROL, TRUST, AND DECISIONS
41
consequences in some DEMO manner. If this general rationale is correct,
such consistent biases would generate reliable differences in decision-making
tasks similar to those which appear in DEMO, persuasion [17],
protest studies [ 1 I].
Bonoma and Schlenker DEMO recently [2] [3] 141 reported some studies on
decision making in general and the SEU hedonic calculus in particular which of-
fer both a DEMO methodology and some unusual findings within which to make
some test of the general reasoning offered above. Instead of having S’s make
choices and DEMO reasoning backward to probability and utility scalings, the in-
vestigators first DEMO trained s’s on probability and utility scales (31.
S’s were then DEMO with several hypothetical decision dilemmas modified
from the Kogan-Wallach Choice Dilemmas instrument [ 131. These dilemmas
were quantified on the predefined experimental scales so DEMO only one numerical
decision component was missing. S’s were asked to intuitively supply that missing
(numerical) value so that the value of the DEMO alternative would be “just
greater” than that of the certain choice.
In three different experiments [4] involving over 200 S’s and including one
complete DEMO study, several findings were stable. The first was that,
generally, both male and female S’s chose missing decisional parameters in an
SEU-consistent, defined as “rational,” fashion in accord with the task direc-
tions, even though they were naive about decision theory and probability theory,
DEMO even though problems were presented strongly as a matter of opinion, DEMO as
one of computation or fact.
The second major result, and DEMO one we further pursue in this paper, con-
cerns the conditions DEMO which “rational” solutions were not provided by s’s. The
major finding has been a sex by form-of-Opinion-Questionnaire interaction on
Ss’ deviations from the “rational” DEMO postexperimentally computed for each
problem using an SEU model. Only the males who responded to feminine-role-
appropriate problems’ requiring a probability-response-format (Form PF)
generated reliably “irrational” (i.e., risk-averse) values on the decisional dilem-
mas; the “irrationality” was three times as large in magnitude as any other ex-
perimental mean. This unusual pattern was found in all three experiments.
DEMO Bonoma and Schlenker were able to speculate on it [4], they DEMO not
able to explain it.
Fortunately, both locus of control and DEMO data had been collected from S’s
as an ancillary experimental exercise-it turns out these data are important in ex-
plaining Ss’ decision making as DEMO present study will show.
’The sex-role treatment was included because initial experiments [4. Experiments 1 and 111 showed
that male and female subjects showed DEMO sex differences when responding to decision dilemmas in
which the central actor was represented only as male. The absence of differences was so disparate DEMO
the main body of conflict literature that a female-appropriate problem set was constructed to pursue
the sex variable along sex role. rather than phenotypic, lines.
or even social
42
DECISION SCIENCES
[Vol. 10
THEORETICAL RATIONALE AND HYPOTHESES
Locus of Control
DEMO reconceptualization of the social personality variables of locus of con-
trol and trust offered above suggests that these constructs may be profitably
viewed within DEMO theoretical decision perspective as representing a kind of intraper-
sonally held, DEMO consistent “frame” or bias for subjective probability
generation. An internal locus of control subject, for example, is presumed to
generally believe in the DEMO of his own acts in producing consequences, and
therefore to bias DEMO characteristically “set” probabilistic decisional components
differently from a subject who displays a predominately external locus of control
orientation. The theoretical reconceptualization does not suggest, however, just
how a given level of locus of control, or DEMO trust, should affect decisional logic,
either alone or in concert DEMO each other. The personality literature, fortunately,
offers some hints.
Regarding DEMO of control, the following pattern emerges. Internals (1’s)
have been found to prefer intermediate or “safe” bets as opposed to risky ones DEMO
gambling tasks [MI, to take longer to make more difficult as DEMO to more
simple decisions [ 121, to use previously provided information DEMO completely in
evaluating another person [17], and also to seek out DEMO choice information
more fully before making a decision (71. Conversely, S’s characterized as high in
external (E’s) locus-of-control orientation prefer risky bets, do not vary decision
time with decision complexity, and neither seek out fully nor use well available
decision information before providing a choice evaluation. DEMO would seem the I’s,
consistent with their desire to believe that they, and not fate or luck, control their
outcomes, have a frame or tendency to set their subjective decisional parameters
in close correspondence DEMO the external decisional information provided. E’s,
however, believing traditionally that DEMO or fate will control the decisional conse-
quences anyway, tend to DEMO less attention to the external decisional components.
If the 1’s are called “accuracy” decision makers, the E’s may be called “sloppy”
decision makers.
Thus, the findings and rationale of locus of control overall seem to suggest
that 1’s are more careful decision makers, and are more information- and
evaluation-oriented; therefore, perhaps 1’s would be more “rational” (i.e., SEU-
DEMO) decision makers generally due to a bias to have subjectively generated
DEMO be highly consistent with provided objective decisional indices or
choice information. In the Opinion Questionnaire methodology (explained more
fully in the methods section), which asks S’s to select a missing subjective proba-
bility (or utility) so that one decisional alternative is “just greater” than another
in subjective satisfaction, we hypothesize that I’s, as opposed to E’s, should ap-
pear to generate decisional solutions generally more consistent with SEU-dictated
solutions, which demands close attention to all decisional parameters for suc-
cessful computation. Further, given that probability-estimate response for-
mats and female-sex-role problem sets have been DEMO found to be most
19791 LOCUS OF CONTROL, TRUST, AND DECISIONS 43
disruptive (that is, not consistent with SEU-dictated solutions) to rational deci-
sion making for DEMO S’s, male 1’s should evidence less deviance from SEU-
dictated “rational” DEMO to the dilemmas than male E’s. Formally,
1. 1’s should generate decisional solutions reliably more SEU-consistent than
E’s.
2. When confronted with decisional DEMO which have been previously found
to produce risk aversion in choice, DEMO should be less affected by these distur-
bances than E’s. Since these conditions have affected only males reponding
to probability-estimate, female-role-appropriate problems, male DEMO (but not
male 1’s) should generate solutions highly inconsistent with SEU-predicted
values to the decision dilemmas under these conditions. ’
Trust
The theoretical DEMO for trust is not so easily made. While the locus of
control variable is easily seen as a generalizable frame on all decisional tasks, the
trust variable has been traditionally associated only with an individual’s behavior
DEMO interaction or interpersonal settings. It is not unreasonable to suggest,
however, that whatever decisional biases are interpersonally revealed by
high (Hi)- DEMO low (Lo)-trust S’s may be part of a more general DEMO of
decision making. Deutsch presents an important clue to such a general style when
he notes that trust is the expectation of the occurrence DEMO an event, where the “ex-
pectation leads to behavior which [the DEMO perceives to have greater negative
motivational consequence if the expectation is not confirmed than positive
motivational consequence if confirmed” [8, p. 2661. Put bluntly, Deutsch argues
that high-trust individuals are poor bettors in the sense that they tend to make
bets with a clear margin of negative to DEMO SEU’s because they
characteristically bias the subjective probabilities associated with success up-
wards. If such a bias exists and is generalizable beyond just interpersonal DEMO
tions, we would expect high-trust individuals to be less “rational” in DEMO solu-
tions to decisional dilemmas than low-trust S’s. Also, Hi’s should DEMO more ir-
rational decisions in those decisional format or context conditions found to cause
deviations from “rational” solutions previously. Low-trust individuals, contrari-
ly, DEMO generally tend toward SEU-consistent, “rational” problem solutions
because they lack such DEMO general bias. Thus,
3. Lo’s will be more “rational” in decision solutions to the dilemmas than Hi’s
when an SEU-dictated solution is used DEMO the comparison for “rationality.”
4. Hi’s should evidence the most deviance from SEU-dictated “rational” solu-
tions in decisional contexts previously found to generate risk-averse DEMO
‘Note that the previously found choice-disturbance conditions are just those involving subjective
probability estimation; the theoretical basis for the personality variables are reported herein.
44 DECISION SCIENCES [Vol. 10
Since these choice-disturbing contexts have affected only DEMO S’s previous-
ly, male Hi’s should generate the most risk-averse decisional DEMO under
these contexts.
If locus of control and trust represent two different sorts of “frames” on
decisional computation, one might ask about their joint presence and interaction
in the same individual. Does a Hi-trust, I-oriented S make decisions differently
than a Hi-trust, E-oriented S? Theoretically, it would seem as if trust and locus of
control may be related and DEMO even be somewhat exclusive. That is, an “ac-
curacy bias” (1 orientation) does not seem to be compatible with a “poor bet-
ting” (High trust) bias within the same individual; the two operate at cross-
purposes. This is tantamount to saying that a correlation may exist DEMO locus
of control and trust levels-1’s should be generally low in trust levels, and E’s
high. The present study confined itself to assessing the presence or absence of
such a general correlation without specifically investigating the DEMO combina-
tions of locus of control and trust possible for each S.
METHOD
Design
Male and female S’s responded to seven different decisional dilemmas (two
times for each dilemma in a different item order) on one of four forms of the
Opinion Questionnaire. These forms were male-sex-role appropriate, probability
estimate (Form P); male-sex-role appropriate, utility estimate (Form U); female-
sex-role appropriate, probability estimate (Form PF); and female-sex-role DEMO
propriate, utility estimate (Form UF), as explained below. S’s were divided (see
below) into Hi and Lo trust, and Internal versus External locus-of-control orien-
tation. Their total mean deviations (SEUo) from SEU-dictated DEMO deci-
sion solutions were analyzed separately for locus of control and trust. The design,
then, was a 2 (sex) by 4 (DEMO) by 2 (trust) analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the
DEMO variable, and a similar three-way ANOVA for the locus of control DEMO
Additionally, a Pearson correlation ratio was computed on the relationship be-
DEMO locus of control and trust scores in the sample.
Subjects
Fifty males and fifty-three females were recruited for the experiment from
the University of DEMO, Chicago Circle, campus. The subjects were all
undergraduate introductory psychology students participating in the experiment
for course credits. Nine S’s were deleted from DEMO design, seven for failing to
show up for the second administration DEMO the questionnaire and two for failing to
19791 LOCUS OF CONTROL, TRUST, AND DECISIONS 45
understand the experimental DEMO as measured by a quiz.3 The total n for
analysis was ninety-four; deletions were approximately equal over cells.
Questionnaire Construction
The Opinion Questionnaire method is more fully described in [3] and [4].
Briefly, the original “English language’’ paragraphs for seven of Kogan and
Wallach’s [13] Choice Dilemmas were DEMO to S’s and supplemented with a
“Gain-Loss Summary Statement” which quantified the probabilities and utilities
associated with each decision alternative available to the central DEMO
In the Opinion Questionnaire, an actor is faced with a choice DEMO a cer-
tain, but only moderately profitable, alternative and an uncertain, but potentially
greatly profitable (or costly), alternative. The task is DEMO provide the minimum
probability (utility) for success of the uncertain alternative before the S, taking
the place of the central actor completely,‘ would adopt the latter over the former.
As previously discussed, Forms P and PF asked for probabilities while
Forms U and UF asked for DEMO or “satisfaction units” (SU’s) in the decision
estimate. The response scale for the former ranged from 0-10 chances in ten steps
of one DEMO; for the latter, from 0-100 SU’s in steps of ten SU’s. Forms P and
U used “Mr.” A, B, “him,” “his,DEMO etc., as the male-sex-role appropriate phras-
ing, while Forms PF and UF used “Ms.” A, B, “her,” etc., as the female-sex-
role appropriate phrasing. The decisional parameters provided by the in-
vestigators (i.e., the utlities and odds for the certain alternative plus all
parameters except for the one uncertain choice) were defined on common scales
and were systematically varied over problems [4]. A sample situation from the
Opinion Questionnaire DEMO in male-appropriate, probability-estimate (Form
P) format may be found in DEMO Appendix.
The major dependent variable was a derived measure, SEUD (deviations
from the SEU of the certain alternative from the uncertain alternative on DEMO
dilemma). Essentially, the experimenters entered Ss’ decisional (probability or
utility) choices into the SEU equation to get an SEU for the uncertain alternative,
compared this with the value generated from the SEU computation DEMO the certain
alternative, and recorded the direction and degree of deviation DEMO the first from
the second. All computations occurred postexperimentally and were performed
’S’s were given a preexperimental demographic questionnaire and instructional quiz which assessed
(a) their naivete regarding decision theory, formal mathematical training, and probability theory, as
well as (b) seven items testing their comprehension of the relatively complex instructions and scales.
On the demographics, the only difference was a sex difference. with males (F=4.0, p< .05) reporting
DEMO more mathematical training than females. The two S’s deleted from the design both made
more than three errors on the instructional quiz; the remaining S’s averaged 0.9 errors. with no
reliable differences over cells.
‘The original DEMO procedure has S’s udvise the central actor only-a more “active” role-
playing [16] procedure was adopted because of its ability to generate decisions similar DEMO those of
“real” decisional contexts [22].
46
DECISION SCIENCES
[Vol. 10
by the investigators; S’s made no computations other than supplying a missing
value. A risky choice is indicated by DEMO negative (-) value; a conservative one
(conservative in this sense has defined as risk aversion, as opposed to the other
possible definition-the avoidance of using extreme values of subjective proba-
bilities) by a positive ( + ) value.
After responding to the second administration of the DEMO Question-
naire, all s’s completed Rotter’s [18] Locus on Control Scale DEMO well as Rotter’s
[19] Trust Scale under the titles “Preference Scale” and “General Opinion
Survey,” respectively. The range of scores on the Locus DEMO Control Scale was
2-18. A median split was used to classify S’s. S’s in the 2-10 range were classified
as 1’s (n =44); S’s in the 11-18 range were classified as E’s (n = 50). S’s did not dif-
fer reliably in their assignment to cells DEMO the design by 1/E classification
(Xz< 1.3); cell size ranged from 11-13.
For the trust variable, the range generated was 44-82. Again a median split
was used to classify the S’s. S’s scoring DEMO 44-66 were termed low trust; there
were 47 Lo’s. S’s scoring DEMO 67-82 were classified as Hi’s, and there were 47
such S’s. DEMO reliable classification differences (X2 < 1) were uncovered by cells of
the design; cell size ranged from 10-14.
The two separate administrations of the instrument to all subjects were used
to generate a test-retest reliability DEMO The Pearson correlation between
the grand mean of a given S’s “deviations from rationality” from seven different
decisional dilemmas completed in the first administration, and the same grand
mean from the second administration (three-week interval), was computed and
equalled .78 (p< .001). An analysis of DEMO was calculated using the sequence
of administrations as an independent variable. When no significant differences
between administrations were discovered, the scores from all fourteen decisional
dilemmas were collapsed into one total mean deviation (SEUD) for DEMO S. The
total mean of S’s SEUo scores generated from the two administrations of the
seven decisional dilemmas was entered into the 2 (sex) x 4 (form) unweighted
means ANOVA for the I/E and trust classifications, respectively.
‘Among the other excellent recommendations of an anonymous reviewer was the suggestion that we
submit the data collected to a multiple DEMO analysis. This was done, with only those variables
significant in the DEMO analyses being entered to predict SEUD. The model constructed was of the
form
SEUD=a+ b,SEX+
b,FORM+ b,I/E+ b,TRUST+ b,DEMO GROUP+e.
The R* the regression attained only a value of .18. with a standard error of 13.4 units. The only
significant effects obtained among DEMO regressed variables were the Trust variable (.05) and the Sex x
Group (.05) factor.
The results diverge from the ANOVA analyses below. DEMO the ANOVA analytic technique is a
special case of the general linear model represented by a regression technique (ANOVA uses noncon-
tinuous treatment variables only), the results cunnot be different unless there is curvilinearity in DEMO
data set such that overall correlative estimates are nullified by reversals at various treatment levels.
This indication of curvilinearity in (at least) the DEMO trust and I/E classification scores led to the
separate computation of correlation coefficients on those scores below; the hypothesis of curvilinear-
ity is indicated by those analyses.
of
19791
LOCUS OF CONTROL, TRUST, AND DECISIONS
47
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
DEMO Between 1/E and Trust
To provide a rough preliminary check on our reasoning about the possible
interactions between locus of control and trust DEMO, a correlation coefficient
was computed between these two indices for each DEMO The theoretical rationale dic-
tates that a reliable coefficient should obtain since (for example) high levels of
trust and high I orientation are DEMO in a decision theory translation. The
correlation between the trust and 1/E measures overall was only + .16, which was
not reliable. There was some suggestion of curvilinearity in the data (see footnote
5), so the Pearson r was computed separately for 1’s and E’s over DEMO levels. For
the I’s, the correlation was -.22 (pC.06); for the E’s, the correlation was .25
(p c .04). Thus, the correlational data support the theoretical rationale that for 1’s
trust is DEMO correlated with increasing externality and that for E’s trust and
externality are positively related.
The overall correlation between trust and the grand mean of DEMO from
“rationality” (SEUD) was .07 (nonsignificant); the overall correlation DEMO
locus of control and SEUD scores was .28 (p c .05)DEMO
Locus of Control
Table 1 presents the results of the ANOVA including locus of control, sex,
and form of questionnaire, and three DEMO (pc .05) effects and one
marginally significant (pc .06) effect are evident. The first is a sex main effect,
with males (X= reporting reliably more risk averse mean SEUD values than
1.6)
DEMO 1
Source Table for Locus of Control by Sex by Form ANOVA on SEUo
Source
ss
df
1
1
3
1
3
3
3
DEMO
MS
108.7
869.1
82.8
191.2
401.4
425.2
646.3
156.7
F
<1
DEMO
c1
1.2
2.6
2.7
4.2
PC
.41
.02
.67
.28
.06
.05
.01
Locus (A)
Sex (B)
Form (C)
AxB
AxC
BxC
AxBxC
Within
108.7
869.1
248.4
191.2
1204.1
1275.5
646.3
12224.8
48 DECISION SCIENCES [Vol. 10
females (X=0.2). Hence, sex of DEMO had some reliable effects on decision making
independent of other variables, DEMO has been found in past research [13]. Sex ef-
fects, however, were generally modulated differentially over form and inter-
naVexterna1 classifications, as summarized below.
The interaction between sex of subject and form of questionnaire reached DEMO
reliable level (p < .05). Female subjects making decisions under DEMO
Form P (male-sex-role appropriate, probability-estimate format) were more risk
averse (x=5.52) than males (x=3.15) responding to Form P, while males
DEMO) responding were significantly to Form PF more (female-sex-role risk averse (DEMO appropriate, 17.32) in their probability-estimate decision making than for-
females (DEMO under the same conditions. Thus, the sex of subject by form-
DEMO interaction appears to be caused by subjects required to make
decisions of a probability response format under the opposite sex role. These
decisions turn DEMO considerably more risk averse than other decisions.
The two-way interaction between form of questionnaire and locus of control
was only marginally significant (p< DEMO) and explicable by one simple effect-E’s
responding under questionnaire Form PF (female-sex-role appropriate,
probability-estimate format) were more risk averse (x= 2.4) in their SEUD com-
putations than were 1’s (x=O.9), (F=4.3, df = 1 and 78, p< .05). The previous
findings DEMO Bonoma and Schlenker [4], then, would primarily seem to have been
due to the behavior of E’s, not the 1’s. No other comparisons in the interaction
between form of questionnaire and locus of control were DEMO (p’s > .lo).
The three-way interaction of locus of control, sex, and form of question-
naire, which was highly significant (p< .Ol), is depicted in Figures 1A and 1B. In-
spection of the figures clearly shows two conditions under which strong choice
“irrationality” (evidenced as risk aversion) was generated. Of the I-oriented S’s,
males under the Form P condition (x= 16.0) were significantly the most risk
DEMO; of the E-oriented S’s, males under the Form PF (x=32.4) were
significantly the most risk averse. These conditions were not equally disturbing DEMO
choice “rationality” for all subgroups of S’s, however. First, for female S’s, the
SEUD scores were not significantly different from SEU-predicted scores under
either of the male-disturbing questionnaire forms. Second, not all of the males’
scores were significantly different. I-oriented males responded somewhat
(x=8.7), but not reliably, more deviantly to the PF questionnaire than either
female 1’s (DEMO) or E’s (x=8.1), (both F’s<2.0, df= 1 and 78). The only
subsets of S’s for which there were reliable DEMO deviations are the I-oriented
males under Form P (p< .05) DEMO the E-oriented males under Form PF (p < .01).
The DEMO males are the most risk averse of all subsets of S’s: DEMO tested
against I males (p< .Ol), I females (p< .Ol), or E females (p< .Ol), and against
the DEMO mean of all other cells (p < .02). The I-oriented DEMO are significantly
risk averse only under Form P. Overall, I-oriented males DEMO not significantly
more risk averse than other subsets of S’s. No other comparisons in Figures 1A
and 1B were significant; all possible comparisons were made (p’s > .15).
Thus, Hypothesis 1, which stated that 1’s should be more “rational” deci-
sion makers than E’s (a) DEMO and (b) under the choice-disturbing conditions
2.15)
LOCUS OF CONTROL, TRUST, AND DECISIONS
49
FIGURES 1A and 1B
DEMO Locus by Sex by Form Interaction on SEUp
t
2
Y
.Y
U
t 30 -
25 -
20 -
15 -
10 -
DEMO
0-
-5 -
-
10
P
P
Form of
U
PF
lntemals
UF
U
PF
Externals
UF
Opinion Questionnaire
Male r^
Female
c
2
DEMO
u)
E
3
E
h
Y
.Y
U
1
19791
c
50
DECISION SCIENCES
[Vol. io
(Form PF), was only partially confirmed for a subset of these S’s. 1’s were not
generally reliably less DEMO from SEU-consistent decision solutions than E’s
(no locus-of-control main effect); DEMO were so only under the female-sex-role ap-
propriate, probability-estimation conditions which DEMO been found to generate
risk-averse choices earlier by Bonoma and Schlenker [4]. The three-way interac-
tion of locus of control, sex, and form DEMO clarified this pattern; it was not all
S’s who were risk DEMO under the PF questionnaire form-rather, only male
subjects high in external-control DEMO were reliably deviant from SEU-
dictated “rational” values.
These results are reassuring in the sense that they add some additional weight
to the earlier DEMO [2] [3] [4] that S’s respond generally in a manner consistent
with (or not reliably different from) SEU-dictated solutions in some decision-
making DEMO like the Opinion Questionnaire. Even the “choice disturbance”
conditions coupled with a probability-estimation response format with female-
sex-role appropriate wording is not disturbing for DEMO I or E females or for I
males. Rather, only the DEMO males were reliably risk averse, even under these
“disturbing” conditions.
These DEMO are perplexing because it is not readily apparent why this
subgroup of male, E-oriented S’s was so radically deviant from their fellows. Cer-
tainly, it is easy to argue that males [2], being unused to DEMO as if they
were female actors, might generate extremely conservative SEUo’s DEMO of an
“irrational” stereotype of females or sheer inexperience with responding in a
female-role set. But why under probability-estimation conditions alone? Why
only the E-oriented Ss? And, why males but not females?
If we DEMO to the original theoretical link between locus of control and deci-
sion logic, some speculative yet plausible answers arise to each question. Regard-
ing why the effect occurs in the probability-estimate, but not utility-estimate con-
ditions, it can be recalled that locus-of-control orientation, as a generalized ex-
DEMO or probability, was assumed to characteristically bias the way in which
DEMO generated, evaluated, or preferred the probability components associated with
their decision ratiocinations. This effect should be more pronounced when prob-
abilities, as opposed to utilities, are estimated, since it was only in the probability-
DEMO forms that the subjective probability component was left unspecified in
the task set for S’s (i.e., they supplied it) and hence open to bias by S’s. If this
argument carries force, we should look for a similar “biasing” trend in the other
probability-estimate form of the Opinion DEMO, Form P. Referring to
Figures 1A and lB, it can be seen that a nonsignificant reversal of the male-
female differences occurred for DEMO s’s. That is, under male-
appropriate wording, the female E’s were in fact more “irrational” or risk averse
(x= than their male (DEMO counterparts. This is exactly the finding to be
expected if locus of control, as a “probability” frame, has more direct effects on
those DEMO forms where this parameter is free to vary and not specified
by the task.
Turning to the second problem, why only the E-control males evidenced “ir-
rationality” or risk aversion, we again appeal to the theoretical link between
7.0)
-2.9)
19791
LOCUS OF CONTROL, TRUST, AND DECISIONS
51
locus of control DEMO choice decisions. E’s, it will be remembered, traditionally are
supposed to have a generalized espectancy that their decision-consequence links
are more characterized by DEMO environmental influences than by processes
internal to them. Working from a general cultural sex-role stereotype (e.g., [5])
which characterizes females as rather DEMO, conservative, and affect-ridden
“irrational” decision makers, it is possible to DEMO that the E’s were simply
following the task instructions very well and modeling as accurately as possible
their understanding of the role to be DEMO I’s, on the other hand, because of
their general expectancy that internal (self) factors influence their decision pro-
cesses, might have been either less willing or less able to adopt this conventional
stereotype completely, since they tend to view their decision tasks frum the set
which DEMO that they (and not any provided values) primarily determine their
decision estimates. Thus, it could be argued that E’s may be better at role playing,
at “externalizing” than 1’s; male E’s displayed the extreme risk aversion they
both conventionally expected and also found comfortable with their DEMO deci-
sion styles. It must be noted that this interpretation is consistent with the “ac-
curacy bias” for 1’s hypothesized in the introduction. If DEMO are indeed more
assiduous at processing decisional information generally, why then DEMO they not
process the sex-role context and produce more risk-averse responses than E’s? An
alternative, of course, is that 1 and E males just have different understandings of
how females would make decisions, the former attributing much self-
determination and the latter much control by luck or DEMO to feminine decision
styles. The present data do not permit any differentiation of these possible ex-
planations.
On the third question, why only males displayed (significant) I vs. E dif-
ferences, there appears to be a plausible cultural explanation for &he strength of
the effect with male, as opposed to female, S’s. In current society. it seems prob-
DEMO that females must become adept at performing decision tasks competently
under both male-role-appropriate (because of male dominance in task setting)
and female-role-appropriate conditions. The same adaptability might not hold
true for males, who because of privileged position do not ordinarily encounter
female-role-appropriate tasks. Hence, all other things equal, we would expect the
males responding under female-role sets to display more disturbance from un-
familiarity than would females responding under male-role sets, and this
hypothesis generally corresponds to the pattern of obtained differences (Figures
IA and 1B).
Parenthetically, one fact which stands out from Figures 1A and lB, as well
as from the sex main effect, DEMO that females were generally more “rational” (i.e.,
SEU-consistent) decision makers than males, a finding which takes one more
brick from the stereotype of the irrational decision styles of the “weaker sex.”
Trust
Table 2 DEMO the results of the analysis of Ss’ trust scores in conjunction
with sex and form of questionnaire. The main effect of trust was highly DEMO
52
DECISION SCIENCES
[Vol. 10
(p < .Ol), with high-trust S’s generating significantly more risk-averse and “irra-
tional’’ SEU, averages (x= than DEMO S’s (x=0.3). The latter almost
exactly approached the SEU-consistent rationality DEMO of zero SEUD over all
dilemmas. Thus, support can be taken DEMO Hypothesis 3, which argued that high-
trust individuals ought to be DEMO “bad bettors,” and hence, somewhat irra-
tional (in SEU-model terms) decision makers under conditions of uncertainty.
TABLE 2
Source Table for Trust by Sex by Form ANOVA on SEUD
Source
ss
df
MS
F
DEMO<
1.2)
Trust (A)
Sex (B)
Form (DEMO)
AxB
AxC
BxC
AxBxC
Within
1142.1
483.3
334.4
293.2
1764.9
873.1
506.4
12665.1
1
1
3
1
3
3
3
78
1142.1
483.3
DEMO
293.2
588.3
291 .O
168.8
162.4
7.0
2.9
<1
I .8
DEMO
1 .o
1.13
.01
.08
.57
.19
.02
.14
.38
The marginally significant (p< .08) sex main effect is the same as reported in
the locus-of-control analysis; males were more conservative on the average over
all items than females.
The interaction of trust with form was reliable (p < .02), and is depicted in
Figure 2. As the DEMO shows, the difference between the high- and low-trust S’s
FIGURE 2
DEMO Trust by Form Interaction on SEUD
19791 LOCUS OF CONTROL, TRUST, AND DECISIONS 53
was only in DEMO choice-disturbance conditions identified by Bonoma and
Schlenker and found in the I/E analysis above-female-role relevant,
probability-estimate response conditions. The high-trust versus low-trust DEMO
parison was reliable for this condition by simple effects test (F DEMO 5.93, p< .03); no
other comparison reached reliable levels.
Thus, Hypothesis 4 was also confirmed by these data; under conditions of
DEMO disturbance,” high- as opposed to low-trust S’s display reliably more
choice “irrationality,” in this case, risk aversion. The general pattern of these
findings is the same as that disclosed for the locus-of-control analyses, with the
exception that in no way were the trust findings differentiable in DEMO to sex of
S’s. The findings, rather, seem equally strong whether males or females are the
decision makers.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
The obtained DEMO generate as many questions as they do conclusions.
Some of the more interesting ones are overviewed here.
1. The most important conclusion to be DEMO is that locus of control and trust
as “social” personality variables have some kind of theoretical relationship
to the formal decision-making models. There appears DEMO be some heuristic
value in viewing these personality variables as probabilistic “styles.”
“frames,” or other intraindividualistic and consistent ways of interpreting,
generating, and evaluating the subjective probabilities associated with
decision-consequence links (see [23] for some theoretical suggestions about a
similar mechanism). Extreme values of I/DEMO control and trust are associated
with reliable biases of decision reasoning: DEMO of control in a rather com-
plex manner as it interacts with questionnaire form and sex of S’s, and trust
somewhat more straightforwardly as well as in interaction with question-
naire form. There may be some DEMO benefits in attempting to reconcep-
tualize other personality variables (e.g., extroversion-introversion or other
Jungian types [I]) in expectancy terms, and hence promoting DEMO
constructs toward decision theoretic relevance.
2. The data obtained in this study at least make somewhat more plausible a
theoretical answer to why probablity DEMO formats (especially when
phrased in female-sex-role-appropriate manners) generate a set of situational
decision variables which “disturb” otherwise “rational” and SEU-
consistent decision making. DEMO, S’s extreme on the social personali-
ty constructs of I/E DEMO and trust may tend to reliably bias, distort, or
otherwise preferentially set the subjective probability components entering
into their decision reasoning differently from DEMO fellows.’ The parameters
‘Strictly, it is only the theoretical link posed DEMO the introduction, and not the data, which argues for
this interpretation. Since utilities were varied experimentally as well, we cannot assert empirically that
the obtained effects were solely due to “probability distortions.”
DECISION SCIENCES
[Vol. 10
3.
of such differences are clearer; E-oriented males, and high-trust S’s, display
these “disturbances to rationality” maximally. Most important, of course, is
why choice-disturbance conditions exist so reliably and whether they
generalize beyond the present methodology or are just an idiosyncracy of the
DEMO Questionnaire task. Some evidence exists indicating that
generalizability of role-playing tasks like the Opinion Questionnaire is quite
high [la]. If this general assertion turns DEMO to be confirmed for our specific
methodology, then it is extremely DEMO to identify exactly which other
variables, besides I/E and trust, effect choice disturbances.
On sex and sex role, a distorted variant of the nature-nurture question, the
results clearly indicate that both factors, alone DEMO interactively, affect
choice logic. Females, over all conditions, tended to DEMO more “rational”
decision makers than males; however, it is clear that this overall finding was
due to the extreme choice conservatism generated by DEMO males (E’s only). An
interesting point is that there are DEMO choice situations which certain S’s
(e.g., males) with unique (e.g., E-oriented) personality patterns just “cannot
handle,’’ or alternatively, certain situations which the SEU model cannot
predict.
Finally, the Opinion Questionnaire methodology seems to offer a good tool
for investigating individual as well as social DEMO influences on deci-
sion making. It is especially valuable if the investigator is not especially in-
terested in “traditional” decision making concerns, such as choice transiti-
vity or utility scaling, but rather wants to treat such variances as “noise” in
order to focus on the reasoning process itself.
DEMO
REFERENCES
Bennet, E. A. What Jung Really Said. New York: Schocken, 1967.
Bonoma. T. V. “Decisions Under Uncertainty HI: Rationality Issues, Sex Stereotypes and Sex
Role Appropriateness.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, Vol. 1 (1974), pp. 293-295.
[31 Bonoma, T. V. “A Methodology for DEMO Study of Individual and Social Choice Behavior.”
Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior, Vol. 5 (1975), pp. 49-62.
Bonoma, T. V., and B. R. Schlenker. “The SEU Calculus: Effects of Response Mode, Sex, and
Sex Role on Uncertain Decisions. Decbion Sciences, Vol. 9 (1978), pp. 206-227.
Brown. J. “Women and Men: Editorial.” TheRadical Therapist. Edited by J. Agel. New York:
Ballantine, 1971. Pp. 113-120.
Coombs, C. H., and S. S. Komorita. “Measuring the Utility of Money DEMO Decisions.”
American Journal of Psychology, Vol. 71 (1958), pp. 383-389.
Davis, W. and E. J. Phares. “Internal-External Control as a Determinant of Information-
Seeking in a Social Influence Setting.” Journal of Personality, Vol. 35 (1967), pp. 547-561.
Deutsch, M. “Trust and Suspicion.” Journal of DEMO Resolution. Vol. 2 (1958), pp.
265-279.
Edwards, W. “Probability Preferences in Gambling.” American Journal of Psychology, Vol.
66 (1953), pp. DEMO
Edwards, W.; H. Lindman; and L. D. Phillips. “Emerging Technologies DEMO Making Deci-
sions.” New Directions in Psychology: 11. New York: Holt, 1965. Pp. 259-325.
Gore, P. M., and J. B. Rotter. “A Personality Correlate of Social Action.” Journal of Per-
sonality, Vol. 31 (DEMO). pp. 58-64.
[9]
[lo]
[Ill
L.,
19791
LOCUS OF CONTROL, TRUST, AND DECISIONS
55
1121 Julian, J. W., and S. B. Katz. “Internal Versus External Control and the Value of Rein-
forcement.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 9 (DEMO). pp. 363-368.
1131 Kogan, N., and M. A. WaUach. Risk Taking: A Study in CognitionandPersonality. New York:
Holt, 1964.
Lee, W. L. Decision Theory and Human Behavior. New York: Wiley, 1971.
DEMO, S., and A. Scodel. “Internal and External Control as Determinants of Decision Mak-
ing Under Conditions of Risk.” Psychological Reports, Vol. 17 (DEMO), pp. 59-67.
Mixon. D. “Instead of Deception.” Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior. Vol. 2 (1972).
pp. 145-177.
1171 Phares, DEMO G. “lnternal-External Control as a Determinant of Amount of Social Influence
Exerted.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 2 (1%5), pp. DEMO
Rotter, J. B. “Generalized Expectancies for Internal Versus External Control of DEMO
forcement.” Psychological Monographs, Vol. 80 (I-), No. I (Whole DEMO 609). .
Rotter, J. B. “A New Scale for the DEMO of Interpersonal Trust.” Journalof Personal-
ity, Vol. 35 (1967), pp. 651-665.
Rotter, J. B.; J. E. Chance; and E. J. Phares. Applications of a SocialLearning Theory of Per-
sonality. New York; Holt, DEMO
Schlenker, B. R.; B. Helm; and J. T. Tedeschi. “The DEMO of Personality and Situational
Variables on Behavioral Trust.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. Vol. 25 (1973),
pp. 419-427.
Slovic, P.; DEMO S. Weinstein; and S. Lichtenstein. “Sex Differences in the Risks a DEMO Selects
for Himself and the Risks He Selects for Someone Else.” Research Bulletin, Oregon Research
Institute (October 1%7), pp. 1-47.
1231 Tedeschi, J. T.; B. R. Schlenker; and T. V. Bonoma. Coflict, Power and Games: The Ex-
perimental Study of Interpersonal Relations. Chicago: Aldine, 1973.
APPENDIX
A Sample Opinion Questionnaire Problem
Form P-SITUATION 7
Mr. G, a married 30-year-old research physicist, has been given a five-year appoint-
ment by a major university laboratory. As he contemplates the next five years, he realizes
that he might work on a difficult, long-term problem which, if a solution could be found,
would resolve basic scientific issues in the field and bring high scientific honors. If no solu-
tion DEMO found, however, Mr. G would have little to show for his five years in the
laboratory, and this would make it hard for him to get a good job afterwards. On the other
hand, he could, as most of his professional associates were doing, work on DEMO series of short-
term problems where solutions would be easier to find, but where the problems are of lesser
scientific importance.
56
DECISION SCIENCES
[Vol. 10
GAIN-LOSS SUMMARY
Alternative 1: Concentrating on minor problems with easy solutions-
Attractiveness
Concentrating on problems with easy solutions and DEMO minor articles
from these works are worth -10 SU’s in personal satisfaction to Mr. G; however, it
would insure at least keeping his DEMO, which is worth + IS SU’s to Mr. G. In total, con-
centrating on minor problems is worth +S SU’s to Mr. G.
DEMO
The chances are 10 in 10 that Mr. G will actually receive the outcomes associated
with concentrating on minor problems.
Alternative 2: Attacking a major scientific problem-
A ttractiveness
The personal satisfaction, fame, and fortune DEMO would accrue to Mr. G as a
consequence of successfully solving a major scientific problem are worth + 80 SU’s to
him.
The personal DEMO, damage to his ego, and the probability that he will
be unemployed if he does not find a solution are worth -70 SU’s DEMO Mr. G.
Odds
?
Consider that you are Mr. G. Listed DEMO are several probabilities or odds that Mr. G
can successfully solve a major scientific problem during his tenure. Please check the lowest
probability that DEMO would consider acceptable to make it worthwhile for you, as Mi. DEMO,
attempt to solve a major problem.
-The
-The
-The
-The
-The
-The
-The
-The
-The
-The
-The
chances are 0 in 10 that DEMO long-range effort would prove successful.
chances are I in 10 that a long-range effort would prove successful.
chances are 2 in 10 that a DEMO effort would prove successful.
chances are 3 in 10 that a long-range effort would prove successful.
chances are 4 in 10 that a long-range DEMO would prove successful.
chances are 5 in 10 that a long-range effort would prove successful.
chances are 6 in 10 that a long-range effort DEMO prove successful.
chances are 7 in 10 that a long-range effort would prove successful,
chances are 8 in 10 that a long-range effort DEMO prove successful.
chances are 9 in 10 that a long-range effort would prove successful.
chances are 10 in 10 that a long-range effort would DEMO successful,
to
WHEN YOU HAVE COMPLETED THIS SITUATION, GO ON DEMO THE NEXT PAGE. DO NOT GO BACK TO
THE INSTRUCTIONS OR TO PREVIOUS SITUATIONS. DO NOT TURN THE PAGE UNTIL YOU HAVE
COMPLETED THIS DEMO{1g42fwefx}