Real Options Analysis and Strategic Decision Making
Author(s): Edward H. DEMO and Gary T. Moskowitz
Source: Organization Science, Vol. 12, No. DEMO (Nov. - Dec., 2001), pp. 772-777
Published by: INFORMS
DEMO URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3086047 .
Accessed: 19/12/2010 02:16
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of DEMO's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at .
http://DEMO/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies DEMO articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only DEMO your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further DEMO of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at .
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=informs. .
Each copy of any part of DEMO JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service DEMO helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use DEMO technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
INFORMS is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Organization Science.
http://www.jstor.org
Real
Options
Analysis
and
Decision
Making
Strategic
Edward
H. Bowman
(deceased)
formerly at The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
Gary T. Moskowitz
Edwin L. Cox School of Business, Southern Methodist University, P.O. Box 750333, Dallas, Texas 75275-0333
gmoskowi @ mail. cox. smu. edu
Abstract
The real options
proach
value
Merck
in an R&D
problems
assumptions
models
analysis.
DEMO
need
ficulty
the
limited
(Real Options;
approach
offers a positive DEMO radical
and
options
project.
associated
incorporated
can conflict
As a result,
the
to create
of developing
use
that
of risk
used
This
with
DEMO most standard
with the conclusions
users of real options
quantitative aspects of these models,
a customized
customized
real
Research and Development;
the
DEMO the
Decision Making;
is frequently
exploration.
real
models
may
explain,
in strategic
approach
in part,
analysis.
Strategic
options
advocated
reassessment
We DEMO
approach
case is used
using
option valuation
by strategic
should
may
situation.
model
real
for
a recent
to justify
to highlight
options.
reached
models
DEMO
each
as an ap-
of the
case
an
some
We note
where
investment
of the
the
un-
often
The
dif-
that
Analysis)
The DEMO decision represents a stylized description
of the critical process by which organizations commit re-
sources to future growth. Though such decisions are sub-
ject DEMO a variety of internal pressures (see Cohen et al.
1972), DEMO nevertheless portray the investment de-
cision as the outcome of a formalized process that em-
ploys explicit rules of valuation. It is unlikely that DEMO
rules are language games without real consequences
(Astley 1985). Indeed, the teaching of financial methods
is a pivotal component in the education DEMO a MBA stu-
dent.
Organizational theories and financial theories of in-
vestment valuation are rarely considered in tandem. Yet,
they both have shared DEMO treatments of risk as un-
desirable. Traditional corporate finance theory suggests
that firms should use a discounted cash flow model (DCF)
ORGANIZATION
Vol. 12,
SCIENCE,
No. 6, November-December
? 2001 INFORMS
2001, DEMO 772-777
to analyze capital allocation proposals. Under this ap-
proach, the DEMO cash flows from an investment pro-
ject are discounted to their present value at a discount rate
that reflects the market price of the DEMO's risk. Higher
systematic risk reduces the attractiveness of a project. If
a proposal has a positive present value, then the project
should be funded. Unfortunately, this approach does not
properly account for the flexibility that may be present in
a project. For example, managers can increase the size of
a production operation in response to higher-than-
expected levels of DEMO, or cut funding for a research
project that is not inventing DEMO products. This
flexibility has value-a value that is not captured by the
traditional DCF methodology.
The real options approach has been suggested as a DEMO
ital budgeting and strategic decision-making tool because
it explicitly accounts for the value of future flexibility
(Trigeorgis 1996, Amram and Kulatilaka 1999). DEMO op-
tions models are based on the assumption that there is an
underlying source of uncertainty, such as the price of a
commodity or the outcome of a research project. Over
time, the outcome of the underlying uncertainty is re-
vealed, and managers can adjust their strategy accord-
ingly.
Despite the theoretical attractiveness of the real options
approach, its use by managers appears to be limited. In
some commodity-based operations, such as oil and mining,
the real options approach appears to have gained DEMO
use by sophisticated companies (Coy 1999). In more stra-
tegic DEMO, however, options' analytic techniques are
less frequently used (Copeland and Keenan 1998, Lander
and Pinches 1998). In fact, when Merck & Co., Inc. re-
cently used the Black-Scholes option valuation model to
DEMO a proposed investment, its use of this analytic tech-
nique received DEMO in business publications, which
1047-7039/01/1206/0772/$05.00
1526-5455 electronic DEMO
EDWARD
H. BOWMAN
AND GARY
T. MOSKOWITZ Real
Options
Analysis
found this DEMO be newsworthy (e.g., Nichols 1994, Sender
1994, Thackray 1995).
This article examines some of the practical organiza-
tional issues associated with DEMO use of real options anal-
ysis. We note many of the practical difficulties managers
face in using real options techniques in strategic decision
making. DEMO illustrate some of these problems using
Merck's recent real options calculation as an example.
This example shows how the results of strategic analysis
DEMO differ from the assumptions of a typical options
model. As a result, the use of a standard options model
in a strategic analysis could lead to poor strategic deci-
sions. We conclude with a discussion of DEMO role of op-
tions analysis in strategic planning.
Valuing a Strategic Real Option
Strategy researchers have suggested that a number of cor-
porate decisions DEMO best be viewed through a strategic
options lens (Bowman and Hurry DEMO). These decisions
include the termination of joint ventures (Kogut 1991),
the management of multinational manufacturing networks
(Kogut and Kulatilaka 1994), venture capital investments
(Hurry et al. 1992), R&D programs (DEMO and Myers
1981, Chapter 29, and see Mitchell and Hamilton 1987
for a managerial discussion), and some capital budgeting
decisions (Dixit and Pindyck 1994). A common theme in
all of these decisions is DEMO they entail the use of a two-
stage process: In the DEMO stage, a small investment is
made that gives the company the DEMO to participate in
the project (i.e., the company purchases the option). Some
time later, when more information is known, the second
DEMO occurs when the company faces a choice about mak-
ing a larger investment in the project (i.e., the company
exercises the option).
DEMO capital budgeting purposes, a real option must be
analyzed multiple times. DEMO, the company must decide
if the real option should be purchased. DEMO investment in
the real option makes economic sense when the value of
the option, as determined by an options valuation algo-
rithm, exceeds DEMO cost of the option. Later, if the com-
pany has purchased DEMO real option, it must decide if and
when to exercise the DEMO option. This second evaluation
is based on the difference between the then-prevailing
value of the project and the exercise price of the option
(this typically does not involve the use of options anal-
ysis, except in the case of a multistaged option invest-
ment').
Real options analysis appears to present formidable
problems for implementation. To demonstrate the feasi-
ble DEMO of the real options approach, and its associated
problems, we utilize an example of an option analysis
performed recently by Merck. The data DEMO our example
are based on information provided to us by Merck during
several conversations we held with the finance personnel
at the company who DEMO this analysis.
The Project
In the early 1990s, Merck used option DEMO to evaluate
a proposed business relationship with a small biotech-
nology company (Sender 1994, Thackray 1995). This
proposed relationship was called Project DEMO Merck
wanted to enter a new line of business that required the
acquisition of a new technology from a small biotech firm
code-named Gamma. DEMO had patented its technology
but had yet to develop any commercial applications from
it. Merck had proposed licensing this technology with the
hope that DEMO new product could be developed therefrom.
Merck estimated that, after licensing DEMO technology, it
would take another two years of research and develop-
DEMO activities before any product would be ready. Be-
cause of the preliminary nature of the technology, it was
not certain that Merck could, DEMO fact, develop a product,
or, if a product were developed, what its commercial pos-
sibilities would be. If, after two years, it appeared that the
new product was commercially feasible, then Merck
would need to construct a plant to produce the product
and make the DEMO marketing, working capital, and
other start-up expenditures. These start-up requirements
could take another year to complete.
Merck negotiated with Gamma to license the DEMO
ogy. Under the terms of the proposed agreement, Merck
would pay DEMO a $2 million license fee over a three
year period. In addition, Merck would pay royalties to
Gamma if and when the product came to market. Merck
had the option to terminate the agreement at any DEMO if
it was dissatisfied with the progress of the research.
The proposed Gamma agreement resembles a call op-
tion and can be analyzed using DEMO analysis. It should
be noted that this use of an option valuation technique
creates the theoretical value of the option; this theoretical
value should be compared to the actual cost of the option,
which equals DEMO sum of the license fee plus the R&D
cost. For a small upfront fee, Merck purchased the right
to benefit from any increase in the value of Gamma's
technology. However, if this technology failed to produce
a commercially viable product, then Merck was under no
obligation to build the plant and incur the start-up costs.
Additionally, Merck expected the start-up costs to be in-
dependent of the future value of DEMO technology.
Merck's Analysis
To calculate the value of the option, DEMO used the
Black-Scholes model (Black and Scholes 1973), which
requires DEMO for five parameters.
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol.
12, No. 6, November-December 2001
773
EDWARD
H. BOWMAN
AND GARY
T. MOSKOWITZ Real
Options
Analysis
The first DEMO the stock price. For this project, Merck took
the expected present DEMO of the cash flows from the
project (i.e., the DCF value), assuming that the technol-
ogy is successful and the plant is DEMO It is this value that
has the variation, or the probability DEMO, associ-
ated with it over the multiyear period. (Please note that
stock price does not refer to Merck's stock price; instead,
it refers to the value of the project.) The calculation of
the stock price excludes both (a) the cash flows for build-
ing DEMO plant and the associated start-up costs (these costs
are considered in DEMO exercise price portion of the calcu-
lation) and (b) the DEMO licensing and development
costs (these costs are considered in the cost DEMO the option).
The stock price calculation is based on Merck's best es-
timate as to the cash flows which would be generated DEMO
the project. This discounted cash flow valuation was
made using traditional-net present-value techniques. In
addition to the base case scenario, a number of sensitivity
cases were run based on different assumptions about the
success of the DEMO The base-case stock price was
$28.5 million; the four sensitivity case DEMO prices were
$22.5, $18, $15.8, and $15 million, because of the use of
a variety of less-favorable assumptions.
The exercise price is DEMO cost of building the plant and
the associated start-up costs that would be incurred if the
decision is made to commercialize the technology. Merck
DEMO that these costs would total $25.4 million.
The time to expiration is based on the expected time
to develop the product and build the DEMO This was
varied over two, three, and four years; after DEMO years, it
was felt that competing products would enter the market,DEMO
making entry by Merck unfeasible.
The volatility is based on the annual standard deviation
of returns for biotechnology stocks. These stocks appear
to have DEMO similar level of risk as Project Gamma. A vol-
atility of 0.5 was used in the analysis and was provided
by Merck's investment DEMO
The risk-free interest rate is based on the then-
prevailing yield on two- to four-year Treasury bonds. An
interest rate of 4.5% was used DEMO the calculation of the
option value.
Using these inputs, Merck calculated DEMO Black-
Scholes option value for the base case scenario and each
of the sensitivity cases. Merck also examined the value
of the option assuming DEMO it was either a two-year, three-
year, or four-year option. These 15 option values (5 cases
X 3 expiration dates) were compared DEMO the cost of buy-
ing the option, which is equal to DEMO costs of licensing
and developing the technology (these upfront costs total
DEMO estimated $2.8 million). Table 1 shows this analysis.
This analysis shows that the value of the option exceeds
the cost of the option (except in two cases), so Merck
Table 1
Common
Stock
Exercise
DEMO
Volatility
2 Year time
Option Value
Decision
3 Year
Option Value
Decision
4 Year
Option Value
Decision
Project
Base
Case
parameters:
price
price
DEMO
50.0%
horizon cases:
$10.1
Invest
horizon
$11.9
Invest
horizon
$13.5
Invest
time
time
Note.
to the $2.8 cost of purchasing
Investment
Option
Sensitivity
DEMO
$28.5 $22.5
25.4 25.4
4.5% 4.5%
50.0%
cases:
$5.9
Invest
$7.6
Invest
$9.0
Invest
cases:
#2
$18.0
25.4
4.5%
50.0%
$3.4
Invest
DEMO
Invest
$6.0
Invest
#3
decision
is based on
the
the option.
Gamma
#1
Valuation
Analysis
#4
$15.8
25.4
4.5%
50.0%
$15.0
25.4
4.5%
50.0%
DEMO
$2.1
Not
invest Not
invest
value
$3.6
Invest
$4.6
Invest
$3.2
Invest
$4.2
Invest
of
the
option
relative
agreed to license the technology and DEMO working on
its commercial development. For example, using the base
case DEMO and a three-year expiration date, Merck
concluded that the Black-Scholes option DEMO was $11.9
million, and the three-year sensitivity case Number 2 has
DEMO value of $4.8 million, both of which are far in excess
DEMO the $2.8 million cost of the option, leading to a decision
DEMO invest.
Limitations of the Quantitative
Approach to Real Options
The user of a quantitative model to value strategic real
options faces a number of DEMO problems
(Lander and Pinches 1998). These problems generally fall
into DEMO categories: finding a model whose assumptions
match those of the project DEMO analyzed, determining
the inputs to this model, and being able to mathematically
solve the option pricing algorithm. We examine the first
two problems DEMO (See Lander and Pinches 1998 for
a discussion of tractability.)
DEMO Assumptions
The usefulness of a real options approach to quantitative
decision making depends on the extent to which the char-
acteristics of the investment DEMO being evaluated
match the assumptions of the option valuation model be-
ing used. The analogy between financial and real options
774
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. DEMO, No. 6, November-December 2001
EDWARD
H. BOWMAN
AND GARY
T. MOSKOWITZ Real
Options
Analysis
is imperfect, making the use of financial option valuation
models problematic for real options. DEMO options of-
ten lack some (and, perhaps many) of the DEMO features
of exchange-traded options. These differences determine
whether formal option valuation models (such as the
Black-Scholes model) are useful for managerial decision
making.
DEMO valuing strategic options, perhaps the most impor-
tant assumption concerns the DEMO of the under-
lying stock price. In the Black-Scholes formula, the DEMO
price is assumed to follow a lognormal distribution, with
a constant DEMO of volatility. Over time, the distribution
of stock prices gets wider, as the path of potential stock
prices increases exponentially at the high DEMO and as-
ymptotically approaches zero at the low end. (Other op-
DEMO pricing models are based on different stock price dis-
tribution assumptions; DEMO example, a mean-reverting
process is often used for natural resource-based options.)DEMO
The lognormal assumption may be inappropriate for a
strategic option. Bollen (DEMO) notes that standard tech-
niques for valuing real options typically ignore DEMO prod-
uct life cycle. For some products, such as semiconductors,
DEMO product life cycle has historically been quite short:
Sales rise rapidly, and then fall rapidly as a new, better
product takes over DEMO market. Given this sales pattern,
the standard lognormal distribution is inappropriate for a
real options model.2
In the Merck example, the use of the Black-Scholes
model is problematic because of its embedded assump-
tions about DEMO distribution of future stock prices. The
Black-Scholes model shows that the longer Merck could
wait to exercise its option, the more valuable the option
becomes (see Table 1). This increase in value is due to
(1) the use of the lognormal stock price distribution as-
sumption, under which the underlying stock price has
more time to move to DEMO values, and (2) the present
value of the exercise price DEMO lower for a longer option.
Under a strategic analysis, however, the longer Merck
waits to exercise its option, the lower the value of the
project. This is because the bulk of the value of the DEMO
comes from patent protection. Without the patent, Merck
assumed that its DEMO would be able to copy the
product and drive economic rents down to zero. Because
the patent has a fixed expiration date, the longer Merck
waits to exercise the option (by building the plant), the
less time is left on the patent and the lower the overall
DEMO value.
Merck could have adjusted its use of the Black-Scholes
model to account for the negative effects of having to
wait longer to exercise DEMO option. To do this, Merck
would have had to create a DEMO set of inputs for their
two-year, three-year, and four-year analyses. Instead of
using the same initial stock price and exercise price for
the DEMO, three-year, and four-year options, Merck
should have performed three separate DEMO of the
expected stock price assuming that the initial R&D took
two years, three years, or four years (the longer time ho-
rizons would have had lower initial stock prices). Simi-
larly, the exercise prices could be adjusted for the addi-
tional inflation factors. These DEMO could then be used
with a separate Black-Scholes model for each time frame.
Determining the Inputs
The effective use of a quantitative model to DEMO a po-
tential strategic investment is limited by the need to cal-
culate the model's inputs. If the inputs are improperly
calculated, then the results from using the model will be
incorrect.3
In examining the DEMO case, we note that the company
faced a number of problems DEMO determining the values of
the model's inputs.
Stock Price. For an exchange-traded option, the current
and future stock prices are readily observable to the op-
tion holder. These stock prices are meaningful to the op-
DEMO holder in the sense that the option holder can readily
buy or sell shares at this price to realize the profit from
(or to cut the loss on) an option position. In contrast, for
real DEMO, the analogous stock price may be unknown
and/or unactionable. For DEMO, in the case of an option
on a plot of vacant DEMO, the developer does not have an
active market to turn to DEMO the current value of the land.
Similarly, strategic options in the DEMO of research proj-
ects do not have a readily observable stock price, as the
outcome of the research is unknown until the project is
completed. The lack of a visible stock price may also
make it DEMO to draw conclusions about the appropri-
ate course of action at the time of the option's expiration.
To calculate the stock price, Merck used its best esti-
mate of the project's net present value. DEMO, any
errors made in the NPV calculation became errors in the
DEMO valuation calculation. A common approach to un-
certainty when using discounted cash flow techniques is
to create a set of sensitivity cases based on DEMO pos-
sible outcomes. As noted above, Merck created a base
case DEMO then a series of sensitivity cases based on a
"what if DEMO went wrong" reasoning. Interestingly,
Merck did not produce a series DEMO sensitivity cases assum-
ing that things went better than expected. Also, DEMO
did not attempt to assess the likelihood of the different
downside scenarios that it created.
Volatility. Merck used the volatility of stocks with a
DEMO risk profile as its input. For many strategic in-
vestments, however, there are no publicly traded instru-
ments whose risk profile matches that DEMO the proposed
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/VOl. 12, No. 6, November-December 2001
775
EDWARD
investment. In general, it is becoming easier to find risk
profile information. Amram and Kulatilaka (1999) note
that the number of instruments DEMO on financial mar-
kets has continually grown, increasing the chances that DEMO
suitable source of volatility (and sometimes stock price)
information can DEMO found.
Time to Expiration. For strategic real options, there is
often DEMO set time to expiration. For example, a research
project could be DEMO for a longer period of time, and
an investment in a DEMO product distribution system in-
definitely retains the option to add additional products.
As noted above, the interaction of the time to expiration
and the stock price distribution assumptions can produce
severe problems in the valuation of DEMO options.
Exercise Price. Option valuation models assume that
the exercise price of the option is fixed in advance. If this
is not the case, then the value of the option changes dra-
matically. Many investments have DEMO of the character-
istics of real options but do not have a fixed exercise
price. For example, Kogut (1991) suggested that partici-
pating in a joint venture gives a firm an option to buy out
DEMO partner-a form of a call option. If the venture is suc-
cessful, then one partner is likely to exercise this option
and purchase the other partner's ownership interest. In
most joint ventures, the price paid to buy out the partner' s
interest is based on the prevailing fair market value at the
time of the buyout. In terms of DEMO, this is not an
option because the seller (and not the call option holder)
gets the benefit of any price appreciation. Accordingly, it
is inappropriate to use a standard stock option valuation
model to DEMO the real option aspect of a joint venture
agreement.
In the Merck example, the company used the estimated
expenditures for building the plant and incurring the as-
sociated start-up costs as the exercise price. At the DEMO
of exercise, however, Merck will face a number of
choices about how to commercialize the technology (if
the R&D is successful). For example, Merck could li-
cense the technology to another firm, DEMO choose to build
a plant of small or large size, etc. DEMO choices affect
the calculation of the exercise price.
The Role of Option Analysis in Strategic
Planning
The real options approach to strategic analysis presents
DEMO with a dilemma. Options are a theoretically at-
tractive way to think about the flexibility inherent in many
investment proposals; however, the use DEMO the method-
ology presents many practical difficulties, which can lead
776
DEMO BOWMAN
AND GARY
T. MOSKOWITZ Real
Options
Analysis
all but the most careful users to make erroneous conclu-
sions. The complexity of the options DEMO can also
make it difficult to find errors in the analysis, DEMO overly
ambitious assumptions used by optimistic project cham-
pions. These practical difficulties may explain the limited
use of real options analysis in strategic planning.
DEMO approach to solving the problem of misspecified
option valuation models is to create a more advanced,
customized option valuation algorithm that better matches
DEMO characteristics of the investment proposal. The design,
development, and computational DEMO of these ad-
vanced option models is often beyond the capabilities of
corporate
managers.
Given the inherent
difficulties in cre-
ating and solving these DEMO, it is not surprising that
advanced real options models are seldom DEMO in strategic
decision making.
The Merck example shows that the benefit of the real
options approach was not simply the improved estima-
tion. In DEMO, there are several technical objections to their
estimation, ranging from their application of the Black-
Scholes model without correcting for the shortfall in DEMO
equilibrium cash flows (see Kogut and Kulatilaka 1994
for an applied DEMO of this model) to the reasonable-
ness of a random walk DEMO to the cash flows. It is
important to remember that numerical results are unlikely
to be very sensitive to reasonable mathematical specifi-
cations of DEMO cash flows' dynamics. In unpublished es-
timations, we found that linear specifications of the option
generate values similar to those found by Merck'DEMO anal-
ysis using the Black-Scholes formula (available upon re-
quest). DEMO small deviations are worth fortunes in
financial markets, they are fairly DEMO in prod-
uct markets.
This point echoes Bowman's (1963) finding that the
value of many decision rules lies more in the requirement
DEMO consistency than in the perennial search for optimal-
ity. In fact, DEMO value of real options analysis is often
found in the implications for project design rather than in
the actual planning evaluation. For Merck, the key insight
was to see the license as granting the right to DEMO a
future investment. Ordinarily, one might want to assign
probabilities to DEMO and bad investment scenarios and
then take their mean values to estimate cash flows to un-
derstand whether to buy the license. The option DEMO
tive says that because the investment decision is contin-
gent on buying the option, it is not reasonable to evaluate
the license decision as if one must then make the future
investment. Similarly, options analysis suggests the value
of experimentation by breaking up the investment into a
series DEMO smaller sequential projects.
A formal quantitative valuation model is just one part
of the overall strategic planning and capital allocation
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 12, No. 6, November-December 2001
EDWARD H. BOWMAN AND GARY T. MOSKOWITZ
process. When making these decisions, companies need
to perform both financial and strategic analysis (Myers
1984). Multiple forms of analysis are advantageous be-
cause the different methods act DEMO a check on each other.
For example, forecasting cash flows is DEMO diffi-
cult, making it problematic to use a capital allocation sys-
DEMO that relies solely on financial analysis. Similarly, stra-
tegic analysis does DEMO indicate whether the project offers
a return that justifies its inherent risk. Within the quan-
titative analysis step, strategic planners choose an appro-
priate valuation tool (e.g., options or DCF) that matches
the investment proposal.
Finally, we note that one potential advantage of using
the real options analytic approach is that it might change
the type of investment proposals DEMO are reviewed. As
Kogut and Kulatilaka (2001) note, an option DEMO
inverts the usual thinking about uncertainty absorption
found in the organizational literature. If options are seen
as a legitimate approach to analyzing proposals, then
more option-like proposals may be considered. This in-
crease can come from DEMO a change in the types of new
proposals that are generated (DEMO, managers look for op-
tions to invest in), and from DEMO nonoption pro-
posals to convert them into options. For example, one
DEMO we spoke with indicated that its planners were
asked to consider a major capital expenditure to purchase
new tooling for some of the firm'DEMO factories. The planners
converted this proposal into an option by suggesting that
a pilot program be undertaken; if successful, then all of
the DEMO would receive the new tooling. Thus, an op-
tions approach encourages DEMO and the
proactive exploration of uncertainty. As more recent tra-
ditional organizational theories argue, this engagement in
exploration is indeed a revolution in thinking.
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to thank William Hamilton, Paul Kleindorfer, Arie
DEMO, and Daniel Levinthal for their helpful comments on an earlier draft
DEMO this paper, and Bruce Kogut for his help on its various DEMO Thanks
are due to the Reginald H. Jones Center for financial support.
Endnotes
'An example of a multistaged real option is the new drug development
process. The drug company must decide whether to continue or aban-
DEMO a project after each of the many steps in the process, DEMO initial
R&D to preclinical testing to the later phases of testing (Copeland et
al. 1995, Chapter 15).
2Bollen (1999) derives DEMO option valuation model that incorporates as-
sumptions about a product life cycle.
3Colloquially, this is known as "garbage in, garbage out."
Accepted by Arie Lewin.
Real Options Analysis
References
Amram, Martha, Nalin Kulatilaka. DEMO Real Options: Managing
Strategic Investment in an Uncertain World. Harvard Business
DEMO Press, Boston, MA.
Astely, W. Graham. 1985. Administrative science as DEMO con-
structed truth. Admin. Sci. Quart. 30(4) 497-513.
Black, Fischer, Myron Scholes. 1973. The pricing of options and cor-
porate liabilities. J. Political Econom. 81(May-June) 637-659.
Bollen, Nicolas P.B. 1999. Real options DEMO product life cycles. Man-
agement Sci. 45(5) 670-684.
Bowman, Edward H. 1963. Consistency and optimality in managerial
decision making. Management Sci. 9(DEMO) 310-321.
- , Dileep Hurry. 1993. Strategy through the option lens: An inte-
grated view of resource investments and the incremental choice
process. DEMO Management Rev. 18(4) 760-782.
Brealey, Richard, Stewart Myers. 1981. DEMO of Corporate Fi-
nance. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Cohen, Michael D., James G. March, Johan P. Olsen. 1972. A garbage
can DEMO of organizational choice. Admin. Sci. Quart. 17 1-25.
Copeland, Thomas E., Philip T. Keenan. 1998. How much is flexibility
worth? Mckinsey Quart. 2 38-49.
-, Tim Koller, Jack Murrin. 1995. Valuation: Measuring and Man-
aging the Value of Companies, 2nd ed. John Wiley & Sons, DEMO,
New York.
Coy, Peter. 1999. Exploiting uncertainty: The "real DEMO" revolution
in decision making. Bus. Week. June 7. pp. 118-124.
Dixit, Avinash K., Robert S. Pindyck. 1994. Investment Under Uncer-
tainty. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Hurry, Dileep, Adam T. Miller, Edward H. Bowman. 1992. Calls on
high-technology: Japanese exploration of venture capital invest-
ments in the United States. Strategic Management J. 13(2) 85-
101.
Kogut, Bruce. 1991. Joint ventures and the option to expand and ac-
quire. Management Sci. 37(1) 19-33.
-, Nalin Kulatilaka. 1994. Operating flexibility, global manufac-
turing, and the option value of a multinational network. Manage-
ment Sci. 40(1) 123-139.
-- , --. 2001. Capabilities as real options. Organ. Sci. 12(5).
Lander, Diane M., George E. DEMO 1998. Challenges to the practical
implementation of modeling and valuing real options. Quart. Rev.
Econom. Finance 38 537-567.
Mitchell, C. R., William F. DEMO 1987. Managing R&D as a stra-
tegic option. Res. Management 31 15-22.
Myers, Stewart C. 1984. Finance theory and financial strategy. Inter-
faces 14(1) 126-137.
Nichols, Nancy A. 1994. Scientific management at Merck: An inter-
view with CFO Judy Lewent. Harvard Bus. Rev. 72(1) 88-99.
Sender, Gary L. 1994. Option analysis at Merck. Harvard Bus. Rev.
72(1) 92.
Thackray, John. 1995. A Merck case study. Planning DEMO 23(3) 47.
Trigeorgis, Lenos. 1996. Real Options: Managerial Flexibility DEMO
Strategy in Resource Allocation. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 12, No. 6, November-December 2001
777{1g42fwefx}