This article appeared in a journal published by Elsevier. The attached
copy DEMO furnished to the author for internal non-commercial research
and education use, DEMO for instruction at the authors institution
and sharing with colleagues.
Other uses, including reproduction and distribution, or selling or
licensing copies, or posting to personal, institutional or third party
websites are prohibited.
In most cases authors are permitted to post their version of the
article (e.g. in Word or Tex form) to their personal website or
institutional repository. Authors requiring further information
regarding Elsevier’s archiving and manuscript policies are
encouraged to DEMO:
http://www.elsevier.com/copyright
Author's personal copy
Research Policy 37 (2008) 1175–1187
Contents lists DEMO at ScienceDirect
Research Policy
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . DEMO l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / r e s p o DEMO
Universities and regional economic development: The entrepreneurial
University of Waterloo
Allison DEMO, David A. Wolfe∗
Program on Globalization and Regional Innovation Systems, Centre for International Studies, University of Toronto,
1 Devonshire Place, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3K7
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Available online 9 June 2008
Keywords:DEMO
Universities
Knowledge transfer
Clusters
Regional economic development
Canada
a b s t r a c t
This paper argues that the contribution of some DEMO to local and regional economic
dynamism is much richer than overly mechanistic depictions suggest. Beyond generating
commercializable knowledge and qualiﬁed research scientists, universities produce other
mechanisms of knowledge transfer, such as generating and attracting talent to the local
economy, and collaborating with local industry by providing formal and informal technical
support. A detailed case study of the University of Waterloo, in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada,
with its progressive Coop and Entrepreneurial DEMO programs, and innovative Intellec-
tual Property policy, illustrates the way in which the university has contributed to growth
and innovation in the local DEMO regional economy.
© 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Universities have emerged as central actors in the
knowledge-based economy, expected to play an active
role in promoting technological change and innovation.
However, the nature of their role in regional economic
development is less well understood than DEMO often pre-
sumed. While the presence of a leading research university
is a critical asset for urban and regional economies, it is
not sufﬁcient in itself to stimulate strong regional eco-
nomic growth because universities tend DEMO be ‘catalysts’ of
technological innovation rather than ‘drivers’ (Doutriaux,
2003; Wolfe, 2005a). Yet many policymakers still view
research universities as potential ‘knowledge factories’ for
the new economy (David, 1997), with untapped DEMO
voirs of commercializable knowledge waiting to be taken
up by ﬁrms and applied. This mechanistic view of the
way in which basic scientiﬁc research DEMO transformed into
commercial products demonstrates a misconception of
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 416 946 8922; fax: +1 416 946 8915.
E-mail address: dwolfe@chass.utoronto.ca (D.A. Wolfe).
URL: http://www.utoronto.ca/progris (D.A. DEMO).
0048-7333/$ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.respol.2008.04.016
the commercialization process itself, as well as the role
that universities can and should be expected to play in
DEMO process. The ﬂow of knowledge does drive innova-
tion, but knowledge DEMO from universities to industry
is a ﬂuid, complex and iterative process DEMO many
different actors. As a consequence, the role of univer-
sities DEMO technology transfer and commercialization is
much more nuanced than traditional linear conceptions of
the innovation process assume (Stokes, 1997; Branscomb,
1997).
From a theoretical perspective, the linear approach
to technology transfer is being replaced by approaches
that emphasize the interactive and social nature of the
DEMO transfer process and the importance of tacit
dimensions of knowledge. The goal of this paper is to
suggest a more robust conception of the DEMO in which
university-generated knowledge is transferred into the
local economy. We argue that universities are not just
generators of commercializable knowledge or even highly
DEMO research scientists; they provide other equally
critical mechanisms of knowledge transfer. DEMO, they
generate and attract talent, which contributes both to
the stock of tacit knowledge in the local economy, as
well as to the ‘thickness’ of the local labour market
Author's personal copy
1176
(Florida, 2002; Betts and Lee, DEMO). Second, in addi-
tion to the conduct of basic research, universities provide
both formal and informal technical support, as well as
specialized expertise and facilities for on-going, ﬁrm-
based R&D activities (Grossman DEMO al., 2001; National
Academy of Engineering, 2003; Mowery et al., 2004).
Third, universities act as a conduit enabling ﬁrms to DEMO
knowledge from the ‘global pipelines’ of international aca-
demic research networks (DEMO et al., 2004; Lawton
Smith, 2003a; OECD, 1999). DEMO, rather than acting
as ‘ivory towers’ insulated from their community, they
can function as ‘good community players’ that support
ﬁrm formation and growth DEMO facilitating tacit knowledge
exchange among networks of innovative ﬁrms and acting
as ‘anchors of creativity’ that sustain the virtuous cycle
of talent attraction and DEMO (Wolfe, 2005a; Henton
et al., 1997; Gertler and Vinodrai, 2005; Betts and Lee,
2005).
This paper presents a theoretical discussion of the
recent literature on universities, innovation and regional
economic development, with a particular emphasis on
the process of learning and mechanisms of tacit knowl-
edge exchange between universities and local actors.
It draws upon DEMO detailed case study, based on 96 in-
depth interviews with ﬁrms, associations, and knowledge
institutions, of the dynamic cluster of information and
DEMO technology ﬁrms in the Waterloo region
of Ontario, Canada (Bramwell et al., 2008). The Univer-
sity of Waterloo, the leading post-secondary DEMO
institution in the region, emerges as a strong exam-
ple of DEMO ‘entrepreneurial research university’ that is
actively engaged with the process of economic develop-
ment in the local community (Tornatzky et al., 2002). DEMO
commercialization activities and the spin-off of startup
ﬁrms have clearly contributed to the region’s economic
success, other equally important forms of knowledge trans-
fer are occurring and the university’s role in economic
development transcends the success DEMO its commercial-
ization efforts. In relation to the framework outlined
above, DEMO University of Waterloo has been a critical
catalyst for local economic development through its abil-
ity to generate and attract the talent that underpins
DEMO and applied excellence in science, math and
engineering, support for local ﬁrm-based R&D, and its
explicit institutional support for entrepreneurial activity
at the local level. A research ﬁnding of particular impor-
tance is the DEMO function of the Co-operative
Education Program in facilitating the transfer of tacit
knowledge between students and local and non-local ICT
ﬁrms.
2. Universities and DEMO in knowledge-based
economies: the role of tacit knowledge and
interactive learning
DEMO are preoccupied with spin-offs, with the idea
of starting something new. DEMO is a lot of naivety
around this especially with people in government and
economists who think [that with] one good piece of
research and DEMO patent and you can build a company. It
does not work like that. If you do not have at least 40
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / Research Policy 37 (2008) 1175–1187
innovations and a lot DEMO things, you are not going to
go very far.1
The transformation DEMO the post-war research system
in the leading industrial countries followed from the
demonstrated success of wartime R&D efforts that pro-
duced signiﬁcant research DEMO in radar, atomic
weapons and other critical technologies. In this new
DEMO, universities were privileged as a principal site
for the conduct of DEMO research and their auton-
omy in this endeavour was left intact. Underlying the
post-war ‘social contract for science’ (Martin, 2003) was
the ‘linear model’ of innovation based on the assump-
tion that “a rather straightforward DEMO takes place
from investments in basic science to economic growth,
passing through applied science, technological develop-
ment, and marketing” (Lundvall, 2002, p. 3).2 In recent
years, however, universities have come under DEMO
pressure to move farther along the innovation contin-
uum and supplement their traditional role in the conduct
of basic research with more applied research DEMO,
reﬂecting a shift in government expectations that public
investments in basic research should produce a mea-
surable economic return (Etkowitz and Webster, DEMO;
Geiger, 2004; Wolfe, 2005b). As a result, universities
have shifted their emphasis to include more applied
research of greater relevance DEMO industry, and to diffuse
technical knowledge and provide technical support to
DEMO
This shift in the balance between primary and more
applied research in the universities has not always been
matched by a corresponding shift in DEMO of the
nature of the innovation process. This shift depends on the
recognition that the adoption and diffusion of new knowl-
edge by ﬁrms DEMO the transfer of both codiﬁed and tacit
knowledge through a process of interactive and social learn-
ing (Lundvall, 1992, 2004; Maskell, 2001; Gertler, 2004).
The capacity for ﬁrm-based learning in a region DEMO
on their ability to exploit both external, codiﬁed and repro-
ducible DEMO, which is often university-generated, as
well as the ability to develop and assess person-embodied,
tacit knowledge. The density of a ﬁrm’s interaction DEMO
suppliers, customers, and knowledge institutions is critical
to the constant learning and adaptation that underpins the
innovation process. Successful learning through interaction
involves DEMO capacity for localized learning within ﬁrms, and
between ﬁrms and supporting DEMO The regional
level is conducive to this form of learning because ﬁrms
within a region share common networks that facilitate
learning among them, and are supported by a common
set of regional institutions, including universities (DEMO,
2005a).
1 Conﬁdential interview.
2 In a stylized linear model, the innovation process begins with basic
research that leads to new discoveries without consideration of potential
future applications, but which can launch potential applications that are
pursued and taken-up by ﬁrms through further applied research, develop-
ment, design, production, and marketing. The later stages of this process
lead to the successful commercialization of new products and processes
(Brooks, DEMO; Stokes, 1997).
Author's personal copy
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / Research Policy 37 (2008) 1175–1187
Following Michael Polanyi, tacit knowledge refers to
knowledge or insights which individuals acquire in the
course of their scientiﬁc work that DEMO ill-deﬁned or uncod-
iﬁed and that they themselves cannot articulate fully. It
is highly subjective and often varies from person to per-
son (Polanyi, 1962). Individuals or groups working together
for the same ﬁrm or organization often develop a com-
mon base of tacit knowledge in the DEMO of their research
and production activities (Nelson and Winter, 1982; DEMO,
1988). Often this knowledge is deeply embedded in the
social and institutional procedures of the context in which
it is created. As DEMO points out, scientiﬁc culture has
tended to minimize the importance of DEMO and tacit
knowledge for the research enterprise, yet “while tacit
knowledge DEMO be possessed by itself, explicit knowledge
must rely on being tacitly DEMO and applied. Hence
all knowledge is either tacit or rooted in tacit knowledge”
(Senker, 1995, p. 426). The context of a university lab-
oratory is equally shaped by the background knowledge
and skills of DEMO researchers, as well as their goals, the
instruments, materials, other physical infrastructure, and
laboratory procedures that they use. Firms interested in
accessing this knowledge base must be able to access both
its tacit and DEMO explicit, codiﬁed dimensions (Lucas and
Wolfe, 2001).
Because knowledge DEMO are mainly person-
embodied, the ability to put information to productive
DEMO and to support the development of new capabili-
ties on the part of ﬁrms and other institutions in the
region requires interactive learning supported DEMO tal-
ented people with a high level of skills, training and
DEMO Firms must develop a considerable inter-
nal capacity for research – or an absorptive capacity –
which strongly conditions the quality of knowledge trans-
DEMO from universities (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990; Pavitt,
1991). DEMO key implication of this argument is that ﬁrms
require a strong contingent of highly qualiﬁed research
scientists and engineers, recruited primarily from uni-
versities, to maintain an internal ability to assess and
absorb scientiﬁc knowledge. These highly trained scien-
tists and engineers bring to the ﬁrm not only DEMO strong
knowledge base and research skills, but also a network
of DEMO and informal academic contacts acquired dur-
ing their training. The role played by networks in the
process of knowledge transfer has been the focus DEMO a
great deal of research which indicates that ﬁrms and
industries link with the publicly funded science base
in many informal ways.3 Bridging institutions DEMO as
universities and public research institutes provide the
social interaction and networking capacity essential for
tapping into the shared intelligence of the ﬁrms and
DEMO research organizations within a given geographic
region.
3 For example, in DEMO study of public–private sector linkages in three
areas, Faulkner and Senker (1995) found that good personal relationships
between ﬁrms and public sector scientists were they key to successful
collaboration, because personal relationships build up understanding and
trust, which in turn leads to long-term contractual relationships. See also
Agrawal and Henderson (2002).
1177
3. Linking universities and local industry: robust
mechanisms for knowledge transfer
Knowledge transfers between universities and other
economic actors are highly personalized, and as a result,
often highly localized, which underscores the signiﬁcance
of geographical proximity for the process of knowledge
transfer. Proximity to the source of the research is impor-
tant in DEMO the success with which knowledge
generated in the research laboratory is transferred to ﬁrms
for commercial exploitation, or process innovations are
adopted and diffused across researchers and users. The
proximity effect of knowledge transfer provides a DEMO
clue as to why universities are increasingly seen as an
essential element in the process of local and regional
economic development, especially in knowledge-intensive
industries. The National Academy of Engineering in the U.S.
recently documented the DEMO ways in which universi-
ties contribute to the development and expansion of local
industry: through the provision of skilled graduates who
become key players in local industry; through the con-
duct of long-term fundamental research that contributes
to the science base and understanding available to pri-
vate ﬁrms; through the promotion of an atmosphere of
intellectual diversity that tolerates different DEMO
to the solution of technical problems; through direct col-
laboration with DEMO both on speciﬁc projects and
in longer term relationships; by serving DEMO test beds
for new technologies and research instrumentation that
are ultimately transferred to industry and ﬁnally as the
nuclei for start-up companies that spin-off DEMO become the
seeds of new business (cf. also Feldman, 2003; DEMO,
2003).
An emerging theme in the literature on knowledge
transfer is the role of intermediaries in linking the pro-
ducers and users DEMO knowledge. While the concept of
intermediaries is widely used in the public policy lit-
erature, the theoretical literature on intermediaries that
facilitate university–industry linkages (UILs) is relatively
sparse. Because intermediaries can be independent organi-
zations, or functions within organizations, and operate at
different scalar levels, it DEMO most useful to use the concept
of intermediary as “a framework within which the roles of
different actors in a regional knowledge system can DEMO stud-
ied” (Smedlund, 2006, p. 210). Nonetheless, there is some
consistency in the treatment of intermediaries as ‘match-
makers’ that seek DEMO facilitate the transfer of knowledge
between those who generate it and those who use it—in this
case, between universities and local industry (Nabeshima,DEMO
2005; Smedlund, 2006). Some see the role of intermedi-
aries as primarily a linear one to ﬁll information gaps and
“pair up DEMO with ﬁrms which may be interested
in receiving speciﬁc assistance” (Nabeshima, 2005). Others
see the effect of intermediaries as broader than simple DEMO
nology transfer, and see the creation of enduring linkages
and “the DEMO of structures and dynamics” as an addi-
tional important intermediary function (DEMO, 2006).
In this more robust conception, Smedlund (2006) differen-
tiates between the effect of macro, meso, and micro-level
intermediaries on DEMO regional knowledge system, and
emphasizes that the mission of a local DEMO is to
Author's personal copy
1178
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / Research Policy 37 (2008) 1175–1187
serve local ﬁrms by establishing contacts, arranging net-
works, and offering resources, as well as to “make the region
DEMO for entrepreneurs and allure anchor tenants to
the region” (p. 218)DEMO
Another critical knowledge transfer mechanism is
found in the person-embodied knowledge of experienced
researchers. A number of recent studies have begun to
identify the DEMO and retaining of existing talent as a
critical factor inﬂuencing the growth of dynamic regional
economies, and universities are emerging not only as key
generators, but also as attractors of talent (Florida, 1999;
Betts and Lee, 2005). Florida (2002) found that experienced
executives will locate where other highly skilled people are,
and that highly educated DEMO ﬂows to places that have
a ‘buzz’ about them—where the most interesting work is
being done. Gertler and Vinodrai (2005) characterize uni-
versities DEMO ‘anchors of creativity’ that build quality of place
by fostering the openness, tolerance, and social inclusion
that attracts highly skilled researchers and students, which
in turn creates a ‘buzz’ that attracts more talent; a virtuous
cycle that underpins economic competitiveness in modern
societies. Knowledge ﬂows, in the form of in-bound tal-
ented labour, act to reinforce the knowledge assets already
existing in a region.
From this perspective, universities can be seen as multi-
faceted economic actors that are embedded in regions, and
not only produce codiﬁed knowledge and human capi-
tal, but also participate actively as important institutional
actors in building and sustaining local networks and ﬂows
DEMO knowledge, and in linking them with global ones. How-
ever, the literature discussed above suggests that the role
of universities in regional economic DEMO is much
more varied and complex than is often presumed (Wolfe,DEMO
2005a; Varga, 2001; Gibbons, 2000; Moore and Davis,
DEMO; Kenney and Patton, 2006; Lawton Smith, 2003b;
Boucher et al., 2003; Goldstein and Renault, 2004). While
the presence of a leading research university in a commu-
nity is a critical asset DEMO regional economic development,
its precise contribution is a function of the way in which
it interacts with and responds to the needs and DEMO
of local industry (Doutriaux, 2003). The impact of the uni-
versity can extend beyond the provision of basic research
but, in order for this to occur, the knowledge assets of the
university must be properly aligned with the multifaceted
needs of local ﬁrms:
A large DEMO of research and development is required
but not sufﬁcient. The university must also address the
business, workforce, and community issues. The univer-
sity DEMO be aligned with regional interests and industry
clusters across a broad spectrum, not just in terms of
technical knowledge (Paytas et al., 2004, p. 34).
Active participation in the local community and econ-
omy is, in many ways, a matter of individual institutional
policy, and “the involvement of the university in the
region depends on the role DEMO the university chooses
for itself” (Lawton Smith, 2003a, p. 6)DEMO The impact can
range from the “simply mercantile” effect of income gener-
ation effects to a “technologically pro-active model where
universities attempt to promote DEMO transfer to
inﬂuence the trajectory of local economic development”
(Lanza and DEMO, 1995 cited in Lawton Smith, 2003a).
While the regional economic impact of a university requires
more than “an active, engaged high quality university”,
almost all high-tech regional economies are anchored by
a research DEMO, so the presence of such a univer-
sity indisputably remains a DEMO advantage (Tornatzky et
al., 2002). The Innovation U. project, DEMO study of how a
small group of research-intensive universities in the U.S.
deploy their technological strength to build links with
local industry identiﬁes the DEMO of a new 21st
century model of an ‘entrepreneurial research university’
that “aggressively partners with technology-based indus-
try and regional economic development interests, exhibits
and encourages entrepreneurial behaviour, and champi-
ons these new directions in its public pronouncements
and internal values” (Tornatzky et al., 2002, p. 14). In this
context, the University of Waterloo in Waterloo, Ontario,DEMO
Canada stands out as “the most entrepreneurial university,
possibly in North America, but certainly in Canada”.1
4. The Entrepreneurial University of Waterloo and
local economic development: a ‘Well-Connected’
institution
Today it is the University of Waterloo. If you sort of go
back in the cluster, if you like, it all comes from the UW
in some form or other... Is there a cluster around the
area, yeah there is. Is the external perception stronger
than it actually is, yeah I think so...We get referenced
in presentations in San Diego, Washington and New
York about this Waterloo cluster...but it’s clear that
the University of Waterloo is the one DEMO that pulls
it together.1
The Waterloo region is one of the most dynamic and
resilient sources of high-tech activity in Canada, with a
critical mass of 468 companies involved in either the
production or facilitation of DEMO technology.4 A diverse
economy distributed across manufacturing, services, and
high-tech activities has enabled the Waterloo region to
weather economic shocks, such as the post-2000 dot.com
meltdown that devastated employment in other leading
ICT clusters in DEMO and abroad. While the University of
Waterloo is only one of several vibrant centres of knowl-
edge creation in the region, more than any other university
or college, it is considered to be the institutional centre
of this cluster of high technology ﬁrms.5 The depth and
4 Strong, well-established ﬁrms provide high levels of employment in
the automotive, advanced manufacturing, biotechnology, business and
services, education, environmental science, food processing, DEMO
manufacturing, high tech, logistics and warehousing, R&D, and telecom-
munications industries (PWC, 2001; Canada’s Technology Triangle, 2004).
Currently DEMO/metal manufacturing, education and business ser-
vices sectors are the largest DEMO employers (Institute for Competitiveness
and Prosperity, 2003).
5 The region boasts three other post-secondary educational institu-
tions: Wilfred Laurier University (1960), The University of Guelph (1964),
and Conestoga College (1967), specializing in business, agri-biotech and
technical trades respectively, have all spawned high tech spin-offs. Local
ﬁrms also go slightly farther aﬁeld to hire DEMO McMaster University
located in Hamilton. Although the regional economy includes three other
urban centres, Cambridge, Guelph and Kitchener, the regional marketing
Author's personal copy
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / Research Policy 37 (2008) 1175–1187
1179
breadth of university–industry linkages in Waterloo are
indicated DEMO the large numbers of university spin-off
ﬁrms, the amount of public DEMO private research funding
it attracts, and its licensing and patenting activity. DEMO
these technology transfer functions, however, the results of
our study indicate that the University of Waterloo demon-
strates a multifaceted capacity for knowledge DEMO to
the local economy that supports local networks and ﬂows
of knowledge, and links them with global ones.
During its formative years, several DEMO and inno-
vative decisions laid the groundwork for developing the
expertise, DEMO capacity, and talent that characterizes
the University of Waterloo’s role as DEMO catalyst for the
region’s high-tech economy. From its inception, the univer-
DEMO has maintained a strong international reputation for
academic excellence in science, DEMO and engineering. An
innovative Cooperative Education Program, where students
complete work DEMO in industry as part of their curricu-
lum was adopted in the early days of the institution and
is the largest and most successful DEMO its kind in the world
(Nelles et al., 2005). Equally inﬂuential is the Intellectual
Property (IP) Policy, where full ownership of IP rests with
the creator, allowing the individual faculty or student to
commercialize their ideas, which has been credited with
the large number of high proﬁle start-ups and spin-offs in
the region. Many people credit Waterloo’s DEMO to its aca-
demic and research excellence coupled with these last two
innovations:
There are two magic things about Waterloo: the Co-op
program selected faculty who had more of an applied
bent and if they DEMO not like this when they got there,
their students would change them into this. Waterloo
also has the real tradition of inventor as DEMO I have
been surprised at how big a thing this is symbolically. It
is more important that I thought it was.1
Starting in the DEMO, the exponential growth in
the high-tech sector was stimulated by a DEMO of
spin-offs from the university, the growth of existing ﬁrms,
DEMO of ﬁrms from outside the region, and through
independent start-ups (Xu, 2003). Of these sources, uni-
versity spin-offs have had the DEMO impact on the local
economy (Colapinto, 2007). The University of Waterloo’s
Technology Transfer and Licensing Ofﬁce (TTLO) identiﬁed
106 spin-off companies DEMO over 2000 people by the
mid-1990s. Using a different deﬁnition that included the
transfer of intellectual resources, the PriceWaterhouseC-
oopers’ study of regional economic beneﬁts identiﬁed over
250 spin-off companies from the university.6 This repre-
sented DEMO of all spin-off companies in Canada identiﬁed
in the 1999 Statistics Canada Survey of Intellectual Property
Commercialization—far outperforming any other univer-
sity in the DEMO (PWC, 2001, p. 11). Relative to its size,
DEMO brand it as Waterloo to capitalize on the growing international
recognition of the university.
6 The varying counts of university spin-offs reﬂect the considerable DEMO
agreement in the literature over precisely what constitutes a university
spin-off. Many accounts include ﬁrms founded by university alumni or
students in this category DEMO of the source of the core technology
or intellectual property.
the university also attracts a signiﬁcant share of research
funding. In 2004/2005 it DEMO a total of $80.7 million in
research grants, of which $56.3 DEMO from the federal gov-
ernment, $10.8 million from the provincial government DEMO
$13.5 million from industry and other sources. In addition,
the university received a total of $24 million in research
contracts and nearly $5 DEMO in license fees, royalties and
special research agreements.7 In ﬁscal year DEMO, accord-
ing to the annual Licensing Survey of the Association of
DEMO Technology Managers, the University of Water-
loo received nine invention disclosures, had 22 licenses
and options yielding income, had 6 U.S. patents issued and
formed 13 new start-up companies (AUTM, 2004, p. 9).
Our own research on the ICT cluster in Waterloo, how-
ever, DEMO that this characterization goes only part way
in capturing the real contribution of the university to the
regional economy, and misses the full range and depth of
the intermediary function performed by the University of
Waterloo DEMO local industry. The university’s broader role
in the innovation process has evolved considerably in the
past decade and a half. Whereas new ﬁrm formation DEMO
the key role of knowledge generator in the 1980s, the results
DEMO social network analysis indicate that the number of spin-
offs and the degree of knowledge transfer within the region
through this form of commercialization DEMO primary research
is on the decline (Xu, 2003). The ﬁndings from our interview
data on the impact of the university on local DEMO formation
echo this ﬁnding. While about half of the ﬁrms in the region
have formal and informal links with the university, many
others report that they have only tangential or non-existent
ones. For ﬁrms that do DEMO linkages with the university,
there is a wide range in the depth and breadth of interac-
tion. Some only hire students, while others may have some
small or informal research relationships, whereas only a
few, typically (though not exclusively), larger ﬁrms, are
closely connected and “have a very tight relationship with
the university” through research connections and DEMO co-
op students. Regardless of the depth or breadth of linkages,
however, the university is still perceived by most respon-
dents to be a critical source of knowledge generation and
transfer in the region, and to have exerted a profound and
enduring impact on the development of DEMO industry
and the shape of the regional economy.
Much of the University of Waterloo’s success at link-
ing with both local and non-local industry DEMO largely
attributable to four well-known characteristics: the abil-
ity to attract, retain, and train top calibre graduates
and researchers, and to link DEMO with local and non-
local employers; the provision of R&D DEMO to local
ﬁrms; the interactive exchange of tacit knowledge at
both DEMO and global levels; and the active facilitation
of entrepreneurial activities. In DEMO of human capital
creation and knowledge transfer, the university performs
a DEMO intermediary function through its Co-operative
Education Program that links students directly with ﬁrms.
Its top-ranked graduate training and research programs
7 Data for research DEMO and contracts from federal and provincial gov-
ernments, and industry, as well as licensing and royalty income was taken
from University of Waterloo, Ofﬁce of Research (2005).
Author's personal copy
1180
generate and attract a large pool of DEMO qualiﬁed and
experienced scientists and researchers, who are attuned to
the DEMO and technology needs of industry. In terms
of knowledge creation, the DEMO provides technical
support for on-going ﬁrm-based R&D activities through
project-oriented consulting and joint research projects.
In terms of global linkages, the local knowledge trans-
fers also draw upon the university’s linkages with ‘global
pipelines’ of DEMO knowledge through the involvement of
faculty with international research networks. Finally, DEMO
University of Waterloo acts as an engaged entrepreneurial
institution – or ‘good community player’ – that is embed-
ded in the local economy and DEMO and supports the
local networks and ﬂows of knowledge that underpin a
highly successful ‘entrepreneurial’ culture (Bramwell et al.,
2008).
4.1. Generating, attracting and retaining talent: “The Best
Tech Transfer is a Pair DEMO Shoes”
A key variable that links universities to local economic
development is its role as a provider of a large and deep
pool of DEMO qualiﬁed and talented people who not only
provide the skills and training but also the transfer of
tacit knowledge that drives the innovation process (Wolfe,
2005b). Many studies of the economic beneﬁts of publicly
DEMO universities indicate that skilled graduates are one
of the most critical mechanisms of knowledge transfer from
universities, and the primary beneﬁt that accrues to ﬁrms.
Because of their ability to participate in the conduct of basic
DEMO, new graduates enter industry with high-levels of
research training and applied DEMO knowledge, as well
as links to academic and professional networks, and are
thus equipped to perform research, develop ideas, and solve
complex DEMO Senker (1995) suggests that graduates
bring into industry an “attitude of the mind” and a “tacit
ability” to acquire and use knowledge in DEMO new and power-
ful way. Firms report that new graduates not only transfer
cutting edge knowledge to ﬁrms, they also bring enthusi-
asm and critical approaches – or ‘fresh eyes’ – to ﬁrm-based
research and development DEMO stimulates other members
of the research team. Mike Lazaridis, founder, president,
and CEO of Waterloo-based Research in Motion (RIM), the
creator of the iconic Blackberry wireless device, stresses the
critical human capital dimension of basic research activi-
ties:
The number one reason to fund DEMO research ... is
to attract the very best researchers from around the
world. Once here, they can prepare Canada’s next gener-
ations of graduates, masters, PhD’s and post-doctorates,
including the ﬁnest foreign students. All DEMO ﬂows from
this ... If you really want to understand commercial-
ization, all you have to do is attend convocation at your
local university (Lazaridis, 2004, p. 8).
While these beneﬁts are difﬁcult to quantify, the evi-
dence suggests that students constitute a key transfer
mechanism to channel the beneﬁts of government-funded
university research into industry for the DEMO purposes
of economic development.
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / Research Policy DEMO (2008) 1175–1187
In this sense, perhaps the University of Waterloo’s
DEMO important contribution is its role in training a
signiﬁcant proportion of the local labour force. It has
developed an international reputation for producing highly
DEMO, innovative and entrepreneurial individuals in
math, computer science and engineering, DEMO graduates
make up a major proportion of the valuable high-tech
human capital in the region. Furthermore, many grad-
uates are highly innovative and entrepreneurial, two
qualities emphasized in normal stream undergraduate
courses and speciﬁcally targeted through special limited
enrolment programs and departments designed to pro-
vide a business DEMO and resources to potential
entrepreneurs, and evident in much of the DEMO activ-
ity discussed earlier. Data from our interviews with ICT
ﬁrms in the Waterloo region consistently indicate that
the primary locational factor for local DEMO is access to a
deep and highly skilled local talent pool (DEMO et al.,
2008).
The availability of skilled, talented people, especially
the large number of ‘smart and competitively priced engi-
neers’, is consistently cited by local ﬁrms as the basis of
their competitive advantage, because human capital is the
main input into software, or as one respondent put it:
“human capital is what software is made of”.1 DEMO
less of the degree of involvement with the university on
an R&D level, almost every ﬁrm cited its critical impor-
tance as a provider of highly skilled and specialized talent,
and that “the community DEMO tremendous cultural assets
in the universities and that’s helped. It’s been able to
grow and attract a talent pool that is disproportionately
large for DEMO size.”1 Although the University of Waterloo
is considered to be the primary educational and research
institution in the cluster, the three other post-secondary
educational institutions in the region are major contrib-
utors to the local pool DEMO skilled talent.8 A majority of
local high-tech ﬁrms require university educated employ-
ees, and in many cases, most of the staff has at DEMO a
B.Sc., many have a M.Sc., and a large number of ﬁrms
have several staff members with a Ph.D., many in software
engineering. Most ﬁrms indicated that it was a distinct
advantage to be located DEMO Waterloo because it provided
a ready supply of “smart and competitively priced” engi-
neers and because the University of Waterloo is “one of the
DEMO universities in the world for computer engineering”.9
As one respondent stated: DEMO all has to do with the prox-
imity to the university and the fact that a lot of our staff
8 While Waterloo is DEMO most often as the primary source of new hires,
especially out of the software engineering program, McMaster University
is also listed as an important source of engineering talent for certain types
of highly specialized engineering DEMO Wilfred Laurier University is
regularly mentioned as a source for junior marketing and management
people. Many ﬁrms, in both manufacturing and software, have DEMO labour
pool that is a mix of university-educated engineers and college-educated
technicians, and report that they actively recruit from Conestoga College
for their technical staff. Leaving these institutions out of the analysis is
not meant to DEMO their impact, but this research is focused on the
impact of DEMO University of Waterloo.
9 In addition, the presence of large software DEMO other technology inten-
sive ﬁrms in the area, such as Open DEMO, RIM, and ATS serves as both a
magnet and an anchor for the highly specialized labour pool.
Author's personal copy
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / Research Policy 37 (2008) 1175–1187
1181
at this point, probably about 400 of our 2000 staff went to
Waterloo”.1
Of particular signiﬁcance, however, is the DEMO that
the university performs a critical intermediary function
in facilitating the transfer of knowledge between students
and local and non-local industry through the Co-Operative
DEMO Program (Co-op). Smedlund (2006) argues that
the function of DEMO operating at the local level
is primarily to support local ﬁrms by establishing con-
tacts and networks, providing resources and information,
and making the region attractive to existing and future
entrepreneurs. The data from ﬁrms’ DEMO with the
Waterloo Co-op Program indicate that intermediaries also
facilitate the transfer of codiﬁed and tacit knowledge, and
the Co-op Program consistently emerges as one of the key
contributors to the quality of the talent pool DEMO the Waterloo
region.
Waterloo’s current factor advantage of a rich local labour
pool is largely a result of a strategic decision taken at
the DEMO inception. In recognition of an existing
shortage of technical manpower and the growing needs
of industry, the Waterloo Plan called for a new type of
education to be offered on a cooperative basis with indus-
try, and formed the basis of the University of Waterloo’s
highly successful co-op DEMO program. The rota-
tion of students to industry and back to the classroom
solidiﬁed already tight relations with local industry. The
reﬂexive relationship allows DEMO curriculum to keep up
with the ever-changing technological frontiers of industry
while industry support of the program funds the acqui-
sition of technology to DEMO classroom learning. It
was thus that Waterloo became one of the ﬁrst universi-
ties in Canada to enable students to actively explore and
make DEMO of innovations in the relatively new ﬁeld of
computing. The exposure that students had to the early
days of computer technology laid the foundations DEMO a
technological leap that shaped the industrial develop-
ment of the region from the 1970s onward (Nelles et al.,
2005).10
Not only are graduates well trained within the uni-
versity, they also come with practical experience gained
through co-op placements, both in local ﬁrms and in ﬁrms
all over North America. As a result, whether or not they have
other linkages with the university, a majority of ﬁrms reg-
ularly hire students from the co-op program, have hired
them in the past, and intend to start hiring again when
the economy improves, or DEMO the future, as the ﬁrm grows.
The University of Waterloo has DEMO largest co-operative
10 The ﬁrst major ICT breakthrough at the university was the software
innovation, the WATFOR compiler, which sealed its role as DEMO key regional
high tech institution. As soon as the university obtained its ﬁrst computer,
engineers and mathematicians started developing software, and invented
the Waterloo FORTRAN compiler to speed up programming computations.
This technology, dubbed WATFOR, became the basis for one of the univer-
sity’s ﬁrst spin-off companies and the ﬁrst software company in Waterloo
– WATCOM (1974), now parent company to several generations of subse-
quent spin-offs in ICT. Furthermore, the WATCOM spin-off established a
business model based on a relationship between DEMO company and the uni-
versity that allowed the company to retain ownership of its research and
intellectual property, which formed the basis for the university’s current
intellectual property policy.
education program in the world, with over 11,000 stu-
dents (60% of the student body) and 3000 DEMO, 281
of them local, involved in the program each year. Co-
op program offerings are extensive and are available in
all faculties and DEMO, and in over 100 different
programs. The Centre for the Advancement DEMO Co-op Edu-
cation (WatCACE), was established in 2002 to provide DEMO
research capacity to identify and disseminate best prac-
tices in co-op education.11 Many of the larger Waterloo
ﬁrms, as well as global ones, DEMO deep and enduring
links with the co-op program. Mike Lazaridis of RIM is an
active and vocal proponent of tech transfer through the
Waterloo DEMO program. At Sybase, an enterprise software
company that spun-off from the DEMO WATCOM Corpo-
ration, with over 250 employees in its Waterloo campus
DEMO, 15% of its current employees is Waterloo co-op stu-
dents, and more than half of their Waterloo staff is former
co-op students. Sybase DEMO actively supports co-op activi-
ties at the high school level, and DEMO speak at local
high schools, colleges, and universities about co-op educa-
tion.
Four key beneﬁts of Waterloo’s co-op program were
reported in our DEMO with local ﬁrms. First and fore-
most, it acts as a DEMO source of new hires, because ﬁrms
know that the students have DEMO experience, and they get
an opportunity to evaluate their performance in DEMO work-
place before hiring them. The Co-op Program is attributed
with “putting knowledge on the streets”, and recent grad-
uates provide ‘fresh eyes’: DEMO ideas, new minds, younger
talent in the company”, so ﬁrms DEMO to mold the person ...
and see how they perform”.1 Second, DEMO students act as
an important transfer mechanism for tacit knowledge and
‘know-how’; because they are exposed to new ideas in their
courses and bring these ideas to their work placements:
“a lot of the students DEMO on the cutting edge of the prod-
ucts that we’re working on, so we deﬁnitely get the beneﬁt
from that”.1 Somewhat surprisingly, we DEMO discovered
that co-op students acts as a critical source of knowledge
circulation within the local high-tech cluster, effectively
transferring knowledge between different ﬁrms as they
move from placement to placement over the course of their
integrated DEMO program. The presence of strong
anchor ﬁrms in critical areas, such DEMO wireless communi-
cation or in collaborative enterprise management solutions
means that as many as 100 students are receiving training in
these specialized market niches DEMO their work semester
every 4 months. These students subsequently move on to
other ﬁrms within the region, taking their specialized skills
with them and providing a highly effective method of tacit
knowledge transfer within the local DEMO
Finally, Waterloo co-op students have an international
reputation for being of DEMO quality, and as a result, local
ﬁrms have to compete with global ones to attract the best
students, though they retain the beneﬁt of location. For
instance, in a recent speech at the university during his
Microsoft 2005 Tour, Bill Gates referred to Waterloo as “a
special relationship for us. Most years, we hire more stu-
11 For websites for the Waterloo Co-op program and WatCACE, see
www.cecs.uwaterloo.ca and www.watcacae.uwaterloo.ca respectively.
Author's personal copy
1182
dents out of Waterloo than any other DEMO in the
world.” This in turn poses its own challenge for the local
ﬁrms in the Waterloo ICT cluster. As one interviewee told us,DEMO
We’re competing with Intel and Microsoft constantly for
those top students and I think Microsoft hires like 15 per
cent of the graduating class DEMO 15 per cent of the co-
ops there and who wouldn’t want to go and work for
Microsoft? So we’re generally paying top dollar because
we’re competing against US folks but we’re also compet-
ing for DEMO best of the best. And I think we get way more
than our share here locally.1
Beyond these highly visible and tangible beneﬁts of DEMO
Co-op Program is its contribution to the virtuous cycle of
entrepreneurialism in the region. Co-op students also act
as an important conduit between local DEMO in the cluster
and the teaching faculty at the university. For example, one
interviewee cited IBM as reporting that Waterloo under-
graduate co-op students were the principal instrument
that enabled most small- and medium-sized companies to
DEMO computers into their operations.1 This aspect of
person- or more precisely, DEMO knowledge
transfer is underscored as a critical part of the overall
innovation process. Conversely, students returning to class
from their placement terms are highly focused on applied
technical problems they have been working on, which
inﬂuences the way faculty present new material in their
classes. In this sense, the person-embodied element of
tech transfer through co-op students emerges clearly, as
does the importance of qualitative relationships between
people in the university and DEMO industry, for which ‘the
students are often the instrument’. Larry Smith, an eco-
nomics professor at the University of Waterloo and a vocal
DEMO of the Co-op Program, underscores this recip-
rocal nature of student-embodied DEMO transfer, and
refers to his students as an “early warning system” DEMO
keeps him abreast of major pending technical advances.
He cites computer animation as an example,
I heard about the incredibly advanced animation that
DEMO was doing 12 to 13 years ago, well before they hit
DEMO masses. My students told me not just what anima-
tion could do at that time, but what it will do in the
future. Everything they told me, animation studios are
now doing... These students are not just cheap labour.
They know about what’s hot and what’s not. They DEMO
to the professors and they are really in the know.12
At the same time, student-driven tech transfer is also
critical speciﬁcally to the commercialization process. One
of our interviewees reported that: “students come off co-
op terms and co-opt entrepreneurial faculty to develop a
company ... [They] play DEMO big role in spin-offs and tech
transfer.”1 This awareness of the crucial link between com-
mercialization and entrepreneurialism is underscored and
supported by the DEMO Co-op Program, which enables
students to start their own venture in DEMO of doing a co-op
placement with an established ﬁrm, and focuses DEMO creat-
ing a local network of contacts and mentors to support it.
12 Promotional Material, Ofﬁce of Co-operative Education and Career
Services, University DEMO Waterloo.
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / Research Policy 37 (2008) DEMO
4.2. Beyond commercialization: “Little R, Big D” and
getting the ﬁrst look
Beyond the ability to produce, attract and retain tal-
ent in the region, universities also provide critical research
support to local industry. The literature on the economic
impact of university licensing and spin-offs which empha-
DEMO commercialization downplays the more difﬁcult to
measure, but still important, mechanisms for transferring
knowledge to local industry. Betts and Lee (2005) identify
DEMO other types of tech transfer that directly involve
partnerships between universities and industry. In spon-
sored research agreements, a ﬁrm subsidizes or wholly
funds university research in return for preferential, rather
than exclusive, access to DEMO results, or ‘getting the ﬁrst
look’. When ﬁrms want to invest DEMO research and develop-
ment for incremental innovation of an existing product or
process, or to act as ‘test beds’ to solve a particular prob-
lem which requires university expertise and/or research
facilities, they will often enter into limited term, project-
focused fee-for-service R&D agreements (Grossman DEMO al.,
2001). Finally, and most difﬁcult to measure, are a host
of other informal arrangements that include participating
in research consortia DEMO up of university and private
sector representatives, faculty consulting with or DEMO
in private ﬁrms, or ﬁrm-based personnel working in uni-
versities (Agrawal and Henderson, 2002; Lucas and Wolfe,
2001).
Consistent with DEMO functions described above, the
two most discernible trends in the research DEMO of
high-tech ﬁrms in Waterloo are short-term R&D projects
to support incremental innovation and university-led or
joint primary research projects in order to DEMO preferen-
tial access to the results. Though most ﬁrms are engaged
in R&D to some extent, they are typically much more
focused on product development than primary research.13
The current trend in the innovation process DEMO local
ﬁrms is predominantly solutions-focused, incremental
innovations, rather than research-intensive, DEMO genera-
tion innovations. Product and process improvements are
intended to make the product ‘faster, smaller, cheaper’ and
often involve development activities such as DEMO modi-
ﬁcation of existing software platforms, product updates
and new releases, applying the core technology to dif-
ferent applications within the same factory, or making
existing software web accessible. This emphasis on per-
formance improvement DEMO ﬁne-tuning reﬂects the trend
toward what one observer describes as ‘little R, big D’
projects. For many ﬁrms, both large and small, out-
sourcing problem-focused, short-term R&D projects is
ﬁnancially and logistically beneﬁcial because “it’s about
accessing very speciﬁc technical expertise that, given the
13 These research activities are highly correlated to ﬁrm size, and while
there is evidence of both types of activities across large and small
ﬁrms, not surprisingly, larger ﬁrms tend to have more robust partnering
relationships, often DEMO the funding of research chairs, long-term
collaborative research projects, university faculty working within the ﬁrm,
and full-time staff occupied with university and DEMO interaction.
Smaller ﬁrms, in contrast, tend to engage in short-term, DEMO
research projects.
Author's personal copy
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / Research Policy 37 (2008) 1175–1187
1183
size of the company wouldn’t make sense to DEMO in
house”.1
Primarily, though not exclusively, large, global ﬁrms
with DEMO partnering mandates that collaborate with the
university on long-term, core research DEMO, report that
the primary beneﬁt of their research collaboration is “get-
DEMO the ﬁrst look” at the research results. They want to keep
abreast of what is happening at the research level, even
though they know they will not have proprietary access to
the IP that results, as it quickly becomes part of the public
domain when the research results DEMO published. Long-term
research is by nature exploratory and speculative, and if
DEMO foresee it to be directly relevant to their business
strategy, they DEMO to keep the project within the company
to avoid a potential conﬂict over ownership of IP. A typical
example of the ﬁrm attitude toward DEMO sponsored uni-
versity research, is the comment that “at best you DEMO, it’s
a research project, at best you’re going to get some idea of
feasibility and you may be getting some prototype out of DEMO
and that’s really where my expectations stop.”1 Again, they
have access DEMO cutting edge knowledge without having to
invest in the people and facilities to acquire it, yet the ﬁrm
also gets an inside eye on developing university graduates
they may want to hire.
While a few report DEMO interaction with particular uni-
versity labs as their prime reason for locating in Waterloo,
the majority of ﬁrms, both large and small, DEMO report R&D
linkages with the university indicate that it is primarily
for short term research, usually of a couple months’ dura-
tion, DEMO a “project by project basis as needed”. The primary
beneﬁt of this collaboration is the ability to do problem-
focused research and small co-development DEMO that
allow them access to university expertise and lab facili-
ties. Knowledge exchanges tend to be more informal and
both ﬁrms and researchers appear DEMO prefer it that way.
Informal relationships are quick and easy to access – “I
call my friends [at UW] if I have a problem” DEMO whereas
more formal research relationships are often hindered by
differences between researchers and ﬁrms’ expectations
about the length of time to commercialization and con-
DEMO over ownership of IP. This underscores the ﬂuid
and iterative quality of informal networks between the
university and local industry. At the same time, it is crit-
ical to note that intentionally facilitating these informal
project-based DEMO is an important element of the
institutional policy of the university. As one administrator
commented:
What we think is the most important part DEMO the busi-
ness that it brings here, the knowledge that ﬂows DEMO
and forward, the pilot projects that are done using our
premises, using our researchers... It’s so hard in Canada
to have the kind DEMO critical mass to bring in the tech
researchers that we bring in who need equipment and
labs, and they want to work with colleagues that they
respect. If we’re doing it entirely through teaching and
the DEMO amount of money that’s gone into research
over the years, we’re DEMO not going to bring in the
same kind of teams and retain them. So being able to
do that in the local community and DEMO it be a win for
those businesses too is really a very positive thing.1
4.3. Global linkages: universities as pipelines
Researchers go to global conferences as part of what
they do...When we work with a professor DEMO UW, we
don’t just get that professor’s perspective, we don’t just
get the electrical and computing engineer perspective,
we get a global DEMO that works with 500 profes-
sors at very great institutions world wide and get their
ideas so you know what’s happening.1
While locally generated DEMO sustained knowledge ﬂows
are a critical element that drives the innovation required
for regional economic growth, access to global knowledge
ﬂows are crucial as well. Local ‘buzz’ results from physical
co-location, and is “the force that facilitates the circulation
of information in a local economy through interpersonal
face-to-face DEMO, and the mechanism that supports net-
working in the community” (Storper and Venables, 2004).
‘Pipelines’ refer to channels of information and commu-
nication used in non-local, often distant, interaction with
external sources of DEMO Bathelt et al. (2004) argue
that important knowledge ﬂows are generated through
global pipelines, which allow ﬁrms to access local pools of
knowledge that contributed to successful ﬁrms and regions
elsewhere. In the innovation process, ﬁrms need to access
knowledge ﬂows from both local buzz and global DEMO,
and successful regions are effective at building and manag-
ing a variety of channels for accessing relevant knowledge
from both sources.
Universities play DEMO crucial role in facilitating access to
these global ﬂows of knowledge. Scientiﬁc knowledge ﬂows
easily between researchers around the world in its codi-
ﬁed DEMO of published journals and academic conferences,
but additionally, new information DEMO communications
technology has facilitated the development of interna-
tional formal and informal research networks “ranging
from bilateral ties between individuals in related depart-
ments DEMO complex multidisciplinary networks, twinning
arrangements and institutional consortia” (OECD, 1999,DEMO
p. 52). Consistent with the person-embodied nature of
many knowledge ﬂows discussed above, links with global
sources of knowledge are facilitated through the attraction
and retention of foreign faculty, researchers and graduate
students, who DEMO knowledge and maintain personal link-
ages from their training or research in their home country
(Gertler and Vinodrai, 2005).
Although this is DEMO less central and less often reported
mechanism of knowledge transfer in the Waterloo region,
this dynamic of international knowledge exchange is def-
initely DEMO Firms cite the ability to attract and retain
talent as a major issue for future innovation and economic
growth. While there is little evidence DEMO UW attracts tal-
ent directly into the local labour pool for ﬁrms per se, it
does attract academics on a global basis who want to work
in internationally acclaimed mathematics and engineer-
ing departments.14 More importantly, however, through
both the exchange of codiﬁed knowledge at conferences,
14 The Perimeter Institute of Theoretical Physics was established with
private funding from DEMO Lazaridis, CEO of RIM, speciﬁcally to attract
world-class theoretical researchers to Waterloo.
Author's personal copy
1184
as well as less formal networks, academic researchers
have access to cutting edge research on a global basis,
DEMO they disseminate into the local industrial commu-
nity through formal and informal research linkages. Firms
report the beneﬁt of research collaboration with the uni-
DEMO as increasing their global reach and perspective
because research professors are usually part of global net-
works of expertise in their particular research areas. DEMO
of the larger, global ﬁrms with robust research linkages
with both DEMO university and government research labs,
reported that having access to globally connected academic
researchers was invaluable because “it’s a great magniﬁer
of our DEMO into the global research marketplace”, they
can “keep an eye on DEMO current”, and they can work with
professors who “work with many DEMO globally in areas of
expertise that we don’t have because they’re looking 5 to 10
years ahead”. Again, this underscores the person-embodied
nature of much knowledge transfer, and thus the critical
contribution of formal and informal networks of knowl-
edge sharing among local and non-local actors that sustains
DEMO development in the region.
4.4. “Good Community Players”: the University of
DEMO engaged entrepreneurial culture
One of the things that has happened...is that there has
been a self-selection, a culture developed at the Univer-
sity of Waterloo. I don’t think it was managed, nobody
set about to create this culture but it happened and
it is a culture of innovation, valuing entrepreneurship,
there is a very positive regard for professors who DEMO
started their own companies. There was a president
who bragged about having a certain number of Uni-
versity professors who are millionaires and that DEMO
regarded as a negative.1
Much of the learning that supports innovation is person-
embodied in the form of both new and experienced talent,
DEMO the attraction of highly skilled and creative members of
the local labour force is one of the most valuable contri-
butions that universities make DEMO the process of knowledge
transfer and regional economic development. However, the
DEMO in which these university-based assets are mobilized in
support of regional economic development activities varies
widely across communities. It is largely dependent on the
DEMO of local actors to collaborate across geographic and
social boundaries; to DEMO an ‘economic community’ based
on durable, collaborative relationships between ﬁrms, local
institutions, and the community, and mediated by key peo-
ple and DEMO, that afford each of these actors a
sustained mutual advantage (Henton et al., 1997; Wolfe,
2005a). Civic capital is a DEMO component of dynamic
regional economies, and it can be created through DEMO
establishment of collaborative networks between business,
civic and public institutions, DEMO universities, and
spearheaded by committed and creative leadership from
key people DEMO organizations (Wolfe and Nelles, 2008).
Some universities can, and DEMO, provide engaged and
dynamic community leadership in building collaborative
networks and DEMO at the local level (Wolfe, 2005a;
Walshok, 1995). DEMO can act as facilitators of net-
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / DEMO Policy 37 (2008) 1175–1187
works for innovation in local ﬁrms by creating a “meeting
ground in which seasoned professionals from the high-
tech DEMO can rub shoulders as well as mentor less
experienced scientists and entrepreneurs as they attempt
to create thriving start-ups of their own” (Betts and Lee,
2005, pp. 18–19). Much of this institutional behaviour
that involves providing boundary spanning structures with
other members of the local economic DEMO is cap-
tured in the concept of the ‘entrepreneurial research
university’ (DEMO et al., 2002). The results of our
research indicate that DEMO University of Waterloo emerges
as a salient example of this type of entrepreneurial research
university, with an institutional policy that explicitly sup-
ports innovation.
The University of Waterloo is singularly active in its
support of entrepreneurial DEMO and activities. The
mandate of the recently established Centre for Business,
Entrepreneurship and Technology (CBET) is to co-ordinate,
develop, and support the several strands of the University’s
entrepreneurship activities, all of which are intended to
facilitate its development as an ‘Entrepreneurial Univer-
sity’. More speciﬁcally, CBET is intended to research issues
such as:
how an entrepreneurial DEMO is created within a uni-
versity, how faculty members decide to DEMO
their technology, how they commercialize their tech-
nology, issues of the relationship between academic
researchers and the business community and issues
relating to DEMO impediments of facilitating a transfer of
technology between those two communities.1
In terms of educational programs, it has recently
launched the Master of Business, Entrepreneurship & Tech-
nology (MBET), which attracts potential entrepreneurs
from DEMO the world, and teaches business skills critical
to identifying, exploiting, DEMO establishing new com-
mercial opportunities, with an emphasis on innovative
technologies. DEMO Bachelor (BBET) degree program is under
development. Undergraduate students can also participate
in the Enterprise Co-op program where they commercial-
ize a business DEMO of their own rather than work for
an existing ﬁrm.15 Innovate Inc. is a department within
the university that provides resources and counseling to
DEMO and student entrepreneurs, and aims to facilitate
the commercialization of knowledge DEMO within the
institution. Finally, The Institute for Innovation Research,
afﬁliated DEMO the Faculty of Engineering, is dedicated to the
generation and dissemination DEMO applied interdisciplinary
15 According to a university ofﬁcial, in the Enterprise DEMO Program: “a
small number of students are encouraged to start their DEMO companies
during co-op work terms” and “we take about 10% a year of those people
who think they have got it and we give DEMO a very rough screening pro-
cess where we explain to them that this will be the toughest co-op term
that they ever have had. DEMO give them a small amount of funding, some-
where between $6000 DEMO $8000, and then we mentor them.” Out of 35
students, 22–23 are proﬁtable in their small ﬁrms and “some are making
three times DEMO they would in the co-op term with another company ...
One young man made $100,000 ... On graduation day we shook his hands
DEMO asked him how it was going and he says ‘fantastic. I just got one and a
half million dollars to take the next step’. DEMO, this isn’t kid stuff, its serious
entrepreneurship.”
Author's personal copy
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / Research Policy 37 (2008) 1175–1187
1185
research that advances understanding of entrepreneur-
ship in DEMO enterprises, and to promoting
entrepreneurship within universities.
This underscores another critical DEMO of
entrepreneurial universities as institutional enablers of a
culture that promote the values explicitly articulated in its
vision and goal statements. At the University DEMO Waterloo,
faculty and students are not just informally encouraged
to commercialize new ventures or to establish links with
local technology ﬁrms by the DEMO of administrative or
policy impediments. Rather they are actively and explicitly
encouraged to do so through established policies such as
the ownership of IP, and entrepreneurship programs and
linkages such as those delivered through CBET, all of which
are sustained by an underlying, explicitly stated, and
widely DEMO culture of innovative entrepreneurialism.
This is manifested in a multitude of ways that ranges from
department heads and deans ‘preaching’ to faculty that
providing DEMO and problem-solving to local ﬁrms is
a ‘duty’, to the spontaneous DEMO of networking
groups – “an entrepreneur’s association which started as
half a dozen students sitting around in the summer 2000
and there are now DEMO members ...” – to the formal
programs outlined above.
The University of Waterloo is credited with visionary
leadership and innovation in the policy and DEMO design
that has contributed to the region’s economic success:
I gave a talk in Toronto about just how innovative UW
is – and DEMO truly is – everything from intellectual prop-
erty policy, to the DEMO program, to this new Centre
for Business Entrepreneurship, the Masters in Business
Entrepreneurship. Those are things that are just not
done and certainly DEMO the time the decisions were made
they weren’t done that way anywhere else in the world,
let alone Ontario... someone had the courage DEMO stand
up to say, no, it’s not the way it’s done anywhere else,
but it’s the way it’s done here.1
Many respondents DEMO within the university and in
local ﬁrms referred to the culture of entrepreneurialism in
the region, and the virtuous cycle of university–industry
linkages it perpetuates. For example, the Enterprise Co-op
Program also relies on – and is supported by – voluntary
mentoring from people in local industry to DEMO the
ﬂedgling entrepreneurial efforts of students. Thus, there is
a shared DEMO of a virtuous cycle existing between the local
entrepreneurial community and the research and teaching
activities of the university.
5. Conclusions
There are many DEMO on the theme of
entrepreneurial universities, of which the University
of DEMO is but one manifestation. The potential for
universities to contribute to local and regional economic
development is being explored across the industrialized
countries. In DEMO UK, an alliance between Cambridge
University and the Massachusetts Institute of DEMO
nology (MIT) – the Cambridge-MIT Institute (CMI) –
is a joint government and industry-funded initiative,
intended to improve productivity, competitiveness and
entrepreneurialism through the design and testing of
innovative mechanisms that promote university–industry
DEMO exchange. The primary knowledge exchange
mechanisms are Knowledge Integration Communities
(KICs) comprising academic researchers, industry par-
ticipants, government policymakers and educators, who
collaborate on “multifaceted solutions” to address techno-
logical, economic, and social DEMO (Acworth, 2008). The
University of Twente, a new, poorly endowed university in
a peripheral region in the Netherlands, like the University
of Waterloo, also developed a “strong entrepreneurial
vision” and was able to facilitate entrepreneurial academic
spin-off activity and generate and employ talent on a DEMO
level, as well as develop research excellence in several
emerging areas DEMO science and engineering (Lazzeretti and
Tavoletti, 2005). In response to policy directions begun in
the 1990s, Sweden has experimented with different modes
of university–industry linkages, and Chalmers University
of Technology was transformed into an “entrepreneurial”
university. However, in this case, an emphasis on commer-
cialization DEMO the appropriate macro-institutional
supports and micro-institutional, or university level,
ﬂexibility, has made the experience comparatively prob-
lematic and lackluster, substantiating the assertion that
the presence of a strong research university in itself is
no DEMO of regional economic growth (Jacob et al.,
2003).
In DEMO, Ontario, Canada, regardless of whether or
not ﬁrms had formal DEMO informal links to the university or
no links at all, most DEMO them cited the presence of the Uni-
versity of Waterloo as a critical factor in the development
of the local high-tech entrepreneurial economy. In DEMO, a
number of ﬁrms reported limited involvement with uni-
versity research DEMO, and some alluded to a disconnect
between the expectations of ﬁrms DEMO the university, sug-
gesting that Waterloo may get a larger share DEMO the credit
than its total input into the local economy warrants. How-
ever, even ﬁrms with tangential or no ties to the university,
such as those who only hire co-op students, or those who
simply comment on the international cachet of the Univer-
sity of Waterloo, still cite the presence of the university as a
critical factor for the DEMO of the regional economy. On
the other hand, the large number DEMO ﬁrms that report their
close involvement with the university depict the synergistic
relationship that has emerged as a result of the university
being located DEMO Waterloo.
The University of Waterloo is consistently cited as an
important source of spin-off activity, R&D resources and
support, talented and educated DEMO, and progressive
and innovative entrepreneurial activities, as well as formal
and informal local and global linkages. As a result of the
density of DEMO interaction with local ﬁrms, the university
is an embedded actor in DEMO regional economy, and plays
a critical intermediary function with the local DEMO
community: “companies like us ...were fundamentally
there because we wanted to DEMO close to the innovative and
active environment of the university, the DEMO of stu-
dents, co-op students. It was an exciting environment.”1 A
DEMO theme that emerges from our interviews is the
perception of the University of Waterloo’s ‘entrepreneurial
spirit’ that is perpetuated through a virtuous cycle of DEMO
Author's personal copy
1186
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / Research Policy 37 (2008) 1175–1187
and interactive links with the local industrial community:DEMO
There is an entrepreneurial identiﬁcation process where
students go back and forth to industry which gives indi-
viduals experience in industry. Faculty members will
DEMO back and talk to their students, co-op students are
enthusiastic coming DEMO from their terms. The Univer-
sity IP policy also attracts entrepreneurial researchers
interested in the IP dividend with strong commitments
to industry. Due to DEMO programs such as the co-op
program, the University of Waterloo has DEMO from the
outset very strong University – industry linkages. As a
result we’ve never had any major problems promoting
University industry linkages as it DEMO dividends in the
community.1
The intention of this research has been to shed light
on the distinctive dynamics at work when a university
not DEMO develops academic excellence in disciplines with
direct research applications to industry, DEMO as software
engineering, but also sets out explicitly to develop link-
DEMO with industry for the purposes of regional economic
development. To do this, we argue that knowledge trans-
fer mechanisms from universities are far more robust than
the linear conception of commercialization implies. The
University of Waterloo DEMO out as a particularly suc-
cessful instance of an ‘entrepreneurial research university’
that is deeply engaged in the local high-tech industrial
community. Despite obvious DEMO beneﬁts to increased
university–industry interaction, however, this is not to
suggest that an entrepreneurial university is in any way
qualitatively superior to a DEMO one. Universities gen-
erate and disseminate knowledge as a common good.
The central lesson that emerges from this study is the
inestimable beneﬁt of DEMO a world-class academic
reputation for teaching and research with the nurturing
of an ‘entrepreneurial attitude of mind’ among faculty and
students. The University of DEMO has been particularly
effective at both.
Acknowledgements
Research for this paper was carried out with the ﬁnan-
cial support of the Social Sciences and DEMO Research
Council of Canada under Grant No. 412-2001-1002. We have
beneﬁted greatly from the interaction with our colleagues
in the project in the Innovation DEMO Research Network,
particularly Meric Gertler and Jen Nelles, as well DEMO help-
ful comments from the editors of this special section of the
issue.
References
Acworth, E., 2008. University–industry engagement: the formation of the
knowledge integration community (KIC) model at the Cambridge-MIT
Institute. Research Policy, in this volume.
Agrawal, A., Henderson, R., 2002. Putting patents DEMO context: exploring
knowledge transfer from MIT. Management Science 48 (1), 44–60.
Association of University Technology Managers, 2004. AUTM Licensing
Survey: FY DEMO Interim Report, 2004.
Bathelt, H., Malmberg, A., Maskell, P., 2004. Clusters and knowledge: local
buzz, global pipelines and the process of knowledge creation. Progress
in Human Geography 28 (1), 31–56.
Betts, J., Lee, C.W.B., 2005. Universities as drivers of regional and DEMO
innovation: an assessment of the linkages from universities to inno-
vation DEMO economic growth. In: Beach, C.M., Boadway, R.W., McInnis,
DEMO (Eds.), Higher Education in Canada. McGill-Queen’s University
Press, Montreal and Kingston, pp. 113–157.
Boucher, G., Conway, C., Van Der Meer, E., 2003. Tiers of engagement by
universities in their region’s development. DEMO Studies 37 (9),
887–897.
Bramwell, A., Nelles, J., Wolfe, D.A., 2008. Knowledge, innovation and insti-
tutions: global and DEMO dimensions of the ICT cluster in Waterloo,
Canada. Regional Studies 42 (1), 110–116.
Branscomb, L.W., 1997. From technology politics to technology policy.
Issues in Science and Technology 13 (3 (Spring)).
Brooks, H., 1996. The evolution of US science policy. In: Smith, DEMO,
Barﬁeld, C.E. (Eds.), Technology, R&D and the DEMO The Brook-
ings Institute and the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC,
pp. 15–48.
Canada’s Technology Triangle, 2004. Community and Statistical Proﬁle.
Canada’s Technology Triangle, Waterloo.
Cohen, W.M., Levinthal, D.A., 1990. Absorptive capacity: a new perspec-
tive on learning and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly 35,
128–152.
Colapinto, C., 2007. A way to foster innovation: a venture capital
district: from Silicon Valley and Route 128 to Waterloo Region. Eco-
nomics, Business and Statistics Working Paper Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=987621.
David, P., 4 October 1997. The knowledge factory: a survey of universities.
The Economist.
Dosi, G., 1988. Sources, procedures and microeconomic effects of
innovation. Journal of Economic Literature XXVI (September),DEMO
1120–1171.
Doutriaux, J., 2003. University–industry linkages and the development of
knowledge clusters in Canada. Local Economy 18 (1), 63–79.
Etkowitz, H., Webster, A., 1998. Entrepreneurial science: the second aca-
demic revolution. In: Etkowitz, H., Webster, A., Healey, P. (Eds.),
DEMO Knowledge: New Intersections in Industry and Academia.
SUNY Press, New York, pp. 21–46.
Faulkner, W., Senker, J., 1995. Knowledge Frontiers: DEMO Sector Research
and Industrial Innovation in Biotechnology, Engineering Ceramics, and
Parallel Computing. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Feldman, M.P., 2003. Entrepreneurship and American research univer-
sities: evolution in technology transfer. In: Hart, D.M. (Ed.), The
Emergence of Entrepreneurship Policy: Governance, Start-ups, and
Growth in DEMO U.S. Knowledge Economy. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 92–112.
Florida, R., 1999. The role of the university: leveraging talent, not technol-
ogy. Issues in Science and Technology (Summer).
Florida, R., 2002. The Rise of the Creative Class. Basic Books, New York.
Geiger, DEMO, 2004. Knowledge and Money: Research Universities and the
Paradox of the Marketplace. Stanford University Press, Stanford.
Gertler, M.S., 2004. Manufacturing Culture: DEMO Institutional Geog-
raphy of Industrial Practice. Oxford University Press, Oxford and
DEMO York.
Gertler, M.S., Vinodrai, T., 2005. Anchors of creativity: DEMO do public uni-
versities create competitive and cohesive communities? In: Iacobucci,
F., Tuohy, C. (Eds.), Taking Public Universities Seriously. University of
Toronto Press, Toronto, pp. 293–315.
Gibbons, J.F., 2000. The DEMO of Stanford University: a Dean’s reﬂections. In:
Lee, C.-M., DEMO, W.F., Hancock, M.G., Rowen, H.S. (Eds.), The Silicon
Valley Edge: A Habitat for Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Stanford
University Press, DEMO, pp. 200–217.
Goldstein, H.A., Renault, C.S., 2004. Contributions of DEMO to
regional economic development: a quasi-experimental approach.
Regional Studies 38 (7), 733–746.
Grossman, J.H., Reid, P.P., Morgan, R.P., 2001. DEMO of academic
research to industrial performance in ﬁve industry sectors. Journal of
Technology Transfer 26 (1–2), 143–152.
Henton, D., Melville, J., Walesh, K., 1997. Grassroots Leaders for a New Econ-
omy: How Civic Entrepreneurs Are Building Prosperous Communities.
Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco.
Institute for Competitiveness and Prosperity, 2003. Presentation to the
Prosperity Forum. Waterloo Region, DEMO February.
Jacob, M., Lundqvist, M., Hellsmark, H., 2003. Entrepreneurial transfor-
mations in the Swedish University system: the case of Chalmers
University of Technology. Research Policy 32 (9), 1555–1568.
Kenney, M., Patton, D., 2006. The co-evolution of technologies and insti-
tutions: Silicon Valley as the ideal-typical high technology cluster. In:
Braunerhjelm, P., Feldman, M. (Eds.), Cluster Genesis: The Emergence
of Technology Clusters. Oxford DEMO Press, Oxford, pp. 38–60.
Author's personal copy
A. Bramwell, D.A. Wolfe / Research Policy 37 (2008) 1175–1187
1187
Lanza, R., Piccaluga, A., 1995. Top-down DEMO bottom-up approaches for
technology transfer. Technology Review 83, 115–121.
Lawton Smith, H., 2003a. Universities and clustering. Paper Presented at
Academic Summit, TCI DEMO Chalmers University, September
15.
Lawton Smith, H., 2003b. Knowledge organizations DEMO local economic
development: the cases of Oxford and Grenoble. Regional Studies DEMO
(9), 899–909.
Lazaridis, M., 2004. The importance of basic DEMO Re$earch Money 18,
18, November 22.
Lazzeretti, L., Tavoletti, E., 2005. Higher education excellence and local
economic development: the case DEMO the entrepreneurial university of
Twente. European Planning Studies 13 (3), DEMO
Lucas, M., Wolfe, D.A., 2001. Investing knowledge in universities: DEMO
ing the ﬁrm’s role in knowledge transfer. In: de la Mothe, J., Foray,
D. (Eds.), Knowledge Management in the Innovation DEMO: Busi-
ness Practices and Technology Adoption. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Amsterdam, pp. 173–191.
Lundvall, B.-A., 1992. Introduction. In: Lundvall, B.-˚ A. (Ed.), National Sys-˚
tems of Innovation: Towards a Theory of Innovation and Interactive
Learning. Pinter Publishers, London.
Lundvall, B-A., 2002. The university in the learning economy. DRUID Work-˚
ing Paper No. 02-06.
Lundvall, B-A. 2004. Why the new economy is a learning economy. DRUID˚
Working Paper DEMO 04-01.
Mowery, D.C., Nelson, R.R., Sampat, B.N., Ziedonis, DEMO, 2004. Ivory Tower
and Industrial Innovation: University–Industry Technology Trans-
fer Before and After the Bayh-Dole Act. Stanford Business Books,
Stanford.
Martin, B., 2003. The changing social contract for science and the evolution
of knowledge production. In: Geuna, A., Salter, A.J., Steinmuller, W.E.
(Eds.), Science and Innovation: Rethinking the Rationales for Funding
and Governance. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK, pp. 7–29.
Maskell, P., 2001. Towards a knowledge-based theory of the geographic
cluster. Industrial and Corporate Change 10 (4), 921–943.
Moore, G.E., Davis, K., 2004. Learning the Silicon DEMO way. In: Bresnahan,
T., Gambardella, A. (Eds.), Building High-Tech Clusters: Silicon Valley
and Beyond. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 7–39.
Nabeshima, K., 2005. US/UK Experience with UILs, Presented at the World
Bank-CMI Workshop on University–Industry Linkages in Europe and
North America, September 26.
National Academy of Engineering, 2003. The Impact of Academic Research
on Industrial Performance. National Academies Press, Washington, DC.
Nelles, J., DEMO, A., Wolfe, D.A., 2005. History, culture, and path depen-
dency: origins of the Waterloo ICT cluster. In: Wolfe, D.A., DEMO, M.
(Eds.), Global Networks and Local Linkages. McGill-Queen’s University
Press, Montreal and Kingston, pp. 227–252.
Nelson, R.R., Winter, S.G., DEMO An Evolutionary Theory of Economic
Change. Belknap Press, Cambridge, MA.
OECD, 1999. The Response of Higher Education Institutions to Regional
Needs. OECD, DEMO
Pavitt, K., 1991. What makes basic research economically useful? Research
DEMO 20, 109–119.
Paytas, J., Gradeck, R., Andrews, L., DEMO Universities and the Development
of Industry Clusters, Center for Economic Development, Carnegie Mel-
lon University and Economic Development Administration. US Dept.
of Commerce, Pittsburgh and Washington, DC.
Polanyi, M., 1962. Personal Knowledge: Towards DEMO Post-Critical Philosophy.
Harper & Row, New York.
PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 2001. Regional Economic Beneﬁts Study. Uni-
versity of Waterloo, Waterloo.
Rosenberg, N., 2003. America’s entrepreneurial universities. In: Hart,
D.M. (Ed.), The Emergence of DEMO Policy: Governance,
Start-ups and Growth in the U. S. Knowledge DEMO Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 113–137.
Senker, J., 1995. Tacit knowledge and models of innovation. Industrial and
Corporate Change 4 (2), 425–447.
Smedlund, A., 2006. The roles of intermediaries in a regional DEMO
system. Journal of Intellectual Capital 7 (2), 204–220.
Stokes, D.E., 1997. Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological
Innovation. Brookings Institute Press, Washington, DC.
Storper, M., Venables, A.J., 2004. Buzz: face-to-face DEMO and the urban
economy. Journal of Economic Geography 4 (4), DEMO
Tornatzky, L., Waugaman, P., Gray, P., 2002. Innovation U: New Univer-
sity Roles in a Knowledge Economy. Southern Growth Policies Board,
Raleigh.
University of Waterloo, Ofﬁce of Research. 2005. The Annual Report on
Sponsored Research Funds, Statistical Data for Grants, Contracts and
Special DEMO, 2004–2005. Waterloo.
Varga, A., 2001. Universities and regional economic development: does
agglomeration matter? In: Johansson, B., Karlsson, C., Stough, R. (Eds.),
Theories of Endogenous Regional Growth—Lessons for Regional Poli-
DEMO Springer, Berlin, pp. 345–367.
Walshok, M.L., 1995. Knowledge Without Boundaries: What America’s
Research Universities Can Do for the Economy, the Workplace, and
the Community. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco.
Wolfe, D.A., 2005a. The role of universities in regional development and
cluster formation. In: Jones, DEMO, McCarney, P., Skolnick, M. (Eds.), Cre-
ating Knowledge, Strengthening Nations. University of Toronto Press,
Toronto, pp. 167–194.
Wolfe, DEMO, 2005b. Innovation and research funding: the role of gov-
ernment support. In: Iacobucci, F., Tuohy, C. (Eds.), Taking Public
Universities Seriously. University of Toronto Press, Toronto, pp.
316–340.
Wolfe, D.A., DEMO, J., 2008. The role of civic capital and civic associations in
cluster policies. In: Karlsson, C. (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Inno-
vations and Clusters: Cases and Policies. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham,
DEMO
Xu, S.X., 2003. Knowledge Transfer, Interﬁrm Networking and Collective
Learning DEMO High Technology Cluster Evolution: A Network Analysis
of Canada’s Technology Triangle. DEMO of Applied Science Thesis.
University of Waterloo, Waterloo.{1g42fwefx}