This article was downloaded by: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network]
On: 15 DEMO 2008
Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 789349990]
Publisher Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: DEMO House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Regional Studies
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713393953
Knowledge, Innovation and Institutions: Global and Local Dimensions DEMO the
ICT Cluster in Waterloo, Canada
Allison Bramwell a; Jen Nelles a; David A. Wolfe a
a Programme on Globalization and Regional Innovation Systems, Munk Centre for International Studies,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Online Publication Date: 01 February 2008
To cite this DEMO Bramwell, Allison, Nelles, Jen and Wolfe, David A.(2008)'DEMO, Innovation and Institutions: Global and Local
Dimensions of the ICT Cluster in Waterloo, Canada',Regional Studies,42:1,101 — 116
To DEMO to this Article: DOI: 10.1080/00343400701543231
URL: http://dx.doi.org/DEMO/00343400701543231
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article may be used for research, DEMO and private study purposes. Any substantial or
systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or
distribution in any form to DEMO is expressly forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or DEMO or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and DEMO doses
should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss,
actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly
or indirectly in DEMO with or arising out of the use of this material.
Regional Studies, Vol. 42.1, pp. 101 –116, February 2008
Knowledge, DEMO and Institutions: Global
and Local Dimensions of the ICT Cluster in
DEMO, Canada
ALLISON BRAMWELL, JEN NELLES and DAVID A. WOLFE
Programme on Globalization and Regional Innovation Systems, Munk Centre for International Studies, University DEMO Toronto,
1 Devonshire Place, Toronto, ON M5S 3K7, Canada. DEMO: abramwell@lincsat.com, jen.nelles@utoronto.ca and
david.wolfe@utoronto.ca
(Received May 2006: in revised form February 2007)
BRAMWELL A., NELLES J. and WOLFE D. A. Knowledge, innovation and institutions: global and local dimensions of the ICT
cluster DEMO Waterloo, Canada, Regional Studies. This paper presents research ﬁndings on the information and communication tech-
nology (ICT) cluster in Waterloo, Ontario. Cluster dynamics in Canada do not conform to some of the key assumptions DEMO the
literature on clusters that emphasize the importance of local intra-cluster dynamics based on inter-ﬁrm linkages at the local level.
The results of this DEMO study indicate that many inter-ﬁrm linkages in the Waterloo ICT cluster are non-local, and that extra-ﬁrm
institutional supports, such as the local university DEMO industry association, are critical in sustaining and strengthening the cluster.
Knowledge-based DEMO theories that emphasize the role of local and global knowledge ﬂows and learning processes, and the
interaction effect of civic capital and local institutions in supporting the development of a local ‘learning economy’, provide
more compelling explanations for the resilience of the ICT cluster in Waterloo, Ontario.
Cluster dynamics Information and communications technology Competitiveness Learning economy Regional econ-
omic development
DEMO A., NELLES J. et WOLFE D. A. La connaissance, l’innovation, DEMO les institutions: les dimensions mondiales et locales de la
grappe TIC DEMO
technologie de l’information et de la communication (TIC) a`
conforme pas a` quelques-unes des suppositions cle´ de la documentation sur les grappes qui DEMO l’accent sur l’importance de la dyna-
sultats de cette e´
Waterloo ne sont pas locaux et que le soutien institutionnel externe, tel l’uni-
re indispensable pour maintenir et consolider la grappe. Les the´ ories de grappes DEMO
beaucoup des rapports interentreprises de la grappe TIC a`
versite´ locale et les relations industrielles, s’ave`
sur la notion de connaissance et soulignant le roˆ le des ﬂux de connaissance locale et mondiale et des processus DEMO, et l’impact
veloppement d’une ‘e´ conomie d’apprentis-
sage’ locale, fournissent des explications indiscutables de la faculte´
Waterloo, dans l’Ontario.
Waterloo, au Canada, Regional Studies
mique locale des grappes fonde´
pre´
Waterloo, dans l’Ontario. Au Canada, la dynamique de grappes ne se
. Cet article cherche a`
de l’interaction du capital municipal et des institutions locales dans le but DEMO soutenir le de´
e sur les rapports interentreprises d’envergure locale. Les re´
de reprise de la grappe TIC a`
senter les re´
sultats des DEMO effectue´
es sur la grappe de
tude de cas indiquent que
sage Ame´
nagement du territoire
Dynamique de grappes Technologie de l’information et de DEMO communication Compe´
titivite´
Economie d’apprentis-
BRAMWELL A., NELLES J. und WOLFE DEMO A. Wissen, Innovation und Institutionen: globale und lokale Dimensionen des Clusters
fu¨ r Informations- und Kommunikationstechnologie in Waterloo (Kanada), Regional Studies. In diesem Beitrag werden die Ergeb-
nisse der Forschung u¨ ber den Cluster DEMO r Informations- und Kommunikationstechnologie in Waterloo (Ontario, Kanada) vorges-
tellt. DEMO Dynamik der Cluster in Kanada entspricht nicht einigen der zentralen Annahmen in der Literatur u¨ ber Cluster, in denen
die Bedeutung lokaler, clusterinterner DEMO auf der Grundlage von Verknu¨ pfungen zwischen den Firmen auf lokaler Ebene
betont wird. Die Ergebnisse dieser Fallstudie weisen darauf hin, dass viele Verknu¨ pfungen zwischen den Firmen im Cluster fu¨r
0034-3404 print/1360-0591 online/08/DEMO # 2008 Regional Studies Association DOI: 10.1080/00343400701543231
http://www.regional-studies-assoc.ac.uk
DEMO By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
102 Allison Bramwell et al.
Informations- und Kommunikationstechnologie von Waterloo nicht lokaler DEMO sind und dass eine institutionelle Unterstu¨ t-
zung außerhalb der Firmen (DEMO Beispiel durch den lokalen Universita¨ ts- und Industrieverband) eine wichtige Rolle DEMO
Erhalt und der Sta¨ rkung des Clusters spielen. Wissensbasierte Clustertheorien, in DEMO die Rolle der lokalen und globalen Wis-
sensstro¨ me und Lernprozesse betont wird, und der Wechselwirkungseffekt des Bu¨ rgerkapitals und der lokalen Institutionen zur
Unterstu¨ tzung der Entwicklung einer lokalen, Lernwirtschaft’ bieten u¨ berzeugendere Erkla¨ rungen fu¨ r die Besta¨ ndigkeit des Clus-
ters fu¨ r Informations- und DEMO in Waterloo.
Clusterdynamik Informations- und Kommunikationstechnologie Konkurrenzfa¨ higkeit Lernwirtschaft Regionale
Wirtschaftsentwicklung
BRAMWELL A., NELLES J. y WOLFE D. A. Conocimiento, innovacio´ n e DEMO: dimensiones globales y locales de la aglomera-
cio´ n de TIC DEMO Waterloo, Canada´, Regional Studies. En este artı´culo presentamos los resultados sobre la aglomeracio´ n de las tecnologı´as
de la informacio´ n y la DEMO n (TIC) en Waterloo, Ontario. Las dina´ micas de aglomeracio´ DEMO no cumplen con algunos
supuestos ba´ sicos en la literatura sobre aglomeraciones que recalcan la importancia de dina´ micas intracumulares basados en los vı´nculos
DEMO empresas a nivel local. Los resultados de este caso pra´ ctico indican que muchas vı´nculos entre empresas en la aglomeracio´ ndelas
TIC en Waterloo DEMO son locales y que estos apoyos institucionales de otras empresas, tales DEMO la asociacio´ n local entre la universidad
y la industria, son DEMO vital importancia para sostener y reforzar la aglomeracio´ n. Las teorı´as de aglomeracio´ n basadas en el conocimiento
que destacan el papel del ﬂujo DEMO conocimiento local y global y los procesos de aprendizaje, y el DEMO de interaccio´ nde la capital
cı´vica y las instituciones locales en apoyar el desarrollo de una ‘economı´a de aprendizaje’ local ofrecen explicaciones ma´ s DEMO
para la capacidad de recuperacio´ nde la aglomeracio´ ndelas TICenWaterloo, Ontario.
DEMO micas de aglomeracio´ n Tecnologı´a de la informacio´ n y la comunicacio´ n Competitividad Economı´a de aprendi-
zaje Desarrollo econo´ mico regional
JEL classiﬁcations: O18, O32, R11, R58
INTRODUCTION
The emergence of a globalizing, DEMO
economy has accentuated the challenges facing both
ﬁrm managers and government policy-makers,
especially at the local level. Concern with both emer-
ging sources DEMO global competition and the necessity
of continuous innovation has focused their attention
on the available strategies to respond to these challenges.
This in turn DEMO led to a growing fascination with indus-
trial clusters due to the perceived relation between clus-
tering and enhanced competitiveness and innovative
performance (PORTER et al., 2001). A substantial scho-
larly, business, and policy literature exists on clusters and
it is growing rapidly. The basic drivers DEMO clustering,
localization and urbanization economies are known,
although signiﬁcant controversy about the nature of
externalities occurs among approaches to the subject.
In DEMO, the literature distinguishes between two
key drivers that contribute to clustering: agglomeration
economies and privileged access to knowledge ﬂows,
but various authors DEMO differing degrees of signiﬁ-
cance to their relative importance.
Another key issue involves the role of local factors
versus the global dimension of cluster DEMO
Clusters are primarily viewed as local phenomena,
and hence the focus of local economic development
agencies. Ultimately, competition occurs between and
among clusters in competing industries, often interna-
tionally. But there are relatively few examples of inter-
national, industry-wide comparisons of competing
clusters and practically no knowledge of the international
dynamics of cluster rivalry. By the same token, much
more is known about the internal linkages of clusters
than about their DEMO linkages, which are usually
market-related. However, there is increasing evidence
that external linkages, especially in smaller, open econ-
omies, drive the internal dynamics of clusters. Some of
themostrecentstudies pointtothe increasing specializ-
ation of clusters DEMO the global economy, as individual
clusters in photonics, for instance, DEMO come to special-
ize in particular technology and sectoral niches.
The case of the information and communication
technology (ICT) cluster in Waterloo, Ontario, is
instructive for developing a better appreciation of the
implications of these factors for the process of cluster
formation. The industrial cluster in the DEMO –
Waterloo– Cambridge (Waterloo) region, located an
hour west of DEMO, is one of the most dynamic
sources of high-tech activity in DEMO Geographically,
Canada’s Technology Triangle (as the region is also
known) encompasses the four municipalities of Waterloo,
Cambridge, Kitchener and Guelph. Overall, the region
boasts 455 companies involved in the high-technology
sector. The companies are spread across four sub-
sectors: information and communication technology,
scientiﬁc and engineering services, advanced manufac-
turing, and the life sciences, biotech and environmental
sub-sector. Of these, information and communications
technology accounts for 62% of the high-tech ﬁrms
and employs 13 000 people or 45% of DEMO total in the
high-tech sector (COMMUNITECH TECHNOLOGY
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
Global and Local Dimensions of the ICT Cluster in Waterloo, Canada
103
ASSOCIATION, 2005). Unlike other concentrations of
high-tech activity in Canada, DEMO economy of the Water-
loo region is not dominated by one particular sector, such
as telecommunications or Internet-based ﬁrms. This
diversity has enabled the regional economy to weather
economic shocks – such as the post-2000 dot-com DEMO
down – that devastated employment in other leading
ICT clusters across the country.
Since its early days as a bustling manufacturing
centre, the Waterloo region has been an important
point on the Southern Ontario industrial landscape. DEMO
has been home to major nationally and internationally
successful corporations for more than a century, from
Dominion Electrohome Ltd to present day success,
Research in Motion. This paper presents the ﬁndings
of recent empirical research DEMO the ICT cluster in the
Waterloo region, and examines the role DEMO various
factors have played in its growth and dynamism.1
Tracing patterns of strategic and locational decision-
making, unpacking the constellation of relationships
among actors in the region and characterizing the
nature of the regional culture in DEMO Waterloo area,
yields a wealth of information about the knowledge
ﬂows that underpin the process of cluster formation
and development. While recent studies DEMO the inno-
vation process emphasize that it is grounded in the
regional or local level in dense networks of geographi-
cally proximate ﬁrms engaged DEMO related types of
activity, including both regional systems of innovation
and DEMO more localized industry clusters, the results of
this study indicate that DEMO linkages and knowl-
edge ﬂows emerge as more powerful explanatory vari-
ables for cluster dynamics than some of the literature
would suggest.
To explore DEMO relationships between ﬁrms and
among ﬁrms and local institutions in Waterloo, DEMO
the inﬂuences affecting their growth and performance,
the paper employs a broad analytical framework that
combines aspects of the cluster, innovation systems
and social learning literatures. The authors gathered
qualitative data on ﬁve sets of DEMO: ﬁrm research
strategies and innovation processes; networks of
relationships between producers, suppliers, and custo-
mers; locational advantages; the role of supporting DEMO
tutions, both local universities and government research
institutes; and the nature of associational activity and
other manifestations of civic capital in the cluster. DEMO
case study of the Waterloo ICT cluster was part of a
broader national study of 26 industrial clusters across
Canada that used a common DEMO framework to
evaluate the relative importance of and interdependence
between these ﬁve sets of factors in the development of
the individual clusters through empirical DEMO col-
lected from interview data.
Studies of cluster formation, structure and DEMO
are characterized by the lack of a universally accepted
methodological approach (DEMO and GERTLER,
2004; ASHEIM et al., 2006). A qualitative case study
method, using semi-structured interviews as the
primary method of data collection, was chosen for
this study because it is best suited to the task of capturing
the diversity of regionally-based innovation dynamics
and the DEMO and relationships of the major actors
involved. Based on the view that learning and inno-
vation are inherently social processes, the research objec-
tive was to capture the non-linear, iterative, and
interactive nature of cluster DEMO Previous studies
of industrial clusters, such as the analyses of Silicon
DEMO and Route 128, conﬁrm that in-depth interviews
provide a fruitful method DEMO gathering this type of
insight into cluster dynamics (SAXENIAN, 1994). This
paper presents ﬁndings from 93 in-depth interviews
carried out during 2003 DEMO 2004, using a consistent
interview protocol. The interviews were conducted
with DEMO broad range of stakeholders, including senior
representatives of large or ‘lead’ DEMO, mid-sized and
smaller ﬁrms, the local university and community
college, DEMO venture capitalists, municipal and provin-
cial governments, and representatives of civic associ-
ations were interviewed, but the paper focuses
primarily on ﬁrm level responses over those of other
actors. The interview data has been supplemented
DEMO survey data collected by the local high-tech indus-
try association (COMMUNITECH DEMO
ASSOCIATION, 2005).
KNOWLEDGE AND SPILLOVERS IN
CLUSTER FORMATION
Within the DEMO on clusters, two perspectives
account for the dynamic nature of clusters DEMO the
economic beneﬁts they confer. The ﬁrst approach,
dating back to the work of the Cambridge University
economist Alfred Marshall (1842– 1924), views clusters
as the product of traditional agglomeration economies,
where ﬁrms DEMO in the cluster beneﬁt from the
easier access to, and reduced DEMO of, certain collective
resources such as a specialized inputs, infrastructure, DEMO
access to a local labour market for specialized skills.
This perspective is highlighted in the work of Michael
Porter, who emphasizes the beneﬁts attributed to tra-
ditional agglomeration economies by setting out the
competitive advantages derived DEMO the microeco-
nomic effects of the four elements that comprise his
‘diamond’. The four elements of the microeconomic
foundations of regional competitiveness include:
DEMO input conditions, demand conditions, the
context for ﬁrm strategy and rivalry, and ﬁnally, the pre-
sence of related and supporting industries that DEMO
locally based suppliers and ﬁrms in related industries
(PORTER et al., 2001). While Porter has been criticized
for presenting both an industrial DEMO spatial conception
of clusters, in the latter versions of his work, the inten-
sity of interaction among the four elements of the
diamond DEMO increased if the ﬁrms involved are located
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research DEMO Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
104
Allison Bramwell et al.
close to each other. However, recent critiques have
raised the objection that in smaller, more open economies
the tendency for the intense pattern of local interaction
Porter describes is greatly diminished. DEMO co-located
ﬁrms may draw upon knowledge sources and suppliers
from outside of the cluster and often they specialize in
different niches of the market (WOLFE et al., 2005).
This raises the critical question of what exactly draws
the clustered ﬁrms to a particular location and holds
them DEMO A further question arises as to exactly how
local knowledge ﬂows occur within the local cluster
and what is the relative importance of inter-ﬁrm DEMO
and the linkages between ﬁrms and other supporting
institutions in the cluster (ASHEIM et al., 2006).
A growing number of analysts have DEMO to address
these lacunae in the argument, in part by focusing
DEMO directly on the nature of knowledge ﬂows
within and between clusters (DEMO et al., 2004;
HENDRY et al., 2000). This knowledge-based approach
emphasizes the role of knowledge ﬂows and learning
processes in sustaining DEMO, and suggests that the
underlying dimension that confers competitive advan-
tage DEMO the ﬁrms in the cluster is shared access to a dis-
tinctive knowledge base (MASKELL, 2001; FELDMAN,
2000). In this respect, individual clusters draw upon
the broader knowledge assets found in the local or
regional innovation system, which are deﬁned as the
institutional infrastructure supporting innovation
within the production structure of a region (ASHEIM
and GERTLER , 2006). These regional innovation
systems are characterized by broad knowledge-
network DEMO across a range of industrial
sectors. The diversity of the local or regional knowl-
edge base contributes to the greater potential range
of knowledge DEMO that ﬁrms can draw upon in the
innovation process (COOKE, 2005).
Firms in the Waterloo ICT cluster clearly beneﬁt
from the rich DEMO legacy of the region’s manufac-
turing tradition and many of the local ﬁrms specialize in
niches that integrate elements of software or infor-
mation DEMO with advanced manufacturing.
The knowledge-based approach to clusters also empha-
sizes that knowledge ﬂows in clusters are not necessarily
restricted to the local level. DEMO the robustness of
knowledge-sharing networks, or ‘buzz’, contributes to
the vibrancy of clusters on a local level, dynamic clusters
usually also develop strong connections to other clusters
through the international sharing of knowledge, or
‘global pipelines’ (BATHELT et al., 2004; GERTLER and
WOLFE , 2006). The issue of knowledge ﬂows, particu-
larly the tacit dimension of knowledge, and the relative
degree to which clusters draw upon local versus global
sources of knowledge emerges as a key theme in a
growing number DEMO case studies, including that of the
Waterloo ICT cluster.
A second DEMO that emerges is the centrality of
skilled labour as the single most important local asset.
This endowment is created and maintained by the
attraction DEMO retention of highly educated, potentially
mobile workers who are drawn to DEMO and deep
opportunity-rich local labour markets. This theme is
closely related to the previous one in that knowledge
diffusion occurs more rapidly among co-located DEMO
than widely dispersed ones due to the ﬂows of highly
skilled individuals within the local labour market.
This element of the cluster concept ‘stresses DEMO central-
ity of local labour market processes to the innovative
capacity, DEMO and indeed existence of clus-
ters. It is the dynamism of the local labour market
that ... account(s) for the associated clusters’ dynamism’
(MALMBERG and POWER, 2006, p. 60).
Post-secondary educational institutions can play a
central role in the development of a local talent pool.
DEMO to Gertler and Vinodrai, universities act as
anchors of creativity in DEMO, attracting and retain-
ing highly skilled talent, while they simultaneously
create an open and tolerant attitude in the communities
in which they are DEMO This in turn reinforces the
conditions needed to attract and retain talent in the
local community (2005). In the Waterloo case, the DEMO
versity of Waterloo provides a particularly salient
example of the impact of post-secondary institutions
on the local labour pool: the founders of many ﬁrms
that populate the cluster are graduates of the university
and most local DEMO overwhelmingly cite the presence
of a strong local labour pool as a key factor in explaining
their presence in the region (BRAMWELL and WOLFE,
2005).
A third and related theme is the role that DEMO
ﬁrm institutional supports play in strengthening and
sustaining the inter-ﬁrm dynamics within the
cluster. Underlying this theme is the insight that
many of the DEMO factors that drive innovation and
competitiveness in ﬁrms lie outside the ﬁrms them-
selves. Marshall does not limit his account of indus-
trial districts DEMO the presence of external economies,
but also draws attention to the role of socio-cultural
factors which affect their institutional underpinnings
or the ‘social DEMO of the district (ASHEIM, 2000,
p. 415). The presence or absence of key institutional
elements in a local or regional economy DEMO affect
both their innovative capacity and their potential to
function as nodes for cluster development. Recent
studies emphasize the importance of local govern-
ments DEMO economic development agencies adopting
sustained development strategies and the key role
played by civic entrepreneurs and local associations
in those strategies. The ability of DEMO regional
economy to sustain the growth of dynamic clusters
may depend on its ability to develop the underlying
conditions of trust and civic capital DEMO support
the local learning economy (WOLFE and NELLES,
2008).
DEMO brief overview of some recent theoretical and
empirical research into the formation and growth of
clusters identiﬁes the key themes of particular relevance
Downloaded DEMO: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
Global and Local Dimensions of the ICT Cluster in Waterloo, Canada
105
to the process of cluster development in the Waterloo
region. While various DEMO emphasize different
key factors in cluster formation, this paper emphasizes
the DEMO of key variables. A strong local
talent pool, a robust research DEMO innovation capacity,
inter-ﬁrm collaboration at local and global levels, sup-
DEMO institutional structures, and a measure of civic
capital are all critical DEMO; each one by itself is a
necessary, but not sufﬁcient condition for dynamic clus-
ters. Drawing upon the insights afforded by the various
DEMO outlined above, this analysis of the ﬁndings
from the study of DEMO Waterloo ICT cluster suggests that
its success rests on a distinctive pattern of interaction
between the locational decisions of ﬁrms, local edu-
cational institutions and civic associations, and a
regional culture particular to the Waterloo area.
A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE WATERLOO
CLUSTER
Historically, the Waterloo region has been a centre of
manufacturing in the economy of south-western
Ontario. The DEMO has had a pioneering presence in
most of the major technological advances in North
America, including automobiles, radio, processed
foods, ﬁnancial services, biotechnology and computing.
Today, this history of technological leadership continues
in ﬁelds such as Internet-enabled wireless communi-
cations, software, aerospace, engineering, e-commerce,DEMO
robotics, and laser technology. The region is also home
to strong DEMO and employment in automotive,
advanced manufacturing, biotechnology, business and
ﬁnancial services, education, environmental science,
food processing, furniture manufacturing, high-tech,DEMO
logistics and warehousing, research and development
(R&D), and telecommunications (CANADA’S TECH-
NOLOGY TRIANGLE, 2004).2
Since 1976, the number of high-technology enter-
prises in the area has grown to a critical mass, starting
with a ﬂurry of new ﬁrm formation that included a
combination DEMO spin-offs from the university, in-migration
of ﬁrms from outside the region DEMO independent start-
ups (XU, 2003). Of these sources, university DEMO
have had the greatest impact on the local economy.
The University of Waterloo’s Technology Transfer and
Licensing Ofﬁce identiﬁed 106 spin-off companies
employing over DEMO people by the mid-1990s. Using a
somewhat different deﬁnition that included the transfer
of intellectual resources, the PRICEWATERHOUSECOO-
PERS ’ (2001a) study of regional economic beneﬁts ident-
iﬁed over 250 spin-off companies from the university.3
DEMO start-ups and second and third generation
spin-offs also contributed greatly to the high-tech
growth in this period.4 The recent Waterloo Region
Tech Industry Proﬁle DEMO that 52% of executive
respondents were alumni of local colleges or universities,
with the majority coming from the University of
Waterloo. In addition, 70% were the founders of their
own companies, with 31% per cent of these being serial
entrepreneurs who had created and sold a number DEMO
companies (COMMUNITECH TECHNOLOGY ASSOCI-
ATION, 2005, p. 13). Much DEMO the university’s commercia-
lization and spin-off success is attributed to its intellectual
property (IP) policy, which allows ownership of IP to rest
with the creator, thus encouraging the individual (faculty
or student) to commercialize the idea.
Over this period the role of the University has
evolved DEMO great deal. Beyond spin-offs and its commer-
cialization activities, the university DEMO the regional
economy in two other important ways: by providing a
DEMO pool of local talent and by transferring cutting-
edge knowledge to local ﬁrms through R&D consulting
or joint research projects. One of the DEMO innovations
adopted in the early days of the University was its coop-
erative education programme – the ﬁrst and most
successful of its kind DEMO Canada. The rotation of students
to industry and back to the classroom solidiﬁed already
tight relations with local industry. The reﬂexive relation-
ship has DEMO the curriculum to keep up with the
ever-changing technological frontiers of industry while
industry support of the programme helped fund the
acquisition of technology DEMO enhance classroom learning
(NELLES et al., 2005).
Another signiﬁcant development is a marked
increase in the level of formalized cooperation in the
DEMO community. As the high-tech sector increased in
relative importance, several civic DEMO business associ-
ations were formed to support the region’s competitive-
ness. In particular, Communitech, the local association
for high-tech ﬁrms, was created to represent their inter-
ests to the government, and provide networking oppor-
tunities, peer-to-peer mentoring, and other support
mechanisms for local high-tech entrepreneurs. The DEMO
gence of a critical mass of high-technology companies,
the resilience of the regional economy, and the presence
of anchor institutions and associations all signify that the
Waterloo region is home to a dynamic high-tech
economy. DEMO question remains as to how this region
conforms to the various models of cluster dynamics
found in the literature discussed above. Certainly his-
torical DEMO have played an important role in laying
the groundwork for the present day cluster. The follow-
ing section explores ﬁrm-level strategies and linkages,
DEMO institutional infrastructure and the cultural context
to analyse the factors that explain its internal dynamics
and functioning.
GLOBAL/LOCAL KNOWLEDGE FLOWS:
INTER-FIRM DYNAMICS DEMO THE
WATERLOO CLUSTER
In contrast to the stream of literature which stresses that
the most important cluster dynamics are those gener-
ated by the DEMO effects of proximity to a
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] DEMO: 18:28 15 September 2008
106
Allison Bramwell et al.
collective set of resources, the knowledge-based theory
of the cluster recognizes that relatively few clusters are
completely self-sufﬁcient in DEMO of the knowledge
base they draw upon. As industrial economies evolve
towards the production of more complex technologies,
a growing number of ﬁrms DEMO upon sophisticated
organizational networks to provide key elements or
components of their ﬁnal product. While some
elements of these technologies may be co-located
within DEMO individual cluster, increasingly, important
parts of the network are situated across a wide array of
locations (BATHELT et al., 2004; STURGEON, DEMO).
However, the precise mix of the global and local knowl-
DEMO ﬂows present in individual clusters varies consider-
ably by cluster. In the most advanced clusters, a growing
proportion of the knowledge base is not exclusively
local. A marked pattern of stronger global (versus
local) relations DEMO in recent studies of more
knowledge intensive clusters, such as opto-electronics.
DEMO recent study of opto-electronics clusters in six
locations found that extra-regional commercial linkages
are more important than localized ones due to the
highly diversiﬁed DEMO of the end-user markets and
the complexity of the technologies involved in assem-
bling an end product for the market. What the ﬁrms
in DEMO clusters do share is their common linkage to
the leading institution or ﬁrm and their common inter-
est in stimulating and maintaining the critical DEMO of
highly skilled labour (HENDRY et al., 2000).
Global/local dynamics between customers, suppliers and
competitors
Contrary to the view of clusters that emphasizes the
importance of dense networking relationships among
local ﬁrms, it is readily apparent from interviews with
software and ICT manufacturing ﬁrms in DEMO Waterloo
cluster that the amount of inter-ﬁrm collaboration in
the form of key customer or supplier relationships is
relatively low. The interview data reveals DEMO the
focus of most economic activity – key customers,
sources of supply, competitors, and important strategic
partnerships – for the vast majority DEMO ﬁrms occurs at
the continental and/or global level. While larger ﬁrms
tend to be more focused on the global level, smaller
ﬁrms, DEMO of whether their key customers are cur-
rently in Canada, also DEMO a growing global reach, or
continental or global aspirations.5
A core DEMO that emerges in the study of inter-ﬁrm
dynamics is the ﬂuid nature of relations between custo-
mers, suppliers and competitors in the cluster. Variation
in types of relationships is reﬂected in many different
combinations and permutations DEMO inter-ﬁrm dynamics,
which are rendered more complex by virtue of the fact
that they occur at local/regional, national, global and
‘virtual’ DEMO As one chief executive ofﬁcer (CEO)
put it:
our DEMO is all local, our supply base is all over the
world, even service providers ... all our manufacturing
service providers are close to DEMO, our engineering
service providers and prototyping providers are all over
the DEMO too. I mean you can e-mail stuff out and get
UPS back in so you kind of go where it’s quick and econ-
omical. DEMO is local [sic], manufacturing is local, but
pretty much everything else is non-local.
(conﬁdential interview, 2003)
Ultimately, many of the ﬁrms interviewed describe
co-location with customers, suppliers, or strategic part-
ners as DEMO unimportant or irrelevant. Of the ﬁrms
for which proximity to customers is important, only
very few have key local customers with whom they
are in regular contact, and many ﬁrms treat local and
non-local customers much the same, communicating
primarily by phone or e-mail regardless of proximity.
One respondent commented that the distinction
between local and global is very artiﬁcial: ‘We sell
exactly half of our product internationally versus the
other half DEMO North America in general. Our partners
can just as easily be in Europe as in the States, so the dis-
tinction never comes up – it means less than nothing’
(conﬁdential interview, 2003). Most DEMO ﬁrms have
an explicitly global focus because for many, even their
DEMO customer contributes only a small percentage
of total revenue, so they DEMO globally for custo-
mers. This means that they have to ‘compete locally
on a global basis’, and ﬁnd that they have to establish
some type of local customer interface capabilities to
serve their global customers.6 Customer DEMO –
both marketing and support – occur at a virtual level.
With ‘the Internet as the great equalizer’, customers
from all over the world can visit company websites to
extract required downloads and access ‘24/7 DEMO
support’. Firms can choose to visit customers on site
to deal with crises or complex issues, so proximity to
customers is not a huge factor.7
Supplier relationships evince similar patterns as the
vast majority of ﬁrms DEMO that co-location with
suppliers was not particularly important. Here there is
some distinction between manufacturing and infor-
mation technology (IT) ﬁrms. Manufacturing ﬁrms
DEMO to buy ready-made components, primarily from
the US. While some ﬁrms DEMO have local suppliers,
they were typically not for key components, DEMO
when it was for a key component, the reason they
sourced DEMO locally was ‘not because they are local
but because the type of technology they provide is
more critical for us’ (conﬁdential interview, 2003)DEMO
Local competition is also not particularly relevant
because no two companies in the Waterloo cluster do
exactly the same thing. The vast majority of DEMO
ﬁrms operate within speciﬁc niches of their industry
segment. A distinctive theme emerged, however, with
respect to the relative degree of ‘transparency’ of DEMO
ticular industry and competitor relationships. Some
relationships are marked by closely guarded IP, a distinct
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
Global and Local Dimensions of the ICT Cluster in Waterloo, Canada
lack of linkages between similar ﬁrms, and sometimes
decidedly ‘unfriendly’ relations between competitors.
Others are more transparent, ﬁrms have a pretty good
idea of what other ﬁrms are offering, and people in
ﬁrms know each other and share collegial relationships
through regular interaction at conferences and sales calls.
With DEMO collegial and transparent inter-competitor
relations, there is evidence of overlap between DEMO
ation and competition – the idea of competitors as part-
ners and collaborators as competitors – where ‘you can’t
help but buy subcomponents from DEMO who you
are competing against in another area’ (conﬁdential
interview, 2003). Other evidence of these types of
relationships emerges through the co-development DEMO
a core technology, ‘we saw them as a competitor but
now DEMO negotiating with them to start using our plat-
form rather than developing their own’ (conﬁdential
interview, 2003), or to make their technology DEMO
with that of a large global competitor – ‘we have archi-
tected our tools to be complementary to them, leverage
their technology, leverage DEMO investment that other
companies have made in their technology and make
both tool sets a little more effective, if not a whole lot
more effective’ (conﬁdential interview, 2003)
Strategic partnerships
While ﬁrms may have DEMO local partners who inte-
grate their technology (or whose technology they DEMO
grate) into their product, key strategic partnerships,
especially for larger ﬁrms, tend to occur overwhel-
mingly at the non-local level, and DEMO often in the
US and Europe. Key partnerships are often with a key
customer or a key supplier because ‘your clients typi-
cally become DEMO partners – your best sources of inno-
vative ideas’ (conﬁdential interview, 2003). Local
partnerships, both formal and informal, tend to be
DEMO weak and take the form of short, project-oriented
collaborations, often on a contracting-out basis, with
key local customers. These linkages tend to be ‘more
relationships than formal alliances’. From an analytical
perspective, ﬁrm conceptions of what constitute a stra-
tegic partnership are inconsistent and the distinction
between DEMO suppliers or customers and strategic part-
ners with whom they share common ownership or IP
is not always clear, indicating that these relationships
are perhaps more ﬂuid than is frequently understood.
Local partnerships tend to occur DEMO between
smaller ﬁrms. There is some evidence of sub-clustering
at the local level, though the relationships are typically
‘soft’ and informal:
There’s another company here that, in fact has begun to
focus on X but from the other end ... and we’re actually
assisting their launch ... DEMO the US ... so I guess there is a soft
relationship with another company here that almost sounds like a
cluster. There’s another company DEMO in Burlington ...
and they’re making the X that we’re using in our next
107
generation front ends, so there are in fact some suppliers
in this region that are developing world class electronics
that are DEMO to this type of product. ... We can
partner with them, DEMO can talk with them about relevant
issues ... it’s good to have these types of partnerships.
(conﬁdential interview, 2003)
It is rare, but there is some evidence of robust partnering
activity between large globally DEMO local ﬁrms and
smaller ones. The relationships are both formal and
informal, focused on taking-up useful solutions that
are generated by small local software ﬁrms, and are
often initiated through common customers. One
respondent identiﬁed this as a strength, ‘one of the
values of being located here is that you have a lot of
entrepreneurial small companies who are coming DEMO
with interesting solutions that we can attach to our
offerings to round them out and bring them to
market’ (conﬁdential interview, 2003). DEMO alternative
to partnering with local or non-local ﬁrms for the
purpose of augmenting existing IP and product offer-
ings for large ﬁrms is to DEMO acquire them.
To recap, Porter’s theory of cluster development
emphasizes geographically DEMO networks of
interrelated ﬁrms and innovation processes driven by
the presence of a sophisticated supply base, demanding
local customers and strong competition from other
local ﬁrms in the same industry. The evidence thus far
indicates that DEMO networks of activity between produ-
cers, customers and suppliers within the DEMO cluster
are rare, and in fact, that local inter-ﬁrm relationships are
signiﬁcantly weaker and more tangential to ﬁrm growth
than posited by Porter. DEMO is international ties with custo-
mers located all over the world that constitute the
primary relationships of Waterloo high-tech ﬁrms. Con-
sequently, it would seem that explanations for cluster
dynamics that privilege inter-ﬁrm relationships based
on DEMO do not capture the whole story and that
explanations for ﬁrm locational decisions are found else-
where in the Waterloo case. Nonetheless, a theme that
arises consistently is the importance of personal relation-
ships; regardless of type, strength, or distance, many
interviewees stressed that their relationships with indi-
viduals in other ﬁrms was a key driver of ﬁrm activity:DEMO
It’s the relationship with the people and the relationship
for me strategically is not necessarily with the local
people, most of my relationships are with the people in
their head ofﬁces. Our company is more well DEMO in
Irvine, California ... than we are in Canada. We’re
more DEMO known in the US, across the US and across
Western Canada DEMO we are in our own home area.
(conﬁdential interview, 2003)
SKILLED LABOUR: AN ABUNDANCE OF
TALENTAND SMART PEOPLE
Another corner of Porter’s diamond emphasizes factor
input conditions, including human capital, as a key
DEMO By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
108
Allison Bramwell et al.
factor in the competitive dynamics of clusters. DEMO
literature on learning regions emphasizes that, in the
current era of DEMO competition in knowledge-based
industries, the local endowment of ‘talent’ in the
DEMO force is increasingly crucial to the growth and
prosperity of economic regions. The ability to train,
attract, and retain highly educated, potentially DEMO
workers who are drawn to thick, deep, opportunity-
rich local markets is emerging as a crucial determinant
of ﬁrm and regional industrial success (FLORIDA,
2003). Critical mass is important, because it sets in
motion a positive, self-reinforcing circle whereby
regions with a large number of highly skilled workers
in a particular sector are able to attract even DEMO
workers of this kind. Results from the Waterloo study
indicate that the presence of a robust local talent pool
is indeed a central factor DEMO the internal dynamics of
the local cluster, and that the local DEMO and university
have been important actors in its development.
The interview data provide valuable insights into the
locational choices of ﬁrms, and can generally be cate-
gorized into ‘thin’ and ‘thick’ reasons for choosing to
locate DEMO Waterloo. On the ‘thin’ end of the spectrum,
many people reported that the company was established
there because they ‘liked it’, but quality of life is a vari-
able reported by many people to account DEMO why they
choose to live where they do, so in itself, it does not
provide a convincing explanation for the location of
the DEMO cluster. Other people indicated that the
reasons why they started up in Waterloo are different
from the reasons why they stay, and stressed the seren-
dipity of their locational decisions; they ﬁnd that they
have come to rely on such advantages as the local
labour pool and the DEMO cachet that the area
carries in technology circles. Others, however, indi-
cated that there are ‘thicker’ or multivariate reasons
why the ﬁrm was DEMO in Waterloo and why it
remains there. They stress the interdependence of
several key factors; the most often cited are the presence
of the university, and the quality of the local talent pool.
Ultimately, the DEMO of skilled, talented people
is consistently cited as the most critical DEMO into their
competitive advantage because human capital is the
main input into software. Most ﬁrms indicated that it
was a distinct advantage to be DEMO in Waterloo
because it provided a ready supply of ‘smart and compe-
titively priced’ engineers and because the University of
Waterloo is ‘one of DEMO best universities in the world for
computer engineering’. In terms of the relative cost of
building software in India, the US, Europe and
DEMO, Canada, and speciﬁcally Waterloo, is seen to
be one of DEMO best locations because of the quality and
productivity of the local talent pool relative to its cost.
While there is always the temptation to DEMO the
whole thing to India’ where the cost of labour is half,
cost is not the only consideration when it comes to
maintaining DEMO innovative ﬁrm. The presence of large
software and technology intensive ﬁrms in the area,
serves as a magnet and an anchor for the DEMO special-
ized labour pool. Firms stay in the area because they
have invested in the local talent pool through in-
house training which has DEMO tacit knowledge
that is difﬁcult to relocate. Some smaller ﬁrms indicated
that it is ‘important to be close to [large anchor] compa-
nies that DEMO leading edge’ because they deepen the
labour pool, and smaller ﬁrms DEMO hire people that
‘used to work at RIM ... Descartes ... MKS, and
others’.8 The following quote illustrates this relationship
between IT ﬁrms and their employees:
No question about it. If you take all the DEMO out of the
building, you don’t have anything left except for DEMO bunch
of machines out there that wouldn’t be any good to
anybody. ... The area here, the Kitchener/Waterloo
area, is good because DEMO has a good skill base. There is a
lot of good tool making people, a lot of good electricians,
and a lot of good universities in the area which we draw
on. We draw on DEMO colleges for the technical people on
the mechanical side as well as on the software side.
Education and training for the local talent pool
DEMO University of Waterloo is considered to be the
premier educational and research institution in the
cluster, but it is only one of the post-secondary insti-
tutions in the region that feeds graduates into the
local talent DEMO Many ﬁrms indicate that the presence
of local universities was primarily relevant to them as a
source of skilled talent. The majority of local DEMO
ﬁrms require university educated employees, and in
many cases, most of the staff has at least a BSc, many
have MScs, and DEMO large number of ﬁrms have several
staff members with a PhD, DEMO in software engineer-
ing. While Waterloo is cited most often as the primary
source of new hires, especially out of the software
engineering programme, Wilfred Laurier University is
regularly mentioned as a source for junior marketing
and management people. Many ﬁrms, in both ICT
manufacturing and software, DEMO a mix of university-
educated engineers and college-educated technicians,
and report that they actively recruit from the local com-
munity college, Conestoga College, for their technical
staff.
The inﬂuence of the local post-secondary insti-
tutions on the supply of highly educated and skilled
workers in the labour DEMO is identiﬁed consistently as
a critical factor that drives the growth of the Waterloo
cluster. Whether or not they have other linkages with
the DEMO, a clear majority of ﬁrms actively or reg-
ularly hire students DEMO the co-op programme, have
hired them in the past, intend to start up again when
the economy improves, or are planning to do so in
the future, as the ﬁrm grows:
It all has to do with the proximity to the university and the
fact that DEMO lot of our staff at this point, probably about 400
of DEMO 2,000 staff went to Waterloo as an example, 100 or
DEMO By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
Global and Local Dimensions of the ICT Cluster in Waterloo, Canada
109
more went to Laurier, 100 or more went to Conestoga ...
there’s only so many places to go in Waterloo and this is
almost DEMO self deﬁning nature of a cluster. Once it starts
it seems to keep on going, but the thing that started it
off is some people who decided to stay here.
(conﬁdential interview, 2003)
Three DEMO beneﬁts of Waterloo’s co-op programme
were reported. First and foremost, it DEMO as a steady
source of new hires, because ﬁrms know that DEMO stu-
dents have work experience, and they get the opportu-
nity DEMO evaluate them in the workplace before hiring
them. Second, co-op students DEMO as an important
source of knowledge transfer; because they are
exposed DEMO new ideas in their courses and bring these
ideas to their placements, ‘a lot of the students are on
the cutting edge of the products that we’re working
on, so we deﬁnitely get the beneﬁt from that’. Finally,
Waterloo co-op students have an international repu-
tation for DEMO of high quality, and as a result, local
ﬁrms have to compete with global ones to attract the
best students, though they retain the beneﬁt of location.
The growing international reputation of the University
is DEMO in the recently staged corporate recruiting
drives by both Microsoft and Google, part of a
broader upsurge in hiring within the region. A recent
survey of 173 CEOs completed by Communitech
reported that 80% of the DEMO ﬁrms are currently
hiring, with more than half expecting to add DEMO to
their work forces in the next year (ROBERTSON,
2006)DEMO Aggressive hiring campaigns by the larger ﬁrms
in the cluster are currently putting pressure on the
supply of suitably trained personal for many of DEMO
other ﬁrms. Although local ﬁrms complain about the
challenge of competing with top international employ-
ers, they recognize that it adds to the attractiveness of
the local talent pool:
We’re competing with Intel and Microsoft DEMO for
those top students and I think Microsoft hires like 15%
of the graduating class and 15% of the co-ops there and
who wouldn’t DEMO to go and work for Microsoft? So
we’re generally paying top DEMO because we’re competing
against US folks but we’re also competing for the best of
the best. And I think we get way more than DEMO share
here locally.
EXTRA-FIRM INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORTS:
THE UNIVERSITYAND ASSOCIATIONAL
ACTIVITY
A ﬁnal theme found in the literature on cluster develop-
ment is the DEMO that extra-ﬁrm institutional supports
play in strengthening and sustaining inter-ﬁrm
dynamics within the cluster. There is a strong interde-
pendence between the economic structure DEMO social
institutions, both formal and informal, that comprise
the cluster, DEMO many of the key factors that drive
innovation and competitiveness in ﬁrms lie outside
the ﬁrms themselves. The presence or absence of
these key DEMO elements in a local or regional
economy may affect both their innovative capacity
and their potential to function as nodes for cluster
development. Waterloo DEMO are supported in the
innovation process by a highly innovative and engaged
local university, coupled with particularly robust and
community-oriented associational activity.
The embeddedness of the University of Waterloo
Several aspects characterize the nature of interaction
DEMO local high-tech ﬁrms and the University of
Waterloo. First, while there DEMO many formal relation-
ships such as research contracts and funding of research
chairs, much of the knowledge exchange is more
informal than formal. Interviewees cite the university
not only as an important source of tech transfer DEMO
specialized skills, but also as providing both inter-
national cachet to DEMO region, and simple social/
professional networks; ‘I contact my friends there if I
have a problem’. This informal approach underscores
the ‘embeddedness’ DEMO the university in the local com-
munity, and many people emphasize DEMO organic
nature of the impact that the university has on the
local community through the interaction effect
between the various roles of the university DEMO R&D
transfer, skills provision, international cachet, and
informal ‘knowledge DEMO
There is, however, a distinct division between those
ﬁrms that interact with the university and those that do
not. For those with linkages DEMO the university, there is a
range in the depth and breadth DEMO interaction. Larger
ﬁrms tend to have more robust partnering relationships,
often involving the funding of research chairs, long-
term collaborative research projects, DEMO faculty
working within the ﬁrm, and full-time staff occupied
with university DEMO government interaction. Smaller
ﬁrms, in contrast, tend to engage in short-term,
problem-focused research projects. One of the
primary reasons cited for not DEMO more involved
in university research is the amount of time required for
commercialization; while university research project
horizons might be two to three years, ﬁrms often
‘need to work on things that need to be commercialized
in 6– 18 months’. Others reported difﬁculty in accessing
what was available, not feeling ‘in the loop’, or had a
perception that the research efforts at the university
were focused on larger companies. Regardless of invol-
DEMO with the university on an R&D level, however,
almost DEMO ﬁrm cited its critical importance as a provider of
highly skilled and specialized talent.
With respect to federal or provincial research insti-
tutes and DEMO as sources of innovation, a few
trends were evident. First, universities were cited
much more often than government research institutes
or technology transfer DEMO as sources of innovation,
(conﬁdential interview, 2003)
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
110
Allison Bramwell et al.
and many more ﬁrms indicated that they DEMO some type
of relationship with a local university than with a gov-
ernment facility. Second, a few larger ﬁrms with
ongoing relationships to universities and government
labs, had a robust approach to R&D and partnering
generally, though this was more applicable to technol-
ogy-intensive manufacturing ﬁrms than to software
ﬁrms. Third, most ﬁrms that interact with the university
engage in small, limited-term projects on an as-needed,
intermittent basis.
Most of the ﬁrms in the Waterloo high-tech cluster
are engaged in R&D. DEMO Waterloo Tech Industry
Proﬁle reported that 76% of the ﬁrms have R&D staff
located in the region totalling 2300 people. Large
ﬁrms accounted DEMO 51% of the total number of R&D
staff. In addition to in-house staff, 22% of the ﬁrms
reported that they also use external sources for R&D
(COMMUNITECH TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATION,
2005, p. 11)DEMO There is a wide disparity in the R&D capa-
bilities of large and small ﬁrms. Large ﬁrms typically
have robust in-house R&D DEMO, although even small
ones typically have some type of in-house development
DEMO that focuses on a core idea to get it market ready
or engages in small, limited one-off collaborative pro-
jects, or ‘skunk works’.9
DEMO ﬁrms covered in this paper’s interviews indicated
that they are typically more focused on product devel-
opment than exploratory research. The emphasis is pre-
DEMO on solutions-focused, incremental
innovations rather than research-intensive, ﬁrst gener-
ation innovations. Product and process improvements
are intended to make the product ‘faster, smaller,
cheaper’ and often involve development activities such
as the modiﬁcation of DEMO software platforms,
product updates and new releases, applying the core
DEMO to different applications within the same
factory, or making software web DEMO This
emphasis on performance improvement and ﬁne-
tuning reﬂects the trend toward what one observer
labelled ‘little R, big D’. However, there was DEMO evi-
dence of robust R&D capacity reﬂected in the strategic
decisions of large multinational ﬁrms, which often
choose to augment their R&D or other technological
capacity through the acquisition of local ﬁrms. Of par-
DEMO interest is the fact that, while several large local
ﬁrms have DEMO foreign (primarily European)
ﬁrms, several large foreign multinationals have acquired
indigenous Waterloo ﬁrms – Google being among the
most recent – to DEMO their R&D capabilities.
Large, global ﬁrms that collaborate with the DEMO
sity on long-term, core research projects, report that the
primary beneﬁt of their collaboration is ‘getting the ﬁrst
look’ at research results. They DEMO to keep abreast of
what is happening at the research level, DEMO though
they know they will not have any proprietary access
to the IP. Long-term research is by nature exploratory
and speculative, and if they see it being directly relevant
to the ﬁrm’s business strategy, they prefer to keep the
project within the company to avoid a potential conﬂict
DEMO ownership of IP. Ongoing involvement in univer-
sity-based research also gives them an inside eye on
developing university graduates who they may want
to DEMO Firms also report the beneﬁt of research collab-
oration with the university as increasing their global
reach and perspective by ‘magnifying your insight into
DEMO global marketplace’ because research professors are
usually part of global networks of expertise in their par-
ticular research areas. The majority of ﬁrms, both large
and small, that report R&D linkages with a local univer-
sity indicate that it is primarily for short-term research,
usually lasting DEMO couple of months, on a ‘project by
project basis as needed’ DEMO that the primary beneﬁt
of collaboration is the ability to do problem-focused
research and small co-development projects that allow
them access to university expertise DEMO laboratory
facilities.
The multiple roles of local universities and colleges as
R&D and technology transfer facilities, as well as sup-
pliers of highly skilled talent, underscores the idea of
the embeddedness of educational institutions in the
Waterloo cluster. Regardless of whether ﬁrms had
formal or informal links DEMO the university, most of
them cited the existence of local universities DEMO col-
leges as a critical element of the cluster’s dynamics.
Some ﬁrms that are heavily networked with a local uni-
versity describe a deeply DEMO relationship that has
emerged and endures as a result of the university being
located in Waterloo. Even ﬁrms with tangential or no
ties to DEMO university – for example, those who only
hire co-op students or DEMO comment simply on the
international cachet of the University of Waterloo –
cite the presence of the university as a critical factor.
In summary, the local universities are cited consistently
as an important source of R&DEMO resources, spin-off
activity, and talented and educated people, as well DEMO
many other types of formal and informal linkages. As a
result of the interdependence of these roles, and the
density of interaction with local ﬁrms, the universities
are embedded in the regional cluster as part of a virtuous
feedback cycle with the local high-tech community:
companies like DEMO, although we licensed some technol-
ogies from the university we were DEMO there
because we wanted to be close to the innovative and
active environment of the university, the source of stu-
dents, co-op students, it was an exciting environment.
(conﬁdential interview, 2003)
Civic capital: Communitech and high-tech hockey
Another factor that plays a signiﬁcant role in DEMO devel-
opment of dynamic clusters is the ability of key actors
within the regional economy to develop the underlying
conditions of trust and civic DEMO that contribute to
the presence of a learning economy (WOLFE, 2002;
WOLFE and NELLES, 2008). The concentration of a
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
Global and Local Dimensions of the ICT Cluster in Waterloo, Canada
large number of high-tech ﬁrms is not sufﬁcient to
transform a local economy DEMO a vibrant cluster. It
also requires the presence of an ‘economic community’
mediated by strong networks and relationships that
bring together economic, social, DEMO civic interests to
collaborate toward sustaining competitive advantage.
These can be created through the establishment of col-
laborative networks between business and civic com-
DEMO (HENTON, et al., 1997). In Waterloo, the
existence of a strong and active business association
that under girds many of the DEMO linkages lends
support to these theoretical assertions.
This paper’s research indicates that there exists a high
degree of ‘civic capital’ in the Waterloo region. DEMO
regional culture is characterized by a robust ‘entrepre-
neurial spirit’ supported by a small and transparent
business community and well-developed business
associations, as well as a vibrant social network and
sense of community. There is a DEMO emphasis on
entrepreneurial activity in the region, and evidence
from the DEMO suggests that the civic capital in
Waterloo is largely geared toward the promotion and
support of this entrepreneurial activity. Firms do not
interact by DEMO business with each other; rather, com-
munity networks are described as being built around
mentoring and problem-solving types of relationships –
the ‘how DEMO of business, rather than the business itself.
Historical research and interview DEMO provide some
insight into what elements contribute to the ‘stickiness’
or resilience of the high-tech cluster. Waterloo beneﬁts
from the combination of a long DEMO illustrious ‘industrial
family tree’ made up of early pioneers and current power-
houses, and a distinctive regional ‘entrepreneurial’ culture
supported, by a high DEMO of civic mindedness.10
The cluster literature suggests that an important con-
tributing factor to cluster development is the presence
of local champions with a DEMO vision than single
ﬁrm success. RIM, Open Text, MKS, and DEMO
are all internationally recognized and established ﬁrms
in their respective industry segments. The interviews
conﬁrmed that these anchor ﬁrms contribute to the
development of DEMO cluster for mutually beneﬁcial
reasons. When they were smaller, the ability DEMO draw
on community resources was important for their
initial survival: ‘for DEMO CEO to talk to similar CEOs
and get their advice on what to do and how to raise
money and all those good things DEMO critical to the
foundation of our company’ (conﬁdential interview,
2003)DEMO Now that they are a larger, more established
and less dependent DEMO the local community for
success, certain successful ﬁrms ‘try to give DEMO and
help local companies, and support the local universities
as much DEMO [they] can’ (conﬁdential interview, 2003).
Associational activity: a sense DEMO (high-tech) community
A strong theme concerning the nature of business
relationships in the local community is the emphasis
111
placed on facilitating learning DEMO ‘how to’ of business.
The informal type of knowledge transfers about the
business of doing business is one of the most striking
features of DEMO region: ‘what it comes down to is we
had some licensing DEMO and so I just lobbed
some e-mails out to people in the software industry
locally here and got answers back. I think that there’s
DEMO sense that we’re not competitive, we’re all in similar
industries just DEMO together’ (conﬁdential interview,
2003). However, these relationships are not simply a
way to lower information and transaction costs; there
appears to be an important social component to them.
For example, there are several spontaneously formed
and voluntary user groups and ‘word of mouth’ net-
works DEMO meet informally ‘down at the pub’, such as
software user groups, product management groups,
and a local software quality assurance engineering
society, some with voluntarily managed websites. It is
described as a peer network DEMO local business
people who know each – as a business networking
cluster – because:
It is not any one industry. It is regional, for example around
here within 40 miles, there is a level of business people that
interact among themselves across multiple, industries that
may never actually use each others products or services
but have relationships and refer DEMO to each other and
that to me is one of the core clusters around here.
(conﬁdential interview, 2003)
Thus, the learning dimension of the local cluster
involves more than just technological learning, but
also involves the important dimensions of entrepreneur-
ial and managerial skills. This is DEMO one of the least
well documented, but most critical elements, of suc-
cessful clusters. Entrepreneurial skill and market infor-
mation can be transmitted DEMO the cluster via a
variety of mechanisms – some formal and some infor-
mal – but one of the most effective is frequent peer-
DEMO mentoring and knowledge sharing that is orga-
nized through local civic associations (WOLFE and
GERTLER, 2004).
Many people have worked with each DEMO on and
off over the years, some stay in contact with DEMO
they worked with early in their careers, and some are
drawn DEMO to Waterloo – part of the ‘brain drain
wash back’ phenomenon – by those relationships.
People know each other because they went to school
DEMO subsequently worked together and have ofﬁces in
close proximity, and socialize DEMO They often
work for high-tech ﬁrms that share the same set of pro-
fessional skills, but do not directly compete: ‘I mean, we
play high-tech hockey every week. So that sets up a bit
of DEMO camaraderie, there’s some movement of staff from
company to company but DEMO far its been on a pretty
polite basis, no ones gone DEMO and done a lot of
raiding of a speciﬁc company’ (conﬁdential DEMO,
2003). Generally speaking, networks are facilitated by
the critical DEMO and co-location of ﬁrms, but most of
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
112
Allison Bramwell et al.
the interaction occurs on a peer-to-peer level. DEMO this
respect, the Waterloo ICT cluster reﬂects the same eco-
logical DEMO that have been used to describe
Silicon Valley, ‘Ecological robustness is DEMO ...
through shared practice, face-to-face contacts, recipro-
city and swift trust, all generated within networks of
practice and communities of practice’ (BROWN DEMO
DUGUID, 2000, p. 37).
In addition to informal relationships, DEMO is a high
degree of formalized regional cooperation and associa-
tional activity in the Waterloo area, focused on facilitat-
ing the region’s economic competitiveness and
sustainability. The Communitech Technology Associ-
ation, in particular, plays an DEMO role in support-
ing regional economic development. Communitech
was cited most often for its facilitation and organization
of social and networking functions. The most DEMO
quently used Communitech programmes are its peer-
to-peer groups that are designed for employees in the
same position with different companies to meet and
DEMO experiences, learn from each other and create a
forum for problem-solving.11 DEMO, the emphasis is
on the fact that ﬁrms do not do DEMO with each
other, but do talk about how to do business DEMO each
other. While Communitech is ‘not strategic from a cus-
tomer point of view’, it is a ‘strong association’ that
respondents see as providing several different functions
that ‘contribute to the fabric of technology companies
in DEMO area’. Another common theme that emerges is
the idea that ﬁrms can be more powerful acting together
rather than in isolation.
However, while many respondents cited Communi-
tech as an important advocate and facilitator of business
DEMO networking, there was a great deal of vari-
ation in how DEMO or relevant ﬁrms saw Commu-
nitech to be to their particular functioning. Small ﬁrms
in the process of establishing themselves tended to ﬁnd
Communitech DEMO be more relevant than larger, more
established ﬁrms. Relationships with Communitech
DEMO over time, and several respondents from larger,
more established ﬁrms DEMO that they attended
Communitech functions more often when they were
getting established, but do so rarely now. In addition,
different size ﬁrms use Communitech for different
things. Small software ﬁrms access the networking func-
tion DEMO learn more about the ‘how to’ of running high-
tech start-ups, DEMO ﬁrms, including large ones, send
employees to the peer-to-peer groups, DEMO yet others
belong to be ‘good citizens’ but do not ﬁnd their par-
ticipation to be of critical importance to their business.
Nonetheless, many ﬁrms reported that Communitech
continues to serve an important networking function
in DEMO local business community, and though it cannot
be credited alone for DEMO high degree of civic capital
in the region, it is clearly DEMO important player. This
underscores the idea of interdependence of different
factors in cluster formation. As one respondent put it,
the university is the DEMO force’ in the cluster, and
Communitech is the ‘uniting force’. The DEMO
role played by both informal networks and local civic
associations in facilitating knowledge ﬂows in the
Waterloo ICT cluster and building civic capital under-
DEMO the importance of regional institutional structures.
CONCLUSION
Questions of location clearly remain salient in analyses
of cluster development, and the geographical proximity
between local actors and institutions continues to play
an important role in the innovation DEMO However,
this study of the ICT cluster in Waterloo underlines
several puzzles related to the core question of location:
if co-location with DEMO ﬁrms is not a main driver of
local economic growth and innovation, what accounts
for the resilience or ‘stickiness’ of the cluster? This
DEMO argues that local economic growth in the Water-
loo case is a result of the interaction between location,
institutions and a regional entrepreneurial DEMO
Whereas purely locational factors, based on demanding
local customers, suppliers and competitors, cannot fully
explain the Waterloo cluster, local institutions – pri-
DEMO the University of Waterloo and the Communi-
tech business association – overlaid with regional
cultural characteristics provide the glue that attracts
and holds innovative DEMO ﬁrms to the region.
The location question: global versus local dimensions DEMO ﬁrm
behaviour
The ﬁndings from the Waterloo ICT cluster study indi-
cate that there is relatively little inter-ﬁrm interaction
on a business level between DEMO, customers and
suppliers, and very little local competition. Instead,
main customers, suppliers and competitors are global
and ﬁrms have to ‘compete locally on a global level’.
Innovation is driven primarily by global customers in
DEMO with in-house R&D departments, rather
than by local competition. In DEMO the pattern of
innovation and the nature of inter-ﬁrm dynamics in
the cluster seem more consistent with the patterns
associated with industries that draw DEMO a ‘synthetic
knowledge base’ than those associated with ‘analytic
knowledge bases’ (DEMO and GERTLER, 2006).
With respect to the nature of local DEMO global knowl-
edge ﬂows, the results conform more closely to the DEMO
spective of BATHELT et al. (2004). They argue that a
DEMO cluster requires a combination of robust and
high quality local buzz that contains actors with a
complementary variety of skills and competencies
who interact DEMO, and a well-developed system
of pipelines that connects the cluster to DEMO rest of the
world. This allows individual ﬁrms to beneﬁt from
knowledge ﬂows and relationships outside the cluster,
as well as other ﬁrms DEMO the cluster to beneﬁt
from the local spillover of this knowledge. They
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September DEMO
Global and Local Dimensions of the ICT Cluster in Waterloo, Canada
113
hypothesize that there is a relation between local buzz
and global pipelines DEMO the more developed the
pipelines between local ﬁrms and non-local sources of
knowledge, the higher the quality of the local buzz
that beneﬁts all ﬁrms in the cluster; ‘new and valuable
knowledge will always be created in other parts of the
world and ﬁrms who can build a DEMO to such sites
of global excellence gain competitive advantage’ (p. 21)DEMO
The Waterloo cluster appears to exhibit elements of
both a healthy local buzz and strong global pipelines.
The co-existence of a globally competitive group DEMO
ICT ﬁrms, with the embeddedness of the University
of Waterloo and DEMO vibrancy of the local business
association, Communitech, give ample evidence of
buzz. At the same time, it is clear that formal inter-
ﬁrm linkages are comparatively weak, and that key
customers and collaborators, and DEMO sources of
innovation, are predominantly global – indeed most
ﬁrms see DEMO as global companies – indicating
the existence of strong global pipelines. In this
respect, ﬁrms in the Waterloo ICT cluster seem to
provide evidence of both a strong local knowledge
base and effective access to international DEMO, but
without the presence of ‘technological gatekeepers’ to
mediate these relationships (GIULIANI, 2005). In
terms of institutional supports, there is strong DEMO
that the research and training capacity of the University
of Waterloo, DEMO well as the organizational and network-
ing functions of Communitech, strengthened DEMO a
strong local entrepreneurial culture, are key institutional
actors that account DEMO a large part of the resilience or
‘stickiness’ of the Waterloo cluster.
In a similar vein, HENDRY et al. found that ‘a general
pattern emerges of ﬁrms, large and small, having a global
rather than DEMO (or even national) perspective
towards market opportunities and technological advances’
(DEMO, p. 130) and that inter-ﬁrm relations with both sup-
pliers and customers are more externally-focused outside
theregionthanwithinit. Theseﬁndings lead them to
suggest that DEMO regional networks among ﬁrms have
low signiﬁcance and therefore, that in DEMO cases, locational
proximity may be unnecessary. In most cases, the local
market is not large enough to sustain ﬁrms, and they have
to develop and sustain a global focus in order to survive.
To help DEMO for this, they use MIYAZAKI’s characteriz-
ation of the photonics industry DEMO to a three level
model involving underlying generic technologies, key
components, and end-user products and systems (1995).
This analysis appears consistent with the pattern of
ﬁrm activity in the Waterloo cluster. Similar to the
DEMO industry, the software industry in Waterloo
is a strategic industry with DEMO in many different
high-tech products and markets, and comprises differ-
ent DEMO that come together to create a wide
range of commercial applications. Indeed, much of
the software produced in the Waterloo region ﬁts in
to the generic technologies or key components part
of the supply chain, and fewer end-user products and
systems are produced. In addition, this model pays
particular attention to relationships between ﬁrms and
supporting institutions such as universities, the labour
market, and government agencies and research
institutes, and emphasizes DEMO importance of end
markets – customer relationships are seen as para-
mount. It displays many similarities with the Waterloo
case: a preponderance of global customers and emphasis
on customer relationships; lack of local networks for
doing business among ﬁrms; and the presence of key
university and other supporting institutions.
Indications that co-location with suppliers and com-
petitors is not the DEMO determinant of ﬁrm beha-
viour in all contexts, suggests that perhaps DEMO
variables are working in conjunction with, or more
powerfully, than co-location. To return to the central
question: if proximity between ﬁrms for transactional
purposes is not as important, what other factors
explain the resilience of the cluster? Economic geogra-
phy provides the explanation that clusters form because
they act as incubators for economic activity, but these
explanations are insufﬁcient to explain ‘differences in
innovative behaviour that is the location, functioning
and evolution of [clusters] in different regional settings’
(PILON and DEBRESSON, 2003, p. 17).
Both the theoretical literature and the results of this
DEMO suggest that institutional and cultural factors
may provide some clues (GERTLER DEMO WOLFE, 2002).
Institutions and social learning: the role of the universities in
cluster formation
Literature on the role of universities in the DEMO
based economy highlights two essential functions: the
performance of research and DEMO transfer and
the training of highly qualiﬁed personnel (BRAMWELL
and WOLFE , 2005). This research indicates overwhel-
mingly that ﬁrms value the university primarily in
terms of its contribution to a highly skilled local labour
DEMO Nevertheless, there is evidence that the value of
the university to DEMO community extends beyond its
training capacity. Regardless of whether the ﬁrms had
formal or informal ties to the university or not, respon-
dents recognized the university as an important centre of
skills formation, R&D capacity, and tech transfer. Others
cited the international cachet that proximity to the uni-
versity affords. This reﬂects the degree to which the uni-
versity DEMO seen to be embedded in the community. Over
time the University of Waterloo has been able to inno-
vate in their own educational processes DEMO academic
pursuits by reading local priorities off the networks in
which it is embedded. This again helps to sustain the
cluster and support innovation DEMO the region.
The culture question: local associations and civic capital
Where DEMO institutions, such as the university, help
anchor the cluster in terms of tangible and networking
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: DEMO:28 15 September 2008
114
Allison Bramwell et al.
support, local culture plays a similar role. This research
reveals a strongly articulated entrepreneurial culture in
the Waterloo region DEMO undoubtedly contributed to
the establishment of the cluster and continues to
sustain it. The authors contend that this culture interacts
with and shapes institutional DEMO and ﬁrm
structures and strategies. Far from constituting a residual
explanation, DEMO culture is an important variable in its
own right, and Communitech DEMO an institutional mani-
festation of the civic capital in the region.
Findings from this study of the ICT cluster in Water-
loo echo ﬁndings DEMO cluster studies in other regions
and economic sectors, and suggest a DEMO conception
of what factors really matter in cluster formation and sus-
tenance than some of the dominant theories in the litera-
ture. Concerning the DEMO between local and
global forces in the development of clusters, these DEMO
ings indicate that regardless of economic sector, for
many of the DEMO successful clusters the most important
end-user markets and knowledge networks are continen-
tal or global.12 At the local level, cross-cluster research
supports these ﬁndings in the Waterloo case, and con-
ﬁrms that social networks at the community level are
crucial. However, where locational factors, formal
knowledge transfer, and strong ties take precedence in
other theoretical approaches, it is suggested that the
role of institutions in fostering social learning, weak ties
and cultural factors interact in such a way as to form
the basis DEMO a successful high-tech cluster.
NOTES
1. This case study is part of a set of national case studies
recently conducted by the Innovation Systems
DEMO Network (ISRN) in Canada. For a more
detailed discussion of the ﬁndings of the ISRN study
on industrial clusters, see WOLFE and GERTLER (2004)
and WOLFE et al. (2005).
2. For a DEMO detailed discussion of the nature of the inno-
vation system in Ontario and an over view of the provin-
cial ICT sector, cf. GERTLER and WOLFE (2004). We
have previously analysed the origins and growth of the
Waterloo ICT cluster in NELLES et al. (2005).
3. There is considerable disagreement in the literature
about what constitutes a university DEMO Many
accounts include ﬁrms founded by university alumni
or students. One deﬁnition is ‘a commercial entity
that derives a signiﬁcant portion of its commercial
DEMO from the application or use of a technology
and/or know-how developed by or during a university
funded research program. The new enterprise is DEMO
either (1) to license a University invention, (2) to DEMO
research at the University in order to further develop
a technology/ DEMO that will be licensed by the
company, or (3) to DEMO a service using University-
derived expertise’ (UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA
RESEARCH SERVICES DEMO , 2003). Some of the
most notable spin-offs include Waterloo Maple Inc.
(1988), Open Text (1989), Virtek Vision Corp.
(1986), Dalsa (1980) and Northern Digital Inc. (1981).
4. Independent start-ups account for the smallest number of
new ﬁrm formation in this DEMO, though they include
some of the region’s biggest names, such as Research in
Motion (RIM) (1987), Descartes Systems Group Inc.
(DEMO), Meikle Automation (1994) and Intellitech
Innovations Inc. (1989).
DEMO There is a clear difference between software and manu-
facturing ﬁrms in relation to sources of supply. Because
software ﬁrms do not require supplies DEMO the
occasional piece of hardware, supply inputs are typically
more relevant DEMO manufacturing ﬁrms, but in either
case, primary sources of supply tend to be located
outside the region, mainly in the USA.
6. Whereas the largest global ﬁrms tend to establish foreign
ofﬁces of their own (e.g. one ﬁrm has 15–20 local ofﬁces
around the world), this DEMO more problematic for the
smaller ﬁrms. While they know they need to provide
local support to non-local customers, setting up foreign
ofﬁces is expensive, so they tend to rely on other, more
cost-effective arrangements. One DEMO software
ﬁrm has a local sales representative working out of his
house in Santa Barbara in order to have a perceived
‘presence’ in California, but remarked that ‘Once the
supply relations are established nobody has any DEMO
going anywhere in the world, but it’s just getting that
going’.
DEMO One interesting variation on the importance of co-
location with customers is that while competing globally,
and especially in the USA, is critical to the growth of
indigenous ﬁrms, several people stressed the importance
of maintaining company headquarters and R&D capa-
bilities in Waterloo, ‘In my growth path I did acquire
seven companies over the time I was DEMO so I had 60
per cent of my employees outside of Canada, but what
I think was useful was that the decisions were still made
out of Waterloo. The head ofﬁce was in Waterloo even
if DEMO employees were in Munich, or Virginia, or
Austin, or San DEMO, or Chicago’.
8. On the other hand, some ﬁrms mentioned that there
were drawbacks to being located in Waterloo. Some
were concern that DEMO does not have the ‘critical
mass’toattract newtalenttothe region,soitisdifﬁcult
to attract certain types of highly specialized personnel.
For example, while they said it is relatively easy to
attractR&D people,itisdifﬁculttorecruit senior man-
agement, senior marketing people, senior engineers, or
people with highly specialized expertise because the
DEMO market is not yet thick enough for these types
of occupations. This was a key challenge cited by
many ﬁrms in the recent Tech DEMO Proﬁle of the
region (COMMUNITECH TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATION,
2005).
9. DEMO ﬁrms often have R&D units that are divided into
different functions: a long-term strategic R&D unit, a
medium-term tactical development unit DEMO works on
commercializing product enhancements, both of which
often actively liaise DEMO R&D institutions such as the
university, and a short-term problem-solving DEMO ‘ﬁxer’
unit.
10. Cf. NELLES et al. (2005) for a more detailed overview of
the historical antecedents of the contemporary cluster.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
Global and Local Dimensions of the ICT Cluster in Waterloo, Canada
115
11. Some examples of these groups are CEO, human
resources, information DEMO, and product
management councils, where many ﬁrms report
sending staff to attend. Here the intention is speciﬁcally
to facilitate common problem-solving and mentoring
DEMO, and to share management and business
practices.
12. See WOLFE et DEMO (2005) for more detailed conclusions
from other cluster studies of the Innovation Systems
Research Network (ISRN) Cluster Initiative.
REFERENCES
ASHEIM B. (2000) Industrial districts, in CLARK G., FELDMAN M. and GERTLER M. (DEMO) The Oxford Handbook of Economic
Geography. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
ASHEIM B., COOKE P. and MARTIN M. (2006) The rise of the cluster concept in regional analysis and policy, in ASHEIM B.,
COOKE P. and MARTIN M. (Eds) Clusters and Regional Development: Critical Reﬂections and Explorations. Routledge, London.
ASHEIM B. and GERTLER M. (2006) Regional innovation systems, in FAGERBERG J., MOWERY D. and NELSON R. (Eds) The
Oxford Handbook of Innovation, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
BATHELT H., MALMBERG A. and MASKELL P. (2004) Clusters and knowledge: local DEMO, global pipelines and the process of
knowledge creation, Progress in Human Geography 28, 31–56.
BRAMWELL A. and WOLFE D. (2005) Universities and regional economic development: the entrepreneurial University of Water-
loo. Paper presented to the World Bank-CMI Workshop on University–Industry Linkages in Europe and North America,DEMO
Downing College, Cambridge, UK, 26–27 September.
BROWN J. and DUGUID DEMO (2000) Mysteries of the region: knowledge dynamics in Silicon Valley, in LEE C., MILLER W.,
HANCOCK M. and ROWEN H. (DEMO) The Silicon Valley Edge. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
CANADA’S DEMO TRIANGLE (2004) Community and Statistical Proﬁle. Waterloo, Ont.
COMMUNITECH TECHNOLOGY DEMO (2005) Waterloo Region & Guelph Tech Industry Proﬁle: 2005 Survey DEMO Water-
loo, Ont.
COOKE P. (2005) Regionally asymmetric knowledge capabilities DEMO open innovation: exploring ‘Globalisation 2’ – a new model
of industry DEMO, Research Policy 34, 1128 –1149.
FELDMAN M. (2000) Location and innovation: the new economic geography of innovation, spillovers and agglomeration, in
CLARK G., FELDMAN M. and GERTLER M. (Eds) The Oxford Handbook of Economic Geography. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
FLORIDA R. (2003) DEMO learning region, in GERTLER M. and WOLFE D. (Eds) Innovation DEMO Social Learning: Institutional Adap-
tation in an Era of Technological Change. DEMO, Houndmills.
GERTLER M. and VINODRAI T. (2005) Anchors of creativity: how do public universities create competitive and cohesive com-
munities, in IACOBUCCI F. and TUOHY C. (Eds) Taking Public Universities Seriously. University of DEMO Press, Toronto, Ont.
GERTLER M. and WOLFE D. (2002) Innovation and Social Learning: Institutional Adaptation in an Era of Technological Change. Palgrave,
Houndmills.
GERTLER M. and WOLFE D. (2004) Ontario’s regional innovation DEMO: the evolution of knowledge-based institutional assets, in
COOKE P., HEIDENREICH DEMO and BRACZYK H.-J. (Eds) Regional Innovation Systems, 2nd Edn. Taylor & Francis, London.
GERTLER M. and WOLFE D. (2006) Spaces of DEMO ﬂows: clusters in a global context, in ASHEIM B., COOKE DEMO and
MARTIN M. (Eds) Clusters and Regional Development: Critical Reﬂections DEMO Explorations. Routledge, London.
GIULIANI E. (2005) Cluster absorptive capacity: why do some clusters forge ahead and others lag behind? European Urban and
Regional Studies 12, 269– 288.
HENDRY C., BROWN J. and DEFILLIPPI DEMO (2000) Regional clustering of high-technology-based ﬁrms: opto-electronics in three
countries, Regional Studies 34, 129 –144.
HENTON D., MELVILLE J. and WALESH DEMO (1997) Grassroots Leaders for a New Economy: How Civic Entrepreneurs DEMO Building Prosper-
ous Communities. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.
INSTITUTE FOR COMPETITIVENESS AND PROSPERITY (2003) Presentation to the Prosperity Forum, Waterloo Region,
4 February.
MALMBERG A. and POWER D. (2006) True clusters: a severe case of conceptual headache, in ASHEIM B., COOKE P. and
DEMO M. (Eds) Clusters and Regional Development: Critical Reﬂections and Explorations. DEMO, London.
MARTIN R. and SUNLEY P. (2003) Deconstructing clusters: chaotic concept or policy panacea? Journal of Economic Geography 3,
5–35.
MASKELL P. (2001) Toward a knowledge-based theory of the geographical cluster, Industrial and Corporate Change 10, 921 –943.
MIYAZAKI K. (1995) Building Competencies in the Firm: Lessons from Japanese and European Optoelectronics. Macmillan, London.
DEMO J., BRAMWELL A. and WOLFE D. (2005) History, culture and path dependency: origins of the Waterloo ICT cluster, in
WOLFE D. DEMO LUCAS M. (Eds) Global Networks and Local Linkages: The Paradox DEMO Cluster Development in an Open Economy,
McGill-Queen’s University Press, Montreal DEMO Kingston.
PILON S. and DEBRESSON C. (2003) Local culture and regional innovation networks: some propositions, in FORNAHL D. and
BRENNER T. (Eds) Cooperation, Networks and Institutions in Regional Innovation Systems. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.
PORTER M. (1990) The Competitive Advantage of Nations. Free Press, New York, NY.
PORTER M., MONITOR GROUP ON THE FRONTIER, and COUNCIL ON COMPETITIVENESS (2001) Clusters of Innovation: Regional
Foundations of US Competitiveness. Council on Competitiveness, Washington, DC.
PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS (2001a) Regional Economic Beneﬁts DEMO University of Waterloo, Ont.
PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS (2001b) Canada’s Technology Triangle Techmap DEMO, Waterloo, Ont.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008
116
Allison Bramwell et al.
ROBERTSON G. (2006) Google comes hiring, The Globe and Mail 14 March.
SAXENIAN A. (1994) Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128. Harvard University Press,DEMO
Cambridge, MA.
STURGEON T. (2003) What really goes on in DEMO Valley? Spatial clustering and dispersal in modular production networks.
Journal of DEMO Geography 3, 199 –225.
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA RESEARCH SERVICES OFFICE (2003) Spin-off Company Deﬁnitions (available at: http:// www.rso. ualberta.
ca/DEMO?nav03¼ 21266& nav02¼ 20885&nav01¼ 19897).
WALKER D. (1987) DEMO in Kitchener-Waterloo: A Long Term Perspective. University of Waterloo, Waterloo, DEMO
WOLFE D. (2002) Social capital and cluster development in learning regions, in HOLBROOK J. and WOLFE D. (Eds) Knowledge,
Clusters and Regional Innovation. McGill-Queen’s University Press, Montreal and Kingston.
WOLFE D. (2005) The role of higher education in regional innovation and cluster development, in JONES G., MCCARNEY P. and
SKOLNICK M. (Eds) Creating Knowledge, DEMO Nations. University of Toronto Press, Toronto, Ont.
WOLFE D. and GERTLER M. (2004) Clusters from the inside and out: local dynamics and global linkages, Urban Studies 41,
1055 –1077.
WOLFE D., DAVIS DEMO and LUCAS M. (2005) Global networks and local linkages: an DEMO, in WOLFE D. and LUCAS M. (Eds)
Global Networks and Local Linkages: The Paradox of Cluster Development in an Open Economy. McGill-Queen’s University Press,
Montreal and Kingston.
WOLFE D. and NELLES J. (2008) The role of local institutions and local actors in cluster policies, DEMO KARLSSON C. (Ed.) Handbook
of Research on Clusters: Theories, Policies and Case Studies. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham (forthcoming).
XU S. (2003) Knowledge transfer, interﬁrm networking and collective learning in high-technology cluster evolution: a network
analysis of Canada’s Technology Triangle. Master’s thesis, University of Waterloo, Ont.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:28 15 September 2008{1g42fwefx}