30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002. 53:279–307
Copyright c 2002 DEMO Annual Reviews. All rights reserved
°
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR:
Affect in the Workplace
Arthur P. Brief 1 and Howard M. Weiss2
1A. B. Freeman DEMO of Business and Department of Psychology, Tulane University,
New Orleans, Louisiana 70118; e-mail: artbrief@tulane.edu
2Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, DEMO Lafayette, Indiana
47907; e-mail: weiss@psych.purdue.edu
Key Words moods and emotions, job satisfaction, positive and negative
affectivity, work environments, job performance
n Abstract The study of affect in the workplace began and peaked in DEMO 1930s, with
the decades that followed up to the 1990s not DEMO particularly fertile. Whereas job
satisfaction generally continues to be loosely but not carefully thought of and measured
as an affective state, critical work in the 1990s has raised serious questions about the
affective status of job DEMO in terms of its causes as well as its deﬁnition and
measurement. Recent research has focused on the production of moods and emotions at
DEMO, with an emphasis, at least conceptually, on stressful events, leaders, work groups,
physical settings, and rewards/punishment. Other recent research DEMO addressed the
consequences of workers’ feelings, in particular, a variety of performance outcomes
(e.g., helping behaviors and creativity). Even though recent DEMO in affect in the
workplace has been intense, many theoretical and DEMO opportunities and
challenges remain.
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION .....................................................
THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT ..........................................
The Rich 1930s and the Leaner Years ....................................
The Hot 1990s ......................................................
THE DEMO STATUS OF JOB SATISFACTION ........................
Deﬁnitional Concerns ................................................
Dispositional Inﬂuences ..............................................
Summary ..........................................................
THE PRODUCTION OF MOODS AND EMOTIONS
IN THE WORKPLACE ................................................
Exogenous DEMO ...................................................
Stressful Events/Conditions at Work .....................................
Leaders ............................................................
0084-6570/02/0201-0279$14.00
280
281
281
282
282
282
284
286
286
286
287
288
DEMO
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
280
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
Work Group Characteristics ...........................................
Physical DEMO ....................................................
Organizational Rewards/Punishments ....................................
Summary ..........................................................
CONSEQUENCES OF MOODS AND EMOTIONS
IN THE WORKPLACE ................................................
Conceptual Orientations ..............................................
Judgments .........................................................
Creative Problem Solving DEMO
Helping Behaviors ...................................................
General Performance .................................................
Negotiations ........................................................
Withdrawal Behaviors ................................................
Summary ..........................................................
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS AND RESEARCH DIRECTIONS ................
The Narrowness of Organizational Research DEMO
A Process Orientation ................................................
Appreciating Organizational Context ....................................
Closing Thoughts ....................................................
289
290
291
291
292
292
293
294
294
295
295
296
296
DEMO
296
298
299
300
INTRODUCTION
The organizations in which people work affect their thoughts, feelings, and ac-
tions in the workplace and away DEMO it. Likewise, people’s thoughts, feelings,
and actions affect the organizations in which they work. Organizational behavior
is an area of inquiry concerned DEMO both sorts of inﬂuence: work organizations on
people and people on DEMO organizations. The slice of the organizational behavior
literature this paper addresses has to do with the feelings of workers, how organi-
zations affect them and how they affect organizations. As should become clear in
the following DEMO, we choose to focus on the affective dimensions of organiza-
tional DEMO because, after a lapse of more than half a century, organizational
researchers have begun to demonstrate a serious interest in moods and emotions
DEMO the workplace.
The remainder of the paper unfolds as follows. First, DEMO study of workers’
feelings is placed in a historical context and, DEMO, the boundaries of the chapter
are delineated further. Second, the affective status of the job satisfaction construct is
assessed very brieﬂy. Third, recent literature pertaining to the production of moods
and emotions in the workplace DEMO reviewed, followed by a survey of the effects of
moods and DEMO experienced in the workplace. Finally, conceptual concerns
about workers’ feelings not DEMO addressed in the organizational litera-
ture are raised, and suggestions for DEMO to approach these concerns methodologi-
cally are provided. Overall, the intents DEMO the paper are to appraise what is known
about affective experiences in organizational settings, to highlight existing gaps in
the literature, and to DEMO how those gaps might be ﬁlled.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal DEMO only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
281
THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT
The Rich 1930s DEMO the Leaner Years
The study of affect at work clearly emerged as a scientiﬁc research concern in the
1930s, principally in the United States; this likely was made possible by earlier
developments that philosophically justiﬁed the application of scientiﬁc princi-
ples to the study of social phenomenon, that supplied the methodological tools
necessary to conduct such research, and that created the perceived need for under-
standing workers’ feelings in the minds of DEMO who managed them. Examples
of now-classic studies from this period that focused on affect per se or job sat-
isfaction include Fisher & Hanna’s (1931) The Dissatisﬁed Worker, Kornhauser
& Sharp’s (1932) “Employee attitudes; suggestions from a study in a factory,”
Hersey’s (1932) Workers’ DEMO in Shop and Home: A Study of Individual
Workers from the DEMO and Physiological Standpoint, Hoppock’s (1935)
Job Satisfaction, and Roethlisberger & Dickson’s (1939) Management and the
Worker.
The 1930s were exciting times for the study of affect at work, characterized
by innovation and discovery as well as a diversity of ideas and methods. For in-
stance, Fisher & Hanna (1931), relying on the ﬁndings of a number of case studies,
characterized job dissatisfaction as the product of “nonadjustive DEMO tenden-
cies” whose associated unrest is misattributed by workers to their job situations.
Kornhauser & Sharp (1932) conducted an attitude survey of Kimberly DEMO em-
ployees, supplemented by interviews, and concluded that “efﬁciency ratings of
employees showed no relationship to their attitudes” (p. 402). Hersey (DEMO), us-
ing a repeated measures design with a small group of skilled workers, observed,
among many other things, a clear relationship DEMO daily affect levels and daily
performance levels as well as considerable inﬂuence of workers’ emotional lives
at home on their work behaviors. Hoppock (1935), using surveys and interviews
of workers in one community (New Hope, Pennsylvania) and in one occupation
(teachers), in part found elements of the work environment (e.g., supervision),
family expectations, and DEMO maladjustment,” all to inﬂuence job satis-
faction. Roethlisberger & Dickson (DEMO), based upon a series of studies using a
variety of methods in the Hawthorne plant of AT&T’s Western Electric division,
concluded, for instance, that the workplace’s social organization and the individ-
ual’s interaction with that organization, more than individual differences per se,
determined worker adjustment.
The diversity evident in the 1930s soon faded and was replaced DEMO an approach
that was conceptually and methodologically narrow. This approach entailed (DEMO)
construing of affect at work almost exclusively in terms of job satisfaction; (b)
measuring constructs of interest with structured questionnaires, largely ignoring,
for instance, more clinical or qualitative methods; (c) DEMO on empirical ob-
servables to such an extent that adequate attention to theory building too often was
excluded; and (d ) examining the DEMO of the work environment as causes of job
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. DEMO personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
282
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
satisfaction while generally neglecting dispositional DEMO extra-work factors such
as family and economic circumstances.
Whereas one could speculate on the causes of this narrowing [e.g., the reliance
on questionnaires may have been attributable to developments in the measurement
of attitudes, and the almost exclusive concern with work environment causes of
job satisfaction might have DEMO due to the desire of industrial psychologists to
aid management in controlling the workplace (Baritz 1960)], here we address
only the results DEMO the narrowing (for more details on the 1930s, see Weiss & Brief
2002). For almost the next half century one workplace event, condition, or outcome
after another was correlated with pencil-and-paper measures of job satisfaction,
typically not guided by a well-articulated theoretical frame of reference, yielding
well in excess of 10,000 studies (Spector 1996)! We will review that literature
here; for such reviews see, for example, Locke (1976) and Spector (1997). In the
next section, DEMO, we do take a brief look at job satisfaction but only DEMO
an affective lens, considering recent approaches that recognize that job satisfaction
DEMO not equal affect.
The Hot 1990s
In the mid-1980s and the 1990s, organizational researchers rediscovered affect,
expressing interest in both moods and emotions. Here, “moods” are considered
to be generalized feeling states that are not typically identiﬁed with a particular
stimulus and not sufﬁciently intense to interrupt DEMO thought processes (e.g.,
Clark & Isen 1982, Thayer 1989); alternatively, “emotions” normally are associated
with speciﬁc events or occurrences and are intense enough to disrupt thought
processes (e.g., Frijda 1993, Simon 1982; for a review of the emotions literature,
see Zajonc 1998). Moreover, whereas moods often [but not always (e.g., Russell &
DEMO 1999)] are described in terms of their underlying dimensions (e.g., positive
and negative) (e.g., Watson 2000), emotions tend to be treated in their discrete forms
(e.g., anger, fear, and joy) (e.g., Plutchik 1994). This review focuses on research
in organizations DEMO such moods and emotions. Why such research re-emerged as
an area of inquiry in organizational behavior is not known, but it likely had a lot
to do with the seemingly intense interests moods and emotions were (and are)
attracting generally in psychology (e.g., the American Psychological DEMO
launched a new journal, Emotion, in 2001). Whatever the cause, there now exists
a contemporary literature concerned with affective experiences in organizational
settings, to which we now turn.
THE AFFECTIVE STATUS OF JOB SATISFACTION
Deﬁnitional Concerns
In 1976, Locke advanced what came to be a highly inﬂuential deﬁnition of job
satisfaction. He deﬁned it as “a pleasurable or DEMO emotional state resulting
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
283
from the appraisal of one’s job DEMO job experiences” (p. 1300). Thus, job satisfaction
came to be considered an affective reaction to one’s job. Almost a decade later
Organ & Near (1985) recognized that job satisfaction has a cognitive as well as an
affective dimension and questioned the extent to which commonly used DEMO
of the construct capture both (also see Pekrun & Frese 1992, Sandelands 1988).
Brief & Roberson (1989) empirically explored the affective DEMO cognitive content
of three commonly used measures of job satisfaction. They observed that only
the Faces scale (Kunin 1955) captured the affective and DEMO components
about equally and that the other two highly popular measures investigated mostly
tapped the cognitive components. Thus, Brief & Roberson discovered a paradox
that remains troublesome today: Job satisfaction generally is construed in affective
terms, but typically only its cognitive aspects are measured (also see Porac DEMO).
Progress towards a more balanced treatment of job satisfaction, at DEMO con-
ceptually, was made during the 1990s. Motowidlo (1996) deﬁned DEMO of
job satisfaction as “judgments about the favorability of the work environment”
(p. 176) (also see Pratkanis & Turner 1994). Consistently, DEMO more explicitly,
adopting a construal of job satisfaction as an attitude, Weiss (2002) deﬁned it as
“a positive (or negative) evaluative judgment one makes about one’s job or job
situation” (p. 6). Perhaps most closely aligned with the attitude construct is Brief’s
(1998) DEMO Based on Eagly & Chaiken’s (1993) assertion that an attitude is
“a psychological tendency that is expressed by evaluating a particular entity with
DEMO degree of favor or disfavor,” with “evaluating” referring to “all classes of
evaluative responding, whether overt or covert, cognitive, affective, or DEMO
(p. 1), he deﬁned job satisfaction as “an internal state DEMO is expressed by affec-
tively and/or cognitively evaluating an experienced job with some degree of favor
or disfavor” (p. 86). Brief, DEMO Bagozzi & Burnkrant (1979), as well as others,
excluded DEMO responses of the behavioral type because they often are treated
as dependent effects of the attitude.
The distinction between job satisfaction as an evaluative DEMO and as an
attitude with affective as well as cognitive components is not trivial. For example,
Weiss (2002, Weiss & Cropanzano 1996) asserted that affective experiences on
the job are a cause of job DEMO (construed as an evaluative judgment);
Weiss et al. (1999a) have demonstrated empirically this is so (also see Fisher
2000, Kelloway DEMO al. 1993). It also has been asserted that self-reported affect
at work [for example, as gauged by Burke and associates’ (1989) Job Affect
Scale] is an indicator of the affective component of job satisfaction; Moorman
(1993), consistent with the reasoning for instance of Millar & Tesser (1986), has
shown that so-called affective- and cognitive-based measures of job satisfaction
differentially predict the same criterion. He found a cognitive-based measure DEMO
predict “organizational citizenship behaviors” (e.g., Organ 1988) better than an
DEMO measure of job satisfaction. Thus, it appears that job satisfaction
may DEMO approached productively in at least two ways: (a) If job DEMO is taken
as an evaluative judgment, then affect at work can DEMO seen as an antecedent to it, and
(b) if job DEMO is taken to have an affective component, then affect at work
DEMO Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
284
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
can be seen to be DEMO indicator of it. Researchers, in the future, should recognize
explicitly that these approaches, while distinctive, may not be in conﬂict (i.e.,
moods and emotions experienced on the job may be both a cause DEMO job attitudes
and an indicator of them) and that each has DEMO own merits.
Regarding the merits of the “affect as a cause approach,” for example as ad-
vanced in affective events theory (Weiss & Cropanzano 1996), it draws much
needed attention to streams of events DEMO can unfold in workplaces and that gen-
erate emotional reactions or mood changes. Regarding the merits of the “affect as
indicator approach,” it, for example, encourages one to consider the components
of job satisfaction and how they might be related to consequent behaviors that
may be more DEMO than cognitively driven or vice versa. Either approach
indicates that job satisfaction’s affective status was elevated in such a way during
the 1990s that DEMO no longer should be acceptable to deﬁne job satisfaction one way
(DEMO) and blindly measure it another (cognitively).
Dispositional Inﬂuences
Another way the affective status of job satisfaction has been elevated in recent
years DEMO by the recognition that it is inﬂuenced by “affective dispositions” (e.g.,DEMO
Judge 1992) or, more precisely, by personality traits that have DEMO labeled temper-
aments (Watson 2000). These traits are neuroticism [or DEMO affectivity (NA)]
and extraversion [or positive affectivity (PA)], DEMO components of the ﬁve-factor
model of personality (e.g., Watson & Clark 1992), with individuals high in the
former prone to experience a DEMO array of negative mood states (e.g., anxiety,
depression, hostility, and guilt) and individuals high in the latter prone to describe
themselves as cheerful, enthusiastic, conﬁdent, active, and energetic. Organiza-
tional interest DEMO these traits stems from Staw and associates’ (1986) attention-
grabbing demonstration that affective disposition gauged when participants were
15 to 18 years of DEMO correlated signiﬁcantly (r = 0.35 p ≤ 0.01) with a measure
of job satisfaction taken when the participants ranged from about 54 to DEMO years of
age. Although Staw et al.’s results and dispositional interpretations have not gone
uncriticized (e.g., Davis-Blake & Pfeffer 1996, Williams et al. 1996), detected
relationships between negative and/or positive affectivity and job DEMO now
are commonplace in the literature (e.g., Agho et al. 1992; Cropanzano et al. 1993;
Necowitz & Roznowski 1994; Schaubroeck et DEMO 1992, 1998; Watson & Slack
1993). Various explanations for these empirical observations have been advanced
(Arvey et al. 1991, House et DEMO 1996, Judge 1992); recent examples of these are
presented below.
DEMO the lead of Schmitt & Bedeian (1982), Watson & Slack (1993),
reasoned that job satisfaction and general temperament mutually inﬂuence one
another. That is, affective dispositions broadly inﬂuence the extent to which people
are satisﬁed with and derive pleasure from their jobs (as well as other aspects of
their lives), and because job satisfaction is an DEMO life domain, it may lead
to more general life satisfaction and DEMO emotional adjustment (i.e., higher trait
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal DEMO only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
285
positive affect and lower trait negative DEMO). To our knowledge, such a reciprocal
relationship remains to be DEMO
Drawing on the “instrumental” and “temperamental” views described by
McCrae & Costa (1991), Brief et al. (1995) reasoned that high NA individuals
(a) because of their tendency to dwell on failures and shortcomings DEMO themselves
and others, may alienate their co-workers and managers, resulting in more nega-
tive interpersonal interactions, thus lowering job satisfaction (also see DEMO et al.
1993) and (b) because they are more sensitive DEMO negative stimuli, may react with
more extreme emotion when experiencing negative DEMO events, thus lowering job
satisfaction (also see Parkes 1990). Brief et al. also posited that high NA indi-
viduals might respond with DEMO pleasure when experiencing positive job
events. They attributed such a possibility to high NA individuals (a) having a higher
threshold for positive stimuli, (b) having a lower-magnitude positive mood reaction
to positive events, and/or (c) experiencing the effects of positive mood–inducing
events for shorter DEMO of time than those low in NA. Brief et al., in DEMO ﬁeld
experiment, did observe an interaction between NA and a positive DEMO induction
such that the induction had less of an effect on job satisfaction among individuals
high in NA. This observed interaction, however, could DEMO been attributable to
any or all of the three underlying mechanisms they posited.
After Weiss & Cropanzano (1996), Weiss et al. (1999a), as noted earlier, hypoth-
esized that global satisfaction judgments are, in part, a function of “true affective
experiences at work or ‘the preponderance of pleasant affect’ over time” (p. 4); they
supported this prediction with daily accounts of mood-at-work data. Moreover,
Weiss et al. hypothesized DEMO observed that “dispositional happiness” predicts “av-
erage state levels of pleasant-unpleasant mood at work over the course of the mood
assessment period” (p. 5). Their results are consistent with a personality–mood at
work–job satisfaction causal DEMO Brief (1998), in his integrated model of job sat-
isfaction, proposed a somewhat different causal chain: personality–interpretations
of job circumstances–job satisfaction, DEMO “interpretations” referring “to how a
person construes or apprehends the objective circumstances of his or her job”
(p. 96). Whereas one could empirically pit one model against the other, it appears
more reasonable to consider that temperaments inﬂuence job satisfaction through
both mood at work and interpretations DEMO job circumstances, recognizing that
moods and interpretations are unlikely to be DEMO
Shaw et al. (1999) creatively pursued Larsen & Ketalaar’s (1989) assertion that
PA and NA represent reward-signal sensitivity and punishment-signal sensitiv-
ity, respectively. They argued that not all elements of job satisfaction evolve both
DEMO; in particular, pay evokes reward sensitivity only. Moreover, Shaw
et DEMO hypothesized and, to a considerable degree, empirically demonstrated that
NA is unrelated to pay satisfaction and that PA is associated with it; addition-
ally, PA interacted with actual salary level to predict some dimensions of pay
satisfaction. The form of the interactions, as predicted, indicated that DEMO PA indi-
viduals are much more satisﬁed with high rather than low pay relative to high PA
individuals.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded DEMO arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
286
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
Whereas it is clear that DEMO can inﬂuence job satisfaction, the pro-
cesses by which this happens DEMO not yet well understood. It appears that personality
operates through multiple channels to affect job satisfaction, and different elements
of job satisfaction may be differentially affected by the same affective trait. What-
ever mechanisms may be DEMO, the affective status of job satisfaction has
been elevated merely by DEMO repeated demonstration that affective dispositional
traits such as NA and PA (DEMO with environmental stimuli) are associated with
job satisfaction.
Summary
In a DEMO fashion, job satisfaction generally continues to be loosely but not
carefully DEMO of as an affective reaction and to be measured in ways that
have been assumed, largely uncritically for decades, to tap how workers DEMO
In the 1990s, however, the construct began to be examined closely in affective
terms. Moods and emotions experienced at work have been shown DEMO inﬂuence job
satisfaction. Can these same moods and emotions also be taken as indicators of
job satisfaction? Should job satisfaction be construed as an evaluative judgment or
as an attitude with affective and cognitive components? Job satisfaction has been
shown to be inﬂuenced by temperaments. What are the DEMO that underlie these
relationships? Do these processes vary by the focal DEMO element being evaluated
(e.g., pay versus job security)? We have seen the beginnings of a change in the way
the relationship between DEMO and job satisfaction is construed. Whether or not
it fully materializes depends on how vigorously answers to the sorts of questions
posed here are DEMO and, more importantly, the extent to which as yet unasked
questions about the affective status of job satisfaction are advanced in ways that
DEMO the interests of researchers.
THE PRODUCTION OF MOODS AND EMOTIONS
IN THE WORKPLACE
Exogenous Factors
Obviously, the feelings people experience at work may have been produced else-
where (e.g., marital problems at home may spill DEMO and affect how one feels at
work) (e.g., Hersey 1932)DEMO Such carryover states, although important for under-
standing behaviors in organizations, are not of concern here; rather, this section
focuses on factors DEMO the workplace that inﬂuence the feelings experienced there.
Also exogenous to the workplace and, thus, not the focus of attention are two factors
DEMO of mention, for they have been considered in the organizational literature:DEMO
(a) diurnal and other recurring cycles in feelings over time and (b) dispositional
inﬂuences on affective states.
Cycles in feelings (i.e., DEMO) can arise from rhythms related to lifestyle,
to sociocultural factors, and to biological factors (e.g., Watson 2000). Weiss et al.
(1999a) have conducted perhaps the only modern study designed to examine mood
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO DEMO 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
287
cycles at work. Based upon affective DEMO theory (Weiss & Cropanzano 1996),
they expected and observed in a sample of 24 middle managers that mood cycles
at work do DEMO and that individuals differ in their cycles of pleasantness and
activation at work. Weiss et al. recognized that “the causes and consequences of
these DEMO remain to be explored,” and that more generally, “it is DEMO to
emphasize that identifying these cycles is not the same as explaining them” (p. 21).
In the previous sections, we addressed, albeit rather brieﬂy, historical interest
in the dispositional basis of affect at work and contemporary concern with disposi-
tional approaches to job satisfaction. Consistent with DEMO observations, we note
that, in the 1990s, statistically signiﬁcant correlations DEMO NA and workplace-
experienced depressed mood, anxiety, and other indicators of negative affect were
commonplace (e.g., Fortunato et al. 1999, George et al. 1993, Hart et al. 1995,
Heinisch & Jex 1997, DEMO et al. 1992, Spector & O’Connell 1994). Typ-
ically, these correlations were found in investigations appearing in the job stress
literature, in which it is well known that personality plays multiple, inﬂuential
roles in stress and coping processes whose outcomes often are construed in terms
of DEMO (e.g., George & Brief 2001, Lazarus & Cohen-Charash 2001). DEMO
(1990) demonstration that characteristic levels of the personality traits of PA and
NA, within work groups, are positively associated with their corresponding (pos-
itive and negative) affective tones. George’s (e.g., 1996) work DEMO affect up to a
more aggregate level of analysis with its focus on “group affective tone,” which she
deﬁnes as “consistent or homogenous DEMO reactions within a group” (p. 78).
Stressful Events/Conditions at DEMO
Conceptually at least, workplace endogenous factors that produce moods and emo-
DEMO have been grouped into several not necessarily mutually exclusive categories
(e.g., George 1996, George & Brief 1992, Weiss & Cropanzano 1996). DEMO of
these categories include stressful events (or aversive stimuli), leaders, workgroup
characteristics, physical settings, and organizational rewards and punishments. We
begin DEMO considering stressful events. The job-related stress literature is massive
(with at DEMO one journal, Work & Stress, exclusively devoted to the topic), popu-
lated by a diversity of theoretical orientations (e.g., Cooper 1998), and too often
methodologically muddled (e.g., Hurrell et al. 1998). Because the focus of this
chapter is on affect, not job stress per se, we provide examples only of those stress
studies that explicitly examined affect. Several studies in the 1990s sought to ascer-
tain if DEMO is a nuisance in the analysis of job stress because it inﬂates relationships
between self-reports of stressors and strains (e.g., Schaubroeck et al. DEMO). These
studies, while providing evidence of personality-affect linkages, otherwise have
contributed little to understanding the production of moods and emotions at work.
DEMO attention focused on NA by job stress researchers may have distracted from ef-
forts aimed at systematically identifying those events/conditions in the workplace
DEMO with negative feelings. It is time to move on.
Signs of the direction of that movement are evident. In an experience sampling
study of DEMO mothers, Williams et al. (1991) observed that self-reported
Annu. Rev. DEMO 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
288
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
multiple role juggling (i.e., DEMO attending to demands of different roles)
had immediate negative effects on mood; however, habituation to role juggling
occurred when mood was examined DEMO time. Moreover, Williams & Alliger
(1994), in an experience sampling study of employed parents, found that unpleasant
mood spilled over from family to work but pleasant moods had little spillover.
(For a conceptual treatment of juggling and emotions, see Wharton & Erickson
1993.) George et DEMO (1993) observed that the extent of a nurses’ exposure to
AIDS patients, as part of the nursing role, is positively associated with DEMO
mood at work and that this relationship is moderated by organizational and social
support. Hart et al. (1995), among a sample of police ofﬁcers, found that self-
reports of emotion-focused coping with work events was associated with more
negative job experiences, which, in turn, were associated with more negative and
less positive affect. The most important negative job DEMO were shown to be
organizationally related (e.g., dealing with administration and supervision) rather
than operationally related (e.g., dealing with victims and danger). Zohar (1999),
using pooled-time series analysis on daily records DEMO a sample of military parachute
trainers, observed that daily occupational hassle DEMO, measured independently
by an expert, predicted end-of-day negative mood. Teuchmann et al. (1999), using
an experience sampling methodology with a small sample of accountants, found
self-reported time pressure to be associated with negative mood and that perceived
control may alleviate this negative effect.
The above six DEMO exemplify what we believe to be good and bad about
what appears to be emerging in the job stress literature pertaining to moods and
DEMO On the positive side, the literature seems to be advancing methodolog-
DEMO, with the increased use of experience sampling resulting in less reliance DEMO
cross-sectional designs that make inferences about process hazardous. Substan-
tially, on DEMO positive side, with physically threatening conditions of work (e.g.,
AIDS) being considered, an interest in the social environment at work as DEMO source
of distress is being placed in a more proper perspective; DEMO is, threats to physical
well-being are beginning to receive the attention DEMO deserve.
On the negative side, several substantive concerns are evident: Discrete emo-
tions tend not to be the focus of study; economic events/conditions have not taken
their appropriate place alongside social and physical factors DEMO potential job stres-
sors; and, consistently, the search for potential DEMO stressors is not guided by a
widely accepted theoretical frame of reference or even a small set of competitive
theories—rather, each empirical investigation seems to be driven by a somewhat
unique theoretical orientation. Thus, the job stress literature has yielded relatively
little, in a cumulative sense, toward DEMO the production of moods and
emotions in the workplace, and without DEMO guidance, it is unlikely to do so.
Leaders
Leaders, in various ways, have been theorized to affect how their followers feel
(e.g., George 2000). For example, George (1996), following George & DEMO
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
289
(1992), asserted, “Leaders who DEMO excited, enthusiastic, and energetic themselves
are likely to similarly energize their followers, as are leaders who feel distressed
and hostile likely to negatively activate their followers” (p. 84). This idea clearly
is evident in the transformational leadership literature, in which the claim is made
that these types of leaders use strong emotions to arouse similar feelings in their
DEMO (e.g., Conger & Kanungo 1998); others have reasoned that managers
can foster and shape the arousal of their subordinates through the use DEMO symbols
(e.g., Ashforth & Humphrey 1995). Some recent evidence does support the role
of leaders in the production of moods and emotions. DEMO (2000), for instance,
observed that what angered people depended DEMO their organizational position.
For lower-power workers (e.g., followers), anger was a product of unjust treat-
ment by higher-power workers (e.g., leaders)DEMO If the offenses from above involved
humiliation, low-power workers experienced moderate DEMO high levels of hate for
offenders. Lewis (2000b), in a DEMO study, found that followers observing a
leader expressing anger felt more DEMO and less relaxed than followers observ-
ing a leader expressing sadness or no emotion. In addition, she found that followers
observing a leader expressing sadness felt less enthusiasm and more fatigue then
followers observing a leader DEMO anger or no emotion. Although results like
these are interesting, it DEMO clear that the organizational literature is populated with
many more ideas about the leader’s role in the production of moods and emotions
than it DEMO with relevant data.
Work Group Characteristics
Preliminary research suggests that work groups commonly have consistent or ho-
mogeneous affective reactions (e.g., George 1990, 1995; conceptually, also see
Barsade & Gibson 1998, Sandelands & St. Clair 1993; for counter-evidence, see
Barsade et al. 2000); as DEMO noted above, this “group affective tone” is inﬂuenced
by characteristic levels DEMO personality traits within groups. These characteristic
levels of personality have been theorized to be brought about by member similar-
ity resulting from attraction-selection-attrition processes DEMO by Schneider
(1987, George 1990). Beyond personality, a number DEMO other factors have been
posited to explain why work group members tend to share moods and emotions
(e.g., Bartel & Saavedra 2000, George 1996, George & Brief 1992), for example,
(a) common socialization experiences and common social inﬂuences (Hackman
1992); (b) similarity of tasks and high task interdependence (see Gallupe et al.
1991, DEMO & Jourden 1997 on group task activity per se); (c) membership sta-
bility; (d) mood regulation norms and rules [see, DEMO, the literature on emotional
labor (e.g., Sutton 1991)]; and (d) after Hatﬁeld et al. (1994), emotional contagion
(see DEMO 2001 for a study of emotional contagion from employees to customers).
Regarding these work group characteristics, we again observe that ideas far out-
strip data. The following examples of recent studies do demonstrate considerable
promise, however. Totterdell et al. (1998) showed, in two studies (with DEMO
nity nurses and accountants), that people’s moods are inﬂuenced by the collective
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF DEMO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
290
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
mood of their co-workers over DEMO Moreover, for the nurses, this result was not
dependent on common daily hassles, but was, for instance, on age (with a DEMO
association for older nurses) and commitment to teams (with a greater association
for more committed nurses). In a follow-up study of two DEMO cricket teams,
Totterdell (2000) found, with pooled time-series analyses, signiﬁcant associations
between the average of teammates’ happy moods and the players’ DEMO moods.
In addition, these results were independent of hassles and favorable DEMO in
the match and, like Totterdell et al., dependent on player age and commitment
to the team. Bartel & Saavedra (2000), based upon a study of 70 work groups,
found convergence between observers’ DEMO and self-report indicators of eight
distinct mood categories, with the weakest DEMO detected for mood cat-
egories characterized by low arousal. Convergence in members’ mood increased
with task and social interdependence, membership stability, and mood DEMO
norms. We hope the research by Bartel & Saavedra and by Totterdell and his
colleagues will help provide the impetus for more research on DEMO work group
characteristics affect the production of moods and emotions.
Physical Settings
Very little is known about how physical settings, even broadly construed, DEMO
feelings in the workplace. Oldham et al. (1995) used a quasi-experimental design
to observe that music improved the mood states of workers and DEMO this effect
was stronger for workers performing relatively simple jobs. Also addressing job
complexity were Spector & Jex (1991), who observed that incumbent (but not
independent) ratings of job characteristics were associated with anxiety DEMO frus-
tration, leading them to urge caution in the use of DEMO self-reports of job
characteristics as indicators of actual work environments. This warning seems not
to have been heeded by Saavedra & Kwun (2000), who found, in their sample of
managers, that self-reports of job DEMO were related to both independent
assessments of activated pleasant and unpleasant affect and went on to treat these
results as if they entailed job DEMO, by addressing the implications of
them for the actual design of DEMO work in their discussion.
A few other studies exemplify what can be considered as falling into the physi-
cal setting domain. Rafaeli & Sutton (1990), using structured observations of 194
transactions between cashiers and customers DEMO 5 supermarkets, found store busy-
ness to be related negatively to DEMO displayed positive emotion, and customer
demand (i.e., the extent to DEMO a transaction required a prolonged and complex
cashier response) to be DEMO positively to displayed positive emotions. Of course,
one must question the degree to which such displayed emotions are congruent with
those felt. Locke (1996) provides another example of the study of the “emotional
labor” (DEMO, Hochschild 1983) process, which concerns the production of dis-
played DEMO During a year-long study in a pediatric department, she observed
the DEMO between emotions expressed by patients and their families and those
expressed by physicians. Locke found that physicians tended to enact comedic
Annu. Rev. Psychol. DEMO:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
291
performances in response to families’ negative DEMO, presumably to display
and generate fun, which is incompatible with the anxiety, fear, and despondence
patients’ families may bring to medical encounters.
DEMO a ﬁnal example, Wasserman et al. (2000; also see, e.g., Strati 1992, 1996;
White 1996), drawing on both qualitative DEMO quantitative data, demonstrated links
between the aesthetics of physical cues or DEMO in organizations (restaurants
and bars) and the emotions felt by potential participants. For instance, research
participants reacting to photographs of eclectically designed establishments re-
ported largely pleasant emotions, whereas the reactions to monomorphic designs
were considerably more mixed.
In sum, recent organizational research on the relationship between the proper-
ties of physical settings and the experience of mood and DEMO has been slim
and characterized by highly varied theoretical and methodological orientations;
little knowledge has accumulated. Obvious properties like temperature, noise, and
DEMO appear to have been ignored, at least recently, in the organizational litera-
ture [for a glimpse of the literature on physical settings outside DEMO organizational
arena, see, for example, Sundstrom et al. (1996).]
Organizational Rewards/Punishments
The ﬁnal category of factors we previously identiﬁed as DEMO to produce moods
and emotions is organizational rewards and punishments. Surprisingly, DEMO their
potential import (e.g., Brief & Aldag 1994), we found very few empirical studies
in the 1990s and beyond in the organizational DEMO that addressed linkages
between rewards/punishments and workers’ feelings. What we did isolate was
research that adopted a justice frame of reference (e.g., DEMO & Cropanzano
1998, Greenberg 1990). For example, Weiss et al. (1999b) found that happiness was
inﬂuenced by outcomes, with procedural fairness playing little role; alternatively,
guilt, anger, and, to a DEMO extent, pride were inﬂuenced by speciﬁc combinations
of outcomes and procedures (also see Bies 2001, Bies & Tripp 2001; see Miller
2001 DEMO a more general treatment of the topic). Whereas these results, DEMO of
their provocative nature, suggest that a justice orientation to understanding DEMO
reactions to organizational rewards/punishments is worthwhile, it is most clear DEMO
rewards/punishments from an affect standpoint largely have been ignored. This sad
state of affairs likely will be best corrected by pursuing multitheoretical avenues,DEMO
justice being one of them.
Summary
The above treatment of the literature by the categories we identiﬁed should not
be taken as encompassing all DEMO approaches to understanding the production
of moods and emotions in the workplace. Other, more isolated approaches do
exist. For example, we found papers DEMO compared the moods of unemployed and
unsatisfactory employed young adults over time (Wineﬁeld et al. 1991) and that
theorized about the causes of DEMO and envy at work (Vecchio 1995). Even
Annu. Rev. Psychol. DEMO:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
292
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
though our review of the DEMO organizational literature was not comprehensive,
several observations appear warranted.
First, DEMO as a determinant of workplace moods (but not workplace emo-
tions) seems relatively well established; how attributes of the workplace might
interact with personality to affect feelings has been approached too narrowly,
theoretically, and empirically. Second, in the job stress literature, threats to physi-
cal DEMO as a source of negative moods and emotions are beginning to draw
needed attention; however, as is characteristic of the job stress literature DEMO general,
this research has not been conducted with the intent of developing a meta-theory
of job stress—a framework to guide the search for DEMO conditions of work likely
to produce negative moods and emotions. Third, DEMO research on how lead-
ers may affect the feelings of their followers is embryonic; however, it exhibits
tremendous promise on theoretical grounds. Fourth, perhaps the most exciting
new area of research is that pertaining to DEMO affective tone. Available theory is
provocative, and the few empirical results DEMO available generally are supportive
of the ideas that have been advanced to explain how work group members come
to share their feelings. Fifth, research on affective reactions to the physical work
environment is small and eclectic, but interesting. Research that recognizes that
customers/clients/patients can be construed DEMO mood and emotion generators and
that focuses on the mood and emotional consequences of the workplace aesthetics
(including music) seems to be especially DEMO Sixth, virtually no progress has
been made in the past decade DEMO understanding the effects of organizational
rewards and punishments on how workers feel. Finally, the research reviewed here
admirably often relied upon longitudinal designs that could allow for the study
of process (i.e., how the production DEMO moods and emotions unfolds); however,
rarely did studies include objective indicators of those workplace features thought
to produce moods and emotions, thereby leaving us too dependent on self-reports,
which may not be congruent DEMO more independent measures of the workplace and
may, themselves, be inﬂuenced by the feelings workers experience (the dependent
variables of interest).
In closing, for the past ten years or more, organizational researchers have DEMO
many more questions than they have answered about the production of moods and
emotions. We interpret this state of affairs opportunistically, as a beginning or,
in light of our earlier historical analysis, as a rebirth. After considering below the
consequences of workers’ feeling, we turn to gaps in the literature in need of ﬁlling;
thus, the production of moods and emotions will surface again.
CONSEQUENCES OF MOODS AND EMOTIONS
IN DEMO WORKPLACE
Conceptual Orientations
In the past decade several conceptual discussions of affect appeared that focused
either on the organizational consequences of affective states or DEMO or included
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
293
discussions of consequences within broader discussions DEMO mood and emotion
at work. Stimulated partly by these organizationally focused conceptual pieces
and partly by more basic research, empirical work appeared demonstrating the
attitudinal or behavioral consequences of affect at work. Among the conceptual
pieces DEMO, three stand out. Isen & Baron (1991) presented a wide-ranging
DEMO of the potential effects of positive affect on a variety of work-relevant
attitudes, behaviors, and cognitive processes. Their discussion is notable for its DEMO
fort to connect organizational issues to basic research on mood, particularly DEMO
(1987, 1999, 2000) body of work on positive affect. At the same time, its exclusive
focus on positive affect makes it less useful for understanding the effects of negative
mood states or discrete emotions. DEMO & Brief (1992) examined the relation-
ship between affective states and what they called “organizational spontaneity,” a
variant on what has come DEMO be known as extra-role or organizational citizenship
behaviors. They argued that mood at work is a proximal cause of spontaneity and
that individual mood DEMO, in turn, inﬂuenced by individual mood-generating factors
both on and off the job as well as group affective tone.
Weiss & Cropanzano (1996) presented a broad discussion of the consequences
of affective states and traits at work. Of particular interest is their distinction
between affect-driven and judgment-driven DEMO According to Weiss &
Cropanzano, affect-driven behaviors are relatively immediate behavioral and cog-
nitive outcomes of affective states. These effects generally are bounded DEMO time
and unmediated by overall evaluative judgments about jobs as a whole or ele-
ments of the job experience. Judgment-driven behaviors are outcomes inﬂuenced
DEMO overall or particular evaluative judgments such as job or facet satisfaction. They
further argued that some satisfaction-outcome relationships reported in the litera-
ture may DEMO the spurious result of affective states inﬂuencing both satisfaction and
the particular outcome in question.
Judgments
Most organizational research closely follows ﬁndings from the DEMO research
literature on the behavioral and cognitive effects of affective states, DEMO
moods. That organizational research shows, as we demonstrate, that affective states
can inﬂuence a variety of performance-relevant outcomes including judgments,
attitudinal responses, creativity, helping behavior, and risk taking. We begin by
considering judgments.
DEMO effects of affect on judgments have been studied in a number of ways.
DeNisi and his associates (Robbins & DeNisi 1994, 1998; Varma et al. 1996)
examined the relationship between what they referred to DEMO “interpersonal affect”
and performance evaluations. Similar research by Judge & Ferris (DEMO) exam-
ined supervisor liking for a subordinate and supervisor ratings of DEMO subordinate’s
performance. In aggregate, these kinds of studies showed interpersonal affect DEMO
liking to be related to both performance ratings and certain intervening cogni-
tive processes. However, as measured, interpersonal affect and liking seem more
DEMO of attitudes held toward a subordinate than assessments of any real
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on DEMO/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
294
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
affective experiences with the subordinate DEMO affective responses to the subordi-
nate. As such, these studies do DEMO that attitudinal consistency can bias
performance judgments, but provide less clarity DEMO affective inﬂuences on
appraisals.
In an interesting twist on the affect-performance evaluation relationship, Fried
et al. (1999) examined the relationship between NA and deliberate rating inﬂa-
tion. They argued that raters high on NA would DEMO produce higher rat-
ings than raters low on NA, through such DEMO processes as biased recall.
The consequence of these automatic distortions is that high NA raters would
have less room or inclination to deliberately inﬂate DEMO ratings and, therefore,
more inﬂation would be seen among raters DEMO in NA. Whereas Fried et al.
did not measure distortion per se, their results did show that NA was positively
correlated with self-reports of distortion and that this relationship was moder-
ated by the extent to DEMO supervisors were required to document subordi-
nates’ work behaviors and the extent to which appraisals were visible among
peers.
Other performance-relevant judgments have been DEMO to be inﬂuenced by
affect. Saavedra & Earley (1991) showed that self-efﬁcacy was higher among
subjects exposed to a positive affect manipulation than DEMO was among subjects
exposed to a negative affect manipulation. Unfortunately, the DEMO of a neu-
tral affect control group precludes the ability to determine whether positive affect
enhances efﬁcacy, negative affect reduces efﬁcacy, or both. DEMO et al. (1995)
had two groups of employees complete a DEMO job satisfaction measure. One
group was put in a positive mood by the receipt of small gifts. The other group
served as a control. DEMO in a positive mood reported higher levels of job
satisfaction than did employees in the control group. Note that this may be a
demonstration DEMO the biasing effects of immediate mood on judgment, rather
than of DEMO substantive inﬂuence of work-relevant affect on the formation of job
attitudes.
Creative Problem Solving
A longstanding laboratory ﬁnding is that being in a positive DEMO can enhance
creative problem solving (Isen 1999). This relationship has DEMO tested in the ﬁeld:
Estrada et al. (1997) showed that physicians placed in a positive mood scored better
on a test of DEMO Madjar et al. (2001) demonstrated that positive mood, but not
DEMO mood, predicted on the job ratings of creativity and mediated the DEMO
of social support on creativity ratings.
Helping Behaviors
A substantial body of social psychological research has shown that being in a
positive mood state DEMO encourages the display of helping behavior and co-
operation and reduces aggression (Isen & Baron 1991). The clear relevance of
cooperative, prosocial DEMO to organizations has produced a lot of research
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. DEMO personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
295
examining affect and various forms of DEMO behavior at work. In a series of
studies, George looked at DEMO relationship between positive mood at both indi-
vidual (George 1991) and group (George 1990, George & Bettenhausen 1990)
levels, with prosocial behavior directed at both co-workers and customers. George
(1991) found that DEMO self-report of positive mood in the previous week predicted
supervisor ratings of altruism on the job and customer service. Moreover, it did so
after controlling for beliefs about justice and fairness in the workplace and more
DEMO measures of affect. George (1990) found that the negative group af-
fective tone was associated with the level of prosocial behaviors in the DEMO;
George & Bettenhausen (1990) found that a leader’s positive mood predicted
group members’ self-reports of customer service behavior.
General Performance
Staw and DEMO colleagues’ (Staw & Barsade 1993, Staw et al. 1994, Wright &
Staw 1999) research is notable for its thoughtful explication of affect processes
that may inﬂuence performance. Some of these processes, as the Staw group
notes, suggest conﬂicting predictions about the effects of positive and negative
affective states. So, for example, research indicates that positive affective states
DEMO creativity and efﬁcacy judgments whereas other research suggests that
negative affective states can lead to more thorough canvassing of problem solutions
and more accurate DEMO By and large, Staw and his colleagues’ research
demonstrates a performance DEMO of positive rather than negative affect. For
instance, Staw & Barsade (1993) showed facilitative effects of positive affect on
decision quality and interpersonal performance, as well as more general indicators
of performance.
Negotiations
The negotiation context, with its emphasis on the receipt of favorable or unfavor-
able outcomes and its opportunity for interpersonal conﬂict, should be a natural
setting for the study of affect. Somewhat surprisingly, few studies of true affect in
negotiations context have been conducted (Barry & Oliver 1996, Thompson DEMO al.
1999). Those studies mostly have focused on negotiator tactics and generally ﬁnd
that positive affect enhances cooperation and the search for creative DEMO (see,
e.g., Baron 1990, Forgas 1998, Pruitt & Carnevale 1993) as well as conﬁdence in
being able to achieve positive outcomes (Baron 1990, Kramer et al. 1993). Ad-
ditionally, Pillutla & Murnighan (1996) have opened up a new line of research
focused DEMO on discrete emotions than general affective states. They ﬁnd that
anger reactions can lead negotiators to reject offers that are in their best interests
DEMO judged by pure economic standards. Recent conceptual treatments of affect in
negotiation processes (e.g., Barry & Oliver 1996, George et al. 1998, DEMO 1997,
Thompson, et al. 1999), as well as Pillutla & Murnighan’s work on anger, should
stimulate more research in this area.
DEMO Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
296
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
Withdrawal Behaviors
In 1989, George showed that positive, but not negative, moods predicted absen-
teeism and DEMO positive and negative moods predicted turnover intentions. Re-
search on affect, DEMO state and trait, and withdrawal continued in the 1990s.
Cropanzano et DEMO (1993) argued that commitment was the consequence of af-
fective experiences at work, and because negative affectivity (NA) and positive
affectivity (DEMO) inﬂuence emotional reactivity, both traits should predict turnover
intentions as mediated by commitment. In two studies they found that NA and PA
correlated DEMO turnover intentions, with commitment mediating the effect of PA
in both DEMO and NA in one. George & Jones (1996) examined the interactive
effects of values, positive moods, and satisfaction in predicting turnover intentions
DEMO found that positive mood predicted turnover intentions both in isolation and
interacting with satisfaction and value fulﬁllment. In a longitudinal ﬁeld study,
Pelled & Xin (1999) showed that both positive and negative mood at work pre-
dicted subsequent absenteeism, although positive mood was more inﬂuential. In
contrast, only negative mood states predicted subsequent turnover. In the aggre-
gate, DEMO studies all point to the importance of examining affective experiences
when studying withdrawal behaviors, although the somewhat conﬂicting ﬁndings
regarding positive and negative states indicate a need for more research on the
processes that explain these DEMO
Summary
It seems fair to say that examinations of the performance consequences of af-
fect have been characterized by somewhat more sophisticated discussions of DEMO
cess than have traditional examinations of satisfaction-performance relationships.
Much of the affect research has been well grounded in basic research, particularly
that pertaining to the behavioral and judgment consequences of mood states. Spe-
ciﬁc affect studies DEMO been as likely to focus on speciﬁc performance–related
behaviors or judgments (DEMO, creativity, goal persistence, and helping behavior)
as on general DEMO assessments. Overall, thus far, the results appear more
positive than what the ﬁeld has been used to with job satisfaction. That being said,DEMO
there have been certain limitations to the research on outcomes of affective states,
which are addressed below.
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS AND RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The DEMO of Organizational Research
The study of affect across psychology is wide-ranging in terms of its research
programs: the problems identiﬁed, the methods used DEMO seeking solutions to those
problems, and the tentative solutions that have DEMO produced. The study of affect
in organizations is narrow in its problems and methods. That narrowness could be
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded DEMO arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
297
considered appropriate if it was the DEMO of a thoughtful examination of
the breadth of basic research followed by a series of judgments about what is and is
not relevant to DEMO behavior in organizations. Unfortunately, that does
not appear to be the DEMO for the discrepancy. Our goal in this section is not to
review basic research on moods and emotions. Rather, we wish to highlight some
of the ways in which we believe organizational research has been overly DEMO
and point to directions for broadening research activities.
Perhaps the most glaring example of the narrowness of organizational research
is the overemphasis of the DEMO of mood at the expense of discrete emotions.
Research on dispositional affect examines tendencies to experience positive or
negative mood states over time. Research DEMO the determinants of affect looks at
the way leaders, work environments, or stress inﬂuence mood states. Research on
the consequences of affect looks DEMO the effects of positive mood states on creativ-
ity or helping behavior. Certainly, counterexamples can be found [for example,
research on anger (DEMO et al. 1997, Fitness 2000, Glomb & Hulin 1997, Pillutla
& Murnighan 1996) or the discrete emotional consequences of justice conditions
(Weiss et al. 1999b)], but the overwhelming emphasis is on mood states.
A number of reasons can be offered for this imbalance. First, the groundbreak-
ing work of Isen (e.g., 1987) provided a compelling framework for examining
the consequences of positive mood states on performance-relevant organizational
behaviors. DEMO no other program of basic research on affect has been as inﬂu-
ential for organizational scholars as Isen’s. Of equal importance has been the DEMO
availability of measures of mood, particularly measures of positive and negative
DEMO That is, much of the organizational research on the consequences of DEMO
has used the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) (Watson DEMO al. 1988)
or modiﬁcations of it (e.g., Burke et al. 1989) as the measurement instrument
and Isen’s work as the theoretical framework, likely resulting in narrower than
desirable methodological and theoretical orientations.
This imbalance in studies of mood and discrete emotions is unfortunate for two
reasons. DEMO, an enormous amount of research on emotions has accumulated, and
this research highlights processes and outcomes of clear relevance to individual
functioning in DEMO settings. Second, it is apparent that discrete emotions are
important, frequently occurring elements of everyday experience. Even at work—
perhaps especially at work—people DEMO angry, happy, guilty, jealous, proud, etc.
Neither the experiences DEMO, nor their consequences, can be subsumed
easily under a simple structure of positive or negative states.
The research on discrete emotions is diverse. DEMO inﬂuenced psy-
chologists have looked at the universality of basic emotions, DEMO character-
istic response patterns as well as the functional value of emotional displays (e.g.,
Cosmides & Tooby 2000, Fridlund 1994, Izard 1997, Keltner & Ekman 2000).
This research can inform studies of emotional contagion and group affective tone
and the behavioral and performance consequences of DEMO states. Cognitively
inﬂuenced psychologists examine the appraisal processes that generate emotional
states (e.g., Clore & Ortony 2000, Dalgleish & Power 1999, Lazarus DEMO). This
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
298
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
research can inform the study DEMO emotion generating working conditions and emo-
tional climates. Research programs on particular emotions such as anger, or what
have been referred to as “self-conscious emotions” (guilt, shame, pride) (Lewis
2000a), can inform understanding of how these particular emotions play out in
organizational contexts. We hope DEMO next few years will see a shift in emphasis
to balance the interest in moods with an interest in discrete emotions.
Dispositional affect research DEMO organizational behavior also has been domi-
nated by PA and NA. Measures of PA or NA have been controlled for in stress
research and DEMO been correlated with satisfaction and performance and mood
states. As we already have noted, in all of this research very little empirical work
has been done on the processes by which dispositional affect inﬂuences various
outcomes. DEMO importantly, there has been little connection between organiza-
tional research on DEMO affect and the burgeoning research on the phys-
iology of affect concerning the delineation of multiple affective systems (e.g.,
Cacioppo et al. 1999, Davidson 1992, Gray 1994) and the development of alter-
native measures of dispositional affect tied to those systems (Avila 2001, Carver
& DEMO 1994). That research points to two systems that control reactivity for
positive and negative events. Although these systems are approximately consis-
tent with DEMO PA/NA structure, they are not entirely so. In addition, they suggest
more precise ways of examining affective dispositions and may provide for DEMO
understanding of how those dispositions operate to produce immediate affective
states.
A Process Orientation
Although we asserted that affect-outcome process discussions are more sophisti-
DEMO than typical satisfaction-outcome process discussions of the past, it is still
DEMO that these process analyses can and need to be even more sophisticated. Current
research is driven by particular criteria. That is, researchers lay out the important
dimensions of performance, look to see what the basic literature says about affect
inﬂuencing those dimensions, and then demonstrate in the work setting the partic-
ular relationship. For example, positive affect enhances helping, DEMO why not show
that positive affect at work enhances helping at work? This is a perfectly reasonable
activity, both theoretically and practically, and serves as a ﬁrst step in the study of
affect-performance relationships.
What DEMO received less attention, but ultimately may be more useful, is research
that is less focused on particular performance dimensions and more focused on
DEMO affect processes. For example, people engage in emotional regulation.
These regulatory DEMO can deplete resources necessary for task performance
(Muraven & Baumeister 2000)DEMO In a very interesting study, Richards & Gross
(1999) showed DEMO attempts to suppress the display of emotional states, a common
requirement DEMO many organizations, impaired memory for information encountered
during the period of DEMO Similarly, rumination about emotional events can
interfere with performance (Mikulincer 1996), and there are measurable individual
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded DEMO arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
299
differences in rumination tendencies (Sarason et al. 1996a). Of course, because
people are just as likely to ruminate about positive as negative events, signiﬁcant
emotional events of either valence may negatively impede performance. Such
possibilities, derived from a process orientation, DEMO yet to be considered in the
organizational literature.
A process orientation requires a better grasp of the state-trait distinction. Few
organizational studies have focused DEMO the immediate consequences of momen-
tary affective states, yet many of DEMO outcome processes described in the liter-
ature are relatively immediate and time bound. A number of studies have used
extended time frames of a DEMO or more (e.g., George 1991, George & Jones
1996, Madjar et al. 2001) to gauge affect at work; even more troublesome, oth-
ers ask about mood at work but leave the time frame DEMO (e.g., Pelled &
Xin 1999). Often, the justiﬁcation is that moods can be long lasting (hours or
days); however, DEMO also can be rather short lived, ﬂuctuating dramatically over
a single DEMO In addition, although some researchers attempt to use the PANAS
structure DEMO state affect, it is not clear that this positive/negative structure DEMO ap-
propriate for describing momentary mood states. Overall, the extent to DEMO
these methods adequately operationalize time- and situation-bound processes is
unknown.
Some organizational studies have been conducted using experience-sampling
methods in which data are collected DEMO or throughout the day. These designs
can have the advantage of better operationalizing affective states, looking at imme-
diate affect processes and better partitioning within subject and between subject
effects. However, the studies reported so far in the organizational literature using
experience-sampling methods are few in number and DEMO have not included
within-subject outcome or process data commensurate with the level of affect mea-
surement. We think these should and will come, with affect gauged at the moment
as well as at other theoretically appropriate DEMO
Appreciating Organizational Context
We also see research needs not as directly tied to developments in understanding
moods and emotions in other areas of psychology. DEMO needs, in large part, stem
from organizational behavior’s focus on a particular context, the workplace. First, it
is apparent that we know DEMO than we should about features of work environments
that are likely to produce particular (positive and negative) moods and emotions
among those who DEMO perhaps the majority of their working hours in them, ﬁve or
DEMO days a week. We do have narrowly focused theories that tell us, for instance,
that if workers are treated unfairly by their employers, they somehow feel bad.
What we do not have and need are theories that guide us in identifying speciﬁc
kinds of work conditions and/DEMO events (physical, social, or economic) associated
with speciﬁc affective states. For example, it would be helpful to know the kinds of
“organizational climates” (e.g., James & Jones 1974) that can be associated with
experiencing fear at work. This need for theory likely should be met, in part, by
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
300
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
methodological approaches more qualitatively rich (e.g., Fineman 1993) than the
ones we have reviewed here, for it seems that the theories required must be built
from the ground DEMO rather than imported from other areas of psychology.
Second, research stemming DEMO these meta-theories should recognize that a
worker’s perceptions of his/her work environment are not necessarily equivalent
to more objective (e.g., independent) assessments of work events and conditions.
Indeed, workers’ perceptions of their work environments may be inﬂuenced by
their affective traits and/or states, and it is those states that supposedly constitute
the dependent variables of interest.
Third, returning to the more general literature on moods and emotions, but
not leaving behind the problem of worker self-reports, it is important to at least
note that workers’ reports of how they feel may not adequately DEMO the constructs
of experienced moods and emotions. That is, it appears DEMO affect can be non-
consciously processed (e.g., LeDoux 1995, Murphy DEMO); affect so processed,
although presumably not subject to self-reports, DEMO inﬂuence how organizational
members think and act. If this may be the case, then organizational researchers
are faced with a sizable methodological challenge, DEMO physiological
indicators of affect into their research.
Fourth, given that affect DEMO the work group level has been demonstrated to be a
meaningful construct, more effort, following the lead of Bartel & Saavedra (2000),DEMO
ought to be expended to understand the processes by which feelings do and do
not come to be shared in the workplace. Moreover, such research should not be
limited to work groups. Can, for example, DEMO, like work groups, have
an affective tone? If so, under what conditions does it come about?
Closing Thoughts
After too many DEMO, the study of affect in organizational behavior is alive
and well. DEMO, Mowday & Sutton’s (1993) charge, in an Annual Review of
Psychology chapter, that organizational behavior’s preoccupation with cognitive
processes “can lead to theory and research that portrays organization members
as cognitive stick ﬁgures whose DEMO is unaffected by emotions” (p. 197) no
longer appears applicable. Considerable change in the ﬁeld has been initiated in
the past few years. DEMO in their infancy, some recently initiated research pro-
grams show considerable DEMO (for example, those concerned with the effects
of leaders on the affective experiences of their followers, with the antecedents and
consequences of group affective tone, and with assessing the many hypotheses
derived from affective events theory). Much more importantly, we are conﬁdent
that many, many DEMO questions about the production and consequences of
moods and emotions in the workplace have yet to be posed. The opportunity (the
challenge) is DEMO front of us. If we are duly enticed by it, then DEMO behavior
will evolve to and beyond considering workers as people who think and feel; we
will more fully appreciate that the groups and organizations to which they belong
also exhibit these person-like characteristics.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. DEMO:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
Visit the Annual Reviews home page at DEMO
301
LITERATURE CITED
Agho AO, Price JL, Mueller CW. 1992. Discri-
minant validity of measures of job satis-
faction, positive affectivity and negative af-
fectivity. J. Occup. Organ. Psychol. 65(3):
185–96
Allred KG, Mallozzi JS, Matsui F, Raia CP.
1997. The inﬂuence of anger and compassion
on negotiation performance. Organ. Behav.
Hum. Decis. Process. 70(3):175–87
Arvey RD, Carter GW, Buerkley DK. 1991. Job
satisfaction: dispositional and situational in-
ﬂuences. In International Review of Indus-
trial and Organizational DEMO, ed. CL
Cooper, IT Robertson, 6:359–83. New York:
DEMO
Ashforth BE, Humphrey RH. 1995. Emotion
in the workplace: a reappraisal. Hum. Relat.
48:97–125
Avila C. 2001. Distinguishing BIS-mediated
and BAS-mediated disinhibition DEMO
nisms: a comparison of disinhibition mod-
els of Gray (1981,1987) and of Patterson
and Newman (1993). J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.
DEMO:311–24
Bagozzi RP, Burnkrant RE. 1979. Attitude or-
ganization and the DEMO behavior relation-
ship. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 37(6):913–29
Baritz DEMO 1960. The Servants of Power: A His-
tory of the Use DEMO Social Sciences in Amer-
ican Industry. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan
Univ. Press. 273 pp.
Baron RA. 1990. Environmentally induced pos-
itive affect—its impact on DEMO, task-
performance, negotiation, and conﬂict. J.
Appl. Soc. Psychol. 20:DEMO
Barry B, Oliver RL. 1996. Affect in dyadic ne-
gotiation: a model and propositions. Organ.
Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 67:127–43
Barsade SG, Gibson DE. 1998. Group emotion:
a view from top and bottom. DEMO Research on
Managing Groups and Teams, ed. DH Gru-
enfeld, 1:81–102. Stamford, CT: JAI. 272 pp.
Barsade SG, Ward AJ, DEMO JD, Sonnenfeld
JA. 2000. To your heart’s content: a model of
affective diversity in top management teams.
Admin. Sci. Q. 45(4):802–36
Bartel CA, Saavedra R. 2000. The collective
construction of work group moods. Admin.
Sci. Q. 45(2):197–231
Bies RJ. 2001. Interactional (in)DEMO: the sa-
cred and the profane. In Advances in Organi-
zational DEMO, ed. J Greenberg, R Cropan-
zano. Stanford, CA: Stanford Univ. Press
Bies RJ, Tripp TM. 2001. A passion for jus-
tice: DEMO rationality and morality of revenge.
In Justice in the Workplace: From DEMO to
Practice: Series in Applied Psychology, ed.
R Cropanzano, 2:DEMO Mahwah, NJ: Erl-
baum
Brief AP. 1998. Attitudes in and Around Orga-
nizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Brief AP, Aldag RJ. 1994. The study of work
values: a call for a more balanced perspec-
tive. In Trends and Perspectives in Empiri-
cal Social Research, ed. I Borg, PP Mohler,
pp. 99–124. New York: de Gruyter. 375 DEMO
Brief AP, Butcher AH, Roberson L. 1995.
Cookies, disposition, and job attitudes: the
effects of positive mood-inducing events and
negative affectivity on job satisfaction in a
ﬁeld experiment. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis.
Process. 62(DEMO):55–62
Brief AP, Roberson L. 1989. Job attitude orga-
nization: DEMO exploratory study. J. Appl. Soc.
Psychol. 19:717–27
Burke MJ, Brief DEMO, George JM. 1993. The role
of negative affectivity in understanding re-
DEMO between self-reports of stressors and
strains: a comment on the applied DEMO
literature. J. Appl. Psychol. 78(3):402–12
Burke MJ, Brief AP, George JM, Roberson L,
Webster J. 1989. Measuring affect at DEMO:
conﬁrmatory analyses of competing mood
structures with conceptual linkage to corti-
cal regulatory systems. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.
57:1091–102
Annu. Rev. Psychol. DEMO:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
302
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
Cacioppo JT, Gardner WL, DEMO GG.
1999. The affect system has parallel and inte-
grative processing components: form follows
function. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 76:839–55
Carver CS, DEMO TL. 1994. Behavioral-
inhibition, behavioral activation, and affec-
tive responses to impending reward and
punishment—the BIS/BAS scales. J. Pers.
Soc. Psychol. 67:DEMO
Clark MS, Isen AM. 1982. Toward understand-
ing the relationship between DEMO states
and social behavior. In Cognitive Social Psy-
chology, ed. A DEMO, AM Isen, pp. 73–108.
New York: Elsevier
Clore GL, Ortony A. 2000. Cognition in emo-
tion: always, sometimes, never. In Cognitive
Neuroscience of Emotion, ed. RD Lane, L
Nadel, pp. 24–61. New York: Oxford Univ.
Press
Conger JA, Kanungo RN. 1998. Charismatic
Leadership DEMO Organizations. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage. 288 pp.
Cooper CL. 1998. Theories of Organizational
Stress. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. 275
pp.
Cosmides L, Tooby J. 2000. Evolutionary psy-
chology and the emotions. See Lewis & Hav-
iland 2000, pp. 91–115
Cropanzano R, James K, Konovsky MA. 1993.
Dispositional affectivity as a predictor of
work attitudes and job performance. DEMO Or-
gan. Behav. 14:595–606
Dalgleish T, Power M. 1999. Handbook DEMO Cog-
nition and Emotion. Chichester, UK: Wiley
Davidson RJ. 1992. Emotion and affective
style: hemispheric substrates. Psychol. Sci.
3:39–43
Davis-Blake A, DEMO J. 1996. Two steps for-
ward, one step back. Acad. Manage. DEMO
21(2):340–43
Eagly AH, Chaiken S. 1993. The Psychology
of Attitudes. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich College Publ.
Estrada CA, Isen AM, Young MJ. 1997. Pos-
itive affect facilitates integration of informa-
tion and decreases anchoring in reasoning
among physicians. Organ. Behav. Hum. De-
DEMO Process. 72:117–35
Fineman S. 1993. Emotion in Organizations.
Thousand Oaks, DEMO: Sage. 230 pp.
Fisher CD. 2000. Mood and emotions while
working: missing pieces of job satisfaction?
J. Organ. Behav. 21:185–202
Fisher DEMO, Hanna JV. 1931. The Dissatisﬁed
Worker. New York: Macmillan. 260 pp.
Fitness J. 2000. Anger in the workplace: an
emotion script approach to anger episodes
between workers and their superiors, co-
workers and subordinates. J. Organ. Behav.
21:147–62
Folger R, Cropanzano R. 1998. Organizational
Justice and Human Resource Management.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 278 pp.
Forgas JP. DEMO On feeling good and getting
your way: mood effects on negotiator DEMO
tion and bargaining strategies. J. Pers. Soc.
Psychol. 74:565–77
Fortunato VJ, Jex SM, Heinisch DA. 1999.
An examination of the discriminant validity
DEMO the Strain-Free Negative Affectivity Scale.
J. Occup. Organ. Psychol. 72(4):DEMO
Fridlund AJ. 1994. Human Facial Expression:
An Evolutionary View. San Diego, CA: Aca-
demic
Fried Y, Levi AS, Ben David HA, Tiegs RB.
1999. Inﬂation of subordinates’ performance
ratings: main and interactive effects of rater
negative affectivity, documentation of work
behavior, and appraisal visibility. DEMO Organ.
Behav. 20:431–44
Frijda NH. 1993. The place of appraisal in emo-
tion. Cogn. Emot. 7(3-4):357–87
Gallupe RB, Bastionatti LM, Cooper WH.
1991. Unblocking brainstorms. J. Appl. Psy-
chol. 76(1):137–42
George JM. 1989. Mood and absence. J. Appl.
Psychol. 74:317–24
George DEMO 1990. Personality, affect, and be-
havior in groups. J. Appl. Psychol. 75:107–
16
George JM. 1991. State or trait: effects of posi-
tive mood on prosocial behaviors at work. J.
Appl. Psychol. 76:299–307
DEMO JM. 1995. Leader positive mood and
group performance: the case of DEMO ser-
vice. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 25(9):778–94
Annu. Rev. DEMO 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
303
George JM. 1996. Group affective tone. DEMO
Handbook of Work Group Psychology, ed.
M West. Sussex, UK: DEMO 642 pp.
George JM. 2000. Emotions and leadership: the
role of DEMO intelligence. Hum. Relat.
53(8):1027–55
George JM, Bettenhausen K. 1990. Under-
standing prosocial behavior, sales perfor-
mance, and turnover: a group-level analy-
sis in a service context. J. Appl. Psychol.
75:698–709
George DEMO, Brief AP. 1992. Feeling good-
doing good: a conceptual analysis of the
mood at work-organizational spontaneity re-
lationship. Psychol. Bull. 112(2):310–29
George JM, Brief AP. 2001. Personality and
work-related distress. In Personality and Or-
ganizations, ed. B Schneider, B Smith. Mah-
wah, NJ: DEMO In press
George JM, Jones GR. 1996. The experience
of work DEMO turnover intentions: interactive
effects of value attainment, job satisfaction,
and positive mood. J. Appl. Psychol. 81:318–
25
George JM, Jones GR, Gonzalez JA. 1998. The
role of affect in cross-cultural negotiations. J.
Int. Bus. Stud. 29:749–72
George JM, Reed TF, Ballard KA, Colin J,
Fielding J. 1993. Contact with AIDS patients
as a source DEMO work-related distress: effects
of organizational and social support. Acad.
Manage. J. DEMO(1):157–71
Glomb TM, Hulin CL. 1997. Anger and gender
effects in observed supervisor-subordinate
dyadic interactions. Organ. Behav. Hum. De-
cis. Process. 72(DEMO):281–307
Gray JA. 1994. Three fundamental emotion sys-
tems. In The DEMO of Emotions: Fundamen-
tal Questions, ed. P Ekman, RJ Davidson,DEMO
pp. 243–47. New York: Oxford Univ. Press
Greenberg J. 1990. Organizational DEMO: yes-
terday, today, and tomorrow. J. Manage.
16:399–432
Hackman DEMO 1992. Group inﬂuences on indi-
viduals in organizations. In Handbook of I/O
Psychology, ed. MD Dunnette, LM Hough,
3:199–267. Palo DEMO, CA: Consult. Psychol.
Press. 1095 pp.
Hart PM, Wearing AJ, Headey B. 1995. Police
stress and well-being: integrating personal-
ity, coping DEMO daily work experiences. J.
Occup. Organ. Psychol. 68(2):133–56
Hatﬁeld DEMO, Cacioppo JT, Rapson RL. 1994.
Emotional Contagion. New York: Cam-
DEMO Univ. Press. 240 pp.
Heath C, Jourden FJ. 1997. Illusion, disillusion,
and the buffering effect of groups. Organ.
Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. DEMO(2):103–
16
Heinisch DA, Jex SM. 1997. Negative affectiv-
ity and gender as moderators of the relation-
ship between work-related stressors and DEMO
pressed mood at work. Work Stress 11(1):46–
57
Hersey DEMO 1932. Workers’ Emotions in Shop
and Home: A Study of Individual DEMO
from the Psychological and Physiological
Standpoint. Philadephia: Univ. Penn. Press
Hochschild DEMO 1983. Comment on Kemper’s
“social constructionist and positivist ap-
proaches to the sociology of emotions.” Am.
J. Soc. 89(2):432–34
Hoppock R. 1935. Job Satisfaction. New York:
Harper. 303 pp.
House RJ, Shane SA, Herold DM. 1996. Ru-
mors of the death of dispositional research
are vastly exaggerated. Acad. Manage. Rev.
21:203–24
Hurrell JJ, Nelson DL, DEMO BL. 1998.
Measuring job stressors and strains: Where
we have been, where we are, and where
we need to go. J. Occup. Health Psychol.
3(4):368–89
Isen AM. 1987. Positive affect, cognitive-
processes, and social-behavior. Adv. Exp.
Soc. Psychol. 20:203–53
Isen AM. 1999. Positive DEMO and creativity.
In Affect, Creative Experience, and Psycho-
logical Adjustment, DEMO S Russ, pp. 3–17.
Philadelphia: Bruner/Mazel
Isen AM. 2000. Positive affect and deci-
sion making. See Lewis & Haviland 2000,
pp. DEMO
Isen AM, Baron RA. 1991. Positive affect as
a factor in DEMO In Re-
search in Organizational Behavior, ed. BM
Annu. Rev. Psychol. DEMO:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
304
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
Staw, LL Cummings, 13:DEMO Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press
Izard CE. 1997. Emotions and facial DEMO
sions: a perspective from Differential Emo-
tions Theory. In The Psychology DEMO Facial
Expressions, ed. JA Russell, JM Fernandez-
Dols, pp. 57–77. DEMO: Cambridge Univ.
Press
James LR, Jones AP. 1974. Organizational cli-
mate: a review of theory and research. Psy-
chol. Bull. 81:1096–112
Judge TA. 1992. The dispositional perspective
in human resource research. In Research in
DEMO and Human Resource Manage-
ment, ed. GR Ferris, KM Rowland, DEMO:31–
72. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Judge TA, Ferris GR. 1993. DEMO
of performance evaluation decisions. Acad.
Manage. J. 36:80–105
Kelloway EK, DEMO J, Shah A. 1993. In-
dustrial relations stress and job satisfaction:DEMO
concurrent effects and mediation. J. Organ.
Behav. 14:447–57
Keltner D, DEMO P. 2000. Facial expression
of emotion. See Lewis & Haviland 2000, DEMO
236–49
Kornhauser AW, Sharp AA. 1932. Employee
attitudes: suggestions from a study in a fac-
tory. Pers. J. 10:393–404
Kramer RM, Newton E, Pommerenke PL.
1993. Self-enhancement biases and nego-
tiator judgment: effects DEMO self-esteem and
mood. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process.
56:110–33
Kumar R. 1997. The role of affect in negotia-
tions. J. Appl. Behav. Sci. DEMO:84–100
Kunin T. 1955. The construction of a new type
of attitude measure. Pers. Psychol. 8:65–77
Larsen RJ, Ketelaar T. 1989. Extraversion, DEMO
roticism, and susceptibility to positive and
negative mood induction procedures. Pers.
DEMO Differ. 10:1221–28
Lazarus RS. 1991. Emotion and Adaptation.
New York: DEMO Univ. Press
Lazarus RS, Cohon-Charash Y. 2001. Discrete
emotions in organizational DEMO In Emotions
in Organizations, ed. R Payne, CL Cooper.
Chichester, DEMO: Wiley. In press
LeDoux JE. 1995. Emotion: clues from the
brain. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 46:209–35
Lewis KM. 2000a. Self-conscious emotions:
embarrassment, pride, shame and guilt. See
Lewis & Haviland 2000, pp. 623–36
DEMO KM. 2000b. When leaders display emo-
tion: How followers respond to DEMO emo-
tional expression of male and female leaders.
J. Organ. Behav. 21:221–34
Lewis KM, Haviland JM, eds. 2000. Handbook
of Emotions. New DEMO: Guilford. 2nd ed.
Locke EA. 1976. The nature and causes of DEMO
satisfaction. In Handbook of I/O Psychology,
ed. MD Dunnette, DEMO 1297–349. Chicago:
Rand-McNally. 1st ed.
Locke K. 1996. A funny thing happened! The
management of consumer emotions in ser-
vice encounters. Organ. Sci. DEMO(1):40–59
Madjar N, Oldham GR, Pratt MG. 2001.
There’s DEMO place like home: the contributions
of work and non-work creativity support
DEMO employees’ creative performance. Acad.
Manage. J. In press
McCrae RR, Costa DEMO 1991. Adding Liebe
und Arbeit: the full ﬁve-factor model and
well-being. DEMO Soc. Psychol. Bull. 17(2):
227–32
Mikulincer M. 1996. Mental DEMO and
learned helplessness: cognitive shifts dur-
ing helplessness training and their DEMO
ioral consequences. See Sarason et al. 1996b,
pp. 191–210
Millar MG, Tesser A. 1986. Effects of affective
and cognitive focus on the attitude-behavior
relation. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 51:270–76
Miller DT. 2001. Disrespect and DEMO experience
of injustice. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 52:527–
55
Moorman RH. 1993. The inﬂuence of cogni-
tive and affective based job satisfaction mea-
sures DEMO the relationship between satisfac-
tion and organizational citizenship behavior.
Hum. Relat. 46(6):759–76
Motowidlo SJ. 1996. Orientation toward the job
and organization. In Individual Differences
and Behavior in Organizations, ed. KR Mur-
phy, pp. DEMO San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from DEMO
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
305
Mowday RT, Sutton RI. 1993. Organizational
behavior: linking individuals and groups to
organizational context. Annu. Rev. Psychol.
44:195–229
Muraven M, Baumeister RF. 2000. Self-regu-
lation and depletion of limited resources:
Does self-control resemble a muscle? Psy-
chol. Bull. 126:247–59
Murphy ST. 2001. Feeling without thinking: af-
fective primacy and the nonconscious pro-
cessing of emotion. In Unraveling the Com-
plexities of Social Life: A Festschrift in
Honor of Robert B. Zajonc, ed. JA Bargh, DEMO
Apsley, pp. 39–53. Washington, DC: Am.
Psychol. Assoc. 209 pp.
DEMO LB, Roznowski M. 1994. Negative
affectivity and job satisfaction: cognitive pro-
cesses underlying the relationship and ef-
fects on employee behaviors. J. Vocat. DEMO
45(3):270–94
Oldham GR, Cummings A, Mischel LJ,
DEMO JM, Zhou J. 1995. Listen while
you work? Quasi-experimental relations bet-
ween personal-stereo headset use and em-
ployee work responses. J. Appl. Psychol.
DEMO(5):547–64
Organ DW. 1988. A restatement of the satis-
faction-performance DEMO J. Manage.
14(4):547–57
Organ DW, Near JP. 1985. Cognitive vs. affect
measures of job satisfaction. Int. J. Psychol.
20:241–54
Parkes DEMO 1990. Coping, negative affectivity, and
the work environment: additive and DEMO
tive predictors of mental health. J. Appl. Psy-
chol. 75:399–409
Pekrun R, Frese M. 1992. Emotions in work
and achievement. In International Review of
I/O Psychology, Vol. 7, Chap. 5, pp. 153–200.
New York: Wiley
Pelled LH, Xin KR. 1999. Down and out: an in-
vestigation of the relationship between mood
and employee withdrawal behavior. J. DEMO
age. 25:875–95
Pillutla MM, Murnighan JK. 1996. Unfairness,
anger, and spite: emotional rejections of ul-
timatum offers. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis.
Process. 68:208–24
Plutchik R. 1994. The Psychology and Biology
of Emotion. DEMO York: Harper Collins Coll.
Publ. 396 pp.
Porac JF. 1987. The DEMO satisfaction question-
naire as a cognitive event: ﬁrst- and second-
order DEMO in affective commentary. In
Research in Personnel and Human Resources
Management, DEMO KM Rowland, GR Ferris,
5:51–102. Greenwich, CT: JAI
DEMO AR, Turner ME. 1994. Of what value
is a job attitude? A socio-cognitive analysis.
Hum. Relat. 47(12):1545–76
Pruitt DG, Carnevale DEMO 1993. Negotiation in
Social Conﬂict. Paciﬁc Grove, CA: Brooks-
Cole
Pugh SD. 2001. Service with a smile: emotional
contagion in the service encounter. Acad.
Manage. J. In press
Rafaeli A, Sutton RI. 1990. Busy stores and de-
manding customers: How do they affect the
display of positive emotion? Acad. Manage.
J. 33(3):623–37
Richards JM, Gross JJ. 1999. Composure at any
cost? The cognitive consequences of emo-
tion suppression. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
25:1033–44
Robbins TL, DeNisi AS. 1994. A closer look
at interpersonal affect as a distinct inﬂuence
on cognitive processing DEMO performance eval-
uations. J. Appl. Psychol. 79:341–53
Robbins TL, DeNisi DEMO 1998. Mood vs. inter-
personal affect: identifying process and rat-
ing DEMO in performance appraisal. J.
Bus. Psychol. 12:313–25
Roethlisberger FJ, Dickson DEMO 1939. Man-
agement and the Worker. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Univ. DEMO 615 pp.
Russell JA, Barrett LF. 1999. Core affect, proto-
typical emotional episodes, and other things
called emotion: dissecting the elephant. J.
DEMO Soc. Psychol. 76(5):805–19
Saavedra R, Earley PC. 1991. Choice of task
and goal under conditions of general and
speciﬁc affective inducement. DEMO Emot.
15:45–65
Saavedra R, Kwun SK. 2000. Affective states
in DEMO characteristic theory. J. Organ. Behav.
21:131–46
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For DEMO use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
306
BRIEF ¥ WEISS
Sandelands L, St. Clair L. 1993. Toward an
empirical concept of group. J. Theory Soc.
Behav. 23(DEMO):423–58
Sandelands LE. 1988. The concept of work feel-
ing. J. DEMO Soc. Behav. 18(4):437–57
Sarason IG, Pierce GR, Sarason DEMO 1996a.
Domains of cognitive interference. See Sara-
son et al. 1996b, DEMO 139–52
Sarason IG, Pierce GR, Sarason BR, eds.
1996b. Cognitive DEMO: Theories,
Methods and Findings. Mahwah, NJ: Erl-
baum
Schaubroeck DEMO, Ganster DC, Fox ML. 1992.
Dispositional affect and work-related stress.
J. Appl. Psychol. 77(3):322–35
Schaubroeck J, Judge TA, Taylor LA III. 1998.
Inﬂuences of trait negative affect and situa-
tional similarity on DEMO and conver-
gence of work attitudes and job stress percep-
tions across two jobs. J. Manage. 24(4):553–
76
Schmitt N, Bedeian DEMO 1982. A compari-
son of LISREL and two-stage least squares
analysis of a hypothesized life-job satisfac-
tion reciprocal relationship. J. Appl. Psychol.
67(6):806–17
Schneider B. 1987. The people make the place.
Pers. Psychol. 40(DEMO):437–53
Shaw JD, Duffy MK, Jenkins GD Jr, Gupta
N. 1999. Positive and negative affect, signal
sensitivity, and pay satisfaction. J. DEMO
25(2):189–206
Simon HA. 1982. Comments. In Affect and
Cognition: The Seventeenth Annual Carne-
gie Symposium on Cognition, ed. MS Clark,
ST Fiske, pp. 333–42. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Spector PE. 1996. Industrial and Organiza-
tional Psychology: Research and Practice.
New York: Wiley. 420 DEMO
Spector PE. 1997. Job Satisfaction: Appli-
cation, Assessment, Causes, and Conse-
quences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 96 pp.
Spector PE, Jex SM. 1991. Relations of job
characteristics from multiple data sources
with employee DEMO, absence, turnover
intentions, and health. J. Appl. Psychol.
76(1):46–53
Spector PE, O’Connell BJ. 1994. The contribu-
tion of personality traits, negative affectivity,
locus of control and Type A to the subse-
quent reports of job stressors and job strains.
J. Occup. Organ. Psychol. DEMO(1):1–12
Staw BM, Barsade SG. 1993. Affect and man-
agerial performance: a test of the sadder-
but-wiser vs. happier-and-smarter hypothe-
ses. Admin. Sci. Q. 38:304–31
Staw BM, Bell NE, Clausen JA. 1986. DEMO
dispositional approach to job attitudes: a life-
time longitudinal test. Admin. DEMO Q. 31:56–
77
Staw BM, Sutton RI, Pelled LH. 1994. Em-
ployee positive emotion and favorable out-
comes at the workplace. Organ. DEMO 5:51–71
Strati A. 1992. Aesthetic understanding of
organizational life. Acad. Manage. Rev.
17(3):568–81
Strati A. 1996. Organizations viewed through
the lens of aesthetics. Organization 3(2):
209–18
Sundstrom E, Bell PA, Busby PL, Asmus C.
1996. Environmental psychology: 1989–
1994. Annu. Rev. DEMO 47:485–512
Sutton RI. 1991. Maintaining norms about ex-
pressed emotions: DEMO case of bill collectors.
Admin. Sci. Q. 36(2):245–68
Teuchmann DEMO, Totterdell P, Parker SK. 1999.
Rushed, unhappy, and drained: DEMO experience
sampling study of relations between time
pressure, perceived control, mood, and emo-
tional exhaustion in a group of accountants.
J. Occup. Health Psychol. 4(1):37–54
Thayer RE. 1989. The Biopsychology of Mood
and Arousal. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
234 pp.
Thompson LL, Nadler DEMO, Kim PH. 1999. Some
like it hot: the case for the emotional ne-
gotiator. In Shared Cognition in Organiza-
tions: The Management of Knowledge, ed.
LL Thompson, JM Levin, DM Messick, pp.
139–61. DEMO, NJ: Erlbaum
Totterdell P. 2000. Catching moods and hitting
runs: DEMO linkage and subjective perfor-
mance in professional sport teams. J. Appl.
Psychol. 85(6):848–59
Totterdell P, Kellett S, Teuchmann K, Briner
DEMO 1998. Evidence of mood linkage in work
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For DEMO use only.
30 Nov 2001 10:47 AR AR146-11.tex AR146-11.SGM LaTeX2e(2001/05/10)DEMO
P1: GSR
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
307
groups. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 74(DEMO):1504–
15
Varma A, Denisi AS, Peters LH. 1996. Inter-
DEMO affect and performance appraisal: a
ﬁeld study. Pers. Psychol. 49:341–60
DEMO RP. 1995. The impact of referral
sources on employee attitudes: evidence
DEMO a national sample. J. Manage. 21(5):
953–65
Wasserman V, Rafaeli A, Kluger AN. 2000.
Aesthetic symbols as emotional cues. In
Emotion in Organizations, ed. S Fineman.
London: Sage. 2nd ed.
Watson D. DEMO Mood and Temperament.New
York: Guilford. 340 pp.
Watson D, Clark LA. 1992. On traits and
temperament: general and speciﬁc factors of
emotional experience and their relation to the
ﬁve-factor model. J. Pers. 60(2):441–76
Watson D, Clark LA Tellegen A. 1988. De-
velopment and validation of brief measures
of positive and negative affect: the PANAS
scales. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 54(6):1063–
70
Watson D, Slack AK. 1993. DEMO factors
of affective temperament and their relation
to job satisfaction over time. Organ. Behav.
Hum. Decis. Process. 54:181–202
Weiss HM. 2002. Deconstructing job DEMO
tion: separating evaluations, beliefs and af-
fective experiences. Hum. Resource Manage.
Rev. In press
Weiss HM, Brief AP. 2002. Affect at work: DEMO
historical perspective. In Emotions at Work:
Theory, Research, and Application in Man-
agement, ed. RL Payne, CL Cooper. Chi-
chester, UK: Wiley. In press
Weiss HM, Cropanzano R. 1996. Affective
Events Theory: a theoretical discussion of
the structure, causes and consequences of af-
fective experiences at work. In Research in
Organization Behavior: An Annual Series of
Analytical Essays and Critical Reviews, ed.
BM Staw, LL Cummings, 18:1–74. Green-
wich, CT: JAI. 373 pp.
Weiss HM, Nicholas JP, Daus CS. 1999a. An
examination of the joint effects of affective
experiences and job beliefs on job satisfac-
tion and variations in affective experiences
DEMO time. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Pro-
cess. 78(1):1–24
Weiss DEMO, Suckow K, Cropanzano R. 1999b.
Effects of justice conditions on discrete emo-
tions. J. Appl. Psychol. 84:786–94
Wharton AS, Erickson RJ. 1993. Managing
emotions on the job and at home: understand-
ing the consequences of multiple emotional
roles. Acad. Manage. Rev. 18(3):457–86
White DA. 1996. “It’s working beautifully!”
Philosophical reﬂections on aesthetics and
organization theory. Organization DEMO(2):195–
208
Williams KJ, Alliger GM. 1994. Role stressors,
mood spillover, and perceptions of work-
family conﬂict in employed parents. Acad.
Manage. J. 37(4):837–68
Williams KJ, Suls J, Alliger GM, Learner SM,
Wan CK. 1991. Multiple role juggling and
daily mood states in working mothers: an ex-
perience sampling study. J. Appl. Psychol.
76(5):664–74
Williams LJ, Gavin MB, Williams ML. 1996.
Measurement and nonmeasurement proces-
ses with negative affectivity and employee
attitudes. J. Appl. DEMO 81(1):88–101
Wineﬁeld AH, Wineﬁeld HR, Tiggemann M,
DEMO RD. 1991. A longitudinal study of
the psychological effects of unemployment
and unsatisfactory employment on young
adults. J. Appl. Psychol. 76(3):424–31
Wright TA, Staw BM. 1999. Affect and favor-
able work outcomes: two DEMO tests
of the happy-productive worker thesis. J. Or-
gan. Behav. 20:1–23
Zajonc RB. 1998. Emotions. In Handbook of
Social Psychology, ed. DT Gilbert, ST Fiske,
G Lindzey, pp. 591–632. Boston: McGraw-
Hill
Zohar D. 1999. When things go wrong: the ef-
fect of daily work hassles on effort, exertion
and negative mood. J. Occup. Organ. Psy-
chol. 72(3):265–83
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
P1: FDS
December 4, 2001 14:39 Annual Reviews AR146-FM
Annual DEMO of Psychology
Volume 53, 2002
CONTENTS
Frontispiece—Endel Tulving
PREFATORY
Episodic Memory: From Mind to Brain, Endel Tulving
GENETICS OF BEHAVIOR
Genetic Contributions to Addiction, John C. Crabbe
BRAIN IMAGING/COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
Child-Clinical/Pediatric Neuropsychology: DEMO Recent Advances,
Byron P. Rourke, S. A. Ahmad, D. W. Collins, B. A. Hayman-Abello,
S. E. Hayman-Abello, and E. M. DEMO
AUDITION AND ITS BIOLOGICAL BASES
Change Detection, Ronald A. Rensink
MEMORY
DEMO Over the Short-Term: The Case Against the Standard
Model, James S. Nairne
JUDGMENT AND DECISION MAKING
Rationality, Eldar Shaﬁr and Robyn A. LeBoeuf
BIOLOGICAL AND GENETIC PROCESSES IN DEVELOPMENT
Gene-Environment Interplay in Relation to Emotional DEMO
Behavioral Disturbance, Michael Rutter and Judy Silberg
DEVELOPMENT IN SOCIETAL CONTEXT
DEMO Status and Child Development, Robert H. Bradley
and Robert F. Corwyn
DEMO DISORDERS
Depression: Perspectives from Affective Neuroscience, Richard J.
Davidson, Diego DEMO, Jack B. Nitschke, and Katherine Putnam
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY:VARIOUS DISORDERS
Causes of Eating Disorders, Janet Polivy and C. Peter Herman
vi
xvi
1
435
309
245
53
491
463
371
545
187
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:DEMO Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
P1: FDS
December 4, 2001 14:39 Annual Reviews AR146-FM
CONTENTS
DEMO: Conceptual Issues in the Development, Maintenance
and Treatment of Sleep Disorder in Adults, Colin A. Espie
CLINICAL ASSESSMENT
Clinical Assessment, James M. DEMO, Howard N. Garb,
Scott O. Lilienfeld, and M. Teresa Nezworski
ADULT CLINICAL NEUROPSYCHOLOGY
Adult Clinical Neuropsychology: Lessons from Studies of the
Frontal Lobes, Donald T. Stuss and Brian Levine
SELF AND IDENTITY
Self and Social Identity, Naomi Ellemers, Russell Spears,
and Bertjan Doosje
ALTRUISM DEMO AGGRESSION
Human Aggression, Craig A. Anderson and Brad J. Bushman
INTERGROUP DEMO,STIGMA,STEREOTYPING,PREJUDICE,
DISCRIMINATION
Intergroup Bias, Miles Hewstone, Mark Rubin, and Hazel Willis
CULTURAL INFLUENCES
Cultural Inﬂuences on Personality, Harry C. DEMO
and Eunkook M. Suh
ORGANIZATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY OR ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
Organizational Behavior: DEMO in the Workplace, Arthur Brief
and Howard Weiss
LEARNING AND PERFORMANCE DEMO EDUCATIONAL SETTINGS
Motivational Beliefs, Values, and Goals, Jacquelynne S. Eccles
DEMO Allan Wigﬁeld
PSYCHOBIOLOGICAL FACTORS IN HEALTH
Emotions, Morbidity, and Mortality: DEMO Perspectives from
Psychoneuroimmunology, Janice K. Kiecolt-Glaser, Lynanne
McGuire, Theodore F. DEMO, and Ronald Glaser
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL DISORDERS AND PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS
ON MEDICAL DISORDERS
DEMO of Psychological and Social Factors on Organic Disease:
A Critical Assessment of Research on Coronary Heart Disease,
David S. Krantz and Melissa DEMO McCeney
vii
215
519
401
161
27
575
133
279
109
83
341
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2002.53:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF DEMO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.
P1: FDS
December 4, 2001 14:39 Annual Reviews AR146-FM
viii
DEMO
ANALYSIS OF LATENT V
ARIABLES
Latent Variables in Psychology and the Social Sciences,
Kenneth A. Bollen
605
INDEXES
Author Index 635
Subject Index DEMO
Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 43–53 705
Cumulative Index of DEMO Titles, Volumes 43–53 709
ERRATA
Online log of corrections to the DEMO Review of Psychology corrections:
Steven Regeser L´opez and Peter J. Guarnaccia
Cultural Psychopathology: Uncovering the Social World
of Mental Illness
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2000, Vol. 51: 571–598.
http://psych.annualreviews.org/errata.shtml
Annu. Rev. Psychol. DEMO:279-307. Downloaded from arjournals.annualreviews.org
by UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO on 01/14/10. For personal use only.{1g42fwefx}