Approaches to Personality
Inventory Construction
A Comparison of Merits
Matthias Burisch University DEMO Hamburg
ABSTRACT: The three major approaches to person-
ality scale construction, the external, inductive, and
deductive strategies, are discussed and their rationales
compared. It is suggested that all scales should possess
validity, communicability, DEMO economy. The relative
importance of these characteristics, however, varies
with the purpose for which the instrument is being
constructed. A review of more DEMO a dozen compar-
ative studies revealed no consistent superiority of any
strategy in terms of validity or predictive effectiveness.
But deductive scales normally communicate DEMO
mation more directly to an assessor, and they are
definitely more DEMO to build and to administer.
Thus, wherever there is a genuine DEMO, the simple
deductive approach is recommended. Furthermore,
self-rating scales narrowly DEMO consistently outdo
questionnaire scales in terms of validity and are clearly
superior in terms of communicability and economy.
There may not be many situations DEMO which the wide-
spread preference for questionnaires is justified. It is
concluded that the more commonsensical approaches
to personality measurement have a lot to DEMO
Anyone who is bold enough today to develop a gen-
eral-purpose personality inventory has basically three
options for how to go about it. They DEMO the external
approach (also called "empirical," or "criterion
group"), the inductive approach (also called "inter-
nal," "internal consistency," or "itemetric"), and the
deductive approach (also called "DEMO," "intuitive,"
or "theoretical"). This article reviews their respective
merits on both a priori and empirical grounds. For
clarity's DEMO I will exaggerate the differences between
the philosophies associated with these three ap-
proaches.
External Approach
Externalists typically, although not necessarily, believe
that DEMO come in batches: for instance, manics and
depressives, schizophrenics and DEMO, and so on.
They also know that there are engineers and DEMO
and clerks, some of them happy, others unhappy. As
a rule, externalists want to distinguish between these
214
types by means of an inventory, but they claim that
they do not know how the types differ in terms of
responses to personality items. Paul Meehl (1945),DEMO
for instance, doubted "that the psychologist building
the test has sufficient insight into the dynamics of
verbal behavior and its relation to the DEMO core of
personality that he is able to predict beforehand what
certain sorts of people will say about themselves when
asked certain kinds of DEMO" (p. 297). This state-
ment was issued in 1945 (DEMO also Meehl, 1979, p.
564), but the quotation may still serve to illustrate
the point.
Now assume that an externalist test constructor
DEMO to develop a scale to differentiate males from
females, a so-called DEMO test. Allegedly not knowing
where the differences were, he or she DEMO never
dream of using an item such as "I can grow DEMO beard
if I want to," or "In a restaurant I DEMO to prefer the
ladies' room to the men's room." Rather, a hetero-
geneous pool of items would be assembled and ad-
ministered to a sample of men and women. Next,
the relative endorsement DEMO in the two sub-
samples would be compared item by item. Any item
discriminating sufficiently well would qualify for in-
clusion in the M-F DEMO This approach is called ex-
ternal because the scale membership of all items is
determined by factors external to the questionnaire
domain.
Inductive Approach
DEMO also claim to know little about individual
differences at the item-response level. However, they
believe there is some basic structure to these differ-
ences, some universal laws to be discovered. Typically,
they claim not to know what this structure looks like
in detail—but they definitely hope it DEMO a simple struc-
ture.
Confronted with the task of uncovering nature's
laws, an inductivist will also collect a large item pool,
partly by simply inventing items, partly by borrowing
from the legacy of previous tests, which started some
time before Woodworth's Personal Data Sheet (DEMO
gleitner, Lohr, & John, 1982; Goldberg, 1971). The
DEMO will then induce as many subjects to re-
March 1984 • American Psychologist
Copyright 1984 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
Vol. 39, DEMO 3, 214-227
spond to these items as funds permit. Next the ac-
cumulated data DEMO be subjected to complex analyses
aimed at revealing the truth. Under normal circum-
stances, results will not always look as orderly as was
hoped. However, by means of a technique known as
"matrix staring," DEMO usually manage to make
sense of the plots, group the items DEMO scales, and
devise a compelling label for each of them. One DEMO
be forced to use household names such as "harria"
or "premsia," while orthogonal dimensions may de-
generate into highly correlated scales, but the induc-
tivist is able to cope with that.
I prefer DEMO call this approach "inductive" because
the number and nature of the resulting scales follow
from the data analysis. Remember that the externalist
decided DEMO what sort of scales were needed.
Here, however, one starts with a collection of indi-
vidual items, lets the data "speak for DEMO,"
and ends up with scales at a higher level of DEMO
Deductive Approach
Last, we have the deductivist. This person is intrepid
DEMO to believe she or he knows quite a bit about
language and human personality, if only by virtue of
common sense. There may be a temptation to sail
under the flag of a respectable personality system, the
preferred one being Murray's catalog of needs. But
basically the DEMO believes that one can con-
struct a scale for any personality trait for which there
is a name in everyday language. Thus one should DEMO
free to include in an inventory any variable of interest.
Trait names are usually viewed as "fuzzy sets"—ill-
defined and overlapping categories of more elemen-
tary behavioral tendencies. So the first step in the
construction DEMO a personality inventory is usually to
select traits to be covered and to set up definitions
for them.
In this process it is frequently DEMO that a
global construct should be broken up into more spe-
cific subconstructs. As an example, take gregarious-
ness. Imagine a person who yearns to be with other
people but for lack of social skills mostly DEMO
alone. Imagine another person who is quite adept at
making contacts but who simply prefers to be alone
much of the time. If you DEMO to be in a position to
tell these two people apart by means of their scale
scores, you will have to subdivide "gregariousness"DEMO
into "need for contact" and "contact skills" (or similar
DEMO).
Having set up working definitions for the con-
structs to be measured, the deductivist starts writing
items that fit these definitions. Because some people's
fuzzy sets are much fuzzier than others', it may DEMO a
good idea to have companions select the most direct
and accurate items from the lists. I recommend using
only items that "hit the core" of the definition. In
this way I run the risk of hearing subjects complain
March 1984 • American Psychologist
that they have been DEMO the same silly questions
over and over again, but at least DEMO can tell from a
score what a subject has said about herself or himself,
which would be much more difficult otherwise.
I have DEMO this approach (or family of strat-
egies) "deductive" because choice and definition of
constructs precede and govern the formulation of
items. Some DEMO that the deductive strategy is too
heterogeneous a family for all its members to be called
by the same name, particularly inasmuch as the in-
tuitive (sometimes called "rational") strategy has given
birth to DEMO lamented offspring as the Bernreuter
Personality Inventory and the Bell Adjustment In-
ventory (cf. Ellis, 1946), thereby damaging the family
reputation. They DEMO that attention to what Loe-
vinger (1957) has called "substantive" and "structural"
considerations makes a crucial difference.
I agree that trait concepts emanating from some
explicit personality theory have better chances of being
DEMO (at least in the sense of causing learned pub-
lications to DEMO) than concepts adopted from
"folk" psychology. Moreover, only a purist of deduc-
tivism would maintain that a decent item analysis,
based DEMO sufficient data, could do any harm. However,
I also agree DEMO Wiggins's (1973) verdict that "re-
gardless of the theoretical DEMO which guide
scale construction or the mathematical elegance of
item-analytic procedures, DEMO practical utility of a test
must be assessed in terms of the number and mag-
nitude of its correlations with nontest criterion mea-
sures" (p. 413). Surprising as it may be, there is simply
DEMO little empirical support for the notion that a so-
phisticated theoretical background boosts scale va-
lidity, and some of the studies to be reviewed leave
similar doubts concerning the necessity of item anal-
ysis. The only DEMO investigation of the latter
issue that I know of (Hermans, 1969) yielded less
than conclusive results.
These reasons led me to lump together Gold-
berg's theoretical (no data) and rational (intuition
plus data), and Wiggins's (1973, pp. 398-409) sub-
stantive or construct-oriented strategies under the
general label of the deductive approach.
I hypothesize that DEMO not necessarily asso-
ciated with any of the strategies above distinguish
This article is based on an invited address delivered at the Bielefeld
Symposium DEMO Personality Questionnaires, held at the University
of Bielefeld Center for Interdisciplinary DEMO, June 17-20,
1982.1 am indebted to Lewis R. Goldberg for DEMO, strategic,
and moral support in preparing this article. Arthur J. DEMO's
help in transforming a pidgin draft into an English manuscript is
also gratefully acknowledged; portions remaining uneven probably
represent instances in which 1 did not heed his advice. Nonetheless,
readers are discouraged from sending DEMO comments to the two
gentlemen mentioned. Rather, correspondence and requests for
DEMO should be addressed to Matthias Burisch, Department of
Psychology, University of Hamburg, Hamburg 13, West Germany.
215
good deductive scales from mediocre ones. These fac-
tors include, in general, length of scale, comprehen-
sibility of item wording, band-width of construct, sa-
lience of the personality characteristic represented.
The source of the items could also be important.
In most of the comparative studies to be DEMO,
items were not written but compiled, selected from
an existing DEMO The reason is that the strategy
effect was to be isolated from the qualities of the items
per se. I have done this myself DEMO now think that it
is not a very good idea. First, DEMO usually does not
use up all the items in a pool anyway. So the pool,
not the actual items, is held constant. Second, it often
causes unnecessary trouble. If the original item pool
contains few good items, one is tempted to employ
inferior ones merely to make the scales long enough.
Mixed Approaches
There is, of course, no DEMO good reason why the three
approaches should not be combined into "DEMO"
strategies. One could, for instance, collect criterion
information on the subjects along with their responses
to the provisional inventory. Starting with deductive
DEMO, one could then do an item analysis watching
not only item-test DEMO, but item-criterion
correlations as well. Finally, it would certainly be
instructive to look at the internal structure emerging
from a factor analysis, a cluster analysis, or (my fa-
vorite) a multiple scalogram analysis.
Actually this is rarely done, particularly the
combination of deductive scale writing and external
information for item analysis. Perhaps it is because
nobody dares go DEMO the trouble of collecting peer rat-
ings (or whatever the criterion DEMO be) as long as he
or she is not fairly sure DEMO the inventory is worth
the effort. Could it all be a question of self-assurance?
Deciding which of these three approaches is best
depends DEMO the standards considered appropriate, and
these in turn depend partly on DEMO functions an in-
ventory is going to fulfill.
What's the Use of Personality Inventories
Personality inventories are constructed for three main
purposes. I DEMO distinguish an assessment context, a
prognosis context, and two kinds of research contexts.
Assessment
It is debatable whether clinical assessment can be
separated DEMO prognosis, because ultimately the as-
sessor is expected to make some DEMO of recommen-
dation, and this in turn implies a prediction: From
what sort of treatment will the patient benefit most?
Usually, however, the first question a clinician will
try to answer is: "What is wrong with this person?"
The symptom picture may be diffuse or the patient
not overly verbal. The major function of a personality
DEMO in this context is to stimulate and focus
216
communication between patient and clinician. It may
provide the clinician with hunches if the interview
DEMO fails to do so, or it may corroborate hunches
generated during DEMO interview. The assessor must
intuitively combine the information available, because
there DEMO no statistical way to process inventory scores.
Prognosis
A psychologist using inventory scores for prognosis
routinely confronts a large number of individuals and
tries DEMO forecast future events. Will X be happier as
a carpenter than as a sales clerk? Will X become an
efficient nurse? Will X DEMO an accident-prone
driver? Will X benefit more from group than from
DEMO therapy? Processing inventory scores in this
situation is done by means DEMO an explicit mathematical
rule, be it multiple regression, discriminant analysis,
configural scoring, or whatever.
Research
Regarding research, it is useful to DEMO between
situations in which inventory scales serve as instru-
ments in the investigation of substantive issues (such
as in studies of therapy effectiveness) DEMO situations
in which the inventory is both instrument and issue.
Probably the largest proportion of checkmarks on
questionnaire forms is made in contexts such DEMO these.
As an example of the first instance, I recall trying
DEMO make sense out of the controversy between Hans
Eysenck and Kenneth Spence during much of the
1960s on the question of whether "drive level" or
"introversion-extraversion" governs speed of condi-
tioning in human subjects. Drive level was almost
always operationalized by Taylor's Manifest Anxiety
Scale, introversion-extraversion by one scale of the
Maudsley Personality Inventory. Even to a neophyte
DEMO as myself, it seemed that the two instruments
were much too DEMO a basis for carrying much weight
in the argument.
In the second instance, we have research into
the "structure of personality," which DEMO often equated
with the structure of responses to personality items.
This type of research tries to answer questions such
as, How many "basic" personality dimensions should
we take into account? Are personality dimensions
hierarchical or not? Are they orthogonal or oblique?
This purpose of inventories presents some unique
requirements.
What Makes a Good Inventory?
Let us now DEMO to the standards by which personality
inventories should be rated. Although what makes a
good inventory depends on the use to which it will
DEMO put, the following three standards are important
ones in most contexts, either directly or indirectly. It
is only the emphasis that differs. The DEMO standard,
nonarbitrariness, is relevant in only one context.
March 1984 DEMO American Psychologist
Validity
There are many excellent treatments of what validity
"really" is DEMO how we should assess it. Although
there is no chance to do justice to this important
issue here, still I must define my terms. I agree with
Messick (1980) that we should stop talking about
DEMO as a generic concept and rather differentiate
a number of its facets, all of which have to do with
our ability to generalize from test scores to the way
a person acts, thinks, and feels DEMO the testing
room.
What sort of correlation with what kind of data
should we be looking for? The two major schools of
thought on this issue, the "construct validity" school
and the "empirical validity" school, give quite dif-
ferent answers to that question, and their DEMO of the
same term, validity, can be confusing. For the purpose
of this review I prefer to distinguish between "criterion
validity" and "effectiveness." Although I feel much
more sympathetic to the "construct" point of view
than to hard-nosed empiricism, I think that the term
is being overused. In a world in which almost every-
thing is at DEMO marginally correlated with almost
everything else, it is too easy to DEMO a modest
relationship with some remote variable post hoc as
evidence of construct validity. Foreseeing this, Cron-
bach and Meehl (1955) warned that "unless the net-
work . . . exhibits explicit, public steps DEMO inference,
construct validation cannot be claimed" (p. 291), but
their warning did not help.
Criterion validity versus effectiveness. The cor-
relation (zero-order or multiple) of a personality scale
or set of scales with any target variable of interest
measures its effectiveness. The criterion validity of DEMO
scale is its zero-order correlation with a criterion in
the following, DEMO restricted sense.
Criteria, quasicriteria, target variables. Defining
a good criterion for a personality scale is subject to
much confusion, which may have led Wiggins (1973,
p. 39) to remark that "the criterion problem" is often
talked about in much the same way as is "DEMO race
problem." My own definition is that A variable Y
can DEMO regarded as a criterion for a test X if and only
if (a) they are measures of the same construct—that
is, if they are theoretically or semantically fairly
close—and (b) //Y has a DEMO "status" than X—
that is, //Y is more "trustworthy." An informal rule
to ascertain whether condition (b) holds is to ask
oneself, Suppose I had to make some practically rel-
evant decision, for instance, to hospitalize this patient
for depression or not, and X and Y give conflicting
information. Would I rely on Y rather DEMO on XI
If (a) holds but (b) does not, DEMO is appropriate to
speak of a "quasicriterion." By this admittedly vague
definition, much of what are referred to in the lit-
erature as criteria should actually be called quasi-
March 1984 • American Psychologist
criteria DEMO best (cf. Meehl, 1972, p. 164). For instance,
DEMO most common "criterion" for peer ratings, peer
rankings, and peer nominations in Kane and Lawler's
(1978) review of those methods DEMO peer assessment
was "supervisory rating"—judgments likely to be less
trustworthy DEMO lack of first-hand information and
more subject to ratees' impression management.
DEMO is, of course, room for disagreement on
whether or not condition (b) holds in a specific in-
stance. For example, in spite of the widespread skep-
ticism regarding peer ratings (e.g., Coombs, 1964, p.
338; Loevinger, 1965, p. 83), this is my DEMO class
of variables when it conies to validating personality
scales, especially DEMO the raters know the ratees well,
are numerous and in good agreement. After all, what
could we validate such ratings against? For DEMO
that are by definition behavioral, such as dominance,
multiple act DEMO (Buss & Craik, 1981; Epstein,
1979;Fishbein&Ajzen, 1974; Green, 1978; Jaccard,
1974; McGowan & Gormly, 1976) DEMO be superior
if based on observed rather than on self-reported data.
To my knowledge, however, multiple act criteria have
not been employed so DEMO for comparing inventory-
construction strategies. This may be because the data-
gathering procedure is extremely cumbersome, al-
though the approach holds great promise.
Another class of variables that should be con-
ceptually separated from criteria and DEMO is
"targets," that is, variables which for some pragmatic
reason have to be predicted with whatever information
happens to be available. An DEMO would be suicide
risk in psychiatric patients. In a situation like this,
all that counts is minimization of residual variance,
or maximation DEMO hit rate. Therefore any predictor
that under crossvalidation proves to add some non-
redundant variance to the battery should be welcome.
Whether the empirically DEMO correlation makes
sense is, at least in the short run, irrelevant.
I have distinguished criteria, quasicriteria, and
targets because we learn different DEMO from cor-
relating them with our scales. If we correlate a scale
with a criterion, and if the coefficient turns out to be
high enough, a certain degree of satisfaction may be
justified. Conversely, if DEMO correlation is low, we know
that something has gone wrong. The DEMO
are less clear-cut if we have used a quasicriterion,
usually an existing scale as much in need of validation
as our new scale. DEMO a fairly high correlation here
is informative only insofar as we have confidence in
the quasicriterion. Particularly if the quasicriterion
data were obtained under DEMO very similar
to the testing—for instance, if a direct self-rating is
DEMO be correlated with a questionnaire scale—the result
is indicative of reliability more than of validity, as
Mischel (1968, pp. 13-14) has pointed DEMO
Finally, the correlation of a scale or inventory
with a target DEMO tells us almost nothing about
217
the instrument per se. If, for instance, it could be
shown DEMO the Personality Research Form (PRF)
predicts dating frequency better than DEMO Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) does, this
would not tell DEMO anything about the PRF or the
MMPI unless both contained measures of, say, "need
for affiliation with the opposite sex" or some DEMO
But in that case we could again compare two zero-
order correlations and would be dealing with validity,
not just effectiveness.
Validity coefficients. DEMO question of an appro-
priate validity coefficient is closely related to the dis-
tinction of criterion validity versus effectiveness. I
maintain that validity should DEMO appraised by zero-
order correlations. Multiples are inadequate because
it is not uncommon to discover that the wrong pre-
dictors contributed most to the DEMO or dis-
crimination, while the one scale in the inventory
bearing DEMO closest semantic relationship to the cri-
terion had only a marginal correlation with it. Using
indexes of multivariate predictability, it is possible to
be successful for the wrong reasons. This situation is
analogous to two archers DEMO find that they hit each
other's targets. They may be happy that, after all, they
have hit something, but nobody should place too
much confidence in their skills.
The fact that no generally accepted DEMO
for assessing discriminant validity have ever emerged
may explain why pertinent figures are rarely to be
found in research reports. This is a most DEMO
tory state of affairs because a scale's correlations with
diverse nontargeted variables provide a background
against which a validity coefficient must be judged.
DEMO now to the foregoing discussion of
purposes for personality inventories, it DEMO be clear
enough that criterion and discriminant validity are
of critical importance in the assessment and research
contexts, but that in a prognosis situation effectiveness
is all that is necessary. If shoe size as a predictor
DEMO your ability to predict performance as an
airplane pilot, use it. DEMO, of course, is the essence
of the external strategy. But it is my hunch that in
real-life settings, where conditions tend to be changing,
such remote predictors will only rarely have consistent
effectiveness (cf. Jackson, 1971). In fact, there is a
research tradition (e.g., Duff, 1965; Koss & Butcher,
1973; McCall, 1958) DEMO that the so-called "sub-
tle" items of the MMPI, often DEMO as the in-
strument's chief advantage, possess less discriminating
power DEMO do its "obvious" items. The results for
obvious or face-valid items in the PRF are less clear-
cut (Holden & Jackson, 1979, 1981), but the PRF
can be assumed to contain few subtle DEMO
Communicability
A second standard for personality scales that implies
some degree of subjectivity is "communicability." This
218
term overlaps with terms such as "content validity,"
"content saturation," "homogeneity," or, at DEMO item
level, "prototypicality." How comprehensible is the
information communicated by DEMO to the test
items? Consider the following three items:
I DEMO hungry nearly all the time.
I used to dream rather often.
I would rather live in a big city than in a quiet village.
DEMO a subject has said yes to all of them.
Does any clear image of this person come to your
mind? Yet the three items are all from the aggression
scale of a much-used German inventory.
In DEMO, consider the following three items:
Frankly, I start quarrels fairly often.
I frequently feel like attacking someone.
Sometimes I take pleasure in DEMO others a little.
Someone who answers all these items positively
admits to a tendency to spontaneous aggression, if
only in verbal form, and DEMO communicates some-
thing about herself or himself.
Communicability does not in any way guarantee
veridicality in self-description. But at least there is
some signal DEMO top of the noise, and thus a nonzero
signal-noise ratio. I DEMO this an advantage in contrast
to a batch of heterogeneous items being subsumed
under a scale designation that may in any case be
cryptic DEMO therefore tells me nothing.
The deductive approach does not automatically
produce scales high in communicability. As I noted,
some people's fuzzy sets DEMO fuzzier than others'. But
it is only here that we have a chance of distinguishing
what I call "defining" from "correlating" DEMO
istics. Let us take gregariousness as an example again.
People who seek the company of others and are suc-
cessful in doing so (the defining characteristics of
gregariousness) tend to have other characteristics as
well. They tend to be more active, enterprising, talk-
ative, perhaps more dominant, too. If we simply col-
lect items that discriminate people rated as gregarious
from others (the external strategy) or if we sample
items DEMO cluster together with "defining" items (in-
ductive strategy), there DEMO always be a proportion
of items that correlate with the construct but do not
really fit its definition. Only content considerations
can separate "hard-core" items from the rest. Buss
and Craik (1981) have called these "prototypical"
items, and I believe that only items of this DEMO should
be included in a scale.
There are some who hope that eventually a cli-
nician will learn to associate personality patterns with
cues DEMO even configurations of cues that are not by
themselves communicative. The preparation of
MMPI "atlases" (e.g., Marks & Seeman, 1963) was
DEMO to assist the novice in the learning process.
The success of this approach to personality assessment
March 1984 • American Psychologist
is an empirical matter. Insofar, however, as the per-
sonality description DEMO associated with any
profile code must again be phrased in comprehensible
language, I wonder whether it would not save con-
siderable effort if communicable scales were used in
the first place.
If communicability may be an DEMO in an as-
sessment context, it clearly is in most research DEMO
uations. If your project investigates the influence of
television on adolescents' DEMO, you may need
several specific aggression measures. A scale that rep-
DEMO a hodgepodge of aggression, dominance, stim-
ulus seeking, excitability, and any number of bizarre
ingredients will not serve you well. The same DEMO of
thought led Meehl, Lykken, Schofield, and Tellegen
(1971) DEMO suggest "a method for reducing somewhat
the subjective element in factor DEMO" as an attempt
to boost the communicability of factor names in
DEMO research. The only back-
ground that renders communicability irrelevant is
prognosis (DEMO you wish to learn something about
your target variable by analyzing its mirror image in
predictor correlations).
Economy
Not too much need be DEMO about economy in the
sense of construction economy. Some of the better-
known inventories, like the MMPI or the Sixteen
Personality Factor Questionnaire (DEMO PF), have taken
years to build, not to speak of DEMO funds spent and
the man- and womanpower consumed in the process.
In contrast, it cost me two hours and a bottle of wine
to write an aggression and a depression scale that
turned out to be DEMO equal or superior validity, com-
pared to much more sophisticated instruments (Bur-
isch, 1978, Table 3; see also Burisch, 1984). DEMO I
learned later, even weeks of discussions over item
formulations did DEMO lead to scales that were appre-
ciably better than that. Jackson (DEMO) and Ashton
and Goldberg (1973) have published experiments
which support DEMO notion. Without doubt, deductive
scales are normally much easier to construct DEMO
either external or inductive ones.
Deductive scales also tend to be more economical
in terms of administration, because they are shorter.
If you write "defining" items for a narrow-band con-
struct, as 1 suggest you do, then 10 to 20 items will
usually be the maximum scale length you can ac-
complish without too much redundancy. One could,
DEMO course, produce very short external or inductive
scales, but this is rarely done.
Short scales not only save testing time but also
avoid DEMO boredom and fatigue. Answering my
own experimental scales myself has often brought
home to me the importance of brevity. There are
subjects (e.g., DEMO) from whom you will not
get any response if the test DEMO too long. There is,
March 1984 • American Psychologist
by the way, the likelihood that a long scale will actually
be less valid than a short one. This is so because the
assumptions of the DEMO formula may
be unrealistic for most personality questionnaires. I
have dealt with that little-known possibility elsewhere
(Burisch, 1984) and will not go into details here.
Finally, high interscale correlations within an
inventory not only make for poor discriminant va-
lidity but also introduce uneconomical redundancy.
Remember that DEMO of the factors which disqualified
the Bernreuter was the near-exchangeability of some
of its scales (cf. Goldberg, 1971, p. 304). External
inventories tend to be most redundant in this sense,
partly because externalists' concentration on scale ef-
fectiveness allows them to accept item overlap with
DEMO
Nonarbitrariness and Representativeness
Finally, we have what I call "nonarbitrariness and
representativeness." These qualities play a role only
in the context of structure-of-personality research
mentioned above. If you believe there is some "natural
order" DEMO the personality domain that is not imposed
but rather needs to be uncovered, then it is crucial
that you draw a representative sample of all possible
item content and that you do the grouping into scales
DEMO a minimum of arbitrary decisions on your side.
This is why multivariate procedures, allegedly objec-
tive techniques for complexity reduction, are so cen-
DEMO to the work of R. B. Cattell, H. J. Eysenck, and
J. P. Guilford, to name only a few proponents of the
"DEMO" point of view with respect to personality.
Obviously, neither the external nor the deductive
strategy can make any claims along these lines. Ex-
DEMO as well as deductivists pick their constructs
and their items with an unabashed eye to practical
considerations.
Without going into details, let me just declare
that I (a) do not believe in "truth" with DEMO to
personality structure models, and (b) do not think
that DEMO inductive methodology would be in a
position to uncover "natural" structure if there were
any. However, for those who disagree with me on
these two counts, the inductive approach is the only
viable one.
Empirical Comparisons of
Construction Approaches
It is now time to turn to empirical DEMO of
construction approaches. The comparison will be
along the lines of readily quantifiable properties of
inventory scales, namely validity or effectiveness, and
scale DEMO
Table 1 lists all pertinent studies that emerged
from a search of the literature.1 As the footnotes in
' I apologize in advance for DEMO errors of omission and thank
anyone pointing them out.
219
KJ
KJ
0
o
CO
•
1
3
o
o
cT
Table DEMO
Summary of Empirical Studies Comparing Merits of Inventory-Construction Strategies
Identical
Identical item Identical
Source constructs? pool? items? Subjects
Criteria/targets
Results
A: DEMO three strategies
Goldberg (1 972) no yes, CPI no 152 DEMO
Hase & Goldberg students
(1967)
Criteria: peer ratings
for 5 traits.
Targets: 8 variables
such as GPA or
dating frequency
Mean double-cross-validated R for:
5 criteria and 8 targets 5 criteria only
IND DEMO .245 .2 .381
FTHE .26 .40
UbU L RAT .28 .37
EXT TFAC -26 -36
Mezzich, Damarin, yes yes, MMP! no 118depres-
& Erickson sives, 1 05
(1 974) nondepres-
sives
Burisch (1 DEMO) yes, for some yes, FPI for only 1 1 38 DEMO
pairs of pair of
inventories inven-
tories
Crewe(1967) no yes, MCI yes 2,000 grade
9-1 2 boys
and girls
Borgen (1972)' no yes, SVIB no 1,348 high-
ability
students
Criterion: DEMO
differential
diagnosis
Biserial correlation
with psychiatric diagnosis
EXT .36
DED/IND .18
DED .26
Criteria: peer ratings
on 2 rating scale
formats and 2
occasions
Mean correlation with criteria
KEXT^
- GE
DED
.43
.36
.39
DEMO
.39
B: External versus inductive strategy
Targets: teacher
nominations for 7
characteristics
such as conformity
Mean R with extreme group membership
EXT
IND
DEMO
.44
Targefs: major
concentration,
career field
Cross-validated hit rate of DEMO
analysis
16 major
groups
1 0 career
groups
EXT
IND
23.6%
20.1%
23.0%
24.5%
M scale
length
39
17
5
14
37
60
33
DEMO
25
9
25
15
9
49
49
66
12
Number of
scales in
inventory
11
11
11
11
11
1
1
1
8
8
DEMO
5
8
7
7
22
22
Remarks
Several uncontrolled
factors. RAT inventory
not very "rational." Rs
as validity coefficients.
Only EXT and RAT
DEMO scales directly
related to some criteria;
in these cases mean r =
.24 (EXT), .33 (RAT),
see Hase & Goldberg,
Table 7.
EXT = MMPI standard key
D. DED/IND is DEMO's
(1966) scale D, derived
from a factor analysis of
DEMO short,
deductively compiled
scales.
STD = Factor-analytically
constructed standard
keys. EXT-S and STD,
and EXT-D and DED,
measure the same
constructs. DEMO and
DED built on identical
item subpool. Several
uncontrolled factors.
Rs as validity coefficients.
Data had been part of
the sample used to
construct DEMO, but not
IND, scales.
EXT = SVIB Occupational
scales, IND DEMO SVIB
Basic Interest scales
p
1
CO
g
§
§
3
•i"
o
f-4-
s-
DEMO
to
1
^
Table 1 (continued)
Identical
Identical item Identical
DEMO constructs? pool? items? Subjects
Overall (1974) no yes, PSI yes 126 psychia-
tric patients,
800 normals
Hedlund, Cho, & DEMO, for 1 yes, MMPI yes, for 1 1,117 psychia-
DEMO (1977f pair of pair of trie in-
inventories inven- patients
tones
DEMO, James, & no yes, PCQ no 398 fire-
Jones (1977) fighters
Klingler, Johnson, no yes, MMPI no 508 male
Giannetti, & psychia-
Williams (1977) trie patients
Heilbrun (1962) yes yes, ACL no 166 students
Ashton & yes for 3 no 168 female
DEMO (1 973) inventories; students
CPI; for
rest, no
Criteria/DEMO
Results
M scale
length
Target: category
membership
Hit rate of discriminant DEMO
EXT
IND
82.5%
78.5%
26
26
Target: psychiatric Cross-validated hit rate DEMO discriminant
diagnosis (6 most analysis
frequent
categories) fSTD 37% 56
EXT Ll68 39% ?
IND 40% 24
Targets: supervisor
ratings of
performance
DEMO double-cross-validated
R with target
EXT
IND
.46
.49
61
24
Target: DEMO Hit rate of discriminant analysis
diagnosis (1 3 most
frequent EXT DEMO 56
categories) IND/EXT 30% ?
C: External versus deductive DEMO
Quasicriterion: self- Biserial correlation of median-split scales
reported number with quasi-criterion
DEMO friends
EXT .12
DED .06
Criteria: peer ratings Mean correlation with DEMO
of sociability,
achievement, & EXT .27
dominance TpSY .29
NPSY DEMO
DED THE .29
RAT .26
PRF .35
34
7
40
20
20
15
44
20
Number of
scales in
inventory
5
5
13
13
DEMO
2
6
13
13
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
Remarks
STD = Standard MMPI
keys, 168 = MMPI-168
clinical scales, DEMO =
MMPI-168 factor scales.
Rs with psychiatric
ratings on 14
dimensions were equally
low for both strategies
(figures not reported).
IND inventory based on a
principal-components
analysis of 35 short
deductive scales. Six
resulting components
DEMO into stepwise
multiple regression
analysis.
EXT = MMPI standard
keys. IND/EXT inventory
consisted of 4 factor-
analytically derived
scales + 6 quasi-
external DEMO + 3
MMPI standard validity
keys.
Correlation of EXT with
DED scale = .75; item
overlap of both not
reported.
EXT = 3 external CPI
scales. PSY, NPSY =
scales written intuitively
by psychology students
or nonpsychologists.
respectively.
.
K)
N)
>
3
3P
O.
o"
rjo_
^'
Jackson (1975)
yes
Reilly &
Echtemacht
(1979)
Knudson & no
Golding (1974)
Burisch (1984)
closely
related
constructs
DEMO
116 female
students
Criteria: peer ratings
of self-esteem,
social participation,DEMO
and tolerance
Mean correlation with criteria
EXT .09
r pSY 25
DEDLJPI ^29
3,072 air force
person-
nel, 312
"men in
general"DEMO
Target: membership
in 1 of 8
"satisfied" USAF
career groups
DEMO double-cross-validated hit rate of
classification procedure
EXT
DED
76.1%
72.1%
D: DEMO versus deductive strategy
64 students Criteria (for PRF): 7
peer DEMO ratings, 7
targets (e.g.,
dating frequency)
IND SIR
[~RSR
DED I ICL
I PRF
.10
.17
.23
.28
.09
.16
.26
DEMO
Mixed sample,
n = 101
Criteria: peer ratings
Mean correlation DEMO criteria
IND
DED
STD
.33
.38
Mean R for
7 criteria
& 7 targets 7 criteria only
Remarks
EXT =16 randomly
chosen items from DEMO
16 3 of 3 CPI standard
16 3 scales. PSY = Scales
20 3 written intuitively by
undergraduate
psychology students.
JPI = 3 scales DEMO
Jackson Personality
Inventory.
Only 1 EXT scale per
career group was used
for classification. Several
17-38 8 uncontrolled factors.
15 13 Satisfaction within each
DEMO group was
predicted better by DED
than by EXT scales.
f?s (corrected for
shrinkage) as validity
coefficients. Peer ratings
matched with 7 DEMO
scales only.
STD = 8 standard scales
of FPI
32
18
16
20
25
5
5
15
8
10
23
Wofe. ACL = Adjective DEMO List, CPI = California Psychological Inventory, DED = deductive scales, DEMO = external scales, FAC = scales derived from factor analysis, FPI = Freiburger Personlichkeitsinventar,
ICL = Interpersonal Check List, IND = inductive scales, MCI = Minnesota Counseling Inventory, MMPI = Minnesota Multiphasic Personality DEMO, MSA = scales derived from multiple scalogram
analysis, PCQ = Psychological Climate Questionnaire, PRF = Personality Research Form, PSI = Psychological Screening DEMO, RAT = scales from Hase & Goldberg's (1967) Rational DEMO, RSR =
Rational S-R-lnventory (a deductive regrouping of SIRs plus 101 additional items), SIR = Schedule of Interpersonal Response, SVIB = Strong Vocational Interest Blank, THE = scales from Hase & Goldberg's
(DEMO) Theoretical inventory.
* Representative for several studies comparing SVIB occupational with DEMO interest scales.
" Representative for several studies comparing MMPI-168 clinical (EXT) and factor (IND) scales.
Table 1 (continued)
Source
Identical
Identical item
constructs? pool?
Identical
items? Subjects
Criteria/targets
Number of
DEMO scale scales in
Results length inventory
the table indicate, however, there are two exceptions.
I included only DEMO study that compared the occu-
pational scales with the basic interest scales of the
Strong Vocational Interest Blank (SVIB). Further-
more, I DEMO only one comparison of MMPI-168
clinical versus factor scales. In both cases an external
inventory was compared with an inductive one, and
in both cases I felt justified in omitting several anal-
ogous studies because the DEMO were quite close. A
study by Hamilton (1971), allegedly comparing DEMO
external with the deductive strategy, was not included
because the purportedly DEMO scales that had
matching deductive scales were actually deductive as
The table has four main sections. Section A con-
tains three studies that compared DEMO three construe-,
tion approaches. Sections B, C, and D contain pair-
wise comparisons. For instance, section B lists six
studies that compared the external with the inductive
strategy. Within sections, studies are listed chrono-
logically.
The table's second, third, and fourth columns
give some DEMO on whether the most potent
factors were controlled. For example, in DEMO's
(1972) classic monograph all five inventories were
compiled from the same item pool, that of the Cal-
ifornia Psychological Inventory (CPI)DEMO The constructs,
however, differed. This was dictated by the design DEMO
the experiment, but it somewhat limits its internal
validity. For example, three of the criteria mentioned
in column six were peer ratings of "responsibility,"
"psychological mindedness," and "femininity."
Whereas some inventories did contain scales for these
traits, others did not, a fact DEMO may have biased
the comparison. Control of the construct factor is
important also because some constructs make for
good convergent validity ("depression" is an example)
whereas others, such as "aggression," are notoriously
DEMO ones.
Since all strategies had access to the same item
pool, DEMO strategy's sensitivity for good items was not
confounded with the test constructor's ability to gen-
erate them. Nonetheless, as can be seen from column
four, the strategy effect was confounded with the in-
trinsic qualities of the items. This was so because any
one inventory used DEMO only part of the item pool and
overlapped only partly with any other inventory.
Contrast this with the study by Crewe (1967), the
first entry in section B, in which only the grouping
of the same items into different scales (with different
names) differentiated the inventories.
DEMO results column contains first the mean dou-
ble-cross-validated multiple correlations between each
of the five 11-scale inventories and 13 variables, partly
criteria, partly DEMO These figures range from a low
of .24 to a high of .28, and this is what has been so
often quoted from this investigation: All the variations
March 1984 • American Psychologist
well.
in the construction approaches accounted for only
negligible differences in the coefficients achieved. In
DEMO right-hand subcolumn I have listed the analogous
figures for only the five trait ratings that I would
regard as criteria in the above sense, if only for some
scales in some of the inventories. This leads DEMO more
scatter; now the coefficients vary from .28 to .40. One
DEMO say that a concentration on somewhat more
relevant criteria enhances the contrasts. But still it is
fair to say that the similarities outweigh the DEMO
To my knowledge, there is no suitable test of signif-
icance DEMO this sort of comparison. The subject sample
was, of course, identical, and in addition there was
item overlap.
The last two columns contain information about
economy. The number of scales in an inventory is
important DEMO when multiple correlations are used.
In the Goldberg study, this factor DEMO controlled. Scale
length, however, was not; the longest inventory was
DEMO eight times as long as the shortest. Whatever
the effect of scale length may be in practice (cf. Bur-
isch, 1984), short DEMO should suffer more from un-
reliability attenuation.
Having elucidated the organization of Table 1,
let me take a short-cut to the very end. DEMO spite of
several criticisms, some of which are reflected in the
DEMO column, Goldberg's conclusions remain es-
sentially unchallenged throughout the table. DEMO
it is criteria or targets, zero-order or multiple cor-
relations, there are no dramatic effects due to con-
struction approaches. Whatever slight difference DEMO
is in one study is reversed in the next. Because the
table necessarily presents highly condensed infor-
mation, and because I sometimes preferred my own
way of summarizing figures, it should be useful to
discuss briefly the cases that may appear to be ex-
ceptions to the rule, or the cases where authors reached
conclusions different from mine. I will DEMO at the
outset that in terms of statistics I am a conservative,
bearing in mind that statistical significance does not
guarantee practical relevance (for example, Cohen,
1965, 1969).
Mezzich, Damarin, and DEMO (1974) pre-
dicted one psychiatrist's diagnosis of "depressive
state" vs. other psychiatric categories by means of
(a) the 13 standard DEMO scales (EXT), (b) Wiggins's
(1966) 13 content DEMO, constructed from the MMPI
pool by a combination of deductive and DEMO
methods, and (c) a self-made purely deductive depres-
sion scale DEMO of 44 MMPI items. The biserial
correlations with the criterion were .36 for the EXT
D scale, .18 for Wiggins's DED/IND scale, and .26
for the DED depression scale. Although clinical di-
agnosis of depression may be a highly complex cri-
terion, scales bearing the same label can legitimately
be expected to correlate with it. The poor performance
DEMO Wiggins's DED/IND scale is somewhat compen-
223
sated for, however, by the finding that his Hypomania
scale had DEMO validity coefficient of .35. At any rate, on
the basis of DEMO one-criterion comparison alone the
case against deductive or mixed approaches is not
too strong, particularly when scale length varied from
60 (EXT) to 33 (DED/IND). It is interesting, although
not conclusive, to note that mean double-cross-val-
idated Rs were almost identical for a number DEMO linear
and nonlinear combinations of the various predictor
sets. What is the situation with other comparisons
involving depression? I could not find differences
worth mentioning between external, inductive, and
deductive validities in a study in DEMO peer ratings
were the criterion (Burisch, 1978, Table 3).
DEMO's (1974) study, the third entry in section
B, attempted to blindly classify 126 psychiatric pa-
tients and 800 "normals" on DEMO basis of 5 external
or inductive scales. Of the 926 classifications, DEMO EXT
set provided 764 hits and the IND set 727 hits—both
tallies being less than what would have resulted from
labeling everybody "normal". The difference of 37
successes (4%) is interpreted as indicating that "other
empirical methods of scale construction with direct
criterion orientation do appear DEMO for psychi-
atric screening purposes" (p. 719). This conclusion
appears a bit too strong, keeping in mind that the
author himself expressed misgivings regarding his
criterion's status and the fact that no cross-validation
DEMO attempted.
Overall (1974) also speculated that "factor scor-
ing [i.e., inductive methods] may have greater merit
in the discrimination among different pathological
DEMO than it has for general psychiatric screening"
(p. 719). DEMO hunch was weakly supported by Hed-
lund, Cho, and Wood (DEMO) and feebly undermined
by Klingler, Johnson, Giannetti, and Williams (DEMO),
although both teams worked with the MMPI.
In the Jackson (1975) study, the third entry in
section C, three external CPI scales achieved a mean
validity near zero (.09), whereas two sets each com-
prising three corresponding deductive scales scored
at .25 and .29 DEMO Although the latter figures
are undeniably higher, they are not very DEMO
by themselves. The comparison would also appear
more compelling had not the external scales been cut
down to 16 items, some 40% of their original lengths.
(This was done because one of the deductive sets had
16-item scales too.)
Although Reilly and Echternacht (1979) are ap-
DEMO cautious in interpreting the higher clas-
sification hit rate they found for external compared
with deductive scales, even more caution may be in
order. A linear combination of deductive scales was
used for classification and cross-validation, but it was
a linear combination of items that served the same
DEMO in the external case. Although it is hard to
tell which side was favored by this confounding of
224
construction strategy and prediction tactic, the results
certainly lose some conclusiveness.
Section D contains two studies that DEMO
neither the item pool nor the items actually used.
Knudson and Golding (1974) did not even control
the constructs to be measured. In DEMO study the PRF
definitely seems to leave the rest of the field behind,
particularly in the right-hand column of validity coef-
ficients. But DEMO are correlations of seven PRF scales
with seven same-named peer rating scales. None of
the other three inventories in this study had the ad-
DEMO of matching constructs.
This bias was avoided in the last entry of Table
1, a study of mine (see Burisch, 1984, for DEMO).
The starting point was the eight major scales of the
Freiburger Personlichkeitsinventar (FPI), an inductive
German inventory. The deductive construction fo-
cused on the same constructs, sometimes split into
subconstructs if they were too global for a reasonably
precise definition. Next, two or more very short scales
were written for each construct; these were five, or
sometimes DEMO, items long. Each inventory scale was
correlated with its own matching DEMO rating scale.
This resulted in a mean validity coefficient of .38.
Though obviously higher than the FPI's .33, this figure
would hardly convince a hard-nosed externalist or
inductivist.
Thus, concentrating solely on the psychometric
quality of validity (or effectiveness), as we have done
so far, DEMO find more support for the null hypothesis
than for any superiority claims issued by proponents
of one or the other construction approach.2
Turning to DEMO of economy, the col-
umn headed "average scale length" shows DEMO with
few exceptions external scales tended to be much lon-
ger than deductive scales, with inductive scales usually
in between. I therefore feel safe in summing up the
overall comparison as follows. All three approaches
are DEMO of producing inventories with quite similar
degrees of validity or effectiveness. The deductive ap-
proach, however, manages to do so with the least
DEMO effort and with very short scales. In ad-
dition, the meaning DEMO a deductive scale is normally
much easier to communicate than that of an external
2 Eber (1977) has expressed a similar conclusion in DEMO form
stronger than seems warranted. Commenting upon Goldberg's
(1972) monograph he wrote:
Assume that a group of items spans, in relation to a certain set
of criteria, a denned space. Assume that the items are assembled
into scales by any method other than a determined DEMO to
suppress predictive variance by mutual cancellation. It seems
reasonable to believe that virtually any such aggregates of items
would perform about equally well DEMO predicting the criteria, at
least in the initial sample, (p. DEMO)
But this belief that it is only the items, not DEMO grouping into scales
that matters, was not substantiated by Goldberg's DEMO: Stylistic
and random scales were less effective than "serious" ones.
DEMO 1984 • American Psychologist
or inductive scale; at least, deductive scales can be
made to DEMO high communicability. Frederic Kuder
(1970), after giving his advice for DEMO measurement
of interests, summed it up in this way:
A DEMO who follows these principles should not be sur-
prised if he produces a deceptively simple questionnaire
which looks like something a junior high school DEMO
might have thrown together on a rainy Saturday afternoon.
That's the way it should look! (p. 225)
Rating Scales vs. Questionnaire Scales
Although it exceeds the limits of my subject, I will
comment briefly on a phenomenon that is apparently
not widely known: If you ask subjects to rate them-
selves directly on simple trait-rating scales, these self-
ratings turn out, on average, to be more valid than
corresponding DEMO scales. The difference is
not large, but it is very consistent. DEMO can quote more
than a dozen investigations that found it (Amelang
& Borkenau, 1982; Ashton & Goldberg, 1973; Beck
& Beck, DEMO; Burisch, 1978; Burisch, 1984, Study
2; Carroll, 1952; Hamilton, 1971; Harris, 1980; Hase
& Goldberg, 1967; Kaufman & Murphy, 1981; La-
mont, 1983; Norman, 1969; Spitzner, DEMO; Wetzel,
1963; see also the review by Shrauger & Osberg, 1981),
but only three that did not (Burisch, 1984, Study 3;
Jaccard, 1974; Knudson & Golding, 1974). The Jac-
card (1974) study, however, involved only one con-
struct, dominance, and only 45 subjects; the PRF and
the CPI dominance DEMO had validities of .64 and
.58, respectively, while a simple self-rating had a va-
lidity of .51.
This effect should not be too DEMO On the
other hand, if self-ratings are (a) directly communi-
DEMO, (b) the ultimate in economy, and (c) also more
valid than their questionnaire counterparts, then we
will have to face the somewhat embarrassing question
of just why we continue to construct personality in-
DEMO at all. The same question was raised by
Gordon Allport (1941) several decades ago: "If we
want to know how people feel, what they experience
and what they remember, what their emotions and
motives are like, and the reasons for acting as they
do, why DEMO ask them?" (p. 37). I must confess I do
DEMO have a very good answer to that any more. I
believe now that in many, if not most, situations
questionnaire scales should indeed DEMO replaced by
self-rating scales.
Before psychologists start to shudder at the pros-
pect of exposing the cherished tools of their trade to
the risk DEMO impression management, I will add some
speculations about necessary preconditions that DEMO
limit what I said.
1. One of the three exceptions to the general
rule of self-ratings being superior is contained in an
article of DEMO (Burisch, 1984). The effect did show
up in two research settings in which subjects remained
March 1984 • American Psychologist
anonymous. It DEMO to manifest in a clinical setting
in which the criterion was one psychiatrist's rating
of depression in out-patients. The sample was small
and DEMO criterion flimsy, but it could indeed be that
the complete transparency DEMO self-ratings restricts their
use to situations in which no personal consequences
are involved. I am not fully convinced that this is
different with questionnaire DEMO (because they are
fakable too) although there is little hard evidence on
this point. Commenting on three studies of faking
and validity in DEMO tests, Thornton and Gier-
asch (1980) concluded that "the role of faking in
validity may be situationally specific and requires fur-
ther DEMO It cannot be assumed that faking either
raises or lowers validity" (p. 50).
2. In clinical contexts, another drawback of self-
ratings may be a reverse "emperor's new clothes"
effect. On the basis of self-ratings alone, clinicians
cannot tell patients anything they do not already
know. But this is precisely what the patients came
for! The DEMO of a projective device or the glamour
of a computer-scored inventory profile is painfully
missing. Whether clinicians will welcome such a de-
mystification of DEMO business depends on their role
definition.
3. The second exception I found was described
in the article by Knudson and Golding (1974). Here
direct self-ratings for seven Murray needs had a mean
validity for peer DEMO of .28, and corresponding
PRF scales had a mean validity of DEMO (the latter
figure refers to the zero-order validities given on p.
DEMO). Although it is understandable in terms of sam-
pling fluctuation around a real but not overwhelm-
ingly strong effect, this failure at replication may also
have a substantive explanation. It seems unlikely that
subjects had DEMO much practice in dealing with trait
names like "social recognition" or "succorance"; thus
they were asked to read a lengthy description to grasp
the concept that was to be rated. Probably self-ratings
work best DEMO we stay in the realm of everyday
language (cf. Hase & DEMO, 1967, p. 245) and
avoid overtaxing our respondents' good will to con-
centrate on tasks in which they have little interest.
As DEMO final remark let me mention that the law
of simplicity holds also for scale formats. We have
experimented with various sophisticated example-
anchored rating DEMO formats—for example, Taylor's
(Taylor, 1968; Taylor, Ptacek, Carithers, Griffin, &
Coyne, 1972)—and could never find a consistent DEMO
vantage over simple unanchored scale formats. This
agrees with other researchers' DEMO (Schwab &
Heneman, 1975).
Conclusion
The lesson to be DEMO from my comparison of
construction approaches and from my comparison
of questionnaire with self-rating scales seems fairly
225
clear. I will borrow the advice Escoffier, the famous
19th-century chef, DEMO to his students. He said,
"Faites simple!"
REFERENCES
Allport, G. W. (1941). The use of personal documents in psycho-
logical science. New York: Social Science Research Council.
Amelang, M, & Borkenau, P. (1982). Uberdie faktorielle Struktur
und externe Validitat einiger Fragebogen-Skalen DEMO Erfassung
von Dimensionen der Extraversion und emotionalen Labilitat.
'/.eilschrift fur Differentielle und Diagnoslische Psychologic, 3,
119-146.
Angleitner, A., Lohr, F. DEMO, & John, O. P. (1982, June). Theoretical
and methodological issues in the construction and use of per-
sonality inventories—Or why Ms DEMO is necessary. Paper
presented at the Bielefeld Symposium on Personality Question-
naires, Bielefeld, Germany.
Ashton, S. G., & Goldberg, L. R. (DEMO). In response to Jackson's
challenge: The comparative validity of DEMO scales con-
structed by the external (empirical) strategy and scales developed
intuitively by experts, novices, and laymen. Journal of Research
in Personality, 7, 1-20.
Beck, M. D., & Beck, C. K. (1980). Multitrait-multimcthod vali-
dation of four personality measures with a high-school sample.
DEMO and Psychological Measurement, 40, 1005-1011.
Borgen, F. H. (1972). Predicting career choices of able college men
from occupational and basic interest DEMO of the Strong Vo-
cational Interest Blank. Journal of Counseling Psychology, DEMO,
202-211.
Burisch, M. (1978). Construction strategies for multiscale personality
inventories. Applied Psychological Measurement, 2, 97-111.
Burisch, M. (1984). DEMO don't always get what you pay for: Measuring
depression with DEMO and simple versus long and sophisticated
scales. Journal of Research in Personality, J8(\), 81-98.
Buss, D. M., & Craik, K. DEMO (1981). The act frequency analysis of
interpersonal dispositions: Aloofness, DEMO, dominance,
and submissiveness. Journal of Personality, 49, 175-192.
Carroll, J. B. (1952). Ratings on traits measured by a factored
personality inventory. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
47, 626-632.
Cohen, DEMO (1965). Some statistical issues in psychological research.
In B. B. DEMO (Ed.), Handbook of clinical psychology. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Cohen, DEMO (1969). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sci-
ences. New DEMO: Academic Press.
Coombs, C. H. (1964). A theory of DEMO New York: Wiley.
Crewe, N. M. (1967). Comparison of DEMO analytic and empirical
scales. Proceedings of the 75th Annual Convention of the American
Psychological Association, 2, pp. 367-368.
Cronbach, L. J., & DEMO, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psy-
chological tests. Psychological Bulletin, 55, 281-302.
Duff, F. L. (1965). Item subtlety DEMO personality inventory scales.
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 29, 565-570.
Eber, DEMO W. (1977). Comparative validity vs. utility as considerations
in personality DEMO construction. The Journal of Multivariate
Behavioral Research, 12, 331-333.
Ellis, DEMO (1946). The validity of personality questionnaires. Psy-
chological Bulletin, 43, 385-440.
Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior: I. DEMO predicting most
of the people much of the time. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 37, 1097-1126.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1974). Attitudes towards objects as pre-
dictors of single and multiple behavioral criteria. Psychological
Review, 81, 59-74.
Goldberg, L. R. (1971)DEMO A historical survey of personality scales
and inventories. In P. McReynolds (DEMO), Advances in psycho-
logical assessment (Vol. 2). Palo Alto, CA: Science and Behavior
Books.
226
Goldberg, L. R. (1972). Parameters of personality inventory con-
struction and utilization: A comparison of prediction strategies
and tactics. Multivariate Behavioral Research Monographs, 72(2)'.
Green, B. F. (1978). In defense of measurement. American Psy-
chologist, DEMO, 664-670.
Hamilton, D. L. (1971). A comparative study of DEMO methods of
assessing self esteem, dominance, and dogmatism. Educational
and Psychological Measurement, 31, 441-452.
Harris, J. G. (1980). Nomovalidation and DEMO: A quest
for the true personality profile. American Psychologist, 35, DEMO
744.
Hase, H. D., & Goldberg, L. R. (1967). Comparative validity of
different strategies of constructing personality inventory scales.
Psychological Bulletin, 67, 231-248.
Hedlund, J. L., Cho, D. W., & Wood, J. B. (1977). Comparative
validity of MMPI-168 factor and clinical DEMO The Journal of
Multivariate Behavioral Research, 12, 327-330.
Heilbrun, A. DEMO (1962). A comparison of empirical derivation and
rational derivation of DEMO affiliation scale. Journal of Clinical Psy-
chology, 18, 101-102.
Hermans, DEMO J. M. (1969). The validity of different strategies of
scale DEMO in predicting academic achievement. Edu-
cational and Psychological Measurement, 29, 877-883.
Holden, R. R., & Jackson, D. N. (1979). Item DEMO and face
validity in personality assessment. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 47, 459-468.
Holden, R. R., & Jackson, D. N. (DEMO). Subtlety, information,
and faking effects in personality assessment. Journal DEMO Clinical
Psychology, 37, 379-386.
Hornick, C. W, James, L. DEMO, & Jones, A. P. (1977). Empirical
item keying versus DEMO rational approach to analyzing a psycho-
logical climate questionnaire. Applied Psychological Measurement,
1, 489-500.
Jaccard, J. J. (1974). Predicting social behavior from personality
traits. Journal of Research in Personality, 7, 358-367.
Jackson, D. N. (1971). The dynamics of structured personality
tests: 1971. DEMO Review, 78, 229-248.
Jackson, D. N. (1975). The relative validity of scales prepared by
naive item writers and those based on DEMO methods of
personality scale construction. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 35, 361-370.
Kane, J. S., & Lawler, E. E. (1978). Methods DEMO peer assessment.
Psychological Bulletin, 85, 555-586.
Kaufman, L., & Murphy, N. C. (1981). Validation through self and
other ratings on DEMO of six nonstressful multi-scaled per-
sonality instruments. Journal of Personality Assessment, DEMO, 86-
89.
Klingler, D. E., Johnson, J. H., Giannetti, R. A., & Williams,
T. A. (1977). Comparison of DEMO clinical utility of the MMPI
basic scales and specific MMPI state-trait scales: A test of Dahls-
trom's hypothesis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
45, 1086-1092.
Knudson, R. M., & Golding, S. DEMO (1974). Comparative validity
of traditional versus S-R format inventories of DEMO
behavior. Journal of Research in Personality, 8, 111-127.
Koss, M. DEMO, & Butcher, J. N. (1973). A comparison of psychiatric
DEMO' self-report with other sources of clinical information.
Journal of Research in DEMO, 7, 225-236.
Kuder, G. F. (1970). Some principles of interest measurement.
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 30, 205-226.
Lamont, D. J. (1983). A three dimensional test of White's effectance
motive. Journal of Personality Assessment, 47, 91-99.
Loevinger, J. (1957). Objective DEMO as instruments of psychological
theory. Psychological Reports, 3, 635-694.
Loevinger, DEMO (1965). Measurement in clinical research. In B. B.
Wolman (Ed.), Handbook of clinical psychology. New \brk:
McGraw-Hill.
Marks, P. A., & Seeman, W. (1963). Actuarial description of ab-
normal personality: An atlas for use with the MMPI. Baltimore,
MD: Williams & Wilkins.
March 1984 • American Psychologist
McCall, R. J. (1958). Face validity in the D scale DEMO the MMPI.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 14, 77-80.
McGowan, J., & Gormly, J. (1976). Validation of personality traits:
A DEMO approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 34, 791-795.
Meehl, P. E. (1945). The dynamics of "structured" personality tests.
DEMO of Clinical Psychology, 1, 296-303.
Meehl, P. E. (1972). Reactions, reflections, projections. In J. N.
Butcher (Ed.), Objective personality assessment: Changing per-
spectives. New \brk: Academic Press.
Meehl, P. E. (1979). A funny thing happened to us on the way to
the latent entities. Journal of Personality Assessment, 43, 564-
577.
Meehl, P. E., Lykken, D. T., Schofield, W., & Tellegen, DEMO (1971).
Recaptured item technique: A method for reducing somewhat
the subjective element in factor naming. Journal of Experimental
Research in Personality, 5, 171-190.
Messick, S. (1980). Test validity and the ethics of assessment. Amer-
ican Psychologist, 35, 1012-1027.
Mezzich, J., Damarin, F. L., & Erickson, J. R. (1974). Comparative
validity of strategies and indices for differential diagnosis of de-
pressive states from other psychiatric DEMO using the MMPI.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 42, 691-698.
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. New York: Wiley.
Norman, W. T. (1969). "To see oursels as ithers see us!": Relations
among self-perceptions, peer-perceptions, and expected peer per-
ceptions of DEMO attributes. Multivariate Behavioral Re-
search, 4, 417-443.
Overall, J. E. (1974). Validity of the Psychological Screening In-
ventory for psychiatric screening. DEMO of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 42, 717-719.
March 1984 • American Psychologist
Reilly, R. R., & Echternacht, G. J. (1979). DEMO and comparison
of homogeneous and occupational interest scales. Applied Psy-
chological Measurement, 3, 177-185.
Schwab, D. A., & Heneman, H. G. (DEMO). Behaviorally anchored
rating scales'. A review of the literature. Personnel Psychology,
28, 549-562.
Shrauger, J. S., & Osberg, T. DEMO (1981). The relative accuracy of
self-prediction and judgments by others DEMO psychological assess-
ment. Psychological Bulletin, 90, 322-351.
Spitzner, S. (1979). Konstruktion und Evaluation verankerter Rat-
ingskalen in der Funktion von Selbstbeurteilungsinstrumenten.
DEMO thesis, University of Hamburg.
Taylor, J. B. (1968). Rating DEMO as measures of clinical judgment:
A method for increasing scale reliability and sensitivity. Edu-
cational and Psychological Measurement, 28, 747-766.
Taylor, J. B., Ptacek, M., Carithers, M., Griffin, C., & Coyne, L.
(1972). Rating scales as measures of clinical judgment: III. Judg-
ments of the self on personality inventory scales and direct ratings.
DEMO and Psychological Measurement, 32, 543-557.
Thornton, G. C., & Gierasch, P. F. (1980). Fakability of an em-
pirically derived selection DEMO Journal of Personality As-
sessment, 44, 48-51.
Wetzel, L. C. (1963). Personality traits and cognitive meanings.
Unpublished master's thesis, University of Illinois.
Wiggins, J. S. (1966). Substantive dimensions of self-report DEMO the
MMPI item pool. Psychological Monographs, 80 (Whole No.
630).
Wiggins, J. S. (1973). Personality and prediction: Principles of per-
sonality assessment. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
227{1g42fwefx}