The Journal of Applied Behavioral
Science
Entrepreneurial Risk and Strategic Decision Making : It's a Matter of Perspective
Lowell W. Busenitz
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 1999 35: 325
DOI: 10.1177/0021886399353005
The online version DEMO this article can be found at:
http://jab.sagepub.com/content/35/3/325
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
DEMO Institute
Additional services and information for The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://jab.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://jab.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations: http://jab.sagepub.com/content/35/3/325.refs.html
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
http://jab.sagepub.com/
Busenitz / ENTREPRENEURIAL RISKTHE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCESeptember 1999
Entrepreneurial Risk DEMO
Strategic Decision Making
It’s a Matter of Perspective
Lowell W. Busenitz
University of Oklahoma
Risk taking has long been a central theme of the DEMO literature. However,
research on the risk propensity of entrepreneurs has met with virtually no empirical sup-
port even though entrepreneurs consistently engage in DEMO events. This article attempts
to resolve this paradox by examining entrepreneurial risk through the lens of cognitive
psychology and decision making. The author proposes DEMO entrepreneurial risk may be
explained by recognizing that entrepreneurs use biases and heuristics more, which is
likely to lead them to perceive less risk in a given decision situation. The data indicate that
entrepreneurs do indeed DEMO representativeness more in their decision making and are
more overconfident than managers in large organizations. These findings provide a new
perspective for understanding how DEMO deal with the inordinate amount of risk
associated with starting new ventures.
The dominant theme running throughout the entrepreneurship literature is risk and
how DEMO are predisposed toward risky alternatives or how they should man-
age risk (see d’Amboise & Muldowney, 1988; Hebert & Link, 1988, for a review).
Clearly, starting entrepreneurial ventures based on new discoveries and innovations
The author would like to thank Norris Krueger, Dale Rude, DEMO two anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments on previous versions of this article.
Lowell W. Busenitz is an associate professor in the Management Division DEMO the Price College of Business at
the University of Oklahoma.
THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE, Vol. 35 No. 3, September 1999 325-340
DEMO 1999 NTL Institute
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
325
326 THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE
September 1999
entails a great DEMO of risk, with failure estimates commonly ranging from 50% to 80%
DEMO the first 5 years of existence (Dun and Bradstreet, 1967). When new businesses
pursue uncharted waters with the intent of achieving substantial DEMO and above
average performance, risk is an inescapable reality. In addition DEMO potentially losing
their financial investments, entrepreneurs also risk career opportunities, family rela-
tionships, personal wealth, and psychic well-being (Bird, 1989). DEMO, entre-
preneurs tend to carry a gambler-like reputation because of their DEMO to quickly
purse new markets (d’Ambroise & Muldowney, 1988; Stevenson & Gumpert, 1985).
Although it is clear that entrepreneurs consistently face DEMO inordinate amount of
risk, empirical evidence showing entrepreneurs to have a DEMO risk propensity has
yielded little support (Brockhaus, 1980; Low & DEMO, 1988). However, Cooper,
Dunkelberg, and Woo (1988) DEMO that entrepreneurs generally perceive their
chances for success to be much higher than fellow competitors starting in the same
industries. The disparity between reality DEMO empirical findings on risk propensity has
led researchers to characterize entrepreneurial risk from a variety of perspectives
including risk avoidance approaches (Miner, Smith, & Bracker, 1989; Ray, 1994;
Raynor, 1974). Although DEMO frequently foster important transformational
changes (Bygrave & Timmons, 1992; Nutt & Backoff, 1997) through the risky ven-
tures they undertake, little DEMO understood about their vision and why they think the way
they do. In a recent inquiry, Palich and Bagby (1995) found that entrepreneurs tend to
be predisposed to cognitively categorize business situations more positively. The DEMO
nitive perspective provides an important perspective with which to investigate why
some entrepreneurs accept an inordinate amount of risk even though, on average, DEMO
do not apparently differ in their risk-taking propensity. To further explore this phe-
nomenon of risk within entrepreneurship, it is proposed that entrepreneurs use biases
and heuristics more extensively in their decision making and, therefore, DEMO to fully
acknowledge the risk associated with starting their own businesses. Stated differently,
it may be that entrepreneurs take more risky paths because DEMO perceive little risk in
their proposed ventures.
Psychologists began examining entrepreneurial differences (Collins & Moore,
1964; McClelland, 1961) in part because DEMO an intrigue with the risk that those who
start their own firms clearly accept. A key assumption was that individuals who start
entrepreneurial ventures DEMO also likely to have a propensity to take chances, to be DEMO
ing to expose themselves to situations with uncertain outcomes, and to DEMO on dan-
gerous situations (high risk propensity). However, this stream of research has yielded
disappointing findings (Low & MacMillan, 1988). DEMO the most widely cited study on
the subject, Brockhaus (1980) DEMO that the risk propensity of entrepreneurs does
not seem to differ significantly from the rest of the general population. Although a cou-
ple of DEMO have found some modest support for differences in risk propensity
among entrepreneurs (Begley & Boyd, 1987; Sexton & Bowman, 1984), the DEMO
consensus is that entrepreneurs do not differ substantially in their risk-taking propen-
sity (Low & MacMillan, 1988; Ray, 1994). This conclusion DEMO widely held even though
it is clear that entrepreneurs are regularly involved in starting ventures that are more
likely to fail than succeed.
Downloaded DEMO jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
Busenitz / ENTREPRENEURIAL RISK 327
This paradox, that entrepreneurs take more risk but do not have a higher risk pro-
pensity, has yet to be resolved. This article attempts to resolve this contradiction by
examining entrepreneurial DEMO through the lens of cognitive psychology and decision
making. Since Simon’s (DEMO) early work, scholars have recognized that managerial
decision making often falls short of a purely rational model (Fredrickson & Mitchell,
1984; DEMO & Bazerman, 1991). Cognitive psychologists, for example, have observed
DEMO people’s perceptions of what constitutes a random event may not conform to what
statistics would predict (Bar-Hillel, 1979; Lichtenstein & Fischhoff, 1977)DEMO Instead,
decision makers frequently have conflicting biases and unjustified optimism. The
frequent use of bias and heuristics in decision making (Kahneman & Lovallo, 1993;
Tversky & Kahneman, 1974; Zajac & Bazerman, 1991) shows a clear departure from a
normative interpretation of randomness. In sum, cognitive research suggests that deci-
sion makers tend to develop a set DEMO decision rules and biases to explain the random
events in their lives.
In their research on entrepreneurial risk, Palich and Bagby (1995) also found that
entrepreneurs do not view themselves as risk takers. However, in taking a cognitive
perspective, they found that due to schema accessibility, DEMO simply tend to
associate business situations with cognitive categories that suggest more favorable
attributes (greater strengths versus weaknesses, opportunities versus threats, and
potential for future performance improvement versus deterioration).
Building on this stream of DEMO, we propose that increased use of biases and
heuristics helps explain DEMO risky ideas entrepreneurs often pursue. Using their specific
biases and heuristics to filter their decisions, entrepreneurs are likely to perceive less
risk in chosen business opportunities. By being more willing to generalize from lim-
ited experience, and by feeling overconfident that they will be able to master the DEMO
obstacles, entrepreneurs may oversimplify and conclude that their specific ventures
are DEMO for success. Thus, it is not differences in risk propensity that DEMO
entrepreneurs from managers in large organizations but differences in the ways they
perceive and think about risk.
In this context, biases and heuristics are decision rules, cognitive mechanisms, and
subjective opinions people use to assist DEMO in making decisions. Frequently, the use
of biases and heuristics yields DEMO solutions to problems for individuals in an
effective and efficient manner (DEMO, 1998; Hogarth, 1987; Tversky & Kahneman,
1974). In this article, the term biases and heuristics will be used to refer to these sim-
plifying strategies that individuals use to make decisions, especially in uncertain and
complex conditions. We define entrepreneurs as those who have DEMO their own
firms. Managers are individuals with middle- to upper-level responsibilities with sub-
stantial oversight in large organizations.
RISK AND DECISION MAKING
The phenomenon DEMO entrepreneurial risk eventually attracted the attention of
behavioral scientists. McClelland’s (1961) influential work characterized the high
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO June 8, 2011
328 THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE
September 1999
achieving entrepreneurs as DEMO being moderate risk takers who prefer 50-50 prob-
abilities (McClelland’s entrepreneurial DEMO included business executives and firm
operators). The important study by Brockhaus (1980) also found entrepreneurs to be
moderate risk takers with little DEMO between them and managers as well as the
general public. Going beyond McClelland’s moderate risk-taking perspective, Raynor
(1974) asserted that success-oriented entrepreneurs should seek a much lower level of
risk than the 50-50 probabilities of DEMO risk recommended by McClelland.
Raynor argued that doing so would allow entrepreneurs to lengthen their careers as
business owners. Some empirical work examining successful DEMO supports a
relationship between risk avoidance and motivational patterns (Miner, 1990), com-
pany growth and capital raised (Miner et al., 1989), and environmental uncertainty as a
moderator of the desire to avoid risk (Bellu, Davidsson, & Goldfarb, 1990). However,
the assertion DEMO entrepreneurs desire to avoid risk is based on subjective, not objec-
DEMO assessments of risks (Bellu, 1993). We also suspect that these findings are most
applicable for entrepreneurs who have experienced a successful startup DEMO for corpo-
rate entrepreneurs who very much desire to preserve the longevity of their established
ventures.
The focus of this study is first of DEMO to understand risk in the context of the startup
process. In contrast to corporate entrepreneurs and successful entrepreneurs who have
interests to protect, we suspect that entrepreneurs in the founding process tend not to
be sensitized DEMO the risk they face. Thus, asking entrepreneurs to engage in risk-
DEMO or risk-averse behavior is often inappropriate because they do not view their
ventures as risky (Cooper et al., 1988). Broader research indicates DEMO decision mak-
ers rarely address risk by first calculating and then choosing among the alternative
risk-return combinations available (Heath & Tversky, 1991; March & Shapira, 1987;
Schwenk, 1988). We argue that this DEMO especially true for entrepreneurs.
In support of the idea of increased use of biases and heuristics, entrepreneurs may
have such a strong belief in their ability to impact the venture process that they do not
view DEMO as engaging in risky endeavors (Bird, 1989; Zajac & Bazerman,DEMO
1991). Because of the market potential they visualize, entrepreneurs may DEMO view
themselves as experts as they forge their new firms to capitalize on perceived opportu-
nities (Baron, 1998; Gatewood, Shaver, & Gartner, 1995). By viewing an opportunity
as unique and from the inside (Kahneman & Lovallo, 1993), entrepreneurs may vastly
underestimate the risk DEMO the opportunities they seek. They also may tend to ignore
potential problems and factors they cannot control. Stated differently, they may accept
risks, DEMO part because they do not expect that they will have to bear them (Low & Mac-
Millan, 1988). Thus, for understanding entrepreneurial behavior, the issue may not be
one of risk propensity or the sensitivity to probability estimates of possible outcomes
but, rather, in how DEMO think about the decisions they make surrounding the
business opportunities they undertake (Gatewood et al., 1995; Ray, 1994). Thus, we
draw on literature from cognitive psychology and strategic decision making to develop
a DEMO unified framework for understanding how entrepreneurs think and why they
make the decisions they do (Baron, 1998). By doing so, we gain some potentially
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
Busenitz / ENTREPRENEURIAL RISK 329
interesting insights into how entrepreneurs accept or DEMO with an inordinate amount
of risk inherent in the perceived opportunities they attempt to seize.
One important class of nonrational decision-making models that are DEMO
with the satisficing principle (Simon, 1955) focuses on biases and DEMO (Kahne-
man & Tversky, 1972; Tversky & Kahneman, 1971). A broad range of empirical find-
ings suggests that decision makers frequently DEMO heuristics to simplify their
decision making and, as a result, often exhibit nonrational biases (Kahneman, Slovic, &
Tversky, 1982). These findings consistently have shown that the expected utility para-
digm is inadequate DEMO describe how managers think about risk (March & Shapira,
1987)DEMO Rather, the tendency seems to be for decision makers to evaluate DEMO a small
number of alternatives and to focus on only a few key aspects of the problem (Krueger &
Dickson, 1994) based DEMO a few personal biases and decision rules (Kahneman &
Lovallo, DEMO). Increasingly, evidence indicates that individuals vary in the way they
DEMO with risk (Krueger & Dickson, 1994; Shapira, 1995), and this may be particularly
reflected in their use of specific biases and DEMO For example, some individuals,
such as entrepreneurs, may be more prone to biases stemming from various heuristics
such as representativeness and overconfidence (Bazerman, 1990; Kahneman et al.,
1982).
Biases and Heuristics DEMO Entrepreneurial Decision Making
An assumption of this article is that there is a relationship between use of biases and
heuristics in decision making and DEMO likelihood of starting your own company. Deci-
sions involving much uncertainty, DEMO risk probabilities are virtually impossible to
calculate, can overwhelm a more DEMO decision maker. The uncertainty sur-
rounding a start-up can be staggering unless one has a more biased perspective. Those
who more readily use biases DEMO heuristics may use them to make sense out of an
uncertain situation through the application of their own decision rules.
The greater manifestation of DEMO and heuristics among entrepreneurs, and how
that leads to the acceptance DEMO greater risk, is likely for at least two reasons. First, entre-
preneurs often act very quickly in deciding to start their own firms (Carter, Gartner, &
Reynolds, 1996; Reynolds & Miller, 1992) as they act to exploit brief environmental
windows of opportunity (Hambrick & Crozier, 1985). In such settings, extensive data
collection and analyses DEMO calculate risk probabilities and choose among alternative
risk-return combinations are generally too time-consuming if not impossible to obtain
(Gilmore & Kazanjian, 1989; Shapira, 1995). Heuristic-based decision making
enables individuals to piece together various fragments of information and assimilate
them based on decision rules to make faster DEMO (Eisenhardt, 1989) before brief
windows of opportunity close. As Tversky DEMO Kahneman (1974) noted, heuristics
provide intuitive guidelines that usually accelerate DEMO decision process substantially.
The influence of biases and heuristics, such as DEMO and overconfidence,
may enable individuals to easily make decisions with incomplete information. The
more extensive use of biases and heuristics in strategic decision DEMO by
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, DEMO
330 THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE September 1999
entrepreneurs also may DEMO explain why they frequently start their ventures with
minimal lead time.
Second, organizational norms that guide decision making in established organiza-
tions (Fredrickson & Iaquinto, 1989) are fundamentally different from what occurs in
an entrepreneurial setting (Miller & Friesen, 1984). Without policies and procedures
in DEMO, individuals must use their own decision-making rules or heuristics to guide
DEMO decision making. These decision-making shortcuts may enable individuals to
deal with the large amounts of unresolved uncertainty and to make decisions that must
be DEMO quickly and efficiently without full consideration of the risk involved. Thus,
biases and heuristics and their use by entrepreneurs are central to understanding DEMO
entrepreneurial process. The use of biases and heuristics facilitates a perceived sense
of overall understanding and a sense that the “rules of the game” DEMO understood. More
cautious decision makers will tend to function better in larger organizations in which
more extensive information tends to be more readily available DEMO in which various
decision tools are more readily available. Additionally, decision DEMO in larger firms
have more resources to collect data more systematically, DEMO it more carefully, and
thus make more risk-averse decisions.
A large DEMO of biases and heuristics have been studied in the nonrational
decision-making literature (Bazerman, 1990; Hogarth, 1987). From among all these
biases DEMO heuristics, we chose to examine differences between these sets of individu-
DEMO with reference to two biases and heuristics: representativeness and overconfidence.
Representativeness DEMO one of the most widely referenced heuristics (e.g., Kahneman &
DEMO, 1972; Katz, 1992). Overconfidence was chosen because of its DEMO to a
number of other biases and heuristics identified in the literature (Kahneman et al.,
1982). Furthermore, Kahneman and Lovallo (1993) used both of these biases and heu-
ristics to build their arguments for a cognitive perspective on risk taking.
Representativeness. In their description of DEMO, Tversky and Kahne-
man (1971) asserted that this heuristic was DEMO used in decision making. Decision
makers manifesting this heuristic are willing to develop broad, and sometimes very
detailed, generalizations about a person or DEMO based on only a few attributes
of that person or phenomenon. In an extreme form, an individual closely associated
with a new project is likely to sketch a representative scenario that captures the essen-
tial elements DEMO the history or the future (Kahneman & Lovallo, 1993). For example, if
Bill once used a single piece of equipment manufactured by “Firm A” and strongly dis-
liked it, the utilization of this heuristic would lead to a bias against all equipment made
by that manufacturer.
DEMO particular form of representativeness heuristic examined here is a willingness
to generalize from small, nonrandom samples. The law of large numbers suggests that
large random samples can be used to make rigorous inferences about population statis-
DEMO However, sometimes decision makers are willing to make such inferences, not
from large random samples but from small, nonrandom samples. The most common
type of small, nonrandom sample used as a basis for generalization is, of course, per-
sonal experience (Kahneman et al., 1982).
DEMO from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
Busenitz / ENTREPRENEURIAL RISK 331
Again, there is little doubt that the representativeness heuristic, and especially the
willingness to generalize from small, nonrandom DEMO, is a decision-making heu-
ristic that may be particularly well suited DEMO entrepreneurial settings (Katz, 1992). In
such settings, there is DEMO the time, or the institutional support, to obtain large ran-
dom samples, even if they do exist. To make these risky decisions, DEMO read-
ily succumb to their own decision rules and to their sometimes narrow experience
base. Entrepreneurs’insensitivity to risk will be manifested in their greater DEMO
ity to risk. Individuals who are less susceptible to heuristics stemming from small sam-
ple sizes are likely to be attracted to larger firms, in which the time and other resources
needed to choose a more DEMO sample are likely to be available. These obser-
vations lead to the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: As a reflection of their insensitivity to risk, entrepreneurs will be more willing
to generalize from small sample sizes than managers in large organizations.
Overconfidence. This bias identifies how decision makers DEMO to be overly opti-
mistic in their estimation abilities on receiving initial information (Alpert & Raiffa,
1982; Fischhoff, Slovic, & Lichtenstein, 1977; Oskamp, 1965), particularly when they
are relatively unfamiliar with DEMO problem and/or when substantial uncertainty exists
(Lichtenstein, Fischhoff, & DEMO, 1982). Overconfidence emanates from the
anchoring and adjustment heuristic (Bazerman, 1990; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974)
and is one of the more commonly referenced decision-making biases (Hogarth, 1987;
Schwenk, 1988). Decision makers tend to be overconfident in their initial assessments
and slow DEMO revise their initial judgments appropriately as additional information
becomes available (Schwenk, 1988).
The issue of overconfidence among entrepreneurs has been studied by DEMO et al.
(1988), who found that entrepreneurs assigned a substantially DEMO probability of
success to their own ventures while assigning lower probabilities of success to other
ventures like theirs. Overconfidence, as a decision-making bias, DEMO likely to be a com-
mon phenomenon for decision makers in entrepreneurial settings. As suggested ear-
lier, given the enormous decision-making uncertainty facing these individuals, and the
speed with which decision making must occur (Eisenhardt, 1989), decisions will be
made before “all the information is in.” DEMO a positive perspective, individuals are
more likely to be willing to DEMO risky decisions if they feel confident in their ability to
implement them (Heath & Tversky, 1991). Consequently, individuals with a greater
sense of overconfidence are likely to function better in an entrepreneurial setting
because DEMO will be less overwhelmed with the multiple hurdles they face. Individuals
with less of a tendency toward overconfidence will be more attracted to larger DEMO
zations in which more risky decisions will generally be approached in a more
programmed and systematic manner. These observations lead to the following
hypothesis:DEMO
Hypothesis 2: As a reflection of their tendency to make more DEMO decisions, entrepreneurs
will manifest more overconfidence in their decision making than DEMO in large
organizations.
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
332 THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE September 1999
METHOD
Measures
Representativeness. DEMO measure the use of the representative heuristic, we followed
the approach DEMO by Fong and Nisbett (1991) and Fong, Krantz, and Nisbett, (1986) in
which subjects were given scenarios representing various types of real-to-life strategic
decisions. As in the scenarios developed by Fong and colleagues, both of our problems
portrayed a strategic decision pitting two alternatives against DEMO another. One alterna-
tive was based on quantitative/statistical information, whereas DEMO other was based on
heuristic reasoning. Problem 1 involved the purchase of a major piece of equipment,
whereas Problem 2 depicted an automation DEMO decision (see the appendix for these
two problems). Subjects were DEMO to decide between the two alternatives for each
problem and then to describe their reasoning for reaching the designated decision.
Coders then analyzed these DEMO to determine whether heuristic-type reasoning
was used by the respondents to answer these scenarios.
The coding schema used to analyze the responses also closely DEMO that of
Fong et al. (1986) and Fong and Nisbett (DEMO). A code of 1 was given for responses
that contained no mention of statistical reasoning but relied instead on subjective opin-
ions or DEMO “rules of thumb.” Examples of this form of reasoning included reference
to personal experience or simple decision rules like “buy American” and “personal
experience.” DEMO code of 0 was given for responses that contained some form of statisti-
cal reasoning, including references to variability or sample size. There were 17
responses that were uncategorizable due to a lack of information given DEMO the respon-
dent and were, therefore, omitted from subsequent analyses.
After some initial training, all responses were coded blind to conditions according
to these criteria by two individuals (the author and a graduate student). There was exact
agreement between Coder 1 and Coder 2 84% of DEMO time across the two problems. In
cases in which disagreement existed, DEMO evaluation of a third coder (another graduate
student) was used to resolve the disparity. These results were then summed across the
two problems DEMO create a single three-category variable (0-2). A sum of 0 DEMO sta-
tistical reasoning in both scenarios, 1 indicates a mix response, and 2 indicates heuris-
tic reasoning was used throughout.
Overconfidence. To measure DEMO, the procedure used in the widely
cited studies conducted by Fischhoff DEMO al. (1977) and Lichtenstein and Fischhoff
(1977) was replicated. A series of five questions based on death rates from various dis-
eases DEMO accidents in the United States was developed. All items were dichotomous in
nature with the general form of “Which cause of death is more DEMO in the United
States? A. Cancer of all types, B. Heart disease.” One of the two choices is correct
based on the most DEMO vital statistics report prepared by the National Center for
Health Statistics. Subjects were asked to make two responses to each item. First, they
were to choose one of the two alternatives as their best guess of DEMO correct alternative.
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
Busenitz / ENTREPRENEURIAL RISK 333
Second, they indicated, on a provided DEMO ranging from 50% to 100%, the level of
confidence they had DEMO their answer. In the instructions, they were told that 50% would
DEMO that their answer was a total guess, whereas 70% would indicate DEMO they
thought they had 7 chances in 10 of being correct. A response of 100% would indicate
that they were totally confident that their DEMO was right. Again, in taking our cues
from the earlier work DEMO Lichtenstein and Fischhoff, all “level of confidence”
responses were grouped into DEMO of six probability categories: .50 to .59, .60 to .69, DEMO
to .79, .80 to .89, .90 to .99, and 1.00 DEMO analysis purposes. Those probability
responses that were in the .50 to .59 range were coded as .50, .60 to .69 responses were
coded as .60, and so forth.
For the purpose of statistical analyses on each observation, a confidence score was
computed. Again, following the lead of DEMO et al. (1977), this was done by noting
the mean DEMO response across all items for each subject and the percentage of
items for which the correct alternative was selected. The difference between these two
DEMO then becomes a measure of overconfidence or underconfidence (a positive score
DEMO overconfidence, whereas a negative score indicates underconfidence; the
higher the score, the greater the overconfidence). For example, a respondent who
answered DEMO, .60, .70, .70, and .90 and gave the correct answer three out of five times
would receive an overconfidence score of .08 (mean of .68 minus .60).
Risk propensity, education, and age. DEMO previous research on differences in
risk propensity between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations has gener-
ated mixed results, we wanted to control for this trait. Risk propensity was assessed by
using the Jackson Personality Inventory (Jackson, 1976), which consists of 16
dichotomous items. Jackson (1977) reported reliability coefficients of .81 to .84 for
risk propensity in terms DEMO scale homogeneity and test-retest stability. Sexton and
Bowman (1984) reduced this risk propensity scale developed by Jackson to 8 items to
better accommodate DEMO research. The use of this 8-item risk propensity dichoto-
mous scale yielded a Kuder-Richardson-20 (KR-20) reliability coefficient of .77, with
scores ranging from 0 to 8. Because the use of biases and heuristics may vary DEMO age
and education, we also inserted the birth year of the DEMO as a control variable.
Sampling
Samples from two populations were drawn: DEMO sample of entrepreneurs and a sample
of managers in large organizations. Survey research was used to collect the primary
data.
The sample of entrepreneurs. DEMO sales tax file of a state comptroller’s office was
used to identify potential entrepreneurs because of its superior capability for identify-
ing new businesses (Busenitz & Murphy, 1996). These files contain the name and
address of the owner, organization, organization type, SIC code, and date DEMO first sale.
A sample of firms showing a date of first sale within the past 2 years and having an SIC
code in the DEMO, 2900, 3000, 3500, 3600, 3700, and 3800 categories was selected.
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
334 THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE September 1999
These SIC categories DEMO the manufacturing of plastics, electronics, and instru-
ments. A priori, DEMO was thought that these categories would represent a higher percent-
age of newly emerging firms because they represent more dynamic industries. This
procedure resulted DEMO a sample of 573 entrepreneurs. A mail questionnaire was devel-
oped and sent to the identified sample. A total of 176 responses from entrepreneurs
DEMO received, for a 31% response rate.
Because, historically, identifying entrepreneurs DEMO been somewhat problematic
(Gartner, 1988), we wanted to be more precise in our operationalization. Our opera-
tionalization consisted of two dimensions. First, respondents had to have been a
founder of the identified firm. Being DEMO for an independent start-up is widely
used as a distinguishing feature of entrepreneurship (Begley & Boyd, 1987; Cooper
et al., 1988) and, thus, was used here as a prerequisite for inclusion in the DEMO for
this study. With the second dimension, subjects had to be DEMO involved in the
start-up process. This was operationalized by requiring our subjects to have started
their venture within the last 2 years and/or DEMO planning on starting another ven-
ture within the next 5 years. These restrictions resulted in 124 usable responses. The
average time since founding for DEMO entrepreneurs included in this sample was 1.7
years. The 52 omissions occurred because either they were not the founder (e.g., they
had purchased DEMO inherited the firm) or had founded the firm more than 2 DEMO ago and
they were not currently contemplating another start-up. To test for a biased response,
nonrespondents were compared to respondents based on the DEMO SIC categories
identified above. The results from the chi-square test suggested that the usable
response was not biased, χ2(5) = 1.782, p = .878.
Managers in large organizations. In this study, managers in large organizations
were defined as individuals who have responsibility for at least two DEMO areas
(such as marketing, finance, personnel, research and development, DEMO manufactur-
ing) and work for publicly owned organizations with more than DEMO,000 employees.
These managers are often referred to as divisional or general managers because
they oversee multiple functional areas (e.g., marketing, research and development,
accounting, manufacturing). This classification of managers was chosen because their
work most closely parallels the work of entrepreneurs (versus the top-level corporate
executives who regularly deal with mergers and acquisitions, public financial markets,
and other external stakeholders). To be included in this study, the managers had to
oversee at least two functional areas (the sample average was 4.55 functional areas).
Contact was made with three organizations, and two agreed to participate in the study.
Data collection was coordinated DEMO the human resource departments of the
respective organizations with a company cover letter attached. Usable responses were
received from 95 of the 176 managers DEMO whom surveys were sent, for a usable
response rate of 54%. DEMO SIC for the managers included in this sample came from the
1300, 3400, 3500, 3600, and 3800 segments. The results of the DEMO test on the
SIC variable between usable responses and nonrespondents again suggest that the
response was not biased, χ2(4) = 3.973, p = .59.
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
Busenitz / ENTREPRENEURIAL RISK 335
TABLE 1
Means, Standard Deviations, and DEMO
Variable
Mean
SD
12 3 4 5
1. Entrepreneurs/managers
2. Education entrepreneurs 2.78 1.18
Education managers 4.03 1.00 –0.49**
3. Age entrepreneurs 44.12 DEMO
Age managers 45.12 6.21 –0.05 0.01
4. Risk-propensity entrepreneurs 5.20 2.42
Risk-propensity managers 5.14 2.33 0.02 0.056 –0.01
5. Representativeness entrepreneurs 1.10 0.78
Representativeness DEMO 0.42 0.54 0.44** 0.33** –0.7 –0.04
6. Overconfidence entrepreneurs 0.07 0.19
Overconfidence managers 0.009 0.185 0.16* –0.11 0.02 –0.04 –0.04
*p < .05. **p < .01.
RESULTS
Table 1 presents the means, standard deviations, and correlation coefficients among
all variables. In this study, managers in large organizations were coded as 1, whereas
the entrepreneurs were coded as 2. The correlations show that the overconfidence and
representativeness variables are significantly related to being DEMO entrepreneur versus a
manager in a large organization. These zero-order correlations indicate preliminary
support for the hypotheses.
One-way ANOVA analysis was also used to DEMO possible differences in scores
between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations. The mean score with the
representative heuristic was 1.24 for entrepreneurs versus 0.53 DEMO managers (F =
50.16, p < .001). As for overconfidence, entrepreneurs scored a mean of 0.106,
whereas managers scored 0.045 (DEMO = 5.53, p < .05). As for the control variables, only
education was significant with managers, on average, having a higher DEMO of formal
education (4.24 vs. 2.98; F = 68.87, p < .001). Notably, we found now differences in
the risk propensity (the mean score for the entrepreneurs was 5.47 vs. 5.12 for the DEMO
agers in large organizations, F = 1.08, ns).
Further analysis was conducted using a multivariate approach. Because our
dependent variable is dichotomous (managers in large organization were scored as 1
and entrepreneurs as 2), logistic regression was employed as the primary test of the
hypotheses. The results presented in Table 2 show that entrepreneurs are more likely to
DEMO affected by representativeness and overconfidence than are managers in large
organizations. Even after controlling for education, age, and risk propensity, the biases
and heuristic effects endure. Taken together, these results suggest that the way entre-
preneurs approach and deal with risky decisions is significantly different from that DEMO
managers of large organizations. These data indicate that entrepreneurs do not view
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
336 THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE September 1999
TABLE 2
Results DEMO Multivariate Analysis: Logistic Regression
Independent Variables Parameter Estimate Wald Chi-Square
Intercept DEMO 3.1
Education –0.91*** 30.02
Age –0.01 0.38
Risk propensity 0.118 2.016
Representativeness 1.46*** 22.97
Overconfidence 2.19* 4.54
Pseudo R2 0.33
Model chi-square 89.7***
df DEMO
Hit ratio (%) 78
NOTE: As noted in the Method DEMO, 52 observations were omitted from our entrepreneurship sample to
control for DEMO possible success bias because either the respondent was not the founder (DEMO, he or she had pur-
chased or inherited the firm) or had founded the firm more than 2 years ago and was not DEMO an-
other start-up in the near future. However, the above model DEMO rerun to include these 52 observations. The
significance levels of all variables remained unchanged from those reported above.
*p < .05. ***p < .001.
DEMO as preferring more risky adventures as shown in the risk propensity scores,
but they do use biases and heuristics more readily to evaluate DEMO decisions. The use
of biases and heuristics is an important breakthrough in understanding entrepreneurial
decision making.
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
The importance of transformational change (Nutt & Backoff, 1997) and the risk
entrepreneurs encounter has long DEMO a central part of the entrepreneurship literature
(d’Amboise & Muldowney, 1988; Low & MacMillan, 1988). However, it has been
somewhat disconcerting that most academic efforts to test entrepreneurs for a higher
risk propensity DEMO met with limited success even though they consistently engage in
more risky events. This article presents empirical evidence indicating that entrepre-
neurs use biases DEMO heuristics in their decision making more extensively than manag-
ers in large organizations do. Together with the Palich and Bagby (1995) findings that
DEMO tend to look at business opportunities more positively, we now have DEMO
important new window from which to probe how entrepreneurs think about and deal
with risk.
First, these findings help explain why entrepreneurs have consistently not been
found to have a higher risk propensity. Entrepreneurs do not DEMO themselves as being
more desirous of risky adventures. Furthermore, these findings DEMO that entrepre-
neurs do not approach the starting of a new venture from a sequential and methodo-
logical perspective. If they approached the start-up DEMO in a more comprehensive
manner, the venture would probably never be DEMO due to the lack of information, or,
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
Busenitz / ENTREPRENEURIAL RISK 337
where sufficient information was available, the probabilities of success would be so
low that the venture would rarely be DEMO However, with entrepreneurs, their
biases and heuristics indicate that there is a major opportunity to be capitalized on
and/or that problems with DEMO their expectations for the venture do not exist or
will be addressed later.
A second implication of this study addresses the contextual versus person-specific
DEMO of the risk. Some studies have concluded that risk is highly contextual (March &
Shapira, 1987; Ray, 1994). However, given DEMO this study found consistent differences
across our samples of entrepreneurs and managers in how they responded to two dif-
ferent decision scenarios and death-rate DEMO, it suggests that how one responds to
risky situations is more DEMO just contextual. Those who are more susceptible to the use
of biases and heuristics may actually gravitate toward and function better in more
uncertain DEMO risky situations. Of course, additional research is needed to further
examine DEMO conclusion.
Some authors have argued for ways to improve one’s decision making by protecting
against the influence of biases and heuristics (Bazerman, 1990; Russo & Schoemaker,
1989). However, in the entrepreneurship context, DEMO use of biases and heuristics may
be potentially advantageous. Without using biases and heuristics extensively, most
new ventures would never get launched within an appropriate window of opportunity.
Thus, a third potential implication of this study is that biases and heuristics may be
important mechanisms that entrepreneurs use DEMO sift through a large diversity of infor-
mation in the face of much uncertainty. As Stevenson and Gumpert (1985) stated,
“successful risk DEMO have the confidence to assume that the missing elements of the
pattern will take shape as they expect” (p. 88).
The puzzle of starting a new venture is usually very scrambled, and those individu-
als who use heuristics more extensively to assist in their strategic decision making DEMO
the only ones who are most likely to attempt such a start-up. Although there are no
doubt shortcomings to an entrepreneur’s clouded or naive DEMO of risk, such an
approach may help explain why entrepreneurs are DEMO able to transform an idea
into a growing enterprise. In other words, it may be the naiveness of the risk involved
that enables entrepreneurs to forge ahead with their new ideas. If entrepreneurs would
carefully calculate DEMO the risks involved in starting a new venture, most new ventures
DEMO never be started. Stated differently, some individuals may have a competitive
DEMO in dealing with the risk inherent in new business start-ups. Of course, future
research needs to examine more carefully these implications. Also, building DEMO the
work of Raynor (1974), Miner (1990), and others, it might be interesting to investigate
if and when insensitivity to risk via the use of biases and heuristics moves from being
an advantage DEMO the start-up process to becoming a disadvantage as the organization
grows and matures.
The use of biases and heuristics may also offer some help DEMO explaining why entre-
preneurs sometimes make bad managers (Schell, 1991). Although the use of biases
and heuristics can be very beneficial, it may lead to major errors in evaluating the riski-
ness of key DEMO decisions. Although research has yet to establish performance
implications, it is DEMO that the more extensive use of heuristics in strategic
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
338 THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE September 1999
decision making may DEMO a great advantage during the start-up years. However, it also
may DEMO to lead to the demise of a business, particularly as a DEMO matures.
Finally, understanding the perspective of entrepreneurs, as reflected in their use of
biases and heuristics, provides an important window into understanding how they
function and why they undertake risky endeavors. If researchers do not DEMO
how entrepreneurs view risk, then it is going to be very DEMO to help entrepreneurs
develop strategies for coping with various risks and help them manage risk.
APPENDIX
Problem 1: Equipment Purchase Decision
Mr. Johnson is about to invest in a new machine and has narrowed his options DEMO Machine A,
which is made in the United States, or DEMO B, which is made overseas. Both machines are
equally capable of DEMO the same function. In considering this decision, Mr. Johnson said
to DEMO friend, “You know, it seems that every time I buy a piece of equipment made by a foreign
manufacturer, it breaks down in the first month of use.”
After further discussion, Mr. Johnson’s friend remembers a recent industrial report that gives
a significantly higher ranking to Machine DEMO (the one made overseas) than to Machine A. This re-
port bases its recommendation on extensive testing as well as on feedback from DEMO of users.
If you were in Mr. Johnson’s position, which machine DEMO you purchase? Why?
Problem 2: Automation Update Decision
The president is urging the board of directors to accept the purchase of a DEMO com-
puterized machine that would fundamentally change their operations. After describing the capa-
bility of this machine, the president cites a recent nationwide study that examined 120 busi-
nesses making similar upgrades. Results indicated that at DEMO 85% showed a sizable increase in
productivity. In a parallel control group of firms not making the upgrade, about half as many
firms (DEMO) showed a sizable increase in productivity. Based on this study, the president con-
cludes that the computerized machine needs to be purchased.
One DEMO the directors now takes the floor giving two reasons why computerized equipment is
not the real reason for increased productivity. First, the managers of businesses that make such
changes are likely to be more energetic and DEMO, thus creating an environment for supe-
rior performance. Second, any change is likely to lead to superior performance because of the in-
creased DEMO and commitment on the part of management.
If you were participating in such a decision, whose line of reasoning (president or director)
DEMO you be more likely to accept? Why?
REFERENCES
Alpert, M., & Raiffa, H. (1982). A progress report on the training of probability assessors. In D. Kahneman,
P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 294-305). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Bar-Hillel, M. (1979). The role of sample size in sample evaluation. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 24, 245-257.
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, DEMO
Busenitz / ENTREPRENEURIAL RISK 339
Baron, R. A. (1998). Cognitive DEMO in entrepreneurship: Why and when entrepreneurs think differ-
ently than other DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 275-294.
Bazerman, M. H. (1990). Judgment in managerial decision making (2nd ed.). New York: DEMO Wiley.
Begley, T. M., & Boyd, D. P. (1987). Psychological characteristics associated with performance in entrepre-
neurial firms and smaller businesses. DEMO of Business Venturing, 2, 79-93.
Bellu, R. (1993). Task role motivation and attributional style as predictors of entrepreneurial performance:
Female DEMO findings. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 5, 331-344.
Bellu, R., Davidsson, P., & Goldfarb, C. (1990). Towards a theory of DEMO behavior: Empirical
evidence from Israel, Italy and Sweden. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 2, 195-209.
Bird, B. J. (1989). Entrepreneurial behavior. DEMO, IL: Scott, Foresman.
Brockhaus, R. H. (1980). Risk DEMO propensity of entrepreneurs. Academy of Management Journal, 23,
509-520.
Busenitz, L. W., & Murphy, G. B. (1996). New evidence in the pursuit of locating new businesses. Journal of
Business Venturing, 11, DEMO
Bygrave, W. D., & Timmons, J. (1992). Venture capital at the crossroads. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Busi-
ness School Press.
Carter, N., Gartner, W. B., & Reynolds, P. D. (1996). Exploring start-up events sequences. Journal of Busi-
ness Venturing, 11, 151-166.
DEMO, O. F., & Moore, D. G. (1964). The enterprising man. East Lansing, MI: MSW Business Studies.
Cooper, A. C., DEMO, W. C., & Woo, C. Y. (1988). Entrepreneurs’perceived chances for success. Jour-
nal of Business Venturing, 3, 97-108.
d’Amboise, G., & Muldowney, M. (1988). Management theory for small business: DEMO and require-
ments. Academy of Management Review, 13(2), 226-240.
DEMO and Bradstreet. (1967). Patterns of success in managing a business. DEMO York: Author.
Eisenhardt, K. (1989). Making fast strategic decisions DEMO high-velocity environments. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 32, 543-576.
Fischhoff, DEMO, Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1977). Knowing with DEMO: The appropriateness of extreme
confidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 3, 552-564.
Fong, G. T., Krantz, D. H., & Nisbett, R. E. (1986). The effects of statistical training on thinking about every-
day problems. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 253-292.
Fong, G. T., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). Immediate and delayed transfer of training effects in statistical reason-
ing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 120(1), 34-45.
Fredrickson, J. W., & Iaquinto, DEMO L. (1989). Inertia and creeping rationality in strategic decision processes.
DEMO of Management Journal, 32(3), 516-542.
Fredrickson, J. W., & Mitchell, T. A. (1984). Strategic decision processes: Comprehensiveness and DEMO
formance in an industry with an unstable environment. Academy of Management Journal, 27, 399-423.
Gartner, W. B. (1988). Who is an DEMO? Is the wrong question. American Journal of Small Business,
12(DEMO), 11-32.
Gatewood, E., Shaver, K., & Gartner, W. (1995). A longitudinal study of cognitive factors influencing
start-up behaviors and DEMO at venture creation. Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 371-391.
Gilmore, DEMO N., & Kazanjian, R. K. (1989). Clarifying decision making DEMO high-growth ventures: The use of
responsibility charting. Journal of Business Venturing, 4, 69-83.
Hambrick, D. C., & Crozier, L. (1985). Stumblers and stars in the management of rapid growth. Journal of
Business DEMO, 1(1), 31-45.
Heath, C., & Tversky, A. (DEMO). Preferences and beliefs: Ambiguity and competence in choice under uncer-
DEMO Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 4, 5-28.
Hebert, R., & Link, A. (1988). The entrepreneur: Mainstream views and radical critiques. New York:
Praeger.
Hogarth, R. M. (1987). Judgement and DEMO: The psychology of decisions. New York: John Wiley.
Jackson, D. DEMO (1976). Jackson Personality Inventory manual. Goshen, NY: Research Psychologists DEMO
Jackson, D. N. (1977). Reliability of the Jackson Personality Inventory. Psychological Reports, 40,
613-614.
Kahneman, D., & Lovallo, D. (1993). Timid choices and bold forecasts: A cognitive perspective on risk tak-
ing. Management Science, 39(1), 17-31.
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011
340 THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE
September 1999
Kahneman, D., DEMO, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: DEMO and biases.New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1972). A subjective probability: A judgment of representativeness. Cogni-
DEMO Psychology, 3, 430-454.
Katz, J. A. (1992). A psychosocial cognitive model of employment status choice. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice, 17(1), 29-37.
Krueger, N., & Dickson, P. (1994). How DEMO in ourselves increases risk taking: Perceived self-efficacy
and opportunity recognition. Decision DEMO, 25, 385-400.
Lichtenstein, S., & Fischhoff, B. (1977). Do those who know more also know more about how much they
DEMO? Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 20, 159-183.
Lichtenstein, S., DEMO, B., & Phillips, L. (1982). Calibration of probabilities: DEMO state of the art to
1980. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and
biases (pp. 306-334). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Low, M. B., & MacMillan, I. C. (1988). Entrepreneurship: Past research and future challenges. Journal of
Management, 14(2), 139-161.
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. (1987). Behavioral decision theory and organizational decision DEMO In G. R.
Ungson & D. N. Braunstein (Eds.), Decision DEMO: An interdisciplinary inquiry (pp. 92-115). Boston:
Kent.
McClelland, DEMO C. (1961). The achieving society. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.
DEMO, D., & Friesen, P. H. (1984). Organizations: A DEMO view. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Miner, J. B. (1990). Entrepreneurs, high growth entrepreneurs, and managers: Contrasting and overlapping
motivational patterns. Journal of Business Venturing, 5, 221-234.
Miner, J. B., DEMO, N. R., & Bracker, J. S. (1989). Role of entrepreneurial task motivation in the growth of
technologically innovative firms. Journal of DEMO Psychology, 74(4), 554-560.
Nutt, P. C., & Backoff, R. W. (1997). Facilitating transformational change. Journal of Applied Behavioral
Science, 33(4), 490-508.
Oskamp, S. (1965). Overconfidence in case-study judgments. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 29,
261-265.
Palich, L. E., & Bagby, D. R. (1995). Using cognitive theory to explain DEMO risk-taking: Chal-
lenging coventional wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing, 10, DEMO
Ray, D. M. (1994). The role of risk-taking in Singapore. Journal of Business Venturing, 9(2), 157-177.
Raynor, J. O. (1974). Future orientation in the study of achievement motivation. In J. DEMO Atkinson & J. O.
Raynor (Eds.), Motivation and achievement (pp. 121-154). New York: John Wiley.
Reynolds, P., & Miller, DEMO (1992). New firm gestation: Conception, birth, and implications for research.
Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 405-417.
Russo, J. E., & Schoemaker, P.J.H. (1989). Decision traps. New York: Doubleday.
Schell, J. (1991). In defense of the entrepreneur. Inc., 13(5), 28-30.
Schwenk, C. R. (1988). The cognitive perspective on strategic decision making. Journal of Management
Studies, 25(1), 41-55.
Sexton, DEMO L., & Bowman, N. (1984, August). The effects of pre-existing psychological characteristics on
new venture initiations. Paper presented at the annual DEMO of the Academy of Management, Boston.
Shapira, Z. (1995). DEMO taking: A managerial perspective. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Simon, DEMO A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly Journal DEMO Economics, 69, 99-118.
Stevenson, H. H., & Gumpert, D. DEMO (1985). The heart of entrepreneurship. Harvard Business Review, 63(2),
85-94.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1971). The belief in the “law of small numbers.” Psychological Bulletin, 76,
105-110.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185,
1124-1131.
Zajac, E. J., & Bazerman, M. H. (1991). Blind spots in industry and competitor DEMO: Implications of
interfirm (mis)perceptions for strategic decisions. Academy of Management Review, 16(1), 37-56.
Downloaded from jab.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 8, 2011{1g42fwefx}