DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
ENTREPRENEURS AND
MANAGERS IN LARGE
ORGANIZATIONS: BIASES
AND HEURISTICS
IN STRATEGIC
DECISION-MAKING
LOWELL W. BUSENITZ
University of Houston
JAY B. BARNEY
Ohio DEMO University
The purpose of this study was to further explore differences between en-
EXECUTIVE trepreneurs and managers in large organizations. However, rather than
SUMMARY focusing on previously examined individual differences, this study ex-
amined differences in the decision-making processes used by entrepre-
neurs and managers in large organizations. DEMO on nonrational de-
cision-making models from behavioral decision theory, we asserted DEMO
entrepreneurs are more susceptible to the use decision-making biases and heuristics than are manag-
ers in large organizations.
To understand why entrepreneurs and managers DEMO large organizations may vary in the extent
to which they manifest biases and heuristics in their decision- making, it is important to understand
the utility of nonrational decision-making. Under conditions of environmental uncertainty and
complexity, biases and heuristics can be an effective and efficient guide to decision-making. In DEMO
settings, more comprehensive and cautious decision-making is not possible, and biases and heuris-
Address correspondence to Lowell W. Busenitz, College of Business Administration, University of
Houston, Houston, TX 77204-6283.
The authors wish to thank Dale Rude and two anonyomous reviewers for their constructive comments
on an DEMO draft of the article.
Journal of Business Venturing 12, 9-30
© DEMO Elsevier Science Inc. 0883-9026/97/$17.00
655 Avenue of the Americas, DEMO York, NY 10010 PH S0883-9026(96)OOOO3-1
10
L.W. BUSENITZ AND J.B. BARNEY
tics may provide an effective way DEMO approximate the appropriate decisions. The use of heuristics
has also been found to be associated with innovativeness. Perhaps a critical difference between these
sets DEMO individuals is the extent to which they manifest biases and heuristics in their decision-making.
We examined differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations DEMO respect
to two biases and heuristics: overconfidence (overestimating the probability of being right) and
representativeness (the tendency to overgeneralize from a few DEMO or observations).
In this study, entrepreneurs are those who have DEMO their own firms and are currently
involved in the start-up process with the average time since founding of I. 7 years. The analysis for
DEMO study involved responses from 124 entrepreneurs. Managers are individuals with middle to
upper level responsibilities with substantial oversight in large organizations. To be included DEMO this
study, the managers had to oversee at least two functional DEMO (sample average was 4.55 functional
areas). Usable responses were received DEMO 95 managers.
The results from the logistic regression analysis show strong support for both hypotheses. Even
after controlling for numerous factors, such as several traits and demographic factors, enduring
support was found for the way entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations make decisions.
Our overconfidence and representativeness variables DEMO categorized entrepreneurs and man-
agers more than 70% of the time. Thus, this research indicates that entrepreneurs do behave differ-
ently than do managers in large organizations and that these differences are substantial.
Practically, we speculate that without the use of biases and heuristics, many entrepreneurial
decisions would never be made. With entrepreneurial ventures in particular, the window of opportu-
nity would often be gone by the time all the necessary information DEMO available for more ratio-
nal decision-making. Additionally, successfully starting a new DEMO usually involves overcom-
ing multiple hurdles. Using biases and heuristics as simplifying mechanisms for dealing with these
multiple problems may be crucial. To face DEMO hurdles from a strict econometric approach would
not only postpone decisions, DEMO would in all likelihood make them overwhelming. More specifi-
cally, overconfidence DEMO be particularly beneficial in implementing a specific decision and per-
suading others to be enthusiastic about it as well.
The use of biases and DEMO may also offer some help in explaining why entrepreneurs
sometimes make bad managers. Whereas the use of cognitive biases may be beneficial in some DEMO
cumstances, it can lead to major errors in others. Although research DEMO yet to establish performance
implications, it is possible that the more DEMO use of heuristics in strategic decision-making may
be a great advantage during the start-up years. However, it may also lead to the demise of a business
as a firm matures. © 1997 Elsevier Science Inc.
INTRODUCTION
DEMO observation suggests that individuals who start their own organizations are
somehow different from those that work in large organizations. Entrepreneurs have
been described as DEMO and rugged individualists (Begley and Boyd 1987;
McGrath et al. DEMO), as engaging in deviate social behavior (Shapero 1975), and DEMO
being a "breed apart" (Ginsberg and Buchholtz 1989). In DEMO, managers in large
organizations have been described as being risk averse (Amihud and Lev 1981), adher-
ing to broadly accepted norms of DEMO (Pettigrew 1973), and more professional and
predictable in their decision-making (Barnard 1968; Hofer and Schendel 1978).
These casual observations have not gone untested in the research literature. Unfor-
tunately, most efforts to empirically describe differences between entrepreneurs and
managers in large organizations have met with DEMO success (Low and MacMillan
1988). These results have led many DEMO to abandon the search for individual
differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations (Gartner 1988)
and to look for explanations of entrepreneurial phenomena elsewhere (Aldrich and
ENTREPRENEURS VS MANAGERS
11
Zimmer 1986). And yet, the observation that these differences exist continues (e.g., Bird
1988; Ginsberg and Buchholtz 1989).
The purpose of this study is to further explore differences between DEMO
and managers in large organizations. However, rather than focusing on previously DEMO
amined individual differences, this study examines differences in the decision-making
processes DEMO by entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations. Building on non-
rational decision-making models from behavioral decision theory (Pitz and Sachs 1984;
Stevenson et al. 1990), we argue that the use of bias and heuristics DEMO explain significant
portions of the variations in strategic decision-making (Haley and DEMO 1989). More
specifically, we argue that entrepreneurs use biases and DEMO more extensively in
their strategic decision-making than do managers in large organizations. We examine
differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations with respect
DEMO two biases and heuristics: overconfidence and representativeness (Tversky and Kah-
neman 1974; Hogarth 1987; Bazerman 1990).
PREVIOUS RESEARCH
Previous research on DEMO between entrepreneurs and managers in large organi-
zations has generally examined psychological and personal/demographic differences.
After a great deal of research (e:g., McClelland 1961; Brockhaus 1980; Schere 1982),
it is now DEMO concluded that most of the psychological differences between entrepre-
neurs and managers in large organizations are small or nonexistent (Brockhaus and
Horwitz 1986; DEMO and MacMillan 1988).
In the psychological differences literature, a wide DEMO of individual psychologi-
cal attributes, including locus of control and risk-taking, has been shown not to vary
significantly between entrepreneurs and managers in DEMO organizations (Begley and
Boyd 1987; Sexton and Bowman 1984). Some relatively small but consistent psychologi-
cal differences have been documented such as DEMO for achievement, tolerance for ambi-
guity, and need for conformity (DEMO and Boyd 1987; Miner et al. 1989). Despite the
fact DEMO very few studies have shown statistically significant differences between entre-
preneurs and managers in large organizations in their risk-taking propensity (Brockhaus
1980, Low DEMO MacMillan 1988), this individual psychological difference continues to
be discussed as an important variable for understanding entrepreneurial behavior (e.g.,
Stevenson and Gumpert 1985; Ray 1994).
Research focusing on personal/demographic differences between these types of in-
dividuals has also been met with limited success. Cooper DEMO Dunkelberg (1987) con-
cluded from their large sample that such differences between entrepreneurs and manag-
ers in large organizations are quite small and DEMO systematic. Despite these findings,
age, gender, and education are several personal/demographic differences that continue
to receive attention in the entrepreneurship literature (Robinson and Sexton 1994).
There have been three fairly distinct responses DEMO the failure to discover systematic
psychological and personal/demographic differences between entrepreneurs and man-
agers in large organizations. First, some have argued that this failure represents inade-
quate methodology (Ginsberg and Buchholtz 1989). Unfortunately, DEMO application of
more sophisticated methods has done little to alter earlier findings.
Second, others have argued that the search for individual differences should be
abandoned, in favor of research that focuses on external causes of entrepreneurial be-
havior (Acs and Audretsch 1987; Aldrich and Zimmer 1986; Gartner 1988; Shapero
12 L.W. BUSENITZ AND J.B. BARNEY
1984). Unfortunately, this more externally oriented work has been unable to completely
abandon the individual differences approach. DEMO example, many economists have ar-
gued that entrepreneurial behavior is caused DEMO market imperfections that create an
opportunity for entrepreneurs to earn above average economic wealth (Hebert and
Link 1988). While emphasizing external market forces in motivating entrepreneurial
activity, these models fail to explain why some individuals are able to perceive and ex-
ploit these opportunities, whereas others are not. This has led some economists to ac-
knowledge that entrepreneurs have "special aptitudes" (Schumpeter 1934), "special
resources" (Schultz 1975), and unusual levels of "alertness" to economic opportunities
(Kirzner 1973; DEMO and Gilad 1991). Unfortunately, the sources of these individual
differences DEMO left largely unexplained in economic models of entrepreneurship.
Finally, another group DEMO scholars continues to assert that individual differences
exist between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations. However, this group
generally suggests that previous research has examined the "wrong" individual differ-
ences (e.g., Robinson et al. DEMO). Rather then examining psychological and personal!
demographic differences, this group DEMO scholars suggests the importance of examining
differences in behavior between these sets of individual (Gartner et al. 1992). Research
is increasingly focusing on the more behavioral approach (e.g., Covin and Slevin 1991;
Miller DEMO; Manimala 1992; Zahra 1993). Robinson et al. (1991) developed several atti-
tudinal scales for predicting behavioral tendencies. This study is consistent DEMO this last
group of scholars, particularly that of Manimala (1992) DEMO identified 186 examples
of very specific heuristics used by entrepreneurs. Our intent is to better understand the
decision-making style of entrepreneurs. More specifically, we probe why entrepreneurs
and managers in large organizations may vary in the DEMO to which they manifest biases
and heuristics in their strategic decision-making. In this study, entrepreneurs are those
who have founded their own firms. Managers are individuals with middle to upper level
responsibilities with substantial oversight in DEMO organizations.
THEORY
Biases, Heuristics, and Entrepreneurial Decision-Making: Previous Work
Since DEMO's (1955) early work, organizational scholars have recognized that manage-
DEMO decision-making often falls short of the purely rational model (e.g., Haley and
Stumpf 1989) Several factors that prevent purely rational decision-making have been
cited, including: (1) the high costs of such decision-making efforts (Simon 1979), (2)
information-processing limits of decision-makers (Abelson and DEMO 1985), (3) differ-
ences in decision-making procedures adopted by managers (Shafer 1986), and (4) differ-
ences in the values of decision-makers (Payne et al. 1992).
One of the most important classes of models that explain deviations from rational
decision-making focuses on biases and DEMO (Kahneman et al. 1982; Schwenk 1988;
Stevenson et al. 1990). Biases and heuristics are decision rules, cognitive mechanisms,
and subjective opinions people use to assist in making decisions. Frequently, the use
of biases and heuristics yields acceptable solutions to problems for individuals in an
DEMO and efficient manner. In this study, the term "biases and heuristics" is used
to refer to these simplifying strategies that individuals use to make decisions, especially
in uncertain and complex conditions.
Although most previous research has been conducted in laboratory conditions, a
ENTREPRENEURS VS MANAGERS
13
broad range of empirical findings suggests that most DEMO apply biases and
heuristics to simplify their decision-making most of the time (Bateman and Zeithaml
1989; Jackson and Dutton 1988; Kahneman et al. 1982; Zajac and Bazerman 1991) and
that inquiry into such behavior DEMO critical for understanding strategic decision-making
(Bazerman 1990; Cowen 1991; Schwenk DEMO). This research is also consistent with this
observation. However, we DEMO the possibility that all decision-makers may not
be subject to these biases and heuristics in their decision-making to the same degree.
In support of DEMO research direction, decision-makers have recently been found to have
different cognitive DEMO (Haley and Stumpf 1989; Stumpf and Dunbar 1991). Further-
more, Bazerman and Neale (1983, p. 317) noted in their review DEMO although individuals
are generally affected by systematic deviations from rationality, some DEMO ap-
pear to be more accurate in their interpersonal judgments or less influenced by the frame
of the situation. The possibility that there may DEMO differences in the extent to which
decision-makers are subject to biases and heuristics suggests an interesting possibility
for research on differences between entrepreneurs and DEMO in large organizations.
Biases and heuristics may be particularly critical for explaining variations in strategic
decisions (Haley and Stumpf 1989). Perhaps a critical difference between these two sets
of individuals is the extent to which DEMO manifest biases and heuristics in their deci-
sion-making.
Differences in the Use of Bias and Heuristics
To understand why entrepreneurs and managers in large DEMO may vary in the
extent to which they manifest biases and heuristics in their decision-making, it is impor-
tant to understand the utility of non-rational decision-making. Under conditions of envi-
ronmental uncertainty and complexity, biases and heuristics can be an effective and
efficient guide to decision-making (Pitz and Sachs 1984). In such settings, more compre-
hensive and cautious decision-making is not possible, and biases and heuristics may pro-
vide an effective way to approximate the appropriate decisions (Tversky and Kahneman
1974; Haley DEMO Stumpf 1989). Also, entrepreneurship has been characterized as an
"enactment" process where acting precedes thinking (Gartner et al. 1992; Weick 1979).
In this sense, entrepreneurship is more a function of actions taken than some objective
set of conditions.
Decision Uncertainty
On average, the level of uncertainty facing entrepreneurs in making decisions is greater
than the level DEMO uncertainty facing managers in large organizations in making decisions
(Hambrick and DEMO 1985; Covin and Slevin 1989). At the very least, managers in
large organizations usually have access to historical trends, past performance, DEMO other
information that can help reduce the level of uncertainty they face in making decisions
(Mintzberg 1973). Moreover, this information can reduce DEMO level of uncertainty facing
decision-makers in large firms at relatively low costs (Thompson 1967). In this sense,
managers in large organizations can more closely approximate the rational ideal in their
decision-making.
Entrepreneurs, on the other hand, often have to make decisions where there are
no historical trends, no previous levels of performance, and little if any specific DEMO
information (Miller and Friesen 1984). Just the decision to start DEMO venture based on a
14
L.W. BUSENITZ AND J.B. BARNEY
new product or service involves making DEMO decisions for which there is little or no
hard information. Furthermore, DEMO market's acceptance of the new product or service
almost always contains a great deal of uncertainty. However, efforts by entrepreneurs
to reduce their uncertainty in decision-making are likely to be very costly and usually
not DEMO effective. And yet, decisions still need to be made if the DEMO is going
to be launched or to quickly move forward once the venture has started (Eisenhardt
1989; Miller 1983; Wally and Baum 1994). A greater use of biases and heuristics facili-
tates a perceived DEMO of overall understanding and a sense that the "rules ofthe game"DEMO
are now understood. Thus, we argue that those who are more DEMO to the use
of biases and heuristics in decision-making are the very ones who are most likely to
become entrepreneurs. The more cautious decision-makers DEMO tend to be attracted
to larger organizations where more methodical information tends to be more readily
available. Entrepreneurial activities simply become too overwhelming to DEMO who are
less willing to generalize through the use of bias and heuristics.
Decision Complexity
Not only are the decisions made by entrepreneurs, on average, made in a more uncertain
environment then decisions made by managers in large organizations, the decision-mak-
ing context facing entrepreneurs also tends to be more complex then that facing manag-
ers in large organizations (Covin and Slevin 1991; Gartner et al. 1992; Miller and Friesen
1984)DEMO Whereas they may have some potential pitfalls, biases and heuristics are DEMO to
have more utility in these highly complex decision settings, compared DEMO less complex
decision settings (Pitz and Sachs 1984; Tversky and Kahneman 1974).
Large organizations develop elaborate policies and procedures to aid managers DEMO
their decision-making. Nelson and Winter (1982) call these decision-making practices
"DEMO" and emphasize the ability of routines to simplify the decision-making com-
DEMO facing managers. In addition to these routines, large organizations adopt elabo-
DEMO organizational charts that define areas of decision-making responsibility. These lim-
its have the effect of reducing the complexity of the decision-making context facing a
DEMO, thus enabling managers in large organizations not to rely on biases DEMO heuristics
as much.
Entrepreneurs, on the other hand, usually have not developed the elaborate deci-
sion-making policies and procedures characteristic of large firms (Fredrickson and Ia-
quinto 1989). In this context, simplifying biases and heuristics may have a great deal
of utility in enabling entrepreneurs to DEMO decisions that exploit brief windows of op-
portunity (Tversky and Kahneman DEMO; Hambrick and Crozier 1985; Stevenson and
Gumpert 1985). Furthermore, DEMO are often opportunists, acting on an idea
with limited information (Gartner et al. 1992). In doing so, they must convince numerous
stakeholders of the credibility of the venture. Using base rate probabilities to justify
DEMO entrepreneurial ventures is usually meaningless.
It is important to recognize that we are not arguing that the decisions facing manag-
ers in large organizations DEMO not uncertain or complex. Clearly, they often are. Rather,
all DEMO are arguing is that, on average, decisions made by entrepreneurs tend to be more
uncertain and more complex than the decisions made by DEMO in large organiza-
tions. Also, without some unsubstantiated enthusiasm, many ventures would never be
started or would quickly die following their start-up. This DEMO that biases and heuristics
may have more utility for entrepreneurs is consistent with findings suggesting that entre-
ENTREPRENEURS VS MANAGERS
15
preneurial posture and proactive ness are positively related DEMO performance (Covin and
Slevin 1989; Zahra 1993). Thus, those DEMO make greater use of biases and heuristics
in their decision-making are more likely to find themselves in an entrepreneurial con-
text. By doing so, they should be able to filter through more information and more effec-
DEMO communicate to various stakeholders the legitimacy of the venture.
Specific Decision-Making Differences
As previously suggested, a large number of biases and heuristics have been studied in
the nonrational decision-making literature (Hogarth 1987; Bazerman 1990). DEMO
among all these biases and heuristics, we chose to examine differences DEMO these
sets of individuals with reference to two biases and heuristics: DEMO and repre-
sentativeness. Overconfidence was chosen because it is considered somewhat character-
istic of a number of other biases and heuristics identified in the DEMO (Kahneman
et al. 1982). Representativeness is one of more widely DEMO heuristics (Pitz and Sachs
1984; Barnes 1984; Katz 1992) and is a good indicator of how quickly one is likely to
generalize DEMO a single or limited number of experiences (Schwenk 1988).
Overconfidence
DEMO described by Oskamp (1965), overconfidence has been shown to exist DEMO a wide
variety of settings (Lichtenstein and Fischoff 1977; Bazerman 1990). Overconfidence
exists when decision-makers are overly optimistic in their initial assessment DEMO a situa-
tion, and then are slow to incorporate additional information DEMO a situation into their
assessmentbecause of their initial overconfidence (Fischhoff et DEMO 1977; Alpert and
Raiffa 1982). For example, Fischhoff et al. (1977) found that subjects who assigned odds
of 1000:1 of DEMO correct were correct only 81 % of the time. Most decision-makers
are overconfident in their estimation abilities and do not acknowledge the actual uncer-
DEMO that exists (Bazerman 1990). Furthermore, decision-makers are generally slow
to incorporate additional information because of their confidence in their existing as-
sumptions DEMO opinions (Phillips and Wright 1977; Russo and Schoemaker 1989).
A priori, overconfidence seems likely to manifest itself in decisions made by entre-
preneurs to a greater extent than in decision made by managers in DEMO organizations.
Overconfidence enables an entrepreneur to proceed with an idea before all the steps
to that specific venture are fully known. Even though enormous DEMO exist in
this decision-making situation (e.g., is there a real economic opportunity to be exploited,
how should that opportunity be exploited, how large is this opportunity, how will com-
petitors react to this opportunity), a higher level of confidence is likely to encourage an
entrepreneur DEMO take action before it makes complete sense. Furthermore, being more
optimistic DEMO the data would suggest may serve to convince other potential stakehold-
ers (such as investors, suppliers, customers, key employees) of the opportunity that af-
fords them if they get in on the ground floor DEMO the venture. Put differently, if entrepre-
neurs wait until all the "facts" are in to start convincing others that their venture is
indeed legitimate, the opportunity they are seeking to exploit will most likely be gone
by the time more complete data becomes available (Stevenson and Gumpert 1985).
Mangers in large organizations, on the other hand, do DEMO have to rely on their personal
confidence in making decisions to as great an extent. Rather, these mangers can rely on
decision-making tools and historical performance patterns to convince top management
16
L.W. BUSENITZ AND J.B. BARNEY
that their projects should have priority. DEMO observations lead to the following hy-
pothesis:
HI: Entrepreneurs will DEMO more overconfidence than will managers in
large organizations.
Previous research provides some empirical support for Hl. For example, Cooper et al.
(1988) found that entrepreneurs assigned a higher probability of success to their own
ventures DEMO with competing ventures. This is consistent with entrepreneurs hav-
ing an unreasonably high level of confidence in their own decision-making ability. Also,
Manimala (1992) found that entrepreneurs do manifest such tendencies in their deci-
sion-making. Although suggestive, this research only indicates that entrepreneurs do
manifest overconfidence. However, as suggested earlier, most research on nonrational
decision-making suggests that most DEMO manifest various biases and heuris-
ticsincluding overconfidenceto some extent. Unfortunately, this DEMO research does
not examine whether or not entrepreneurs are more overconfident then managers in
large organizations.
Representativeness
Representativeness was first described by Tversky and DEMO (1971) and is one of
the most common of all decision-making biases and heuristics (Hogarth 1987). Decision-
makers manifest this heuristic when they are willing to generalize about a person or
a phenomenon based DEMO only a few attributes of that person or only a few observations
of a specified phenomenon (Nisbett and Ross 1980; Bazerman 1990). DEMO wide variety of
problems has been developed to test representativeness with studies repeatedly showing
that subjects consistently ignore base rate information (e.g., Bar-Hillel DEMO; Tversky
and Kahneman 1974). Decision-makers consistently underestimate the error and DEMO
liability inherent in small samples of data (Payne et al. 1992)DEMO
The particular form of representativeness examined here is a willingness of deci-
sion-makers to generalize from small, nonrandom samples (Tversky and Kahneman
1971)DEMO The law of large numbers suggests that large random samples can be used to
make rigorous inferences about popUlation statistics. However, sometimes, decision-
DEMO are willing to make such inferences, not from large random samples, but from
small, nonrandom samples. The most common type of small nonrandom sample used
as a basis for generalization is, of course, personal DEMO (Kahneman et al. 1982).
Again, there is reason to believe that representativeness, and especially the willing-
ness to generalize from small, DEMO samples, is a decision-making short cut that
may be particularly common DEMO entrepreneurial settings (Katz 1992). In such setting,
large random DEMO to reliably estimate customer demand, production costs, and
other key pieces of information are rarely available. Nor do most entrepreneurs have
the resources (including the time) to engage in such systematic data collection. Indeed,
such systematic data collection activities might prematurely reveal an entrepreneurs
products and DEMO to competitors, thereby reducing the return potential of those
products and DEMO to competitors (Porter 1980). In this setting, entrepreneurs
must be willing to rely on small, nonrandom samplesin particular, their personal experi-
DEMO with current and potential customersto guide their decision-making. Of course,
managers in large organizations have to rely less on these nonrandom samples, and thus,
ENTREPRENEURS VS MANAGERS 17
on average, will be able to more closely approximate purely rational decision-making.
These observations lead to the following hypothesis:
DEMO: Entrepreneurs will manifest representativeness more extensively in their deci-
sion-making than DEMO managers in large organizations.
As with overconfidence, Manimala's (1992) DEMO indicates that entrepreneurs do
manifest representativeness in their decision-making. However, Manimala DEMO to ex-
amine the extent to which entrepreneurs manifest this decision-making short cut in com-
parison with other decision-makers, including managers in large organizations.
METHODS
Samples
As implied by these hypotheses, samples from two populations were drawn: a sample
of entrepreneurs and a sample of managers in large organizations. Survey research was
used to collect the primary data.
Sample of
DEMO
The sales tax file of a state comptroller's office was used to identify potential entrepre-
neurs, because it has been found to be a superior source for identifying new businesses
(Busenitz and Murphy In Press). These files contain the name and address of the organi-
zation, owner, organization type, SIC code, and date of first sale. A sample of firms
showing a date of first sale within the past DEMO years and having an SIC code in the
2800,2900,3000,3500,3600,3700, and 3800 categories was selected. These SIC catego-
ries include the manufacturing of plastics, electronics, and instruments. A priori, it was
thought that these categories would represent a higher percentage of newly emerging
DEMO, because they represent more dynamic industries. This procedure resulted in a
DEMO of 573 firms. A mail questionnaire was developed and sent to the identified sam-
ple, and 176 responses were received for a 31 % response rate.
Because, historically, identifying entrepreneurs has been somewhat problematic
(Gartner 1988), we wanted to be more precise in our operationalization. Our DEMO
alization consisted of two dimensions. First, respondents had to have been DEMO founder
of the identified firm. Being responsible for an independent start-up is widely used as
a distinguishing feature of entrepreneurship (e.g., Begley and DEMO 1987; Cooper et
al. 1988; Miner et al. 1989) and DEMO was used here as a prerequisite for inclusion in
the sample for this study. With the second dimension, subjects had to be currently in-
volved in the start-up process. This was operationalized by requiring subjects to DEMO
started their venture within the last two years and/or currently planning on starting an-
other venture within the next five years. These restrictions DEMO in 124 usable re-
sponses. The average time since founding for the entrepreneurs included in this sample
was 1.7 years. To test for a DEMO response, nonrespondents were compared with re-
spondents based on the two-digit DEMO categories identified previously. The results from
the chi-square test suggested that the usable response was not biased (X2 (5) = 1.782;
p = .878).
18
L.W. BUSENITZ AND J.B. BARNEY
Sample of
Managers in Large Organizations
DEMO this study, managers in large organizations were defined as individuals who DEMO re-
sponsibility for at least two functional areas (such as marketing, finance, personnel, re-
search and development, and manufacturing) and work DEMO publicly owned organiza-
tions with more than 10,000 employees. These managers are often referred to as
divisional managers or general managers because they DEMO multiple functional areas
(e.g., marketing, research and development, accounting, DEMO). Contact was
made with three organizations, and two agreed to DEMO in the study. Data collec-
tion was coordinated through the human resource departments of the respective organi-
zations with a company cover letter attached. DEMO be included in this sample, the manag-
ers had to oversee DEMO least two functional areas (sample average was 4.55 functional
areas). DEMO usable response rate of 54 % was received. The SIC for the managers included
in this sample came from the 1300, 3400, 3500, 3600, and 3800.1 The results of the chi-
square test between usable responses and nonrespondents again suggest that the re-
sponse was not biased (X2 (4) = 3.973; p = .59).
Measures
The central goal of this study was to measure the use of biases and DEMO as a part
of the decision-making style of entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations.
Thus, some diversity of decision problems was sought to give a better representation of
the decision style in a specific context of DEMO two groups of strategic decision-makers.
Overconfidence
To measure overconfidence, the procedure DEMO in the widely cited studies conducted
by Fischhoff et al. (1977) and Lichtenstein and Fischhoff (1977) was replicated. A series
of five DEMO based on death rates from various diseases and accidents in the United
States was developed. All items were dichotomous in nature with the general DEMO of
"Which cause of death is more frequent in the United DEMO? A. Cancer of all types, B.
Heart disease." One of DEMO two choices is correct based on the most recent vital statistics
report prepared by the National Center for Health Statistics. Subjects were asked to
DEMO two responses to each item. First, they were to choose one DEMO the two alternatives
as their best guess of the correct alternative. Second, they indicated, on a provided scale
ranging from 50% to 100% DEMO level of confidence they had in their answer. In the in-
structions, they were told that 50% would indicate that their answer was a total guess,
whereas 70% would indicate that they thought they had DEMO chances in 10 of being
correct. A response of 100% would indicate that they were totally confident that their
choice was right. Again, in taking our cues from the earlier work of Lichtenstein and
Fischhoff (1977), all "level of confidence" responses were grouped into one of DEMO proba-
bility categories: 0.50-0.59,0.60-0.69,0.70-0.79,0.80-0.89,0.90-0.99, and 1.00 for analy-
I Not only do these industries largely coincide with those from DEMO our entrepreneurs came, but they
are also industries characterized by high DEMO of research and development. Also, both organizations we
sampled in these DEMO claimed that they attempted to recruit "intrapreneurial" managers into their orga-
nizations. The choice of these firms creates a conservative test of our DEMO differences hypotheses since
entrepreneurial type individuals tend to be attracted to these industries.
ENTREPRENEURS VS MANAGERS
19
sis purposes. Those probability responses that were in DEMO 0.50-0.59 range were coded
as 0.50, 0.60-0.69 responses as 0.60, etc.
Two primary measures were computed from this information. The first is what
DEMO et al. (1977) referred to as the group calibration curve. This curve reveals how
closely the designated probability score for each category (0.50, 0.60, etc.) and for each
group (in this case entrepreneurs DEMO managers in large organizations) approximates
the perfectly calibrated curve. For example, for all responses in the 0.70 category, perfect
calibration would be reflected in correct responses to the dichotomous part of the ques-
tion seven DEMO of 10 times. If all the responses in the 0.70 category were correct only
60% of the time, one would conclude that the designated group was overconfident in
that category.
For the purpose of statistical analyses DEMO each observation, a second score was com-
puted. Again, following the lead of Fischhoff et al. (1977), this was done by noting the
mean probability response across all items for each subject and the DEMO of items
for which the correct alternative was selected. The difference between these two scores
then becomes a measure of over- or underconfidence (a positive score indicates over-
confidence, whereas a negative score indicates underconfidence). For example, a re-
spondent who answered 0.50, 0.60, 0.70, DEMO, and 0.90 and gave the correct answer three
out of five DEMO would receive an overconfidence score of 0.08 (mean of 0.68 mi-
DEMO 0.60).
Representativeness
To measure the representativeness, we followed the approach DEMO by Fong et al. (1986)
and Fong and Nisbett (1991) in which subjects were given scenarios representing various
types of real-to-life strategic decisions. As in the scenarios developed by Fong and col-
leagues, both of our scenario problems portrayed a strategic decision pitting two alterna-
tives DEMO one another. One alternative was based on quantitative/statistical informa-
tion, DEMO the other was based on heuristic reasoning. Problem 1 involved the
purchase of a major piece of equipment, whereas problem 2 depicted an automation
update decision (see Appendix for these two problems). Subjects were told to decide
between the two alternatives for each problem and then to DEMO their reasoning for
reaching the designated decision. Coders then analyzed these responses to determine
whether heuristic type reasoning was used by the respondents to DEMO these scenarios.
The coding schema used to analyze the responses also closely paralleled that of
Fong et al. (1986) and Fong and Nisbett (1991). A code of "I" was given for responses
that DEMO no mention of statistical reasoning, but relied instead on subjective opin-
DEMO or simple rules of thumb. Examples of this form of reasoning included reference
to personal experience or simple decision rules like "buy American" DEMO "personal
experience." A code of "0" was given for responses that contained some form of statisti-
cal reasoning, including references to variability or sample size. An additional category
was added because some responses from DEMO subjects of this study were uncategorizable
based on the Fong et al. (1986) criteria. These 17 uncategorizable responses were omit-
ted from subsequent DEMO
After some initial training, all responses were coded blind to conditions DEMO
to these criteria by two individuals (one of the authors and DEMO graduate student). There
was exact agreement between coder 1 and coder 2 84 % of the time across the two prob-
lems. In DEMO where disagreement existed, the evaluation of a third coder (another grad-
20
L.W. BUSENITZ AND 1.B. BARNEY
uate student) was used to resolve the disparity. These results were then summed across
the two problems to DEMO a single three-category variable (0-2). A "0" indicated that
DEMO individual used statistical reasoning across both problems, whereas a "2" DEMO
that only heuristic reasoning was used.
Control Variables
Although previous research on differences between entrepreneurs and managers in
large organizations has generated mixed results, we chose to include various measures
of these variables. Also, a measure of economic alertness has been included, because
it has been used to help explain entrepreneurial activity and could impact decision-
making.
Risk- Taking and DEMO
The psychological trait of risk-taking propensity was included because risk is so com-
monly associated with entrepreneurial activity. Conformity, although not studied as fre-
quently as risk-taking, has received some consistent empirical support. These two traits
were assessed by using the Jackson Personality Inventory (Jackson 1976). Jackson
(1977) reported reliability coefficients of 0.81-0.84 for risk-taking and 0.81-0.82 for DEMO
formity in terms of scale homogeneity and test-retest stability. Sexton and Bowman
(1984) reduced this risk-taking scale to eight items to better accommodate DEMO re-
search. The utilization of this eight-item risk-taking scale yielded a Kuder-Richardson-
20 (KR-20) reliability coefficient of 0.77 in this study. A KR-20 DEMO 0.70 was obtained
for the conformity factor.
Personal/Demographic Characteristics
Age and education information was also collected, since entrepreneurship has been ex-
amined from this perspective. Additionally, it is conceivable that age and/or greater
amounts of education may impact the use of biases and heuristics. Age was DEMO mea-
sured by asking for their birth year. Education was measured using a five-point scale
ranging from high school or less to a graduate DEMO
Economic Factors
Some have argued that economic concerns are what encourage entrepreneurial activity.
In the context of this study, factors involving risk and profit concerns and alertness to
economic opportunities may impact entrepreneurial decision-making. Kaish and DEMO
(1991) recently developed several scales to measure these factors. However, DEMO to low
reliability estimates for the economic risk cue and economic profits scales received in
this study (0.47 and 0.57 respectively), they were omitted from further analyses. Kaish
and Gilad (1991) also developed measures DEMO "alertness" to economic opportunities
(Kirzner 1973). The nonverbal search DEMO reading alertness for economic opportunity
generated a Cronbach's alpha reliability rating of 0.81 in this study. A second factor
measuring open thinking about DEMO ideas received a reliability rating of 0.52 in this
study and thus was dropped from further analysis.
ENTREPRENEURS VS MANAGERS
21
RESULTS
Table 1 presents the means, standard deviations, and correlation coefficients among
all variables. These correlations show that the overconfidence and representativeness
variables are related to one's vocation (entrepreneurs versus managers in large organi-
zations), indicating preliminary support for both hypotheses.
Further DEMO analysis was conducted with the overconfidence variable. The cal-
ibration curve shown in Figure 1 represents the aggregated results of the number of
correct DEMO in each category (50%, 60%, 100%) divided by the total number of
responses in each category. For example, if all the responses in the 0.70% category given
by managers were correct seven out of DEMO times, then one would conclude that as a
group they tend DEMO be perfectly calibrated (at least in that category). The charting DEMO
these two curves in Figure 1 indicates that entrepreneurs are overconfident in their
choices in five out of the six probability categories, whereas managers were overconfi-
dent only three out of the six categories. Additionally, entrepreneurs were more over-
confident than managers in large organizations in each of DEMO categories except in the
0.8 range probability where they were very nearly identical.
Further analysis was conducted with the overconfidence and representativeness
variables. Because DEMO dependent variable in this model is dichotomous, logistic regres-
sion was DEMO as the primary test afHl and H2 (Aldrich and Nelson 1984)DEMO In this study,
the dependent variable represented the entrepreneur versus manager in a large organi-
zation (coded "2" and "I" respectively).
Given the coding of the dependent variable, the coefficients for the overconfidence
and representativeness variables should be positive and significant. Table 2 presents
DEMO results of the logistic regression analysis. Model 1 tested the overconfidence and
representativeness variables by themselves. Both variables are significant and in the ex-
DEMO direction. These two variables by themselves correctly predicted entrepreneur
versus manager more than 70% of the time.
Further examination of Table 1 suggests little DEMO among independent vari-
ables. However, several moderate intercorrelations involving control variables DEMO
that including these variables in an analysis would be important. The results of this anal-
ysis are shown in model 2 of Table 2. DEMO the control variables, education, conformity,
and alertness remain statistically significant. The risk-taking and age variables were non-
significant. Overall, these results support the emerging consensus that psychological,
personal/demographic, and broader social and economic factors have a limited ability to
TABLE 1 Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations
Variable
Mean
SD
1
2 3 4 5 6 7
1. Entrepreneur/Manager
2. Representativenss
3. Overconfidence
4. Risk-taking
5. Conformity
6. DEMO
7. Age
8. Alertness
1.6
1.14
.17
5.2
2.4
3.32
44.55
5.45
0.49
0.78
0.17
2.38
1.86
1.27
9.7
1.79
0.61h
0.20b
0.02
-0.3Gb
DEMO
-0.07
0.09
-0.05
-0.04
-0.07
-0.35b
-0.07
-0.04
-0.04
-0.01
-0.11
0.03
-0.11
-.28b
0.06
-0.01
0.21b
0.02
-0.11
-0.19'
0.01
0.09
0.17"DEMO
"p < .05.
b fJ < .01.
22
L.W. BUSENITZ AND J.B. BARNEY
1.0
.9 --
.8 --
.7 DEMO
.6--
.5 --
.4 --
Underconfidence
Domain
Overconfidence
Domain
nr = .5
.6
.7
.8
Probability Response
FIGURE 1 Calibration curves for entrepreneurs and DEMO
.9
1.0
distinguish entrepreneurs from managers in large organizations (the hit DEMO reported in
Table 2 only improved 9% with the inclusion of the control variables). More importantly
for this study, continuing support was found for HI and H2. Even after controlling for
previously examined factors, the overconfidence and representativeness measures re-
main statistically significant and help distinguish between DEMO and managers
in large organizations.
To ensure that an industry effect was not confounding the results, a subanalysis
was conducted. Based on the two-digit SIC classification, eight different industries were
represented by these two samples. However, 62 % of the entrepreneurs and 86 % of the
managers in large organizations came from three industries (3500, 3600, and 3800). As
these three industries are closely related (industrial and commercial machinery and
computer equipment; electronic equipment and components; and measuring, analyzing,
and controlling instruments) and they represent the majority of the two samples, DEMO
ENTREPRENEURS VS MANAGERS
23
TABLE 2 Results of Logistic Regression Analysis
Modell
DEMO Variables
Intercept
Risk-Taking
Conformity
Education
Age
Alertness
Representativeness
Overconfidence
Pseudo-R2
Model X2
df
Hit ratio (%)
Parameter
Estimate
2.07'
1.6'
2.68b
0.21
54.43'
198
70
30.64
36.49
8.36
"p < .05.
h P < .01.
'p < .001.
Model 2
Parameter
Estimate
6.31'
-0.007
-0.39b
-1.09'
-0.D3
0.34"
1.56'
2.76"
0.37
DEMO'
185
79'
17.6
0.005
11.64
31.76
1.67
6.61
22.09
6.21
full logistic regression model id~ntified earlier was again tested with this subsample.
DEMO and representativeness still remain significant at the same levels as with
the full samples reported previously. The only significant change was with the alertness
DEMO With the full samples reported in Table 2, it was not DEMO significant at the
.05 level, whereas with the subsample, it did turn significant.
DISCUSSION
These results have several important implications, both for research and for prac-
tice. These implications are discussed below.
Theoretical Implications
Common DEMO suggests that entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations
are, somehow, different from each other. It has been somewhat disconcerting that most
academic efforts DEMO discovering the sources of these experienced differences have met
with limited success. This study presents empirical evidence suggesting that entrepre-
neurs do behave differently DEMO managers in large organizations and that these differ-
ences are substantial. By applying the theory of biases and heuristics, this study has
shown that entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations think differently.
This field study has DEMO implications for future work on biases and heuristics.
In particular, most DEMO work has focused on understanding whether specific biases
and heuristics exist and the conditions that affect their usage (Abelson and Levi 1985;
Stevenson et al. 1990). This research accepts this general premise and moves DEMO another
question: Do individuals vary in the extent to which biases DEMO heuristics operate in
their decision-making? The results of this study suggest DEMO the extent to which deci-
sion-makers deviate from the strict econometric approach may not be a constant and
that different individuals may utilize biases DEMO heuristics to different degrees.
24
L.W. BUSENITZ AND J.B. BARNEY
Of course, this research only examines two biases and heuristics: overconfidence
and representativeness. Other biases and heuristics already identified in the literature
may also differentiate between entrepreneurs and managers in DEMO organizations. Fu-
ture research will need to examine other biases and heuristics to more completely ex-
plain the differences between entrepreneurs and managers in DEMO organizations. Also,
future research will need to refine current measures of biases and heuristics, to examine
not only if these phenomena exist, DEMO also the extent to which they vary among individu-
als and organizations. Finally, additional samples of entrepreneurs and managers in
large organizations should be examined to ensure the generalizability of the findings
reported here.
In addition DEMO extending this research to examine other kinds of biases and heuris-
tics, future work will need to examine whether the use of biases and heuristics in strategic
decision-making remains stable over time. Some have argued that DEMO and heuristics
are often applied in an unconscious manner (Tversky and DEMO 1981) and thus
are relatively immune from change or modification. Alternatively, others have reasoned
that decision biases can be corrected through training (e.g., Russo and Schoemaker
1989; Fong and Nisbett 1991). If the DEMO of biases and heuristics are stable over time,
then it would follow that those who are uncomfortable with heuristic-based decision-
making, on average, will be attracted and selected into larger firms where this type of
decision-making is less frequently required. On the other hand, those who are comfort-
able with creating and relying on these decision-making short cuts are DEMO to be at-
tracted to entrepreneurial settings where these decision skills are best utilized (Schnei-
der 1987; Haley and Stumpf 1989). An DEMO future research could address is
whether individuals with different decision preferences will naturally and efficiently se-
lect into organizational contexts where those preferences are DEMO and accepted, i.e.,
into entrepreneurial firms or larger organizations. Future DEMO should also explore
if the use of biases and heuristics effectively helps with career placement decisions.
This research on biases and heuristics also potentially DEMO resolve some counter-
intuitive conclusions from previous work on risk. Few themes are as synonymous with
entrepreneurship as risk, and yet, remain so DEMO Entrepreneurs clearly accept
higher levels of risk in their careers and business decisions than managers in large orga-
nizations (Bird 1989), yet empirical evidence surrounding this phenomenon is diverse
and often weak. For example, many psychological-based studies have shown that the
risk-taking propensity of entrepreneurs is not DEMO than that of managers in large
organizations (Brockhaus 1980; Low and MacMillan 1988). Thus, most academicians
hold that entrepreneurs do not differ substantially in their risk-taking propensity (e.g.,
Ray 1994). This conclusion is widely held even though it is clear that entrepreneurs are
generally DEMO in starting ventures that are more likely to fail than succeed. This
contradiction is frequently resolved by characterizing entrepreneurs as risk accepters
(versus risk seekers or risk averse). Thus, the focus has shifted toward understand-
ing how to manage the risk inherent in an entrepreneurial opportunity (Bird 1989;
Ray 1994).
For understanding entrepreneurial behavior, the issue may not be one of risk pro-
pensity or the sensitivity to probability DEMO of possible outcomes, but rather how
entrepreneurs think about the decisions DEMO make surrounding the business opportuni-
ties they undertake (Ray 1994). DEMO may be that entrepreneurs are more susceptible to
the use of biases and heuristics and are likely to perceive less risk in a given DEMO
ENTREPRENEURS VS MANAGERS 25
situation than are managers in large organizations in DEMO same situation. By being more
willing to generalize from limited experience (DEMO) and by feeling over-
confident that they will be able to DEMO the major obstacles, entrepreneurs may con-
clude that a situation is DEMO less risky than would managers in large organizations.
Thus, it may DEMO be the differences in risk propensity that distinguish entrepreneurs
from managers in large organizations, but the ways they perceive and think about risk.
Finally, these observations have a potentially important impact in analyzing the
relationship between decision-making and performance. Tversky and Kahneman
(1974) noted that the use DEMO heuristics may actually improve decisions by noting that
they are "quite DEMO" (p. 1124); that they are "valuable estimation procedure[s]" (DEMO
1128) and that they "are highly economical and usually effective" (p. 1131). Nonethe-
less, such claims are typically followed by warnings that heuristics may also "lead to
severe and systematic errors" (p. 1131). Rarely if ever do Tversky and Kahneman give
examples of DEMO working well. However, if different individuals and organizations
are cognitively biased DEMO different ways, then they may make strategic choices in funda-
mentally DEMO ways (Stumpf and Dunbar 1991). If these cognitive biases are DEMO
to change, they may represent sources of sustained differences among individuals DEMO
firms. Such differences, in the field of strategic management, have been shown to be
sources of sustained competitive advantage and sustained competitive disadvantage
(Barney 1991). By recognizing that strategic decisions can be nonrational in DEMO
ways, this research points to a possible connection between cognitive theories DEMO deci-
sion-making, strategic management, and firm performance. Of course, additional DEMO
search will need to be conducted to examine these potential linkages.
Practical Implications
There are several practical implications that emerge from this study as DEMO We suspect
that without these biases and heuristics, many decisions would DEMO be made. In entre-
preneurial ventures, in particular, the window of opportunity would often be gone by the
time all the necessary information DEMO available for more rational decision-making.
Additionally, successfully starting a new business DEMO involves overcoming multiple
hurdles. Using biases and heuristics as simplifying mechanisms for dealing with these
mUltiple problems may be crucial. To face such hurdles DEMO a strict econometric ap-
proach would not only postpone decisions, but DEMO in all likelihood make them over-
whelming. More specifically, a greater DEMO of overconfidence may be particularly
beneficial in implementing a specific decision and persuading others to be enthusiastic
about it as well (Russo and Schoemaker 1989).
As an illustration of the possible benefits of using biases DEMO heuristics in decision-
making, consider the following. One entrepreneur from our DEMO wrote to us because
he took issue with the quantitative emphasis of our study. Overall, he rejected this sys-
tematic approach to decision-making. He stated:
You see, people who are engaged in businesses such as mine are rarely influ-
enced by surveys because they don't place DEMO stock in them. Survey reports, in gen-
eral, are most highly prized by those individuals who lack sufficient knowledge of
a matter in DEMO they are required to make a decision. It is my considered opinion
that those individuals are not going to be found successfully engaging in DEMO
neurial businesses.
26
L.W. BUSENITZ AND J.B. BARNEY
The use of biases and heuristics DEMO also offer some help in explaining why entrepre-
neurs sometimes make bad managers (Schell 1991). Whereas the use of cognitive biases
may be beneficial in some circumstances, it can lead to major errors in others (Tversky
and Kahneman 1974). Although research has yet to establish performance implications,
it is possible that more extensive use of heuristics in DEMO decision-making may be
a great advantage during the start-up years. However, DEMO may also lead to the demise
of a business as a firm matures.
Implications may also exist for managers in large organizations in how DEMO manage
the entrepreneurial individuals in their firms. It would appear that a fundamental deci-
sion needs to be made as to whether such individuals DEMO be accommodated within
the firm or released to go and start their own firm. As large organizations tend to be
characterized by more methodical DEMO, such environments can be very sti-
fling for those more comfortable DEMO biased and heuristic reasoning. Thus, if an organi-
zation values such DEMO, it is important to find organizational contexts for letting
these individuals DEMO their contributions. More specifically, it has been suggested that
such individuals DEMO be particularly good with problem solving and new product devel-
opment (DEMO 1990; Russo and Schoemaker 1989). A second alternative is to DEMO
cide that such individuals simply will not help an organization long-term. It may be bet-
ter to help these individuals to start their own DEMO, where their biased decision-making
approach is likely to be more beneficial.
DEMO
Abelson, R.P., and Levi, A. 1985. Decision-making and decision theory. DEMO G. Lindzey and E.
Aronson, eds., The Handbook of Social Psychology, Vol 1. New York: Random House,
pp. 231-308.
Acs, Z.J., and Audretsch, D.B. 1987. Innovation, market structure, and firm size. DEMO of Eco-
nomics and Statistics 69(4):567-575.
Aldrich, H.E., DEMO Zimmer, C. 1986. Entrepreneurship through social networks. In D.L. Sexton
and DEMO Smilor, eds., The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger
Publishing, pp. 3-23.
Aldrich, J.H., and Nelson, F.D. 1984. DEMO Probability, Logit, and Probit Models. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage DEMO
Alpert, M., and Raiffa, H. 1982. A progress report on DEMO training of probability assessors. In
D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, and A. Tversky, eds., Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases. New York: DEMO University Press, pp. 294-305.
Amihud, Y., and Lev, B. 1981. Risk reduction as a managerial motive for conglomerate mergers.
Bell Journal of DEMO 12:605-617.
Bar-Hillel, M. 1979. The role of sample size in DEMO evaluation. Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance 24:245-257.
Barnard, c.1. 1968. DEMO Functions of the Executive. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.
Barnes, DEMO 1984. Cognitive biases and their impact on strategic planning. Strategic Management
JournaI5:129-l37.
Barney, J.B. 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Manage-
ment 17:99-120.
Bateman, T.S., and Zeithaml, c.P. 1989. The psychological context of strategic decisions: A model
and convergent experimental findings. Strategic Management Journal 10:59-74.
Bazerman, M.H. 1990. Judgment in Managerial decision-making, DEMO ed. New York: John Wiley
and Sons.
ENTREPRENEURS VS MANAGERS
27
Bazerman, M.H., and Neale, M.A 1983. Heuristics in negotiation: Limitations to dispute resolu-
tion effectivenesS. In M.H. Bazerman and RJ. Lewicki, eds., Negotiating in Organizations.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage DEMO, pp. 311-321.
Begley, T.M., and Boyd, D.P. 1987. Psychological characteristics associated with performance
in entrepreneurial firms and smaller businesses. Journal of Business DEMO 2:79-93.
Bird, B.J. 1988. Implementing entrepreneurial ideas: The case for intention. Academy of Manage-
ment Review 13(3):442-453.
Bird, B.J. DEMO Entrepreneurial Behavior. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman and Company.
Brockhaus, RH. 1980. Risk taking propensity of entrepreneurs. Academy of Management Jour-
nal 23:DEMO
Brockhaus, RH., and Horwitz, P.S. 1986. The psychology of the DEMO In D.L. Sexton
and RW. Smilor, eds., The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Bal-
linger Publishing.
Busenitz, L.W., and DEMO, G.B. New evidence in the pursuit oflocating new businesses. Journal
of DEMO Venturing (in press).
Cooper, A.e., and Dunkelberg, W.e. 1987. Entrepreneurial research: Old questions, new answers
and methodological issues. American Journal DEMO Small Business Winter:11-22.
Cooper, Ae., Dunkelberg, W.e., and Woo, e.Y. 1988. Entrepreneurs' perceived chances for
success. Journal of Business Venturing DEMO:97-108.
Covin, J.G., and Slevin, D.P. 1989. Strategic management of DEMO firms in hostile and benign
environments. Strategic Management Journal 10(1):DEMO
Covin, J.G., and Slevin, D.P. 1991. A conceptual model of DEMO as firm behavior.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 16(1):7-25.
Cowen, D.A1991. The effect of decision-making styles and contextual experience on executives'
DEMO of organizational problem formulation. Journal of Management Studies
28:463-483.
Eisenhardt, DEMO 1989. Making fast strategic decisions in high-velocity environments. Academy of
Management Journal 32:543-576.
Fischhoff, B., Slovic, P., and Lichtenstein, S. 1977. Knowing with certainty: The appropriateness
of extreme confidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Per-
formance 3:552-564.
Fong, G.T., and Nisbett, RE.1991. Immediate and delayed transfer of training effects in statistical
reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 120(1):34-45.
Fong, G.T., Krantz, D.H., and Nisbett, RE. 1986. The effects of statistical training on DEMO
about everyday problems. Cognitive Psychology 18:253-292.
Fredrickson, J.W., and Iaquinto, AL. 1989. Inertia and creeping rationality in strategic decision
processes. Academy of Management Journal 32(3):516-542.
Gartner, W.B. 1988. Who is an DEMO? Is the wrong question. American Journal of Small
Business 12(4):11-32.
Gartner, W.B., Bird, B.J., and Starr, J.A 1992. Acting as if: Differentiating entrepreneurial from
organizational behavior. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 16(3):13-31.
Gilmore, T.N., and Kazanjian, RK. 1989. Clarifying decision-making DEMO high-growth ventures:
The use of responsibility charting. Journal of Business Venturing 4:69-83.
Ginsberg, A, and Buchholtz, A 1989. Are entrepreneurs a breed apart? A look at the evidence.
Journal of General Management 15(2):32-40.
Haley, u.e.V., and Stumpf, S.A1989. Cognitive trails in DEMO decision-making: Linking theo-
ries of personalities and cognitions. Journal of Management DEMO 26(5):477-497.
Hambrick, D.e., and Crozier, L. 1985. Stumblers and stars in the management of rapid growth.
Journal of Business Venturing DEMO(1):31-45.
Hebert, R, and Link, A 1988. The Entrepreneur: Mainstream Views and Radical Critiques. New
York: Praeger Publishers.
28
L.W. BUSENITZ AND J.B. BARNEY
RHofer, CW., and Schendel, D.E .. 1978. Strategy Formulation: Analytical Concepts. St. Paul,
MN: West.
DEMO, RM. 1987. Judgement and Choice: The Psychology of Decisions. New York: John Wiley
and Sons.
Jackson, D.N. 1976. Jackson Personality Inventory Manual. DEMO, NY: Research Psycholo-
gists Press.
Jackson, D.N. 1977. Reliability of DEMO Jackson Personality Inventory. Psychological Reports
40:613-614.
Jackson, S.E., and Dutton, J .E. 1988. Discerning threats and opportunities. Administrative Science
Quarterly 33:370-387.
Kahneman, D., Siovic, P., and Tversky, A 1982. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Bi-
ases. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kaish, S., and Gilad, B.1991. Characteristics of opportunities search of entrepreneurs versus DEMO
utives: Sources, interests, general alertness. Journal of Business Venturing 6:DEMO
Katz, J.A 1992. A psychosocial cognitive model of employment status choice. DEMO
Theory and Practice 17(1):29-37.
Kirzner, I.M. 1973. Competition and Entrepreneurship. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lichtenstein, S., and Fischhoff, DEMO 1977. Do those who know more also know more about how
much they know? Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 20:159-183.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischhoff, B., and Phillips, L. 1982. Calibration of probabilities: The DEMO of the
art to 1980. In D. Kahneman, P. Siovic, and A Tversky, eds., Judgment under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases. New DEMO: Cambridge University Press, pp. 306-334.
Low, M.B., and MacMillan, DEMO 1988. Entrepreneurship: Past research and future challenges.
Journal of Management 14(DEMO):139-161.
Manimala, M.J. 1992. Entrepreneurial heuristics: A comparison between high DEMO (pioneering-
innovative) and low PI ventures. Journal of Business Venturing 7:477-504.
McClelland, D.C 1961. The Achieving Society. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.
McGrath, R. Gunther, MacMillan, I.,c. and Scheinberg, S. 1992. DEMO, risk-takers, and rugged
individualists? An exploratory analysis of cultural differences DEMO entrepreneurs and
non-entrepreneurs. Journal of Business Venturing 7:115-135.
Miller, D. DEMO The correlates of entrepreneurship in three types of firms. Management Sci-
ence 29:770-791.
Miller, D., and Friesen, P.H.1984. Organizations: A Quantum DEMO Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren-
tice Hall.
Mintzberg, H. 1973. The DEMO of Managerial Work. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Miner, J.B., Smith, N.R, and Bracker, J.S. 1989. Role of entrepreneurial task motivation in the
growth of technologically innovative firms. Journal of Applied Psychology 74(DEMO):554-560.
Nelson, RR, and Winter, S.G. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Nisbett, RE., and Ross, L. 1980. Human Inference: Strategies and Shortcomings of Social DEMO
ments. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Oskamp, S. 1965. Overconfidence in DEMO judgments. Journal of Consulting Psychology
29:261-265.
Payne, J.W., Bettman, DEMO, and Johnson, E.J. 1992. Behavioral decision research: A constructive
processing DEMO Annual Review of Psychology 43:87-131.
Pettigrew, AM. 1973. The Politics DEMO Organizational decision-making. London: Tavistock.
Phillips, L.D., and Wright, G.N. 1977. Cultural differences in viewing uncertainty and assessing
probabilities. In J. Jungermann and DEMO de Zeeuw, eds., decision-making and Change in
Human Affairs. Amsterdam: DEMO Reidel, pp. 507-519.
Pitz, G.F., and Sachs, N.J. 1984. Judgment and decision: Theory and application. Annual Review
of Psychology 35:139-163.
ENTREPRENEURS VS MANAGERS
29
Porter, M. 1980. Competitive Strategy. New York: DEMO Free Press.
Ray, D.M.1994. The role of risk-taking in Singapore. Journal DEMO Business Venturing 9(2):157-177.
Robinson, P.B., and Sexton, E.A1994. The effect of education on self-employment success.Jour-
nal of Business Venturing 9:DEMO
Robinson, P.B., Stimpson, D.V., Huefner, J.e., and Hunt, DEMO 1991. An attitude approach to
the prediction of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 15:13-31.
Russo, J.E., and Schoemaker, P.J.H. 1989. Decision Traps. New York: Doubleday.
Schell, J. 1991. In defense of the entrepreneur. DEMO 13(5):28-30.
Schere, J.L. 1982. Tolerance of ambiguity as a discriminating variable between entrepreneurs
and managers. Proceedings of the Academy of Management DEMO 404-408.
Schultz, T. 1975. The value of the ability to deal DEMO disequilibria. Journal of Economic Litera-
ture 13:827-846.
Schumpeter, J.A 1934. DEMO Theory of Economic Development. Boston, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Schwenk, e.R 1988. The cognitive perspective on strategic decision-making. Journal of Manage-
ment Studies 25(1):41-55.
Sexton, D.L., and Bowman, N. 1984. DEMO effects of pre-existing psychological characteristics on
new venture initiations. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Manage-
ment, Boston, MA.
DEMO, G. 1986. Savage revisited. Statistical Science 1:463-485.
Shapero, A 1975. The displaced, uncomfortable entrepreneur. Psychology Today 9(6):83-88.
Shapero, A 1984. The entrepreneurial event. In e.A Kent, ed., The Environment for DEMO
neurship. Lexington, MA: D.e. Heath, pp. 21-40.
Simon, H.A 1955. A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics
69:99-118.
DEMO, H.A 1979. Information processing models of cognition. Annual Review of Psychol-
DEMO 30:363-396.
Stevenson, H.H., and Gumpert, D.E. 1985. The heart DEMO entrepreneurship. Harvard Business Re-
view 63(2):85-94.
Stevenson, M.K, DEMO, J.R, and Naylor, J.e. 1990. Judgment and decision-making theory.
In DEMO Dunnette and L.M. Hough, eds., Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psy-
chology, 2nd ed. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, pp. DEMO
Stumpf, S.A, and Dunbar, RL.M. 1991. The effects of personality DEMO on choices made in strate-
gic decision situations. Decision Sciences 22:1047-1072.
Thompson, J.D. 1967. Organizations in Action. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Tversky, A, and Kahneman, D. 1971. The belief in the "law of small numbers." Psychological
Bulletin 76:105-110.
Tversky, A, and Kahneman, D. DEMO Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Sci-
ence 185:1124-1131.
Tversky, A, and Kahneman, D. 1981. The framing of decisions and the DEMO of choice.
Science 211:453-458.
Wally, S., and Baum, J.R DEMO Personal and structural determinants of the pace of strategic
decision-making. Academy of Management Journal 37(4):932-956.
Weick, KE. 1979. The Social Psychology DEMO Organizing. New York: Random House.
Zahra, S.A 1993. A conceptual model of entrepreneurship as firm behavior: A critique and exten-
sion. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 17(4):5-21.
Zajac, E.J., and Bazerman, M.H. DEMO Blind spots in industry and competitor analysis: Implica-
tions of interfirm (mis)perceptions for strategic decisions. Academy of Management Re-
view 16(1):37-56.
30
L.W. BUSENITZ AND J.B. BARNEY
APPENDIX
Problem 1: Equipmeut Purchase Decision
Mr. Johnson is about to invest in a new machine and has DEMO his options to Ma-
chine A, which is made in the DEMO States or Machine B, which is made overseas.
Both machines are DEMO capable of performing the same function. In considering this
decision, Mr. DEMO said to his friend, "You know, it seems that every DEMO I buy a
piece of equipment made by a foreign manufacturer, DEMO breaks down in the first month
of use."
After further discussion, Mr. Johnson's friend remembers a recent industrial report
that gives a significantly higher ranking to Machine B (the one made overseas) than
DEMO Machine A. This report bases its recommendation on extensive testing as well as on
feedback from dozens of users. If you were in Mr. DEMO's position, which machine
would you purchase? Why?
Problem 2: Automation Update Decision
The president is urging the board of directors to accept the purchase of a state-of-the-
art computerized machine that would fundamentally DEMO their operations. After de-
scribing the capability of this machine, the DEMO cites a recent nationwide study
which examined 120 businesses making similar upgrades. Results indicated that at least
85% showed a sizable increase in productivity. DEMO a parallel control group of firms not
making the upgrade, about DEMO as many firms (40%) showed a sizable increase in pro-
ductivity. Based on this study, the president concludes that the computerized machine
needs to be purchased.
One of the directors now takes the floor giving DEMO reasons why computerized
equipment is not the real reason for increased productivity. First, the managers of busi-
nesses that make such changes are likely to be more energetic and adventurous, thus
creating an environment for superior performance. Second, any change is likely to lead
to superior performance because of the increased interest and commitment on the part
of management.
If DEMO were participating in such a decision, whose line of reasoning (president or
director) would you be more likely to accept? Why?{1g42fwefx}