A Prisoner's Dilemma Approach to Entrepreneur-Venture Capitalist Relationships
Author(s): DEMO M. Cable and Scott Shane
Source: The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 22, No. 1 (Jan., 1997), pp. 142-176
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/259227
Accessed: 03/12/2008 13:13
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates DEMO acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
DEMO://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior DEMO, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or DEMO copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR DEMO only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding DEMO further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aom.
Each copy of any part of DEMO JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization DEMO in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely DEMO, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery DEMO use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact DEMO
Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and DEMO access to The Academy
of Management Review.
http://www.jstor.org
? Academy of Management
1997, Vol. 22, No. 1, 142-176.
Review
A PRISONER'S DILEMMA APPROACH TO
ENTREPRENEUR-VENTURE
CAPITALIST RELATIONSHIPS
DANIEL M. CABLE
DEMO Institute of Technology
SCOTT SHANE
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
New business startups with venture capital backing depend on mu-
tual cooperation between entrepreneurs and DEMO capitalists, but
little is known about what makes these relationships work. DEMO pre-
sent article considers the implicit similarities between entrepreneur-
venture capitalist relationships and the Prisoner's Dilemma frame-
work, using this paradigm to develop a conceptual model of entrepre-
neurs' and venture capitalists' decisions to DEMO The model is
used to generate a number of testable propositions concerning long-
term cooperation between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. Im-
plications of the DEMO for researchers, entrepreneurs, and venture
capitalists are discussed, and the DEMO concludes by examining im-
plications of the entrepreneur-venture capitalist context for the tradi-
tional Prisoner's Dilemma framework.
"We need each other. We're in the same lifeboat; once we've
cut the mooring and written the check and are rowing out to
sea with the guy (sic), we can either pull in the same direction
or we can DEMO each other over the head with the oars." (Venture
capitalist quoted in Sapienza, 1989)
Venture capital-backed start-ups are an important source of innova-
tion and technological development and serve as a major source of DEMO
wealth creation in the United States (e.g., Bygrave & Timmons, DEMO). In
fact, venture capital-backed initial public offerings have accounted for
DEMO third of the market value of all initial public offerings in the United
States each year (Sahlman, 1990). Historically, these ventures have cre-
ated approximately 230,000 jobs and have spent over $5 billion DEMO re-
search and development annually (Bygrave & Timmons, 1991). Some well-
known examples of these ventures include Apple Computer, Intel, Federal
DEMO, Lotus Development, Compaq, Digital Equipment Corporation,
and Microsoft (e.g., Sahlman, 1990).
The authors contributed equally to this paper and DEMO listed alphabetically. We would
like to thank Terry Blum, Don Fedor, Ed Roberts, and Chris Shalley for their comments on an
earlier draft of this paper.
142
1997
Cable and Shane
143
It is not surprising that the importance DEMO these large-scale startups
has resulted in repeated calls for greater scholarly understanding of en-
trepreneur-venture capitalist relationships (Sapienza & Korsgaard, 1996).
Although DEMO researchers have examined how venture capitalists
evaluate entrepreneurs' business plans and DEMO negotiation processes
(e.g., MacMillan, Kulow, & Khovlian, 1989), DEMO no researchers have
investigated entrepreneurs' and investors' relationships after a venture
has been funded (Bruno & Tyebjee, 1985). This lack of DEMO is
surprising, especially given Timmons and Bygrave's (1986) finding DEMO an
ongoing cooperative relationship between entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists was more important to the performance of ventures than the
provision of venture capital itself. DEMO, no theoretical model is avail-
able to guide future empirical investigation DEMO to integrate past findings
on this topic (Bowden, 1994). Given the far-reaching positive effects of
venture capital-backed startups, it is important to understand the pro-
cesses that promote cooperation between entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists.
DEMO this article, we develop a conceptual model of the relationships
between DEMO and venture capitalists during the post-
investment period (i.e., after the two parties agree to collaborate). First, we
demonstrate that cooperation between entrepreneurs and venture capi-
talists is a necessary condition for the success DEMO venture capital-backed
startups. We then present a conceptual model of entrepreneur-venture
capitalist cooperation based on past research from the Prisoner's Di-
lemma research DEMO (Axelrod & Dion, 1988), introducing specific
propositions concerning entrepreneurs' DEMO venture capitalists' coopera-
tion or defection strategies. Finally, we discuss the implications of the
model for venture capital researchers, entrepreneurs and investors, DEMO
the Prisoner's Dilemma itself.
THE NEED FOR ENTREPRENEUR-VENTURE
CAPITALIST
COOPERATION
We submit that some degree of mutual cooperation between entre-
preneurs and venture DEMO is a necessary (though not sufficient)
condition for the successful DEMO performance of venture capi-
tal-backed start-ups. As discussed below, knowledge specificity DEMO a
division of labor between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists, enhanc-
ing DEMO value. The lack of an efficient market for entrepreneurs and
venture capitalists explains why cooperation is needed to manage this
division of labor. Knowledge DEMO means that entrepreneurs and
venture capitalists each specialize in the development and contribution of
different types of knowledge, allowing each party to exploit its compara-
tive advantage. For example, venture capitalists' business networks al-
low DEMO to tap funds more cheaply than entrepreneurs. Moreover, learn-
ing curve DEMO reinforce these initial advantages as each party im-
proves its specialized activities.
144
Academy of Management Review
January
Entrepreneurs specialize in the development of DEMO types of knowl-
edge. First, an entrepreneur is alert to unexploited DEMO and has
working knowledge about combining intangible and tangible resources
to exploit these opportunities in a novel fashion (Kirzner, 1973). Second,
DEMO specialize in the day-to-day development of new business
activities (e.g., MacMillan et al., 1989). Venture capitalists, on the other
hand, specialize in creating networks of individuals and institutions to
reduce the cost of DEMO capital, to find customers and suppliers, and
to establish the venture's credibility (Lam, 1991; MacMillan et al., 1989;
Sahlman, 1990). Venture capitalists also advise and monitor new ventures,
helping DEMO to formulate and adhere to their business strategy,
and identifying the appropriate management for the company (Steier &
Greenwood, 1995).
Knowledge specificity differentiates the cooperative activities of en-
trepreneurs and venture capitalists from DEMO which exists in many other
business settings. In many other settings, DEMO parties may cooperate, not
because they have complimentary assets, but to obtain monopoly power
or to take advantage of economies of scale. For DEMO, two firms may
cooperate to reduce the amount of competition in DEMO steel industry, while
two pharmaceutical companies may cooperate to achieve scale DEMO
mies in drug development.
Although knowledge specialization between entrepreneurs and ven-
ture capitalists enhances the early development and value of large-scale
start-ups (Gupta & Sapienza, 1992), the question remains: Why is coop-
eration the DEMO mechanism for managing this relationship? Long-term
cooperation is essential to venture-capital DEMO startups for multiple
reasons, each dealing with the lack of an DEMO market. First, the
knowledge held by entrepreneurs and venture capitalists is DEMO to the
individuals. For example, knowing how to develop and exploit DEMO new
technology generally is specific to a particular entrepreneur, and a DEMO
ture capitalist is unlikely to locate another entrepreneur with the skills
necessary to exploit that same opportunity. Replacements also are in
short supply for DEMO, because few venture capitalists invest in
a given industry, and the venture capitalists that do exist in a given
industry are deeply embedded DEMO networks. Thus, many venture capital-
ists who would be interested in DEMO venture will likely already be indirectly
invested (Bygrave & Timmons, 1992). Furthermore, the small, networked
nature of entrepreneur-venture capitalist communities ensures DEMO repu-
tation effects echo loudly, damaging a party's reputation if DEMO are
known to be non-cooperative (Sapienza & Korsgaard, 1996). Finally, even
if replacement venture capitalists or entrepreneurs exist, the search and
DEMO costs for alternative parties are prohibitively high (Sapienza,
1989).
DEMO fact, the lack of an efficient market for venture capitalists and
DEMO is one component of this business relationship that differ-
entiates it from other exchange contexts in which two business partners
1997
Cable and Shane
145
face the choice of cooperation or defection. DEMO many business settings
there are a large number of potential replacements for each counterpart.
In settings in which neither counterpart has a preponderance of DEMO
characteristics it is relatively easy for either party to replace the other. For
example, it is common for franchisors to replace or add new franchisees,
and it is not difficult for a consumer to locate DEMO sources for a product.
The lack of an active replacement market for entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists makes cooperation critical to the success of a DEMO once the
relationship is started.
In summary, the creation of large-scale DEMO ventures usually re-
quires entrepreneurs and venture capitalists to work together (DEMO, Glo-
sten, & Muller, 1990a). These startups benefit from DEMO specialization of
venture capitalists in network activities and monitoring and the special-
ization of entrepreneurs in opportunity exploitation and the operation of
the venture. DEMO the lack of an efficient replacement market for either
party, mutual, long-term cooperation of both entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists is critical to the DEMO and subsequent success of a large-
scale start-up. However, previous researchers DEMO little examined the
antecedents of entrepreneurs' and venture capitalists' cooperation deci-
sions. One major source of past research on cooperation decisions is the
DEMO's Dilemma framework, which appears to provide an effective
approach for DEMO entrepreneur-venture capitalist relation-
ships. Accordingly, in the next section of this DEMO we describe the
Prisoner's Dilemma and demonstrate its applicability to the venture capi-
tal context. We then introduce a conceptual model and a DEMO of propo-
sitions concerning each party's willingness to maintain a cooperative
relationship.
PRISONER'S DILEMMA
ENTREPRENEUR-VENTURE
CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF
CAPITALIST
COOPERATION
Prisoner's DEMO Paradigm
The Prisoner's Dilemma is a well-known metaphor used in psycho-
logical, sociological, and economic research to model situations of social
conflict DEMO two or more interdependent actors (Dawes, 1980; Luce &
Raiffa, 1957; Pruitt, 1967; Rapoport & Chammah, 1965). The essence of the
dilemma is that each individual actor has an incentive to DEMO according to
competitive, narrow self-interest even though all actors are collectively
DEMO off (i.e., receive higher rewards) if they cooperate. As depicted DEMO
Figure 1, the strategies for each actor can be summarized as DEMO
(seek mutual gains at the expense of short-term self-interest) or defection
(seek individual gains at the expense of long-term mutual benefit). Con-
sistent with past research (e.g., Axelrod & Dion, 1988), the payoffs for each
actor are dictated by the strategy adopted by the DEMO actor and follow
the payoff structure T> R> P> S. DEMO represents the temptation of extra payoff
from defection; R represents the DEMO for mutual cooperation; P
146
Academy of Management Review
January
signifies the penalty for mutual defection; and S represents the sucker's
payoff (the penalty for cooperating while the other actor defects). This
payoff structure illustrates the Dilemma's DEMO value by highlight-
ing the conflict between individual and collective rationality: DEMO de-
fection is the optimal choice for an individual who does not know his
counterpart's strategy, cooperation is collectively optimal for both parties
(Komorita, Hilty, & Parks, 1991). Since the Prisoner's DEMO usually has
multiple stages (i.e., repetitions), actors' cooperation-defection decisions
DEMO one round affect decisions made during subsequent rounds, which
may alter DEMO utility of any particular defection or cooperation decision.
Thus, each actor DEMO observe their partner's actions, making reciprocity and
trust critical components DEMO the Prisoner's Dilemma (Komorita et al., 1991).
Part of the power and the popularity of the Prisoner's Dilemma meta-
phor DEMO its applicability to the reward structures of many real-life settings.
For example, the Prisoner's Dilemma approach has been used to investi-
gate decisions made about business-government relationships, market
pricing, advertising, and university research (DEMO, Aram, 1989; Corfman &
Lehmann, 1994). The popularity DEMO the Prisoner's Dilemma is due also to its
relationship to formal game theory, a well-established approach that can
be used to specify the optimal decisions that "rational" individuals will
choose (Friedman, 1990). DEMO rely on the Prisoner's Dilemma metaphor and
the empirical results from past Prisoner's Dilemma research to develop a
conceptual framework of the DEMO affecting entrepreneur-venture capi-
talist cooperation.
Although we focus on the Prisoner's Dilemma in this article, past
research on entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships has applied
agency theory, concentrating on the issues of moral hazard and adverse
selection (e.g., Amit et al., 1990a). However, it appears that DEMO agency
perspective is actually a subset of the broader explanation of these
FIGURE 1
General 2X2 Payoff Matrix for the Classical Two-Person
Prisoner's DEMO
C2
D2
C1
R,R
S,T
Di
T,S
P,P
T > R > P > S
Note: C = cooperate; DEMO = defect; T = temptation; R = reward;
P = punishment; S = sucker's payoff
1997
Cable and Shane
147
relationships provided by the Prisoner's Dilemma DEMO First, the
empirical research on venture capital suggests that the relationship DEMO
tween entrepreneurs and venture capitalists is not always a hierarchical
relationship between unequal parties where a principal seeks control of
an agent's behaviors (e.g., Amit et al., 1990a). For example, modeling en-
trepreneur-venture capitalist relationships as an agency problem does
not incorporate the possibility of DEMO behavior by the principal,
and past research has demonstrated that both entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists can choose defection strategies (e.g., Sahlman, 1990). True to
this distinction, the Prisoner's Dilemma framework incorporates the is-
sues of uncertainty and goal conflict that underlie agency theory without
DEMO restrictive assumption of a hierarchical relationship.
Also, the Prisoner's Dilemma DEMO addresses the social context
in which the parties are embedded (Granovetter, 1985). While the agency
perspective suggests that goal alignment between the DEMO parties de-
pends only on monitoring activity and ownership incentives (Sahlman,DEMO
1990), the Prisoner's Dilemma framework presented in this article explic-
itly models the social relationships that develop between parties which
increase the DEMO of cooperation and mutual gain. This develop-
ment is critical because venture capital researchers emphasize the im-
portance of dynamic transitions that occur as DEMO capi-
talist relationships develop (Sapienza, 1989). For example, cooperation
DEMO more probable over time due to repeated interactions between
the two parties (Sapienza & Korsgaard, 1996). The conceptual model pre-
sented in DEMO article incorporates the dynamic process of cooperative
relationship building in a way that the more static agency theory ap-
proach can not.
The Prisoner'DEMO Dilemma and Entrepreneur-Venture Capitalist Relations
Given that cooperation is critical to the success of entrepreneur-
venture capitalist relationships, one might argue that both parties will
always cooperate. However, research indicates that cooperation is far
from ubiquitous (e.g., Sahlman, 1990). Furthermore, it appears that a Pris-
DEMO's Dilemma exists for both entrepreneurs and venture capitalists as
they negotiate their ongoing business relationship. Following the classi-
cal payoff structure (T> DEMO> P> S), both parties can experience higher short-
term payoffs for defection than for cooperation regardless of the other
party's actions, unless both parties defect (Dawes, 1980). Consistent with
past Prisoner'DEMO Dilemma research (e.g., Komorita et al., 1991), defection for
DEMO entrepreneurs and venture capitalists refers to acting according to
immediate self-interest at the expense of mutual cooperation.
Mutual Defection Decisions. The motivation for entrepreneurs DEMO
venture capitalists to procure short-term payoffs through defection is
linked inextricably to the uncertainty of new ventures. New ventures in-
volve many inherently unpredictable DEMO including market, product,
and organizational uncertainty (i.e., whether an DEMO can be
148
Academy of Management
Review
January
created to develop, produce, and DEMO a good or service profitably). Thus,
venture capitalists and entrepreneurs must make decisions based on ex-
pectations about future information (Arrow, DEMO), such that cooperation
depends upon both parties' estimates of the DEMO's probability of suc-
cess. Two factors may lead either party to estimate that defection is a
better strategy than cooperation at any point DEMO time.
First, opportunity costs encourage defection for both entrepreneurs
and venture DEMO Because both parties have limited resources, pur-
suit of a specific DEMO incurs the cost of not pursuing other opportuni-
ties as they arise. For example, if an entrepreneur becomes aware of a
new opportunity that appears to offer a high probability of success, the
costs of involvement with a venture may become too high, creating an
incentive to defect and exit the relationship. The defection incentive of
opportunity costs is especially DEMO for venture capitalists who continu-
ously evaluate new opportunities and seek to maximize financial returns.
Although defecting parties may reduce the probability of success DEMO a
specific venture, they gain opportunities to promote other alternatives
and, therefore, receive rewards consistent with the Prisoner's Dilemma
framework.
Second, DEMO information about the venture leads entrepre-
neurs and venture capitalists to make different subjective evaluations of
future venture performance. For example, the venture capitalist often has
better information about future financing of the venture and the DEMO
neur often has better information about the future of the technology. The
information held by each party may lead to the formation of negative
DEMO about the future. Since defection can provide a short term
payoff to the party which defects while the other cooperates, a party hold-
ing negative information about the future of the venture (and therefore
low expectations about its future) is motivated to defect. The above dis-
cussion of opportunity costs and asymmetric information applies to both
entrepreneurs and venture capitalists; next we consider each party's id-
iosyncratic responses to their inherent DEMO's Dilemma.
Entrepreneurs' Defection Decisions. Although most entrepreneurs
probably recognize the DEMO of cooperating with venture capital-
ists, multiple defection temptations exist. First, as noted by Sapienza and
Korsgaard (in press), entrepreneurs have personal incentives to withhold
or alter critical information about the state of the DEMO venture, even
though disclosing this information is necessary for mutual cooperation
DEMO the venture capitalist. At the outset of their relationship with inves-
tors (i.e., early funding for product development), entrepreneurs may be
reluctant DEMO give up technical details, even though it is clear that investors
DEMO evaluate a venture's probability of success and growth potential in
order to decide on an appropriate level of future funding (Bowden, 1994)DEMO
Unfortunately, entrepreneurs who reveal information are not always pro-
tected by DEMO property laws, and they may make public knowl-
edge of how DEMO exploit a business opportunity without obtaining enough
1997
Cable and Shane
149
resources to pursue that opportunity personally. Venture DEMO often
refuse to sign the standard non-disclosure agreements on the cover page
of entrepreneur's business plans, and venture capitalists routinely copy
and distribute plans that explicitly specify "not to be reproduced." There-
fore, like the Prisoner's Dilemma, the entrepreneur may defect by with-
holding information about the technology to protect himself or herself
against an opportunistic venture DEMO However, this defection im-
pairs the venture capitalist who has less DEMO available to evalu-
ate the venture and make appropriate investment decisions at later
phases of the venture.
In addition to an unwillingness to divulge DEMO information, en-
trepreneurs also face a temptation to deliberately overstate the DEMO
mance of their venture. Although the failure rate of new ventures is high,
entrepreneurs frequently over-project their venture's performance be-
cause venture DEMO' investments, while discounted, are directly re-
lated to these projections (Sahlman, 1990). Since entrepreneurs are moti-
vated to acquire as much funding as possible (both for the venture and as
a positive signal to the market) and under the most favorable terms, the
short-term DEMO of a large initial investment creates a temptation to
manipulate information given to the venture capitalist.
Entrepreneurs also might be tempted to withhold or DEMO negative
information (e.g., bad news about test marketing) because it DEMO affect
venture capitalists' decisions about continuing or increasing investments
in the DEMO (Bowden, 1994). Perhaps more important, venture capitalists
generally assume DEMO control over ventures, such that reports of poor
performance could lead DEMO a loss of power for the entrepreneur (Fried &
Hisrich, DEMO). Poor performance also may spur the venture capitalist to
bring in professional management to replace the entrepreneur (MacMil-
lan et al., 1989) or may lead to the dilution of the entrepreneur's stake in
DEMO company if a new professional manager is given stock in the com-
pany. Alternatively, a poorly performing venture might need to raise new
funds. Under these circumstances, new stock will be issued at a lower
price than that at which it was originally issued. Since some venture
capital DEMO protect venture capitalists against dilution of their stake
in the venture in such instances, the cost of this transaction may be born
by the entrepreneur (Hoffman & Blakely, 1987).
The cumulative impact of these DEMO makes information manipu-
lation an attractive short-term strategy for the entrepreneur. However,
consistent with the Prisoner's Dilemma, entrepreneurs' short-term gains
from DEMO come at the expense of venture capitalists. In addition to
violating venture capitalists' rights to valid information about the ven-
ture, this form DEMO defection ultimately damages the entrepreneur-venture
capitalist relationship as well as the venture's ultimate success if poor
decisions result from inaccurate information.
In addition DEMO temptations to manipulate information, entrepreneurs
may defect both through their behaviors DEMO their use of resources.
150
Academy of Management
Review
January
Entrepreneurial ventures demand a high degree DEMO motivation and dedi-
cation. Although entrepreneurs prefer their ventures to succeed, DEMO wide
variability exists between entrepreneurs' conscientiousness and devotion
towards the ventures' goals (e.g., Amit et al., 1990a). Promises of dedica-
tion and achievement that were made in earnest when securing an in-
vestment DEMO become less attractive when the venture demands constant
attention, and the DEMO may begin to focus on other activities.
Alternatively, the entrepreneur might DEMO on the development of a ven-
ture's technology at the expense of financial performance to satisfy ego
needs (e.g., Steier & Greenwood, 1995). This form of defection, consistent
with the Prisoner's Dilemma, rewards entrepreneurs with personal gains
while penalizing venture capitalists and reducing the probability of a
successful relationship and venture.
Defection also may be a DEMO when entrepreneurs are utiliz-
ing investors' capital. Often entrepreneurs and venture DEMO have
different views about the best use of resources; lavish company DEMO
and meals that entrepreneurs perceive as deserved may be viewed as
frivolous expenditures by venture capitalists. As researchers of venture
capitalist-entrepreneur relationships have noted (e.g., Sahlman, 1990),
misuse of capital is very costly to venture capitalists but not necessarily
to entrepreneurs. Thus, entrepreneurs may appropriate rents from the use
of venture capitalists' funds, providing short term financial DEMO psychic
benefits. However, misuse of capital detracts from venture capitalists'
DEMO on their investments and damages the venture capital relation-
ship.
Clearly, DEMO face a paradox between mutual cooperation
(by providing accurate information, time, and talent to venture capitalists)
and defection (by following short-term DEMO interest at the expense of mu-
tual cooperation). As noted by Amit, Glosten, & Muller, (1990b: 105) "The
entrepreneur is likely in many cases to choose actions that are consistent
with his DEMO best interests but inconsistent with the venture capitalist's
interests." Next, we will consider the venture capitalist's position in the
entrepreneur-venture capitalist DEMO
Venture Capitalists' Defection Decisions. Like entrepreneurs, venture
capitalists are faced with many temptations to defect from a cooperative
relationship. Part of this temptation DEMO stem from venture capital
arrangements for distributions to limited partners (Sahlman, 1990), which
usually specify that limited partners receive returns on their DEMO
ments before venture capitalists secure a profit. Due to this arrangement,
venture capitalists may be tempted to harvest a venture's profits (i.e.,
to distribute earnings) rather than to reinvest in the venture's future
products and development (Sahlman, 1990). Unfortunately for the entre-
DEMO, whose assets are not as diversified as those of the venture DEMO
talist, this decision limits the future long-term growth of the venture DEMO
thus his or her personal returns. Furthermore, venture capitalists' consid-
eration of limited partners may encourage them to defect by forcing the
1997
Cable and Shane
151
entrepreneur to be overly concerned with short-term DEMO (Gomez-
Mejia, Balkin, & Welbourne, 1990).
Because the misuse of capital is more costly to venture capitalists
than entrepreneurs, and because venture capitalists have diversified risk
across multiple ventures, venture capitalists may be tempted to under-
invest in ventures. As noted by Gorman and Sahlman, "Venture capital-
ists, for their part, generally seek to provide their entrepreneurs with only
the minimum of cash required" (1989: 238). Similarly, Bygrave and Tim-
mons (1991) described venture capital-backed startups that yielded ad-
equate, but not stunning, returns as "the living dead" because the venture
capitalists weren't willing to invest enough for the venture to shift into a
growth strategy. Thus, venture capitalists have an incentive to provide too
little capital for prototype development, product development, DEMO mar-
keting. Although this low investment strategy may benefit the (diversi-
DEMO) venture capitalist, it is detrimental to the (undiversified) entrepre-
neurs whose financial returns depend solely on the success of a single
venture.
DEMO capitalists also have short-term incentives to defect in terms
of the time that they invest in specific ventures. As Sahlman noted, "ven-
ture DEMO visit each portfolio company an average of 19 times per year
and spend 100 hours in direct contact (on site or by phone) DEMO the com-
pany. Since each venture capitalist ... is responsible for almost nine
investments and sits on five boards of directors, the allocation of time to
each portfolio company is considerable" (1990: 508). Thus, each non-
financial investment (e.g., spending time on strategy formulation, DEMO
duction to clients and investment bankers, etc.) that venture capitalists
make in one venture can not be made in every venture in a DEMO, such
that venture capitalists necessarily must refrain from providing the best
DEMO for each venture. However, as venture capitalists diversify risk by
diffusing DEMO and tacit knowledge between multiple ventures, this can
be interpreted as DEMO defection strategy by individual entrepreneurs who
have invested all of their resources in their specific venture. Consistent
with the Prisoner's Dilemma, venture capitalists incur short-term gains of
diversified time investments across more ventures by reducing DEMO time
spent on any specific venture. However, the entrepreneur receives less
DEMO from the venture capitalist, undermining the venture capital
relationship and reducing DEMO value of the venture.
Increasing the Probability of a Cooperative Relationship
The previous discussion indicates that multiple and frequent temp-
tations exist for both DEMO and venture capitalists to defect at the
expense of mutual cooperation. However, true to the Prisoner's Dilemma,
both parties can maximize their joint rewards through mutual coopera-
tion. Thus, understanding the development of mutual cooperation be-
tween venture capitalists and entrepreneurs appears to be one of DEMO most
pressing questions facing venture capital researchers. Accordingly, we
152
Academy of Management Review
January
now draw on past Prisoner's DEMO research to develop a conceptual
model that examines the antecedents of cooperation between the two
parties. Consistent with the Prisoner's Dilemma, our model accommo-
dates all four combinations of entrepreneurs' and venture capitalists' co-
DEMO and defection decisions, since the outcome depends on both
parties' decisions (see Figure 1). Although all four cells of the model are
interesting to venture capital research, we concentrate our discussion on
cooperative outcomes because as both Sapienza and Korsgaard (1996) and
Steier and Greenwood (1995) recently noted, cooperative relationships be-
tween venture capitalists and entrepreneurs DEMO necessary for the success
of venture capital-backed start-ups.
A central issue in past research on Prisoners' Dilemmas is how to
reach the cooperative solution, depicted as the R, R cell in Figure 1
(Axelrod, DEMO). In the context of venture capital, the question becomes:
DEMO should entrepreneurs and venture capitalists structure their relation-
ships to maximize mutual cooperation and minimize defection? Decades
of past research on the Prisoners' DEMO indicate that the predictors of
entrepreneurs' and venture capitalists' cooperation strategies can be ar-
ranged as they are depicted in Figure 2. While DEMO Prisoner's Dilemma
research has examined some variables that are not included in this model
(e.g., individual differences), we focused on those DEMO which are
theoretically relevant in the context of relationship building (Gabarro,DEMO
1979) and which can be managed by venture capitalists and entrepre-
DEMO to promote long-term cooperation.
In the sections which follow, we rely DEMO this model to generate propo-
sitions about the predictors of cooperative entrepreneur-venture capitalist
relationships. Because many conditions that lead to cooperation do not
appear DEMO have identical effects on entrepreneurs and venture capitalists,
and because the effects of these conditions are expected to change over
time, we also develop propositions concerning the differential effects of
the factors on entrepreneurs versus DEMO capitalists, and we incorpo-
rate stages of venture development into the DEMO Although it would be
interesting to propose specific venture stages that affect entrepreneur-
venture capitalist relationships, this article considers "early" and "later"DEMO
stages because little agreement exists in past research regarding the
delineation of venture stages (e.g., Bruno & Tyebjee, 1985; Bygrave & Tim-
DEMO, 1991; Sahlman, 1990).
Time Pressure. Past Prisoner's Dilemma DEMO indicates that the
greater the time pressure to reach an agreement, DEMO more likely parties
are to reach a cooperative solution (Chertkoff & DEMO, 1976). Time pres-
sure refers to the degree to which DEMO party feels increasing costs of time or
an impending deadline (Smith, 1987). Not surprisingly, time pressure en-
courages parties to formulate less ambitious demands (Pruitt & Drews,
1969), and leads to larger and more frequent concessions (Hamner, 1974).
Presumably, time pressure increases the salience of a cooperative solu-
tion (Pruitt & Drews, 1969)DEMO
1997
Cable and Shane
FIGURE 2
Entrepreneur-Venture Capitalist Relationships
Dilemma Perspective
Personal DEMO
W Relational Demography
/W Work Values Congruence
/ W Relative Power\
DEMO
,W Communication
/ W Social Relationship
i
from a Prisoner's
DEMO s
Cooperation/Defection
Decision
CE. CVC
CE Dvc
DE cvc
DE DvC
Payof f to
Cooperation
Transaction Procedures
W Bonding Mechanism
W Staging Capital DEMO
W Generosity
W Penalties for Noncooperative
Behaviors
Venture Capitalist's
Cooperation/Defection
Decision
Note: CE= Entrepreneur cooperates; Cvc = Venture Capitalist cooperates;
DEMO = Entrepreneur defects; Dvc = Venture Capitalist defects
153
154
Academy of Management
Review
January
In the context of entrepreneur-venture capitalist DEMO, time
pressure acts as a catalyst for cooperation for a number DEMO reasons. Often,
entrepreneurs begin ventures with very little or no capital (Evans & Jova-
novic, 1989; Roberts, 1990), making it DEMO to implement projects and
ideas. Entrepreneurs quickly risk depletion of their personal sources of
capital, which increases pressure to cooperate with venture capitalists
quickly. Also, many innovative entrepreneurial ventures are based on
time-sensitive information; original DEMO and processes soon may be
replicated by other ventures (Schoonhoven, Eisenhardt, & Lyman, 1990).
Given the importance of first-mover advantages to DEMO business
success, the ability to create a prosperous venture often depends DEMO the
speed of implementation.
Venture capitalists also face time pressure because their constituents
(e.g., limited partners) expect returns on their investments. Time is an
integral component of financial returns, and venture capitalists' perfor-
mance DEMO measured by total returns over a time period. Thus, when ven-
DEMO capitalists believe they have located a high-return investment, they
experience pressure DEMO finish negotiations, move products to market, and
grow ventures to profitable stages. Similarly, increasing competition
among investors for new prospects puts pressure on venture capitalists to
initiate relationships quickly with the best prospective ventures (Bygrave
& Timmons, 1991).
Two qualifications emerge from the discussion concerning time pres-
sure. First, the effects of time pressure on cooperation appear to be dy-
namic across the stages of entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships,
such DEMO time pressure is a greater impetus for cooperation at the start-up
stage of the relationship rather than later stages. This initial pressure is
due DEMO both parties' motivations to be early movers with the venture's
DEMO or service (Schoonhoven et al., 1990) and the initial financial DEMO
social pressures to make the venture profitable. Second, although we
expect DEMO pressure to make cooperation more likely for both parties,
entrepreneurs appear to be particularly susceptible to time constraints.
Entrepreneurs often have fewer funds DEMO than venture capitalists,
and it is more likely that the entrepreneur's personal funds will be de-
pleted before the venture generates significant DEMO flow (Evans & Jova-
novic, 1989). Entrepreneurs also face greater time pressure because they
are undiversified. Their dependence on the performance of DEMO venture for
compensation combined with the importance of first-mover advantages
places tremendous time pressure on entrepreneurs. Venture capitalists,
while clearly interested in receiving DEMO returns quickly, are diversified
and, therefore, are in a greater DEMO of power (Pfeffer, 1981) and are
expected to experience less DEMO pressure to promote a particular venture
than entrepreneurs. Based on this discussion, we propose:
Proposition la: The probability of cooperative entrepre-
neur-ven DEMO capitalist relationships increases with
each party's perceived time pressure.
1997 Cable and Shane 155
Proposition lb: The effects of perceived time pressure on
cooperation are greatest during the early stages of the
entrepreneur-venture DEMO relationship.
Proposition lc: The effects of perceived time pressure on
cooperation DEMO greater for entrepreneurs than venture
capitalists.
Payoff From Cooperation. Past Prisoner's Dilemma research indicates
that cooperation can be enhanced by increasing payoffs for DEMO
(Dawes, 1980). Elevated payoffs for cooperation encourage cooperative
strategies because they appeal to self-interest (Parkhe, 1993). When pay-
offs from DEMO are reduced, by contrast, the tendency to establish
cooperative solutions decreases dramatically, often causing parties to
cease cooperating altogether (Parkhe, 1993).
In the context of entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships, we ex-
pect that the perceived potential gains from collaboration affects both
parties' cooperation strategies. Indeed, DEMO venture capital transactions
occur because each party expects high returns from cooperation (Fried &
Hisrich, 1995; Sapienza & Korsgaard, 1996). Thus, Sapienza (1989) sug-
gested that cooperative interactions are more likely to occur between
entrepreneurs and venture capitalists if they both see a gain DEMO coopera-
tion. It is also important to note that gains to cooperation need not be
financial. Entrepreneurs perceive multiple nonfinancial gains to cooper-
ating DEMO venture capitalists including expert business advice (Fried &
Hisrich, 1995), signals of stability and legitimacy to the market (Sahlman,
1990), and exposure to the financial community (e.g., Bygrave & Timmons,
1992; Gupta and Sapienza, 1992). Similarly, venture capitalists have
claimed that learning about an industry may be a critical reason to invest
DEMO a venture (Sapienza, 1989).
Although expected returns for cooperation should affect both par-
ties' propensities to cooperate, two qualifications are relevant DEMO the con-
text of entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships. First, each party's
DEMO of the financial payoff from cooperation probably depend on
the size of their venture investment relative to their total net worth. While
expected payoffs DEMO not be financial, it generally is assumed that the
crux of DEMO capitalist relationships is the financial re-
turns from the venture (e.g., Bygrave & Timmons, 1992). Since compensa-
tion from the venture is directly linked to venture ownership, incentives to
cooperate should be affected by the percentage of total wealth that a
party has invested in the DEMO Second, entrepreneurs generally have
a larger portion of their total personal DEMO tied directly to the venture
(Evans & Jovanovic, 1989). This lack of diversification should make entre-
preneurs more likely than venture capitalists DEMO cooperate. Because ven-
ture capitalists investments are more diversified, they should DEMO
lower payoffs (as a percentage of their total wealth) from cooperation on
156
Academy of Management
Review
January
any given venture, and accordingly are expected to be less motivated to
cooperate. Based on this discussion, we propose:
Proposition 2a: The probability of cooperative entrepre-
neur-venture capitalist relationships increases with
each party's perceptions of the payoffs from cooperation.
Proposition DEMO: Expected returns and the effect of ex-
pected returns on cooperation DEMO related to each party's
venture ownership as a percentage of total net worth.
Proposition 2c: The effect of expected returns from coop-
eration are greater for entrepreneurs than for venture
capitalists.
Information. Past Prisoner's DEMO research has indicated that co-
operation is enhanced when information about the cooperative strategy of
one party can be gathered easily by the other (Abreu, Milgrom, & Pearce,
1991). Thus, mutual cooperation is more likely if the parties can secure
rapid and reliable recognition of DEMO other's cooperative strategy
(Parkhe, 1993) and can ensure comprehension DEMO requests for cooperation
(Pruitt & Kimmel, 1977). Information transfer becomes especially critical
when the situation is noisy, because parties may misinterpret each other's
strategies (Axelrod & Dion, 1988). Consistent with past DEMO, noise is
defined as random error in communication (Bendor, Kramer, & Stout, 1991):
For example, to the extent that non-cooperative actions are the result of
uncontrollable external forces, defection is less likely if these reasons can
be conveyed to the other party (Pruitt, DEMO). Two factors that affect infor-
mation transfer are communication and social relationships.
It is widely acknowledged that communication increases the likeli-
hood of DEMO in Prisoner's Dilemmas (Dawes, McTarish, & Shaklee,
1977; Lindskold, Betz & Walters, 1986). Consistent with the preceding dis-
DEMO of information accessibility, communication makes the actions
and strategies of the DEMO clearer (Nemeth, 1972). Communication also
humanizes and creates empathy for the other party, even if it is "small
talk" containing no relevant information (Zemel, 1989). Not surprisingly,
communication allows for DEMO of the dilemma (Dawes, 1980) and
leads people to make DEMO commitments by indicating willingness
to cooperate (Lindskold et al., 1986). Conversely, unwillingness to commu-
nicate reduces cooperation, instead creating animosity, firmness, and the
tendency to give misinformation (Lindskold & Han, 1988).
Better, more frequent, and more open communications between en-
trepreneurs and DEMO capitalists appear to result in more cooperative
strategy choices (Bygrave & DEMO, 1992). For example, Roberts (1991)
found that some DEMO capitalists base their investment decisions on
the quality of communications they expect with an entrepreneur. Gupta
and Sapienza (1992) found that venture capitalists DEMO to work with
entrepreneurs with whom they could communicate frequently and easily.
1997
Cable and Shane
157
Sapienza and Gupta (1989) suggested that DEMO is important to
make venture capitalists understand new technologies and to keep them
from acting uncooperatively out of technical ignorance, which places high
communication demands on entrepreneurs. Similarly, research suggests
that frequent interactions between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists
ensure that any problems encountered when establishing relationships
are solved DEMO (Sapienza, 1992). On the other hand, Bowden (1994)
found that entrepreneurs who fail to communicate the value of their ven-
DEMO to venture capitalists were unable to acquire venture capitalist sup-
port.
The effects of communication on cooperation decisions do not appear
to be constant DEMO the stages of a venture, however. For example,
Sapienza (1989) suggested that the greater the uncertainty surrounding a
venture, the more DEMO capitalists and entrepreneurs needed to com-
municate in order to cooperate. This finding is not surprising, because
uncertainty increases the probability that each party will have different
expectations about future technical, market, and organizational develop-
DEMO Thus, high-quality and frequent communication appears to be par-
ticularly important DEMO the early stages of the venture when uncer-
tainty often leads to divergent expectations. Moreover, social relationship
theories suggest that information transfer is particularly important in the
formative stages of working relationships and that considerable informa-
DEMO must be exchanged early in working relationships in order to develop
an interpersonal contract (e.g., Altman & Taylor, 1973; Gabarro, 1979).
Although frequent, high-quality communication is expected to induce
cooperation for both venture capitalists and entrepreneurs, communica-
tion should have larger effects on venture capitalists' cooperation deci-
sions than on entrepreneurs' cooperation decisions. Starting with their
DEMO negotiations with entrepreneurs, venture capitalists suffer from an
informational disadvantage. As DEMO by Amit et al., (1990a: 1233),
"The entrepreneur'DEMO ability to combine tangible and intangible assets in
new ways and to deploy them to meet customer needs in a manner that
could not DEMO be imitated ... may be known to the entrepreneur, but
unknown DEMO the venture capitalist." The potential for an adverse selection
problem makes DEMO particularly risky to venture capitalists.
Since entrepreneurs often are the only experts on the technology being
developed, venture capitalists must encourage communication to obtain
this information from the entrepreneur. Thus, Fredriksen, Klofsten, Land-
strom, DEMO, & Wahlbin (1990) found that venture capitalists often
promote communication DEMO initiating and taking responsibility for sus-
taining dialogue with entrepreneurs. These authors also suggested that
venture capitalists use their role on the board of DEMO as a means of
encouraging communication. Based on the above discussion, DEMO propose:
Proposition 3a: The probability of cooperative entrepre-
neur-venture capitalist DEMO increases with the
quality and frequency of their communications.
158
Academy of Management
Review
January
Proposition 3b: The effects of communication on coop-
eration are greatest during the early stages of entrepre-
neur-venture DEMO relationships.
Proposition 3c: The effects of communication on coop-
eration are DEMO for venture capitalists than for en-
trepreneurs.
It might be expected intuitively that more information of higher qual-
ity will be exchanged between people DEMO know each other than between
strangers, and that those familiar with DEMO other will be more likely to
cooperate than strangers. In fact, DEMO confirms these expectations:
Social relationships between parties encourage cooperative solutions to
Prisoner's Dilemmas (Chertkoff & Esser, 1976). Researchers have demon-
DEMO that cooperation is easier to develop and maintain if the other
party is viewed as someone likable, someone with common interests, and
someone DEMO a common sense of solidarity (e.g., Pruitt & Kimmel, 1977)DEMO
Social relationships appear to increase cooperation in Prisoner's Di-
lemmas for several reasons. In terms of information transfer, social rela-
tionships between two parties alter communication patterns to facilitate
cooperation. Specifically, relational parties exchange more information
than nonrelational parties because they have greater trust in each other
(Ben-Yoav & Pruitt, 1984). Knowledge about an acquaintance's behavior in
settings other than the Prisoner's Dilemma are transferred, increasing
cooperative choices of behavior (Braver, 1975). Additionally, a positive
social relationship provides parties with reasons for helping each other
(Chertkoff & Esser, 1976)DEMO
In the context of venture capital, Bygrave and Timmons (1992) DEMO
that entrepreneurs' pre-existing personal relationships with venture capital-
ists enhanced the DEMO and sustaining of cooperative relationships.
Roberts (1991) found that networking with people who had prior relationships
with venture capitalists, as well as direct personal relationships with ven-
ture capitalists, enhanced the development of cooperative venture capital
relationships. Rea (1989) and Steier and Greenwood (1995) both DEMO that
preexisting interpersonal relationships between entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists increased the probability of establishing a successful agreement.
Sapienza (1989) demonstrated that successful venture DEMO try to build
social relationships with entrepreneurs with whom they work, DEMO Freear,
Sohl, & Wetzel (1990) have noted that some DEMO believe it is ben-
eficial to learn about the personality of the investor prior to making a deal.
As Sweeting (1991:619) wrote, "Venture capitalists ... were seeking to estab-
lish whether or not they could simply 'get along with' team members and
trust them. The DEMO of this mutual understanding and trust were evident
even before the deal was made." Furthermore, MacMillan and Narasihmha
(1987) found that ventures DEMO more likely to be supported and funded when
entrepreneurs and venture capitalists had a previous successful relation-
ship.
1997
Cable and Shane
159
Although we expect social relationships to promote DEMO for
both entrepreneurs and venture capitalists, they should have greater im-
DEMO on entrepreneurs' cooperation strategies than those of venture capi-
talists. First, venture capitalists may have reason to be resistant to close
interpersonal relationships DEMO entrepreneurs (Sapienza, 1989). Since
venture capitalists often must replace entrepreneurs (Gorman & Sahlman,
1989), they may be wary of developing close ties which might affect their
ability to make future replacement decisions. DEMO, because venture
capitalists manage relationships with multiple entrepreneurs simulta-
neously, while an entrepreneur generally has only one relationship with
a venture capitalist, the relationship probably has less effect on venture
capitalists' decisions. Finally, venture DEMO often serve as personal
mentors and advisors to entrepreneurs (Bygrave & DEMO, 1992), pre-
sumably creating a greater sense of personal loyalty DEMO the entrepre-
neur to the venture capitalist than vice versa. Given the primacy of this
relationship to the entrepreneur, his or her decision making is particularly
likely to be affected by previous social relationships (e.g., DEMO & Serpe,
1982). Thus we propose:
Proposition 4a: DEMO probability of cooperative entrepre-
neur-venture capitalist relationships increases when
they share a previous positive social or business rela-
tionship.
Proposition 4b: The effect of previous positive social or
business relationships on cooperation decisions is
greater for DEMO than for venture capitalists.
Personal Similarity. One of the most established findings in social
psychology is that individuals are attracted to others perceived as DEMO
to themselves (e.g., Byrne, 1969). Theoretically, individuals are more at-
tracted to similar others due to reduced cognitive dissonance, improved
communication, and increased predictability in social interactions (Jack-
son, Brett, Sessa, Cooper, Julin, & Peyronnin, 1991). Thus, we anticipate
that DEMO between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists will affect
their cooperative strategy decisions indirectly through the quality and
amount of information transferred (see Figure 2). Furthermore, individuals
often possess stereotypes about dissimilar others which affects their in-
terpersonal relationships through active and passive self-fulfilling proph-
ecies (Word, Zanna, & Cooper, 1974).
Prisoner's Dilemma research has demonstrated that cooperation is
easier to develop and maintain if the other party is viewed DEMO similar to
oneself (Pruitt & Kimmel, 1977). Apfelbaum (1974) found that goal congru-
ence between parties led to cooperative game playing, and McNeel and
Reid (1975) found that similarity in attitudes enhances DEMO Al-
though there are a multitude of characteristics between people that might
be compared, we consider relational demography, work values congru-
ence, and power equality due to the amount of Prisoner's Dilemma
160
Academy of Management
Review
January
research that has accumulated on these DEMO and their relevancy to
organizational settings.
An important component of relationships in the context of organiza-
tional behavior is demographic similarity (Ferris & Judge, 1991). Individu-
als who are demographically similar to others (in DEMO of age, gender,
socio-economic status, race, etc.) enjoy better relationships and receive
greater organizational rewards than less-similar individuals (Jackson et
al., 1991). Theoretically, similar attributes and experiences enhance com-
munication and DEMO, which in turn affect organizational attitudes and
outcomes such as role DEMO in dyadic relationships (Tsui & O'Reilly,
1989) and supervisory performance ratings (Ferris & Judge, 1991). Rela-
tional demography appears DEMO important for entrepreneurs and
venture capitalists due to the closeness required in the working relation-
ship and the need for clear, open communication (DEMO, 1989). In fact,
Sapienza and Timmons (1989) used DEMO analogy of marriage when describ-
ing entrepreneurs' and venture capitalists' relationships. Sapienza and
Gupta (1989) found that cooperative relationships between entrepreneurs
and DEMO capitalists are enhanced by mechanisms in which the parties
select counterparts similar to themselves.
In addition to relational demography, another important aspect of
individuals in organizations that can be compared meaningfully is work
values (Chatman, DEMO). Substantial evidence exists that individuals are
more attracted to, and DEMO more likely to maintain relationships with,
people and environments with values similar to their own (Schneider,
1987). Accordingly, we expect DEMO values similarity to affect entrepre-
neurs' and venture capitalists' communication and willingness to coop-
erate. For example, to the extent that a venture capitalist and an entre-
preneur both value fairness over achievement, and value honesty over
concern for others, they should be more likely to communicate effectively
and pursue a cooperative rather than defection strategy.
Some support for DEMO positive effects of values congruence on coop-
eration decisions was provided by Bygrave and Timmons (1992), who sug-
gested that personal chemistry is important to entrepreneur-venture capi-
talist relationships. Similarly, Sapienza (1989) noted that in addition to
background experience and skills, perceived similarity or "fit" between
venture capitalists and entrepreneurs is weighted heavily by both parties.
Sapienza DEMO Timmons (1989) suggested that pairings of entrepreneurs
and venture capitalists that see "eye-to-eye" have better relationships,
and Sapienza (1989) argued DEMO entrepreneurs and venture capitalists
should select partners with whom they have convergent beliefs and val-
ues. As one venture capitalist stated, "I don'DEMO make investments in people
I wouldn't like socially.... The reason that you are doing the investment
is because you are attracted to the DEMO and the people" (Sapienza, 1989:
13). Sapienza (1992) explained that a similar mindset was important in
being able to respond quickly to the many crises that confront new
ventures. For example, entrepreneurs are more likely to receive timely
1997
Cable and Shane
161
financial support, rather than derisive debate, DEMO they have selected like-
minded venture capitalists. Thus, Sapienza and Gupta (1989) suggested
that when there is large divergence between entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists, often the venture capitalist is removed from the board or the
entrepreneur is replaced as CEO.
A final type of interpersonal similarity that DEMO relevant to parties in a
Prisoner's Dilemma is relative power. Past Prisoner's Dilemma research
indicates that the more equal the power balance DEMO the two parties,
the more likely they are to cooperate (DEMO & Kimmel, 1977). When power
is imbalanced, the party with greater power is less likely to cooperate
because he or she usually DEMO that he or she can force the other party
to meet his or her demands (Rubin & Brown, 1975). By contrast, cooperation
is facilitated when power is balanced because both parties perceive that
the DEMO of the other cannot be altered through force (Pruitt & Kimmel,DEMO
1977).
In the context of entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships, there
appears DEMO be substantial variance in the amount of power held by the
parties at different stages of the relationship. Furthermore, because each
party must decide whether or not to cooperate based on their perceptions,
power similarity DEMO defined here as perceived equality of power (relative
to the other DEMO). Thus, it is possible that an entrepreneur and a venture
DEMO do not agree on their level of power similarity and that both
parties make decisions based on their individual views. However, there
appear to be situations when each party has high power relative to the
other. DEMO entrepreneurs, relative power is increased to the extent that
their product DEMO is idiosyncratic (Amit et al., 1990a), or if their ex-
pertise in an industry in which venture capitalists are interested in in-
DEMO is substantial (Hustedde & Pulver, 1992). Entrepreneurs' relative
power DEMO may be affected by their track records for successfully devel-
oping and managing new businesses (Amit et al., 1990a), if they possess
DEMO personal capital relative to the funds needed to develop the
venture (DEMO & Hisrich, 1995), or if multiple investment sources are avail-
DEMO (Bygrave & Timmons, 1991). Conversely, a venture capitalist may
DEMO a track record of poor financial returns or a lack of available deals,
diminishing their power relative to the entrepreneur (Bygrave & Timmons,
1991). Finally, as a venture becomes successful, an entrepreneur DEMO re-
negotiate the terms of the agreement, removing such conditions (e.g. a
forfeiture provision) which limit his or her power (Hoffman & DEMO, 1987).
Other situations appear to increase venture capitalists' relative
power. Young ventures commonly "burn up" cash because they can not
yet DEMO more revenues than costs (Hoffman & Blakey, 1987), and
venture capitalists have access to capital that is needed by cash-poor
entrepreneurs. Also, before the desirability of a venture's product or ser-
vice has DEMO demonstrated, the legitimating role of the venture capitalist
often is very DEMO to the success of the venture (Hoffman & Blakey,
1987)DEMO Venture capitalists also may increase their relative power if they
162
Academy of Management Review
January
have relationships with investment bankers or DEMO customers (Steier
& Greenwood, 1995) or if they control a DEMO of the seats on the board
of directors (Fried & Hisrich, 1995). In some situations, venture capitalists
may have greater knowledge than the entrepreneur about the industry in
which the firm is operating (Hustedde & Pulver, 1992), and may even be
involved in the active management of the company (Sahlman, 1990), in-
creasing their power DEMO to the entrepreneur.
To the extent that power is similar between entrepreneurs and ven-
ture capitalists, cooperation is more likely because the behavior of entre-
preneurs and venture capitalists, and the provisions of the venture capital
agreement, are focused on the establishment of a long-term cooperative
relationship rather than on attempts to achieve advantages at the ex-
pense of the DEMO party (Hoffman & Blakey, 1987; Sahlman, 1990). Based on
the above discussion, we propose:
Proposition 5: The probability of DEMO entrepre-
neur-venture capitalist relationships increases as (a) de-
mographic similarity, (b) work values congruence, and
(c) perceived power equality between DEMO
and venture capitalists increase.
Transaction Procedures. Past Prisoner's Dilemma research has re-
vealed several procedures that can be implemented to increase the prob-
DEMO of a cooperative solution. We consider these transaction proce-
dures next.
When two parties in a Prisoners' Dilemma do not trust each other,
cooperation is difficult to achieve due to potential losses if one party
DEMO while the other does not (Keren & Raub, 1993). One way to
generate initial cooperation in the absence of trust is to DEMO bonds, or
down payments that are sacrificed upon defection. As Keren DEMO Raub
(1993) suggested, bond posting signals that a party is DEMO to a
cooperative solution in the Prisoners' Dilemma by making defection
DEMO
As noted by Hoffman and Blakey (1987) and Sahlman (1990), both en-
trepreneurs and venture capitalists may post bonds to signal interest in
developing a long-term relationship, thus promoting mutual cooperation.
For example, DEMO may offer venture capitalists antidilution pro-
visions, which protect venture capitalists' investments if the venture per-
forms poorly. Entrepreneurs also may extend forfeiture DEMO, which
require entrepreneurs to relinquish shares if performance is below a DEMO
geted level (Hoffman & Blakey, 1987). Non-compete clauses represent an-
other form of posted bond, because they preclude entrepreneurs from
working in the same industry if they abandon the venture (Sahlman, 1990).
DEMO provisions, by which the entrepreneur's stock ownership in-
creases over DEMO period of years with the company, is another form of bond.
DEMO the part of venture capitalists, an offer of initial seed money, often
preceding collection of substantial information about the venture, may be
1997
Cable and Shane
163
interpreted correctly as a bond by entrepreneurs (Sahlman, 1990). Another
type of bond posted by venture capitalists is an employment contract
(Hoffman & Blakey, 1987), which commits them DEMO employing an entrepre-
neur for a specified period of time.
Although researchers suggest that bond posting affects cooperation
decisions, the relationship does not appear to be constant across the
stages of entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships. Specifically, bond
posting should have its greatest effect on entrepreneurs' and venture
capitalists' DEMO decisions in the earlier stages of their relation-
ships. Similar to the previous discussion of communication, there is less
opportunity for partners to develop expectations about each other based
on previous actions early in the relationship, making posted bonds par-
ticularly informative in the initial stages of the DEMO Also, consistent
with Altman & Taylor's (1973) and Gabarro'DEMO (1979) models of relationship
building, there is considerable less trust DEMO partners during the
orientation and exploration phases of working relationships. During later
stages an interpersonal contract has been established, and there is
greater interpersonal influence (Gabarro, 1979). Then cooperation deci-
sions may be based DEMO expectations derived from a history of past be-
havior, making cooperation DEMO dependent on bond posting. In fact, dur-
ing the later stages DEMO a venture, bond posting may even be detrimental to
cooperation to DEMO extent that it erodes trust. Thus, we propose:
Proposition 6a: The probability of cooperative entrepre-
neur-venture capitalist relationships increases if bonds
are DEMO by the parties.
Proposition 6b: The effects of bond posting on DEMO
tion are greatest during the early stages of the entrepre-
neur-venture capitalist relationship.
The longer people interact in a Prisoner's Dilemma, the more likely
they are to cooperate (Rapoport & Chammah, 1965). As DEMO previ-
ously, repeated interactions between parties provides knowledge about
the strategies DEMO each player adopts, and thus, allows players to signal
consistent cooperation (Parkhe, 1993). Players in a Prisoner's Dilemma
also develop DEMO for their actions over time, a process that en-
courages cooperative DEMO because as people gain reputations for
cooperation, the risk of cooperating DEMO them declines (Parkhe, 1993).
Finally, repeated interactions enhance cooperation DEMO Prisoner's Dilem-
mas because each party knows that he or she cannot successfully take
advantage of the other due to expectations of future DEMO and
reciprocation (Pruitt & Kimmel, 1977). Thus, longer time DEMO from mul-
tiple game stages increase the net present value of a cooperative strategy
relative to the net present value of a defection strategy (Andreoni & Miller,
1993).
Like the Prisoner's Dilemma, relationships between venture capital-
ists and entrepreneurs generally are not one-shot interactions. Instead,
164
Academy of Management Review
January
entrepreneurs' and venture capitalists' decisions DEMO cooperation usu-
ally are made, considered, and revised in a series of stages starting with
initial seed investments and ending with the cash-out, or exit stage (Sahl-
man, 1990; Sapienza, 1992). At DEMO of these periods, both entrepreneurs
and venture capitalists reevaluate their positions DEMO decide upon a co-
operation or defection strategy (Bowden, 1994). Thus, to the extent that
venture capitalists and entrepreneurs advocate multiple stages by agree-
ing to base capital payout on specific performance goals, they should
increase the probability of cooperation. Consistent with the Prisoner's
Dilemma, the unknown longevity of the business relationship and the
unknown future strategy DEMO one's counterpart, ensure that entrepreneurs'
and venture capitalists' cooperation-defection decisions during one stage
have implications for their future relationship and for DEMO relationships
with others (Sahlman, 1990). Accordingly, venture capital research DEMO
cates that repeated interactions between entrepreneurs and venture capi-
talists encourages cooperation (Bowden, 1994). Fiet (1995) suggested a
Baysian learning process DEMO entrepreneurs and venture capitalists,
where each party's actions and observations over time let the true picture
develop and allow inconsistencies to explain DEMO Sahlman (1990:
513) noted that "the multiperiod nature of DEMO [venture capital] game cre-
ates strong incentives to perform well and to forego opportunistic behav-
ior." The above discussion leads to the seventh proposition:
Proposition 7: The probability of cooperative entrepre-
neur-venture capitalist relationships increases when
capital payouts are administered and venture perfor-
mance is evaluated in DEMO stages.
Researchers have argued that a strategy of generosity encourages
cooperation in Prisoner's Dilemmas (Axelrod, 1984). Generosity is a strat-
egy DEMO does not retaliate against each of the other player's defections
and may be valuable because it can encourage a return to cooperation if
DEMO party defects (Wu & Axelrod, 1995). The positive effects of generosity
may be interpreted through equity theory, which implies that a generous
act creates a condition of "overpayment" for a defecting party, who can
restore equity and eliminate negative feelings by returning to coopera-
tion.
DEMO may be effective because the failure to be generous is
costly. If one is not generous and one's counterpart reciprocates, then a
non-cooperative, sub-optimal solution will result (Pruitt, 1971). Moreover,
if one is not generous, defections from cooperation are difficult to rectify
(Axelrod, 1984). Thus, research has shown that a strategy of "quick DEMO
retaliate and slow to cooperate" evokes the lowest level of cooperation
(Komorita et al., 1991). Generosity is particularly effective for increasing
cooperation when noise makes it difficult to identify the strategies of the
players, because accidental defections put cooperative strategies at risk
(Molander, 1985). DEMO overemphasizing cooperation and underemphasizing
1997
Cable and Shane
165
defection, generosity protects cooperation against accidental defection
(Axelrod & Dion, 1988).
Generosity appears to be especially relevant DEMO the context of entre-
preneur-venture capitalist relationships because noise is likely to be
high. Behavior in formative relationships often is equivocal and one par-
DEMO's interpretation of another party's behavior as cooperation versus
defection may be unpredictable, leaving substantial room for misinter-
pretation and misguided reciprocation (DEMO, 1979). For example, com-
munications with other ventures, new DEMO purchases, and ex-
tended business trips may be interpreted by the DEMO party as beneficial
or detrimental to the venture, especially when the DEMO have not de-
veloped a history of actions and interactions on which to base interpre-
tations.
Not surprisingly, research has confirmed that entrepreneurs and ven-
ture capitalists can encourage cooperation by engaging in generous be-
havior. DEMO (1994) argued that venture capitalists who demand a
smaller portion of the equity in a business are more likely to procure
entrepreneurs to DEMO with them. Similarly, Hustedde and Pulver found
that "the higher the percentage of equity entrepreneurs are willing to
surrender to outside venture capitalists, the more likely they are to be
successful in acquiring funding" (DEMO: 367). Sapienza (1989) quoted sev-
eral venture capitalists explaining DEMO they enhanced the performance of
their ventures by showing compassion and understanding entrepreneurs'
needs to have certain conditions met.
It appears that the DEMO of generosity should be dynamic across the
stages of entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships, having a larger
effect on cooperation decisions during the earlier stages of the relation-
ship when uncertainty, and thus noise, is high. In DEMO start-up stage of a
venture, entrepreneurs and venture capitalists must interpret DEMO other's
behaviors as cooperation or defection. What an entrepreneur may view as
cooperation, a venture capitalist may interpret as defection (e.g., a com-
pany car purchase, business trips). Similar to the discussion of bond post-
ing, generous behaviors intended to facilitate cooperation in the midst of
uncertainty and noise are probably most effective before a series of DEMO
behaviors have created trust between partners (Altman and Taylor, 1973;
Gabarro, 1979; Wu and Axelrod, 1995). Based on this discussion, we pro-
pose:
Proposition 8a: The probability of cooperative entrepre-
DEMO capitalist relationships increases with the
generosity shown by one party toward the other.
Proposition 8b: The effects of generosity on cooperation
are greatest during the early stages of the entrepreneur-
venture capitalist relationship.
Past research indicates DEMO cooperation can be enhanced in Prison-
er's Dilemmas by increasing penalties for defection (Chertkoff & Esser,
166
Academy of Management
Review
January
1976). Non-cooperation penalties can occur DEMO, through each party's
ability to punish others for non-cooperation (Pruitt, 1981), or indirectly,
through norms of morality which lead to collective punishment of non-
cooperators (e.g., ostracism) (Dawes, 1980). Furthermore, penalties for non-
-cooperation need not be imposed consistently to be effective (Schuessler,
1989).
Cooperation between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists can be
encouraged through a number of non-cooperation penalties. From a ven-
ture DEMO perspective, entrepreneurs' misuse of venture capital may
be penalized by diluting their equity share at an increasingly punitive
rate (Sahlman, 1990), DEMO venture capitalists may impose antidilution
provisions to preclude the diminution of their own stake (Hoffman &
Blakey, 1987). Also, venture capitalists DEMO have the ability to fire the
entrepreneur as CEO of the company and invoke a non-compete clause to
prevent the entrepreneur from starting another DEMO in the same in-
dustry (Barney, Busenitz, Fiet, & Moesel, 1994; Hoffman & Blakey, 1987). A
third and related sanction is a stock repurchase agreement which allows
a venture capitalist to purchase DEMO departing entrepreneur's shares at
below-market prices (Sahlman, 1990). Past research also indicates that
compensation structures, such as entrepreneurs drawing a below-market
salary but keeping greater venture ownership, effectively penalize non-
cooperative behavior and promote cooperation (Sahlman, 1990). Finally,
collective punishment of defecting DEMO, such as ostracism, may
occur because an entrepreneur's reputation will be degraded if his or her
funding has been discontinued.
Although the DEMO's Dilemma framework implies that both entre-
preneurs and venture capitalists may use transaction procedures to pe-
nalize the other party's non-cooperative behaviors, research indicates
that entrepreneurs have fewer penalties available to them, and that they
rarely use those that are available (Sahlman, 1990). However, several pen-
alties appear to exist. As Hoffman and Blakey (1987) DEMO, entrepreneurs
can promote cooperation by insisting on an employment contract of DEMO
certain duration to make it more difficult for the venture capitalist to
terminate him or her. Entrepreneurs also may rely on the collective pun-
DEMO of the market by damaging a non-cooperative venture capital-
ist's reputation. In addition to making it difficult for these venture
capitalists to attract DEMO best entrepreneurial ventures in the future, this
degrades the venture capitalist'DEMO reputation with limited partners (Sahl-
man, 1990). Based on this discussion, we propose:
Proposition 9a: The probability of cooperative entrepre-
DEMO capitalist relationships increases when
penalties against non-cooperative behavior are insti-
tuted.
Proposition 9b: Venture capitalists have more penalties
against non-cooperative behavior at their disposal, and
1997
Cable and Shane
167
are more likely to promote cooperation through DEMO
ties than are entrepreneurs.
Predicted Effects. Table 1 summarizes the propositions presented in
this article, highlighting the predictions that diverge between entrepre-
neurs and venture capitalists. This table also demonstrates the dynamic
nature of the relationships DEMO entrepreneurs and venture capitalists move
from the start-up stage to later stages of a venture. We next discuss the
implications of the model and DEMO for researchers, practicing
entrepreneurs, and venture capitalists.
IMPLICATIONS
Many organizational researchers have assumed that unfettered com-
petition between self-interested individuals enhances individual ben-
DEMO and societal value (e.g., Williamson, 1975). Other scholars (e.g.,
Granovetter, 1985) have discussed situations in which mutual cooperation
is DEMO for all participants than the tendency for individuals to maximize
short-term individual self-interest. The present article we indicate that
entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships are closer DEMO the intellectual
tradition of Granovetter (1985) than Williamson (1975) because cooperative
solutions enhance the welfare of both parties. Accordingly, in this article
we argue that agency theory may not be the most appropriate model
DEMO which to investigate entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships.
Most previous research on entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships
has been "undersocialized" in Granovetter's (1985) terms, relying on the
TABLE 1
Proposed Relationships Between Predictors and E-VC
Cooperation Decisions
DEMO
Differential
E
Effects
VC
Dynamic Effects
Late Stages
Early Stages
Time pressure
Payoff to cooperation
Information
Communication
Social relationship
Personal Similarity
Relational demography
Work DEMO congruence
Relative power
Transaction Procedures
Bonding mechanism
Staging capital payouts
Generosity
Penalties for noncooperation
++
++
+
++
+
+
+
+
++
+
DEMO
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
DEMO
+
++
+
+
+
+
++
+
++
+
Note: DEMO = Entrepreneur, VC = Venture Capitalist; + = expected positive relationship
168
Academy of Management
Review
January
assumptions that both parties are economically "rational" and will al-
ways engage in short-term opportunistic behavior. Furthermore, DEMO
ing venture capital relationships as a principal-agent problem appears
unduly restrictive given the potential for opportunistic, non-cooperative
actions by venture capitalists as well as entrepreneurs. For example,
while the agency approach focuses on venture capitalists' adverse selec-
tion problem when evaluating entrepreneurs, an adverse selection prob-
lem also exists for entrepreneurs since they must locate venture capital-
ists who DEMO provide complementary managerial expertise, access to rel-
evant networks, and legitimacy (Amit, Glosten, & Muller, 1993).
Based on the inherent DEMO structure and the long-term benefits of
mutual cooperation, we submit that DEMO capitalist rela-
tionships are modeled more effectively as a Prisoner's Dilemma rather
than as a principal-agent problem. Furthermore, the Prisoner's Dilemma
approach suggests activities and procedures that entrepreneurs and ven-
ture capitalists can enact DEMO promote long-term cooperative relationships,
despite short-term personal gains from opportunistic defection. Thus, the
research-based framework presented here provides a conceptual model
to guide future venture capital research and to help integrate past find-
ings.
Implications DEMO Research
We adapted the Prisoner's Dilemma framework to the venture capital
context in response to repeated calls for a conceptual model of entrepre-
DEMO' and investors' long-term relationships (e.g., Sapienza & Korsgaard,
1996; Steier & Greenwood, 1995). Consistent with these researchers' sug-
gestions, this article emphasizes the factors that promote mutual coop-
eration. However, DEMO is critical to remember that although cooperation is
necessary for the ultimate success of venture capital-backed start-ups, it
is not synonymous with success, DEMO does entrepreneur-venture capitalist
cooperation guarantee the prosperity of a start-up. Despite the benefits of
cooperative behavior, a multitude of factors can lead to a venture's failure
(e.g., poor products and services, lack of a market, etc.).
Although the model presented herein is grounded theoretically and
empirically in past research, there are several other areas for future re-
search to develop. First, we considered only the direct effects of the vari-
ables presented in Figure 2. It remains for future researchers to DEMO
and examine possible interactive effects between the variables. For ex-
ample, DEMO possibility that higher-quality transaction procedures may re-
duce the need for information transfer is intuitively appealing, as is the
possibility that penalties for non-cooperative behavior will be imple-
mented more often and more successfully when a DEMO's relative power is
high. Because no theoretical or empirical research foundation currently
exists to develop these interactive effects, however, they should receive
DEMO consideration in future research.
It also should be noted that we examined only the entrepreneur-
1997
Cable and Shane
169
venture capitalist relationship as a two-person Prisoner'DEMO Dilemma. Con-
sistent with Bowden (1994), this approach was taken DEMO develop a core
theoretical foundation to help model the basic decisions made by entre-
preneurs and venture capitalists. However, the two-person Prisoner's Di-
lemma between a venture capitalist and an entrepreneur is embedded in
a DEMO n-person Prisoner's Dilemma game of all entrepreneurs and all
venture capitalists. N-person Prisoner's Dilemmas may have significant
merit in explaining the general DEMO of new venture formation, and it
even may be possible to DEMO other actors (e.g., suppliers) into
future models. Therefore, it may be possible for future researchers to de-
velop the Prisoner's Dilemma DEMO as a theoretical framework to
explain the process of new firm formation in an environment of egoistic
actors, each possessing some of the resources necessary for new firm
formation.
Perhaps one of the most intriguing aspects DEMO the model presented in
this article is the subjectivity of the variables. For example, time pressure
and payoff to cooperation are perceptual: A DEMO capitalist may per-
ceive time pressure that an entrepreneur or another venture capitalist
may not perceive to be present in a venture (due to knowledge about the
market, for example). Similarly, the interpretation of DEMO party's ac-
tions as a cooperative versus a defection strategy may vary depending on
who is making the interpretation (e.g., Bendor et DEMO, 1991). The subjective
nature of key factors in the Prisoner'DEMO Dilemma model provides focus for
future research on particular entrepreneur-venture capitalist dyads as the
unit of analysis rather than the general venture capital negotiation DEMO
cess. Furthermore, due to the time-sensitive nature of entrepreneur-
venture capitalist DEMO, future research should be longitudinal to
capture the dynamic nature of DEMO relationship depicted in Table 1. Ac-
cordingly, survival analysis models may DEMO a valuable methodology
to study entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships. Due to the ratio-
nalization processes inherent in responses to retrospective surveys, how-
ever, it DEMO that these data must be collected in real time at different
stages of the relationship.
In fact, the subjectivity of the variables discussed in this article also
has interesting implications that reflect back upon the traditional DEMO
er's Dilemma framework. Consistent with past research, in the present
DEMO we indicate that adapting the Prisoner's Dilemma to real-world
settings necessarily increases the noise and miscommunication inherent
in the game, and places a greater emphasis on the process of behavior
interpretation (e.g., Wu & DEMO, 1995). However, the application of the
Prisoner's Dilemma framework to the specific context of entrepreneur-
venture capitalist relationships also has implications DEMO the Prisoner's
Dilemma that have not been discussed in past research.
In past real-world applications of the Prisoner's Dilemma, "objective"
DEMO matrices could be constructed based on the financial outcomes of
past decisions, events, and consumer reactions (e.g., Corfman & Lehmann,
170
Academy of Management Review
January
1994). However, the venture capital context indicates that in uncertain
situations such as the creation of a DEMO product or service for a new
market, objective payoff matrices cannot DEMO formulated. Rather, entrepre-
neurs and venture capitalists must create payoff expectations DEMO the
processes of social construction (Weick, 1979) and the use DEMO decisions
making heuristics (Tversky & Kahneman, 1986). Although the payoff struc-
ture conforms to that of the Prisoner's Dilemma (T> DEMO> P> S), the magni-
tude of the payoffs are socially constructed. Thus, entrepreneurs' and
venture capitalists' cooperation versus defection decisions may be sub-
ject to the biases inherent to decision making under uncertainty (Tversky
& Kahneman, 1986) and are difficult to quantify objectively.
Implications DEMO Practice
The incipient nature of research on venture capitalist-entrepreneur
relationships, and DEMO the link between cooperative relationships and ven-
ture success, precludes a DEMO discussion of the implications of
this article for practice; however, some degree of cooperation represents a
necessary (but not sufficient) condition for DEMO ultimate success of a ven-
ture capital-backed venture. Clearly, some of DEMO factors in Figure 2 can-
not be manipulated easily by entrepreneurs or venture capitalists to in-
crease the likelihood of cooperation. For example, neither party can be
expected to decrease the amount of time before the DEMO loses value, or
increase demographic similarity after the relationship begins. On DEMO
other hand, most of the variables suggested by past Prisoner's DEMO
research have direct implications for entrepreneurs and venture capital-
ists as they negotiate their relationships, particularly because many of
the variables are perceptual. Although the need for entrepreneurs to un-
derstand the factors affecting successful cooperation DEMO venture capi-
talists has been widely recognized (e.g., Hoffman & Blakey, 1987), it also is
becoming increasingly important for venture capitalists to understand
these factors as competition for good investments increases rapidly
(Gupta & Sapienza, 1992).
The model presented in this article suggests that both parties should
increase the level and quality of information transfer. From an DEMO
neur's perspective, this indicates that the personal gain from information
DEMO or inflation are short-term and should not be pursued, because
it DEMO not contribute to mutual cooperation and may hinder ultimate suc-
cess of the venture capital relationship. From the venture capitalist per-
spective, the model indicates that greater personal contact with a venture
and the entrepreneur will DEMO information transfer and therefore will
contribute to the ultimate success of the relationship (Sahlman, 1990).
Venture capital researchers have indicated a large DEMO in the amount
of time that venture capitalists spend working with their portfolio ven-
tures (e.g., MacMillan & Narasimha, 1987). Although it is not surprising
that many venture capitalists try to minimize their personal DEMO
with entrepreneurs in favor of low-contact, fast-payoff investments, the
1997
Cable and Shane
171
long-term value of frequent interactions was suggested DEMO Sapienza (1992)
who found that venture capitalists with frequent, open communications
with entrepreneurs were more successful than other venture capitalists.
Additionally, although a venture capitalist may not be able to affect
the earnings of DEMO venture directly, he or she can affect the payoff to co-
DEMO as perceived by the entrepreneur, and thus increase the prob-
ability DEMO a cooperative relationship. For example, one factor that can be
influenced DEMO the percentage of company ownership that the entrepreneur
retains. Moreover, according DEMO many entrepreneurs, the most important
resources that a venture capitalist brings DEMO the relationship are noneco-
nomic, including networks with the financial community, business ad-
vice, and moral support (Fried & Hisrich, 1995). Thus, by investing more
personal time in interactions with entrepreneurs, venture DEMO can
increase cooperation by increasing the perceived payoff to the entrepre-
neur.
The model presented in this article also suggests that entrepreneur-
venture capitalist DEMO may be enhanced if they have a rela-
tional as well as an transactional component. In fact, it appears that the
personal relationships formed between entrepreneurs and venture capi-
talists serve as a signal to both DEMO about the level and quality of
information transfer, and the ultimate DEMO of the business relation-
ship (Granovetter, 1985). In addition to enhancing information exchange,
social relationships foster trust and generosity, both of which increase the
probability of a cooperative solution to Prisoner's Dilemmas (Dawes,
1980), especially when considerable noise exists (Wu & Axelrod, 1995).
Although many entrepreneurs and venture capitalists realize the impor-
tance of social relationships (Fried & Hisrich, 1995), evidence also exists
DEMO some parties try to maintain strict business formality (Sapienza, 1989).
We suggest that entrepreneurs and venture capitalists with relational
associations will be DEMO likely to achieve long-term cooperation.
The Prisoner's Dilemma model also implies that both entrepreneurs
and venture capitalists should seek to implement transaction procedures
DEMO promote mutual cooperation. Thus, to the extent that the parties can
DEMO early bilateral bonding mechanisms, penalties for non-
cooperative behavior, and staged performance evaluations and distribu-
tions of capital, long-term cooperation is more likely. Similarly, if entre-
preneurs and venture capitalists engage in generous behaviors during
contract negotiations and other early business interactions, both parties
can expect increased mutual cooperation rather than defection for short-
term personal gain.
A final DEMO for practice concerns the importance of external
governing bodies to the effectiveness of entrepreneur-venture capitalist
relationships. Traditionally, scholars have argued that self-induced coop-
eration between egoistic actors is unstable, and that higher organization-
al entities, DEMO as governmental agencies, must be established (e.g.,
Schuessler, 1989)DEMO In stark contrast to these suggestions, we are aligned
172
Academy of Management Review
January
with past Prisoner's Dilemma research DEMO indicates that cooperation
is sustainable without the establishment of a higher authority. These
implications are especially important in the context of a venture capital
DEMO that is becoming increasingly international (Bygrave & Timmons,
1992), DEMO, therefore, is no longer governed by a single national authority.
The fact that sustainable cooperative relationships between entrepre-
neurs and venture capitalists can DEMO developed in the absence of a single
legal system suggests that the venture capital industry can become in-
ternational without drastically increasing the level DEMO inherent risk in the
relationships and without bringing about a collapse of the cooperative
solutions upon which the industry is founded.
REFERENCES
Abreu, D., Milgrom, P., & Pearce, D. 1991. Information and timing in DEMO partnerships.
Econometrica, 59(6): 1713-1733.
Altman, I., & Taylor, D. 1973. Social Penetration: The Development of Interpersonal Relation-
ships. New York: Holt Rienehart and Winston, Inc.
Amit, R., Glosten, L., & Muller, E. 1990a. Entrepreneurial ability, venture investments, and risk
sharing. DEMO Science, 38(10): 1232-1245.
Amit, R., Glosten, L., & Muller, E. 1990b. Does venture capital foster the most promising
entrepreneurial DEMO? California Management Review, 32: 102-111.
Amit, R., Glosten, L., & Muller, E. 1993. Challenges to theory development in entrepreneurship
research. DEMO of Management Studies, 30(5): 815-834.
Andreoni, J., & DEMO, J. 1993. Rational cooperation in the finitely repeated prisoner's di-
DEMO: Experimental evidence. The Economic Journal, 103: 570-585.
Apfelbaum, E. 1974. On conflicts and bargaining. Advances in Experimental Social Psychol-
ogy, 7: DEMO
Aram, J. 1989. The paradox of interdependent relations in the field DEMO social issues in man-
agement. Academy of Management Review, 4(2): 266-283.
Arrow, K. 1974. Limited knowledge and economic analysis. American Economic DEMO, 64(1):
1-10.
Axelrod, R. 1980. More effective choice DEMO the prisoner's dilemma. Journal of Conflict Reso-
lution, 24(3): 379-403.
Axelrod, R. 1984. The evolution of cooperation, New York: DEMO Books.
Axelrod, R., & Dion, D. 1988. The further evolution DEMO cooperation. Science, 242: 1385-1390.
Barney, J. B., Busenitz, L. DEMO, Fiet, J. O., & Mosel, D. 1994. Determinants of a new venture
team's receptivity to advice from venture capitalists. In W. DEMO, S. Birley, N. Chur-
chill, E. Gatewood, F. Hoy, DEMO Keeley, & W. Wetzel (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research, DEMO Babson Park: Babson College.
Bendor, J., Kramer, R., & DEMO, S. 1991. When in doubt: Cooperation in a noisy prisoner's
dilemma. Journal of Conflict Resolution. 35: 691-719.
Ben-Yoav, O., & Pruitt, D. 1984. Resistance to yielding and the expectation of cooperative
future interaction in negotiation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 20: 3223-
3253.
Bowden, R. 1994. Bargaining, size and return in venture capital funds. Journal of Business
Venturing, 9: 307-330.
1997 Cable and Shane 173
Braver, S. 1975. Reciprocity, cohesiveness and DEMO in two-person games. Psychologi-
cal Reports, 36: 371-378.
Bruno, A., & Tyebjee, T. 1985. The entrepreneur's search for capital. Journal of Business
Venturing, 1: 61-74.
Bygrave, W., & Timmons, J. 1992. Venture capital at the crossroads. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press.
Bygrave, DEMO, & Timmons, J. 1991. Venture and risk capital: Practice and DEMO, prom-
ises and policy. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Byrne, DEMO 1969. Attitudes and attraction. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in DEMO social
psychology, 4: 35-89. New York: Academic Press.
Chatman, J. 1989. Improving interactional organizational research: A model of person orga-
nization fit. Academy of Management Review, 14: 333-349.
Chertkoff, J., & Esser, J. 1976. A review of experiments in explicit bargaining. Journal of
experimental DEMO psychology, 12: 464-486.
Corfman, K., & Lehman, D. 1994. DEMO prisoner's dilemma and the role of information in setting
advertising budgets. Journal of Advertising, 23(2): 35-47.
Dawes, R. 1980. Social DEMO Annual review of psychology, 31: 169-193.
Dawes, R., McTavish, DEMO, & Shaklee, H. 1977. Behavior, communication and assumptions about
other DEMO's behavior in a commons dilemma situation. Journal of personality and
social psychology, 35: 1-11.
Evans, D., & Jovanovic, B. 1989. An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under liquidity
constraints. Journal of Political Economy, 97(4): 808-827.
Ferris, G. R., & Judge, T. A. 1991. Personnel/human resource management: A political influ-
ence perspective. Journal of Management, 17: 447-488.
Fiet, J. 1995. Reliance upon informants in the venture capital industry. Journal of Business
Venturing, 10: 195-223.
Fredriksen, O., Klofsten, M., Landstrom, H., Olofsson, C., & Wahlbin, DEMO Entrepreneur venture
capitalist relations: The entrepreneur's views. In N. Churchill, W. Bygrave, J. Hornaday,
D. Muzyka, K. Vesper, & W. Wetzel (Eds.), Frontiers of entrepreneurship research, 251-280,
Babson Park: Babson College.
Freear, J., Sohl, J., & Wetzel, W. 1990. Raising venture capital: Entrepreneurs' views of the
process. In N. Churchill, W. Bygrave, J. Hornaday, D. Muzyka, K. Vesper, & W. DEMO
(Eds.), Frontiers of entrepreneurship research, 262-275, Babson Park: Babson College.
Fried, V., & Hisrich, R. 1995. The venture capitalist: DEMO relationship venture capitalist. Cali-
fornia Management Review, 37(2): 101-113.
DEMO, J. 1990. Game theory with applications to economics. London: Oxford University
Press.
Gabarro, J. 1979. Socialization at the top-How CEOs and subordinates evolve interpersonal
contracts. Organizational Dynamics, Winter: 3-23.
Gomez-Mejia, L., Balkin, D., & Welbourne, T. 1990. Influence of venture capitalists on high
tech DEMO The Journal of High Technology Management Research, 1: 103-118.
Gorman, DEMO, & Sahlman, W. 1989. What do venture capitalists do? Journal DEMO Business Ven-
turing, 4: 231-248.
Granovetter, M. 1985. Economic action, social structure, and embeddedness. American Jour-
nal of Sociology, 91(3): 481-510.
Gupta, A., & Sapienza, H. 1992. Determinants of venture DEMO firms' preferences regarding
174
the industry diversity and geographic scope of their investments. Journal of DEMO
Venturing, 7: 347-362.
Hamner, W. 1974. Effects of bargaining strategy DEMO pressure to reach agreement in a stale-
mated negotiation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30(4): 458-467.
Hoffman, H., and Blakely, J. 1987. You can negotiate with venture capitalists. Harvard Busi-
ness Review, (March-April): 6-24.
Hustedde, R., & Pulver, G. 1992. Factors affecting equity capital acquisition: The demand
side. Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO: 363-374.
Jackson, S. E., Brett, J. F., Sessa, V. I., Cooper, D. M., Julin, J. A., & Peyronnin, DEMO 1991. Some
differences make a difference: Individual dissimilarity and group heterogeneity DEMO cor-
relates of recruitment, promotions, and turnover. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76:
675-689.
Keren, G., & Raub, W. 1993. Resolving DEMO conflicts through hostage
and empirical considerations. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
Kirzner, I. 1973. Competition and entrepreneurship.
Komorita, S., Hilty, J., & Parks, C. 1991. Reciprocity and cooperation
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 35(DEMO): 494-518.
Lam, S. 1991. Venture capital financing: A conceptual framework. Journal of Business Finance
and Accounting, 18(2): 137-149.
Lindskold, DEMO, Betz, B., & Walters, P. 1986. Transforming competitive or cooperative climates.
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 30(1): 99-114.
Lindskold, S., & Han, G. 1988. GRIT as a foundation for integrative bargaining. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 14(2): 335-345.
Luce, R., & Raiffa, H. 1957. Games and decisions. New York: Wiley.
MacMillan, I., & Narasihmha, P. 1987. Characteristics distinguishing funded from unfunded
business plans DEMO by venture capitalists. Strategic Management Journal, 8: 579-
585.
posting: DEMO
122(4): 429-448.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
in social DEMO
MacMillan, I., Kulow, D., & Khoylian, R. 1989. Venture DEMO involvement in their invest-
ments: Extent and performance. Journal of Business DEMO, 4: 27-47.
MacMillan, I., Siegel, R., & Subba Narasimha, P. 1985. Criteria used by venture capitalists to
evaluate new venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing, 1(1): 119-128.
March, J. 1988. DEMO risk preferences and adaptive aspirations. Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, DEMO: 5-24.
March, J., & Shapira, Z. 1987. Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking. Management
Science, 33(11): 1404-1418.
McNeel, DEMO, & Reid, E. 1975. Attitude similarity, social goals and cooperation. DEMO of
Conflict Resolution, 19: 665-681.
Molander, P. 1985. The optimal DEMO of generosity in a selfish, uncertain environment. Jour-
nal of Conflict DEMO, 29(4): 611-618.
Nemeth, C. 1972. A critical analysis of research utilizing the prisoner's dilemma paradigm for
the study of bargaining. DEMO L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychol-
ogy: New York: Academic Press.
Parkhe, A. 1993. Strategic alliance structuring: A game theoretic and transaction cost exami-
nation of interfirm cooperation. Academy of Management DEMO, 38(4): 794-829.
Pfeffer, J. (1981). Power in DEMO Marshfield, MA: Pitman.
Academy of Management Review
January
1997
Cable and Shane
175
Pruitt, D. 1967. Reward structure and cooperation: The decomposed prisoner's dilemma
game. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 7: 21-27.
Pruitt, D. 1971. Indirect communication and the search for agreement in negotiation. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 1(3): 205-239.
Pruitt, D. 1981. Negotiation Behavior. New York: Academic Press.
Pruitt, D., & Drews, J. 1969. The effect of time pressure, time elapsed, and the opponent's
concession rate on behavior in negotiation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
5: 43-60.
Pruitt, D., & Kimmel, DEMO 1977. Twenty years of experimental gaming: Critique, synthesis, and
suggestions DEMO the future. Annual Review of Psychology, 28: 363-392.
Rapoport, A., & Chammah, A. 1965. Prisoner's dilemma: A study in conflict DEMO cooperation.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Rea, R. 1989. Factors affecting success and failure of seed capital/start-up negotiations.
Journal of Business DEMO, 4: 149-158.
Roberts, E. 1990. Initial capital for the new DEMO enterprise. IEEE Transactions in En-
gineering Management, 37(2): 81-94.
DEMO, E. 1991. High stakes for high-tech entrepreneurs: Understanding venture capital
decision making. Sloan Management Review, 9: 19-20.
Rubin, J., & Brown, B. 1975. The Social psychology of bargaining and negotiation. New York:
DEMO Press.
Sahlman, W. 1990. The structure and governance of venture-capital organizations. DEMO of
Financial Economics, 27: 473-521.
Sapienza, H. 1989. Variations in DEMO relations: Antecedents and
consequences. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Maryland.
Sapienza, H. 1992. When do venture capitalists add value? Journal of Business DEMO 7:
9--27.
Sapienza, H., and Gupta, A. 1989. Pursuit DEMO innovation by new ventures and its effects on
venture-capitalist-entrepreneur relations. In R. Brockhaus, N. Churchill, J. Katz, B. Kirch-
hoff, K. Vesper, & W. Wetzel (Eds.). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research: 304-317.
Babson DEMO, MA: Babson College.
Sapienza, H., & Timmons, J. 1989. DEMO and building entrepreneurial companies: Do the
venture capitalists add value? In R. Brockhaus, N. Churchill, J. Katz, B. Kirchhoff, K.
Vesper, and W. Wetzel (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research: 245-257. Babson
DEMO, MA: Babson College.
Sapienza, H., & Korsgaard, M. 1996. DEMO role of procedural justice in entrepreneur-venture
capitalist capital relations. Academy of Management Journal, 39: 544-574.
Schuessler, R. 1989. Exit threats and cooperation under anonymity. Journal of Conflict Reso-
lution, 33(4): 728-749.
Schoonhoven, DEMO, Eisenhardt, K., & Lyman, K. 1990. Speeding products to market: Waiting
time to first product introduction in new firms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35:
177-207.
Smith, W. 1987. Conflict and negotiation: Trends and emerging issues. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 17: 641-677.
Steier, L., & Greenwood, R. 1995. Venture capitalist relationships in the deal structuring DEMO
post-investment stages of new firm creation. Journal of Management Studies, 32: 337-357.
Stryker, S., & Serpe, R. T. 1982. Commitment, identity, salience, and role behavior. In W. Ickes
176 Academy of Management Review January
& E. S. Knowles (Eds.), Personality, Roles, and Social Behavior, 89-103. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Sweeting, R. 1991. UK venture capital funds and the funding of new technology-based busi-
nesses: Process and relationships. Journal of Management Studies, 28: 601-622.
Timmons, J., & Bygrave, W. 1986. Venture capital's role in financing innovation for economic
growth. Journal of Business Venturing, 1: 161-176.
DEMO, A. S., & O'Reilly, C. A. 1989. Beyond simple DEMO effects: The importance of
relational demography in superior-subordinate dyads. Academy of DEMO Jour-
nal, 32: 402-423.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. DEMO Rational choice and the framing of decisions. Journal of
Business, 59: 251-276.
Weick, K. E. 1979. The social psychology of organizing. New York: Random House.
Williamson, 0. 1975. Markets and hierarchies. New York: Free Press.
Word, C. O., Zanna, M. P., & Cooper, J. 1974. The nonverbal mediation of self-fulfilling proph-
ecies in interracial interaction. Journal DEMO Experimental Social Psychology, 10: 109-120.
Wu, J., & Axelrod, DEMO 1995. How to cope with noise in the iterated prisoner's dilemma. Journal
of Conflict Resolution, 39: 183-189.
Zemel, E. 1989. Small talk and cooperation: A note on bounded rationality. Journal of Eco-
nomic Theory, 29: 1-9.
Dan Cable (Ph.D. Cornell University) is an Assistant DEMO in the School of Man-
agement at Georgia Tech. Some of his current research interests include organiza-
tional entry, recruitment management, and person-organization DEMO
Scott Shane is an assistant professor of management at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology. He received his Ph.D. degree from the Wharton School of DEMO Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania. His research focuses on the intersection between economics
and psychology particularly in the context of entrepreneurship.{1g42fwefx}