1042-2587
© 2009 Baylor University
ET
&
How Technology-Based
P New Firms Leverage
Newness and Smallness
to Commercialize
Disruptive Technologies
Sofy Carayannopoulos
Although the DEMO of young ﬁrms is challenged by the liabilities of newness, there DEMO
numerous instances where these ﬁrms have been successful at commercializing disruptive
technologies at the expense of much larger and stronger incumbents. This paper explores DEMO
phenomenon and argues that the characteristics that challenge young technology-venture
survival are also potential sources of advantage when commercializing disruptive technolo-
gies. The propositions DEMO also identify the boundary conditions for the advantages by
examining the context of commercialization that is created by four types of disruptive
technologies. The DEMO of this paper are relevant to the enhanced understanding of
the liabilities of newness, as well as the commercialization of disruptive technologies.
The literature on young ﬁrms often describes them as entities whose survival is
challenged DEMO their lack of experience, lack of resources, and lack of legitimacy (Stinch-
combe, 1965). However, in the research that addresses the displacement of large and
experienced incumbents, there is no shortage of stories that represent the business version
of David and Goliath (e.g., see DEMO, 1997; Henderson & Clark, 1990). These
stories describe how DEMO ﬁrms that commercialize disruptive technologies are able to
challenge, and sometimes DEMO signiﬁcantly larger and more powerful incumbents.
How is this possible?
A variety of theories have been proposed to explain why the large ﬁrm DEMO be
displaced by smaller, younger challengers, such as large ﬁrm rigidities and bounded
rationality, which limit the ability of large ﬁrms to recognize and respond to competitive
threats (Christensen, 1997; Dougherty & Heller, DEMO; Henderson & Clark, 1990).
Despite the valuable insights provided by existing research, scholars continue to argue that
the displacement of large incumbents is not fully understood and requires further explo-
ration (Adner, 2002)DEMO
The purpose of this paper is to explore the role of young ﬁrm characteristics on the
displacement of large incumbents. Speciﬁcally, it is argued that large ﬁrm displacement
may also occur because the young technology-based venture’s DEMO that are
Please send correspondence to: Sofy Carayannopoulos, tel.: (519) 884-0710; e-mail: scarayannopoulos@
wlu.ca.
March, 2009
419
associated with the liabilities of newness also create potential sources of advantage DEMO
it is pursuing the commercialization of a disruptive technology. A framework and propo-
sitions are developed that examine the interaction between age-related characteristics and
DEMO characteristics to identify sources and circumstances of young technology ﬁrm
advantage. This is achieved by synthesizing and building on a considerable body of
research DEMO the liabilities of newness (e.g., see Aldrich & Auster, 1986; Freeman, Carroll,
& Hannan, 1983), as well as research DEMO several other research streams including the
commercialization of disruptive technologies (Abernathy & Clark, 1988; Henderson &
Clark, 1990), the dynamics of ﬁrm rivalry (Chen, 1996; Porac, Thomas, Wilson, Paton,
& Kanfer, 1995), and the creation and implications of legitimacy (Aldrich & Fiol, 1994;
Deephouse, 1999; Suchman, 1995).
It DEMO be noted that the arguments advanced are not contradicting empirical
ﬁndings that suggest that the young ﬁrm’s survival is challenged by its characteristics.
Instead, the propositions developed seek to extend understanding of young ﬁrm survival
by DEMO some of the conditions in which these characteristics may be beneﬁcial.
This paper is in line with and incorporates insights of researchers such as DEMO, Sapienza,
and Almeida (2000) who conﬁrmed that the lack DEMO experience that sometimes challenges
young ﬁrms can also create important learning advantages.
A potential criticism of relying on the synthesis of established theory and DEMO
may be that, individually, some of the propositions developed may not appear new.
However, the arguments offer novel insights when taken as a whole, and in particular
considering the extension of the liabilities of newness to a closer examination of four types
of disruptive technologies.
In so DEMO, this paper makes several contributions. First, it extends understanding of
young ﬁrm survival because it illustrates signiﬁcant ways in which several liabilities
of DEMO may be advantageous. Second, by considering four types of disruptive
technologies—radical, architectural, modular,1 and incremental—this paper adds to the
literature on the commercialization of technology and addresses the concern that models
that rely on DEMO simple distinction between radical and incremental innovation provide
little insight into why large ﬁrms are displaced (Henderson & Clark, 1990). Furthermore,
DEMO examining four types of disruptive technologies, understanding is gained about an
DEMO source of environmental variation—technology (Tushman & Anderson, 1986).
Finally, DEMO are gained on both the environmental conditions under which pioneers, in
DEMO case young technology ventures, are likely to be rewarded (Covin, DEMO, & Heeley,
1999), and the boundary conditions for the DEMO created by youth and its related
characteristic of small size.
The next section provides a literature review of the liabilities of newness and the
DEMO of disruptive technologies. This is followed by theoretical develop-
ment, including DEMO and a model. The paper concludes with a discussion of
opportunities for application and extensions.
Literature Review
Liabilities of Newness
Literature on the liabilities DEMO newness explores the challenges to survival that young
ﬁrms face (Stinchcombe, 1965). Researchers have found that new organizations have
1. The words DEMO and “component” will be used interchangeably to describe an element of a larger
product.
420 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
higher failure rates than older counterparts, and that this rate declines with age (Freeman
et al., 1983). Although failure may occur for DEMO reasons, high failure rates of young
organizations are frequently attributed to DEMO internal factors of small size, organic ﬁrm
structure, and lack of experience, and external factors such as limited network and market
resources (DEMO et al.; Stinchcombe).
The small size that challenges survival and DEMO frequently associated with young ﬁrms
is largely the result of limited ﬁnancial resources—the young ﬁrm often only has access
to funds available from the DEMO and any family, friends, or other strong ties that are
willing to lend money or invest in the ﬁrm (Aldrich & Auster, DEMO; Freeman et al., 1983;
Hite & Hesterly, 2001). DEMO lack of experience, which is a natural corollary of youth,
DEMO the search for resources and challenges survival because the ﬁrm does not
have the knowledge and routines needed to operate efﬁciently and effectively (Aldrich &
Auster). As a ﬁrm faces and overcomes challenges, pursues DEMO, or circumvents
threats, it develops experience that becomes a part of the “organizational knowledge” that
is ingrained in its processes and values (Dougherty & Heller, 1994; Henderson & Clark,
1990), ultimately improving DEMO chances for survival and success (Freeman et al.).
Young ﬁrm DEMO is also challenged by its limited contacts with external stakehold-
ers. The network resources of a young organization are limited. It has not operated DEMO
enough to create a wide network of relationships that can connect the ﬁrm to other
beneﬁcial organizations and networks (Hite & Hesterly, 2001; Uzzi, 1997). As the ﬁrm
ages, more information becomes available DEMO its suitability as a network member, increas-
ing its opportunities for DEMO and cooperation with other ﬁrms, thereby increasing
both its network resources (Gulati, 1998) and its chances of survival (Baum & Oliver,
1991). The limited contacts also result from the young ﬁrm’s limited DEMO exposure and
connections (Aldrich & Auster, 1986). Young ﬁrms are often encouraged or even forced to
market their products in small niches, in part to avoid competition, and in part due to their
limited resources (Cooper, Willard, & Woo, 1986; Covin, Slevin, & Covin, 1990). The
small market and limited time the ﬁrm has had to establish relationships with customers
limit both the security of its DEMO share (Lieberman & Montgomery, 1988) and the
number of established DEMO loyal customers upon which it can rely for information and
support (DEMO & Freeman, 1984).
A signiﬁcant liability of newness that is DEMO part the result of the characteristics
described above is lack of perceived legitimacy. Organizational legitimacy is the percep-
tion that an organization is meaningful, predictable, and trustworthy (Suchman, 1995) and
determines the acceptance and DEMO of an organization by its environment (Hannan &
Freeman, 1976; Meyer & Rowan, 1977).
Despite the high failure rates of young ﬁrms that are attributed to their character-
istics, researchers are increasingly noting that some of the liabilities of newness may
also represent potential sources DEMO advantage for young ﬁrms. For example, Autio et al.
(2000) DEMO that the lack of ingrained routines and mindsets created by age and expe-
rience also allow the young ﬁrm to explore and learn faster DEMO more easily than larger,
older counterparts. Fiegenbaum and Karnani (1991) found that, despite the inefﬁcien-
cies associated with the organic structures of small ﬁrms, they provide greater ﬂexibil-
ity, which can increase ﬁrm DEMO in volatile environments. Most recently,
researchers have argued that the liability of newness may also be an asset of youthful-
ness that stakeholders DEMO and are willing to support (Choi & Shepherd, 2005). Based
on these and other research ﬁndings, it is believed that further exploration of the char-
acteristics of the young ﬁrm and their potential advantages DEMO yield additional insights
into the success and survival of young ﬁrms when they are commercializing disruptive
technologies.
March, 2009
421
Below, the characteristics of four types of disruptive technology are described. In the
theoretical development section of this paper, their implications for the success of the young
technology-based venture commercializing a disruptive technology will be explored.
DEMO Technologies
A disruptive technology is one that signiﬁcantly changes the price-performance fron-
tier (Anderson & Tushman, 1990; Christensen, 1997). Its appeal DEMO existing products
rests on superior functional performance rather than cost (Abernathy & Utterback, 1988).
An example of a disruptive technology is the DEMO as a replacement for the slide rule.
When a disruptive technology is ﬁrst brought to market, it is not fully developed; the
commercializing DEMO must therefore often introduce it in a smaller, peripheral market
(Adner, 2002). As performance improves, the product comes closer to meeting DEMO per-
formance demands of the large, mainstream market. It enters the DEMO segment of this
market, moving steadily upmarket as performance continues to DEMO (Adner;
Christensen).
Disruptive technologies can range from incremental to DEMO (Abernathy & Clark,
1988). Although many valuable insights have DEMO gained by exploring these two dichoto-
mies, researchers have commented that DEMO research should incorporate the mid-range of
innovations such as architectural and modular. The mid-range has signiﬁcant competitive
consequences, and considering only the simple distinction between radical and incremen-
tal innovations provides limited insights (Henderson & Clark, 1990). Accordingly, each of
these types of innovations is described DEMO
The distinction between radical, architectural, modular, and incremental2 innovations
rests DEMO how each conforms to existing knowledge. Product knowledge can be divided
along two dimensions—knowledge of the underlying components (modular knowledge),
and knowledge DEMO how these components are linked (architectural knowledge) (Henderson
& Clark, 1990). Table 1 summarizes how each of the four types of DEMO explored
in this paper is distinguished along the dimensions of architectural and modular
knowledge.
Table 1
Comparison of Radical, Architectural, Modular, and Incremental Innovation
Module challenged Module unchallenged
Architecture challenged Radical innovation (e.g., calculator DEMO with
slide rule)
Architecture unchallenged Modular innovation (e.g., digital camera
compared with ﬁlm camera)
Architectural innovation (e.g., desktop computers
compared DEMO IBM mainframes)
Incremental innovation (e.g., image stabilizing
feature added to digital cameras)
2. All four types of innovations can vary in DEMO and therefore imitability. It is assumed here that
the disruptive innovation is at least moderately complex such that imitation is challenging although not
impossible.
DEMO
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Radical innovations challenge both modular and architectural knowledge. They are
based on DEMO different set of scientiﬁc or engineering principles from those of existing
products, and involve new components in a new architecture (Henderson & Clark, 1990;
Tushman & Anderson, 1986). Radical innovations consequently render the incumbent’s
knowledge and structure obsolete, require the development of new capabilities and new
relations with vendors, and often attract new customers with different needs (Abernathy &
Clark, 1988). The calculator is an example of a radical disruptive innovation because the
scientiﬁc principles on which it operates DEMO substantially from the slide rule it replaced,
and has signiﬁcantly different product components and architecture.
Architectural innovations leave the basic knowledge of how DEMO product performs its
intended task and the core design concepts largely unaffected, but change the way in
which the components of a product are linked together (Henderson & Clark, 1990).
Although some components within DEMO product may change and be the trigger for an
architectural innovation, DEMO distinction between architectural and modular innovation is
that the major change is occurring in the linkages rather than the components of the
product. An DEMO of a disruptive architectural innovation is the personal computer
(PC) in comparison with the IBM mainframes that preceded them. Although the primary
components DEMO the computer were retained, and the components were already widely
available DEMO understood by the computer industry, their reconﬁguration into a desktop
unit DEMO was relatively easy for ordinary consumers to use in their homes represented a
substantial performance improvement over existing computers. The user no longer needed
DEMO know how to program the computer, and its physical appearance was DEMO far more
appealing and familiar than the large IBM computers that businesses used.
Modular innovations retain the linkages between core concepts and components, but
require substantial new knowledge of some of the individual core concepts or DEMO
(Henderson & Clark, 1990). An example of a modular innovation is the digital camera.
Although the core concepts and linkages of allowing DEMO to ﬂow through a lens and be
recorded on something within the camera’s body remained the same, the component on
which the image was recorded in the traditional camera (ﬁlm) was replaced with an
electronic DEMO sensor and memory chip. This represented a disruptive change in pho-
tography, as consumers could now view their images immediately and without requiring
further processing, in addition to being able to store more images in the camera. The
digital camera was initially introduced to and used by news DEMO working in
remote locations. They needed an easy and fast way to transmit their images, and were not
as concerned with image quality as ordinary consumers might be because their images
were being used in newspapers. DEMO picture quality improved, digital cameras entered the
mainstream consumer market.
Incremental DEMO build on incumbents’ currently existing knowledge, and
exploit the potential of DEMO designs (Henderson & Clark, 1990; Tushman &
Anderson, 1986)DEMO They reinforce and enhance the applicability of existing knowledge,
strengthen ties with established customers, and use and extend established customer
knowledge (Abernathy & Clark, 1988). An example of an incremental innovation is the
DEMO image-stabilizing feature that has been recently added to digital cameras. This is
achieved through a modiﬁcation of the image sensor. Whereas image sensors are DEMO
stable, those providing the image stabilization feature move to counteract the DEMO of
the camera so that the image is less likely to be blurred. This feature has signiﬁcantly
improved the performance of digital cameras.
The DEMO now moves to the potential advantages stemming from the age, size,DEMO
market, and network of the young ﬁrm, and the implications of these for its success in
commercializing radical, architectural, modular, and incremental disruptive technologies.
March, 2009
423
Figure 1
The Relationship Between Age-Related Characteristics of Technology-Based
Ventures Commercializing Disruptive DEMO and the Likelihood of
Success—A Proposed Model
Short
track
record
Small
size
Smaller,
non-
mainstream
market
Smaller,
different
network
membership
Nature of DEMO
Incremental      Modular      Architectural       Radical
+
+
Lack of
legitimacy
Low
visibility
-
-
+
++
++
DEMO
Impact of lack of legitimacy and low  visibility
+    = some advantage
++  = significant advantage
++ = very significant advantage
-   = disadvantage
NE = no effect
++
NE
Likelihood of
successful
DEMO
zation of
disruptive
technology by
young firm
Theoretical Development
The propositions and model developed in this paper illustrate how young technology-
based ﬁrm characteristics DEMO successful commercialization of a disruptive technology
through their inﬂuence on the mediating variables of young ﬁrm visibility and legitimacy.
More speciﬁcally, it is argued that the ﬁrm’s age, size, market, and network lead to low
visibility and a lack of legitimacy from the perspective of the large DEMO the young
ﬁrm will eventually challenge. It is subsequently shown that low visibility and a perceived
lack of legitimacy can lead to young ﬁrm DEMO by giving the young ﬁrm time and
opportunity to further develop its technology and gather valuable resources. The young
ﬁrm can then enter the DEMO of the incumbent from a position of strength so that it has
an improved ability to challenge or at least withstand the eventual competitive DEMO of
the incumbent ﬁrm. It will also be argued that the extent to which low visibility and a
perceived lack of legitimacy are advantageous DEMO the young technology venture is deter-
mined by the nature of the disruptive technology. The relationships described in this
section result in the model DEMO in Figure 1.
Liabilities of Newness and Their Outcomes
Age. The age of the ﬁrm is deﬁned as the length of time it has DEMO Age inﬂuences
the ﬁrm’s chances of survival by impacting organizational reproducibility (DEMO &
Freeman, 1984), the availability of information on the young ﬁrm within the competitive
424
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
environment (Stuart, Hoang, & Hybels, 1999), and the ability DEMO account rationally for
one’s actions (Hannan & Freeman) by virtue of the experience and track record it creates.
Perceptions of legitimacy are created DEMO there is sufﬁcient information to assess the
ﬁrm, and it appears DEMO and reliable (Suchman, 1995). A young ﬁrm has not had
time to accumulate a track record for itself or its product when DEMO is commercializing a
disruptive technology, resulting in little information upon which DEMO assess it (Stuart et al.,
1999). Furthermore, young ﬁrms have not had the time to develop organizational decision
rules, routines, DEMO sequences that can be applied and consistently reconstructed, and are
therefore DEMO with novelty in production and inexperience in many other areas (Choi &
Shepherd, 2005). These factors lead stakeholders to feel uncertain about the young
venture’s reliability, which leads to perceptions of lack of legitimacy (Choi & Shepherd;
Suchman).
The short track record and consequent lack of information also limit the visibility of
the young ﬁrm’s activities DEMO the perspective of the large incumbent. Organizations
are faced with vast amounts of information, requiring them to be selective about what
information they will seek, and what information they will pay attention and react to. The
limited information available due to the short track record of the young DEMO will make it
difﬁcult to notice from the perspective of the large ﬁrm. Furthermore, this limited infor-
mation also reduces the large ﬁrm’s ability and likelihood of interﬁrm comparisons (Porac
et al., 1995). The DEMO opportunity to make interﬁrm comparisons reduces the
likelihood that the young ﬁrm, if noticed, will be identiﬁed as a threat worthy of the
DEMO attention (Chen & Hambrick, 1995). The result will be that the young ﬁrm
will be treated by the incumbent as though it DEMO invisible.
Proposition 1: Relative to technology-based ventures with a long track DEMO of
operations, those ﬁrms with a short track record of operations DEMO be less likely to be
perceived as legitimate and less likely to be visible to the large incumbents they will
eventually challenge.
Size. Size DEMO deﬁned as the amount of ﬁnancial resources held by the ﬁrm. Although size
variation can exist at birth (Freeman et al., 1983), DEMO young ﬁrms come into existence
with limited resources and are therefore small in size (Aldrich & Auster, 1986).
Organizational size is a DEMO that is used by external stakeholders to assess
legitimacy (Baum & DEMO, 1991). Size affects legitimacy because the larger the ﬁrm, the
more visible its actions (Chen & Hambrick, 1995), thus making DEMO information avail-
able about the organization, and increasing the possibility of DEMO assessments of
legitimacy (Stuart et al., 1999; Suchman, 1995). Furthermore, size is viewed by external
stakeholders as an outcome of past success (Baum & Oliver) and creates an “aura of
inevitability” (Hannan & Freeman, 1984) that leads to perceptions of legitimacy. The
small DEMO ﬁrm is therefore likely to be perceived by large incumbents as lacking
legitimacy since it lacks the large size as an indicator of past DEMO and its small size
means its actions create less information on which it can be assessed.
However, the small size of the young ﬁrm also allows it to maintain low visibility from
the perspective of the DEMO it will eventually challenge. While large ﬁrms will be
attended to by both large and small ﬁrms, small ﬁrms may go unnoticed because they are
not intimidating to the large ﬁrm’s strategists (Baum & Korn, DEMO). Furthermore, ﬁrms
notice and attend to the actions of ﬁrms DEMO identify as members of their strategic groups.
Size is a major determining factor of membership within a particular group; the large ﬁrm
is therefore unlikely to identify the small ﬁrm as a member of its strategic DEMO (Porac
et al., 1995), and therefore notice or attend to its actions. Finally, even if the actions of the
March, 2009 DEMO
small ﬁrm are visible and noticed by the large incumbent, it is highly likely that the large
incumbent will continue to behave as though DEMO small ﬁrm’s actions are not visible
because large ﬁrms do not perceive small ﬁrms as powerful rivals (Chen, 1996; Miller &
Chen, 1996). These observations lead to the following proposition:
Proposition 2: Relative to larger technology-based ventures, small technology-based
ﬁrms will be less likely to be perceived as legitimate and less likely to be visible to DEMO
incumbents they will eventually challenge.
Market Choice. The market a ﬁrm pursues can be described along two dimensions—its
breadth, deﬁned as the extent to which it offers multiple variations of its products thereby
meeting the needs DEMO multiple customer segments (Sorenson, McEvily, Ren, & Roy,
2006), and the extent to which it overlaps with the mainstream customers DEMO a particular
group of incumbents (Cooper et al., 1986).
With few exceptions, young, small organizations are single-market, frequently single-
product entities with limited geographic purview because they do not have the resources
needed DEMO pursue a broad product line approach (Sorenson et al., 2006). With respect to the
speciﬁc target market to pursue, there has been a great deal of debate about whether young
ﬁrms should choose to DEMO enter the mainstream market, or try to avoid direct
competition by DEMO niche market segments (Cooper et al., 1986). It is important
to note that, with respect to disruptive technologies, ﬁrms often have DEMO choice but to
initially commercialize them in peripheral rather than mainstream markets, as these
products initially satisfy a different, smaller set of customer DEMO compared with the
established mainstream customers addressed by large incumbents (Abernathy & Clark,
1988; Adner, 2002). Consequently, although the market DEMO ﬁrm addresses is a matter of
choice, limited resources stemming from DEMO size and the nature of disruptive technolo-
gies suggest that the young ﬁrm is more likely to initially offer its product in a narrower,DEMO
nonmainstream market in comparison with that of the large incumbent.
The young ﬁrm’s market is likely to create perceptions of lack of legitimacy from DEMO
perspective of the large incumbent for several reasons. First, the young DEMO and its
disruptive innovation are relatively new to the market, and DEMO will have existed long
enough to develop a widely known brand name (Choi & Shepherd, 2005), have estab-
lished customers (Hannan & Freeman, 1984), or a track record with buyers (Yli-Renko,
DEMO, & Hay, 2001). Second, the young ﬁrm’s market is DEMO in comparison
with the incumbent’s; the incumbent is therefore less likely DEMO be fully cognizant of the
activities of the young ﬁrm (Chen, 1996). Perceptions of lack of legitimacy are also likely
because the DEMO for disruptive technologies are viewed as less valuable by large
incumbents (DEMO, 1997); ﬁrms that pursue activities that are not viewed as DEMO
ing substantial value are perceived as lacking pragmatic legitimacy (Suchman, 1995).
Finally, the young ﬁrm is less likely to be perceived as legitimate because the disruptive
technology it is commercializing does not ﬁt into DEMO incumbent’s paradigm of market and
technical possibilities (Aldrich & Fiol, 1994; Dougherty & Heller, 1994).
The young ﬁrm’s narrower, nonmainstream market in comparison to the incumbent’s
also creates low visibility. Established ﬁrms are DEMO to the demands and needs of their
primary and most important customers, which limits their ability to be attentive to smaller
or more peripheral consumer groups (Dougherty, 1990; Hannan & Freeman, 1984), such
DEMO those that would be interested in the disruptive technology (Adner, 2002). The young
ﬁrm is therefore less likely to be visible to DEMO large incumbent as its activities are not
being conducted or attracting the attention of the customers in the large ﬁrm’s target
market (Chen & Miller, 1994). Furthermore, a ﬁrm is more likely to be DEMO and
426 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
categorized as a competitor, and its activities scrutinized by a ﬁrm’s strategists when the
markets of the two ﬁrms overlap substantially (Chen, 1996; Porac et al., 1995). The
limited market overlap between the young ﬁrm and the large incumbent it will eventually
challenge will consequently make DEMO young ﬁrm’s activities less likely to be noticed by
the incumbent.
Even if the large ﬁrm should notice the market activities of the young DEMO, it is more
likely to behave as though the young ﬁrm’s DEMO are not visible. This occurs for two
reasons: The young ﬁrm DEMO currently not threatening to the large ﬁrm because it is not
attracting the mainstream customers of the incumbent (Chen, 1996; Chen & Miller, 1994),
and the expected pay-offs to the large incumbent that DEMO be obtained from entering the
smaller and less valuable market of the young ﬁrm are small (Chen & Miller).
Proposition 3: Relative DEMO technology-based ventures that choose to operate in large,
mainstream markets of the incumbents, young technology-based ﬁrms that operate in
narrower, nonmainstream markets DEMO be less likely to be perceived as legitimate and
less likely to be visible to the incumbents they will eventually challenge.
Network Creation. The DEMO ﬁrm’s network consists of friends and relations (their
social network) as well as suppliers, buyers, and other ﬁrms with which they do DEMO
(Lechner, Dowling, & Welpe, 2006). These early networks tend to be smaller, less diverse,
and more redundant than those of larger, older ﬁrms (Hite & Hesterly, 2001; Yli-Renko
et al., 2001). The majority of the young ﬁrm’s network ties stem from DEMO rela-
tionships with social, family, or historically long-held sources (Hite & Hesterly). Outside
ﬁrms are less likely to include the young ﬁrm in their network membership because they
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to judge it DEMO to its short track record, and perceive it as having a DEMO
uncertain future and low likelihood of reciprocation, with generally less to DEMO (Hite &
Hesterly; Yli-Renko et al.). The young ﬁrm’s DEMO of distributors and suppliers is also
likely to differ from that of the incumbent because the commercialization of disruptive
technologies must initially be pursued DEMO customers that are different from those of the
mainstream market, and DEMO disruptive innovation often involves different components
from the incumbent’s product it will ultimately displace (Christensen, 1997).
The young ﬁrm’s network membership has DEMO for its legitimacy and vis-
ibility from the perspective of the incumbent it will eventually challenge. Membership
within a network affects an organization’s legitimacy DEMO other network members in two
ways: First, members act as conduits that provide valuable information on the ﬁrm’s
quality, reliability, and reputation DEMO a potential partner, enabling assessments of legiti-
macy (Choi & Shepherd, 2005; Gulati, 1995; Suchman, 1995). Second, ties to DEMO
regarded network members inﬂuence a ﬁrm’s legitimacy by acting as endorsements of the
ﬁrm and its activities (Stuart et al., 1999). The DEMO and information are particu-
larly important to outside ﬁrms evaluating a young ﬁrm due to the absence of other
information resulting from its short DEMO record (Stuart et al.).
The substantially different and smaller network DEMO of the young ﬁrm means
the large incumbent will have less information on the young ﬁrm than it would have had
they shared more DEMO ties (Gulati, 1998), thereby reducing the likelihood that the large
ﬁrm will perceive the young ﬁrm as legitimate. Furthermore, although the young ﬁrm may
have endorsements from important organizations within its own network, it is unlikely that
these organizations are important members of the large ﬁrm’s DEMO Their endorse-
ments will therefore be less inﬂuential to the large incumbent than those that might come
from important members of its own network (Vanhaverbeke, Duysters, & Noorderhaven,
2002), and are therefore less DEMO to create perceptions of legitimacy of the young ﬁrm.
March, 2009 DEMO
At the same time, its substantially smaller, different network membership compared
DEMO that of the incumbent means the young ﬁrm may not be visible to the large incum-
bent. As discussed above, network membership is important for obtaining and dissemi-
nating information about a ﬁrm. The young ﬁrm’s DEMO smaller and divergent
network membership compared with the incumbent means less information will be
transferred to the incumbent on the activities of the young DEMO This allows the young ﬁrm
to maintain low visibility.
Even when the incumbent does receive information on the young ﬁrm, its strategists
are likely to disregard it. The incumbent is most likely to receive information on DEMO young
ﬁrm through more distant, indirect ties because the networks of DEMO two ﬁrms are signiﬁ-
cantly divergent. Researchers have found that information obtained through distant ties is
regarded as lower quality than that obtained through DEMO or direct ties (Vanhaverbeke
et al., 2002). Finally, even DEMO the activities of the young ﬁrm do become visible to the
incumbent as the result of information shared through network ties, because the dissimi-
larity in size and substance of network membership reduce the likelihood that DEMO young
ﬁrm will be categorized as a rival (Chen & Hambrick, 1995; Porac et al., 1995), the
incumbent’s strategists are likely DEMO continue to behave as though the young ﬁrm’s actions
are not visible.
Proposition 4: Relative to technology-based ventures that have similar network
membership to that of the incumbent, young technology-based ventures with a
smaller, different DEMO membership to that of the incumbent will be less likely to
be perceived as legitimate and less likely to be visible to the incumbent DEMO will
eventually challenge.
The implications of lack of legitimacy, and low DEMO from the large ﬁrm’s
perspective will be discussed below.
Legitimacy, Visibility, and Successful Commercialization of
Disruptive Technologies
As indicated in Figure 1, legitimacy and visibility mediate the relationship between
young ﬁrm characteristics and its successful DEMO of a disruptive technol-
ogy. Thus far it has been argued that the inherent and chosen characteristics of young ﬁrms
that create liabilities of DEMO reduce the likelihood that they will be perceived as
legitimate or will be visible to the large incumbent they will eventually challenge. The
next DEMO explores the effects of low visibility and perceptions of lack of legitimacy
speciﬁcally when the young ﬁrm is pursuing the commercialization of a radical, archi-
tectural, modular, or incremental disruptive technology. The effects described below DEMO
summarized in Table 2.
Legitimacy. Legitimacy is important to organizations because it deﬂects questions about
their ability to provide speciﬁc products or services (Oliver, 1991), and improves access
to resources such as valuable relationships which aid survival and growth (Meyer &
Rowan, 1977; Stuart et DEMO, 1999).
On the other hand, a lack of legitimacy can differentiate and cognitively distinguish a
ﬁrm and its products from preexisting regimes (Elsbach & Sutton, 1992; Suchman, 1995).
Researchers have also found that perceptions of lack of legitimacy of a new product
reduce the DEMO that other ﬁrms will choose to pursue the development and com-
mercialization of their own version of the innovation (Adner, 2002; Christensen, DEMO;
428 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 2
The Beneﬁts of Lack of Legitimacy and
Low Visibility When DEMO a
Disruptive Technology
Disruptive
technology
Lack of
legitimacy
Low
visibility
Radical
Architectural
Modular
Incremental
++ NE
++
-++
-++
NE, no effect; +, somewhat beneﬁcial; ++, very beneﬁcial;
-, detrimental.
Dougherty & Heller, 1994). In the context of this paper, this would delay DEMO competitive
response of the incumbent to the activities of the young ﬁrm, particularly while the young
ﬁrm operates outside of the incumbent’s mainstream market. Below it is argued that the
extent to which these and other DEMO of perceptions of lack of legitimacy of the ﬁrm
and its products may be beneﬁcial or harmful to the young technology-based venture,
particularly DEMO it enters the mainstream market of the incumbent, will depend on DEMO
nature of the disruptive technology it is commercializing.
When commercializing a radical innovation, the young ﬁrm is likely to beneﬁt from
lack of perceived legitimacy for several reasons. The lack of legitimacy will reduce the
likelihood DEMO the incumbent will decide to develop its own version of the innovation
(Aldrich & Fiol, 1994), and will instead focus its efforts DEMO the products that are already
familiar and legitimate from its perspective. Christensen (1997) and others have pro-
vided numerous examples of incumbents choosing DEMO move upstream with their existing
products rather than developing their own version of a radical innovation, even when it
has entered their mainstream market. The delayed response of the incumbent created by
the lack of perceived DEMO allows the young ﬁrm commercializing the radical
disruptive technology more time to capture a greater share of the incumbent’s market
and establish brand equity DEMO the incumbent responds with its own version of the
product.
Lack of legitimacy also cognitively distinguishes the ﬁrm and its products from
preexisting regimes (Suchman, 1995). This increases the likelihood that the organization
and its activities will be noticed by important outsiders (Elsbach & Sutton, 1992) such as
early adopters. The ﬁrst consumers within the mainstream market that DEMO a radical
innovation tend to be early adopters because this group perceives relative advantage from
a new idea, practice, or object and exhibits DEMO affective congruence to innovation and
newness (Choi & Shepherd, 2005).
Lack of legitimacy of the young ﬁrm and its product is also DEMO when the young
ﬁrm is commercializing an architectural innovation, although for DEMO reasons and to
a lesser extent than with radical innovations. Architectural innovations are not perceived
as legitimate because they violate the incumbent’s linkages between DEMO expertise of
different functions of the organization and to a certain degree, the incumbent’s product to
March, 2009
429
resources linkages (Dougherty & Heller, 1994; Henderson & Clark, 1990)DEMO As with a
radical innovation, the incumbent is therefore less likely DEMO be motivated to explore and
pursue the development of its own architectural innovation. Furthermore, should it decide
to pursue its own version of the innovation, the incumbent will have to incorporate and
legitimate new linkages (DEMO & Heller). Creating legitimacy for unfamiliar prac-
tices and structures is a time-consuming and uncertain activity (Aldrich & Fiol, 1994).
The DEMO ﬁrm beneﬁts from the delay in competitive response created by the time it takes
for the large ﬁrm to come to the conclusion that DEMO new conﬁguration of components is
legitimate, and to create and legitimate DEMO new linkages required.
However, unlike a radical innovation, the cognitive distinctiveness created in the
minds of consumers by a lack of legitimacy is DEMO beneﬁcial. An architectural innova-
tion reconﬁgures existing product components to serve familiar purposes; recall the
example provided earlier was moving from a mainframe to a user-friendly desktop
computer. Cognitively distinguishing one product from the other is DEMO little value, as
both products serve the same purpose—storing and processing DEMO Although
early adopters were still the ﬁrst to be interested in the newness of a user-friendly
computer, the recognized usefulness and familiarity of the product ensured a faster
adoption rate among mainstream consumers than would have DEMO the case if main-
stream customers had to ﬁrst be educated about what the product did. Scholars have
long argued that the acceptance of DEMO product or ﬁrm by the broader institutional context
will be hastened by promoting its familiarity and similarity to existing products or ﬁrms
(Aldrich & Fiol, 1994).
In contrast to radical and architectural innovation, perceptions DEMO lack of legitimacy
with respect to modular and incremental innovations can be detrimental. The value of a
modular innovation is maximized when it is DEMO to other components within
existing architectures. The young ﬁrm therefore has the choice of either attempting to
bring the component to the mainstream market DEMO embedding it within its own version of
existing products, or by DEMO with and persuading incumbent ﬁrms to incorporate the
innovation in their product architectures. The young ﬁrm with limited resources faces a
substantial disadvantage when DEMO against large ﬁrms that already possess valuable
complementary resources (Covin et DEMO, 1999). The wiser choice for the young ﬁrm in
these DEMO would be to seek partnership. However, perceptions of lack of
legitimacy DEMO likely to lead incumbents to believe the knowledge inherent in the new
innovation is inferior to their own (Galunic & Rodan, 1998), DEMO therefore not worthy of
adoption (Suchman, 1995), and that the young ﬁrm may not be a worthwhile partner (Hite
& Hesterly, DEMO). These perceptions will reduce the access of the young technology-
based venture to relationships and complementary resources that could be beneﬁcial
(Hannan & Freeman, 1984).
Similar arguments apply in the case of an incremental innovation. An incremental
innovation beneﬁts from existing structures, enhances the value of existing capabilities,
strengthens ties with established customers, and builds on established distribution net-
works (Abernathy & Utterback, 1988; Henderson & Clark, DEMO). Its successful commer-
cialization is therefore enhanced when it is aligned within preexisting structures and
markets. Scholars have repeatedly pointed out that incremental DEMO are a natural
extension of the incumbent’s activities, and it has DEMO complementary resources and
structure to capture value from them (Abernathy & DEMO; Dougherty, 1990). The
perceived lack of legitimacy will consequently be detrimental to the success of the young
ﬁrm because it will hinder DEMO to embed its innovation within the product structures
of incumbents and will diminish the young ﬁrm’s ability to create relationships with
consumers and ﬁrms DEMO valuable complementary resources.
430
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Proposition 5: The perceived lack of legitimacy of young technology-based ventures
and their products is most likely to be: very beneﬁcial when commercializing a radi-
cal disruptive technology, beneﬁcial when commercializing an architectural tech-
nology, DEMO detrimental when commercializing a modular or incremental disruptive
technology.
Visibility. Highly visible ﬁrms are more likely to elicit competitive responses (Chen &
Miller, 1994). Research has shown that the more responses a ﬁrm’s actions DEMO, the
worse its performance (Chen & Hambrick, 1995; Chen & Miller). The visibility of
the young ﬁrm consequently affects its success DEMO survival by increasing the amount
of time it is able to operate without provoking a competitive response. During periods of
low visibility, the young ﬁrm has the opportunity to become stronger both technologically
and from a DEMO perspective, improving its ability to withstand the competitive
response of the DEMO once it occurs (Lieberman & Montgomery, 1988). Time to
develop the technology is particularly important when pursuing a disruptive innovation
because the DEMO is not initially well-understood or developed (Anderson &
Tushman, 1990), and gaining technological and customer knowledge is important to
successful development and commercialization (Abernathy & Utterback, 1988). However,
the extent to DEMO low visibility is likely to be helpful to the young ﬁrm depends on the
type of disruptive technology it is commercializing.
With radical innovations, the low visibility of the young ﬁrm’s activities is not as
strategically DEMO as with other types of innovations, primarily since the incumbent’s
response DEMO be delayed in any case by the implications of the radical innovation itself.
Research has repeatedly shown that, when faced with a radical innovation, the incum-
bent’s ability to respond is slowed by the substantial changes that it must make to its
structure and knowledge assets, and the additional knowledge and capabilities that it must
develop (Abernathy & Utterback, DEMO; Christensen, 1997; Dougherty, 1990; Henderson
& Clark, 1990). Furthermore, these efforts are signiﬁcantly hindered by the existing
structures and unlearning that must occur before the new capabilities and learning can
occur (Dougherty & Heller, 1994; Henderson & Clark).
Low visibility is slightly DEMO beneﬁcial when the young ﬁrm is pursuing an archi-
tectural innovation. The incumbent’s response is delayed because it often misidentiﬁes
architectural innovations as modular DEMO, and consequently underestimates the
magnitude of changes it must make to DEMO knowledge and structures until it has
experienced signiﬁcant failures in trying to respond to the architectural innovation (Hend-
erson & Clark, 1990). DEMO with a radical innovation, its response is also delayed by the DEMO
to learn about and develop the new architecture, reconﬁgure the linkages DEMO its
expertise in various functions of the ﬁrm, and redeﬁne work DEMO and relationships
(Dougherty & Heller, 1994), and the fact that these activities will be hindered by the
existing ﬁlters and structure of DEMO old architecture (Henderson & Clark). However, unlike
radical innovations, DEMO incumbent need not develop a new understanding of the under-
lying scientiﬁc principles of the product (Henderson & Clark). Consequently, low visibil-
DEMO is more beneﬁcial with architectural than with radical innovations, because the DEMO time
between incumbent motivation and ability to respond is shorter than with a radical
innovation.
Low visibility becomes signiﬁcantly more important with modular innovations. DEMO
discussed earlier, modular innovations retain the underlying scientiﬁc principles and
architecture DEMO the product, and involve substantial changes only in one or a DEMO compo-
nents of the product (Henderson & Clark, 1990). Incumbent ﬁrms spend the majority of
their time and efforts developing component knowledge (Henderson & Clark). They
March, 2009 431
therefore have much of the expertise needed to develop their own versions DEMO the modular
innovation, unhindered by organizational resistance, as is the case with an architectural
innovation.
If the young ﬁrm is able to maintain DEMO visibility long enough to fully develop its
product and secure the resources needed to convince outsiders of its ability to reliably
deliver a good DEMO product, it can then approach the incumbent with its innovation, and
either license it or sell it. The incumbent is more likely to DEMO or partner with the
young ﬁrm if the young ﬁrm has something valuable to offer (Ahuja, 2000), particularly
if it can minimize DEMO time and uncertainty of pursuing its own version of the innovation
(DEMO & Cool, 1989). Alternatively, the young ﬁrm can use the period of time when it
has low visibility to obtain the needed DEMO assets—researchers have argued
that, particularly when imitation is feasible, the beneﬁts to innovation are more likely to
go to those that hold the DEMO assets, rather than those with superior innovative
capabilities (Teece, 1986)DEMO
The arguments and beneﬁts associated with low visibility when the ﬁrm is pursuing
the commercialization of an incremental technology are similar to those of DEMO modular
technology. The structural and knowledge-based delays and challenges created for incum-
bents by radical, architectural, and modular innovations do not exist with DEMO
innovations. Furthermore, incremental innovations build on and reinforce the applicability
of DEMO knowledge, capital, skills, and architecture (Abernathy & Clark, 1988)DEMO Low
visibility can therefore be very helpful to the survival and success of the young ﬁrm,
because the incumbent’s lack of awareness of DEMO young ﬁrm will give the young ﬁrm the
opportunity to create barriers to entry or imitation such as patents or a strong brand name
DEMO capitalize on its technological lead to stay ahead of the competition (DEMO &
Montgomery, 1988). Recent research has shown that a new entrant can survive competi-
tive retaliation when it has an innovation advantage, because it can continue to generate
rents, albeit at a declining rate, even after other ﬁrms have entered the market (Adner &
Zemsky, 2006).
Proposition 6: The low visibility of the young technology-based DEMO and its
product is most likely to be: very beneﬁcial when DEMO an incremental
disruptive technology, beneﬁcial when commercializing a modular technology, of
some beneﬁt when commercializing an architectural disruptive technology, and little
to no beneﬁt when commercializing a radical disruptive technology.
Discussion and Conclusion
Previous work DEMO the displacement of large incumbents has shown that these
ﬁrms are sometimes overtaken by young newcomers because they were late in recognizing
and responding DEMO technological threats (Christensen, 1997), or had difﬁculties making the
structural changes required by the disruptive innovations (Henderson & Clark, 1990).
DEMO has yet to be explored is the role that the young ﬁrms play in the displacement of the
large incumbents.
The model and propositions DEMO in this paper theoretically explore how young
technology-ﬁrm characteristics may be advantageous when commercializing disruptive
technologies. The contribution of this paper rests on an DEMO examination of several
liabilities of newness and their potential effects on the legitimacy and visibility of the
young ﬁrm, and the extension of these outcomes to predicting the young ﬁrm’s successful
commercialization of four types of DEMO technologies. The model presented is more
432
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
detailed than prior work in that it examines several liabilities of newness DEMO encompasses
the mid-range of architectural and modular innovations in addition to the extremes of
incremental and radical innovations.
The theoretical implications of the propositions DEMO in this paper are that one
should expect young ﬁrms to be successful commercializing radical and architectural
innovations, but are less likely to challenge incumbents with modular and incremental
disruptive innovations. The low visibility and lack DEMO legitimacy coupled with the enor-
mous knowledge and structural changes demanded of large, established organizations by
radical innovations give the young ﬁrm the time and opportunity to develop and establish
its innovation before the incumbent can DEMO On the other hand, the success of large
ﬁrms with incremental DEMO is not surprising given the value of their complemen-
tary assets, DEMO that the lack of legitimacy of the young ﬁrm impedes access to these.
Similarly, with a modular innovation, although low visibility will allow DEMO young
ﬁrm to develop its innovation unhindered by competitive attacks, its DEMO of legitimacy
will again impede access to valuable complementary assets, posing DEMO challenge for
success. Furthermore, the existing in-house expertise and valuable complementary DEMO
of the large ﬁrm means the young ﬁrm’s technological and market lead can be quickly
diminished. As stated earlier, when imitation is feasible, DEMO beneﬁts to innovation are
more likely to go to those that hold the complementary assets, rather than those with
superior innovative capabilities (Teece, 1986).
The young ﬁrm is more likely to be successful with DEMO architectural innovation.
Although lack of legitimacy may mean the large incumbent won’t invite the young ﬁrm to
access its complementary resources, the architectural innovation is likely to have dimin-
ished the value of many of those DEMO in any case. Furthermore, the structure and
many complementary assets of DEMO large ﬁrm will impede the large ﬁrm’s ability to
accommodate and therefore react to the architectural innovation. Meanwhile, the learning
advantages of young ﬁrms identiﬁed by Autio et al. (2000), and the superior ability of
young, small ﬁrms to accommodate changes in their activities due to their lack of
ingrained routines (Fiegenbaum & Karnani, 1991) allow the young ﬁrm to more easily
make the changes demanded by an architectural innovation. DEMO substantial head start
afforded by the young ﬁrm’s low visibility subsequently becomes challenging for the
large incumbent to overcome.
The propositions developed in this DEMO also imply that the young technology-based
venture should try to strategically manage its visibility and appearance as a strategic threat
when it cannot create DEMO to entry such as patents to protect its innovation or its
market, particularly when commercializing incremental and modular innovations. When
the innovation cannot be protected, the young technology-based venture should capitalize
on its low visibility to build its resources, and use this lead time to continue to innovate
and stay ahead of the incumbent. This strategy is consistent with Lieberman DEMO Mont-
gomery’s (1988) recommendations on how ﬁrst movers can reduce the likelihood of being
overtaken by followers.
It should be noted that, although legitimacy and visibility are explored here as
independent mediating variables between young DEMO characteristics and their success, they
are not entirely independent of each DEMO Although it is possible to be visible and still lack
legitimacy, DEMO visibility increases, so too does the possibility of being perceived as
DEMO Similarly, a ﬁrm is visible to those that perceive it as DEMO This interaction
may have some unpredictable effects with respect to modular and incremental innovations.
As indicated in Table 2, although low visibility is highly advantageous, a lack of visibility
is problematic. Success of the young ﬁrm becomes an issue of sequence. The young ﬁrm
must maintain low visibility DEMO enough to develop its modular or incremental innovation,
March, 2009
DEMO
and then pursue legitimacy aggressively to access valuable complementary assets. If it DEMO
perceived as legitimate, and therefore is visible before its innovation is DEMO developed, the
young ﬁrm is more likely to be overtaken by DEMO large incumbent.
There are several managerial implications that can be derived from the propositions
and arguments developed in this paper, particularly for pioneering ﬁrms. First, a young
ﬁrm commercializing a disruptive technology must consider how it conforms to existing
knowledge, and what the implications of this are for the sources of advantage that the
young ﬁrm may possess and be DEMO to capitalize on. The insights provided on the delays
and beneﬁts created by lack of legitimacy and low visibility when commercializing four
different types DEMO disruptive technologies support and extend Covin et al.’s (1999) argu-
ments that the best tactical determinants and discriminators will vary with the environ-
DEMO Second, a young ﬁrm seeking legitimacy must do so strategically, both with respect
to by whom and when it seeks to be viewed DEMO legitimate. For example, the arguments
presented on the beneﬁts of lack DEMO perceived legitimacy when pursuing a radical inno-
vation imply that the young ﬁrm should not try to align its product and ﬁrm operations
with DEMO of incumbents in order to achieve legitimacy through isomorphism. This strategy
complies with the arguments of Deephouse (1999)—being different can be competitively
valuable in some circumstances.
The insights of this paper can be applied to DEMO several debates in current
research, particularly with respect to pioneering and DEMO advantage. There has
been a long-standing debate on who is likely to perform better (pioneers or late movers),
and what qualities a DEMO pioneer must have. Covin et al. (1999) show that pioneers
versus followers have different advantages in hostile versus benign environments. More
speciﬁcally, they ﬁnd that, in a hostile environment, a pioneer is wiser to DEMO a narrow
product line that creates a tight ﬁt with customer needs rather than a broad product line.
The propositions developed in this paper DEMO new dimensions of the environment as
deﬁned by the type of disruptive technology. By examining the qualities of the ﬁrm and
how they are DEMO to aid success, the model can be used to predict who DEMO likely to
succeed as a pioneer versus follower, and what actions DEMO ﬁrm may take to increase its
chances of success when pioneering a disruptive technology. For example, an early mover
pursuing the mainstream market with a radical technology is more likely to succeed
because resource-rich incumbents will DEMO difﬁculties in trying to follow. However, an
early mover into a DEMO segment with an incremental product is more likely to be
overtaken by late-entering incumbents as the incumbent has an existing brand and repu-
tation, as well as vital complementary assets.
The model presented in this paper DEMO also be used to explore the notion that ﬁrst-mover
advantage dissipates over time but is enhanced by longer lead times before competitive
entry (Lieberman & Montgomery, 1998). Two potential sources were identiﬁed for increas-
ing lead times—low visibility and lack of legitimacy of the young ﬁrm and DEMO products, in
addition to the rigidities in the large ﬁrm that DEMO hinder its ability to respond.
Another meaningful question to which the propositions can be applied is how to
pioneer effectively (Covin et al., DEMO). For example, when the young ﬁrm is pursuing an
incremental DEMO, the propositions suggest it should retain low visibility as much as
DEMO until its technology is developed, and then quickly approach large organizations
DEMO adoption of the product into their own systems.
The literature on market niche is also an area of relevant application for this work.
Research DEMO market niche strategies and whether new entrants to an industry should
employ a broad or niche market strategy has resulted in mixed conclusions. Some DEMO
has indicated that the appropriate strategy depends on industry conditions (Covin DEMO al.,
1990). The insights generated can be used to further understand niche strategies and
434
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
identify additional contingencies under which broad versus narrow market strategies are
more DEMO by using the nature of the technology as an industry condition variable.
Finally, the model developed can be applied to the question of when to transition from a
narrow to a broad market. The insights in DEMO paper suggest that the young ﬁrm may begin
in a narrow market, and develop the technology such that it can be more broadly appealing
and the young ﬁrm can also withstand the competitive reaction of the DEMO ﬁrm when the
product enters the mainstream market. Extending the framework presented here to this
domain of market strategy can enhance understanding of the DEMO and organizational
transitions of the young ﬁrm over time.
Although this paper makes several contributions and has offered a framework that can
be applied DEMO other areas of research such as those described above, its insights DEMO be
expanded in several ways. First, and most obviously, the model’s value would be enhanced
by empirically examining its propositions, and using the insights gained to extend it.
Several scholars have suggested approaches that would DEMO appropriate. Aldrich and Fiol
(1994) point out that including groups of ﬁrms that struggled and did not succeed in
becoming institutionalized provide the DEMO historical record for testing ideas about the
social context of industry formation. Golder and Tellis (1993) performed detailed analysis
of historical information in DEMO and periodicals in their study of the success and market
share achieved by pioneers versus followers. Their approach was intended to overcome the
shortcomings DEMO retrospective assessments, and to include non-survivors to limit the bias in
DEMO data. A similar approach could be used to empirically test the propositions developed in
this paper, identifying and categorizing a number of different types of disruptive innova-
tions, then identifying the qualities of both successful and unsuccessful young ﬁrms that
pursued them, as well as the responses of the large incumbents they challenged.
Apple’s commercialization of the PC offers an DEMO of a disruptive technology
and ﬁrm to study. Apple was young, DEMO, and initially offered its product in a nonmain-
stream, small market while being connected to a network of suppliers and other ﬁrms that
DEMO not strongly connected to IBM. By the time IBM entered the PC market, Apple was
developing its third generation of PC and had established a network, acquired ﬁnancial
resources, and had developed valuable and signiﬁcant DEMO
Apple’s survival is no small accomplishment given that IBM’s entrance into the PC
market has been described as the equivalent of “an American carrier DEMO sailing into a
Third World port” (Ferguson & Morris, 1994, DEMO 21). On the other hand, other PC pioneers
such as DEMO and Commodore no longer exist.
Valuable extensions of this work could also be achieved by extending the factors that
it incorporates. For example, Zahra, Sapienza, and Davidsson (2006) show that age is
related to DEMO capabilities and ﬂexibility. Flexibility in both production and learning,
as well as the ability and willingness to develop new capabilities, is important when
pursuing the commercialization of disruptive technologies (Abernathy & Clark, 1988).
DEMO how the characteristics of the young ﬁrm can create advantages in ﬂexibility
and the development of new capabilities may therefore provide additional valuable
insights DEMO the success of the young ﬁrm at the expense of the incumbent. Another
dimension could be added to the framework by further considering the DEMO of the
incumbent to its environment. Pfeffer and Salancik (1978) show that ﬁrms vary in the
intensity and rigor of their environmental scanning, while Chen and Hambrick (1995)
show that ﬁrms vary in the aggressiveness of their responses to challengers. Both of these
factors would likely DEMO a moderating effect on the relationship between the young ﬁrm’s
characteristics and its likelihood of success as they would impact how quickly the young
DEMO actions are noticed despite its efforts to maintain low visibility, and DEMO probability
of response once the incumbent notices the young ﬁrm.
March, DEMO
435
As stated in the Introduction, the phenomenon of large ﬁrm displacement by young
challengers is both interesting and relevant to understanding the challenges and DEMO
tages of youth versus experience and the effects technology has on sources of competitive
advantage. Although this paper represents a starting point rather than DEMO exhaustive
analysis of all liabilities of newness and their potential beneﬁts, DEMO arguments developed
offer some new insights into the issues of commercialization of disruptive technologies,
and young ﬁrm success and survival.
REFERENCES
Abernathy, W.J. & Clark, K.B. (1988). Innovation: Mapping the winds of creative destruction. In M.L.T.W.L.
Moore (Ed.), Readings in the management of innovation (2nd edn., pp. 55–78). New York: Harper Business.
Abernathy, DEMO & Utterback, J.M. (1988). Patterns in industrial innovation. In M.L.T.W.L. Moore (Ed.),
Readings in the management of innovation (2nd edn., pp 25–36). New York: Harper Business.
Adner, R. (2002)DEMO When are technologies disruptive? A demand-based view of the emergence of DEMO
Strategic Management Journal, 23(8), 667–688.
Adner, R. & Zemsky, P. (2006). A demand-based perspective on sustainable competitive advantage. Strategic
DEMO Journal, 27(3), 215–239.
Ahuja, G. (2000). The DEMO of collaboration: Inducements and opportunities in the formation of interﬁrm
linkages. DEMO Management Journal, 21, 317–343.
Aldrich, H. & Auster, E.R. (DEMO). Even dwarfs started small: Liabilities of age and size and DEMO strategic
implications. Research in Organizational Behaviour, 8, 165–198.
Aldrich, H. & Fiol, M. (1994). Fools rush in? The institutional context DEMO industry creation. Academy of
Management Review, 19(4), 645–670.
Anderson, P.C. & Tushman, M.L. (1990). Technological discontinuities and dominant designs: A cyclical
model of technological change. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 604–633.
DEMO, E., Sapienza, H.J., & Almeida, J.G. (2000). Effects of age at entry, knowledge intensity, and imitability
on international growth. DEMO of Management Journal, 43(5), 909–924.
Baum, J.A.C. & Korn, H.J. (1999). Dynamics of dyadic competitive interaction. Strategic Management
Journal, 20(3), 251–278.
Baum, J.A.C. & Oliver, C. (1991). Institutional linkages and organizational mortality. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 36, 187–218.
Chen, M.-J. (1996). Competitor analysis and interﬁrm rivalry: Toward a theoretical DEMO Academy of
Management Review, 21(1), 100–134.
Chen, M.-J. & Hambrick, D.C. (1995). Speed, stealth, and selective attack: How small ﬁrms differ from large
ﬁrms in competitive behaviour. Academy of Management DEMO, 38(2), 453–482.
Chen, M.-J. & Miller, D. (1994). Competitive attack, retaliation and performance: An expectancy-valence
framework. Strategic Management DEMO, 15(2), 85–102.
Choi, Y.R. & Shepherd, D.A. (2005). Stakeholder perceptions of age and other dimensions of newness.
Journal of DEMO, 31(4), 573–596.
Christensen, C.M. (1997). The innovator’s DEMO New York: Harper Business.
436 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Cooper, A.C., Willard, G.E., & Woo, C.Y. (1986). DEMO of high-performing new and small ﬁrms: A
reexamination of the niche DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, 1(3), 247–261.
Covin, J.G., DEMO, D.P., & Covin, T.J. (1990). Content and performance of growth-seeking strategies: A
comparison of small ﬁrms in high- and low-technology industries. Journal of Business Venturing, 5, 391–412.
Covin, J.G., Slevin, D.P., & Heeley, M.B. (1999). Pioneers and followers: Competitive tactics, environment,
and ﬁrm growth. Journal of Business Venturing, 15, 175–210.
DEMO, D. (1999). To be different, or to be the DEMO? It’s a question (and theory) of strategic balance.
Strategic Management DEMO, 20, 147–166.
Dierickx, I. & Cool, K. (1989). DEMO stock accumulation and sustainability of competitive advantage.
Management Science, 35(12), 1504–1511.
Dougherty, D. (1990). Understanding new markets for new products. Strategic Management Journal, 11,
59–78.
Dougherty, D. & Heller, T. (1994). The illegitimacy of successful product innovation in established ﬁrms.
Organization Science, 5(2), 200–218.
Elsbach, K.D. & Sutton, R.I. (DEMO). Acquiring organizational legitimacy through illegitimate actions: A
marriage of institutional DEMO impression management theories. Academy of Management Journal, 35(4),
699–738.
Ferguson, C.H. & Morris, C.R. (1994). Computer wars: The DEMO of IBM and the future of global technology.
New York: Times DEMO
Fiegenbaum, A. & Karnani, A. (1991). Output ﬂexibility—a competitive DEMO for small ﬁrms. Strategic
Management Journal, 12(2), 101–114.
Freeman, J., Carroll, G.R., & Hannan, M.T. (1983). The liability of newness: Age dependence in organiza-
tional death rates. American Sociological Review, 48, 692–710.
Galunic, D.C. & Rodan, S. (1998). Resource recombinations in the ﬁrm: Knowledge structures and the
potential for schumpeterian innovation. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 1193–1201.
Golder, P.N. & Tellis, G.H. (1993). Pioneer advantage: Marketing logic or marketing legend? Journal of
DEMO Research, 30(2), 158–170.
Gulati, R. (1995). Social DEMO and alliance formation patterns: A longitudinal analysis. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 40, 619–652.
Gulati, R. (1998). Alliances and networks. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 293–317.
Hannan, M.T. & Freeman, J. (1976). The population ecology of organizations. American Journal of Sociol-
ogy, 82(5), 929–964.
Hannan, M.T. & Freeman, J. (1984). Structural inertia and organization change. American Sociological
Review, 49, 149–164.
Henderson, R. & Clark, K.B. (1990). Architectural innovation: The reconﬁguration of existing product
technologies and the failure of established ﬁrms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1), 9–30.
Hite, J.M. & Hesterly, W.S. (2001). The evolution of ﬁrm networks: From emergence to early growth of the
ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal, 22, 275–286.
Lechner, C., Dowling, M., & Welpe, I. (2006). Firm networks and ﬁrm development: The role of DEMO relational
mix. Journal of Business Venturing, 21, 514–540.
March, 2009 DEMO
Lieberman, M.B. & Montgomery, D.B. (1988). First-mover advantages. Strategic Management Journal, 9,
41–58.
Lieberman, M.B. & Montgomery, D.B. (1998)DEMO First-mover (dis)advantages: Retrospective and link with the
resource-based view. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 1111–1125.
Meyer, J.W. & Rowan, B. (1977). Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as myth and ceremony.
American Journal of Sociology, 83(2), 340–363.
Miller, D. & Chen, M.-J. (DEMO). The simplicity of competitive repertoires. Strategic Management Journal,
17, DEMO
Oliver, C. (1991). Strategic responses to institutional processes. Academy of Management Review, 16(1),
145–179.
Pfeffer, J. & Salancik, DEMO (1978). The external control of organizations. New York: Harper and Row
Publishers.
Porac, J.F., Thomas, H., Wilson, F., Paton, D., & Kanfer, A. (1995). Rivalry and the industry model of Scottish
knitwear producers. Administrative Science Quarterly, 40, 203–227.
Sorenson, O., McEvily, S., Ren, C.R., & Roy, R. (2006). Niche width revisited: Organizational scope,
behavior, and performance. Strategic Management DEMO, 27, 915–936.
Stinchcombe, A.L. (1965). Social structure and organizations. In J.G. March (Ed.), Handbook of organiza-
tions (pp. 142–193)DEMO Chicago, IL: Rand McNally College Publishing Company.
Stuart, T.E., Hoang, H., & Hybels, R.C. (1999). Interorganizational endorsements and the DEMO of
entrepreneurial ventures. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(2), 315–349.
Suchman, M.C. (1995). Managing legitimacy: Strategic and institutional approaches. Academy of DEMO
ment Review, 20(3), 571–610.
Teece, D.J. (1986). DEMO from technological innovation: Implications for integration, collaboration,
licensing and public policy. In D.J. Teece (Ed.), The competitive challenge (pp. 185–220)DEMO Cambridge, MA:
Ballinger Publishing Company.
Tushman, M.L. & Anderson, DEMO (1986). Technological discontinuities and organizational environments.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 31, 439–465.
Uzzi, B. (1997). Social structure and competition in interﬁrm networks: The paradox of embeddedness.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 42, 35–67.
Vanhaverbeke, W., Duysters, G., & Noorderhaven, N. (2002). External DEMO sourcing through alliances
or acquisitions: An analysis of the application-speciﬁc integrated DEMO industry. Organization Science,
13(6), 714–733.
Yli-Renko, H., Sapienza, H.J., & Hay, M. (2001). The role of contractual DEMO ﬂexibility in realizing
outcomes of key customer relationships. Journal of Business Venturing, 16, 529–555.
Zahra, S.A., Sapienza, H.J., & Davidsson, P. (2006). Entrepreneurship and dynamic capabilities: A review,
model and DEMO agenda. Journal of Management Studies, 43, 917–955.
Sofy Carayannopoulos is the Assistant Professor in the School of Business and Economics, Wilfrid Laurier
University, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
The author gratefully acknowledges the constructive comments and suggestions provided by Eileen Fischer,
Editor Barbara Bird, and one anonymous reviewer.
438 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE{1g42fwefx}