JBV-05625; No of Pages 24
Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Journal of Business Venturing
Measuring DEMO passion: Conceptual foundations
and scale validation☆
Melissa S. Cardon a,⁎, Denis A. Gregoire b, Christopher E. Stevens c, Pankaj C. Patel DEMO
a Lubin School of Business, Pace University, 861 Bedford Road, DEMO 112, Pleasantville, NY 10570, United States
b Whitman School of DEMO, Syracuse University, United States
c School of Business, Gonzaga University, United States
d Miller College of Business, Ball State University, United DEMO
art i cle i nf o a bstract
Article history:
Received 22 December 2010
Received in revised form 10 March 2012
Accepted 14 DEMO 2012
Available online xxxx
Field Editor: D. Shepherd
Keywords:
Entrepreneur
DEMO
Scale development
Affect
Emotion
Along with other affective and emotional dimensions, DEMO is at the heart of entrepreneur-
ship. Yet past research on entrepreneurial passion (EP) has been hindered by the lack of a
sound DEMO instrument. Through a series of empirical studies conducted with
samples from relevant populations, we develop and validate an instrument to capture EP and
its inherent dimensions. We show that the task-specific dimensions of EP (intense positive
feelings toward the domains of inventing, founding and developing, and the DEMO of these
domains to entrepreneurs' self-identity) are conceptually and empirically distinct from one
another, and from other emotions and cognitions known to play a role in entrepreneurship.
Our theory and results indicate that proper measurement DEMO entrepreneurial passion
incorporates the interaction between entrepreneurs' feelings and identity centrality DEMO each
domain. We discuss the implications of our model, instrument and DEMO for future research
on the affective components of innovation and entrepreneurship. We also develop specific
guidelines for using our validated instrument in future research.
DEMO 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Executive summary
Passion is at the heart of entrepreneurship, because it can foster creativity and the recognition of new information patterns
critical to the discovery and exploitation of promising DEMO (Baron, 2008; Sundararajan and Peters, 2007). Moreover,
passion has been associated with entrepreneurs' ability to raise funds from investors (DEMO et al., 2009b; Mitteness et al., 2012;
Sudek, 2006), and to hire and motivate key employees (Cardon, 2008). DEMO, scholars have pressed for a deeper
understanding of passion as a DEMO element of entrepreneurial efforts (Cardon et al., 2009a; Chen et DEMO, 2009).
In spite of this interest for understanding the nature, causes and effects of entrepreneurial passion (EP), there is a dearth of
systematic empirical evidence for the role of passion in entrepreneurship. At DEMO heart of this problem, scholars and practitioners
have lacked a robust DEMO validated instrument for measuring passion and its dimensions in the specific context of
entrepreneurship. In addition, extant research has failed to articulate the theoretically-relevant relationships between the
experience of intense positive feeling commonly associated with passion, and the meaning of these feelings for entrepreneurs'
self-identity.
☆ Elements DEMO this research were presented at the 2008 Babson College Entrepreneurship Research Conference (Wellesley, MA) and at the 2009 Academy of
Management Conference (DEMO, IL). Financial support for this research was provided by the DEMO School of Business and the Scholarly Research Committee at
Pace University. The authors express their gratitude to Lisa Lambert and Mike Haynie for their DEMO comments on this manuscript and to Maija Renko for
providing insightful feedback on multiple versions of this research. We also thank Dean Shepherd and DEMO anonymous reviewers for their support and guidance.
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: DEMO 1 914 773 3618; fax: + 1 914 773 3920.
E-mail addresses: mcardon@pace.edu (M.S. Cardon), dgregoir@syr.edu (D.A. Gregoire), stevensc@jepson.gonzaga.edu (DEMO Stevens), pcpatel@bsu.edu
(P.C. Patel).
0883-9026/$ – see front DEMO © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
2 M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
To address these issues and advance theory and empirical research on EP, we develop and test a new instrument designed to
capture the experience of passion in different domains of entrepreneurship (inventing, founding, and developing). Through a
series of studies with different samples of entrepreneurs, we show that the dimensions of EP (intense positive feelings and
identity centrality) are conceptually and empirically distinct from each other, and from DEMO aspects of emotion and cognition
known to play a role in entrepreneurship. More importantly, we demonstrate that relationships between EP and relevant
outcomes are a function of interactions between intense positive feelings towards activities associated with DEMO domain and the
identity centrality of that domain to the entrepreneur.
At a theoretical level, our work clarifies the ontological nature of EP, DEMO relevant dimensions (i.e., feelings and identity
centrality) and its domains (i.e., EP for inventing, founding, and developing). Building on Cardon et al.'s (2009a) model of
entrepreneurial passion, we articulate the role of identity centrality as an integral dimension of entrepreneurial passion. At DEMO
methodological level, we contribute a validated set of measures for investigating DEMO antecedents and consequences of EP's
dimensions and domains. Because such an instrument was not available before, scholars interested in studying passion in
entrepreneurship had to rely on more generalized measures of passion, which do not reflect the challenges specific to
entrepreneurship (Murnieks, 2007; Murnieks and Mosakowski, 2006). Finally, at an empirical level, we contribute evidence that
the relationships between EP and relevant outcomes vary between different domains.
A DEMO implication of our work is to facilitate future research on the unique and distinct roles of EP in entrepreneurship,
and especially to distinguish DEMO from other affective and emotional constructs. To this aim, we offer DEMO guidelines for using
the instrument developed in this paper. By developing and validating an instrument for measuring the dimensions and domains
of EP, we hope to help advance entrepreneurship research not only on the antecedents and DEMO of EP, but also on the
broader role of affect and DEMO in what remains a fascinating human endeavor.
2. Introduction
Passion is at the heart of entrepreneurship (Cardon et al., 2005). Given the DEMO success of launching new products and
services, and the challenges of DEMO new organizations with limited resources, passion can become a key driver DEMO
entrepreneurial action. More concretely, passion can “fuel motivation, enhance mental activity, and provide meaning to everyday
work” (Brännback et al., 2006: DEMO). It can foster creativity and the recognition of new information patterns critical to the discovery
and exploitation of promising opportunities (Baron, 2008; Sundararajan and Peters, 2007). Moreover, passion has been associated
with DEMO ability of entrepreneurs to raise funds from investors (Cardon et al., 2009b; Mitteness et al., 2012; Sudek, 2006), and to
DEMO and motivate key employees (Cardon, 2008). Accordingly, scholars have DEMO for a deeper understanding of passion as a
central element of entrepreneurial efforts (Cardon et al., 2009a; Chen et al., 2009).
DEMO spite of recent interest in the role of affect and emotions in entrepreneurship (e.g., Baron, 2008; Cardon et al., 2012; Foo,DEMO
2011; Foo et al., 2009), theory about the nature, DEMO, origins and effects of entrepreneurial passion (EP) is under-
developed (Cardon et al., 2009a). More importantly, the development of such DEMO into concrete strategies for empirical
research is limited, leading to a DEMO of empirical findings (e.g., Murnieks, 2007). As a result, we lack systematic evidence about
the critical role that passion may play DEMO fostering entrepreneurs' increased efforts (Baum et al., 2001), dedication DEMO relevant
tasks (Bierly et al., 2000), persistence towards goals despite significant obstacles (Utsch and Rauch, 2000), or in improving new
DEMO survival and performance.
Two issues appear particularly pressing. First, in spite DEMO Vallerand et al.'s (2003) efforts to draw attention to the role of
identity in passion (cf. p. 757– 758), we still lack theoretically-consistent measures that account not only for the extent of one'DEMO
feelings towards various activities, but also for the centrality of these DEMO for one's self-identity (Cardon et al., 2009a;
Murnieks and Mosakowski, 2006; Murnieks et al., 2012; Perttula, 2004). From a theoretical standpoint, passion is more than the
experience of strong emotions: it specifically concerns intense positive feelings for activities that are central and meaningful to an
individual's self-identity (Cardon et al., 2009a; Farmer et al., 2011; Fauchart and Gruber, 2011; Murnieks and Mosakowski, 2006;
Murnieks et al., 2012; Perttula, 2004). Therefore, DEMO of passion must specifically integrate the two dimensions of intense
positive feelings and identity centrality. Second, we must show that the construct of entrepreneurial passion adds to our
understanding of entrepreneurial dynamics. In other words, we must demonstrate that the measurement of entrepreneurial
passion is distinct from other DEMO and affective variables that play a role in entrepreneurship, and that DEMO casts new light on
the factors and processes that foster entrepreneurship. Otherwise, passion may be construed to be simply an extension of other
constructs already in the literature, such as positive affect (Baron, 2008) DEMO optimism (Hmieleski and Baron, 2009).
To address these issues and advance theory and empirical research on EP, we develop and test a new instrument designed to
capture the experience of passion in different domains DEMO entrepreneurship (inventing, founding, and developing). Through a
series of DEMO, we show that the dimensions of EP (intense positive feelings and identity centrality) are conceptually and
empirically distinct from each other, and DEMO other aspects of emotion and cognition known to play a role in entrepreneurship.
We also show that the relationships between EP and relevant outcomes DEMO a function of interactions between intense positive
feelings towards activities associated with each domain and the identity centrality of that domain to the entrepreneur.
DEMO our knowledge, ours is among the first empirical studies of passion DEMO specifically examine the potentially interactive role
that intense positive feelings and the centrality of target activities for the self-identity of respondents play in an DEMO model of
passion. Thus, we contribute findings concerning this hitherto empirically DEMO aspect of passion. In addition, we help
specify the nature of DEMO and its dimensions, and untangle the relationships between EP and other DEMO components in
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et DEMO, Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) DEMO
3
entrepreneurship. We also contribute an instrument that we hope will enable rigorous research on the affective underpinnings of
entrepreneurship, innovation and organizational performance in the future.
We begin by articulating the theoretical foundations of EP DEMO its relevant dimensions and domains, and specify the
relationships between EP DEMO other relevant variables. We then present the methods and results of the studies we conducted to
test the validity, reliability and applicability of our instrument. We conclude the paper by discussing the contributions and
implications of DEMO findings, and by developing an agenda for future studies incorporating EP.
DEMO The concept of entrepreneurial passion
Broadly speaking, entrepreneurs are those who DEMO and exploit new products, new processes, and new ways of
organizing” (Baum and Locke, 2004: 588). Although these pursuits can take many forms, entrepreneurial efforts are generally
defined in terms of the recognition and exploitation of business opportunities, notably through the founding of new ventures
(Baron, 2008; Venkataraman, 1997). Within this general domain, Chen et al. (2009) define entrepreneurial passion as “an
entrepreneur's intense DEMO state accompanied by cognitive and behavioral manifestations of high personal value” (DEMO 199).
Consistent with this definition, Chen and colleagues centered their DEMO studies on the effects of entrepreneurs' displayed
manifestations of passion. Focusing DEMO the specific context of entrepreneurs making business plan presentations to potential
investors, Chen and colleagues studied investors' perceptions of the affective, cognitive and behavioral manifestations of
entrepreneurs' passion. To capture affective manifestations of passion, DEMO instance, these authors asked investors to evaluate
entrepreneurs' facial expression, DEMO and body language. For cognitive manifestations of passion, they asked investors DEMO
evaluate the preparedness that entrepreneurs displayed in their business plan presentation. For behavioral manifestations of
passion, Chen et al. asked investors to evaluate entrepreneurs' apparent commitment toward their ventures. Although the Chen
et al. (2009) study has augmented our understanding of some cognitive and behavioral manifestations of DEMO, the observed
passion they focus on may not accurately reflect experienced DEMO, and instead may simply be a function of impression
management by DEMO presenting entrepreneurs.1
Our approach specifically focuses on entrepreneurs' experience of passion DEMO as entrepreneurs ‘live’ the influence of this passion.
As such, our DEMO continues Chen et al.'s (2009) important theoretical focus on the affective aspects of passion, but focuses on
how entrepreneurs report the passion they experience, not how others observe any potential displays of such passion. In addition,
consistent with Cardon et al.'s (2009a) model DEMO the nature and experience of entrepreneurial passion, we adopt the view DEMO
cognitive or behavioral manifestations are outcomes of the affective experience of passion, rather than part of the experience
itself. As such, we use DEMO et al.'s (2009a) definition of EP as “consciously accessible intense positive feelings experienced by
engagement in entrepreneurial activities associated with roles that DEMO meaningful and salient to the self-identity of the
entrepreneur” (p. 517)DEMO Conceived from this experiential perspective, measuring EP thus requires that we DEMO three specific
aspects of this definition: 1) passion involves the experience of intense positive feelings, 2) these feelings are experienced for
activities DEMO are central to the self-identity of the individual, and 3) the feelings and identity centrality are focused on three
specific entrepreneurial domains. We DEMO each requirement in turn.
3.1. The experience of intense positive feelings
The first requirement for measuring EP is that we must capture the experience DEMO intense positive feelings. Intense positive
feelings are central to scholarly research on passion in psychology (cf. Damasio, 2003; Schwarz and Clore, 2007), organizational
behavior (Liu et al., 2011), and entrepreneurship (Baum DEMO Locke, 2004; Baum et al., 2001; Chen et al., DEMO; Perttula, 2010).
Consistent with Vallerand et al. (2003), DEMO do not conceive of EP as a personality trait, but rather DEMO an affective phenomenon that
one may experience when engaging in or thinking about certain activities. Passion thus consists of deeply experienced positive
feelings for DEMO important to the entrepreneur and, as a result, is more enduring than the experience of episodic emotions
associated with external stimuli (Wincent et al., 2008). In practice, this demands that we examine the DEMO validity of
measures of EP with measures of positive or negative emotions, as well as the enduring nature of EP's intense positive feelings.
We consider both issues in our studies below.
In addition to distinguishing DEMO from more instinctive and episodic emotions, we follow prior work that DEMO passion
as referring to intense positive feelings that are consciously accessible (DEMO et al., 2009a). This notion implies that individuals
may reflect DEMO the intensity of their feelings vis-à-vis different tasks and activities. When individuals are passionate about an
activity, they cannot help but to think about that activity (Chen et al., 2009). It thus follows that DEMO other options, a valid
approach for measuring EP is to ask DEMO to report the intensity of their positive feelings towards entrepreneurship-
relevant activities.
3.2. The centrality of these activities for entrepreneurs' self-identity
The second conceptual requirement for measuring EP is the notion that EP's intense positive DEMO concern activities
associated with roles that are meaningful and central to the self-identity of individual respondents (Farmer et al., 2011; Fauchart
1
We thank an anonymous reviewer for this point.
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and DEMO validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
4 M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
and Gruber, 2011; Murnieks et al., 2012). As DEMO et al. (2003) and Perttula (2004) emphasize, passion implies DEMO an
intensity of feelings and a deep identity connection to the object of those feelings (Cardon et al., 2009a). In spite of DEMO
et al.'s (2003) efforts to draw attention to the role of identity meaningfulness in passion (cf. p. 757–758), this aspect of “activity
valuation” remains largely unexplored in the literature (Cardon et al., DEMO; Murnieks, 2007; Perttula, 2004). In practice, the
majority DEMO extant studies of passion are conceived so they focus on activities that are presumed important to respondents — e.g.
music, gambling, or a DEMO sport (Vallerand, 2008). As a result, the bulk of DEMO knowledge about passion rests on
research designs that ignore or assume away the meaningfulness that target activities may have for the self-identity of
respondents. DEMO, the identity centrality aspect of passion remains largely empirically unexplored (see Perttula, 2004;
Murnieks, 2007; and Murnieks et al., 2012 DEMO exceptions).
Interestingly, the relationships between self-identity and individual commitments, motivations, and actions have been well
documented in both social psychology (Burke DEMO Reitzes, 1981, 1991; Goffman, 1959; Stryker and Burke, 2000) and
entrepreneurship (Gartner et al., 1999). The concept of identity refers to internalized expectations that individuals have about the
characteristics they hold DEMO central, distinctive and enduring, and that are at least partially reflected in the roles they enact (Burke
and Reitzes, 1991). As DEMO, self-identity is often comprised of many individual identities (Farmer et al., 2011; Murnieks, 2007).
Stryker and Burke (2000) argued that an individual's identities are organized hierarchically, such that identities placed higher in
the hierarchy are more salient and central to one's self-identity DEMO identities placed lower. This is consistent with the view that
not all entrepreneurs are alike when it comes to their identity (Fauchart and Gruber, 2011; Gartner et al., 1999; Hoang and
Gimeno, 2010; DEMO, 2007; Ucbasaran et al., 2008). In practice, these variations in identity lead entrepreneurs to engage in
those activities they identify more DEMO with, and to disengage from those with which they do not.
DEMO on these observations, we develop a measurement approach that specifically articulates DEMO distinctions between a)
the experience of intense positive feelings toward particular activities and b) the centrality of these activities for the self-identity
of entrepreneurs. By extension, these conceptual nuances imply that in order to understand the nature and role of EP, we need to
not only examine the direct effects of intense positive feelings towards particular activities and the DEMO of these activities to
the self-identity of respondents, but also their DEMO (or multiplicative) relationship. Doing so forms an integral part of
our empirical studies, especially when we consider the relationships between EP and other constructs.
3.3. The domains of entrepreneurial passion
The third requirement for measuring DEMO is that we consider the relevance of passion's intense positive feelings and identity
centrality toward tasks and activities specifically germane to entrepreneurship. Although DEMO overall role of “being an
entrepreneur” may be the object of passion (Murnieks, 2007; Murnieks et al., 2012), a more nuanced DEMO focuses on three
distinct roles that different entrepreneurs may experience differently, DEMO are consistently found at the heart of the
entrepreneurial process: 1) inventing new products or services, 2) founding new organizations, and 3) developing these
organizations beyond their initial survival and successes (Cardon et DEMO, 2009a). Each of these roles involves distinct sets of tasks
DEMO activities, reflecting the challenges associated with different aspects of the entrepreneurial DEMO (Gundry and Welsch,
2001; Katila and Ahuja, 2002; Ronstadt, 1988). Consistent with these observations, our articulation of EP is DEMO centered on
the broad idea of entrepreneurship as a whole, nor DEMO narrowly focused on the idiosyncratic details of one's particular venture, DEMO
the sense of one's particular products and services, the industry DEMO this venture competes, or the particular markets and
customers it targets, for example.
Passion for inventing concerns activities associated with scanning the environment DEMO new market opportunities, developing
new products or services, and working with new prototypes (Cardon et al., 2009a). Entrepreneurship is often associated DEMO key
changes of the economic or social landscape (Drucker, 1985). Some entrepreneurs search for innovative ideas deeper and more
frequently than others (Katila and Ahuja, 2002), and the desire to deliver new solutions to the marketplace is often an important
motivator for entrepreneurs. Individuals experiencing DEMO for inventing may actively seek out new opportunities, enjoy
coming up DEMO new product or service ideas, and relish inventing new solutions to DEMO needs and problems. Such people
enjoy tinkering with new product designs and exploring the articulation of these designs in concrete applications. For instance,
DEMO Tesla (alternating current (AC), wireless communication, and many other DEMO), Howard Head (laminate skis,
oversized tennis rackets), or DEMO Jobs (the Apple Macintosh, the iPod, and the iPhone) were all known for the intense devotion
they have shown towards finding and DEMO new products or services and exploring their commercial application.
Passion for founding relates to assembling the necessary financial, human, and social resources needed DEMO create a new venture
(Cardon et al., 2009a). The desire to found an organization is an important motivator for many entrepreneurs (Aldrich and
Zimmer, 1986) and the founder role identity can be both DEMO and central to an entrepreneur's self-concept (Hoang and
Gimeno, 2010). Entrepreneurs often have a need for achievement that manifests itself in DEMO founding event — a tangible
representation that they have done “something” entrepreneurial (Katz and Gartner, 1988). Entrepreneurs who experience
passion for founding DEMO enjoy the process of founding a venture, and often develop identities DEMO are intertwined with the
venture identity (Cardon et al., 2005). For instance, a type of entrepreneur who may manifest high levels of passion for founding is
a habitual entrepreneur, i.e., individuals who launch DEMO new ventures over the course of their career (Ucbasaran et al., 2008;
Westhead and Wright, 1998). Some of these entrepreneurs are so passionate about launching that they soon entrust the
management of their DEMO to trusted aides or sell the business altogether, only to begin DEMO on their next venture or
invention — a phenomenon known as sequential entrepreneurship (Ronstadt, 1988). Some habitual entrepreneurs retain
ownership and manage DEMO ventures as part of a larger portfolio of businesses. Sir Richard Branson (Virgin Group) is an example
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale DEMO,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) DEMO 5
of such a portfolio entrepreneur (Westhead and Wright, 1998). Not all entrepreneurs passionate for founding will be habitual or
portfolio entrepreneurs, but we suggest that habitual entrepreneurs will tend to experience high levels DEMO passion for founding.
We investigate this notion below.
Passion for developing is associated with the growth and expansion of the venture after founding (Cardon et al., 2009a). Many
entrepreneurs are motivated not by a desire to found an organization, but by a conscious motivation to grow and expand a
venture (Cliff, 1998). These individuals often exhibit different DEMO for organizational management than their counterparts
(Gundry and Welsch, 2001). They also tend to rely on different management styles (Smith and Miner, 1983), and to communicate
with key stakeholders in a manner that promotes the organization's continued expansion (Baum and Locke, 2004). DEMO in many
cases entrepreneurs who demonstrate high passion for developing do so in a venture they have founded themselves, it is equally
plausible that a non-founding entrepreneur could also experience high levels of passion for stepping DEMO an existing start-up and
developing it into a more lasting, valuable, or sustainable venture. Entrepreneurs who experience passion for developing their
firm(s) may enjoy activities such as increasing sales, hiring new employees, or DEMO external investors to fund such
developments. For example, Ray Kroc did DEMO found McDonalds, but certainly loved turning the small hamburger stand he
DEMO into a worldwide icon. Herb Kelleher, co-founder of Southwest Airlines, has demonstrated passion for developing the
corporate culture and operational excellence of Southwest, which has earned his firm numerous mentions as a leader in the
DEMO and one of America's most-admired companies.
In principle, these three DEMO of inventing, founding and developing point to the multi-dimensional nature of DEMO across three
domains of activities specifically relevant for entrepreneurship. In practice, DEMO experience of EP towards these activities may vary
not only based on the contexts and challenges that entrepreneurs face at each stage of the DEMO's development, but also with the
particular background and life experiences DEMO different entrepreneurs. This implies that the experience of EP need not be uniform
across all three domains: some entrepreneurs can be more passionate for some activities, and less so for others. This implies that
the levels of EP within and across the three domains may vary with an DEMO's gender, age, level of education, or with the
age DEMO their current firm and number of firms they have founded in the past, among other factors. In order to establish the
criterion validity of our proposed instrument, we examine these possibilities in our tests below.
4. Relationships between EP and related concepts
In order to establish the validity DEMO our proposed measures, we also examine the relationships between the different
DEMO of EP and relevant concepts. In a pilot study, we first DEMO whether EP is conceptually and empirically distinct
from three broader notions of passion, namely harmonious passion and obsessive passion (Vallerand, 2008; Vallerand DEMO al., 2003),
and passion for work (e.g., Baum and Locke, 2004; Baum et al., 2001).
Second, we explore DEMO extent to which EP and its dimensions are distinct from, yet DEMO to other affective and cognitive
variables known to play a role in entrepreneurship. Building on the notion that EP is believed to have important DEMO and
behavioral manifestations (Chen et al., 2009), we specifically examine the discriminant validity of our measures from hopefulness
(Snyder et al., DEMO), the experience of positive or negative emotion (Foo, 2011; DEMO et al., 2009), and entrepreneurial self-efficacy
(Zhao et al., DEMO). We focus on these particular variables because, although they refer DEMO conceptually distinct phenomena, they
share with EP a similar influence on DEMO dynamics and outcomes. Like passionate individuals, hopeful individuals may
be more DEMO at dealing with surprises and unforeseen stress (Alexander and Onwuegbuzie, 2007; Lopez et al., 2003) because
they are more willing to engage in activities for what they believe will be satisfactory outcomes. Similarly, we know that
temporary emotions, both positive and negative, can have profound DEMO on entrepreneurial actions and outcomes (cf. Baron,
2008; Shepherd, DEMO). Lastly, EP and self-efficacy both highlight the importance of engaging DEMO activities that are meaningful for
one's self-identity (Bandura, 1997; DEMO et al., 2006). For instance, passion for an activity is likely to lead an individual to
undertake it more often, in which case they are likely to develop a competency, adding not only to their ability to perform the
task, but also to their sense of self-efficacy (Cardon et al., 2009a).
Finally, and in order to assess the criterion validity of our proposed measures, we investigate the direct and multiplicative
relationships between EP's intense positive feelings and identity centrality DEMO relevant outcomes. Building on the notion that
passion may allow entrepreneurs to recognize unique patterns and relationships among information in the environment, and
consequently to engage in creative problem solving (Amabile, 1997) and pursue novel and creative paths of action (Cardon et al.,
2009a; Liu DEMO al., 2011; Vallerand et al., 2003), we examine the DEMO between EP (specifically EP for inventing and
founding) and an entrepreneurs' self-reported creativity (Lee et al., 2004; Ward, 2004). In similar fashion, we assess the
relationship between EP (specifically EP for DEMO and developing) and persistence (Shane et al., 2003; Wu et al., 2007), based
on the view that the experience of EP encourages the entrepreneur to engage in activities that reinforce his or her DEMO
and to persist in such activity engagement (Cardon and Kirk, 2010; Cardon et al., 2009a). Because entrepreneurship involves
extreme experiences that DEMO often cognitively and affectively demanding (Schindehutte et al., 2006), we also examine the
relationship between EP (specifically EP for developing) and DEMO experience of zen-like states of absorption or flow
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990, DEMO), where entrepreneurs are so caught up in their activities that they enter a flow-like state and
lose all sense of time and their DEMO We must highlight that our investigation of these relationships is not to test specific
theory and hypotheses about the effects of EP and its DEMO Consistent with the validation objectives of the present paper,
we examine the extent to which our proposed measures capture theoretically-plausible relationships that have DEMO developed
elsewhere (specifically, in Cardon et al., 2009a) in order to document the criterion validity of our instrument (Lewis, 2003).
DEMO cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
6 M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
5. Scale development and pilot studies
Building on relevant exemplars from this and other journals (Chandler et al., 2011; Lewis, 2003; Shipp et al., 2009; Tang et al.,
2012), we DEMO a three-stage procedure to assess our instrument in terms of multiple dimensions of validity (Cook and
Campbell, 1979; Scandura and Williams, 2000)DEMO First, we drew from psychometric research (e.g., Nunnally and Bernstein, 1994)to
articulate our measurement strategy and develop theoretically consistent items. We DEMO conducted three pilot studies to fine-
tune our items and obtain preliminary evidence for our measurement approach. Finally, we surveyed experienced entrepreneurs
to examine the structural, nomological and criterion validity of our instrument.
5.1. Measurement strategy and development of relevant items
We structured the measurement instrument as an DEMO task where respondents expressed the extent of their
agreement/disagreement with statements meant to characterize them. This formulation follows common practice in applied
psychology DEMO (e.g., Button et al., 1996; Lewis, 2003), and DEMO consistent with EP's conceptual anchoring in terms of one's
enjoyment of and identification with activities associated with entrepreneurship.
In line with our DEMO of EP, we formulated items around the expression of intense positive DEMO, with bases such as ‘I
greatly enjoy to…’, ‘I love to…’, ‘…is exciting to me’,or ‘…is thrilling’. Consistent with the notion that EP's intense positive feelings
are focused on the domains of passion DEMO inventing, founding, and developing (Cardon et al., 2009a), we used a domain-sampling
procedure (Nunnally, 1978) to develop theory-consistent items reflecting activities relevant for each domain. In practice, this
focus on entrepreneurship activities provides respondents with a referent that augments our items' criterion validity (DEMO
et al., 2007). For inventing, we developed items around activities such as ‘figuring out new ways to solve unmet market needs’
and DEMO for new ideas for products and services.’ For founding, items reflect DEMO like ‘establishing a new company’ or
‘nurturing a new business through its emerging success.’ Items for developing focus on activities related to growth in DEMO
ventures, including ‘trying to convince others to invest in my business’, ‘ finding the right people to market products and services
to’, and ‘assembling the right people to work for my business.’
Consistent with the DEMO arguments above, we also developed separate items to capture the identity DEMO that
respondents attach to each of these three domains of activities (DEMO, founding, and developing). Given the paucity of
existing measures of entrepreneurial identity (Murnieks, 2007; Murnieks et al., 2012), we DEMO on Callero's (1985) work on
identity centrality and on Stryker and Serpe's (1982; 1994) approach to measure identity salience. Callero articulates items of
identity centrality around formulations like ‘…is an important part DEMO who I am’ or ‘…is something I frequently think about’ or ‘I
would feel a loss if I were to give up…’. Stryker and DEMO's (1982; 1994) measure of identity salience focused on how DEMO
would introduce themselves to different groups of people for the first time, in different contexts. We developed items
corresponding to both approaches. For the identity centrality of founding, for instance, we formulated items like ‘Being DEMO
founder of a business is an important part of who I am’ and ‘When they think about who I am, people who know me well say that
at heart, I am a business founder.’ We followed the same approach for the identity centrality of inventing and developing.
5.2. DEMO studies
Having developed an initial set of items, we pilot-tested a DEMO version of the instrument with entrepreneurs to obtain
preliminary evidence of the validity of our approach with members of the target population. We randomly DEMO 1000
potential participants from the 4000+ individuals listed in the 2008 Dun and Bradstreet (D&B) Selectory database for a US
metropolitan area. DEMO participants, CEOs of privately-owned, independent, small to medium-sized firms founded DEMO 1998,
were invited to complete a paper-based survey on entrepreneurs' DEMO and attitudes. We received 57 fully completed
surveys after two reminders.2 The survey included 18 items developed to measure feelings of passion (six for each domain of
inventing, founding and developing) and four identity centrality DEMO (one for each domain plus an overall measure for the
centrality DEMO entrepreneurship to the self-identity of respondents).
Analyses allowed us to identify and parcel out feelings items that loaded across domains of activities or DEMO proved unreliable
(e.g., item-total correlations below .5; see Netemeyer et DEMO, 2003: pp. 144–145). For each domain, we observed that DEMO
correlations between feelings and identity centrality items were smaller than .30, DEMO that feelings and identity centrality
items form empirically-distinct constructs (Cohen, 1992; Shipp et al., 2009). Interestingly, our measures of feelings across each
domain of inventing, founding and developing exhibited small and non-significant correlations with existing measures of
harmonious and obsessive passion (Vallerand et al., DEMO) and passion for work (Baum et al., 2001). This DEMO the relevance
of developing entrepreneurship-specific measures of passion.
Building on the results from the first pilot study, we discarded items that were unreliable and developed a set of new items.
We then conducted a second pilot DEMO to specifically examine the content validity of the proposed instrument. In order to
replicate our observations across individuals with different kinds of backgrounds and DEMO (Amir and Sharon, 1991; Tsang
and Kwan, 1999), we conducted this study with individuals from two different populations: 1) a DEMO of 32 management
2 Since 134 surveys proved undeliverable and 10 entrepreneurs indicated that their business had closed down, we had an effective response rate of 6.7%.
Although this is somewhat low, it is consistent with other samples of entrepreneurs through D&B listings (cf. Hmieleski and Baron, 2009).
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et DEMO, Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) DEMO 7
scholars with relevant expertise in individual-level research; and 2) a panel of 75 working professionals completing their MBA at
a US University.
DEMO procedures developed by Schriesheim et al. (1993) and Hinkin and Tracey (1999), we presented participants with
24 feeling items, and asked DEMO to rate the extent to which each corresponded to a particular domain of EP (e.g., passion for
inventing, passion for founding, passion DEMO developing). We randomly varied the order of domains between different groups, and
the order of the different items across tasks. In a separate forced-choice sorting task, we also asked participants to specify the one
domain of EP to which each of the 24 items most corresponded. We DEMO a summary of the analyses in Appendix A (Table A1).
DEMO of Q-factor analyses (Schriesheim et al., 1993) and means comparisons (Hinkin and Tracey, 1999) converged, and
identified items that loaded ambiguously across multiple domains of EP. We discarded these items from further investigations.
DEMO order to develop an instrument that is not only valid, but DEMO parsimonious and efficient for data collection purposes, we
conducted a third DEMO study to examine the reliability of single-item measures of identity centrality, DEMO to test alternate
wordings of items that stress the enduring nature of EP's feeling items. In order to obtain assessments from individuals with
DEMO kinds of backgrounds and experience (Amir and Sharon, 1991; Tsang DEMO Kwan, 1999), we conducted this pilot study
with two samples: MBA students registered to a graduate seminar in entrepreneurship at two US DEMO (n = 51), and
individuals recruited by a national panel DEMO organization on the basis that they were the founder of a privately-owned,
independent, seven-year old or less US-founded new venture with at least one employee (n = 111).
The survey instrument for both samples included 24 items targeting the identity centrality of inventing, founding and
development activities (eight items per domain). Results indicated that using multiple items for capturing identity centrality had
important drawbacks. In their open-ended comments at DEMO end of the survey, several respondents commented that our
questions were DEMO Building on observations by Sackett and Larson (1990) that using single-item measures could be
warranted when the construct of interest is clear to DEMO and sufficiently narrow, we therefore considered the possibility
of using single DEMO of identity centrality for each domain. Following Wanous and Hudy (2001; see also Wanous et al., 1997),
we assessed the reliability DEMO single-item indicators of identity centrality for each domain by using principal component analysis
and examining the items' communalities (h2) — the proportion of variance that each item has in common with other items. We
report DEMO results of these analyses in Appendix B, Table B1.
Analyses revealed DEMO the single target items we had tested in the first pilot study exhibited high communalities with other
items targeting the same dimensions. For MBA DEMO and entrepreneurs, respectively, we observed h2 values of .71 and .70 for
inventing; .81 and .80 for founding; and .79 and .83 DEMO developing. These findings suggest that the single items targeting identity
centrality in Pilot Study 1 exhibit at least 70% of shared variance of with DEMO items targeting the same constructs. Consistent
with Wanous and Hudy (2001), these observations support the reliability of a parsimonious single-item approach to capturing
the centrality of inventing, founding and developing activities to the self-identity of entrepreneurs.
Since we theorized that EP's positive feelings are more enduring DEMO the experience of episodic emotions associated with
external stimuli (Wincent et DEMO, 2008), we also examined the relevance of formulating items that DEMO stressed the
enduring nature of these feelings. To this aim, a DEMO of 16 MBA participants completed two versions of the survey, two DEMO
apart. The first version included the same items we tested in the first pilot study; the second version had reworded items that
stressed the long-term experience of EP's intense positive feelings (e.g., ‘ Searching DEMO new ideas for products/services gives me
durable feelings of joy.’). The 111 entrepreneurs in this pilot study completed only the ‘enduring’ items.
DEMO present the items and relevant analyses in Appendix C. For the student data, correlations between the corresponding items
for intense positive feelings for inventing and for developing were all significant at the .01-level (average correlations of .66 and
.64 (p≤ .01), respectively). Inter-item correlations were smaller in magnitude and not significant for three of the five items
targeting DEMO positive feelings for founding. In addition to the limited power afforded by the small sample size, we suspect
that MBA students might have less consistent feelings for founding than entrepreneurs. To examine this possibility, we compared
the results of Pilot Study 1 and Pilot Study 3. Principal component DEMO confirmatory factor analyses revealed that the relationships
between the items and their intended domain of activities were the same across the original and revised DEMO (cf. Table C1). We
conclude that from a reliability standpoint, the extra language stressing the long-term nature of EPs' feelings was thus not
necessary.
6. Main study: validation of the instrument with experienced entrepreneurs
Building on the three pilot studies above, we fine-tuned the instructions and items, and developed a survey to explore the
relationships between EP and other relevant concepts. Through this study, we sought to establish the internal consistency,
reliability, and structural validity of our proposed instrument, as DEMO as its discriminant and criterion validity.
6.1. Participants and procedures
We conducted the study with a sample of experienced entrepreneurs identified through the same DEMO we employed
for Pilot Study 1. We selected all remaining members (DEMO = 3085) of the population of entrepreneurs that corresponded to our
DEMO after removing those who had been contacted for the pilot study and those with only one employee (the entrepreneur
him or herself). We sent potential participants a postcard inviting them to take part in the DEMO Participants could complete the
study online using the web address provided on the card or on a paper questionnaire that was mailed one week DEMO The only
incentive offered for participation was a summary of the study results. Surveys for 404 respondents were undeliverable and 14
Please cite this DEMO as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual DEMO and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/DEMO
8 M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
company representatives indicated that their businesses had closed, reducing our DEMO frame to 2667. We sent two reminder
invitations two weeks apart. Of the 168 surveys received after a month, 10 had incomplete sets of answers. The final sample of
158 thus corresponds to a response rate DEMO 5.9% — a rate relatively consistent with other studies using D&B databases for research
on entrepreneurs (cf. Hmieleski and Baron, 2009), DEMO for surveys of upper-echelon managers (cf. Bartholomew and Smith,
2006)DEMO We observed no significant differences in target or control variables between early and late respondents, or between
respondents' and non-respondents' firm characteristics (DEMO, number of employees, or sales).
Respondents ranged in age from 26 to 85 years old (average = 48.6 years, S.D. = DEMO years). In terms of new venture
experience, 94 respondents (59.5%) had founded a single new venture in their career, whereas 25 (15.8%) had founded two, and
16 (10.1%) had founded three. DEMO three entrepreneurs in our sample had founded more than six new ventures in their career
(two had seven, and one had 10). DEMO average, respondents indicated having 12.1 years of industry experience before they
DEMO their current firm. The typical firm had a median age of seven years (average = 8.6), and median of five employees
(average DEMO 15.1). D&B databases report median sales of $295,000 for 2007 (average = $811,500).
6.2. Measures
Building on the pilot study results, the survey included 15 items for measuring EP's intense positive feelings (12 items) and
identity centrality (3 items) across DEMO three domains of inventing, founding and developing. Consistent with our validation
DEMO, the survey also included validated measures of affective and cognitive variables DEMO we expected to be related to yet
distinct from EP. We measured entrepreneurs' hope via the instrument developed by Snyder et al. (1991) and used the PANAS
scale (Watson et al., 1988) to capture respondents' recent experiences of positive and negative emotions. We also included
measures of entrepreneurial self-efficacy devised by Chen et al. (1998).
Consistent with our theoretical developments above, the survey also included measures of target outcomes thought to be
related to EP, including creativity, persistence, and absorption in current activities. We measured creativity using a 13-item scale
developed by DEMO and George (2001) that has been used in many studies of creativity in the workplace (e.g., Gilson and Shalley,
2004; Perry-Smith, 2006; Zhou, 2003). To measure persistence, we used items DEMO by Baum and Locke (2004). Finally, we
measured absorption using 7 items developed by Schindehutte et al. (2006). To minimize the common-method biases inherent in
surveys (cf. Podsakoff et al., 2003), DEMO guaranteed the anonymity of respondents and counterbalanced question order. We also
included measures of participants' learning goals (Button et al., 1996) as DEMO variables. Because this concept is unrelated to
EP's dimensions and domains, it provides an opportunity to assess the presence of common method bias (cf. Williams et al.,
2010).
6.3. Measurement model and analyses
Consistent with the theoretical considerations discussed above, we develop a measurement model that specifically articulates
EP's two dimensions – intense positive feelings and DEMO centrality – across the three domains of inventing, founding, and
developing. From a measurement standpoint, the theoretical arguments of Cardon et al. (DEMO) point towards a three-order
multidimensional construct (Edwards, 2001). We DEMO this measurement model in Fig. 1, which also specifies the
relationships DEMO the dimensions and their indicators (Diamantopoulos and Siguaw, 2006; Edwards, 2011; MacKenzie et al.,
2005).
At the lower order, DEMO measurement of intense positive feelings and identity centrality toward each domain of activity is
reflective (Bollen and Lenox, 1991). This implies that DEMO entrepreneur's intense feelings toward developing activities should be
consistently reflected in his or her answers across a series of items targeting feelings towards DEMO activities. At the
intermediate level, and consistent with both our theoretical DEMO and pilot study observations, we advance that feelings
and identity centrality DEMO separate dimensions of EP for each domain of inventing, founding, and developing. Because it is
theoretically possible that an entrepreneur would experience intense DEMO feelings for some activities without these activities
being necessarily central to his or her identity, we model the relationships between EP and its two dimensions of intense positive
feelings and identity centrality as formative (Bagozzi, DEMO; Diamantopoulos et al., 2008; Howell et al., 2007; Kline, 2005). Finally,
consistent with theory, we advance that respondents' DEMO of EP need not be simultaneously high (or low) across all
domains of activity: in other words, an entrepreneur may experience more DEMO for one particular domain of activity and less
so for another. To model this important distinction in measurement terms, we advance that the relationships between measures
of EP in each domain and an overall assessment of DEMO are formative (Bagozzi, 2007; Diamantopoulos et al., 2008; Howell DEMO al.,
2007). Fig. 1 clarifies the reflective and formative aspects of our model, and is consistent with recent discussions about the
formulation of hybrid multidimensional models (cf. Bollen, 2007; Edwards, 2001, 2011). As such, the model suggests that
different entrepreneurs will report different patterns of feelings and identity centrality toward the domains of inventing, founding
and developing.
We discuss below the specific findings reported in Fig. 1. DEMO analyses with all 15 items from the survey revealed that
one feeling item for founding exhibited low item-total correlations, and one feeling item for developing exhibited evidence of
cross-loadings across domains (high modification indices). We discarded these items from further analyses.
We conducted our Confirmatory Factor Analyses (CFA) using AMOS 18, and Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE)
procedures. For all other statistical analyses, we used SPSS 18. In line with recommendations by Edwards (2001) and Hoyle and
Panter (1995), we used several fit indices to evaluate the soundness of our models. We DEMO on indices that are deemed more
Please cite this article as: DEMO, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
.32
.16
.33
.30
.09
.35
.32
.38
.10
Υ IPF-inv 1
DEMO IPF-inv 2
Υ IPF-inv 3
Υ IPF-inv 4
Υ IC-inv
Υ IPF-fnd 1
Υ IPF-fnd 2
Υ IPF-fnd 3
Υ IC-fnd
.88 / .75
DEMO / .88
.84 / .73
.81 / .73
.84 / .92
.93 / .70
1.0 / .74
.73 / .59
.90 / .95
M.S. DEMO et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
IPF -
inventing
IC -
inventing
IPF -
founding
IC -
founding
1.0 / .44
EP -
inventing
1.0 / .48
1.0 / .33
EP -
founding
1.0 / .56
1.0
1.0
Correlations between latent
constructs
IPF-inv  IC-inv  =  .52
IPF-inv  IPF-fnd = .53
IPF-inv  IC-fnd  =  DEMO
IPF-inv  IPF-dev = .52
IPF-inv  IC-dev  =  .36
IC-inv    IPF-fnd = .27
IC-inv    IC-fnd  =  .29
IC-inv    IPF-dev = .23
IC-inv    IC-dev  =  .27
IPF-fnd  IC-fnd  =  .80
IPF-fnd  IPF-dev = .69
IPF-fnd  IC-dev  =  .69
IC-fnd    IPF-dev = .36
IC-fnd    IC-dev  =  .62
DEMO / .41
1.0 / .46
EP - overall
1.0
9
.38
Υ IPF-dev 1
.93 / .72
.37
Υ IPF-dev 2
1.0 / .75
DEMO -
developing
.36
Υ IPF-dev 3
.84 / .70
.08 Υ IC-dev .90 / .95 IC -
developing
Fig. 1. Measurement model and results DEMO confirmatory factor analysis.Note. Un-standardized coefficients appear before the slash; standardized coefficients DEMO
For ease of reading, we omitted covariance relationships between latent variables DEMO the figure. IPF = intense positive feelings; IC = identity centrality; and EP =
entrepreneurial passion.Consistent with standard CFA practices, we allowed latent constructs for IPF-inventing, founding and developing to load ‘freely’ on all but
one of their respective items — and this to allow for proper DEMO identification. Because of this, the correlations reported above depart slightly from DEMO reported
in Table 1, although they remain in the same order DEMO magnitude (Cohen, 1992).In order to examine the structural validity of our measures, we include in this CFA
model an overall construct of EP across all domains. Future research should investigate antecedents and consequences of DEMO's dimensions in each domain
separately, and not through an overall DEMO construct.
stable for smaller samples, such as the comparative fit index (CFI) and incremental fit index (IFI) (Fan et al., 1999). For both
indices, we used an ideal target criterion of .95 and above to indicate adequate fit (Hu and Bentler, 1999; Marsh et al., 2004).
Given the tradeoffs between Type I and Type II error noted for the behavior of fit indices in sample sizes DEMO than 250, we
follow Hu and Bentler's (1999: p. DEMO) suggestion to use a combination rule of root mean square error DEMO approximation (RMSEA)
less than .06 and standardized root mean square DEMO (SRMR) of less than .09. Following standard practices in structural
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial DEMO: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
1.0 / .40
1.0
EP -
developing
1.0 / DEMO
1.0 / .43
10 M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
equation methods to compare the fit of nested models (Edwards, 2001; John and Benet-Martinez, 2000; Williams et al., 2010), DEMO
used Chi-square difference tests to evaluate the soundness of alternate models that include the same indicators with different
path specifications. Combined with an examination DEMO modification indices (for evidence of cross-loadings), such comparison
technique provides DEMO for the structural validity of our model (cf. Edwards, 2001; DEMO), for assessing the presence of
common method bias (cf. Williams DEMO al., 2010), and for examining the discriminant validity of our DEMO (cf. Eby et al., 2008;
Lewis, 2003).
6.4. DEMO
In the following sections, we present our findings regarding different aspects DEMO validity. We report in Appendix D the
instructions, scale anchors and DEMO items composing our measure.
6.4.1. Are the measures of EP's intense positive feelings consistent and reliable?
We used scale analysis techniques to DEMO items that exhibited poor item-to-total correlations to their intended construct.
Netemeyer et al. (2003, p.145) recommend retaining items that show item-to-total correlations in the .50 to .80 range. Item-total
correlations were all above .65 for DEMO feelings for inventing subscale (average = .69), above .51 for DEMO feelings for founding
subscale (average = .54), and above .57 DEMO the feelings for developing subscale (average = .60). This indicates DEMO
relationships between items and their intended domain. Alpha reliabilities for the subscales were .85, .72 and .77 respectively.
These findings suggest that the items are reliable and form internally consistent subscales.
6.4.2. Are measures intense positive DEMO distinct from measures of identity centrality?
Table 1 reports the means, standard deviations and correlations for the Study. Building on the above results, the measures for
intense positive feelings (IPF) for inventing, founding DEMO developing in these analyses (as well as in subsequent regression
analyses) consist of the summated average score for their respective items (four items for IPF-inventing, and three each for IPF-
founding and IPF-developing). Consistent with prior work, correlations provide a first line of evidence for the discriminant
validity of specific constructs within our overall model.3 We first observe DEMO correlations of .45, .62 and .38 between
feelings for inventing, founding, and developing, and their corresponding identity centrality items (all p≤ .01). This observation
suggests that though they are related, feelings and identity centrality items only share moderate amounts of variance. Second, we
note that save for the .55-correlation (p≤ .01) between the feelings for founding DEMO the identity centrality of developing, the
cross-domain correlations between feelings and DEMO items tend to be significant but are smaller in magnitude.
To further examine the discriminant validity of feelings and centrality items, and consistent with the methods advocated in
validation monographs from Bagozzi, Yi, and Phillips (1991) and John and Benet-Martinez (2000), we used confirmatory factor
DEMO (CFA) to evaluate the fit of alternate measurement models where feelings and identity centrality items for each domain
loaded as separate dimensions of DEMO superordinate formative construct (e.g., the subset model of EP-inventing in Fig. 1), or
together on a single construct (cf. Edwards, 2001; 2011).4
Results indicate that for each domain of EP, the fit of the superordinate target model was better than that of the single
DEMO model (for EP-inventing: CFI = .99/.45; Δχ2 = 166.2; p≤ .001; for EP-founding: CFI = .95/.85; Δχ2 20.9; DEMO .001; for
EP-developing: CFI = 1.0/.36; Δχ2 = 92.8; p≤ .001). To further establish the validity of these observations, we report in Table 2
the factor loadings (squared correlations) of tau-equivalent DEMO (where all the paths between latent constructs and indicators
are fixed DEMO 1, as they would be when using summated average scores). DEMO indicate that the fit of the models for EP-inventing
and EP-developing is above commonly-accepted criteria, and not worse than that of unconstrained congeneric model (no
modification indices; Δχ2 6.8; p = .08 for EP-inventing, DEMO Δχ2 4.1; p = .13 for EP-developing). However, results indicate that
constraining the paths of EP-founding items lowers model fit below acceptable DEMO Modification indices revealed that
entrepreneurs who express high levels of intense positive feelings for founding also tend to systematically report high levels of
identity DEMO for founding (hence the lower fit associated with constrained paths). DEMO, the fit of this model remains
well above that of a DEMO model where feelings and identity items would load together. Taken together, DEMO
observations support the validity of modeling feelings and identity centrality as two distinct dimensions of EP within each of the
three domains of inventing, founding, and developing.
6.4.3. Is EP differentiated across the three domains of inventing, founding, and developing?
Results in Table 1 indicate that DEMO measures of intense positive feelings for inventing, founding and developing exhibit
DEMO correlations among themselves (.42, .43, .54), yet these correlations DEMO not overly large: for instance, feelings for
3 A rigorous assessment of the relationships between our measures and relevant concepts required that we DEMO only consider the signiﬁcance of these
correlations, but also that we DEMO judgments about their magnitude (Cohen, 1992). To facilitate this task, we used the benchmarks advocated by Shipp et al.
(2009): DEMO interpreted statistically signiﬁcant correlations that were equal or smaller than .30 as ‘small’, signiﬁcant correlations between .30 and .50 as
‘moderate’, and signiﬁcant DEMO greater than .50 as ‘large’ . Because they are higher than the guidelines proposed by Cohen (1992), these benchmarks
provide added rigor, DEMO strategy that is particularly appropriate in the context of self-reported measures of variables that are conceptually close.
4 In order to conduct these analyses DEMO a rigorous manner, we ﬁxed the path coefﬁcient between the identity DEMO construct and its indicator to the square
root of the communality documented in Pilot Study 3, and the error variance of the indicator to the item variance times 1.0 minus its communality (cf. Edwards,
2011; Kline, 2005; Lewis, 2003). This allowed us to run DEMO analyses in spite of the single indicator for centrality.
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
1
1
3
1
2
Table 1
Means, standards deviations, reliabilities (α) and correlations for DEMO study.
Variables M SD 1 2 3
4567 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1718 19
1. IPF-inventing 4.08 0.69 (.85)
2. IPF-founding 4.29 0.65 .42⁎⁎ (.72)
3. IPF-developing 4.03 0.73 .43⁎⁎ .54⁎⁎ (.77)
4. IC-inventing 4.15 0.73 .45⁎⁎ .22⁎⁎ .18⁎
5. IC-founding 4.19 0.98 .21⁎⁎ .62⁎⁎ .30⁎⁎ .25⁎⁎
6. IC-developing 4.06 0.93 .32⁎⁎ DEMO .38⁎⁎ .24⁎⁎ .56⁎⁎
7. Learning goals 4.37 0.58 .46⁎⁎ .29⁎⁎ .32⁎⁎ .36⁎⁎ .14 .17⁎ (.86)
8. Hopefulness 3.51 0.41 .38⁎⁎ .42⁎⁎ .28⁎⁎ .43⁎⁎ .26⁎⁎ .27⁎⁎ .35⁎⁎ (.86)
9. Postv emotns 3.96 0.65 .54⁎⁎ .50⁎⁎ .44⁎⁎ .33⁎⁎ .33⁎⁎ .19⁎ .46⁎⁎ .43⁎⁎
10. Negatv emotns 2.16 0.81 −.00 DEMO −.01 −.04 −.04 −.02 .00 −.29⁎⁎ −.03
11. ESE innov. 3.97 0.79 .54⁎⁎ .36⁎⁎ .23⁎⁎ .36⁎⁎ .22⁎⁎ .25⁎⁎ .28⁎⁎ .49⁎⁎ .39⁎⁎ −.20⁎ (.82)
12. ESE mgmt 4.05 0.60 .44⁎⁎ .38⁎⁎ .36⁎⁎ .44⁎⁎ .22⁎⁎ .23⁎⁎ .44⁎⁎ DEMO .41⁎⁎ −.13 .56⁎⁎ (.74)
13. Creativity 4.37 0.55 .64⁎⁎ .35⁎⁎ DEMO .53⁎⁎ .29⁎⁎ .34⁎⁎ .41⁎⁎ .51⁎⁎ .48⁎⁎ −.13 .58⁎⁎ .50⁎⁎ (.90)
DEMO Persistence 3.92 0.61 .38⁎⁎ .34⁎⁎ .27⁎⁎ .32⁎⁎ .32⁎⁎ .29⁎⁎ .40⁎⁎ .40⁎⁎ .48⁎⁎ .02 .21⁎⁎ .43⁎⁎ .40⁎⁎ (.76)
15. Absorption 3.95 0.59 .33⁎⁎ .35⁎⁎ .35⁎⁎ .29⁎⁎ .42⁎⁎ .29⁎⁎ .36⁎⁎ .36⁎⁎ .37⁎⁎ −.20⁎ .29⁎⁎ .37⁎⁎ .40⁎⁎ .35⁎⁎ (.76)
16. Gender − 0.09 0.31 −.25⁎⁎ −.05 −.13 −.17⁎ .06 DEMO −.05 −.03 −.15 .07 −.11 −.02 −.02 .02 −.00
17. Education 4.10 1.25 .01 −.07 −.10 −.02 −.08 −.10 −.06 −.06 .02 .01 −.04 DEMO −.05 .00 .03 −.05
18. Age(ln) 48.62 9.87 −.07 −.06 DEMO .19⁎ −.01 −.04 −.05 .06 −.09 −.18⁎ .00 .03 .01 −.08 .08 −.03 .03
19. Firms fnd(ln) 1.56 1.80 .24⁎⁎ .11 .15 .17⁎ .05 .24⁎⁎ .18⁎ .13 .03 −.16⁎ .19⁎ .11 .09 .06 .09 −.29⁎⁎ DEMO .17⁎
20. Firm age(ln) 8.63 6.61 −.02 .13 .10 .06 DEMO .09 .09 .08 .06 −.11 .080 .09 .13 .11 .14 −.01 .01 .32⁎⁎ .05
Note. Reliability indices (α ) are displayed in parentheses on the diagonal; n = 158 entrepreneurs/firms (n = 128 for DEMO 08–10’,Δ‘size 08–10’ and ‘Δ sales’); IPF = intense positive feelings; IC = identity centrality;
ESE = entrepreneurial self-efficacy; and (ln) = indicates variables that were ln-transformed for subsequent analyses in order to control for non-normal distribution (mean and standard deviations = non-transformed
values). Measures for IPF-inventing, founding and developing consist of the summated average score for their respective items.
⁎⁎ p≤ .01.
⁎ p≤ .05.
M.S. Cardon DEMO al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
11
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial DEMO: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
12 M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
founding and developing share no more than 29% of variance (DEMO ). In a similar fashion, the correlations between the centrality
items are significant (.25, .24, 56) but suggest low to moderate DEMO of shared variance.
To further examine the validity of differentiating between the measures of passion in the three domains of inventing,
founding, and developing, we used CFA techniques to examine the structural validity of the target model represented in Fig. 1.5
Although our sample size is small DEMO test such a complex model in a robust fashion, results suggest DEMO model fit is only slightly
outside of the ideal criteria for fit (CFI = .93; IFI = .93; SRMR = .04; RMSEA DEMO .08). The path coefficients represented in Fig. 1 are
all significant at the .001 level, and account for an average of 61% of the variance in individual items.
To further assess the structural consistency of DEMO measures, we tested a tau-equivalent model with all relationships between
latent DEMO and their indicators fixed at 1. Fit indices were similar to that of the congeneric model in Fig. 1 (CFI = .92;
IFI = .92; SRMR = .05; RMSEA = .08), the χ27-difference DEMO 12.4 between the tau and congeneric models was non-significant
(p = DEMO), and the correlations between EP's domains and dimensions proved similar. These observations provide further support
for the structural validity of our proposed DEMO, where passion for inventing, founding, and developing are viewed as DEMO
constructs.
More importantly, the fit of the target model in Fig. DEMO is largely superior to that of an alternate model where the centrality
items load together with the feelings items for each domain (CFI = .68; IFI = .69; SRMR = .13; RMSEA = .16; DEMO = 208.9;
p≤ .001), to that of a model where all items across all domains load together on a single EP construct (CFI = .33; IFI = .34;
SRMR = .46; RMSEA DEMO .23; Δχ213 = 492.1; p≤ .001), or to that of a model where the identity centrality items load together on
their own DEMO construct, separate from three latent constructs for the feelings items in DEMO domain (CFI = .00; IFI = .02;
SRMR = .08; RMSEA = .29; Δχ2 = 793.1; p≤ .001).6 Taken together, these results provide converging support that treating EP's
dimensions of feelings and identity centrality separately across the three domains of inventing, founding and developing is both
theoretically and empirically sound.
Consistent with recent discussions about DEMO specification of multidimensional measurement models (Bollen, 2007; Edwards,
2001, 2011), it is important to observe that in the context of DEMO specific tests we conduct here, the superordinate latent construct
of EP DEMO all domains is only a statistical tool to assess the validity of distinguishing between the experience of EP across the
three domains of inventing, founding, and developing. An overall measure of EP across all domains is theoretically inconsistent,
and should not be used in empirical investigations of DEMO antecedents and/or effects of passion. From a technical perspective,
Edwards (2011) observes that “if the construct associated with formative measures is DEMO as nothing more than a
combination of its measures, then the DEMO itself can be eliminated from the model, and the relationships between DEMO
measures and other variables can be examined jointly” (p. 384). DEMO in all, these theoretical, methodological and empirical
observations reinforce the importance of examining the specific antecedents and consequences of EP for the different DEMO of
inventing, founding, and developing.
6.4.4. Are common-method biases affecting our results?
Building on the work of Brannick et al. (2010) DEMO Williams et al. (2010), we tested for the presence of DEMO common-
method bias (Podsakoff et al., 2003) by comparing a DEMO of models that included a marker variable thought to be unrelated to
EP's dimensions and domains — in this case, a measure of participants' learning goals (Button et al., 1996). Comparisons between
baseline and constrained models (cf. Williams et al., 2010) indicate that if there were method biases, these were unlikely to be
uniform across all items (Δχ2 = 3.35; p = .07). Accordingly, we tested an un-constrained model to assess the magnitude of a
possible methods effect: results revealed that on average, the methods factor explained 10.6% of item variance and 14.1% of
construct reliability — values that are substantially lower DEMO the 32% value documented by Doty and Glick (1998). Lastly,DEMO
comparisons between the un-constrained and restricted model (cf. Williams et al., 2010) indicate that the presence of small
method biases does not affect the pattern of correlations between EP's dimensions within and across domains (Δχ2 = 4.46; n.s.).
These observations support the notion that common-method biases are unlikely to affect the validity of our proposed measures.
6.4.5. DEMO the dimensions of EP distinct from other psychological constructs?
We followed similar procedures as reported in Section 6.4.3 above to investigate the extent DEMO which each domain and
dimension of EP is empirically distinct from conceptually related affective and cognitive variables — namely entrepreneurs'
hopefulness, their experience of positive and negative emotions, and their entrepreneurial self-efficacy. Results displayed in
Table 1 show that the correlations between the dimensions of EP across DEMO three domains and relevant affective and cognitive
variables were generally moderate in magnitude (i.e., between .30 and .50; cf. Shipp et al., DEMO). For instance, we found that
feelings for each domain of DEMO were moderately correlated with hopefulness (with r of .38, .42, DEMO .28 (all p≤ .01). Correlations
between the identity centrality items DEMO hopefulness were similar (with r of .43, .26, and .27 (all p≤ .01). To further assess the
nomological validity of our DEMO, we compared alternate CFA models with different model specifications (cf. Edwards, 2001;
Lewis, 2003; Williams et al., 2010). Results DEMO that for all three domains of EP, the fit of a DEMO model treating hopefulness as
5 In order to test this measurement model, we followed the guidelines set forth in Edwards (2011) that “to achieve identiﬁcation, the loadings relating to (the
formative relationships) must be ﬁxed to constant (2011: 382–3).”
6 Given the complexity added DEMO the inclusion of centrality measures for all three domains, we also DEMO simpler CFA models that only included intense
positive feeling items. Results indicate that the ﬁt of a target model treating each domain as its DEMO latent construct was superior to that of a model where all
items load on an overall measure (CFI = .95/.72; IFI = DEMO/73; SRMR = .04/08; RMSEA = .08/17; Δχ2 DEMO 136.4; p≤ .001).
Please cite this article as: Cardon, DEMO, et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,DEMO
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
9
9
1
DEMO
3
M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) DEMO
13
Table 2
Relationships between feelings and identity centrality items.
Domain and item # Validated items
IPF-inv1
IPF-inv2
IPF-inv3
IPF-inv4
IC-inv1
IPF-fnd1
IPF-fnd2
IPF-fnd3
DEMO
IPF-dev1
IPF-dev2
IPF-dev3
IC-dev1
CFA factor loadings
(squared correlations)
tau-equivalent DEMO
It is exciting to figure out new ways to solve unmet market needs that can be commercialized. .58
Searching for new ideas for products/DEMO to offer is enjoyable to me. .68
I am motivated to figure out how to make existing products/services better. .57
Scanning the environment DEMO new opportunities really excites me. .58
Inventing new solutions to problems is an important part of who I am. .84
Correlation between IPF and DEMO constructs .52
Establishing a new company excites me. .44
Owning my own company energizes me. .51
Nurturing a new business through its emerging success DEMO enjoyable. .44
Being the founder of a business is an important part of who I am. .90
Correlation between IPF and IC constructs .79
DEMO really like finding the right people to market my product/service to. .49
Assembling the right people to work for my business is exciting. DEMO
Pushing my employees and myself to make our company better motivates me. .55
Nurturing and growing companies is an important part of who I DEMO .90
Correlation between IPF and IC constructs .46
CFI
RMR
RMSEA
.98 .88 1.0
.05 .08 .04
.08 .19 .02
Note. IPF = intense DEMO feelings; IC = identity centrality; and tau-eq. = tau-equivalent model (DEMO fixed to 1).
a separate construct is significantly better than the fit of a model collapsing hopefulness and EP items on a single DEMO construct
(Δχ2≤ .001). These observations support our argument that EP DEMO conceptually and empirically distinct from hopefulness.
We also find supportive evidence for a relationship between EP and positive affect, but not with negative affect. Correlations
between feelings for inventing, founding and developing and positive affect were .54, .50 and .44 (p≤ .01), but near zero (and
negative) with negative affect. With r of .33, .33 (p≤ .01) and .19 (p≤ .05) for positive affect and near zero for negative affect,
correlations between identity centrality indicators and positive/negative affect DEMO a similar pattern. Here as well,
comparisons of alternate model specifications revealed that the fit of CFA models treating positive or negative emotions DEMO
separate constructs from EP were significantly better than the fit of models collapsing positive or negative emotions together with
EP items on a single DEMO construct (Δχ2≤ .001). These observations support the notion that EP DEMO conceptually and empirically
distinct from the experience of either positive or negative emotions. We report additional results below about the enduring
nature of EP DEMO
We used the same techniques to investigate the relationships between EP and two dimensions of self-efficacy: innovation self-
efficacy and management self-efficacy (Chen DEMO al., 1998; Zhao et al., 2005). We found that DEMO feelings for all three domains were
significantly correlated with innovation self-efficacy (DEMO = .54, .36, and .23 (p≤ .01)), as were the identity centrality measures for
the three domains (r = .36, DEMO, and .25 (p≤ .01)). Similarly, we found that feelings and identity centrality for the three domains
were significantly correlated with managerial DEMO (with r of .44, .38, and .36 (p≤ .01) DEMO feelings for inventing, founding,
and developing respectively, and .44, DEMO and .23 for identity centrality of those domains). Comparisons of alternate model
revealed that the fit of CFA models treating either measure of DEMO as a separate construct from EP was significantly better than the
fit of models collapsing measures of ESE together with EP items on a DEMO construct (Δχ2≤ .001). As above, these results indicate
that for all three domains of inventing, founding and developing, EP and innovation DEMO, and EP and managerial self-
efficacy are best modeled as empirically DEMO variables, rather than as loading on the same latent construct.
6.4.6. DEMO different entrepreneurs report different levels of EP?
As part of our effort to establish the criterion validity of our proposed measures of EP, it is relevant to explore the extent to
which EP's different DEMO and domains vary systematically with key individual variables. Past studies refer to this aspect of
validation as known-group validity (Lewis, 2003; Spector, DEMO). As we noted in our theoretical development, it is theoretically
DEMO that levels of EP towards inventing, founding and developing vary with DEMO particular challenges faced by entrepreneurs
at different moments in the growth of their ventures, or according to background and life experiences. To examine this question,
we regressed entrepreneurs' reported experience of EP on the key characteristics of gender, age, highest level of education
achieved, number of firms founded in the past, and current firm age. Results indicated that entrepreneurs' intense positive
feelings toward inventing are significantly higher for males (DEMO = .42; p = .02) and increase with the number of firms founded in
the past (B = .22; p = .02)DEMO Evidence also suggests that entrepreneurs' intense positive feelings and identity centrality DEMO
founding increase with the age of their firm (B = .14; p≤ .05, and B = .27; p≤ .01, respectively). This indicates that entrepreneurs
from older firms still experience intense feelings for founding DEMO are deeply attached to their identity as founders. Finally, we
observed DEMO entrepreneurs' identity centrality toward developing is positively related to the number DEMO firms they have founded
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
14 M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
Table 3
Criterion validity: relationships between the dimensions of EP DEMO relevant target behaviors.
Variable Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5
DV: creativity DV: creativity DV: persistence DV: persistence DEMO: absorption
(Constant) 4.37⁎⁎⁎ 4.42⁎⁎⁎ 4.37⁎⁎⁎ 4.30⁎⁎⁎ 3.93⁎⁎ 3.86⁎⁎⁎ 3.93⁎⁎⁎ 3.91⁎⁎⁎ DEMO 3.93⁎⁎⁎
Gender .02 .27⁎⁎ .02 .02 .09 .08 .09 .10 .05 .08
Age(ln) −.14 −.14 −.14 −.07 −.43 −.35 −.43 −.36 .07 .13
Education −.03 −.02 −.03 −.03 .00 .00 .00 .02 .01 .02
Num. DEMO fnd(ln) .09 −.03 .09 .01 .08 .00 .08 −.00 .08 DEMO
Firm age(ln) .10 .10⁎ .10 .06 .12† .07 .12† .09 DEMO .06
IPF-inventing .41⁎⁎⁎
IC-inventing .24⁎⁎⁎
IPF∗ IC-invent. −.08
IPF-founding .34⁎⁎⁎ .31⁎⁎⁎
IC-founding .10† .15⁎
IPF∗ IC-found. .18⁎⁎⁎ .17⁎⁎
IPF-developing .17⁎⁎ .25⁎⁎⁎
IC-developing .14⁎⁎ .13⁎
DEMO IC-devel. .06 .10⁎
R2 .03 .54 .03 .21 .04 .21 .04 .14 .03 .20
ΔR2 .51⁎⁎⁎ .18⁎⁎⁎ .17⁎⁎⁎ .10⁎⁎⁎ .17⁎⁎⁎
F .9 21.5⁎⁎⁎ .9 DEMO 1.1 4.8⁎⁎⁎ 1.1 3.0⁎⁎ .8 4.5⁎⁎⁎
Note. n = 158 entrepreneurs; DEMO = intense positive feelings; IC = identity centrality; and (ln) = indicates variables that were ln-transformed for subsequent
analyses in order to DEMO for non-normal distribution (mean and standard deviations = non-transformed values).
DEMO for IPF-inventing, founding and developing consist of the summated average score DEMO their respective items. All variables were mean-centered prior to
the analyses.
⁎⁎⁎ p≤ .001.
⁎⁎ p≤ .01.
⁎ p≤ .05.
† pb .10.
in DEMO past (B = .39; p≤ .001). This suggests that habitual entrepreneurs are particularly passionate about growing the new
ventures they start.
Taken DEMO, the above findings confirm that our proposed measures can capture systematic DEMO in how
entrepreneurs with different background and characteristics experience EP across its different dimensions and domains.7 These
theoretically-consistent findings contribute to establish the criterion DEMO of our measures.
6.4.7. Are the dimensions of EP related to relevant behaviors?
We used regression techniques to examine relationships between EP and DEMO entrepreneurship-relevant behaviors:
creativity, persistence, and absorption in one's activities. This approach allowed us to investigate an important feature of our
model DEMO EP: the independent and interactive effects of feelings and identity centrality. DEMO further the rigor of our analyses, our
tests specifically focus on DEMO relationships advanced by Cardon et al. (2009b) in their conceptual model of the nature and
experience of EP, namely: a) the relationships between EP for inventing and EP for founding and creative problem-solving (cf.,
Propositions 2 and 4, p. 521); b) the relationships DEMO EP for founding and EP for developing and persistence (cf., Proposition
4 and 6, p. 521–522); and c) the relationship between DEMO for developing and absorption (Proposition 6, p. 522). Consistent with
our model, we found evidence that feelings and identity centrality can have distinct relationships with different individual-level
outcomes. More importantly, we observed significant interactions between EP's intense positive feelings and identity centrality.
We report the DEMO of these analyses in Table 3.
In support of the criterion validity of our measures, both feelings for inventing and identity centrality of inventing were
significantly and positively related to creativity (Model 1: B = DEMO, p≤ .001; and B = .24 p≤ .001). Feelings for founding were also
significantly and positively related to creativity (Model 2: DEMO = .34, p≤ .001), and there is evidence of a DEMO interaction
between feelings for founding and identity centrality for founding on creativity (Model 2: B = .18, p≤ .001). This indicates that the
significant and positive relationship between intense positive feelings towards founding and DEMO is larger in magnitude for
entrepreneurs who report that founding is very important to their identity than it is for entrepreneurs who report that DEMO is
less important.
We also found evidence of significant and positive relationships between feelings for founding and persistence (Model 3:
B = .31, p≤ .001), between identity centrality for founding and persistence (Model DEMO: B = .15, p≤ .05), and for an interaction
between feelings and identify centrality for founding in their relationships with persistence (Model 3: B = .17, p≤ .01). In
7
Additional tests DEMO rmed that our observations remain signiﬁ cant when controlling for ﬁrm size and industry.
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. DEMO (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) DEMO
15
concrete terms, this latter result indicates that the significant and DEMO relationship between intense positive feelings towards
founding and persistence increases in magnitude with the centrality of founding to an entrepreneurs' identity. Next, we DEMO
that both feelings and identity centrality for developing were significantly and positively related to persistence (Model 4: B = .17,
p≤ .01; and B = .14 p≤ .01).
Finally, we found evidence of significant and positive relationships between feelings for developing and absorption (Model 5:
B = .25, p≤ .001), between identity centrality for developing and absorption (Model 5: B = .13, p≤ .05), and for an interaction
between feelings and identity centrality for developing in their DEMO with absorption (Model 5: B = .10, p≤ .05). DEMO result
indicates that the significant and positive relationships between intense positive feelings towards developing and absorption is
larger in magnitude for entrepreneurs who report DEMO developing is very important to their identity than it is for entrepreneurs
who report that developing is less important.
Taken together, these observations indicate that our proposed measure can capture distinct relationships between the
experience of DEMO in different domains and relevant entrepreneurial behaviors. More importantly, our results DEMO to the
importance of considering the direct and multiplicative effects of intense positive feelings and identity centrality toward each
domain of entrepreneurial activity.
7. DEMO study: the enduring nature of EP
Based on Cardon et al. (2009a), we built our measurement on the idea that EP is DEMO enduring phenomenon, persisting over
several months or years. This helps distinguish DEMO from the experience of more temporary emotions. To assess this claim we
collected longitudinal data from a sample of entrepreneurs as part of a DEMO study. The sampling frame for this follow-up
study focused on entrepreneurs who ran high-technology manufacturing ventures in the US states of Indiana, Illinois, DEMO,
Ohio, and Missouri. We contacted entrepreneurs listed in Corptech Directory DEMO 1526 high tech companies in October of 2009
and asked them to participate in an online survey about the role of entrepreneurs in promoting DEMO initiatives in ventures.
The survey included the same 15 items used in the main study above. We received responses from 219 entrepreneurs (a 14.35%
response rate). On average, the responding firms were 7.9 years old, had 22 employees, and had sales of $1.25 million. The
responding DEMO were 38 years old on average, with more than 15 years DEMO industry experience. Five percent of the respondent
CEOs were female. We observed no significant differences in target or control variables between early and late DEMO, or
between respondents' and non-respondents' firm characteristics (as listed in Corptech).
Eighteen months after the initial survey (April 2011), we re-contacted all 219 entrepreneurs and sent them a follow-up survey
that contained DEMO same EP items. We received responses from 122 CEOs (a retention DEMO of 56.7%). To assess follow up bias, we
first measured DEMO error of the firms responding in the follow-up compared to firms not responding in the follow-up round.
Our tests indicated no significant biases or DEMO differences in returning versus non-returning respondents. Building on this
data, we DEMO the extent to which entrepreneurs' experience of EP's across different DEMO and dimensions had changed
over the 18-month period. We report these results in Table 4.
Results indicate that entrepreneurs' experience of passion was enduring. Paired t-tests of entrepreneurs' responses to each
item across the two periods did not reveal any significant differences. Pearson correlations were high and significant DEMO all items,
and measures of Cohen's kappa were well above the recommended cutoff of 0.8 (Landis and Koch, 1977). In DEMO to further
establish the enduring nature of EP, we tested the DEMO of alternate model formulations (cf. Vandenberg and Lance, 1992).
Results of these model comparisons provided evidence for configural equivalence (i.e., same DEMO of factors: CFI = .98;
SRMR = .02; RMSEA = .05), for metric equivalence (i.e., similar factor loadings: CFI = .97; SRMR = .02; RMSEA = .05), and for
Table DEMO
Enduring nature of EP: entrepreneurs' responses across time.
Domain of EP
and item #
Original item
Mean SD Mean SD
IPF-inv1 It is DEMO to figure out new ways to solve unmet market needs that can be 2.61 0.57 2.46 .30 −.23 .86⁎⁎⁎
commercialized.
IPF-inv2 Searching for new DEMO for products/services to offer is enjoyable to me. 2.34 0.41 2.44 .55 .15 .89
IPF-inv3 I am motivated to figure out how to DEMO existing products/services better. 2.64 0.37 2.32 .56 −.48 .88
IPF-inv4 Scanning the environment for new opportunities really excites me. 2.49 0.31 2.37 .39 DEMO .85
IC-inv1 Inventing new solutions to problems is an important part of who I am. 2.63 0.78 2.49 .56 −.15 .83
IPF-fnd1 Establishing a DEMO company excites me. 2.27 0.34 2.69 .32 .90 .87
IPF-fnd2 Owning my own company energizes me. 2.23 0.73 2.31 .37 .10 .89
IPF-fnd3 Nurturing DEMO new business through its emerging success is enjoyable. 2.70 0.37 2.44 .78 −.30 .80
IC-fnd1 Being the founder of a business is an important DEMO of who I am. 2.35 0.37 2.41 .40 .11 .87
IPF-dev1 I really like finding the right people to market my product/service to. DEMO 0.69 2.51 .78 .03 .86
IPF-dev2 Assembling the right people to work for my business is exciting. 2.34 0.57 2.4 .30 .09 .79
IPF-dev3 DEMO my employees and myself to make our company better motivates me. 2.61 0.72 2.46 .49 −.17 .82
IC-dev1 Nurturing and growing companies is an DEMO part of who I am. 2.34 0.37 2.30 .56 −.06 .86
Note. IPF = intense positive feelings; IC = identity centrality; inv = DEMO; fnd = founding; and dev = developing.
⁎⁎⁎ pb .001.
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
October
DEMO
April 2011 Paired
t-test
Pearson
r
Cohen's
κ
.96
.95
.94
.95
.94
.93
.94
.94
.95
.94
.93
.94
.94
Please cite DEMO article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: DEMO foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:DEMO/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
16 M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
scalar equivalence (i.e., similar intercepts: CFI = .98; SRMR = .01; RMSEA = .04). These observations provide support for the
enduring nature of EP, and of the temporal validity of our proposed measures of feelings and identity centrality for each of
the three domains DEMO inventing, founding, and developing. In addition, along with results documented DEMO Pilot Studies 1 and 3b
(cf., Appendix C), observations that our measurement model exhibited high levels of fit with this additional sample DEMO
entrepreneurs provide initial evidence of the generalizability of our measures.
8. Discussion
In spite of the central role that affect and emotions play in DEMO (e.g., Baron, 2008; Cardon et al., 2012; Foo et al.,
2009), theory and methods for studying the nature and DEMO of entrepreneurial passion (EP) have so far fallen short of the
substantial scholarly interest in the construct. The net result has been a DEMO of rigorous empirical findings about passion and its
effects. Seen in this light, the present paper makes important contributions at three distinct levels.
At a theoretical level, our work clarifies the ontological nature of EP, DEMO relevant dimensions (i.e., feelings and identity
centrality) and its domains (i.e., EP for inventing, founding, and developing). Our work thus builds on Cardon et al.'s (2009a)
model of entrepreneurial passion by articulating the often-overlooked dimension of identity centrality in empirical research on
DEMO (see Murnieks, et al., 2012 for a notable exception). DEMO point is theoretically significant: without the role of identity
centrality, the concept of passion may be little more than context-specific positive affect. By DEMO a model of EP that
encompasses both dimension of intense positive feelings and identity centrality, we contribute to refining theoretical
conceptualizations of passion. More importantly, the model and measures we develop in this paper specifically include
consideration of the interactive effects between the experience of intense positive feelings DEMO identity centrality.
At a methodological level, we contribute a validated set DEMO measures for investigating the antecedents and consequences of
EP's dimensions and domains. Because such an instrument was not available before, scholars interested in studying passion in
entrepreneurship had to rely on more generalized measures of DEMO, which do not reflect the challenges specific to
entrepreneurship (Murnieks, DEMO; Murnieks and Mosakowski, 2006). Along this line, our work DEMO that the domains and
dimensions of EP are distinct from each other, and from other affective and cognitive variables known to play a role in
entrepreneurship (e.g., hopefulness, the experience of positive and negative emotions, and entrepreneurial self-efficacy). By
developing and validating a set of measures for capturing EP's underlying dimensions in different domains, we thus provide a
concrete way to explore the nature of EP, such as why EP may systematically vary with the background and experience of
different entrepreneurs.
DEMO, at an empirical level, we contribute evidence that the relationships between EP and relevant outcomes vary between
different domains. Since our intention was DEMO to develop or test a model of the specific effects of passion on these outcomes, but
simply to provide evidence for the criterion validity of our measures, the findings we report in this regard should not be taken as
definitive evidence of these relationships. Our measures capture the DEMO and interactive relationships between EP's intense
positive feelings and identity centrality with relevant outcomes, which provides a rich basis upon which to advance research on
entrepreneurial passion, and more broadly, on the affective aspects DEMO entrepreneurial action.
8.1. Implications for future research
A primary implication of our work is to facilitate future research on the unique and distinct roles DEMO EP in entrepreneurship,
and especially to distinguish EP from other affective and emotional constructs. Recent empirical research in entrepreneurship has
moved beyond the DEMO for the unique personality characteristics of entrepreneurs (e.g., Zhao and Seibert, 2006; Zhao et al.,
2010); the new frontiers now DEMO the operation of cognitive processes that enable entrepreneurs' unique achievements (cf.
Grégoire et al., 2011), and/or the critical importance of affect and emotion in supporting entrepreneurial action (Baron, 2008;
Cardon et DEMO, 2012). In spite of increased interest in the latter, however, high-impact theoretical contributions have only recently
begun to be tested with rigorous empirical work (Foo, 2011; Foo et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2011).
By developing and testing the validity of a new instrument for measuring EP, we provide empirical evidence that EP and its
dimensions are empirically distinct from other constructs. Building on the instrument we DEMO and validate in this paper, it
becomes possible to investigate the DEMO effects of the domains of EP, over and above the effects DEMO other affective and
emotional components. In practice, we anticipate that such DEMO will first focus on the role and effects of EP on
different aspects of the entrepreneurial process. For instance, it has been argued that variations in entrepreneurial passion
could help explain why some individuals (but not others) are able to recognize or imagine opportunities to introduce new
products or services (Cardon et al., 2009a). But what exactly is DEMO impact of EP (particularly passion for inventing) on
individual efforts to identify entrepreneurial opportunities? Does EP simply induce would-be entrepreneurs to view any new
project in a more positive light, or does it enable some individuals to perceive unique patterns of meaning among noisy
environment signals (Baron and Ensley, 2006)? And if it does enable perception, what DEMO the contribution of EP to this process,
over and above that of prior knowledge and other individual dispositions (cf. Grégoire et al., DEMO; Shane, 2000)? Is theroleof
EP unique and separate, or DEMO it interact with other resources and dispositions to facilitate the identification of
entrepreneurial opportunities? By extension, are these relationships between EP and opportunity DEMO the same for
nascent and habitual entrepreneurs?
Similarly, identifying an DEMO for a new business does not guarantee entrepreneurial action. It is generally assumed that
particular motivations are needed for one to engage in actual DEMO to start a new venture and/or introduce new products or
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial DEMO: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) DEMO 17
services in the marketplace (Baum and Locke, 2004; McMullen DEMO Shepherd, 2006). Accordingly, it becomes legitimate to ask:
what is the role of EP in one's commitment to start a DEMO venture (especially in this case, passion for founding)? Is EP simply
another form of motivation towards entrepreneurship, or does it have unique implications for scholarly efforts to understand the
decision to start? Which domains of EP are particularly relevant for actual founding of ventures? Are these relationships
consistent for all entrepreneurs, or do they vary with their background and experience?
In the same vein, prior research suggests that EP could help explain why many entrepreneurs persist in the face of difficulties
DEMO uncertain outcomes (Utsch and Rauch, 2000). What is the unique contribution of EP and its dimensions to such persistence,
over and DEMO that of other motivating factors and/or affective dimensions? Does EP DEMO encourage entrepreneurs to
maintain their efforts or downplay the difficulties they encounter, or does it instead enable entrepreneurs to learn from their
circumstances and adapt their efforts in search of better outcomes? Likewise, we know DEMO not all entrepreneurs are equally
passionate about activities associated with the growth and development of new ventures, so does EP (especially EP for
DEMO) explain why some entrepreneurs devote considerable energy towards the growth and DEMO of their
ventures, especially after they have successfully passed the initial DEMO stages?
Many other questions could be investigated for these and other aspects of the entrepreneurial process. We believe that the
theoretical and methodological DEMO we make in this paper enable further explorations of EP. By extension, we suggest
that the instrument validated in this paper is not limited to research at the individual-level of analysis, but could be leveraged to
study the team and organizational implications of EP and its dimensions. The DEMO kind of questions highlighted above could be
asked with respect to the role of EP within organizational efforts towards innovation, strategic renewal and corporate
entrepreneurship. For instance, one could ask to what extent is passion contagious (e.g., Cardon, 2008), and what are the
mechanism and boundary conditions for passion to ‘grow’ among co-workers and employees? How does passion operate within
founding teams of new ventures, and do all members of the team need to be passionate in order to realize the potential DEMO of
passion? Should TMT members be equally passionate for the same DEMO and associated activities, or is a team with more balanced
passion DEMO (cf. Drnovsek et al., 2009)?
8.2. Limitations and avenues DEMO expansion
Naturally, our study is not without limitations. Theoretically, one could question whether the concept of EP is appropriately
limited to the three DEMO domains we focused on. Although we took great care to build our model on extant literature that
specifically discussed the nature of EP and DEMO articulation with respect to three salient roles to which individual entrepreneurs
may identify themselves, it remains theoretically possible that EP could include other domains. Accordingly, we believe that
future research could build upon our model to explore whether EP includes additional domains, and if so, what those DEMO are.
Methodologically, critics could object that our methods and findings are DEMO by the self-report nature of our observations, and
by our reliance DEMO a single method. In spite of the practical advantages of formulating our instrument on these grounds, we agree
that an interesting direction for future research would be to explore the convergent validity of our measures with DEMO obtained
from biophysical measures that capture the experience of feelings of passion regardless of what the participant is trying to
express or professes to DEMO In the same vein, it would seem important to explore the DEMO of experiencing different types of
passion not only on individual behaviors, DEMO also on firm-level outcomes like survival and growth. In this regard, DEMO believe that
the instrument we developed in this paper can be readily integrated with other data collection techniques and methods.
Finally, we must observe that with the exception of the last study, where we surveyed the same entrepreneurs 18 months
apart, all our other observations were cross-sectional. Interesting avenues for future research thus lie in exploring the antecedents
of EP, and the factors and dynamics that preside over its development and subsequent DEMO In this regard, important
questions for future research are to determine DEMO, to what extent, and why some individuals are naturally predisposed to
exhibit high levels of EP before they engage in entrepreneurial activities, or whether, to what extent, and why such high levels of
EP DEMO develop over time, as individuals engage in such entrepreneurial activities.
8.3. DEMO for using this measure
In order to ensure that the instrument we developed and validated has value for capturing entrepreneurs' levels of passion,
and for understanding the antecedents and consequences of passion, we offer several specific guidelines and suggestions about
the use of our measures.
First, we must guard scholars against the temptation of combining our items into an DEMO average-across-all-domains
measure of EP. Doing so would be inconsistent with extant theory about EP (Cardon et al., 2009a). It would also be
DEMO questionable. As we noted above, the higher-order latent construct of overall DEMO depicted in Fig. 1 has no
substantial meaning outside of a measurement model: it is only a statistical tool used to examine the pattern of correlations
across the dimensions and domains of EP. Further, our empirical results reinforce the in-appropriateness of compiling an average-
across-domains measure of EP.
DEMO, we recommend that empirical investigations of the antecedents and/or effects DEMO passion consider the three
domains of passion separately. Lumping all measures into an overall EP score is likely to obscure important and meaningful
distinctions DEMO the three domains of inventing, founding, and developing. These distinctions should be maintained. To
advance research in this idea, we need robust models that examine the relationships between a specific domain of passion
and its DEMO and outcomes, as well as the explanatory mechanisms for such relationships. DEMO the very different
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., DEMO al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
18 M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
types of activities involved, these models may differ for passion DEMO inventing, passion for founding, and passion for
developing. Scholars may choose to explore just one or multiple domains of passion as appropriate for DEMO particular
research question.
Second, we strongly recommend that future studies of DEMO integrate the two dimensions of intense positive feelings and
identity centrality. Both dimensions form an integral part of passion, and their interaction appears to be a critical aspect of EP. As
Cardon et al. (2009a) DEMO, “original future work in operationalizing entrepreneurial passion is needed to include DEMO
assessment of (1) the meaningfulness of individual role identities for the entrepreneur…, (2) the intensity of positive feelings for
activities associated with individual role identities…, and (3) a rule for combining the preceding evaluations to develop a
composite or latent entrepreneurial passion score for each DEMO (p. 527, emphasis in original). Accordingly, we encourage
scholars DEMO our instrument to measure both positive feelings and identity centrality for each domain, and to account for the
multiplicative effects of these dimensions.
Finally, we believe it useful to draw attention to the problems of range restriction that can arise when using 5-item Likert
scales. These problems are DEMO trivial, and can undermine the noticing of otherwise important relationships. To DEMO such
issues, and consistent with Aguinis et al. (2009), we recommend that future uses of our measures leverage wider scales and
anchors (cf. Appendix D). In short, while we believe the scales developed and validated here constitute an excellent starting point,
we believe that DEMO and methodological refinements are an integral part of the scholarship process.
9. Conclusion
Along with other affective and emotional dimensions, passion is at the very heart of the entrepreneurial experience. Yet past
research on EP has DEMO limited by the lack of means to translate extant theories into models that reflect the specific nature and
context of entrepreneurship, and strategies and tools that are methodologically sound. By developing and validating an
instrument for DEMO the dimensions and domains of EP, we hope to help advance DEMO research not only on the
antecedents and consequences of EP, but DEMO on the broader role of affect and emotion in what remains a fascinating human
endeavor.
Appendix A. Analyses and results of Pilot Study 2 (content validity)
Table A1 reports the results of content validity analyses DEMO for Pilot Study 2. Consistent with Schriesheim et al. (1993),
we conducted a Q-factor analysis of participants' ratings of each item on the three domains of inventing, founding, and
developing. Whereas traditional factor DEMO consists of examining correlations between variables across a sample of subjects,
Q-factor analysis focuses on the correlations between subjects across a sample of DEMO — in this case, participants' ratings of
each item on the three aforementioned domains. For both panels of academic experts (n = 32) and MBA students (n = 75 MBA),
results of Principal Component Analyses (PCA) converged on a four-factor solution. The four factors DEMO for 70.1% of the
variance in academic experts' ratings of the DEMO, vs. 64.6% of the variance in MBA students' ratings. In line with Schriesheim et al.
(1993: p. 400), we consider loadings DEMO .40 and above to indicate a meaningful association between an item and a particular
domain. To facilitate readings of the table, we only report loadings above .40. Results are similar across both panels, and tend to
group together items targeting intense positive for inventing, founding, developing, and a fourth factor that stresses the creation
and commercialization of new products DEMO services. At the same time, results in Table A1 point to DEMO that load on different
domains than intended, and/or that cross-load DEMO more than one factor — indicating poor content validity.
To further assess the validity of ambiguous items, we followed the procedures developed by Hinkin and Tracey (1999) and
supplemented the above observations with one-way analyses DEMO variance: this allowed us to specifically compare the mean
ratings of DEMO IPF item on its intended domain (inventing, founding, or developing), relative to its rating on the other two
domains. Table A1 also reports the percentage of participants who classified each item on its intended DEMO in a separate
sorting task. We indicate in bold the mean ratings for items that were significantly higher on their intended domain of EP. DEMO
instance, we observe that in both panels, all six items targeting IPF for inventing exhibit higher rating on their intended domain of
inventing DEMO on any other domain.
Table A1 indicates which items we discarded because they loaded across domains and/or did not exhibit consistent mean
ratings DEMO their intended domain (we indicated these items with a † ). The first two items for IPF developing deserve particular
explanations: where academics associated these two items with founding, professional MBA students associated them
with developing. Because of the importance of assembling the right team of people DEMO face the challenges of new venture
growth, we decided to keep DEMO items in the main study to examine whether entrepreneurs' responses to DEMO items are
more closely tied to EP for founding or EP for developing. To cast light on the parallels between this pilot study and DEMO main
study, we indicate in Table A1 the reasons why some DEMO the items were eventually discarded. These reasons include items
that exhibit poor item-total correlation to their intended subscale in main study (marked ††), and items that showed poor
item-total correlation and evidence of cross-loading with DEMO dimensions in main study (e.g., high modification indices —
marked †† †).
For the mean difference tests, we adjusted for multiple comparisons to address the increased risk of making Type I errors. For
comparisons DEMO Levene's test indicated that the groups compared were homogeneous in variance, we used Duncan's Multiple
Range test. When there was no statistical evidence that we could assume equal variance, we used Dunnet's C, which is
appropriate for pairwise comparisons, and particularly conservative for small DEMO (Hsu, 1996).
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
Table A1
Results of content validity analyses.
Academic experts (n = 32) Working professionals MBA students (n = 75)
Factor loadings (PCA) Mean ratings (ANOVA) Factor loadings (PCA) Mean ratings (ANOVA)DEMO
# Domains and items inv fnd dev com inv fnd dev % inv fnd dev com inv fnd dev %
IPF-inventing items
inv1 It DEMO exciting to figure out new ways to solve unmet market needs that .81
can be commercialized.
inv2 Searching for new ideas for products/services DEMO offer is enjoyable to me. .80
inv3 I am motivated to figure out how to make existing products/services better. .70
inv4 Scanning the DEMO for new opportunities really excites me. .81
inv I feel energized when I am developing product prototypes. .71
inv I really like tinkering with DEMO designs. .68
††
5
††
6
IPF-founding items
fnd1 Establishing a new company excites me. .75 −.43 2.41⁎⁎⁎ 4.88 2.14⁎⁎⁎ 97
fnd2 Owning my DEMO company energizes me. .80 1.75⁎⁎⁎ 4 2.66⁎⁎⁎ 91
fnd3 Nurturing a new business through its emerging success is enjoyable. .68 1.88⁎⁎⁎ 4.25 3.50⁎ 52
DEMO I love creating a new firm. .78 −.40 2.22⁎⁎⁎ 4.91 2.02⁎⁎⁎ 97 .86 3.15⁎⁎⁎ 4.6
fnd Trying to convince others to invest in my DEMO motivates me. .78 1.78⁎⁎⁎ 4.31⁎ 3.53 30 .64 .48 2.28⁎⁎⁎ 4.41⁎⁎⁎
fnd I enjoy figuring out how to take someone else's ideas and DEMO them. .53 2.77 ns 3.25 3.31ns 33 .60 2.47⁎⁎⁎ 3.40 3.79ns
fnd I greatly enjoy talking about my ideas with other people. .69 3.75 DEMO 3.19 3.06ns 21 .60 3.83ns 3.55 3.17ns
fnd I really enjoy creating and appropriating value for my company. .45 2.59⁎⁎⁎ 3.45 3.84ns 30 .70 DEMO 3.68
fnd Creating something out of nothing is exciting. −.56 .45 4.22ns
††
4
††
5
††
6
†
7
†
8
†
9
DEMO 2.63⁎⁎⁎ 40 .61 .47 4.75⁎
3.59 48 .72 2.41⁎⁎⁎
2.93 55 .62 .55 2.47⁎⁎⁎
4.19 82 .84 2.24⁎⁎⁎
3.5 0 .64 3.33⁎⁎⁎
4.59 91 DEMO 2.48⁎⁎⁎
4.84 91 .67 .41 2.67⁎⁎⁎
4.75 91 −.47 .48 3.81⁎
4.63 91 .83 2.11⁎⁎⁎
4.74 88 −.60 3.93⁎
Note. IPF = intense positive DEMO; inv = inventing; fnd = founding; dev = developing; and com = commercialization (4th domain factor that emerged in PCA). Item numbers are consistent across all studies. % =
percentage of participants who DEMO the item with its intended domain in a separate forced-choice task.
† = items that were discarded for poor content validity (e.g., cross DEMO or loading on unintended domain); †† = items that were discarded in main study because of low item-total correlations; ††† = items that were
discarded in main study because of evidence of cross loadings (high modification indices in CFA). Reported significance levels are for comparisons with DEMO mean rating of an item on its intended domain.
Significance levels: DEMO = non significant; * p ≤ .05; ** p ≤ .01; *** p ≤ .001.
IPF-developing items
dev1
dev2
dev3
dev4†††
†††
dev5
dev†††
6
dev†††
7
dev†††
8
dev†††
9
−.43
4.5
4.44
4.31
DEMO
4.91
4.59
I really like finding the right people to market my product/service to. .66 2.15⁎⁎⁎
Assembling the right people to work for DEMO business is exciting. .85 1.56⁎⁎⁎
Pushing my employees and myself to make our company better motivates me. .79 1.72⁎⁎⁎
I really enjoy commercializing new DEMO/services. .80 3.28 ns
Attracting new customers to my existing business is highly motivating. .83 1.78⁎⁎⁎
Taking a small business and growing it is DEMO .86 1.81⁎⁎⁎
Expanding my company by offering new products and services excites me. .84 2.97⁎⁎⁎
I really like it when we meet or exceed DEMO projections. .91 1.53⁎⁎⁎
Expanding the number and type of products and services we offer is thrilling. .84 3.06⁎⁎⁎
3.00⁎⁎⁎
2.66⁎⁎⁎
2.47⁎⁎⁎
2.63⁎⁎⁎
2.22⁎⁎⁎
1.84⁎⁎⁎
DEMO
4.59⁎⁎⁎
2.63⁎⁎⁎
3.44ns
2.84⁎⁎⁎
2.61⁎⁎⁎
2.41⁎⁎⁎
2.06⁎⁎⁎
2.16⁎⁎⁎
3.50⁎⁎⁎
3.41⁎⁎⁎
3.53⁎
3.09⁎⁎⁎
2.25⁎⁎⁎
2.03⁎⁎⁎
76
76
61
70
97
97
.42 .73
.79
.71
DEMO
.81
.82
.87 3.05⁎⁎⁎
.67 .48 2.55⁎⁎⁎
.58 2.76⁎⁎⁎
4.53
4.67
4.23
4.61
4.67
4.40
4.61
3.96
4.04
3.83⁎⁎⁎
3.41⁎⁎⁎
3.13⁎⁎⁎
3.64⁎⁎⁎
3.01⁎⁎⁎
2.50⁎⁎⁎
DEMO
3.76⁎⁎⁎
3.45⁎⁎⁎
4.00⁎⁎
2.31⁎⁎⁎
2.07⁎⁎⁎
77
56
51
52
95
89
2.66⁎⁎⁎
2.88⁎⁎⁎
4.03ns
2.65⁎⁎⁎ 91
3.4 15
51
42
4.16⁎
4.32 2.84⁎⁎⁎
93
DEMO
44
63
28
3.85ns
4.32⁎⁎⁎
3.08⁎⁎⁎
3.80ns
3.16⁎⁎⁎
3.43⁎⁎⁎
3.22⁎⁎⁎
3.03⁎⁎⁎
2.88⁎⁎⁎
4.13 59
3.32 19
3.88 85
4.13 44
4.70 93
4.74 89
DEMO 89
4.38 95
4.45 87
M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
19
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and DEMO validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
20
M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
Appendix B. Analyses and results of Pilot Study 3 (identity DEMO)
Table B1 reports the results of Principal Component Analysis of items targeting participants' identity centrality for inventing,
founding, and developing (respectively). Results indicate that the target items highlighted in bold share high DEMO of
communality (h2 ) with other items). Consistent with Wanous DEMO Hudy (2001) and Wanous et al. (1997), these observations
DEMO the validity of a parsimonious single-item approach to capture participants' Identity DEMO
Table B1
Examining the reliability of single-item measure for identity centrality.
h2
IC-inv1
IC-inv2
IC-inv3
IC-inv4
IC-inv5
IC-inv6
IC-inv7
IC-inv8
IC-fnd1
IC-fnd2
IC-fnd3
IC-fnd4
DEMO
IC-fnd6
IC-fnd7
IC-fnd8
IC-dev1
IC-dev2
IC-dev3
IC-dev4
IC-dev5
IC-dev6
IC-dev7
IC-dev8
MBA students
(n = 16)
Inventing new solutions to problems is an important part of who I am. .71 .70
I frequently think about DEMO new solutions to business problems. .87 .77
When I think of who I am, a key aspect of my identity is that I am an innovator. .74 .82
Identifying and developing new business opportunities is central DEMO how I define myself. .70 .73
I think of myself as an idea person. .40 .49
I would feel a loss if I were DEMO to give up searching for new solutions to business problems. .58 .65
When they think about who I am, people who know me well say that at heart, I'm an inventor. .89 .72
My colleagues and employees think of me as an inventor. .95 .75
Being the DEMO of a business is an important part of who I am. .81 .80
I frequently think about starting/founding a business. .27 .35
When DEMO think of who I am, a key aspect of my identity DEMO that I am the founder of a business. .87 .81
Being the founder of a new business is central to how I define myself. DEMO .87
I think of myself as a business founder. .78 .70
I would feel a loss if I were forced to give up starting DEMO businesses. .77 .57
When they think about who I am, people DEMO know me well say that at heart, I am a business DEMO .80
founder.
My colleagues and employees think of me as a business founder. .73 .68
Nurturing and growing companies is an important part of DEMO I am. .79 .83
I frequently think about developing and growing my venture. .33 .66
When I think of who I am, a key aspect of my identity is that I am someone who grows businesses. DEMO .74
Being a developer of businesses is central to how I define myself. .78 .82
I think of myself as someone who grows ventures. DEMO .90
I would feel a loss if I were forced to give up nurturing and growing companies. .66 .69
When they think about who DEMO am, people who know me well say that at heart, I am someone who .81 .80
grows business ventures.
My colleagues and employees DEMO of me as someone who nurtures and develops companies. .75 .86
Note. IC = identity centrality; inv = inventing; fnd = founding; and dev = developing.
Domain of IC
and item #
Items
h2
Entrepreneurs
(n = 111)
Appendix C. Analyses and results of pilot studies (enduring nature of feelings)
Table C1 reports the results of our DEMO studies concerning the relevance of formulating items that stress the enduring nature
of participants' reported intense positive feelings vis-à-vis EP's different domains. The fourth column reports the inter-item
correlations between the original and reworded items DEMO the 16 working professional MBA students who completed the two
versions of the survey, two weeks apart. Correlations were significant and ‘large’ in magnitude (Cohen, 1992) for all inventing and
developing items, but they DEMO only significant for two of the founding items. We suspect that this may be due to MBA students'
lack of new venture founding DEMO To examine this possibility, we used factor analysis techniques to compare DEMO
responses of entrepreneurs in Pilot Study 1 (who answered some of DEMO original items), and entrepreneurs from Pilot Study 3b
(who answered DEMO reworded items).8 Consistent with standard practices, we only report loadings DEMO than .40. Results
indicate that the factor structure between the two groups was similar.
8
Please note that some items that were in Pilot DEMO 1 were dropped, and new ones were added for Pilot Study DEMO
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (DEMO), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
Table C1
Examining items emphasizing the enduring nature of EP.
Domain of DEMO
and item #
Original items Reworded items to stress the enduring nature of EP Pilot Study
3a
Pilot Study 1 Pilot Study 3b
Inter-item DEMO loadings CFA loadings
IPF-inv1 It is exciting to figure out new ways to solve unmet market needs
that can be commercialized.
IPF-inv2 Searching for DEMO ideas for products/services to offer is enjoyable to
me.
IPF-inv3 I am motivated to figure out how to make existing products/services
better.
DEMO Scanning the environment for new opportunities really excites me. I get lasting excitement from scanning the environment for new opportunities. .67
IPF-inv5 I feel DEMO when I am developing product prototypes. I feel long-lasting energy when I am developing product prototypes. .62
IPF-fnd1 Establishing a new company excites me. DEMO a new company excites me for a long time. .54
IPF-fnd2 Owning my own company energizes me. Owning my own company gives me lasting DEMO .42
IPF-fnd3 Nurturing a new business through its emerging success is enjoyable. Nurturing a new business through its emerging success is enjoyable. .31
IPF-fnd4 DEMO love creating a new firm. My love for creating a new firm has lasted. .51
IPF-fnd5 Trying to convince others to invest in my DEMO motivates me. Trying to convince others to invest in my business motivates me for a long time. .79
IPF-dev1 I really like finding the DEMO people to market my product/service to. I really like finding the right people to market my product/service to for my .69
company.
DEMO Assembling the right people to work for my business is exciting. In the long-term, assembling the right people to work for my business is exciting. .59
IPF-dev3 Pushing my employees and myself to make our company DEMO Pushing my employees and myself to make our company better motivates .64
motivates me. me for a long time.
IPF-dev4 I really enjoy commercializing DEMO products/services. In the course of running my business, I really DEMO commercializing new products/ .53
services.
r
When I work on figuring DEMO new ways to solve unmet market needs, .60
it excites me DEMO a long time.
Searching for new ideas for products/services give me durable feelings of joy. .77
It motivates me for a long-time to DEMO out how to make existing products/ .77
services better.
Note. Pilot DEMO 3a: n = 16 professional MBA students; Pilot Study 1: DEMO = 58 entrepreneurs; Pilot Study 3b: n = 111 entrepreneurs.
IPF = intense positive feelings; inv = inventing; fnd = founding; and dev = developing.
⁎ p≤ .05.
⁎⁎ p≤ .01.
⁎
⁎⁎
⁎⁎
DEMO
⁎⁎
⁎
⁎
⁎⁎
⁎⁎
⁎
⁎⁎
⁎
inv fnd dev inv fnd dev
.75 .48 .61
.84 .73
.80 .62
– .66
.79 DEMO
.65 .74
– .60
.76 .59
– .70
.63 –
.63 .55
.79 .70
– .63
.44 .69 .63
M.S. Cardon et al. / DEMO of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
21
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
22 M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
Appendix D. Validated instrument for measuring entrepreneurial passion
Table D1 reports the validated items for measuring Entrepreneurial Passion's two dimensions (Intense Positive Feelings and
Identity Centrality) across the three domains of inventing, founding, and developing. As we indicated in the text, we welcome
future investigations of the experience of EP in additional domains (such as passion for social causes). More importantly, we
encourage scholars to study the experience of EP in each domain separately and in parallel (cf. Tables 2 and 3), and not to lump all
measures into an overall DEMO measure of EP. Finally, we recommend that scholars not only investigate DEMO
independent effects of EP's Intense Positive Feelings and Identity Centrality, DEMO also consider the multiplicative combination of
the two dimensions in each domain.
Table D1
Instructions, scale anchors, and items for EP's dimensions DEMO domains.
Instructions Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with each statement.
Scale 1=‘strongly disagree’;2=‘disagree’;3=‘neither agree nor disagree’;4=‘agree’;DEMO agree’.
anchors Note: We recommend that scholars using this instrument consider DEMO 7-point or 9-point scales to guard against issues of range restriction.
Note: Please see Appendix B for other identity centrality items that could be included in future studies.
Domain Validated item
and item #
IPF-inv1 It DEMO exciting to figure out new ways to solve unmet market needs that can be commercialized.
IPF-inv2 Searching for new ideas for products/services to DEMO is enjoyable to me.
IPF-inv3 I am motivated to figure out how to make existing products/services better.
IPF-inv4 Scanning the environment for new DEMO really excites me.
IC-inv1 Inventing new solutions to problems is an important part of who I am.
IPF-fnd1 Establishing a new company excites me.
DEMO Owning my own company energizes me.
IPF-fnd3 Nurturing a new business through its emerging success is enjoyable.
IC-fnd1 Being the founder of a business DEMO an important part of who I am.
IPF-dev1 I really like finding the right people to market my product/service to.
IPF-dev2 Assembling the DEMO people to work for my business is exciting.
IPF-dev3 Pushing my employees and myself to make our company better motivates me.
IC-dev1 Nurturing and DEMO companies is an important part of who I am.
Note. IPF = intense positive feelings; IC = identity centrality; inv = inventing; fnd = founding; and dev = developing.
References
Aguinis, H., Pierce, DEMO, Culpepper, S.A., 2009. Scale coarseness as a methodological artifact: correcting correlation coefficients attenuated from using coarse scales.
Organizational Research Methods 12, 623–665.
Aldrich, H.W., Zimmer, C., 1986. Entrepreneurship through social networks. In: Sexton, D., Smilor, R. (Eds.), The Art and Science DEMO Entrepreneurship. Ballinger,
Cambridge, MA, pp. 3–23.
Alexander, E.S., Onwuegbuzie, A.J., 2007. Academic procrastination and the role of hope as a DEMO strategy. Personality and Individual Differences 42,
1301–1310.
Amabile, T.M., 1997. Entrepreneurial creativity through motivational synergy. Journal of Creative Behavior 31, 18–26.
Amir, Y., Sharon, I., 1991. Replication research: a “must” for the scientific advancement of psychology. In: Neuliep, J.W. (Ed.), Replication Research in the Social
Sciences. Sage, Newbury Park, CA, pp. 51–69.
Arthur, W., Bell, S.T., Edwards, B.D., 2007. A longitudinal examination DEMO the comparative criterion-related validity of additive and referent-shift consensus
operationalizations of team efficacy. Organizational Research Methods 10, 35–58.
Bagozzi, R.P., 2007. On the meaning of formative measurement and how it differs from reflective measurement: comment on Howell, Breivik, and Wilcox (2007).
Psychological Methods 12, DEMO
Bagozzi, R.P., Yi, Y., Phillips, L.W., 1991. Assessing construct validity in organizational research. Administrative Science Quarterly 36, 421–458.
Bandura, A., 1997. Self-efficacy: The Exercise of Control. Freeman, New York.
Baron, R., 2008. The role of affect in the entrepreneurial process. Academy of Management Review 33, 328–340.
Baron, R., Ensley, M., 2006. Opportunity recognition as the detection of meaningful patterns: evidence from comparisons of novice and experienced
entrepreneurs. Management Science 52, 1331–1344.
Bartholomew, S., Smith, A.D., 2006. Improving survey response rates from chief executive officers in small firms: the importance of social networks.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 30, 83–96.
Baum, J.R., Locke, E.A., 2004. The relationship of entrepreneurial traits, skill, and motivation to subsequent venture growth. Journal of Applied Psychology 89,
587–598.
Baum, J.R., Locke, E.A., Smith, K.G., 2001. A DEMO model of venture growth. Academy of Management Journal 44, 292–303.
Bierly, P.E., Kessler, E.H., Christensen, E.W., 2000. Organizational learning, knowledge, and wisdom. Journal of Organizational Change Management 13, 595–618.
Bollen, K.A., 2007. Interpretation confounding is due to misspecification, not to type of indicator: comment on Howell, Breivik, and Wilcox (2007). Psychological
Methods DEMO, 229–237.
Bollen, K.A., Lenox, R., 1991. Conventional wisdom on DEMO: a structural equation perspective. Psychological Bulletin 110, 498–522.
Brännback, M., Carsrud, A., Elfving, J., Krueger, N.K., 2006. Sex, [drugs], and entrepreneurial passion? An exploratory study. Paper Presented at the Babson DEMO
Entrepreneurship Research Conference. Bloomington, IN.
Brannick, M.T., Chan, D., DEMO, J.M., Lance, C.E., Spector, P.E., 2010. What is method variance and how can we cope with it? A panel discussion. Organizational
Research Methods 13, 407–420.
Burke, P.J., Reitzes, D.C., 1981. The link between identity and role performance. Social Psychology Quarterly 44, 83–92.
Burke, P.J., Reitzes, D.C., 1991. An identity theory approach to commitment. DEMO Psychology Quarterly 54, 239–251.
Please cite this article as: Cardon, DEMO, et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,DEMO
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) DEMO 23
Button, S., Mathieu, J., Zajac, D., 1996. Goal orientation in organizational research: a conceptual and empirical foundation. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 67, 26–48.
Callero, P.L., 1985. Role-identity salience. Social Psychology Quarterly 48, 203–215.
Cardon, M.S., 2008. Is passion contagious? DEMO transference of entrepreneurial emotion to employees. Human Resource Management Review 18, DEMO
Cardon, M.S., Kirk, C., 2010. Passion, self-efficacy, and persistence in entrepreneurship. Academy of Management Conference. Montreal, Canada.
Cardon, M.S., Zietsma, C., Saparito, P., Matherne, B., Davis, C., 2005. DEMO tale of passion: new insights into entrepreneurship from a parenthood metaphor. DEMO of
Business Venturing 20, 23–45.
Cardon, M.S., Sudek, R., DEMO, C., 2009a. The impact of perceived entrepreneurial passion on angel investing. In: Zacharakis, A.L. (Ed.), Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research: Proceedings DEMO the Babson College Entrepreneurship Research Conference, vol. 29, Babson College, DEMO, MA.
Cardon, M.S., Wincent, J., Singh, J., Drnovsek, M., 2009b. The nature and experience of entrepreneurial passion. Academy of Management Review 34, 511–532.
Cardon, M.S., Foo, M.D., Shepherd, D.A., Wiklund, J., 2012. Exploring the heart: entrepreneurial emotion is a hot topic. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 36, 1–10.
Chandler, G.N., DeTienne, DEMO, McKelvie, A., Mumford, T.V., 2011. Causation and effectuation processes: a validation study. Journal of Business Venturing 26,
375–390.
Chen, C.C., Greene, P.G., Crick, A., 1998. Does entrepreneurial self-efficacy distinguish entrepreneurs from managers? Journal of Business Venturing 13, 295–316.
Chen, X.-P., DEMO, X., Kotha, S., 2009. Passion and preparedness in entrepreneurs' DEMO plan presentations: a persuasion analysis of venture capitalists' funding
decisions. Academy of Management Journal 52, 199–214.
Cliff, J.E., 1998. Does one size fit all? Exploring the relationship between attitudes towards growth, gender, and business size. Journal of BusinessVenturing 13,523–542.
Cohen, A., 1992. Antecedents DEMO organizational commitment across occupational groups: a meta-analysis. Journal of Organizational Behavior DEMO, 539–559.
Cook, T.D., Campbell, D.T., 1979. Quasi-experimentation: Design and Analysis Issues for Field Settings. Rand McNally, Chicago, IL.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., 1990. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. Harper Perennial, New York.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., 1997. Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement with Everyday Life. Harper Perennial, New York.
Damasio, A.R., 2003. Fundamental feelings. Nature 413, 781.
Diamantopoulos, A., Siguaw, J.A., 2006. Formative versus reflexive indicators in organizational measure development: a comparison and empirical illustration.
British Journal of Management 17, 263–282.
Diamantopoulos, A., Riefler, P., Roth, DEMO, 2008. Advancing formative measurement models. Journal of Business Research 61, 1203–1218.
Doty, D.H., Glick, W.H., 1998. Common method bias: does common methods variance really bias results? Organizational Research Methods 1, 374–406.
Drnovsek, M., Cardon, M.S., Murnieks, C.Y., 2009. Collective passion in entrepreneurial teams. In: Carsrud, A., Brannback, M. (Eds.), The Entrepreneurial Mind.
Springer Publishing, New York, NY, pp. 191–218.
Drucker, P., 1985. Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Harper Row, New York.
Eby, L.T., Durley, J.R., Evans, S.C., Ragins, B.R., 2008. Mentor's perceptions DEMO negative mentoring experiences: scale development and nomological validation.
Journal of Applied DEMO 93, 358–373.
Edwards, J.R., 2001. Multidimensional constructs in organizational behavior DEMO: an integrative framework. Organizational Research Methods 42, 144–192.
Edwards, J.R., 2011. The fallacy of formative measurement. Organizational Research Methods 14, 370–388.
Fan, X., Thompson, B., Wang, L., 1999. Effects of sample DEMO, estimation method, and model specification on structural equation modeling fit indexes. Structural
Equation Modeling 6, 56–83.
Farmer, S., Yao, X., Kung-McIntyre, K., 2011. Social roles, identities, and entrepreneurship: a three-nation study in the US, China, and Taiwan. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice 35, 245–273.
Fauchart, E., Gruber, M., 2011. Darwinians, communitarians and missionaries: the role of founder identity in entrepreneurship. Academy of Management Journal
54, 935–957.
Foo, M., 2011. Emotions and entrepreneurial opportunity evaluation. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 35, 375–393.
Foo, M., Uy, M., Baron, DEMO, 2009. How do feelings influence effort? An empirical study of entrepreneurs' affect and venture effort. Journal of Applied Psychology
94, 1086–1094.
Gartner, W.B., Starr, J.A., Bhat, S., 1999. Predicting new venture survival: an analysis of “Anatomy of a Startup” cases from Inc. Magazine. Journal of Business
Venturing 14, 215–232.
Gilson, L., Shalley, C., 2004. A little creativity goes a long way: an examination of teams' DEMO in creative process. Journal of Management 30, 453–470.
Goffman, E., DEMO The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Doubleday, Garden City, NY.
Grégoire, D.A., Barr, P.S., Shepherd, D.A., 2010. Cognitive processes DEMO opportunity recognition: the role of structural alignment. Organization Science 21, 413–431.
Grégoire, D.A., Corbett, A.C., McMullen, J.S., 2011. The cognitive DEMO in entrepreneurship: an agenda for future research. Journal of Management Studies
DEMO, 1443–1477.
Gundry, L.K., Welsch, H.P., 2001. The ambitious entrepreneur: high growth strategies of women-owned enterprises. Journal of Business Venturing 16, 453–470.
Hinkin, T.R., Tracey, J.B., 1999. An analysis of variance approach DEMO content validation. Organizational Research Methods 2, 175–186.
Hmieleski, K., Baron, R., 2009. Entrepreneurs' optimism and new venture performance: a social cognitive perspective. Academy of Management Journal 52,
473–488.
Hoang, H., Gimeno, J., 2010. Becoming a founder: how founder role identity affects entrepreneurial DEMO and persistence in founding. Journal of Business
Venturing 25, 41–53.
Howell, R.D., Breivik, E., Wilcox, J.B., 2007. Reconsidering formative measurement. Psychological Methods 12, 205–218.
Hoyle, R.H., Panter, A.T., 1995. Writing about structural equation models. In: Hoyle, R.H. (Ed.), Structural Equation Modeling: Concepts, Issues, and Applications.
Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. DEMO
Hsu, J.C., 1996. Multiple Comparisons. Chapman and Hall.
Hu, L.T., Bentler, P.M., 1999. Cutoff criteria for fit indices in covariance structure DEMO: conventional criteria vs new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling
6, 1–55.
John, O.P., Benet-Martinez, V., 2000. Measurement: reliability, construct validation, and scale construction. In: Reis, H.T., Judd, C.M. (Eds.), Handbook of Research
Methods in Social and Personality Psychology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 339–369.
Katila, R., Ahuja, G., 2002. Something DEMO, something new: a longitudinal study of search behavior and new product introduction. Academy of Management
Journal 45, 1183–1194.
Katz, J., Gartner, DEMO, 1988. Properties of emerging organizations. Academy of Management Review 13, 429–441.
Kline, R.B., 2005. Principles and Practices of Structural Equation Modeling. Guilford, New York, NY.
Landis, J.R., Koch, G.G., 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics 33, 159–174.
Lee, S.Y., Florida, R., Acs, Z.J., 2004. Creativity and entrepreneurship: a regional analysis of new firm formation. Regional Studies 38, 879–891.
Lewis, K., 2003. Measuring transactive memory systems in the field: scale development and validation. Journal of Applied Psychology 88, 587–604.
Liu, D., Chen, X., Yao, X., 2011. From autonomy to creativity: a multilevel investigation of the mediating role of harmonious passion. Journal of Applied Psychology
96, 294–309.
Lopez, S.J., Snyder, C.R., Teramoto-Pedrotti, J., 2003. Hope: many definitions, many measures. In: Lopez, S.J., Snyder, C.R. (Eds.), Positive Psychological Assessment:
A Handbook of Models and Measures. American Psychological Association, Washington, DC, pp. 91–107.
MacKenzie, S.B., Podsakoff, P.M., Jarvis, C.B., 2005. The problem of measurement model misspecification in behavioral DEMO organizational research and some
recommended solutions. Journal of Applied Psychology 90, DEMO
Marsh, H.W., Wen, Z.L., Hau, K.T., 2004. Structural equation models of latent interactions: evaluation of alternative estimation strategies and indicator
construction. Psychological Methods 9, 275–300.
McMullen, J.S., Shepherd, D.A., 2006. Entrepreneurial action and the role of uncertainty in the theory of the entrepreneur. DEMO of Management Review 31,
132–152.
Please cite this article as: DEMO, M.S., et al., Measuring entrepreneurial passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003
24
M.S. Cardon et al. / Journal of Business Venturing xxx (2012) xxx–xxx
Mitteness, C., Sudek, R., Cardon, M.S., 2012. Investor characteristics that determine whether perceived passion leads to higher evaluations of funding DEMO
Journal of Business Venturing 27, 592–606.
Murnieks, C. 2007. Who am I? The quest for an entrepreneurial identity and an investigation of its relationship to entrepreneurial passion and goal-setting.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Colorado-Boulder.
Murnieks, C., Mosakowski, E., 2006. Entrepreneurial passion: an identity theory perspective. Paper Presented at the Academy of Management Conference. Atlanta, GA.
Murnieks, C.Y., Mosakowski, E., Cardon, M.S., 2012. Pathways of passion: identity centrality, passion, and behavior among entrepreneurs. Journal of Management.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0149206311433855 (February 3).
Netemeyer, R.G., Bearden, W.O., Sharma, S., 2003. Scaling Procedures: Issues and Applications. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Nunnally, J., 1978. Psychometric Theory, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Nunnally, J.C., Bernstein, I.H., 1994. Psychometric Theory. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Perry-Smith, J., 2006. Social yet creative: the DEMO of social relationships in facilitating individual creativity. Academy of Management Journal 49, 85–101.
Perttula, K., 2004. The POW Factor: Understanding and Igniting DEMO for One's Work. University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California.
Perttula, K., 2010. Passion for work: initial measurement and construct validation. Academy of Management Conference. Chicago, IL.
Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Lee, J.-Y., Podsakoff, N.P., 2003. Common method biases in behavioral DEMO: a critical review of the literature and
recommended remedies. Journal of DEMO Psychology 88, 879–903.
Ronstadt, R., 1988. The corridor principle. Journal DEMO Business Venturing 3, 31–40.
Sackett, P.R., Larson, J.R., 1990. DEMO strategies and tactics in industrial and organizational psychology, In: Dunnette, DEMO, Hough, L.M. (Eds.), Handbook of
Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Second ed. Consulting Psychologists Press, Palo Alto, CA, pp. 419–490.
Scandura, T.A., Williams, E.A., 2000. Research methodology in management: current practices, trends, and implications for future research. Academy of
Management Journal 43, 1248–1264.
Schindehutte, M., Morris, M., Allen, J., 2006. Beyond DEMO: entrepreneurship as extreme experience. Small Business Economics 27, 349–368.
Schriesheim, DEMO, Powers, K., Scandura, T., Gardiner, C., Lankau, M., 1993. Improving construct measurement in management research: comments and a
quantitative DEMO for assessing the theoretical content adequacy of paper-and-pencil survey-type instruments. Journal of Management 19, 385–417.
Schwarz, N., Clore, G.L., 2007. Feelings and phenomenal experiences, In: Higgins, E.T., Kruglanski, A. (Eds.), DEMO Psychology: Handbook of Basic Principles, 2nd
ed. Guildord Press, New DEMO, pp. 385–407.
Shane, S., 2000. Prior knowledge and the discovery DEMO entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization Science 11, 448–469.
Shane, S., Locke, E.A., Collins, C.J., 2003. Entrepreneurial motivation. Human Resource Management Review 13, DEMO
Shepherd, D.A., 2003. Learning from business failure: propositions of grief DEMO for the self-employed. Academy of Management Review 282, 318–329.
Shipp, A.J., Edwards, J.R., Lambert, L.S., 2009. Conceptualization and measurement of temporal focus: the subjective experience of the past, present, and future.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110, 1–22.
Smith, N.R., Miner, DEMO, 1983. Type of entrepreneur, type of firm, and managerial motivation: implications for organizational life cycle theory. Strategic
Management Journal 4, 325–340.
Snyder, C.R., Harris, C., Anderson, J.R., Holleran, S.A., Irving, L.M., Sigmon, S.T., Yoshinobu, L., Gibb, J., Langelle, DEMO, Harney, P., 1991. The will and the ways:
development DEMO validation of an individual-differences measure of hope. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 60, 570–585.
Spector, P.E., 1992. Summated Rating Scale Construction: DEMO Introduction. Sage, Newburg Park, CA.
Stryker, S., Burke, P.J., 2000. The past, present, and future of an identity theory. Social DEMO Quarterly 63, 284–297.
Stryker, S., Serpe, R.T., 1982. Commitment, identity salience, and role behavior: theory and research example. In: Ickes, W., Knowles, E.S. (Eds.), Personality, Roles
and Social Behavior. Springer Verlag, New York, pp. 199–218.
Stryker, S., Serpe, R.T., 1994. Identity salience and psychological centrality: equivalent, overlapping, or complementary DEMO? Social Psychology Quarterly 57,
16–35.
Sudek, R., 2006. Angel DEMO criteria. Journal of Small Business Strategy 17, 89–103.
Sundararajan, M., DEMO, L., 2007. Role of emotions in the entrepreneur's opportunity recognition process. Paper Presented at the Academy of Management
Conference. Philadelphia, PA.
Tang, J., Kacmar, K.M., Busenitz, L.W., 2012. Entrepreneurial alertness in DEMO pursuit of new opportunities. Journal of Business Venturing 27, 77–94.
Tsang, E.W.K., Kwan, K.M., 1999. Replication and theory development in organizational science: a critical realist perspective. Academy of Management Review 24,
759–780.
Ucbasaran, D., Alsos, G., Westhead, P., Wright, M., 2008. DEMO entrepreneurs. Foundations and Trends in Entrepreneurship Research 4, 1–93.
Utsch, A., Rauch, A., 2000. Innovativeness and initiative as mediators between achievement orientation and venture performance. European Journal of Work &
Organizational Psychology 91, DEMO
Vallerand, R.J., 2008. On the psychology of passion: in search DEMO what makes people's lives most worth living. Canadian Psychology 49, DEMO
Vallerand, R.J., Mageau, G.A., Ratelle, C., Leonard, M., Blanchard, C., Koestner, R., Gagne, M., 2003. Les Passions DEMO l' Ame: on obsessive and harmonious passion.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 85, 756–767.
Vandenberg, R., Lance, C., 1992. Examining the causal order of job satisfaction and organizational commitment. Journal of Management DEMO, 153–167.
Venkataraman, S., 1997. The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research. DEMO in Entrepreneurship. : Firm Emergence, and Growth., vol. 3. JAI Press,
Greenwich, CT, pp. 119–138.
Vignoles, V.L., Jen, G., DEMO, C., Manzi, C., Scabini, E., 2006. Beyond self-esteem: DEMO of multiple motives on identity construction. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 90, 308–333.
Wanous, J.P., Hudy, M.J., 2001. Single-item reliability: DEMO replication and extension. Organizational Research Methods 4, 361–375.
Wanous, J.P., DEMO, A.E., Hudy, M.J., 1997. Overall job satisfaction: how good DEMO single-item measures? Journal of Applied Psychology 82, 247–252.
Ward, T.B., 2004. Cognition, creativity, and entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing 19, 173–188.
Watson, D., Clark, L.A., Tellegen, A., 1988. Development and DEMO of brief measures of positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales. DEMO of Personality
and Social Psychology 54, 1063–1070.
Westhead, P., Wright, M., 1998. Novice, portfolio, and serial founders: are the different? Journal of Business Venturing 13, 173–204.
Williams, L.J., Hartman, N., Cavazotte, F., 2010. Method variance and marker variables: a review and comprehensive CFA marker technique. Organizational
Research Methods 13, 477–514.
Wincent, J., Cardon, M.S., Singh, J., Drnovsek, M., 2008. Entrepreneurial affect: the distinction between emotion and passion. Academy of Management Conference.
Anaheim, CA.
Wu, S., Matthews, L., Dagher, G.K., 2007. Need for DEMO, business goals, and entrepreneurial persistence. Management Research News 30, 928–941.
DEMO, H., Seibert, S.E., 2006. The big five personality dimensions and entrepreneurial status: a meta-analytical review. Journal of Applied Psychology 91, 259–271.
DEMO, H., Seibert, S.E., Hills, G.E., 2005. The mediating role of self-efficacy in the development of entrepreneurial intentions. Journal of Applied Psychology DEMO,
1265–1272.
Zhao, H., Seibert, S.E., Lumpkin, G.T., 2010. The relationship of personality to entrepreneurial intentions and performance: a meta-analytic review. Journal of
Management 36, 381–404.
Zhou, J., 2003. When the presence of creative coworkers is related to creativity: role of supervisor close monitoring, developmental feedback, and creative
personality. Journal of Applied Psychology 88, 413–422.
Zhou, J., George, J., 2001. When job dissatisfaction leads to DEMO: encouraging the expression of voice. Academy of Management Journal 44, 682–696.
Please cite this article as: Cardon, M.S., et al., Measuring DEMO passion: Conceptual foundations and scale validation,
J. Bus. Venturing (2012), doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.03.003{1g42fwefx}