RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 1 
The Nature and Experience of Entrepreneurial Passion** 
Melissa S. Cardon 
Pace University Lubin School of Business 
861 Bedford Road, Goldstein 227 
Pleasantville, NY  10570 
Phone: (914) 773-3618 
Fax: (914) 773-3920 
Email: mcardon@pace.edu 
Joakim Wincent 
LuleåUniversity of Technology 
SE-971 87, Luleå, Sweden 
Phone: + 46 920 492161 
Email: joakim.wincent@ltu.se 
Jagdip Singh 
CaseWestern Reserve University 
Weatherhead School of Management 
10900 Euclid Avenue, PBL 224 
Cleveland, OH  44106 
Phone: (216) 368-4270 
Email: jagdip.singh@case.edu 
Mateja Drnovsek 
University of Ljubljana 
Kardeljeva ploscad 17, 1000 Ljubljana 
Phone: + 386 1 589 2 613 
Email: mateja.drnovsek@ef.uni-lj.si 
** The authors sincerely appreciate the constructive comments and critical enthusiasm ofthe 
guest editors and three anonymous reviewers that challenged and excited us during the review 
process. The authors also thank Bill Schulze and Chuck Murnieks for helpful discussionsand 
advice. In its early development, this work benefited from generous feedback received during 
presentations at the 2004 Babson and 2005 AoM conferences. 
© Academy of Management. All rights reserved.  
Content may NOT be copied, e-mailed, shared or otherwise transmitted without written permission. This non-copyedited article version was 
obtained from the Academy of Management InPress website and is intended for personal or individual use. 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 2 
THE NATURE AND EXPERIENCE OF ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION 
ABSTRACT 
Entrepreneurialpassionplays an important role in entrepreneurshipbut theoretical 
understanding of what it is and what it does is lacking. We build on fragmented and disparate 
extant work to conceptualize the nature of entrepreneurial passionassociated withsalient 
entrepreneurial role identities.  We also theorize the mechanisms ofthe experience of 
entrepreneurial passionthat provide coherence to goal-directed cognitions and behaviors during 
the pursuit ofentrepreneurial effectiveness.
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 3 
Passion is deeply embedded in the folklore and practice of entrepreneurship. Dating back 
to Schumpeter’s early writings (1951), researchers and practitioners alike invoke passion to 
explain entrepreneurial behaviors that defy reason-based explanations, such as unconventional 
risk taking, uncommon intensityoffocus, and unwavering belief in a dream. In the popular 
press, successful entrepreneurs stress the power of passion: Anita Roddick of the Bodyshop 
assertedthat,“To succeed you have to believe in something with such a passion that it becomes a 
reality” and Michael Dellsuggests that “Passion should be the fire that drives your life’s work”1. 
Manyacademics concur, including Bird, whosays that entrepreneurial behavior can be 
“passionate, full of emotionalenergy, drive, and spirit” (1989: 7-8).  Cardon, Zietsma, Saparito, 
Matherne, and Davis suggest that entrepreneurship can be thought of as a “tale of passion” 
(2005: 23), and Smilor goes so far as to say that passion is “perhaps the most observed 
phenomenon of the entrepreneurial process” (1997: 342). 
Despite the widespread fascination with entrepreneurial passion, it has not been 
systematically studied and existingresearch is fragmented. Moreover, while emphasizing that 
passion is important for entrepreneurship, most studies neitheradequatelydefine entrepreneurial 
passion nor explain its role in the entrepreneurial process and its outcomes. We aim to fill this 
gap by developing a definition ofthe nature of entrepreneurial passion and theorizing about the 
experience of entrepreneurial passion to offer predictions about its influence in the 
entrepreneuring process. Specifically, we first address what passion isby proposing a definition 
oftheentrepreneurial passion concept based on psychological research on emotions and feelings 
(Barrett, Mesquita, Ochsner, & Gross, 2007; Russell, 2003)and identity (Burke, 2006; Stryker & 
Burke, 2000), as well as grounded work in entrepreneurship. Second, we address what passion 
  
1 
Citations accessed from http://www.evancarmichael.com
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 4 
doesby proposing a conceptual framework to theorizethe mechanisms that coordinate the 
influence of role identity-specific passion on entrepreneur’s cognitions and behaviors in the 
pursuit of entrepreneurial effectiveness. We assertthat the proposed framework can help explain 
previously unanswered questions in the literature, such as why some nascent entrepreneurs who 
evidence high passion forentrepreneuring lose the fire of passion as the venture grows, while 
others continue to experiencethe fire ofpassion throughout their entrepreneurial career; why 
some entrepreneurs who seem passionate for their ideas are willing to give themup to others to 
grow the venture and extract its market value; and why some entrepreneurs continue to persist 
despite considerable obstacles and impediments during the process of entrepreneuringwhile 
others do not. We utilize self-regulation as an overall theoretical framework to extract 
empiricallytestable propositions. 
PASSION IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP: REVIEW AND RELEVANCE 
Table 1 summarizes the literature on passion and related emotions in entrepreneurship. 
We include studies that focus onindividual entrepreneurs whofound new (de novo) ventures, 
and/or pursue opportunity recognition, venture creation, or venture growthactivities. Consistent 
withBaron (In Press), wefocus on entrepreneurs who individually recognize and exploit 
opportunities, rather than do so as part of a team. 
-----Insert Table 1 about here ----- 
While past research is fragmented in its conceptualization and theoretical development, it 
is coherent inits recognition of the relevance of passion in entrepreneurship. Table 1 suggests 
three themes of convergence: (1) the content of “passion” is an intense positive emotion, (2) 
whose empirical referents or objects usually involve venture-related opportunities, tasks, or 
activities, and (3) which have a motivational effect that stimulates entrepreneurs to overcome 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 5 
obstacles and remain engaged. However, this review also identifies several gaps and open issues 
including lack of (1) a clear definition of entrepreneurial passion that is theoretically grounded, 
(2) agreement over whether passion is a personal trait or is stimulated by an object or the context, 
and (3) a conceptual model that explains how passion influences entrepreneurial outcomes. We 
briefly review the preceding themes of convergence and gaps to motivate our study. 
Our review indicates that scholars view passion as important but are unclear on what it 
actually is. Studies define or associate passion witha diverse range of positive affect, including 
pride (Bierly, Kessler, & Christensen, 2000), love (Baum& Locke, 2004; Cardon et al., 2005), 
enthusiasm, and joy (Smilor, 1997)that occurs as part of the entrepreneuring process and 
provides an emotional resource for coping with entrepreneurial challenges. While Schumpeter 
had long recognized that an entrepreneur needs unusually strong will and personal strength 
during the process of creation, which “is inherently emotional” (Goss, 2005: 209), few studies to 
date have provided an original theoretical foundation for linking entrepreneurial passion to the 
broader literature on affect and emotional experiences. 
Current literature is also vague in identifying the object of entrepreneurial passion and 
includes ventures, opportunities, products, tasks, or generally “one’s work” (see Table 1). This 
suggests an implicit relevance of addressing what entrepreneurs are passionate about, but there is 
no agreement onwhich specific referents should be considered. Moreover, some studies treat 
passion as an individual trait giving less emphasis to the specific objects involved (e.g., Baum, 
Locke, & Smith, 2001). Others argue that both individual and venture must be considered given 
that entrepreneurs invest themselves (e.g. in terms oftime, money, and energy) heavily in their 
ventures (Cardon et al., 2005). Thus, the centrality of venture-related objects appears evident in 
conceptualizing entrepreneurial passion, but supporting theoretical work is lacking.
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 6 
Table 1 indicatesthat the literature is also unclear about the mechanisms for how passion 
influences outcomes. Scholars suggest that entrepreneurs who experience passion benefit from 
its motivationalenergy. For example, Table 1 indicates that passion involves strength and 
courage (Bierly et al., 2000), mobilizing energy (Brännback, Carsrud, Elfving, & Krueger, 2006) 
and unflagging pursuit of challenging goals(Smilor, 1997). Passion has been related to drive, 
tenacity, willingness to work long hours, courage, high levels of initiative, and persistence in the 
face of obstacles (Bierly et al., 2000; Bird, 1989). Brännback et al. (2006: 3)note that “passion 
can fuel motivation, enhance mental activity, and provide meaning to everyday work.” Likewise, 
scholars suggest that highly activated and positive emotional states such as passion foster 
creativity and recognition of new patterns which are criticalin opportunity exploration and 
exploitation in uncertain and risky environments(Baron, In Press). Yet, doubts remain about 
whether entrepreneurial passion is universally functionalin the entrepreneurial process. 
Dysfunctional effects of passion, suchas obsession and discounting negative information 
(Branzei & Zietsma, 2003), are thought to interfere with entrepreneurial effectiveness. Original 
theoreticalwork is needed to understand if and when entrepreneurial passion has functional 
outcomes and why. 
Overall, the preceding literature review suggests two critical gaps that need attention: (1) 
a theoretically grounded conceptualization of the nature of entrepreneurial passion to address 
what it is, and (2) a theoretical model for the experience of entrepreneurial passion that guides 
empiricaltesting of its predicted influence on cognitions and behaviors to explain whatit does. 
THE NATURE OF ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION 
We draw from psychological literature on emotions and feelings, and incorporate 
grounded ideas from entrepreneurship research and practice to propose a conceptual definition 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 7 
for entrepreneurial passion. Severalnotable reviews of psychological research on emotion are 
available (e.g., Barrett et al., 2007; Russell, 2003; Schwarz & Clore, 2007). A summary of the 
working definitions of key psychologicalconcepts relevant to our context is in the Appendix. To 
build our conceptualization, we first outlinethesupporting theoreticalfoundations for two key 
assertions central to our proposed conceptualization: (1) entrepreneurial passion is a consciously 
accessible, intense positive feeling, and (2) entrepreneurial passion results from engagement in 
activities that have identity meaning and salience to the entrepreneur. 
Entrepreneurial Passion is a Consciously Accessible, Intense Positive Feeling 
The notion of passion has a long history, with earlywritingsabout its nature and 
importancedating back to Greek and Western philosophers (e.g., Aristotle’s Rhetoric), moral 
theologists (e.g., Spinoza’s Ethics), political scientists (e.g., Machiavelli’s The Prince)and 
culturalmythologies (e.g., Bhagavad Gita). Whilethese writings differ on whether it impairs or 
empowers reason, most view passion as anyintense emotion that stirs humans with energyand 
deep longingto make a difference. Social psychologists’interest in studying passion is more 
recent and emphasizes its conscious experience, motivational quality, and identity meaning. 
Csikszentmihalyi (1990), for instance, suggests thatpassion promotesintense, flow-like statesof 
totalabsorption in one’s activities. Vallerand and colleagues’ (2003) notion of passion is focused 
on activities in which people invest time and energy and that they find important. Other scholars 
argue that passion is activated by emotionallyimportant goals that control and guide desires, 
thoughts, plans, and behaviors, andthat persist over time, regardless of costs, external obstacles, 
and moral objections(Frijda, 2005).Across these definitions, passion invariably involves 
feelings that are hot, overpowering, and suffused with desire.  This fire of desire is referred to in 
virtually all writings on entrepreneurialpassionwith words such as enthusiasm, zeal, and intense 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 8 
longing(Table 1). 
In accord with the psychologicalliterature, passion is viewedas energythat gives 
individuals a sense of “pleasure and promise” (Rockwell, 2002: 52)and engages them 
“wholeheartedly with what [they] love” (Belitz & Lundstrom, 1997: 57). The scholarlyview of 
passion is compatible with a feeling that is highly intense and positive, similar to excitement, 
elation, and joy, but distinct from states that are negative and intense (e.g. upset, stressed), and 
states that are not at all intense (e.g. fatigued, calm), or positive but not intense (e.g. contented). 
As a feeling, passion involves consciouslyexperienced changesin core affect (i.e., internal 
affective state) that areattributed toexternal stimuli, and that are effortfully reflected upon and 
stored cognitively for later retrieval(Damasio, 2003; Schwarz et al., 2007 and see Appendix). 
Reflection might include self-awareness (What am I feeling physically?), appraisals (Why am I 
feeling this way? What caused thisfeeling?), and categorization (How does it compare with 
other feelings?). As a feeling, entrepreneurial passion differs from episodicchanges in core 
affect.  While thelatter is subconsciouslyor unconsciouslyactivated by externalobjects or 
activities that may be inert or irrelevant to an individual’s identity meaning, passion involves 
“intense longing,” that one feels for those objects or activitiesthat are deeply meaningful to their 
identity, whether those objects are real, remembered, desired, imagined, or anticipated. We 
discuss the implication of this identity meaning of entrepreneurial activities next. 
Entrepreneurial Passion Results from Engagement in Activities with Identity Meaning 
In our view, passion is aroused not because some entrepreneurs are inherently disposed to 
such feelings, but rather as a result of entrepreneurs’engagement in somethingthat relates to a 
meaningful and salient self-identity for them. For example, Baumand Locke (2004)and Shane et 
al. (2003)say that entrepreneurial passion is a love of work, Smilor (1997)argues it is about 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 9 
enthusiasm for venture-related activities, and Cardon et al. (2005)saythat passion is about love 
for the ventureitself. Vallerand and colleagues (2003: 757)define passion as a “strong 
inclination toward an activity that people like, that they find important.” Although their study 
suggests that identity meaning is important for understanding whysomething warrants 
investment of individuals’ time and energy, Vallerand et al. neitherexplicitly consider identities 
in their proposed definition of passion, nor is their definition specific to entrepreneurship. 
Murnieks and Mosakowski (2006) also invoke identities, arguing that passion emerges when a 
broad entrepreneurialrole identityis salient. We extend the work of these authors by developing 
the notion of distinct entrepreneurial role identities that are linked to particular activities.  
Specifically, based on a taxonomy of entrepreneurial activities developed by Gartner, Starr and 
Bhat (1999), we suggestthree role identities: 1) an inventoridentitywhere the entrepreneur’s 
passion is for activities involved in identifying, inventing and exploring new opportunities, 2) a 
founderidentity, where the entrepreneur’s passion is for activitiesinvolved in establishing a 
venture for commercializing and exploiting opportunities, and 3) a developeridentity, where the 
entrepreneur’s passion is for activities related tonurturing, growing and expanding the venture 
once it has been created. Undeniably, some entrepreneurs may be equally passionate about all 
three of theseidentities, while others may weigh one identity as significantly more meaningful to 
them. 
Identity theory (Burke & Reitzes, 1981, 1991; Goffman, 1959), especially the literature 
focusingon conceptions of identity rooted in the self (Stryker et al., 2000),provides the 
theoreticallogic for conceptualizing these three role identities.  Here the focus is on the “active 
self” that asks “whoamI?” and how this self-knowledge motivates reflexive thought and self- 
initiated action to create, sustain and change larger social and economic conditions to help one’s 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 10 
self-growth and survival (Burke et al., 1991).Researchers define identity as internalized 
expectations about those characteristics that individuals hold as central, distinctive and enduring 
about them, and are at least partially reflected in the roles theyenact (Burke et al., 1991). For 
example, entrepreneurs who find self-meaning in the role of an inventor brimmingwithmarket- 
disruption ideas arelikely to view the inventor identity as a central, possibly defining, and 
enduring characteristic about their self. Noting that the self is comprised of multifaceted 
identities, identity theoryacknowledges that, for any individual, identities are organized 
hierarchicallysuch that an identity placed higher in the hierarchy is more salient and more 
centralto self-meaning than those placed lower (Stryker et al., 2000).Therefore, some 
entrepreneurs may view a founder, rather than inventor, identity as more salient and central and, 
consequently, be more committed to the role of creating a new venture, rather than exploring or 
inventing new opportunities. Indeed, over a lifetime, an entrepreneur may change the salience of 
different role identities (e.g., founder becomes more centralthan inventor); however, at any 
given time, the relative importance of role identities isstable, making an entrepreneur’s self- 
meaning temporally both distinctive and coherent. 
This distinctive and salient role identity motivates entrepreneurs to engage in certain 
activities (and disengage from others), and explains the affective experience that this engagement 
invokes. In particular, identities are a source of motivation for actions that result in social 
validation of self-meaning.  Role identities put people in social categories (e.g., I am an 
inventor), and individuals are motivated to maintain and confirm their self-meaning by engaging 
in activities and interacting with people in ways that confirm the role expectations and validate 
the behavioral implications of salient social categories (Burke et al., 1981, 1991; Goffman, 
1959).  Burke and Reitzes (1991)liken this to an “active self” that seeks engagement in activities
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 11 
that confirm, and disengagement from those activities that distract from salient identities. 
Such engagement in activities that validate salient identities is often not affect neutral; 
rather, it arouses positive affect in accord with affect control theory (Burke et al., 1991). 
Individuals experiencepositive emotions when their behavioral engagement maintains and 
enhances their salient identity. When such appraisals are congruent (behaviors reinforce the 
salient identity), activities are tagged with positive emotions, motivational resources are 
bolstered, and these associative links are stored in memory for later retrieval.  Conversely, when 
appraisals lack congruence (behaviors are contrary to the salient identity), activities are tagged 
withnegative emotion, motivational resources are mobilized to disengage, and such activities are 
possiblystored with avoidance links. Over repeated cycles and for some individuals, certain 
activities become associated with intense positive feelings because they reliably and strongly 
support an individual’s salient identityand motivate the individual to experience the positive 
feelings that come from continued engagement in such identity meaningful activities.  
Consistent with the preceding logic, popular accounts indicate that entrepreneursare 
often differentiallypassionate toward entrepreneurial activities. For instance, entrepreneurs with 
a salient inventor identity, exemplified by Stephan Wozniak, are aroused by passion when they 
engage in activities that involve seeking out new ideas, tinkering with new product development, 
or scanning the environment for market-disruptive opportunities. Alternatively, entrepreneurs 
whohave the founder identity as most salient, such as Wayne Huizenga, experience passion for 
activities that involve assembling the resources necessary to create a firm including financial 
(e.g., VC funding), human (e.g., employees), and social capital (e.g., boardmembers). Finally, 
entrepreneurs whose self-meaning is derived from the developer identity, exemplified by Ray 
Kroc, experience passionwhen they engage in activities related tomarket development (e.g., 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 12 
attracting new customers) and financial growth (e.g., value creation and appropriation). 
It is not necessary that entrepreneurs have a single identity that is hierarchically 
dominant.  However, when they do, entrepreneurs may disengage fromactivities relevant to 
other less meaningful identities. For example, entrepreneurs may be so passionate about the 
inventor role that theynever actually take their products to the market or found the venture to 
exploit the opportunity. Similarly, serial and portfolio entrepreneurs may be more passionate 
about the founder role and willing to sell their firm to others who are more interested in growing 
the venture to realize its full market potential. More generally, entrepreneurs may have multiple 
identities that depict varying patterns as they are organized in a hierarchy of more or less 
importance, where none is clearly dominant, or where some may be in conflict. Burke (2006) 
notes that multiple identities shift focus to internal organization of identities, and mechanisms by 
which the active self negotiates among different identities. Consideration of multiple 
entrepreneurial role identities may help explain conditions that lead to harmonious passion (e.g., 
when an entrepreneur can easily transition among three salient role identities) and to obsessive 
passion (e.g., when one role identity crowds out other identities). Thus, it matters which specific 
role identity invokes passion for entrepreneurs, to what extent it interferes in the fulfillment of 
rolesrelated to other identities, and how an entrepreneur’s active self managesthe multiple 
identities.  In summary, we conceptualize the nature of entrepreneurial passion asconsciously 
accessible intense positive feelings experienced by engagement in entrepreneurial activities 
associated with roles that are meaningful and salient to the self-identity of the entrepreneur.  
Next we discuss the experience of entrepreneurial passion to address what it does. 
THE EXPERIENCE OF ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION: COORDINATION OF 
COGNITIONS AND BEHAVIORS FOR ENTREPRENEURIAL EFFECTIVENESS 
Once activated, entrepreneurial passion catalyzesfull-blown emotionalexperiences, 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 13 
complete withengagement of brain (e.g., appraisals, cognitions) and body (e.g., physiological 
and behavioral) responses (Russell, 2003). The notion ofemotionalexperience recognizes that 
the brain and body responses triggered by passion do not appear as independent and 
disconnected responses, but rather as a coherent and coordinated pattern that is maintained over 
time (Damasio, 2003 and see Appendix). As such, the passion experience facilitates an 
entrepreneur’s efforts to adapt and cope with environmental challenges. This does not presume 
that the resulting adaptation and coping is necessarily functional. Instead, we acknowledge that 
the experience of entrepreneurial passion may produce response patterns that are obsessive, 
blind, ormisdirected (e.g., Vallerand et al., 2003). Cases abound of entrepreneurs who obsess 
about their ventures to the point that it curbs growth or persist with failing ventures long after 
theyshould have moved on. In prefacing our conceptualmodel, we definethe experience of 
entrepreneurial passion as a complex pattern of psychological, brain and body responses that 
are activated and maintained by an entrepreneur’s passion that, when regulated, aid incoherent 
and coordinatedmotivated goal pursuit.Below, we elaborate the proposed model withself 
regulation theoryas the overarching conceptual framework. 
Several aspects of self-regulation theory (Carver & Scheier, 1998)make it relevant for 
understanding how and why entrepreneurial passion might coordinate entrepreneurs’ cognitions 
and behaviors. First, self-regulation processes are central to human agency (effortful and 
conscious engagement of the self), and human coping (mobilization of body and brain responses 
to overcome challenges). The notions of agency and coping are compatible with entrepreneurial 
thinking that recognizing, reshaping and responding to opportunities lies at the nexus of the 
individual and the environment (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). Second, self-regulation views 
individual agency and coping as goal directed processes, just as entrepreneurs are thought to 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 14 
engage in exploration and exploitation activities in pursuit of desired goals. Goals provide 
direction and clarity to entrepreneurial efforts. Third, individual differences in self-regulation are 
known to influence coping effectiveness. Likewise, entrepreneurs differ in the degree to which 
theycan regulatetheir internal feeling states and behavioralresponses to cope effectively, 
especiallywhen multiple feeling states associated with disparate identities are activated. For 
instance, entrepreneurs may demonstrate a range of regulative control, from under-regulation, 
characterized by an inability tooptimally control or balance internal feeling states and giving 
wayto impulsive responses, to over-regulation, characterized by suppression of one or more 
internalfeeling states and a lack of response spontaneity and novelty(Gross, 1999). 
Figure 1 depicts the proposed conceptual model. The modeled processes are triggered 
when entrepreneurial passion is activated (shown in the left-most circle), and culminate in 
entrepreneurial outcomes(shown in the right-most box). Consistent with three identities 
proposed as meaningful for entrepreneurs, we include indicators of entrepreneurial outcomes that 
can be loosely categorized into those involving opportunity recognition (e.g., inventor identity), 
venture creation (e.g., founder identity), and venture growth (e.g.,developer identity)2.  
When a particular identity is activated (say, inventor), we expect that the experience of 
passion mobilizes an entrepreneur’s self regulation processes that are directed toward 
effectiveness in the pursuit of the corresponding entrepreneurial goal (here, opportunity 
recognition).  This goal pursuit, in turn, involves validating the focal identity by cognitive and 
behavioral engagement in activities in a mannerthat is characteristic of intense positive 
emotions. Consequently, the self-regulation processes linking entrepreneurial passion and 
  
2 
While we include these three broad categories of entrepreneurial effectivenessin our model and specify potential 
metrics for each categorybased on research in entrepreneurship, we do not view these indicators as definitive or 
complete. Additional details on opportunity recognition are available from Singh, Hills, Lumpkin, &Hybels(1999); 
venture creation from Gartner (1985);and venture growth in Haber & Reichel (2005).
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 15 
outcomesare represented by linkages involving goal related cognitions and entrepreneurial 
behaviors (the two middle boxesin Figure 1). We arguethat entrepreneurs fired by passion 
evidence behavioral engagement in entrepreneurial activities that is characterized by:(a) creative 
problemsolving, defined as the production of novel and useful ideas or actions (Woodman, 
Sawyer, & Griffin, 1993), (b) persistence, definedas the continuation of effortful action despite 
failures, impediments, or threats either real or imagined (Gimeno, Folta, Cooper, & Woo, 1997), 
and (c) absorption, defined as being fully concentrated and deeply engrossed in one’s work 
(Schindehutte, Morris, & Allen, 2006). Note that persistence, which refers to the duration of task 
engagement, is conceptually and empirically distinct from absorption, which refers to the level of 
task involvement. 
Further, we organize our discussion of the experience of entrepreneurial passion by 
emphasizing that the role fulfillment for each identity involves a focus on the goal corresponding 
to a specific set of entrepreneurialoutcomes, and this goal pursuit is differentiallyaffected by 
entrepreneurial behaviors. We first focus on how entrepreneurial passion influences these 
behaviors directly, and then indirectly through goal-related cognitions. 
-----Insert Figure1 about here ----- 
Direct Effects in the Experience of Entrepreneurial Passion 
Because passion involves intense and pleasurable feelings arising from engagement in 
activities associated with a role identity that is deeply meaningful, we expect entrepreneurs to 
regulate their responses to maintain or enhance such feelings. With experience and learning, 
entrepreneurs may encode a coherent pattern of behavioral responses as part of schema for a 
specific role identitythat can be autonomously activated without much cognitive effort.Such 
autonomous response patterns are the direct effects in Figure 1 (paths A, B, and C).
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 16 
Based on the psychologyofpositive emotions (Fredrickson, 1998), we posit that the 
intense feelings associated with passion will result in an inverted-U effect on entrepreneur’s 
creative problem solving (path A in Figure 1). Individuals experiencing positive affect have an 
adaptive approach to environmental stimuli, motivating their attention and energy to tackle 
encounteredchallenges or problems. When problems stand in the way of dreams, desires or 
purpose deeply rooted in the self-identity, entrepreneurs experiencing passion are more likely to 
regulate their attention and motivation to identify solutions that could otherwise go unnoticed or 
unexploited by entrepreneurs who are not similarly passionate.  In this sense, passion facilitates 
creation of unusual associationssuch asrecognition of patterns and relatedness among stimuli 
more readily to engage in novel and creative paths of action (Fredrickson, 1998; 2001). As such, 
we expect the regulatoryinfluence of passion to enable entrepreneurs to recognize novel patterns 
ofinformation, perceptuallyprocess stimuli, and leverage their existing knowledge to find 
creative solutions. This reasoning is consistent withAmabile’s(1997: 42)findingthat people 
who do what theyhave passion forare more likely to pursuecreative solutions. 
However, passion that is too positive or intense can limit an entrepreneur’screative 
problemsolving. Wetheorize that this occurs because the entrepreneur is resistant to exploring 
alternative options fearing that doing so may dilute and distract the intense positive experience, 
thereby curtailing the productive and flexible problem solving approach associated with passion. 
Consistent with this, Vallerand and colleagues (2003)suggest that extremely intense passion 
may invoke an obsessive response indicated by a rigid rather than flexible manner ofengagement 
in identity relevant activities because that identity would crowd out other identities consistent 
with the notion of it having“disproportionate space” within a person’s life. Thus, we posit: 
Proposition 1: Entrepreneurial passionwill have an inverted-U influence on creative 
problemsolving directed toward identity relevant activities.
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 17 
The importance of creative problem solving for effectiveness is especially germane when 
an entrepreneur’s passion is for the inventor identity. In this instance, validation and affirmation 
ofthe entrepreneur’s identity will come from effectiveness in opportunity recognition rather than 
other outcomes. Such entrepreneurs will be particularly driven towards engagement in creative 
pursuit ofidentifying, inventing, and exploring new opportunities or market niches (Wilson & 
Stokes, 2005). Past research suggests that creative problem-solving is particularly important for 
generating novel and useful ideas and opportunities for business ventures (Ward, 2004). For 
instance, many entrepreneurs are challenged by identifyingnovel market niches or opportunities 
that are concurrently interesting, compatible with their individual human capital and skills, 
innovative for the potentialmarket, and viable as a profit-making venture. Thus, while 
persistence and absorption behaviors can be helpful in effective opportunity recognition, 
entrepreneurial engagement in creative problem solving is crucial. Thus, we posit: 
Proposition 2: When the entrepreneur’s inventor identity is dominant, entrepreneurial 
passion will influence an entrepreneur’s effectiveness in opportunity recognition mainly 
due to its effect on creative problem solving. 
As depicted by the direct path B in Figure 1, we alsoexpect that passion will positively 
and directly influence an entrepreneur’s persistence on tasks that validate and reaffirm the 
identity activated by passion. Support for this assertion is drawn from psychologicalstudies of 
behavioral patterns associated with, and regulated by positive feelings (Fredrickson, 1998). In 
general, positive feelings enhance continued engagement on tasks and activities that invoke such 
feelings because people want to maintain a positive emotional state and resist disengagement 
(Pham, 2004). When the focal activities are not only pleasurable but also deeply meaningful to 
self identity, we can expect that individuals will be bolstered to persist so that they can enjoy a 
prolonged state of positive affect, reinforce their role identity, and mitigate the risk of identity 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 18 
threats that come from premature disengagement (Burke, 2006; Pratt & Foreman, 2000). 
Consequently, we posit: 
Proposition 3:  Entrepreneurial passion will positively influence an entrepreneur’s 
persistence on identity relevant activities. 
When an entrepreneur’s passion is associated with the founder identity, we expect that 
the entrepreneur will regulate attention and motivation in pursuit ofventure creation goals. For 
effectiveness in this pursuit, we expect that persistence and creative problem solving will be 
particularly important. The liabilities of smallness and newness are most prominent at the 
venture creation stage (D’Intino, 2007). Entrepreneurs face considerable challenges including 
rejection of ideas, refusals of funding requests, and lack of legitimacy, which together may turn 
awaypotentialcustomers as well as employees. To secure funding, locate customers, hire 
employees, and more generallyestablish the firm’s reputation and legitimacy, persistence in the 
pursuit offinancial, human and social capital is critical (Gimeno et al., 1997). We expect that the 
regulatoryinfluence of intense positive feelings associated with the founder identityis likely to 
mobilize action and needed energy of entrepreneurs to master challenging situations by 
overcoming uncertainties, setbacks and resource shortages in the assembly of financial, human 
and social capital. Bierley and colleagues (2000)affirm that passionis linked to energetic and 
persistent goalpursuit, particularlythe abilityto overcome resistance, obtain resources, 
coordinate activity, and motivate key people. However, creative problem-solving in developing 
new ways of reaching out to potential investors, employees and customers is also important. For 
example, Elsbach (2003) studied venture capital pitch sessions and found that the investors often 
made their investment decisionat least in part based on the creativity of the entrepreneur making 
the pitch. More broadly, Lee, Florida, and Acs (2004) argue that creativity has a positive 
relationship with new firm formation.  Thus: 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 19 
Proposition 4: When the entrepreneur’s founder identity is dominant, entrepreneurial 
passion will influence an entrepreneur’s effectiveness in venture creation primarily due to 
its effect on persistence and creative problem solving. 
We also predict that entrepreneurial passion will positively influence absorption in 
entrepreneurial activities associated with the invoked role identity (path C).Engagement in tasks 
and activities that hold identity meaning is posited to be an experience akin to “flow”, where 
entrepreneurs become immersed in, and feel in complete control of their activities, such that they 
barelynotice the passing of time or people around them(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990).  The 
combination of intense excitement and focus, which are defining characteristics of flow 
experiences, are central to the experiential and regulation effects of entrepreneurial passion. 
When entrepreneurs are aroused by their passion for activities associated with a meaningful 
identity, theyexperience intense excitement that comes from pursuit of deeply internalized goals 
such that theyoften ignoreactivities or people that will detract from it.  Some scholars suggest 
that entrepreneurs’ success largely depends on their regulative capabilities to cultivate personal 
flow experiences (e.g. Schindehutte, et al., 2006). Successful entrepreneurs, such as Bill Gates, 
who are able to continuously innovate in highly competitive and rapidly evolving markets are 
thought to be capable of remaining in states of flow for periods of time much longer than that of 
the average business person (d’Intino et al., 2007).  Thus, we expect a positive relationship 
between entrepreneurial passion and absorption. 
Proposition 5: Entrepreneurial passion will positively influence entrepreneurs’ 
absorption on identity relevant activities. 
Further, an entrepreneur’s goal pursuit is likely to be regulated for venture growth when 
the developer identity is at the fore of entrepreneurial passion.  In this instance, weexpect that an 
entrepreneur’s absorption and persistence are relatively more significant for effectiveness in 
venture growth, although creative problem solving is also relevant.  The challenges of venture 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 20 
growth involve navigating the chaos and ambiguity ofmarkets that comes from continuously 
evolving customer needs and unrelenting competitive moves (Schindehutte, 2006).  When 
entrepreneurs approach venture growth activities with a high level of absorption they are less 
prone to be perturbed by environmentalambiguity and more likely to engage with clarity and 
focus (Jelinek & Litterer, 1995). In addition, while new firms are often quick to market with new 
products and flexiblyadapt their product mix and strategies, the liability of growth poses 
challenges of managing competing pressures, includingmaintainingrapid growthby radical 
innovation in systems and procedures within the firmwhile providing bureaucratic stability, and 
the need to simultaneously manage the evolving operationalneeds of the firm and monitor 
changing market and environmentalconditions(e.g., Slevin & Covin, 1997).  Such challenges 
require resolveand sustained effort over time to effectively cope with the considerable tension, 
transition and changeinvolved in venture growth.  Thus, the combination of focused attention 
(absorption) and continued efforts (persistence) is critical to market growth activities. Thus: 
Proposition 6: When the entrepreneur’s developer identity is dominant, entrepreneurial 
passion will influence entrepreneurialeffectiveness in venture growth primarily due to its 
effect on absorption and persistence. 
Thus far, we have assumed that an entrepreneur’s role identities are organized 
hierarchicallysuch that onlya single identity is dominant in the experience of entrepreneurial 
passion.  In reality, this is not always the case.  Entrepreneurs may have conflicting role 
identities.  However, at a given point in time, an entrepreneur’s passion may beassociated with 
onlyone ofthe salient identities.  In some instances, multiple identities may be concurrently 
activated.  For instance, in the nascent stages of venture creation, entrepreneuring may involve 
activities that relate to both inventor and founder identities such as when entrepreneurs present 
their ideas to a prospective venture capitalist.  In these situations, the proposed direct effects will 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 21 
be contingent on the regulatory capabilities of entrepreneurs.  When the entrepreneurs are able to 
regulate harmoniously among the invoked identities, the proposed effects are likely to hold.  
However, when an entrepreneur’s regulatory capabilities are challenged by identity conflict, we 
expect the proposed effects to be subdued, and even to become nonsignificant as the conflict 
dilutes and divides the entrepreneur’s attention and motivation.  We expect regulatory 
capabilities to vary across entrepreneurs, and influence the ability of entrepreneurs to realize the 
positive outcomes from passion, especially insituations involving conflicting identities. 
Mediated Effects in the Experience of Entrepreneurial Passion 
We also argue that entrepreneurial passion will influence behaviorsand ultimately 
effectivenessthrough its mediating effect on goal-related cognitions (see Figure 1). Despite past 
arguments that emotions and reason are inherently atodds, scholars now recognize that 
cognitions and emotions may act as coherent and connected systems that work together to 
dynamically regulate human behavior toward desired goals (Damasio, 2003; Pham, 2004). For 
example, Fredrickson (1998)postulates that positive feelings broaden one’s thought–action 
repertoires by activating (via attentional processes) and broadening (via information processing) 
the scope of cognitions, which in turn guide an individual’s behavioral responsetoward effective 
goalpursuit. Seo et al. (2004)specify broaden and build postulates for work motivation by 
proposing goal cognitions as mediators of the influence of core affect. Building on these ideas, 
we propose mediation effects ofgoalcognitions to reflect coordination between passion and 
cognition during goal pursuit. Specifically, we proposethat entrepreneurial passion will 
influence the level of challenge inherent in the goals entrepreneurs set, their commitment to 
those goals, and the nature of their striving towards goal attainment. These goal cognitions in 
turn will have differential effects on entrepreneurs’ creative problem-solving, persistence, and 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 22 
absorptionon identity-relevant tasks.  These behaviors influence entrepreneurial effectiveness, as 
elaborated on in the preceding direct effects section. 
Consider the influence of entrepreneurial passion mediated by goal challenge, the 
difficulty level of goals set (paths d-g and d-h in Figure 1). We expect that anentrepreneur’s 
passion will lead to settingmore challenging goalsfor the tasks and activities associated with the 
invoked role identity, for two primary reasons. First, the positive valence of passionbolsters 
success beliefs for activitiesthat affirm and validate the identity associated with that passion.  
When entrepreneursengage in activities they are passionate about, they are more confident and 
positive in making evaluative judgments about possibilities of success in those activities. This 
may happen, for instance, because entrepreneurs interpret their intense positive feelings for 
identity relevant tasks as affirmative information about their capabilities to meet environmental 
demands (i.e., I feel good, so I must be good at this), in accord with feeling-as-information 
hypothesis(Schwarz et al., 2007).  When success beliefs are bolstered, entrepreneurs with 
passion are prone to set more challenging goals than those who approach the focal activities 
withoutbeing energized by passion. More generally, Locke and Latham (2002)suggest that 
positive feelings influencecognitive appraisals associated with setting challenging goals. 
Second, when entrepreneurs are passionate about a particular role identity, theyare likely tohave 
more expansive thought-action repertoires as per thebroaden and buildtheory (Fredrickson, 
1998; Seo et al., 2004), resulting in an enlarged sense of their capabilities and personal resources. 
In uncertain and dynamic situations where success expectancies are unknown, inestimable or 
fuzzy, entrepreneurs experiencing passion are likely to be emboldened by their heightened sense 
ofcapabilities and resources to set more challenging goals than those entrepreneurs who lack the 
spark of passion.  Baumand Locke’s (2004)research suggests that entrepreneurs with passion 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 23 
are more prone to garner and invest resources like time and effort to develop needed capabilities 
for activities they like and goals they aspire for. Thus, passion is associated with setting 
challenging goals. 
In turn, setting challenging goals is predicted to enhance creative problem solving and 
inhibit persistence on role relevant activities. Creativityin entrepreneurial tasks necessitates 
flexibly altering preexisting routines to explore new approaches and ideas that are effective in 
problemsolving. Challenging goals, especiallywhen theyare self-set and identity relevant rather 
than assignedand identity irrelevant, are likely to energize entrepreneurs to expend greater effort 
and develop creative task strategies. This is because self-set challenging goals have motivational 
influence such that entrepreneurs have a strong desire to achieve those goalsso theycan validate 
or bolster their internalized entrepreneurial identity.  When this motivation is focused and 
directed bychallenging goals to specific identity relevant activities, studies report that 
individualsfind and make better task strategies to attain goals (Locke & Latham, 2002). 
While challenging goals can increase persistence in stable and predictable environments 
(Locke et al., 2002), we expect the reverse effect in environmentsinvolving uncertain or 
ambiguous feedback during goal pursuit, such as entrepreneurship.  When an entrepreneursset 
challenging goals, they are more likely to encounter obstacles during goal pursuit, especially in 
unstable environments where uncontested success is unlikely and it is hard to assess whether 
performance goals are met. Such encumbered goal pursuit providesnumerous instances of 
negative feedback. While initial negative feedback may not perturb an entrepreneur fired by 
passion, continued negative feedback from the pursuit of challenging goals can result in the 
entrepreneur mitigatingthe growing threats to a strongly held identity by revising or disengaging 
from initialgoals. Such actions diminish persistence on the challenging goals. Also, given 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 24 
limited cognitive resources, focus on developing and implementing ways to address challenging 
goals can consume considerable cognitive resources, limiting resources available for persisting to 
overcome unexpected obstacles encountered during goal pursuit.Thus, we posit: 
Proposition 7: Entrepreneurial passion for activities associated with a particular identity 
will lead entrepreneurs to set more challenging goals, resulting in a) higher levels of 
creative problem solving but b) lower levels of persistence in identity relevant activities. 
Next, we posit that goalcommitment will mediate the influence of entrepreneurial 
passion on creative problem solving, persistence and absorption (paths e-i, e-j, & e-k in Figure 
1). Goal commitment is defined as the extent of determination an individual has to attain a set 
goal (Locke et al., 2002). Because passion is associated with salient role identities, it should lead 
entrepreneursto be intrinsically motivated to achieve the goals associated with affirming those 
identities. When entrepreneurs are intrinsically motivated, theyare likely to havegreater 
commitment than entrepreneurs who set instrumentally motivated goals. Studies show that 
motivationis not simply due to higher activation levels associated with positive emotion but 
because of cognitive processes involving evaluation of rewards (e.g., more valued), effort- 
outcomelinkages (e.g., moreconfident and stronger) and autonomous control (e.g., more self 
directed)from intrinsic motivation. While no study in theentrepreneurship literature has directly 
examined therelationshipbetween passion and goal commitment, indirect evidence exists that 
when positive feelings activate identity relevant goals, entrepreneurs are motivatedfor effortful 
engagement in goal pursuit (Baron & Ward, 2004), which is a critical part of goalcommitment. 
In turn, goalcommitment is predicted to enhance entrepreneurs’absorption, creative 
problemsolving, and persistence. Once entrepreneurs commit to set goals, their intrinsic 
motivation regulatesthemto focus their cognitions on attainmentofidentity relevant goals, and 
suppressresources directed atidentityirrelevant activities and distractions (Locke et al., 2002).
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 25 
Suppressing goal irrelevant distractions combined with highly focused and motivated 
involvement is conducive for flow experiences, thereby promoting task absorption (Schindehutte 
et al., 2006). Further, when entrepreneurs are intrinsically motivated to engage inactivities that 
validate their salient identity, we expect that theywill demonstrate greater involvement in goal 
directed tasksresulting ina generative behavioral orientation, indicated by a focus on learning 
and enjoyment of identity-relevant activities. Such orientation is associated with a flexible 
approach to problems and enhanced creativity in problemsolving. Finally, we expect goal 
commitment to lead to greater persistence because intrinsic motivation is associated with higher 
levels of perceived autonomyand confident self beliefsregarding identity salient activitiesthat 
bolster an entrepreneur’s effort and attention toward goal focused activities. In a recent study, 
Schindehutteet al. (2006: 353)found that entrepreneurs’commitment level was a key indicator 
ofpeak performance, which allows themto persist as they “continueagainst the odds and 
overcome fatigue and pain to finish a task or meet a challenge.”Thus, we propose: 
Proposition 8: Entrepreneurial passionfor activities associated with a particular identity 
will lead to greater goal commitment, resulting in a) higher levels of creative problem 
solving, b) higher levels of persistence, and c) higher levels of absorption in identity- 
relevant activities. 
Goalstriving is also posited to mediate the influence of entrepreneurial passionon 
persistence and absorption (Figure 1, paths f-l and f-m). Goal striving is defined asaction 
planning, monitoring progress, and adjusting action plans based on impediments encountered 
during goal pursuit (Oettingen & Gollwitzer, 2001).Entrepreneurial passion directs attention to 
challenging strategic goals related to a particular meaningful role identityrather than more 
tactical goals needed to maintain progress on immediate tasks.This is because passion engages 
meaningful role identities that are usually associated with abstract goals. Building on past 
research(Seo et al., 2004), we reason that strong commitment to initiallyset goals combined 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 26 
withtheir higher level of abstraction(strategic rather than tactical) will makeentrepreneurs less 
inclined to makefrequent and thorough progress judgments, and will inhibit altering and 
adjusting their initial goals. As a result, entrepreneurial passionshould diminish goal striving. 
Support for this comes from Baum and Locke (2004), who note that the energyin passion 
triggers a natural toughness to stick to the initial goals involved in venturingand an unwavering 
focus on those initiallyset goals. Likewise, Cova and Svanfeldt (1993)suggest that 
entrepreneurs with high levels of passion are less sensitive to contrary market information, and 
instead continue with initiallydetermined plans. This is consistent with Schwarz and Clore’s 
arguments (2007: 26)that when different processing styles are possible to meet current goals and 
task demands, happy individuals rely on a less effortful, top down, heuristic information 
processing strategy, although they are able and willing to engage in more careful and systematic 
information processing(which is associated with goal striving) when task demands require it. 
However, when entrepreneurs are more effective in goalstriving, we predicttheyare 
likelyto evidence higherpersistence but lowerabsorption. First, entrepreneurs who engage in 
goalstriving are planning and attending to task feedback, both of which are likely to lead to 
greater persistence in goal pursuit. Support for this comes fromLiao and Gartner (2006), who 
reportthat entrepreneurs who engaged in planning activities were more persistent at new venture 
creation. Second, we expect goal striving to diminish absorption in identity relevant activities 
because it shifts attention away from strategic goals activated by entrepreneurialpassionto more 
immediate tacticalgoals and associated feedback, thereby interruptingflow experiencesthat 
come from effortlessness in goaldirected actions. Support for this comes from Schindehutte et 
al. (2006), whofound that the flow experiences among founding entrepreneurs had hallmarks of 
autotelic experiences, whichare indicative of heuristic processingthat is less compatible with the 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 27 
detailed cognitive processing associated with goalstriving. Finally, because goalstriving 
involves monitoring progress feedbackand attending to implementationrather than innovation, 
we do not expect an association between goal striving and creative problem solving. Thus: 
Proposition 9: Entrepreneurial passionfor activities associated with a particular identity 
will lead to lower levels of goal striving thus resulting in a) lower levels of persistence (a 
positive effect of goal striving on persistence), and b) higher levels of absorption (a 
negative effect of goal striving on absorption) on identity relevant activities. 
DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
We aimedto bring order to thedisparate meanings and uses of the term “passion” in 
entrepreneurship by developing a theoryfor understanding the nature and experience of 
entrepreneurial passion that addresses what it isand what it does. Best viewed as a starting point 
for programmatic research, the proposed theoretical framework facilitates examining outstanding 
questions about passion in entrepreneurship that have thus far received mixed or limited 
attention, and invites empirical testing to guide further developments and refinements. We begin 
our discussion with contributions concerning the nature of entrepreneurial passion. 
Entrepreneurial Role Identities and the Nature of Entrepreneurial Passion 
Our conceptualizationof the nature of entrepreneurial passion asserts that studies that ask 
what passion isor what it doesmust begin by addressing passion for what. We propose that 
entrepreneurial passion is forone or more meaningful rolesthat are salient to the self-identityof 
the entrepreneur and correspond tointense positive feelings consciously experienced by 
engagement in entrepreneurial activities associated with the focal role(s). We specifically discuss 
three role identities—inventor, founder and developer—that are relevant for entrepreneurship. 
Past researchers, including Vallerand and colleagues(2003), have noted that passion involves 
engagement in specific activities (e.g., biking) or with specific objects (e.g., coin collections), 
and some have hinted that these activities and objects have identity meaning.  However, we are 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 28 
the first to explicitly break down the notion of an abstract entrepreneurial identity (Murnieks & 
Mosakowski, 2006)to conceptualize and theoretically develop three specific role identities that 
have distinct characteristics and relate to disparate entrepreneurial outcomes including 
opportunity recognition (inventor role), venture creation (founder role), and venture growth 
(developer role).  In so doing, our studymovesbeyond theories of entrepreneurship that 
implicitly or explicitlyportraythe entrepreneurial role as motivated primarily by the instrumental 
goalofwealthcreation and maximization. We do not rule out that, for some entrepreneurs, the 
mere thought of possessing unimaginable wealth may invoke intense positive feelings akin to 
passion.  However, we argue that passion will be associated with the three roles developed 
herein, because these have intrinsic motivation stemming from the validation and affirmation of 
the entrepreneur’s conception of their true self, thereby activating authentic passions.  In this 
sense, wealth seeking is relevant but not central to the conception of the self.  
Conceptualizing entrepreneurial role identities as central to the nature of entrepreneurial 
passion allows the field to:  (1) clarify the distinction between passion and any positive emotion, 
(2) overcome the limitations of trait-based approaches to entrepreneurial passion in explaining 
observed entrepreneurial behaviors, and (3) open new lines of theoreticaland empirical inquiry 
that current researchneither facilitates nor illuminates. First, it is inappropriate to conflate 
entrepreneurial passion with episodic emotions, or view it simply as anyintense positive feeling.  
Episodic affect entails shifts in current moods that are primarily triggered by external events, 
short termin duration, and hardwired and involuntaryresponse to stimuli. By contrast, 
entrepreneurialpassionis consciously experienced and categorized feeling, invoked from 
engagement with activities anchored to the entrepreneur’s self-identity, and encoded based on 
effortful reflection, categorization, and integration of affective responses (see Appendix).  
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 29 
Moreover, while an entrepreneur’s positive emotions will be based on aggregating across a 
diverse set of activities engaged in over a (short) period of time, passion involves feelings 
experienced when entrepreneurs engage in a set of activities relating to a salient entrepreneurial 
identity, and which endure over a longer period of time. Because we expect that onlyfeelings 
associated withinventor role identity and its meaningfulness will influence, for example, 
persistence on opportunity recognition activities, an aggregated indicator of emotions is likely to 
lack comparable predictive and diagnostic power.  An entrepreneur can, ofcourse, experience 
passion and episodic emotions concurrently, and this is an area ripe for future inquiry. 
Secondly, some recent studies conceive entrepreneurial passion as a trait-like, individual 
difference variable (Baumet al., 2001; Shane et al., 2003).  These approaches can explain why 
some entrepreneurs experience passion for their pursuits while for others entrepreneurship is a 
cognitive and rational pursuit, devoid of emotive content.  However, our identity based approach 
is more flexible and can explain observed patterns of entrepreneurial behaviors that are not 
capturedinthe trait-based approach.  For instance, some nascent entrepreneurs who evidence 
high passion for entrepreneuring lose the fire of passion as the venture grows, just as some 
entrepreneurs with passion for discovering high value-added market opportunities are willing to 
let others take their ideas and extract market value by further growing the venture. Such patterns 
pose a challenge forthepassion-as-trait approach because it asserts that passion would remain 
fairly stableacross the life cycle of entrepreneurs. Our conception suggests that whether passion 
remains stable or is “lost” depends on variability in the differing levels of passion entrepreneurs 
have for different role identities. 
Third, in extending these lines of inquiry, we can hypothesize that some nascent 
entrepreneurs may lose the fire of passion because less meaningful role identities are invoked for 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 30 
themas the venture grows. For example, in the early stages, entrepreneurial activities are 
typicallylinked to an inventor identity, while in later stages activities are more likely related to a 
founder or developer role, which may be less central to the entrepreneur’s self-identity. Some 
entrepreneurs may find identity meaning in each role identity and harmoniously shift from one 
identity to the other as the venture emerges and grows. Similarly, some entrepreneurs who 
appear passionate yet foregotheir inventions or ventures to others may have passion for the 
inventor or founder, but not the developer identity. While conjectural, such lines of inquiry are 
neither entertained nor provoked by current conceptions, and warrant future investigation. 
Empirical examination of the preceding insights will require developing a validated 
entrepreneurial passion measure. Recent studies have taken initial steps by identifying activities 
toward which entrepreneurs have strong inclinations, that theyfind important, and in which they 
invest time and energy, as a wayto measure entrepreneurial passion (Brännback et al., 2006; 
Murnieks, 2007), following Vallerand and colleagues (2003).While important, these efforts 
neither link entrepreneuring activities to specific role identities, nor capture activities at a 
specific enough level. Our definition instead suggests that original future work in 
operationalizing entrepreneurial passion should include direct assessment of the: (a) 
meaningfulness of individual role identities for the entrepreneur (e.g., Inventing newsolutions to 
problems is an important part of who I am.), (b) intensity of positive feelings for activities 
associated withindividual role identities (e.g., It is exciting to figure out newways to solve unmet 
market needs that can be commercialized), and (c)a combinatorial rule for combining the 
preceding evaluations to develop a composite or latent entrepreneurial passion score for each 
identity.  We note that such an operationalization has parallel with attitude measurements (a 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 31 
multiplicative combination of beliefs and importance ratings), and much can be gained by 
drawing on the extensive experience with such measurement (e.g., Fishbein & Azjen, 1975). 
CoordinatedRegulation in the Experience of Entrepreneurial Passion 
Until recently, most studies held the view that passions cloud reason, and that effective 
decision making requires rationaland reasoned judgments(Damasio, 1994). For instance, Shane 
and Venkataraman (2000)assert that optimism, an emotion related to passion, limitsinformation, 
leads to rosyforecasts, and impedes reason (act-first-think-later), and emphasize the superiority 
of reason based decisions for effectiveness inexploitingopportunities. Our work goes beyond 
normative assertions of passion versusreason to developtheorybased predictions for a more 
balancedstudyofpassion andreason as interdependent systems.  In our view, when aroused, 
passion for entrepreneurial identities coordinates and regulates entrepreneurialcognitionsand 
behaviors for goal pursuit.  While this regulatoryinfluence is not universally functional, the 
proposed theoryofentrepreneurial passion clarifies when it is functionalor dysfunctionalby 
positing direct and goal-mediated effects on entrepreneuring behaviors, and contingenciesfor its 
consequences for entrepreneurial outcomes that are regulated by the salient identity(ies) 
entwined in the experience of entrepreneurial passion. 
Our theorizing contributes to the literature by moving beyond global assertions about 
passion versusreason to provide a fine-grained understanding of whatpassiondoes, whenit is 
functional, and why. Our work suggests that what passion doesvaries depending on (1) what the 
passion is for (e.g., which identity and how salient that is to the individual), (2) the specific 
entrepreneurial behavior considered, (3) the particular goal cognitions activated, and (4) what 
aspect of entrepreneurial effectiveness is of substantive interest.  The proposed conceptual 
framework provides a systematically organized approach for simultaneously accounting for the 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 32 
preceding effects in a way that encourages its empirical examination. Forinstance, we predict 
thatentrepreneurs who experience passion for one or more salient identities will bemore 
persistent and more absorbed in identity relevant tasksbut will be limited in their creative 
problemsolving beyond an intermediate point. Likewise, our inclusion of goal cognitions as 
mediators of the influence of passion on behaviors suggests parallel and dynamics pathways for 
passion’s effects, rather than simple linear relationships.  Moreover, we advance a contingent 
view of entrepreneurial passion by theorizing differential effects of entrepreneurial behaviors on 
outcomes depending on the specific identity invoked in the experience of entrepreneurial 
passion.  When an inventor identity is invoked, for instance, opportunityrecognition is the 
dominant goal and creative problem solving the consequential pathway for goal effectiveness. 
Our rich theorizing allows new insights intothe observed heterogeneity in the patterns of 
entrepreneurial success. For instance, why do some entrepreneurs succeed in achieving 
impossible goals despite the odds and failures along the way, while others burn out too quickly, 
resulting in grief and disappointment? Although past research has addressed these questions with 
variables such as personality traits, market forces, or luck, our theorizing suggests that passion 
may be acriticalingredient in an entrepreneur’s success in achieving challenging goals not 
simply because it mobilizes energyandenhances commitment but rather because passion 
activates heuristic cognitive processing and coordinates broaden and build mechanisms that are 
especiallyfunctional. As such, our theoryposits that entrepreneurslike Wayne Huizenga, Anita 
Roddick or Stephan Wozniak may have succeeded because they had high levels of passionfor 
their entrepreneurial identities, in particular for the inventor identity, and this passion kept their 
energy focused on overarching, but challenging, goals and promoted cognitive mechanisms that 
were not easily impeded by temporary setbacks, impedimentsor failures. Nevertheless, at this 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 33 
stage, our theorizing and propositions are conjectural andwarrant future empirical examination. 
Initial empirical testing of the proposed framework will likely require quasi-experimental 
and non-experimental approaches with entrepreneurship relevant samples. One possible 
approach focused on internal validity would be controlled, longitudinal quasi-experiments that 
utilize materials for activating passion(e.g., imagined task engagement), and dynamically track 
individual entrepreneur’s responses as they work toward goal-directed tasks. Computer “game” 
models and role playing algorithms may be effective for such experiments, as it has been in 
emotion studies (Barrett et al., 2007), provided that identity salience can either be elicited or 
measured in such experiments. Another possible approach, focused on external validity, would 
be cohort, panel or random sample studies that examine the key assertions of the hypothesized 
framework in the field with entrepreneurs. 
CONCLUDING NOTES 
Much has been writtenand saidabout the nature and experience of entrepreneurial 
passion; yet there is little to show for conceptual development and theorizing of this intriguing 
phenomenon.  We correct this gap by proposinga theoryofentrepreneurial passion that provides 
a systematic foundation for examining what passion is, and what it doesfor entrepreneurs.  We 
do not presume that entrepreneurs can be necessarily trained to feelmore or less passion for 
entrepreneuring. Neither do we assert that passion is a panacea for successful coping with 
entrepreneurial challenges. Rather, our theorizing recognizes passion as a phenomenon that is 
prevalent among entrepreneursbut is often loosely defined, confused with other emotions or 
misunderstood, andinadequately theorized for understanding its mechanisms of influence on 
entrepreneuring behaviors.  Clarity about the nature of entrepreneurial passion and theorizing 
about its regulatoryinfluence has implications for theoryand practice. We hope that research 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 34 
guided by our theorizing will help entrepreneurs to recognize and effectively regulate their 
passions, harmoniously manage conflict among competing entrepreneurial identities, and 
mitigate the dysfunctional effects of passion.  We encourage scholarsto use our work as a 
starting point for systematic studies of entrepreneurialpassionto provide insights for practice 
that channel the fire of passion for entrepreneurial effectiveness. 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 35 
REFERENCES 
Amabile, T. M. 1997. Entrepreneurialcreativity through motivational synergy. Journal of 
Creative Behavior, 31(1): 18-26. 
Baron, R. A. In Press. The role of affect in the entrepreneurial process. Academy of 
Management Review, 33(2). 
Baron, R. A., & Ward, T. B. 2004. Expanding entrepreneurialcognition's toolbox: Potential 
contributors from the field of cognitive science. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 
28(6): 553-573. 
Barrett, L. F., Mesquita, B., Ochsner, K. N., & Gross, J. J. 2007. The experience of emotion. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 58: 373-403. 
Baum, J. R., & Locke, E. A. 2004. The relationship of entrepreneurial traits, skill, and motivation 
to subsequent venture growth. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(4): 587-598. 
Baum, J. R., Locke, E. A., & Smith, K. G. 2001. A multidimensionalmodelofventure growth. 
Academy of Management Journal, 44(2): 292-303. 
Belitz, C., & Lundstrom, M. 1997. The Power of Flow: Practical Ways to Transform Your Life 
with Meaningful Coincidence. New York: Harmony Books. 
Bierly, P. E., Kessler, E. H., & Christensen, E. W. 2000. Organizational learning, knowledge, 
and wisdom. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 13(6): 595-618. 
Bird, B. J. 1989. Entrepreneurial Behavior. Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman and Co. 
Brännback, M., Carsrud, A., Elfving, J., & Krueger, N. K. 2006. Sex, [drugs], and 
entrepreneurial passion?: An exploratory study, Paper presented at the Babson College 
Entrepreneurship Research Conference. Bloomington, IN. 
Branzei, O., & Zietsma, C. 2003. Entrepreneurial love: The enabling functions of positive 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 36 
illusions in venturing, Paper presented at the Babson-Kauffman Entrepreneurial 
Research Conference. Wellesley, MA: Babson College. 
Burke, P. J. 2006. Identity change. Social Psychology Quarterly, 69(1): 81-96. 
Burke, P. J., & Reitzes, D. C. 1981. The link between identity and role performance. Social 
Psychology Quarterly, 44(2): 83-92. 
Burke, P. J., & Reitzes, D. C. 1991. An identity theoryapproach to commitment. Social 
Psychology Quarterly, 54(3): 239-251. 
Cardon, M. S., Zietsma, C., Saparito, P., Matherne, B., & Davis, C. 2005. A tale of passion: New 
insights into entrepreneurship from a parenthood metaphor. Journal of Business 
Venturing, 20(1): 23-45. 
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. 1998. On the Self-Regulation of Behavior. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Cova, B., & Svanfeldt, C. 1993. Societal innovations and the postmodern aestheticization of 
everyday life. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 10(3): 297-311. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1990. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York: Harper 
Perennial. 
Damasio, A. R. 1994. Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human Brain. New York: 
Grossett/Putnam. 
Damasio, A. R. 2003. Fundamental feelings. Nature, 413(6858): 781. 
Fishbein, M., & Azjen, I. 1975. Belief, Intention, Attitude, and Behavior: An Introduction to 
Theory and Research. Reading, MA: Addison-WesleyPublishing. 
Fredrickson, B. L. 1998. What good are positive emotions? Review of General Psychology, 2(3): 
300-319.
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 37 
Frijda, N. 2005. Emotion experience. Cognition and Emotion, 19(4): 473-497. 
Gartner, W. B. 1985. A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of new venture 
creation. Academy of Management Review, 10(4): 696-706. 
Gartner, W. B., Starr, J. A., & Bhat, S. 1999. Predicting new venture survival: An analysis of 
"Anatomyofa Startup." cases from Inc. magazine. Journal of Business Venturing, 
14(2): 215-232. 
Gimeno, J., Folta, T. B., Cooper, A. C., & Woo, C. Y. 1997. Survival of the fittest? 
Entrepreneurial human capital and the persistence of underperforming firms. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 42(4): 750-783. 
Goffman, E. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 
Goss, D. 2005. Schumpeter's legacy? Interaction and emotions in the sociologyof 
entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 29(2): 205-218. 
Gross, J. J. 1999. Emotion regulation: Past, present, future. Emotion and Cognition, 13(5): 551- 
573. 
Haber, S., & Reichel, A. 2005. Identifying performance measures of small ventures: The case of 
the tourism industry. Journal of Small Business Management, 43(3): 257-286. 
Jelinek, M., & Litterer, J. 1995. Toward entrepreneurial organizations: Meeting ambiguity with 
engagement. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 19(3): 137-168. 
Liao, J., & Gartner, W. B. 2006. The effects of pre-venture plan timing and perceived 
environmental uncertainty on the persistence of emerging firms. Small Business 
Economics, 27(1): 23-40. 
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. 2002. Building a practically useful theory of goal setting and task 
motivation: A 35-year odyssey. American Psychologist, 57(9): 705-717.
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 38 
Murnieks, C. 2007. Who am I? The Quest for an Entrepreneurial Identity and an Investigation 
of Its Relationship to Entrepreneurial Passion and Goal-Setting Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, University of Colorado-Boulder. 
Murnieks, C., & Mosakowski, E. 2006. Entrepreneurial passion: An identity theoryperspective, 
Paper presented at the Academy of Management conference. Atlanta, GA. 
Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P. M. 2001. Goal setting and goal striving. In A. Tesser, & N. 
Schwarz (Eds.), Intraindividual Processes. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Pham, M. T. 2004. The logic of feeling. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14(4): 360-369. 
Pratt, M. G., & Foreman, P. O. 2000. Classifying managerial responses to multiple 
organizational identities. The Academy of Management Review, 25(1): 18-42. 
Rockwell, I. 2002. The Five Wisdom Energies: A Buddhist Way of Understanding 
Personalities, Emotions, and Relationships. Boston: Shambhala. 
Russell, J. A. 2003. Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion. Psychological 
Review, 110(1): 145-172. 
Schindehutte, M., Morris, M., & Allen, J. 2006. Beyond achievement: Entrepreneurship as 
extreme experience. Small Business Economics, 27(4): 349-368. 
Schumpeter, J. A. 1951. Imperialism and Social Classes. New York: Augustus M. Kelley. 
Schwarz, N., & Clore, G. L. 2007. Feelings and phenomenal experiences. In E. T. Higgins, & A. 
Kruglanski (Eds.), Social Psychology: Handbook of Basic Principles, 2nd ed.: 385-407. 
New  York: Guildord Press. 
Seo, M., Barrett, L. F., & Bartunek, J. M. 2004. The role of affective experience in work 
motivation. Academy of Management Review, 29(3): 423-439. 
Shane, S., Locke, E. A., & Collins, C. J. 2003. Entrepreneurial motivation. Human Resource 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 39 
Management Review, 13(2): 257-279. 
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. 2000. The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research. 
Academy of Management Review, 25(1): 217-226. 
Singh, R. P., Hills, G. E., Lumpkin, G. T., & Hybels, R. C. 1999. The entrepreneurial 
opportunity recognition process: Examining the role of self-perceived alertness and 
social networks. Paper presented at the Academy of Management Meetings; Best Paper 
Proceedings, Chicago, IL. 
Slevin, D. P., & Covin, J. G. 1997. Time, growth, complexity, and transitions: Entrepreneurial 
challenges for the future. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22. 
Smilor, R. W. 1997. Entrepreneurship: Reflections on a subversive activity. Journal of Business 
Venturing, 12(5): 341-346. 
Stryker, S., & Burke, P. J. 2000. The past, present, and future of an identity theory. Social 
Psychology Quarterly, 63(4): 284-297. 
Vallerand, R. J., Mageau, G. A., Ratelle, C., Leonard, M., Blanchard, C., Koestner, R., & Gagne, 
M. 2003. Les Passions de l' Ame: On obsessive and harmonious passion. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 85(4): 756-767. 
Ward, T. B. 2004. Cognition, creativity, and entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing, 
19(2): 173-188. 
Wilson, N. C., & Stokes, D. 2005. Managing creativity and innovation: The challenge for 
culturalentrepreneurs. Journal of Small business and Enterprise Development, 12(3): 
366-378. 
Woodman, R. W., Sawyer, J. E., & Griffin, R. W. 1993. Towards a theory of organizational 
creativity. Academy of Management Review, 18(2): 293-321.
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 1 
TABLE 1 
A Review of Literature Focusing on Affect and Passion in Entrepreneurship 
Authors Construct Construct Conceptualization Object of 
Affect Type of 
Research Findings and Implications 
Baron (In press) Affect Feelings, moods, and emotions Situational 
events or stable 
tendencies of 
person 
Conceptual Affect influences many aspects of entrepreneurial cognition and 
behavior and is important for opportunity recognition and resource 
acquisition. The effects of affect on the entrepreneurial process 
could be direct, indirect or moderated. 
Baron and 
Hannan (2002) Love/passion Asense of personal belonging and 
identification with the company. Venture Empirical Founders that emphasize “love” as a basis for attachment of 
employees to the organization bring in HR expertise earlier and 
have the lowest likelihood of organizational failure. 
Baron and Ward 
(2004) Emotional 
valence and 
arousal 
[No clear definition provided] Opportunities Conceptual Affect may help entrepreneurs find complex patterns to pursue 
opportunities. Entrepreneurs may experience more positive 
emotions than other people do when exposed to excellent 
opportunities. 
Baum and Locke 
(2004) Passion Agenuine love for work; emotions 
of love, attachment, and longing. One's work Empirical Passion has an indirect effect on venture growth, mediated by 
communicated vision, goals, and self-efficacy. 
Baum et al. 
(2001) Passion Atrait of entrepreneurs. One's work Empirical Passion has an indirect effect on venture growth, mediated by 
competency, motivation, and competitive strategy. 
Bierly et al. 
(2000) Passion The drive to overcome personal, 
social, and institutional barriers to 
implement the "right" strategy 
One's work Conceptual Passion increases the belief that one's work is meaningful and is 
associated with pride, commitment, empowerment, and energy. 
Passion is linked to motivation and can facilitate innovation. 
Bird (1989) Passion Is full of emotional energy, drive, 
and spirit. Venture Empirical - 
interview 
data 
Passion drives entrepreneurs’ persistence and tenacity. Passion 
leads entrepreneurs to experience their venture’s successes and 
difficulties as personal events. Vision and passion together sustain 
optimism in the face of setbacks and mobilize others' beliefs and 
energy. 
Branzei and 
Zietsma (2003) Passion and 
love [No clear definitions provided] Opportunities Conceptual Passion and love involve positive illusions, which may lead to 
cognitive biases and greater opportunity exploitation. 
Brännback et al. 
(2006) Passion An emotional and energizing 
component. Favorite hobby 
or activity Empirical Passion may be important to develop start-up intentions and for 
the process of exploring an opportunity. Problems finding direct 
effects from a scale used to capture passion for hobbies. Suggest 
the influence of passion is complicated and needs further 
elaboration. 
Cardon (2006) Passion An enduring feeling that is likely to 
be highly intense and positively 
valent. 
Venture or 
venture-related 
objects 
Conceptual Passion promotes transformational leadership and emotional 
display, which influence employee passion and engagement. 
Cardon et al. 
(2005) Passion Attachment and identification of 
entrepreneurs with their ventures. Venture Conceptual Passion leads to harder work with greater effort, persistence, and 
enthusiasm. Passion leads to intense identification with the 
venture, but this may not necessarily be functional.
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 2 
Authors Construct Construct Conceptualization Object of 
Affect Type of 
Research Findings and Implications 
Chen, Yao, and 
Kotha (2007) Passion Devotion and enthusiasm for a 
proposed business venture. Venture Empirical Entrepreneur’s passion has a significant positive effect on venture 
capitalists’ funding decision. 
Cross and 
Travaglione 
(2003) 
Emotional 
intelligence Management of the emotions of the 
self and of others. [No specific 
focus 
identified] 
Empirical – 
interview 
data 
Entrepreneurs were able to appraise, express, regulate, and utilize 
emotions. Entrepreneurs had the ability to use emotions in 
problem solving, and had high persistence on tasks. 
Filion (1991) Energy The time and intensity allocated to 
professional activities. Work; 
professional 
life 
Empirical Energy supports development and implementation of 
organizational vision. Working long hours is not enough to be 
successful; intensity is also required. 
Huyand Zott 
(2007) Emotion 
regulation Pleasant high activation emotion. Stakeholders Empirical Displaying passion and enthusiasm to others helps attract funding, 
increases investors’ confidence in the business, helps mobilize 
employees to do what you want them to. 
Ma & Tan 
(2006) Passion Desire to achieve, create, make 
thingshappen. [No specific 
focus 
identified] 
Conceptual Passion makes entrepreneurs believe in what they are doing, 
which is important for realizing their entrepreneurial dreams and 
achievingsuccess against all odds. 
Murnieks and 
Mosakowski 
(2006) 
Passion An intense longing related to 
salient role identity. Activities Conceptual Passion emerges when the entrepreneurial identity is salient. 
Passion helps coping with negative experiences. 
Shane et al. 
(2003) Passion Selfish love of work. Work Conceptual Passion can facilitate opportunity recognition, idea development, 
and opportunity execution (resource assembly, organizational 
design, marketmaking, and product development). 
Smilor (1997) Passion Enthusiasm, joy, and zeal; 
persistent desire to succeed. Venture Conceptual Passion comes from that energetic and unflagging pursuit of a 
worthy, challenging, and uplifting purpose; emerges when one has 
freedom and opportunity to pursue one's dream. 
Souitaris et al. 
(2007) Inspiration The infusion of some idea or 
purpose into the mind, and the 
awakening or creation of some 
feeling of impulse. 
Activity from a 
start-up 
program 
Empirical Inspiration comes from the emotional ‘chemistry’ between 
individuals andparticular opportunities,which affects their 
decision to exploitmatters beyond the rational models presented in 
previous entrepreneurship research. 
Sundararajan 
and Peters 
(2007) 
Positive 
emotion Positive (and negative) emotions 
are defined by combinations of 
emotion prototypes sorted by 
various degrees of pleasure and 
activation. 
Opportunities Conceptual Positive emotion is triggered by a match between entrepreneurial 
motives and idea. Self-efficacy and prior knowledge moderate 
emotion experience. 
Winnen (2005) Passion and 
emotional 
intelligence 
Passion is an emotion. Identifies 
what it means to live with passion. Venture, 
success, work 
tasks, product 
Empirical Passion is an emotion that influences opportunity recognition, 
mission, vision, decision, persistence, and the planning process 
when engaged in new venturing. Focus of passion differs among 
entrepreneurs.
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 3 
FIGURE 1 
A Conceptual Model of the Experience of Entrepreneurial Passion
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 1 
APPENDIX 
Review of Key Psychological Concepts Relevant for Entrepreneurial Passion 
Core Affect and Affective Quality 
Core affect is generally defined as an internal, free-floating and object-less 
neurophysiological state that is represented by elementary affect ofpleasure or displeasure (i.e., 
valence) and of activation or deactivation (i.e., intensity), in accord with the circumplex model 
(Watson & Tellegen, 1985). The circumplex model represents different affective states (e.g., 
excited, happy, upset, tense), which are situated in a two-dimensional plane defined by a 
pleasure-displeasure and activation-deactivation axes. Elation, for instance, is a reflection of core 
affect that is both highly activated and pleasant. Such affectsareelementary because they usually 
occur without effortful cognitive intervention, and they are experienced regardless of individual, 
contextual, and cultural differences(Russell & Barrett, 1999). Individuals vary in the degree to 
which they characterize the valence and intensity of their affective experiences. 
External stimuli such as objects, activities, and contextsare imbued with affective 
quality. When individuals interact with the external environment, they perceive them to hold 
more or less affective quality (e.g., boring, exciting). While perception of affective quality is an 
elementalprocess that is individually dependent, to perceive affective quality is to assess 
external stimuli that may or may not invoke any affect. Nevertheless, core affect and affective 
quality are linked in complex ways, and a stimuli’s affective quality holds the “capacity to 
change core affect” (Russell, 2003: 149). 
Key Elements of Experiences of Emotion 
Russell and Barrett (1999) note that experienced emotions may be conceptualized as 
prototypicalepisodes that involve four key elements: (1) appraisals of the affective quality of one 
or more stimuli in the environment, (2) conscious experience of changes in one’s core affect and 
attributions to antecedent stimuli, (3) overt action readiness or action directed toward or away 
from the stimuli, and (4) associated engagement of brain and body response tendencies for goal 
pursuit. When all four elements are present, Russell (2003) calls them exemplars of full-blown or 
blue-ribbon emotions such as fearand elation. For instance, when an individual on a leisurely 
trail encounters a wild bear an account of experienced emotion will be as follows: the 
individual’s appraisal of the bear (stimuli) indicates a danger (appraisal) triggering a change in 
core affect from pleasant to unpleasant (attribution) followed by an overt behavioral response of 
flight (action) and associated alertness, sweating and increased effort directed at reducing danger 
(goalpursuit). The first two elements, involving the association ofexternalstimuli with changes 
in core affect through an attributional process, are usually viewed as a core aspect of emotion 
and referred to as attributed affect. We do not deny that one can experience affect without any 
attributions to external stimuli (e.g., moods). However, they are less relevant in our context. 
While appraisals, attributions, attributed affect, and action engagement are often 
cognitively mediated processes, learning can short-circuit cognitions resulting in effortless and 
automatic behavioral responses that take split seconds (Dolan, 2002). In this case, the experience 
ofemotion may occur as automatic affect, as if subconsciously programmed (Baumeister, Vohs, 
DeWall, & Zhang, 2007). In other cases, appraisal of the threats and opportunities posed by 
novel stimuli may be needed before an overt response or plan for such response is developed. A 
particularly relevant novel stimulus is feedback from goal-directed behaviors. As individuals 
execute behaviors in pursuit of goals, theymayencounter unforeseen impediments or 
opportunities which invoke affect. Russell and Barrett (1999)view these encounters as episodes 
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 2 
ofemotional experiences since theyare triggered by environmental stimuli, dissipate once the 
individual’s behavioral response facilitatescoping, and hence have a beginning and an end. 
Neurobiologicalstudies provide initial data in support of the preceding view of emotional 
experiences(Dolan, 2002; Noel, Van Der Linden, & Bechara, 2006).Evidence suggests that the 
amygdala—a group of neurons located deep in the brainplays a criticalrole in linking the 
external stimulus to the individual’s affective state. The amygdala is involved in detecting the 
salience and relevance of the stimulus, and activating visceral motor structures such as the 
hypothalamus and autonomic brainstem nuclei that produce systematic changes in facial 
expression and bodily responses that is usually conditioned by instinctive, social or cultural 
learning factors. Researchers characterize the patterned response involved in an emotional 
episode as a “reactive system” to recognize that it is activated in reaction to external stimuli. 
Russell noted that there is “no neural circuit, peptide or other biologicalmarker” (2003: 
151) that is unique to any specific affective state. Individuals construct the meaning of novel 
experiences using a psychological process of categorization, which involves determining the 
experience’s resemblance to stored mental representations of prototypical instances of emotion. 
The mentalrepresentations are usuallybased on culturally shared concepts,and the 
categorization is thought to occur via online processing as individuals become conscious of their 
emotionalexperiences(Barrett et al., 2007). Researchers believe that in so doing, individuals 
provide coherence to the diverse elements that comprise their emotional experiences. 
Feelings and Experiences of Emotion 
Feelings are defined in many different ways(Damasio, 2003). To identify a workable 
definition for our study, we drawfrom neurobiologyresearch that provides a physiologicalbasis 
for defining feelings as a conscious experience of changes in one’s core affect that is attributed to 
external stimuli (like attributed affect) but engages additional resources for processing, storing, 
and retrieval on demand. Not all emotional experiences are salient. Changes in core affect that 
are less salient are less likely to elicit reflection (of the experience’s meaning) and integration 
(withpast experiences). When objects or activities involved in emotional experiences are central 
to an individual’s self-identity, effortful reflection on the current experience is likely followed by 
its integration with past experiences. Such integration is object-specific and may be viewed as a 
networkofnodes and linkages in which the experienced and categorized feeling is a key node 
and is linked to cognitions, motivation and action tendencies that are tagged by the focal identity 
associated withthe emotionalexperience(Schwarz & Clore, 2007). As such, salient experiences 
ofemotion strengthen and update the encoding associated with the focal identity. 
When stored mental representations of feelings have been effortfully encoded and 
updated, theyare easier to retrieve when needed. The process is individualized and idiosyncratic 
leading neurobiologists to view feelings as a “reflective system” that stores accounts of 
individuals’ reflections on experiences of emotion(Noelet al., 2006). Moreover, while feelings 
can be stirred, activated, or amplifiedby direct engagement with stimuli, that is not necessary. 
Feelings can be retrieved as cohesive mental constructions, complete with their network of 
linkages; long after the antecedent stimuli has ended or receded from the environment. A 
particularly relevant retrieval process involves anticipatoryfeelings (Baumeister et al., 2007). 
People may imagine, desire, dream, or long for engagement in activities involving a focal 
identity and, in so doing, consciously experience the associated feeling stored from past 
experiences. Because of their identity salience and their ease of retrieval, anticipatoryfeelings 
can produce relatively enduring behavioral engagement.
RUNNING HEAD: Entrepreneurial Passion 
Page 3 
Author Bios: 
Melissa Cardon (PhD, Columbia University) is an Assistant Professor of Management at Pace 
University’s Lubin School of Business.  Her research focuses on unleashing human potential 
within entrepreneurial firms, including HR practices that maximize employee potential, and the 
emotional, relational, and cognitive aspects of entrepreneurs that helpoptimizetheir behavior 
and performance. 
Joakim Wincent (PhD, Luleå University of Technology) is a researcher at the Department of 
Business Administration and Social Sciences, Luleå University of Technology. His research 
focuseslargely on strategic interfirm relations, stress management and health of entrepreneurs, 
and effectiveness implications of cognitive foundations and emotional experiences in new 
venturing. 
Jagdip Singh holds a Ph.D. in Marketing from the Texas Tech University (1985) andis currently 
a Professor of Marketing at the Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio. Jagdip’s 
research focuses on issues of organizing effective interfaces for exploring and exploiting market 
opportunities. 
Mateja Drnovsek (PhD, University in Ljubljana) is an Assistant Professor of Entrepreneurship at 
Faculty of Economics, University in Ljubljana. Her research is immersed incognitive and 
emotional determinantsofentrepreneurs and their influence on behaviours that lead to effective 
venturing. She is particularly interested in researching technologyand high-growth firms.
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research
Volume 29, Issue 2 2009
CHAPTER II. ANGEL FINANCING
Article 1
THE IMPACT OF PERCEIVED
ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION ON
ANGEL INVESTING
DEMO S. Cardon∗
Richard Sudek†
Cheryl Mitteness‡
∗Pace University, USA, mcardon@pace.edu
†Chapman University, USA
‡Northeastern University, USA
This paper is posted at Digital DEMO at Babson.
Copyright c 2009 by the authors. All rights reserved.
This content may not be commercially reproduced without the permission of the copyright DEMO
THE IMPACT OF PERCEIVED
ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION ON
ANGEL INVESTING
Melissa S. Cardon, Richard Sudek, and Cheryl Mitteness
Abstract
In this paper we examine the relationship between the passion an entrepreneur displays, the
passion angels perceive, DEMO the impact on angels’ interest and funding of ventures. Our qual-
itative study results indicate that angels do use displayed passion as a factor DEMO their investment
decisions and speciﬁcally focus on the enthusiasm, preparedness, and commitment entrepreneurs
demonstrate. Results from our quantitative study suggest that the importance DEMO different types of
displayed passion varies depending on the stage of the funding process examined, and that all three
types of displayed passion have a relationship with perceived passion and evaluations of funding
potential, although the nature of these relationships is complex.
KEYWORDS: investment decisions, entrepreneurial passion
Cardon et al.: IMPACT OF PERCEIVED ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION
THE IMPACT OF PERCEIVED ENTREPRENEURIAL
PASSION ON ANGEL INVESTING
Melissa S. Cardon, Pace University, USA
DEMO Sudek, Chapman University, USA
Cheryl Mitteness, Northeastern University, USA
ABSTRACT
In this paper we examine the relationship between the passion an entrepreneur DEMO, the
passion angels perceive, and the impact on angels’ interest and funding of ventures.  Our
qualitative study results indicate that angels do use displayed passion as a factor in their
investment decisions and specifically focus DEMO the enthusiasm, preparedness, and commitment
entrepreneurs demonstrate.  Results from our DEMO study suggest that the importance of
different types of displayed passion varies depending on the stage of the funding process
examined, and that all three types of displayed passion have a relationship with perceived passion
and DEMO of funding potential, although the nature of these relationships is complex.
DEMO
Entrepreneurs need financial resources to grow their ventures, and often such DEMO come
from outside investors, such as venture capitalists, angel investors, DEMO friends and family.
Entrepreneurs of fast growth firms who anticipate quick and aggressive growth often turn to angel
investors for financing. Angels, who are often wealthy individuals with experience building a
business, provide early stage financing for start-up ventures. Angel investors have provided seed
capital for notable U.S. DEMO such as Bell Telephone in 1874, Ford Motor Company in 1903,DEMO
and Apple Computer in 1977 (e.g., Van Osnabrugge & Robinson, DEMO).   Although it is hard to
estimate the exact size of angel investment due to its highly fragmented nature, in 2007 it is
estimated that angels invested a total of $26 billion in 57,120 DEMO (e.g., Sohl, 2008.).
Angels tend to invest in very DEMO stages of the funding process, before new ventures typically
can attract DEMO capital financing.  Therefore, angel capital plays an important role in the
entrepreneurial process.
Prior research suggests that angels use various criteria for determining DEMO or not to invest
in a start-up, including enthusiasm of the DEMO, trustworthiness of the entrepreneur, exit
route, revenue potential, domain expertise of the entrepreneur, growth potential of the market, and
barriers for DEMO (eg. Van Osnabrugge, 1998, Sudek, 2006).  One investment DEMO receiving
increasing attention is entrepreneurial passion.  Chen, Yao, and Kotha (2009) argue that “passion
is often critical to convince the targeted individuals to invest their money, time, and effort in the
new venture.”   Passion may provide a strong indication of how committed the entrepreneur is to
putting in the time and effort needed to make the company DEMO success (c.f. Vallerand, et al., 2003).
Passion may be DEMO with drive, tenacity, initiative, and willingness to work long hours
(Bierly et al., 2000; Bird, 1989), and may help entrepreneurs find creative solutions to problems,
persist despite obstacles, and experience a flow-like state of absorption (Cardon et al., 2009).
While scholars DEMO recently focused on passion as experienced by entrepreneurs (e.g.
Klauken, Paetzelt, & Shepherd, 2008; Cardon et al, 2009), others suggest DEMO displayed passion is
perhaps just as important (e.g. Cardon, 2008).  This is because some people display emotions they
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2009
1
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Vol. 29 [2009], Iss. 2, Art. 1
do not feel (e.g. Rafaeli & Sutton, 1987; Dasborough & Ashkanasy, 2002), and some are less
expressive in displaying felt emotions (DEMO, Kring, Smith, & Neale, 1994).  We use the DEMO
“displayed passion” to refer to the emotion that is expressed or displayed by the entrepreneur.
Entrepreneurs may be more persuasive when they demonstrate high DEMO of positive emotion
(Baron, 2008), may appear more confident, DEMO may receive more favorable decisions from
investors (Chen, et al., DEMO).
When entrepreneurs display passion, such as through providing animated venture DEMO or
presentations, potential investors make assessments concerning the level of perceived DEMO, or
the amount of passion they perceive the entrepreneur to have.  This is distinct from displayed
passion, because the emotion an entrepreneur is trying to communicate through their display may
not be perceived by the DEMO, or the investor may perceive that the displayed emotion is not
DEMO and thus will not perceive the entrepreneur to have passion.  We DEMO the term “perceived
passion” to refer to the extent to which others perceive the entrepreneur to be passionate about
their venture.
Scholars suggest that DEMO angels and VCs rate perceived passion as an important investment
criterion (DEMO, MacMillan et al., 1987; Carter & Van Auken, 1992), however angels may view
perceived passion as even more important than VCs (Carter & Van Auken, 1992; Sudek, 2006;
Van Osnabrugge, DEMO) due to their investments typically occurring at earlier stages of a
DEMO life.   It may also be more relevant to angel investors because they base a lot of stheir
investment decision on the entrepreneur themselves (Sudek, 2006), in addition to the business
opportunity.
Very little is known about the extent to which either displayed and/or perceived passion DEMO a
role in angel investment decisions.  Thus, the focus of this study is on the relationship between an
entrepreneur’s displayed passion, the angels’ perceived passion and how far the entrepreneur gets
through the angel investment DEMO  Angels have many decision points in considering investing
in a business DEMO firms fall out of the process due to unfavorable decisions at each step.  For
example, in our dataset, of the 1266 entrepreneurs who applied to the angel investor organization
at the time of our study, 152 were invited to make presentations, and to date only 30 have been
funded by angels in this group.  While there may be several reasons why angels decide not to fund
a venture or to move DEMO to the next stage in the funding process, we focus on DEMO extent to which
displayed and perceived passion play a role in these decisions.  Our specific research questions
are; 1) Do angel investors consider the passion of the entrepreneur when making their funding
decisions?  If DEMO, how do they conceive of passion?  How do they evaluate DEMO?; and 2) What impact
does passion have on the actual DEMO?  How far can passion take an entrepreneur towards
acquiring the financial resources s/he wants from angels?
ANGEL INVESTING
Investors make their DEMO to invest in startups based on the attributes of the entrepreneur,
the management team, and the business opportunity. Previous research has looked at VC and the
angel investment decisions (e.g., Tyebjee & Bruno, 1984; MacMillan, Siegel, & Subbanarasimha,
1985; MacMillan, Zemann, & DEMO, 1987; Carter and Van Auken,  1992; Van
Osnabrugge, 1998; Haar, Starr, and Macmillan, 1988; Sudek, 2006). These DEMO show that
entrepreneurial commitment, passion, trustworthiness, domain expertise, and track record are the
most important entrepreneurial characteristics. In addition, these studies showed that revenue
potential, market growth potential, barriers for entry, and exit potential are the most important
criteria when evaluating  characteristics of the opportunity.
Posted at Digital Knowledge at Babson
http://digitalknowledge.babson.edu/fer/vol29/iss2/DEMO
2
Cardon et al.: IMPACT OF PERCEIVED ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION
The funding decision process used by VCs and angels typically consists of an initial screening
of DEMO opportunity, a screening presentation, due diligence, funding, and post investment
involvement (e.g., Tyebjee & Bruno, 1984; Sudek, 2006). The initial screening phase typically
filters out business opportunities that do not fit DEMO VC or angel group. This may consist of a brief
meeting with the entrepreneur, or this might be done via business plan or application review by the
angel group.  The screening phase consists of a presentation by the entrepreneur, followed by a
question and answer period. This phase typically lasts between 30 and 45 minutes. If there is
enough interest DEMO the screening, the deal proceeds to due diligence.  The due diligence phase
consists of multiple meetings with entrepreneur and investors to review the DEMO plan in detail.
If it is determined the deal is still worthy of investing, a funding phase includes the final deal
terms negotiation and actual investment.  After the investment is made both VC and angels are
involved with the company in the post investment phase.
Although entrepreneurs go DEMO a similar funding decision process with both angels and
VCs (Sudek, 2006), angels differ from VCs in several important areas.  Angels tend to invest in
very early stages of the funding process, before new ventures can attract venture capital financing
(Freear & Wetzel, 1990).  Angel investors typically include private individuals that invest their
own money, whereas VCs invest funds raised from institutional investors (Van Osnabrugge,
2000).  Angels perform less due diligence than VCs and invest more opportunistically, DEMO more
on instincts, and do not calculate internal rates of return (IRR) (e.g., Timmons, 1990; Baty, 1991;
Mason & DEMO, 1996; Van Osnabrugge & Robinson, 2000).  Angels and VCs also differ in
their entrepreneurial experience and expected involvement (e.g., Van DEMO & Robinson,
2000). In general, Angel investors have more DEMO experience and are much more involved
with the companies in which they invest than VCs.  In addition, angels are more often involved in
DEMO operations (e.g., Benjamin & Margulis, 2000).  Often, Angels DEMO work part-time with
periods of full-time commitment to help entrepreneurs through challenging issues (e.g., Van
Osnabrugge & Robinson, 2000).  For these DEMO, the angel investment often becomes more
personal for the investor., and is distinct from VC investment.  Because of these differences we
seek to understand how entrepreneurial passion may play a role in the funding decisions DEMO angel
investors, a question not yet addressed in the literature.
ENTREPRENEURIAL DEMO, DISPLAYED PASSION AND PERCEIVED PASSION
Entrepreneurial passion involves an “intense affective DEMO that bears cognitive and behavioral
manifestations of high personal value” (Chen, Yao, & Kotha, 2009: 199).  It involves intense and
DEMO feelings that entrepreneurs experience when they are engaged in key activities associated
with roles (such as founder) that are critical to the self-identity DEMO the entrepreneur (Cardon et al.,
2009; Hoang & Gimeno, DEMO press).  The two key aspects of entrepreneurial passion seem to DEMO that
1) it involves positive and intense feelings, and 2) DEMO object of these feelings is profoundly
personally meaningful to the entrepreneur.  DEMO can be difficult for outsiders to determine the
personal meaning of activities or events to an entrepreneur, so the observable aspect of passion is
the intensity of the positive feelings that an entrepreneur displays.
While entrepreneurs DEMO certainly display authentic emotions to others such as employees (e.g.
Cardon, 2008) or potential investors (Chen, et al., 2009), scholars DEMO long ago that
individuals can use emotional labor to display emotions they do not feel or hide emotions they do
feel in order to DEMO more positive outcomes for themselves (Rafaeli and Sutton, 1987) or DEMO
organizations (Dashborough and Ashkanasy, 2002).  The entire field of DEMO intelligence is
based on the idea that individuals can control their own emotions, pick up on the emotions of
others, and deliberately try DEMO influence the emotions of other people (Cross and Travaglione,
Frontiers DEMO Entrepreneurship Research 2009
3
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Vol. 29 [2009], Iss. 2, Art. 1
2003).  Thus it is critical for us to differentiate between the passion or more general positive affect
experienced by entrepreneurs that other scholars DEMO looked at (Cardon et al., 2009; Baum,
Locke, and Smith, 2001; Baron, 2008), the passion entrepreneurs choose to display, and passion as
perceived by others such as angel investors.
The passion an entrepreneur displays is important because it can lead investors to be DEMO
confident in the entrepreneur, particularly when the product or environment is DEMO and
uncertain (Zacharakis & Shepherd, 2001).   High levels of displayed positive affect can help
entrepreneurs expand their social networks and be DEMO persuasive, which combined can increase
their social and financial capital (Baron, 2008).  Displayed passion can also lead to emotional
contagion, where others cannot help but get caught up in the excitement the entrepreneur DEMO
(Cardon, 2008).  This would lead to a suggestion that DEMO passion, especially enthusiasm
which is most readily associated with the theoretical DEMO of passion as an affect, will lead to
greater investment by DEMO  More formally,
H1: Greater enthusiasm (displayed affective passion) will be associated with greater
evaluations of funding potential.
In addition, different aspects of how an entrepreneur displays passion might be important,
including affective, cognitive, and behavioral aspects.  Chen, Yao, and Kotha (2009) DEMO
passion as an intense affective state that is accompanied by cognitive and behavioral
manifestations of high personal value.  They talk about affective passion, DEMO when displayed is
akin to enthusiasm, and suggest that the affective DEMO of passion tends to be accompanied
by cognitive arousal (I can’t DEMO thinking about my business) and behaviors to act on that passion
(Chen et al., 2009).  In particular they argue that in DEMO to enthusiasm, investors will pay
attention to the cognitive preparedness of DEMO entrepreneur that is likely associated with passion.
We agree that investors may well consider how prepared an entrepreneur is for a presentation and
assess DEMO much thinking they have done about their business; their preparedness.  In fact, Chen,
Yao, and Kotha (2009) found that for DEMO business plan presentations, business plan judges
(i.e. bankers, VCs, and individuals from financial companies) paid more attention to preparedness
than to the displayed enthusiasm of student presenters.  The content of the business plan itself was
more important than the manner in which the pitch was delivered.  Consistent with their findings
and the theoretical arguments above, we propose that,
H2: Greater preparedness (displayed cognitive passion) will be associated with greater
evaluations of funding potential.
Investors may also consider how committed an DEMO is to the business in terms of their
behaviors.  The entrepreneur’s DEMO and determination are critical when looking for
successful entrepreneurs (e.g., Timmons & Spinelli 2004). As Benjamin and Margulis (2000: 95)
DEMO, investors pay great attention to passionately committed entrepreneurs. For example,
DEMO or not the entrepreneur has committed their own money to the venture may be important,
as well as whether the entrepreneur still maintains DEMO job or only works for the company
seeking investment.  These behavioral DEMO may be associated with the amount of
passion an entrepreneur experiences, DEMO therefore are a part of the passion they may display to
others.   From an investment perspective, when an entrepreneur has invested their own money
angels feel they have “skin in the game.” This signals to DEMO angels that they are more committed
to a successful outcome.  Sudek (2006) reported that in a qualitative study of angel investors
discussed an entrepreneur who appeared passionate and committed based on investing his own
money, one who showed high energy and enthusiasm that impressed the angels. In DEMO, the
Posted at Digital Knowledge at Babson
http://digitalknowledge.babson.edu/fer/DEMO/iss2/1
4
Cardon et al.: IMPACT OF PERCEIVED ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION
passionate entrepreneur had made reasonable money in past careers and had put up most of his
DEMO, including mortgaging his house, to start the company. The passion and perceived
commitment of this entrepreneur garnered excitement from the investors.
H3: Greater commitment (displayed behavioral passion) will be associated with greater
evaluations of DEMO potential.
However, if the passion displayed is perceived by angels as DEMO or not genuine, it will
likely not have a major impact DEMO angel investing.  Angel investors typically screen many
companies and have developed DEMO sense of when the presenter is genuinely passionate about their
product or company and when not.  Similarly, Elsbach and Kramer (2003) found DEMO when
unknown screenwriters pitched ideas for shows to studio producers, the DEMO categorized the
presenters based on their level of passion in order to assess their creative potential, including the
ability to adapt and innovate, DEMO presenters that had an interesting story but lacked this creative
potential.  DEMO categorization determined whether or not the script would be successful at that
studio.  We believe angel investors have a similar skill at reading between the lines to determine
their own assessment of the perceived passion of DEMO entrepreneur.  They may also rely more on
their assessment of the DEMO of the entrepreneur’s displayed passion (Chen, Yao, and Kotha,
DEMO; Ferris, Treadway, Perrewe, Brouer, Douglas, & Lux, 2007) in making their funding
decisions.
In addition, temporary emotions, such as DEMO elicited through contagion processes, tend to
diminish once the stimuli (such as the immediate presence of the passionate entrepreneur) is
removed (Bechara, Dimasio, and Dimasio, 2003).  This leads us to believe that some aspects of
displayed passion, such as preparedness and commitment, may DEMO more important than displayed
enthusiasm at later stages of the funding process.  Overall, we suggest that while all three aspects
of displayed passion DEMO influence the extent of progress an entrepreneur makes in the funding
process, a key mediating variable may be the level of perceived passion on the part of the angel
investor.
H4: The relationship between a) DEMO, b) preparedness, and c) commitment and
greater evaluations of funding potential will be mediated by the level of passion perceived
by angel DEMO
METHODS
To test our hypotheses we conducted two studies, one qualitative DEMO one quantitative.  In the
first we qualitatively assessed our first research DEMO, how angel investors think about passion
and whether they think it DEMO relevant to the investment decision.  In the second study we examined
DEMO second research question, the impact of the perceived passion of entrepreneurs DEMO the funding
process, and tested our hypotheses using a sample of DEMO entrepreneurs and 53 angels.
Study 1
In study 1, data were DEMO from multiple US angel investment groups to determine what
angel investors think about perceived entrepreneurial passion.  These groups sometimes invest as a
group, DEMO typically each angel decides whether or not to independently invest.    DEMO the fall of
2008, angels were asked to take an online DEMO that included measures of 1) the extent to which
they include DEMO passion as a criterion when they make investment decisions; 2) why
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2009
5
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Vol. 29 [2009], Iss. 2, Art. 1
passion is or isn’t important when evaluating an entrepreneur; 3) how DEMO define perceived
passion; and 4) the specific behaviors or attitudes they look for in entrepreneurs seeking funding.
This qualitative study was necessary to DEMO and modify the scale that has been used in
prior research to assess perceived passion (Chen et al., 2009), for several reasons.  First, the prior
scale was developed to assess passion in student presentations, which might be quite different than
presentations given by practicing entrepreneurs.  DEMO, the prior scale was used by judges (i.e.
bankers, VCs, and individuals from financial companies) to assess student presentations, and
research DEMO shown that angel investing is quite different than VC investing (e.g., Van Osnabrugge
& Robinson, 2000), and may also differ from typical loan decisions from banks.  For example,
because angels do not have to answer to other partners in a firm they may have less DEMO and
objective evaluations of ventures (e.g., Van Osnabrugge & Robinson, DEMO), and are thus perhaps
more easily persuaded by a passionate entrepreneur.  Finally, the scale developed by Chen and
colleagues has only been DEMO in one prior study, and therefore validation of the scale in DEMO
contexts is important.
Study 1 results.  1,336 angels were asked DEMO participate in this study, and 150 angels completed
the survey, yielding a response rate of 11%.  The average rating of how important passion is to
their investment decisions was 4.53 on a 5 point scale. DEMO of passion included comments
such as “passion is the emotional attachment to the business that carries you through the hard
times.  It is often the intense, driving feeling or conviction that this can work, will DEMO, and must
work.”
In response to the question of why passion DEMO important, angels responded with comments such
as “it reflects the entrepreneur’s DEMO of commitment to and energy for the endeavor being
considered.”  “Without DEMO it won’t last long.” “Without passion, the normal speed bumps can
DEMO terminal.” “Passion keeps people going in the face of obstacles and early failures.” “It
contributes to momentum and has an infectious quality that brings DEMO talent and money.”
However, other angels were more skeptical of using DEMO as an investment criterion, making
comments such as the following:  DEMO amount of passion can make a pig fly.” “Passion is
important, DEMO more of a necessary than sufficient condition for considering an investment.”
“Numbers speak for themselves and the idea should make sense on its own. DEMO one person can
sell an idea just with passion.” “Too much passion is dangerous because it equates to tunnel
vision.” “Passion is just one DEMO of the equation: skill, knowledge, intelligence, eloquence, etc.”
also DEMO  “it is just one element of the recipe.  For example, DEMO would never be more important
to me than intelligence but intelligence is insufficient without passion.”
In order to develop a new scale for measuring DEMO passion, three independent coders
analyzed two questions the angels responded to: What specific behavior or attitudes would
represent an entrepreneur with a high (low) level of passion?  The responses fell into three
categories, DEMO were consistent with the affective, cognitive, and behavioral passion distinction
made by Chen and colleagues (2009).  However, the specific items contained in each category
differed from those presented previously.  Displayed affective passion included factors related to
how much enthusiasm and excitement the entrepreneur displayed in DEMO presentation to the
angels.  Specific items identified included “tone of voice,DEMO “eye contact and intensity of
verbalization”, energetic and enthusiastic presentation of DEMO/ideas,” “high energy and a
positive attitude.”  Displayed cognitive passion DEMO preparedness, or the extent to which the
entrepreneur appeared knowledgeable and DEMO mentally on their venture.  Specific comments
made by the angels included DEMO following: “deep and thorough knowledge of his business
Posted at Digital DEMO at Babson
http://digitalknowledge.babson.edu/fer/vol29/iss2/1
6
Cardon et al.: IMPACT OF PERCEIVED ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION
model,” “to display extensive knowledge of the key issues.” “knowing their field, product and/or
idea cold, and “has thought about objections and has clearly defined answers.”
Displayed behavioral passion items reflected the amount of personal commitment the
entrepreneur DEMO demonstrated to their business including how much personal financial investment
they have made.  Sample comments from the angels include “committing significant time and
resources to the project,” “willing to put his own money at risk,DEMO “commitment of time, career, and
money,” and “personal sacrifice, DEMO to the business, long hours (years in some cases)
developing the company business.”  Based on angel responses to these open-ended questions we
created three scales for use in Study 2: displayed affective passion (DEMO), displayed
cognitive passion (preparedness), and displayed behavioral passion (commitment). Specific items
for each scale are indicated in Figure 1.
Study DEMO
In study 2, we used the displayed passion scale developed in DEMO 1, and examined the
relationship between displayed passion, angel assessments of perceived passion and how far the
entrepreneur got in the funding process.
DEMO used 60 videotaped screening presentations entrepreneurs made to one of the largest US
angel investment groups, the Teach Coast Angels group.  As of DEMO 2009, this group had
made investments in over 150 companies totaling DEMO $99 million (TCA, 2009).  TCA has
approximately 300 angels DEMO five chapters in California.  Angel participants in this study were
part DEMO the Orange County chapter of TCA.  In the normal TCA funding DEMO, entrepreneurs fill
out an online application and are then pre-screened by DEMO angels.  If the angels determine the
entrepreneur should go further, they give a full screening presentation.  These presentations are
typically made to 10-20 angels.
Videos were collected at screenings made to the Orange County chapter DEMO TCA between July
2006 and March of 2009.  In each video, the presenting entrepreneur made a 15 minute
presentation following by 15 minutes DEMO Q&A. The full 30 minutes were coded for this study.
Each coder responded to the video in terms of scales described below to DEMO the displayed
passion (enthusiasm, preparedness, and commitment) of the presenter. Coding of videos was
completed in two separate steps. In the first DEMO, five researchers coded 10 presentations. The
overall inter-rater reliability for the DEMO presentations was .896.  This gave us confidence that the
coding was DEMO and that we could proceed to step two, where the remaining DEMO videos were
assessed by three of the five original coders.  The DEMO reliability for these 50 videos was
.872. One company was dropped from the analysis due to the determination it was an outlier due
to DEMO negative Cronbach’s alpha among coders.. The resulting sample included 59 video—taped
entrepreneurs.
Measures of displayed passion.  The displayed passion scale developed in study 1 contains
three types of displayed passion – displayed enthusiasm (affective passion), displayed
preparedness (cognitive passion), displayed commitment (behavioral passion). Reliability DEMO two
of the three displayed passion scales were high. The Cronbach’s alpha of .937 for displayed
enthusiasm and .844 for displayed preparedness are comparable DEMO Chen, et al. (2009) alphas for
similar scales of .94 DEMO .90, respectively. In addition, we measured displayed commitment but
only achieved a Cronbach’s alpha of .444 for this three item measure. The correlations DEMO the
three scales were low (ranging from -.033 to .366), DEMO that while they are correlated, they
are not redundant scales.
Frontiers DEMO Entrepreneurship Research 2009
7
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Vol. 29 [2009], Iss. 2, Art. 1
Measures of perceived passion.  When each screening presentation was initially made, DEMO
investors assessed the overall passion and enthusiasm demonstrated by the entrepreneur at the time
of their presentation.  The passion item was “CEO is very passionate about the company” and the
enthusiasm item was “CEO is very DEMO  This measure of perceived passion was done at
the screening stage DEMO the angel funding decision process.
Measure of evaluation of funding potential.  DEMO evaluate the funding potential of a new
venture at various stages of the funding decision process, creating multiple points where an
entrepreneur can fail to proceed to the next stage of the funding decision process. Two DEMO
variables were utilized in this study, interest at the screening stage DEMO investment at the funding
stage. Interest represents the evaluation angels make at the end of the screening stage: whether the
angel expresses interest in the new venture as an investment which we coded as 1 = DEMO and 0
= no interest. The second dependent variable, measured at DEMO funding stage, indicates whether the
angel invested in the new venture. DEMO dichotomous variable was created with 1 indicating an angel
invested in a new venture and 0 indicating no investment.
Control variables include the strength DEMO the opportunity and the amount of funding sought.
Strength of the opportunity was determined by averaging the responses of angels attending the
focal screening. DEMO used a 5 point agree-disagree scale to rate the strength of the opportunity
using six items, such as “the business model is strong”, DEMO market has a large growth potential”,
etc.  The dollar amount DEMO funding sought was standardized to make it more comparable to the
other variables.
Study 2 results.  Table 1 provides means, standard deviations and DEMO for variables
used in the study. Fairly low correlations among the independent variables indicate
multicollinearity is not an issue.  In addition, our diagnostic DEMO indicate that the data do not
violate assumptions of linearity, normality, homoskedasticity, and independence.  We tested our
hypotheses using hierarchical regression analyses DEMO regress each of the dependent variables on
blocks of predictor variables.  DEMO 2 provides the logistic regression results for both dependent
variables. Models 1-3 provide the results predicting interest in funding the new venture at the
DEMO stage and models 4-6 show results for investment in the new venture at the funding
stage. We controlled for strength of opportunity which was DEMO in all models and amount of
funding sought which was not significant in any of the models (Table 2, models 1 and 4)DEMO
Hypothesis 1 argues that displayed enthusiasm will be positively associated with progress
through the funding process.  We did not find support for this hypothesis at either the screening
stage or the funding stage (Table 2, DEMO 2 and 5). The results indicate that displayed
enthusiasm may be negatively related to interest at the screening stage but not related to DEMO
angels invest at the funding stage (b = -.294, p < .05; b = -.597, p > .05, respectively).
Hypothesis 2 proposes that displayed preparedness will be positively associated with progress
through the DEMO process.  Support for this hypothesis was found at the funding stage DEMO not at
the screening stage (b = .316, p > .05; b = 9.986, p < .05, respectively).
Results regarding hypothesis 3 are similar to the results regarding hypothesis 1.  We did not
find support for the positive association of displayed commitment with either interest DEMO the
screening stage or investment at the funding stage (Table 2, models 2 and 5).  The results indicate
that displayed commitment may be negatively related to interest at the screening stage and not
related DEMO investment at the funding stage (b = -.392, p < .01; b = 3.152, p > .05, respectively).
Posted at Digital Knowledge at Babson
http://digitalknowledge.babson.edu/fer/vol29/iss2/1
8
Cardon et al.: IMPACT OF PERCEIVED ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION
Hypothesis 4 suggests that perceived passion mediates the relationships between displayed
passion (enthusiasm, preparedness, and commitment) and funding progress. Baron and Kenny
(1986) provide a framework using regression to test for mediation. Variable M is considered a
mediator DEMO the following criteria are met: 1) X significantly predicts Y, DEMO) X significantly predicts
M, and 3) M significantly predicts Y DEMO controlling for X (Baron & Kenny, 1986; Preacher &
Hayes, 2004).  Following this framework, perceived passion does not appear to mediate the
relationships between types of displayed passion and progress in the DEMO process due to one or
more of these three criteria not being met (Tables 2, models 3 and 6; Table 3, model DEMO). However,
researchers argue the importance of directly testing the significance of indirect effects to overcome
the shortcomings inherent in the Baron and DEMO method (i.e. Holmbeck, 2002; MacKinnon,
Lockwood, Hoffman, West, & Sheets, 2002; Preacher & Hayes, 2004).
Evidence of mediation exists if the indirect effect of X on Y when M is DEMO differs from the
direct effect of X on Y (Preacher & DEMO, 2004). Statistically testing if these two effects differ is
more DEMO than conducting a series of regression analyses (MacKinnon et al., 2002; Preacher &
Hayes, 2004). The Sobel test provides a more direct test of an indirect effect but assumes normal
distribution of errors (Preacher & Hayes, 2004). A more conservative approach is not to assume
normal distributions and use a bootstrap test (Lockwood & MacKinnon, DEMO). Preacher and
Hayes (2004) provide the framework and necessary SPSS syntax to test for significance with the
Sobel test and a bootstrapping DEMO
Table 4 shows the results of the Preacher and Hayes (2004) Sobel and bootstrap test using the
unstandardized path coefficients. The Sobel test DEMO the bootstrap indicate perceived passion has a
mediating effect on the relationships between the three types of displayed passion and interest at
the screening DEMO but not investment at the funding stage. Perceived passion appears to mediate
the relationship between displayed enthusiasm and interest as determined by the Sobel DEMO (z =
4.73, p < .01), as well as the bootstrap test which indicates the indirect effect is different from zero
with DEMO confidence. In other words, although displayed enthusiasm by itself does not DEMO to or
prevent angel interest at the screening stage (b = DEMO, p > .05), there is a part of displayed
enthusiasm DEMO is positively related to perceived passion (b = .264, p < .01) and is positively
related to interest at the screening stage (DEMO = .735, p < .01).  The part that is not related to
perceived passion is in fact negatively related to interest at DEMO screening stage (b = -.320, p < .01).
With regards to displayed preparedness, the results indicate that displayed preparedness does
have an indirect effect on interest, with the effect occurring through perceived passion. Although,
the positive relationship between displayed preparedness and interest is not statistically DEMO
(b = .284, p > .05), the relationship is smaller after controlling for perceived passion (b = .083, p >
.05). The bootstrap output shows that the indirect effect is different from DEMO with 99%
confidence and the Sobel test also indicates a statistically significant indirect effect exists (z =
3.26, p < .01).
Finally, the mediating effect of perceived passion on the relationship between displayed
commitment DEMO interest at the screening stage is similar to when examining displayed enthusiasm
with the exception of a statistically significant negative relationship between displayed
commitment DEMO angel interest at the screening stage (b = -.363, p < .01).  However, there is a part
of displayed commitment that DEMO positively related to perceived passion (b = .156, p < .01) and is
positively related to interest at the screening stage (b DEMO .728, p < .01).  The part that is not related
to perceived passion is negatively related to interest at the screening stage (b = -.496, p < .01).
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2009
9
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Vol. 29 [2009], Iss. 2, Art. 1
Therefore, we find support for hypothesis 4 when examining interest at the screening stage but not
investment at the funding stage.
DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS
DEMO developments have argued that passion is a critical component of entrepreneurship.
This paper adds to the literature by providing an empirical assessment of the DEMO to which these
theoretical arguments hold true for angel investment decisions. This should help both angels and
entrepreneurs seeking their funding to better understand DEMO dynamics of these investment
decisions.  It also is one of the DEMO empirical studies of the role of passion in entrepreneurship,
and the first to examine the impact of displayed passion on angel investor decision-making.
DEMO implications and areas for future research
As expected, displayed enthusiasm (affective passion) and displayed commitment (behavioral
passion) appear to lead to more perceived passion, as assessed by angel investors. However, these
two types DEMO displayed passion were not expected to be negatively associated with interest at the
screening stage or investment at the funding stage.  It appears that the relationship between
displayed passion and evaluations of funding potential angels make DEMO both the screening and
investment stage of the funding process may be more complex than originally thought.  Both
displayed enthusiasm and displayed commitment have aspects that lead to increased perceptions of
passion and also interest at DEMO screening stage, but also have aspects that lead to decreased interest
DEMO the screening stage.  One possible explanation for these results could be DEMO to literature
regarding individuals displaying emotions they do not feel in order to secure more positive
outcomes for themselves (Rafaeli and Sutton, 1987) or their organizations (Dashborough and
Ashkanasy, 2002). Angels may be DEMO of being influenced in this manner and therefore are
suspicious of some aspects of displayed passion.  Future research can conduct a more fine-grained
examination of exactly what aspects of displayed enthusiasm and commitment are positively
associated DEMO interest at the screening stage of the funding process, and which DEMO have a
negative impact on interest.
The fact that perceived passion only had a mediating effect when predicting interest at the
screening stage of DEMO funding process and not at the investment stage of the funding process
suggests that displayed enthusiasm (affective passion) and displayed commitment (behavioral
passion) will only get you only so far in the funding process.  DEMO strong opportunity appears to be
always important (as indicated in its DEMO significance in all models), whereas the type of
displayed passion that matters changes as an entrepreneur progresses through the funding process.
This could DEMO a result of temporary emotions elicited through the contagion process diminishing
over time (Bechara, et al., 2003).  In the weeks or DEMO between the presentation and the
investment decision, the passion the entrepreneur DEMO able to convey to the angel, as well as the
angels DEMO of displayed passion likely diminishes. However, displayed preparedness
(cognitive passion) DEMO not seem to diminish over time.  Although not directly related to DEMO
perceived passion or interest at the screening stage, displayed preparedness is DEMO associated
with investment at the funding stage.  Displayed preparedness may have DEMO more lasting impact
than the other two types of displayed passion.  DEMO result is consistent with the findings of Chen
Yao, and Kotha (2009) who found that in evaluations of business plan presentations raters also
focused more on preparedness than on affective passion of the presenters.  However, while those
authors propose three aspects of passion (affective, cognitive – preparedness, and behavioral –
commitment), they tested only the first two of these aspects, while we tested all three.
Posted at Digital Knowledge at Babson
http://digitalknowledge.babson.edu/fer/vol29/iss2/1
10
Cardon et al.: IMPACT OF PERCEIVED ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION
While we focused on the mediating effect of perceived passion on the relationship between
displayed passion DEMO important outcomes, there is a need for future research to continue DEMO
explore how experienced passion differs from displayed passion and perceived passion in the
entrepreneurship context. Our somewhat surprising results concerning enthusiasm and
commitment may DEMO due to angels sensing the entrepreneur is putting on an act and not displaying
authentic emotions.  Therefore we need to use recently developed measures of the extent to which
entrepreneur really feel or experience passion (Cardon, 2008), as well as what this passion is
focused on (DEMO et al, 2009) in order to truly understand the nuanced relationships between
passion that is felt, displayed, and perceived, and how these factors influence angel funding
decisions.  It may also be relevant to look at other characteristics of the entrepreneur (i.e.
personality, social skills, etc.) that might impact the level of displayed passion and perceived
passion.  DEMO amount of passion perceived by others likely is impacted by characteristics of the
entrepreneurs displaying such passion, as well as their skills such as social perception skills. We
hope that this study encourages future research to DEMO these types of relationships.
Limitations
There are several limitations of this study that need to be noted.  First, our measure of
displayed commitment (behavioral passion) had a low Cronbach’s alpha.  We had only a DEMO
item measure that reflected different possible manifestations of behavioral passion, and DEMO
research is needed to examine what additional or alternative items could be used.
Second, since most new ventures at the screening stage of the funding process do not
ultimately receive funding, the number of cases at the funding stage was substantially smaller than
at the screening stage. 59 DEMO ventures were screened by between 7 and 21 angels for a total of
860 observations. Of the 59 new ventures in the sample that DEMO the screening stage, 9
received funding, resulting in 109 observations involving both displayed passion data and data
regarding whether the angel invested. Most DEMO choose not to invest most of the time. This
results in a fairly low number of cases involving angels’ evaluations of the investment criteria DEMO
subsequently invested in the new venture.  Only ten of the 109 DEMO involve angels who
ultimately invested. This small sample size may explain the lack of support for some of the
hypotheses at the investment stage DEMO the funding process.
Practical implications
The results suggest that entrepreneurs seeking funding from angel investors need to have a
good business idea and need DEMO be able to display to potential investors that they are prepared,
meaning they have thought through the big picture and impact of their DEMO or service and are
able to convey confidence and answer questions competently.  In addition, their ability to convey
authentic enthusiasm and commitment to DEMO appears to be important in terms of increasing
angels’ initial interest in the venture.  However, the relationships among the three aspects of
displayed DEMO, angels’ perceptions of perceived passion, and actual funding appear complex
and warrant further practical and academic study.
CONTACT: Melissa S. Cardon; mcardon@pace.edu; (T): 914-773-3618; (F) 914-773-3920; Pace
University Lubin School of Business, 861 Bedford Rd., Pleasantville, NY 10570.
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2009
11
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Vol. 29 [2009], Iss. 2, Art. 1
REFERENCES
Baron, R. A. (2008). The role of affect in DEMO entrepreneurial process. Academy of
Management Review, 33(2), 328-340.
Baron, R.M, Kenny, D.A. (1986). The Moderator-Mediator Variable Distinction in Social
Psychological Research: Conceptual, Strategic, and Statistical Considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology  51(6), 1173-1182.
Baty, G.B. (1991). Entrepreneurship for the 1990s. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Baum, J. R., Locke, E. A., & Smith, K. G. (2001). A multidimensional model of venture
growth. Academy of Management Journal, 44(2): 292-303.
Bechara, A., Dimasio, H., & Dimasio, A.R. (2003)DEMO Emotion, decision making and the
orbitofrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 10: DEMO
Benjamin, G.A. & Margulis, J. (2000). Angel Financing: How to Find and Invest in Private
Equity. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Bierly, P. E., Kessler, E. H., & Christensen, E. W. (2000). Organizational learning,
knowledge, and wisdom. Journal of DEMO Change Management, 13(6): 595-
618.
Bird, B. J. (DEMO). Entrepreneurial Behavior. Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman and Co.
Cardon, DEMO (2008). Is passion contagious? The transference of entrepreneurial emotion to
employees, Human Resource Management Review, 18 (2): 77-86.
Cardon, DEMO S., Wincent, J., Singh, J., & Drnovsek, M. (DEMO). The nature and experience of
entrepreneurial passion, Academy of Management DEMO, 34(3).
Carter, R.B. & Van Auken, H.E. (1992). Effect of professional background on venture
capital proposal evaluation. Journal of DEMO Business Strategy, 3(1), 45-55.
Chen, X., Yao, X., & Kotha, S.B. (2009).  Passion and preparedness in entrepreneurs’
DEMO plan presentations: A persuasion analysis of venture capitalists’ funding
decisions, Academy of Management Journal, 52(1).
Cross, B. & Travaglione, A. (2003). The untold story: Is the entrepreneur of the 21st DEMO
defined by emotional intelligence? The International Journal of Organizational Analysis,
DEMO(3): 221-228.
Dasborough, M.T., & Ashkanasy, N.M. (2002). Emotion and attribution of intentionality in
leader-member relationships. Leadership Quarterly, 13(5): 615.
Elsbach, K.D., &Kramer, R.M. (2003). Assessing creativity in Hollywood pitch meetings:
Evidence for a dual-process model of creativity DEMO Academy of Management
Journal, 46(3): 283.
Ferris, G.R., DEMO, D.C. Perrewe, P.L., Brouer, R.L., Douglas, & Lux. (DEMO). Political
skill in organizations. Journal of Management, 33(3): DEMO
Freear, J., & Wetzel, W.E. (1990).  Who bankrolls DEMO entrepreneurs? Journal of
Business
Venturing. 5:77-89.
Harr, N.E., Starr, J., & MacMillan, I.C. (1988). Informal risk capital investors: DEMO
patterns on the east coast of the U.S.A. Journal of Business Venturing, 3, 11-29.
Hoang, H. & Gimeno, J. (in press). Becoming a founder: How founder role identity affects
entrepreneurial transitions and persistence in founding. Journal of Business Venturing.
Holmbeck, G.N. (2002).Post-hoc Probing DEMO Significant Moderational and Meditational
Effects in Studies of Pediatric Populations. Journal of Pediatric Psychology  27, 87-96.
Kring, A.M., Smith, D.A., & DEMO, H.M. (1994). Individual differences in dispositional
expressiveness: Development and DEMO of the emotional expressivity scale. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO(5): 934.
Posted at Digital Knowledge at Babson
http://digitalknowledge.babson.edu/fer/vol29/iss2/1
12
Cardon et al.: IMPACT OF PERCEIVED ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION
Lockwood, C.M., & MacKinnon, D.P. (1998). Bootstrapping the Standard Error of the
Mediated DEMO Proceedings of the 23rd annual meeting of SAS Users Group
International (DEMO 997-1002). Cary, NC: SAS Institute.
MacKinnon, D.P., Lockwood, DEMO, Hoffman, J.M., West, S.G., & Sheets, V. (2002)DEMO A
Comparison of Methods to Test Mediation and other Intervening Variable Effects.
Psychological Methods  7, 83-104.
MacMillan, I.C., Siegel, R., & DEMO, P.N. (1985). Criteria used by venture
capitalists to evaluate new venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing, 1, 119-128.
MacMillan, I.C., DEMO, L., & SubbaNarashimha, P.N. (1987). Criteria distinguishing
successful from unsuccessful ventures in the venture screening process. Journal of
Business Venturing, 2, 123-137.
Mason, C.M. & Harrison, R.T. (1996). Why ‘business DEMO say no: a case study of
opportunities rejected by an informal DEMO syndicate. International Small Business
Journal, 14(2), 35-51.
Preacher, K.J., Hayes, A.F. (2004). SPSS and SAS Procedures for Estimating Indirect
Effects in Simple Mediation Models. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers 36(4), 717-731.
Rafeli, A., & Sutton, R. I. (DEMO). Expression of emotion as part of the work role. Academy
of Management Review, 12, 23-37.
Sohl, J. (2008). The Angel DEMO Market in 2007, Center for Venture Research, University
of New Hampshire, May 2008.
Sudek, Richard (2006). Angel Investment Criteria. Journal of Small Business Strategy,
17(2).
Tech Coast Angels. (2009). Information retrieved on April 8, 2009 from
www.techcoastangels.com.
Timmons, J.A. (1990). Planning and Financing the New Venture. Acton, MA: Brick House
DEMO Co.
Timmons, J.A. & Spinelli, S. (2004). New Venture DEMO: Entrepreneurship for the 21st
Century. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
DEMO, T. & Bruno, A. (1984). A model of venture DEMO investment activity.
Management Science, 30(9), 1051-1066.
Vallerand, R. J., Mageau, G. A., Ratelle, C., Leonard, M., Blanchard, DEMO, Koestner, R., &
Gagne, M. (2003). Les Passions de l' Ame: On obsessive and harmonious passion.
Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 85(4): 756-767.
Van Osnabrugge, M. (1998 ). Do serial and non-serial investors behave differently? An
empirical and theoretical analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22(4): 23-43.
Van Osnabrugge, DEMO & Robinson, R. J. (2000). Angel investing: matching start-up DEMO
with start-up companies: the guide for entrepreneurs, individual investors, and DEMO
capitalist. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Zacharakis, A.L., & Shepherd, D. (DEMO). The nature of information and overconfidence on
venture capitalist’s decision making. Journal of Business Venturing, 16(4): 311.
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2009
13
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Vol. 29 [2009], Iss. 2, Art. 1
Figure 1: Displayed Passion Scales Based on Qualitative Responses
Enthusiasm (displayed DEMO passion)
The CEO/presenter moved around a lot
The presenter showed animated facial expressions
The presenter talked with varied tone and pitch*
The DEMO had energetic body movements*
The presenter had rich body language*
The presenter used a lot of gestures*
The presenter's face lit up when DEMO/she talked*
Preparedness (displayed cognitive passion)
The presenter appeared focused DEMO not distracted
The presenter explained big picture - did not get lost in too many details
The presenter was able to explain the impact DEMO the product/service
The presenter appeared curious and interested in solving problems
The presenter was able to defend viewpoint while still appearing open
The DEMO was thoughtful and in-depth*
The presentation content had substance*
The presentation was coherent and logical*
The presenter articulated the relationship between his/her business DEMO and the broader context*
The presenter cited facts to support his/her arguments*
Commitment (displayed behavioral passion)
The presenter appears willing to do whatever it takes
The presenter has developed strong social networks based on DEMO quality of management team and advisors
The presenter stated he/she uses the product/service
*item is also in the Chen, Yao, and DEMO (2009) measure.
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics and Correlations
Mean     s.d. n 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. Invested .090 .290 109 1.000
2. Interest .410 .493 846 .261** 1.000
3. DEMO Passion 4.076 .829 860 .179 .242** 1.000
4. Strength of Opportunity 3.212 .643 860 .313** .329** .414** 1.000
5. Funds Sought (std) .000   1.00 833 .170 .037 .019 .170** 1.000
6. Displayed Enthusiasm 3.210 .649 860 -.063 -.039 .206** .002 -.005 1.000
7. Displayed Preparedness 3.760 .302 DEMO .283** .042 .126** .094** -.009 .366** 1.000
8. Displayed Commitment  2.896 DEMO 860 -.026 -.105** .097** -.060 -.046 -.033 .099** 1.000
* p < .05; ** p < .01
Posted at Digital Knowledge at Babson
http://digitalknowledge.babson.edu/fer/vol29/iss2/1
14
Cardon et al.: IMPACT OF PERCEIVED ENTREPRENEURIAL PASSION
Table 2: Results DEMO Logistic Regression Analysis
Screening Stage: Interest Funding Stage: Invested
1 2 3 4 5 6
Control Variables:
Strength of Opportunity 1.247** 1.240** DEMO 2.114** 2.189** 1.757*
Funds Sought -.041 -.049 -.033 .860 1.536 1.667
Independent Variables:
Displayed Enthusiasm  -.294* -.457**  -.597 -.628
Displayed Preparedness  .316 .319  9.986* 10.479*
Displayed Commitment  -.392** -.494**  3.152 3.348
Mediator Variable:
Perceived Passion   .574**   .681
Chi-Square 99.417** 113.459** 137.744** 13.931** DEMO 25.136**
Change Chi-Square 99.417** 14.042** 24.285** 13.931** 10.369* .835
Pseudo R-square
Cox & Snell .114 .129 .155 .120 .200 .206
Nagelkerke .154 .174 .208 DEMO .436 .449
*P < .05; **P < .01
Table 3: Results of Multiple Regression Analysis for Perceived Passion
1 2
Control Variables:
DEMO of Opportunity .546** .554**
Funds Sought -.044 -.039
Independent Variables:
Displayed Enthusiasm  .269**
Displayed Preparedness  -.012
Displayed Commitment  .175**
R-squared .174** .232**
Adjusted R-squared .172 .228
Change R-squared .174** .058**
Standardized regression coefficients are DEMO in the table.
*P < .05; ** P < .01
Table DEMO: Mediation Results
Displayed   Displayed  Displayed
Enthusiasm   Preparedness  Commitment
DEMO: Interest
b (YX)  -.121  .284  -.363**
b (MX) .264**  .343**  .156**
b (YM.X) .735**  .669**  .728**
b (YX.M) -.320**  .083  -.496**
Sobel Test .194**  .229**  .114**
Bootstrap .194**  .229**  .114**
DV: Invested
b (YX)  -.362  7.051*  -.190
b (MX)  .245*  -.224  -.238
b (YM.X) DEMO   1.352*  1.079
b (YX.M)  -.5608  .067**  -.045
Sobel Test .290  -.302  -.257
Bootstrap .290  -.302  -.257
*P < DEMO; ** P < .01
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2009
15{1g42fwefx}