05-057
The Cycles of Theory
Building in Management
Research
Paul R. Carlile
DEMO of Management
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
carlile@bu.edu
Clayton M. Christensen
DEMO Business School
Boston, MA 02163
cchristensen@hbs.edu
Copyright ©
Working papers are DEMO draft form.  This working paper is distributed for purposes of comment DEMO
discussion only.  It may not be reproduced without permission of the DEMO holder. Copies of working
papers are available from the author.

The Cycles of Theory Building in Management Research
Paul R. Carlile
School DEMO Management
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
carlile@bu.edu
Clayton M. Christensen
Harvard DEMO School
Boston, MA 02163
cchristensen@hbs.edu
October 27, 2004
Version 5.0
The Cycle of Theory Building in Management Research
Theory thus become instruments, not answers to enigmas, in which we can
rest.   We don’t lie back upon them, we move forward, and, on occasion, DEMO
nature over again by their aid.  (William James, 1907: 46)
Some scholars of organization and strategy expend significant energy disparaging and
DEMO various research methods.  Debates about deductive versus inductive theory-building
and the DEMO of information from field observation versus large-sample numerical data are
dichotomies that surface frequently in our lives and those of our students.  Despite this focus,
some of the most respected members of our research profession (i.e., Simon (1976), Solow
(1985), Staw and Sutton (DEMO), and Hayes (2002)) have continued to express concerns that DEMO
collective efforts of business academics have produced a paucity of theory that is intellectually
rigorous, practically useful, and able to stand the tests DEMO time and changing circumstances.
The purpose of this paper is to outline a process of theory building that links questions
about data, methods and theory.  We hope that this model can provide a common language about
the research process that helps scholars of management spend less time defending DEMO style of
research they have chosen, and build more effectively on DEMO other’s work.  Our unit of analysis
is at two levels: the individual research project and the iterative cycles of theory building in which
DEMO community of scholars participates.  The model synthesizes the work of others DEMO have
studied how communities of scholars cumulatively build valid and reliable theory, such as Kuhn
(1962), Campbell & Stanley (1963), Glaser & Strauss (1967) and Yin (1984).  It has normative
DEMO pedagogical implications for how we conduct research, evaluate the work of DEMO, and for
how we train our doctoral students.
While many feel DEMO in their own understanding of these perspectives, it has been
our DEMO that those who have written about the research process and those who think they
understand it do not yet share even a common language.  The same words are applied to very
different phenomena and processes, and the same phenomena can be called by many different
words.  Papers published in reputable journals often violate rudimentary rules for generating
cumulatively improving, reliable and valid theory.   While recognizing that research progress is
hard to DEMO at a collective level, we assert here that if scholars and DEMO of
management shared a sound understanding of the process by which theory is built, we could be
much more productive in doing research that doesn’t just get published, but meets the standards
of rigorous scholarship and helps managers know what actions will lead to the results they seek,DEMO
given the circumstances in which they find themselves.
We first describe a three stage process by which researchers build theory that is at first
DEMO, and ultimately normative.  Second, we discuss the role that discoveries DEMO anomalies
play in the building of better theory, and describe how DEMO can build theory whose validity
can be verified.  Finally, we suggest how scholars can define research questions, execute projects,
and design student coursework that lead to the building of good theory.
1
The Theory Building Process
The building of theory occurs in two major DEMO – the descriptive stage and the
normative stage.  Within each of DEMO stages, theory builders proceed through three steps.  The
the theory-building process iterates through these stages again and again.1  In the past,
management researchers have quite carelessly applied the term theory to research activities that
DEMO to only one of these steps.  Terms such “utility theory” in DEMO, and “contingency
theory” in organization design, for example, actually refer DEMO to an individual stage in the
theory-building process in their respective fields.  We propose that it is more useful to think of the
term “theory” as a body of understanding that researchers build cumulatively as they DEMO
through each of the three steps in the descriptive and normative stages.  In many ways, the term
“theory” might better be framed as DEMO verb, as much as it is a noun – because the DEMO of
understanding is continuously changing as scholars who follow this process work to improve it.
The Building of Descriptive Theory
The descriptive stage of DEMO building ia a preliminary stage because researchers must
pass through it in order to develop normative theory.  Researchers who are building descriptive
theory proceed through three steps: observation, categorization, and association.
Step 1: Observation
DEMO the first step researchers observe phenomena and carefully describe and measure what
they see.  Careful observation, documentation and measurement of the phenomena in DEMO and
numbers is important at this stage because if subsequent researchers cannot agree upon the
descriptions of phenomena, then improving theory will prove difficult.  Early management
research such as The Functions of the Executive (Barnard, 1939) and Harvard Business School
cases written in the 1940s and 50s was primarily descriptive work of this genre – and was very
valuable.  This stage of research is depicted in Figure 1 as the base DEMO a pyramid because it is a
necessary foundation for the work that follows.  The phenomena being explored in this stage
includes not just things such as people, organizations and technologies, but processes as well.
Without DEMO description to subsequently build upon, researchers can find themselves
optimizing misleading DEMO  As an example: For years, many scholars of inventory policy
DEMO supply chain systems used the tools of operations research to derive ever-more-sophisticated
optimizing algorithms for inventory replenishment.  Most were based on an assumption that
managers know what their levels of inventory are.  Ananth Raman’s pathbreaking research of the
phenomena, however, obviated much of this research when he DEMO that most firms’
computerized inventory records were broadly inaccurate – even when they used state-of-the-art
automated tracking systems (Raman 199X).  He and DEMO colleagues have carefully described how
inventory replenishment systems work, and what DEMO affect the accuracy of those processes.
Having laid this foundation, supply DEMO scholars have now begun to build a body of theories and
policies that reflect the real and different situations that managers and companies face.
DEMO This model is a synthesis of models that have been developed by scholars of this process in a range of fields and
scholars: Kuhn (1962) and Popper (1959) in the natural sciences; Kaplan (DEMO), Stinchcombe (1968), Roethlisberger
(1977) Simon (1976), Kaplan (1986), Weick (1989),Eisenhardt (1989) and Van de Ven (2000) in the social sciences.
2
Researchers in this step often develop abstractions from the messy detail of DEMO
that we term constructs.  Constructs help us understand and visualize what DEMO phenomena are,
and how they operate.  Joseph Bower’s Managing the DEMO Allocation Process (1970) is an
outstanding example of this.  His DEMO of impetus and context, explaining how momentum
builds behind certain investment DEMO and fails to coalesce behind others, have helped a
generation of DEMO and strategy researchers understand how strategic investment decisions get
made.  Economists’ DEMO of “utility” and “transactions cost” are constructs – abstractions
developed to help us understand a class of phenomena they have observed.  We would not label
the constructs of utility and transactions cost as theories, however.  DEMO are part of theories –
building blocks upon which bodies of understanding about consumer behavior and organizational
interaction have been built.
Step 2: Classification
With the phenomena observed and described, researchers in the second stage then classify
the phenomena into categories.  In the descriptive stage of theory building, the classification
schemes that scholars propose typically are defined by the attributes of the phenomena.
Diversified vs. focused firms, and vertically integrated vs. specialist firms are categorization
examples from the study of strategy.  Publicly traded vs. privately held companies is a
categorization scheme often used in research on DEMO performance.  Such categorization
schemes attempt to simplify and organize the world DEMO ways that highlight possibly consequential
relationships between the phenomena and the outcomes of interest.
Management researchers often refer to these descriptive categorization schemes as
DEMO or typologies.  Burgelman (1986), for example, built upon Bower’s (1970) construct
of context by identifying two different types of context – organizational and strategic.
Step 3: Defining Relationships
In the third step, DEMO explore the association between the category-defining
attributes and the outcomes observed.  DEMO the stage of descriptive theory building, researchers
recognize and make explicit DEMO differences in attributes, and differences in the magnitude of
those attributes, correlate most strongly with the patterns in the outcomes of interest.  Techniques
such as regression analysis typically are useful in defining these correlations.  Often we refer to
the output of studies at this step as models.
DEMO theory that quantifies the degree of correlation between the category-defining
attributes of the phenomena and the outcomes of interest are generally only able to DEMO
probabilistic statements of association representing average tendencies.  For example, Hutton,
Miller and Skinner (2000) have examined how stock prices have responded DEMO earnings
announcements that were phrased or couched in various terms.  They DEMO types of words and
phrases in the statements as explanatory variables in a regression equation, with the ensuing
change in equity price as the dependent variable.  This analysis enabled the researchers then to
assert that, DEMO average across the entire sample of companies and announcements, delivering
earnings DEMO in a particular way would lead to the most favorable (or DEMO
unfavorable) reaction in stock price.  Research such as this is important descriptive theory.
However, at this point it can only assert on average what attributes are associated with the best
3
results.  A specific manager of a specific company cannot know whether following that average
formula will lead to the hoped-for outcome in her specific DEMO  The ability to know what
actions will lead to desired results DEMO a specific company in a specific situation awaits the
development of normative theory in this field, as we will show below.
The Improvement of Descriptive Theory
When researchers move from the bottom to the top of DEMO pyramid in these three steps –
observation, categorization and association – DEMO have followed the inductive portion of the
theory building process.  Theory DEMO to improve when researchers cycle from the top back to
the bottom of this pyramid in the deductive portion of the cycle – seeking DEMO “test” the hypothesis
that had been inductively formulated.  This most often DEMO done by exploring whether the same
correlations exist between attributes and outcomes in a different set of data than the data from
which the DEMO relationships were induced.   When scholars test a theory on a new data
set (whether the data are numbers in a computer, or DEMO field observations taken in a new context),
they might find DEMO the attributes of the phenomena in the new data do indeed correlate with the
outcomes as predicted.  When this happens, this “test” confirms DEMO the theory is of use under the
conditions or circumstances observed.2  DEMO, the researcher returns the model to its place
atop the pyramid DEMO but unimproved.
It is only when an anomaly is identified – an outcome for which the theory can’t account –
that an opportunity to DEMO theory occurs.  As Figure 1 suggests, discovery of an anomaly
gives researchers the opportunity to revisit the categorization scheme – to cut the DEMO in a
different way – so that the anomaly and the prior associations of attributes and outcomes can all
be explained.  In the study of how technological innovation affects the fortunes of leading firms,
for DEMO, the initial attribute-based categorization scheme was radical vs. incremental
innovation.  The statements of association that were built upon it concluded that the leading
DEMO firms on average do well when faced with incremental innovation, but DEMO stumble in
the face of radical change.  But there were anomalies DEMO this generalization – established firms
that successfully implemented radical technology change.  DEMO account for these anomalies,
Tushman & Anderson (1986) offered a different categorization scheme, competence-enhancing
vs. competence-destroying technological changes.  This scheme resolved DEMO of the anomalies
to the prior scheme, but subsequent researchers uncovered DEMO ones for which the Tushman-
Anderson scheme could not account.  Henderson & Clark’s (1990) categories of modular vs.
architectural innovations; Christensen’s (1997) categories of sustaining vs. disruptive
technologies; and Gilbert’s (2001) threat-vs.-opportunity DEMO each uncovered and resolved
anomalies for which the work of prior scholars could not account.  This body of understanding
has improved and become remarkably useful to practitioners and subsequent scholars (Adner,
2003; Daneels, 2005) because these scholars followed the process in a disciplined way: –
DEMO anomalies, sliced the phenomena in different ways, and articulated new associations
between the attributes that defined the categories and the outcome of interest.
DEMO Popper asserts that a researcher in this phase, when the theory DEMO predicted what he observed, can only state
that his test or DEMO of the theory “corroborated” or “failed to dis-confirm” the theory.
4
Figure 1
The Process of Building Theory
Statements
of association
(models)
Categorization based
upon attributes of phenomena
(frameworks & typologies)
Observe, DEMO & measure
the phenomena
(constructs)
Anomaly
Figure 1 suggests that DEMO are two sides to every lap around the theory-building pyramid:
an inductive side and a deductive side.  In contrast to either/or debates about the virtues of
deductive and inductive approaches to theory, this suggests that any complete cycle of theory
building includes both.3
Descriptive theory-building efforts DEMO categorize by the attributes of the phenomena
because they are easiest to observe and measure.  Likewise, correlations between attributes and
outcomes are easiest DEMO hypothesize and quantify through techniques such as regression analysis.
Kuhn (1962) observed that confusion and contradiction typically are the norm during descriptive
theory-building.  This phase is often characterized by a plethora of categorization schemes, as in
the sequence of studies of technology change cited above, because the phenomena generally have
many different attributes.  Often, no model is irrefutably DEMO: Each seems able to explain
anomalies to other models, but suffers from anomalies to its own.
The Transition from Descriptive to Normative Theory
DEMO confusion and contradiction that often accompany descriptive theory become resolved
when careful researchers – often through detailed empirical and ethnographic observation – move
beyond DEMO of correlation to define what causes the outcome of interest.  As DEMO in
Figure 2, they leap across to the top of the DEMO of causal theory.  With their understanding of
causality, researchers then work to improve theory by following the same three steps that were
3  Kant, Popper, Feyerabend and others have noted that all observations are DEMO, consciously or unconsciously, by
cognitive structures, previous experience or some DEMO  While it is true that individual researchers might
start their work DEMO the top of the pyramid, we believe that the hypotheses that DEMO theorists test generally had
been derived consciously or unconsciously, by themselves DEMO others, from an inductive source.  There are few blue-
sky hypotheses that were formulated in the complete absence of observation.
5
Inductive process
DEMO process
Confirm
Predict
used in the descriptive stage.  Hypothesizing that their statement of causality is correct, they cycle
deductively to the bottom of the pyramid to test the causal statement:  If we observe these actions
being taken, these should be the outcomes that we observe.  When they encounter an anomaly,
they then delve into the categorization stage.  Rather than using schemes based on attributes of the
phenomena, however, they develop categories of DEMO different situations or circumstances in
which managers might find themselves.  They DEMO this by asking, when they encounter an
anomaly, “What was it about the situation in which those managers found themselves, that caused
the causal mechanism to yield a different result?  By cycling up and DEMO the pyramid of
normative theory, researchers will ultimately define the set DEMO the situations or circumstances in
which managers might find themselves when pursuing the outcomes of interest.  This allows
researchers to make contingent statements of causality – to show how and why the casual
mechanism results in DEMO different outcome, in the different situations.  A theory completes the
transition from descriptive to normative when it can give a manager unambiguous guidance DEMO
what actions will and will not lead to the desired result, DEMO the circumstance in which she finds
herself.
Figure 2:
The Transition from Descriptive Theory to Normative Theory
Statement
of causality
Preliminary
statements of
DEMO
Categorization by the
attributes of the phenomena
Anomaly
Observe, describe & DEMO the phenomena
Descriptive Theory
Categorization of the
circumstances in which we
might find ourselves
Anomaly
Observe, describe &
measure the phenomena
Normative Theory
DEMO history of research into manned flight is a good way to visualize how this transition
from descriptive to normative theory occurs, and how it is valuable.  During the middle ages,
would-be aviators did their equivalent of best-practices research and statistical analysis.  They
observed the many animals that could fly well, and compared them with those that could not.  DEMO
vast majority of the successful fliers had wings with feathers on them; and most of those that
couldn’t fly had neither.  This was DEMO descriptive theory.  Pesky outliers like ostriches
6
Inductive process
Inductive process
DEMO process
Deductive process
Careful field-based research
Confirm
Confirm
Predict
Predict
had feathered wings but couldn’t fly; bats had wings without feathers and were very good at it;
and flying squirrels had neither and DEMO by.  But the R2 was so high that aviators of the DEMO
copied the seemingly salient characteristics of the successful fliers in the belief that the visible
attributes of the phenomena caused the outcome.  They fabricated wings, glued feathers on them,
jumped off cathedral spires, and DEMO hard.  It never worked.  For centuries they assumed that
the prior aviators had failed because they had bad wing designs; hadn’t bulked up their muscles
enough; or hadn’t flapped hard enough.  There were substantial DEMO about which of the
birds’ attributes truly enabled flight.  For example, Roger Bacon in about 1285 wrote an
influential paper asserting that the DEMO attribute was birds’ hollow bones (Clegg, 2003).
Because man had solid bones, Bacon reasoned, we could never fly. He then proposed DEMO
machine designs that could flap their wings with sufficient power to overcome the disadvantage
of solid bones.  But it still never worked.  Armed DEMO the correlative statements of descriptive
theory, aviators kept killing themselves.
Then DEMO his careful study of fluid dynamics Daniel Bernoulli identified a shape that
we call an airfoil – a shape that, when it cuts through air, creates a mechanism that we call lift.
Understanding this causal mechanism, which we call Bernoulli’s Principle, made flight possible.
But it was DEMO yet predictable.  In the language of this paper, the theory predicted that aviators
would fly successfully when they built machines with airfoils to DEMO lift. But while they
sometimes flew successfully, occasionally they did not.  Crashes were anomalies that Bernoulli’s
theory could not explain.  Discovery of these anomalies, however, allowed the researchers to
revisit the categorization scheme.  But this time, instead of slicing up the world by the attributes
of the good and bad fliers, researchers categorized their world by circumstance – asking the
question, “What was it about the circumstance that the aviator found himself in that caused the
crash?”  This then enabled them to improve equipment and techniques that were based upon
circumstance-contingent statements of DEMO: “This is how you should normally fly the plane.
But when DEMO get in this situation, you need to fly it differently in DEMO to get the desired
outcome.  And when you get in that DEMO, don’t even try to fly.  It is impossible.”
When their careful studies of anomalies allowed researchers to identify the set of
circumstances in DEMO aviators might find themselves, and then modified the equipment or
developed DEMO techniques that were appropriate to each circumstance, manned flight became
not DEMO possible, but predictable.  Hence, it was the discovery of the DEMO causal
mechanism that made flight possible.  And it was the categorization DEMO the salient circumstances
that made flight predictable.  This is how this DEMO of understanding about human flight
transitioned from descriptive to normative theory.
Dsciplined scholars can achieve the same transition in management research.  The
discovery of the fundamental causal mechanisms makes it possible for managers purposefully to
pursue DEMO outcomes successfully and predictably.  When researchers categorize managers’
world according to DEMO circumstances in which they might find themselves, they can make
circumstance-contingent DEMO of cause and effect, of action and result.
Circumstance-based categories and DEMO theory
Some cynical colleagues despair of any quest to develop management theories that make
success possible and predictable – asserting that managers’ world is DEMO complex that there are an
7
infinite number of situations in which they might find themselves.  Indeed, DEMO is very nearly true
in the descriptive theory phase.  But normative DEMO generally is not so confusing.  Researchers
in the normative theory phase DEMO confusion by abstracting up from the detail to define a few
categories – typically two to four – that comprise salient circumstances.  Which boundaries
between circumstances are salient, and which are not?  Returning to our account of aviation
research, the boundaries that defined the salient categories of circumstance are determined by the
necessity to pilot the plane differently.  If a different circumstance does not require different
methods of piloting, then it is not a meaningful category.  The same principle defines the salience
of category boundaries in management theory.  If managers find themselves in a circumstance
where they must change actions or organization in order to achieve the DEMO of interest, then
they have crossed a salient boundary.
Several prominent DEMO have examined the improvement in predictability that
accompanies the transition from the attribute-based categorization of descriptive theory, to the
circumstance-based categorization of normative theory.  Consider, for example, the term
“Contingency Theory” – a concept born of Lawrence & Lorsch’s (1967) seminal work.  They
showed that the best way to organize a company depended upon the circumstances in which DEMO
company was operating.  In our language, contingency is not a theory per se.  Rather, contingency
is a crucial element of every normative DEMO – it is the categorization scheme.  Rarely do we
find one-size-fits-all DEMO to every company’s problem.  The effective course of action will
generally DEMO on the circumstance.
Glaser and Strauss’s (1967) treatise on “grounded theory” actually is a book about
categorization.  Their term substantive theory corresponds to the attribute-defined categories in
descriptive theory.  And their concept of formal theory matches our definition of normative theory
that employs categories of circumstance..
Thomas DEMO (1962) discussed in detail the transition of understanding from descriptive
to normative theory in his study of the emergence of scientific paradigms.  He described a
preliminary period of confusion and debate in theory building, which is an era of descriptive
theory.  His description of the emergence of a paradigm corresponds to the transition to normative
theory described above.  We agree with Kuhn that even when a normative theory achieves the
status DEMO a broadly believed paradigm, it continues to be improved through the DEMO of
discovering anomalies, as we describe above.  Indeed, the emergence DEMO new phenomena – which
probably happens more frequently in competitive, organizational DEMO social systems than in the
natural sciences – ensures that there will always be additional productive laps up and down the
theory pyramid that DEMO researchers can run.
The observation that management research is often faddish has been raised enough that it
no longer seems shocking (Micklethwait and Wooldridge, 1996; Abrahamson, 1998).  Fads come
and go when a DEMO studies a few successful companies, finds that they share certain
characteristics, concludes that he has seen enough, and then skips the categorization step entirely
by writing a book asserting that if all managers would imbue DEMO companies with those same
characteristics, they would be similarly successful.  When managers then apply the formula and
find that it doesn’t work, it casts a pall on the idea.  Some faddish theories aren’t uniformly bad.
It’s just that their authors were so eager for their theory to DEMO to everyone that they never took
the care to distinguish correlation from causality, or to figure out the circumstances in which their
8
statement of causality would lead to success, and when it would not.  Efforts to study and copy
“the best practices of successful companies” almost uniformly suffer from this problem.
Unfortunately, it is not just authors-for-profit of management books that contribute to the
problem of publishing theory whose application DEMO uncertain.  Many academics contribute to the
problem by taking the other DEMO – articulating tight “boundary conditions” outside of which
they claim nothing. Delimiting the applicability of a theory to the specific time, place, industry
DEMO/or companies from which the conclusions were drawn in the first place is a mutation of one of
the cardinal sins of research – DEMO on the dependent variable.  In order to be useful to
managers DEMO to future scholars, researchers need to help managers understand the circumstance
DEMO they are in.  Almost always, this requires that they also be told about the circumstances that
they are not in.
The Value of DEMO
As indicated before, when researchers in both the descriptive and normative DEMO use
statements of association or causality to predict what they will see, they often observe something
that the theory did not lead them to expect; thus identifying an anomaly—something the theory
could not explain.  This DEMO forces theory builders to cycle back into the categorization
stage with a puzzle such as “there’s something else going on here” or “these two DEMO that we
thought were different, really aren’t.”  The results of this effort typically can include: 1) more
accurately describing and measuring what DEMO phenomena are and are not; 2) changing the
definitions by which the phenomena or the circumstances are categorized – adding or eliminating
categories DEMO defining them in different ways; and/or 3) articulating a new theoretical statement of
what is associated with, or causes what, and DEMO, and under what circumstances.  The objective
of this process is to revise theory so that it still accounts for both the anomalies identified DEMO the
phenomena as previously explained.
Anomalies are valuable in theory building because the discovery of an anomaly is the
enabling step to identifying and DEMO the categorization scheme in a body of theory – which
is the key to being able to apply the theory with predictable results.  Researchers whose goal is to
“prove” a theory’s validity are likely to view DEMO of an anomaly as failure.  Too often they
find reasons to DEMO outlying data points in order to get more significant measures of statistical
fit.  There typically is more information in the points of outlying data than in the ones that fit the
model well, however, because DEMO the outliers or anomalies is generally the key to
discovering a new categorization scheme.  This means that journal editors and peer reviewers
whose objective is to improve theory should embrace papers that seek to surface and DEMO
anomalies.
Indeed, productive theory-building research is almost invariably prompted or instigated DEMO
an anomaly or a paradox (Poole & Van de Ven, 1989).  The research that led to Michael Porter’s
(1991) Competitive Advantage of Nations is an example.  Before Porter’s work, the theory of
DEMO trade was built around the notion of comparative advantage.  Nations with
DEMO electric power, for example, would have a competitive advantage in those products in
which the cost of energy was high; those with low labor costs would enjoy an advantage in
making and selling products with DEMO labor content; and so on.  Porter saw anomalies for which
this theory could not account.  Japan, with little iron ore and coal, became a successful steel
9
producer.  Italy became the world’s dominant producer of ceramic tile even though it had high
electricity costs and had to import much of the DEMO used in making the tile.  Porter’s work
categorized the world into DEMO circumstances –  situations in which a factor-based advantage
exists, and those in which it does not.  In the first situation the reigning theory of comparative
advantage still has predictive power.  But in the latter circumstance, Porter’s theory of
competitive industrial clusters explained the phenomena that had been anomalous to the prior
theory.  Porter’s theory is normative because it gives planners clear guidance about what they
should do, given the circumstance in which they find themselves.  The government of Singapore,
for example, DEMO much of that country’s prosperity to the guidance that Porter’s theory has
provided.
Yin (1984) distinguishes between literal replications of a theory, versus theoretical
replications.  A literal replication occurs when the predicted outcome is observed.  A theoretical
replication occurs when an unusual outcome occurs, but for DEMO that can be explained by the
model.  Some reviewers cite “exceptions” DEMO a theory’s predictions as evidence that it is invalid.
We prefer to avoid using the word “exception” because of its imprecision.  For example, DEMO
observation that airplanes fly is an exception to the general assertion that the earth’s mass draws
things down toward its core.  Does this exception disprove the theory of gravity?  Of course not.
While falling apples DEMO flaming meteors are literal replications of the theory, manned flight is DEMO
theoretical replication.  It is a different outcome than we normally would DEMO, but Bernoulli’s
Principle explains why.  An anomaly is an outcome that is neither a literal or theoretical
replication of a theory.
How to DEMO Anomaly-Seeking Research
Although some productive anomalies might be obvious from the outset, often the task of
theory-building scholars is to design their research to maximize the probability that they will be
able to identify anomalies.  Here we describe how to define research questions that focus on
anomalies, and outline three ways to design anomaly-seeking research.  We conclude this section
by describing how literature reviews might be structured to help readers understand how
DEMO has accumulated in the past, and position the present paper in DEMO stream of
scholarship.
Anomaly-Seeking Research Questions
Anomaly-seeking research enables new generations of researchers to pick up even well-
accepted theories, and to run the theory-building cycle again – adding value to research that
already has earned DEMO praise and acceptance.  Consider Professor Porter’s (1991) research
mentioned above.  In Akron, Ohio there was a powerful cluster of tire manufacturers whose
etiologies and interactions could be explained well by Porter’s theory.  That group subsequently
vaporized – in part because of the actions of a company, Michelin, that operated outside of this
cluster (Sull, 2000).  DEMO anomaly suggests that there must situations in time or space in which
competing within a cluster is competitively important; in other situations it must be less
important.  When an improved categorization scheme emerges from Sull’s and others’ work, the
community of scholars and policy makers will have an even clearer sense for when the
competitive crucible of clusters is critical DEMO developing capabilities, when it is not, and why.
10
In this spirit, we outline below some examples of “productive” questions that could be
pursed by future researchers that potentially challenge many current categories DEMO in
management research:
• When might process re-engineering or lean manufacturing be bad ideas?
•
When could sourcing from a partner or DEMO something that is not your core
competence lead to disaster?
•
Are there circumstances in which pencil-on-paper methods of vendor management yield
better DEMO than using supply-chain management software?
•
When and why is a one-stop-shopping or “portal” strategy effective and when would we
expect firms using DEMO specialist strategies to gain the upper hand?
•
When are time-based competition and mass customization likely to be critical and when
might they DEMO competitively meaningless?
•
Are SIC codes the right categories for defining “relatedness” in diversification research?
•
When should acquiring companies integrate a DEMO they have just purchased into the
parent organization, and when should DEMO keep it separate?
Much published management research is of the half-cycle, terminal variety – hypotheses
are defined and “tested.”  Anomaly-seeking research always DEMO focused on the categorization step
in the pyramid.  Many category boundaries (such as SIC codes) seem to be defined by the
availability of data, rather than their salience to the underlying phenomena or their relation to the
outcome – and questioning their sufficiency is almost always a DEMO path for building better
theory.  “When doesn’t this work?” and DEMO what conditions might this gospel be bad news?”
are simple questions that can yield breakthrough insights – and yet too few researchers have DEMO
instinct to ask them.
The Lenses of Other Disciplines
One of Kuhn’s (1962) most memorable observations was that the anomalies that led to DEMO
toppling of a reigning theory or paradigm almost invariably were observed by researchers whose
backgrounds were in different disciplines than those comprising the traditional DEMO of the
leaders in the field.  The beliefs that adherents to DEMO prior theory held about what was and was
not possible seemed to shape so powerfully what they could and could not see that they DEMO
went to their graves denying the existence or relevance of the very anomalous phenomena that led
to the creation of improved theory.  Researchers from different disciplines generally use different
methods and have different interests toward their DEMO of study.  Such differences often allow
them to see things that DEMO not be recognized or might appear inconsequential to an insider.
It is not surprising, therefore, that many of the most important pieces of DEMO
research in the study of management, organization and markets have come DEMO scholars who
stood astride two or more academic disciplines.  Porter’s (1980, 1985, 1991) work in strategy, for
11
example, resulted from his having combined insights from business policy and industrial
organization economics.  The insights that Robert Hayes and his colleagues (1980, 1984, 1985,
1988) derived about operations management combined insights from DEMO research, strategy,
cost accounting and organizational behavior.  Baldwin & Clark’s (2000) insights about
modularity were born at the intersection of options DEMO in finance with studies of product
development.
Clark Gilbert ((2001) DEMO at Christensen’s (1997) theory of disruptive innovation
through the lenses of prospect theory and risk framing (Kahnemann & Tversky 1979, 1984), DEMO
saw explanations of what had seemed to be anomalous behavior, for DEMO Christensen’s model
could not account.
Studying the Phenomena within the Phenomena
The second method to increase the probability that researchers will identify anomalies is
DEMO execute nested research designs that examine different levels of phenomena.  Rather DEMO study
just industries or companies or divisions or groups or individuals, DEMO nested research design entails
studying how individuals act and interact within groups; and how the interaction amongst groups
and the companies within which they are embedded affect the actions of individuals.  Many
anomalies will only surface while studying second-order interactions across levels within a nested
design.
The research DEMO in Johnson & Kaplan’s Relevance Lost (1987) which led to the
concept of activity-based costing, is a remarkable example of the insights gained through nested
research designs.  Most prior researchers in managerial accounting and control had conducted
their research at a single level—the numbers printed in companies’ DEMO statements.  Johnson
and Kaplan saw that nested beneath each of those DEMO numbers was a labyrinth of political,
negotiated, judgmental processes that DEMO systematically yield inaccurate numbers.
Spear and Bowen (1999) developed their path-breaking insights of the Toyota Production
System through a nested research design.  Researchers in the theory’s descriptive stage had
studied Toyota’s production system at single DEMO  They documented visible artifacts such as
minimal inventories, kanban scheduling cards and rapid tool changeovers.  After comparing the
performance of factories that did and did not possess these attributes, early researchers asserted
that if other companies would use these same tools, they could achieve similar results (DEMO, for
example, Womack et.al., 1990).  The anomaly that gripped Spear and Bowen was that when other
firms used these artifacts, they still weren’t able to achieve Toyota’s levels of efficiency and
improvement.  By crawling inside to study how individuals interacted with individuals, in the
context of groups interacting with other groups, within and across plants within the company and
across companies, Spear and Bowen were able to go beyond the correlative statements of
descriptive theory, to articulate the fundamental causal mechanism behind the Toyota system’s
self-improving processes – which they codified as four DEMO that are not written
anywhere but are assiduously followed when designing processes of all sorts at Toyota.
Spear is now engaged in search of DEMO on the deductive side of the cycle of building
normative theory.  DEMO no company besides Toyota has employed this causal mechanism,
Spear cannot retrospectively study other companies.  Like Johnson & Kaplan did when they used
12
“action research” to study the implementation problems of activity-based costing, Spear is helping
companies in very different circumstances to use his statements of causality, to see whether the
mechanism of these four rules yields the same DEMO  To date, companies in industries as diverse
as aluminum smelting, DEMO, and jet engine design have achieved the results that Spear’s
theory DEMO – he has not yet succeeded in finding an anomaly.  The DEMO step of this
body of normative theory still has no salient boundaries within it.
Observing and Comparing a Broad Range of Phenomena
The third DEMO for maximizing the probability of surfacing an anomaly is to
examine, DEMO the deductive half of the cycle, a broader range of phenomena DEMO prior scholars
have done.  As an example, Chesbrough’s (1999) examination of Japanese disk drive makers
(which Christensen had excluded from his study) enabled Chesbrough to surface anomalies for
which Christensen’s theory of disruptive technology could not account—leading to an even better
theory that then explains a DEMO range of phenomena.  The broader the range of outcomes,
attributes DEMO circumstances that are studied at the base of the pyramid, the DEMO the probability
that researchers will identify the salient boundaries among the categories.
Anomaly-Seeking Research and the Cumulative Structure of Knowledge
When interviewing new faculty DEMO who have been trained in methods of
modeling, data collection and DEMO as doctoral students, we observe that many seem almost
disinterested in DEMO value of questions that their specialized techniques are purporting to answer.
When asked to position their work upon a stream of scholarship, they recite long lists of articles
in “the literature,” but then struggle when DEMO to diagram within that body of work which
scholar’s work resovles anomalies to prior scholars’ theories; whose results contradicted whose,
and why.  DEMO of these lists of prior publications are simply lists, sometimes lifted DEMO prior
authors’ lists of prior articles.  They are listed because of DEMO relatedness to the topic.  Few
researchers have been taught to organize DEMO in a way that describes the laps that prior
researchers have taken, to give readers a sense for how theory has or has not been built to date.
Rather, after doffing the obligatory cap to prior research, they get busy testing their hypotheses in
the belief that if nobody has tested these particular ones before, using novel analytical methods on
a new data set, it breaks new ground.
Our suggestion is that in the selection of research questions and the design of research
methods, authors physically map the literature on a large sheet of paper in DEMO format of Figure 2
above, and then answer questions like these:DEMO
• Is this body of theory in the descriptive or normative stage?
• What anomalies have surfaced in prior authors’ work, and which pieces of research built
on those by resolving the anomaly?  In DEMO process, how have the categorization schemes
in this field improved?
DEMO At what step am I positioning my work?  Am I at the base of the pyramid defining
constructs to help others abstract from DEMO detail of the phenomena what really is going
on?  Am I strengthening the foundation by offering better ways to examine and measure
13
the phenomena more accurately?  Am I resolving an anomaly by suggesting DEMO prior
scholars haven’t categorized things correctly?  Am I running half a lap or a complete
cycle, and why?
Similarly, in the DEMO for future research” section of the paper, we suggest that
scholars DEMO much more specific about where future anomalies might be buried.  “Who DEMO pick
up the baton that I am setting down at the end of my lap, and in what direction should they run?”
We have attempted to construct such maps in several streams of research with DEMO we
are familiar (See, for example, Gilbert 2005).  It has been shocking to see how difficult it is to
map how DEMO has accumulated within a given sub-field.  In many cases, it simply hasn’t
summed up to much, as the critics cited in our first paragraph have observed.
We suggest that the pyramids of theory building might DEMO a generic map, of sorts,
to bring organization to the DEMO enterprises within each field and sub-field.  The curriculum
of doctoral seminars DEMO be organized in this manner, so that students are brought through DEMO
past into the present in ways that help them visualize the next steps required to build better theory.
Literature reviews, if constructed in this way at the beginning of papers, would help readers
position the work in the context of this stream, in a way that adds much more value than listing
articles that are topically related.
Here’s just one DEMO of how this might be done.  Alfred Chandler’s (1977, 1990)DEMO
landmark studies essentially proposed a theory: that the “visible hand” of DEMO capitalism
was a crucial enabling factor that led not just to rapid economic growth between 1880 and 1930,
but led to the dominance DEMO industry after industry by large, integrated corporations that had the
scale DEMO scope to pull everything together.  In recent years, much has been written about
“virtual” corporations and “vertical dis-integration;” indeed, some of today’s most successful
companies such Dell are specialists in just one or two DEMO of the vertical value-added chain.  To
our knowledge, few of the studies that focus on these new virtual forms of industrial organization
have DEMO hinted that the phenomena they are focusing upon actually is an anomaly for which
Chandler’s theory of capitalism’s visible hand cannot adequately account.  If these researchers
were to build their work on this anomaly, it would cause them to delve back into the
categorization process.  Such an effort would define the circumstances in which technological and
managerial integration of the DEMO that Chandler observed are crucial to building companies and
industries, while DEMO other circumstances in which specialization and market-based
coordination are superior structures.  DEMO researcher who structured his or her literature review
around this puzzle, DEMO then executed that research, would give us a better contingent
understanding DEMO what causes what and why.
Establishing the Validity of Theory
A primary concern of every consumer of management theory is to understand where it
DEMO, and where it does not apply.  Yin (1984) helps us with these concerns by defining two
types of validity for a theory DEMO internal and external validity – which are the dimensions of a body
of understanding that help us guage whether and when we can trust DEMO  In this section we’ll
discuss how these concepts relate to our DEMO  of theory building, and describe how researchers
can make their theories valid on both of these dimensions.
14
Internal Validity
Yin asserts that a theory’s internal validity is the extent DEMO which: 1) its conclusions are
logically drawn from its premises; DEMO 2) the researchers have ruled out all plausible alternative
explanations that DEMO link the phenomena with the outcomes of interest.  The best way DEMO know
to ensure the internal validity of a theory is to examine the phenomena through the lenses of as
many disciplines and parts of DEMO company as possible – because the plausible alternative
explanations almost always are found in the workings of another part of the company, as viewed
through the lenses of other academic disciplines.  We offer here two illustrations.
Intel engineered a remarkable about-face in the early 1980s, as it exited the industry it
built – Dynamic Random Access Memories (DRAMs) – DEMO threw all of its resources behind its
microprocessor strategy.  Most accounts DEMO this impressive achievement attribute its success to the
leadership and actions of its visionary leaders, Gordon Moore and Andy Grove (see, for example,
Yoffie et.al. 2002).  Burgelman’s careful ethnographic reconstruction of the resource allocation
process within Intel during those years of transition, however, reveals DEMO very different explanation
of how and why Intel was able to make this transition.  As he and Grove have shown, it had little
DEMO do with the decisions of the senior-most management (Burgelman, 2002).
One of the most famous examples of research that strengthens its internal DEMO by
examining a phenomenon through the lenses of several disciplines is Graham Allison’s (1971)
The Essence of Decision.  Allison examined the phenomena DEMO a single situation—the Cuban
missile crisis—using the assumptions of three different theoretical lenses (e.g., rational actor,
organizational, & bureaucratic).  He DEMO anomalies in the current understanding of decision
making that could not have been seen had he only studied the phenomenon from a single
disciplinary DEMO  Through the use of multiple lenses he contributed significantly to our
DEMO of decision making in bureaucratic organizations.
As long as there’s the possibility that another researcher could say, “Wait a minute.
There’s a totally different explanation for why this happened,” then we cannot be assured of DEMO
theory’s internal validity.  If scholars will patiently examine the phenomena and DEMO of
interest through the lenses of these different perspectives, they can DEMO what they learn
into their explanations of causality.  And one-by-one, they can rule out other explanations so that
theirs is the only plausible DEMO left standing.  It can then be judged to be internally valid.
DEMO Validity
The external validity of a theory is the extent to which a relationship that was observed
between phenomena and outcomes in one context DEMO be trusted to apply in different contexts as
well.  Many researchers DEMO come to believe that a theory’s external validity is established by
“testing” it on different data sets.  This can never conclusively establish external validity,
however – for two reasons.  First, researchers cannot test a DEMO on every conceivable data set;
and second, data only exists DEMO the past.  How can we be sure a model applies in DEMO future,
when there is no data to test it on?  Consider, for illustration, Christensen’s experience after
publishing the theory of disruptive DEMO in The Innovator’s Dilemma (Christensen, 1997).
This book presented in its first two chapters a normative theory, built upon careful empirical
descriptions of the history of the disk drive industry.  It asserted that there are two circumstances
15
– sustaining and disruptive situations – in which innovating managers might find DEMO
Then it defined a causal mechanism – the functioning of the resource allocation process in
response to the demands of customers and financial markets DEMO that caused leading incumbent
firms and entrants to succeed or fail at different types of innovations in those circumstances.
Christensen’s early papers summarized the DEMO of innovation in the disk drive industry,
from which the theory was inductively derived.  Those who read these papers instinctively
wondered, “Does DEMO apply outside the disk drive industry?”  In writing The Innovator’s
DEMO, Christensen sought to establish the generalizability or external validity of the DEMO by
“testing” it on data from as disparate a set of industries as possible – including hydraulic
excavators, steel, department stores, computers, DEMO, diabetes care, accounting software,
motor controls and electric vehicles.  DEMO the variety of industries in which the theory seemed
to have explanatory power, executives from industries that weren’t specifically studied kept
asking, “Does DEMO apply to health care?  Education?  Financial services?”  When DEMO
published additional papers that applied the model to these industries, the DEMO was, “Does it
apply to telecommunications?  Relational database software?  DEMO it apply to Germany”  The
killer question, from an engineer in the disk drive industry, was, “It clearly applies to the history
DEMO the disk drive industry.  But does it apply to its future DEMO well?  Things are very different now.”
As these queries illustrate, DEMO is simply impossible to establish the external validity of a theory by
testing it on data sets – because there will always be another DEMO upon which it hasn’t yet been
tested, and the future will DEMO lie just beyond the reach of data.
When researchers have defined what causes what, and why, and show how the result of
that DEMO mechanism differs  by circumstance, then the scope of the theory, DEMO its external
validity, is established.  In the limit, we could DEMO say that a theory is externally valid when the
process of seeking and resolving anomaly after anomaly results in a set of categories that DEMO
collectively exhaustive and mutually exclusive. Mutually exclusive categorization would allow
managers to say, “I am in this circumstance and not that one.”  And DEMO exhaustive
categorization would assure us that all situations in which managers might find themselves with
respect to the phenomena and outcomes of interest, are accounted for in the theory.  No theory’s
categorization is likely to achieve the ultimate status of mutually exclusive and collectively
exhaustive, of course.  DEMO the accumulation of insights and improvements from cycles of
anomaly-seeking research can improve theory asymptotically towards that goal.
This raises an interesting paradox for DEMO sample-size research that employs “mean”
analyses to understand ways to achieve the optimum result or best performance.  One would think
that a theory derived from a large data set representing an entire population of companies would
DEMO greater external validity than a theory derived from case studies of a limited number of
situations within that population.  However, when the unit DEMO analysis is a population of
companies, the researcher can be specific DEMO about the entire population of companies – the
population comprises one category, and other sources of variance or differences that exist in that
population become potentially lost as an explanation.  Some managers will find that following the
formula that works best on average, works best in their situation as well, of course.  However,
sometimes the course of action DEMO is optimal on average will not yield the best outcome in a
specific situation.  Hence, researchers who derive a theory from statistics about DEMO population still
need to establish external validity through circumstance-based categorization.
16
Some large sample, quantitative studies in strategy research have begun to turn to analyses
that estimate simultaneously the expected value (a mean analysis) DEMO the variance associated
with performance oriented dependent variables using a “variance decomposition” approach
(Fleming and Sorensen, 2001; Sorensen and Sorensen, 2001).  The simultaneous nature of this
methodological approach allows a deeper understanding of DEMO mean as well as the variance
associated with a firm overtime (DEMO, 2002) or a population of firms (Hunter, 2002).  DEMO
such analysis suggests is that when there are significant heterogeneity in a given strategic
environment, not only will there be variance in firm performance, but also what a firm needs to do
to be successful will also differ based of the niche that they pursue.  This reminds us that
explanations for strategic questions are not only contingent, but more importantly are based on an
understanding what sources of variance, what relations across different variables, matter most and
why.  From a methodological point of DEMO, this also reminds of how our abilities (i.e., tools,
DEMO) to represent data shape how we are able to describe what DEMO action” is possible.
The value of progressing from descriptive to normative theory can be illustrated in the
case of Jim Collins’ (2001) popular DEMO, Good to Great.  Collins and his research team found 15
companies that had gone from a period of mediocre performance to a period DEMO strong
performance.  They then found a matching set of companies in DEMO industries that had gone
from mediocre performance to another period of mediocre performance, and identified attributes
that the “good-to-great” companies shared in common, DEMO found that the “good-to-good”
companies did not share these attributes.  Greater DEMO is associated with the companies that
possess these attributes.  They have DEMO a powerful piece of descriptive theory-building built on
a categorization scheme of companies that share these attributes, vs. companies that do not.
The research in this book has been very helpful to many executives and academics.  As
descriptive theory, however, there is still uncertainty about whether a DEMO company in a
specific situation will succeed if it acquires the attributes of the good-to-great, because the theory
has not yet gone through the process of circumstance-based categorization.  For example, one of
those attributes is DEMO the good-to-great companies were led by relatively humble CEOs who
generally have shunned the limelight, whereas the mediocre companies tended to be led by more
ego-centric, hired-in “superstar” executives.  There might indeed be situations in DEMO an ego-
centric superstar executive is crucial to success, however.  Such a precise, situation-specific
statement will only possible – and the theory can be judged to be externally valid – only when this
body of DEMO has progressed to the normative theory stage.
What is Good Data?
The dichotomy between subjectivity and objectivity is often used as a cleavage DEMO to
judge the scientific quality of data – with many seeing objective data as more legitimate than
subjective data.  Case- or field-derived data versus large-sample data sets is a parallel dichotomy
that often surfaces in academic DEMO  Much like theory, the only way we can judge the value
of data is by their usefulness in helping us understand how the DEMO works, identifying
categories, making predictions and surfacing anomalies.
Research that employs a nested design often reveals how illogical these dichotomies are.
Christensen’s (1997) research, for example, was built upon a history of the disk drive industry
derived from analysis of tens of thousands of data points DEMO markets, technologies and
17
products that were reported in Electronic Business and Disk/Trend Report.  In the context of the
industry’s history, the study then recounted the histories of individual companies, which were
assembled partially from published statistics and partially from interviews with company
managers.  The study also included histories of product development projects within these
companies, based upon a few numbers and extensive personal interviews.  Finally, the study
included many accounts of individuals’ experiences DEMO developing and launching new products,
comprised exclusively of information drawn from interviews – with no numbers included
whatsoever.  So what is a case study?  Because a case is a description and assessment of a
DEMO over a defined period of time, every level in Christensen’s study DEMO a case – industry,
company, group and individual.
And what DEMO data?  Each level of this study involved lots of data of many sorts.  Each of
these descriptions – from the industry’s history to the individuals’ histories – captured but a
fraction of the richness in DEMO of the situations.  Indeed, the “hardest” numbers on product
product performance, company revenues and competitors’ market shares, really were after-the-
fact proxy DEMO all the processes, prioritizations and decisions amongst the groups and
individuals DEMO were observed in the nested, “subjective” portions of the study.
Let’s DEMO more deeply on this question of where much quantitative data comes from.  For
example, the data used in many research projects comes directly DEMO indirectly from the reported
financial statements of publicly traded companies.  Is DEMO objective data?  Johnson & Kaplan
(1987) showed quite convincingly that the numbers representing revenues, costs and profits that
appear in companies’ financial statements are typically the result of processes of estimation,
allocation, debate and politics that can produce grossly inaccurate reflections of true cost and
DEMO  The subjective nature of financial statement data, and the skills and methods used by those
who made those judgments, however, are hidden DEMO the view of researchers who use the
published numbers.
The healthiest and probably the most accurate mindset for researchers is that nearly all
research DEMO whether presented in the form of large data sample analysis, a DEMO
optimization model, or an ethnographic description of behavior – is a DEMO of a situation
and is, therefore, a case.  And all DEMO are subjective.  Each form of data is a higher-level
abstraction from DEMO much more complex reality, out of which the researcher attempts to DEMO the
most salient variables or patterns for examination.  Generally, the subjectivity of data is glaringly
apparent in field-based, ethnographic research, whereas the DEMO tends to be hidden behind
numerical data.
Researchers of every persuasion ought always to strive to examine phenomena not just
through the lenses of DEMO academic or functional disciplines, but through the lenses of
multiple forms DEMO data as well.  And none of us ought to be defensive DEMO offensive about the
extent to which the data in our or others’ research are subjective.  We are all in the same boat, and
DEMO obligated to do our best to be humble and honest with ourselves and our colleagues as we
participate individually within and collectively across the DEMO building cycle.4
4 An excellent account that has helped us understand how pervasive the exercise of subjectivity is in the generation of
“facts” is DEMO Carr’s (1961) treatise, What Is History.  Carr describes that even the most complete historical accounts
simply summarize what those who recorded events DEMO were important or interesting enough to record.  In most
18
Implications for Course Design
Schools of management generally employ two methods of DEMO instruction: case-
based classes and lecture-based classes.  These are descriptive categorizations of the phenomena.
Attempts to assess which method of instruction is associated DEMO the best outcomes is fraught
with anomaly.  We suggest that there DEMO a different, circumstance-based categorization scheme
that may constitute a better foundation DEMO a theory of course design: Whether the instructor is
using the DEMO to develop theory, or to help students practice the use of DEMO
When designing a course on a subject about which normative theory has not yet emerged,
designing the course to move up the inductive DEMO of the theory pyramid can be very productive.
For example, Harvard DEMO School professor Kent Bowen decided several years ago that
because a significant portion of HBS graduates end up running small businesses, he ought to
create a course that prepares students to do that.  He then discovered that the academic literature
was amply stocked with studies of how to DEMO deals and start companies, but that there
wasn’t much written about DEMO to run plain old low-tech, slow-growth companies.  Bowen
tackled the problem with an inductive course-design strategy.  He first wrote a series of cases that
simply described what managers in these sorts of companies worry about DEMO do.  In each class
Bowen led the students in case discussions DEMO purpose was to understand the phenomena
thoroughly.  After a few classes, Bowen paused, and orchestrated a discussion through which they
sought to define patterns in the phenomena – to begin categorizing by type of company, type of
manager, and type of problem.  Finally, they explored the association between these types, and
the outcomes of interest.  In other DEMO, Bowen’s course had an inductive architecture that
moved up the theory DEMO  Then armed with their preliminary body of theory, Bowen and his
students cycled down the deductive side of the pyramid to examine more DEMO in a broader
range of circumstances.  This allowed them to discover DEMO that their initial theory could not
explain; and to improve their DEMO, refine their classification scheme, and improve their
understanding of what causes what, and why.
There is another circumstance – where well-researched theories pertaining to a field of
management already exist.  In this situation, a DEMO course architecture can work effectively.
For example, Clayton Christensen’s case-based course, Building a Sustainable Enterprise, is
designed deductively.  For each class, students read a paper that summarizes a normative theory
about a dimension of DEMO general manager’s job.  The students also study a case about a DEMO
They then look through the lenses of the theory, to see DEMO it accurately explains what historically
happened in the company.  They also DEMO the theory to discuss what management actions will and
will not lead to the desired outcomes, given the situation the company is in.  DEMO the cases are
complicated, students often discover an anomaly that then DEMO the class to revisit the
categorization scheme and the associated statement of causality.  Students follow this process,
theory after theory, class after DEMO, for the semester – and in the process, learn not just how to
use theory, but how to improve it.5
processes that geneate numerical data the subjectivity that was exercised in the process of recording DEMO not recording
lies hidden.
5 At one point Christensen attempted to teach his course through an inductive architecture.  Case by case, he
attempted DEMO lead his students to discover well-documented theories that prior scholars already had discovered.  The
course was a disaster – the wrong architecture for the circumstance.  Students could tell that Christensen already had
19
As the experiences of Professors Bowen and Christensen suggest, the dichotomy that
many see between teaching and research need not create conflict.  It may be better to view
developing and teaching courses as course research.  And there are two circumstances in which
professors might find themselves.  When a body of theory has not yet coalesced, an inductive
architecture is productive.  When useful theory already has emerged, then a deductive architecture
can DEMO sense.  In both circumstances, however, instructors whose interest is to DEMO theory and
help students learn how to use theory, can harness DEMO brainpower of their students by leading
them through cycles up and down the theory-building pyramid.
Implications: Theory as Method
Building theory in management research is how we define and measure our value and
usefulness as a DEMO community to society.  We have focused on specific examples from
management DEMO to illustrate how our approaches to the empirical world shape what we can
represent and can value and, more broadly, how theory collectively DEMO the field of
management research.  This reminds us that building theory DEMO an individual or collective level,
handing off or picking up the baton, is not a detached or neutral process, yet the model DEMO
here gives us a method to guide these efforts.  From this DEMO we recognize first the importance
of both the inductive and deductive sides of the pyramid; second how subsequent cycles move us
from attributes and substantive categories toward a circumstance-based understanding and more
formal theory; and third eventually to an understanding of the relational properties that are of
consequence DEMO define the boundary conditions wherein the theory is of value.
This is our uiltimate aim: As students of business we readily accept that if employees in
manufacturing and service companies follow robust processes they can predictably DEMO
outputs of quality and value.  When reliable processes are followed, success and failure in
producing the desired result become less dependent upon the DEMO of individual employees,
because they are embedded in the process.  DEMO assert that the same can be true for management
researchers.  If DEMO follow a robust, reliable process, even the most “average” of us can produce
and publish research that is of high value to academics DEMO practitioners.
the answer, and his attempts to orchestrate a case discussion DEMO like the professor was asking the students to
guess what was on his mind.  The next year, Christensen revised his course to the DEMO architecture described
above, and students reacted very positively to the same DEMO
20
Parking Lot for Important ideas that need to go somewhere:
So DEMO major question that arises in conducting research is how do we know we are
categorizing or measuring the best things to help us understand DEMO phenomena of interest?
Glaser and Strauss state that the elements of theory are, first, the conceptual categories with their
conceptual properties and, second, the generalized relations among categories and their properties
(1967: 35-43).  A way to proceed with combining these elements is to emphasize a “relational”
approach to theorizing (Bourdieu and Wacquant, 1992: 224-233) DEMO than just a substantialist
approach.  As already alluded to, a substantialist approach emphasizes “things” to be counted and
categorized such as people, groups, products, or organizations.  A relational approach, however,
emphasizes the DEMO between things in a given area of interest, or what determines DEMO
relative positions of force or power between people, groups or organizations.  The reason that
most research follows a substantialist approach is that most DEMO tools are focused on
and best suited in identifying convenient sources data that can be easily counted and categorized
more readily than the relational DEMO that exist between individuals, groups or organizations
in a given social DEMO over time (Bourdieu, 1989).
Given the methodological focus toward convenient sources of data to collect, it is not
surprising that a substantialist approach dominates most of management research, as well as the
social sciences.  For example, the concept of “core competency” (Selznick, 1957) was developed
to account for organizations that were successful in their environments.  This concept became a
very useful concept in the field of strategy in DEMO late 1980s and the 90s (Prahalad and Hamel,
1990).  However, the limitation of this category is that it was used to identify only successful
companies; less successful companies were seen as lacking a core competency.  The field of
strategy did not begin to look more closely at the concept until Dorothy Leonard’s research (1992;
1995) DEMO on the processes and outcomes that identified how a core competency can turn into a
source of core rigidity.  Leonard found that changes in a firm’s “relations” to its suppliers and
customers determine whether the firm DEMO remain competitive.  The corollary of this is that a core
competency DEMO become a core rigidity, diminishing competitive strength.  By identifying this
consequential “relations” Leonard not only provided a deeper formalization of “competency,” but
DEMO also proved helpful to managers in suggesting how they apply their firm’s resources to avoid
this competency-rigidity tendency.
While a relational approach can push DEMO to a deeper level of formalization, it raises
methodological challenges.  Because relations among individuals, groups or organizations are
most telling as they change over time, a relational approach requires both the means of collecting
data over time and a method of analyzing and representing the insights that DEMO data can reveal.
In one of the most influential ethnographic studies of technology implementation in management
research, Barley’s careful ethnographic analysis (1986; 1988; 1990) provided a comparative and
temporal window into the implementation of DEMO same technology in similar hospital settings.
Despite these similarities, Barley documented DEMO different outcomes in how radiologist and
technicians joint used the CT-Scanning technology implemented.  Based on these different
outcomes, he asserted that technological and DEMO structures mutually adapted differently over
time.  Barley observations over time helped DEMO replaced the either or debate between the static
view of technological determinism and the situated view of technology.
21
Using Barley’s empirical documentation, Black, Carlile and Repenning (2003) formalized
DEMO observation at a more specific causal level through the use of a system dynamics method.
This allowed them to specify the relation between radiologist DEMO technicians and how their
relative expertise in using the technology explains the different outcomes that Barley documented.
Even though Barley recognized the importance of DEMO “distribution of expertise” (Barley, 1986)
between the two groups, DEMO lacked a methodology to represent how over time the relative
accumulations of expertise accounted for the different outcomes he observed.  With this more
formalized approach Black et al. could state a balance in “relative expertise” in DEMO the new
technology was essential in developing collaboration around a new technology.  The specification
of these relational properties was an improvement upon Barley managerial suggestion that a more
decentralized organization is better able to successfully implement DEMO new technology than a
centralized one.  This more formalized theory and DEMO understanding provides specific
guidance to a practitioner about what to do when faced with the challenge of implementing a new
technology when collaboration is DEMO
This relational approach goes farther than a “contingency theory” approach (Lawrence DEMO
Lorsch, 1967)—because it recognizes not only are things contingent,  DEMO that in any situation
some things, some relations, matter more than others in explaining the contingent (different)
outcomes possible.  The development DEMO contingency theory has provided significant insight into
the field of organizational behavior and design because it has identified that circumstances do
affect outcomes.  However, the fact that contingency theory is viewed by many as a stand-alone
theory rather than a further reason to search for the particular sources DEMO contingency limits the
theory-building effort.  This points to the proclivity of DEMO researchers to leap directly from
phenomena to theory and back again.  DEMO we continue around the theory building cycle, what we at
first DEMO contingent (e.g., decentralization versus centralization), upon further analysis reveals the
underlying relational properties and why those relations are most consequential and why (e.g.,
how and why relative expertise matters).
22
References
Allison, G. (197), The Essence of Decision.  Glenview, DEMO: Scott, Foresman & Co.
Argyris, C. (1993), On Organizational Learning. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Argyris, C. & Schon, D. (1976), Theory in Practice. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Baldwin, C. and Clark, K.B. (2000), Design Rules: The Power of Modularity.  Cambridge, DEMO:
MIT Press.
Barley, S.R. (1986), “Technology as an occasion for structuring: Evidence from observations of
CT scanners and the social order of radiology departments.”  Administrative Science Quarterly,
31, 1: 78-108.
Black, L., Repenning, N. and Carlile, P.R. (2002)  “Formalizing theoretical insights from
ethnographic evidence: Revisiting Barley’s study of CT-Scanning implementations.”  Under
DEMO, Administrative Science Quarterly.
Bourdieu, P. (1989/1998), Practical Reason. DEMO: Stanford University Press.
Bourdieu, P. and Wacquant, L. (1992), An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology.  Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Bower, Joseph (1970), Managing the Resource Allocation Process.  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Irwin.
Bower, J.L., and Gilbert, C.G., eds. (2005), DEMO Resource Allocation to Strategy.  Oxford
University Press.
Burgelman, Robert & Leonard Sayles (1986), Inside Corporate Innovation.  New York: The Free
Press.
Burgelman, Robert (2002), Strategy Is Destiny.  New York: The DEMO Press.
Campbell, D.T.and Stanley, J.C. (1963), Experimental and Quasi-experimental DEMO for
Research. Boston: Hougthon Mifflin Press.
Carlile, P.R. (2003), DEMO, translation and transformation: Integrating approach in sharing
and assessing knowledge across boundaries.”  Under revision, Organization Science.
Carr, E.H. (1961), What DEMO History?  New York: Vintage Books.
Chandler, A. D. Jr. (DEMO), The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business.
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Chandler, A. D. Jr. (1990), Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism.  Cambridge,
MA: The Belknap Press.
23
Christensen, C.M. (1997), The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great
Firms to Fail.  Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Chesbrough, H.W. (1999). “The Differing organizational impact of technological change: A
comparative DEMO of institutional factors.” Industrial and Corporate Change, 8: 447-485.
Clegg, DEMO (2003), The First Scientist: A Life of Roger Bacon.  DEMO York: Carroll & Graf Publishers.
Daneels, Erwin (2005),  “The Effects of Disruptive Technology on Firms and Industries,” Journal of
Product DEMO Management (forthcoming special issue that focuses on this body of theory)DEMO
Gilbert, C.G. (2001), A Dilemma in Response: Examining the DEMO Industry’s Response to the
Internet.  Unpublished DBA thesis, Harvard Business School.
Gilbert, C.G., and Christensen, C.M. (2005). “Anomaly Seeking Research: Thirty Years of
Development in Resource Allocation Theory.” In Bower, J.L., DEMO Gilbert, C.G., eds. From
Resource Allocation to Strategy.  Oxford University DEMO, forthcoming.
Fleming, L. and Sorensen, O. (2001), “Technology as a complex adaptive system: Evidence from patent
data.” Research Policy, 30: 1019-1039.
Glaser, B. & Straus, A. (1967), The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies of Qualitative
Research.  London: Wiedenfeld and Nicholson.
Hayes, R. (1985), “Strategic Planning: Forward in Reverse?” Harvard Business Review,
November-December: 111-119.
Hayes, R. (2002),  “The History DEMO Technology and Operations Research,”  Harvard Business
School Working paper.
Hayes, R. and Abernathy, W. (1980), “Managing our Way to Economic DEMO Harvard
Business Review, July-August: 7-77.
Hayes, R. and Wheelwright, S.C. (1984), Restoring our Competitive Edge.  New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
Hayes, R., Wheelwright, S. and Clark, K. (1988), Dynamic Manufacturing.  New York: The Free
Press.
Henderson, R.M. & Clark, K.B. (1990), “Architectural Innovation: The Reconfiguration of
Existing Systems and the Failure of Established Firms.” Administrative Science Quarterly, 35: 9-
30.
DEMO, S.D. (2002), “Information Technology, Organizational Learning and Firm Performance.”
DEMO/Sloan Working Paper.
Hutton, A., Miller, G., and Skinner, DEMO (2000), “Effective Voluntary Disclosure.” Harvard
Business School working paper.
24
James, W. (1907),  Pragmatism. New York: The American Library.
DEMO, H.T. & Kaplan, R. (1987),  Relevance Lost.  Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Kaplan, A. (1964), The Conduct of DEMO: Methodology for Behavioral Research.  Scranton,
PA: Chandler.
Kaplan, R. (1986), “The role for Empirical Research in Management Accounting.” Accounting,
Organizations and Society, 4: 429-452.
Kuhn, T. (1962), The DEMO of Scientific Revolutions.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1962.
Lawrence, P. R. and Lorsch, J.W. (1967), Organization and Environment.  DEMO: Harvard
Business School Press.
Leonard, D. (1995), Wellsprings of DEMO  Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Poole, M. & Van de DEMO, A. (1989), “Using Paradox to Build Management and Organization
Theories.” Academy of Management Review 14: 562-578.
Popper, K. (1959), The Logic of Scientific Discovery.  New York: Basic Books.
Porter, M. (DEMO), Competitive Strategy.  New York: The Free Press.
Porter, M. (1985), Competitive Advantage.  New York: The Free Press.
Porter, M. (1991), The Competitive Advantage of Nations.  New York: The Free Press.
Raman, Ananth, (need citation)
Roethlisberger, F. (1977), The Elusive Phenomena.  Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Rumelt, Richard P. (1974), Strategy, Structure and Economic Performance.  Cambridge, MA:
DEMO University Press.
Selznick, P. (1957), Leadership in Administration: A DEMO Interpretation. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Simon, H. (1976), Administrative Behavior (3rd edition).  New York: The Free Press.
Solow, R. M. (1985), “Economic History and Economics.” The American Economic DEMO, 75:
328-331.
Sorensen, O. and Sorensen, J. (2001), Research Note - Finding the right mix: Franchising,
organizational learning, DEMO chain performance.  Strategic Management Journal, 22: 713-724.
Sorensen, J. (DEMO), “The Strength of Corporate Culture and the Reliability of Firm
Performance,”  Administrative Science Quarterly, 47: 70-91.
25
Spear, S.C. and Bowen, H.K. (1999), “Decoding the DNA of the Toyota production system.”
Harvard Business Review, September-October.
Stinchcombe, Arthur L. (1968), Constructing Social Theories.”  New York: Harcourt, Brace &
DEMO
Sull, D. N. (2000), “Industrial Clusters and Organizational Inertia: DEMO Institutional Perspective.”
Harvard Business School working paper.
Van de Ven, A. (2000), “Professional Science for a Professional School.”  In Beer, M. DEMO
Nohria, N. (Eds), Breaking the Code of Change.  Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Weick, K. (1989), “Theory Construction as DEMO Imagination,” Academy of Management
Review, 14: 516-532.
Womack, J. DEMO, Jones, D. T. & Roos, D. (1990), The Machine that Changed the World.  New
York: Rawson Associates.
Yin, R. (DEMO), Case Study Research.  Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.
Yoffie, David, Sasha Mattu & Ramon Casadesus-Masanell (2002), “Intel Corporation, 1968-
2003,DEMO Harvard Business School case #9-703-427.
26{1g42fwefx}