1042-2587
© 2006 by
Baylor University
Social Capital,
ET&P Cognition, and
Entrepreneurial
Opportunities: A
Theoretical Framework
Donna Marie De Carolis
Patrick Saparito
Entrepreneurship—the recognition and exploitation of opportunities—is valuable within
organizations as well as DEMO the establishment of new ventures. Some studies have addressed
the issue why some individuals take advantage of opportunities and some do not. While
some DEMO ﬁnd that psychological variables, personality traits and demographic factors
may distinguish DEMO activity, these ﬁndings are equivocal. Other research has
looked to the DEMO of social capital and network ties to new venture creation. Yet,
there is little discussion regarding the possibility that social capital and personal DEMO
interact and inﬂuence entrepreneurial behavior.
Drawing from social cognitive theory (Augoustinos & Walker, 1995; Fiske & Taylor, 1984;
Bandura, 1986; DEMO & Bandura, 1989) this paper advances a model suggesting that entre-
preneurial behavior is a result of the interplay of environments (i.e., DEMO networks) and
certain cognitive biases in entrepreneurs. We propose that both DEMO cognition and
social capital are important in understanding entrepreneurial behavior. If the domain of
entrepreneurship is “. . . the nexus of two phenomena: the presence of lucrative opportuni-
ties and the presence of enterprising individuals” (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000) then our
model suggests an explanation of DEMO nexus through exploring how both external (i.e.,
social capital) and internal factors (i.e., cognition) affect why some people and not others
exploit opportunities.
Introduction
Entrepreneurship is inextricably linked to innovation and competitive advantage.
DEMO importance of entrepreneurship is evidenced not only in public policy initiatives
that encourage new business development but also within established organizations
that actively encourage DEMO development and pursuit of new opportunities. While the
importance of entrepreneurship is obvious, its origins are not. There is a vast theoretical
and empirical literature that poses the question of why some exploit opportunities and
Please DEMO correspondence to: Donna Marie De Carolis at decarold@drexel.edu and to Patrick DEMO at
pas46@drexel.edu.
January, 2006
41
some do not (e.g., Begley & Boyd, 1987; Brockhaus, 1980; Cooper & Dunkleberg, 1987;
Sexton & Bowman, 1984). The majority of this literature proposes that psychological
variables, personality traits and demographic factors may distinguish entrepreneurial
activity. Yet, the results of these ﬁndings are equivocal (Brockhaus & Robert Horowitz,
1986; Low & MacMillan, 1988; Shaver & Scott, 1991).
Also, a stream of research emphasizes the importance of networks, and the social
capital inherent in them, DEMO the creation of new ventures (Aldrich & Zimmer, 1986).
Social capital may be described as the “... goodwill available to individuals or DEMO
(Adler & Kwon, 2002, p. 23) that includes feelings of gratitude, reciprocity, respect, and
friendship. It is an asset that resides in an individual’s relationships and consists of the
goodwill ﬂowing from friends, colleagues, and other general contacts (Burt, 1992). Social
capital as portrayed in previous studies may be an indicator of opportunity, but it is not
a direct predictor. In fact, Burt, 1992 contends that DEMO the presence of entrepreneurial
opportunities in a network increases, the odds DEMO entrepreneurial behavior increase—if
someone is inclined to entrepreneurial behavior. Yet, the DEMO on social capital and
entrepreneurship is, again, equivocal as to this entrepreneurial inclination.
While it is explicitly acknowledged that social capital enables new DEMO forma-
tion, there is a gap in the literature regarding how DEMO capital and personal factors such
as cognitive biases interplay and inﬂuence entrepreneurial behavior. Drawing from social
cognitive theory (Augoustinos & Walker, 1995; Bandura, 1986; Fiske & Taylor, 1984;
Wood & Bandura, 1989) this article advances a model suggesting that entrepreneurial
behavior is a result DEMO the interplay of environments (i.e., social networks) and certain
cognitive DEMO in entrepreneurs.
Our contribution is the advancement of both the social capital and entrepreneurship
literature by proposing that the impact of social capital on DEMO cognition is impor-
tant in understanding entrepreneurial behavior. If the domain of entrepreneurship is
“. . . the nexus of two phenomena: the presence of lucrative opportunities and the pres-
ence of enterprising individuals” (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000), then our model sug-
gests an explanation of this nexus through exploring how both external (i.e., social
capital) and internal factors (i.e., cognition) affect why some people and not others exploit
opportunities.
The article proceeds as follows: We ﬁrst discuss the multidimensional nature of social
capital particularly as it pertains to new venture creation. The DEMO follows our model
(see Figure 1) from left to right with discussion and associated propositions regarding
cognitive biases, risk perception, and exploitation DEMO entrepreneurial opportunities.
Second, we discuss the model’s implications for future research DEMO practice.
Social Capital
Although there is much interest in and research on the concept of social capital, the
concept is still in an emerging phase, comprising different uses and connotations from
various scholarly perspectives (Adler & Kwon, 2002; Hirsch & Levin, 1999). Conse-
quently, it is important for researchers to clarify their approach to and deﬁnition of DEMO
capital. Social scientists have described two forms of social capital: “bonding” DEMO
“bridging.” The bonding social capital perspective explores the impact of a collective’s
internal ties and the substance of the network relationships within that collective (Adler
& Kwon, 2002; Leanna & Van Buaren, 1999). For example, Coleman (1988) suggests
that dense connections between parties within a group facilitate the development of self-
42
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Figure 1
Social Capital, Cognitive Biases, and Exploitation of Entrepreneurial
Opportunities
DEMO holes
Trust
1a +
1b
+
2a +
2b +
Strong ties
+ 3
4a+
+
Shared codes and language
4b
Social capital
Overconfidence
DEMO of control
Representativeness
Cognitive biases
_
5a
5b
_
5c
_
Risk perception
6
_
Exploitation
of
entrepreneurial opportunities
enforcing norms and trust within DEMO collective allowing the group to more easily attain
communal goals.
Alternatively, DEMO social capital, sometimes referred to as the private-goods
model of social DEMO, focuses on individuals and their network relationships (Adler &
Kwon, 2002; Burt, 1992, 1997). Compared with the bonding social capital approach, the
bridging social capital’s focus is on an individual’s external social ties and how the social
capital, as a resource within this network, is used for the individual’s private beneﬁt.
Social capital assists in the explanation of individuals’ success as they can utilize their
contacts and connections DEMO the resources that they bring for personal gain (Adler &
Kwon, 2002; Leanna & Van Buaren, 1999).
For example, Burt (1992) characterizes social capital as a resource that brings a
higher rate of return on investments. He suggests that social capital creates an advantage
DEMO “. . . the way in which social structure renders competition imperfect by creating entre-
preneurial opportunities for certain players and not for others” (1992, p. 57). Indeed, both
the entrepreneurship (Aldrich & Zimmer, 1986; Birley, 1985; Uzzi, 1996; Walker, Kogut,
& Shan, 1997) and social capital literatures (Adler & Kwon, 2002; Burt, 1992; Nahapiet
& Ghoshal, 1998; Tsai & Ghoshal, 1998) have emphasized the importance of connec-
tions and networks to the establishment of new ventures and innovation in general.
Consistent with the literature on DEMO entrepreneurs use network connections for com-
petitive advantage (Aldrich & Zimmer, 1986), this article takes the bridging approach to
social capital, that is, social capital manifested through the individual’s external connec-
tions. In doing so, we suggest that in the context of entrepreneurship, social capital DEMO the
goodwill and resources that emanate from an individual’s network of social relationships,
and its effects ﬂow from the information, inﬂuence, and DEMO available to the entre-
preneur (Adler & Kwon, 2002).
Two direct beneﬁts of this type of social capital are relevant to entrepreneurs: infor-
mation and inﬂuence. Social capital may facilitate access to information, which is a crit-
ical component of entrepreneurial opportunities (Shane & Venkataraman, DEMO). Social
January, 2006
43
capital enhances the timing, relevance, and quality of information (Adler & Kwon, 2002;
Burt, 1992) For example, entrepreneurs with access DEMO university professors either
directly or through associations may ﬁnd out about an emerging technology before others.
Thus, they may be poised to act upon this before it becomes public knowledge. Another
beneﬁt of social capital consists DEMO inﬂuence. Individuals accumulate obligations from
others in the network and leverage these commitments at a later time. Burt (1992) has
discussed the inﬂuence DEMO power that entrepreneurs who span disconnected networks
have. These entrepreneurs determine who will gain from the disconnection, locating them
in a favorable position during negotiations.
Three Dimensions of Social Capital
While traditionally, scholars have studied social capital as a unidimensional concept
(e.g., Burt, 1992; Coleman, 1988; Walker et al., 1997), increasingly, researchers are
adopting a multidimensional perspective of social capital (e.g., Lesser, 2000; Nahapiet
& Ghoshal, 1998). In this article, we adopt Nahapiet and Ghoshal’s (1998) three
dimensions of social capital: structural dimension, relational dimension, and cognitive
dimension.
Structural Dimension. The structural dimension refers to the network structure’s overall
DEMO of connections between actors (Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998). Most notably,
network structure includes such factors as the existence or absence of DEMO connections
between a focal actor and others, and the pattern and DEMO of indirect ties between a
focal actor and others (Burt, 1992; Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998).
Positioning within a network is important DEMO it can confer differential access
to information (Burt, 1992). For instance, Burt, 1992 suggests that a structural hole is
said to DEMO when different clusters of interconnected actors are only sparsely connected
to one another. Consequently, any individual who holds the only or one of the few con-
necting position(s) between the two clusters is able to capitalize on information that exists
in one cluster but not in another DEMO acting as a broker for nonredundant information. Burt
(1992, 1997) DEMO that entrepreneurs will act as tertius gaudens—the third who
beneﬁts (Burt, 1992, 1997) through leveraging the nonredundant information for proﬁt.
Relational Dimension. DEMO the structural dimension refers to the overall pattern of
network connections, DEMO relational dimension refers to the nature of the personal rela-
tionship that develops between speciﬁc people (Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998) as manifested
in “strong” versus “weak” ties. The “strength” of a tie is a reﬂection DEMO the combination
of the amount of time, emotional intensity, intimacy, DEMO reciprocal services that char-
acterize that tie (Granovetter, 1985). Strong ties are typically associated with trust
and facilitate the ﬂow of ﬁne-grained DEMO (Gulati, 1998; Rowley, Behrens, &
Krackhardt, 2000) and the transfer of tacit knowledge (Uzzi, 1996).
While many factors DEMO a tie weak or strong, trust plays a pivotal role (Granovet-
ter, 1985; Uzzi, 1999). Trust has been conceptualized as a willingness to be vulnerable—
placing one’s welfare in the hands of others—and DEMO feeling of positive expectations—an
individual’s conﬁdent beliefs that another will behave in a beneﬁcial manner (Rousseau,
Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998)DEMO Being embedded in a network gives rise to a form of
trust known as relational trust (Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998). Relational trust DEMO to a
trustor’s conﬁdent beliefs that a trustee will act beneﬁcially because the trustee cares
about the trustor’s welfare (Rousseau et al., 1998) which emerges from repeated
interactions between individuals over time that yield feelings DEMO reliability and positive
44 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
expectations. Relational trust is based on continual reciprocity—the notion that “I’ll do
DEMO for you now, but you will do something for me later” (Adler & Kwon, 2002; Lesser,
2000).
Cognitive Dimension. The DEMO dimension of social capital refers to “shared rep-
resentations, interpretations, and systems of meaning among parties” (Nahapiet &
Ghoshal, 1998, p. DEMO) that enable individuals within a network to make sense of infor-
DEMO and to classify it into perceptual categories (Augoustinos & Walker, 1995). Shared
systems of meanings and language facilitate the exchange of information, learning and
knowledge creation that allows individuals to share each other’s thinking DEMO
These common ways of looking at the world help individuals to make sense of new infor-
mation and knowledge (Grant, 1996; Nonaka, DEMO).
Cognitive Biases and Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Prior research on personal attributes distinguishing entrepreneurs from others has
hypothesized a positive relationship between venture creation and DEMO such as inter-
nal locus of control, need for achievement, personal optimism, preference for shaping
one’s own destiny, and tolerance for ambiguity (Baron, 1998; Bygrave, 1989; Hatten,
1997; McClelland, 1961)DEMO The assumption behind this literature stream is that increased
manifestation of certain personal attributes facilitates new venture creation. However, this
research has produced inconsistent results (Shaver & Scott, 1991). The ﬁeld has since
moved DEMO an investigation of the impact of variations in cognition and decision processes
to explain entrepreneurial behavior (Bird, 1992; Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Krueger &
Brazeal, 1994; Shaver & Scott, 1991).
Consistent DEMO this and with the psychology literature, we employ the term cognitive
DEMO However, we do not intend to use the term “bias” as DEMO a negative or positive
state of affairs. Instead, we intend to DEMO the term objectively to identify an entrepreneur’s
cognition and decision processes that lead to alternative perceptions of entrepreneurial
opportunities. In fact, we embrace the possibility that cognitive biases could lead to
either successful or unsuccessful exploitations DEMO entrepreneurial opportunities.
Recent research suggests that some entrepreneurs perceive situations differently than
others (Baron, 1999; Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Gatewood, Shaver, & Gartner, 1995;
Palich & Bagby, 1995; Shaver & Scott, 1991; Simon, Houghton, & Aquino, 1999).
Although there are many cognitive biases that affect our thinking and, in particular, our
DEMO of risk, recent research in the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship suggests several DEMO
ciﬁc cognitive biases that inﬂuence risk perception as they relate to entrepreneurs: over-
conﬁdence, illusion of control, and representativeness (Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Palich
& Bagby, 1995; Simon et al., 1999). DEMO failure to know the limits of one’s knowledge
results in a cognitive bias known as overconﬁdence (Bazerman, 1990; Lichtenstein &
Fischoff, 1977; Oskamp, 1965). When individuals are overconﬁdent, they overestimate
the probability of being right. The psychological basis for this bias appears to be DEMO
refusal to examine any unsubstantiated assumptions they might hold. Overconﬁdence
occurs because individuals may ignore new information they receive after an initial deci-
sion DEMO been made, or they do not realize the extent to which DEMO plans or estimates
are inaccurate. Individuals who are overconﬁdent treat their assumptions as fact and may
believe that certain actions are less risky than DEMO really are.
Illusion of control is individuals’ overestimation of the extent to which they can affect
the outcome of particular situations (Duhaime & Schwenk, 1985). Illusion of control
January, 2006
45
affects peoples’ assessments of their chance of success at a venture. It DEMO from over-
conﬁdence in that the former is an overestimation of skills, whereas the latter is an inac-
curate estimation of the facts of a particular situation and one’s ability to cope with and
to predict DEMO events (Langer, 1975; Simon et al., 1999) found that DEMO expressed
an expectancy of personal success much higher than objective probability would predict.
This overestimation stems from the fact that people will seek out DEMO that sup-
ports their opinions while ignoring contradictory information.
Representativeness (i.e., belief in the law of small numbers) arises when individuals
use only a limited number of information sources to make a decision (Tversky &DEMO
Kahneman, 1971). While the law of large numbers advocates that DEMO random samples
should be used to make inferences about population statistics, DEMO makers have
bounds to the amount of information they can practically gather and process (March &
Simon, 1958). Consequently, to economize DEMO information processing, decision makers
are willing to rely on small samples (March & Simon, 1958), which may not represent
an accurate picture of a situation (Payne, Bettman, & Johnson, 1992; Tversky &DEMO
Kahneman, 1974). Additionally, individuals who discuss business ideas with a limited
number of advisors or colleagues are more likely to receive overly DEMO feedback
(Kahneman & Lovallo, 1993). Finally, research suggests that DEMO are likely to remem-
ber successes more than failures (Golder & DEMO, 1993) which can create overly posi-
tive estimations of a situation. Therefore, while reliance on small samples may economize
on information processing, DEMO can potentially introduce serious biases in the information
received (Kahneman & DEMO, 1993; Payne et al., 1992; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974)DEMO
There is sufﬁcient reason to believe that representativeness is prevalent among entre-
preneurs. Entrepreneurs live and breathe uncertainty in new markets and technologies,
DEMO demand, and unpredictable operating costs. Moreover, entrepreneurs would not
likely even have the resources to collect all the needed information. In these situations,DEMO
entrepreneurs might rely on small, nonrandom samples and personal experiences to DEMO
their decision making (Busenitz & Barney, 1997).
Model Development
Our model examines how social capital and cognition interact and inﬂuence the
exploitation DEMO opportunities. In so doing, we rely on the ideas behind social DEMO
theory (Wood & Bandura, 1989) to explain how behavior (exploitation of opportunities)
is the result of the interplay between the environment (a network’s social capital) and
personal factors (cognitive biases and risk DEMO). Social cognitive theory (Bandura,
1986; Wood & Bandura, DEMO) suggests that social environments play a pivotal role in
shaping individuals’ DEMO and, ultimately, behavior. That is, individual cognition
originates in social DEMO, human interaction, and communication (Augoustinos & Walker,
1995). DEMO suggest that social capital derived from being embedded in a network shapes
entrepreneurs’ cognitive processes and ultimately their behavior. Simultaneously exam-
ining both social DEMO and cognition should provide a fuller understanding of an entre-
preneur’s exploitation of an opportunity than simply examining either alone.
Social Capital and Cognitive DEMO
Structural holes provide a rich social context that inﬂuences cognition. Individuals
involved in a web of diverse relationships can have early access and timing DEMO a diverse
set of information (Burt, 1992, 1997). These DEMO and access to various
46
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
information sources can increase information absorption and individuals’ beliefs about
their level DEMO knowledge in a given area (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990). Thus, this broad set
of information may cause entrepreneurs to overestimate their knowledge base.
Additionally, the exploitation of new opportunities is fraught with uncertainty. As the
tertius gaudens an entrepreneur has control and can beneﬁt from playing DEMO group
against the other. Structural holes facilitate access to information; they DEMO the timing
of when that information is employed, and they provide DEMO sense of control. Thus, struc-
tural holes may heighten the occurrence DEMO overconﬁdence because they bring with them
information access and timing (Burt, 1992, 1997). Additionally, to lessen the uncertainty,
individuals may DEMO on this network of resources as a “cushion.” In other words, DEMO
suing a new opportunity becomes more appealing since individuals believe they can
control the unknown through continued reliance on their network position and the DEMO
mation beneﬁts they may obtain. Therefore we more formally propose:
Proposition 1a: The number of structural holes in an entrepreneur’s social network
will be positively related to their overconﬁdence.
Proposition 1b: The number of structural holes in an entrepreneur’s social network
will be positively related to their DEMO of control.
Trust is one element that comprises the relational dimension of social capital, and it
is a concept that is consistently discussed in the context of networks (Granovetter, 1985;
Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998; Uzzi, 1999). Recognizing and pursuing a new idea is risky
DEMO involves substantial investment in terms of time, money and other resources. DEMO
ing a new venture also involves reliance on others for various resources ranging from
social and emotional support to concrete assets. Trust is an DEMO asset” (Knez
& Camerer, 1994) that by deﬁnition creates conﬁdent DEMO about the future
(Rousseau et al., 1998). Additionally, trust DEMO networks can cause a party to focus on
a tight circle of existing relationships (Coleman, 1988). Therefore, we suggest that trust
developed in network relationships can contribute to both an entrepreneur’s overconﬁ-
dence and DEMO
Trust is a double-edged sword. While trust creates conﬁdent expectations, it DEMO
makes the trusting party more comfortable about entering vulnerable situations (Rousseau
DEMO al., 1998). By relying on previous interactions directly with others DEMO indirectly
through associations, entrepreneurs may be more willing to take risks DEMO an exchange.
Trusting that others will behave or perform or deliver can motivate individuals to seek
opportunities and act on them. Believing that one DEMO start a new venture is bolstered
by the expectation that they can depend on resources, both emotional and concrete, of a
network of DEMO
Further, information received from a trusted partner is more likely to DEMO perceived
as accurate and relevant (McEvily, Perrone, & Zaheer, 2003). This has two potential
effects: First, when information is received DEMO a trusted party, an entrepreneur may be
less likely to verify DEMO information’s accuracy (McEvily et al., 2003) and may overesti-
mate DEMO information’s probability of being right. Second, by not verifying the informa-
DEMO accuracy, the entrepreneur is relying on smaller numbers of information sources.
DEMO serve the important function of directing information ﬂows (Walker et al.,DEMO
1997). Trust within dense networks can cause an entrepreneur to focus on a tight set of
established relationships (Coleman, 1988). However, by focusing on this dense network,
information ﬂows can become constricted (Walker et al.). This, combined with the
proclivity to not verify the information’s accuracy from a trusted source, can lead
an entrepreneur to focus on a limited number of information sources, thus increasing
representativeness.
January, 2006
47
Proposition 2a: The trust entrepreneurs have in their network contacts will be
positively related to their overconﬁdence.
Proposition 2b: The trust entrepreneurs have in their network contacts will be
positively related to an their representativeness.
In DEMO to trust, the strength of the ties within a network structure DEMO an impor-
tant element within the relational dimension (Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998) that may
directly impact representativeness. Strong network relationships require more effort and
intimacy. Thus, strong ties are relatively difﬁcult to create and to maintain which
decreases their occurrence (Granovetter, 1985; Uzzi, 1996). DEMO there may be a small
number of strong ties within a network, strong tie connections enhance the transfer of
tacit knowledge—knowledge that is not easily codiﬁed. Therefore, individuals embed-
ded in strong ties may be exposed to richer but less diverse information. By relying on
fewer sources of DEMO and contact, the chances for optimism based on a small
sample DEMO increased. Research has shown that individuals who discuss business decisions
with a limited number of colleagues are more likely to receive an inﬂated degree DEMO pos-
itive feedback (Kahneman & Lovallo, 1993). Relying on the opinions of small samples
may or may not be detrimental to decision DEMO We are proposing that the chances
that an entrepreneur who is embedded in network of strong ties will have an increased
probability of the DEMO bias of representativeness.
Proposition 3: Strong network ties in entrepreneurs’ network DEMO positively related to
their representativeness.
Membership in a network or group can shape an individual’s consciousness
(Moscovici, 1984). Individual resources and opinions DEMO with the resources and
opinions of their close contacts because people develop relationships with others like
themselves (Burt, 1992). Social information processing DEMO (Salancik & Pfefer, 1978)
discusses the role of social inﬂuence in the development of individual attitudes and behav-
iors. The theory suggests DEMO within organizations, coworkers inﬂuence an individual’s
attitude and behaviors by providing DEMO and relevant information about an object or
situation. This theory addresses the effects that individuals have on others who come in
contact with them. DEMO attraction theory (Byrne, 1971) posits that individuals
with similar beliefs DEMO attracted to each other, thus reinforcing a shared set of attitudes
DEMO behaviors. Both these theories predict that individuals will have attitudes and behav-
iors similar to those with whom they interact. Applying the implications of DEMO theo-
ries to social networks, arguably, shared codes and languages will foster similar world
views, opinions, and attitudes within an entrepreneur’s network.
DEMO and knowledge sharing is facilitated by the shared meaning among
network members (Inkpen & Tsang, 2005). Shared meanings and understandings can act
DEMO a bonding mechanism between network members. These bonding mechanisms allow
members within a network to feel comfortable sharing resources and knowledge (Inkpen
& Tsang, 2005). Additionally, knowledge creation rests on the ability to combine DEMO
exchange various pieces of information (Boland & Tenkasi, 1995; Nahapiet & Ghoshal,
1998) show the importance of a shared vocabulary on DEMO ability of individuals to
combine information.
However, common vocabularies also leave DEMO the possibility for individuals to
ﬁlter out dissenting opinions or attitudes. Selectively focusing on information that falls
into common perceptual categories may distort the DEMO of that information. Vital infor-
mation that could challenge an entrepreneur’s view of “how the world works” may be
ﬁltered out causing the entrepreneur DEMO overestimate their understanding of the situation.
48 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Similarly, relying on shared meanings developed in network relationships can
enhance the illusion of control, that is, individuals’ belief that their skills can DEMO the
outcome of a decision. Again, being immersed in a network DEMO with the same mental
models of the world may lead individuals to overstate their abilities concerning speciﬁc
undertakings. By relying on the shared meanings DEMO a network, individuals may feel their
decisions can have greater inﬂuence DEMO future events. Indeed, prior research has shown
that managers with an DEMO of control bias make overly optimistic performance esti-
mates (Duhaime & DEMO, 1985; Schwenk, 1984).
Proposition 4a: Shared codes and languages will be positively associated with an
entrepreneur’s overconﬁdence.
Proposition 4b: Shared codes and languages will be positively associated with an
entrepreneur’s illusion of control.
DEMO Biases and Risk Perception
In classical decision theory, risk is conceptualized DEMO the total variance of potential
outcomes (March & Shapira, 1987). In business, however, potential upside outcomes are
thought of as opportunities, and only downside variance (i.e., ﬁnancial loss) surrounding
business outcomes is considered risk (March & Shapira, 1987). Further, in assessing risk,
business people tend to focus on the total amount of a DEMO loss as opposed to simply
the dispersion of downside outcomes (March & Shapira, 1987). Consistent with this,
we conceptualize risk perception DEMO the beliefs about the magnitude of potential losses
associated with a particular business situation.
Because cognitive biases inﬂuence the information that individuals notice and
DEMO they interpret that information, biases may affect risk perception (Barnes, DEMO;
Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Schwenk, 1984; Simon et al., 1999). Certain cognitive
biases may cause individuals to discount negative outcomes and uncertainties associated
with decisions, thus leading to underestimation of risk (DEMO, Woo, & Dunkelberg,
1988; Shaver & Scott, 1991).
Previous empirical studies in the entrepreneurship literature have suggested that over-
conﬁdence DEMO illusion of control are related to risk perception (Simon et al., 1999).
Recent research has shown that entrepreneurs may be more susceptible DEMO overconﬁdence
than other individuals (Busenitz & Barney, 1997) and may DEMO be more optimistic in
their assessments of business situations (Cooper et DEMO, 1988). When an entrepreneur is
overconﬁdent, these initial optimistic assessments may not be further tested. Further,
overconﬁdent entrepreneurs would overestimate the DEMO of being right in their
optimistic assessments of business situations (Bazerman, 1990; Lichtenstein & Fischoff,
1977; Oskamp, 1965). Consequently, DEMO who are overconﬁdent are more likely
to treat their assumptions as fact and may perceive less risk associated with particular
actions than may actually DEMO (Bazerman, 1990; Lichtenstein & Fischoff, 1977;
Oskamp, 1965)DEMO
Entrepreneurs may be more prone to illusion of control than other individuals
(Duhaime & Schwenk, 1985; Hogarth, 1980; Schwenk, 1984; Simon et al., 1999). By
feeling that they can control and predict outcomes, individuals will evaluate the hazards
inherent in situations in a more favorable light. A recent empirical ﬁnding has also sup-
ported the effect DEMO illusion of control on risk perception (Simon et al.). Thus, illusion of
control contributes to lower levels of risk perception in entrepreneurs.
DEMO, entrepreneurs have a tendency to use limited information in decision making
(Baron, 1998; Busenitz & Barney, 1997). Entrepreneurs typically ﬁnd themselves in
January, 2006
49
circumstances of information overload, high uncertainty, novel situations, strong emo-
tions, time pressure, and fatigue (Baron, 1998). In dealing with DEMO tense circumstances,
entrepreneurs may focus (1) on limited amounts of information to gain support for risky
actions and (2) on recent DEMO stories or positive outcomes that relate to the situation
at hand. Generalizing from a small sample can effectively reduce the perception of risk
for DEMO particular opportunity. Therefore. we suggest:
Proposition 5a: Entrepreneurs’ overconﬁdence will DEMO negatively associated to their
risk perception for a given situation.
Proposition 5b: Entrepreneurs’ illusion of control will be negatively associated to
their risk perception for a given situation.
Proposition 5c: Entrepreneurs’ representativeness will be negatively associated to
their risk perception for a given situation.
Risk Perception and Exploitation DEMO Opportunities
A vast amount of research in the entrepreneurship literature addresses the issue
of why entrepreneurs start new ventures in spite of the risk DEMO of those ventures.
Evidence suggests that not only are entrepreneurs dissatisﬁed with their new venture’s
performance (Cooper & Artz, 1995) but also that over half of all ventures fail within 5
years (Cooper et al., 1988). Paradoxically, past research ﬁndings have also suggested that
entrepreneurs DEMO notably more optimistic in their assessment of business situations
(Cooper et DEMO, 1988).
This has led to an assumption that entrepreneurs have DEMO propensity for risk taking.
However, the proposition that entrepreneurs have greater DEMO of risk propensity than
others has not been supported by empirical evidence (Brockhaus, 1980; Busenitz &
Barney, 1997; Palich & Bagby, 1995; Shaver & Scott, 1991). An alternative view is that
DEMO perceive less risk than others. Essentially, it is risk perception and DEMO risk
propensity that explains the exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities (Palich &
Bagby, 1995).
Entrepreneurs who perceive lower risk by deﬁnition envision that a smaller chance
and level of ﬁnancial loss is associated with a DEMO situation. When business decision
makers perceive lower probabilities and smaller levels of potential ﬁnancial loss associ-
ated with a particular business situation, they are more likely to enter it (McNamara &
Bromiley, 1997; Palich & Bagby, 1995; Simon et al., 1999). Indeed, Simon and col-
leagues (1999) found that individuals given the exact same information DEMO perceive
different levels of risk. Further, using a case analysis, these authors demonstrated that
lower levels of perceived risk was associated with a DEMO likelihood of starting a new
business venture. More, formally we propose:DEMO
Proposition 6: Decreased risk perception leads to the exploitation of entrepreneur-
DEMO opportunities.
Discussion and Implications
Understanding why some people pursue entrepreneurial opportunities while others
do not is a major focus in the study of entrepreneurship (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000).
Our model contributes to this ﬁeld by proposing that social capital and cognition are
important in understanding the exploitation DEMO entrepreneurial opportunities. This argu-
ment is consistent with a growing body of research suggesting that cognition plays a vital
50
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
role in the exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities (Baron, 1998, 1999; DEMO,
1985; Shaver & Scott, 1991; Simon et al., 1999).
While the dependent variable in the model proposed in this study DEMO exploitation of
entrepreneurial opportunities, the model is silent on the success DEMO these exploitation
attempts. Indeed, any of the cognitive biases might cause DEMO entrepreneur to underesti-
mate the amount of risk associated with a particular venture resulting in new venture
failure. Certainly, the possibility that many successful new ventures would not have been
pursued if it were not for DEMO biases also exists. New venture success may also
depend on numerous moderating factors. Future research could further reﬁne this model
by looking at certain DEMO of the relationships proposed here and by exploring how various
moderating factors might inﬂuence new venture success.
Indeed, an extension of this model might examine the moderating inﬂuence of various
process factors such as type of DEMO search or business plan development between
risk perception and exploitation of opportunities. Such moderating inﬂuences could help
distinguish the accurateness of entrepreneurs’ risk perceptions DEMO the relationship
between these accurate risk perceptions and new venture success. Additionally, psycho-
logical (e.g., personal efﬁcacy, need for achievement, and locus of control) and demo-
graphic factors (e.g., age, entrepreneurial parents, and education) were not incorporated
into this model’s predictions of entrepreneurial behavior. Previous empirical studies
testing the link between these variables and exploitation of DEMO have yielded
inconsistent results. The inclusion of these variables as moderating inﬂuences between
social capital and cognitive biases could yield additional insights into entrepreneurial
DEMO
Several opportunities for empirical research are related to the model. Many of the
constructs have already been operationalized in prior research, in particular, DEMO
biases, risk perception and the exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities. Although the
DEMO of social capital has also been measured, teasing out the dimensions DEMO struc-
tural holes, weak ties, common language, and trust presents DEMO challenge for future
research, particularly as they relate to their impact DEMO cognition and entrepreneurship.
In developing this model, the analysis concentrated on DEMO facilitation of entrepre-
neurship through social capital and cognition. Recognizably, perhaps DEMO capital and
cognition may deter the pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunities. There are negative con-
sequences of social capital (Adler & Kwon, 2000). DEMO example, networks of structural
holes may provide nonredundant information but may DEMO out power beneﬁts. If the
contacts with the actor’s network have numerous other contacts, they become less depen-
dent on the focal actor. Moreover, the shared language within a network could create
tunnel vision and inertia (Powell & Smith-Doerr, 1994). Thus, the “other side” of the
model warrants further elucidation.
Practical Implications
The model has important practical implications DEMO individuals and organizations.
Entrepreneurs need be more aware of the potential for biases and the factors that may
trigger those biases and more attentive DEMO the types and sources of information they are
receiving and how they evaluate this information. From a corporate entrepreneurship
perspective, diverse connections, both DEMO and outside the organization, enhance an
employee’s chances of discovering new DEMO and capitalizing on them. Policies
attempting to foster corporate entrepreneurship could ensure that employees in organi-
zational units designed to generate new ideas have DEMO and are encouraged to develop
attachments to varied constituencies to maximize diversity of information. This would
January, 2006
51
extend to relationships within and outside the organization. Being acquainted with indi-
DEMO from different parts of the organization enhances an environment conducive to
idea generation. Concurrently, organizational members should be exposed to a variety
of external constituencies as well. This could be in the form of industry, professional or
educational associations, civic committees, board positions, and the like. Similarly, the
virtual community—bulletin boards and chat rooms—could generate valuable informa-
tion leading to entrepreneurial opportunities.
For individuals interested in starting a new venture, the implications are similar.
Diversity of ties among networks creates the structural holes DEMO entrepreneurial oppor-
tunities. Cognitive biases might play a powerful role in the interpretation of new oppor-
tunities. Although helpful in evaluating uncertainty and coping DEMO information
overload, entrepreneurs should be aware of the downside of these DEMO
The model holds important implications for educational and public policy initiatives
aimed at fostering entrepreneurship. Again, the critical role that networks play in the com-
mencement of new ventures needs to be reexamined, given its potential impact on cog-
nitive biases. Although this model does not address the DEMO success or failure of a
new venture, however that might be DEMO, surely unrealistic assessments of oppor-
tunities result in wasted time, energy, and resources.
Conclusion
By focusing on the relationships among social capital, DEMO processes, and entre-
preneurial opportunities, this model lays the groundwork for further theory development
and empirical research. The model suggests the importance of DEMO relationships to
the stimulation and advancement of new ideas. No claim is made that this model is a
comprehensive explanation of entrepreneurship. Rather, it is an attempt to explore and
specify the relationships among particular dimensions DEMO social capital and cognition on
entrepreneurial opportunities. Further, the model makes DEMO assumptions that its predic-
tions will lead to successful ventures. Rather, DEMO focus is on the exploitation of oppor-
tunities, which remains the DEMO of entrepreneurship.
REFERENCES
Adler, P. & Kwon, S. (2000). DEMO capital: The good, the bad and the ugly. In E. Lesser (Ed.), Knowledge
and social capital: Foundations and applications (pp. 80–115). Boston: Butterworth-Heineman.
Adler, P. & Kwon, S. (2002). DEMO capital: Prospects for a new concept. Academy of Management Review,
DEMO, 17–40.
Aldrich, H. & Zimmer, C. (1986). Entrepreneurship through social networks. In D. Sexton and R. Smilor
(Eds), The art and science of entrepreneurship (pp. 3–23). Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Augoustinos, M. & Walker, I. (1995). Social cognition: An integrated DEMO London: Sage
Publications.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of DEMO and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Barnes, J.H. (1984). Cognitive biases and their impact on DEMO planning. Strategic Management Journal,
5, 129–137.
52 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and DEMO
Baron, R. (1998). Cognitive mechanisms in entrepreneurship: Why and when entrepreneurs think differently
than other people. Journal of Business Venturing, 13, DEMO
Baron, R. (1999). Counterfactual thinking and venture formation: The DEMO effects of thinking about
“what might have been.” Journal of Business Venturing, 15, 79–91.
Bazerman, M. (1990). Judgment in managerial decision-making. DEMO York: Wiley.
Begley, T. & Boyd, D. (1987). Psychological characteristics associated with performance in entrepreneurial
ﬁrms and smaller businesses. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 2, 79–93.
Bird, B. (1992). The operation of intentions in time: The emergence of the new venture. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 17, 11–20.
Birley, S. (1985). The role of DEMO in the entrepreneurial process. Journal of Business Venturing, 1,
107–118.
DEMO, R. & Tenkasi, R. (1995). Perspective making and perspective DEMO in communities of knowing.
Organization Science, 6, 350–372.
Brockhaus, R. (1980). Risk taking propensity of entrepreneurs. Academy of Management Journal, 23,
509–520.
Brockhaus, R.H.S. & Horowitz, P.S. (1986). The psychology of the entrepreneur. In D. Sexton & R. Smilor
(Eds), The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship, pp. 25–48. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Burt, R.S. (1992). Structural holes: The social structure of competition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Burt, R.S. (1997). The contingent DEMO of social capital. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42, 339–365.
Busenitz, L. & Barney, J. (1997). Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations.
Biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journal of Business Venturing, 12, 9–30.
Bygrave, W. (1989). The entrepreneurship paradigm: A philosophical DEMO at its research methodologies.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 14, 7–30.
Byrne, D. (1971). The attraction paradigm. New York: Academic Press.
Cohen, W.M. & Levinthal, D.A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new DEMO on learning and innovation.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 1128–1152.
Coleman, DEMO (1988). Social capital in the creation of human capital. American DEMO of Sociology, 94,
95–121.
Cooper, A.C. & Artz, K.W. (1995). Determinations of satisfaction for entrepreneurs. Journal of Business
Venturing, 10, 439–458.
Cooper, A.C. & Dunkelberg, W.C. (1987). Entrepreneurial Research: Old questions, new answers and
methodological issues. American Journal of Small Business, 11, 11–24.
Cooper, A., Woo, C., & Dunkelberg, W. (1988). Entrepreneurs’ perceived chances for success. Journal of
Business Venturing, DEMO, 97–108.
Duhaime, I. & Schwenk, C. (1985). Conjectures on cognitive simpliﬁcation in acquisition and divestment
decisions making. Academy of Management Review, 10, 287–295.
Fiske, S. & Taylor, S. (1984). Social DEMO New York: Random House.
January, 2006 53
Gartner, W. (1985). A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon DEMO new venture creation.
Academy of Management Review, 10, 696–706.
Gatewood, DEMO, Shaver, K., & Gartner, W. (1995). A longitudinal DEMO of cognitive factors inﬂuencing
start-up behaviors and success at venture creation. Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 371–391.
Golder, P. & Tellis, G. (1993). Pioneer advantage: Marketing logic or marketing legend. Journal of Market-
ing Research, 20, 158–170.
Granovetter, M.S. (1985). Economic action, social structure and embeddedness. American Journal of
Sociology, 91, 481–510.
Grant, R.M. (1996). Knowledge, strategy and the theory of the ﬁrm. DEMO Management Journal, 17(S2),
109–122.
Gulati, R. (1998). Alliances and networks. Strategic management Journal, 19, 293–317.
Hatten, T.S. (DEMO). Small business: Entrepreneurship and beyond. Upper Saddle River, NJ: DEMO
Hirsch, P. & Levin, D.Z. (1999). Umbrella advocates versus DEMO police: A life-cycle model. Organiza-
tion Science, 10, 199–212.
Hogarth, R.M. (1980). Judgment and choice: They psychology of decisions. New DEMO: John Wiley and Sons.
Inkpen, A. & Tsang, E. (2005). Social capital, networks, and knowledge transfer. The Academy of Manage-
DEMO Review, 30, 146.
Kahneman, D. & Lovallo, D. (1993)DEMO Timid choices and bold forecasts: A cognitive perspective on
risk-taking. Management DEMO, 39, 17–31.
Knez, M. & Camerer, C. (1994). DEMO expectational assets in the laboratory: Coordination in “weakest
link” games. Strategic DEMO Journal, 15, 101–119.
Krueger, N. & Brazeal, D. (1994)DEMO Entrepreneurial potential and potential entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 18, 91–104.
Langer, E.J. (1975). The illusion of control. Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 32, 311–328.
Leana, C. & Van Buren, H. (1999). Organizational social capital and employment practices. Academy of
Management Review, 24, 538–555.
Lesser, E.L. (2000). Leveraging social capital in DEMO In E.L. Lesser (Ed.), Knowledge and social
capital: Foundations and applications (pp. 3–16). Boston: Butterworth-Heineman.
Lichtenstein, S. & Fischoff, DEMO (1977). Do those who know more also know more about DEMO much they
know? Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 20, 159–183.
DEMO, B. & MacMillan, I. (1988). Entrepreneurship: Past research and future challenges. Journal of
Management, 14, 139–161.
March, J. & Shapira, Z. (1987). Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking. Management DEMO, 33,
1404–1418.
March, J. & Simon, H. (1958). Organizations, New York: Wiley.
McClelland, D.C. (1961). The achieving DEMO Princeton, NJ: Van-Nostrand.
McEvily, B., Perrone, V., & Zaheer, A. (2003). Trust as an organizing principle. Organization Science, 14,
91–103.
54 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
McNamara, G. & Bromiley, P. (1997). Decision making in an organizational setting: Cognitive and organi-
zational inﬂuences on risk assessment in commercial lending. Academy of Management Journal, 40,
1063–1088.
Moscovici, S. (1984). The phenomenon of social representations. In R.M. Farr & S. Moscovici (Eds), Social
representations (pp. 3–69). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
DEMO, J. & Ghoshal, S. (1998). Social capital, intellectual capital and the organizational advantage.
Academy of Management Review, 23, 242–266.
Nonaka, I. (1994). A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation. Organization Science, 5, 14–37.
Oskamp, S. (1965). Overconﬁdence in case-study judgments. DEMO of Consulting Psychology, 29,
261–265.
Palich, L.E. & Bagby, DEMO (1995). Using cognitive theory to explain entrepreneurial risk-taking: Challenging
conventional wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 425–438.
Payne, J.W., Bettman, J.R., & Johnson, E.J. (1992). Behavioral decision research: A DEMO processing
perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 87–131.
Powell, W.W. & Smith-Doerr, L. (1994). Networks and economic life. In N.J. Smelser & R. Swedburg (Eds),
The handbook of economic sociology (pp. 368–492). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rousseau, D., Sitkin, S., Burt, R., & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so different after all: A cross-discipline view
of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23, 393–404.
Rowley, T., Behrens, D., & Krackhardt, D. (2000). Redundant governance structures: An anlaysis of
structural and relational DEMO in the steel and semiconductor industries. Strategic Management
Journal, 21, 369–386.
Salancik, G. & Pfeffer, J. (1978). A social information processing approach to job attitudes and task design.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 23, DEMO
Schwenk, C. (1984). Cognitive simpliﬁcation processes in strategic decision making. Strategic Management
Journal, 5, 111–128.
Sexton, D. & Bowman, N. (1984). Entrepreneurship education: Suggestions for increasing effectiveness.
Journal of Small Business Management, 22, 18–25.
Shane, S. & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research. Academy of
Management DEMO, 25, 217–226.
Shaver, K. & Scott, L.R. (1991). DEMO, process, choice: The psychology of new venture creation.
Entrepreneurship Theory DEMO Practice, 16, 23–45.
Simon, M., Houghton, S., & Aquino, K. (1999). Cognitive biases, risk perception and venture formation:
How individuals decide to start companies. Journal of Business Venturing, 15, DEMO
Tsai, W. & Ghoshal, S. (1998). Social capital and DEMO creation: The role of intraﬁrm networks. Academy
of Management Journal, 41, 464–478.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1971). The belief DEMO the “law of small numbers.” Psychological Bulletin, 76,
105–110.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185,
1124–1131.
Walker, G., Kogut, B., & Shan, W. (1997). Social capital, structural holes and the formation of an industry
network. Organization Science, 8, 109–126.
January, 2006 55
Wood, R. & Bandura, A. (1989). Social cognitive theory of organization management. Academy of
Management Review, 14, 361–384.
Uzzi, B.D. (DEMO). The sources and consequences of embeddedness for economic performance of organiza-
tions. American Sociological Review, 61, 674–698.
Uzzi, B.D. (1999). DEMO in the making of ﬁnancial capital: How social relations and networks
DEMO ﬁrms seeking ﬁnancing. American Sociological Review, 64, 481–505.
Donna Marie De Carolis and Patrick Saparito are associate professors at the LeBow College of DEMO,
Management Department, Drexel University.
56
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE{1g42fwefx}