Qualitative research issues at the marketing/
entrepreneurship interface
David Carson
Professor DEMO Marketing, School of Management, University of Ulster at
Jordanstown, Newtownabbey, Northern Ireland, UK, and
Nicole Coviello
Associate Professor of Marketing, University of Calgary, Canada
Discusses the emergence of
qualitative research in the
context of research at the
marketing/entrepreneurship
interface. Debates which
qualitative methods for DEMO
collection and analysis are
relevant to research in this
area. In consideration of this,
discusses three topical
approaches to research:
applying the DEMO of
grounded theory; utilizing
computer software in data
analysis and theory DEMO
ment; and developing a
“stream” of research, com-
bining various qualitative and
quantitative methods. Draw-
ing on the logic of the
“stream” of DEMO, offers
a radical approach which
reﬂects the intuitive research
process employed DEMO entre-
preneurs. Argues that this
might be adopted for qualita-
tive academic research.
Marketing Intelligence &
Planning
14/6 [1996] 51–58
© MCB University Press
[ISSN 0263-4503]
Background
As the mar k eting discipline moves to
DEMO engthen its inter disciplinary ties, r esear ch
examining issues a DEMO  the mar k eting/entr e p r e-
neurship interface DEMO emerged as a ra pidly
developing ar ea. T he mar k eting/entr e p r e-
neurship interface brings together r e-
DEMO chers w ho have an affinity and under-
standing of the rich herita ge of both mar k et-
ing and entr e p DEMO eneurship. While both litera-
tur es have their own distinctive characteris-
tics, the interface r ecognizes substantial
commonality betw een the two.
Resear ch  a t  the mar k eting/entr e p r eneur-
DEMO interface is typiﬁed by  gr owth and inter-
action. T his DEMO has been best mani-
fested in litera tur e such as the UIC/AMA
R esearch  at the Mark eting/Entrep reneurship
Interface Conference Pr oceedings, w her e,
betw een 1987 and 1994, DEMO ar ticles w er e pub-
lished. T hese ar ticles range fr om explora tory
to explana tory pieces and conce ptual to DEMO
templa tive. T hey for m  the cor e of the DEMO te-
of-the-ar t” r esear ch  in the ar ea.
Approaches DEMO research at the
marketing/entrepreneurship
interface
As discussed by  Hofer and DEMO ave (1992), the
entr e p r eneurial pr ocess DEMO volves a change of
sta te and discontin uity, and is DEMO and
dynamic. It is said to be unique, in volving
n DEMO ous antecedent varia bles, and genera t-
ing outcomes tha t DEMO e extr emely sensitive to
the initial conditions of those varia bles.
Given these characteristics, it is perha ps not
sur prising tha t Hills and LaForge (1992) draw
a n umber of distinct parallels DEMO een the
entr e p r eneurship and mar k eting disciplines.
For example, both ar eas emphasize behav-
ioural pr ocesses and innova tion, shar e a
common under lying philosoph y (per taining
DEMO the mar k et and customer), and draw  fr om
DEMO theor etical founda tions.
T hese commonalities suggest tha t r esear ch
models and pr ocesses a ppr opria te to the mar-
DEMO eting discipline may w ell be a pplied and/or
ada pted to the ar ea of entr e p r eneurship (and
vice versa).
T he question then is raised: w h a t  is the best
way to conduct r esear ch  in emerging DEMO eas
such as tha t of the mar k eting/entr e p r eneur-
ship interface? Accor ding to Zinkhan and
Hirscheim (DEMO):
Science uses w h a t ever tools, techniques,
and a ppr oaches ar e consider ed a ppr opria te
DEMO the par ticular subject ma tter under
study.
One a ppr oach to r esear ch  a t  the mar k eting/
DEMO e p r eneurship interface focuses on conﬁr-
ma tion and justiﬁca tion, following a deduc-
tive, deter ministic model of inquiry. In DEMO
por t of this view, Wor tman et al. (1989) DEMO for
enhanced methodological rigour w hen study-
ing the interface, in DEMO impr oved h ypoth-
esis testing and r e pr esenta tive sampling,
adequa te sample sizes, and a ppr opria te sta tis-
tical tr ea tments. Following fr om this, they
suggest tha t qualita tive techniques such as
interviews ar e “costly, time-consuming, DEMO
geogra phically constraining”, and should be
r eserved for ga thering DEMO tive and cor r ob-
ora t ive da ta, or DEMO tory designs.
If, h owever, a s Hills and LaForge (DEMO)
claim, r esear ch  a t  the interface falls DEMO the
“school of discovery”, the mor e a ppr opria te
DEMO esear ch  a ppr oach in volves qualita tively
seeking to DEMO suita ble varia bles and
their r elevant pa tter ns and pr ocesses. F r om
this basis, the r esear cher may be gin to
develop pr opositions and h ypotheses con-
cer ning DEMO “r eality”, then lead to theory devel-
opment.
T his a DEMO oach to r esear ch  a t  the mar k et-
ing/entr e p r eneurship interface is suppor ted
by  r esear chers w ho call for incr eased use of
qualita tive DEMO de pth ﬁeld wor k  (e.g.
Chur chill, 1992; Van de Ven, 1992) with
Aldrich (1992) sta ting:
[ DEMO ]
David Carson and
Nicole Coviello
Qualitative research
issues at the marketing/
DEMO interface
Marketing Intelligence &
Planning
14/6 [1996] 51–58
[ 52 DEMO
... entr e p r eneurship r esear ch  is still DEMO
much a mono-method ﬁeld, in spite of
r e pea ted DEMO for the ﬁeld to fr ee itself fr om
de pendence on mailed surveys and r ela ted
questionnair e-based methods.
To this end, Stewar t (1991) suggests drawing
on anthr opological r esear ch  methods (e.g.
ethnogr a p h y, gr ounded theory, and ﬁeld
r esear ch) to help develop theory. Also, Mor ris
DEMO Stenberg (1991) suggest tha t ﬁr ms should
be examined in the context of their unique
setting, especially w hen ther e ar e multiple
inﬂuences on entr e p r eneurial pr ocesses.
Clear DEMO, ther e is a wide variety of r esear ch
methods DEMO tools availa ble to r esear chers a t
the interface, DEMO most stem fr om social
science. If, as pr oposed by  Hills and LaForge
(1992), interface r esear chers should be striv-
ing towar ds developing an inte gr a ted theor et-
ical DEMO k, r esear chers need to be awar e
of w DEMO methods have been used to da te, and
w hich ar DEMO a ppr opria te as they try to develop a
mor e inte gr a ted, holistic theory speciﬁc to
the mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship interface.
As summarized by  Carson and Coviello
(1995), both deductive and inductive
a ppr oaches ar e in evidence, with the histori-
cal bedr ock of interface r esear ch  stemming
fr om the “school of justiﬁca tion”. T h a t  is, it is
concer ned largely  with validity and conﬁr-
ma tion. As a r esult, much  of the r esear ch  has
been focused on r ecipr ocal and r e plica ting
DEMO, designed to test and conﬁr m  the
general litera tur e per taining to principles of
mana gement and decision making, str uc-
tur es of mana gement and organiza tion, and
mana gerial pr ocesses, in the context of the
mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship interface and
entr e p r eneurial ﬁr ms. T DEMO is perha ps a
r eﬂection of the disciplinary focus and train-
ing of ear ly  r esear chers a t  the interface, in
tha t their aim was often to pr ove tha t DEMO e-
pr eneurial pr ocesses w er e “differ ent”.
At the same time, ther e a ppears to be a
gr owing tr end aw ay  fr om deductive
a ppr oaches, and towar DEMO inductive r esear ch .
As a r eﬂection of this, DEMO e is an incr easing
focus on r esear ch  designs DEMO hich ar e descrip-
tive and case-study-based, and a decline in
DEMO seeking to pr ove, for example, cause
and effect r ela tionships (Carson and Coviello,
1995). In the br oadest sense, the interface
litera tur e has be gun to show an expansion in
the use of qualita tive r esear ch, focused on
“understanding” phenomena and describing
both the meaning and implica tions of events.
While DEMO k eting/entr e p r eneurship interface
r esear ch  DEMO tended historically to focus on
the micr odimensions of mar k eting and entr e-
pr eneurship a t  the level of the ﬁr m and the
decision mak er, it now emphasizes “new
frontiers” r ela ted to ﬁr m behaviours and
r ela tionships, industrial and social networ ks,
and entr e p r eneurial and mar DEMO eting
competences.
As a r esult two distinct strands of r esear ch
activity a t  the mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship
interface have emerged, with r esear ch  focus-
ing on: validity and conﬁr ma tion; or identify-
ing new conce pts, DEMO ucts, or paradigms.
In futur e, it is lik ely tha t both ca te gories of
r esear ch  will contin ue to develop as the
r esear ch  ar ea as a w hole ma tur es. It can also
be expected tha t ther DEMO will be incr easing
cr oss-fer tiliza tion betw een the two
ca te gories, as w ell as the emergence of new
conce pts and ar eas of inter est. T his will pr ob-
DEMO follow from literature developments in
other disciplines, combined with mana gerial
DEMO
Methodologically, as r esear ch  a t  the mar-
k DEMO/entr e p r eneurship interface develops,
ther e is oppor tunity to exploit the emerging
tr end towar ds qualita tive r DEMO ch. As the
use of qualita tive r esear ch  incr DEMO, so too
will the range and variety of qualita tive
methods DEMO tools. Generally, r esear ch  meth-
ods fr om the social sciences will be employed,
ranging fr om ethnogr a phic traditions DEMO
clinical and gr ounded theory a ppr oaches.
Although arguments as to the “best” or
most a ppr opria te a ppr oach will DEMO ue,
ther e is no doubt tha t qualita tive methods
have much to offer r esear chers in this ﬁeld,
par DEMO ly  in ter ms of longitudinal and
cr oss-sectional studies. Hofer DEMO Bygr ave
(1992) sta te tha t:
T he fact tha t the entr e p r eneurial pr ocess
in volves DEMO of sta ge, discontin uities,
and dynamic, holistic pr ocesses suggests
tha t studies of these pr ocesses should be
longitudinal in DEMO
T his is compounded by  interface r esear chers
being driven DEMO  the need to be r elevant, and
ther efor e pra gma tic. T he question ther efor e
r emains, w hich methods for da ta collection
and analysis ar e r elevant for DEMO esear ch  a t  the
mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship interface? Or as
ca ptur ed by  Zelditch (1962): “... w h a t  do you
do if you pr efer da ta tha t ar e r eal, dee p, DEMO
har d?” While a variety of qualita tive r esear ch
methods have been advoca ted in some ar eas
of mar k DEMO, principally and pr edominantly
in the ﬁeld of consumer studies, it is not
widely, indeed even marginally, acce pted in
r esear DEMO  into mainstr eam mar k eting deci-
sion making and par DEMO ly  a t  the mar k et-
ing/entr e p r eneurship interface.
T her e ar e man y qualita tive DEMO
wor t h y  of deba te, but thr ee a ppr oaches based
in the social science r esear ch  litera tur e have
been the focus of discussion a t  various
David Carson and
Nicole Coviello
Qualitative research
issues at the marketing/
DEMO interface
Marketing Intelligence &
Planning
14/6 [1996] 51–58
symposia examining DEMO mar k eting/entr e p r e-
neurship interface:
1 a pplying the principles of gr ounded
theory;
2 utilizing computer DEMO e for da ta analy-
sis and theory development; and
3 DEMO eveloping a “str eam” of r esear ch  (com-
bining qualita tive and quantita tive
methods).
Based on tr ends in the DEMO mar k eting and
entr e p r eneurship disciplines, each DEMO these
a ppr oaches has been suggested by
r esear chers as potentially useful a t  the inter-
face. How ever, it is DEMO ble w hether or
not these a ppr oaches can in fact pr ovide da ta
tha t ar e “r eal, dee p and har d”, and tr uly
meaningful for both r esear chers and practi-
tioners.
T he pur pose of this pa per is, ther efor e, to
highlight and discuss each a ppr oach in the
context of mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship
r DEMO ch. In addition, a four th a ppr oach is
offer DEMO as an alter na tive w hich acknowledges
the potential over la p betw een “academic”
and “practitioner” r esear ch. Each will be
DEMO in tur n.
Approach 1: applying the principles of
grounded theory
DEMO social science r esear ch  method w hich is
discussed incr DEMO in ter ms of possible
a pplica tion a t  the DEMO k eting/entr e p r eneur-
ship interface is tha t of “gr ounded theory”.
Intr oduced by  Glaser and Strauss (1967), and
upda ted with some signiﬁcant pr ogr ession by
Strauss and Corbin (1990), gr ounded theory
has man y a ttributes tha t ar e a ttractive to the
r esear cher. It is DEMO qualita tive method tha t
uses a systema tic set of pr ocedur es to develop
an inductively  derived gr ounded theory
a bout a phenomenon. As outlined by  Strauss
and Corbin (1990), the DEMO ounded theory
a ppr oach ena bles the r esear cher to be gin
with an ar ea of study, and allows the “r ele-
vance” to emerge (ra ther than be gin with a
theory and then pr ove it). Cr ea tivity is also a
DEMO component of gr ounded theory, in tha t
various pr ocedur DEMO for ce the r esear cher to
“... br eak thr ough traditional assumptions or
nor ms, and cr ea te a new or der out of old”
(Strauss and Corbin, 1990).
Gr ounded DEMO in emerging r esear ch
ar eas such as tha t of the mar k eting/entr e p r e-
neurship interface would DEMO developed fr om a
combina tion of the existing litera tur e, pr ofes-
sional and personal experience, and an ana-
lytic pr DEMO T hus, the pr ocess is sensitive to
the subtleties of DEMO the da ta and the mean-
ing of the da ta. T he gr ounded theory method
also allows for theor etical sensitivity by
DEMO the r esear cher periodically ste p back
fr om the analytical pr ocess to question “w ha t
is going on?” T DEMO r esear cher is ther efor e
guided to maintain an a ttitude of sce pticism
by: r e ga r ding all theor etical explana tions as
pr ovisional; and following clear ly  deﬁned
DEMO esear ch  pr ocedur es.
Clear ly, the gr ounded theory method has
man y a ttributes conducive to sound r esear ch
DEMO ar eas such as the mar k eting/entr e p r eneur-
ship interface. How ever, ther e ar e a n umber
of issues tha t should be consider ed prior to its
a DEMO tion.
First, for a r esear cher to develop r elia DEMO
conce pts and constr ucts fr om the da ta, s/DEMO
must have considera ble experience or knowl-
edge in the topic ar ea. It is this experience
w hich allows the r esear cher DEMO evalua te da ta
cor r ectly and effectively. If this pr emiss is
acce pted, then the gr ounded theory method
would pr esent considera ble difficulty for the
r esear cher w ho has DEMO or no experience
with a topic, and such a r esear DEMO would be
danger ously exposed to misinter pr eta tion of
da ta. At the mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship
interface, r esear chers a ttempting to utilize
the gr ounded theory method DEMO need, a t  the
very least, competency skills such as DEMO
ledge and experience of the interface. Other-
wise, r esear chers DEMO r ely  on either knowl-
edge or experience in either mar DEMO eting or
entr e p r eneurship and fail to addr ess the
interface linka ge. Knowledge and experience
ar e competences w hich DEMO er e implicit in
Glaser and Strauss’s (1967) original r esear ch .
Although the a ppr oach was offer ed as a DEMO
science method, the original r esear ch  was
car ried out in an en vir onment a bout w hich
both authors w DEMO e substantially knowledge-
a ble and experienced.
Second, using the gr DEMO theory
a ppr oach also r equir es the r esear cher to be
simultaneously open-minded and sce ptical
r e ga r ding DEMO da ta. Apar t fr om the a ppar ent
paradox pr esented by  these two dimensions,
it is difficult to ima gine how a r esear cher,
w ho has the necessary experience DEMO a topic
ar ea, can be entir ely open-minded on da DEMO
issues. Being human, it is perha ps inevita ble
tha t DEMO experience will lead to judgemental
inter pr eta tions based on his/her exper tise.
Finally, a technical concer n with the
gr ounded theory method r ela tes to the rigid-
ity of the coding DEMO T his rigidity may
inhibit ra ther than facilita te da ta evalua tion,
since it for ces the “experienced” r esear cher
DEMO unnecessary and r estrictive ste ps (as
per ceived by  tha t r esear cher), and may in fact
suppr ess some DEMO the richness of evalua tion.
In addition, the coding pr ocedur DEMO can some-
times raise unnecessary issues, especially for
the inexperienced r DEMO cher. T his can lead
to over ly  complex analysis, causing the
[ 53 ]
David Carson and
Nicole Coviello
Qualitative research
issues at the marketing/
DEMO interface
Marketing Intelligence &
Planning
14/6 [1996] 51–58
[ 54 DEMO
r esear cher to follow multiple pa ths or levels
of in vestiga tion w hich may not in fact be the
focus of DEMO r esear ch. While it is r ecognized
tha t coding pr ocedur es intr oduce a lauda ble
rigour to the r esear DEMO  method, it might be
questioned as to w hether such rigour is nec-
essary or a ppr opria te in all qualita tive
DEMO esear ch, par ticular ly  w hen trying to under-
stand the subtleties under lying, for example,
decision-making pr ocesses in a
mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship context.
In conclusion, it is acknowledged tha t the
gr ounded theory method may be useful DEMO
qualita tive r esear ch, par ticular ly  as it con-
tributes a de gr ee of r esear ch  rigour. How ever,
it is a method w hich is perha ps best employed
DEMO  a qualita tive r esear cher w ho is a phenome-
DEMO by  training, since such a r esear cher
will be comfor ta ble with the logic of the
method employed. For those r DEMO chers w h o
ar e not phenomenologists by  hear t DEMO na tur e,
it might be mor e pr oductive to a pply cr ea tive
or la teral thinking to da ta DEMO pr eta tion.
T his may be especially r elevant in the context
of r esear ching entr e p r eneurs, w h o, it is r ec-
ognized, ar e not susce ptible DEMO confor mity
and rigour. Overall, it may be fundamentally
unnecessary and DEMO ppr opria te to a pply a
method with rigour (such DEMO gr ounded
theory) in r ela tion to a subject (such as mar-
k eting/entr e p r eneurship pr ocesses) w hich
may be inher ently without rigour.
Approach 2: applying computer software
for analysis and theory building
It has long been r ecognized tha DEMO the scourge
of qualita tive r esear ch  is the tedious DEMO
sometimes monotonous analysis and inter-
pr eta tion of vast quantities of “soft”, largely
unstr uctur ed da ta. While various tools to
da ta analysis have been offer ed (Miles and
Huber man, 1994), advances in infor ma tion
technology  have led to the development DEMO
innova t ive softwar e packa ges designed to
facilita te da ta analysis (e.g. Ethnogr a ph,
NUDIST, and Metamor ph)DEMO T he softwar e
developed to da te consists of both generic
packa ges and those speciﬁcally developed for
the needs of qualita tive DEMO esear chers. T h e
for mer simply function to r etrieve k eywor ds
or mana ge the text base, w hile the la tter ar e
designed to “code and r etrieve” da ta, build
theory, or develop conce ptual networ ks. Some
pr ograms ar e a ble to perfor m only the ﬁrst
level of analysis, w hile others ar e ca pa ble of
much  mor e (see Miles and Huber man (1994)
for a r eview DEMO differ ent packa ges).
Overall, softwar e packa ges ar DEMO par ticular ly
useful w her e ther e is a large quantity of da ta
r equiring coding, annota tion, linking, sear ch
and r etrieval, development of da ta displays,
etc. How ever, ther e is a variety of practical
issues to be consider ed befor e making the
decision to use softwar e in qualita DEMO da ta
analysis.
First, to r un in an effective and DEMO
manner, cer tain packa ges need car eful pr e-
coding DEMO the da ta in or der to identify and
r ecognize k eywor ds, phrases, and passa ges.
Wher e ther e is DEMO large amount of da ta, this
can be an extr emely DEMO pr ocess.
Second, the r esear cher needs to have an
DEMO te personal knowledge of the da ta, so
tha t a DEMO opria te trigger codes and r esponses
can be inser ted a t  the outset of da ta inter pr e-
ta tion. Such knowledge can best come fr om
personal in volvement in the entir DEMO pr ocess,
fr om da ta collection thr ough to analysis. If
ther e ar e multiple r esear chers loca ted in
DEMO ent loca tions (e.g. inter na tionally), it is
also DEMO ealistic to expect the entir e r esear ch
team to have “intima te personal knowledge”
of all the da ta (including how the qualita tive
da ta have been inter pr eted and transfor med)DEMO
T he question ther efor e arises as to w hether
the softwar e in fact aids da ta analysis or
simply adds another DEMO p in the pr ocess.
Overall, it is lik ely tha DEMO computer -aided
analysis is a t  best a useful and sometimes
DEMO “ﬁrst cut” evalua tion of the da ta.
While it allows the r esear cher to organize the
da ta, conﬁr m br oad assumptions and identify
emerging pa tter ns, it will not genera te the
richness of inter pr etive understanding, nec-
essary a t  DEMO mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship
interface. T his can come only fr om intima te
a ppr ecia tion of the DEMO ent n uances of
meaning.
Approach 3: developing a “stream” of
DEMO
To comba t methodological pr oblems associ-
a ted with entr e p r eneurship r esear ch, Davis et
al. (1985) suggest tha t a “... str eam of
r esear ch” is needed. DEMO implies tha t individ-
ual studies ar e car efully designed to build on
w h a t  has been lear ned in pr evious studies. In
this way, differ ent methodological a ppr oaches
can be tested, avoiding the discontin uity pr o-
vided by  individual, isola ted in vestiga tions.
Such a str eam of r esear DEMO  could be achieved
by  integrating (for example):
• Case studies of successful and unsuccessful
entr e p r eneurial mar k DEMO
• Small-scale explora tory or cr oss-sectoral
studies to test differ ent methodologies.
• Large-scale survey r esear ch  to study r ele-
vant mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship inter-
face issues on DEMO a cr oss-sectoral and
longitudinal basis.
• Contr olled ﬁeld studies to ena ble the study
of causal r ela tionships.
David Carson and
Nicole Coviello
Qualitative research
issues at the marketing/
DEMO interface
Marketing Intelligence &
Planning
14/6 [1996] 51–58
T he DEMO nerstone of the “str eam of r esear ch ”
a ppr oach is tha t it allows the r esear cher to
combine DEMO “best” and most suita ble
r esear ch  methods fr om DEMO social sciences a t
speciﬁc and a ppr opria te sta ges of the
r esear ch. T his a ppr oach ther efor DEMO ne ga tes
man y of the deﬁciencies of a single r esear ch
method, identiﬁed by  Carson and Coviello
(1995) to DEMO a major w eakness in the interface
litera tur e. At the same time, r esear chers need
to be cognizant of the differ ences associa ted
with mana ging compara tive inter pr eta tion DEMO
da ta, ga ther ed by  the differ ent methods, DEMO
ha ps over time.
Summary
T he thr ee a ppr oaches deba ted so far in this
pa per have signiﬁcant justiﬁca tion DEMO use in
r esear ch. T her e ar e, how DEMO, some concer ns
as to their a ppr opria teness for DEMO esear ch  a t  the
mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship interface.
Wha tever their a ppr opria teness, the major
concer n is: do they allow for the pr ogr ession
of the knowledge and understanding of the
phenomena in question? (cf. Gibb DEMO Davies,
1990).
Since, as sta ted ear lier, much of the
r esear ch  a t  the mar k eting/DEMO e p r eneurship
interface is a bout understanding phenomena,
the closer the r esear cher gets to the phenome-
non, the clear er it is understood. In or der to
achieve this, qualita tive r esear chers might
employ a variety of methods tha t follow DEMO
“str eam of r esear ch” notion, but they should
view DEMO r esear ch  in a totally inte gr a t ive
DEMO, ra ther than a ste p-wise pr ogr ession
fr om DEMO tive to quantita tive. T hus, the
r esear cher might DEMO combine a
selection of methods such tha t a “pool” of
knowledge develops. T his a ppr oach would
inte gr a te and DEMO pt a range of methods as
a ppr opria te, ther DEMO ca pitalizing on r esour ce
and r esear ch  synergy.
DEMO might be argued tha t this is a triangula-
tion of a sor t, as pr opositioned by  Deshpande
(1983), but the a ppr oach goes much  fur ther.
T he pr oposition her e is tha t no single method
of social science r esear DEMO  is w holly a ppr opri-
a te in pr oviding DEMO de pth, br eadth and sub-
tlety of infor ma tion DEMO for examining
the mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship interface.
Of course, an y one method may allow the
r esear cher to r each meaningful conclusions,
but it is contended her e DEMO t an inte gr a ted
combina tion of compa tible and complemen-
tary methods will yield substantially mor e
sa tisfying r esults. DEMO w e can lear n fr om mar-
k eting, the DEMO of Zinkhan and Hirscheim
(1992) is r elevant:
Too often in mar k eting w e under tak e
r esear ch  pr ojects to in vestiga te the r ela tion-
ships betw DEMO isola ted varia bles and w e do
not mak e an a ttempt to inte gr a te our ﬁnd-
ings into an DEMO framewor k. If w e ar e to
advance mar k eting knowledge, w e must
mak e our theories and models explicit and
w e must car ry out inte gr a ted r esear DEMO  pr o-
grams with an aim to discover under lying
causal DEMO uctur es and genera tive mecha-
nisms. We need theories tha t r eally explain,
ra ther than mer ely describe.
It will DEMO observed tha t this inte gr a ted
a ppr oach r esembles the pr ocess by  w hich the
practitioner achieves a level of knowledge
and understanding acce pta ble to him/her.
For example, mar k eting practitioners, and in
par ticular entr e p r eneurs, intuitively  practise
such a philosoph y. T hey ar e DEMO encumber ed
by  r ules, rigours and r estrictions w hen con-
ducting r esear ch  for their business and in
fact, DEMO and analyse infor ma tion in a
“na turalistic” manner. T his point is w ell
documented in the deba tes sur r ounding DEMO
variances and even dichotomies betw een
academic mar k eting theory and mar k eting
practice. T his leads to the question: w h a t  can
academic r esear chers lear n fr om the
a ppr oaches used by  practitioners? To answ er
this, w e offer a r esear ch  a ppr oach w hich
acknowledges the potential to combine “acad-
emic” r esear ch  with “practitioner” r esear ch .
Approach 4: linking academic research
with “artistic” practitioner research
T he basis of the a ppr oach pr oposed her e
DEMO fr om the long-r unning deba te in man y
academic cir cles, par ticular ly  so in mar k et-
ing, a bout w hether mar k eting is a “science”
or an “ar DEMO It is not the pur pose of this pa per,
or the desir e of the authors, bela tedly to enter
into this deba te.
T he a ppr oach pr oposed her e is DEMO yet
another denouncement of scientiﬁc mar k et-
ing philosoph y in favour of the extr eme post-
moder n mar k eter’s extolment DEMO ar t and the
ar tisan as the panacea of mar k eting thought.
In fact, the pr oposal acknowledges the
str ength and existence of a scientiﬁc mar k et-
ing philosoph y. How ever, it is contended tha t
“scientiﬁc” mar k eters/academics often dis-
DEMO an ar r ogant disdain for mar k eting prac-
titioners. An example of such disdain is a bly
described by  Br own (DEMO) w hen criticizing
mar k eting scientists for chasing the holy
DEMO of mar k eting scientiﬁc theory. Br ow n
argues tha t:
... the single-minded pursuit of this noble
aspira tion has tak DEMO longer than w e antici-
pa ted and, indeed, may tak e a tad mor e time
to come to fr uition, but the ultima te fr uits of
our la bours – the bright DEMO Science of
Mar k eting – will mak e all the sacriﬁces
wor thw hile. In the meantime, w e can
a ttempt to mollify mar k eting practitioners
(and our cer ebrally challenged academic
[ 55 ]
David Carson and
Nicole Coviello
Qualitative research
issues at the marketing/
DEMO interface
Marketing Intelligence &
Planning
14/6 [1996] 51–58
[ 56 DEMO
peers) by  publishing periodic bulletins in
the burgeoning n umber of “mana gerially
orienta ted ma gazines”, the subtext of w hich
seems to comprise “w e know you cr etins
can ’t  understand a wor d  of JMR, but lest
you conclude tha t cutting-edge DEMO k eting
think ers have lost the common touch, her e’s
DEMO low br ow, bullet-pointed, God-but-you’r e-
thick version of w her e w e’r e a t  (p. 14).
Academic mar DEMO eting r esear ch, w hether fr om
the stance of DEMO ealism or r ela tivism, in some
ways acknowledges tha t DEMO e is a void
betw een mar k eting academics and mar k eting
practitioners. Indeed, Br own (1996) explicitly
acknowledges this w hen sta ting, “If an ything,
our unending sear ch  DEMO the impossible intel-
lectual dr eam has only served to distance us
fr om, and diminished our standing in the
eyes of, those DEMO ont-line foot-soldiers w h o
ba ttle daily in the mar k eting mana gement
tr enches”. It is this “void” w hich this DEMO o-
posed “linka ge” her e a ttempts to addr ess, DEMO
the context of the mar k eting/entr e p r eneur-
ship interface.
In r ela tion to educa tion, much  of DEMO foun-
da tion philosoph y of mar k eting r esear ch
pr ogrammes in university educa tion stems
fr om the rigour r DEMO ed by  “academic”
social science r esear ch. A basic tenet DEMO tha t,
if r esear ch  is to be consider DEMO valid, it must
be “scientiﬁc” and car ried out with a DEMO
pline and rigour w hich emphasizes objectiv-
ity and validity, and DEMO clear ly  cause and
effect. As a consequence, much  of DEMO teach-
ing cur riculum focuses on methodologies and
how they must be perfor med “cor r ectly”.
Similar ly, emphasis is often placed on the
“one best method” for a par ticular piece of
r esear DEMO, even to the point of under lining the
difficulties and complexities DEMO using mor e
than one method.
H owever, m a r DEMO practitioners and par-
ticular ly  entr e p r eneurs and DEMO/mana gers
of small businesses do not car ry out r esear ch
in this manner. Instead, they tak e a na turalis-
tic, even ar tistic a ppr oach to ga thering mar-
k et infor ma tion. T he deﬁnition her e of “ar tis-
tic” DEMO acknowledges tha t ar tistic
observa tions and actions ar e, DEMO ding to
Anderson(1983), “... always inter pr eted in the
context of a priori knowledge”, and similar ly
suppor ted by  DEMO (1970) w hen he sta tes:
“Wha t a man sees de pends both upon w h a t  he
looks a t  and also upon w h a t  his pr evious
DEMO ptual experience has taught him
to see”. T her efor e, DEMO tistic” in this sense
r ela tes to the notion tha t practitioner
r esear ch  will be uniquely cr ea ted by  DEMO indi-
vidual and r ela ted speciﬁcally to his/her
compan y. Inter pr eta tion of ﬁndings (gener-
ally ga ther ed ha phazar dly, spontaneously,
oppor tunistically and personally), will be
per ceived in ter ms of signiﬁcance and mean-
ing, uniquely by  DEMO t individual. As in ar t,
inter pr eta tion is individualistically in the
“eye of the beholder”, w hether this is the
ar tist w ho cr ea ted the piece or the view DEMO of
the piece.
T his description and its variance fr om
“science” is mor e compr ehensively  described
by  Eisner (1985) w DEMO o, in an evalua tion of the
differ ences betw een DEMO tistic and scientiﬁc
a ppr oaches to qualita tive r esear ch, identiﬁed
and described ten k ey factors. T hese ar e
admirably summarized by  Brown(1996) and
illustra ted in Ta ble I DEMO or der to under pin the
a b ove arguments.
Practitioner mar k et r esear ch  will use an y
method a t  its disposal, r e ga r dless of cor r ect-
DEMO and compa tibility. Typically, a practi-
tioner will ga ther infor DEMO tion fr om a variety
of sour ces and in a variety of ways. T he con-
ce pts of rigour and validity seldom DEMO into
the mind-frame. T he practitioner will have a
“feel” for the value and usefulness of infor ma-
tion and its sour ce and DEMO intuitively  acce pt
or r eject infor ma tion as it DEMO ga ther ed. Much
of the infor ma tion ga thering (DEMO the use of
the ter m “infor ma tion ga thering” as opposed
to mar k et r esear ch) may w ell be unstr uctur ed
and without a single speciﬁc pur pose.
Ta ble DEMO illustra tes clear ly  the void in both
a ppr oach DEMO thinking betw een academics
and practitioners. T he question becomes:
how can mar k eting academics mak e r esear ch
mor e DEMO “r eal”, w hile not r ejecting
the characteristics of “academic” DEMO
science r esear ch, par ticular ly  its rigour and
validity? Can academic r esear chers accom-
moda te the ethos of “practitioner” r esear ch ?
T his would r equir e acce ptance of the view
tha t inter pr eta tion of ﬁndings is DEMO ely
personal for the pur pose of understanding in
a business context and this understanding is
pr ecisely personal, in ter ms of it r ela ting to a
practitioner’s business. Equally, might acade-
mic r esear chers acce pt the a ppr oach of using
and/or DEMO an y r esear ch  method with
w hich the r DEMO cher is comfor ta ble and
w hich he/she chooses to use out of con ve-
nience or expediency? T his is unclear
because social science r esear ch  fails to r ecog-
nize tha t mar k et infor ma tion is of a unique
value DEMO an individual and his/her compan y.
H owever, if su DEMO  a  notion is acce pted, w h a t
might DEMO -r ela ted academic r esear ch
look lik e and w h a t  pr oblems, if an y, would
ensue? DEMO the r esear ch  would r eﬂect the
unique situa tion DEMO context of the r esear ch
pr oblem, its distinct characteristics DEMO e diffi-
cult to deﬁne, but if the uniqueness of such
DEMO esear ch  in practice is acce pted, then this is
not an issue. Of course, this gives rise to con-
cer ns r e ga r ding the validity of the r esear ch .
David Carson and
Nicole Coviello
Qualitative research
issues at the marketing/
DEMO interface
Marketing Intelligence &
Planning
14/6 [1996] 51–58
Table I
DEMO between scientiﬁc and artistic approaches to research
Criteria Science Art
Mode of representation Formal statements; literal language Non-literal language; evocative statements
Appraisal criteria DEMO paramount; unbiased methods Persuasiveness paramount; seek illumination,
of data collection and analysis; penetration and insight; arguments supported
conclusions supported by evidence DEMO success in shaping concepts
Point of focus Concentrates on overt or expressed Concentrates on experience and meanings
behaviour (which can be recorded, (observed behaviour provides springboard
counted and analysed) to understanding)
Nature of generalization Extrapolates from particular to general; Studies single cases and the idiosyncratic, DEMO
randomly drawn sample is deemed presupposes that generalizations reside in the
representative of universe and particular, that broad (if not statistically
statistically signiﬁcant DEMO signiﬁcant) lessons can be learned from the
drawn about latter from DEMO unique
Role of form Results reported in neutral, Avoidance of standardization; form and
unembellished manner (third person, content interact; meaning of content
past tense) and according to a standard determined by form in which it is
format (problem, literature review, expressed
sample, analysis, implications)
Degree of licence Factual emphasis; little scope for Subjective orientation; DEMO self-
personal expression or ﬂights of expression both permitted and expected
imaginative fancy
Prediction and control Aims to anticipate the future accurately, Aims to explicate, thereby increasing
thus enabling or facilitating its control understanding; less DEMO than heuristic
Sources of data Standardized instruments, such as The investigator DEMO the principal research
questionnaire surveys or observation instrument and his or her experiences the
schedules, used to collect data major source of data
Basis of knowing Methodological monism; only formal Methodological pluralism; knowledge
propositions provide DEMO (affect conveyed by successful evocation of experience
and cognition separate) in question (affect and cognition combined)
Ultimate aims Discovery of truth and laws of nature; Creation of meaning and generation of
propositions taken to be true when understanding; statements seek to alter
they correspond with the reality they extant perceptions about the world
seek to explain
Source: Brown (1996), originally adapted from Eisner (1985)
If, how ever, the practitioner r esear ch
a ppr oach can be link ed in some manner with
inte gr a ted, multimethod academic r esear ch ,
some concer ns may be over come. T his is a
par ticular ly  impor tant issue a t  the mar DEMO et-
ing/entr e p r eneurship interface. T hus, the
DEMO us is on academics a t  the interface to soften
cur DEMO ent and esta blished philosophies and to
encompass a “practitioner philosoph y”
w hich is na turalistic and perha ps inher ently
ar tistic. DEMO his is not an impossible notion;
after all, “ar t” DEMO be based on for ms and
str uctur es, and on DEMO and views,
but the individual outcomes ar e still essen-
tially singular ly  cr ea tive with unique
cir cumstances in mind.
Conclusions
T his pa per discusses a variety of qualita tive
r esear DEMO  a ppr oaches in the context of a
ra pidly emerging DEMO ea of r esear ch  inter est:
the mar k DEMO/entr e p r eneurship interface.
Applica tion of the principles of gr ounded
theory, using computer softwar e in da ta
analysis and theory building, and developing
a combined method/“str eam” a ppr oach to
r esear ch  ar e all discussed, and their r DEMO tive
str engths and w eaknesses noted.
Re ga r dless of a ppr oach, the critical issue to
be addr essed by  DEMO esear chers is one of integ ra-
tion, w her e DEMO the r esear ch  pr oblem and
method ar e view DEMO holistically, in an effor t  to
allow for pr ogr ession of knowledge and
understanding of the phenomena in question.
To this end, the pa per intr oduces a radical
r esear ch  a ppr oach, a ttempting to accommo-
da te the intuitive practitioner r esear ch  of the
entr e p r eneur with aspects of the academic
pr ocess. Mor e speciﬁcally, it is r ecommended
tha t “r eal” r esear ch  in emerging ar eas such
as the mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship interface,
[ 57 DEMO
David Carson and
Nicole Coviello
Qualitative research
issues at the marketing/
DEMO interface
Marketing Intelligence &
Planning
14/6 [1996] 51–58
[ 58 DEMO
should r eﬂect the ethos of the practitioner’s
na tural or “ar tistic” r esear ch  method.
Enlightened educa tors have long r ecognized
the need to ada pt mar k eting techniques and
teaching a DEMO oaches to suit the entr e p r eneur-
ial context, DEMO such considera tion is long
over due in our a ppr oach to r esear ch  design
and analysis.
References
Aldrich, H.E. (1992), “Methods in our madness?
T r ends in entr e DEMO r eneurship r esear ch”, in
Sexton, D.L. and Kasar da, J .D. (Eds), T he State
of the Art of DEMO reneurship R esearch, PWS
Kent, Boston, MA, pp. 191-213.
Anderson, P.F. (1983), “Mar k eting, scientiﬁc
pr ogr ess and scientiﬁc method”, J our nal of
Mark eting, Vol. 47, F all, pp. 18-31.
Br own, S. (1996), “Ar t  DEMO science? Fifty years of
mar k eting deba te”, J our nal of Mark eting
Mana gement, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. DEMO
Carson, D.J . and Coviello, N.E. (1995), “Resear ch DEMO
ing the mar k eting/entr e p r eneurship inter-
face”, in R esearch  at the Mark eting/Entrep re-
neurship Interface (for thcoming).
Chur chill, N.C. (1992) “Resear ch  issues DEMO entr e-
pr eneurship”, in Sexton, D.L. and Kasar da,
J .D. (Eds), T he State of the Art of Entrep reneur-
ship R esearch, PWS Kent, Boston, MA,
pp. 579-96.
Davis, C.D., Hills, G.E. and LaForge, R.W. (1985),
DEMO he mar k eting/small enter prise paradox: a
r esear DEMO  a genda”, Inter national Small Busi-
ness J our nal, DEMO 3 No. 3, pp. 31-42.
Deshpande, R. (1983), “‘P DEMO lost’: on theory
and method in r esear ch  in mar k eting”, J our-
nal of Mark eting, Vol. 47, F all, pp. 101-10.
Eisner, E. (1985), T he Art of Educational Evalua-
tion: A Personal V iew, F almer Pr ess, London.
Gibb, A. and Davies, L. (1990), “In pursuit of
framewor ks for the development of gr owth
models of the small DEMO, Inter national
Small Business J our nal, Vol. 19 No. 1,
pp. 15-31.
Glaser, B. and Strauss, A. (1967), T he Discov er y of
Gr ounded T heor y, Aldine, DEMO go, IL.
Hills, G.E. and LaForge, R.W. (Eds) (1992),
“Resear ch  a t  the mar k eting interface to
advance entr e p r eneurship theory”, Entrep re-
neurship: T DEMO y and Practice, Vol. 16 No. 3,
pp. 33-59.
Hofer, C.W. and Bygr ave, W.D. (1992), “Resear ching
entr e DEMO r eneurship”, Entrep reneurship: T heor y
and Practice, Spring, pp. 91-100.
Kuhn, T.S. (1970), T he Structure of Scientiﬁc DEMO evo-
lutions, University of Chica go Pr ess, Chica go,
IL.
Miles, M.B. and Huber man, A.M. (1994), Qualita-
tiv e Data Analysis, 2nd ed., Sa ge, T housand
Oaks, DEMO
Mor ris, L.J . and Stenberg, L. (1991), “Entr DEMO p r e-
neurship r esear ch: methodological issues in
mar DEMO eting stra t e gy studies”, in Hills, G.E. and
LaForge, R.W. (Eds), R esearch  at the Mark et-
ing/Entrep reneurship Interface, University of
Illinois a t  Chica go, Chica go, IL, pp. 185-201.
Stewar t, A. (1991), “A pr DEMO on the anthology
of entr e p r eneurship”, Entrep reneurship:DEMO
T heor y and Practice, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 71-91.
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J . (1990), Basics of Qualita-
tiv e R esearch: Gr ounded T heor y Pr ocedures
and T echniques, Sa ge, Newbury P a r k, CA.
Van de Ven, A.H. (1992), “Longitudinal methods
for studying the pr DEMO of entr e p r eneur-
ship”, in Sexton, D.L. and Kasar da, J .D. (Eds),
T he State of the Art of Entrep reneurship
R esearch, PWS Kent, Boston, MA, DEMO 214-42.
Wor tman, M.S. Jr, Spann, M.S. and Adams, M.
(1989), “T he interface of entr e p r eneurship and
mar k eting: conce pts and r esear ch  perspec-
tives”, in Hills, G.E., LaForge, R.W. and
P a r k er, B.J . (Eds), R esearch  at the Mark et-
ing/Entrep reneurship Interface, University of
Illinois a t  Chica go, Chica go, IL, pp. 117-37.
Zelditch, M. (1962), “Some methodological DEMO ob-
lems of ﬁeld studies”, J our nal of American
Sociolog DEMO, Vol. 67, pp. 566-76.
Zinkhan, G.M. and Hirscheim, R. (DEMO), “T r uth in
mar k eting theory and r esear ch: an alter na-
tive perspective”, J our nal of Mark DEMO,
Vol. 56, April, pp. 80-88.{1g42fwefx}