This article was downloaded by: [University of Toronto]
On: 4 September DEMO
Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 905051418]
Publisher Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer DEMO, 37-
41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Entrepreneurship & DEMO Development
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
DEMO://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713721987
Entrepreneurship: a social psychological perspective
Alan L. DEMO; Robyn W. Johnsona
a The University of Southern California,
To DEMO this Article Carsrud, Alan L. and Johnson, Robyn W.(1989) 'Entrepreneurship: a social psychological perspective',
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 1: 1, 21 — 31
To link to this Article: DOI: DEMO/08985628900000003
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08985628900000003
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR DEMO
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This DEMO may be used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any DEMO or
systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or
distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.
The publisher DEMO not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or accurate or up to date. The DEMO of any instructions, formulae and drug doses
should be independently verified DEMO primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss,
actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly
or indirectly in connection with or arising out of DEMO use of this material.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP & REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT. 1
(1 989). 21-3 1
Entrepreneurship: DEMO social psychological perspective
ALAN L.
CARSRUD and ROBYN
W. JOHNSON
The University of Southern California
Abstract-Entrepreneurship can be advanced by idemfing other theories of DEMO
behavior that mn be mferred to the study of the field. Research paradigm such as
the contingency and truns~~~onol
Entrepreneurial Md require research dLr
DEMO rdect the richness of the processes diced. A social psych~logicol approach
to the field has not yet matured Future research using more sophisticated behavioral
DEMO will have significant impact on the undentrrnding of the development of
entrepred behaviors.
Current state of the art
Research in quest of a paradigm
DEMO, although ancient in practice, is new as a field of scientific study. The
current status of entrepreneurship research reflects a preparadigmatic tliscipline that DEMO
searching for identity and respectability (Carsrud, Olm, & Eddy, 1986b; Vesper, 1987).
Entrepreneurship research is at a stage similar to DEMO previously identified with other
behavioral-based phenomena such as "management policy," "organizational behavior,"
or "social psychology" (Koch, 1959). We are approaching entrepreneurship from a
social psychological perspective because it can be DEMO as social behavior.
Inadequate transfer of theories
'
The advancement of DEMO research has been inhibited by the indiscriminate
transfer of methodologies and theories from other disciplines (Carsrud et al., 1986b).
Whereas this "transfer of technology" is uSeful, it often has not been successful. For
DEMO, Brockhaus and Horwia (1986) note that the overall results of DEMO psychologi-
cal studies of entrepreneurs have been disappointing. There are four possible reasons for
the lack of success in adapting psychological theories to entrepreneurship.
DEMO Assumption of srable characteristics. The first reason for unsucct:ssful transfer is
an assumption held by many theories. Most theories have traditionally fixused on DEMO
characteristics of entrepreneurs, and stable groups and organizations that were neither
DEMO, nor in a state of flux and change (Begley. and Boyd. 1987). However, entrepreneur-
ial behavior is a dynamic ever-changing process that is usually evidenceti in situations of
instability and changes (Carsrud, 1987)DEMO
2. Poor application of knowledge. Another reason for the disappointing perfor-
mance of psychological theories is the tendency to misapply them (C;usrud, DEMO, &
Thomas, 1984; Carsrud et al., 1986b). For DEMO, McClelland's (1961) work on
achievement motivation continues to influence DEMO research. However, Mc-
Clelland's unidimensional approach has long since been DEMO by more
sophisticated
behaviors an
madelc of leadership hold great promise.
complerly &temnrumd
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 03:03 4 September 2010
22
A. L. CARSRUD and R. W.
JOHNSON
multidimensional models and measures DEMO achievement motivation (Spence &
Helmreich, 1978; Carsrud et al., DEMO, 1986b; Carsrud & Olm, 1986; Helmreich,
Sawin, & DEMO, 1986; Carsrud, Olm, Dodd, & Gaglio, 1987).
Researchers in social psychology have conducted extensive investigations into the
relationships between personality DEMO social behaviors (Snyder & Ickes. 1985). Re-
searchers in entrepreneurship, on the other hand, often have made naive and simplistic
assumptions about the relationships between personality and social behaviors. An exam-
ple of such DEMO naive assumption comes from the early work of McClelland (1961). DEMO
concludes that achievement motivation drives people to become entrepreneurs.
Research has found that entrepreneurs are high achievers, but it has also been found
that successful executives are also high achievers. Motivation alone does not seem to DEMO
an effective differential variable between entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs. In addi-
tion, DEMO causal direction is unclear and does little to help us understand entrepreneurial
behaviors. That is, successful performance may contribute to high need for achievement.
rather than a high need for achievement contributing to success. The fact DEMO the casual
direction is unclear suggests that achievement motivation alone is not a sufficient expla-
nation for the drive to become an entrepreneur. To DEMO that achievement motivation
drives people to become entrepreneurs would be a naive assumption. A more likely
interpretation is that motivation has a general causal DEMO on any type of performance
success.
3. Conficsion of levels of analysis. The third reason that psychological approaches
have not met expectations may relate DEMO levels of analysis. Current research typically
does not integrate both "micro" and "macro" level variables into the study of the
process of DEMO venture creation. For example, the "macro" level variables of social
DEMO and socialization influence the "micro" level variables of the entrepreneur's
"personality" and oven behaviors. Only a few studies have related "macro" level
variables of social context, such as industry structure with "micro" level variables such
as the individual entrepreneur (Sandberg & Hofer. 1987)DEMO
4. Lack of systemuric research. Indicative of the lack of systematic research in
entrepreneurship is the dearth of adequate operational definitions in the field. DEMO exam-
ples, the conceptual argument on the differences between small business DEMO entrepre-
neurship (Cariand, Hoy, Boulton, & Carland, 1984) is reminiscent of "how many angels
can dance on the head of a pin." This argument would be irrelevant if global operational
definitions were routinely applied by researchers. The recent work of Brockhaus (1987)
and his collaborators on developing mutually agreed upon measures of research popula-
tions may DEMO the development of much needed systematic research.
Broadening the psychological perspective
To abandon a psychological perspective as a part of the research repertoire would DEMO
several useful contemporary theories. It would also ignore significant advances in re-
search methodology. If the focus is on entrepreneurial behaviors and related social DEMO
uli, then entrepreneurship is clearly a social psychological phenomena.
A social DEMO approach could provide significant and meaningful advance-
ments in entrepreneurship research through the adaptation of welldeveloped and sup-
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 03:03 4 September 2010
A SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
23
ported theories. Any adoption of social psychological DEMO also requir'es the adoption
of related sophisticated research methodologies (Dawes & Smith, 1985; Kenny, 1985;
Schuman & Kalton, 1985). Thls paper is an attempt to transfer the theoretical ap-
proaches developed DEMO social psychology to the study of entrepreneurid behaviors in
their social contexts. This paper does not focus on methodological issues, but more on
empirically based theory.
A social definition of entrepreneurship
Take as a set of DEMO that entrepreneurial behaviors are most prevalent in unsta-
ble, socioeconomic environments, particularly in new ventures and those organizations
adapting to rapid change. In DEMO, assume that these behaviors are characterized by
the pursuit of opportunities DEMO resource-poor situations where the creation of value is a
goal. Individuals who are opportunity driven and capable of identifying g:rowing markets
exhibit entrepreneurial DEMO Finally assume that such behaviors are elicited most
frequently whenever the environment is most congenial (Duffy & Stevenson, 1984;
Stevenson, Roberts, & Grousbeck, 1985). Therefore, entrepreneurial behaviors can oc-
cur in a variety of contexts, not just in the business setting itself.
Entrepreneurial behaviors frequently occur within organizational contexts that are
resource tense or strained (Cooper, 1985; Carsrud, 1987; Peterson, 1987). Thus entre-
preneurship research could provide significant input into the study of small group behav-
ior DEMO behaviors in larger organizations from the little studied perspective of highly
unstable and unstructured groups (Pfeffer, 1985).
Social context of entrepreneurial behaviors
DEMO social context in which entrepreneurial behaviors occur includes role-sets (Aldrich
& DEMO, 1986). which are components of social relationships that occur by DEMO of
an individual occupying a particdm social status. The entrepreneur's role-set may in-
clude family members, venture capitalists. bankers, partners, and distributors. The en-
trepreneur's behaviors are significantly influenced by the networks of DEMO they are a
part. This is especially true when members of the entrepreneur's role-set have conflict-
ing expectations, since the individual will have to adapt his or her behavior to meet these
differing expectations.
Various DEMO strategies are employed by the entrepreneur in fulfilling ths role.
As the focal person in the role-set, these strategies influence the survival of the business
venture. Also as the focal person in the role-set, the entrepreneur deper~ds on informa-
tion and resources provided by social networks.
Role-set and DEMO influence may strongly effect entrepreneurs throul;h susceptibility
to "group think" (Janis, 1972). For example, entrepreneurs may surround themselves
with management teams that are "yes men." These individuals may Nter any discon-
DEMO information related to decision making before it is considered. Such a process
may facilitate group cohesiveness among the members of the start-up team, but jeopard-
ize the venture by increasing poor decision making. Thus the study DEMO management
teams and their effect on success in emerging industries (Vmy & Ibhman, 1986)
could be conceptualized in terms of "groupthink" DEMO social influence.
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 03:03 4 September 2010
Social nerworh: know-who versus
kn0.w-how
A. L. CARSRUD and R. W. JOHNSON
Carsrud, Gaglio, and Olm (1987) assume that entrepreneurial behaviors are DEMO de-
termined by social situations, rather than determined by macro-level variables DEMO as
economic conditions or political climate. The innovation component of that development
is the linkage of key resources. The study of those linkages from DEMO network analysis
perspective should provide information about the social processes that are most signifi-
cant in successful new venture development.
The new venture development DEMO is strongly affected by social contacts, or
linkages, which are the patterns of social interaction with significant human resources.
The entrepreneur is embedded DEMO a complex set of social networks that either facilitate or
inhibit venture development through linkages between the entrepreneur and required
resources and available economic DEMO In social situations, these resources can
be seen as being various DEMO who have skills, information, or control over materials
or capital funds that are necessary for the success of the new venture.
Conceptually, a strong situational determinant in entrepreneurial behaviors should be
the density of the DEMO or linkages. These contacts include not only direct contacts,
but other networks in which these contacts are members. This phenomena could be
called DEMO "strength of weak ties." From such diverse contacts the entrepreneur should
be able to gather the necessary resources and information to assure the DEMO devel-
opment and growth of a new venture. These would include finding product-service
ideas, access to new technology, transfer of technology, capital funds, current market
data, and appraisal of the relevant competition. It is DEMO direct and indirect contacts
that contribute to the development and success of the new venture.
Despite the potentially salient role of networks, their effect may not always be easily
identified. For example, in asking entrepreneurs to recount their successes and failures.
it is not uncommon for them to DEMO the "know-how" aspects of starting or
running a business rather than the "know-who." Peterson and Ronstadt (1987) refer to
entrepreneurial "know-how" as possessing the particular skills, traits, or business
knowledge for entrepreneurship. "Know-who" describes an entrepreneur who demon-
strates the power of having DEMO to the right contacts at the right time.
Networks may not uniformly be used by the entrepreneur. Carsrud and coworkers
(1987) found networks DEMO be unrelated to the success of the initiation process. but poten-
tially very important to success in the growth phase. It is clear that DEMO role of networks
has yet to be adequately researched in the study of the successes and failures of entrepre-
neurial ventures (Birley, 1985)DEMO
Nevertheless, entrepreneurial networks increasingly have been associated with suc-
cess. Entrepreneurs DEMO on these contacts and connections to cut comers, to pave the
DEMO for acceptance, and enhance image and credibility (Mitton. 1984). These contacts
can also provide information and support, help avoid costly time-consuming errors and
research, and help locate resources. Such contacts also block or slow down adversaries.
Entrepreneurs constantly maintain these relationships to be called upon when DEMO to
provide information and assistance (Birley, 1985).
Peterson and Ronstadt (1987) propose a silent strength explanation for the tendency
of entrepreneurs DEMO avoid talking about their personal networks in terms of their suc-
cesses and failures. The entrepreneur may wish for these contacts to remain confidential,DEMO
because if revealed, the strength of the network with these people DEMO be weakened. It is
also possible that the entrepreneur does not emphasize the importance of his or her
networks because the individual wants to DEMO credit for the business's success in
Downloaded By: [University of DEMO At: 03:03 4 September 2010
A SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECINE
25
terms of innate abiIity and sliilIs (know-how) rather than,at&buting success to "know-
who". This attributional DEMO has been extensively studied by social psychologists
(Ross & Fletcher. 1985)DEMO Incorporating both "know-how" and "know-who" provides
the entrepreneur with a broad perspective that places environment, people, events, infor-
mation, and DEMO into understandable and manipulative perspective (Minon.
1984).
Social influence and DEMO
Funhermore, there are both cognitive and social influences on entrepre:neurial DEMO
iors. Risk-taking propensity is a cognitive factor that influences human behavior (DEMO
cock, 1986). Risk-taking propensity refers to the predisposition to behave, whereas risk-
taking (referred to earlier) refers to the actual behavior. DEMO factors influence both
cognitions and information processing related to roleenactment (Aldrich & Zimmer.
1986). The entrepreneurial role is embedded in a social context. Fulfilling this role is
facilitated or constrained by people's positions in DEMO networks, role expectations, and
social pressures to conform (Moscovici, 1985). Understanding confornlity and social
influence is important in discerning potential limitations DEMO the exhibition of entrepre-
neurial behaviors.
Impression management: the entrepreneurial image
DEMO example of how social influence impacts entrepreneurial behavior comes from im-
pression management research on the self-evaluation process and behavioral self-
regulation. Central to DEMO management theory is a person's exp:rience of self,
which often takes the form of imagining how the entrepreneur would be perceived DEMO
responded to by significant others such as bankers, investors, and employees (Baldwin &
Hoirnes. 1987).
Impression management focuses on the public DEMO of the self ,to people in the
environment. Impression management also DEMO the internal representation of the
self by imagining the reactions of others. People act in ways to uphold! their sense of
acceptance by others. DEMO psychological research supports the idea tha.t the behaviors
of people who focus on publicly observable aspects of self tend to conform to the
evaluative DEMO of this public audience (Carver & Scheier, 1981). Ib the entrepre-
neur acceptance and recognition by others may lead to the attainment DEMO resources that
are useful to the entrepreneur. How much the entrepreneur conforms to stxietal expecta-
tions may be critical to the ultimate success of DEMO business venture.
Another interpretation of the entrepreneur's reluctance to stress the significance of
social networks (Peterson & Ronstadt, 1987) also stems from the prillciples of self-
presentation and impression management. Societal norms and expectatiorls DEMO the entre-
preneur may tend to be biased against networking and may make the entrepreneur feel
guilty about expressing "know-who" rather than "know-how" (Peterson & Ronstadt,
1987). To avoid this response bias DEMO others, the entrepreneur often presents an image of
the competent business DEMO, emphasizing skills and knowledge utiiiztxl in becoming
successful. When an entrepreneur DEMO an image, he or she makes a commitment to
live up DEMO that image (Schlenker, 1980). By failing to do so, DEMO entrepreneur risks losing
the networks.
People's self-presentations are responsive to making a favorable imp]-ession on soci-
ety, so that the social attitude will be one of promotion of entreprer~eurial growth.
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 03:03 4 September 2010
26
A. L. CARSRUD and R. W. JOHNSON
Violating the societal norms DEMO have the effect of changing the public's attitude
toward the entrepreneur from one of approval to dsapproval.
Equitable exchange: managing a favorable impression
One strategy the entrepreneur uses to preserve impressions once created is described DEMO
equity theory of social relationships (Markus & Zajonc. 1985). The DEMO man-
ages a favorable impression with networks by continually making the network members
feel that they are in an equitable relationship with the entrepreneur.
DEMO, like all individuals, are intermeshed in a social matrix in which their
outcomes are interlinked (Schlenker, 1980). In other words, when people interact, their
actions and behaviors have consequences for themselves as well as for others. Interde-
pendence of outcomes is characteristic of such interaction: outcomes received are de-
rived from the interplay of one's own DEMO and those of others (Schlenker, 1980).
Reciprocity and social exchange occur in social interactions with others. This ex-
change involves the reciprocation DEMO tangible or intangible outcomes that are seen as
valuable. Outcomes involve both rewards and costs, and a profit is yielded when costs
are subtracted from rewards for each participant. It is these exchanges that are the DEMO
of networking by entrepreneurs.
Exchange theory as proposed by social psychologists holds that all people, not just
entrepreneurs. want to maximize profits from interactions (Schlenker, 1980). If profits
are high, the entrepreneur will be satisfied. If the profits are low, relative to what could
be obtained in an alternative relationship, the entrepreneur is likely to leave. The pattern
also applies to those individuals who are a part of the entrepreneur'DEMO network. By man-
aging the impression of an equitable relationship, the DEMO will be more likely to
maintain the network. Different impressions must be managed with different audiences
and at different stages of firm development.
In DEMO theory the exchange of goods and/or services (sometimes referred to DEMO
rewards) between two people must be equitable for both parties. This DEMO is not unlike
the "win-win" strategies frequently proposed by entrepreneurs in "cutting a deal" with
business associates. Likewise, the costs for either party should not outweigh the rewards
that are received. That is, the proportion of rewards over costs for one person is equal to
the DEMO of reward over costs for the other person. This idea of equity in personal
networks was implied by Peterson and Ronstadt (1987) when DEMO stated that an entre-
preneur should utilize a network with the understanding that it is a "two-way street." It
should also be noted DEMO the maintenance of equity in relationships extends far beyond
the principle of impression management. Equity is a critical dimension influencing the
formation and stability DEMO many relationships.
l3e entrepreneur and role theory
The more the entrepreneur fulfills role expectations. the more likely the individual will
be to succeed in DEMO venture (Sexton & Bowman, 1985; Sexton, 1986). Thus the study
of social norms, mores, and values is an effective avenue DEMO research investigation with.
respect to the initiation and growth of new ventures @ion. 1985; Spence, Deaux. &
Helrnreich, 1985; Suyker & Statham, 1985).
An example of how attitudes and norms influence the role of the entrepreneur comes
from reported differences between male and female entrepreneurs DEMO the United States.
Carsrud and Olm (1986). Hisrich (1986), and Bowman-Upton, Carsrud. and Olm (1987)
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 03:03 4 September 2010
A SO%
PSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
27
report statistics that female"~ntrepreneurs, until recently, were not as successful as male
entrepreneurs.
One explanation is that women entrepreneurs generally have less experience and
specialized education than male entrepreneurs. Another DEMO may be that females
stan businesses that may not be counted, DEMO as their own consulting :practices. Con-
temporary research on sex-role orientation DEMO provide some useful insights into the
differential rates of new venture initiation in males and females (Spence: & Helrnreich,
1978; Spence er al., 1985). For example, the observed educational difference may re-
DEMO a social attitude or norm opposed to women obtaining specialized! education and
training in business. There is strong evidence to indicate that such a DEMO held view
has been prevalent in the past (Hisrich, 1986).
The exhibition of entrepreneurial behaviors would be mtluencea by tn~e soclu accept-
DEMO of those behaviors. Even if women had a strong desire to fulfd the entrepreneurial
role to its fullest, the societal norm toward women in this role woultl have made it
difficult for them to achieve success DEMO the role of an entrepreneur since they may lack
the necessary know-how that would have been available to them through training and
education (Carsrud, Olm, & Ahlgren, 1986a). Research in adult socialization process
may provide some interesting insight into this phenomena (Dion, 1985).
Role DEMO: entrepreneur versus manager
Research on role conflict may also be useful DEMO the study of the changes tllat occur during
life phases of the entrepreneurial venture. For example, the entrepreneur may experi-
ence conflict due to role-transition as a part of achieving company growth (Sexton &
Bowman, 1985; Stevenson et al., 1985). As resources increase, a new role identity
emerges: the role of "resource manager." The entrepreneur must moclify the existing
dominant role and associated behaviors to ensure the maintenance DEMO the business (Sex-
ton & Bowman, 1985; Sexton. 1986).
DEMO way the entrepreneur adjusts behaviors to the emerging managerial role is by
learning new behaviors such as the delegation of authority and responsibilities. Because
DEMO role conflict, contradictory behaviors may interfere with the fulfillment of new DEMO
demands such as delegating authority. Role conflict may result from the unwillingness to
delegate responsibility and thereby contribute to the downfall of the business DEMO
Multiple role involvement may also offer benefits as well as costs. One benefit might
be access to multiple segments of society. These different segments DEMO offer network
assets that include resources, monetary and nonmonetary (i.e., DEMO) rewards, as
well as contributions to personal growth and development (DEMO & Rapkin, 1986).
The entrepreneur's health and well-being is DEMO by the membcrs of the social
network. Role partners such as one's spouse, clients, and business associates help shape
role expectations and DEMO (Hirsch & Rapkin, 1986). These role p:mers may also
provide or withhold emotional support andor material goods that can assist the DEMO
ment of role tasks and help reduce the amount of conflict experienced. In other words.
networks, both personal and business, can help or DEMO the enactment of business-
related roles. Thus social networks help to define, influence, and evaluate entrepreneur-
ial behaviors (Carsrud et al., 1987)DEMO
Knowledge and enactment of appropriate roles are important for entrepreneurial
success. Roles act as social scripts that dictate how one should behave. Roles give
DEMO and purpose to a person's behavior (Stryker & Statham, 1985). In assuming the
role of enwpreneur, people must be able to adapt to the set of behaviors that are
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 03:03 4 September 2010
28
A. L.
CARSRUD ud
R. W. JOHNSON
associated with this entrepreneurial DEMO Becoming an ownerlmanager is a role-
transition in itself, since the DEMO system often prepares individuals for entry level
positions in larger businesses, DEMO than considering starting a business as a viable
alternative (Sexton & DEMO, 1985; Sexton, 1986; Carsrud et al., 1986a).
Alternative DEMO to entrepreneurship research
A contingency theory of entrepreneurship
The trend in entrepreneurship research seems to follow the historical trends in leadership
research. In the DEMO stages of leadership research, the focus was on trait approaches.
This DEMO to research proved to be less informative than expected. The recent move
in entrepreneurship research to the study of leadershiplike behaviors and a situational
DEMO likewise follows the research history of leadership (Hollander, 1985). .
If this parallel is correct, one can anticipate the next stages in the theory-research
cycle. For example, as an outgrowth of the situational approach to leadership, there
developed a series of contingency models that attempted to specify the factors that made
various leader qualities effective given certain contingencies.
DEMO short, contingency theories of entrepreneurship behavior would emphasize those
environmental conditions DEMO elicit different entrepreneurial attributes for effectiveness.
For example. Carsrud et al. (DEMO) have proposed a path-analytic model viewing the
effects of personality and DEMO variables as they would be mediated by various
organizational and situational factors that effect the ultimate success of the business
venture.
A transactional theory DEMO entrepreneurship
Another model derived from the leadership research tradition is the transactional model
of behavior (Hollander, 1985). As we have argued up DEMO this point, one can perceive of
entrepreneurship behaviors as being social DEMO nature and involving relationships of the
entrepreneur with others in the environment. Transactional models of leadership stress
the two-way interaction of leaders and followers. DEMO, similar patterns exist in
entrepreneurial interactions with lawyers, banks, and DEMO Transactional models
take into account the perceptions and counterperceptions involved.
Although the transactional approach has typically focused on stable organizations, or
laboratory created groups, the approach signifies a more active role by those in the
social environment than other models. If one extrapolates this model to entrepreneur-
ship, the phenomena becomes an exchange relationship with two-way influence between
the entrepreneur DEMO other individuals.
Thus entrepreneurial behaviors are not only situationally influenced, as DEMO the contin-
gency model, but also influenced by social interactions in DEMO the entrepreneur is
placed. A transactional model may be a bridging paradigm in entrepreneurship research
between the traditional leadership literature in social psychology and DEMO network analy-
sis literature in sociology.
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] DEMO: 03:03 4 September 2010
A SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECIYVE
29
Conclusions
Entrepreneurship research will best be advanced DEMO identifying other areas of scientific
investigation that have followed similar patterns and strategies, or deal with similar
behaviors. Thus more productive models, theories, and technologies can be transferred
to the study of entrepreneurship. Research paradigms DEMO as the contingency and trans-
actional models of leadership hold great promise in furthering entrepl-eneurship re-
search.
Entrepreneurial behaviors, like all human behaviors, DEMO complexly dletermined and
their study requires models that do justice to the complexity and richness of the entrepre-
neurial behaviors being exhibited. The social DEMO approach to the study of
entrepreneurship has yet to reach maturity. Future results using more sophisticated
models wiLl have more significant impact on entrepreneurship DEMO other behavioral
approaches previously undertaken in the study of entrepreneurship.
References
Aldrich. H., & Zimmer. C. (1986). Entrepreneurship through social networks. In DEMO L.
Sexton & R. W. Smilor (Eds.), 7%e art and DEMO of enrrepreneurship. Cambridge: Ballinger.
Baldwin. M. W., & Holmes. J. G. (1987). Salient private audiences and awareness of the self.
Joumal of Perso~liry and Social Psychology. 52 (6). 1087-1098.
Begley. T. M.. & Boyd, D. P. (1987). Psychological characteristics associated with performance
in DEMO firms and smaller businesses. Journal of Buiness Yemring. 2 (11). DEMO
Birley, S. (1985). The role of networks in the entrepreneurial process. Journal of Business
Yenmirg, 1(1), p. 107-1 18.
Bowman-Upton, N.. Carsrud. A. L., & Olm, K. W. (1987). DEMO venture funding for the
female entrepreneur: A preliminary analysis. Frontiers of DEMO research. Wellesley
MA: Babson College.
Brockhaus. R. H.. Sr. (1987). Improving entrepreneurship research: Suggestions for popula-
tion descriptions. In E. Gatewood. Entrepreneurial Education: I. Session at the meeting of the
International Council on Small Business, Vancouver. Canada.
Brockhaus. R. H.. Sr.. & Horwitz. P. S. (DEMO). The psychology of the entrepreneur. In D. L.
Sexton and R. W. Smilor (Eds.). The an and science of entrepreneurship. Cambridge: DEMO
Carland, J. W., Hoy. W. R., Boulton. W. R.. & DEMO J. C. (1984). Differentiation entre-
preneurs from small business owners: A conceptualization. Academy of Managtment Review, 9
(2). 345-359.
Carsrud, A. L. (1987). Entrepreneurship: A behavioral science perspective. Speech presented
DEMO the Entrepreneurship Workshop of the National Centre for Management Rm:h and Develop
ment in London, Ontario. Canada.'
Carsrud, A. L.. & DEMO, K. W. (1986). The success of male and female entrepreneurs: A
comparative analysis of the effects of multidimensional achievement motivation and personality
traits. In R. Smilor & R. L. Kuhn (Eds.). Managing takc-off in fan growth films. New York:
Praeger, 147- 162.
Carsrud, DEMO L., Olm. K. W., & Ahlgren, R. D. (1986a). Comparison of femaJe entrepreneurs
and MBA students: Groomed for success or doomed to failure? [Summary] Prtxeedings of rhe
31st Intern~n~o~l on Small Business.
Carsrud. A. L., Olm, K. W., & Eddy, G. G. (1986b). Entrepreneurship: Research in quest of
a paradigm. In D. L. Sexton & R. W. Srnilor (Eds.). 7'7~ an and science of entrepreneurship.
Cambridge: Ballinger.
Council
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 03:03 4 September 2010
30
A. L. CARSRUD and R. W. JOHNSON
Carsrud, A. L., DEMO, K. W., & Thomas, J. B. (1984). Small business productivity: Relation-
ship of owner's personality to organizational success. In M. Woman (Ed.), Proceedings of rhe.
29rh world conference on small business. St. Louis: ISCB, 18-24.
Carsrud. A. L., Gaglio, C. M., & Olm, K. W. (1987). Entrepreneurs-Menton, networks.
and successful new venture development: An exploratory study. American Journal of Small Busi-
ness, DEMO (I), 13-18.
Carsrud, A. L., Olm, K. W., DEMO, B. G.. & Gaglio, C. M. (1987). Business initiation DEMO
success: A simulation study of personalities and organizational design. Fronrien of DEMO
ship research. Wellesley. MA: Babson College.
Carver. C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1981). Attention and self-regularion: A conrrol-theory ap-
proach to hwnan behavior. New York: Springer.
Cooper, A. C. (1985). The role of incubator organizations in the founding of growth-oriented
firms. Jountal DEMO Brrriness Yenturing, 1 (1). 75-86.
Dawes, R. M.. & DEMO, T. L. (1985). Attitude and opinion measurement. In G. Lindzey &
E. Aronson, (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology. I. New York: Random House.
Dion. K. K. (1985). Socialization in DEMO In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), The
handbook of DEMO psychology. II. New York: Random House.
Duffy. P. B., & Stevenson. H. H. (1984). Entrepreneurship and self-employment: under-
standing the distinctions. DEMO of enrrepreneurship research. Wellesey. MA: Babson College.
Helmreich, R. L., DEMO L. L., & Carsrud, A. L. (1986). The honeymoon DEMO in job
performance: Temporal increases in the predictive power of achievement DEMO Journal of
Applied Psychology, 71 (2). 185- 188.
Hirsch. B. J., & Rapkin. B. D. (1986). Multiple roles, social networks, and womens' well-
being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51 (6). 1237-1247.
Hisrich. R. D. (1986). The woman entrepreneur: Characteristics, skills. problems, and pre-
scriptions for success. In D. L. DEMO & R. W. Silor (Eds.) The an Md science of enrrepreneur-
ship. Cambridge: Balingcr.
Hollander. E. P. (1985). Leadership and power. DEMO G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), 7he
handbook of social DEMO 21. New York: Random House.
Janis, I. L. (1972). DEMO of groupthink Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Kenny. D. A. (1985). Quantitative methods for Social Psychology. In G. Lindzey, & E.
Aronson, (Eds.). 17u hcrndbook of social psychology, I. New York: Random House.
DEMO S. (1959). Psychology: A sfudy of a science. New York: McGraw-Hill.
McClelland. D. C. (1961). The Achieving Society, Toronto: DEMO PresslCollier-McMillain.
Markus. H.. & Zajonc. R. B. (1985). The cognitive DEMO in Social Psychology. In G.
Lindzey, & E. Aronson (Eds.), 7he handbook of social psychology. I. New York: Random House.
Minon, DEMO G. (1984). No money, know-how, know-who: Formula for managing venture
success and personal wealth. From'ers of Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson
College.
Moscovici. S. (1985). Social influence and conformity. In DEMO Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.),
The handbook of social psychology. 11. New York: Random House.
Peacock. P. (1986). The influence DEMO risk-taking as a cognitive judgmental behavior of small
business success. Frontiers of entrepreneurship research, Wellesley. MA: Babson College.
Peterson, R. (1987). DEMO with entrepreneurship research. Speech presented at the Entre-
preneurship Workshop of the National Centre for Management Research and Development in
London. Ontario, Canada.
Peterson, R, & Ronstadt, R. (1987). Developing your enrrepreneurial knowwho. DEMO,
Ontario: Wrking Paper Series NC 87-02 National Centre for Management DEMO and Devel-
opment.
Pfeffer. J. (1985). Organizations and organization theory. DEMO G. Lindzey & E. Aronson,
(Eds.). The handbook of DEMO psychology, I. New York: Random House.
Ross, M.. & Fletcher, G. J. 0. (1985). Atvibution and social perception. In G. Lindzey & E.
Aronson. (Eds.), The Mook of social psychology. I!. New York: Random House.
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 03:03 4 September 2010
A SOCIAL
PSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPEW
rite
3 1
Sandberg, W. R.. & C. W. (1987). Improving new kriture performance: The role of
strategy, industry structure, and the entrepreneur. Journal of Business Venncring. 2 (1) 5-28.
Schlenker, B. R. (1980). Impression management: The self-concept, DEMO identity, and inter-
personal relations. Monterey, CA: Wadswonh.
Schuman, H.. & Kalton, G. (1985). Survey Methods. In G. Lindzey & DEMO iironson. (Eds.),
7he handbook of social psychology, I. New DEMO: Random House.
Sexton. D. L. (1986). A pleasant dilemma: DEMO grow or not to grow. In R. Smilor and R. L.
Kuhn (Eds.). Managing rake-off in fat growth finns. New York: Praeger.
DEMO, D.. & Bowman, N. (1985). The entrepreneur: A capable executive and more. Journal
of Business Venturing, I (1). 129-140.
DEMO M., & Ickes. W. (1985). Personality and social behavior. In G. Linclzey & E. Aron-
son (Eds.), 7he handbook of social psychology, II. New York: Random House.
Spence, J. T.. & Helmreich, R. L. (1978). Macdiniry and femininity: 7heir psychological
dimensions, DEMO and onrecedenrs. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Spence. J. T., Deaux, K.. & Helmreich, R. L. (1985). Sex roles in contemporary American
society. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.). 7Xe handbook of social psychology, II. New York:
Random How.
Stevenson. H. H., Roberts, M. J., & Grousbeck, H. I. (1985). New business ventures and the
entrepreneur. Homewood, Ill. : Irwin.
Stryker. S., & Slatham, A. (1985). Symbolic Interaction and Role Theory. In G. Lindzey &
E. Aronson (Eds.), 7Xe handbook of social psychology, I. New York: Random House.
Vesper. K. ( 1987). Entrepreneurial academics. Journal of Small Business IUanagemenr, 25
(2). 1-7.
Virany, B.. & lbshman, M. L. (1986). Top management teams and corpor* DEMO In an
emerging industry. Journal of Business Venturing (1)2. 261-274.
DEMO;
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 03:03 4 September 2010{1g42fwefx}