J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
www.elsevier.com/locate/jﬁ
Experience, screening and syndication in venture capital
investments
Catherine Casamatta a,b,∗, Carole Haritchabalet c
a IDEI-CRG, Université de Toulouse 1, 21 allée de DEMO 31000 Toulouse, France
b Europlace Institute of Finance, France
c Université de Limoges and GREMAQ, Université de Toulouse 1, 21 allée de DEMO, 31000 Toulouse, France
Received 12 July 2006
Available online 12 April 2007
Abstract
We consider a theoretical model that offers a rationale for DEMO syndication of venture capital investments:
syndication improves the screening process of venture capitalists and prevents competition between in-
vestors after investment opportunities are DEMO The analysis identiﬁes the costs of syndication in terms
of investment decisions or post-investment involvement of venture capitalists. These costs depend crucially
on the DEMO of experience of venture capitalists. The model generates empirical predictions concerning the
determinants of syndication and the characteristics of syndicated deals.
© 2007 Elsevier DEMO All rights reserved.
JEL classiﬁcation: G2; G3; D8
Keywords: Venture capital; Syndication; Screening; Experience; Competition
1. Introduction
Venture capitalists often DEMO for ﬁnancial partners to complete their investments in start-
up ﬁrms. This so-called syndication can either take place at the same round of ﬁnancing DEMO be
sequential, with new partners coming in at later rounds of DEMO Even taken in the most
restrictive sense, syndication is widely observed: Brander et al. (2002) report from Canadian
data that 60% of DEMO capital investments were syndicated in 1997. Wright and Lockett (2003)
DEMO Corresponding author. Fax: +33 5 61 22 55 63.
E-mail addresses: catherine.casamatta@univ-tlse1.fr (C. Casamatta), carole.haritchabalet@univ-tlse1.fr
(C. Haritchabalet).
1042-9573/$ – DEMO front matter © 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jﬁ.2007.03.003
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
369
report from Venture Economics and EVCA data that about 30% of DEMO capital investments
were syndicated in Europe in 2001, compared to 60% DEMO the US.1 The objective of this paper is
to understand why venture capitalists syndicate and how syndication affects the efﬁciency and
the proﬁtability of DEMO venture capital industry.
At the root of these questions is the source of value-added of venture capitalists. Venture
capital investments can be successful because DEMO capitalists are good at selecting projects
and/or because they enhance the proﬁtability of the projects they back by providing useful advice.
Sahlman (1988, 1990) reports that venture capitalists spend a great deal of time DEMO carefully select
projects, and remain also deeply involved in the post-investment DEMO of those projects.
Emphasizing the importance of the selection process, Fenn DEMO al. (1995) estimate that only 1% of
the projects received by venture capitalists obtain ﬁnancing. Gorman and Sahlman (1989) ﬁnd
that venture DEMO have repeated interactions with the ﬁrms they invest in. This enables them
to extract information on the quality of their investment, in order to terminate the less promising
ventures (Gompers, 1995). They can also DEMO and directly control entrepreneurs (Lerner,
1995; Hellmann and Puri, DEMO), and provide managerial advice.2
In line with the above empirical literature, we consider that the value added by venture capi-
talists is twofold: their expertise allows them to spot the most proﬁtable projects and to enhance
their value by providing valuable advice. However, we do not view these two activities as sep-
arate tasks: the efﬁciency of the selection process determines the effectiveness of the venture
capitalists’ involvement. In our model, this interaction arises from the venture capitalist’s effort
being more valuable for DEMO quality projects. Therefore, the decision to provide advice will de-
pend DEMO the perceived quality of the investment project. The important question is then: how can
venture capitalists efﬁciently select projects? The answer we propose DEMO this paper is that syndi-
cation helps to gather information on the investment opportunities, which improves the selection
process, and impacts the post-investment DEMO of venture capitalists.
To study these issues, we consider a model DEMO a venture capitalist must decide whether or
not to invest in a highly uncertain project, and whether or not to exert costly effort to improve
the project’s proﬁtability once investment is made. The venture capitalist can DEMO the project
by generating an informative signal on the project’s true quality. An important assumption is that
the preciseness of his signal depends on DEMO level of experience. On top of his signal, the venture
capitalist DEMO the opportunity to ask for a second evaluation, performed by another DEMO capi-
talist. However, obtaining this evaluation can be costly. Disclosing the DEMO of an investment
opportunity to another venture capitalist makes him a potential rival: he could compete with the
initial venture capitalist to obtain exclusive ﬁnancing of the project. From the point of view of
the venture DEMO ﬁrst informed of a new project, revealing the existence of the DEMO creates
the conditions for proﬁt-dissipating competition. In order to preserve part of his monopoly rents,
the venture capitalist has no choice but to DEMO with his potential competitor, and share the
project’s surplus.
The main DEMO of the model are the following. First, information can be gathered DEMO form-
ing a syndicate, i.e. by signing a co-investment, co-ownership contract between the two venture
capitalists. Second, inexperienced venture capitalists do not fear potential competition because
1 Hopp and Rieder (2006) document using German DEMO that European ﬁgures are very sensitive to the industry con-
sidered: DEMO and Internet industries exhibit levels of syndication similar to their US counterparts.
2 The importance of this advising role has been extensively documented empirically DEMO Gorman and Sahlman (1989),
Sahlman (1990), Bygrave and DEMO (1992), Gompers and Lerner (1999), and more recently Hellmann and Puri
(2002). For theoretical treatments, see Schmidt (2003), Repullo and Suarez (2004),or Casamatta (2003).
370 C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
their evaluation of the project is not accurate enough to allow DEMO to invest alone. They form a
syndicate each time it is optimal to do so. At the opposite, very experienced venture capitalists
suffer from potential competition and are more reluctant to syndicate. Therefore they need to
DEMO more experienced partners or to forgo syndication. Third, syndication affects the DEMO
capitalist’s effort decision, to improve the project expected proﬁtability. Moderately experienced
DEMO capitalists do not exert enough effort, because of the cost of DEMO competition. At the
opposite, very experienced venture capitalists exert too much DEMO, because of the same cost.
The intuition of this result is DEMO following. Potential competition prevents venture capitalists
from gathering enough information. Consequently, DEMO experienced venture capitalists
who would like to, but cannot syndicate, remain too pessimistic about the project’s success,
and do not exert effort. DEMO the opposite, very experienced venture capitalists remain too opti-
mistic about DEMO project’s success and exert too much effort. Last, syndication can also DEMO costly
for inexperienced venture capitalists if the effort decision is not observable. Syndication entails
leaving part of the ﬁrm’s equity to the syndicate partner, which weakens the venture capitalist’s
incentives to exert effort. We ﬁnd that DEMO syndication is more likely for inexperienced venture
capitalists, they are more DEMO to bear this additional cost of syndication.
The original contributions of the paper are ﬁrst to propose a model where syndication arises
endogenously. Syndication DEMO not the unique way to achieve coordination, though. For instance,
DEMO arrangements involving transfers between venture capitalists are equally valid in our
setting. We view these transfers as less likely, since venture capital investments are typically
governed by restrictive fund covenants.3 It is plausible that setting transfers DEMO one fund to
another generates additional costs to circumvent the funds investment restrictions. We suggest
that syndication, because it avoids direct transfers between venture capitalists, can mitigate these
problems and allow information gathering. Second, we DEMO the importance of experience
on the formation and efﬁciency of syndicates, DEMO on the ex post involvement of venture capital-
ists. To our knowledge, no other theoretical paper considers this dimension.4 This enables us to
propose a number of empirical predictions and possible tests.
First, the model predicts that the level of experience should be a major determinant of the
DEMO decision. In particular, standalone investments should be performed by highly ex-
DEMO venture capitalists. Two effects combine to sustain this result: ﬁrst, as was already
recognized in the literature, more experienced venture capitalists generate better signals (see
Lerner, 1994). Second, syndication is more costly the higher the level of experience of ven-
ture capitalists: because they have more accurate appraisals, experienced venture capitalists have
more to lose when disclosing a deal. This prediction is supported by the observations of Hopp
and DEMO (2006) that more experienced German venture capitalists syndicate much less than
inexperienced ones. Also, a natural consequence of this result is that more syndication should
arise in countries where the venture capital industry is young DEMO rather inexperienced.5 A sec-
ond prediction of the model is that the uncertainty of the portfolio ﬁrm, or of the industry in
which venture capitalists invest, should also call for more syndication. This is consistent with the
analyses of Bygrave (1987), and Chiplin et al. (1997), who document that syndication is posi-
3 See Gompers and Lerner (DEMO) for an analysis of such covenants.
4 A recent paper by DEMO et al. (2006) considers the impact of experience in the formation of venture capital syndi-
cates, but does not relate this to the ex post involvement of venture capitalists.
5 This prediction may seem at DEMO with the observation that syndication is very frequent in the US. Note however
that the level of innovation of projects also impacts the level DEMO syndication. The fact that venture capital in the US is
notoriously directed towards innovative ventures could explain the high level of syndication.
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
371
tively related to the level of uncertainty, and of Brander et al. (2002) who measure that standalone
investments have less variability than DEMO ones. Another implication of this result is that
more drastic innovations should induce more syndication: Hopp and Rieder (2006) do ﬁnd that
syndication is less frequent for more mature industries. Whether this result holds at DEMO ﬁrm
level is still an empirical issue. To test more precisely the predictions of our model, one could
identify the product-market strategies of the portfolio ﬁrms, and deﬁne different degrees of in-
novativeness, in the DEMO of Hellmann and Puri (2002). Third, our model relates the syndication
decision to the involvement of venture capitalists. The predictions are twofold: ﬁrst, because in-
experienced venture capitalists syndicate more, and because the DEMO returns are not very
high, they do not exert enough effort. DEMO, experienced venture capitalists who invest alone
provide more, but sometimes too much, effort. This last point is supported by Sapienza et al.
(DEMO) who ﬁnd a positive relationship between experience and involvement. It is DEMO in line
with Kaplan and Strömberg (2004) who ﬁnd a positive relationship between value-added activ-
ities and the equity stake of venture capitalists, and a negative relationship between the size of
syndicates and value-added activities. DEMO, our results also address the issue of the relative prof-
itability DEMO standalone and syndicated investments. The empirical evidence is mixed: Brander et
DEMO (2002) ﬁnd that syndicated investments exhibit higher returns and higher volatility that stand-
alone investments. Using different performance measures, Hege et al. (DEMO) ﬁnd no signiﬁcant
relationship between the size of the syndicate and DEMO level of excess returns. In our model, the
relation between syndication DEMO returns depends on the level of experience of venture capital-
ists: DEMO important point is that, in contrast to alternative learning models, syndicated investments
can exhibit higher expected returns than standalone investments. A possible test DEMO be to in-
clude the level of experience of syndicate members, DEMO testing the relation between returns
and syndication.
In our model, syndication DEMO not result from ﬁnancial constraints or diversiﬁcation motives
but from the need to gather information while preventing competition. It is important to discuss
to DEMO extent our predictions are different, and are able to explain different DEMO observa-
tions, from these competing rationales for syndication. An implication of DEMO resource constraint
motive is that syndication increases with the size of deals, and decreases with the size of ven-
ture capital funds. An implication of our model is that syndication increases with the level of
uncertainty, but is not affected by deal size, or venture capital fund size. This could lead to op-
posite predictions if one considers that early-stage DEMO are typically more uncertain, but
require less ﬁnancial investments than late-stage DEMO Our model predicts more syndication
for early-stage rounds, while the resource DEMO motive suggests more syndication at later
stages. There is not but limited evidence on this. If any, anecdotal evidence on UK investments
suggests that the size of syndicates is smaller at later stages, while amounts invested are larger
(Wright and Lockett, 2003). Another reason usually put DEMO to explain syndication is risk
diversiﬁcation. It is not easy to derive predictions from the risk mitigation motive though. From
a theoretical point of DEMO, it is not clear why VCs should care about diversiﬁcation at DEMO fund
level, and why syndication should be the tool to mitigate DEMO Some empirical evidence by Hopp
and Rieder (2006) ﬁnd that the concentration of VC portfolios increases with syndication. If any,
this suggests DEMO syndication is not used to hold a diversiﬁed portfolio of ﬁrms in different lines
6 The limited partners who invest in venture capital funds DEMO institutional investors who only invest a small portion
of their endowments in the venture capital sector, and who can invest in several VC funds. In addition, if the VC ﬁrms
themselves want to mitigate risk, DEMO can achieve this through the management of several funds.
372
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
of business. While we believe that the risk mitigation and resource DEMO deﬁnitely bear
some relevance, it seems unlikely that they are the DEMO determinant of the decision to syndicate.
Our paper is closely related to a few papers that explicitly focus on the syndication decision of
ﬁnancial DEMO Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1994) is probably the ﬁrst paper where syndica-
tion emerges as the optimal arrangement. However they focus on sequential syndication, whereby
an initial venture capitalist remains in the ﬁrm to solve a DEMO problem with future investors,
while we focus on the formation of simultaneous syndicates. Pichler and Wilhelm (2001) provide
a theory of syndicates DEMO the investment banking industry. Their approach differs in the sense that
they view syndication as a way to solve a moral hazard in team DEMO (see also Bubna, 2002),
while we view syndication as DEMO way to prevent competition. More recently, Bachman and Schin-
dele (2006) and Cestone et al. (2006) both analyze models to explain the formation of syndicates:
in Bachman and Schindele (2006), syndication can be a way to deter theft of idea by increasing
the reputation DEMO of each syndicate member. Cestone et al. (2006) also analyze the syndication
decision of a venture capitalist, and study how an optimally designed contractual arrangement of
syndicates, can induce information revelation of the syndicate members. In their model, the cost
of syndication arises from the adverse selection costs to induce truthful information revelation,
while in our model it DEMO from the disclosure of a proﬁtable deal to a potential competitor.
Their results share our view that the cost of syndication increases with the DEMO of experience of
venture capitalists, but they differ in the sense DEMO, in their model, the initial venture capitalist
does not always gain by choosing the most experienced partner. Another difference is that we
explicitly DEMO the link between the screening process and the value-added efforts of venture
capitalists, while the value-added dimension is absent in Cestone et al. (DEMO).
This paper belongs naturally to the broader literature on venture capital. An important differ-
ence is that while most of the research activity DEMO focused on the post-investment role of venture
capitalists,7 and studied the ﬁnancial contracts between venture capitalists and investors,8 we em-
phasize the DEMO selection process of venture capitalists and focus on their syndication
decision. This pre-investment selection process has not been much analyzed in the venture cap-
DEMO context. Kaplan and Strömberg (2004) study empirically the contents of venture capitalists’
investment analyses, and their relation to the type of contracts and ex post involvement of venture
capitalists. Garmaise (2006) considers a model DEMO venture capitalists have superior expertise
in project evaluation compared to other agents. He however concentrates on the ﬁnancial contract
between the entrepreneur and the DEMO capitalist, while we focus on the contractual arrange-
ment between venture DEMO, and study the formation of syndicates. Brander et al. (2002)
also investigate the selection and value-added activities of venture capitalists, but they do not
endogenize the syndication decision. Last, our paper is also related to Biais and Perotti (2003)
who study the formation of a partnership by experts with different pieces of information. They
share our assumption DEMO revealing the existence of an investment project to another expert can
be costly. In a context of private information, they highlight the importance of the complemen-
tarity between the evaluations of the different experts to mitigate DEMO risk of idea-stealing. In our
model, evaluations are not complementary in DEMO sense that the project can be valuable without
their joint realization and syndication deters potential competition.
7 See Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1994), Bergemann and Hege (1998), Cornelli and Yosha (2003),and Dessi (DEMO) for
a theoretical analysis of sequential investment and the optimal continuation DEMO, Schmidt (2003), Renucci (2000),
Repullo and Suarez (DEMO),or Casamatta (2003) on the advising role of venture capitalists, and Chan et al. (1990),
Hellmann (1998) or Cestone (2002) on the control exerted by venture capitalists.
8 See Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) for a detailed empirical analysis of venture capital contracts.
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398 373
Last, our emphasis on the importance of information aggregation for ﬁnancial decisions re-
lates to the research ﬁeld on the role of experts DEMO certiﬁcation in economics and ﬁnance. In
some of that literature, experts DEMO viewed as intermediaries who transmit information from in-
formed to uninformed parties, and researchers have focused on the various incentives of each
party (DEMO Lizzeri (1999) on the incentives of intermediaries to manipulate information, DEMO
Grimaud et al. (2005) on the incentives of (informed) ﬁrms to effectively use that information,
or Morrison and White (2004) DEMO the externalities created by screening, in a model of bank reg-
DEMO). Another branch of the literature emphasizes the incentive problems between a principal
and experts (see Gromb and Martimort (2004) on the use of multiple experts to save on agency
costs, Gerardi et al. (DEMO) on the optimal arrangement to aggregate information, and Baron and
Besanko (1999) on the formation of informational alliances among experts). While DEMO of that
literature emphasizes information revelation problems, and focuses on the DEMO of infor-
mation to uninformed principals, we consider venture capitalists as DEMO, and do not study
issues of information revelation.
The organization of DEMO paper is the following. The next section presents the model and as-
sumptions. Section 3 derives the optimal aggregation of information and investment decisions.
DEMO 4 introduces the cost of potential competition between venture capitalists and provides a
rationale for syndication. Section 5 analyzes the syndication decision and the DEMO process
when the initial venture capitalist is under the threat of potential competition. Section 6 intro-
duces another cost of syndication when effort is DEMO observable. Section 7 derives empirical
predictions and proposes new tests. The last section concludes. Proofs are provided in Appendix
A, except those directly derived from the text.
2. The model
We consider the situation faced by DEMO risk-neutral, cash-poor entrepreneur who needs an initial
outlay I to start DEMO innovative investment project. The project yields a veriﬁable risky outcome
R R
values: R> 0 in case of success and 0 in case DEMO failure. The probability of success depends on
the quality of the project. If the project is good, the probability of success is ph (DEMO 1 −ph is
the probability of failure of a good project), while if the project is bad, the probability of success
is pl <ph.9 We assume that only good projects are proﬁtable. With risk-neutral agents, and a
riskless interest rate normalized to zero, this implies that:DEMO
ph R>I >pl R.
Since we are concerned with a DEMO, innovative project, the true quality of the project is initially
unknown. Denote q0 the a priori probability that the quality of the project DEMO good. This prior is
common knowledge.
The entrepreneur must raise funds from outside investors. Some of those investors have spe-
ciﬁc expertise in ﬁnancing DEMO projects. We call them venture capitalists (hereafter VC)
and assume DEMO have the following characteristics. First, VCs have the ability to better DEMO
the true quality of the projects they are proposed, while traditional, non-specialized investors can-
not.10 This assumption reﬂects the fact that VCs concentrate DEMO investments in speciﬁc lines
9 In the remaining of the paper, DEMO will indifferently refer to a good project, or to a project DEMO success probability ph
to denote a project of good quality.
10 See Sahlman (1988, 1990) for instance.
. For simplicity, we assume DEMO the project can either succeed or fail, hence  can take DEMO
374 C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
of business and can use their expertise to infer the quality DEMO new projects. Consequently, we as-
sume that venture capitalists can complete DEMO investment analysis, to obtain a signal related to the
project true DEMO For simplicity, we assume that generating this signal is costless.11 This DEMO
can be either good (s =H ) or bad (s =L) and is all the more precise that the venture capitalist’s
expertise is high. In other words, all venture capitalists have the ability to screen projects, but
they have different levels of observable ability. This assumption captures the idea that although
specialized in the same line of business, some venture capitalists may be more experienced than
others. Formally, the signal si received by a venture capitalist with expertise αi has the following
properties:DEMO
prob(si = H/ph) =αi ,
prob(si = L/pl ) =αi ,
1
∈[ 2 ; 1]. The probability of receiving a good signal conditional on a project being good
where αi
DEMO with the venture capitalist’s expertise. After observing a signal, the venture DEMO
updates his belief on the project’s quality using Bayes’ rule.
Second, DEMO can also use their expertise to provide business advice once the project has been
funded.12 Correspondingly, we assume that VCs can exert a costly contractible effort13 that in-
creases the probability of success of the project, if the true quality is good. To keep things simple,
there DEMO only two possible levels of effort. If the VC exerts effort (DEMO e), he incurs a private
cost c> 0 and increases DEMO probability of success of a good project by > 0 (the probability
of success of a bad project remains unchanged). If the DEMO does not exert effort (decision ), the
probability of success remains unchanged. The assumption that effort affects only good projects
is motivated by DEMO fact that the returns to “living dead” projects are typically very low (close to
zero), whatever the effort of the VCs. Bad projects in our model refer to those types of projects.14
Another important assumption DEMO that only one agent needs to exert effort.15 This is in line with
casual observation about the role of the lead venture capital investor DEMO a VC syndicate. As
pointed by Wright and Lockett (2003, p. 2085), “the degree of contact between the members of
the syndicate DEMO the investor is anticipated to differ according to their role. Absent this asymme-
try of contact, there would be a considerable degree of duplication of effort between the lead and
/e
non-lead ﬁrms.” Using survey data on the UK VC industry, Wright and Lockett (2003) ﬁnd that
lead VCs are more hands-on in monitoring, more likely to have frequent contacts with investors,
11 In standard models of sequential competition, costly signals could in principle constitute barriers to entry, and play a
strategic role (see Bain, 1956). This is not the case in DEMO model, since the second VC’s entry depends exclusively on the
ﬁrst DEMO willingness to let him entry. Therefore, introducing a ﬁxed cost to DEMO the signal does not qualitatively
modify the results, but heavily burdens DEMO presentation of the model.
12 See Gompers and Lerner (1999) or Hellmann and Puri (2002).
13 In a ﬁrst step, we DEMO aside incentive issues, and focus on the interaction between the perceived DEMO quality, the
investment, and the effort decision. The assumption of contractible effort is relaxed in Section 6.
14 An important question is to DEMO extent our results depend on this speciﬁcation. The current speciﬁcation allows us
to obtain investment regimes in which it is optimal to invest and DEMO to exert effort. Such regimes also occur if we take
a multiplicative and symmetric effort term, where the probability of success p is multiplied by (1 + ) for all types of
projects. But they DEMO disappear for instance with an additive and symmetric value-adding term. In that case, effort is
always exerted when investment takes place, as long DEMO R − c> 0. This speciﬁcation generates a perfect correlation
between DEMO investment and the effort decision, and prevents us from studying the DEMO of the effort exerted, according
to the perceived quality of the DEMO
15 We thus abstract from moral hazard in team problems.
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398 375
and that they have more access to management-based information. We follow DEMO features of the
industry by assuming that only one effort is needed.16
The net present value of the project depends on the agents’ beliefs, the project’s quality, and
the effort decision. Denote qsi the updated belief after a signal si is generated and qsi ,sj the
updated belief after two signals si and sj . For instance, after one signal, the NPV is written:
NPV (e, qsi ) =−I −c +qsi (ph + )R +(1 −qsi )pl R,
(1)
if the effort is exerted, and:
NPV e,qsi ) =−I +qsi phR +(1 −qsi )pl R,
(2)DEMO
if the VC does not exert effort. Consistent with the fact that very innovative projects, while po-
tentially highly proﬁtable, also have a DEMO uncertain quality, the a priori NPV of the project is
negative, whatever the effort decision. Therefore, the entrepreneur needs to rely on VC ﬁnancing
to implement his project.
The timing of the game is the DEMO The entrepreneur proposes an investment opportunity
to a ﬁrst VC (labeled DEMO), who generates a signal s1 . Then, VC1 can:
DEMO either reject the project,
• or stop collecting information and invest immediately,
• or call for a second evaluation performed by a DEMO VC, labeled VC2.
In the latter case, we assume that the signals are freely observed by the two VCs.17 Last, if
(and DEMO) the project is implemented, VC1 takes the effort decision.18
3. Optimal information aggregation and investment decision
In this section, we determine VC1’s optimal information gathering and investment policy. We
assume that VC1 is able to DEMO all the project surplus, so that he maximizes the project’s
NPV.19 DEMO asks for a second evaluation each time it increases the project’s expected NPV,
compared to the current NPV. This implies that at least DEMO realization of the second signal must
modify the initial investment decision. If not, the expected value of the project given s2 is equal
to the value of the project given s1 . Formally, s2 is generated if and only if:
max0; NPV (e, qs1 ); DEMO e,qs1 ) Es2 max0; NPV (e, qs1 ,s2 ); NPV e,qs1 ,s2 ).
(/ (/
To keep the analysis as rich as possible, we want to ensure that it is sometimes optimal to in-
vest, but not to exert effort. It must be the case that for some α1 , NPV (/e,DEMO )> NPV (e, qs1 )> 0.
Otherwise, the decision DEMO invest would immediately trigger effort. Intuitively, this is the case if
DEMO effort is not very efﬁcient, which is formally stated in the DEMO assumption.
16 Note however that this needs not be the case for other types of syndicates. See for instance Pichler and Wilhelm
(2001) DEMO an analysis of moral hazard in team in the investment banking industry.
17 See Biais and Perotti (2003) or Cestone et al. (2006) on the issue of privately observed signals.
18 Alternatively, the effort DEMO be decided by VC2: the identity of the lead VC investor DEMO not modify the results.
19 The model can easily be extended to the case where the entrepreneur has a ﬁxed fraction of surplus. Also, this
assumption can be an equilibrium outcome in speciﬁc bilateral negotiation games—see DEMO and Haritchabalet
(2006).
(/
376
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
Assumption 1. Effort is not very efﬁcient:
c(ph −pl )  (I −pl R).
(3)
Figure 1 represents DEMO optimal information aggregation and investment decision of VC1,
according to his, as well as the other VC’s, level of experience. The x DEMO measures the level
of experience of VC1, while the y axis DEMO the level of experience of VC2.20 This ﬁgure
describes the choice made by VC1 for any couple {α1; α2}.21 The ﬁgure restricts to the case
where VC1 has received a good signal. In the dotted-line regions, VC1 does not collect the
second signal, and makes his investment decision alone. In the plain regions, he collects the
second signal: investment DEMO effort decisions are speciﬁed according to the realization of the
second signal.
When α1 is below a threshold αI (in the lower left side of the picture), VC1 prefers not to
invest alone. He then DEMO a second good evaluation to accept to invest. The minimum level
of VC2’s experience for signal s2 to be valuable is represented by the DEMO ϕI,
it depends on VC1’s experience. When VC1’s experience increases, DEMO becomes more conﬁdent
e/
(α1). Note that
Fig. 1. DEMO information gathering when s1 =H .
20 A detailed explanation for the determination of the different functions and variables is provided in Appendix A.
DEMO We have not considered the optimal choice of VC2’s experience. This is because in our setting, the optimal value
of α2 is trivially 1. We implicitly assume that choosing exactly the level of experience of VC2 DEMO be impossible or
difﬁcult. The venture capital industry may be more or less well developed, which restrains the set of available levels of
VC experience. Even when experienced VCs exist in the economy, time constraints may prevent a given VC to actually
process an investment candidate, which reduces again the set of available syndicate partners. A way to model this DEMO
be to introduce a matching technology that randomly draws the level of experience α2 available to VC1 when he wants
to syndicate.
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398 377
about his own evaluation, and the second evaluation has to be less precise to encourage invest-
ment. Consequently, one observes that the curve ϕI, (α1) decreases with VC1’s experience.
When VC1 is more experienced (i.e. when α1 is above αI in the lower right side of the picture),
he chooses to invest if he relies on his signal only. A second piece of information can be useful
to deter DEMO if the second signal is bad. In that case, the more DEMO VC1 is, the
higher must be the experience of VC2 to DEMO him change his mind: this effect is represented by
the increasing DEMO ϕ (α1).
The second piece of information can also be DEMO to modify the effort decision. When VC1
e/
I,/ e/
is moderately experienced (i.e. when α1 ∈[αI ,αe]), he DEMO to invest and not to exert effort
unless he receives a second good signal. The experience of VC2 required to exert effort decreases
then DEMO VC1’s own experience. This effect is represented by the decreasing curve ϕe (α1).The
opposite arises when VC1 is very experienced and is discouraged to exert effort after bad news
from VC2. This is represented by DEMO increasing curve ϕ (α1).
The above discussion is summarized in DEMO next proposition.
e/
Proposition 2. The minimum level of experience of VC2 increases (decreases) with VC1’s own
experience when they disagree (agree) on the investment or effort decision.
Note that these results rely on the dynamics of q induced by Bayesian updating. In particular,
they DEMO not rely on our speciﬁc binary investment model. To assess this, DEMO present in Section A.2
in the appendix a continuous investment version of our generic model and state that the results
of Proposition 2 are DEMO unchanged.
4. Potential competition between venture capitalists
The previous paragraph determined the information aggregation and investment decision
when VC1 is able to capture the DEMO NPV. We now introduce the possibility that VC2 pro-
poses a competing offer to the entrepreneur, if he is contacted by VC1. Asking for a second piece
of information becomes costly for VC1: disclosing the investment opportunity to the second VC
destroys his monopoly position.22 To determine the DEMO information aggregation strategy of
VC1, we ﬁrst need to determine what DEMO can be obtained by each party if VC2 is contacted.
4.1. The outcome of potential competition
The timing of the game is modiﬁed as DEMO: if VC1 discloses the project to a second VC,
we DEMO that both VCs observe freely the two signals s1 and s2 generated by their analyses.
After information is observed, they can either make competing (separate) offers, or negotiate and
make a joint offer. This timing implicitly assumes that competing offers cannot be ruled out, i.e.
that VC1 cannot write a non competing agreement with VC2. This assumption can be DEMO
by the fact that
22 This is however different from standard sequential competition models, because VC1 decides whether or not to allow
VC2 to enter the market: there is no threat of entry from VC2, DEMO there is no room for entry-deterrence strategies by VC1,
as in Spence (1977) or Dixit (1979). This is also why introducing costly signals will not involve strategic, barrier-to-entry
effects in the model.
378
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
(i) since VC1 has not invested into the project yet, he cannot claim to have property rights over
the project, that could rule out competing offers;
(ii) forcing the second VC to DEMO a non-competing clause goes against all competition enhanc-
ing policies.
We will come back to this point when discussing the possible contractual arrangements between
DEMO
To solve the model, we now describe the outcome of the DEMO if VCs do make competing
offers. Offers are simultaneous. If the project’s NPV (conditional on the signals) is negative,
neither VC1 nor DEMO will propose to ﬁnance the entrepreneur’s project. If the project’s NPV
is positive, each VC separately proposes a ﬁnancial agreement to the entrepreneur, DEMO
the share of ﬁnancial income (denoted δi ,i ∈{1, 2}) that they require in exchange for the initial
investment I . Since DEMO two VCs have the same evaluation, the game thus boils down DEMO standard
Bertrand competition. At equilibrium, we thus have δ1 = δ2 , and each VC earns zero proﬁt in
expectation.
Alternatively, the two DEMO can negotiate for a joint offer23 to share the project’s NPV. We
make the assumption that such a joint offer does not modify the DEMO bargaining
power.24 As is standard in this type of setting, the DEMO between the two VCs leads to
the Nash solution: when the DEMO have the same bargaining power, they split evenly the surplus
from DEMO If negotiation fails, as stated above, the two VCs engage in Bertrand compe-
tition and obtain zero proﬁts. Their reservation utility in the DEMO process is thus equal to
zero, and the surplus from negotiation DEMO equal to the project’s NPV. Each VC thus obtains half
of the project’s NPV from negotiating.
The cost of gathering information incurred by VC1 DEMO now clearly. If he sticks to his own
evaluation, he enjoys DEMO monopoly position, and captures the whole project’s NPV. If however he
DEMO for a second evaluation, because of the threat of competition, he cannot capture more than
half of the project’s NPV. Intuitively, there will be cases where the second signal is valuable
(i.e. it increases the NPV), but VC1 loses too much to be willing to gather DEMO VC1’s
incentives to gather information will be analyzed more formally in Section 5.
4.2. The contractual arrangement between VCs
We now investigate which contracts DEMO implement the Nash bargaining solution. The con-
tractual elements can be contingent on the following veriﬁable variables: the amount invested,
the investment decision and the ﬁnal income generated by the project. We thus exclude signals
DEMO being part of the contract. Indeed, although signals are observable by DEMO two VCs, it is very
unlikely that they can be veriﬁable DEMO an outside court. Last, contracts are signed after signals
are observed.
DEMO This assumption departs from Garmaise (2006) who focuses on competition between VCs, in an asymmetric infor-
mation setting.
24 If the entrepreneur’s bargaining power increases with the number of investors, that will creates an additional cost of
syndication, and reinforce our result that syndication is costly, DEMO for the most experienced VCs. For simplicity,
we choose not to include this cost in the analysis. Note also that our assumption is DEMO with the way we view
syndication: the entrepreneur bargains with a DEMO, and not with two (separate) investors. From the entrepreneur’s
point DEMO view, there is thus no difference between bargaining with a single DEMO and with a syndicate.
25 Relaxing the assumption of equal bargaining power, by allowing for instance the bargaining power of each party to
increase with his relative level of experience, does not modify qualitatively the results.
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
379
A contract determines
(ii) VC(i) VCii ’s contribution to the total initial outlay’s return according to the ﬁnal income RIi, denoted(R)˜ 26, andCi (I), with i Ci (I) DEMO ,
(iii) transfers between VCs at the investment date, denoted Ti , such that i Ti = 0.
Any contract {Ci (I); Ri (R)˜ ; Ti } verifying ∀i:
1 NPV (s1,s2),
R R 2
implements the Nash-bargaining solution. Examples DEMO possible contracts are:Ti −Ci (I) +E ˜ Ri  ˜ =
⎨⎪⎧
⎩⎪
Ex. 1:
Example 1 is a contract whereby DEMO buys to VC2 the right to be the sole investor in the project:
the initial transfer compensates VC2 accordingly. Example 2 is a DEMO involving no initial
transfer. Note that all contracts in the form of Example 2 involve co-ownership of the ﬁrm by the
two VCs. Indeed, even if one VC’s contribution is null (Ci = 0), he receives a strictly positive
share of equity (R (R) > 0). In the remainder of the analysis, such contracts involving no initial
i
transfers will be denoted syndicated investments.
In principle, all types of contracts are equally valid. We view contracts with transfers as less
likely, since venture capital investments are typically governed by restrictive fund covenants.27 It
DEMO plausible that setting transfers from one fund to another generates additional costs to circum-
vent the funds investment restrictions. For these reasons, we argue that syndicated investments,
where the two VCs are co-owners of the DEMO, are the most frequent contractual arrangements to
implement the Nash-bargaining solution.
DEMO contracts derived above are decided upon after observing signals, which seems DEMO
in line with practice. It is important though to discuss what would happen if contracts could
be signed before disclosing the project to the DEMO VC, in the spirit of the ex ante contracts
considered in DEMO and Yao (1994).28 Clearly, the investment contract proposed by VC1 to VC2
before disclosing the project is plagued by asymmetric information, because VC2 does not know
VC1’s signal yet. Separating contracts would typically entail DEMO VC1 keeps a higher fraction of
returns, and invests a higher DEMO of investment to credibly signal his good evaluation.29 But,
our model is different in that VC1 does not need to sell his project DEMO VC2, but only needs a second
piece of information. Avoiding to DEMO with VC2 allows him to save on adverse selection costs.
This implies that26 Recall that ˜ can take two values:R1(0) =R2(0) = 0.R or 0. Quite plausibly, we assume limited liability: i Ri ( ˜  ˜ and Ri ( ˜  0.
27 DEMO Gompers and Lerner (1996) for an analysis of such covenants.
1 NPV ,T2 1 NPV ,
=− 2 = 2
C1 (I) = I, C2 (I) = 0,
(R) = DEMO, R2 (R) = 0,
T1
R1
⎧
Ex. 2: ⎨
⎪⎪
T1 = 0,T2 = 0,
−C1 (I) DEMO ˜ R1( ˜ =
−C2 (I) +E ˜ R2( ˜ =
C1 (I) +C2 (I) = I,
R1 (R) +R2 (R) = R,
R
R
R)
R)
1 NPV ,
2
1 NPV ,
2
with Ri  DEMO
28 In theory, one could also conceive to sign contracts even DEMO the ﬁrst VC receives his signal, specifying what
would be the DEMO contract if VC1 contacts VC2: considering contracts signed after the ﬁrst DEMO amounts for
VC1 to select his preferred contract in the class of ex ante contracts.
29 A similar feature arises in Anton and Yao (1994) who show that such ex ante contracts are possible if the seller (VC1)
does not have limited liability, and can signal DEMO quality of his project by guaranteeing possible future losses of the buyer.
⎪⎪
R
⎩
R)
R
R)
380 C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
The (rather trivial) optimal contract is simply for VC1 to DEMO to invest alone and to get all the
proceeds from the investment, whatever his signal. This is exactly the non competing contract
that we ruled out previously. One reason for ruling it out (on top of such contracts being illegal in
practice) is that it might not be robust to collusion with a third VC. Even if VC2 commits not DEMO
invest in the project after observing the two signals, it should DEMO hard to prevent him from making
a competing offer through another fund. Another reason for not considering such contracts would
be to consider that DEMO second signal is not publicly observed. In that case, VC1 would DEMO to
offer an incentive compatible contract to make VC2 reveal his information: this would give rise
to informational rents, and the ex ante DEMO described above would not be optimal.30 The cost
of information revelation is studied in other models of information gathering (Biais and Perotti,
2003; Cestone et al., 2006), and we focus here on the DEMO of potential competition.
5. The decision to syndicate
In this section, DEMO investigate when syndication actually takes place and compare the syndi-
cation decision to the efﬁcient information aggregation derived in Section 3. The trade-off faced
DEMO VC1 is now the following. He can rely on his own evaluation and enjoy a monopoly position.
Alternatively, he can call for a second evaluation that yields more precise information on the pro-
ject’s true quality. DEMO that case, VC1 gives up half of the monopoly proﬁts to DEMO competition
as stated in Section 4. Formally, VC1 chooses to syndicate DEMO and only if:
1
max0; NPV (e, qs1 ); NPV e,qs1 ) Es2 2 max0; NPV (e, qs1 ,s2 ); NPV e,qs1 ,s2 ).
We then compare this syndication decision to the optimal information gathering strategy (from
Section 3).
Proposition 3. If VC1 is rather inexperienced (in the sense that α1 αI ) or if VC1 has received
a bad signal, syndication occurs whenever information gathering is optimal. The threshold αI is
deﬁned in Appendix DEMO
Proposition 3 means that potential competition has no incidence on inexperienced (DEMO pes-
simistic) VCs. The intuition is the following: inexperienced VCs are not able to screen efﬁciently
the projects under evaluation. Therefore they have DEMO to lose when contacting a second eval-
uator (their monopoly proﬁts DEMO equal to zero). Since syndication is costless, it takes place DEMO
time the second piece of information is valuable, and the project DEMO proﬁtable. The same is true if
VC1 receives a bad signal: DEMO is not proﬁtable to invest alone, and VC1 contacts VC2 anytime DEMO
information is valuable, as deﬁned in Section 3. Both the realization DEMO the signal and the expe-
rience of the venture capitalist determine the extent to which he is hurt by potential competition.
Proposition 4. Potential DEMO between VCs affects the screening process in the following
way:
• an experienced VC1, in the sense that α1 ∈[αI ,αe], demands a higher than optimal level of
VC2’s experience to form a syndicate.
DEMO We thank an anonymous referee for raising this point.
(/
(/
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398 381
• A very experienced VC1, in the sense that α1 >DEMO, never forms a syndicate and forgoes
gathering information.
The threshold αe DEMO deﬁned in Appendix A.
When VC1 is rather experienced, his evaluation DEMO precise enough to ﬁnd it proﬁtable to invest
alone. As a consequence, syndication is costly because VC1 has to give up positive monopoly
proﬁts. To compensate this loss, he requires a more precise signal s2 (DEMO to the ﬁrst best),
hence a more experienced partner. Since DEMO monopoly proﬁts of VC1 increase with his level of
experience, he DEMO more and more reluctant to syndicate (or, he requires more and more experi-
enced partners): this may reach the point at which DEMO level of VC2’s experience satisﬁes VC1’s
requirement. In those cases, the DEMO of potential competition is too large compared to the beneﬁts
of more precise information. This does not happen in the ﬁrst best since, unless VC1 has perfect
information, there always exists a degree of precision such that the second piece of information
is valuable.
Corollary 5. Potential competition DEMO to overinvestment when VC1 is sufﬁciently experienced
(in the sense that DEMO >αI ).
The intuition of Corollary 5 is the following. When VC1 is sufﬁciently experienced so that
he can invest alone after a DEMO signal, the evaluation made by a second VC is valuable to
DEMO investment in case of a bad signal s2 . Because of potential competition, VC1 does not
gather information each time it is optimal to do so, and invests too much.
Corollary 6. Potential competition leads to overprovision (respectively underprovision) of effort
when VC1’s experience is greater (respectively smaller) than αe.
When VC1 is the sole investor, he exerts DEMO optimal level of effort given his own information.
When he is very experienced (i.e. when αi  αe ), he always exerts effort DEMO his signal is good,
while a bad signal s2 could be used to discourage effort (if α2 >ϕ (α1), as depicted in Fig. 1).
At the opposite, when VC1 is moderately experienced (i.e. when αi ∈[αI ,αe]), he never exerts
effort if DEMO signal is good, while a good signal s2 would encourage effort (if α2 >ϕe (α1)). When
potential competition deprives VC1 of the second evaluation, he exerts too much effort in those
cases where the second signal would have discouraged effort, and where VC1 prefers not to
contact VC2. Similarly, he exerts too little effort in those cases where the second signal would
have encouraged effort, and where VC1 does not contact a second evaluator.
The results stated in Propositions 3 and DEMO and in Corollaries 5 and 6 are illustrated in Fig. 2 for
e/
the case where s1 =H . As before, the dotted line regions represent the zones where VC1 does
not contact a second DEMO capitalist after receiving a good signal. The plain (white) regions
represent the zones where VC1 contacts VC2, and forms a syndicate when investment takes
place. Each region speciﬁes the optimal investment and effort decisions according DEMO the signals
and the levels of experience. It is useful to compare Fig. 2 and Fig. 1 to understand how potential
competition alters the DEMO of information, as well as the investment decisions.
First, inexperienced VCs are not affected by the cost of potential competition: when α1 <DEMO ,
both ﬁgures coincide, and the threshold above which VC1 calls for a second expertise re-
mains the same (ϕI, (α1))DEMO This illustrates the result of Proposition 3: there is no cost DEMO
e/
382
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
Fig. 2. Syndication decision when s1 =H .
syndicate for inexperienced DEMO since they have nothing to lose. Second, the information gath-
Fig. DEMO region shrinks when the experience of VCshows that VC1 should contact VC2 whenever1 grows. For instance, whenα2  ϕ α1 ∈[αI ,αe],
(α1) and refrain from invest-
ing if the second signal is bad. From Fig. 2 one can see that VC1 contacts VC2 to refrain
DEMO investing if α2  ϕs, (α1 )>ϕ
lighted in Proposition 4: competition prevents VC1 from collecting a second evaluation each
time he should. Third, the cost of syndication increases with VC1’s experience and can ﬁnally
deter information gathering. This effect is easily seen in the case DEMO VC1 is very experi-
enced (α1 >αe ). The information DEMO zone (when α2 >ϕ (α1)) has disappeared from
I,/ e/
(α1). This is the cost of potential competition DEMO
I,/ e/ I,/ e/
e/
Fig. 2. DEMO, observe that one region, that was deﬁned by α2 ∈[max[ϕe (DEMO ), ϕ (α1)],ϕ (α1)]
e/ I,/ e/
completely disappears: this is the region where the second signal is used to modify the ef-
fort, but not the investment decision. As a consequence, a moderately experienced VC1 ex-
erts too little effort and a very experienced VC1 exerts too much effort as stated in DEMO
lary 6.
6. Syndication and unobservable effort
In the previous sections, DEMO assumed that the effort decision was contractible to abstract from
moral hazard issues. We now relax this assumption and assume that the effort exerted DEMO VC1
is unobservable and cannot be contracted upon. In our simple setting, if VC1 remains the sole
investor, moral hazard is irrelevant: VC1 is the only owner of the ﬁrm, he reaps the full beneﬁt
of effort, and is always induced to exert effort whenever it is optimal to do so (conditional on his
information).
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
383
If VC1 decides to form a syndicate, his effort decision might be altered because he has to
R1 .31 VC1 still bears the DEMO cost of his
concede a fraction 1effort, but recoups only a DEMO of the beneﬁt, which can weaken his incentives to exert effort.−γ DEMO equity to VC2, with γ = R
Deﬁne γmax (< 1) the maximal share of equity that VC1 can keep with a syndication contract;
γmax corresponds to the case where C1 (I) = DEMO , and is deﬁned by (in the case where effort is
DEMO):
1 NPV (e, q)
( 2
+I + DEMO) .
γmax = q(ph + )R +(1 − DEMO)pl R
Also, the incentive compatibility condition ensuring that VC1 prefers DEMO exert effort given his
stake in the ﬁrm γ is written:
γ  c .
qR
c ,γ
∈[ qR
Therefore, VC1 DEMO and exerts effort if γ max]. As long as this interval exists,
moral hazard has no bite because it is always possible to DEMO γ such that VC1 exerts the optimal
effort level. In the case where the interval does not exist, it is not possible to induce VC1 to
exert effort although it would be optimal to do so. DEMO that case, syndication between VCs leads
to underprovision of effort.
When DEMO syndication likely to deter effort? As illustrated in Fig. 2,ifVC1 DEMO, it is
optimal to exert effort when α2 >ϕe (α1)DEMO This means that along the curve representing ϕe (α1),
c
qR = 1, and VC1 exerts effort if and only if he owns 100% of the ﬁrm’s equity. Clearly, for α2
slightly above ϕe (α1),VC1 forms a syndicate to invest, and has too small a stake in the ﬁrm to
be induced to exert effort: the interval
discussion that there exists a region above ϕe (α1) where DEMO is optimal to exert effort, but where it
c
[ qR ,γmax]
does not exist. It follows from the previous
is not possible DEMO induce VC1 to do so.
This gives the following proposition which is graphically illustrated with a numerical example
in Appendix A Section A.7.
Proposition DEMO Moral hazard leads to underprovision of effort under syndication, i.e. when DEMO
is not very experienced.
The previous section points out one cost of potential competition, which is the insufﬁcient
aggregation of information and inefﬁcient screening process. Because they have more to lose
when forming a syndicate, experienced VCs essentially bear this cost. Inexperienced VCs are
immune from the threat DEMO potential competition and can aggregate through syndication all valu-
able information. This section highlights another cost of syndication that is borne primarily by
inexperienced DEMO When effort is not observable, there is a tension between the DEMO to give
up a fraction of the ﬁrm’s equity to form a syndicate and the need to keep enough shares to be
induced to DEMO We show that this tension leads to underprovision of effort. Note that moral haz-
ard affects the regions where syndication takes place. Intuitively, since there is less syndication
for more experienced VCs, this cost decreases with VC1’s experience.
31 Note that in our setting, equity is an optimal contract to induce one agent to exert effort. This is because the DEMO
income can only be R or 0: it is not possible DEMO distinguish between debt, equity, or any other ﬁnancial contract.
384
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
7. Empirical predictions and possible tests
This model allows to derive DEMO number of empirical predictions concerning the formation of
syndicates (who syndicates DEMO whom, and for which projects), the post-investment involve-
ment of DEMO syndicate partners, as well as the proﬁtability of syndicated investments. We DEMO
below the main predictions of our model, and try to assess DEMO empirical relevance compared
to alternative explanations of syndication. Finally, we suggest DEMO empirical tests to ﬁt more
accurately our predictions.
7.1. The empirical predictions of our model
• A central prediction of our model is that DEMO level of experience of venture capitalists should
be a major determinant of their decision to syndicate. In particular, standalone investments should
be performed by highly experienced VCs. In our model this happens for two reasons. The DEMO
one is rather obvious: more experienced VCs are able to screen DEMO efﬁciently projects, and
circumvent more accurately the project risk. Therefore, there is less need for syndication. The
second one is directly linked to DEMO cost of disclosing deals to potential competitors: because they
have more DEMO evaluations, experienced VCs are more vulnerable to potential competition.
In other DEMO, experienced VCs have more to lose when disclosing a deal. Having DEMO higher
cost and a lower beneﬁt of forming a syndicate, they DEMO less. While the ﬁrst argument
was already recognized in the literature (DEMO, 1994), the second is speciﬁc to our paper. We
believe DEMO the second argument is important, in particular for early stage investments, where
uncertainty is so high that even experienced VCs could beneﬁt from DEMO assessment of a peer.
According to our analysis, what refrains them DEMO syndicating is the cost of losing monopoly
rents. This prediction is supported by various empirical ﬁndings: studying a sample of Biotech in-
vestments, DEMO (1994) ﬁnds that experienced VCs syndicate with similarly experienced VCs.
In addition, Hopp and Rieder (2006) document from a sample of German venture capital invest-
ments that more experienced VCs syndicate much less than DEMO inexperienced counterparts. For
instance, VC ﬁrms which have undertaken more deals DEMO less, as well as those which have
undertaken a larger proportion DEMO their deals in Germany.
• Our results also imply that, other DEMO equal, the uncertainty of the portfolio ﬁrms, or of the
industry where VCs invest in, should have an inﬂuence on the level of syndication of venture cap-
italists. Indeed the venture capitalists’ ability to generate DEMO signals on the projects’ quality
(αi in the model) also depends on the general level of uncertainty of those projects. Presumably,
the DEMO capital industry ability to screen projects, should be lower the younger DEMO ﬁrm, or the
more innovative the ﬁrm’s business. For those projects DEMO industries, it is unlikely that VCs with
very high αi exist. DEMO a consequence, one should observe more syndication for those industries.
This DEMO supported by evidence both at the ﬁrm, and at the industry DEMO Different papers have re-
ported that syndication is positively related to the level of uncertainty of projects (Bygrave, 1987;
Chiplin et al., 1997; Brander et al., 2002), or to the age of DEMO funded ﬁrms, early stage ﬁrms
exhibiting more syndication (Hopp and Rieder, 2006). Some papers have also reported that the
industry itself is an important determinant of syndication. Hopp and Rieder (2006) ﬁnd that DEMO
mature industries, like industrial products and services, exhibit much lower levels of syndication
that the Biotech or Internet sectors (see also Lehman and Boschker, 2003). To the extent that
projects in mature industries are more easily readable (say, because comparisons are easier, val-
uations based on ratio comparisons more accurate), the precision of VCs signals is DEMO to be
higher than in more innovative sectors.
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
385
• An original feature of our analysis is to study jointly DEMO sources of value-added of venture
capitalists, which are usually investigated separately DEMO the literature, namely their ability to
screen projects, and their ability to provide value-enhancing advice. Our predictions are twofold.
First, because inexperienced VCs syndicate, they do not exert enough effort. This is because
syndicate members have to share the returns from the project, which can discourage the lead
VC’s effort. Note however that syndication does not necessarily imply underprovision DEMO effort:
When expected returns are quite high, it is possible DEMO conceive an incentive compatible return
sharing scheme. As a consequence, underprovision DEMO effort because of syndication is more likely
when (some) syndicate members are inexperienced (i.e. when expected returns are not very high).
Second, the model predicts that experienced VCs who invest alone should provide more effort,
and sometimes too much effort. Because of their high cost DEMO syndicating deals, experienced
VCs may overestimate the quality of projects, which, together with them being the sole investor,
induces them to exert too much effort.32 The fact that very experienced VCs exert more effort
DEMO consistent with Sapienza et al. (1996). This is also in DEMO with Kaplan and Strömberg (2004)
who ﬁnd a positive relationship DEMO value-added activities and the equity stake of venture
capitalists, and a DEMO relationship between the size of syndicates and value-added activities.
Last, our DEMO stress the fact that whether syndication triggers more effort than standalone
investments depends on the level of experience of VCs: in particular, moderately DEMO
VCs should exert more effort when they form a syndicate.
• Our model allows to discuss whether standalone investments should exhibit more or less
DEMO returns than syndicated investments. Brander et al. (2002) ﬁnd in their sample that stand-
alone investments have less variable returns. The predictions we DEMO derive from the model are
less clearcut, but can shed light DEMO the determinants of the variability of returns of VC invest-
ments. On the one hand, experienced VCs (who invest alone) have more precise signals: their
investments should exhibit less variable returns. On the other hand, experienced VCs who ﬁnd
it too costly to syndicate accept too many projects: in that case, their standalone investments
should exhibit more variable DEMO Our analysis states that highly experienced VCs beneﬁt
from the positive precision-of-signal effect, but suffer from relying on their own information
only. The investments of less experienced VCs exhibit exactly the opposite features: each piece
of information is less precise, but those VCs manage to syndicate, which DEMO their selection
process. Which effect dominates according to the level of experience of VCs is still an empirical
issue.
• Last, an important question is whether syndicated projects are more or less proﬁtable than
standalone projects. DEMO empirical evidence is mixed. Brander et al. (2002) ﬁnd a positive rela-
tionship between syndication and the return of portfolio ﬁrms. But they DEMO ﬁnd that syndicated
investment have higher volatility than stand-alone investments. Hopp and Rieder (2006) docu-
ment that syndication has a positive effect on DEMO growth. However they ﬁnd no signiﬁcant
impact of the number of syndicated members on the sales growth. Using more appropriate per-
formance measures, Hege et al. (2006) ﬁnd no signiﬁcant relationship between the size of DEMO
syndicate and the level of excess returns. In our model, the DEMO between syndication and
expected returns depends on the level of experience of VCs. The important point is that syndi-
32 Overprovision of effort arises DEMO our model from the assumption that the efﬁciency of the VC’s effort increases with
the quality of the project: it is therefore optimal not to exert effort if it is unlikely that the project is good. DEMO that with
constant effort efﬁciency, experienced VCs who cannot syndicate would DEMO too much, and also exert too much effort:
our predictions DEMO be unchanged, but the current speciﬁcation allows to disentangle the investment DEMO from the
effort decision.
386
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
cated investments can exhibit higher expected returns than standalone investments.33 This DEMO
is to be contrasted to the result of Brander et al. (DEMO). They predict lower expected returns for
syndicated projects, when syndication DEMO used for a screening motive. We complement their work
by showing that this result depends crucially on the level of experience of VCs.
7.2. DEMO with alternative motives of syndication
Several motives for syndication are traditionally proposed in the literature (although not rely-
ing on formal models). One possible reason for syndication is the capital constraint of venture
capitalists: some deals may simply be too large to be undertaken by a single DEMO who might not
have enough funds, or might be prevented by DEMO fund’s covenants to invest a large amount in a
single ﬁrm. The argument would imply the following empirical patterns: one should observe that
syndication at any given round of investment increases with the size of the DEMO, and decreases
with the size of the venture capital fund. To DEMO extent that early stage rounds involve generally
less ﬁnancial investment than later stage rounds, the capital constraint hypothesis also implies
that there is less syndication at earlier stages, and more syndication at later stages. This predic-
tion is exactly the opposite of what our model suggests: when uncertainty is high (earlier stages)
there is a greater need to gather information, and VCs’ signals are unlikely to be very precise,
which should result in more syndicated deals. Some empirical evidence seems to speak DEMO
the capital constraint motive as the only reason for syndication. For instance, Hopp and Rieder
(2006) report that syndication is not related to the amount of capital under management: large
VC funds do not syndicate less than small counterparts. Also, anecdotal evidence on UK venture
capital investments suggests that the size of syndicates is smaller at later stages, while amounts
invested are larger (Wright and Lockett, 2003). It is DEMO though that capital constraints play,
in some instances, a role DEMO the decision to syndicate. Our model simply suggests an alternative,
and possibly complementary rationale for syndication: while early stage syndication may be due
to the need to gather information, later stage syndication may simply reﬂect some capital con-
straints of VC funds. Last, the capital constraint argument is agnostic concerning some of the
empirical predictions we suggest. If syndication DEMO only a matter of investment size, it is not
obvious why DEMO should affect the level of effort of syndicate members (even if DEMO syndicate
member has a lower share of equity, the total project DEMO is higher, and effort should not be
affected), or their DEMO of who to syndicate with.
Another reason usually put forward is the risk diversiﬁcation motive: VCs syndicate deals to
invest in more projects, DEMO to hold a more diversiﬁed portfolio. We are not aware of any evi-
dence that directly tests this assumption. From a theoretical point of DEMO though, it is not clear
why VCs should care about diversiﬁcation DEMO the fund level, and why syndication should be the
tool to DEMO risk. First, limited partners who invest in VC funds are institutional DEMO
who only invest a small portion of their endowments in the venture capital sector, and who can
invest in several VC funds. It is not clear why there is also a need to diversify at the DEMO level
from the investors point of view. In addition, if the DEMO ﬁrms themselves want to mitigate risk,
they can achieve this through the management of several funds, each dedicated to a speciﬁc line
of business, or geographic area. It is thus rather uneasy to derive predictions from the risk miti-
gation motive. Some empirical evidence by Hopp and DEMO (2006) ﬁnd that the concentration
of VC portfolios increases with syndication. If any, this suggests that syndication is not used to
33 We provide in Appendix A Section A.8 a numerical example to highlight this DEMO
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
387
hold a diversiﬁed portfolio of ﬁrms in different lines of business. DEMO we believe that the risk
mitigation motive bears some relevance, it DEMO unlikely that it is the only determinant of the
decision to syndicate. Also, diversiﬁcation per se cannot explain some usually observed patterns
of syndication, in particular the fact that experienced VCs syndicate less, and more DEMO with
their peers.
Last, several models view syndication as an optimal DEMO arrangement. Building on
Lerner’s (1994) idea that syndication can improve the selection process, Brander et al. (2002)
propose two alternative models DEMO syndication, relying respectively on information gathering,
and on value-added. We DEMO different assumptions, which lead to different predictions. First, we
explicitly consider the level of experience in the syndication decision, while they do not. This
allows us to derive predictions linking the level of experience, to the syndication decision, to the
ex post involvement of VCs, and DEMO the characteristics of VC investments in terms of variance
and return. We already discussed above to which extent these predictions ﬁt some empirical
evidence. DEMO, by construction in their model, syndicated projects exhibit more value-added
from VCs than standalone investments (since it is one reason for syndication). We enrich their
analysis by considering simultaneously the selection process and effort DEMO This allows us
to predict that experienced VCs syndicate less and provide more effort. Such a prediction was
not possible in their framework. Cestone DEMO al. (2006) have more recently proposed a model of
syndication to gather signals. Their assumptions differ from ours on several dimensions. They
consider DEMO observed signals, and investigate the incentive costs of syndication, while
we focus on observable signals and explore the potential competition costs of syndication. DEMO
predictions partly differ in the sense that highly experienced VCs in their model do not always
prefer to syndicate with experienced counterparts, because of the high incentive costs. In our
model, if one VC wants to syndicate, he always prefers the most experienced partner available.
In addition, DEMO analysis of the provision of effort is absent in their model, DEMO that some of
our predictions are irrelevant in their analysis. Finally, DEMO and Schindele (2006) motivate
syndication as a commitment device not to steal the entrepreneur’s idea: in particular, they derive
predictions relating the DEMO size to the extent of legal protection of ideas, which are
DEMO and possibly complementary to ours.
7.3. Possible tests of our model
Some available empirical evidence ﬁts well the implications of our analysis, but could also
ﬁt alternative explanations. One way to disentangle our predictions from others DEMO to think about
more speciﬁc tests. For instance, the fact that DEMO mature industries exhibit less syndication
could be due to different features. It could be, as we argue, that the precision of the VCs DEMO
tion is larger in those industries. Alternatively, it could be that DEMO some industries (e.g. services),
projects require smaller amounts of investment, and VCs do not face hard capital constraints.
Also, there could DEMO some heterogeneity in mature industries, with some projects being more
innovative DEMO difﬁcult to evaluate. Another way to test our prediction is to measure whether
more drastic innovations at the ﬁrm level induce more syndication. To DEMO this hypothesis, one
could identify the product market strategies of different DEMO, in the spirit of the analysis
of Hellmann and Puri (2002), to deﬁne groups of ﬁrms of different innovativeness. We expect
syndication DEMO be more prevalent for the most innovative ﬁrms.
In addition, some DEMO our results highlight the importance of the level of experience of VCs
for the observed value added, and the ﬁnancial return of syndicates. The empirical result of
Brander et al. (2002) that standalone investments exhibit DEMO variable returns illustrates well the
388
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
case where VCs are highly experienced. It would be useful to DEMO the level of experience
of venture capitalists to create different groups of standalone investments. One should ﬁnd that
the difference in variability between standalone DEMO syndicated investments should be stronger
for more experienced VCs. In the same vein, the model predicts that standalone experienced
VCs will exert more effort that syndicated less experienced VCs. One could introduce the level
of experience DEMO VCs when measuring value-added. Effort should increase with the level of
experience of VCs, and should increase for standalone investments. An interesting feature of
the model is that there can be overprovision of effort by experienced DEMO This implies that
the relationship between effort and ﬁnancial returns is not monotonic, especially for high levels
of experience. Empirically, this means that DEMO one wants to investigate the relationship between
effort and returns, one DEMO take into account the level of experience of VCs, on top DEMO the
syndication decision.
8. Conclusion
In this paper we investigate the efﬁciency of the selection process of venture capitalists. We
provide a rationale for DEMO syndication of venture capital investments based on the trade-off be-
tween the need to gather accurate information on the quality of an investment opportunity, and
the need to maintain monopoly proﬁts. We consider a model in DEMO two venture capitalists
can generate costless signals on a highly uncertain venture. Although gathering information can
be proﬁt-enhancing, collecting the second appraisal creates potential competition for the initial
venture capitalist. Forming a syndicate is a coordination DEMO that prevents proﬁt-dissipating
competition from actually taking place. Such a contract is however costly for the initial venture
capitalist, since he must forgo part of the project’s surplus. The higher the proﬁts the initial ven-
ture DEMO can capture when being the sole investor, the more reluctant he DEMO to syndicate.
Therefore the actual syndication decision will not induce efﬁcient learning. This is the ﬁrst cost
of syndication. We show that this cost DEMO with the level of experience of the initial venture
capitalist. We then relate the syndication decision to the post-investment involvement of venture
capitalists. Very DEMO venture capitalists ﬁnd it too costly to syndicate and do not gather
enough information. Relying on their own signal, they provide too much effort. Moderately expe-
rienced VCs also ﬁnd it too costly to syndicate, and do not gather enough information. However,
because of their imprecise evaluation, they do not exert enough effort.
A second cost of syndication arises DEMO there is moral hazard on the ex post value-added
effort of the initial venture capitalist. Syndication forces the two venture capitalists to share
ownership DEMO the ﬁrm, which weakens the incentives to exert effort. We establish DEMO this cost
decreases with the experience of the initial venture capitalist. Therefore syndication can also be
costly for very inexperienced venture capitalists since it DEMO alter their incentives. This results in
the underprovision of effort by young or inexperienced venture capitalists.
We derive results concerning the link between the DEMO of experience of venture capitalists,
the decision to syndicate, and DEMO intensity of their ex post involvement.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to S. Viswanathan (the editor) and anonymous referees, Ulf Axelson, Bruno
Biais, Denis Gromb, Bruno Jullien and Per Strömberg for their insights. The paper has also
beneﬁted from comments of participants at the Vth Toulouse Finance DEMO (2002), the
Second Amsterdam Summer workshop in Corporate Finance Theory (2002), the Econometric
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
389
Society European Meeting (2003), the SIFR Conference on Venture Capital and Entrepreneurial
Finance (2003) and the GAEL-INRA seminar.
Appendix A
A.1. DEMO of Proposition 2
• To set the proof of Proposition 2, DEMO ﬁrst need to characterize the optimal investment/effort
decision when VC1 calls for a second evaluation according to the signals and the levels of DEMO
rience of the two agents.
Start with the case where s1 =H .
Suppose ﬁrst that s2 =H . With Bayesian updating, we get:
qH,H = α1α2q0 +(1 α1α2q0
−α1)(1 −α2)(DEMO −q0)
Using (1), it follows that:
.
NPV (e, qH,H)  0 ⇔
(1 −α1)(1 −q0 )(I −pl R + c)
α2  α1q0 ((ph + )R −I − c) +(1 −α1)(1 −q0 )(DEMO −pl R + c)
And using (2):
ϕI,
e/
(α1).
– to invest and exert effort when α2 >ϕe (α1),
– not to invest when α2 <ϕI, (α1),
– to invest and not exert effort when
e/DEMO
α2 ∈[ϕI,
Suppose next that s2 =L.
NPV (e, qH,L)  0 ⇔
α1q0 ((ph + )R
α2  α1q0 ((ph + )R −I − c) +(1 −
And:
NPV (/e,qH,L)  0
α2  α1q0(phR
ϕI,
e/
(α1) ∀α1 . Therefore, when
−I − c)
α1)(1 −q0 )(I −pl
⇔
α1q0(phR − I)
− I) +(1 −α1)(1 −q0 )(DEMO −pl R) ≡ϕ
I,/ e/
NPV (e, qH,DEMO)  NPV e,qH,H)

⇔
(1 −α1)(DEMO −q0)c
α1q0 (R − c) +(1 −α1
q0)c ≡ϕe (α1).
≡
α2
)(1 −
One checks easily that under Assumption 1, ϕe (α1) ϕI,e(α1)
both VCs receive good signals, it is optimal:
NPV (/e,qH,H)  0 ⇔
α2  (1 −α1)(1 −q0 )(I −pl R)
α1q0(phR − I) +(1 −α1)(1 DEMO )(I −pl R)
It follows that:
e/
(DEMO); ϕe (α1)].
≡ϕI,e(α1).
R + c) ≡ϕ
(α1).
I,e/
(α1).
(/
390
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
It follows that:
NPV (e, qH,L)  NPV (/e,qH,L)
α2  α1q0
⇔
α1q0 (R − c)
(R − c) +(1 −α1)(1 −q0)c
≡ϕ
e/
(α1).
Under Assumption 1, ϕ
e/
(α1) ϕ
I,e/
(α1) ϕ
I,/ e/
(α1) ∀α1 . Therefore:
– it is optimal to invest DEMO exert effort if α2 <ϕ
– it is optimal not to DEMO if α2 >ϕ
– it is optimal to invest but not DEMO exert effort if
I,/ e/
(α1),
e/
(α1),
α2 ∈[ϕ
e/
(α1); ϕ
I,/ e/
(α1)].
And:
Consider now the case s1 =L.
If s2 =L, it is clearly optimal not to invest.
Suppose next that s2 =H . Proceeding as before, we get:
NPV (DEMO, qL,H )  0 ⇔
α1(1 −q0 )(I DEMO R + c)
α2  (1 −α1)q0 ((ph DEMO )R −I − c) +α1(1 −q0 )(I −pl DEMO + c)
– when α2 <νI,
– when α2 DEMO,
– when α2 >νe (α1), it is optimal to invest and exert effort.
NPV (/e,qL,H )  0 DEMO
α1(1 −q0 )(I −pl R)
α2  (1 DEMO)q0(phR − I) +α1(1 −q0 )(I −pl R) ≡νI,
e/
(α1).
≡νI,e(α1).
It follows that:
NPV (e, qL,H )  NPV (/e,DEMO,H ) ⇔
α1(1 −q0)c
α2  (1 −α1)DEMO (R − c) +α1(1 −q0)c
One checks easily that νe (α1) νI,e(α1) νI,
since NPV e,qL)  0. We conclude that:
e/
≡νe (α1).
(α1)
e/
(α1), it is optimal not to invest,
(α1) is always larger than 1
∀α1 .Also, νI,e/ 2
e/
(α1); νe (α1)], investment takes DEMO, but not effort is exerted,
(/
• The second DEMO of the proof consists in determining when the investment decision is re-
versed for at least one possible signal s2 .
When s1 =L,DEMO does not invest alone. Hence information is valuable when VC2’s signal
makes the project’s NPV positive. This arises when α2 >νI,e (α1)DEMO
/
Suppose now that s1 = H . Deﬁne αI the DEMO level of VC1’s experience, such that in-
vesting but not exerting DEMO becomes valuable after a good signal. Using (2), such a DEMO
is obtained by solving:
NPV e,qH)  0
(/DEMO
⇔
α1 
(1 −q0 )(I −pl R)
q0(DEMO − I) +(1 −q0 )(I −pl R)
≡αI DEMO
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
Deﬁne similarly αe the minimum level of experience above which it is DEMO to start exerting
effort. This threshold solves:
(1 −q0)c
DEMO (R − c) +(1 −q0)c
NPV (e, qH)  NPV e,qH) ⇔ α1  ≡αe.
See that:
DEMO αI
As a consequence, under Assumption 1, after receiving a good signal, it is optimal not to invest
when α1 <αI , DEMO invest and not exert effort when α1 ∈[αI ; αe], and DEMO invest and exert effort
when α1 >αe.
It follows that:
DEMO when α1 <αI ,VC1 asks for a second evaluation if VC2’s good signal makes the project’s
NPV positive, i.e. when α2 >ϕI, (α1).
e/
– when α1 ∈[αI ; αe],VC1 calls for VC2 if the latter is experienced enough to deter investment
when DEMO a bad signal, or to induce effort. Since ϕe (α1 )>ϕ e (α1) for all α1 in the
I,/ /
interval considered, information gathering occurs when α2 >ϕ (α1),
DEMO when α1 >αe, information gathering occurs to deter effort after a bad signal
I,/ e/
s2 , or to deter
investment, i.e. when α2 > min[ϕ (α1); ϕ (α1)].
e/ I,/ e/
Last, check that ∂ϕ (α1 ) is DEMO so that the minimum level of VC2’s experience needed
I,/e
DEMO
to trigger investment decreases with α1 . At the opposite note that ∂ϕI,// e (α1 ) is positive, which
∂α1
means that the minimum level of VC2’s experience needed to deter investment increases with
DEMO . Similarly,  0 and ∂ϕ (α1 )  0, DEMO that the same result applies concerning the effort
decision.
∂ϕe (α1 )
∂α1
/e
∂α1

A.2. Generalization with a continuous investment model
We consider a continuous investment model to assess the robustness of our DEMO To give
a ﬂavor of the generalization of our model, we DEMO here the results of Proposition 2, with a
general investment model, for the case of an initial good signal (i.e. s1 =H )DEMO
Consider the following continuous investment model.
R+, the project generates in DEMO of success a revenue R(I).The
R (I) > 0, and R (I) < 0. The FOC of the maximization of the
functionFor any investment levelR on R+ is such that:I ∈
DEMO NPV when effort is not exerted gives:
1
R (I) = q(ph −pl ) +pl .
(4)
Denote I (DEMO) the solution of Eq. (4). Since we have decreasing returns (R is concave), I (q) is an
increasing function of the belief q . When investment occurs, the project’s NPV can be written:
e/ e/
(q) + q(ph −pl ) +pl RI (q).
−I
e/ e/
Deﬁne q∗ the DEMO such that the project’s NPV, when effort is not exerted, is equal to zero.
I,e/
The belief q∗
I,
−I (q∗
e/ I,
e/
e/
⇔
veriﬁes:
) + q∗
I,
e/
(/
c(ph −pl ) DEMO (I −pl R).
(ph −pl ) +pl RI
e/DEMO
(q∗
I,
e/
) = 0.
391
392
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
Note that in the binary investment choice model, we are able to specify explicitly qI,∗ and
I (q), thus to solve analytically the model. Also, we can easily present the solutions graphically
in a two-dimension space. All this is not possible in the general continuous DEMO model.
This gives the following investment rule, where I∗ is the DEMO level of investment, given
that no effort is exerted:
I∗
DEMO = 0if
=Ie/ (q) if
q<q∗
I,
q DEMO
I,
e/
e/
,
.
e/
e/DEMO
Similarly, the FOC of the maximization of the NPV when effort DEMO exerted is:
1
R (I) = q(ph + −pl ) +pl .
(5)
Denote Ie (q) the solution of (5) and deﬁne q∗ the belief such that the project’s NPV, when
effort is exerted, is equal to zero. The belief q∗ veriﬁes:
e
e
e/
e
e/
e
e/
e/DEMO
e/
e/
I,e
−c −Ie (q∗ ) + DEMO (ph + −pl ) +pl RIe (q∗ ) = 0.
DEMO,e
I,e
I,e
I,e
The optimal level of investment, given that no effort is exerted, is deﬁned by:
q∗
DEMO,
I∗ +c −I∗ +pl (R(I∗) − R(I∗))DEMO
(ph + −pl )R(I∗) − (ph −pl )R(DEMO) .
Check that under condition (6), we have that q∗
Initially, q0 <qI,∗
signal, but is not experienced enough to invest alone, i.e. qH <qI,∗
qH,H q∗
e/
DEMO/
q∗(1 −α1)(1 −q0)
α2  α1q0(1 DEMO) +q∗(1 −α1)(1 −q0) ≡ϕR(I),
Assume now that investing but not exerting effort becomes valuable after a good signal, i.e.
<qH <q∗.VC1 asks for a second evaluation if VC2 is DEMO enough to induce effort
e/
(α1).
NPV e,qH,DEMO)  0
(/
e/
⇔
⇔
I,
<q∗ , which is equivalent to the following
condition:
I∗
R(I∗
) −pl <
ph −pl
c+Ie∗ −pl .
R(I∗)
e
DEMO + −pl
/e
/e
I,e
(6)
In our DEMO investment model, the inequality (6) boils down to what is DEMO to as As-
sumption 1.
Deﬁne q∗ the minimum level of experience above which it is valuable to start exerting effort.
This threshold solves:DEMO
e/
<q∗.
e
: the project is not proﬁtable. Suppose DEMO that VC1 has received a good
. He asks for a second evalu-
ation if the project’s NPV becomes positive if VC2 receives a DEMO signal, i.e. if:
e/
e/
e/
e/DEMO
I∗ = 0if q<q∗ ,
I∗ =Ie (q) if DEMO q∗ .
e
e
I,e
I,e
We consider that effort is not very efﬁcient, q∗
I,
e/
NPV (e, qH)  NPV e,qH)
(/
⇔
q∗ 
e
e
when receiving a good signal or to deter investment when receiving DEMO bad signal i.e. if:
NPV (e, qH,H)  DEMO e,qH,H)
(/
⇔
⇔
qH,H q∗
(DEMO −α1)(1 −q0)q∗
α2  α1q0(1 −q∗) −(1 −α1)(1 −q0)q∗ ≡ϕe (α1)
e
e
e
e
or
qH,L q∗
I,
e/
393
α1q0(1 −q∗)DEMO
α2  α1q0(1 −q∗) +q∗(1 −α1)(1 −
To state the results of Proposition 2, check that functions ϕR(I),DEMO
have the same properties as in the binary investment model. See that:
∂ϕR(I),
∂α1
This implies that the minimum level of VC
with α1 .
We have that
e/
(α1) < DEMO
e/
2’s experience needed to trigger investment decreases
∂ϕe (α1) < 0,
∂α1
so that the minimum level of VC2’s experience DEMO to induce effort decreases with α1 .
Also:
∂ϕ
R(I),/ e/
(α1) > 0.
∂α1
The minimum level of VC2’s experience needed to discourage investment increases with α1 .
A.3. Proof DEMO Proposition 3

NPV e,qH,L)  0
(/
DEMO
⇔
e/
q0) ≡ϕ
R(I),/ e/
(DEMO).
(α1), ϕe (α1) and ϕ
R(I),/ e/
(α1)
The proof of this proposition is straightforward. Recall from the proof of Proposition 2 that
if s1 =L or if DEMO =H and α1 <αI , the optimal decision is not to DEMO Hence, VC1 decides to
syndicate iff:
0 < prob(s2 DEMO
+ prob(s2
Simplifying both sides by
1
); NPV e,DEMO ,H )
); NPV e,qs1 ,L).
,L
DEMO) 2 max0; NPV (e, qs1 ,H
(/
1
DEMO L) 2 max0; NPV (e, qs1
(/
1 gives the same condition for syndication as in Section 3.
2
A.4. Proof DEMO Proposition 4

Suppose that s1 =H . The case where α1 <αI is treated in Proposition 3.
Therefore, VC• When α1 ∈[1 DEMO iff:αI ,αe], it is optimal for VC1 to invest but not to exert effort when staying alone.
⎨⎪⎪⎧
⎩⎪⎪
NPV (/e,DEMO )< prob(s2 =
NPV (/e,qH )< prob(s2 =
NPV (/e,qH )< prob(s2 =
+ prob(s2
1 NPV e,qH,H
H) 2 )
1 NPV (e, qH,H
H) 2 )
1 NPV (e, qH,H)
H) 2
1 NPV e,qH,L)
= L) DEMO
if α2 ∈[ϕ
I,/ e/
(α1 ), ϕe (DEMO)],
(/
if α2 >ϕe (α1) and α2 >ϕ
I,/ e/
(/
if α2 ∈[ϕe (α1 ), ϕ
I,/ e/
(α1)].
(α1),
C. DEMO, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
e/DEMO
e/
394
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
This reduces to
⎧
⎨
⎪⎪
α2 > 2α1 q0 (phR−I)+(1−α1 )(1−q0 )(pl R−I) (α1)
α1 q0 (phR−I)−(1−α1 )(1−q0 )(pl R−I) ≡ϕs,I,/ e/
α2 > 2α1 q0 (phR−I)+(1−α1 )(1−q0 )(pl R−I+c)
α1 q0 [(ph+)R−I−c]−(1−α1 )(1−q)(pl R−I−c) ≡ϕs,I,e/
if α2 >ϕe (α1) and α2 >ϕI,/ e/ (α1),
α2 > α1 q0 (phR−I)DEMO(1−α1 )(1−q0 )(pl R−I+c)
α1 q0 (R−c)+(DEMO )(1−q0 )(c) ≡ϕs,e(α1)
if α2 ∈[ϕ
DEMO,/ e/
(α1 ), ϕe (α1)],
(α1)
if α2 ∈[ϕe (α1 ), ϕ
I,/ e/
(α1)].
⎪⎪
⎩
The proof of Proposition 2 states that information DEMO is optimal for α2  ϕ
I,/ e/
(α1),
when α1 ∈[αI ,αe]. It is easy to check that both ϕs,
ϕ (α1) ∀α1 . Also note that ϕs,e(DEMO)< 1 is not consistent with
α1 For consistency, we verify DEMO whether the necessary conditions for syndication are com-∈[αI ,αe], potential competition makes VC1 more demanding in term of VC2’s experience.
I,/ e/DEMO
I,/ e/
(α1) and ϕs, (α1) are DEMO than
α1  αI . Therefore, when
I,e/
patible DEMO the interval considered for α1 and α2 .Wehave ϕs,
I,/ e/
(α1)  1iff:
2(1 −q0 )(I
DEMO(phR − I) + 2(1
which is compatible with some
DEMO ϕs,
α1 
I,e/
(α1)  1iff:
−pl R)
−q0 )(I
−pl R)
α1 ∈[αI ,αe].
< 1,
(7)
α1 
2(1 −q0 )(I −pl R)
q0(phR − I) −q0 (R − c) + 2(1 −q0 )(I −pl R)
< 1,
(8)
which is compatible with α1 αI .
• When α1 >αe, it is optimal for VC1 to invest and exert effort when staying alone. VC1
syndicates iff:
⎨⎪⎧
⎩⎪
NPV (e, qH )<prob(s2 = H)
if α2 ∈[ϕ
NPV (e, qH )<prob(s2 = H)
e/
(α1 ), ϕ
DEMO,/ e/
(α1)],
This equation simpliﬁes to:
DEMO NPV (e, qH,H
2
1 NPV (e, qH,H
2
)
)
1 NPV e,qH,L)
+ prob(DEMO = L) 2
if α2 ϕ
I,/ e/
(α1).
(/
⎨⎪⎧
⎩⎪
α2
α2
q0 [(ph+)R−I−c]+(1−α1 )(1−q0 )(pl R−I−c)+α1
α1 q0 (R−c)+(1−α1 )(DEMO )c
∈[ϕe/ (α1 ), ϕI,/ e/ (α1)],
> α1 2α1 q0 (phR−I)+(1−α1 )(1−q0 )(pl R−I+c)
q0 [(ph+)R−I−c]−(1−α1 )(1−q0 )(pl R−I−c)DEMO ≡
q0 (R−c) ≡ϕs,I,
ϕs,
I/
(DEMO)
e/
(α1)
> α1
if α2
if α2 >ϕ
I,/ e/
(α1).
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
395
Consider the following parameter values, which are consistent with Assumption 1.
q0 = 0.4,pl = 0.3,ph = 0.7,R = 90,DEMO = 50, = 0.1,c = 8.
Unobservable effort does not modify the effort decision under syndication iff
c (e, qH,H) +I + c)
qH,HR  qH,H(ph + )DEMO +(1 −qH,H)pl R
Assume equality and call α∗(α1) the positive root of the above equation. Thus, the inequality
is DEMO if α2 α2∗(α1).
Figure 3 plots the root α∗(α1) in Fig. 2 which represents the syndication and effort decision.
The dashed region represents the cost of syndication due to unobservable effort. In this DEMO,
when effort is observable, VC1 syndicates and exerts effort when DEMO signals are good. When
effort is not observable, VC1 syndicates but DEMO not exert effort when both signals are good:
as stated in Proposition 7, moral hazard leads to underprovision of effort when VC1 is not very
experienced.
1 NPV
( 2
.
Simple computations establish that:DEMO
– ϕs,I,
– and ϕs,
e/
(α1 )>ϕ
I,/ e/
I/
(α1)< 1 is DEMO compatible with α2 ϕ
I,/ e/
(α1): the DEMO case considered does not exist,
(α1).
This implies that DEMO α1 αe,VC1 prefers not to syndicate. 
A.5. Proof of Corollary 5
We know from Proposition 3 that if VC1 receives a bad DEMO, or if he receives a good signal
but α1 <αI , he syndicates whenever it is optimal to do so. We thus focus DEMO the case where
s1 =H and α1 αI . In that case, the second piece of information is used to deter investment, or
DEMO modify the effort decision. Combining the results of Propositions 2 and 4, we get:
–if α1 ∈[αI ; αe], there is too DEMO investment for α2 ∈[ϕ
–if α1 >αe, there is too much investment for α2 >ϕ
I,/ e/
.
I,/ e/
(α1); min[ϕs,

I,/ e/
(α1); ϕs,
I,e/
(α1)]],
A.6. Proof of DEMO 6
• Suppose that α1 ∈[αI ,αe]
good signal would encourage DEMO There is thus underprovision of effort.When α2 ∈[ϕe (α1); ϕs,DEMO
Because of the cost of syndication, VC• Suppose that α1 αe DEMO prefers not to syndicate, and exerts effort each time
he receives DEMO good signal. The ﬁrst best information gathering requires to ask for a second signal,
and stop exerting effort when a bad second signal DEMO obtained, if
overprovision of effort.

α2 ∈[ϕ
e/
A.7. DEMO numerical example of the incidence of the unobservability of effort
I,e/
(α1)] VC1 invests alone and does not exert effort while a second
2
; ϕ
I,/ e/
]. There is DEMO
2
396
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
Fig. 3. Unobservable effort and syndication decision when s1 =H .
DEMO Expected value of syndicated vs standalone projects: a numerical example
Consider DEMO following parameter values:
q0 = 0.4,pl = 0.3,ph = 0.7,R = 90,I = 45, = 0.1,c = DEMO
Under these values, Assumption 1 holds.
α = 0.65.
(0.65
Suppose that there are two VCs in the economy, with experience α = 0.73585 and ).Also,
Note that: 00.73585 <ν.I,73585 and 0(0.65) and 0.65.65∈[ανI ,αI, e],0.65  ϕ
– if the more experienced VC receives the project ﬁrst, he prefers not to call for a second
signal: he invests alone, and does not exert DEMO, after a good signal,
– if the less experienced VC DEMO the project ﬁrst, he calls for the second signal.
(0.73585),DEMO 0.73585 >ϕ
(0.73585). These parameter values imply that:
I,/ e/ I,/ e/
e/ e/
Therefore, we can compute the expected value of the project ﬁnanced by the more DEMO
VC, and compare it to the value of the project ﬁnanced DEMO the syndicate. We get:
NPV (e, qH ,α1 = DEMO) = 5.4,
NPV (e, qH,H,α1 = 0.65,DEMO = 0.73585) = 9.9083.
For these parameter values, the standalone project has a lower expected return than the syndicated
project.34
34 Note however DEMO the more experienced VC earns higher expected proﬁts than the syndicate because he ﬁnances
more projects (or to put it differently, he ﬁnances DEMO project more often).
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
397
ϕs,
to stay alone and invests only after a good DEMO
I,/ e/
With potential competition, the less experienced VC DEMO prefers to syndicate: 0.73585 >
(0.65), and invests iff DEMO have received a good signal. The more experienced VC prefers
References
Admati, A., Pﬂeiderer, P., 1994. Robust ﬁnancial contracting and the role DEMO venture capitalists. J. Finance 49, 371–402.
Anton, J., Yao, D., 1994. Expropriation and inventions: Appropriable rents in the absence of property DEMO Amer. Econ.
Rev. 84, 190–209.
Bachman, R., Schindele, I. 2006. Theft and syndication in venture capital ﬁnance. Unpublished manuscript. Norwegian
School of DEMO
Bain, J., 1956. Barriers to New Competition. Harvard Univ. Press, DEMO, MA.
Baron, D., Besanko, D., 1999. Informational alliances. Rev. DEMO Stud. 66, 743–768.
Bergemann, D., Hege, U., 1998. Venture DEMO ﬁnancing, moral hazard, and learning. J. Banking Finance 22, 703–735.
DEMO, B., Perotti, E., 2003. Entrepreneurs and new ideas. Unpublished manuscript. University of Toulouse and University
of Amsterdam.
Brander, J., Amit, R., Antweiler, W., 2002. Venture-capital syndication: Improved venture selection vs. the DEMO
hypothesis. J. Econ. Manage. Strategy 11, 423–452.
Bubna, A., 2002. DEMO among venture capitalists: When and with whom. Res. Finance 19, 285–321.
Bygrave, W., 1987. Syndicated investments by venture capital ﬁrms: A networking perspective. J. Bus. Venture 2, 139–
154.
Bygrave, W., Timmons, DEMO, 1992. Venture Capital at the Crossroads. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Casamatta, C., 2003. Financing and advising: Optimal ﬁnancial contracts DEMO venture capitalists. J. Finance 58, 2059–
2086.
Casamatta, C., Haritchabalet, C., 2006. Competition between informed venture capitalists for the ﬁnancing of entrepre-
neurs. Unpublished manuscript. University of Toulouse.
Cestone, G., 2002. Venture capital DEMO contract theory: Risky claims or formal control? Discussion paper No. 3462.
CEPR.
Cestone, G., Lerner, J., White, L., 2006. The DEMO of syndicates in venture capital. Unpublished manuscript. CSEF—
University of Salerno.
Chan, Y.-S., Siegel, D., Thakor, A., 1990. Learning, corporate control, and performance requirements in venture capital
contracts. Int. Econ. Rev. 31, DEMO
Chiplin, B., Robbie, K., Wright, M., 1997. The syndication of venture capital deals: Buy-outs and buy-ins. In: Rey-
nolds, P., et al. (Eds.), Frontiers Entrepreneurship Res. Babson College, Wellesley, DEMO
Cornelli, F., Yosha, O., 2003. Stage ﬁnancing and the role of convertible securities. Rev. Econ. Stud. 70, 1–32.
Dessi, R., 2005. Start-up ﬁnance, monitoring and collusion. RAND J. Econ. 36, 255–274.
Dixit, A., 1979. A model of duopoly suggesting a theory of entry barriers. Bell J. Econ. 10, 20–32.
Faure-Grimaud, A., Quesada, L., Peyrache, E., 2005. The ownership of ratings. Unpublished manuscript. LSE.
Fenn, G., Liang, N., Prowse, S., 1995. The economics of the private equity market. Staff study No. 168. Washington
board of Governors of the DEMO Reserve System.
Garmaise, M., 2006. Informed investors and the ﬁnancing of entrepreneurial projects. Unpublished manuscript. GSB
Chicago.
Gerardi, D., MacLean, R., DEMO, A., 2005. Aggregation of expert opinions. Discussion paper No. 1503. Cowles
Foundation.
Gompers, P., 1995. Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging DEMO venture capital. J. Finance 50, 1461–1489.
Gompers, P., Lerner, J., 1996. The use of covenants: An empirical analysis of venture partnership DEMO J. Law
Econ. 39, 463–498.
Gompers, P., Lerner, J., DEMO The Venture Capital Cycle. MIT Press.
Gorman, M., Sahlman, W., 1989. What do venture capitalists do? J. Bus. Venture 4, 231–248.
DEMO, D., Martimort, D., 2004. The organization of delegated expertise. Discussion paper No. 4572. CEPR.
Hege, U., Palomino, F., Schwienbacher, A., 2006. Venture capital performance in Europe and the United States: A DEMO
parative analysis. Unpublished manuscript. HEC.
Hellmann, T., 1998. The allocation of control rights in venture capital contracts. RAND J. Econ. 29, 57–76.
Hellmann, T., Puri, M., 2002. Venture capital and the professionalization of DEMO ﬁrms: Empirical evidence. J. Fi-
nance 57, 169–197.
398
C. Casamatta, C. Haritchabalet / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 368–398
Hopp, C., Rieder, F., 2006. What drives venture capital DEMO? Unpublished manuscript. University of Konstanz.
Kaplan, S., Strömberg, P., DEMO Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An empirical analysis of DEMO
capital contracts. Rev. Econ. Stud. 70, 281–315.
Kaplan, S., Strömberg, P., 2004. Characteristics, contracts, and actions: Evidence from venture capitalist DEMO J. Fi-
nance 59, 2177–2210.
Lehman, E., Boschker, K., DEMO Venture capital syndication in Germany: Evidence from IPO Data. Unpublished manu-
DEMO University of Augsburg.
Lerner, J., 1994. The syndication of venture capital investments. Finan. Manage. 23, 16–27.
Lerner, J., 1995. Venture capitalists and the oversight of private ﬁrms. J. Finance 50, 301–318.
Lizzeri, A., 1999. Information revelation and certiﬁcation intermediaries. RAND J. Econ. 30, 214–231.
Morrison, A., White, L., 2004. Financial liberalisation and capital regulation in DEMO economies. Unpublished manu-
script. Oxford Financial Research Centre.
Pichler, P., Wilhelm, W., 2001. A theory of the syndicate: Form follows function. J. Finance 56, 2237–2264.
Renucci, A., 2000. Optimal claims and tightness of relationships with a value-enhancing investor. Unpublished manu-
script. University of Toulouse.
Repullo, R., Suarez, J., 2004. Venture capital ﬁnance: A security design DEMO Rev. Finance 8, 75–108.
Sahlman, W., 1988. Aspects of ﬁnancial DEMO in venture capital. J. Appl. Corp. Finance 1, 23–36.
Sahlman, W., 1990. The structure and governance of venture capital organizations. J. Finan. Econ. 27, 473–522.
Sapienza, H., Manigart, S., Vermeir, W., 1996. Venture capitalist governance and value-added in four countries. J. Bus.
Venture 11, 439–469.
Schmidt, K., 2003. Convertible securities and venture capital ﬁnance. J. DEMO 58, 1139–1166.
Spence, M., 1977. Entry, capacity investment and oligopolistic pricing. Bell J. Econ. 8, 534–544.
Wright, M., Lockett, A., 2003. The structure and management of alliances: Syndication in the venture capital industry.
J. Manage. Stud. 40, 2073–2102.{1g42fwefx}