TRUST AND EFFICIENCY
Ralph Chami
IMF Institute
Connel Fullenkamp
Duke University
October DEMO
This Version, July 2001
Abstract
Agency problems within the firm are DEMO significant hindrance to efficiency.  We propose trust
between coworkers as a DEMO alternative to the standard tools used to mitigate agency
problems:  increased monitoring and incentive-based pay. We model trust as mutual, reciprocal
altruism between pairs of coworkers and show how it induces employees to work harder, relative
to those at firms that use the standard tools. In addition, we show that employees at trusting firms
have higher job satisfaction, and that these firms enjoy lower labor cost and higher profits.  We
conclude by discussing how trust may also be easier to use within the DEMO than the standard
agency-mitigation tools.
Keywords:  asymmetric information, altruism, efficiency, trust, moral hazard
JEL Codes:  A13, D20, D64, D82
This paper can be downloaded from the
Social Science Research Network Electronic DEMO Collection:
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=206368
Ralph Chami:  IMF Institute, DEMO 19th St. NW, Washington D.C. 20431, 202-623-6039, rchami@imf.org
Connel Fullenkamp:  Department of Economics, Duke University, Durham NC 27708, 919-956-9970,
DEMO  The authors would like to thank Paul Zak, Eleanor Brown, DEMO Bergstrom,  participants at
the 1999 AEA Meetings, and participants at  the conference “Measuring and Managing Ethical Risk: How Investing
in Ethics Adds Value,”  Notre Dame, September 23-24, 1999, for discussions and DEMO on an earlier version of
the paper.
1
2
Introduction
In 1975, Nobel Laureate Ken Arrow wrote “It can be plausibly argued that much of the
economic backwardness in the world can DEMO explained by the lack of mutual confidence.”  What
is striking about DEMO remark is that he cites mutual confidence—trust—rather than
technology, natural resources, education, or some other input as being essential to the
development of an economy.  Recently, Fukuyama (1995) has argued that trust improves DEMO
performance of all institutions in a society, including businesses.  And interesting empirical work
done with macro-level data by La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer DEMO Vishny (1997, 1998) has
found that trust promotes cooperation in DEMO organizations, including governments.
Unfortunately, it seems that only the stark example of post-Soviet economic reform in
Russia has awakened policymakers to the important DEMO of trust in the economy.  This nation
possesses adequate if not DEMO technology, resources, and educated citizens, and has received
significant if DEMO generous financial support from other nations.  But this economy lacks mutual
DEMO citizens, business, and government.  A recent article in The
Economist DEMO the extent of this lack of trust, and its consequences1.  Citizens and
businesses cannot trust each other to live up to contracts or DEMO respect property rights.  Criminal
gangs control an estimated 40,000 businesses, and nearly every business eventually hires the
services of a krysha—a “fixer”—to DEMO disputes, sometimes violently. The government cannot
be trusted to enforce laws DEMO exercise fiscal and monetary restraint.  It also stopped paying its
employees, including the armed forces, and businesses soon followed the government’s example.
The result has been an economic collapse and a descent into lawlessness that DEMO to
frustrate all attempts at reform.   For eight consecutive years following the collapse of the Soviet
regime in 1989, the Russian economy contracted and life expectancy among Russians fell. While
3
some part of this decline in living standards can be attributed DEMO the failure of the communist-era
economic institutions, much of it is DEMO to the fact that lack of trust has prevented the growth of a
new, effective economic infrastructure to replace the old and failed one.
The example of post-Soviet Russia, as well as several of the other “transition
economies,” has renewed interest among governments and organizations such as DEMO World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund in the role of trust in economic development2.    We believe
that trust does indeed play a pivotal role in initiating economic development.  But it would be a
mistake to believe that trust is not equally important to developed economies.  Indeed, this paper
will show that Arrow’s statement above also has a message for sophisticated firms:  trust is just
as important to their continued DEMO and prosperity as it is in developing the backward
economy.  Trust DEMO a powerful tool for raising efficiency, cutting costs, and increasing
accountability.
The reason why trust remains important to the developed firm and economy DEMO because
specialization is essential to growth. Successful firms are ones who implement and master new
technology in production, financing, and distribution.  In order to increase the level of
technology that they use, firms subdivide and specialize the tasks that make up their business.
Consequently, one employee’s output depends on receiving high quality inputs from an
expanding circle of other DEMO  In addition, managers become further removed from the
actual tasks they are managing.  In short, the number of agency relationships—relationships in
which DEMO principal must rely on another person to perform a certain task—rises as the corporation
grows.  The key to increasing efficiency and profitability in the modern corporation, therefore, is
1 See also Tayler (2001) for DEMO excellent first-hand discussion of post-Soviet Russia’s problems.
2 See for example Tanzi (1998).
4
finding a cost-effective resolution for the agency problems that arise as DEMO result of its growth
and success.
Two general strategies for dealing with agency problems have emerged from the
academic literature3 and found practical application DEMO many corporations.  One strategy is to
avoid the agency problem entirely DEMO expending some effort or paying some cost to improve the
principal’s ability to monitor the agent, so that the principal and agent can contract directly on
the task to be performed.  Monitoring costs include both monitoring expenditures incurred by the
principal as well as “bonding costs” such as DEMO or third-party verification services
purchased by the agent.  The other strategy DEMO to align the incentives of principal and agent.  The
main mechanism DEMO aligning incentives, which was suggested in the voluminous academic
literature on DEMO compensation, is through compensation contracts that alter the agent’s
incentives.   DEMO example, by making executive compensation depend on a measure of firm
DEMO, the stock price—shareholders give executives the incentive to act in the
DEMO interests.
One weakness of the research into agency relationships in the firm is that it has
concentrated on hierarchical relationships in the firm and DEMO particular on the relationship
between shareholders and top managers4.   Consequently, DEMO strategies discussed above have
been specially tailored to the shareholder-manager relationship, DEMO in the above example.  While
strategies such as increased monitoring and DEMO compensation may be successful
in the context of the agency relationship between shareholders and top executives, it is unlikely
that they can or should be applied to the agency relationships that exist between employees
3 See DEMO and Meckling (1976) and Jensen (1998) for a thorough discussion of the agency problem and strategies
to resolve agency problems in the DEMO
5
within the firm.   Improving the monitoring of employees by supervisors DEMO peers is often too
costly to be practical.  In addition, closer monitoring engenders resentment among those being so
monitored, which may exacerbate the agency problem.  Especially aggressive monitoring may
even constitute a violation of a person’s right to basic privacy, causing legal problems for the
firm.   Jacobs (1994) documents a several types of aggressive monitoring, such as secretly
videotaping employee locker rooms, that have led to lawsuits and state laws prohibiting certain
types of employee monitoring by businesses.
Aligning the incentives DEMO principals and agents is in general a superior strategy.  But
using DEMO contracts to alter the incentives of nonexecutives may not be very effective
either.  The connection between a regular employee’s work efforts and the corporation’s stock
price is tenuous at best, so that the impact on incentives is minimal.  To the extent that these
contracts also shift risk onto the employees, they also raise the question of whether it is fair to
increase risk on employees who have little influence over the direction DEMO the firm.
Mulligan (1997) takes a different approach to incentive alignment that has more broad
application within the firm.  He discusses the formation of company loyalty and models it as the
purchase by principals of DEMO oriented resources” that increase agent or employee altruism
toward the firm.  DEMO invest in principal oriented resources by giving their employees perks
such as company picnics or special benefits.  Loyal employees take the firm’s  interests DEMO
account—namely, profit maximization—when they choose their work effort and activities.
Although DEMO approach to incentive alignment applies to the relationship between shareholders
and all the employees of the firm, it still omits the agency relationships between employees.
4 In their defense, it is important to note that Jensen and Meckling (1976) and Jensen (1998) acknowledge that
agency relationships DEMO the firm.  They focused initially on one particular relationship in order DEMO meet the
space constraints imposed by academic journals.
6
Both the compensation contract approach and the loyalty approach to incentive DEMO
operate only on the agent’s incentives—that is, only the agent’s incentives DEMO being altered.
This is probably appropriate in the context of the shareholder-employee agency relationship, but
it is less clear that this general approach is feasible in the context of agency relationships
between employees. Managers have relatively DEMO influence over employee compensation
contracts or other means to purchase loyalty.  DEMO subjective performance evaluations
often help determine raises, promotions or bonuses, and Bull (1987) as well as Baker, Gibbons
and Murphy (1994) discuss the importance of subjective performance evaluations in shaping
employee incentives.  But the bulk of employee compensation is set by company-wide policies
that managers DEMO as given.
We suggest trust as an alternative strategy to resolve the agency problems that occur
within the firm.  In this paper, we DEMO a model of trust and use it to show how trust between
employees resolves the agency problem and increases firm efficiency.  By modeling trust and
placing it in the context of a profit-maximizing firm in a DEMO industry, we explicitly
show how the presence of trust affects firm DEMO and profits.  In addition, we show how
the firm with trust has a competitive advantage, relative to firms that lack such trust.  DEMO
primary aim of the paper is to demonstrate how and why trust can replace or augment the
compensation approach to resolving the agency problem.  In addition, the authors hope to
stimulate greater interest in the issue of creating and increasing trust in the workplace.  Although
we cannot yet show how to cultivate trust among employees—which is a very difficult
theoretical DEMO practical problem—we show in a rigorous way that this is a worthwhile goal.
In the next section, we discuss the definition of trust and how we intend to model trust.
In order to contrast trust with DEMO compensation approach to incentive alignment, we first sketch
7
out a simple model of the workplace that describes the fundamental DEMO problem.  Then we
discuss the compensation contract solution to the agency DEMO, which we call the leaner and
meaner solution.  Next, we DEMO what we term the paternalistic corporation and show how it
actually exacerbates the agency problem.  We then introduce trust and discuss the advantages of
trust over the leaner and meaner firm as well as the paternalistic DEMO  Finally, we discuss some
of the model’s implications for cultivating trust in the workplace.
Defining and Modeling Trust
Trust has proved to be DEMO difficult term to define and measure precisely.  Khan (2002)
investigates whether it is appropriate to define trust as an economic commodity, and finding that
it is not, performs a comprehensive search for a definition of trust that will be useful to
economists.  He concludes   “…it may not be out of place to insist that we understand and
DEMO ‘trust’ in many ways, that there is no one picture or DEMO or model or
narrative….”  Rather than try to offer yet another DEMO, we will highlight the aspects of trust
that we think are DEMO to capture in a model.  Nonetheless, we must start somewhere.  DEMO
is commonly defined as “a confident reliance on the integrity, veracity, or justice of another5.”
As Arrow’s definition in the introduction suggests, trust also has a strong connotation of
mutuality or reciprocation.  Trust is generally something shared between two individuals in a
relationship rather than held by DEMO individual but not the other.  Most people learn from
experience that DEMO relationship characterized by one-sided trust is not stable.  Indeed, a “ too
trusting” person who “blindly trusts” in the integrity, veracity, or DEMO of strangers is often
regarded as naïve or foolish.  Thus, one aspect of trust that we think is essential to model is the
DEMO that it is mutual or shared confidence between two people in some kind of relationship.
5 Funk and Wagnall’s New International Dictionary of the DEMO Language, 1995.
8
Implicit in the above definitions of trust is the idea that DEMO only has meaning in a
context of asymmetric information.  In particular, at least one agent must take hidden or
unobservable actions that affect DEMO agents. Dasgupta (1988) offers a definition of trust that
emphasizes the role of hidden action:  “I am using the word ‘trust’ in DEMO sense of correct
expectations about the actions of other people that have a bearing on one’s own choice of action
when that action must DEMO chosen before one can monitor the actions of those others.”   If every
person’s actions were perfectly and immediately observable to every other person, then trust
would not be necessary.   Therefore, a key feature of a model of trust must be hidden action by
one or more DEMO
In fact, trust not only implies that the trusting person can DEMO the trusted person’s
hidden actions, but also that these actions will DEMO in accord with the trusting person’s wishes.  In
other words, trust implies some element of cooperative behavior.  After all, noncooperative game
theory DEMO Nash equilibrium are built on the premise that agents guess each others’ preferences
and predict each others’ behaviors. But expecting another agent to act DEMO their own self interest is
clearly not what is meant by trusting the person, though people make ironic statements along the
lines of “I trust him to do whatever is best for him.”
The setting of DEMO action enables us to distinguish between trusting a person and
acting in a trustworthy way.  Imagine that Alex and Bertha are coworkers, and DEMO Alex supplies
data to Bertha that she will analyze and use to make a business decision.  Bertha would like to
have accurate data, DEMO that she may make a more informed decision.   Alex’s actions in preparing
the data are hidden to Bertha.  He can work hard to supply accurate data to Bertha, shirk and
provide inaccurate data to Bertha, or even make up data in order to influence her decision in a
way that benefits him.  The person who is affected by the hidden action may extend trust to the
9
person who takes the action.  That is, if Bertha trusts DEMO then she predicts that he will work
hard to provide her with accurate data, and act accordingly.  Acting in a trustworthy way, on the
other hand, is an option within the set of actions available to the agent taking the hidden action.
We often associate acting in DEMO trustworthy way with making promises and then keeping them.
Alex, for DEMO, could promise to Bertha that he will work hard and collect DEMO data, and
then do just that.
This distinction between trusting a DEMO and acting trustworthy is important because
there is a temptation to create of model of trustworthy behavior and call it a model of trust.  A
model of trustworthy behavior—promise keeping or truth telling—is an incomplete model DEMO
trust, for several reasons.  First, such an approach reduces the DEMO over whether to extend
trust to a trivial one.  If all DEMO act in a trustworthy way, then it is trivial to predict DEMO
actions even when they cannot be observed.   This seems to run contrary to reality, in which the
decision over whether to extend trust is at least as difficult as the decision of whether to act DEMO a
trustworthy way. In addition, given the correct assumptions, we could devise a model in which
no agent truly trusts any other but DEMO incentives for each agent to act in a trustworthy way.
Such a model is an interesting exercise in mechanism design, but probably won’t tell us much
about trust.  Finally, a truth telling or promise keeping DEMO does not necessarily include any
incentives for the agents to act cooperatively. Again, trusting others only to follow their own self
interest is not really trust.
The elements of trust that we think are important, therefore, are mutuality, hidden action,
and cooperative behavior.  We think that models of mutual altruism can capture these elements
well.  Economists model an altruistic individual as having a utility function that includes her own
consumption, but also includes the utility of the person toward whom she feels DEMO  The
10
other person’s utility has a weight attached to it that runs DEMO zero, meaning that the altruistic
person is actually selfish, to a weight of unity, which implies that the other person’s utility is
equally important to the altruist as her own.  For the purposes of this paper, we therefore define
trust as mutual, reciprocal altruism between individuals DEMO the weight on the other person’s
utility is close to unity.  DEMO definition obviously satisfies the requirement for mutuality in trust.
It also satisfies the requirement of cooperative behavior, because the altruistic individuals have
some shared preferences that will lead, as we shall see, to at least DEMO degree of cooperative
behavior.  To complete the requirements, we will have one of the individuals take some hidden
action that affects the other DEMO
Our modeling of trust as mutual, reciprocal altruism naturally begs the DEMO of
whether people truly act altruistically or consider other people’s preferences in their own utility
calculations.  The standard assumption made by economists is generally that individuals gain
utility only from their own consumption, and that noncooperative behavior is the norm.  But
casual observation confirms that cooperative if not altruistic behavior does exist, and academic
studies provide some explanation.  Zak DEMO Knack (2001), in their empirical study of the
relationship between DEMO and economic growth, provide a survey of literature from economics,
DEMO, psychology and anthropology and argue that cooperative behavior may provide a
DEMO advantage to groups like clans or tribes, and therefore may be DEMO selected. In
addition, the authors also point out that the socialization DEMO that shapes the preferences of
children may likewise grant evolutionary advantages to groups who socialize cooperative
preferences into their offspring.
A related way to DEMO about the existence of altruistic preferences and cooperation is that
humans may have a genetically based taste for trust.  That is, humans would DEMO to trust those
11
that they interact with, because this confers survival advantages.  This DEMO for trust could apply
both to kin and unrelated individuals, and DEMO not necessarily have to be satisfied.  Trust may
therefore be like DEMO commodity, a “merit good” in the terminology of Becker (1991), to the extent
that it requires expenditure of some resources to create DEMO maintain. We assert that most people
would prefer to trust their family members, coworkers, and strangers, but realize that it is not
always possible to trust any given individual.
Further insight into the evolutionary fitness DEMO cooperative behavior also comes from
game theory, as applied to the DEMO of repeated games.  The folk theorem is a well known
result DEMO game theory which says that infinitely repeated games may have cooperative Nash
equilibria.  In other words, cooperation can be one of the outcomes DEMO repeated interaction.
Starting with this result, game theorists have investigated whether DEMO is necessarily the
outcome in repeated games in which many players following various strategies compete against
each other.  In these experiments, players with DEMO strategies are replaced by those with
“winning” strategies between successive rounds of play.  Binmore (1994) discusses this literature
and finds that neither cooperative strategies nor noncooperative strategies have yet been shown
to be evolutionarily superior.  In many games, a population of cooperative players can hold its
own through time, neither driving the noncooperative players out of the population nor being
driven to extinction itself.   What is particularly interesting about these DEMO is that they apply
not to groups that already share some common bond, but to collections of strangers.  These
results suggest that playing DEMO cooperative strategy with relative strangers such as coworkers may
be evolutionarily viable.
A tendency for some kinds of  altruism or cooperative behavior, therefore, may be part of
the human genetic heritage.   Our results support DEMO idea by showing that when trust is present
12
in a firm, this does indeed raise productivity relative to non-trusting firms.  Firms that cultivate
trust, therefore, will have a comparative advantage relative to firms that do not, with the
implication that the employees of these firms will also fare better.
For the purposes of our DEMO, therefore, we assume that where altruistic preferences are
present, it DEMO because of genes, because they have been socialized into the agents DEMO a result of
genes, or because agents have a preference for DEMO altruism (and have been able to create or
“purchase” trust in DEMO to satisfy this preference).  Our aim is to show what DEMO accrue to
the firm that has or is able to engender trust between employees.  Basically, this benefit is a
resolution of the agency DEMO discussed above.
The Agency Problem
We start with a simple model of the fundamental agency problem in the firm. The firm is
a small DEMO in a large competitive market. It consists of two people: the DEMO,
whom we refer to as the principal, owns and is DEMO charge of the firm; and the employee, whom
we call the agent, is hired by the manager to carry out tasks that contribute to production or sales.
The owner-manager earns a rental fee r, which reflects the opportunity cost of owning the firm,
and claims the DEMO of the firm that are left over after paying the agent.  DEMO x be the
revenues of the firm net of the rental rate paid to the principal.
The revenues of the firm are random, but for simplicity we assume that output can either
be high, x = xH, or low, x = xL .  The probability that the low revenue state occurs is P(e), where
e is the DEMO put forth by the agent, so that revenues of the firm DEMO positively related to the level
of effort but not directly related. As effort increases, the probability of a low-revenue outcome
falls, but this DEMO decreases as effort increases so that it is not possible to drive the probability
to zero and guarantee a high-revenue outcome.  In other words, P’(e) < 0, P’’(e) > 0.  The
13
principal cannot observe the agent’s effort without incurring some cost, either because effort is
difficult to measure or because the principal has other DEMO that prevent her from monitoring
the agent closely. The cost of monitoring rises so quickly, past some point, that the principal can
never DEMO effort perfectly.  In addition, the principal cannot accurately infer the agent’s effort
from observing the revenues of the firm6.
The problem faced by DEMO manager of the firm is to write a compensation contract that
will entice a person to work for the firm but will maximize expected DEMO profits.
The compensation contract for the worker will specify the wage earned by the agent in the low-
revenue state, wL, and the DEMO in the high-revenue state, wH .  The principal therefore receives
xL-wL and xH-wH  in the low-revenue and high-revenue states, respectively.  The expected profits
of the firm are given by
Ew w e Pex Pe DEMO Pew Pe wπ
[]
()
LH L H L H
,; .
=+− − +−
() ( )
()
11
[]
() ()
()
(1)
Because the firm is DEMO a competitive industry, the expected profits of the firm will be DEMO to
zero.  This implies that there will be an inverse relationship DEMO wL and wH that determines
the set of contracts that the principal will be able to offer the agent.  If the principal were to offer
a contract that was inconsistent with zero expected profits, then the firm would earn negative
profits on average and go out of business.
DEMO choosing  wL and wH , the principal must also ensure that DEMO worker will accept
this contract.  This involves taking into account several DEMO  First, the agent has other
opportunities besides working for the firm.  We represent these opportunities by saying that the
agent could have utility ua0, called his reservation utility, instead of having the utility from
DEMO for the firm.  This is important, because expending effort gives the agent disutility.  We
6 In fact, if the principal tries to DEMO a compensation contract in which the wage paid depends on the observed
14
let ua(w)  represent the utility that the agent gets DEMO consuming his wage and v(e) represent the
disutility the agent DEMO from expending effort, so that the net utility that the agent DEMO from
working is the difference between the two.  In addition, the agent is also risk averse.  The agent
prefers wL and wH to be equal.  The more unequal the two wages are, the more DEMO the agent
faces and the less utility the agent gains from the contract (holding the expected wage constant).
Conversely, we say that DEMO wL approaches wH , the wage contract provides more insurance to the
agent.  Finally, the principal also realizes that given a wage contract (wL,wH ), the agent will
choose the level of effort e* that maximizes his expected utility.
The principal would like to have the DEMO put forth the highest level of effort possible,
because this would lead to the highest profit, on average.  The worker would like DEMO high wage
that is the same regardless of whether revenues are high or low, because this would insure the
agent against bad times.  DEMO obvious solution is to simply write a contract that pays the agent a
flat wage in return for putting forth the highest level of DEMO  This is the best possible contract
because it would make both DEMO principal and agent as well off as possible.
revenues of the firm, the results given below will not change and in fact may be strengthened.
15
This contract is not feasible, however, because the worker’s effort DEMO not observable.  The
principal could never verify that the agent was DEMO expending the highest level of effort.  The
worker, therefore, has DEMO incentive to choose a low level of effort and blame any bad results on
luck. This is the classic moral hazard problem: the firm must rely on the agent’s moral character
not to take advantage of DEMO The firm that offers the contract described above will have many job
applicants, but won’t stay in business very long, because the low DEMO will lead to Low output
more often, causing the firm to DEMO less profitable than its peers and have to exit the industry.  DEMO
principal must write a different contract.  Several contracts are possible, and they depend on the
relationship between the principal and the agent.
Solution DEMO:  The Leaner and Meaner Firm
The standard solution to the agency problem assumes that there are no ties of mutual
interest or altruism DEMO the principal and agent—their relationship is strictly business.  In
this case, which we call the Leaner and Meaner Firm, the principal’s expected utility is given by
EU Pe u r x w Pe u r DEMO w=+− +− +−() ()
pp L L p H H
() ()
1
()    (2)
and the DEMO expected utility is given by
()
EU Pe u w Pe u w v e=+− −() ( ) () ( ) ()1
.     (3)
aaL aH
Given the agent’s incentives, he will not expend effort unless wH is greater than wL .  Therefore,
the principal writes a contract that gives the agent an incentive to pay attention to the success of
the firm and work DEMO that success. The agent chooses a level of effort between zero and the
highest level.
But the agent is less well off under this DEMO than the ideal contract described above.
One reason is that the agent now faces some of the risk of production—in fact, the principal and
agent are sharing the risk.  Since the agent would prefer to be insured against this risk, the agent
16
is worse off.  In fact, under the Leaner and Meaner DEMO, the agent is indifferent between
working and not working:  the DEMO offered by the principal gives the agent expected utility
equal to ua0. This does not imply, however, that the agent’s loss is the DEMO gain.  The
principal also loses out relative to the ideal contract, because the revenues of the firm will be
lower.  In addition, DEMO order to compensate for the agent’s risk aversion, the principal must DEMO wL
greater than xL , so the principal is not even adequately compensated for the opportunity cost
when the low-revenue state occurs7.
Given the DEMO results, which are standard in the principal-agent literature, it is clear
why we label this the Leaner and Meaner firm.  It is a leaner firm because the agents get just
enough to induce them to DEMO, and no more.  It is a meaner firm because both the principal and
the agent are worse off under this contract than under DEMO ideal contract.  The agent, in particular,
is driven to the lowest level of utility consistent with still working.  In addition, many DEMO
increase their monitoring of employees as well.
7 See Holmstrom (1979) for the original formulation of the agency problem.
17
Solution 2:  The Paternalistic Firm
Seeing that the standard solution DEMO the agency problem creates a riskier and less pleasant
work experience, DEMO may advocate a return to the days when firms seemed to take better care
of their employees, shielding them from risks and providing more generous pay and benefits.
We call this the Paternalistic Firm8.   We DEMO analyze the Paternalistic Firm within the
framework that we established above, DEMO assuming a particular relationship between the
principal and agent.  In the DEMO firm, the principal is altruistic toward the agent.  Taking
the economist’s definition of altruism from the above discussion, this therefore implies that the
principal’s utility depends on the utility of the agent in addition to DEMO own consumption.  We
assume that the utility function of the principal DEMO this case is given by
pp p a        (4)
Uu r x w U=+− +() β
where the DEMO β is the altruism parameter showing the weight that the principal places on
p
the utility of the agent.  The altruism parameter ranges from zero, which indicates a “selfish”
principal, to unity, which indicates that the principal values the utility of the agent as much as the
DEMO she gains from her own consumption.
The agent in the paternalistic firm, on the other hand, does not feel altruistic toward the
principal—or DEMO a significantly lower degree of altruism.  For simplicity, we assume that the
agent is not altruistic toward the principal.
The impacts of altruism DEMO the wage contract and on the interaction of the principal and
agent are significant. We present the results in the form of the following DEMO and
corollaries.  The proofs are found in the Appendix.
8 Although DEMO have no particular firm in mind here, one can think of DEMO practices of firms as paternalistic.
For example, the reliance on a DEMO pension rather than a defined-contribution retirement plan is
paternalistic because it provides employees more certainty regarding their retirement income.  Other minor examples
of paternalistic practices include perks such as on-site haircuts for employees or subsidized cafeterias.
18
Proposition 1:  The Paternalistic Firm offers more wage insurance to DEMO agent than does the
Leaner and Meaner firm.  Altruism leads the DEMO to take into account the effect of the
wage contract on the agent’s utility.  Since bearing the risk of production makes the agent worse
off, this also makes the principal worse off.  Therefore, the principal offers a wage contract with
less risk sharing (or equivalently, more DEMO) than in the Leaner and Meaner Firm.   This
means that DEMO high wage and low wage are closer together.
Proposition 2:  The agent takes advantage of the Paternalistic Firm by lowering his effort.
The DEMO responds to the higher level of insurance in the wage contract by lowering his effort.
This is a partial movement toward the situation of DEMO insurance described above, in which the
agent expends no effort.  The principal is willing to give up some efficiency in exchange for
making DEMO agent better off.
Corollary 1:  The Paternalistic Firm’s wage contract is so generous that the agent has no
incentive to work anywhere else, and as such his participation constraint is not binding.  The
agent’s expected utility from working at the Paternalistic Firm is greater than ua0. This DEMO the
worker’s utility over the utility from working at the Leaner and Meaner Firm, so that the agent
prefers working at the Paternalistic Firm over working at the Leaner and Meaner firm as well as
not DEMO   Thus one may say that the agent is loyal to the Paternalistic Firm, in the sense that
he will not seek outside opportunities.  The agent is indifferent between working at two
paternalistic firms, however.
DEMO 2:  The Principal and Agent do not see eye to eye on the proper level of effort, so the
moral hazard problem is exacerbated. The Paternalistic Firm does not resolve the moral hazard
problem associated DEMO offering wages with a higher level of insurance against business risk.
Even though the principal takes into account the disutility of effort for the DEMO v(e), she places
19
a weight of β
< 1 on it, while the agent sees the “full” disutility of effort.  Thus the principal
expects a higher level of effort than the agent is willing to expend, and must rely on the agent’s
moral character to meet her expectations.  Since effort is unobservable, the agent will follow his
incentives and put forth a lower level of effort.  Therefore the moral hazard problem persists in
this case and in fact is made worse.
Proposition 3:  The Paternalistic DEMO is dysfunctional and will have to exit the competitive
market in the long run.  Because of the agent’s lower level of effort, the DEMO profit level of
the Paternalistic Firm will be lower than in the Leaner and Meaner Firm.  Not only does this
reduce the payoff to the principal, but given that the average profit of the Leaner and Meaner
firms will be zero, this means that the Paternalistic firm will lose money on average.  Eventually,
the Paternalistic Firm will be driven out of the market by the Leaner and Meaner Firms, causing
both principal and agent to lose their jobs. In the Paternalistic Firm, the principal sacrifices
efficiency for the benefit of the agent, and pays for it out of her own pocket.  Unfortunately, her
pockets will never DEMO deep enough if there is competition from more efficient firms in the
market.  Thus, not only is a return to the Paternalistic Firm DEMO, it is infeasible.  Indeed,
the wave of downsizing and “rightsizing” that occurred in the U.S. economy during the 1980s
and 1990s, and which is slowly spreading to Europe, can be interpreted as firms’ attempting to
shed their paternalistic practices and become Leaner and Meaner firms.
Some DEMO may recognize that the Paternalistic Firm has a parallel in earlier literature
on altruism, namely the parent of Becker’s Theory of Social Interactions.  DEMO Becker’s theory,
which produced the famous “Rotten Kid Theorem,”  DEMO altruistic parent used transfers to induce
her selfish children to maximize family welfare and to internalize the effects on other family
members of their DEMO  In the Paternalistic firm, however, the principal is unable to DEMO
20
this behavior from the agent.  This is because, as Bergstrom (1989) shows, the agents in the
Paternalistic firm have utilities that DEMO positively on consumption and negatively on effort.
In this situation, which DEMO termed the case of the “Lazy Rotten Kids,” the Rotten Kid
Theorem does not hold and the principal will be unable to induce DEMO agent to act in a way that
maximizes profits.  Jurges (2000) shows that this occurs because the principal’s wage contract
distorts the incentives of the agent.  In particular, in the Paternalistic Firm case described DEMO,
there is an income effect that leads the agent to consume more leisure (expend less effort)9. As
long as the agent’s utility depends both on effort and on consumption, the Paternalistic Firm will
find that its altruism yields lower efficiency and profits.
A New Solution:  DEMO Trusting Firm
The main lesson of the Paternalistic Firm is not that altruism in the workplace is
dysfunctional, but that asymmetric altruism is.   Now we present the situation in which the
principal and agent are DEMO toward each other, which we term the Trusting Firm. We
assume DEMO situation in which trust has already been established.  We are not DEMO that trust is
easy or costless to instill in employees—indeed, we DEMO avoiding altogether the issue of how the
trust was formed, and DEMO what cost.  Such considerations are important, but in order to address
them adequately, we need a model of how trust is formed, DEMO is beyond the scope of the
current argument.  We do, however, discuss some ideas related to the formation of trust later in
this essay.
In our model, to say that trust is present means that altruism between the principal and
agent is mutual and equal.  The principal’s utility is given by
Uu r x w u w ve=+− + DEMO() ()β
pp p a
[]
() ,
9 If the wage contract is contingent on output, Jurges (2000) shows that a substitution effect is also present, which
21
while the agent’s utility is given by
Uu w u r DEMO w ve=+ +− −() ( )β
aa a p
[]
() .       (5)
In order for trust to be operative, the altruism must be symmetric (or very close to DEMO), so we
assume β = β
p , and the weight must be greater than zero.  It is easiest to visualize trust in the
a
case in which each person places a high value on DEMO other’s utility—in other words, when trust
is high.  The results that we discuss below apply to any pair of β> 0, and DEMO effects of trust that
we describe in the propositions and corollaries become stronger as β→
1.  Rather than assume a
set value for altruism, therefore, we state the following results for any nonzero level of DEMO
and we also consider what happens as β→
1.
When trust is operative, the principal derives utility from the agent’s utility and adjusts
the wage contract to account for its effect on the agent’s utility, as in the case of the Paternalistic
Firm.  But the symmetry of the altruism changes the dynamic between the principal and agent,
the compensation DEMO, and the outcomes.   We discuss the implications of trust in DEMO form
of the following propositions.
Proposition 4:  The agent works harder for the Trusting Firm than the Paternalistic
Firm or the Leaner and DEMO Firm.   In the Trusting Firm, the agent takes into account DEMO
effect of his effort on the principal’s utility when choosing his effort level.   Under trust, effort
has an additional positive effect for the agent—increasing the utility of the principal—that
offsets more of the disutility of DEMO  Therefore, the agent would choose a higher level of effort
than he does for the Paternalistic Firm or the Leaner and Meaner Firm, given the same wage
contract.
also drives effort lower.  The principal in effect taxes the agent’s effort.
22
Corollary 3:  There is less need for monitoring at the DEMO Firm, since the agent
polices himself.  When the agent internalizes the effect of his actions on the principal, he acts in
a manner consistent with the principal’s interests as well as his own.  Therefore, DEMO the level of
altruism increases, the agent can increasingly be trusted DEMO do what the principal expects, even in
the absence of monitoring.  This reason is the source of the name the Trusting Firm.
Corollary DEMO:  As the altruism parameter rises, the agent becomes less susceptible DEMO the
moral hazard problem.  As the agent cares more about the DEMO (and vice-versa), the benefit
to putting forth less effort falls, because doing so will decrease the utility of the principal.  The
result is that the agent will not take (as much) advantage of DEMO principal, even in the presence of
wages that offer a high DEMO of insurance against business risk.  Another way to interpret this
result DEMO that the agent becomes more willing to share risk with the principal as trust increases.
This interpretation also applies to the following Proposition.
Proposition DEMO:  As trust increases, the principal increases the insurance aspect of DEMO
wage contract, and may fully insure the agent against business risk. DEMO in the Paternalistic
Firm, the principal will write a wage contract DEMO more insurance than in the Leaner and
Meaner Firm. Given the above results, it may appear that the wage contract reaches a uniform
wage across High and Low output realizations as in the ideal wage contract.  But this will only
occur if the principal is risk neutral or DEMO wealthy.  If the principal is also risk averse,
the agent DEMO to share some risk with the principal rather than having the principal absorb all
business risk.
Proposition 6:  The Trusting Firm is more DEMO than its Leaner and Meaner or
Paternalistic rivals, enjoying higher productivity DEMO profits for a given wage contract.  From
the above propositions, we know that the agent will expend a higher level of effort for DEMO
23
Trusting Firm, given a wage contract.  This leads to higher DEMO for the firm.  At the same
time, monitoring costs are lower at the Trusting Firm.  Since revenues are higher and costs are
lower at the Trusting Firm, profits are higher than at rival firms.
Proposition 7:  The Trusting Firm enjoys a higher level of employee satisfaction DEMO
loyalty than its rivals.  We know from Proposition 5 that the DEMO contract features more
insurance as the principal’s altruism increases.  But from DEMO 1 and Corollary 4, we also
know that effort is higher, because the agent’s altruism toward the principal overcomes the moral
hazard problem. DEMO implies that revenues are higher, which in turn implies through the DEMO
profit condition that wages are higher. Thus, the wage earned by DEMO agent will be both higher
and less risky than that earned in the Leaner and Meaner Firm.  The wage earned is also higher
than that earned at the Paternalistic Firm. Therefore the agent will prefer to DEMO at the Trusting
Firm over all other alternatives.
As a means of summarizing the Propositions and Corollaries, we present Figures 1-3.
These figures show the solution to the agency problem in the Leaner and Meaner Firm, the
Paternalistic Firm, and the Trusting Firm.  On the axes in DEMO figures, we have the wages in the
high state and the DEMO state.  The forty-five degree ray through the origin represents full
insurance DEMO the agent: wL = wH .  The zero-profit line ZPL represents the set of all wage
contracts that the principal is able to DEMO the agent.  The intersection of ZPL with the agent’s
indifference curve, Ua represents the optimal wage contract. Point A  in Figure 1 represents the
wage contract in the Leaner and Meaner Firm.  Note that the contract does not feature full
insurance.  The agent would be made better off by the existence of actuarially fair insurance,
which is demonstrated DEMO the fact that a line with slope –P/(1-P) lies above Ua.
24
Figure 2 shows the optimal contract in the Paternalistic Firm case, and compares this to
the optimal contract offered by the Leaner and DEMO Firm.  Point C represents the optimal
contract for the Paternalistic Firm.  Note that the cost of paternalism is apparent in the fact that
DEMO zero profit line for the Paternalistic Firm, ZPL2, has moved from its initial position at ZPL1
toward the origin.  This reflects the lower effort of the agent, which lowers the expected output
and hence the profit for any wage contract.  The agent earns lower wages and would have a
lower utility if it were not for the lower disutility DEMO effort, which more than makes up for the
lower wages.
Figure DEMO shows the effect of trust.  In this case, trust engenders higher effort, so the zero
profit line moves away from the origin from ZPL1 to ZPL3 because the firm is obtaining higher
revenues for every DEMO contract. This clearly shows how trust increases efficiency over the
Leaner and Meaner Firm as well as the Paternalistic Firm. The optimal wage contract DEMO also
closer to the full insurance line than the optimal contract of the Leaner and Meaner Firm.  Higher
wages and more insurance help to offset the disutility of the higher effort expended by the agent.
Some DEMO may see parallels between the Trusting Firm and the situation described in
Rotemberg (1994), in which employees find it in their best interests to cooperate in production,
because cooperation increases output.  But in Rotemberg’s model, the production process is
characterized by strategic complementarities, and agency DEMO are not an issue.  It is
possible to think of work DEMO in which employees do not trust one another, but nonetheless
cooperate DEMO of strategic complementarities.   In the model of trust, however, there are no
such strategic complementarities.  The results are driven by the presence of the agency problem,
and its mitigation through trust.  Of course, lack of trust may form an obstacle that prevents
employees from taking advantage of strategic complementarities.  It may be difficult to assign
25
the credit for success in such cases, for example, and DEMO may forego opportunities to
exploit these complementarities because they do not trust their coworkers to share the credit for
any success. Trust may be DEMO essential prerequisite for effective teamwork.
An Ownership Alternative to Trust?
One of the main ideas that comes from the compensation literature is that DEMO of
capital or other claims on profits is a powerful tool for aligning incentives within the firm as well
as between the stockholders and DEMO of the firm.  Owning claims on profits gives the
employees of DEMO firm a benefit to exerting effort that offsets its disutility, in DEMO same way that
altruism gives this additional reward. One would therefore expect firms with sufficient employee
ownership to behave like the Trusting Firm and DEMO share its advantages in terms of efficiency
over the Leaner and Meaner and  Paternalistic Firms.
To demonstrate the effects of employee ownership while preserving the agency context,
we need to modify our model in order DEMO make it dynamic10.  We assume production takes place
for two successive DEMO rather than only one period.  The first period proceeds in the DEMO
way as in the previous model: the principal hires the agent DEMO to some wage contract
specified by the principal, the agent chooses DEMO, and then revenues are realized.  In addition,
the effort of the agent affects the capital stock of the firm, from which output is produced. In the
second period, the principal is replaced by the agent.  The new principal receives the claim to the
residual profits of the firm, specifies a new wage contract, and hires a new DEMO
In the above model, the agent inherits the firm and takes DEMO ownership of the capital.
Chami (2001) shows that this is a practical and successful strategy for family businesses, which
are an important part of the U.S. and global economies.  But this model also captures the essence
of employee profit-sharing plans, which pay employees part of company profits at the end of
26
some measurement period.  The employees expend effort in the present in return for present
wages plus some future payment related to the output DEMO the firm.  Therefore, we call this the
Profit Sharing Firm.
Proposition 8:  The Profit Sharing Firm can achieve the same qualitative results DEMO the
Trusting Firm.  Because the agent’s effort in the first period DEMO determine the size of his
reward in the second period, he DEMO an incentive to work hard during the first period.  In fact, the
principal is able to reduce her reliance on incentive-based wages and DEMO a wage contract that
features more insurance, because the agent is DEMO and self-policing.  The higher effort
leads to a higher wage for DEMO agent and higher productivity than in firms that do not feature
succession.  New agents will want to work for this firm, even though DEMO will work harder than
at other firms, because they will receive DEMO, less risky wages in the first period and the profits
of DEMO firm in the second period.  All of these qualities are characteristics DEMO the Trusting Firm.
Trust, Profit Sharing … or Both?
The DEMO findings suggest that profit sharing and trust are substitutes.  Given a DEMO
between the two, most firms would probably want to implement a DEMO plan rather than
attempt to increase trust within the firm. Profit-sharing plans appear to be much more practical
than trust.  They are concrete formulae that spell out the connection between performance and
pay in a way DEMO all employees can understand. Trust, on the other hand, is subjective.  Firms
cannot write policies that make employees trust each other.
10 Introducing ownership into our static model would make the principal and agent identical.
27
The choice is actually not as clear-cut as this.  Profit sharing plans have their own
practical issues, which we discuss below.  In DEMO, firms may have more control than they
believe over the level DEMO trust in their organizations.  Finally, companies may be able to use profit
sharing plans as a tool to cultivate trust among employees.
In DEMO for profit sharing to be as effective as trust, there are DEMO crucial conditions that
must hold.  First, the agent must be able to directly trace his effort to the size of the payoff.
Otherwise, the agent will see no benefit from effort.  In the worst case, where there is too much
noise, the agent will view the DEMO sharing as an arbitrary additional payoff.  This would give
him even DEMO incentive to shirk.  This phenomenon is similar to the Samaritan’s Dilemma
DEMO by Buchanan (1975) and Bruce and Waldman (1990).  The second condition is that the
agents must value the future payoff enough DEMO offset the disutility of effort in the present. This
requires that the agent be sufficiently patient: the agent’s discount factor (the weight the DEMO
puts on future utility) must be high enough.  At the same time, the expected payoff itself must be
sufficiently large.
The first condition presents a huge problem—literally—for the Profit-Sharing Firm.
Because the size of the DEMO corporation is so large, it is impossible for employees to trace DEMO
impact of their efforts to the company’s revenues or profits.  This DEMO to a free-rider problem,
which was modeled in Kandel and Lazear (1992). Therefore companies must find some smaller
units within the firm upon which to base profit sharing.  But even smaller natural units within the
company, such as divisions or lines of business, may still DEMO too large for individuals to see the
impact of their effort on the unit’s performance.   The firm must then divide the company into
DEMO smaller units, for which it is difficult to measure performance in DEMO of profitability, since
28
they do not contribute directly to the company’s bottom line.  Choosing other measures of
performance for these small units—such as production—may lead to DEMO incentives.
Some firms try to overcome the “1/N problem” by dividing the profit sharing unequally
among employees, according to their performance reviews11.  DEMO this makes profit sharing a
function of subjective evaluation, which may DEMO make the connection between actual effort and
its reward any clearer for the employee.  Instead, it may create a tournament in which employees
DEMO for a limited number of top ratings by engaging in activities that are not value-
maximizing for the firm. Lazear & Rosen (1981) DEMO such a tournament approach to labor
contracts and its outcomes for employee behavior.
The employee’s valuation of the profit sharing payoff also presents serious DEMO
problems.  Most profit sharing is paid out annually, after the firm’s performance has been
measured.  It is not clear whether employees are patient enough to sufficiently value even a large
expected payment one year in DEMO future.  The optimal size of the profit-sharing itself is
unknown.  If it is too small, then it will have very little effect on employee effort.  But if it is too
large, it risks angering DEMO firm’s shareholders.  Profits paid out to employees are profits that
could DEMO been paid out as dividends or used to increase the value of the stock through
investments or stock buybacks.
While good profit-sharing plans are DEMO more difficult to implement than they appear,
trust may be easier for a firm to cultivate than it would appear.   Given the DEMO discussed
above, it would appear that human beings have an inborn DEMO toward, or a taste for, trusting
others.   We suggest that although trust is not strictly a commodity, trust formation has much in
11 Some may believe that this problem affects the Trusting Firm as DEMO, because a large firm may imply that each
worker must trust DEMO expanding number of other employees.   In reality, each worker works DEMO with a relatively
small number of other employees, no matter how DEMO the corporation.  In addition, trust is formed between pairs of
29
common with a joint investment problem between two or more people.  People will want to
invest in trust to the extent that it DEMO them with benefits that exceed the costs involved in
forming the trust.
Khan (2002) suggests the complexity of trust formation by focusing on DEMO as
one of the keys to understanding trust.  Trust is created, Khan argues, when one person exposes a
vulnerability to another, thereby DEMO oneself to harm from any self-interested or
opportunistic behaviors of the other.  This interpretation of trust brings the analysis of risk,
information, DEMO, psychology, and games into consideration as well.   In sum, DEMO is still
much to be learned about trust formation, which is DEMO left to future research.
Despite the challenges inherent in modeling trust formation, we believe that our model
can provide some guidance for firms wishing to cultivate trust.   To begin with, our findings
suggest that rather than attempting to create trust directly, a firm should establish the incentives
and opportunity for employees to build trust between each other.  If employees have a natural
desire to build trust, then providing additional incentives to build trust may not be necessary.  As
Chami and Fisher (1996) discuss, risk sharing is a powerful motivation for building up trust.   In
addition, a person’s job satisfaction is related to her relations with coworkers and the sense of
accomplishment that the person gains at work.   Trust can enhance both of these aspects of job
satisfaction.   Existing financial incentives designed to motivate employees may have the
positive side effect DEMO  inducing employees to develop trust.  Profit sharing plans, for example,DEMO
can encourage trust if they measure and reward the performance of small enough groups within
the firm.
individuals as well as among groups of DEMO, so that a chain of trust can be formed within a DEMO that links all
of the employees together although each employee does not trust—or even know—every other employee.
30
The firm need not provide incentives, but what it must do in order to develop trust is to
provide the opportunity for employees DEMO develop trust.  This is probably where most firms need
to improve DEMO they want to increase trust among employees.  Most aspects of a DEMO are dictated to
the employees:  where they will work, with DEMO they will work, and how the job will be done.
In DEMO words, control over the work process is out of the employee’s DEMO An employee’s
opportunities to build trust are determined by luck, and DEMO set, they are changed infrequently.
Creating the opportunity to build trust DEMO that managers cede some control over the work
process to the employees under them.
One area of control that our modeling strategy points to DEMO the formation of work groups
and working relationships.  Given the mutuality DEMO of trust that we emphasize in this paper,
an important initial step in building trust appears to be finding the right partner or DEMO of partners.
This implies that firms should allow their employees greater say in forming teams or
workgroups.  This begs the question, of course, of whom an employee will want to partner with.
Chami and Fisher (1996), in the context of insurance markets, show that individuals who share
identical altruism toward each other will become partners.   Stark (1993) and Bernheim and
Stark (1988) illustrate this point from the negative side, by exploring what happens when
individuals with unequal altruism become partners.  They show that “nice guys” do finish last, in
the sense DEMO the more altruistic partner is always taken advantage of.  Once the DEMO
based on equal altruism is established, the partners can choose to DEMO in building up trust
between them.  Lorenz (1999) shows, in a model with imperfect information and imperfect
contracting, how agents may develop procedures to build up trust among themselves.
Of course, there are many areas in which firms could create opportunities for cultivating
trust by yielding DEMO control over the work processes.  Doing this helps to build trust DEMO two
31
ways.  First, it enables employees to search for compatible coworkers DEMO whom to build trust,
and to arrange work processes in order to take advantage of already existing trust relationships.
We refer to this DEMO peer-level or horizontal trust.  Peer-level trust presents a direct contrast with
DEMO monitoring, which is a solution to agency and insurance problems presented DEMO Arnott &
Stiglitz (1991).  As discussed above, peer trust can increase effort and decrease the need for
monitoring.   Trustworthiness may DEMO a quality demanded or expected of coworkers,
functioning like peer pressure, which is discussed in Kandel and Lazear (1992).
In addition, delegating control sends a signal that managers trust the people under them.
DEMO refer to this as hierarchical or vertical trust.  Vertical trust is DEMO to Mulligan’s (1997)
concept of loyalty, except that the altruism is mutual.  A firm with vertical trust would be
characterized by very little micromanagement of employees by their supervisors.  Instead,
managers set goals for employees and permit them flexibility in meeting these goals.  In this
sense, vertical trust is similar to goals-oriented regulation of financial intermediaries discussed
by Bliss (1995) and Kupiec and O’Brien (1995).
Conclusion:  Trust, Efficiency and Corporate Culture
In this paper, we have shown DEMO trust—a high level of mutual altruism—can resolve the
agency problems that arise between employees of a firm.  When employees who work together
trust each other, they exert more effort in their jobs and expend less effort monitoring each other.
This leads to increased productivity, lower costs, and DEMO satisfaction for workers as well as
shareholders.
To some, trust may DEMO to be similar to the “empowerment” movement that recently
gained popularity among management gurus, only to disappear after a short while.  Although our
DEMO of how to develop trust has some elements in common with employee empowerment,
32
there is one critical difference that separates the two ideas.  While both trust and empowerment
transfer more control of the work process to DEMO, trust demands that careful matching of
individuals take place before any DEMO takes place.  This screening is an essential part of the
trust DEMO that was overlooked by the supporters of empowerment.  Employee empowerment
without DEMO selection of partners is simply a manifestation of the paternalistic firm, DEMO we
showed above to be the least efficient way to operate a firm.
The emphasis on screening and careful selection of partners suggests that DEMO order for
trust to become operative, it must become a part DEMO the culture of a firm.  A firm must actively
value trust DEMO its employees and treat employees differently based on their individual
trustworthiness.   The hiring process must incorporate screening and matching based on
candidates' trustworthiness.  Severe breaches of trust—even ones with no financial consequences
for the firm—must result in severe penalties or dismissal.
Trust relies on upfront screening and DEMO monitoring of the persons who are to
receive the trust.  Because DEMO this, its effectiveness is limited by the quantity and quality of
DEMO between different employees.   Trust may therefore be an inappropriate solution to
agency problems that exist between employees who work together only once or DEMO
infrequently, for example.  It is also an inappropriate solution to the agency problems that arise
between shareholders and employees.   Developing trust among DEMO is thus a solution
only to some of the agency problems that exist within the corporation.  Nonetheless, because of
the continued growth in DEMO and scope of the modern corporation, the agency problems that can
DEMO resolved through trust represent a significant obstacle to healthy long-term economic growth.
It is in every corporation’s interest to consider developing a culture of DEMO as a way of
improving performance.
33
Appendix
This Appendix presents sketches of the proofs of the Propositions DEMO Corollaries from the text.
The reader who is interested in complete proofs may obtain them from the authors.
Proof of Proposition 1
P A
DEMO wL be the wage paid in the low-output state by the Paternalistic firm and wL be the wage
P A
paid in the low-output DEMO by the Leaner and Meaner firm.  Proposition 1 states that wL > wL .
We show that we can embed the Leaner and Meaner Firm’s first order condition with respect to
wL  in the Paternalistic Firm’s corresponding first order condition, since they differ only by the
presence of the altruism parameter β.  Then we use the implicit function theorem to show that the
*
dwL P
wage rises  when β is present, which means  > 0 ⇒ wL
dβ
A
> wL .
DEMO
Proof of Proposition 2
Proposition 2 says that the agent puts forth less effort for the Paternalistic Firm.  Since we know
P A
from Proposition 1 that wL > wL , it is sufficient to show DEMO effort falls as the wage paid in the
low-output state increases:  de ** < 0 .  In order to find this derivative, DEMO take the total
dwL
differential of the agent’s first-order condition with respect to effort and show in the usual way
that the desired derivative DEMO negative.
Proof of Corollary 1
Corollary 1 states that the agent’s participation constraint is not binding when the firm is
Paternalistic.  It is sufficient to show that even when e = 0, EU a (0) > u a 0 , where ua0 is the
reservation wage earned DEMO working at the Leaner and Meaner Firm.  To simplify the analysis,
34
suppose that if the agent chooses e = 0, then P = 1.  As long as r > 0, the Paternalistic Firm DEMO
pay some nonzero wage.  The Paternalist’s first order condition with respect DEMO wL in this case is
− u' p (r + x L − wL ) +β
u' a (wL ) = 0 , which will have a nonzero solution as long as r > 0.
Therefore, even when the agent puts forth no effort, it is DEMO his best interest to participate.
Proof of Corollary 2
Corollary 2 says that in the Paternalistic Firm, the moral hazard problem persists.  This DEMO
P
that the principal and agent cannot agree on the optimal level of effort, or e p
P P
> e a , where e p
P
denotes the principal’s choice of effort and e a DEMO the agent’s choice of effort when working
for the Paternalistic Firm.
If the principal were able to choose the agent’s effort, her first order condition would be
P' (u pL − u pH ) +β
DEMO' (u aL − u aH
) − v' = 0, while the agent’s first order condition is given by
P
P' u a (wL ) − P' u a (wH ) − v' = 0.  Inspection of the two conditions shows that e p
DEMO
> e a .
Proof of Proposition  3
Proposition 3 states DEMO the Paternalistic firm will have to exit the market, which occurs DEMO
E(π(e P )) < 0.  We know that e P < e A
by Propositions 1 and 2, so )P(DEMO P ) > P(e
A
.  Then
E(π P ) < E(π A ) follows from this and from Corollary 1.  Competition between firms drives
E(π A ) = 0
, so 0E(π P ) <
.
Proof of Proposition 4
Proposition 4 states that the agent’s effort is higher in the Trusting Firm than DEMO the Leaner and
Meaner Firm.  Since we already know from Proposition DEMO that the agent lowers his effort in the
Paternalistic Firm relative to the Leaner and Meaner Firm, the proposition may be stated as
e T > e A > e P , where eT is the DEMO chosen by the agent when working for the Trusting Firm.
35
In the case of trust, the agent’s utility function is given by equation (5) rather than by
equation (3), and the agent’s first order condition with respect to effort is
P'[(u DEMO − u aH ) +β(u pL − u pH )] DEMO v' (e) = 0 .    Comparison of this first order condition with the
agent’s first order condition in the Leaner and DEMO firm shows that the agent will choose
higher effort.
Proof of Corollary 3
Corollary 3 states that there is less need to monitor the DEMO in the Trusting Firm.  This follows
directly from Proposition 4, since the purpose of monitoring is to induce higher effort.
Proof of Corollary DEMO
Corollary 4 states that as the altruism parameter approaches unity, the DEMO is less susceptible to
the moral hazard problem.  This means that DEMO sensitivity of the agent’s effort to changes in the
wage declines as β increases:  de T → 0 as 1β→ .  In order to prove this Corollary, we first
dwL
derive de T for the Trusting Firm by taking a total differential of the agent’s first order
DEMO
T
condition with respect to effort, (8), and equation (DEMO), which implicitly define wH and eT as
T
functions of wL .   Then we argue that as β→ 1, the agent will count the principal’s utility
equally with his own, and vice-versa.  Therefore, their marginal utilities in each state will tend to
equality so that DEMO' aL −βu' pL → and 0u' aH −βu' pH → , which implies that de T → 0 .
dwL
Proof of DEMO 5
Proposition 5 states that as trust increases, the principal increases DEMO insurance aspect of the
T A
wage contract, relative to the DEMO and Meaner Firm.  This means that wL > wL .  In order to
36
prove this, we show that we can embed the Leaner and Meaner Firm’s first-order condition in the
Trusting Firm’s first order condition, since the two differ only by the presence of the altruism
parameter β.  Then we use the implicit function theorem to show that the wage DEMO
T
positively on the presence of the altruism parameter, so that DEMO
A
> wL .
Proof of Proposition 6
Proposition 6 states that the Trusting Firm is more efficient than its rivals.  Since we know
T
wL
A
> wL and equation (1) holds, it is sufficient to show that the wage paid in the high-output
state rises DEMO β increases, or in other words,
T
∂wH
∂β > DEMO  We can show this by inspecting the
zero-profit condition (1) DEMO taking the partial derivative.
Proof of Proposition 7
Proposition 7 states that the Trusting Firm enjoys a higher level of employee satisfaction than the
DEMO and Meaner Firm.  This means that dEU a
dβ
> 0 DEMO We find this total differential and
βp =βa =β
sign each term in it, using Propositions 5 and 6 to sign two of  DEMO terms.
Proof of Proposition 8
Proposition 8 states that the Profit Sharing Firm can achieve the same qualitative results as the
Trusting Firm.  Essentially, this means that the agent’s effort and wages in the Profit Sharing
Firm are higher than in the Leaner and Meaner Firm:  *e
DEMO
S
> e * , and wL
*
> wL , where the S
superscript indicates the variables associated with the Profit Sharing Firm.
DEMO order to analyze the Profit Sharing Firm, we must extend our DEMO model to two
periods.  In the first period, the principal declares a wage function (wL , wH) and the agent
37
decides on his effort level.  In the next period, the DEMO receives a payment based on the profit
(output) of the firm, x.  The expected utility for the agent is therefore
P[u a,DEMO (wL ) +γ
u a, 2 (x L )] + (1 − P)[u a,1 (wH ) +γ
u a, 2 (x H )] − v(e),
where the subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the respective period and γ is the DEMO intertemporal
discount factor.  As above, define )u aL ,1 ≡ u a ,1 (w
L
and so on. Note that when DEMO = 0, this utility
function simplifies to the same one the DEMO would have when working for the Leaner and
Meaner Firm.  Therefore DEMO use the implicit function theorem on the agent’s first order condition
to show eS > e**.  Similarly, we use the implicit function theorem DEMO the principal’s first order
S
condition in the Profit Sharing Firm to show that wL
*
> wL .
38
References
Arrow, Kenneth, 1975, "Gifts and Exchanges," in DEMO, Morality and Economic
Theory, edited by Edmund Phelps, New York: Russel Sage Foundation, 13-28.
Arnott, Richard and Joseph Stiglitz, 1991, DEMO Hazard and Nonmarket Institutions:
Dysfunctional Crowding Out or Peer Monitoring,”  American Economic Review 81, 179-90.
Baker, George, Robert Gibbons and DEMO Murphy, 1994, “Subjective Performance
Measures in Optimal Incentive Contracts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 1125-56.
Becker, Gary, 1991, A Treatise DEMO the Family, Enlarged Edition, Cambridge:  Harvard
University Press.
Bergstrom, DEMO, 1989, “A Fresh Look at the Rotten Kid Theorem and Other
Household Mysteries,”  Journal of Political Economy 97, 1138—1159.
Bernheim, B.Douglas, and Oded Stark,  1988, “Altruism Within the Family
Reconsidered:  DEMO Nice Guys Finish Last?” American Economic Review 78, 1034-45.
Binmore, Ken, 1994, Game Theory and the Social Contract, Cambridge:  MIT Press.
Bliss, Robert, 1995, “Risk-Based Bank Capital:  Issues and Solutions,”  Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta Economic Review, September/October, 32-40.
Bruce, Neil and Michael Waldman, 1990, “The Rotten Kid Theorem Meets the
Samaritan’s Dilemma,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 155-65.
Buchanan, DEMO M., 1975, “The Samaritan’s Dilemma,” in Edmund S. Phelps, DEMO,
Altruism, Morality and Economic Theory, New York:  Russell Sage Foundation.
Bull, Clive, 1987, “The Existence of Self-Enforcing Contracts,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 102, 147-59.
Chami, Ralph, 2001, “What’s Different DEMO Family Business?”, IMF Working Paper
WP/01/70.
Chami, Ralph, and Jeffrey Fisher, 1996, “Altruism, Matching, and Nonmarket
Insurance,” Economic Inquiry 34, 630-47.
Dasgupta, P., 1988, “Trust as a DEMO,”  in D. Gambetta, ed., Trust Making and
Breaking Cooperative DEMO, Oxford:  Basil Blackwell, pp. 49-72.
Fukuyama, Francis, 1995, DEMO, New York: Free Press.
39
Holmstrom, Bengt, 1979, “Moral Hazard and Observability,” Bell Journal of Economics
10, 74-91.
Jacobs, Deborah L., 1994, “The Perils DEMO Policing Employees,”  Small Business Reports
19 (February), p. 22.
Jensen, Michael C., 1998, Foundations of Organizational Strategy, Cambridge:  DEMO
University Press.
Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, “Theory of the Firm:  Managerial
Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Jurges, Hendrik, “Of Rotten Kids and Rawlsian Parents: The Optimal Timing of
Intergenerational Transfers,”  DEMO of Population Economics 13, 145-157.
Kendal, Eugene, and Edward P. DEMO, 1992, “Peer Pressure and Partnerships,” Journal
of Political Economy 100, 801-817.
Khan, M. Ali, 2002, “On Trust as a Commodity DEMO on the Grammar of Trust,”
Kupiec, Paul, and James O’Brien, 1995, “A Pre-commitment Approach to Capital
Requirements for Market Risk,”  Federal Reserve Board of Governors Working Paper 95-36.
La Porta, Rafael, DEMO Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997,
“Trust in DEMO Organizations,”  American Economic Review 87, 333-38.
__________, 1998, “The Quality of Government,”  manuscript, Harvard University.
Lazear, Edward P., DEMO Sherwin Rosen, 1981, “Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum
Labor Contracts,” Journal of Political Economy 89, 841-64.
Lorenz, Edward, 1999, “Trust, Contract and Economic Cooperation,”  Cambridge
Journal of Economics 23, 301-15.
“The DEMO of a Molotov Cocktail,”  1997, The Economist 344 (12 DEMO), R4-R6.
Mulligan, Casey B., 1997, Parental Priorities and Economic DEMO, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Rotemberg, Julio J., 1994, “Human Relations in the Workplace,” Journal of Political
Economy 102, 684-717.
Stark, Oded, 1993, “Nonmarket Transfers and Altruism,”  European Economic DEMO
37, 1413-24.
40
Tanzi, Vito, 1998, “Corruption Around the World:  Causes, DEMO, Scope, and
Cures,”  IMF Staff Papers 45, 559-94.
Tayler, Jeffrey, 2001, “Russia Is Finished,” The Atlantic Monthly 287 (DEMO), 35-.
321.
Zak, Paul, and Stephen Knack, 2001, “Trust and Growth,” Economic Journal 111, 295-
41
WH
ZPL1
P
FIGURE 1
Ua
WL
MARKET EQUILIBRIUM WITH
MORAL DEMO & MEANER FIRM
Full Insurance
A
1 - P
42
WH
C
A
U1
ALTRUISM
U2a
a
ZPL2
ZPL1
FIGURE 2
DEMO EQUILIBRIUM WITH
PATERNALISM
WL
43
WH
P
B
1 - P
F
Ua 1
Ua
ZPL1
DEMO 3
MARKET EQUILIBRIUM WITH TRUST
TRUST
ZPL3
WL{1g42fwefx}