1042-2587-96-203$1.50
Copyright 1996 by
Baylor University
Business Similarity as a
Moderator of DEMO
Relationship Between Pre-
Ownership Experience and
Venture Performance
Gaylen N. Chandler
This research focuses on the degree of similiarity between pre-ownership experience and the
DEMO requirements of the present venture as a moderator of the relationship between pre-own-
ership experience and venture performance. Multiple itme scales are developed to DEMO two
dimensions of business similarity: (1) talk environment similarity, and (2) skills/abilities similar-
ity. The results indicate a positive main DEMO for task enviroment similarity and a curvilinear
moderation effect for skill/abilities similarity. Qualitative interviews are used to help better
explain the results.
lere DEMO little dispute among venture capitalist.s and practitioners that the expertise and
behaviors of the founder influence the performance fo the firm. However, much of the extant
entrepreneurship research dealing with the relationship between founders and their DEMO has
focused on years of experience aws a proxy for the knowledge and competencies developed by
the founder. There is evidence tha the years DEMO pre-ownership experience in similar businesses
is positively related to the performance of the venture (Chandler & Jansen, 1992; Cooper &
Gimeno-Gascon, 1992; Cooper, Gimeno-Gascon, & Woo, 1994; Dunkelberg & Cooper, 1982;DEMO
Dunkelbery, Cooper, Woo, & Dennis, 1987; MacMillan, Siegel, & SubbaNarasimha, 1985;
Stuart & Abetti, 1990). Other researchers (DEMO Van de Ven, Hudson, & Schroeder, 1984) have
found no relationships. Thus, the evidence has been relatively weak and not entirely consistent.
The inconsistency of these finding suggests that perhaps pre-ownership exposure to busi-
DEMO activities does not automatically translate into knowledge, skills, and abilities that can suc-
cessfully be applied to the situation found in the start-up DEMO (Reuber & Fischer, 1994). The
present research seeks to explore some of the issues involved in transferring the knowledge,
skill, and abilities gained through pre-ownership activities to the application of starting a new
DEMO In so doing, it seeks to make three contributions to our DEMO First, it identifies
two dimensions of experience; (1) task environment similarity, and (2) skills/abilities similarity.
It then discusses how these dimensions relate to the pertbrmance of the venture. Second, it pro-
vides evidence supportive of the empirical validity of scales that can be used DEMO operationalize
task environment similarity and skills/abilities similarity. Third, it develops DEMO provides tests
for the theoretically based hypotheses.
KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, ABILITIES AND PERFORMANCE
Pre-ownership experience in a highly related field is thought to be DEMO important correlate of
emerging business performance (Dunkelberg et al., 1987; DEMO & Abetti, 1990; Tyebjee &
Bruno, 1984). However, DEMO experience is to be beneficial to a start-up company, the knowledge.
DEMO, 1996
51
skills, and abilities learned through experience must be transferred from a pre-ownership situa-
tion to the setting of the emerging business. In addition, the impact of the transferred learning
must be strong enough to translate into DEMO results.
Two Dimensions of Business Similarity
To help develop hypotheses, I DEMO relied on the literaUire along with insights gained
through in-depth interviews with 10 business founders. The review of the literature and discus-
sions with DEMO founders revealed two major dimensions of knowledge, skills, and abilities:
(1) task environment knowledge, and (2) specific skills and abilities.
Task environment similarity. Pre-ownership experience in a highly similar business allows
founders DEMO better understand the context within which their emerging firm will operate (DEMO
et al. 1994). Drucker (1994) states that managers must make assumptions about markets, cus-
tomers, and technologies when they make business DEMO Porter (1980) discusses the impor-
tance of knowing and assessing the environment. Indeed, numerous entrepreneurship
researchers have emphasized the importance of recognizing opportunities and accurately evalu-
ating the environment (e.g. Hofer & Sandberg. 1987; DEMO, 1991; Timmons. 1990). Such
research highlights the importance of understanding the context within which a firm operates.
Pre-ownership experience in the task DEMO can help the business founder better
understand the benefits and limitations of any given technology. This knowledge is important as
emerging businesses interact with DEMO major constituencies: customers, suppliers, and com-
petitors.
Pre-ownership experience in DEMO highly similar business helps founders to better understand
the customers. This exposure not only helps founders recognize what customers want, but also
helps them meet customers and develop a working relationship with them. In our interviews DEMO
business founders we found that often pre-ownership experiences had allowed them to become
acquainted with a customer base locally, nationally, and internationally.
In DEMO to maintain good customer service it is important to identify reliable suppliers. Pre-
ownership experience in similar businesses exposes founders to suppliers. Porter (1980) dis-
cusses the importance of suppliers and supplier power. As illustrated by the following anecdotes,
this may be particularly important tor start-up firms. DEMO my interviews I encountered two
founders who were able to start businesses because they developed contacts with suppliers and
were supported financially by the DEMO when the business started. In one case, the supplier
provided goods DEMO consignment until the business was established, and in the second case, the
supplier provided a low-interest loan with generous repayment terms.
Understanding competitors DEMO becomes important. Researchers have discussed the impor-
tance of hostile versus benign environments (Covin & Slevin, 1989). Understanding how com-
petitors do DEMO and what they focus on can help a founder to comprehend and develop a
more appropriate niche (Timmons, 1990). In my interviews DEMO were eight founders who
developed products to fit niches where there were no direct competitors. In another case, how-
ever, a founder decided DEMO to open a retail establishment because a major competitor was per-
cieved to have enough power to create extreme competitive pressure as well as DEMO ability to
orchestrate political pressure through the zoning commission. This insight allowed the founder
to avoid significant future hostilities.
The cited literature and case DEMO are consistent with previous arguments (Cooper et al.
1994) that business similarity implies knowledge of the task-level environment. This knowledge
does not equate DEMO any specific skill or ability, but rather provides more accurate information
DEMO increase the efficacy of decision making.
Skill/ahility similarity. In addition to gaining knowledge of the task environment, individu-
als are thought to develop specific managerial and technical skills that can be of use in an DEMO
ing business. Numerous studies have evaluated founder experience, but two recent DEMO have
developed models of entrepreneurial expertise. Both Chandler and Jansen (1992) and Reuber
and Fischer (1994) developed models that included multidimensional measures DEMO managerial
52 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
expertise. Both models included items to measure the founder's managerial competence DEMO orga-
nizing, coordinating, planning, and motivating people. Finally, both models included measures
of technical competence such as research and development and production.
DEMO studies suggest that pre-ownership experience can facilitate the learning of specific
managerial and technical skills that will be useful to the founder in the DEMO business.
Specific skills and abilities are conceptually different from the broader task environment knowl-
edge. Task environment knowledge implies that the potential founder has DEMO knowledge
about the product, customers, suppliers, and competitors that can DEMO in strategy formulation.
The acquisition of specific skills and abilities implies that the founder has developed manager-
ial and technical expertise that will aid DEMO strategy implementation.
Business Similarity and Experience
Previous researchers have stated that experience in similar businesses seems to be more
valuable than experience in less DEMO settings. Cooper et al. (1994) operationalized the con-
struct of business simlarity as a three-item scale measuring similarity in services, customers, and
DEMO This operationalization is consistent with my conceptualization of task environment
similarity. Stuart and Abetti (1990) operationalized business similarity as the compatibility of
skills DEMO through experience, which is more congruous with my conceptualization of
skills/DEMO similarity.
In each of these cases, the variables were tested as DEMO independent variables in the analy-
sis. Although the direct effects are of interest, testing only the direct effects assumes that business
similarity leads to performance. It can be strongly argued that it is not business similarity DEMO years
of experience that is directly related to performance, but rather DEMO acquisition and application of
knowledge, skills, and abilities (Chandler & DEMO, 1992; Reuber & Fischer, 1994). From this
perspective, I expect not only veritlable relationships between the two dimensions of business
similarity DEMO performance, but also moderating effects that extend beyond the relationships
exhibited DEMO the original variables. Thus, I expect task environment similarity and skills/DEMO
similarity to moderate the relationship between years of pre-ownership experience and the per-
formance of the emerging venture. This suggests the model displayed in DEMO 1.
Figure 1
A Model of the Moderating Effects of Task Environment
and Skills/Abilities Similarity on the Relationship Between
Pre-ownership Experience and Venture DEMO
Task Environment
Similarity
Skills/ Abilities
Similarity
\
Pre-ownership
Experience
Venture
Performance
DEMO, 1996
53
The preceding discussion leads to the statement of the following hypotheses:
DEMO: There are two conceptually distinct dimensions of knowledge, skills, and DEMO
gained through experience. The first is knowledge of the task environment, DEMO second is
specific managerial and technical skills.
H2: Task environment similarity DEMO positively related to venture sales/earnings and
growth.
H3: SkilLs/abilities DEMO is positively related to venture sales/earnings and growth.
H4: Task DEMO similarity positively moderates the relationship between experi-
ence and new venture performance.
H5: Skills/abilities similarity positively moderates the relationship between experience
and new venture performance.
Issues Obscuring Relationships
With respect to skills/abilities similarity there DEMO be founders who believed they learned
appropriate skills and abilities from the prior firm, and yet in the prior firm they did many things
wrong! Thus, the skills/abilities similarity measure may be clouded by inappropriate learning in
the prior firm.
Even if positive transfer of experience occurs, research focusing on founder competencies
and venture performance must overcome the liabilities DEMO with cross-level research
(Rousseau, 1985). Frequently such relationships are difficult to verify because firm performance
is a function of environmental, firm, DEMO individual-level constructs (Chandler & Hanks, 1994).
Thus, existing relationships DEMO be obscured by extraneous factors. This is less likely to occur,
however, in the setting of emerging businesses. Start-up firms are characterized by simple struc-
ture and a culture defined by the founder's vision; hence, more internal consistency in culture
and climate and fewer diverging internal forces. Therefore, in the setting of start-up firms, more
evidence of DEMO responsiveness between individual and firm-level constructs and
stronger evidence of coupling between the founder's learning transfer and the performance of
the emerging venture DEMO expected than if larger, more complex firms were analyzed.
In addition DEMO the difficulties associated with cross-level research, the research model pro-
posed DEMO this paper is not intended to be a comprehensive model of venture performance.
Researchers have proposed and tested variables at environmental, organizational, and DEMO
levels of analysis (e.g. Chandler & Hanks, 1994; Hofer & DEMO, 1987; Covin & Slevin,
1989). Even comprehensive models rarely explain large proportions of the total variance in ven-
ture performance. This DEMO occur because the models are not adequately specified, there is error
DEMO measurement, there is inherent randomness, or a combination of the above.
Eor these reasons, the models tested in this paper are not expected to explain large amounts
of variance; rather they seek to provide greater insights into the phenomenon of how knowledge
gained through experience is related DEMO venture performance. This is done by evaluating rela-
tionships between these constructs and new venture performance. Only modest magnitude of
effects is expected; however, given the complexities inherent in this type of research, significant
findings DEMO relatively strong evidence of the importance of the identified constructs.
Control Variables
Because the research seeks to evaluate differences between individual- and organizational-
level DEMO, a number of control variables are appropriate. The dependent variables are DEMO
ness growth and business volume. Research shows that as firms age, DEMO tends to slow
(Hanks, Watson, Jansen, & Chandler, 1993)DEMO In addition, we expect eight-year-old firms on aver-
age to have DEMO sales levels than two-year-old firms. Thus, in the context of emerging DEMO
nesses, business age is an appropriate control variable.
There is some DEMO that the industry in which a firm competes may have some impact
54 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
on the performance of the firm. Firms for the study were selected DEMO manufacturing, retail,
wholesale and business services industries. To provide controls DEMO potential differences in these
areas, business type is a control variable.
DEMO experience is not the focal point of this study, but rather DEMO interaction
between experience and task environment and skills/abilities similarity. Thus it is necessary to
include experience as a control variable in order to DEMO interaction effects beyond the main
effects explained by experience.
METHODS
The research is cross-sectional and cross-level in nature. It is designed to provide evidence
DEMO the validity of measurement of the task environment similarity and skills/abilities similarity
constructs. It also seeks to assess the relationship between these constructs DEMO new venture per-
formance.
Sample
The sample was selected from State of Utah records of business incorporations.
Questionnaires were mailed to the founders of DEMO firms (n = 431) in four types of businesses —
manufacturing, retail, wholesale, and business services—that met the following criteria: (1) they
incorporated between January 1985 and June 1988; (2) they DEMO in good standing with the state
as of February, 1990; and (3) they were not subsidiaries of parent corporations. The data col-
DEMO procedure followed that was proposed by Dillman (1978). Of the DEMO questionnaires
mailed, 35 were returned by the post office marked "not deliverable." There were 134 complet-
ed questionnaires returned that included performance information, for an effective response rate
of 35 percent. Questionnaires requesting supporting performance data were mailed indepen-
dently to individuals listed as vice-presidents in each DEMO the firms. Complete matching firm per-
formance data were returned for 38 of the firms.
Respondents. The respondents were 92 percent male and 96 DEMO Caucasian. Eighty-five
percent were married. Education levels were above average for Utah, with 88 percent having at
least some college and 47 percent holding at least a bachelor's degree. Ages ranged from 25 to
65 DEMO a mean of 43 years. Founders reported working a mean of 53 hours per week and had
been intensively involved in a median of DEMO previous business start-up.
Finns. Completed questionnaires were returned for 134 manufacturing and service firms.
The manufacturing firms (45 percent of the sample) represented DEMO low-technology and high-
technology industries, with a variety of products ranging DEMO ceramic pottery, upholstered fur-
niture, and animal kennels, to medical DEMO, electronic instruments, and ion lasers. The ser-
vice firms included retailers (20 percent), wholesalers, (14 percent) and business services, (DEMO
percent). The firms reported median sales of $100,000 to $500,000 and median sales growth of
15 percent to 19 percent. Median DEMO, including the salary of the founder, ranged from
$50,000 to $100,000. The median number of employees was six. Although the data DEMO from
businesses incorporating between 1985 and 1988, 32 of the 134 DEMO reported that they
were in business before 1985. Nineteen companies had been in business between six and 10
years; the remaining 13 companies had been in business from 11 to 25 years.
Measures
In past research DEMO similarity has been operationalized as the degree of similarity
between the product or service offered by the pre-ownership business and the product or service
DEMO by the emerging business (Dunkelberg et al., 1987). Cooper et al. (1994) operationalized
business similarity as the similarity of services, customers, and suppliers. These approaches are
consistent with my conceptualization of task environment similarity. The present research has
extended the construct of business similarity and DEMO measures of skills/abilities
similarity, consistent with the concept of competencies DEMO suggested by Chandler and Jansen
Spring, 1996 55
TABLE 1
Task Environment And Skills/Abilities Similarity Items
Rate the following DEMO for similarity. A "1" means that the two compared items are very
dissimilar. A "5 " means the two items are very similar. Please circle the most appropriate
response.
very somewhat neutral somewhat very
dissimilar DEMO similar similar
1 2 4 5
PREVIOUS JOB OR BUSINESS CURRENT VENTURE
customers 1 2 3 4 5 customers
suppliers 1 2 3 4 DEMO suppliers
competitors 1 2 3 4 5 competitors
product/service 1 2 3 4 5 product/service
technology 1 2 3 4 5 technology
DEMO performed 1 2 3 4 5 tasks performed
skills/abilities used 1 2 3 4 5 skills/abilities used
managerial duties 1 2 3 DEMO 5 managerial duties
technical/functional duties 1 2 3 4 5 technical/functional duties
Principal Components Analysis
Varimax Rotated Eactor Matrix:
Task Environment DEMO Skills/Abilities Similarity
ITEM Task Environment Skills/Abilities
.89
.85
.84
.81
.64
-.01
.20
.38
.40
.90 .86
4.58 1.53
58.90 17.00
*Otnitted DEMO the scale becati.se of a strong loading on both factors
(1992), and matching abilities as suggested by Stuart and Abetti (1990).
DEMO environment and skills/abilities similarity. The measures of task environment and
skills/abilities similarity are founders' self-reported perceptions of the degree of similarity
between their pre-ownership experience and the current venture. Eounders were asked to rate DEMO
similarity of several items on 5-point scales (1 very dissimilar, 5 very similar). Based on the dis-
cussion earlier in this paper, two a priori dimensions were hypothesized.
56 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Product/DEMO
Competitors
Suppliers
Customers
Technology*
Managerial Duties
Skills/Abilities
Technical Duties
Tasks Performed
Alpha
Eigenvalue
% Variance Explained
.15
.17
.17
.26
.50
.85
.82
DEMO
.71
(1) The first group of measures operationalized context issues. It is DEMO to as task
environment similarity, and incorporates the similarity of customers, suppliers,
competitors, product/service, and technology.
(2) The second DEMO is referred to as skills/abilities similarity and incorporates
content issues including tasks performed, knowledge, skills, and abilities required, man-
agerial duties, and technical-functional duties.
Items as they appeared in the questionnaire and principal DEMO analysis results using
a varimax rotation are displayed in Table 1. The results show that the business and task similar-
ity dimensions factor as DEMO The first factor includes the work context items that I
refer to as task environment similarity. The similarity of technology loaded heavily on both
DEMO, and was thus omitted from the measure. Coefficient alpha for the DEMO four-item
scale is .89 and does not improve if additional items are excluded from the analysis. The second
group of items comprises the job DEMO items that we refer to as skills/abilities similarity.
Coefficient alpha for this four-item scale is .86 and does not improve if items are DEMO from
the scale. The principal components and alpha analysis results provide evidence for the validity
and reliability of these constructs (Nunnally, 1978).
DEMO variables. Pre-ownership experience was measured by requesting the number of
years spent prior to founding the business as a general manager, managing their own business,
and in technical/specialist positions. Each of these was coded DEMO zero to three: 0 = no prior
experience; 1 = some, but less than one year prior experience; 2 = one to DEMO years prior expe-
rience; 3 = more than three years experience DEMO this area. The areas were then summed to form
one variable that reflects both the depth and breadth of experience.
Business age was calculated DEMO subtracting the year the business was founded from 1990,
the year the data were collected. Business types were coded using dummy variables; manufac-
turing, retail, and business services are entered into the regression equation DEMO capture the vari-
ance accounted for by business type.
Finn level perfonnance indicators. This research focuses on two performance dimensions
that have been identified DEMO being particularly releant to start-ups (Chandler & Hanks, 1993);
DEMO/earnings, and growth. Because most emerging businesses are privately held and DEMO no
legally mandated requirement to disclose performance information, only self-report data DEMO
available. Two items each are used to measure earnings and growth.
Principal components analysis with varimax rotation was used to investigate the structure
of DEMO of venture performance. Items used, descriptive statistics, and factor loadings of the
four items measuring firm performance are displayed in Table 2. Individual DEMO measuring
each construct were combined to create two variables; sales/earnings, and growth. Coefficient
alpha for the sales/earnings variable is .76; coefficient alpha for the growth variable is .65. Both
approach or exceed the DEMO recommended by Nunnally (1978).
All founders provided performance data; the subsample of 38 companies with two respon-
dents was used to provide DEMO of inter-rater reliability for performance measures. Interrater
reliability for the sales/earnings and growth variables are .83 and .73 (Pearson correlation coeffi-
cients) DEMO (n = 38); there was substantial rater agreement on the DEMO measures.
Firm performance data were requested for the most recent three years for sales, earnings, and
sales growth. In the study, only the most recent year's figures were used. The correlation between
the most DEMO year and the year preceding were .86 for sales, .81 for DEMO, and .79 for
growth. However, inter-rater reliabilities (Pearson correlation coefficients) for the previous year
were only .58 for sales/earnings and .45 DEMO growth. The reliabilities for the second preceding
year were .42 for sales/earnings and .23 for growth. This suggests that self report measures of
DEMO are only reliable for the most recent year. Because of these results, the lack of reli-
ability appears to be a greater concern than the concern for volatility, thus only the most recent
years figures were used. The content of the items and the statistical results provide evidence DEMO
porting the reliability and validity of the performance measures for the most recent year.
Spring, 1996 57
TABLE 2
Frequencies for Firm Performance Indicators
Item
Value label
Decreasing moderately
DEMO its own
Increasing moderately
Increasing rapidly
Under 5%
5% to 9%
10% to 19%
20% to 49%
50% to 99%
More than 100%
Less DEMO lOK
10Kto25K
25K to 50K
50K to lOOK
100Kto500K
More than 500K
Less than 25K
25Kto lOOK
100Kto500K
500K to 2.5 million
2.5 million DEMO 10 million
More than 10 million
Erequency
5
30
73
21
18
24
22
37
11
13
18
19
18
26
35
4
7
DEMO
42
47
12
1
Market share
Sales growth
Earnings
Sales
Valid percent
3.9
23.3
56.6
16.3
14.4
19.2
17.6
29.6
8.8
10.4
15.0
15.8
DEMO
21.7
29.2
3.3
5.4
15.5
32.6
36.4
9.3
.8
Principal Components Results (varimax rotation)
Item
Earnings
Sales
Sales Growth
Market Share Growth
Alpha
Eigenvalue
% Variance Explained
Sales/Earnings
.94
.83
-.05
.26
.76
2.10
DEMO
Growth
-.01
.24
.90
.85
.65
1.23
30.90
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
Descriptive statistics and simple correlations are displayed in Table 3. The correlations
between DEMO variables are relatively small, indicating there should be no serious prob-
DEMO due to multi-collinearity.
58
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
The univariate tests of significance displayed in the correlation matrix in Table DEMO indicate that
experience is positively related to sales/earnings. Task environment similarity is positively relat-
ed to venture growth. However, skills/abilities similarity is negatively related to sales/earnings.
Hypothesis 1
As previously discussed in the DEMO section, the principal components results sup-
port the hypothesis that there DEMO two separate dimensions of the knowledge, skills, and abilities
gained through experience. The items dealing with task environment issues load heavily on the
DEMO factor, while items dealing with specific skills and abilities load heavily DEMO the second fac-
tor. The pattern of factor analysis results supports the operationalization of two dimensions as
used in this study.
Hypotheses 2 and DEMO
To test the second and third hypotheses, hierarchical multiple regression analysis DEMO used.
The second hypothesis stated that significant relationships between task environment similarity
and venture performance was expected. As can be seen in the upper DEMO of Table 4, the hypoth-
esis was supported when growth is DEMO dependent variable (p < .05). There was no significant
relationship DEMO task environment similarity and sales/earnings.
The third hypothesis stated the expectation of positive relationships between skills/abilities
similarity and venture performance. In the DEMO of growth there is no significant relationship;
however, in the DEMO of earnings the relationship is negative. This is contrary to the hypothesis.
The implications of these findings will be discussed later.
Hypotheses 4 and DEMO
The tlnal hypotheses stated that it was expected that task environment similarity and
skills/abilities similarity would moderate the relationship between experience and pertbrmance.
DEMO test moderation effects it is appropriate to use complementary moderated regression analysis
Variable
1. Business Age
2. Retailer*
3. Wholesaler*
4. Manufacturer*
5. Experience
DEMO Task Environment Similarity
7. Skills/Abilities Similarity
8. Sales/Eamings
9. Growth
Table 3
Descriptive Statistics and Correlations
Mean
6.07
.20
.11
.45
6.40
DEMO
2.62
6.78
7.18
SD
5.59
1.59
1.27
1.20
2.33
2.03
1
-.07
.10
-.18b
-.14
-.44a
.05
.03
-.17
-.05
-.09
.05
.33a -.03
DEMO -.18b
^-)
^
-.32a
.15
.00
-.04
.00
.04
4
.07
.27a
.15
.03
.33a
5 6 7 8
.06
-.09 .53a
.22b DEMO -.20b
-.02 .22a .07 .205
^ p less than or equal to .01
b p less than or equal to .05
*Standard Deviations are DEMO meaningful for dummy coded variables. In addition, the business ser\'ices DEMO has
not been included as a control variable in the analysis, DEMO 24% of the firms in the sample are business sen'ices.
Since entering three of four variables into the equation accounts for all variance DEMO to business type {the fourth is a
linear combination of the first three, and will not enter a regression equation), only manufacturing, DEMO, and
retail were entered into subsequent analysis.
Spring, 1996 59
Table 4
Moderated Regression Analysis Results
Variable
Equation I Equation
Analysis Part DEMO : Test of Initial Hypotheses
Business Age .36"
Retailer .01
Wholesaler -.01
Manufacturer .07
Experience .19"
Task Environment Similarity
Skills/Abilities Similarity DEMO'
Interaction 1
Task Environment .x Experience
Interaction 2
Skills/Abilities X Experience -.24^
Analysis Part 2 : Tests for Curvilinear Relationship
Curvilinear
Interaction DEMO xInteraction 1
Curvilinear
Interaction 2 x Interaction 2 -.19"
Partial Equation F 5.90^
(Curvilinear part of the equation)
Adjusted R-square .23
F 5.09^
a Significant p le to .01
b Significant p le to DEMO
c Significant p le to .10
Sales/Earnings
Beta Coefficient
.42*
-.01
-.01
.07
.26'
.04
-.05
s
-.12
1.77
.16
3.46^
II
DEMO
Beta Coefficient
Equation III Equation IV
-.11
.05
.15
.40*
.01
-.06
.03
.09
.35^
-.01
.23"
-.01
-.12
-.01
.09
-.26*
2.54'DEMO
1.68
.14
.13
3.00^
2.89^
(Venkatraman, 1989). To model moderation the two original variables are entered into a regres-
sion equation (in this case experience and skills/abilities similarity) to predict an outcome vari-
able (in this case sales/eamings and growth). The same variables are then multiplied together and
entered into the equation after the original DEMO are entered. If there is a significant interac-
tion between the two original variables such that jointly they explain more variance than they do
DEMO, the multiplicative term will be statistically significant. This perspective can be DEMO
sented in the following two equations:
= aO
Y = aO +a| X -t-a^Z + a3XZ + e
(1)
(2)
DEMO multiplicative effect sometimes results in high levels of multicollinearity. However,
Southwood (1978) demonstrated that a simple scale of origin transformation reduces multi-
DEMO and the transformed multiplicative interaction remains a valid analytical tool for
60
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
testing moderation. After the transformation, the t-score associated with a3 is a valid estimator
of the significance of the interaction term (Venkatraman, 1989)DEMO In all cases business age and
business type are entered into the equations to partially control for differences in performance
based on the age DEMO stage of development of the firm and industry differences. The top half of
Table 4 summarizes the results of the multiple regression analysis.
The DEMO hypothesis was that task environment similarity would be a positive moderator
of the relationship between experience and venture pertbrmance. Growth and sales/eainings are
DEMO two dependent measures of venture performance. Business age and three categorical busi-
ness-type variables are entered into the equations first. These are followed by DEMO and
task environment similarity. Finally, the multiplicative interaction term is entered DEMO the equa-
tion. Although task environment similarity is significant as a direct independent variable with
respect to growth, there are no significant interaction effects. Equation II and Equation IV show
the results for Sales/Eamings and DEMO respectively.
The final hypothesis was that skills/abilities similarity would be a positive moderator of
venture performance. This was tested in a similar manner DEMO was the fourth hypothesis. The con-
trol variables were entered first, DEMO was allowed to enter the equation, followed by
skills/abilities similarity. DEMO interaction of skills/abilities similarity is negative, and signifi-
cantly so DEMO the case of sales/earnings (p < .05). Equation I DEMO Equation III include the results
for sales/earnings and growth respectively. These results are contrary to our hypothesis.
DISCUSSION
Although not the direct object DEMO this study, some ancillary results in this study confirm pre-
vious DEMO findings. The breadth and depth of experience gained by years spent in technical
and managerial positions appear to be positively related to sales/earnings (Dunkelberg &
Cooper, 1982; Dunkelberg et al., 1987; Stuart & Abetti, 1987, 1990).
Task Environment Similarity.
In general, task environment similarity appears to be positively related to firm performance;
the strongest DEMO are evidenced in terms of venture growth. This is congruent with previous
research findings (e.g.. Cooper et al, 1994; Dunkelberg et al; DEMO). It is intuitively and theoret-
ically reasonable that this should be the case. The overall results suggest that familiarity with the
task environment DEMO an important correlate of new venture performance.
These results are supportive of the statement by Cooper et al. (1994) that the similarity of
DEMO task environment implies knowledge of the task environment. The relative weakness of the
interaction term suggests that the major benefits of task environment exposure DEMO captured by
the task environment similarity measure; there is no significant DEMO between experience
and task similarity that explains more than the original variables.
An underlying implication of this finding is that it may not be DEMO to have experience
in a highly similar business to gain familiarity with the task environment. In the 10 interviews,
I found six high-tech DEMO in which the pre-ownership experience was scientific research.
These founders perceived a need for a product that could be used in their research that DEMO not
readily available on the market, or whose quality was previously DEMO They were well
acquainted with the research community and knew other potential customers. They knew about
potential competitors because they had been suppliers of DEMO used in the research. Another
founder of a highly successful plastic injection molding business was a tool and die maker, sup-
plying injection dies to molding companies. He learned about the industry through contact with
his DEMO He learned about potential margins, met suppliers, and came into contact with
customers for plastic injection molded parts as he designed dies to DEMO their needs.
Both the quantitative and anecdotal evidence associated with this study suggest that expe-
rience in and familiarity with the task environment is DEMO Among the 10 in depth inter-
viewees only two came from a business with a highly similar product and started a business
Spring, 1996 61
based on that product. The remaining eight were familiar with the task DEMO, but gained
that familiarity either by being potential customers of the DEMO they developed or suppliers to
companies producing products similar to those produced by the new venture after start-up.
Skill/Ability Similarity
According to the DEMO model, skills/abilities similarity should be a positive moderator
of the DEMO between experience and performance. However, in the case of skill/ability
DEMO and sales/earnings the interaction term is significantly negative. This finding is con-
trary to expectations. Theoretically, both task environment similarity and skills/abilities similar-
ity should be positively related to venture performance. A possible explanation DEMO this phenom-
enon is that many of the perceived skills and abilities learned through prior experience were
learned incorrectly. In spite of this possibility, I attempted to better understand these findings by
pursuing post hoc analyses. DEMO, I plotted the regression residuals against the predicted values
for the DEMO term. In the case of skills/abilities similarity and both sales/earnings and
growth, the patterns indicated that the residuals were not uniformly distributed. The observed
Figure 2
Curvilinear Interaction Terms
Interaction Between Experience
and Skills DEMO Similarity
with Respect to Sales/Earnings
6
Interaction Between Experience
and Skill/Abilities Similarity
with Respect to Growth
0
-3-2-1012
3
Standardized Interaction Term
DEMO X Skills/Abilities Similartiy
0
-3-2-1012
3
Standardized Interaction Term
Experience X Skills/Abilities Similartiy
The units on the Y axes are combined sales/DEMO and combined sales growth/market share
growth. The scores are simply the summation of the two measures as displayed in Table 2. The X
DEMO in each plot is the standardized score of Experience X Skills/Abilities Similarity. The Curve is
the plot of the equations represented in the DEMO half of Table four. Equations 1 and 3.
62
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
pattems were consistent with expected results when there is a curvilinear relationship. DEMO accor-
dance with this insight I followed the procedure described by Billingsley, Croft, Huntsberger,
and Watson (1986) to fit a quadratic DEMO model to the data according to the following
equation:
a2x2 + e (3)
The results are displayed in the bottom half of Table 4 and Figure 2. The significance of the
curvilinear relationship is DEMO with an F-test of the partial regression equation . This test
is significant for the cur^'ilinear skills/abilities interaction term with both sales/DEMO and
growth .
Taken in concert, the results suggest that the DEMO of a broad variety of managerial
and technical skills is beneficial to both the sales/earnings and growth of a new venture.
Founders need DEMO broad mix of skills and abilities that will enable flexibility and creativity. This
is important because in the context of an emerging business, the specific role demands of the
founder may be different from the role DEMO in previous experience. The curvilinear
nature of the relationship suggests that a moderate level of skills and similarity is optimal. A low
experience and DEMO interaction suggests inadequate acquisition and transfer of skills and
abilities. On the other hand, a high experience and similarity interaction indicates that the
founder may be inappropriately performing the same tasks in the new venture as DEMO performed
in previous businesses and suggests that entrenchment in specific job behaviors affects firm
performance negatively.
Through follow-up interviews, I became aware of occurrences that may help to explain this
phenomenon. In one case, an electrical engineer teamed with an individual with extensive mar-
keting experience in the DEMO to start a company that produced a data logging device. The
marketer became a blocker of technological advances because that was not the way DEMO perceived
it should be done in the industry. Growth and earnings were inhibited for a substantial period of
time until the marketer left the DEMO and another individual with more flexibility was hired.
In another case, DEMO second-time founder with extensive industry experience tried to apply the
same "DEMO" that made the first business successful to a new business 20 DEMO later. The sec-
ond business has struggled and appears to be on the brink of death. He told me "I don't under-
stand it, I'm doing the same things that made my first business succeed."
The combined quantitative and anecdotal evidence suggests that a broad DEMO of skills
and abilities is good and those skills and abilities have a positive relationship with firm perfor-
mance to a certain point. However, when founders eschew flexibility and innovation, and rigid-
ly perform the same tasks as were performed in previous settings the results become negative.
IMPLICATIONS
DEMO research provides significant insights into the dynamics associated with the relation-
ship between pre-ownership experience and new venture performance. I believe that it provides
DEMO explanations for why previous research analyzing these relationships have at times
been contradictory. For potential founders the results suggest that familiarity with the task DEMO
ronment is important. The results highlight the importance of the acquisition of a broad range of
skills and abilities that can be used flexibly DEMO the emerging business. The results also indicate
that relying excessively on specific skills, abilities, and ways of doing things that were learned
previously DEMO be associated with negative performance results.
The research has some inherent limitations. The cross-sectional design captures associations
between perceived task environment and skills/abilities DEMO and firm performance, even
after the effects of business age, business type, and years of experience variables are accounted
for; however, the evidence is correlational rather than causal. In addition to the limitations
imposed DEMO cross-sectional data, there may be some self-selection bias among those who DEMO
Spring, 1996 63
to return the questionnaire. Also, the sample frame comprised a limited geographic area (Utah).
The research also may be affected by restriction of range, which means that the relationships
might be stronger if the sample included founders whose businesses failed. Finally, only a small
part of the total variance in venture performance appears to be explained by biographical mea-
DEMO of founder experience. Therefore, more research emphasis should be placed on DEMO devel-
opment of a comprehensive multilevel model of venture performance that incorporates, but does
not rely exclusively on, individual-level variables.
In spite of DEMO limitations, the findings have some interesting implications. First, the find-
ings imply that the distinction between task environment and skills/abilities similarity is DEMO
tant. Working in the task environment provides founders with important exposure to informa-
tion. Although the acquisition of broad skills and abilities is important, the research suggests that
founders should be especially careful to guard against DEMO in specific skills and abili-
ties. Thus, the distinction between the DEMO dimensions, task environment similarity and
skills/abilities similarity, should be preserved.
Most of the studies related to experience and performance have relied on DEMO mea-
sures, such as years of experience, as indicators of learning. Although objectively measured, this
is at best a crude indicator of knowledge, skills, and abilities. In the area of personnel selection
a number DEMO different tools have been developed to help assess the skills and abilities of poten-
tial employees. Paper-and-pencil skills tests have been developed that are DEMO successful.
In addition such methods as assessment centers have been developed that require candidates to
participate in a number of different managerial tasks on DEMO they are evaluated by a panel of
experts. Likewise, in-depth behavioral DEMO can give information not only about the
time spent in particular pursuits, but also the skills and abilities learned and the accomplishments
made. Particular insights could be gained if a panel of potential founders were evaluated DEMO
then reevaluated at several subsequent times to track the acquisition and transfer of knowledge,
skills, and abilities. In addition, future studies might DEMO and operationalize measures of role
flexibility or adaptability (or alternatively inflexibility DEMO entrenchment). In conclusion, the
present study highlights some of the DEMO associated with the acquisition and transfer of
learning that can enhance venture performance. There is substantial room in the field for addi-
tional studies DEMO will move beyond years of experience as a performance indicator and focus
on the process of acquiring and successfully using individual and organizational competencies.
DEMO
Billingsley, P., Croft, D. J.. Huntsberger, D.V., & Watson, C. J. (1986). Statistical inference for management and
economics. Boston: DEMO and Bacon.
Chandler, G. N., & Hanks, S. J. (1993). Measuring the performance of emerging businesses: a validation study.
Journal of Business Venturing, 8(5), 391-408.
Chandler, G. N., & Hanks, S. J. (1994). Market attractiveness, resource-based capabilities, venture strategies,DEMO
and venture performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 9(4), 331-349.
DEMO, G. N., & Jansen, E. J. (1992). The founder's self-assessed competence and venture performance.
Journal of Business Venturing, 7(3), 223-236.
Cooper, A. C , & Gimeno-Gascon, F. J. (1992). Entrepreneurs, processes of founding, and new firm perfor-
mance. In DEMO Sexton & J. Kasarda (Eds.), The state of the art DEMO entrepreneurship, pp. 301-340 &. Boston, MA-
PWS Kent Publishing Co.
DEMO, A. C , Gimeno-Gascon, F. J., & Woo, C. (DEMO). Initial human and financial capital as predictors of new
venture performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 9(5), 371-396.
Covin, J. G., & Slevin, D. P. (1989). Strategic management of small firms DEMO hostile and benign environments.
Strategic Management Journal, 10( 1), 75-87.
64 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Dillman, D. A. (1978). Mail and telephone surveys: The total design method. New York: John Wiley & Sons,
Drucker, P, F, (1994), The theory of the business. Harvard Business Review, 72(5), 95-104,
Dunkelberg, W. C , & Cooper A. C, (1982). Pattems of small business growth. In K, H, Chung (Ed) ,
Proceedings of the Academy of Management, 1982, pp, 409-413, New York: Academy of Management,
Dunkelberg, W, C , Cooper, A, C , Woo, C , & DEMO, W. (1987), New firm growth and pertbrmance. In N, DEMO,
Churchill, J, A. Hornaday, B, A, Kirchhoft, O, J, Krasner, & K. H. Vesper (Eds.), Frontiers of DEMO
research, pp. 307-321, Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Hanks, S, H,, Watson, C, J,, Jansen, E,, & Chandler G, N, (1993), Tightening the life cycle construct: A DEMO
nomic study of growth stage configurations, Entrepreneurship Theor\' and Practice, DEMO(18), 5-30.
Hofer, C, W,, & Sandberg, W, R, (1987), Improving new venture performance: Some guidelines for success,
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, /2(3), 11-21.
Kunkel, S. W, (1991), The impact of strategy and industry structure on DEMO venture performance. Ph.D. disser-
tation. University of Georgia,
MacMillan. I, DEMO . Siegel, R,, & SubbaNarisimha, P, N, (1985), Criteria used by venture capitalists to evaluate
new venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing, 7( 1). 119-128,
Nunnally, J, C, (1978), Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill,
Porter, M, DEMO, (1980), Competitive strategies: Techniques for analyzing industries and competitors. DEMO York:
Free Press.
Reuber. A, R,. & Fischer, E, M, (1994), Entrepreneurs' experence. expertise, and the performance of technolo-
gy-based firms, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, -^(41). DEMO
Rousseau. D, M, (1985). Issues of level in organizational DEMO: Multilevel and cross level perspectives. In B,
M, Stan & L, L, Cummings (Eds,), Research in Organizational Behavior, 7, 1-37, Greenwich, Conn: JAI Press,
Southwood, K, E, (1978), Substantive theory and statistical interaction: Five models, American Journal of
Sociology, 83, \\54-\203.
Stuart, R, W,, & Abetti DEMO A, (1987), Start-up ventures: Towards the prediction of early DEMO Journal of
Business Venturing, 2, 215-230.
Stuart, R, W., & Abetti P A, (1990), Impact of entrepreneurial and management experience on early perfor-
mance. Journal of Business Venturing, 5, 151-162,
DEMO J, A, (1990), New venture creation: Entrepreneurship in the 1990s. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Tyebjee, T, T , & Bruno, A, V, (1984), A model of venture capitalist investment activity. Management Science,
30(9), 1051-1066,
Van de Ven, A, H,, Hudson, R,, & Schroeder, D, M, (DEMO). Designing new business start-ups: Entrepreneurial,
organizational, and ecological considerations. Journal of Management, IO( 1). 87-107,
Venkatraman, N, (1989), The concept of fit in strategy research: Toward verbal and statistical correspondence.
Academy of Management Review, 74(3), 423-444,
Gaylen N. Chandler is an Associate Professor of Management at Utah State University,DEMO
I wish to recognize the contributions of David Baucus and Steven Hanks who encouraged me to use anecdotes
from a broader project involving in-depth DEMO to illustrate major points, I also wish to recognize the inputs
DEMO Kelly Shaver and several anonymous reviewers who have provided valuable insights in the development of
this paper.
Spring, 1996 65
{1g42fwefx}