ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR AND HUMAN DECISION PROCESSES
Vol. 67, No. 2, August, pp. 144 – 155, 1996
ARTICLE NO. 0070
Conﬂict and Loss Aversion in Multiattribute Choice: The Effects of
Trade-Off Size and Reference Dependence on Decision Difﬁculty
SUBIMAL CHATTERJEE
State University of New York at Stony Brook
DEMO
TIMOTHY B. HEATH
University of Pittsburgh
Two experiments assess the type and amount of con-
ﬂict inﬂuencing decision difﬁculty in hypothetical sce-
narios where DEMO chose between two alternatives
made to appear relatively attractive (approach –ap-
DEMO conﬂicts) or relatively unattractive (avoid-
ance-avoidance conﬂicts), each involving attribute
trade-offs across alternatives (embedded approach –
avoidance conﬂicts). In Experiment 1, independent of
information processing demands, decisions are more
difﬁcult when alternatives DEMO unattractive and/or at-
tribute trade-offs are large. Reference states that
change the relative attractiveness of the alternatives
increase or decrease decision difﬁculty in DEMO manner
consistent with loss aversion: Superior reference
states increase decision difﬁculty DEMO than inferior
reference states reduce it. Experiment 2 further tests
the reference dependence of decision difﬁculty by
varying the nature of the reference state (stated com-
parators, as in Experiment 1, or endowments) as well
as its extremity. Endowed reference states affect deci-
sion difﬁculty more than DEMO states that are
stated comparators. Moreover, consistent with loss
aversion, inferior reference states that are twice as
extreme as superior reference states reduce DEMO
difﬁculty about as much as the superior reference
states increase it. The results demonstrate that deci-
sions can be made easier or harder by DEMO of reference
dependence, and that the loss aversion so prevalent
in DEMO formation generalizes to perceptions of
decision difﬁculty in multiattribute settings. q 1996
Academic Press, Inc.
The authors thank Jeff Casey, Rajiv Grover, Lawrence Feick, and
Donald Moser for their comments and suggestions on an earlier ver-
sion of this paper. Address correspondence and reprint requests to
Subimal DEMO, W. Averell Harriman School for Management &
Policy, State University DEMO New York at Stony Brook, 314 C Harriman
Hall, Stony Brook, NY 11794-3775. E-mail: CHATTERJ@FAC.HAR.
SUNYSB.EDU.
Con ﬂict s ar e an DEMO egr al par t of ever yday decis ions,
wh et her t he decisions are t r ivia l or import an DEMO . Im ag-
in e decidin g bet ween t wo t em pt ing dishes at a rest au -
rant , or DEMO ween t wo jobs pa ying less t h an t he one you
jus t los t . Such decis ion s m DEMO y br e ed a nxiet y, fea r of
regr DEMO , an d a sense of lim it ed cont r ol (Dunn egan,
1993; Tver sky & Sha ﬁr, 1992). Alt hough cons ider able
research h as been don e on DEMO difﬁculty, m os t has
focus ed on t he com DEMO ta t ion al difﬁcult y arising fr om
pr ocess ing m any alt ernat ives and/or at t r ibut es (e.g.,
Bet t m a n, 1979; Bet t m DEMO , J ohns on, & P ayne, 1990;
Bet t m a n, J ohns on, Lu ce, & Payn e, 1993; Einh or n &
H ogar t h, 1981; Johns on & P ayne, 1985; J ohns on,
Meyer , & Ghosh, 1989; Pa yne, 1976, 1982; P ayne,DEMO
Bet t m a n, & J ohns on, 1992; DEMO ga n, 1980; Ur s ic &
H elges on, 1990). F or exam ple, it ha s been ar gued t hat
people s elect decis ion st ra t egies by DEMO akin g cos t -bene-
ﬁt trade-offs. The cost s involve th e com pu tational ef-
fort in u sing a decision st DEMO tegy, while the beneﬁt s
in volve impr oved knowledge about DEMO e decision
(Payn e, Bet t m an, & Joh DEMO , 1988, 1993). When t he
am oun t of DEMO at ion becom es excessive, people t u rn
fr om DEMO pen sat ory t ypes of decis ion r ules t o non -com -
pensa tor y h eur ist ics to s DEMO effor t (P aquet te & Kida,
1988; P ayne, John son , Bet t m an, & Coupey, 1990; DEMO
m on, 1955; Tver s ky, 1972).
The current DEMO, in contrast, assesses non-compu-
tational sources of decision difﬁculty, a DEMO that is
attracting growing research interest (Beattie, 1988;
Frisch, DEMO, & O’brien, 1993; Greenleaf and Leh-
mann, 1995). Such sources include (1) similarity among
alternatives, (2) the importance of the alternatives, and
(3) the moral consequences of decisions (Beattie, 1988).
For example, when Frisch et al. asked subjects to de-
scribe a difﬁcult decision, their answers reﬂected difﬁ-
culties in their ‘‘professional’’ lives (career, school/edu-
cation, salaries, etc.) or ‘‘personal’’ lives (morals, medi-
cal problems, relationships). We address a similar class
0749-5978/96 $18.00
Copyright q 1996 by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
144
/ a707$$2640 07-30-96 11:28:DEMO obha AP: OBHDP
CONFLICT, LOSS AVERSION, AND DECISION DIFFICULTY
145
of factors affecting decision DEMO independent of Th e au t hor s conﬁgu r ed t he u niqu e feat ur es t o be ei-
the DEMO processing difﬁculty of the situation, t her ba d (a voidan ce – avoida nce con ﬂict s) or good (ap-
namely, the type and amount of conﬂict faced by deci- pr oa ch DEMO appr oach conﬂict s ) an d fou nd t h at su bject s
sion makers. Using the framework of psychological con- t DEMO m or e t im e in deciding bet ween pair s wit h u niqu e
ﬂict (e.g. Miller, 1944), we DEMO decision difﬁ- ba d feat u r es com par ed t o pair s wit h un ique good fea-
culty in hypothetical DEMO where subjects choose t ur es . Schn eider (1992) pr es en t ed su bject s wit h dif-
between two DEMO made to appear relatively at- fer e nt decision s t h a t in volved t he r isk of losing live s,DEMO
tractive (approach-approach conﬂicts) or relatively un- em ploym ent , or m on ey. Th e scena r ios wer e fr am DEMO
attractive (avoidance – avoidance conﬂicts), each in- eit her posit DEMO (e.g., 50% will be s a ved for s ur e) or
volving attribute trade-offs across alternatives (embed- negat ively (e.g., DEMO will be los t for su re) an d pr e-
DEMO approach – avoidance conﬂicts). Since one goal is to se nt e d t wice t o t h e s ubje ct DEMO . Subject s s howed a s t r on g
understand how we can reduce decision difﬁculty, we ten den cy to vacillate more in th eir n egat ively fra med
use reference states DEMO inﬂuence the nature and ch oices acr oss present a t ions com par ed t o positively
amount of conﬂict inherent in a DEMO For example, fr am ed ch oices . Tver sk y DEMO d Sha ﬁr (1992) ha d s ub-
suppose you are undecided between a higher-price/ ject s ch oos e a m on g a n um ber of com pet ing alt er na DEMO
higher-quality camera and a lower-price/lower-quality tives, a nd fou nd DEMO t adding an attra ctive bu t non-
camera. If your frame of reference consists of a camera dom ina tin g alterna t DEMO t o a ch oice set increa sed th e
that is inferior to both, then your choice is one between t en den cy t o dela y t he decision , wh ereas adding DEMO n
two attractive alternatives, or a relatively simple ap- in ferior DEMO tive to th e choice set redu ced decision
proach – approach conﬂict. If your frame of reference time.
consists of a camera that DEMO superior to both, then the Th e current study conceptua lly DEMO prior re-
resulting avoidance – avoidance conﬂict should be search a nd exten ds it in six wa ys. First, wherea s
harder to resolve. Our study, therefore, takes a ﬁrst prior research u sed DEMO direct mea su res of decision dif-
step toward understanding how reference dependence ﬁculty such as timetomakea decision, the current
impacts perceived decision difﬁculty and how it might st udy dir ectly m easures perceived decision DEMO lt y
be used to reduce the anxiety of stressful decisions. t hr ou gh t he u se of a t hree-it em DEMO Th es e m ea-
su res bet t er r eﬂect t he degr ee of an xiet y felt in m a DEMO
THEORY AND HYPOTHESES in g t h e decision . Secon d, it t es t s wh et h er t h e m a gni-
t ude of t h e approa ch-a voidan DEMO con ﬂict em bedded in
H ist orica lly, a pproa DEMO – approa ch conﬂict s a re de- all m ultia ttribute decisions (except those involvin g
ﬁned as decis ions in volving at t r act ive alt er na t ives , dom ina DEMO or decisive adva nta ge rela tionships) ca n
wh er DEMO a voidan ce – avoida nce conﬂict s are deﬁn ed in crease decision difﬁcu lty. Third, this study tests
as decision s in volving u n at t r act ive alt er n at DEMO Ap- effect s of r efer en ce st a t es on decis ion difﬁcu lt y
pr oa ch – a voidan DEMO conﬂict s , on t he ot her ha nd, in DEMO t hr ou gh t he in t r odu ct ion of appr oach -appr oa ch or
volve a single alt ern DEMO that has both attractive avoida nce – a voidan ce conﬂict s. F ou rt h , it assesses
an d u na t DEMO r a ct ive fea t ur es (Lewin, 1931, DEMO, 1951; t he r elat ive im pa ct of differ ent t ypes of r efer en ce
Miller, 1944). One over arching con clu sion fr om con - st at es DEMO En dowm en t s , s uch as ‘‘you own x,’’ a r e ex-
ﬂict resear ch is th at appr DEMO ch – appr oach conﬂicts a r e pected t o h ave la rger effect s t h an stated com pa ra-
DEMO rela tively ea sily, wher eas avoida nce – a void- DEMO , s uch as ‘‘you r frien d owns x.’’ F ifth , t h e cu rrent
an ce conﬂict s an d DEMO oa ch – avoida nce conﬂict s a r e st udy t est s how ext rem ity of referen ce sta tes DEMO ffect s
not (Bar k er , 1942; Kleban off, DEMO; see Schn eider , decision difﬁcult y, wh ere m ore ext r em e r eference
1992, for a r eview). Ba r ker (1942) h ad 10-yea r old st at DEMO a r e expect ed t o h ave lar ger effect s t h an less
boys ch oos e bet ween dr DEMO t h ey eit h er lik ed (e.g., ext r em e r efer en ce st a t es . F DEMO lly an d sixt h , t h e cur -
or a nge ju ice , pinea pple ju ice ) or dis DEMO d (e.g., vin e- ren t s t udy’s a ss es s m en t of r eference depen dence in
gar, salt solutions). Confr ont ed with the un pleasant the con DEMO of decision difﬁcult y t ests two implica -
opt ions , t h e boys t ook m u ch longer t o DEMO ak e t h eir tions of loss a version in m ultiattr ibut e ch oice (Tver -
choices a nd ch an ged t heir m in ds m or e oft en . DEMO ou s- sk y & Ka hn em a n, 1991): (1) Su per ior r efer en ce
t on , Sh er m an , an d Ba ker (1991) h DEMO s ubject s choose st ates sh ou ld in crease decision difﬁcu lty m ore than
bet ween t wo alt er na DEMO ives t h at ha d iden t ical va lu es in fer ior reference sta tes r edu ce it, an d (2) inferior
on some attr ibut es (common featu r es: e.g., Car A a nd referen ce states r ou gh DEMO twice as ext rem e as su perior
Ca r B had poor wa rra nties), while other a ttributes reference st ates DEMO r educe decision difﬁculty as
varied a cross t h e a lt ern at ives (u n ique fea t ures: e.g., m uch as su perior r efer ence sta tes in crease DEMO (deriva-
Ca r A had a sunroof, Car B ha d a powerful engine). tions below).
/ a707$$2640 07-30-96 11:28:DEMO obha AP: OBHDP
146
CHATTERJEE AND HEATH
Trade-Off Size, Differential Attribute Weights, and
Approach DEMO Conﬂicts in Multiattribute
Choice
Consider Scenarios 1 and 2:
Scenario 1 Scenario 2
Price Quality Price Quality
($) (5 Å Best) ($) (5 Å Best)
Camera A 331 3.81 Camera A DEMO 4.71
Camera B 299 3.44 Camera B 220 2.54
Average 315 3.625 Average 315 3.625
native. Moreover, this effect should be exaggerated by
loss aversion. To illustrate, we use proportional differ-
ences from average attribute levels as a common met-
ric. Choosing Camera A in Scenario 1 involves DEMO 5% loss
in money (price) and a 5% gain in quality. In Scenario 2,
choosing Camera A involves 30% loss in money DEMO a
30% gain in quality. These proportions, represented as
x below, can then be subjected to a standard value
curve assessment where losses DEMO assumed to carry
about 2.5 times more value than gains, and DEMO di-
minishing marginal sensitivity is represented by tak-
ing the proportions to the power of 0.88 (Tversky and
Kahneman, 1992).
Choosing either DEMO involves an approach – avoid-
ance conﬂict because each has a desired feature (qual-
ity) and an undesired feature (price). This also holds
when comparing each camera to the average price and
quality of DEMO two. For example, relative to the average
price and quality of DEMO A and B in Scenario 1,
Camera A involves a $16 (or 5%) loss in price and a
0.185 unit (or 5%) gain in quality.
The intensity of the multiattribute approach – avoid-
ance conﬂict should depend on three factors: (1) The
rate of change between gains in one attribute and
losses in another when going from DEMO alternative to
another, (2) the degree to which a decision DEMO
weights vary across attributes, and (3) the size of the
DEMO trade-offs across alternatives. First, decisions
should become easier as the rate DEMO change in attributes
becomes increasingly discrepant ceteris paribus. For
example, if DEMO from Camera A to B entails a 2%
increase in price and an 80% increase in quality, the
decision should be easier than if both attributes change
at the same rate. Hereafter, we assume that the rate
of change in attributes across alternatives is similar.
Second, as the difference in attribute weights be-
comes larger (e.g., weighing quality greatly DEMO price
little), the approach – avoidance conﬂict should become
less intense. Consider situations in which quality is
weighted more than price. Larger weight DEMO
increase the approach tendency and reduce the avoid-
ance tendency to the higher-quality alternative, while
simultaneously reducing the approach tendency and
increasing the avoidance tendency to the lower-quality then the relative value of the alternative stronger DEMO
alternative. Therefore, larger differences in attribute the preferred attribute, v(A), is 00.01, the relative
weights should make choosing a higher-quality or a value of the alternative weaker on the preferred attri-
lower-quality alternative DEMO depending on whether bute, v(B), is 00.19, and the value difference between
quality or price is weighted more. the two is DEMO If A’s advantage on the preferred attri-
Third, enlarging trade-offs (Scenario 2) should inten- bute and its disadvantage on the lesser preferred attri-
sify the approach – avoidance conﬂict by increasing the bute increases to DEMO (Scenario 4), then, v(A) reduces
relative gains (approach tendency) and relative losses to 00.03, v(B) reduces to 00.79, and their difference
(avoidance tendency) associated with any given alter- increases to 0.76.
v(x) Å x0.88, iff x ú 0 (i.e., gains)
v(x) Å02.5 x0.88, iff x õ 0 (DEMO, losses)
In Scen ar io 1, an d assu ming u nit weigh tin g of a ttributes,
therelativevalues of A DEMO B (or v(A) and v(B)) are esti-
mated a t 00.11 each. Enlarging trade-offs (Scenario 2)
mak es both v(A) a nd v(B) mor e n ega tive (Th er efor e, if loss aversion a pplies to felt con ﬂict in multi-00.52 each).
att ribut e decisions, enla rging tra de-offs will redu ce th e
desira bilit y of th e DEMO na tives a nd thereby r educe t he a p-
proa ch – approach na tu re or in crease th e a DEMO ce – avoid-
an ce na tur e of th e decision . Th e r esult would be grea ter
decision difﬁculty a DEMO/or va cilla tion between a lternatives.
The latter two sources of conﬂict in multiattribute
settings, namely attribute-weight difference and trade-
off size, DEMO likely to interact. For example, suppose
that in the choice of DEMO cameras, A and B, Camera A
enjoys a 10% advantage on the more preferred attri-
bute and a 10% disadvantage on the lesser DEMO
attribute (Scenario 3 below). Furthermore, suppose
that the weights attached to the two attributes are 0.7
and 0.3. Assuming, that the advantages (gains) and
disadvantages (losses) are represented by xG and xL ,
and the attribute weights are represented by wi in the
weighted DEMO functions below,
v(x) Å (wi)(xG)
v(DEMO) Å0(wi)(2.5)(xL)0.88, for losses,
0.88, DEMO gains, and
/ a707$$2640 07-30-96 11:28:25 obha AP: OBHDP
CONFLICT, LOSS AVERSION, AND DECISION DIFFICULTY
147
Scenario 3 Scenario 4
DEMO
A 0.7, 0.3
B 0.7, 0.3
xi
/10%
010%
xi
DEMO
/10%
v(A) 0 v(B)
00.01 A 0.7, DEMO 0.76/50% 050% 00.03
00.19 B 0.7, 0.3 050% /50% 00.79
v(A)
or
v(B)
wi
xi
xi
v(A)DEMO
or
v(B)
v(A) 0 v(B)
Two DEMO merit note. First, when attribute weights but that camera is no DEMO available (Scenario 6).
are different, enlarging the proportional advantage of Since both cameras A and B are inferior to Camera S on
DEMO more preferred attribute generates larger differ- all attributes, they should now DEMO less appealing,
ences in preference between the more preferred and the recasting the decision as a harder avoidance – avoid-
lesser preferred alternative, thereby reducing decision ance conﬂict.
difﬁculty. However, and second, the effect DEMO be miti- In general, superior reference states such as Camera
gated DEMO the reduced attractiveness of the alternatives. S should increase decision difﬁculty while inferior ref-
Increasing trade-off size when going from Scenario 3 erence states DEMO as Camera I should reduce it. How-
to Scenario 4 reduces the overall relative value of each ever, applying loss aversion leads to predictions of dif-
alternative which should make choosing one of the al- ferential DEMO of change in decision difﬁculty
ternatives more difﬁcult. In general, larger DEMO across superior and inferior reference states. Cameras
and disadvantages may reduce the desirability of the I and S are conﬁgured to deviate from the DEMO attri-
alternatives, thereby reducing the approach – approach bute values of DEMO A and B by the same amount.
component or increasing the avoidance – avoidance Camera I costs $75 more and has 0.625 units less DEMO
component of the decision. ity than the average, whereas Camera S DEMO $75 less
and has 0.625 units more quality than the average. In
Reference States and Approach –Approach and terms of product space, the two reference states are
Avoidance –Avoidance Conﬂicts in Multiattribute equidistant from the choice DEMO If the perceived losses
Choice from the superior reference state receive about 2.5
Multiple reference st at es m a y be involved in DEMO y times more weight than the perceived gains associated
given evalua tion (K lein & Oglet horpe, 1987; Ka hn e- with the inferior reference state, the superior reference
man, 1992; Neale & Bazerma n, 1991; Winer, 1988). state should increase decision difﬁculty more than the
Thenatureof the referencestate may alter thetype inferior reference state reduces DEMO
of con ﬂict fa ced by t h e decision m ak er. F or exam ple,
con sider a ddin g a DEMO in fer ior or a superior reference
state in the form of an un available br and (Scenar ios EXPERIMENT 1
5and 6).
Experiment 1 assesses the effects of trade-off size
Scenario 5 Scenario 6 DEMO reference states on decision difﬁculty in two deci-
sion environments: choosing DEMO two cameras de-
Price Quality Price Quality scribed on price and quality, and choosing between two
($) (5 Å Best) ($) (5 Å Best) job candidates described on scholastic achievement and
Camera DEMO 390 3.00 Camera S 240 4.25 experience score. We test ﬁve hypotheses: (1) trade-off
(reference) (reference) size will generally increase decision difﬁculty, except
Camera A 331 3.81 Camera A 331 3.81 in cases with extreme differences in attribute weights;
Camera B 299 3.44 Camera DEMO 299 3.44 (2) larger differences in attribute weights will reduce
decision difﬁculty; (3) compared to no external refer-
Suppose that you saw Camera I ﬁrst and now you ence states, introducing a superior reference state will
must choose between Cameras A and B (Scenario 5). increase decision difﬁculty; whereas (4) introducing an
Since both cameras are superior to Camera I on all inferior reference state will reduce decision DEMO;
attributes, they should appear more appealing, re- and (5) superior reference states will increase decision
casting the decision as an easier DEMO – approach difﬁculty more than inferior reference states will re-
conﬂict. Alternatively, suppose you saw Camera S ﬁrst, duce it.
/ a707$$2640 07-30-96 DEMO:28:25 obha AP: OBHDP
148
CHATTERJEE AND HEATH
TABLE 1
Attribute Conﬁgurations in Experiment 1a
Small DEMO Large trade-offs
Reference
state #1 #2 #1 #2 #1 #2 #1 #2
Cameras Job candidates Cameras Job candidates
None (Control) A 330 3.75 DEMO
B 300 3.50 B
Inferior R 390 3.00 R
A 330 3.75 A
B 300 3.50 B
Superior R 240 4.25 R
A 330 DEMO A
B 300 3.50 B
/9
/11
/2
/9
/DEMO
/18
/9
/11
/11 A 360 4.00 A
/9 DEMO 270 3.25 B
/2 R 390 3.00 R
/11 A 360 4.00 A
/9 B 270 3.25 B
/18 R 240 4.25 DEMO
/11 A 360 4.00 A
/9 B 270 3.25 B
/DEMO
/14
/2
/6
/14
/18
/6
/14
/14
/6
/2
/14
/6
/18
/14
/6
a R Å Unavailable reference state; #1 Å Price of camera, or experience DEMO of the job candidate; #2 Å Quality of camera, or scholastic
achievement score of the job candidate.
experience and scholarship scores of the DEMO are
/10 units).
Second, trade-offs are symmetric around the average
attribute values. For example, in small trade-off condi-
tions, Camera A’s DEMO is $15 higher and Camera B’s
price is $15 lower. In large trade-offs, Camera A’s price
is $45 higher and Camera B’s price is $45 lower.
Third, gains and losses from superior and inferior
reference states are equated to test for loss aversion.
For example, compared to the average price and quality
of Cameras A and B, the inferior reference camera is
priced $75 higher and has 0.625 units less quality,
DEMO the superior reference camera is priced $75
lower and has 0.625 units more quality.
In the experiment, subjects chose between two cam-
eras or candidates (A or B). Half of the subjects re-
ported their attribute weights before making a choice,
while the other half reported DEMO after making a
choice. Subjects reported attribute weights by dividing
100 points between the two attributes according to
their relative importance (cf. Goldstein and Beattie,
1991). Following choice and attribute-weight reports,
subjects reported DEMO attitudes toward the two alter-
natives as well as the difﬁculty of the decision.
ence states were created by describing average scores Measures. To DEMO overall liking of the alterna-
of candidates hired in the past. Table 1 summarizes tives, subjects evaluated each alternative on 21-point
the descriptions corresponding to each experimental dislike/like and unfavorable/favorable scales ranging
condition. from DEMO to /10. Three 21-point scales ranging from
The experimental alternatives are DEMO subject 0ﬁcult10 to/very difﬁcult, not at all simple/10 measured DEMO difﬁculty:/very simple,not at all dif-and
to three constraints. First, to help equate overall at-
tractiveness of each pair of alternatives, the average not all likely to regret/very likely to regret. To detect DEMO
attribute values are kept constant across small and control for any unintended increases in computational
large trade-off conditions (average price and quality difﬁculty resulting from the addition of reference
of the two cameras are $315 and DEMO; the average states, subjects rated the difﬁculty of information pro-
Method
Design and subjects. The experiment orthogonally
varied the following factors between subjects: trade-off
size (small, large), type of reference state (none, DEMO
rior, superior), decision issue (cameras, job candidates),
and task order (attribute weights then choice, choice
then attribute weights). DEMO decision issues were used
to enhance generalizability, and task order was DEMO
to help control for carryover effects. One hundred ﬁfty-
three undergraduate students at a large northeastern
university were randomly assigned to the experimental
conditions. DEMO earned extra course credits for
their participation.
Stimuli and procedure. Subjects read a short vi-
gnette that had them either choose between two cam-
DEMO or between two job candidates. The cameras were
described on price and quality, the job candidates were
described on experience and scholarship. Subjects were
told that the quality of the cameras ranged from 1 to
5(DEMO Å best), and experience and scholarship scores of
the candidates ranged from 0 (inferior) to 20 (superior).
For cameras, reference DEMO were created by describ-
ing a close friend’s camera. For job candidates, refer-
/ a707$$2640 07-30-96 11:28:25 obha AP: OBHDP
CONFLICT, LOSS AVERSION, AND DECISION DIFFICULTY
149
cessing on a 21-point DEMO not at all difﬁcult to process
crease it. The signiﬁcant reference-state effect sup-
the information/very difﬁcult to process the information ported the hypothesis (F(2,139) Å 7.08, v2 Å 0.08, p õ
ranging from 010 to /10. To avoid negative numbers 0.005). Compared to no reference state conditions, deci-
and simplify reporting, we added /11 to all scores sions were easier with inferior reference states and
(transformed scales range from 1 to 21). more difﬁcult with superior reference DEMO (MInferior Å
Analyses and Results 8.62,Based on loss aversion, superior reference statesMNone Å 9.11, MSuperior Å 11.45).
The correlations between the three decision difﬁculty were expected to increase decision difﬁculty more than
items DEMO sufﬁciently high to merit a composite mea- inferior reference states reduce it. This was tested in
two ways. First, we contrasted each reference-state
condition with the control condition (no reference state)
using Dunnett’s test. Superior reference states in-
creased decision difﬁculty signiﬁcantly relative to the
sure (a Å 0.78). The data were collapsed across decision
issue and task DEMO since neither produced any sig-
niﬁcant effects. Predictions for decision difﬁculty were
tested with an ANOVA (SAS GLM) testing the main
and interaction DEMO of trade-off size, reference state,
and attribute weight difference. The DEMO
scaled attribute ratings were transformed to a single
attribute-weight variable by taking the absolute differ-
ence between the importance ratings of the two attri-
DEMO condition (MD Å/2.34, p õ 0.05,
Dunnett’s one-tailed), whereas inferior reference states
butes (Éprice 0 qualityÉ,or Éexperience 0 scholar-
failed to reduce decision difﬁculty signiﬁcantly (MD Å
0aversion’s prediction that the change in decision difﬁ-0.48). These tests, however, do not test DEMO loss-
culty arising from a superior reference state is larger
than the change arising from an inferior reference state
(i.e., 2.34 vs 0.48)DEMO Therefore, and second, we directly
compared these two changes by creating a difference
score for each subject in the reference-state conditions:
shipÉ)DEMO This continuous variable was mean-centered
and standardized within each decision issue to reduce
colinearity and enhance comparison across the differ-
ent issues (Jaccard, DEMO, & Wan, 1990).
Trade-off size, liking of alternatives, and attribute-
weight differences. We averaged the two attitudinal
items since they were DEMO correlated (rA-Camera Å 0.91,
rTrade-off size did not signiﬁcantly affect DEMO liking forA-Candidate Å 0.76, rB-Camera Å 0.90, rB-Candidate Å 0.88).
any alternative (Camera A: MSmall Å 9.60, MLarge Å
10.39, DEMO Å 1.16; Camera B: MSmall Å 8.62, MLarge Å
8.54, t71 Å 0.13; Candidate A: MSmall Å 9.24, MLarge Å
9.51, t77 Å 0.57; Candidate B: MSmall Å 10.29, MLarge Å
DEMO,size on decision difﬁculty are due to factors other thant77 Å 0.18). Therefore, any effects of trade-off
less liking for the alternatives.
We hypothesized that trade-off size would increase
decision difﬁculty. This hypothesis was supported. DEMO
larging trade-offs made decisions more difﬁcult (MSmall
Å 9.21, MLarge Å 10.25; F(1,139) Å 3.95, v2 Å 0.02, p DEMO
0.05). We also hypothesized that larger differences in
attribute weights would make decisions easier. This
hypothesis was generally supported. The main effect
of DEMO weights approached statistical signiﬁcance
(F(1,139) Å 3.03, p DEMO 0.084) because, as expected, the
attribute-weight differential was negatively correlated
DEMO decision difﬁculty (r Å00.21, p õ 0.05). However,
in contrast to our expectations, the trade-off size by
attribute-weight difference interaction was not statisti-
cally signiﬁcant (F(1,139) Å 0.02).
Reference DEMO and loss aversion. We predicted
that inferior reference states would reduce decision dif- tion load was treated as a covariate (F(2,138) DEMO 6.70, v2
ﬁculty, whereas superior reference states would in- Å 0.07, p õ 0.005).
Inferior reference state subjects:
MControl 0 Subject’s score,
Superior reference state subjects:
Subject’s score 0 MControl .
DEMO difference score was subjected to a three-way AN-
OVA with trade-off size, reference state, and attribute-
weight difference as predictors. The only signiﬁcant
DEMO was that of reference state (F(1,91) Å 6.72, DEMO Å
0.06, p õ 0.05). Consistent with loss aversion, superior
signiﬁcantly more than did inferior reference statesreference states changed decision difﬁculty (MD Å 2.34)
(MD Å 0.48).
Testing for an information load confound. It is pos-
sible that introducing reference states increased the
information DEMO difﬁculty of the decision and
thereby contaminated the ﬁndings. This does not ap-
pear to be the case for three reasons. First, the correla-
tion between decision difﬁculty and reference state
(yes/no) was not DEMO (r Å 0.11). Second, informa-
tion processing difﬁculty was uniformly low across all
three conditions of reference states (MInferior Å 6.54,
MControl Å 6.06, MSuperior Å 6.94, on a scale ranging from
DEMO affected decision difﬁculty even when informa-1 to 21; F(2,140) Å 0.55). Third, reference states signiﬁ-
/ a707$$2640 07-30-96 11:28:25 obha AP: OBHDP
150
CHATTERJEE AND HEATH
Choices.
trade-off size or reference states affected subjects’
DEMO enough to produce the desired effect. To test this
log-linear model (DEMO CATMOD): trade-off size by ref-
erence state by attribute-weight difference. There were Second, the nature of Experiment 1’s reference states
no signiﬁcant effects. The absence of any choice effects may have undermined their effects. The DEMO cam-
coupled with signiﬁcant differences in decision difﬁ- era was said to be that of a friend, whereas the refer-
culty make for interesting comparisons. For example, ence job candidate was said to be an average of past
in both small and large trade-offs, subjects slightly pre- candidates. These reference states may not be as pow-
ferred the lower-priced camera DEMO the more experienced erful as giving subjects the reference camera or refer-
candidate (Alternative B; BSmall Å 57.33%, BLarge Å ence candidate and then removing them (i.e., losses
60.53%; x2(1) Å 0.16), although the decision was signiﬁ- from endowments). Therefore, Experiment 2 DEMO
cantly harder under large trade-offs (MSmall Å 9.21, endowments with the type of stated descriptions used
Mtive B across inferior and superior reference-state DEMO Å 10.25). Similarly, subjects preferred Alterna- in Experiment 1 a DEMO sources of reference dependence in
the context of multiattribute decision making.
ditions (BInferior Å 64%, BSuperior Å Third, in keeping with the English adage that ‘‘the
although the decision was signiﬁcantly harder under grass is DEMO greener on the other side of the fence,’’
superior reference states (MInferior Å 8.63, MSuperior Å people may be predisposed toward seeing DEMO options
11.45). Altering reference states and/or trade-off size negatively more so than positively. That is, they may
therefore, can change decision DEMO without chang- be more inclined to dismiss or downplay inferior as
ing decisions, at least in the aggregate. opposed to superior reference states. This explanation
Finally, we added the alternative chosen as a pre- is difﬁcult to test directly. However, it would receive
dictor to see if reported decision difﬁculty was any dif- indirect support in Experiment 2 if none DEMO the inferior
ferent between subjects choosing higher-quality/lower- reference states reduced decision difﬁculty, especially
quality camera or more experienced/lesser experienced
candidate. No such effects emerged.
2
65.31%; x(1)
Å 0.02),
choices, by subjecting the choice data to a three way possibility, Experiment 2 varies reference state ex-
tremity.
We investigated whether variations in Experiment 1’s DEMO reference states were not infe-
the more extreme inferior endowment.
EXPERIMENT 2
Discussion
Overview and Hypotheses
As expected, larger trade-offs and smaller attribute-
weight differentials increased decision difﬁculty by in- Experiment 2 differed from Experiment 1 DEMO two
tensifying the approach/avoidance conﬂict embedded ways. First, it varied DEMO extremity of reference states.
within multiattribute decisions. However, in contrast More DEMO reference states were created such that
to our expectations, larger weight DEMO failed they were roughly 2.5 times further from the core
to reverse the trade-off size effect. It appears that giv- choice set’s attribute levels DEMO were the less extreme
ing up more of some attribute when choosing a given reference states. The 2.5 value is a fairly standard loss-
DEMO makes decisions harder even when the for- aversion coefﬁcient and therefore was selected to help
gone attribute gets relatively little weight. equate the power DEMO the more extreme inferior reference
The fact that superior reference states increased de- states with that of the less extreme superior reference
cision difﬁculty DEMO than inferior reference states re- states. For example, consider Scenarios 7 DEMO 8.
duced it is consistent with loss aversion. However, the
lack DEMO a signiﬁcant inferior-reference-state effect is in-
consistent with reference dependence. Three possible
explanations exist. First, Experiment 1’s inferior refer-
ence states may not have been inferior enough to in-
crease the attractiveness of the alternatives sufﬁciently
DEMO thereby make decisions easier. One objection to
this explanation is that the superior reference states
signiﬁcantly increased decision difﬁculty despite being
of the same DEMO as the inferior reference
states. However, loss aversion can account for DEMO dis- In Scenario 7, Camera S deviates from the average
crepancy. DEMO losses are roughly 2.5 time more un- price and quality of Cameras A and B by 15%, (Camera
pleasant as gains are pleasant, it may be that inferior S is 15% lower in price and DEMO higher in quality). In
reference states can make decisions easier, DEMO that Scenario 8, Camera I’s deviation is 2.5 times larger and
DEMO 7 Scenario 8
Price Quality Price Quality
($) (5 Å DEMO) ($) (5 Å Best)
Camera S 268 4.17 Camera I 433 2.27
(unavailable) (unavailable)
Camera A 330 3.75 Camera A 330 3.75
Camera B 300 3.50 Camera B 300 3.50
/ DEMO 07-30-96 11:28:25 obha AP: OBHDP
CONFLICT, LOSS AVERSION, AND DECISION DIFFICULTY
151
in the opposite direction (Camera I is 37.5% higher between two job candidates, who later withdrew their
in price, and 37.5% lower in quality). If loss aversion applications. These subjects then went on to make a
generalizes to felt DEMO difﬁculty in multiattribute second choice between two superior or two inferior op-
choice, Camera I should reduce decision difﬁculty by tions.
about as much as Camera S increases it. Reference state extremity was scaled using the DEMO
Second, to further strengthen the power of the refer- lowing metric:DEMO
ence states, Experiment 2 tested reference states that
were stated comparators (as in Experiment 1) or en- Attribute deviation
dowed. Endowed reference states can be created as fol- Éattribute valuereference state
lows. Suppose that you DEMO chose Camera I from other
options. Later, you ﬁnd that Camera DEMO is no longer Å 0 average attribute valuechoice alternativesÉ .
available, DEMO you must choose between Cameras A average attribute valuechoice alternatives
and B. This type of endowment should make it harder
to ignore inferior reference DEMO, one possible expla- The deviations were subjected to four constraints.
nation DEMO Experiment 1’s null effect of inferior refer- First, within each decision DEMO and attribute, the de-
ence states. viations were kept constant across DEMO states
In Experiment 2, we test four hypotheses: (1) Supe- (e.g., if the inferior reference camera was x% higher in
rior DEMO states will increase decision difﬁculty price, then the superior reference camera DEMO x% lower
more than inferior reference states reduce it (replicat- in DEMO). Second, within each decision issue and refer-
ing Experiment 1), (2) more extreme reference states ence state condition, deviations were DEMO constant
will have greater power than less extreme reference
across attributes (DEMO, if the inferior reference camera’s
states (where more extreme/less extreme É 2.5), (3) price was x% higher, then its quality was x% lower).
more extreme inferior reference states and less ex-
DEMO superior reference states will change decision ence state condition, small and DEMO deviations dif-
difﬁculty by comparable amounts (one reducing it, the
other increasing it), and (4) endowed reference states deviations were comparable DEMO decision issues.
will affect decision difﬁculty more than stated compara- Small and large deviations were 15 and 37.5% for cam-
tors. eras, and 20% and 40% for job candidates.1 Table 2
summarizes the descriptions.
Subjects were DEMO a multipage booklet that asked
them to imagine that they were shopping for a 35 mm
camera, or, as personnel manager of a DEMO, they
were selecting a job candidate. In the endowed-refer-
ence state DEMO, the ﬁrst page described two iden-
tical cameras or job candidates, and subjects were
asked to choose one of them. These subjects then
DEMO to the next page where they were asked to write
1 The deviations could not be made exactly identical across the
decision issues. Suppose DEMO, as in cameras, we start with a 15%
deviation for job candidates. This makes the reference candidate only
one-half of a scale point DEMO or worse than a choice candidate
on any one attribute (e.g., the reference candidate scores 11.5 on
experience, whereas Candidate M scores 11.0). Unfortunately, the
nature of the attribute scales precludes us from using much higher
starting deviations if (1) the deviations are to be DEMO across
the decision issues, and (2) expandable enough to test DEMO loss aver-
sion. For example, if we use a starting deviation DEMO 20% for job candi-
dates, and extend that to cameras, we will have to make the large
deviation at least twice that amount (40%) to test for loss aversion.
A 40% deviation for cameras, DEMO, translates to a quality score
of 5.075, and exceeds the 1 to 5 scale for quality. Hence, we use 15%
(cameras) and 20% (job candidates) for the less-extreme conditions
and 37.5 and 40% DEMO the more-extreme conditions. This way, the
percentages, as well as the ratio of small to large, are roughly compa-
rable across the two issues.
Method
Design and subjects. The experiment orthogonally
varied reference-state valence (inferior, superior), ref-
erence-state extremity (more extreme, less extreme),
DEMO type (endowment, stated comparator),
and decision issue (camera, DEMO candidate) between
subjects. In addition to these 16 groups, two separate
control groups with no reference states, one for each
decision issue, DEMO also included. Two hundred seven
business students at a large northeastern university
were randomly assigned to the experimental condi-
tions. No student from this DEMO had participated in
Experiment 1. The students earned extra course credits
for their participation.
Stimuli. Subjects read a short vignette that had
them choose DEMO two cameras or two job candi-
dates. The attributes were identical to those in the
small trade-off conditions of Experiment 1. When refer-
ence DEMO were stated comparators, a close friend’s
camera was described, or the average scores of job can-
didates hired in the past were given. DEMO reference
states were endowed, subjects ﬁrst chose between two
cameras that DEMO subsequently made unavailable, or
Third, within each decision issue, attribute, and refer-
fered by a factor of 2 to 2.5. Finally, and fourth, the
/ a707$$2640 07-30-96 11:28:25 obha AP: OBHDP
152
CHATTERJEE AND HEATH
TABLE 2
Attribute Conﬁgurations in Experiment 2a
Less DEMO More extreme
Reference
state #1 #2 #1 #2 #1 #2 #1 #2
Cameras Job candidates Cameras Job candidates
Inferior R 362 3.08 R
L DEMO 3.75 A
M 300 3.50 B
Superior R 268 4.17 R
L 330 3.75 A
M 300 3.50 B
/8
/9
/11
/DEMO
/9
/11
/8 R 433 2.27 R
/11 L 330 3.75 A
/9 M 300 3.50 B
/12 R 197 4.98 DEMO
/11 L 330 3.75 A
/9 M 300 3.50 B
/DEMO
/9
/11
/14
/9
/11
/6
/11
/9
/14
/11
/9
a R Å Unavailable reference state; #1 DEMO Price of camera, or experience score of the job candidate; #2 Å Quality of camera, or scholastic
achievement score of the job candidate. In addition, two control groups were run, one for each decision DEMO, that had only Options
L and M.
down, once again, DEMO camera or candidate they had and the mean of the control condition to test loss aver-
chosen on the previous page. Once they had DEMO sion’s prediction that inferior reference states increase
their choice, subjects were DEMO that the camera decision difﬁculty more than superior reference states
was out of stock in all nearby stores, or the job candi- reduce it. Testing these transformed scores rather than
date had withdrawn his application, and they had to raw scores forgoes only the less interesting question of
DEMO between two other cameras or candidates (L and signed differences from DEMO conditions. For exam-
M). In the stated-comparator conditions, subjects were DEMO, the difference between superior and inferior refer-
simply informed about a DEMO that a friend had pur- ence states in raw decision difﬁculty scores is quite
chased but was no longer available, or about the aver- large, but not terribly interesting in and of itself (MSup-
age DEMO of job candidates selected in the past. These erior Å 11.93, DEMO Å 6.48). Therefore, we subjected
subjects made only one choice, that between L and M. the transformed scores to an ANOVA consisting DEMO the
Following choice, subjects responded to measures of following between-subjects factors: reference-state va-
decision difﬁculty and attribute weights. lence (inferior, superior), DEMO extremity
Measures. As in Experiment 1, three 21-point (less extreme, DEMO extreme), reference-state type
scales measured decision difﬁculty. As before, to DEMO (stated comparator, endowment), decision issue (cam-
negative numbers and DEMO reporting, we added era, job candidate), and the continuous attribute
/11 to all scores (transformed scales ranged from 1 to weight DEMO which was standardized per decision
21). Attribute weights were measured on a 21-point issue.
scale price (experience) more important/quality (scho- Consistent with loss aversion and Experiment 1, su-
lastic achievement) more important DEMO from 010 perior reference states increased decision difﬁculty (MD
as the DEMO /10, with 0 (the two are equally important) serving Å 3.42) more than inferior reference states reduced it
(aversion was further DEMO by a planned compari-MD Å 2.01; F(1,138) Å 4.54, v2 Å 0.02, p õ 0.05). Loss
Analyses and Results
DEMO three items measuring decision difﬁculty were
sufﬁciently correlated to merit a composite measure (a
Å 0.91). The composite measure was used in all subse-
quent analyses. We begin by assessing the experi-
ment’s factorial structure, that is, variations across the
experimental (reference state) conditions. We then test
differences between experimental and control condi-
tions to disentangle explanations of DEMO 1’s
nonsigniﬁcant inferior-reference-state effects.
Experimental conditions. As in Experiment 1, we DEMO state than does presenting some item as a
took the unsigned difference between a subject’s score comparator.
son between the more-extreme-inferior-reference-state
and less-extreme-superior-reference-state conditions
DEMO, if loss aversion holds, should not differ from
each other in decision difﬁculty. As expected, no sig-
niﬁcant difference between these conditions emerged
(MD(Inferior/More Extreme) Å 2.23, MD(Superior/Less Extreme) DEMO 2.66;
t81As hypothesized, endowed reference states changedÅ 0.43).
decision DEMO (MD Å 3.22) more than did stated
0.05). Ownership apparently establishes a ‘‘stronger’’comparators (MD Å 2.29; F(1,138) Å 4.12, v2 Å 0.01, p õ
/ a707$$2640 07-30-96 11:28:25 DEMO AP: OBHDP
CONFLICT, LOSS AVERSION, AND DECISION DIFFICULTY
153
Although the main effect DEMO reference-state extremity ﬁculty signiﬁcantly (MInferior Å 6.48, p õ 0.05 Dunnett’s
was not signiﬁcant, the reference-state-extremity by
one-tailed). This ﬁnding suggests that people do not
decision-issue interaction was F(1,138) Å 6.11, DEMO Å 0.02, categorically ignore the good things they have relative
more DEMO reference states produced larger changes explanation of failed inferior-reference-state effects inp õ 0.05). When subjects chose between job candidates, to other situations, DEMO effect which mitigates the third
in decision difﬁculty (MD Å 2.99) than did less extreme Experiment 1.
reference states (MD Å 0.78; DEMO(1,138) Å 6.59, v2 Å 0.03, The next issue DEMO whether the inferior-reference-state
peras, more and less extreme reference states produced DEMO reference states or from the use of endowments.õ 0.05). However, DEMO subjects chose between cam- effect in Experiment 2 arose from the use of more ex-
comparable shifts in decision difﬁculty (MD’s Å 3.45 To assess this, we compared the four cells deﬁned by
and 3.77, DEMO; F õ 1).2 the crossing of reference-state-extremity and reference-
state DEMO within inferior reference state conditions.
Control-experimental differences.
states failed to reduce decision difﬁculty signiﬁcantly
in Experiment 1. Experiment 2 tested three potential
explanations of DEMO failure: (1) insufﬁciently extreme
reference states, (2) the use of stated comparators for
reference states rather than endowments, the latter of
which might be harder to ignore, and (3) a natural
tendency for people to focus on what they do not have
(focusing on superior reference state) while taking for
granted what they do have (DEMO inferior reference
states).
To assess these explanations, we ﬁrst test DEMO
superior and inferior reference states changed decision
difﬁculty. Superior reference states, DEMO in Experiment
1, increased decision difﬁculty relative to control condi-
tions (MSuperior Å 11.93, MControl Å 8.46, p õ 0.01,
Dunnett’s DEMO).3 In contrast to Experiment 1,
however, inferior reference states DEMO decision dif-
2 The decision-issue main effect was signiﬁcant as well (DEMO Å
6.11, v2 Å 0.03, p õ 0.05) because camera-decisions DEMO from
control conditions (MD Å 3.61) more than did candidate-decisions
(DEMO Å 1.89). The only other signiﬁcant effect emerged solely as a
function of the rescaling of the dependent measure: The reference-
state valence by attribute weight interaction was signiﬁcant (F1,138
Å 11.94, v2 DEMO 0.06, p õ 0.001) because with inferior reference states,
larger differences imply easier decisions and a positive correlation
between decision difﬁculty and DEMO weights (r Å/0.24, p õ
0.05), whereas with superior reference states, larger differences im-
ply harder decisions and a negative correlation between decision dif-
ﬁculty and attribute weights (r Å00.23, p õ DEMO).
3 Dunnett’s test controls for alpha inﬂation when a single condition
is compared with multiple conditions, all within a factorial design,
where the error term is based on the ANOVA’s MSe. In Experiment
2, control conditions were external to the factorial structure and
therefore did not DEMO to the model’s MSe . Nonetheless, we use
Dunnett’s test and DEMO model’s MSe for four reasons: (1) the test is
designed DEMO for our case, that is, for multiple comparisons
with some other condition; (2) the model’s MSe is our best estimate
of unexplained variation; (3) means and variances within control
conditions fall within the range of means and variances in the experi-
mental conditions (i.e., DEMO pooled error term should be smaller, more
liberal, than the one used here due to the combination of larger ns
and no expansion DEMO variance); and (4) using the test in Experiment
2 facilitates cross-experimental comparisons since it was used in
Experiment 1.
Inferior reference
Control: Less extreme More extreme
Mean Å 8.46 reference state reference state
Stated DEMO 6.54 (MD Å01.92) 6.77 (MD Å01.69)
Endowment 6.92 (MD Å01.54) 5.61 (MD Å02.85)
This pattern fails to support a DEMO mechanism.
Compared with the less extreme stated comparator
(the type of DEMO state used in Experiment 1), nei-
ther a more extreme reference state alone nor an en-
dowed reference state alone reduced decision difﬁculty
(MD’s 01.69 and 01.54 respectively). However, combin-
ing a more extreme reference state with an endowment
did, in fact, reduce decision difﬁculty. DEMO to con-
trol conditions, the type of reference state used in DEMO
periment 1 failed to reduce decision difﬁculty signiﬁ-
cantly (MD Å01.92, ns, Dunnett’s one-tailed), whereas
the more extreme endowed condition did (DEMO Å02.85,
p õ 0.05, Dunnett’s one-tailed).
Choice. We tested DEMO main and interaction effects
of reference-state valence, reference-state type, refer-
ence-state extremity and attribute weights on subjects’
choice using a log-linear model. There DEMO no signiﬁ-
cant effects. For example, although decisions were
more difﬁcult DEMO superior rather than inferior refer-
ence states (MSuperior Å 11.93, MInferior Å 6.48), subjects
preferred the lower-priced camera or the more experi-
DEMO candidate (Alternative M) across superior and
inferior reference-state conditions (MSuperior DEMO 60.92%,
Mthese aggregate results is that although referenceInferior Å 50.60%; DEMO(1) Å 1.83, ns). The implication of
states can make decisions easier or harder, they do so
without substantial changes to ultimate choices.
Discussion
Experiment 2 further implicates the importance of
loss aversion in DEMO effects of reference states on felt
decision difﬁculty. Superior reference states increased
decision difﬁculty more than inferior reference states
reduced it. Superior and inferior DEMO states had
/ a707$$2640 07-30-96 11:28:25 obha AP: OBHDP
154
CHATTERJEE AND HEATH
effects of similar magnitude when inferior reference player DEMO it. The results suggest that (1) a ‘‘str aw
states were about 2.5 times more extreme than their man’’ alternative t hat makes DEMO alt ernative look r eally
superior counterparts. good can increase t he approach tendency or r educe the
Experiment 2 tested three potential explanations DEMO avoidan ce ten den cy towa rds th at bra n d, an d (2) a ‘‘str aw
the failure of inferior reference states to reduce decision man’’ alternative that makes one alt ernative look DEMO
difﬁculty in Experiment 1. Experiment 1’s signiﬁcant ba d can in cr ea se th e a voidan ce t en den cy or DEMO th e
effects of superior but not inferior reference states can appr oach tendency toward that br and.
be attributed to the inﬂuence of DEMO aversion combined In r ecen t year s, con sider able DEMO ch a ttent ion ha s fo-
with the use of less extreme stated comparators rather cused on factors that reduce procrast inat ion DEMO help indi-
than more extreme endowments. Only more extreme vidua ls a nd or ga niza tion s m ake qu ick decision s (e.g.,
inferior endowments reduced decision difﬁculty sig- Berr y, 1988; DEMO alk, 1988; Aker lof, 1991; J udge & Miller,
niﬁcantly in Experiment 2. Although the signiﬁcant 1991). Our research suggests DEMO the speed of m aking
effect of inferior reference states in Experiment 2 indi- decisions depends on how t he choice sets ar e DEMO
cates that people do not completely ignore inferior ref- In clu din g a n u na ttr active a lter na tive to DEMO con sider ed
erence states, any tendency to take for granted DEMO prom ises t o be one way of reducing decision difﬁculty and
superiority would supplement effects of reference de- procra st ina tion, as does discrediting, or elimina ting unre-
pendence and loss aversion on decision difﬁculty. alistic super ior refer ence states (r educing t he avoidance
ten den cy, or in creasing the appr oa ch ten den cy). On th e
GENERAL DISCUSSION oth er ha n d, decision ma kers a fra id of ha st y decision s DEMO
th eir orga n iza tion s, may be able t DEMO slow th e pr ocess by
intr oducing a pa rticular ly a ttr active but unava ilable al-
The experiments reported here demonstrate DEMO ter na tive tha t r edu ces th e over all at tra ctiveness of th e
sources of decision difﬁculty inherent in DEMO available a lter na tives, or by discrediting or eliminat ing
DEMO: trade-off size and reference states. Each in ferior referen ce sta DEMO (in creasing th e a voidan ce ten -
source’s effects DEMO consistent with research on psycho- den cy, or r edu cing DEMO e a ppr oa ch t en den cy).
logical conﬂict and/or loss aversion. Trade-off size in- Th e ta sk of DEMO a n a lt ern a tive th at ha s a desir ed
creases decision difﬁculty by increasing the approach – fea tu DEMO (e.g., qua lity) a n d an u n desired DEMO tu re (e.g., price)
avoidance conﬂicts of attribute trade-offs, DEMO effect that in volves a n a pproach – avoidan ce con ﬂict , a con ﬂict th at
is exacerbated by loss aversion. DEMO reference requ ir es th e decision ma ker to tr ade-off between the good
states, on the other hand, recast decisions as DEMO an d t he bad. As th e t ra de-offs become lar ge, th ey in tensify
avoidance – avoidance (superior reference DEMO) or as the approach – avoidance conﬂict s by increasing t DEMO r ela-
easier approach – approach conﬂicts (inferior reference tive adva DEMO age (a pproa ch tendency) a nd r ela tive losses
states). The reference dependence of decision difﬁculty (avoidan ce tenden cy) associa ted with an y given a lter na -
is further affected by (1) loss aversion, and (2) whether tive. Keeping th e magnitu de of tr ade-offs sm all is one wa DEMO
or not the reference states are part of a person’s endow- of ma king decisions ea sier. However , if large tra de-offs
ment. DEMO with loss aversion, (1) superior refer- ar e unavoidable (e.g., buying a car), one way of resolving
ence states increase decision difﬁculty more than infe- th e dilemma is to redu ce th DEMO a voida n ce aspect or increa se
rior reference states reduce it, and (2) superior and th e a pproa ch a spect . For exa mple, we can h elp th e car
inferior reference states have effects of similar magni- bu yer m ake DEMO qu ick decision eith er by offer ing some form
tude when the inferior reference states are 2 to 2.5 of ﬁnancial arr angements DEMO low APR ﬁnancing (de-
times more extreme than the superior reference DEMO laying and/or reducing the avoidance component) or by
When reference DEMO become part of a person’s endow- offering to install extra features at no additional cost (in-
ment (e.g., a camera that a person once possessed), they creasing th e a pproa ch com pon DEMO t).
affect felt decision difﬁculty more than does presenting
some item as a comparator (e.g., a friend’s camera). REFERENCES
J u DEMO as su per ior a n d in fer ior refer en ce st ates can
ch an ge decision difﬁculty (on e in creasin g it , th e ot her r e-
du cin DEMO it ), addin g an at tra ctive or a n DEMO n attr active ‘‘str aw
man’’ alternative ca n increa se or decrease decision avoid-
an ce. F or exa mple, Tver sk y a nd Sh a ﬁr (1992) fou nd tha t,
DEMO red to con trol-con dition su bject s decidin g wh et her
or not to buy a SONY CD player, adding a superior AIWA
CD player in cr ea sed t he sh ar e DEMO people defer ring th e
decision, while adding an unnamed ‘‘less-attr DEMO CD
Akerlof, G. A. (1991). Procrastination and obedience. American Eco-
nomic Review, 81, 1 – 19.
Barker, R. G. (1942)DEMO An experimental study of the resolution of
conﬂict by children: Time DEMO and amount of vicarious trial
and error behavior occurring. In Q. McNemar & M. A. Merrill
(Eds.), Studies in personality. New York: DEMO Hill.
Beattie, J. (1988). Perceived differences in trade-off difﬁculty. Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Philadel-
phia.
/ a707$$2640 07-30-96 DEMO:28:25 obha AP: OBHDP
CONFLICT, LOSS AVERSION, AND DECISION DIFFICULTY
155
Berry, J. M. (DEMO). High cost of procrastination in handling huge Lewin, K. (1938). The conceptual representation and measurement of
S&L losses. Financier, 12, 7 – 11. psychological Forces, Durham: Duke Univ. Press.
Bettman, DEMO R. (1979). An information processing theory of consumer
choice. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Bettman, J. R., Johnson, & Payne, J. W. (1990). A componential
analysis of cognitive effort in choice. Organizational Behavior and
DEMO Decision and Human Decision Processes, 45, 111 – 139.
Bettman, DEMO R., Johnson, E. J., Luce, M. F., & Payne, J. W. (1993).
Correlation, conﬂict, and choice. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 931 – 951.
Dunnegan, K. J. (1993). Framing, cognitive modes, and image DEMO:
Toward an understanding of a glass half full. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 78, 491 – 503.
Einhorn, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. (1981). Behavioral decision theory:
Processes of judgment and choice. Annual Review of Psychology,
32, 53 – 88.
Frisch, DEMO, Taylor, Jones, K., & O’brien, M. (1993). Sources of difﬁ-
culty in real-life decisions. Unpublished manuscript, University of
Oregon, DEMO of Psychology, Eugene, OR.
Goldstein, W. M., & Beattie, DEMO (1991). Judgment of relative impor-
tance in decision making: The importance of interpretation, and
the interpretation of importance. In D. R. Brown & J . E. Keith
Smith (Eds.), Frontiers in mathematical psychology. New York:
Springer Verlag.
Greenleaf, E. A., & Lehmann, D. (1995). Reasons for substantial
delay in consumer decision making. Journal of Consumer Re-
search, 22, 186 – 199.
Houston, D. A., DEMO, S. J., & Baker, S. M. (1991). Feature
matching, unique features, and the dynamics of the choice process:
Predecision DEMO and post-decision satisfaction. Journal of Ex-
perimental Social Psychology, 27, 411 – 430.
Jaccard, J., Turrisi, R., & Wan, C. K. (1990). Interaction effects in
multiple regression. Newbury Park: Sage.
Johnson, E. J., Meyer, R. J., & Ghosh, S. (1989). When choice models
fail: Compensatory models in negatively correlated environments.
Journal of Marketing Research, 26, 255 – 270.
Johnson, E. J., & DEMO, J. W. (1985). Effort and accuracy in choice.
Management Science, 31, 394 – 414.
Judge, W. Q., & Miller, A. (1991). Antecedents and outcomes of deci-
sion speed in different environmental contexts. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 34, 449 – 463.
Kahneman, D. (1992). Reference points, anchors, norms, and mixed
feelings. DEMO Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
51, 296 – 312.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis
DEMO decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263 – 291.
Klebanoff, S. DEMO (1939). An experimental analysis of approach –ap-
proach and avoidance– DEMO conﬂict. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Yale University.
Klein, N. M., & DEMO, J. E. (1987). Cognitive reference points
in consumer decision making. In M. Wallendorf and Paul Anderson
(Eds.), Advances in Consumer Research, 14, 183 – 187.
Lewin, K. (1931). Environmental forces DEMO child behavior and devel-
opment. In C. A. Murchison (Ed.), DEMO handbook of child psychology,
Worcester: Clark Univ. Press.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science: Selected theoretical
papers. New DEMO: Harper.
Miller, N. E. (1944). Experimental studies of conﬂict. DEMO J. McV.
Hunt (Ed.), Personality and the behavior disorders: A handbook
on experimental and clinical research (Vol. 1). New York: DEMO
Neale, M. A., & Bazerman, M. H. (1991). Cognition and rationality
in negotiation. New York: Free Press.
Paquette, L., & Kida, T. (1988). The effect of decision strategy and
task DEMO on decision performance. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 41, 128 – 148.
Payne, J. W. (1976). Task complexity and contingent DEMO in
decision-making: An information search and protocol analysis. Or-
ganizational Behavior DEMO Human Performance, 16, 366 – 387.
Payne, J. W. (1982). Contingent decision behavior. Psychological Bul-
letin, 92, 382 – 402.
DEMO, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1988). Adaptive
strategy selection in decision making. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 534 – 552.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1992). Behavioral
decision research: A constructive processing perspective. Annual
Review of Psychology, DEMO, 87 – 131.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The adaptive
decision maker. Cambridge, DEMO: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Payne, J. W., Johnson, E. J., DEMO, J. R., and Coupey, E. (1990).
Understanding contingent choice: A computer simulation ap-
proach. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 20,
296 – 309.
Schneider, S. L. (1992). Framing and conﬂict: Aspiration level contin-
gency, the status quo, and current theories of risky choice. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18,
1040 – 1057.
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 69, 99 – 118.
Shugan, S. M. (1980). The cost of thinking. Journal of Consumer
Research, 7, 99 – 111.
Stalk, G., Jr. (1988). Time — The next source of competitive advan-
DEMO Harvard Business Review, 66, 41 – 51.
Thaler, R. (1985). Mental accounting and consumer choice. Market-
ing Science, 4, 199 DEMO 214.
Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory DEMO choice. Psy-
chological Review, 79, 281 – 299.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect theory:
Cumulative DEMO of uncertainty. Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 5, 297 – 323.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1991). Loss aversion in DEMO choice:
A reference dependent model. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
106, 1039 – 1061.
Tversky, A., & Shaﬁr, E. (1992). Choice under conﬂict: The dynamics
of deferred decision. Psychological Science, 3, 358 – 361.
Ursic, M. L., & Helgeson, J. G. (DEMO). The impact of choice phase and
task complexity on consumer decision making. Journal of Business
Research, 21, 69 – 90.
Winer, R. S. (1988). Behavioral perspective in pricing: Buyer’s subjec-
tive perceptions DEMO price revisited. In T. M. Devinney (Ed.), Issues
in pricing: Theory and research. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Received: February 23, DEMO
/ a707$$2640 07-30-96 11:28:25 obha AP: OBHDP{1g42fwefx}