Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
ORGANIZATIONAL
BEHAVIOR
DEMO HUMAN
DECISION PROCESSES
www.elsevier.com/locate/obhdp
Fast, frugal, and rational: DEMO rational norms explain behavior
Nick Chater,a,* Mike Oaksford,b Ramin Nakisa,c and Martin Redingtonc
a Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry CV7 4AL, UK
b School of Psychology, Cardiﬀ University, DEMO Box 901, Cardiﬀ CF1 3YG, UK
c Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Abstract
Muchresearchonjudgmentanddecisionmakinghasfocussedontheadequacyofclassicalrationalityasadescriptionofhuman
reasoning. But more recently it has been argued that classical rationality should also be rejected even DEMO normative standards for
human reasoning. For example, Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) and Gigerenzer and Todd (1999a) argue that reasoning involves
‘‘fast and frugal’’ algorithms which are not justiﬁed by rational norms, but which succeed in the environment. They provide three
linesofargumentforthisview,basedon:(A)theimportanceoftheenvironment;(B)DEMO;and(C)
thefactthatanalgorithmwithnoapparentrationalbasis,Take-the-Best,succeedsinanjudgmenttask(judgingwhichoftwocities
is the larger, based DEMO lists of features of each city). We reconsider (A)–(DEMO), arguing that standard patterns of explanation in
psychology and the social and biological sciences, use rational norms to explain why simple cognitive algorithms can succeed. We
alsopresentnewcomputersimulationsthatcompareTake-the-Bestwithothercognitivemodels(whichuseconnectionist,exemplar-
based, and decision-tree algorithms). Although Take-the-Best still performs well, it does not perform noticeably better than the
other models. We conclude that these results provide no strong reason to DEMO Take-the-Best over alternative cognitive models.
 2003 Elsevier Science (USA). DEMO rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Research on human judgment and decision making
has frequently focussed on the relationship between
observed human reasoning and classical rational
DEMO Instances where actual reasoning and classical
norms diverge have been taken to exemplify cognitive
biases; human performance is viewed as failing to
measure up, in some ways and under some circum-
stances, to classical rational DEMO For example,
people appear to persistently fall for logical blunders
(DEMO, Newstead, & Byrne, 1993), probabilistic falla-
cies (e.g., DEMO & Kahneman, 1974), to make in-
consistent decisions (Kahneman, DEMO, & Tversky,
1982; Tversky & Kahneman, 1986), and DEMO make ir-
rational moves in games (Colman, 1995). Indeed, DEMO
concepts of logic, probability, decision theory and the
like do not appear to mesh naturally with our everyday
reasoning strategies: these notions took centuries of
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: nick.chater@warwick.ac.uk (N. Chater).
DEMO intellectual eﬀort to construct, and present a
tough challenge for each DEMO of students. From
this perspective, the gap between observed decision
making DEMO and classical rationality may appear a
yawning gulf.
Various factors have been viewed as contributing to
this gulf: performance errors, computational limita-
tions, and diﬀerences between the understanding of the
task employed by experimenter and DEMO par-
ticipant (e.g., Ayton & Hardman, 1997; Cohen, 1981;DEMO
Oaksford & Chater, 1993; Stanovich, 1999; Stanovich
& West, DEMO; Stein, 1996). There have also been
persuasive arguments that individual diﬀerences con-
cerning cognitive ability and/or educational back-
ground can substantially DEMO the gap between
observed behavior and classical norms. Where cogni-
tive ability is high and/or the task constraints do not
severely impact cognitive DEMO of memory and
attention, people may on occasion conform quite well
DEMO classical rational norms, even on tasks where per-
formance is typically DEMO as systematically irrational
(Stanovich & West, 1998a, 1998b, 1998c). This line of
argument suggests that the gulf between performance
0749-5978/03/DEMO - see front matter  2003 Elsevier Science (USA). All DEMO reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0749-5978(02)00508-3
64
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2003) 63–86
and classical rationality may be bridged, at least DEMO
some individuals, in some circumstances (Stanovich,
1999, although see, for example, Ayton, 2000; Hertwig,
2000).
Recently, a DEMO of theorists have suggested a
more radical alternative—that comparing human be-
havior against classical rationality is like comparing
apples and oranges. Whereas the traditional DEMO
with psychology and economics is that the comparison
is appropriate, but DEMO the disparity between the two
may be substantial, the radical viewpoint DEMO that
the comparison itself is misconceived.
Evans and Over (1996, 1997), for example, distin-
guish between two notions of rationality:
Rationality1 : Thinking, speaking, reasoning, making a decision,
or acting in a way that is generally reliable and eﬃcient for
achieving ones goals
DEMO : Thinking, speaking, reasoning, making a decision,
oractingwhenonehasareasonforwhatonedoessanctionedby
a DEMO theory. (Evans & Over, 1997, p. 2)
Crucially,EvansandOverarguethatthesetwokindsof
DEMO are largely independent: ‘‘people are largely
rational in the sense of DEMO their goals
(rationality1 )buthaveonlyalimitedabilitytoreasonor
act for good reasons sanctioned by a normative theory
(rationality2 )’’(Evans&Over,1997,p.1).Ifthisisright,
then DEMO ones goals can be achieved without fol-
lowingthepreceptsofclassical rationality—i.e.,without
there being a justiﬁcation for the actions, decisions or
thoughts which lead to success: rationality1 does not
require rationality2 . That is, Evans and Over DEMO com-
mitted to the view that thoughts, actions or decisions
which DEMO be normatively justiﬁed using classical
rational norms can, nonetheless, consistently lead to
practical success.
Relatedly, Gigerenzer and his colleagues (e.g., Gi-
gerenzer, 2000; Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996; Gige-
renzer&Todd,1999a)havedevelopedamajorresearch
DEMO on human judgment that attempts to break
out of the restrictive mould of comparing human per-
formance with classical rationality. Like Evans and
Over (1996, 1997), Gigerenzer and colleagues have ar-
guedthat,instead,inferenceshouldbeassessedinterms
of its success in solving ecologically relevant problems
in natural environmental contexts: ‘‘the minds of living
systems should be understood relative to the environ-
ment DEMO which they evolved rather than to the tenets of
classical rationality [i.e., probability theory, expected
utilitytheoryandsoon]...’’(GigerenzerandGoldstein,
p. 651) (emphasis added)DEMO The proposal is that the
point of reasoning is to allow people to deal with the
everyday world, rather than conforming with rational
norms.
The aim of this paper is to consider the viability of
this DEMO proposal. For concreteness, we focus on a
particularly inﬂuential formulation, by Gigerenzer and
Goldstein (1996), but we intend our analysis to apply
more generally to accounts of ecological and classical
norms of rationality.
Gigerenzer DEMO Goldstein (1996) give three lines of
argumentthatanecologicalstandardofrationality(i.e.,
that reasoning gets good results in the real world)
should replace classical norms DEMO the appropriate
comparison for human reasoning, based on: (A) the
importance of the environment; (B) the existence of
cognitivelimitations;and(C)an existenceproof, i.e.,a
speciﬁc algorithm, Take-the-Best that exempliﬁes their
approach. Take-the-Best succeeds in a real environ-
ment, even though it has no apparent rational justiﬁ-
cation.
Gigerenzer and colleagues also argue that Take-the-
Best DEMO also more than a mere existence proof—it is in-
tended to be a cognitively plausible model of a speciﬁc
kind of cognitive estimation (e.g., Gigerenzer & Gold-
stein, 1996; Gigerenzer, 2000). The task DEMO and
Goldstein consider is that of two alternative forced
choice concerning which of two German towns has the
larger population, based on a set of nine binary fea-
tures ofeachtown(e.g.,‘‘hasasoccerteam,’’‘‘isastate
capital,’’etc.).GigerenzerandGoldstein(DEMO)consider
the computational problem of learning how to predict
which of two cities is the larger, from a training set of
cities,theirfeatures,andpopulations.Fromthepointof
view of conventional statistics, an obvious way to
proceedinsuchataskistoattempttousesomeformof
regression(e.g.,linearregression)toassesstheinﬂuence
ofeachofthefeaturesoncitysize.Whenpresentedwith
aforcedchoicetest,theregressionmightthenbeusedto
integrateallthefeaturesofthetwocities,tocometoan
overall conclusion concerning which is likely DEMO be the
larger.
Gigerenzer and Goldstein s Take-the-Best algorithm,
however, DEMO a radically diﬀerent approach. It has
two steps. The ﬁrst routine, DEMO recognition principle
statesthat,ifareasonerrecognisesthenameofonecity
but not the other, then the ﬁrst DEMO should be assumed
to be the larger–no further memory search is carried
out. If the recognition principle does not decide the
issue, Take-the-Best moves to a second and more
elaborate routine (on which we concentrate below).
Features of the cities are considered in order, one-by-
one, DEMO the feature most diagnostic of city size to the
feature that is least diagnostic of city size (where di-
agnosticity is calculated as the probability that the
feature will correctly signal which is the larger of DEMO
randomly chosen cities which diﬀer on this feature). As
soon as a feature is found on which the cities diﬀer
(e.g.,onecityhasasoccerteambuttheotherdoesnot),DEMO
thenthefeatureisusedtodecidewhichcityisthelarger
(the city with the soccer team) and the calculation
terminates. This means that the decision is based on a
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
65
single feature, rather than attempting to integrate all
DEMO diﬀerent featuresof the two cities; andindeed many
of the features of DEMO cities are not even considered in
the decision. Gigerenzer and Goldstein (DEMO) showed
that, despite this very frugal use of information, Take-
DEMO performs impressively. In a computational
competition using real features of German cities,
Take-the-Best performs as well as linear regression and
a range of DEMO to linear regression. Sub-
sequent computational simulation work has success-
fullygeneralizedtheseﬁndingstoaremarkablerangeof
domains, ranging from judgments of levels of home-
lessness based on features of US cities, to judgments of
houseprices,professors salaries,theamountoftime35
species of mammal spend asleep based their biological
features, and many more (Czerlinski, Gigerenzer, &
Goldstein, 1999).
Take-the-Besthasinterestingantecedentsinprevious
work in the literature of behavioral decision making.
Non-compensatorystrategies(i.e.,thosethatuseaspects
of individual features to make a decision, rather than
integrating all the features given) have been widely dis-
cussed (e.g., Einhorn, 1970, 1971; Ganzach, 1995), in-
cluding DEMO by aspects (Tversky, 1972) and the
lexicographic heuristic (Tversky, DEMO).
Morebroadly,theAdaptiveDecisionMakerresearch
program of Payne and colleagues (Payne, 1976; DEMO,
Bettman,&Johnson,1988,1990,1993;Payne,Bettman,
& Luce, 1996), has emphasized that the decision maker
can strategically choose between DEMO range of decision
making methods—many of which will be fast and fru-
gal. In the Adaptive Decision Maker framework,
though, fast and frugal algorithms are one end of a
continuum of options from which the DEMO maker
may choose—given suﬃcient time, cognitive resources
and motivation, participants may choose strategies
which integrate the information that they have been
given in DEMO elaborate ways (although not necessarily
with better decision making results). DEMO within this
traditionfocusesinconsiderabledetailontheconditions
under which particular fast and frugal methods are
applied, and under what conditions these methods are
successful (Payne et al., 1993). One diﬀerence of em-
phasis between the two approaches isthatthe DEMO
Decision Maker program has been concerned primarily
with understanding how people make choices between
options,whereGigerenzerandcolleagueshavefocussed
primarily on questions of judgment: i.e., tasks DEMO which
people have to judge, on limited information, which of
two states of the world holds. Although, from a nor-
mative point of view, the domains of choice and judg-
ment are very diﬀerent (DEMO, the normative theory
for choice is utility theory; the normative theory for
judgment is decision theory), it is quite possible that
some DEMO the underlying cognitive algorithms used the
two cases are closely related. Indeed, Tverskys (1969)
lexicographicheuristic,mentionedabove,isveryclosely
related to Take-the-Best.1
TheAdaptiveDecisionMakerframeworkstressesthe
ﬂexible DEMO of cognitive heuristics and strategies. By
contrast, Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) do not ex-
plicitly discuss whether they see Take-the-Best as a
universal cognitive algorithm, or as being selected dy-
namically by decision makers from a range of decision
making methods. But the latter position appears to DEMO
embodied in the idea of the adaptive toolbox (Gige-
renzer & DEMO, 1999b; Gigerenzer, 2000, 2001; Gige-
renzer & Selten, 2001). The adaptive toolbox is ‘‘the
collection of specialized cognitive mechanisms that
DEMO has built into the human mind for speciﬁc
domains of inference and reasoning, including fast and
frugal heuristics’’ (Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999b, DEMO 30).
GigerenzerandTodd(1999b)suggestthat,forexample,
there may be adaptive selection from within the family
of Take-the-Best-type algorithms (and presumably also
outside this family), depending on, among other things,
the kinds of factors analysed in the Adaptive Decision
Maker framework (Payne et al., 1993)DEMO We shall see, at
the end of this paper, that the empirical evidence con-
cerning Take-the-Best is most consistent with this type
of DEMO
The two parts of this article focus on general and
speciﬁc issues in turn. In the ﬁrst part, we begin by
outlining the central role for rational norms in the ex-
planation of human behavior. This DEMO for rational
norms is quite diﬀerent from that embodied in ‘‘classi-
cal’’ or ‘‘unbounded’’ rationality (Gigerenzer & Gold-
stein,1996;Gigerenzer&Todd,1999b),DEMO
underliesexplanationthroughoutmuchofthesocialand
biologicalsciences.Inparticular,wearguethatnormsof
classical rationality are crucially involved in explaining
why a particular behavior is ecologically successful.
Thus, we argue that classical and ecological notions of
rationality are complementary, rather than standing in
competition. With this analysis in mind, we reevaluate
and counter the three arguments (A)DEMO(C) that Gigeren-
zer and Goldstein (1996) give for the DEMO that an
ecological notion of rationality should replace classical
rationality. The second part of this article conducts a
new competition, between Take-the-Best and DEMO range
of algorithms based on existing cognitive architectures
widelyusedincognitivescienceandartiﬁcialintelligence,
1 Speciﬁcally, the lexicographic rule compares two choice options
byconsideringfeaturesofeachoption,onebyone,indescendingorder
ofimportance.Ifoneoption wins onaparticularfeature,itischosen;
if there is a tie, the next most important feature is chosen, and so on.
ThecorecomponentofTake-the-Bestmakesajudgmentbetweentwo
options—e.g., which is the DEMO city—by considering cues in
descending order of cue validity concerning that judgment; again, if
one option wins on a cue, it is chosen (e.g., judged to be the largest
city); if there is DEMO tie, the next most valid cue is chosen.
66
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2003) 63–86
and considers theoretical arguments which appear to
favor Take-the-Best.We conclude that, while Take-the-
Bests performance is again impressive, there is DEMO
strong reason to view Take-the-Best as having greater
cognitive plausibility than a range of other algorithms.
This competition also raises questions concerning the
relationshipbetweenresearchonjudgmentanddecision
DEMO and computational and experimental work on
basic mental processes in cognitive psychology (e.g.,
Dougherty, Gettys, & Ogden, 1999; Weber, Goldstein,DEMO
& Barlas, 1995).
2. Rationality and the explanation of behavior
DEMO have seen that some leading theorists (e.g.,
Evans & Over, 1996, 1997; Gigerenzer & Goldstein,
1996; Gigerenzer & Todd, DEMO) have argued that
classical rational principles have no useful role in DEMO
plaining everyday behavior; that classical rationality
and ecological rationality are entirely DEMO do-
mains. One implication is that classical rational prin-
ciples, of DEMO, probability, decision theory, and game
theory do not even provide DEMO standards
against which everyday behavior can be compared—
because to make such a comparison is to compare
apples and oranges. Everyday behavior is properly
DEMO by its results, rather than conformity to ab-
stract standards of DEMO If their analysis is cor-
rect, then it appears to have DEMO ramiﬁcations across
the social and biological sciences, where classical ra-
tional DEMO are frequently used to explain every-
day behavior. But, we suggest, this apparently radical
perspective is rooted in an incorrect characterization of
the DEMO that classical rational principles play in ex-
planation in the social and biological sciences. Specif-
ically, critics of the application of classical rational
principles typically assume that such principles explain
behavior by assuming that the mind DEMO rational
calculations. We believe that is a crucial mischarac-
terization of the project of rational explanation in the
social and biological sciences, which aim for rational
description, without ascribing rational calculations to
the cognitive system.
2.1. Rational calculation vs. rational description
Gigerenzer and Goldstein s characterization of the
DEMO view—that rational norms are the laws of
thought—is intended to encompass the broad sweep of
rational explanation of behavior across several disci-
plines.
From DEMO Laplace to George Boole to Jean Piaget, many
scholars have defended DEMO now classical view that the laws of
humaninferencearethelawsofprobabilityandstatistics... Fol-
lowingthistime-honoredtradition,muchcontemporaryresearch
inpsychology,behavioralecology,andeconomicsassumesstan-
dardstatisticaltoolstobethenormativeanddescriptivemodels
of inference and decision making. (p. 650)
GigerenzerandTodd(1999b,p.9)amplifythepoint:
Unbounded rationality is a strange and demanding beast. DEMO
the one hand, researchers who envision rationality in this
way accept DEMO diﬀerence between God, or Laplaces [hypothet-
ical] superintelligence, and mere mortals. Humans must make
inferences from behind a veil of uncertainty, but God sees
clearly; the currency of human thought is probabilities,
whereas God deals in certitude. On the other hand, where it
comes to how they think these uncertain inferences are exe-
cuted, those who believe in unbounded rationality paint hu-
mans in Gods image. God and Laplaces superintelligence DEMO
not worry about limited time, knowledge, computational ca-
pacities. The ﬁctional, unboundedly rational human mind does
not either...
The idea that rational explanation presupposes that
rational calculation (and implausibly vast amounts of
such calculation) DEMO conducted by the human mind ﬁts
well with Evans and Overs (DEMO, 1997) viewpoint that
classicalrationalnormsexplainanagentsbehavioronly
when the agent understands the relevant normative
justiﬁcation—thisistheirrationality2 ,above.Theirview
is that rationality2 explanation requires that an agent
possesses rational norms and can calculate their impli-
cations for the particular decision being DEMO Evans
and Over point out, echoing the quotes above, that the
complexity of these calculations is likely to exceed the
capacity of the DEMO system, for most interesting
real world reasoning problems (see also Oaksford &
Chater, 1991, 1993).
We suggest that the view that rational explanation
requires that people themselves carry out the relevant
rational calculations DEMO a fundamental mischaracteriza-
tion of how rational principles are used to explain
thoughtandbehaviorinbehavioralecology,economics,
andpsychology.Insteadofbeingcommittedtowhatwe
shall call rational calculation, researchers in these dis-
ciplines are actually committed to a very diﬀerent and
more modest claim: rational description.2;3
Rational calculation is the view that the mind works
DEMO carrying out probabilistic, logical, or decision-theo-
retic operations. Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) en-
dorse this reading of the role of rationality in DEMO social
2 Theterminologicalpictureisfurthercomplicatedbythefactthat
in discussing their competition between algorithms, Gigerenzer and
DEMO (1996) carefully deﬁne algorithms to be ‘‘rational’’—with
quotationmarks—iftheyuseallinformationalavailabletothem,andif
they combine all this information together (p. 657). Gigerenzer and
Goldsteinquitedeliberatelysetthisusageapartagainstgeneralnotions
of rationality, such as we are discussing here. To minimize confusion,
we shall not refer to ‘‘rational algorithms’’ here.
3 Therearedirectrelationsbetweenthisdistinctionandthegeneral
distinctionbetweenrule-describedandrule-followingbehavior(Chom-
sky, 1980; Hahn & Chater, 1998; Kripke, 1982).
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
67
and biological sciences, arguing that theorists in these
DEMO are implicitly committed to the view that the
mind is a ‘‘supercalculator...—carrying around the col-
lected works of Kolmogoroﬀ, Fisher, or Neyman’’ (p.
651). Rational calculation is explicitly avowed by rela-
tively few theorists, though it has clear advocates with
respect to logical inference: Mental logicians propose
thatmuchofcognitionisamatterofcarryingoutlogical
calculations(e.g.,Braine,1978;Inhelder&Piaget,1958;
Rips, 1994).
Rational description, by contrast, is the view that
behaviorcanbeapproximatelydescribedasconforming
withtheresultsthatwouldbeobtainedbysomerational
DEMO This view does not assume (though it does
not rule out) that the thought processes underlying be-
havior involves any rational calculation. An DEMO
maybeuseful:thewingsofabirdmayapproximatethe
resultsofarationalcalculationofoptimalaerodynamic
design. Moreover, this observation helps explain why
the DEMO has the structure that it does; but there is, of
course, no presumption that the bird conducts any cal-
culations in designing its wing.
Behavioralecologistsextendthispatternofbiological
explanation from anatomy and physiology to behavior.
They attempt to DEMO an animals strategies for for-
aging, defending territory, or choosing mates, by
showing that these can be approximately described as
theresultsofarationalcalculationofoptimalbehavior.
There is no presumption that the animal carries out
complex probabilistic or decision-theoretic calculations
DEMO this behavior, any more than it rationally
calculates the optimal length DEMO its incisors, or the op-
timalstructureofitslungs.Indeed,behavioralecologists
expressly disavow a rational DEMO interpretation
of their theories, as being patently at variance with the
DEMO limitations of the animals they study (e.g.,
McFarland & Houston, 1981).
Contemporary economics also aims to explain be-
havior by rational DEMO, rather than rational cal-
culation. Indeed, the emphasis in economic explanation
inthemiddleandlatterpartofthepastcenturyhasbeen
to attempt to minimize psychological claims as far as
possible (Loewenstein, 1992). For example, many nine-
teenth century theorists, drawing on the philosophical
tradition of utilitarianism, viewed utility as a psycho-
logical construct; and they hypothesized that economic
agents act in order to maximize their utility—hence at
leastsomecalculationsconcerningutilitywouldseemto
be inevitably attributed to the agent. But the twentieth
DEMO has seen the development of the revealed pref-
erence interpretation of utility (Samuelson, 1937)—
utilities are deﬁned in terms of peoples patterns DEMO
preferences.Inthisinterpretation,utilityisabehavioral
(and economically observable) construct, rather than a
component DEMO internal mental calculations. This be-
havioralapproachhasbeenextended toexpectedutility
theory (von Neumann & DEMO, 1944) and to
subjective probability (Anscombe & Aumann, 1963;
Savage, 1954). Patterns of observable choice behavior
are used to attribute utilities and probabilities to an
economic agent. Crucially, there is no assumption that
these utilities or probabilities are internal to the agent;
andhence,DEMO,thereisnoassumptionthatagents
actually engage in probabilistic or decision-theoretic
calculations.
There is, moreover, a recognition in economics that
applying rational theories, such as probability theory,
expected utility theory, and game theory will only pro-
vide an approximation model of peoples behavior.
Economists allow that ‘‘Faced with complexity, indi-
viduals resort to rules of thumb, to back of the enve-
lope calculations, to satisﬁcing behavior...’’ (Kreps,
1990, p. 119). Economists thus recognise that behavior
only approximates to rationality; but economic theory
typically idealises away from such limitations. Various
justiﬁcationsfortheseidealizationshavebeenproposed,
ranging from making a DEMO of severe idealization, so
longastheresultingtheorymakessuccessfulpredictions
(Friedman, 1953), to the DEMO that errors in individual
agents will cancel out on aggregate, to DEMO view that
errors be gradually eliminated in contexts where indi-
viduals can learn (e.g., Cyert & de Groot, 1974; de Ca-
nio, 1979), or eliminated in competitive markets (see
Akerlof & Yellen, DEMO, for theoretical analysis). There
are also those skeptical of much DEMO theory, who
areunpersuadedbyanyofthesearguments(e.g.,Nelson
& Winter, 1982; Simon, 1959). For our purposes, the
important point is that most economists interpret their
theories as about rational description, but not rational
calculation(atbest,peopleact asif theymaderational
calculations; but they do not actually perform such
calculations); and they agree furthermore that actual
behavior is only an approximation to DEMO stan-
dards.4
This leads us naturally to consider the psychology of
human reasoning, judgment and decision making. The
4 It is also true, DEMO course, that there are often many aspects of
purely descriptive psychological DEMO, e.g., of processes in catego-
rization or memory, in which DEMO aspects of the machinery of the
model is not assumed to be calculated by the cognitive system, but is
instead a description of cognitive processes. For example, in models
that involve retrieval of stored instances or traces from memory, a
measure of mental distance between present and stored item is often
usedtopredictcategorizationormemoryperformance(e.g.,Nosofsky,
1986). But it is DEMO assumed that the cognitive system does not
itself calculate this distance, DEMO more than planets need to compute
the distance between them to calculate the gravitational forces
between them. Moreover, many cognitive models are formulated in a
waythatleavesvaguethedistinctionbetweenaspectsofthemodelthat
are intended to be calculated by the cognitive system, rather than as
descriptions of its operation. We thank an anonymous reviewer for
DEMO this point.
68
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2003) 63–86
question at issue is how well people s behavior ﬁts with
rational models based on probability, expected utility
theory, or DEMO theory—and hence how far the ratio-
nality assumptions in economic models idealise away
from actual human behavior. Thus, crucially, as in
economics, the issue again concerns rational descrip-
tion—how well behavior conforms to rational descrip-
DEMO than how far people make rational
calculations. Only rarely is any attempt made to assess
whether people are actually carrying out internal prob-
abilistic, decision- or game-theoretic calculations (e.g.,
Gigerenzer & Hoﬀrage, 1995)—generally, the working
hypothesis seems to be that they are not.5
We have DEMO that theoretical economists have as-
sumed that the predictions of rational theories are only
followed to an approximation. Laboratory studies of
individual behavior, by both psychologists and experi-
mental economists, have conﬁrmed this assumption.
Indeed,theyhaverevealedthatbehaviorcanshowmany
substantial and systematic departures from normative
theories. People appear to fall for DEMO probabi-
listicfallacies(Kahnemanetal.,1982),makepredictable
logical blunders (Evans, 1982, 1989), show inconsistent
preferences with (Allais, 1953; Ellsberg, 1961) and
without (May, 1954) uncertainty, and to fail to adopt
the DEMO ‘‘Nash equilibria’’ (Nash, 1950) in game
theory (Flood, 1958; Ledyard, 1995). The practical
question of interest for theorists applying rational
principlestoexplainbehaviorisnotwhetherthemindis
carrying out the rational calculations that they postu-
late—in most cases, at least, it seems inconceivably un-
likely that this is true. Instead, the real question is
whetherandhowthebroadoutlinesofhumanbehavior
in everyday contexts can usefully be described in ra-
tional terms at all.
So, we suggest, across economics, biology, and psy-
chology, the working assumption of those producing
rational DEMO is that these explanations aim to
explain observed behavior, in terms DEMO its optimality in
relation to goals, environment, and computational re-
sources.
ToddandGigerenzer(1999,p.365),bycontrast,sum
up the ﬁndings of their research program with the
statementthat‘‘Abitoftrustintheabilitiesofthemind
andtherichstructureoftheenvironmentmayhelpusto
seehowthoughtprocessesthatforgothebaggageofthe
laws of logic and probability can solve DEMO
adaptive problems quickly and well.’’ But we would
5 There is a telling contrast here with the empirical testing of the
mentallogictheoryofdeductivereasoningmentionedabove,atheory
thatdoesconcernrationalcalculation.Intheliteratureonthistheory,DEMO
there has been considerable emphasis on attempting to show, using
error DEMO reaction time data, that the internal processes underlying
deductive reasoning involve DEMO out steps in a logical calculation
(see Rips, 1994).
suggest that proponents of rational explanation were
never committed to the idea that DEMO thought processes
themselves are weighed down by the baggage of nor-
mativemodels.Andweshallsuggestthatwhereasimple
heuristic is shown to succeed in a real-world environ-
ment,thequestionofwhyitsucceedsstillremainstobe
answered—anditishardtoseehowthisquestioncanbe
DEMO without taking up the baggage of normative
theory once more.
We shall argue that the mischaracterization of ra-
tionalexplanationinthesocialandbiologicalsciencesas
involving rational calculation, rather than just rational
description, is of critical importance. Moreover, once
the rational DEMO viewpoint is properly under-
stood, the fundamental attacks on the relevance DEMO ra-
tionalnormsinexplainingbehaviorlosetheirforce.We
therefore now turn to spelling out a methodology for
explanation by rational description, which has been
crisply expressed in Anderson s (DEMO) methodology of
‘‘rational analysis.’’
3. Rational analysis: A methodology for the rational
description of behavior and cognition
3.1. Rational and algorithmic explanations of DEMO
Human inferential behavior is spectacularly success-
ful. In the face of severe memory and time constraints,
the cognitive system vastly outperforms the most DEMO
phisticated artiﬁcial intelligence systems inalmost every
real-world domain (see, e.g., DEMO, 1987; Pearl,
1988). Two fundamental questions must be addressed.
First, why is inference successful? Following Anderson
(1990), we characterize answers to this question as ex-
planations at the rational level. Second, how is this
success achieved? Again following Anderson (1990,
1991), we characterize answers to this question as ex-
planationsatthealgorithmiclevel(Marr,1982)—i.e.,by
specifying the computational procedures involved in
inference, such as Take-the-Best and the other algo-
rithms in Gigerenzer and Goldsteins competition.
3.2. Rational analysis
DEMO central idea underlying explanation at the ra-
tional level is that, DEMO cognition is well adapted to
achieving a goal in some environment, DEMO it can be
describedasapproximating,tosomedegree,theoptimal
solution to achieving that goal in that environment.
Providing a rational level explanation requires specify-
ing the goals DEMO the system, the structure of the envi-
ronment, and formally deriving an optimal solution for
achieving the goal in that environment. An elegant
DEMO for constructing such explanations has
been formulated in the context of cognitive psychology
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
69
in Anderson s concept of rational analysis.6 Andersons
approach involves six steps:
1. Specify precisely the goals of the cognitive DEMO
2. Developaformalmodeloftheenvironmenttowhich
the system is adapted.
3. Make minimal assumptions about computational
limitations. [Sometimes minimal assumptions will
be no assumptions at all—this step is DEMO op-
tional.]
4. Derive the optimal behavior function given 1–3
above.[Thisrequiresmathematicalanalysisusingra-
tionalnorms,suchasprobabilitytheoryandexpected
utility theory.]
5. Examine the empirical evidence to see whether the
DEMO of the behavior function are conﬁrmed.
[Note crucially that the goal is to use the rational
analysis to predict and describe behavior. Thus, the
rational calculations in Step 4 are not assumed to
be carried out DEMO the cognitive system. This is what
makes rational analysis a theory of rational descrip-
tion, rather than rational calculation.]
6. Repeat, iteratively reﬁning DEMO theory.
As we will see below, this pattern of explanation is
DEMO appropriate to characterizing classical rational
explanation in economics or behavioral ecology.
In the following three sections, we illustrate rational
and algorithmic explanation by reference to speciﬁc
examplesfrompsychologyandthesocialandbiological
sciences, showing how such explanation appears to un-
dermine each of Gigerenzer and Goldsteins (1996) ar-
guments (A)–(C). For each argument, we outline its
basis in Andersons account of rational analysis (1–6
above),andexemplifythesepointsfrompsychologyand
other areas of the social and DEMO sciences.
3.3. Ecological considerations
Advocatesofecologicalviewsofrationality(Evans&
Over, 1996, 1997; DEMO & Goldstein, 1996; Gige-
renzer & Todd, 1999a) make much of the contrast be-
tween everyday human behavior, the success of which
must be judged in the context of a speciﬁc andcomplex
environment, and abstract classical principles of ratio-
nality,whichappeartobejustiﬁedapriori,andhenceto
embody no constraints concerning DEMO reasoning envi-
ronment.Inshort,theconcernisthatclassicalprinciples
6 Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) argue that Andersons (1990)
frameworkforrationalanalysisisanexampleofclassicalrationalityin
psychology. More speciﬁcally, Gigerenzer and Todd (1999a) classify
Anderson s (1990) rational analysis as rationality subject to con-
straints. See Oaksford and Chater, 1998b for a collection of recent
work in this tradition; and Chater and Oaksford, 2000, relating the
methodology to other philosophical positions concerning rationality
and behavior.
of rationality are unecological,DEMO and hence inappropri-
ate as standards of real-world reasoning.
But, as DEMO have seen, a central element of rational
analysis is modeling the DEMO at an appropriate
level of idealization (Andersons Step 2). The DEMO
mental success of inference is explained to the extent
that it approximates the optimal behavior function
(Anderson s Step 4) derived by applying DEMO prin-
ciples to the environmental problem. Consequently, on
this view, rational principles and environmental success
are complementary, and not in opposition. In psychol-
ogy,thisisfamiliarfromperception,whererationallevel
theory (Marrs computational level) involves detailed
modeling of DEMO visual environment. Only then can op-
timal models for visual processing of that environment
bedeﬁned.Indeed,Marr(1982)explicitlyalliesthislevel
of explanation with Gibson s ‘‘ecological’’ DEMO to
perception (Gibson, 1979), where the main focus is on
environmental structure.
Similarly, in behavioral ecology, environmental ide-
alizations of resource DEMO and replenishment of
food stocks, patch distribution and time of day DEMO
crucial to determining optimal foraging strategies
(Gallistel, 1990;McFarland &Houston,DEMO;Stephens
& Krebs, 1986). And in economics, idealizations of the
‘‘environment’’ are crucial to determining rational eco-
nomicbehavior(McCloskey,1985).Inmicroeconomics,
DEMO the environment (e.g., game-theoretically) in-
volvescapturingtherelationbetweeneachactorandthe
environment of other actors DEMO exogenous variables
(Kreps, 1990). In macroeconomics, explanations using
rational DEMO theory (Muth, 1961) begin from a
formal model of the DEMO, as a set of equations
governing macro-economic variables.
In summary, environmental analysis cannot replace
rational norms as an explanation of why behavior is
DEMO In rational explanation in psychology, be-
havioral ecology, and economics, DEMO environmental
modeling and rational principles are required.
Whereasinsomecontexts,Gigerenzerandcolleagues
consider environment analysis as a possible alternative
to explanation in terms of rational norms, in other
contexts,environmentalanalysisisviewedasapotential
add-on to rational explanation. Gigerenzer and Todd
(1999b, DEMO 11), for example, state that ‘‘in Andersons
rationalanalysisframework(Anderson,1990;DEMO
& Chater, 1994) constraints from the environment are
used to modify ones understanding of what is optimal
behavior in a particular context.’’ We DEMO argue in-
stead that, without constraints from agents goals and
environment (and, optionally, computational con-
straints) the notion of optimal behavior is simply
ill-deﬁned—the goals and environment deﬁne the opti-
mizationproblem.Inparticular,then,itismisleadingto
think DEMO constraints from the environment modifying
ones understanding of optimal behavior, as DEMO
70
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2003) 63–86
and Todd suggest. Without a speciﬁcation of the struc-
ture of the environment, optimal behavior is not well
deﬁned.
Although Gigerenzer and Goldsteins (1996) and
Evans and Overs (1996, 1997) arguments do not un-
dermine rational explanation in psychology, their ar-
guments do have a genuine target. Their emphasis on
the environment does count against DEMO
accounts of human inference, which ignore content and
context. Part of DEMO reason for this is the attempt to
devise empirical tests of descriptive rational theories
which are independent of speciﬁc beliefs or utilities,
which DEMO led to a focus on internal consistency of be-
haviorinhighlyartiﬁcialconditions,ratherthanonhow
behavior meshes with the environment. Reasoning that
may appear poor in an ecologically DEMO laboratory
context may be highly adaptive in the natural environ-
ment, DEMO has been extensively argued (Gigerenzer, Hell,
&Blank,1988;Gigerenzer&DEMO,1995;Gigerenzer
&Murray,1987;Oaksford&Chater,1991,1993,1998a;
Oaksford, Chater, & Stenning, 1990). Thus, it is im-
portant to stress the environmental context in which
reasoning takes place in order to DEMO everyday
human inference (Oaksford & Chater, 1995).
3.4. Cognitive limitations
If rational explanation in the social and biological
sciences is assumed to DEMO rational calculation, then
this style of explanation seems to run into DEMO
problemsofcomputationalcomplexity.EvansandOver
(1997) note that problems of computational complexity
bedevil rationally-based theories in the psychology of
reasoning; and Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) argue,
as we have already noted, that classical rational expla-
nation requires the assumption that the mind is a ‘‘su-
percalculator.’’
But if we DEMO the view that we have been advo-
cating, that rational explanation DEMO be understood
in terms of  rational description rather than rational
calculation, then these concerns about computational
complexity disappear. To be sure, in rational analysis,
derivingtheoptimalbehaviorfunction(AndersonsStep
4) is frequently very complex. Indeed, DEMO relevant ra-
tional theories in which these calculations are made,
includingprobabilitytheory,expectedutilitytheoryand
logic are typically computationally intractable for
complex problems (Cherniak, 1986; Garey & Johnson,
1979; Good, 1971; Paris, 1992; Reiner, 1995; Stanovich
& West, 2000; Stich, 1990). Intractability results imply
that no computer algorithm could perform the relevant
calculations given the DEMO time and memory limita-
tions of a ‘‘fast and frugal’’ cognitive system. Thus it
might appear that there is an immediate contradiction
between the DEMO of the cognitive system and the
intractability of rational explanations.
There is no contradiction, however, because the op-
timalbehaviorfunctionisanexplanatory tool, not part
ofanagent scognitiveequipment.Toextendourearlier
analogy, the theory of aerodynamics is a crucial com-
ponentofexplainingwhybirdscanﬂy.Butclearlybirds
know nothing about aerodynamics, and the computa-
tional intractability of aerodynamic calculations does
not in any way prevent birds from ﬂying. Similarly,
people do DEMO need to calculate their optimal behavior
functions in order to behave adaptively. They simply
havetousesuccessfulalgorithms;theydonothavetobe
abletomakethecalculationsthatwouldshowthatthese
algorithms are successful.
This viewpoint is standard DEMO rational explanations
across a broad range of disciplines. Economists do not
assume that people make complex game-theoretic or
macroeconomic calculations (Harsanyi & Selten, DEMO);
zoologists do not assume that animals calculate how to
forage DEMO (e.g., McFarland & Houston, 1981);
and, in psychology, rational analyses of, for example,
memory, do not assume that DEMO cognitive system cal-
culates the optimal forgetting function with respect to
the costs of retrieval and storage (Anderson & Milson,
1989; Anderson & Schooler, 1991). Such behavior may
bebuiltinbyevolutionorbeacquiredviaalongprocess
oflearning—butitneednotrequireon-linecomputation
of the optimal DEMO
In some contexts, however, some on-line computa-
tions may be required. Speciﬁcally, if behavior is highly
ﬂexible with respect to environmental variation, DEMO
calculation is required to determine the correct behav-
ior, and this DEMO may be intractable. Thus the
two leading theories of perceptual organization assume
thatthecognitivesystemseekstooptimizeon-lineeither
the simplicity (e.g. Leeuwenberg & Boselie, 1988) or
likelihood(vonHelmholtz,1910/1962;seePomerantz&
Kubovy,1987)oftheorganizationofthestimulusarray.
Thesecalculationsarerecognizedtobecomputationally
intractable (see Chater, DEMO). This fact does not inval-
idatethesetheories,butitdoesentailthattheycanonly
be approximated at the algorithmic level. Within the
literature on perceptual organization, there is consider-
able debate concerning the nature of such approxi-
mations, and which perceptual phenomena can be
explained in terms of optimization, and which result
from the particular approximations that the perceptual
system adopts (van der Helm & Leeuwenberg, 1996).
More generally, where on-line computations of ra-
tional thoughtorbehaviorisrequired,DEMO
traditional rational models depends on the (often im-
plicit) assumption that theoretical predictions of ra-
tional theories are reasonably stable if the optimization
DEMO is weakened. For example, in economics,
weakeningsofrationalassumptionshavebeenarguedto
not just preserve DEMO basic pattern of predictions of
economic models, but to enrich them (e.g., by distin-
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
71
guishing viable from non-viable equilibria consistent
with rationality assumptions, van Damme, 1991; Hars-
anyi&Selten,1988).7 Inbehavioralecology,ithasbeen
argued that many phenomena can only be fully under-
stood by showing how DEMO limitations of the animals
cognitive abilities interact with the goal of optimization
(see, e.g., Brunner, Kacelnik, & Gibbons, 1992; Kacel-
nik, 1998; Todd & Kacelnik, 1993). In sum, psycholo-
gists, economists, and behavioral ecologists using
rational explanation do not claim that the mind
has unlimited computational power, and they do not
have to.
Rational level explanation, like all scientiﬁc expla-
nations of complex phenomena, involves DEMO sim-
pliﬁcations. Psychologists, economists, and zoologists
have pursued optimality approaches in the hope that
idealizing away from cognitive limitations may provide
anapproximate,andinsightful,DEMO
human or animal behavior. The hope is that, by ignor-
ing DEMO on rationality, just as physicists some-
times ignore friction, a useful idealization may be
possible (Roth, 1996). Whether this hope will DEMO
justiﬁedisthereallocusofdebateconcerningoptimality
models in psychology, economics and behavioral ecol-
ogy(see,e.g.,DEMO,Colombatto,Perlman,&Schmidt,
1996; Simon, 1992, for discussion). Both advocates and
detractors of perfect rationality idealizations agree that
computational limitations DEMO, and must form part of
anycompleteexplanationofhumanoranimalbehavior.
That is, they agree that the mind is not a Laplacean
demon.8
Interestingly, Gigerenzer and Todd (DEMO) ac-
knowledge that advocates of classical rational explana-
tion typically accept DEMO cognitive limitations are real:
‘‘Proponents of unbounded rationality generally ac-
knowledgethattheirmodelsassumethathumansactas
if they were unboundedly rational. On this interpreta-
tion,thelawsofprobabilitydonotdescribetheprocess
but merely DEMO outcome of reasoning.’’ (Gigerenzer &
Todd, p. 9). This DEMO entirely consonant with the present
view—and seems to undercut their concern with the
cognitive complexity of rational explanation. We pre-
sume that Gigerenzer and DEMO (1999b) would argue
that the as if interpretation of rational explanation
(which we would endorse) is, in some way, illegitimate;
DEMO showing this would seem to be of substantial
7 Theconcernhasbeenraised,however,thatcertainweakeningsof
rationalityassumptionscanhavemoredrasticconsequencesonoverall
system-level predictions (e.g., Akerlof & Yellen, 1985).
8 Indeed, to the extent that Stanovich and Wests (2000) position
that normative results are often obtained by a many cognitively able
individuals,itcouldbearguedcomputationallimitationscannotbetoo
overwhelming DEMO obstacle to normative, or near-normative, perfor-
mance. We thank an anonymous reviewer for raising this point.
importance for their position. They do not, however,
discuss this issue further.
The concerns over computational complexity that
DEMO and Goldstein (1996), and Evans and Over
(1996, 1997), raise do have a genuine target: psycho-
logicalmodelsofinferencewherenormativetheoriesare
interpreted as models DEMO mental calculation, not merely
behavioral description. The paradigm example of such
DEMO are mental logic theories in the psychology of
reasoning, which regard DEMO syntactic proof theory for
logic as the basis of the algorithms that implement
logical inference in the mind (e.g., Braine, 1978; Fodor
& Pylyshyn, 1988; Rips, 1994). However, these algo-
rithms are intractable and therefore cannot apply to
complexities of real-world contextualized inference
(Chater&Oaksford,1990;Cherniak,1986;McDermott,
1987; Oaksford & Chater, 1991)DEMO Consequently, con-
siderations of cognitive limitations and computational
complexity are primarily DEMO at the algorithmic le-
vel, ruling out computationally intractable implemen-
tations DEMO rational calculi such as logic as models of
humaninferentialprocesses.Buttheseconsiderationsdo
not undermine the role of these calculi in rational level
description.9
3.5. Take-the-Best as an DEMO proof
The main body of Gigerenzer and Goldsteins attack
on the role of classical rational norms in understanding
real-world reasoning and decision making is DEMO to
providing an existence proof ‘‘... that cognitive mech-
anisms capable of successful performance in the real
world do not need to satisfy the DEMO norms of ra-
tional inference’’ (p. 650). They therefore conclude DEMO
providing algorithms alone can be regarded as an al-
ternative to the standard approach to rational expla-
nation that we have been arguing for DEMO this article.
We argue instead that Take-the-Best illustrates that
successful rational algorithms can be developed, before
a rational explanation for why they work has been de-
veloped.10 From this perspective, rather than standing
9 Oaksford and Chater (1991, 1995) point out than an even more
seriousproblemforlogic-basedtheoriesofinferenceisthattheydonot
predict people s common sense reasoning behavior, and therefore fail
at the rational level. Oaksford and Chater (1994) therefore propose
diﬀerent rational explanations which DEMO claim provide a better
explanation of common sense reasoning and data from laboratory
tasks.Theydonotassume,however,thattheirrationallevelaccountis
directly implemented (Oaksford & Chater, 1998a).
DEMO The opposite pattern, where rational explanations of behavior
haveproceededwithoutconsideringhowtheymightbeapproximated
by cognitive DEMO, is also common, whether in social behavior
(Crawford, Smith, & Krebs, 1987; Messick, 1991), economics (e.g.,
Muth,1961;vonNeumann& Morgenstern, 1944)oranimalbehavior
(Maynard-Smith & Price, 1973).
72
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2003) 63–86
as a lone existence proof Take-the-Best stands in an
illustrious tradition.
Let us consider three examples of psychological in-
terest: associative learning, connectionist models and
statistical tests.
First, the Rescorla–Wagner learning rule DEMO asso-
ciative learning (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972) was devel-
opedwithoutanyclear DEMO ofwhyitleads
to successful learning. But such an analysis has been
provided, DEMO that thealgorithm asymptotically
approximates the optimal solution in a normative
probabilistic account of causal reasoning (Cheng, 1997;
Shanks, 1995a, 1995b).
DEMO, connectionist models typically embody al-
gorithms that are shown to learn DEMO task, without a
rational explanation of why that learning is successful.
DEMO example, in the study of reading, connectionist
models mapping from orthography to phonology,11
(e.g.,Bullinaria,1994;Plaut,McClelland,Seidenberg,&
Patterson, 1996; Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989) learn
to read aloud eﬀectively, DEMO not based on a ra-
tional theory of the orthography-phonology mapping,
orhowitshouldbelearned.Butthesesuccesseshaveled
to a large research program of providing a rational ex-
planation DEMO connectionist learning (e.g., Chater, 1995;
Mackay,1992;McClelland,1998;DEMO,1993),aswellas
theoretical analysis of the orthography-phonology
mapping (Brown, 1998)DEMO
Third, the history of statistical tests used in psy-
chologyshowsthewidespreaduseoftestsascalculating
algorithms, before a rational analysis of the conditions
underwhichtheyapplyhasbeendeveloped(Gigerenzer
& Murray, 1987). In response to this, a range of statis-
tical theories have been developed to provide a rational
basisforpracticalstatisticalalgorithms(e.g.,Bernado&
Smith, 1995).
In each case, where algorithms have proved practi-
cally successful in the absence of an obvious rational
basis, this has triggered a search to provide a rational
explanation for why the algorithm is successful. We
DEMO that, analogously, Gigerenzer and Goldsteins
impressive demonstration of the success of Take-the-
Best should lead to a search for a rational analysis of
DEMO,ratherthantheconclusionthatrational
explanation is dispensable.
Indeed, recent important work by Gigerenzer and
DEMO (e.g., Martignon & Hoﬀrage, 1999; Marti-
gnon & Laskey, DEMO) suggests that there may be no
fundamental dispute on this issue. DEMO provide a rig-
orous formal analysis of the conditions under which
Take-the-Best succeeds. Thus, they provide a descrip-
tive rational explanation for the success of Take-the-
Best s behavior, using standard normative principles to
do so.
Thus, Take-the-Best stands as an outstanding ex-
ample of how a fast and frugal algorithm can succeed
in the real world, and exempliﬁes that environmental
success does not require that the cognitive system en-
gages in DEMO calculation using probability or sta-
tistical theory. But this does not challenge the use of
descriptive rational theories, to explain why algorithms
are successful—and, as noted above, Gigerenzer and
colleagues have themselves provided such an DEMO
of the success of Take-the-Best. Thus, once it is
recognized that DEMO explanation in psychology,
economics or behavioral ecology involves rational de-
scriptionratherthanrationalcalculation,itisclearthat
the success of Take-the-Best does not undermine, but is
consistent with, rational explanation in these disci-
plines.
3.6. Counterarguments and replies
We have argued that rational explanation has a
central role in the social and DEMO sciences—it
provides descriptions of behavior as approximating ra-
tionally optimal behavior, DEMO a speciﬁc problem, en-
vironment, and (possibly) set of cognitive limitations.
We close this section by brieﬂy responding to two pos-
sible DEMO of counterargument: (1) that the iterative as-
pect of rational DEMO (Step 6) betrays a fundamental
diﬀerence with respect to normative rational theories
undertestinthepsychologyandeconomicsofjudgment
and decision making; (2) that appeal to evolutionary
considerations provides an alternative answer to ques-
tions of why cognition succeeds, obviating the need for
rational explanation.
3.6.1. Iteration and rational norms
It might DEMO that the iterative step in Andersons
rational analysis (Step 6) betrays a fundamental dif-
ference between the program of rational analysis of
behavior DEMO norms of classical rationality, as used in
economics, psychology, or DEMO ecology.12 The
norms of classical rationality have been derived by a
priori analysis, typically from deriving normative the-
ories from seemingly incontrovertible axioms or as-
sumptions. For example, probability theory can, for
example, be justiﬁed by a range of (converging) argu-
ments, such as the Dutch book theorem, which states
(given certain assumptions) that if a persons judg-
ments violate the laws of probability theory, they will
accept a bet that they will certainly lose (which seems
11 We take no stand here on whether such models are compatible
with detailed psychological and DEMO data. See, e.g.,
Coltheart, Curtis, Atkins, and Haller (DEMO) for discussion.
12 Wethankananonymousreviewerforpointingoutthispossible
concern.
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
73
undeniably irrational). If logic, probability theory, ex-
pected utility theory, and game theory, are justiﬁed by
a priori DEMO, then it would seem that they cannot
be iteratively modiﬁed, in order to provide better ﬁts
with empirical phenomena (as Andersons Step 6 im-
plies).
This argument is, however, misleading. The modiﬁ-
cation DEMO in Anderson s Step 6 does not typically
involve modiﬁcation to the rational norms themselves
(i.e., modiﬁcation of the calculating machinery used at
DEMO Step 4)—a radical option suggested, for ex-
ample, by Cohen (1981). Rather, it involves modiﬁca-
tionsatSteps1–3—arevisedformulationofthegoalsof
the agent, the environment, or cognitive limitations. In
explaining foraging behavior, for example, the behav-
ioral ecologist may improve the rational description by
noting that the animal DEMO not merely to maximise
food intake, but to minimise variance in DEMO intake
(e.g., to avoid the risk of obtaining very little food on
some occasions with perhaps life-threatening conse-
quences). The same behavioral DEMO may incorpo-
rate a richer model of the environment, incorporating,
DEMO example, the length and temperature of the night
timeperiod(thiswillpartlydeterminewhatlowerbound
on DEMO intake is acceptable if the animal is to survive
the night); and the behavioral ecologist may also note
thatthe animalcan only monitorthe amount DEMO it
has obtained with Weberian accuracy, which also im-
pacts on DEMO foraging strategy (see Brunner et al., 1992).
Parallel examples from economics and psychology have
the same form. Crucially, Andersons Step 6 is not
typically concerned with modifying, e.g., the laws of
probability. Hence DEMO suspected clash with a priori ra-
tional norms does not typically arise.
Tosumup,theiterativeaspectofrationaldescriptive
modelling need not involve tinkering with apparently
incontrovertiblenormsofreasoning.Instead,itinvolves
iteratively DEMO the empirical assumptions, con-
cerning the agents goals, environment, and DEMO
limitations, which are an input to rational calcula-
tions.13
3.6.2. Evolution DEMO an alternative ‘‘why’’ explanation
One line of research that is often perceived as allied
with the ecological view of cognition, and hostile to
13 In economics, there is, interestingly, work which does seek to
challenge norms of rationality on the basis of empirical data, thus
challenging the very premise of the claim that iterative modiﬁcation
does not ﬁt with DEMO a priori character of rational norms. The
motivation underlying this challenge is that rational norms are
ultimately justiﬁed only insofar as they capture human DEMO
behavior (e.g., Cohen, 1981). For example, it has been argued that
Allais s paradox undermines the normative status of expected utility
DEMO,andthatthetheoryshouldberevisedtoﬁtwithourintuitions
(see Allais, 1953; Chew,1983; Fishburn,1983; Kahneman& Tversky,
1979; Loomes & Sugden, 1982; Machina, 1982).
DEMO rationality, is evolutionary psychology (e.g.,
Barkow, Cosmides, & Tooby, 1992; Pinker, 1998). In-
deed, both Evans and Over (1996) and Gigerenzer and
Goldstein draw on evolutionary considerations in de-
veloping their accounts of ecological rationality. This
raises the critical question of whether DEMO ex-
planation might provide an alternative explanation for
why cognitive mechanisms succeed in their environ-
ments—an explanation that can replace explanations
that invoke classical DEMO
Perhaps natural selection has ensured that our cog-
nitive algorithms succeed; DEMO perhaps our learning
mechanisms have simply favored algorithms that work.
But explanations in terms of evolution or learning do
not explain why speciﬁc cognitive DEMO are adap-
tive. Instead, they explain why we possess adaptive ra-
DEMO than non-adaptive algorithms—essentially because
adaptivealgorithms,bydeﬁnition,performbetterinthe
natural environment, and processes DEMO natural selection
or learning will tend to favor algorithms that are suc-
cessful.
Let us illustrate this point with an example from a
domain DEMO which evolutionary explanation is widely
accepted. An account of optimal foraging in behav-
ioral ecology may explain why particular foraging
strategies are successful and DEMO are not. Behavioral
ecologists assume evolution explains why animals
possess good foraging strategies, but do not take
evolutionary explanation to provide an alternative to
the rational level explanation given by optimal forag-
ing theory.
There is, though, a way of sharpening this concern
further,inthe light oftheiterative characterofrational
analysis, that we dealt with above.14 This is that the
process of iteratively developing a rational analysis
might have much in common with the DEMO reﬁne-
ment of the algorithms employed by the cognitive sys-
tem,duringbiologicalevolution.Indeed,onemighteven
suppose that the parallel between the meta level of
theoretical evolution DEMO the process of biological
evolution might be strong—after all, each involve DEMO
cessive modiﬁcations in order to provide a better ﬁt
between environment, DEMO and computational re-
sources. This might suggest (although spelling out a
DEMO argument is not straightforward) that devising
an explanation of some behavior DEMO terms of rational
analysis will only be possible where some evolutionary
process can lead to the corresponding algorithm. And
this might further suggest that DEMO explanation in terms
of rational analysis will work only when a parallel
evolutionary explanation would serve equally well.
We suggest that, nonetheless, an DEMO ex-
planation is not an alternative explanation of why a
14 We thank an anonymous reviewer for raising this point.
74
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2003) 63–86
cognitive algorithm is successful. Evolutionary expla-
nationsarebasedonthefactthatcertainalgorithmsare
more successful than others (where success is measured
in terms of contribution to the inclusive ﬁtness of the
individual with that algorithm). But we still DEMO to
address the question of why some algorithms are suc-
cessful in the environment, whereas some are not. An-
swering thisquestionrequiresanalysingthestructureof
the environment, DEMO goals of the agent, and studying
howthesegoalscanbeachievedgiventhatenvironment.
In short, it involves rational level explanation. This
suggests that rational explanation addresses a diﬀerent
question DEMO evolutionary explanation. Rational expla-
nation is required to explain why a particular cognitive
algorithmsucceeds(givenparticulargoals,environment,
and computational limitations). Evolutionary explana-
tion DEMO how the diﬀerential success of diﬀerent
algorithms can lead to the gradual predominance of
successful algorithms, through a process of natural se-
lection. These are fundamentally diﬀerent questions,
and hence it is not appropriate to DEMO evolutionary
explanation as a potential alternative to rational expla-
nation.
3.7. Summary
We have consideredthree lines ofargument thataim
to undercut the role of rational DEMO in under-
standing everyday judgment and decision making. For
eachargument,wehavefoundpointsofagreement:We
endorse the emphasis on the environment and on cog-
nitivelimitations,andonﬁndingsimplealgorithmsthat
work DEMO in the real environment. But we have argued
that these positive points are entirely consistent with
‘‘classical rationality,’’ as it is used to DEMO behavior
in the social and biological sciences. Indeed, we argue
thatrationalexplanationisalwaysdesirable:DEMO,
the adaptive success of cognitive algorithms is left un-
explained.
It is worth noting that the consequences of rejecting
rational level explanation would DEMO alarming. The very
idea that human thought can be understood as reason-
ing rather than as a collection of uninterpreted proce-
duresinvolvestheassumptionthatsomerationalnorms
are being DEMO (see Newell, 1982; Oaksford &
Chater, 1995). Giving DEMO the idea that thought involves
reasoning has catastrophic implications, not just DEMO
psychology, but more broadly: Assumptions of (ap-
proximate) human rationality are at the core of ‘‘ra-
tional choice’’ explanations in the social DEMO and
economics (e.g., Elster, 1986) and appear to underpin
the attribution of meaning both to mental states and to
natural language (Davidson, 1984; Quine, 1960). For-
tunately, these alarming consequences need DEMO be
faced.WhereasGigerenzerandGoldsteinarguethatthe
cognitivesystemisfastandfrugal,butdoesnotadmitof
rational explanation; we argue instead that cognition DEMO
fast, frugal and can be explained in rational terms.15
4.HowPlausibleisTake-the-Best?
DEMO now turn to the question of the plausibility of
Take-the-Best as a model of cognitive estimation. We
presentanewcompetitionbetweenTake-the-Bestanda
rangeofstandardalgorithmsusedincognitivemodeling
in psychology, and ﬁnd that Take-the-Bests perfor-
mance is impressive. We agree with Gigerenzer and
Goldstein (1996, 1999) that Take-the-Best is a serious
contender as a model of DEMO kind of cognitive estima-
tion.
Weargue,though,thattherearegroundsforcaution.
Take-the-Bestperforms well in city size estimation (and
in a wide range of other domains, Czerlinski DEMO al.,
1999), and at a level comparable with human perfor-
mance. On the other hand, as we shall see later, the
DEMO evidence for Take-the-Best is not clear cut.
Gigerenzer and Goldsteins case for the cognitive
plausibility of Take-the-Best has three components: (1)
Take-the-Bestperformswelloncitysizeestimation(DEMO
other tasks); (2) Take-the-Best is fast; (3) Take-the-Best
DEMO frugal (i.e., it uses relatively little information from
memory).
We suggest that none of these points provide strong
grounds for presuming that DEMO is more
plausible than a range of other algorithms. Speciﬁcally,
we argue: (1) that many standard algorithms perform
comparably with Take-the-Best; (2) that these algo-
rithmsmaybejustasfastasTake-the-Best;and(3)that
frugality in terms of informational retrieval may not
confer any advantage in terms of cognitive plausibility.
DEMO begin by reviewing Take-the-Best and Gigerenzer
and Goldsteins original competition.
4.1. Gigerenzer and Goldstein’s competition
Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996, 1999) consider a
range of algorithms for comparing the populations of
pairs of cities, based on a list of features of each city.
They show thataverysimple algorithm,Take-the-Best,DEMO
performs as well as ‘‘various rational decision proce-
15 The argument is complicated here by the fact that Gigerenzer
and colleagues argue that rationality DEMO be used in an ecological
sense, rather than in a normative DEMO, a mental process is
ecologically rational if it just works even DEMO there may, putatively, be
no normative explanation for why it works. Hence, in common with
the present view, they embrace the conclusion DEMO fast and frugal
algorithms can also be rational—e.g., ‘‘models of reasoning DEMO not
forsake rationality for psychological plausibility...’’ (Todd & Gige-
renzer, 1999, p. 365). But clearly this conclusion has very diﬀerent
implications from ours, precisely because rationality has been
decoupled from normative explanation.
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
75
dures’’ (p. 650). As we noted in DEMO introduction, Take-
the-Best discriminates the size of cities by sequentially
consideringindividualfeatures(DEMO
onafeature).Thefeaturesareconsideredindescending
orderofthevalidityofeachfeatureforcitysize–theﬁrst
featureintheorderonwhichthecitiesdiﬀerdetermines
the judgment concerning which city has the larger
population.
Gigerenzer and Goldstein s ﬁve comparison algo-
rithmsarelinearregressionandvariousapproximations
to linear multiple DEMO (‘‘tallying,’’ ‘‘weighted tal-
lying,’’ the‘‘unitweighted linear model,’’the ‘‘weighted
DEMO model’’). The most important comparison is be-
tween Take-the-Best and multiple regression, for two
reasons. First, the other algorithms are approximations
to DEMO regression, and hence would be expected to
show comparable (or poorer) levels of performance—if
Take-the-Best can match multiple regression, it is likely
DEMO match or exceed the performance of the other algo-
rithms. Second, DEMO a vast range of tasks, from clinicians
predicting the outcomes of DEMO patients to bankers
predicting the viability of companies, linear regression
performs DEMO well as, and often better than, human ex-
perts (e.g., Einhorn, 1972; Libby, 1976; Meehl, 1954;
Sawyer, 1966)DEMO
It is crucial, though, to recognise that multiple re-
gression has a very diﬀerent status from the normative
laws of logic, expected utility, or probability. Whereas
these laws are candidates for universal rational princi-
ples, which can be given a priori justiﬁcation, this is
deﬁnitely not DEMO case for multiple regression. Multiple
regression requires that diﬀerent pieces of information
combine linearly, and this is known to be appropriate
only in a very restricted set of cases. The restricted
character of linear regression is DEMO recognized in the
psychologicalliterature.Indeed,muchresearchhasbeen
concerned with exploring when cues are integrated lin-
early, and when they are integrated non-linearly (e.g.,
Hammond & Summers, 1965), and with clarifying the
conditions under which linear DEMO works well in
practice,evenifitsunderlyinglinearityassumptions are
violated(e.g.,Dawes&Corrigan,1974).Thelimitations
of linear regression have also motivated the vast statis-
tical literature on DEMO non-linear regression meth-
ods, including projection-pursuit regression (Intrator,
1993), regression using multilayer connectionist net-
works (Neal, 1993)16 and exemplar-based DEMO
methods (Duda & Hart, 1973). Multiple regression is a
pragmatically useful tool, which works well under re-
stricted conditions. The results of multiple regression
16 For those familiar with connectionism, it may be useful to note
that multiple regression is mathematically closely related to the single
DEMO perceptron; connectionistresearch was largely abandoned in the
late 1960s partly becausethis DEMO couldlearn suchas limited range
ofproblems(Minsky&Papert,1969;Rumelhart&McClelland,1986).
cannot,therefore,beviewedasembodyingprinciplesof
rationality deﬁning ‘‘correct’’ reasoning, despite this
impression sometimes being given in research in the
literature.17
Gigerenzer and Goldstein present computer simu-
DEMO that compare these algorithms. Take-the-Best
and the other methods learn on a subset of cities
(which are therefore ‘‘known’’), and it is ‘‘tested’’ on
the entire set of cities. Speciﬁcally, Take-the-Best
learns cue validities from the initial subset, from which
the ordering and signiﬁcance of cues is derived. The
generalization performance of Take-the-Best and three
of the alternative algorithms, linear regression, tallying
and weighted tallying are almost identical. These sim-
ulations provide an interesting and useful set of com-
parisons in a psychologically DEMO yet tractable
domain. Gigerenzer and Goldstein argue that the good
performance of Take-the-Best in their competition,
and its speed, is evidence for its cognitive plausibility.
But we will argue that the more general and psycho-
DEMO familiar algorithms that we now consider are
at least as cognitively plausible as models of city size
estimation.18
4.2. A new competition
Thealgorithmsweconsideraredrawnfromtherange
of DEMO methods used in cognitive psychology and
artiﬁcial intelligence research, rather than DEMO in
statistics. We suggest that these kinds of models may
usefully be viewed as null hypotheses against which
morespecializedalgorithms(suchasTake-the-Best)can
be compared.
The DEMO algorithms are exemplar-based, and assume
that people store previous examples, and judge new
examples in relation to their similarity to stored exam-
ples. DEMO methods are general with respect
todomain:Theyhavebeenwidelyusedinpsychological
models of categorization (e.g., Nosofsky, 1986) and
memory (e.g.,Hintzman, 1986), andare related DEMO non-
parametric statistical methods which have been exten-
sively applied in statistics, pattern recognition and
artiﬁcial intelligence concerned with both classiﬁcation
17 We thank an anonymous reviewer for raising this issue.
Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) DEMO this distinction by using
explicitly putting ‘‘rationality’’ in inverted commas when referring to
the linear regression and its variants, which integrate information
across all features, but using the term without inverted commas when
referring to putatively universal rational norms such as probability
theory or logic.
18 Although these DEMO are general, and psychologically
familiar,thesealgorithmshavenotransparentrelationshiptorational
analysis—althoughtheprojectofexplainingtheperformanceofneural
network and exemplar models DEMO rational terms is now quite well
developed, as touched on brieﬂy DEMO (e.g., Chater, 1995; McClel-
land, 1998; Mackay, 1992; Neal, 1993; Nosofsky, 1990).
76
and interpolation problems (Duda & Hart, 1973; Par-
zen, DEMO; see Ashby & Alfonso-Reese, 1995, for dis-
cussion).Theyarealsoextremelygeneralwithrespectto
thestructureofthedatatheycanhandle(DEMO&Hart,
1967).19 Interestingly, moreover, an exemplar-based
modelofmemoryandgeneralization(Hintzmans(1984,
1988), MINERVA2 model) has recently been used as
thebasisforaninﬂuentialrecentmodeloftheprocesses
underlying probability judgments (Dougherty et al.,
1999), as well as the PROBEX model of probabilistic
inference (Juslin & Persson, 2001).
The DEMO type of algorithm is the multilayered,
feedforward neural network, trained DEMO back-propaga-
tion (Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1986). Like ex-
emplar models, these models are very general with
respecttodomain. Thisisshown bythevastamount of
psychological and applied research using these methods
across a range of problem DEMO (Christiansen, Chater,
& Seidenberg, 1999; Rumelhart & McClelland, DEMO).
They are also very general with respect to the structure
of the data that they can handle, being able to deal, for
DEMO, with highly non-linear mappings, and map-
pings that mix rules and exceptions (e.g., Seidenberg &
McClelland,1989),althoughthelimitsofthisgenerality
are not clear.
DEMO third type of algorithm is a standard classiﬁca-
tionlearningalgorithmfrommachinelearningresearch,
theC4.5decisiontreemodel,whichhasbeenusedacross
awiderangeofproblemdomains.Ithasalsobeenused
toalimiteddegreeinpsychologicalmodelling(e.g.,Ling
& Marinov, 1993, 1994).20
4.2.1. Representation DEMO data
Gigerenzer and Goldstein represent each city as a
vector of nine binary (0 or 1) cue values. To facilitate
comparison between algorithms, we represented each
19 Ofcourse,thecognitiveplausibilityofthesealgorithmscanalso
bechallenged,e.g.,onthegroundsthattherequirementthatpastcases
are retrieved imposes DEMO unreasonable memory load on the cognitive
system. Advocates of exemplar models might respond by suggesting
that retrieval of quite a small subset of items DEMO memory would
produce very similar results. But, from the present point DEMO view, we
note simply that this class of algorithms is widely DEMO in cognitive
modeling in categorization and memory, and hence is presumably
DEMO, at least by its advocates, as cognitively plausible. The same
point applies to the other classes of algorithms in our competition.
20 One DEMO between Gigerenzer and Goldsteins simulations
andthosereportedhereisthatwehaveassumedthatpeopleonlyhave
to compare familiar cities. Gigerenzer and Goldstein considered cases
in which some cities might not be recognized, and used their
‘‘recognitionprinciple’’todealwiththiscase.Therecognitionprinciple
is that cities whichare recognizedareassumedto be largerthan cities
which DEMO not recognized. Gigerenzer and Goldstein allow all the
algorithms in their competition to use this principle. In these
simulations, we consider only the case where all cities and all features
of each city are known, and hence the recognition principle is not
relevant (because all cities are recognized).
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2003) 63–86
pairofcitiesbyninefeaturesrepresentingthediﬀerence
between the nine cue values for each city. For example,
forthecitieswithfeatures(1,1,0,0,1,0,0,1,DEMO)and(1,
0,1,1,1,0,1,1,0),DEMO
would be (0, 1, )1, )1, 0, 0, )1, 0, 1). Each pattern is
associated with a DEMO indicating whether the popula-
tionoftheﬁrstcitywassmallerthan,equalto,orlarger
than, the population of DEMO second city. This change of
representationhasnoeﬀectonTake-the-Best.Takingall
pairs of distinct cities in both orders yielded a possible
83  82 ¼ 6806 training patterns.
In DEMO to capture the eﬀects of limited knowledge,
wetrainedeachofthealgorithmsonasubsetofthe6806
comparisons. In Fig. 1, the percentage of training ex-
amples refers to the percentage of these comparisons
presented during the training of each algorithm. The
values shown DEMO Fig. 1 are for generalization perfor-
mance, for predicting the outcome DEMO all 6806 compar-
isons. This approach allowed the algorithms to be
assessed on an equal footing.
4.2.2. Take-the-Best
As described by Gigerenzer and Goldstein, the cue
validityforeachfeaturewascalculatedasthefractionof
training examples in which the feature correctly picked
out DEMO larger city divided by the total number of
training pairs on which that feature diﬀered between
cities. The cue validities determined the order in DEMO
features are considered by Take-the-Best, and the ﬁrst
featureinthisorderthatdiscriminatedbetweenthetwo
cities was DEMO to be the models answer.
4.2.3. Exemplar-based models
We used two exemplar-based models: Nearest
Neighbor (e.g., Cover & Hart, 1967) and the General-
ized Context Model (Nosofsky, 1990). In both models,
DEMO are the diﬀerence patterns, representing the
diﬀerence between the features for DEMO of cities. As
notedabove,eachdiﬀerencepatternisassociatedwitha
label indicating whether the ﬁrst or second city in the
pair is larger.
In the nearest neighbor algorithm, the diﬀerence
pattern associated with each test pair is constructed.
Thus, each pattern corresponds to a point inside in a
nine dimensional hypercube, with values on each di-
mensiontakingvalues )1,0,or1.Thenearestdiﬀerence
pattern associated with a training pair of cities is then
selected. If this diﬀerence pattern is associated DEMO the
ﬁrst city of the training pair being larger, then the DEMO
gorithm responds that the ﬁrst city of the test pair is
larger; and similarly if the second city of the training
pair is larger, then the algorithm responds that the sec-
ond city of the test pair is larger. Distance between
diﬀerence patterns is measured by the Euclidean DEMO
tance metric (i.e., the square root of the sum of the
squared distance along each dimension).
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
77
Fig.1.Resultsofthecompetition.PercentageofcorrectinferencesaboutthepopulationsofGermancitiesasafunctionofpercentageofcitiesseen in
training.
The Generalized Context Model (Nosofsky, 1990) is
similar to Nearest Neighbor, but the response is deter-
DEMO,ratherthan
justthenearesttrainingpair.Theinﬂuenceofatraining
pair is determined by its similarity to the test example.
Speciﬁcally, the inﬂuence of each training pair is a
Gaussianfunctionofitsdistancefromthetestexample,
again using a Euclidean distance metric. In practice, in
thismodel,whichcityisjudgedtobethelargerdepends
on the inﬂuence of possibly several nearby diﬀerence
patterns, rather than just the nearest diﬀerence pattern,
as in the Nearest Neighbor algorithm. The Generalized
Context DEMO has adjustable parameters concerning
the relative weighting of each feature, and DEMO allows a
parameter for response bias. For simplicity we did not
include such parameters, and thus each feature was
weighted equally, and there DEMO no response bias. We
included just one adjustable parameter, the standard
DEMO
Gaussian determines the narrowness of the search
amongthediﬀerencespatterns.Ifthestandarddeviation
issmall,thentypicallyonlythenearestitemwillhaveany
substantial inﬂuence on the judgment, and hence the
results of the algorithm become identical with the
NearestNeighboralgorithm.Ifthestandarddeviationis
large,thenmanydiﬀerencepatternshavesomeinﬂuence
(although that inﬂuence still diminishes with increasing
distancefromthediﬀerencepatternrepresentingthepair
ofcitiesaboutwhom thejudgmentisbeingmade).This
standard deviation was optimized straightforwardly by
measuring the DEMO score for many diﬀerent
values andchoosing thebest.
It might be thought that, by not allowing free choice
for the other parameters in the Generalized Context
Model,weunreasonablydisadvantagedtheGeneralized
Context Model. Certainly, if these additional parame-
ters are adjusted freely, post hoc, in order to obtain the
highest level DEMO accuracy, a modest improvement in
performance is obtained. On the other DEMO, however,
this improvement is wiped out if we train the DEMO
ters on only some of the city comparisons, and then
generalize DEMO the remaining comparisons. That is, it
appears that the slight advantage DEMO using these pa-
rametersisdueto overﬁtting. Hence,inthesimulations
shown, we decided to DEMO such complexities and set
theparametervaluestobeequal(thespeciﬁcﬁxedvalue
chosen for all of these parameters is arbitrary).
It turns out, moreover, that performance is remark-
DEMO thatare
chosen. This is appears to be an analog of the ﬂat
maximum phenomenon that is found for linear regres-
sion for similar problems: that quite large variations of
regression weights in a linear model lead DEMO remarkably
similar levels of performance.
4.2.4. Feedforward connectionist network
Weusedathree-layerfeedforwardnetworkwithnine
input units, two hidden units, and one output unit,
trainedusingthebackpropagationalgorithm(Rumelhart
& DEMO, 1986). The inputs were the diﬀerence
patterns, and the output corresponded to the decision
aboutwhichcityislarger.Thetargetvaluesfortheout-
put were 0, .5, and 1, for smaller, equal to, and bigger,
respectively. Weights were initialized DEMO random values
within the range ().5, .5). The net DEMO trained for 100
epochs (passes through each training sample), with DEMO
learning rate of .01, and a momentum of .9 (these pa-
rameterswerenotadjustedtoobtaingoodperformance—
the parameter values used in the simulations reported
hereweretheﬁrstvaluesthatweused).Theorderofthe
training DEMO was randomized within each epoch.
Duringtest, outputvalues less than .5were classiﬁed DEMO
78
‘‘smaller,’’ and values greater than .5 were classiﬁed as
larger. DEMO results that we obtained appear to be insen-
sitivetothespeciﬁcchoicesofparameters(e.g.,numbers
ofhiddenunits,learningrate,momentum,etc.).
4.2.5. Decision trees: C4.5
The decision tree algorithm, C4.5 (Quinlan, 1993),
wasusedtoconstructadecisiontreeonthebasisofthe
nine features of the diﬀerence DEMO At the top level
of a decision tree the feature that best distinguishes
smaller from larger cities isused todivide thediﬀerence
patternsintotwogroups.Onegroupputativelycontains
thepairsofcitiesforwhichtheﬁrstcityisthelarger,the
other DEMO putatively contains the pairs of cities for
which thesecondcity is the larger. Classiﬁcation on the
basis of this single diﬀerence feature will be wrong DEMO
some city pairs. Therefore at the next level in the tree,
another feature can be used to subdivide these cases.
The leaves of DEMO decision tree are associated with a
‘‘decision’’—thattheﬁrstorsecondcityisthelarger.The
number of levels and mode of construction of the deci-
sion tree is determined by an information-theoretic
DEMO See Quinlan (1993) for a detailed description
and source code for the C4.5 algorithm.
LikeTake-the-Best,decisiontreesuseasmallnumber
of features, rather than integrating all the features.
However, whereas Take-the-Best relies on a single cue,
decision trees may make reference to several cues in
navigating through the tree to DEMO a decision. The
precise way in which this is done is somewhat complex
(Quinlan,1993);nonetheless,theapproachisofinterest,
partly because it has been DEMO applied in other
psychological contexts (Ling & Marinov, 1993, 1994)DEMO
5. Results and discussion
The performance of Take-the-Best is again impres-
sive: it outperforms the other algorithms where limited
data is available, and DEMO almost as well, when
most or all relevant data is available.21
DEMO that, that the overall levels of performance
across many simulations algorithms DEMO very similar.
Combined with Gigerenzer and Goldsteins observation
that Take-the-Best had almost exactly the same perfor-
manceproﬁleastallying,weightedtallyingandmultiple
regression, this suggests that this population estimation
task is a poor discriminator between algorithms.22 The
21 WethankGerdGigerenzerforstressingtheimportanceofTake-
the-Bests DEMO with limited data.
22 Persson and Juslin (1999) provide important additional simula-
tions on this task, showing very similar performance levels for
PROBEX, an exemplar-based algorithm, ridge regression, and Take-
the-Best. Both PROBEX and ridge regression outperform Take-the-
Best for small amounts of data in these DEMO
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
familiar cognitive algorithms used in this competition
arewidelyusedtomodeldatafrom otherdomains,DEMO
match Take-the-Best s performance in Gigerenzer and
Goldsteinscognitiveestimationtask.Itwouldtherefore
seem that these widely used cognitive models have a
comparablelevelofprimafacieplausibilityasTake-the-
Best as potential cognitive models in DEMO city size esti-
mation task. There results are also broadly in line with
recent results from Gigerenzer s laboratory, in which
Take-the-Bestisfound toperformnearlyaswellastwo
Bayesian statistical methods: so-called na€ıve Bayes,
which assumes (typically incorrectly) that all cues are
conditionally independent given the outcomes values
(i.e.,whichcityisthelarger);DEMO,bycontrast,acutting-
edge Bayesiannetwork learningalgorithm(speciﬁcally,
an algorithm developed by Cooper & Herskovits, 1992;
Friedman & Goldszmit, 1996; see Frey, DEMO; Pearl,
1988). Successful performance by Take-the-Best was,
moreover, found to hold across the wide range of data
sets used by DEMO et al. (1999).
GigerenzerandGoldstein,however,arguethatTake-
the-Best is particularly attractive DEMO it is fast (it
involves a small number of serial processing DEMO) and
frugal (it draws on very limited information, because it
DEMO non-integrative). We now argue that neither consid-
eration straightforwardly gives Take-the-Best an ad-
vantage over the available alternatives.
5.1. Is Take-the-Best especially fast?DEMO
GigerenzerandGoldsteinarguethatTake-the-Bestis
faster than the other algorithms in their competition, in
terms DEMO the amount of information searched in mem-
ory. The possibility therefore arises that Take-the-Best
maybe preferabletothegeneralpurposealgorithmswe
have considered on grounds of speed. There are DEMO
points to consider.
First, very rapid integration of vast amount of DEMO
formation is believed to occur in language processing,
perception,motorcontrol,andcommonsensereasoning,
as we shall discuss in the next subsection. Therefore
there seems DEMO reason to suppose that integrative pro-
cessingcannotbefastenoughtoaccountforpresumably
relatively slow human responses in cognitive estimation
tasks such as city size estimation. Without empirical
evidence concerning DEMO performance on the cogni-
tive estimation task, and in particular without DEMO
mation about how rapidly people might perform it, the
emphasis on DEMO as a deciding factor between algo-
rithms may be inappropriate.
Second, DEMO and Goldsteins measure of
speed, which favors Take-the-Best, depends on speciﬁc
assumptions about the architecture of the cognitive
system (Chater & Oaksford, DEMO; Oaksford & Chater,
1991, 1993, 1995). On a DEMO architecture, in which it
may be presumed that information is searched DEMO
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
79
memory at a constant rate, Take-the-Best would be
DEMO,forexample,multipleregression,orthe
neural network model and exemplar accounts we have
considered here. But in a parallel architecture, speed of
processingwillnotgenerallyberelatedtotheamountof
informationsearchedinmemory,becauselargeamounts
of information can be searched in memory simulta-
neously. So, for example, DEMO the learning and appli-
cation of multiple regression can be implemented in
parallelusingaconnectionistnetworkwithasinglelayer
ofconnections.Thisimplementationcouldoperatevery
rapidly—inthetimeittakestopropagateactivityacross
one layer of connections (e.g., Hinton, 1989). Similarly
the back-propagation account could also be rapidly
implemented in parallel, in connectionist hardware. In
the same way, in an instance-based architecture, where
DEMO can be retrieved in parallel, the Nearest
NeighborandGeneralContextModelalgorithmswould
be the quickest.
DEMO literally, the sequential character of Take-the-
Best might even make it DEMO rather slow algorithm, if
implemented in these architectures, although fast par-
allel implementations of Take-the-Best may be possible
(e.g.,usingexponentiallydistributedweightsonasingle
layerneuralnetwork,sothateachweightdominatesthe
sum of all smaller weights—see Martignon & Hoﬀrage,
1999).Inanycase,Take-the-Bestonlyappearstohavea
clearadvantageoverotheralgorithmsifweassumethat
DEMO processes are serial. Given that there are ex-
tensive research programs aimed at establishing the vi-
abilityofinstance-basedandconnectionistarchitectures
as general accounts of cognitive architecture (e.g., Ko-
lodner, 1993; Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986), it seems
DEMO considerable caution must be used in applying a
measure of speed which presupposes a serial architec-
ture.
5.2. Is frugality an advantage?
Take-the-Bestisundoubtedlyaveryfrugalalgorithm.
DEMO than integrating all the information that it is
given (all the DEMO of the cities), it draws on only
enoughfeaturevaluesto breakthetie betweenthetwo
cities. For example, across Gigerenzer and Goldsteins
(1996) simulations, only about DEMO/3 of features were re-
trieved. But does the frugality of Take-the-Best make it
more cognitively plausible? Comparison with other do-
mains suggests that it may not.
In other cognitive domains, there is a considerable
evidence for the integration of multiple sources of in-
formation.Forexample,inspeechperception,thereisa
wealth DEMO experimental work showing rapid integration
ofdiﬀerentcues,includingcuesfromdiﬀerentmodalities
(e.g., Massaro, 1987)DEMO This integration even appears to
obey law-like regularities (e.g., Morton, DEMO), which
follow from a Bayesian approach to cue integration
(Movellan & Chadderdon, 1996), and can be modelled
by neural network learning DEMO (Movellan & McC-
lelland, 1995). Recent work on sentence processing has
alsoshownevidencefortherapidintegrationofmultiple
‘‘soft’’constraintsofmanydiﬀerentkinds(MacDonald,
Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994; Taraban & McClel-
land, 1988). Motor coordination is a very diﬀerent do-
main in which a vast number of constraints must be
rapidly and simultaneously DEMO in order to plan a
successful action (Jeannerod, 1988). Finally, Brunswick
(1934) provided a wide range of examples where diﬀer-
ent sources of information appear to be integrated in
judging,forexample,theweightorvalueofacollection
of DEMO (see Gigerenzer & Murray, 1987: p. 66 for dis-
cussion)DEMO
Two points from these examples are relevant to the
cognitive plausibility of Take-the-Best. First, the ability
to integrate large amount of information may be cog-
nitively quite natural—and hence it is at least not to be
DEMO
or exemplar-based models should count against their
cognitive plausibility. Second, the DEMO above ap-
pear to require rich and rapid information integration,
which cannot be handled by a non-integrative type of
algorithmsuchasTake-the-Best.Thusanon-integrative
algorithmsuchasTake-the-Bestmaybeataprimafacie
disadvantage with DEMO to the generality of its cog-
nitive performance.
A possible objection to this viewpoint may be that
evidence for rapid integration of large amounts DEMO in-
formation in perceptual and motor domains does not
necessarily carry over to the kind of reasoning involved
ina judgmenttask, suchas deciding which oftwo cities
is the larger.23 Perhaps, in such a task, retrieval from
DEMO is slow and sequential, and hence rapid infor-
mation integration cannot DEMO This is an important
possibility, which would need to be supported DEMO de-
tailed empirical work on how people make city size es-
timates, and related judgments. Moreover, there is
evidencefromrelatedchoicetasksthatpeoplemayfocus
on a restricted amount DEMO information, rather than at-
tempting to integrate many pieces of information.
DEMO,though,notethatinmostareasof
everyday reasoning (e.g., reasoning about each others
behavior, DEMO about the physical world) it seems
that very large amounts of DEMO are rapidly re-
cruited (e.g., Oaksford & Chater, 1991, 1998a)—indeed,
the amount of knowledge recruited appears to be in-
deﬁnitely DEMO, as the frame problem in artiﬁcial in-
telligence and cognitive science DEMO to show
(Pylyshyn,1987).Itseemsreasonabletoviewestimating,
say, the approximate size of a city as a speciﬁc example
of everyday inference, and hence to assume that large
23 We thank Gerd Gigerenzer for pointing out this DEMO
80
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2003) 63–86
amounts of information from memory can be retrieved
andappliedrapidlyinthiscasealso.Ifso,theremaybe
no strong reason to favor cognitive algorithms that are
frugal.
Building DEMO the ideas of Payne et al. (1993) and Gi-
gerenzer and Todd (1999a), one might postulate that
whether or not frugality is a relevant constraint for a
cognitive algorithm depends on the nature of DEMO task.
Perhaps, for example, the cognitive system is able to
bring to bear very large amount of information in par-
allel when that DEMO is already known (and per-
haps even heavily overlearned); but DEMO there are
strong limitations on the deployment of such informa-
tionwheninformationmustbe loadedin tomemoryin
the experimental task. This kind of division would ex-
plain why, on the one hand, it appears possible to de-
ploy and integrate vast amounts of information in
perception,motorcontrol,andcommonsenseinference,
whereas the amount DEMO information that can be inte-
grated and deployed in some explicit judgment tasks is
severely limited (e.g., if an experimental participant is
given DEMO list of properties or cues of an object, loading
these into DEMO, let alone integrating them together,
may be slow and diﬃcult)DEMO This may reconcile the ap-
parent severe limits of the cognitive system (e.g., Payne
et al., 1993; Shepard, 1967) with its DEMO impres-
sive information integration performance (e.g., Ander-
son, 1981). DEMO viewpoint is consistent with the idea
that ‘‘Higher order cognitive mechanisms can often be
modeled by simpler algorithms than can lower order
mechanisms’’ (Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999a, p. 31), with
the proviso that this DEMO only to higher order
mechanisms for which there is severe bottleneck of in-
formation uptake.
Ifthisisright,thisopensuptheintriguingpossibility
that apparently minor variations of the judgment DEMO
to which Take-the-Best has been applied (Czerlinski
et al., 1999; DEMO & Goldstein, 1996) may have
diﬀerent psychological characteristics. Where the back-
ground cues thatarebeingdrawnupon arepartof the
priorgeneralknowledgeoftheexperimentalparticipant,
one might not expect limitations DEMO information inte-
gration to be severe. On the other hand, where DEMO cues
arenotpartoftheparticipant sbackgroundknowledge,
and are explicitly provided to the participant in the ex-
periment, one might expect information uptake would
belimited,andhencethatthecognitivealgorithmwould
be limited. Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) are not
explicit about which scenario DEMO would take to be
most appropriate for testing Take-the-Best, or whether
DEMO should apply in both cases. As we shall discuss in the
next subsection, subsequent experimental work has fo-
cused on cases where cues are not part of the back-
ground knowledge of the participant in experimental
DEMO testing the approach (perhaps the most favorable
conditionsforTake-the-Best).Thisisessentiallybecause
it allows DEMO experimenter to control the cues that par-
ticipants can use, and DEMO validity of these cues.
Atminimum,then,itseemsthattheconditionsunder
which frugality is a crucial constraint on judgment are
not straightforward, and hence that there is no auto-
maticadvantageofasimplenon-integrativeand frugal
algorithm such as Take-the-Best over alternative cog-
nitive algorithms (such as we considered in our new
competition above) that do allow information integra-
tion.
Overall, we may conclude that issues both of speed
andfrugalityarediﬃculttoassessoutsidethecontextof
speciﬁc assumptions aboutcognitive architecture.For a
serial processor, with very limited memory capacity,
searchingoneitematatimemayoptimisespeed,andbe
appropriately frugal. But for a connectionist network,
DEMO information integration may be very rapid; and
integration all available information DEMO be computa-
tionally just as easy, or even easier, than frugally
choosing only the most important information.
5.2.1. Empirical evidence for Take-the-Best
We DEMO considered computational evidence that
Take-the-Best performs well in relation to a range of
cognitive algorithms, in judgments in the city size esti-
mation task. We now turn to consider empirical evi-
dence. This evidence can be DEMO direct and indirect.
Indirect evidence concerns the degree to which there is
independent empirical motivation for the underlying
principles upon which Take-the-Best is founded, in re-
lation to rival cognitive models. Here, the picture is
unclear.
On the one hand, the tradition of empirically suc-
cessful models of choice using non-integrative methods
(e.g., Payne et al., 1993; Tversky, 1969, 1972) and the
fact that, under some circumstances at least, people
appear to be able to focus only on a limited amount of
information (e.g., Shepard, 1967), provides some inde-
pendent motivation for the underlying principles in
Take-the-Best and related models. Moreover, as a rule-
based system, Take-the-Best can draw on a long tradi-
tion of rule-based proposals concerning cognitive
architectures (e.g., Anderson, 1983; Newell, 1991—al-
though the speciﬁcs of these architectures are quite
distantly related to Take-the-Best)DEMO
On the other hand, as we have discussed the other
models DEMO our competition also have been used across
othercognitivedomains,andarehereappliedwithlittle
modiﬁcation (whereas DEMO is speciﬁcally con-
structedinordertoperformthiskindofjudgmenttask).
Most notably, the now vast tradition DEMO detailed cogni-
tive psychological modeling using connectionist meth-
odssuggeststhatconnectionistprinciplesarguablyhave
a strong empirical basis (e.g., Christiansen & Chater,
2001; MacLeod, Plunkett, & Rolls, 1998; Rumelhart &
McClelland, 1986).
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
81
In the absence of clear evidence concerning the em-
piricalplausibilityoftheprinciplesunderlyingTake-the-
Bestvs.rivalalgorithms,weturntothedirectempirical
evidence.24
Working in Gigerenzer s laboratory, Rieskamp and
Hoﬀrage (1999) attempted to gather relevant empirical
evidence,inthecontextofataskinwhichpeoplehadto
judge the most DEMO of four companies, on the
basis of six cues. Unlike the DEMO size case, described
above,thecuesherearerealvalued,ratherthanbinary:
share price, recognition rate (i.e., what proportion of
people have heard of the company), DEMO, share
capital, investment and number of employees. The
sample in the experiments was taken from information
about 70 German companies. Cue validities (which are
heredeﬁnedslightlydiﬀerentlyfromthecuevaliditiesin
the city size case) were given to the participants (DEMO
were visible throughout the experiment). The experi-
mentaltaskwastosampleinformationfromamatrixof
companies and their properties, by clicking on a cell in
thematrixwithamouse—onlyonepieceofinformation
wasvisibleatatime.RieskampandHoﬀragefoundthat
peoplesampledinformationquitefrugally(i.e.,theydid
not exhaustively sample the entire matrix, even when
they had time to do so). Moreover, they tended to
sample information cue-wise—i.e., they DEMO a partic-
ular cue, and then sampled the values of each DEMO
on that cue. Rieskamp and Hoﬀrage note, though, that
theirdatadoesnotproviderichenoughevidencetoback
up Take-the-Best, at least when considered on its own.
Perhaps most fundamentally, DEMO algorithms
appear to be severely disadvantaged from the outset,
because the information can only be sampled sequen-
tiallyinthisexperimentalparadigm.Moreover,cue-wise
sampling seems to be DEMO on almost any algo-
rithm, assuming that participants have poor base DEMO
estimatesforthevariouscues,sothattheyhavenoway
of interpreting the likely signiﬁcance of, say, the abso-
lute value of the share capitalization of one company,
without assessing DEMO in relation to other companies.
More generally, the complexity of the DEMO be-
tween strategies for information integration, and opti-
maldataselectionmethods(Berger,1995;DEMO,1956;
Oaksford & Chater, 1994) geared to those strategies is
24 Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) and Goldstein and Gigerenzer
(1999)note that there is empirical evidencefor anaspect of the Take-
the-Best strategy, the recognition principle. Although important, this
evidence for the recognition principle does not bear on their compe-
tition, because they allow that the recognition principle is combined
with allthealgorithmsin theircompetition. Similarly,the recognition
principle is not relevant DEMO present competition, because we consider
the case where all cities (and their features) are known, so that the
recognitionprincipleisnottriggered.Soempiricalevidenceconcerning
therecognitionprincipledoesnot provideempiricalevidence that DEMO
help decide between rival competitors, with similar levels of ecolog-
ical success.
suﬃciently great, that it seems unlikely that this source
of data will be decisive. Nonetheless, Rieskamp and
Hoﬀrages results certainly appear compatible with
Take-the-Best, as well as a broad range of other algo-
rithms.
AmoredirecttestofTake-the-Bestwasperformedby
Br oder (2000). His experiment involved three phases: a€
periodoftraining,DEMO
validities from experience; the core phase of experi-
mental judgments; and a ﬁnal phase, in which partici-
pantswereexplicitlyaskedaboutcuevalidities,tocheck
that they had learned them successfully. Broder used€
carefullycraftedsetsofcues.Thecriticalvariableinthe
experiment was the whether dominated cues (i.e., cues
that should never be assessed, if cues are sampled in
DEMO)agreedordisagreewiththe dominant
cue.AccordingtoTake-the-Bestthevaluesofthesecues
should be irrelevant, because people will not sample
DEMO Nonetheless, Broder found substantial eﬀects of€
thesecues,aggregatedacrosshisparticipantpopulation.
Br oder also DEMO careful statistical analysis of in-€
dividual participants behavior, and argued that DEMO sub-
stantial number of participants (28% in one study; 53%
in another) do roughly conform to Take-the-Best (or,
more generally, some kind of non-compensatory deci-
sionstrategy—thesemightincludedecisiontrees,asused
in the competition above). These DEMO areconsistent
with the idea that non-compensatory strategies, such as
Take-the-Best may DEMO among the heuristics available to
the adaptive decision maker (Payne et DEMO, 1993) or
present in the adaptive toolbox (Gigerenzer & Selten,DEMO
2001).
Similarconclusionswerereachedinastudyofaclose
variantofTake-the-Best(theMatchingHeuristic)inthe
context of judgments concerning whether defendants
should, or should not, be given bail, where participants
werelaymagistratesintheEnglishlegalsystem(Dhami
& Ayton, 2001). The Matching Heuristic was found to
provide the best ﬁt to data from a substantial minority
of magistrates, when compared to two integrative al-
gorithms. Again, this suggests that non-compensatory
algorithms may be among the cognitive strategies that
peoplecanuse,althoughitalsosuggeststhatpeopleare
able to integrate information.25 DEMO a complementary
study,inamedicalcontext,theMatchingHeuristicwas
found to do as well as logistic regression in describing
Englishdoctorsdecisionsaboutprescriptions(Dhami&
Harries, 2002).
25 Note, DEMO, that this latter conclusion is not straightforward
to infer once one DEMO the possibility of noise in the process of
orderingthecuestobeassessed.Thiswouldalsoleadtotheapparently
non-compensatory patterns in Broder€ s study, because dominated
cues would be sampled on some occasions, and hence could inﬂuence
participants decisions.
82
Finally, Newell and Shanks (2001) built on Broder€ s
(DEMO) studies. Speciﬁcally, participants had to buy cue
values that they could use to help them decide which of
twoshareswouldhavethebestpayout(theexperimental
set-up and cover DEMO was borrowed from Broder€ s
experiments 3 and 4). According to Take-the-Best, one
might expect that people would buy just enough infor-
mation to allow them to discriminate the two shares
(i.e., to break DEMO tie between the two), and then would
buy no further information. However, people typically
boughtagreatdealmoreinformationthantheyneeded,
althoughsomeparticipantswenttotheoppositeextreme
of undersampling information, and hence DEMO on
many trials. Although the conditions used by Newell
and Shanks appeared well suited to engaging the Take-
the-Best heuristic (e.g., information could DEMO be sam-
pled sequentially) there appeared to be large individual
variation DEMO performance, with few participants con-
forming at all closely to the DEMO of Take-
the-Best.
Overall, the state of the empirical evidence is DEMO
There seems some tentative reason to believe that
Take-the-Best, or some DEMO non-compensatory
heuristic, may be among the strategies that people can
adopt (Broder, 2000; Dhami & Ayton, 2001; Rieskamp€
& Hoﬀrage, 1999); but there seems to be large indi-
vidual variation, and, DEMO at least one study (Newell &
Shanks, 2001), a DEMO ﬁt between detailed patterns of
behavior with the predictions of Take-the-Best. Note,
in particular, that the other algorithms that we con-
sidered in the competition above (e.g., connectionist,
exemplar-based and decision-tree models) have not
been explicitly compared with empirical data. Given
the closely related performance DEMO all these algorithms
(together with traditional statistical algorithms related
to linear DEMO), discriminating between these em-
pirically represents an important challenge for future
work.
5.2.2. Summary
In this section, we have argued that familiar and
widely applicable cognitive algorithms give comparable
resultstoTake-the-Bestonthecitysizeestimationtask,
and are at least DEMO plausible on grounds on speed and
frugality. Moreover, we suggest that DEMO is not pres-
ently suﬃcient empirical evidence to tip the balance in
favor of Take-the-Best—and indeed, much of the em-
piricalevidenceappearstofaceTake-the-Bestalgorithm
with some challenges. Overall, then, the algorithms in
our competition, which are well established in psychol-
ogy and artiﬁcial intelligence, appear at least as cogni-
tivelyplausibleasTake-the-Best.Moreover, thecurrent
empiricalevidencedoeslittletohelpresolvetheseissues.
So far, it appears that Take-the-Best may capture the
DEMO
alternative models might fair in relation to the same
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
DEMO,itseems
reasonable to conclude that Take-the-Best is not a uni-
versal cognitive algorithm for judgment tasks; but the
data is consistent with it being an element of the
adaptive toolbox that participants have available to
them (Gigerenzer, 2001).
A more general implication of this discussion is that
there may be scope for a broader interchange between
researchonjudgmentanddecisionmaking,andgeneral
cognitive DEMO research. It has been persuasively ar-
gued that rich experimental techniques may be usefully
imported into judgment and decision making research
from cognitive psychology (e.g., Dougherty etal., 1999;
Payneetal.,1993;Weberetal.,1995);wesuggestthatit
may also be useful to import the general purpose
cognitive architectures and algorithms DEMO have been
developed within cognitive science and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we have argued for two claims. First,
we have argued that standard notions of rational ex-
planation in psychology and DEMO biological and social
sciences are not undermined by recent challenges. This
pattern of explanation involves providing rational de-
scriptions which explain why behavior is DEMO,
rather than viewing the mind as a probabilistic or
statistical calculating machine. The standard notion of
rational explanation: (A) stresses rather than ignores
the environment; (B) takes cognitive limitations into
account; and (C) allows that algorithmic theories may
run ahead of rational explanation, DEMO Take-the-Best
illustrates. Second, we have argued that familiar cog-
nitive algorithms DEMO the performance of Take-
the-Best on the city size estimation task, DEMO may be
equally plausible in terms of speed, memory require-
ments, and, currently, empirical evidence. We also
emphasise the importance of the DEMO of providing
rational descriptive explanations that can explain
when and why the cognitive system is adaptively suc-
cessful.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank DEMO Gigerenzer, Alex Ka-
celnik, Michael Bacharach and three anonymous re-
viewers for helping to substantially strengthen this
paper. Nick Chater was partially supported DEMO a small
grant from the British Academy, by a Senior Research
DEMO from BT, by European Commission Grant
RTN-HPRN-CT-1999-00065, by the Human Frontiers
ScienceProgram,theESRC,theLeverhulmeTrust,and
by Oliver, Wyman & Company.
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
83
References
Akerlof,G.,&Yellen,J.(1985).Cansmalldeviationsfromrationality
make DEMO diﬀerences to economic equilibria? American
Economic Review, 75, 708–720.
Allais, M. (1953). Le comportement de lhomme rationnel devant le
risque: DEMO des postulats et axiomes de lecole americaine.
Econometrica, 21, 503–546.
Anderson,J.R.(1983). The architecture of cognition.Cambridge,MA:
Harvard University Press.
DEMO, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Anderson, J. R. (1991). Is human cognition adaptive? Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 14, 471–517.
Anderson, J. R., & Milson, R. (1989). Human memory: An adaptive
perspective. Psychological Review, 96, 703–719.
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (DEMO). Reﬂections of the
environment in memory. Psychological Science, 1, 396–408.
Anderson,N.H.(1981). Foundations of information integration theory.
New York: Academic Press.
Anscombe, F., & Aumann, R. (1963). A deﬁnition DEMO subjective
probability. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 34, 199–205.
Arrow, K. DEMO, Colombatto, E., Perlman, M., & Schmidt, C. (Eds.)DEMO
(1996). The rational foundations of economic behavior. London:
Macmillan.
DEMO, F. G., & Alfonso-Reese, L. A. (1995). Categorization as
probability density estimation. Journal of Mathematical Psychol-
ogy, 39, 216–233.
Ayton, P. (2000). Do the birds and bees need cognitive reform?
Behavioral and Brian Sciences, 23, 666–667.
Ayton, P., & Hardman, D. (1997). Are two rationalities better than
one? Current Psychology DEMO Cognition, 16, 39–51.
Barkow, J., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1992). The adapted mind:
Evolutionary psychology and the DEMO of culture. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Berger, J. O. (1995). Statistical decision theory and Bayesian analysis.
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Bernado,J.M.,&Smith,A.F.M.(1995). Bayesiantheory.Chichester,
Sussex: Wiley.
Braine, M. D. S. (1978). On the relation between the natural logic of
reasoning and standard logic. Psychological Review, 85, 1–21.
best’’heuristicasamodelofhumanprobabilisticinference. Journal
of DEMO Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 26,
1332–1346.
Brown, G. D. A. (1998). The endpoint of reading instruction: The
ROARmodel.InJ.L.Metsala&DEMO(Eds.), Wordrecognition
in beginning literacy (pp.121–138).Mahwah,NJ:Erlbaum.
Brunner,DEMO,Kacelnik,A.,&Gibbons,J.(1992).Optimalforagingand
timing processes in the starling, Sturnus vulgaris: Eﬀect of inter-
capture interval. Animal Behavior, 44, 597–613.
Brunswick, E. (1934). Wahrnehmung und Gegenstandswelt: Grundle-
gung einer Psychologie vom Gegenstand her. Leipzig: Deuticke.
Bullinaria, J. A. (1994). Internal representations of a connectionist
model of reading aloud. In Proceedings of the DEMO annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 84–89). Hillsdale,DEMO
NUJ: Erlbaum.
Chater, N. (1995). Neural networks: The new statistical models of
mind. In J. P. Levy, D. Bairaktaris, J. DEMO Bullinaria, & P. Cairns
(Eds.), Connectionistmodels of memory and language (pp.207–228).
London: UCL Press.
Chater, N. (1996). Reconciling DEMO and likelihood principles in
perceptual organization. Psychological Review, 103, 566–581.
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (1990). Autonomy, implementation and
cognitive architecture: A reply to Fodor and Pylyshyn. Cognition,
34, 93–107.
DEMO,N.,&Oaksford,M.(2000).Therationalanalysisofmindand
behavior. Synthese, 122, 93–131.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A causal power
DEMO Psychological Review, 104, 367–405.
Cherniak,C.(1986). Minimal rationality.Cambridge,MA:MITPress.
Chew, S. H. (1983). A generalization of the quasilinear DEMO with
applications to the measurement of income inequality and
decision theory resolving the Allais paradox. Econometrica, 51,
1065–1092.
Chomsky,N.(1980). Rules and representations.Cambridge,MA:MIT
Press.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (Eds.). (2001). Connectionist
psycholinguistics. Westport, CT: Ablex.
Christiansen, M., Chater, N., & Seidenberg, M. (Eds.) (1999). Special
issue on connectionist natural language processing. Cognitive
Science, 23(4).
Cohen, L. J. (1981). Can human irrationality be experimentally
demonstrated? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 4, 317–370.
Colman, A. M. (1995)DEMO Game theory and its applications in the social
and biological sciences (DEMO).Oxford:Butterworth-Heinemann.
Coltheart, M., Curtis, B., Atkins, P., & Haller, M. (1993). Models of
reading aloud: Dual-route and parallel-distributed-processing ap-
proaches. Psychological Review, 100, 589–608.
Cooper, G., & Herskovits, E. (1992). A Bayesian method for the
induction of probabilistic networks from data. Machine Learning,
9, 309–347.
Cover, T., & Hart, P. (1967). Nearest neighbor pattern classiﬁcation.
IEEE Transactions on Information DEMO, 13, 21–27.
Crawford, C., Smith, M., & Krebs, DEMO (1987). Sociobiology and
psychology. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cyert,R.,&deGroot,M.(1974).RationalexpectationsandBayesian
analysis. Journal of Political Economy, 82, 521–536.
DEMO, J., Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1999). How good
are simple heuristics? In G. Gigerenzer, P. Todd, & The ABC
Group (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us smart (DEMO 97–118).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davidson, D. (1984). DEMO into truth and interpretation. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Dawes, R. M., & Corrigan, B. (1974). Linear models in decision
making. Psychological DEMO, 81, 95–106.
de Canio, S. (1979). Rational expectations and learning from experi-
ence. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93, 47–57.
Dhami, M. K., & Ayton, P. (2001). Bailing and jailing the fast and
frugal way. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 14, 141–168.
DEMO,M.K.,&Harries,C.(2002).Fastandfrugalversusregression
models of human judgment. Thinking and DEMO, 7, 5–27.
Dougherty, M. R. P., Gettys, C. F., & Ogden, E. E. (1999).
MINERVA-DM: A memory process model for judgments of
likelihood. Psychological Review, 106, 180–209.
Duda, R. O., & Hart, P. E. (1973). Patterns classiﬁcation and scene
analysis. New York: Wiley.
Einhorn,H.J.(1970).Theuseofnonlinear,noncompensatorymodels
in decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 73, 221–230.
Einhorn,H.J.(1971).Useofnonlinear,noncompensatorymodelsasa
function of task DEMO amount of information. Organizational
Behavior and Human Performance, 6, 1–27.
Einhorn, H. J. (1972). Expert measurement and mechanical combina-
tion. Organizational DEMO and Human Performance, 13, 171–
192.
Ellsberg,D.(1961).Risk,ambiguityandthesavageaxioms. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 75, 643–669.
Elster, J. (Ed.). (1986). Rational choice. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Evans, J. St. B. DEMO (1982). The psychology of deductive reasoning.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1989). Bias in human DEMO: Causes and
consequences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Br
oder, A. (DEMO). Assessing the empirical validity of the ‘‘take-the-€
84
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2003) 63–86
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, DEMO E. (1996). Rationality and reasoning.
Hove, Sussex: Psychology Press.
DEMO, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. (1997). Rationality in reasoning: The
problem of deductive competence. Cahiers de Psychologie Cogni-
tive, 16, 1–35.
Evans,J.St.B.T.,Newstead,S.E.,&Byrne,R.M.J.(1993). Human
reasoning. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fishburn, P. C. (1983). Transitive DEMO utility. Journal of
Economic Theory, 31, 293–317.
Flood,M.M.(1958).Someexperimentalgames. Management Science,
5, 5–26.
Fodor, J. A., & Pylyshyn, DEMO W. (1988).Connectionism and cognitive
architecture: A critical analysis. Cognition, DEMO, 3–71.
Frey, B. (1998). Graphical models for machine learning DEMO digital
communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Friedman, M. (1953). Methodology of positive economics. Chicago:
Chicago University Press.
Friedman, N., & Goldszmit, M. (1996). Learning Bayesian networks
with local structure. In Proceedings of the 12th conference on
uncertainty in artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 252–262). San Mateo, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann.
Gallistel, C. R. (1990). The organization of learning. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Ganzach, DEMO (1995). Nonlinear models of clinical judgment: Meehls
data revisited. Psychological Bulletin, 118, 422–429.
Garey,M.R.,&Johnson,D.S.(1979). Computersandintractability:A
guide to the theory of NP-completeness. San Francisco: W.H.
Freeman.
Gibson, DEMO J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception.
Boston, MA: Houghton Miﬄin.
Gigerenzer,G.(2000). Adaptive thinking: Rationality in the DEMO world.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G. (2001). The DEMO toolbox. In G. Gigerenzer & R.
Selten (Eds.), Bounded rationality: The adaptive toolbox (pp. 37–
50). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gigerenzer,G.,&Goldstein,D.(1996).Reasoningthefastandfrugal
way: Models of bounded rationality. DEMO Review, 103,
650–669.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1999). Betting on one good
reason. In G. Gigerenzer, P. DEMO, & The ABC Group (Eds.),
Simple heuristics that make DEMO smart (pp. 75–95). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Hell, W., & Blank, H. (1988). Presentation and
content:DEMO use of base-rates as a continuous variable. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: DEMO Perception and Performance, 14,
513–525.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoﬀrage, U. (1995). How to improve Bayesian
reasoning without instruction: Frequency DEMO Psychological
Review, 102, 684–704.
Gigerenzer,G.,&Murray,D.J.(1987). DEMO asintuitive statistics.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gigerenzer, G., & Selten, DEMO (2001). Rethinking rationality. In G.
Gigerenzer & R. Selten (Eds.), Bounded rationality: The adaptive
toolbox (pp. 1–13). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gigerenzer,G.,Todd,P.&TheABCGroup(1999a). Simple heuristics
that make us smart. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. (1999b). Fast and frugal heuristics: The
adaptive toolbox. In G. Gigerenzer, P. Todd, & The ABC Group
(Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp. 3–34). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (1999). The DEMO heuristic:
Howignorancemakesussmart.InG.Gigerenzer,P.Todd,&The
ABC Group (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp. 37–
58). Oxford: Oxford University DEMO
Good, I. J. (1971). Twenty seven principles of rationality. In V. P.
Godambe & D. A. Sprott (Eds.), Foundations of statistical
inference. Toronto: Holt, Rhinehart & Winston.
Hahn, U., & Chater, N. (1998). Similarity and rules: Distinct?
Exhaustive? Empirically distinguishable? Cognition, 65, 197–230.
Hammond,K.R.,&Summers,D.A.(1965).Cognitivedependenceon
linear DEMO non-linear cues. Psychological Review, 72, 215–224.
Harsanyi, J. C., & Selten, R. (1988). A general theory of equilibrium
selection in DEMO Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hertwig, R. (2000). The questionable utility of ‘‘cognitive ability’’ in
explaining cognitive illusions. Behavioral and Brian Sciences, 23,
678–679.
Hinton, G. E. (1989). Connectionist learning procedures. DEMO
Intelligence, 40, 185–234.
Hintzman, D. L. (1984). MINERVA2: DEMO simulation model of human
memory. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments and Computers,DEMO
16, 96–101.
Hintzman, D. L. (1986). ‘‘Schema abstraction’’ in DEMO multiple trace
memory model. Psychological Review, 93, 411–428.
Hintzman, D. DEMO (1988). Judgments of frequency and recognition
memory in a multiple-trace DEMO model. Psychological Review,
95, 528–551.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking from
childhood to adolescence. New York: Basic Books.
Intrator, N. (1993). On the use of projection pursuit constraints for
training neural networks. In S. J. Hanson, J. D. Cowan, & C. L.
Giles (Eds.), Advances in DEMO information processing systems
(Vol. 5, pp. 3–10). San Mateo, DEMO: Morgan Kaufman.
Jeannerod, M. (1988). The neural and behavioral DEMO of goal-
directed movements. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Juslin, P. & Persson, M. (2001). PROBabilities from EXemplars
(PROBEX): A ‘‘Lazy’’ algorithm for probabilistic inference from
generic knowledge. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Psy-
chology, Uppsala University, Sweden.
Kacelnik, A. (1998). Normative and DEMO models of decision
making: Time discounting and risk sensitivity. In M. DEMO &
N.Chater(Eds.), Rational models of cognition (pp.54–70).Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1982). Judgment
under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kahneman,D.,&Tversky,A.(1979).Prospecttheory:Ananalysisof
decision DEMO risk. Econometrica, 47, 263–291.
Kolodner,J.L.(1993). Case-basedreasoning.SanMateo,CA:Morgan
Kaufman.
Kreps, D. M. (1990). A course in microeconomic theory. DEMO York:
Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Kripke, S. (1982). Wittgenstein on rules and private languages: An
elementary exposition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ledyard, J. O. (1995). Public goods: A survey of experimental
research. In J. DEMO Kagel & A. E. Roth (Eds.), The handbook of
experimental DEMO (pp. 111–194). Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Leeuwenberg,E.,&DEMO,F.(1988).Againstthelikelihoodprinciple
in visual form perception. Psychological Review, 95, 485–491.
Libby, R. (1976). Man versus model of man: Some conﬂicting
evidence. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 16,
1–12.
Lindley,D.V.(1956).Onameasureoftheinformationprovidedbyan
experiment. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 27, 986–1005.
Ling, C. X., & Marinov, M. (1993). Answering the connectionist
challenge: A DEMO model of learning the past tense of English
verbs. Cognition, 49, 235–290.
Ling, C. X., & Marinov, M. (1994). A DEMO model of the
nonconscious acquisition of information. Cognitive Science, 18,
DEMO
Loewenstein,G.(1992).Thefallandriseofpsychologicalexplanations
in the economics of intertemporal choice. In G. Loewenstein & J.
Elster(Eds.), Choice over time (pp.3–34).NewYork:RussellSage
Foundation.
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90 (2003) 63–86
85
Loomes,G.,&Sugden,R.(1982).Regrettheory:Analternativetheory
of DEMO choice under uncertainty. Economic Journal, 92, 805–
824.
McClelland,J.L.(1998).ConnectionistmodelsofBayesianinference.
In M. Oaksford & N. Chater (Eds.), Rational models of cognition
(pp. 21–53). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
MacLeod, P., DEMO, K., & Rolls, E. T. (1998). Introduction to
connectionist modelling of cognitive processes. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
McCloskey, D. N. (1985). The rhetoric of economics. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.
DEMO, M. C., Pearlmutter, N. J., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1994).
Lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution. Psychological
Review, 101, DEMO
McDermott, D. (1987). A critique of pure reason. Computational
Intelligence, 3, 151–160.
McFarland,D.,&Houston,A.(1981). Quantitativeethology:Thestate
space approach. London: Pitman.
Mackay, D. J. C. (1992). A practical Bayesian framework for
backpropagation networks. Neural computation, 4, 448–462.
Machina, M. J. (1982). ‘‘Expected utility’’ analysis without the
independence axiom. Econometrica, DEMO, 277–323.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.
Martignon, L., & Hoﬀrage, U. (1999). Why does one DEMO decision
making work? A case study in ecological rationality. In G.
DEMO, P. Todd, & The ABC Group (Eds.), Simple heuristics
DEMO ussmart (pp.119–140).Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress.
Martignon,L.,&Laskey,K.(1999).Bayesianbenchmarksforfastand
frugal heuristics. In G. Gigerenzer, P. Todd, & The ABC Group
(Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp.169–188).Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Massaro, D. W. (1987). Speech perception by ear and DEMO Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
May, K. O. (1954). Intransitivity, utility, and the aggregation of
preference patterns. Econometrica, 22, 1–13.
Maynard-Smith,J.,&Price,G.R.(1973).Thelogicofanimalconﬂict.
Nature, 246, 15–18.
Meehl,P.E.(1954). Clinical versus statistical predictions: A theoretical
analysis and revision of the literature. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Messick, D. M. (1991). On the evolution of group-based altruism. In
R. Selten (Ed.), Game equilibrium models I: Evolution and game
dynamics (pp. 304–328). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Minsky, M., & Papert, S. (1969). Perceptrons: An introduction to
computational geometry. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Morton,J.(1969)DEMO
Psychological Review, 76, 165–178.
Movellan,J.R.,&Chadderdon,G.(1996).Cognitionandthestatistics
DEMO natural signals. In G. Cottrell (Ed.), Proceedings of the
eighteenth DEMO conference of the cognitive science society (pp.
381–394). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Movellan, J. R., & McClelland, J. L. (1995). Stochastic interactive
processing, channel separability and optimal perceptual inference:
An examination of Mortons Law. Technical Report
PDP.CNS.95.4, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Muth, J. F. (1961). Rational expectations and the theory of DEMO
movements. Econometrica, 29, 315–335.
Nash, J. (1950). The bargaining problem. Econometrica, 28, 155–162.
Neal, R. (1993). Bayesian learning DEMO stochastic dynamics. In S. J.
Hanson, J. D. Cowan, & C. L. Giles (Eds.), Advances in neural
information processing systems (Vol. DEMO, pp. 475–482). San Mateo,
CA: Morgan Kaufman.
Nelson, DEMO, & Winter, S. (1982). An evolutionary theory of economic
DEMO and behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Newell, A. (1982). The knowledge level. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 18, 87–
127.
Newell, A. (1991). Uniﬁed theories of cognition. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University DEMO
Newell, B. R., & Shanks, D. R. (2001). Take the best or look at the
rest? Factors inﬂuencing one-reason decision-making. Unpub-
lished manuscript, Department of Psychology, University College
London.
Nosofsky, R. (DEMO). Attention, similarity, and the identiﬁcation–
categorization relationship. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 115, 39–57.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1990). DEMO between exemplar similarity and
likelihood models of classiﬁcation. Journal of Mathematical Psy-
chology, 34, 393–418.
Oaksford, M.,& Chater,N. (1991).Against DEMO cognitivescience.
Mind and Language, 6, 1–38.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1993). Reasoning theories and bounded
rationality. In K. I. DEMO & D. E. Over (Eds.), Rationality
(pp. 31–60). London: Routledge.
Oaksford,M.,&Chater,N.(1994).Arationalanalysisoftheselection
taskasoptimaldataselection. Psychological Review, 101,608–631.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1995). Theories of DEMO and the
computational explanation of everyday inference. Thinking and
Reasoning, 1, 121–152.
Oaksford,M.,&Chater,N.(1998a). Rationality in an uncertain world:
Essays in the cognitive science of human reasoning. Hove, Sussex:
Psychology Press.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (Eds.). (1998b). Rational models of
cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Oaksford, M., Chater, N., & Stenning, K. (1990). Connectionism,
classical DEMO science and experimental psychology. AI &
Society, 4, 73–90.
Paris, J. (1992). The uncertain reasoners companion. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Parzen,E.(1962).Onestimationofaprobabilitydensityfunctionand
mode. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35, 1065–1076.
DEMO, J. W. (1976). Task complexity and contingent processing in
decision making: An information search and protocol analysis.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 16, 366–387.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & DEMO, E. J. (1988). Adaptive
strategy selection in decision making. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 14, 534–552.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1990). The adaptive
decision maker: Eﬀort and accuracy in choice. In R. M. Hogarth
(Ed.), Insights in decision making: A tribute to DEMO J. Einhorn (pp.
129–153). Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Payne, DEMO W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993)DEMO The adaptive
decision maker. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Luce, M. F. (1996). When time is
money: Decision behavior under opportunity-cost time pressure.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 66, 131–
152.
Pearl, J. (1988)DEMO Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems. San
Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufman.
Persson, M., & Juslin, P. (1999). The ecological rationality of
DEMO Unpublished manuscript, Department of Psychology,
Uppsala University, Sweden.
Pinker,S.(1998). Howthemindworks.Harmondsworth,UK:Penguin.
Plaut,D.C.,McClelland,J.L.,Seidenberg,M.S.,&Patterson,K.E.
(1996). Understanding normal and impaired word reading: Com-
putational DEMO in quasi-regular domains. Psychological
Review, 103, 56–115.
Pomerantz, J. R., & Kubovy, M. (1987). Theoretical approaches to
perceptual organization. In DEMO R. Boﬀ, L. Kaufman, & J. P.
Thomas (Eds.), DEMO of perception and human performance,
Volume II: Cognitive processes and DEMO (pp. 36.1–36.46).
New York: Wiley.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1987). The robot s dilemma: The frame problem in
artiﬁcial intelligence. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
86
N. Chater et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2003) 63–86
Quine,W.V.O.(1960). Word and object.Cambridge,MA:MITPress.
Quinlan,J.R.(1993). C4.5: Programs for machine learning.LosAltos:
Morgan Kaufmann.
Reiner, R. (1995). Arguments against the possibility of perfect
rationality. DEMO and Machines, 5, 373–389.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, DEMO R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian
conditioning: Variations in the eﬀectiveness in the variation of
reinforcement and non reinforcement. In A. H. DEMO & W. F.
Prokasy(Eds.), ClassicalconditionalII: Currentresearchand theory
(pp. 64–99). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Rieskamp, J., & Hoﬀrage, U. (1999). When do people use simple
heuristics and how can we tell? In G. Gigerenzer, P. Todd, & The
ABCGroup(Eds.), Simple DEMO that make us smart (pp.141–
168). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Roth, A. (1996). Individual rationality as a useful approximation:
Comments on Tverskys ‘‘Rational theory of constructive choice’’.
InK.J.Arrow,E.Colombatto,DEMO,&C.Schmidt(Eds.),
The rational foundations of economic behavior (pp. DEMO).
London: Macmillan.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986). Learning
representations by back-propagating errors. Nature, 323, 533–536.
Rumelhart, D. E., McClelland, J. L., & DEMO PDP Research Group
(1986). Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the micro-
structures of cognition (Vols. 1 & 2). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Samuelson,P.(1937).Anoteonthemeasurementofutility. Review of
Economic Studies, 4, DEMO
Savage, L. J. (1954). The foundations of statistics. New York: Wiley.
Sawyer,J.(1966).Measurementandprediction,clinicalandstatistical.
Psychological Bulletin, 66, 178–200.
Seidenberg, M. S., & McClelland, J. L. (1989). A distributed,DEMO
developmentalmodelofwordrecognitionandnaming. Psycholog-
ical Review, 96, 523–568.
Shanks, D. R. (1995a). Is human learning rational? Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 48A, 257–279.
Shanks,D.(1995b). The psychologyof associativelearning.Cambridge:
Cambridge Univerisity Press.
DEMO, R. N. (1967). On subjectively optimum selections among
multi-attribute alternatives. In W. Edwards & A. Tversky (Eds.),
Decision making (pp. 257–283). Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Simon, H. A. (1959). DEMO of decision-making in economics and
behavioral science. American Economic Review, 49, 253–283.
Simon, H. A. (1992). Economics, bounded rationality and the cognitive
revolution. Aldershot: Elgar.
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of individual
diﬀerences in reasoning. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stanovich,K.E.,&West,R.F.(1998a).Cognitiveabilityandvariation
inselectiontaskperformance. Thinking and Reasoning, 4,193–230.
DEMO, K. E., & West, R. F. (1998b). Individual diﬀerences in
framing and conjunction eﬀects. Thinking and Reasoning, 4, 289–
317.
DEMO, K. E., & West, R. F. (1998c). Individual diﬀerences in
rational thought. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
127, 161–188.
DEMO, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual diﬀerences in
reasoning: Implications for the rationality debate? Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 23, 645–726.
Stein, E. (1996). Without good reason: The DEMO debate in
philosophy and cognitive science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stephens, D. W., & Krebs, J. R. (1986). Foraging theory. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Stich, S. (1990). The fragmentation of reason. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Taraban,R., &McClelland,J. DEMO (1988).Constituentattachmentand
thematic role assignment in sentence processing: Inﬂuences of
content-based expectations. Journal of Memory and Language, 27,
597–632.
Todd,I.A.,&DEMO,A.(1993).Psychologicalmechanismsandthe
Marginal Value Theorem: Dynamics of scalar memory for DEMO
time. Animal Behavior, 46, 765–775.
Todd, P., & Gigerenzer, DEMO (1999). What we have learned (so far). In
G. Gigerenzer, P. Todd, & The ABC Group (Eds.), Simple
heuristics that make us smart (pp. 357–365). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
DEMO,A.(1969).Intransitivityofpreferences. Psychological Review,
76, 31–48.
Tversky, A. (DEMO). Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice.
Psychological Review, 79, 281–299.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgement under uncertainty:
Heuristics and biases. Science, 125, 1124–1131.
Tversky,A.,&Kahneman,D.(1986).Rationalchoiceandtheframing
of decisions. Journal of Business, 59, 251–278.
van DEMO, E. (1991). Stability and the perfection of Nash equilibria.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
van der Helm, P. A., & Leeuwenberg, E. L. DEMO (1996). Goodness of
visual regularities: A non-transformational approach. Psychologi-
cal Review, 103, 429–456.
vonHelmholtz,H.(1910/1962).InJ.P.Southall(Ed.andtranslation).
Treatise DEMO physiological optics (Vol. 3). New York: Dover.
von Neumann, DEMO, & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of games and
economic DEMO Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Weber, E. U., Goldstein, W. M., & Barlas, S. (1995). And let us not
forget memory: The role of memory processes and techniques in
thestudyofjudgmentandchoice. The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, 32, 33–81.
Received 16 January 2001{1g42fwefx}