Integrating Variable Risk Preferences, Trust, and Transaction Cost Economics
Todd H. DEMO; John F. McMackin
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 21, DEMO 1. (Jan., 1996), pp. 73-99.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199601%2921%3A1%3C73%3AIVRPTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-O
The Academy of Management Review is currently published by DEMO of Management.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download DEMO entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and DEMO may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, DEMO use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/aom.html.
DEMO copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such DEMO
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the DEMO The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. DEMO more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Tue DEMO 25 09:06:39 2008
0 Academy of Management Renew
1996. Vol. 21. No. 1. 73-99.
INTEGRATING DEMO RISK PREFERENCES,
TRUST, AND TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS
TODD H. CHILES
DEMO F. MCMACKIN
University of Oregon
Transaction cost economics (TCE) relies on three behavioral assump-
tions in predicting how firms choose governance structures-
bounded DEMO opportunism, and risk neutrality. We explore the
implications of the neglected DEMO assumption of risk neutral-
ity. offer an integrative appraisal of the three behavioral assumptions
using trust as a unifying perspective. and explicate subjective costs
DEMO risks. We illustrate the relative ease with which previous empir-
ical shortcomings can be addressed by incorporating risk and trust in
TCE models.
Why DEMO firms decide to integrate vertically or to contract in the mar-
ket? Do the integration decisions of firms have any bearing on whether
they survive and prosper? Transaction cost economics (TCE) has made an
important contribution to management researchers' understanding of
these central questions of the economics of the firm. Despite the impor-
tance of its contributions, some fundamental questions about TCE as a
theory remain unanswered. Does TCE merely describe DEMO behaviors, or
does it prescribe what managers should do to ensure DEMO andlor
prosperity? What time frame does the theory address? Is it concerned
mostly with individual firm behaviors, or does the theory predict market
behaviors? What is the role of risk and trust in the model? And does
empirical evidence, which shows that two firms faced with DEMO trans-
action costs choose different levels of integration, challenge the validity
DEMO the theory? This article addresses all of these questions.
TCE, which has experienced a revitalization during the past 20 years,
most notably DEMO the work of Williamson (1975, 1985), is a synthesis of
economics, law, and organizational theory. In essence, Williamson pro-
posed that if theorists can ascertain the level of asset specificity for a
transaction, the frequency of interaction between the parties to it and the
degree DEMO uncertainty surrounding it, they can predict the governance
The authors are DEMO alphabetically, reflecting an equal contribution to the article. We
wish to DEMO Paul Fouts, Rico Lam, Alan Meyer, Richard Mowday, Michael Russo, Carlos
Sanchez-Runde, the participants in the doctoral proseminar in management at DEMO Univer-
sity of Oregon, and three anonymous reviewers for helpful comments DEMO earlier drafts of this
article.
74
Academy of Management Review
January
structure that will be adopted by DEMO parties to the transaction. Underly-
ing this rationale is the central premise that the chosen governance struc-
ture will be the one that minimizes DEMO costs. Of the three attri-
butes of the transaction, asset specificity DEMO occupied center stage. Asset
specificity refers to the extent to which assets (e.g., physical, human, or
locational) are specialized to a specific transaction and can be used only
at lower value in alternative applications. DEMO example of physical asset
specificity is the significant investment made by an automobile parts
supplier (e.g., Fisher Body in the 1920s) in stamping equipment and molds
for automobile bodies that are specialized to the needs DEMO a particular
auto manufacturer (e.g., GM in the 1920s) and DEMO have little or no value
to other firms (Klein, Crawford, & Alchian, 1978). TCE's contribution lies in
the ability its DEMO has to predict the governance structure (market, hybrid,
or hierarchy) as a function of the attributes of the transaction. As an
example of governance structure, an automobile manufacturer that is
building a new assembly plant must decide whether to purchase the parts
it needs in the DEMO (market), to manufacture them in house (hi-
erarchy), or to enter into some intermediate form of relationship with
suppliers (hybrid); Williamson (1991) described as hybrid those interme-
diate forms that lie DEMO the continuum between market and hierarchy. In
sum, TCE focuses attention DEMO the attributes of the transaction, with econ-
omizing on transaction costs DEMO as the main purpose of economic
institutions. The theory also relies on three behavioral assumptions in
predicting how firms choose governance structures-opportunism,
bounded DEMO and risk neutrality (Williamson, 1985).
The predictive validity of the theory has, however, been somewhat
undermined by empirical evidence that firms DEMO coexist for extended
periods with structures that are apparently "anomalous" (DEMO, 1987:
81). A good example of such an anomaly DEMO be found in the 1982 study by
Monteverde and Teece, who DEMO asset specificity as the degree of
"specialized, non-patentable know-how" (1982: 206) in the production of
parts in the U.S. automobile industry. DEMO finding that GM and Ford are
more likely to vertically integrate at higher levels of asset specificity has
been widely acclaimed as providing empirical DEMO for the TCE para-
digm.' Less satisfactory, from this new institutional economics perspec-
tive, is the failure of the theory to predict the significant difference in the
level of integration between GM and Ford in DEMO same study. To date,
transaction cost theorists have been notably silent in the face of such
anomalies; others, however, have been more forthcoming. For instance,
' We focus on vertical integration because, as Williamson put it: "Vertical integration is
not only an important condition DEMO its own right but equally because the transaction cost
treatment of the decision to integrate is paradigmatic" (1985:13). We suggest. however, that
the arguments offered here also may extend to other issues in DEMO TCE literature, such as
employment relations and corporate governance.
1996
Chiles and McMackin
75
Robins (1987) used such findings to DEMO his argument that TCE has
much more limited scope as a theoretical framework than its proponents
would advocate. Thus, such empirical shortcomings, if DEMO remain un-
explained, may have far-reaching consequences for TCE.
As the DEMO contribution of this article, we propose that these
apparent limitations of DEMO theory are partly a result of the neglect of the
third behavioral assumption of TCE, that of risk neutrality (Williamson,
1985). DEMO the other behavioral assumptions in the model-
opportunism and bounded rationality-have been closely scrutinized,
the assumption of risk neutrality has gone virtually unnoticed. DEMO adop-
tion of this assumption has focused the attention of TCE scholars away
from the variable risk preferences of transactors. In this article, we use
Williamson's (1991) framework to illustrate that incorporating a range DEMO
risk preferences (from risk aversion, through risk neutrality, to risk DEMO
ing) into the model can help resolve, within the TCE paradigm, many of
the apparent contradictions encountered in earlier empirical research.
Furthermore, DEMO propose that isolated treatment of the individual
behavioral assumptions of TCE is rendered futile by the interactive na-
ture of bounded rationality, opportunism, DEMO risk neutrality. The impor-
tant links among these three variables have not been comprehensively
appraised. We also undertake what we believe is the first DEMO
and integrative appraisal of these three assumptions. We propose that
the social context variable of trust provides a unifying perspective with
which to undertake DEMO task.
Finally, we render explicit the important issue of the treatment DEMO
economic costs in TCE. We argue that much of the logic of mainstream
TCE, including the work of Williamson, ultimately relies on an DEMO
but unstated view of economic costs as subjective, a perspective gener-
DEMO associated with the Austrian school of economics. We explore the
implications of this subjectivist interpretation of costs and compare and
contrast this work with DEMO stream of research within the TCE para-
digm in which costs are viewed as objective. In general, we propose that
not only can previous inconsistencies in TCE begin to be reconciled when
assumptions about costs are DEMO explicit, but that different, comple-
mentary research streams can readily coexist within the TCE paradigm.
In sum, we examine the implications of relaxing the assumptions of
risk neutrality, opportunism, and bounded rationality in the DEMO model.
Such a relaxation is in keeping with a deductive theorizing approach, in
which assumptions that are initially less realistic are relaxed over time,
in order to bring greater realism to the model (Camerer, DEMO). In essence,
we take two commonsense ideas that have been supported by empirical
research-that managers have variable risk preferences and that trust
DEMO risk are mutually interdependent-and show how they can be incor-
porated in the TCE model in a way that enhances the predictive validity
of DEMO theory. We hope not only to improve the theory but also to move TCE
a step closer to being directly useful to managers.
76
Academy of Management Review
January
THE TREATMENT OF COSTS IN TRANSACTION DEMO ECONOMICS
Since its revitalization by Williamson, there has been some debate
DEMO the place of TCE in the body of economic theory (e.g., Hill, 1990;
Robins, 1987). We propose that there are, in fact, two separate streams of
research within TCE, in which DEMO agendas are driven by contrast-
ing views of what is meant by economic costs. These alternative perspec-
tives on costs have led researchers to DEMO different levels of analysis,
time frames, and dependent variables. For DEMO of this discussion,
we label the two streams as economic natural selection, which has been
adopted by evolutionary theorists, and managerial choice, which has
been adopted by decision theorists.
The economic natural-selection approach of DEMO evolutionary theo-
rists adopts the population of organizations as the level of analysis, the
environment as the primary selection mechanism that utilizes some se-
lection criteria (e.g., transaction cost economizing), the long run as DEMO
appropriate time frame, and an ex post objective view of costs. DEMO eco-
nomic natural selection approach has been adopted by Alchian (1950) and
Nelson and Winter (19821, generally, and by Ulrich and Barney (1984) and
Hi11 (1990) with respect to TCE. Ulrich and DEMO (1984) argued that pop-
ulation ecology could be treated as a meta-theory, in which transaction
cost efficiency represented one possible first-order selection mechanism.
From a TCE perspective, Hill argued that "in the long-run, the invisible
hand selects actors whose behaviors are biased toward cooperation"
(1990: 501). In this framework, organizations that have adopted gover-
nance DEMO that economize on transaction costs are selected by the
invisible hand of the market and survive in the long run, regardless of
whether the choice of such governance structures was based on transac-
tion-cost-economizing decisions, resource-dependence decisions, imita-
tion of other firms, luck, or any variety of other reasons; those that have
not chosen efficient governance structures are deselected and fail. Thus,
TCE is a theory about what governance structures DEMO would observe
among a population of organizations at the end of a lengthy evolutionary
process, in which the economic system reaches the competitive equilib-
rium. From this perspective, the "anomalous" coexistence of firms that
adopt differing governance structures is consistent with TCE because in
the short run, disequilibrium prevails, and both efficient and inefficient
forms will be observed to coexi~t.~
The second major body of theory and research in TCE can DEMO de-
scribed as the managerial-choice approach. This approach to TCE has
been adopted by Williamson (1975, 1985) and Walker and Weber (1984),
who assumed that managers utilize a transaction-cost-economizing cal-
culus in making DEMO decisions. In this view, TCE is a theory about
-
We DEMO indebted to consulting editor Charles W. L. Hill for provoking the development
of this argument.
1996
Chiles
and McMackin
77
the choice of governance structures made by DEMO faced with given
levels of asset specificity, uncertainty, and frequency of interaction. In
this article, we seek to build on this body of work. Our arguments provide
support for TCE as a theory of managerial DEMO making by showing
that when risk and trust are included in the model, TCE offers a viable
explanation for previously confounding empirical evidence.
We propose that the important differences between the evolutionary
theorists and the decision DEMO are rooted in different assumptions
about economic costs.3 The managerial-choice approach to TCE relies on
an implicit view of costs as subjective. The concept DEMO subjective costs
comes from the Austrian school of economics (e.g., Kirzner, 1986; Pasour,
1991; Vaughn, 1980)-a branch of economics DEMO with individual-
choice and disequilibrium-market processes. Economic costs are inher-
ently subjective, because different decision makers sacrifice different al-
ternatives at the moment of choice based on different perceptions of and
preferences for the alternative opportunities DEMO a world of uncertainty.
Pasour provided an illustrative example of the subjective nature of
costs: "Consider the cost to be imputed to (say) land in producing corn.
The cost of land in corn is the value of opportunities foregone by using
land for corn instead of using DEMO in its best alternative use. Cost by its
very nature, however, involves choice, and choice cannot be predeter-
mined and still remain choice. The cost of similar land in corn may well
be quite different DEMO Jones and Smith. Jones, for example, may anticipate
a return to land of $30 per acre when using the land for soybeans (the best
alternative use). Smith, on the other hand, being more DEMO about
future soybean yields or prices, may anticipate a return of DEMO per acre for
Jones and $50 per acre for Smith, even DEMO Jones and Smith pay the
same rental price for land" (1991: 283). In this case, the cost of land as it
DEMO entrepreneurial choice is inherently subjective. One can now
begin to understand why Jones may choose to plant corn (or GM to build
parts in house) and Smith soybeans (or Ford to subcontract parts), even
DEMO conventional accounting records might show the same objective
cost for each farmer (or automobile firm).
By contrast with the subjective view of costs implicit in the manage-
rial-choice approach, we suggest that the natural-selection approach to
TCE relies on an assumption of costs as objective. Thus, in the manage-
rial-choice view, the relevant costs are those that influence choice,
whereas in the natural-selection approach the relevant costs are those
that DEMO from choice. In the managerial-choice approach, costs involve
an ex ante DEMO of future outcomes, whereas, in the economic-
natural-selection approach, costs DEMO an ex post evaluation of past
In particular, economic costs are DEMO as opportunity costs or the costs of sacrificed
alternatives by the decision maker. "This particular concept of costs would seem to be the
only one which is of use in the solution of business problems, since it concentrates attention
on the alternative courses of action which are open DEMO the businessman" (Coase, 1973: 108).
78
Academy of Management Review
January
outcomes. It is only in general DEMO that subjective costs will
equate directly to objective costs, measured using DEMO records
(Vaughn, 1980).
These differing views of cost provide insight on and reveal the com-
plementarity of the two streams of research DEMO TCE. For example, a gov-
ernance structure chosen under the uncertainty DEMO disequilibrium to econ-
omize on subjective transaction costs at the moment of choice may be
judged in error, as having failed to economize on objective transaction
costs, when assessed ex post by an outside observer. Hence, from the
distant, ex-post equilibrium perspective of an outside observer, such fail-
ures to economize on transaction costs result not in an "optimal level of
integration" as TCE would predict, but rather in a "preferred level of
integration." However, from an up-close, ex ante disequilibrium perspec-
tive of an actual decision maker, this choice of governance structure may
have, in fact, been based on a transaction-cost-economizing rationale-
the DEMO transaction-cost-economizing decision that could be made, given
the uncertainty of the DEMO, hence, resulting in an optimal level of
integration as understood at the moment of choice.
In general, the evolutionary theorists view costs as objective and
focus their attention on a different research domain from the DEMO
theorists. Evolutionary theorists consider a long-run time frame, in which
the DEMO, or population of organizations, is the level of analysis. Be-
cause it is the relative economic performance of firms that determines
their selection DEMO survival or death, the dependent variable of interest is
economic performance. DEMO evolutionary approach is not the primary fo-
cus of TCE, according DEMO Williamson, although he acknowledged that "the
argument relies in a general, background way on the efficacy of compe-
tition to perform a sort between more and less efficient modes and to shift
resources in favor DEMO the former . . . The intuition would nevertheless
benefit from a more fully developed theory of the selection process" (1985:
22-23)DEMO
TCE's decision theorists consider a world in which managers choose
governance structures in accordance with a subjective interpretation of
transaction costs. As such, the level of analysis is the individual firm, the
time frame is relatively short run, and the empirical research focuses on
the behaviors of a single firm or a few firms (Monteverde & Teece, 1982;DEMO
Walker & Weber, 1984). The managerial-choice approach to TCE is, we
would suggest, the primary focus of the theory. This is reflected through-
out the work of Williamson and is also consistent with the DEMO of Coase,
who stated, "There is no one decision which can be considered to maxi-
mize profits independently of the attitude of DEMO of the business-
man. A further point is that the correctness of the decision cannot be
determined by subsequent events" (1973: 104-105). The importance of un-
derstanding managerial decisions is also explicitly recognized by DEMO
evolutionary theorists, as reflected in Alchian: "The precise role and DEMO
1996
Chiles
and McMackin
79
ture of purposive behavior in the presence DEMO uncertainty and incomplete
information have not been clearly understood or analyzed" (1950: 221).
In sum, this article fits solidly into a DEMO of literature whose au-
thors have viewed costs as subjective and TCE as a theory of managerial
choice. We provide a strong rationale for DEMO interpretation, which is
grounded in the mainstream TCE literature of Williamson (1975, 1985) and
Walker and Weber (1984) as well as DEMO work of Coase. Furthermore, we
argue that development of the TCE DEMO will be enhanced by more
explicit recognition of the differing views of costs that underlie the evo-
lutionary- and decision-theoretic applications of the theory. DEMO our
analysis reflects our belief that the subjective view of costs has greater
validity, we recognize that parallel research based on the objective view
of costs is to a large extent complementary and entirely consistent with
DEMO foundations of the theory.
THE TREATMENT OF RISK IN TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS
The behavioral assumption of risk neutrality has received but sparse
attention in DEMO TCE literature to date. Williamson defended his own
cursory treatment of the issue (which is relegated to the concluding sec-
tion of his 1985 book) on the grounds that the focus of TCE is "on DEMO
attributes of transactions rather than the risk attitudes of transactors"
(DEMO: 389).4 By adopting the simplifying assumption that all transactors
are DEMO in their attitudes to risk, Williamson argued, attention is
firmly focused on the transaction as the unit of analysis. A striking con-
trast DEMO be observed in the TCE literature between the limited attention
afforded the assumption of risk neutrality and the more direct focus on the
behavioral DEMO of bounded rationality and opportunism (Hill,
1990; Ring & Van de Ven, 1992; Williamson, 1985). We suggest that there
are three important reasons why a closer examination of risk neutrality is
called DEMO First, it differs from the risk-aversion assumption of neoclas-
sical economics. DEMO that "transaction cost analysis relies on an im-
plicit analogy to DEMO economics" (Robins, 1987: 70), an explicit
Two other defenses for adopting the assumption of risk neutrality are offered by
Williamson (1985: 389-390). First, he suggested that an assumption of risk neutrality DEMO
proximates reality and is acceptable when the theory is applied to intermediate product
markets wherein owners (not managers) make the governance-structure decisions of DEMO
firms. We argue that not only does this impose severe, and DEMO unnecessary, limi-
tations on the application of the theory, but that it is at odds with empirical research in
agency theory on the DEMO played by owners in firms' decision-making processes (Eisenhardt,
1989). The third defense, described by Williamson as the "most compelling" (DEMO: 389). is
that a risk-neutrality assumption focuses attention on "core efficiency features" (William-
son, 1985: 389) of organizations that are obscured when behavioral assumptions are relaxed.
We illustrate in this article that DEMO important insights offered by TCE on these efficiency
features can be illuminated by relaxing the behavioral assumption of risk neutrality.
80
Academy of Management Review
January
treatment of the differences in the DEMO assumptions of the two
models is a prerequisite for any comparison between them. Second, as
discussed next, psychological studies of risk taking in DEMO con-
texts suggest that the assumption of a single risk attitude for a firm may
be inadequate and that risk preferences for a single DEMO vary in a sys-
tematic fashion on a spectrum from risk aversion through risk neutrality
to risk seeking, influenced by a variety of contextual variables (March &
Shapira, 1987). Finally, the governance structure DEMO by the TCE
model will vary with the risk preference of the firm.
Defining Risk
The task of defining risk has long been fraught DEMO controversy and
confusion (Fischoff, Watson, & Hope, 1990). Although classical decision
theory suggests that risk is "the variance of the probability distribution of
possible gains and losses associated with a particular alternative"
(March & Shapira, 1987: 14041, organizational researchers suggest that
this is a poor description of how managers view risk (MacCrimmon &
Wehrung, 1986; March & Shapira, 1987). Following MacCrimmon and
Wehrung (19861 and Yates and Stone (19921, we treat risk as "the possibil-
ity of loss" (1992: 41, a definition that more closely DEMO the perspectives
of managers in organizations. Importantly, risk is understood as "an in-
herently subjective construct" (Yates & Stone, 1992: 5), a view also explic-
itly adopted by MacCrimmon and Wehrung (1986)DEMO The definition of risk
adopted here is therefore pertinent not only to our treatment of TCE as a
theory of organizational decision making, but also it is consistent with our
view of costs as subjective.
The DEMO between risk and uncertainty is important. As Orbell
put it: "A decision maker confronts risk when he or she can attach prob-
abilities DEMO alternative states of the world with confidence; from a fair
pack DEMO playing cards, for example, a gambler can be confident that there
is a 1 in 52 chance of drawing the ace of hearts. DEMO decision maker con-
fronts uncertainty, however, when there is an unknown number of cards
and (or) an unknown number of aces of DEMO in the deck. Under uncer-
tainty, not only can one still DEMO but one does not know the odds" (1993:
130). For our purposes, this definition distinguishes between risk (the
subjective possibility DEMO loss as perceived by the decision maker) and the
notion of DEMO in TCE, which Williamson described as attributable
to exogenous "disturbances" (1985: 581, the origins of which may be be-
havioral or DEMO
Defining Risk Preferences
What is the difference between an assumption of risk aversion and an
assumption of risk neutrality or risk seeking? Because no definition of risk
neutrality is offered in the TCE literature, we assume that the term is
1996
Chiles and McMackin
81
intended to be interpreted as it is DEMO in the neoclassical economics
literature.
An assumption of risk neutrality suggests that a risk-neutral party is
"indifferent between a prospect of uncertain profits and a certain profit,
provided that the expected average of the prospective DEMO profits
is equal to the certain profit" (Aoki, 1984: 15). These parties therefore have
a linear utility function (Townsend, 1982), which is characterized by con-
stant marginal utility. This assumption can be contrasted with the risk-
aversion assumption of neoclassical economics that suggests that DEMO party
which is risk averse will always prefer a certain profit to the prospect of
fluctuating profits, provided the expected value of the certain profit is not
less than the expected average of the prospective profits DEMO more than
some positive value. The utility function for risk-averse parties is, there-
fore, "strictly concave, strictly increasing and continuously differentia-
ble" (Townsend, 1982: 1170). The concept of risk aversion is based on
diminishing marginal utility, which "supposes" that the marginal utility
of an extra dollar in payoffs declines as more dollars are won. In DEMO,
risk-averse parties will always prefer a certain profit to the prospect of
fluctuating profits, whereas risk-neutral parties will be indifferent be-
tween the two, provided that their expected values are equal. It should be
noted that Williamson's (1985) discussion of risk neutrality compares it
with DEMO single alternative assumption of risk aversion. In a more complete
conceptualization of the range of possible risk preferences, one must also
consider risk seeking, as suggested by prospect theory (Bromiley, 1991;
Fiegenbaum & Thomas, 1988; Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). A party that is
risk seeking will always prefer a fluctuating profit to the prospect of
certain DEMO, provided the expected average of the fluctuating profit is
greater than DEMO expected value of the certain profit. The utility function
for risk-seeking parties is therefore convex (i.e., concave-up), increasing,
and continuously differentiable-properties DEMO are consistent with in-
creasing marginal utility.
Determinants of Risk Preferences
There is a substantial theoretical and empirical literature on risky
behavior that provides DEMO on what determines risk preferences. Risk
preferences are driven by a combination of influences, which have been
described as situational and constant factors (DEMO & Pablo, 1992). In
general, situational factors, such as DEMO framing (e.g., Kahneman &
Tversky, 19791, reference points (e.g., Lopes, 1987; March, 1988), levels of
organizational slack (Cyert & March, 1963), and escalation of commitment
(Brockner, 1992), have been found to influence risk perceptions. More con-
stant factors, such as individual dispositions (Laughunn, Payne, & Crum,
1980). national culture (Hofstede, 1980). and organizational culture (Mor-
gan, 19861, combine to determine managerial risk preferences. Therefore,
a manager's risk DEMO may vary on a spectrum from risk aversion
through risk neutrality to risk seeking, depending on a combination of
82 	Academy of Management Review January
influences. In their study, March and Shapira summarized the impor-
tant findings of this research stream: "[Firms] DEMO . . can show unstable
risk-taking behavior in the neighborhood of death, relatively high levels
of risk taking when slack resources are large, DEMO seeking in the neigh-
borhood of a target, a tendency to DEMO risk preference over time with
the same resources, and a tendency DEMO underestimate risks as a result of
favorable experience with them" (1992: 181).
FIGURE 1
Risk Preference as a Moderator of the Relationship Between Asset
Specificity and Governance Costb
M(K)ra,rn,rs = DEMO cost
Governance curves for market governance for
Costs risk-averse, risk-neutral, and risk-
seeking firms
I
I
I
:
I
Kra.Krn. Krs =
I I 	I switchover levels
I I 	I
I I I for risk-averse,DEMO
I I
I I
I I
I I
I I
:
DEMO, and
I risk-seeking firms
I
I%
Km KrS 	Asset
Specificity
"The "switchover" (Kra. Krn. Kr) levels of asset specificity, at which firms are indifferent
between market and hierarchy, are determined by the intersection between the transaction
cost curves of market and hierarchy. Because the subjective DEMO of market governance M(K)
are determined by the shape of the utility function of the decision maker, the switchover level
will vary with the risk preference of the firm.
bFrom "Comparative Economic Organization: DEMO Analysis of Discrete Structural Alterna-
tives," by 0. E. Williamson, DEMO, Administrative Science Quarterly, 36: 284. Copyright 1991 by
Administrative Science DEMO Adapted with permission.
1996
Chiles and McMackin
Governance Structure Implications of Variable Risk Preferences
Although DEMO of TCE acknowledge that the risk attitudes of man-
agers "for DEMO purposes can be of utmost importance" (Williamson, 1985:
389), the adoption of the assumption of risk neutrality has effectively sup-
pressed these issues in TCE. We suggest that the efficacy of the theory
DEMO be enhanced only by an examination of the implications of variable
risk preferences for the governance structure predictions of the model.
The essence of DEMO TCE perspective on governance structures is captured
in a heuristic model by Williamson, which, in a "reduced form analysis"
(1991: 282), explores the relationship between governance costs and asset
specificity.5 The model DEMO in Figure 1 is based directly on William-
son's model.
In essence, the model offered by Williamson suggests that there is a
single level of asset specificity (K,, in Figure l), which represents the
"switchover" point at which firms are indifferent between market and
DEMO as forms of governance. For levels of asset specificity that are
below this switchover level, the argument goes, firms will choose market
procurement, and for levels above, internal organization will be pre-
ferred. As illustrated in Figure 1, the switchover level is determined by the
intersection between the transaction-cost curve for market governance
and the transaction-cost curve for hierarchy. DEMO argue that the switch-
over level of asset specificity will vary as a function of the risk preference
of the firm. The risk, or possible loss associated with the transaction, will
vary with the level of asset specificity of the transaction. As discussed
previously, the utility associated with a given level of risk is determined
by the shape of the DEMO function of the firm. Therefore, the shape of the
transaction-cost curve DEMO market governance6 will vary with the risk pref-
erence of the firm. Because the switchover level of asset specificity is
determined by the intersection DEMO the transaction-cost curves for
market and hierarchy, it will vary with DEMO risk preference of the firm.
Thus, the level of asset specificity (K,, in Figure 1) at which a risk-averse
firm will prefer hierarchy to market will be lower than that of a risk-
In DEMO 1991 article, Williamson included hybrid forms of governance in the model.
DEMO inclusion of such forms would unnecessarily complicate the essential argument
made here, they are excluded from the illustrations in Figures 1 and 2 in the interests of
clarity. Their exclusion does not imply they are irrelevant; we show later that they are
relevant, especially for transactions infused with trust. Thus, references to market in this
article are not limited to spot-market contracts involving little or no asset specificity and
anonymous actors. Such DEMO also include long-term contracts across a market inter-
face, which embody DEMO of hierarchy (Stinchcombe, 1990; Williamson, 1985) and higher
levels DEMO asset specificity (Williamson, 1985)-the so-called hybrid form.
The variance of transaction costs across levels of asset specificity is much greater for
costs DEMO market governance than for costs of hierarchy (Williamson, 1985, 1991)DEMO Although it
could be argued that costs of hierarchy also vary with risk preferences, the effects would be
in the same direction but less pronounced. Therefore, we have represented them with a
single curve, in DEMO to simplify the model.
84 Academy of Management Review January
neutral firm, (K,,), DEMO, in turn, will be lower than the switchover level
for a risk-seeking firm (K,,). The choice of governance structure will vary
with the risk preference of the firm. Therefore, we propose
Proposition 1: Risk-seeking firms will continue to trans-
act in the market at higher levels of asset specificity
than either risk-neutral or risk-averse firms.
Proposition 2: Risk-averse firms will vertically integrate
transactions at lower levels of asset specificity DEMO ei-
ther risk-neutral or risk-seeking firms.
The failure of authors to define the meaning of risk in TCE has led to
some ambiguity in DEMO discussions. For instance, one of three
defenses offered by Williamson to DEMO the use of this assumption is that
"if the penalties for DEMO to bear risk are great, parties have strong
incentives to craft DEMO with superior risk-bearing properties" (1985:
389). However, if DEMO is a subjective phenomenon, these penalties do not
apply to risk-neutral DEMO Faced with two transactions of unequal re-
turns, a risk-neutral actor DEMO choose the higher return, irrespective of
risk, thus avoiding any penalties. The defense offered by Williamson
seems to imply a view of risk DEMO an objective feature of the exogenous
environment. Following this interpretation, Ring DEMO Van de Ven pro-
posed that "consistent with Williamson . . DEMO the greater the risks in a
transaction, the more complex the DEMO structure, ceteris paribus"
(1992: 488). This proposition is DEMO with Williamson's work, but it is
only consistent with an DEMO of risk neutrality if risk is an objective
phenomenon. The subjective definition of risk adopted in this article is
grounded in research on how DEMO view risk (MacCrimmon & We-
hrung, 1986; March & Shapira, 19871, and, therefore, we argue, it is more
realistic than DEMO interpretation implied in Williamson's work. We further
suggest that a subjective view of risk is more consistent with the subjec-
tive view of DEMO that we have already argued is implicit in mainstream
TCE research.
In essence, the assumption of risk neutrality has relegated variable
risk preferences to the status of an omitted variable in empirical TCE
research to date, thereby reducing the predictive efficacy of the theory.
Our examination of risk DEMO in the TCE model suggests that a more
realistic assumption-that of variable risk preferences-can be adopted
with relative ease and with little threat to DEMO We have illustrated
that when variable risk preferences are incorporated in the model, the
switchover level from market to hierarchy for a transaction of a given
level of asset specificity, uncertainty, and frequency of interaction DEMO
vary, according to those risk preferences.
INTEGRATING THE BEHAVIORAL ASSUMPTIONS OF DEMO
USING TRUST
We believe that progress in theory development has been impeded by
a tendency to treat the behavioral assumptions of TCE as separate DEMO
1996
Chiles and McMackin
85
distinct. This tendency underlies the neglect of DEMO neutrality and also
explains the dearth of attention to the interactive nature of these assump-
tions. In this section, we use the social-context variable of trust to unify
TCE's three behavioral assumptions and illustrate how DEMO and trust
interact to influence the governance-structure predictions of the theory.
Trust is chosen for this task because in the literature it is related DEMO each
of the behavioral assumptions. The relationship between trust and op-
portunism has been widely established Ie.g., Bradach & Eccles, 1989;
Granovetter, 1985; Larson, 1992); the relationship between trust and
bounded rationality DEMO received slight attention (Lincoln, 1990; Powell,
1990); and DEMO relationship between trust and risk has just begun to be
explored (DEMO & Van de Ven, 1992).
Additional justification for incorporating trust DEMO the TCE model
comes from calls by proponents within the TCE paradigm for its inclusion.
Williamson acknowledged that although transaction-cost economizing is
the primary DEMO of TCE, "the costs need to be located in the larger
context of which they are a part . . . [including] the DEMO context in which
the transactions are embedded" (1985: 22). DEMO this regard, he acknowl-
edged that "trust is important and businessmen rely on it much more
extensively than is commonly realized" (Williamson, 1975: 108). Although
trust is given passing recognition as an important social context variable,
it is not incorporated into the mainstream model DEMO TCE. Williamson (1985:
406) acknowledged both that the difficulties in operationalizing and "un-
packing" trust were more the domain of the DEMO theorist than the
economist and that attention to behavioral and governance features that
transcend the mainstream model of TCE may be needed. In this DEMO,
we attempt to "unpack" trust and incorporate it into the TCE model. By
doing so, we begin to relax the assumptions of opportunism and bounded
rationality in keeping with a deductive approach to theory DEMO
A Structured View of Trust
Trust can be defined as increasing one's vulnerability to the risk of
opportunistic behavior of one's transaction DEMO, whose behavior is not
under one's control in a situation DEMO which the costs of violating the trust
are greater than the benefits of upholding the trust (Zand, 1972). Without
vulnerability to the DEMO of opportunism, there is no need to trust. Some
degree of DEMO must be present so that there is a test of trust (DEMO,
1988). Trust also may be defined as the expectation that an exchange
partner will not engage in opportunistic behavior, even in the face of
countervailing short-term incentives (Bradach & Eccles, 1989; Frank, DEMO;
Orbell, Dawes, & Schwartz-Shea, 1994) and uncertainty about long-term
benefits. Both definitions address risk either explicitly or implicitly; thus,
trust requires risk. However, what would cause economic actors to in-
crease their vulnerability or to have such expectations? Why would par-
ties to an economic exchange refrain from opportunistic behavior? These
questions may be addressed by viewing the conditions that generate trust
86
Academy of Management Review
January
through three interpretive lenses-two sociological and DEMO economic in
nature (Bradach & Eccles, 1989; Husted, 1989).
First, the conditions that generate trust may be viewed through the
interpretive lens of social norms. In this case, "global trust in generalized
DEMO" (Butler, 1991: 643) is generated as a result of DEMO norms, such as
norms of reciprocity (Gouldner, 1960), norms DEMO obligation and cooperation
(Bradach & Eccles, 1989), and norms of fairness (Kahneman, Knetsch, &
Thaler, 1986). Such social norms generate shared expectations among
people at various societal levels, including the larger society (Gouldner,
1960), regional and local culture, ethnic or DEMO sectors, industry sec-
tors by way of standard business practices and DEMO associations, and
professional and occupational sectors (Husted, 1989; Zucker, DEMO). This
view was also expressed by Durkheim, who believed that DEMO ex-
change relations were enforced and regulated by "an obligation imposed
DEMO society as a whole . . . or . . . by an occupational group of professional
practitioners" (cited in Dore, 1983: DEMO). Thus, it is the honoring of moral
obligations inherent in DEMO social norms that generates trust, which, in
turn, constrains opportunistic DEMO
Second, the conditions that generate trust may be viewed through the
DEMO lens of social embeddedness. In this case, "situational trust
in specific others" (Butler, 1991: 643) is generated as a result of personal
relations that arise in the course of economic transactions. Macauley
(1963) discussed U.S. managers' concern that detailed attention to con-
tracts may DEMO the undesirable consequences of signaling a lack of trust
and the damaging of a friendship. Likewise, Granovetter (1985) viewed an
economic actor's purposeful behavior as embedded in concrete personal
relations and networks of personal DEMO that generate trust and dis-
courage malfeasance. similarly, Dore argued that DEMO is a "sense of duty
. . . a particular sense DEMO diffuse obligation to the individual trading part-
ner" (1983: 470-471) that generates trust and constrains opportunistic be-
havior in Japanese relational contracting. DEMO, it is the honoring of per-
sonal obligations inherent in socially DEMO economic transactions
that generates trust, which, in turn, constrains opportunistic DEMO
Third, the conditions that generate trust may be viewed through the
DEMO lens of rational economics. In this case, "trust-like behavior"
(DEMO, 1989: 32; Frank, 1993) is generated in a multiperiod DEMO'
dilemma game as a result of self-interest-seeking, utility-maximizing in-
dividuals DEMO net-present-value calculations, the results of which in-
dicate net benefits to DEMO from short-term opportunistic behavior.
Game theory has been widely enlisted as a means of explaining such
behavior (Axelrod, 1984; Frank, 1993; Heide & Miner, 1992; Hill, 1990;
Parkhe, 1993). In DEMO multiperiod prisoners' dilemma, both parties act with
the expectation that they may engage each other again. This expectation
of future economic relations, known as the "shadow of the future" (Axel-
rod, 1984: 126), constrains the actors' opportunistic behavior in the current
period. Thus, DEMO is a purely economic calculus employed by self-interest-
1996
Chiles and McMackin
87
seeking actors devoid of social norms or DEMO embeddedness that gen-
erates this type of trust, which, in turn, constrains opportunistic behavior.
Up to this point, we have employed both DEMO and behavioral
conceptions of trust by using such terms as trust and trust-like behavior,
respectively. This distinction between trust and trusting behavior de-
DEMO further comment. Zand (1972) described a spiral reinforcement pro-
cess, DEMO which one's inner state of trust (mistrust) becomes transformed
into behavior that is trusting (mistrusting). In this case, there is DEMO bidi-
rectional link between trust and trusting behavior, in which each DEMO
forces the other, such that they become isomorphic. Following Zand, we
take the position that trust and trusting behavior are inseparable.
We have DEMO far argued (a)that the conditions that generate trust
can be DEMO through three interpretive lenses and (b) that trust con-
strains opportunistic behavior. In addition to this direct link between trust
and the constraining DEMO opportunistic behavior, this relationship can be
mediated by reputation. Reputation is DEMO multidimensional construct. A
firm's reputation can be construed as a reputation for reliability (Weigelt
& Camerer, 19881, predation (Kreps & Wilson, 1982; Milgrom & Roberts,
1982), quality (Weigelt & Camerer, 1988), tit-for-tat behavior (Buckley &
Casson, 1988), honesty (DEMO & Roberts, 1992), or trustworthiness (Mil-
grom & Roberts, DEMO; Ring & Van de Ven, 1992). A reputation for trust-
worthiness is an asset in which firms invest by engaging in trustworthy
DEMO This asset can be a signal to other actors-both those that have
interacted with the party in the past and those that have not-of DEMO party's
trustworthiness based on its prior history of trustworthy behavior. Parties
possessing such reputational assets would be willing to forego desirable
short-term outcomes DEMO through opportunistic behavior in order
to protect their valued reputation and the long-term benefits it provides,
such as decreased costs of finding and DEMO with future exchange
partners. Thus, trust can lead to the constraining DEMO opportunistic behav-
ior by way of reputation. As a final note, DEMO link between trust (and,
hence, trusting behavior) and reputation DEMO trustworthiness also can be
bidirectional and subject to spiral reinforcement processes as described
above.
In sum, we have sketched a structured view of trust by using multiple
interpretive lenses and shown how reputation effects enter into DEMO a
framework. Building on this foundation, we turn next to investigate DEMO
trust can serve to integrate all the behavioral assumptions of TCE.
Trust, Opportunism, and Transaction Cost Economics
The behavioral assumption of opportunism holds DEMO individuals are
"self-interest seeking with guile" (Williamson, 1985: 47)DEMO Importantly, not
all actors are assumed to behave opportunistically, but rather some prob-
ability exists that any given actor will do so some DEMO the time. The tradi-
tional TCE paradigm assumes this probability to increase as investments
in specific assets by the other party increase (Hill, DEMO). The party making
88
Academy of Management Review
January
significant investments in transaction-specific assets is DEMO at risk of
exploitation by the other party as a consequence of the latter's opportu-
nistic behavior. Accordingly, the transaction costs incurred in establish-
ing safeguards for such market transactions can exceed the bureaucratic
costs DEMO internal organization, thus occasioning a change in governance
structure from market DEMO hierarchy, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Many scholars have critically addressed DEMO assumption of opportun-
ism (Granovetter, 1985; Heide & John, 1992; Hill, 1990; Larson, 1992; Mait-
land, Bryson, & Van de Ven, 1985) as less than realistic for a wide range
DEMO economic exchange relationships, instead viewing such relations as
infused with trust DEMO than opportunism. We concur and argue that
trust's role in constraining opportunistic behavior allows parties to adopt
less elaborate safeguards, thereby economizing on transaction costs and,
in turn, altering the choice of governance structure. In other words, the
introduction of trust in the TCE model can alter the efficient boundaries of
the firm.
In the face of opportunism, contracts have to be laden with safe-
guards that are designed to DEMO each party from the opportunistic
behavior of the other. Such safeguards are costly and include costs as-
sociated with negotiating, drafting, and monitoring DEMO For con-
tractual relations infused with trust, the risk of opportunism DEMO attenu-
ated, thus reducing the elaborateness and costs associated with
contractual DEMO Trust decreases negotiating costs by fostering a
game-type approach to negotiations in which actors are cooperative and
quick to come to a resolution rather DEMO a tactical-type approach in
which actors are cautious and slow to come to a resolution (R. M. March,
1988). Trust decreases drafting costs by allowing contracts to be specified
more loosely with the expectation DEMO any ex ante gaps in the contract
will be dealt with ex post in a fair manner. Trust decreases monitoring
costs as a result DEMO each party's confidence in the other's performance,
even though short-term incentives may favor opportunism. Trust also de-
creases the costs associated DEMO more complex safeguards such as bond-
ing, and as noted previously, a party's reputation for trustworthiness de-
creases the costs of finding DEMO exchange partner. Because the costs
associated with contractual safeguards and search are, in fact, transac-
tion costs, trust economizes on transaction costs.
The introduction of trust in the TCE model can shift the comparative
costs DEMO governance (as illustrated in Figure 2 by the rightward shift in DEMO
family of market governance cost curves) and can alter the choice DEMO
governance structures (as noted by the resulting increase in the level DEMO
asset specificity at which market governance is preferred relative to bu-
reaucratic governance). As such, inclusion of the social-context variable
of trust in the TCE framework will yield a model with greater predictive
power.
Transactions DEMO sufficiently large investments in transaction-
specific assets that would conventionally be assigned to a hierarchical
1996
Chiles and McMackin
89
governance structure in the absence of trust DEMO be assigned to a hybrid
governance structure in the presence of trust. Hybrid structures entail
recurrent, long-term relations between autonomous economic actors
where nontrivial specific assets are involved. Ring and Van de Ven ex-
plicated recurrent DEMO relational contracting as structures where "trust is
the principle mode of DEMO control" (1992: 491)-both are types of hybrid
governance structures. DEMO, Helper emphasized "governance by
trust" (1990: 153) in contractual relations of a long-term, bilateral nature-
also a type of hybrid governance structure. Finally, Granovetter (1985)
viewed virtually all economic transactions as DEMO in a structure of
personal relations. Accordingly, he argued that the DEMO anony-
mous market was virtually nonexistent and that a wide range of complex
economic transactions could occur across the market interface without
resorting to DEMO governance. For transactions involving long-
term relations and social embeddedness, he DEMO that hybrid gover-
nance structures could even be superior to hierarchical governance struc-
tures in generating trust and discouraging opportunism.
Trust, Bounded Rationality, DEMO Transaction Cost Economics
TCE utilizes the behavioral assumption of bounded rationality where
"human behavior is intendedly rational, but only limitedly so" (Simon,DEMO
1961: xxiv). Hence, the cognitive limitations of human actors are acknowl-
edged. As a result, economic actors do not possess the wits necessary to
write comprehensive contracts that account for all possible contingen-
cies. DEMO, incomplete contracting occurs.
Furthermore, it is instructive to observe the pairing that exists be-
tween bounded rationality and uncertaintylcomplexity (Williamson,
1975). In the absence of bounded rationality andlor uncertainty1
complexity, complete contracting is obtained, and no interesting choices
are left to be made regarding governance structures (Williamson, 1975).
Bounded rationality is, however, not absent-people DEMO all encumbered
by cognitive limits rooted in the human physiological makeup. Impor-
tantly, bounds on rationality have salience "only to the extent that DEMO
limits of rationality are reached-which is to say, under conditions of
DEMO and/or complexity" (Williamson, 1975: 22). It is bounded ratio-
nality relative to the uncertainty/complexity of the contracting world that
DEMO important with regard to specifying contracts and assessing alternative
governance structures (DEMO, 1975). Thus, if one can reduce the
level of uncertaintylcomplexity, then it is said that one has economized on
bounded rationality.
We argue that a relationship exists between trust and bounded ra-
tionality and DEMO the relationship is mediated by information, influence,
and control-a group DEMO variables identified by Zand (1972). Specifically,
the existence of DEMO in a contractual relationship may lead to (a)infor-
mation exchange DEMO is more accurate, comprehensive, and timely; (b)
greater receptivity to influence by others; and (c) relaxation of controls on
90
Academy of Management Review
January
others, which, in turn, reduces behavioral uncertainty/complexity (i.e.,
each party will have greater certainty as to the behavior of the other)
(Zand, 1972), which, in turn, "economizes" on bounded rationality. In sum,
trust in contractual relations may reduce behavioral uncertainty1
complexity, thus rendering bounded rationality less harmful and less
salient. Lincoln (1990) and Powell (1990) made DEMO arguments, though
they did not explicate the critical links of information, influence, and
control. Lincoln noted that the "rich integration of relations DEMO trust and
obligation with business transactions 'economizes' on bounded rational-
ity and uncertainty" (1990: 281). Likewise, Powell proposed that "trust re-
duces complex realities far more quickly and economically than predic-
tion, authority, or bargaining" (1990: 305).
Williamson (1985) noted DEMO bounded rationality concerns not only
decision processes as we have dealt with above, but it also concerns
governance structures. In particular, Williamson (1975, 1985) noted the
importance of devising governance structures that economize on DEMO
rationality, that is to say, the relative disfavoring of governance struc-
tures that "make large demands against cognitive competence" (William-
son, DEMO: 46). By rendering bounded rationality less harmful or less sa-
DEMO, trust can cause changes in the comparative efficacy among
governance structures. DEMO, the introduction of trust in the TCE model
can shift the DEMO costs of governance (asillustrated in Figure 2 by
the rightward shift DEMO the family of market governance cost curves) and
can alter the DEMO of governance structures (as noted by the resulting
increase in the DEMO of asset specificity at which market governance is
preferred relative to bureaucratic governance).
Trust, Risk, and Transaction Cost Economics
Although a relationship DEMO trust and risk has been established
(Ring & Van de Ven, 1992), the complex and interactive nature of this
relationship renders causal DEMO difficult to establish. Both trust and risk
are, as we have DEMO, subjective concepts embedded in a web of
social relationships. As such, the relationship between them is suffused
with "the complexities of parallel processing, bidirectional causality and
reverberating feedback that characterize both cognitive and social orga-
nizations" (McGuire, 1973: 448).
Consider, for instance, how DEMO permeates the relationship
among trust, risk, and transaction costs. Risk in this context is the per-
ceived risk that a partner to a DEMO that involves asset-specific
investments will behave opportunistically, consistent with our definition
DEMO risk as the subjective possibility of loss as perceived by the decision
maker. First, trust can indirectly affect transaction costs via the need (DEMO
lack thereof) to exchange information. If I trust you, I will let you make
choices that take my perspective into account; because there is less need
for verification of your behavior, information exchange is reduced, lead-
ing to lower transaction costs. Conversely, if I do not DEMO you, I will want
Chiles and McMackin
FIGURE 2
Trust and Risk Preference as Moderators of DEMO Effect of Asset
Specificity on Governance costb
M(K)r,,,,,,, = transaction cost
curves for market governance for
Governance risk-averse, DEMO, and risk-
Costs seeking firms
M(K)
Without Trust
M(DEMO)
With Trust
for risk-averse.
:
I 1 1 I I DEMO
1 1 1 I I
I 1 1 I I
I I 1 I I
I I 1 I I
I I t I DEMO
I I I
risk-neutral, and
risk-seeking firms
I
I
Kro Krn DEMO Asset
Specificity
Without Trust With Trust
a The switchover level of asset specificity will vary according to the risk preference of the
firm and DEMO level of trust in the relationship.
From "Comparative Economic Organization: The Analysis of Discrete Structural Alterna-
tives," by 0. E. Williamson, 1991, Administrative Science Quarterly, 36: 284. Copyright 1991
by Administrative Science Quarterly. Adapted with permission.
accurate and timely information to verify your behavior, leading to higher
transaction costs.7 Second, however, trust also can indirectly affect DEMO
action costs in other ways. For example, trust can affect transaction DEMO
via the nature of information that may be exchanged in an economic
relationship. Because I trust you, I perceive less risk in divulging rele-
We wish to thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing out this argument.
92
Academy of Management Review
January
vant, comprehensive, accurate, timely (DEMO, 1972)' or proprietary (Ring &
Van de Ven, 1992) information to you and, hence, less need to have elab-
orate contracts to safeguard my interests and, thus, lower transaction
costs. Conversely, if I do not trust you, then I perceive greater risk in
divulging such information to you, and I will desire more elaborate con-
tracts to safeguard my interests and, thus, higher transaction costs.
If DEMO considers the multidimensional nature of trust as outlined, and
inasmuch as DEMO is but one of three components of risk as seen by
managers-the others being time and control (MacCrimmon & Wehrung,
1986)-our discussion reveals something of the complexity of the relation-
ship among trust, risk, and TCE. A complete analysis of this complex
relationship is beyond our scope. We can, however, clearly recognize that
the subjective risk of DEMO transaction will be influenced by both the risk
appetite of the firm's managers and the degree to which the parties trust
each other. DEMO other words, the perceived risk of opportunistic behavior by
a counterparty DEMO a transaction that involves asset-specific investments
will be influenced by the risk preferences of a firm's managers and the
level of trust in DEMO relationship.
In concluding this section, we present a model of how DEMO prefer-
ences and trust can be jointly integrated into the mainstream TCE frame-
work. We propose that there are several different levels of asset DEMO
ity at which firms will change their preferred governance structure from
market to hierarchy, depending on the joint effects of risk and trust. First,
as previously illustrated, the utility associated with market governance in
a particular firm is a function of the risk preference of the firm. DEMO have
already proposed that a risk-averse firm will switch from market to hier-
archy at a lower level of asset specificity (K,, in Figure 1) than a risk-
neutral firm (K,, in Figure DEMO) and that the switchover level of asset spec-
ificity for a DEMO firm will, in turn, be lower than that of a risk-
seeking firm (K,, in Figure 1). Second, recognition that DEMO are
embedded in a social context, in which the level of DEMO between trans-
acting parties is a critical determinant of the perceived risk of opportun-
ism, leads to the realization that the switchover level of asset specificity
will be greater for transactions between parties who trust each DEMO than
between opportunistic parties, as illustrated in Figure 2.
Finally, the incorporating of the spectrum of risk preferences into the
model and the DEMO of the importance of trust yields a range of
predicted governance structures as a function of the risk preferences of
the transactors and the DEMO context in which the transaction takes
place. The switchover level of asset specificity predicted in the model
presented by Williamson (1991) is therefore DEMO one of a number of pos-
sible outcomes, representing the relatively DEMO case in which firms
are risk neutral and behave opportunistically. The switchover level of
asset specificity will be determined in part by the risk DEMO of the
firm and the level of trust in the relationship with the counterparty. Figure
2 illustrates an integrated model of trust and risk DEMO shows how they
1996
Chiles and McMackin
93
jointly affect the assignment of governance structures. DEMO suggest that
the expanded model presented here is more complete and offers ample
scope within the TCE framework to help explain anomalies such as DEMO
identified by Robins (1987) and Monteverde and Teece (1982). DEMO short,
incorporating risk and trust into the TCE paradigm enhances the explan-
atory and predictive power of the theory with relatively little loss DEMO par-
simony. The following is therefore proposed:
Proposition 3: The DEMO level of asset specificity at
which firms will choose to structure transactions within
the firm rather than in the market will be greater for DEMO
risk-averse (risk-neutral, risk-seeking) firm engaged in
transactions infused with higher DEMO of trust than for
an equally risk-averse (risk-neutral, risk-seeking) firm
DEMO in a transaction infused with lower levels of
trust.
IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH AND PRACTICE
We have offered a number of propositions from which testable DEMO
potheses can be derived. Moving from the theoretical propositions offered
here to empirical research will require researchers to confront a variety of
conceptual and DEMO issues not yet addressed in this article. The
first major empirical issue will concern measurement of both risk and
trust. We concur with Eisenhardt, who suggested that "studying risk pref-
erences is particularly opportune because of recent advances in measur-
ing risk preferences" (1989: 70). The works of MacCrimmon and Wehrung
(1986) and March and Shapira (1987) provide a base for researchers in this
area. Progress also has been made regarding the measurement of trust.
Butler (1991), in a review of measurements of trust and conditions of trust,
offered the conditions DEMO trust inventory (CTI) as an instrument. Butler's
work and that which he reviews should prove valuable to researchers
seeking to test the DEMO advanced in this article. Some measure-
ment issues posed by our propositions are, however, too complex to be
resolved in such a straightforward DEMO The risk instruments just de-
scribed essentially measure managerial attitudes. TCE, DEMO contrast, pur-
ports to predict firm behaviors. The further question of DEMO links between
these attitudes and firm behaviors also must be addressed.
Variables that moderate the relationship between managerial risk
preferences and a firm's DEMO behaviors must be considered. Three direc-
tions are suggested as potentially rewarding. First, agency theorists have
identified a number of variables that influence the relationship between
the risk preferences of owners and managers (Eisenhardt, 1989)DEMO Our pro-
posal that agency theory can be a source of variables for inclusion in TCE
models is consistent with Williamson's (1988) DEMO that these theories are
complementary. Second, although TCE focuses our attention DEMO choice of
governance structure, a firm's risk preferences may manifest DEMO
94
Academy of Management Review
January
in a variety of other ways. DEMO instance, a firm can choose a highly le-
veraged financial structure, or it can pursue a more risky strategy as its
modus operandi (Miles & Snow, 1978; Williamson, 1988); in employment
relationships, DEMO contracting carries risks (for the employer) of
opportunistic behavior by employees with idiosyncratic knowledge and
skills (Williamson, Wachter, & Harris, 19751, which can be eliminated
most effectively by structuring the relationship within the DEMO Thus,
even managers who are "risk seeking" by disposition may behave in a
"risk-averse" manner with respect to choice of governance DEMO, if
they are pursuing risky strategies in financial or other areas. DEMO
research is needed on the role of functional perspective in determining
risk preferences (Melone, 1994).
Applying TCE as a theory of managerial DEMO making relies, we
argue, on the treatment of economic costs as subjective costs. This idea
also has important research implications. Subjective costs cannot DEMO
measured post hoc using accounting data. In a subjective interpretation,
the costs that are relevant to the decision are those that are considered DEMO
the decision calculus of the decision maker at the moment of decision. In
order to measure these subjective transaction costs, researchers must
therefore gather data via direct contact with decision makers (Parkhe,
1993). A number of methods can be adopted. The use of mail and tele-
DEMO questionnaires and face-to-face interviews are well-established
research techniques in the social sciences (Judd, Smith, & Kidder, 1991).
All of these techniques DEMO be applied to measure subjective costs, but
they are vulnerable to DEMO heuristics and biases that distort memory of
even important events in people's lives (e.g., Dawes, 1988). We suggest
that the use of verbal protocols can more accurately measure subjective
transaction costs. Verbal protocols DEMO the taped thought processes of
decision makers who think aloud while making a decision. Decisions in
verbal protocol studies usually are not "real," but they are scenarios cre-
ated by the researcher, and they vary on the dimensions of interest. For
example, Melone (1994) gathered verbal protocols from a sample of CFOs
and VPs of corporations in the DEMO services industry to examine the in-
fluence that roles and experience have on the decision processes of cor-
porate executives. Although verbal protocols have DEMO obvious short-
comings as a research technique (e.g., the artificiality of the decision
scenario and whether the protocols reflect the true thought processes DEMO
the decision maker), they do yield unique insights into the decision cal-
culus used by managers when making decisions. As such, they are em-
inently suitable for the study of TCE.
A limitation of TCE DEMO to date, both empirical and theoretical,
has been the dearth DEMO practical advice for managers that it has produced.
We believe that our treatment of the model enhances the realism of the
theory because it DEMO realistic assumptions about risk and trust,
based on studies of how managers actually treat these issues (e.g., Mac-
Crimmon & Wehrung, 1986). The research methods suggested previously
1996
Chiles and McMackin
95
also can yield useful information for managers. DEMO, we must identify
the extent to which a transaction-cost calculus is DEMO in decision
making by managers of different functional backgrounds in a variety of
situations (Walker & Weber, 1984). Next, we can examine the outcomes of
decisions to determine whether, or in what circumstances, DEMO of a trans-
action-cost-economizing calculus leads to more economically efficient de-
cisions. Once such information has been gathered, researchers can as-
sess the need for, and potential benefits of, training managers in the
conscious use DEMO transaction cost analysis.
Finally, we acknowledge two important limitations of this DEMO
First, TCE, with efficiency analysis at its core, has an DEMO place in
the multiparadigm world of organization theory, but to claim DEMO it is the
only paradigm would be foolhardy. "[Tlhere is more DEMO organization theory
than economizing on transaction costs . . . [but] efficiency analysis is
important to the study of all forms of organizations and DEMO absolutely
crucial to the study of commercial organizations" (Williamson & Ouchi,
1981: 367-368). Some alternative explanations for the empirical anomalies
described previously include power and resource dependency (Pfeffer &
Salancik, 1978; DEMO & Ouchi, 1981), strategy (Eccles, 1987; William-
son, DEMO), differential organizational size (Kimberly, 1976), and disequi-
librium effects. Referring to these alternatives, Williamson (1985, 1991)
and Williamson and Ouchi (1981) invoked the larger context of economic
natural selection and DEMO that such considerations, although some-
times worth acknowledging in the short DEMO, usually give way to effi-
ciency considerations in the long run, especially for profit-making enter-
prises. Ultimately, the question of which paradigm or alternative
explanation is capable of explaining the most variance in governance
structures DEMO an empirical one.
Second, we refer to the temporal aspects of DEMO trust and risk.
Though we do not address the stability of the trusting relationship, Slovic
(1993) argued that trust is fragile, is DEMO slowly, and is destroyed
easily. "Thus, once trust is lost, it may take a long time to rebuild it to its
former DEMO In some instances lost trust may never be regained" (Slovic,
1993: 8). The stability over time of economic relations infused with trust
may provide a fruitful avenue for future research. A similar argument DEMO
be made for risk, as a substantial body of empirical research DEMO dem-
onstrated (e.g., March & Shapira, 1992). The decision-making DEMO
offers important insights on the relationship between time and risk, the
DEMO of which are not fully explored in this article.
CONCLUSIONS
We have argued that many of the perceived shortcomings of the TCE
paradigm are DEMO part attributable to the inadequate treatment of risk and
trust in earlier empirical and theoretical work. Williamson's adoption of
the behavioral assumption of DEMO neutrality has had the effect of render-
96 Academy of Management Review January
ing TCE silent on one of DEMO fundamental determinants of economic be-
havior. The social-context variable of trust interacts with all three behav-
ioral assumptions of the TCE model and therefore DEMO be addressed in
future treatments. Using Williamson's framework, we have DEMO the
relative ease with which risk and trust can be incorporated into the
theoretical model. We also uncovered the heretofore implicit assumption
in much DEMO research that transaction costs are subjective. Finally, we
proposed a direction DEMO research in TCE that can yield more practical
advice for managers.
REFERENCES
Alchian, A. A. 1950. Uncertainty, evolution, and economic theory. ]ournal of Political Econ-
omy. 58: 211-221.
Aoki, M. 1984. The cooperative game DEMO of the firm. New York: Oxford University Press.
Axelrod, R. 1984. The evolution of cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
Bradach, J. L., & Eccles, R. G. 1989. Price, authority, and trust: From DEMO types to plural
forms. Annual Review of Sociology. 15: 97- 118.
DEMO, J. 1992. The escalation of commitment to a failing course of DEMO Academy of
Management Review, 17: 39-61.
Bromiley, P. 1991. Testing DEMO causal model of corporate risk taking and performance. Acad-
emy of Management lournal, 34: 37-59.
Buckley, P. J., & Casson. M. 1988. DEMO theory of cooperation in international business. In F.
Contractor & P. Lorange (Eds.), Cooperative strategies in international business: 31-53.
Lexington, MA: DEMO Books.
Butler, J. K. 1991. Toward understanding and measuring conditions of DEMO: Evolution of a
conditions of trust inventory. Journal of Management. 17: 643-663.
Camerer, C. 1985. Redirecting research in business policy and strategy. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal. 6: 1- 15.
Coase, R. H. 1973. Business DEMO and the accountant. In J. M. Buchanan & G. F.
Thirlby (DEMO), L.S.E. essays on cost: 95-132. London: London School of Economics and
Political Science.
Cyert, R. M., & March, J. G. 1963. A behavioral theory of the firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Dasgupta, P. 1988. Trust as a commodity. In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking
coopemtive relations: 49-72. New York: Basil DEMO
Dawes, R. M. 1988. Rational choice in an uncertain world. New DEMO: Harcourt Brace Jo-
vanovich.
Dore, R. 1983. Goodwill and the spirit of market capitalism. British Journal of Sociology, 34:
459-482.
Eccles, DEMO G. 1987. [Review of the book The economic institutions of capitalism: DEMO, mar-
kets, and relational contractingl. Administrative Science Quarterly. 32: 602-605.
DEMO, K. M. 1989. Agency theory: An assessment and review. Academy of Manage-
ment Review. 14: 57-74.
Fiegenbaum, A., & Thomas, H. DEMO Attitudes toward risk and the risk-return paradox:
Prospect theory explanations. Academy of Management lournal. 3 1: 85- 106.
1996
Chiles and McMackin
97
Fischhoff, B.. Watson, S. R., & Hope. C. 1990. Defining risk. In T. S. Glickman & M. Gough
(Eds.). Readings in risk: 30-41. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Frank, R. H. 1993. The stmtegic role of the emotions: DEMO over- and undersocialized
accounts of behavior. Working paper, Cornell University Johnson DEMO School of
Management, Ithaca, NY.
Gouldner, A. W. 1960. The DEMO of reciprocity: A preliminary statement. American Socio-
logical Review. 25: 161- 179.
Granovetter, M. 1985. Economic action and social structure: A theory DEMO embeddedness.
American lournal of Sociology. 91: 481-510.
Heide, J. B., & John, G. 1992. Do norms matter in marketing relationships? lournal of Mar-
keting, 56(April): 32-44.
Heide, J. B., & Miner, A. S. 1992. The shadow of the future: Effects of anticipated DEMO
and frequency of contact on buyer-seller cooperation. Academy of Management lournal.
35: 265-291.
Helper, S. 1990. Comparative supplier relations in the US and DEMO auto industries: An
exitlvoice approach. Business and Economic History. 19(2nd DEMO): 153- 162.
Hill, C. L. 1990. Cooperation, opportunism, and DEMO invisible hand: Implications for trans-
action cost theory. Academy of Management DEMO, 15: 500-514.
Hofstede, G. 1980. Culture's consequences. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Husted, B. W. 1989. Trust in business relations: Directions for empirical research. Business
and Professional Ethics lournal. 8(2): 23-40.
DEMO, C. M., Smith, E. R., & Kidder, L. H. DEMO Research methods in social relations (6th ed.).
Orlando, FL: DEMO, Rinehart & Winston.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decisions under risk.
Econometrica, 47: 262-291.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. 1986. Fairness as a constraint on profit seeking:
Entitlements in the market. American Economic DEMO, 76: 728-741.
Kimberly, J. R. 1976. Organizational size and the DEMO perspective: A review, cri-
tique, and proposal. Administmtive Science Quarterly. DEMO: 571-597.
Kirzner, I. M. 1986. Another look at the subjectivism of costs. In I. M. Kirzner (Ed.), Subjec-
tivism, intelligibility and DEMO understanding: 140- 156. New York: New York Uni-
versity Press.
Klein, B., Crawford, R. G., & Alchian, A. A. 1978. Vertical integration, appropriable rents,
and the competitive contracting process. Journal of Law and Economics. 21: 297-326.
Kreps, D. M., & Wilson, R. DEMO Reputation and imperfect information. lournal of Economic
Theory, 27: 253-279.
Larson, A. 1992. Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: A study of the DEMO of
exchange relationships. Administmtive Science Quarterly. 37: 76-104.
Laughunn, D. J., Payne, J. W., & Crum, R. 1980. Managerial risk preferences DEMO below target
returns. Management Science, 26: 1238- 1249.
Lincoln, J. DEMO 1990. Japanese organization and organization theory. In B. M. Staw & L. L.
Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior. vol. 12: 255-294. DEMO, CT:
JAI Press.
Lopes, L. L. 1987. Between hope and fear: The psychology of risk. Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, 20: 255-295.
Macaulay, S. 1963. Non-contractual relations in business: A preliminary study. DEMO
Sociological Review. 28: 55-70.
98 Academy of Management Review January
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1986. Taking risks: The management of uncertainty.
New York: DEMO Press.
Maitland, I., Bryson. J.. & Van de Ven. A. 1985. Sociologists, economists, and opportunism.
Academy of Management Review, 10: 59-65.
DEMO, J. G. 1988. Variable risk preferences and adaptive aspirations. lournal of DEMO
Behavior and Organization. 9: 5-24.
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. 1987. Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking. Manage-
ment Science. DEMO: 1404- 1418.
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. 1992. Variable risk preferences and the focus of attention. Psy-
chological Review, 99: DEMO 183.
March, R. M. 1988. The lapanese negotiator. Tokyo: Kodansha International, Ltd.
McGuire, W. J. 1973. The Yin and Yang of progress DEMO social psychology. lournal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology. 26: 446-456.
DEMO, N. M. 1994. Reasoning in the executive suite: The influence of rolelexperience-
based expertise on decision processes of corporate executives. Organization Science. 5:DEMO
438-455.
Miles, R. E., & Snow, C. 1978. Organizational strategy. DEMO and process. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Milgrom. P.. & Roberts. J. 1982. Predation, reputation. and entry deterrence. lournal of Eco-
nomic Theory, 27: 280-312.
Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. 1992. Economics. organization and management. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Monteverde, K., & Teece, D. J. 1982. Supplier switching costs and vertical integration in the
automobile industry. DEMO lournal of Economics. 13: 206-213.
Morgan, G. 1986. Images of organization. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Nelson, R. R., & Winter, S. G. 1982. An evolutionary theory of economic change. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Orbell, J. 1993. Hamlet and the psychology of rational choice under uncertainty. Rationality
and Society. 5: 127- 140.
Orbell. J., Dawes, R., & Shwartz-Shea. P. 1994. Trust, social categories. and individuals: The
case of gender. Working paper, University of Oregon, Eugene.
Parkhe, A. 1993. Strategic alliance structuring: A game theoretic and transaction cost ex-
amination of interfirm cooperation. Academy of Management lournal, 36: 794-829.
Pasour, E. C. 1991. Cost and choice-Austrian vs. conventional views. In R. Ebeling (Ed.),
Austrian economics: A reader: 281-303. Hillsdale, MI: Hillsdale College Press.
Pfeffer. J., & Salancik, G. R. 1978. The external control DEMO organizations. New York: Harper &
Row.
Powell, W. W. 1990. DEMO market nor hierarchy: Network forms of organization. In B. M.
Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 12: 295-336.
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. 1992. Structuring cooperative relationships between organi-
zations. Strategic Management Iournal. 13: 483-498.
Robins, J. A. 1987. Organizational economics: Notes on the use of transaction cost theory in
the study of organizations. Administrative DEMO Quarterly. 32: 68-86.
Simon, H. A. 1961. Administrative behavior (2nd DEMO). New York: Macmillan.
1996 Chiles and McMackin 99
Sitkin, S. B., & Pablo, A. L. 1992. Reconceptualizing the determinants of risk behavior. Acad-
emy of Management DEMO 17: 9-38.
Slovic, P. 1993. Perceived risk, trust, and democracy. Risk Analysis. 13: 675-682.
Stinchcombe, A. L. 1990. Information and organizations. DEMO: University of California
Press.
Townsend, R. 1982. Optimal multiperiod contracts and gain from enduring relationships
under private information. lournal of Political Economy. 90: 1166- 1186.
Ulrich, D., & Barney, J. B. 1984. Perspectives in organizations: Resource dependence, effi-
ciency, and population. Academy of Management Review. 9: 471-481.
Vaughn, K. I. 1980. Does it matter that costs DEMO subjective? Southern Economic lournal, 46:
702-715.
Walker, G., & Weber, D. 1984. A transaction cost approach to make-or-buy decisions. Ad-
ministmtive Science Quarterly, 29: 373-391.
Weigelt, K., & Camerer, C. 1988. Reputation and corporate strategy: A review of recent
theory and applications. Strategic Management lournal. 9: 443-454.
Williamson, 0. E. 1975. Markets and hierarchies. DEMO York: Free Press.
Williamson, 0. E. 1985. The economic institutions of capitalism. New York: Free Press.
Williamson, 0. E. 1988. Corporate finance DEMO corporate governance. lournal of Finance,
43(3): 567-591.
Williamson, DEMO E. 1991. Comparative economic organization: The analysis of discrete struc-
tural DEMO Administrative Science Quarterly. 36: 269-296.
Williamson, 0. E., & Ouchi, W. G. 1981. The markets and hierarchies and visible hand
perspectives. In DEMO H. Van de Ven & W. F. Joyce (Eds.), Perspectives DEMO organization
design and behavior: 347-370. New York: Wiley.
Williamson, 0. DEMO, Wachter, M. L., & Harris, J. E. 1975. Understanding the employment re-
lation: The analysis of idiosyncratic exchange. Bell lournal of Economics. 6: 250-280.
Yates, J. F., & Stone, E. R. 1992. DEMO risk construct. In J. F. Yates (Ed.), Risk taking behavior:DEMO
1-25. New York: Wiley.
Zand, D. E. 1972. Trust and managerial problem solving. Administrative Science Quarterly.
17(2): 229-239.
Zucker, L. G. 1986. Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure, 1840-
1920. DEMO B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in DEMO behavior. vol.
8: 53- 11 1. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
DEMO H. Chiles is a doctoral candidate in the Lundquist College of Business at the
University of Oregon. He is pursuing a degree in strategic DEMO and orga-
nization theory. His current research interests include transaction cost economics,
economic sociology, industry emergence, and resource-based strategy.
JohnF. McMackin is DEMO doctoral candidate in the Lundquist College of Business at
the University of Oregon. He is pursuing a degree in organizational behavior and
human resource DEMO His research interests include managerial cognition,
compensation, and recruitment and DEMO
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 8 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Integrating Variable Risk Preferences, Trust, and Transaction Cost Economics
Todd H. Chiles; John F. McMackin
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 21, No. 1. (Jan., 1996), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199601%2921%3A1%3C73%3AIVRPTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-O
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
DEMO location, you may be required to first logon via your library DEMO site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
[Footnotes]
DEMO Agency Theory: An Assessment and Review
Kathleen M. Eisenhardt
The Academy DEMO Management Review, Vol. 14, No. 1. (Jan., 1989), pp. 57-74.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198901%2914%3A1%3C57%3AATAAAR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P
6 Comparative Economic DEMO: The Analysis of Discrete Structural Alternatives
Oliver E. Williamson
Administrative Science DEMO, Vol. 36, No. 2. (Jun., 1991), pp. 269-296.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28199106%2936%3A2%3C269%3ACEOTAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q
References
Uncertainty, Evolution, and DEMO Theory
Armen A. Alchian
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 58, No. 3. (Jun., 1950), pp. 211-221.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3808%28195006%2958%3A3%3C211%3AUEAET%3E2.0.CO%3B2-K
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has DEMO maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 8 -
Price, Authority, and Trust: From Ideal Types to Plural Forms
Jeffrey L. DEMO; Robert G. Eccles
Annual Review of Sociology, Vol. 15. (1989), pp. 97-118.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0360-0572%281989%2915%3C97%3APAATFI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-V
The Escalation of Commitment to a Failing Course of Action: Toward Theoretical Progress
Joel Brockner
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 17, No. 1. (Jan., 1992), pp. 39-61.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199201%2917%3A1%3C39%3ATEOCTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P
Testing a Causal Model of Corporate Risk Taking and Performance
Philip Bromiley
DEMO Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 34, No. 1. (Mar., 1991), pp. 37-59.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199103%2934%3A1%3C37%3ATACMOC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-M
Redirecting DEMO in Business Policy and Strategy
Colin Camerer
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. DEMO, No. 1. (Jan. - Mar., 1985), pp. 1-15.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28198501%2F03%296%3A1%3C1%3ARRIBPA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-W
Goodwill and the Spirit of Market Capitalism
Ronald Dore
The British Journal of Sociology, Vol. 34, No. DEMO (Dec., 1983), pp. 459-482.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0007-1315%28198312%2934%3A4%3C459%3AGATSOM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 8 -
Review: [Untitled]
Reviewed Work(s):
The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, Relational Contracting. by Oliver E.
Williamson
Robert G. Eccles
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 32, No. 4. (Dec., 1987), pp. 602-605.
DEMO URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198712%2932%3A4%3C602%3ATEIOCF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z
Agency Theory: An Assessment DEMO Review
Kathleen M. Eisenhardt
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 14, No. 1. (Jan., 1989), pp. 57-74.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198901%2914%3A1%3C57%3AATAAAR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P
Attitudes toward Risk and the Risk-Return Paradox: Prospect DEMO Explanations
Avi Fiegenbaum; Howard Thomas
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 31, No. 1. (Mar., 1988), pp. 85-106.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28198803%2931%3A1%3C85%3AATRATR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L
The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary Statement
Alvin W. Gouldner
American Sociological Review, Vol. 25, No. 2. (Apr., 1960), pp. 161-178.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28196004%2925%3A2%3C161%3ATNORAP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-8
Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness
Mark Granovetter
The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 91, No. 3. (Nov., 1985), pp. 481-510.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-9602%28198511%2991%3A3%3C481%3AEAASST%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R
NOTE: DEMO reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 4 of 8 -
Do DEMO Matter in Marketing Relationships?
Jan B. Heide; George John
Journal DEMO Marketing, Vol. 56, No. 2. (Apr., 1992), pp. 32-44.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2429%28199204%2956%3A2%3C32%3ADNMIMR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0
The Shadow of the DEMO: Effects of Anticipated Interaction and Frequency of Contact on
Buyer-Seller Cooperation
DEMO B. Heide; Anne S. Miner
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 35, No. 2. (Jun., 1992), pp. 265-291.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199206%2935%3A2%3C265%3ATSOTFE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
Cooperation, Opportunism, and the Invisible Hand: Implications for Transaction Cost Theory
Charles W. L. Hill
The Academy of DEMO Review, Vol. 15, No. 3. (Jul., 1990), pp. 500-513.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199007%2915%3A3%3C500%3ACOATIH%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk
Daniel Kahneman; Amos Tversky
Econometrica, Vol. 47, No. 2. (Mar., 1979), pp. 263-292.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28197903%2947%3A2%3C263%3APTAAOD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3
Fairness as a Constraint on Profit Seeking: Entitlements DEMO the Market
Daniel Kahneman; Jack L. Knetsch; Richard Thaler
The American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No. 4. (Sep., 1986), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28198609%2976%3A4%3C728%3AFAACOP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I
Organizational Size and the Structuralist Perspective: A Review, Critique, and Proposal
John R. Kimberly
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 21, No. 4. (Dec., 1976), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197612%2921%3A4%3C571%3AOSATSP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-8
NOTE: The reference DEMO from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 5 of 8 -
Vertical DEMO, Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process
Benjamin Klein; Robert DEMO Crawford; Armen A. Alchian
Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 21, No. 2. (Oct., 1978), pp. 297-326.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2186%28197810%2921%3A2%3C297%3AVIARAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-D
Network Dyads in Entrepreneurial Settings: A Study of the Governance of Exchange
Relationships
Andrea Larson
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 37, No. 1. (Mar., 1992), pp. 76-104.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28199203%2937%3A1%3C76%3ANDIESA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
Non-Contractual Relations in Business: A Preliminary Study
Stewart Macaulay
American Sociological Review, Vol. 28, No. 1. (Feb., 1963), pp. 55-67.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28196302%2928%3A1%3C55%3ANRIBAP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
Sociologists, DEMO, and Opportunism
Ian Maitland; John Bryson; Andrew van de Ven
DEMO Academy of Management Review, Vol. 10, No. 1. (Jan., 1985), pp. 59-65.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198501%2910%3A1%3C59%3ASEAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
Managerial DEMO on Risk and Risk Taking
James G. March; Zur Shapira
Management DEMO, Vol. 33, No. 11. (Nov., 1987), pp. 1404-1418.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0025-1909%28198711%2933%3A11%3C1404%3AMPORAR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
Reasoning in the Executive Suite: The Influence of Role/Experience-Based Expertise on
Decision Processes of Corporate Executives
DEMO Paule Melone
Organization Science, Vol. 5, No. 3. (Aug., 1994), pp. 438-455.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1047-7039%28199408%295%3A3%3C438%3ARITEST%3E2.0.CO%3B2-W
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation DEMO
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 6 of 8 -
Supplier DEMO Costs and Vertical Integration in the Automobile Industry
Kirk Monteverde; David DEMO Teece
The Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 13, No. 1. (DEMO, 1982), pp. 206-213.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?DEMO
Strategic Alliance Structuring: A Game Theoretic and Transaction Cost Examination of
DEMO Cooperation
Arvind Parkhe
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 36, No. 4. (Aug., 1993), pp. 794-829.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199308%2936%3A4%3C794%3ASASAGT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
Structuring Cooperative Relationships between Organizations
Peter Smith Ring; Andrew DEMO Van De Ven
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 13, No. 7. (DEMO, 1992), pp. 483-498.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?DEMO
Organizational Economics: Notes on the Use of Transaction-Cost Theory in the DEMO of
Organizations
James A. Robins
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 32, No. 1. (Mar., 1987), pp. 68-86.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198703%2932%3A1%3C68%3AOENOTU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0
Reconceptualizing the Determinants of Risk Behavior
Sim B. Sitkin; DEMO L. Pablo
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 17, No. 1. (Jan., 1992), pp. 9-38.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/DEMO?sici=0363-7425%28199201%2917%3A1%3C9%3ARTDORB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-E
Optimal Multiperiod Contracts and the Gain from Enduring Relationships under Private
Information
Robert M. Townsend
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 90, DEMO 6. (Dec., 1982), pp. 1166-1186.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3808%28198212%2990%3A6%3C1166%3AOMCATG%3E2.0.CO%3B2-V
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 7 of 8 -
Perspectives DEMO Organizations: Resource Dependence, Efficiency, and Population
David Ulrich; Jay B. Barney
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 9, No. 3. (Jul., 1984), pp. 471-481.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198407%299%3A3%3C471%3APIORDE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
Does It Matter That Costs Are Subjective?
Karen I. Vaughn
Southern DEMO Journal, Vol. 46, No. 3. (Jan., 1980), pp. 702-715.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0038-4038%28198001%2946%3A3%3C702%3ADIMTCA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-J
A Transaction Cost Approach DEMO Make-or-Buy Decisions
Gordon Walker; David Weber
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 29, No. 3. (Sep., 1984), pp. 373-391.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198409%2929%3A3%3C373%3AATCATM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-N
Reputation and Corporate Strategy: A Review of Recent Theory and Applications
Keith Weigelt; Colin Camerer
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. DEMO, No. 5. (Sep. - Oct., 1988), pp. 443-454.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28198809%2F10%299%3A5%3C443%3ARACSAR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I
Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance
Oliver E. Williamson
The Journal of Finance, Vol. 43, No. 3, Papers and Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Annual
Meeting of the American Finance Association, Chicago, Illinois, December 28-30, 1987. (Jul.,
1988), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-1082%28198807%2943%3A3%3C567%3ACFACG%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5
Comparative Economic Organization: DEMO Analysis of Discrete Structural Alternatives
Oliver E. Williamson
Administrative Science Quarterly, DEMO 36, No. 2. (Jun., 1991), pp. 269-296.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28199106%2936%3A2%3C269%3ACEOTAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q
NOTE: The reference numbering from the DEMO has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 8 of 8 -
Understanding DEMO Employment Relation: The Analysis of Idiosyncratic Exchange
Oliver E. Williamson; Michael L. Wachter; Jeffrey E. Harris
The Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. DEMO, No. 1. (Spring, 1975), pp. 250-278.
Stable URL:
DEMO://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0361-915X%28197521%296%3A1%3C250%3AUTERTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Y
Trust and Managerial Problem Solving
Dale E. Zand
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 17, No. 2. (Jun., 1972), DEMO 229-239.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197206%2917%3A2%3C229%3ATAMPS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-N
NOTE: The DEMO numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.{1g42fwefx}