1983 APA Award Addresses
Choices, Values, and Frames
Daniel Kahneman
Amos DEMO
University of British Columbia
Stanford University
ABSTRACT: We discuss the cognitive DEMO the psy-
chophysical determinants of choice in risky and risk-
less contexts. The psychophysics of value induce risk
aversion in the domain of gains DEMO risk seeking in
the domain of losses. The psychophysics of chance
induce overweighting of sure things and of improbable
events, relative to events of moderate probability. De-
cision problems can be described orframed in multiple
ways DEMO give rise to different preferences, contrary
to the invariance criterion of DEMO choice. The pro-
cess of mental accounting, in which people organize
DEMO outcomes of transactions, explains some anomalies
of consumer behavior. In particular, the acceptability
of an option can depend on whether a negative outcome
DEMO evaluated as a cost or as an uncompensated loss.
The relation between decision values and experience
values is discussed.
Making decisions is like speaking DEMO do
it all the time, knowingly or unknowingly. It is hardly
DEMO, then, that the topic of decision making is
shared by many disciplines, from mathematics and
statistics, through economics and political science, to
sociology and psychology. The study of decisions ad-
dresses both normative and DEMO questions. The
normative analysis is concerned with the nature of
rationality and the logic of decision making. The de-
scriptive analysis, in contrast, DEMO concerned with peo-
ple's beliefs and preferences as they are, DEMO as they
should be. The tension between normative and de-
scriptive considerations characterizes much of the
study of judgment and choice.
Analyses of decision DEMO commonly distin-
guish risky and riskless choices. The paradigmatic
example of decision under risk is the acceptability of
a gamble that yields monetary outcomes DEMO specified
probabilities. A typical riskless decision concerns the
acceptability of a transaction in which a good or a
service is exchanged for money or DEMO In the first
part of this article we present an analysis of the cog-
nitive and psychophysical factors that determine the
value of risky DEMO In the second part we extend
this analysis to transactions and trades.
April 1984 • American Psychologist
Copyright 1984 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
Vol. 39, No. 4, 341-350
Risky Choice
Risky choices, such as whether or not to take an
umbrella and whether or not DEMO go to war, are made
without advance knowledge of their consequences.
DEMO the consequences of such actions depend on
uncertain events such as the weather or the opponent's
resolve, the choice of an act may be construed as the
acceptance of a gamble that can yield various DEMO
comes with different probabilities. It is therefore nat-
ural that the study of decision making under risk has
focused on choices between simple gambles DEMO
monetary outcomes and specified probabilities, in the
hope that these simple DEMO will reveal basic at-
titudes toward risk and value.
We shall sketch an approach to risky choice that
derives many of its hypotheses from DEMO psychophysical
analysis of responses to money and to probability.
The psychophysical approach to decision making can
be traced to a remarkable essay that Daniel DEMO
published in 1738 (Bernoulli 1738/1954) in which
he attempted to explain why people are generally
averse to risk and why risk aversion DEMO with
increasing wealth. To illustrate risk aversion and Ber-
noulli's analysis, consider the choice between a pros-
pect that offers an 85% chance to win $1000 (with a
15% chance to win nothing) and DEMO alternative of
receiving $800 for sure. A large majority of people
prefer the sure thing over the gamble, although the
gamble has higher (DEMO) expectation. The
expectation of a monetary gamble is a weighted av-
DEMO, where each possible outcome is weighted by
its probability of occurrence. DEMO expectation of the
gamble in this example is .85 X $1000 + .15 X
$0 = $850, which exceeds the expectation of $800
associated with the sure thing. The preference for the
sure gain is an DEMO of risk aversion. In general,
a preference for a sure outcome over a gamble that
has higher or equal expectation is called risk DEMO,
and the rejection of a sure thing in favor of a gamble
of lower or equal expectation is called risk seeking.
Bernoulli suggested DEMO people do not evaluate
prospects by the expectation of their monetary out-
comes, but rather by the expectation of the subjective
341
value of these outcomes. The subjective value of a
gamble is again DEMO weighted average, but now it is the
subjective value of each DEMO that is weighted by
its probability. To explain risk aversion within this
framework, Bernoulli proposed that subjective value,
or utility, is a DEMO function of money. In such a
function, the difference between the DEMO of $200
and $ 100, for example, is greater than the utility dif-
ference between $1,200 and $1,100. It follows from
DEMO that the subjective value attached to a gain
of $800 is more than 80% of the value of a gain of
$1,000. Consequently, the concavity of the utility
function entails a risk averse preference for DEMO sure
gain of $800 over an 80% chance to win $1,000,
although the two prospects have the same monetary
expectation.
It is DEMO in decision analysis to describe
the outcomes of decisions in terms of total wealth.
For example, an offer to bet $20 on the toss of a fair
coin is represented as a choice between an individual'DEMO
current wealth W and an even chance to move to
W + $20 or to W —$20. This representation appears
psychologically unrealistic: People do not normally
think of relatively small outcomes in terms of states
of DEMO but rather in terms of gains, losses, and
neutral outcomes (DEMO as the maintenance of the
status quo). If the effective carriers of subjective value
are changes of wealth rather than ultimate states of
DEMO, as we propose, the psychophysical analysis of
outcomes should be applied to gains and losses rather
than to total assets. This assumption plays DEMO central
role in a treatment of risky choice that we called
prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). In-
trospection as well as DEMO measurements
suggest that subjective value is a concave function of
the size of a gain. The same generalization applies to
losses as well. The DEMO in subjective value be-
tween a loss of $200 and a loss of $ 100 appears greater
than the difference in subjective value between DEMO loss
of $ 1,200 and a loss of $ 1,100. When the value func-
tions for gains and for losses are pieced DEMO, we
obtain an S-shaped function of the type displayed in
Figure DEMO
This article was originally presented as a Distinguished Scientific
Contributions Award address at the meeting of the American Psy-
chological Association, Anaheim, California, August 1983. This
work was supported by grant NR 197-058 from the DEMO Office of
Naval Research.
Award addresses, submitted by award recipients, are published
as received except for minor editorial changes designed to maintain
American DEMO format. This reflects a policy of recognizing
distinguished award recipients by eliminating the usual editorial
review process to provide a forum consistent with that DEMO
in delivering the award address.
Requests for reprints should be sent to Daniel Kahneman,
Department of Psychology, The University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
342
Figure 1
A Hypothetical Value Function
VALUE
DEMO
GAINS
The value function shown in Figure I is (a) de-
nned on gains and losses rather than on total wealth,
(b) concave in the domain of gains and convex in the
domain of losses, and (c) considerably steeper for losses
than for gains. The last property, which we label loss
aversion, expresses the intuition that DEMO loss of $X is
more aversive than a gain of $X is attractive. Loss
aversion explains people's reluctance to bet on a fair
DEMO for equal stakes: The attractiveness of the possible
gain is not DEMO sufficient to compensate for the
aversiveness of the possible loss. For example, most
respondents in a sample of undergraduates refused
to stake $10 on the toss of a coin if they stood to
win less than DEMO
The assumption of risk aversion has played a
central role in economic theory. However, just as the
concavity of the value of gains entails risk aversion,
the convexity of the value of losses entails risk DEMO
Indeed, risk seeking in losses is a robust effect, par-
ticularly when the probabilities of loss are substantial.
Consider, for example, a DEMO in which an in-
dividual is forced to choose between an 85% chance
to lose $1,000 (with a 15% chance to lose nothing)
and a sure loss of $800. A large majority of people
DEMO a preference for the gamble over the sure loss.
This is a risk seeking choice because the expectation
of the gamble (—$850) is DEMO to the expectation
of the sure loss (—$800). Risk seeking DEMO the domain
of losses has been confirmed by several investigators
(Fishburn & Kochenberger, 1979; Hershey & Schoe-
maker, 1980; Payne, Laughhunn, & Crum, 1980;
Slovic, FischhofF, & Lichtenstein, 1982). DEMO has also
been observed with nonmonetary outcomes, such as
hours of DEMO (Eraker & Sox, 1981) and loss of human
lives (Fischhoff, 1983; Tversky, 1977; Tversky &
April 1984 • American Psychologist
Kahneman, 1981). Is it wrong to be risk averse in
the domain of gains and risk seeking in the domain
of losses? These preferences conform to compelling
intuitions about the subjective value of gains and
DEMO, and the presumption is that people should be
entitled to their DEMO values. However, we shall see
that an S-shaped value function has DEMO that
are normatively unacceptable.
To address the normative issue we turn from
psychology to decision theory. Modern decision theory
can be said to begin DEMO the pioneering work of von
Neumann and Morgenstern (1947), who DEMO down
several qualitative principles, or axioms, that should
govern the preferences of a rational decision maker.
Their axioms included transitivity (if A is preferred
to B and B is preferred to C, then A is preferred to
C), and substitution (if A is preferred to B, then an
even chance to get A or C is preferred to an even
chance to get B or C), along with other DEMO of
a more technical nature. The normative and the de-
scriptive status of the axioms of rational choice have
been the subject of extensive DEMO In particular,
there is convincing evidence that people do not always
obey the substitution axiom, and considerable dis-
agreement exists about the normative merit of this
axiom (e.g., Allais & Hagen, 1979). However, all anal-
yses of rational choice incorporate two principles:
dominance and invariance. Dominance demands that
if prospect A is at least as good DEMO prospect B in every
respect and better than B in at least one respect, then
A should be preferred to B. Invariance requires that
the preference order between prospects should not
depend on the manner in DEMO they are described.
In particular, two versions of a choice problem DEMO
are recognized to be equivalent when shown together
should elicit the same preference even when shown
separately. We now show that the requirement of DEMO
variance, however elementary and innocuous it may
seem, cannot generally be satisfied.
Framing of Outcomes
Risky prospects are characterized by their possible
outcomes DEMO by the probabilities of these outcomes.
The same option, however,can DEMO framed or described
in different ways (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). For
example, the possible outcomes of a gamble can be
framed either as gains and losses relative to the status
quo or as asset DEMO that incorporate initial
wealth. Invariance requires that such changes in the
description of outcomes should not alter the pref-
erence order. The following pair DEMO problems illustrates
a violation of this requirement. The total number of
respondents in each problem is denoted by N, and
the percentage who chose each option is indicated in
parentheses.
Problem 1 (N = 152): Imagine that the U.S. is preparing
for the outbreak of an unusual DEMO disease, which is
April 1984 • American Psychologist
expected to kill DEMO people. Two alternative programs to
combat the disease have been proposed. Assume that the
exact scientific estimates of the consequences of the pro-
grams DEMO as follows:
If Program A is adopted, 200 people will DEMO saved. (72%)
If Program B is adopted, there is a one-third probability
that 600 people will be saved and a two-thirds probability
DEMO no people will be saved. (28%)
Which of the two DEMO would you favor?
The formulation of Problem 1 implicitly adopts
as a reference point a state of affairs in which the
disease is DEMO to take its toll of 600 lives. The
outcomes of the programs include the reference state
and two possible gains, measured by the number of
lives saved. As expected, preferences are risk averse:
A clear majority of respondents prefer saving 200
lives for sure over a gamble DEMO offers a one-third
chance of saving 600 lives. Now consider another
problem in which the same cover story is followed
by a different description DEMO the prospects associated
with the two programs:
Problem 2 (N DEMO 155): If Program C is adopted, 400 people
will die.(DEMO)
If Program D is adopted, there is a one-third probability
DEMO nobody will die and a two-thirds probability that 600
people will die. (78%)
It is easy to verify that options C and D in Prob-
lem 2 are undistinguishable in real terms from options
A DEMO B in Problem 1, respectively. The second ver-
sion, however, DEMO a reference state in which no
one dies of the disease. The best outcome is the
maintenance of this state and the alternatives are DEMO
measured by the number of people that will die of
the disease. People who evaluate options in these terms
are expected to show a DEMO seeking preference for
the gamble (option D) over the sure loss of 400 lives,
Indeed, there is more risk seeking in the second version
of the problem than there is risk aversion in the DEMO
The failure of invariance is both pervasive and
robust. It is as common among sophisticated re-
spondents as among naive ones, and it is not elimi-
nated even when the same respondents answer both
questions within DEMO few minutes. Respondents con-
fronted with their conflicting answers are typically
puzzled. Even after rereading the problems, they still
wish to be risk averse in the "lives saved" version;
they wish to be risk DEMO in the "lives lost" version;
and they also wish to obey invariance and give con-
sistent answers in the two versions. In DEMO stubborn
appeal, framing effects resemble perceptual illusions
more than computational errors.
DEMO following pair of problems elicits preferences
that violate the dominance requirement of rational
choice.
343
Problem 3 (N = 86): Choose between:
E. 25% chance to win $240 and
75% chance to lose $760
(0%)
F. 25% chance to win $250 and
75% chance to lose $750 (100%)
It is easy to see that F dominates E.
respondents chose DEMO
Problem 4 (N = 150): Imagine that you face
pair DEMO concurrent decisions. First examine b
then indicate the options you prefer.
Decision (i) Choose between:
A. a sure gain of $240 (84%)
B. 25% chance to gain $1000 and
75% chance to gain DEMO (16%)
Decision (ii) Choose between:
C. a sure DEMO of $750 (13%)
D. 75% chance to lose $1000 and
DEMO chance to lose nothing (87%)
As expected from the previous DEMO, a large
majority of subjects made a risk averse choice for DEMO
sure gain over the positive gamble in the first decision,
and an even larger majority of subjects made a risk
seeking choice for DEMO gamble over the sure loss in
the second decision. In fact, DEMO of the respondents
chose A and D and only 3% chose B and C. The same
pattern of results was observed in a modified DEMO
of the problem, with reduced stakes, in which un-
dergraduates selected gambles that they would actually
play.
Because the subjects considered the two DEMO
in Problem 4 simultaneously, they expressed in effect
a preference for DEMO and D over B and C. The preferred
conjunction, however, is actually dominated by the
rejected one. Adding the sure gain of $240 (option
A) to option D yields 25% chance to win $240 and
75% to lose $760. This is precisely option E in Prob-
lem DEMO, Similarly,adding the sure loss of $750 (option
C) to DEMO B yields a 25% chance to win $250 and
75% chance to lose $750. This is precisely option F
in Problem 3. Thus, the susceptibility to framing and
the S-shaped value function produce a violation of
DEMO in a set of concurrent decisions.
The moral of these results is disturbing: Invari-
ance is normatively essential, intuitively compelling,
and psychologically DEMO Indeed, we conceive
only two ways of guaranteeing invariance. The first
DEMO to adopt a procedure that will transform equivalent
versions of any problem into the same canonical rep-
resentation. This is the rationale for the DEMO ad-
monition to students of business, that they should
consider each DEMO problem in terms of total assets
rather than in terms of gains or losses (Schlaifer, 1959).
Such a representation would avoid the DEMO of
invariance illustrated in the previous problems, but
the advice is DEMO to give than to follow. Except in
Indeed, all
the following
DEMO decisions,
344
the context of possible ruin, it is more DEMO to
consider financial outcomes as gains and losses rather
than as states of wealth. Furthermore, a canonical
representation of risky prospects requires a com-
pounding of all outcomes of concurrent decisions (e.g.,
Problem 4) DEMO exceeds the capabilities of intuitive
computation even in simple problems. Achieving a
canonical representation is even more difficult in other
contexts such as safety, health, or quality of life.
Should we advise people to evaluate the consequence
of a public health policy (e.g., Problems 1 and 2) in
terms of overall mortality, mortality due to diseases,
or the number of deaths associated with the particular
disease under study?
Another DEMO that could guarantee invari-
ance is the evaluation of options in terms of their
actuarial rather than their psychological consequences.
The actuarial criterion has DEMO appeal in the context
of human lives, but it is clearly DEMO for financial
choices, as has been generally recognized at least since
DEMO, and it is entirely inapplicable to outcomes
that lack an objective DEMO We conclude that frame
invariance cannot be expected to hold and that a
sense of confidence in a particular choice does not
ensure that DEMO same choice would be made in another
frame. It is therefore good practice to test the ro-
bustness of preferences by deliberate attempts to
DEMO a decision problem in more than one way
(Fischhoff, Slovic, & Lichtenstein, 1980).
The Psychophysics of Chances
Our discussion so far DEMO assumed a Bernoullian ex-
pectation rule according to which the value, DEMO utility,
of an uncertain prospect is obtained by adding the
utilities of the possible outcomes, each weighted by
its probability. To examine this assumption, let us
again consult psychophysical intuitions. Setting the
value of the status quo at zero, imagine a cash gift,
say of $300, and assign it a value of one. Now imagine
that you are only given a ticket to a lottery that has
a single prize DEMO $300. How does the value of the
ticket vary as a function of the probability of winning
the prize? Barring utility for gambling, DEMO value of
such a prospect must vary between zero (when the
DEMO of winning is nil) and one (when winning
$300 is a certainty).
Intuition suggests that the value of the ticket is
not DEMO linear function of the probability of winning,
as entailed by the expectation rule. In particular, an
increase from 0% to 5% appears to have a larger effect
than an increase from 30% to 35%,which DEMO appears
smaller than an increase from 95% to 100%. These
considerations suggest a category-boundary effect: A
change from impossibility to possibility or from pos-
sibility to certainty has a bigger impact than a com-
parable change DEMO the middle of the scale. This hy-
pothesis is incorporated into the curve displayed in
April 1984 • American Psychologist
Figure 2, which plots the weight attached to an event
as a function of its stated numerical probability. The
most salient feature of Figure DEMO is that decision weights
are regressive with respect to stated probabilities. Ex-
cept near the endpoints, an increase of .05 in the
probability of winning increases the value of the pros-
pect by less than 5% DEMO the value of the prize. We
next investigate the implications of these psycho-
physical hypotheses for preferences among risky op-
tions.
In Figure 2, decision weights are lower than the
corresponding probabilities over most of the DEMO
Underweighting of moderate and high probabilities
relative to sure things contributes to risk aversion in
gains by reducing the attractiveness of positive gam-
bles. DEMO same effect also contributes to risk seeking
in losses by attenuating the aversiveness of negative
gambles. Low probabilities, however, are over-
weighted, and very low probabilities are either over-
weighted quite grossly or neglected altogether, making
the decision weights highly unstable in that region.
The overweighting of DEMO probabilities reverses the
pattern described above: It enhances the value of DEMO
shots and amplifies the aversiveness of a small chance
of a severe loss. Consequently, people are often risk
seeking in dealing with improbable gains and risk
averse in dealing with unlikely losses. Thus, the char-
acteristics of decision weights contribute to the at-
tractiveness of both lottery tickets DEMO insurance pol-
icies.
The nonlinearity of decision weights inevitably
leads to violations of invariance, as illustrated in the
following pair of problems:
Problem 5 (N = 85): Consider the following two-stage game.
In the first stage, there is a 75% chance to end the game
without winning anything and a 25% chance to move into
the second stage. DEMO you reach the second stage you have a
choice between:
A. a sure win of $30 (74%)
B. 80% chance to win $45 (26%)
Your choice must be made before the game starts, i.e.,
before the outcome of the first stage is known. Please indicate
the option you prefer.
Problem 6 (N = 81): Which of the following options do
you prefer?
C. 25% chance to DEMO $30 (42%)
D. 20% chance to win $45 (58%)
Because there is one chance in four to move into
the second DEMO in Problem 5, prospect A offers a
.25 probability of winning DEMO, and prospect B offers
.25 X .80 = .20 probability of DEMO $45. Problems
5 and 6 are therefore identical in terms of probabilities
and outcomes. However, the preferences are not the
same in the two versions: A clear majority favors the
higher chance to win the smaller amount in Problem
April 1984 • American Psychologist
Figure 2
A Hypothetical DEMO Function
£l.O
e>
UJ
.5
o
UJ
Q
0
.5
1.0
STATED PROBABILITY: p
5, whereas the majority goes the other way DEMO Problem
6. This violation of invariance has been confirmed
with both real and hypothetical monetary payoffs (the
present results are with real money), with human
lives as outcomes, and with a nonsequential repre-
sentation of the chance process.
We attribute the failure of invariance to the in-
DEMO of two factors: the framing of probabilities
and the nonlinearity of DEMO weights. More spe-
cifically, we propose that in Problem 5 people DEMO
the first phase, which yields the same outcome re-
gardless of DEMO decision that is made, and focus their
attention on what happens DEMO they do reach the second
stage of the game. In that case, of course, they face
a sure gain if they choose option DEMO and an 80% chance
of winning if they prefer to gamble. Indeed, people's
choices in the sequential version are practically iden-
tical to the choices they make between a sure gain
of $30 and an DEMO chance to win $45. Because a
sure thing is overweighted in comparison with events
of moderate or high probability (see Figure 2) the
DEMO that may lead to a gain of $30 is more attractive
in the sequential version. We call this phenomenon
the pseudo-certainty effect because an DEMO that is
actually uncertain is weighted as if it were certain.
A closely related phenomenon can be demon-
strated at the lowend of the DEMO range. Suppose
you are undecided whether or not to purchase earth-
quake insurance because the premium is quite high.
As you hesitate, your friendly insurance agent comes
345
forth with an alternative offer: "For half the regular
premium you DEMO be fully covered if the quake occurs
on an odd day of the month. This is a good deal
because for half the price DEMO are covered for more
than half the days." Why do most DEMO find such
probabilistic insurance distinctly unattractive? Figure
2 suggests an answer. DEMO anywhere in the region
of low probabilities, the impact on the DEMO weight
of a reduction of probability from p to p/2 is con-
siderably smaller than the effect of a reduction from
p/2 DEMO 0. Reducing the risk by half, then, is not worth
half the premium.
The aversion to probabilistic insurance is sig-
nificant for three DEMO First, it undermines the
classical explanation of insurance in terms of DEMO con-
cave utility function. According to expected utility
theory, probabilistic insurance DEMO be definitely
preferred to normal insurance when the latter is just
acceptable (see Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). Second,
probabilistic insurance represents DEMO forms of
protective action, such as having a medical checkup,
DEMO new tires, or installing a burglar alarm system.
Such actions typically DEMO the probability of some
hazard without eliminating it altogether. Third, the
DEMO of insurance can be manipulated by the
framing of the contingencies. An insurance policy
that covers fire but not flood, for example, could DEMO
evaluated either as full protection against a specific
risk, (e.g., DEMO) or as a reduction in the overall prob-
ability of property DEMO Figure 2 suggests that people
greatly undervalue a reduction in the probability of
a hazard in comparison to the complete elimination
of that hazard. DEMO, insurance should appear more
attractive when it is framed as the DEMO of risk
than when it is described as a reduction of risk. Indeed,
Slovic, Fischhoff, and Lichtenstein (1982) showed that
a DEMO vaccine that reduces the probability
of contracting a disease from 20% to 10% is less at-
tractive if it is described as effective in DEMO of the
cases than if it is presented as fully effective against
one of two exclusive and equally probable virus strains
tliat produce identical DEMO
Formulation
Effects
So far we have discussed framing as a tool to dem-
onstrate failures of invariance. We now turn attention
to the processes DEMO control the framing of outcomes
and events. The public health problem illustrates a
formulation effect in which a change of wording from
"lives saved" to "lives lost" induced a marked shift
of preference from risk aversion to risk seeking. Ev-
idently, the subjects adopted the descriptions of the
outcomes as given in the question and evaluated the
outcomes accordingly DEMO gains or losses. Another for-
mulation effect was reported by McNeil, DEMO, Sox,
and Tversky (1982). They found that preferences of
physicians and patients between hypothetical therapies
346
for lung cancer varied markedly DEMO their probable
outcomes were described in terms of mortality or
survival. Surgery, unlike radiation therapy, entails a
risk of death during treatment. As DEMO consequence,
the surgery option was relatively less attractive when
the statistics of treatment outcomes were described
in terms of mortality rather than in DEMO of survival.
A physician, and perhaps a presidential advisor
as well, could influence the decision made by the
patient or by the President, without distorting or sup-
pressing information, merely by the framing of out-
comes and contingencies. Formulation effects can oc-
cur fortuitously, without anyone being aware of the
impact of the frame on the ultimate decision. They
DEMO also be exploited deliberately to manipulate the
relative attractiveness of options. For example, Thaler
(1980) noted that lobbyists for the credit card industry
insisted that any price difference between cash and
credit purchases be labeled DEMO cash discount rather
than a credit card surcharge. The two labels frame
the price difference as a gain or as a loss by implicitly
DEMO either the lower or the higher price as
normal. Because losses loom larger than gains, con-
sumers are less likely to accept a surcharge than to
forego a discount. As is to be expected, attempts to
influence framing are common in the marketplace
and in the political arena.
DEMO evaluation of outcomes is susceptible to for-
mulation effects because of the nonlinearity of the
value function and the tendency of people to evaluate
DEMO in relation to the reference point that is sug-
gested or implied by the statement of the problem.
It is worthy of note that DEMO other contexts people
automatically transform equivalent messages into the
same representation. Studies of language compre-
hension indicate that people quickly recede much of
what DEMO hear into an abstract representation that
no longer distinguishes whether the idea was expressed
in an active or in a passive form and no DEMO dis-
criminates what was actually said from what was im-
plied, DEMO, or implicated (Clark & Clark,
1977). Unfortunately, the DEMO machinery that per-
forms these operations silently and effortlessly is not
adequate to perform the task of receding the two
versions of the public DEMO problem or the mortality-
survival statistics into a common abstract form.
Transactions and Trades
Our analysis of framing and of value can be extended
DEMO choices between multiattribute options, such as
the acceptability of a transaction DEMO a trade. We pro-
pose that, in order to evaluate a DEMO option,
a person sets up a mental account that specifies the
advantages and the disadvantages associated with the
option, relative to a multiattribute reference state.
The overall value of an option is given by the DEMO
of its advantages and its disadvantages in relation to
April 1984 • American Psychologist
the reference state. Thus, an option is acceptable if
the value of its advantages exceeds the value of its
disadvantages. This analysis assumes psychological—
DEMO not physical—separability of advantages and dis-
advantages. The model does not constrain the manner
in which separate attributes are combined to form
overall measures DEMO advantage and of disadvantage,
but it imposes on these measures assumptions of con-
cavity and of loss aversion.
Our analysis of mental accounting DEMO a large
debt to the stimulating work of Richard Thaler (1980,DEMO
in press), who showed the relevance of this process
to consumer behavior. The following problem, based
on examples of Savage (1954) and Thaler (1980), in-
troduces some of the rules that govern the construction
of mental accounts and illustrates the extension of
the concavity of DEMO to the acceptability of trans-
actions.
Problem 7: Imagine that you DEMO about to purchase a jacket
for $125 and a calculator for $15. The calculator salesman
informs you that the calculator you wish to buy DEMO on sale
for $ 10 at the other branch of the store, located 20 minutes
drive away. Would you make a trip to the other store?
This problem is concerned with the acceptability of
an DEMO that combines a disadvantage of incon-
venience with a financial advantage that can be framed
as a minimal, topical, or comprehensive account. The
DEMO account includes only the differences be-
tween the two options and disregards the features that
they share. In the minimal account, the advantage
associated with driving to the other store is framed
as a gain of DEMO A topical account relates the con-
sequences of possible choices to a reference level that
is determined by the context within which the decision
DEMO In the preceding problem, the relevant topic
is the purchase of DEMO calculator, and the benefit of
the trip is therefore framed as DEMO reduction of the
price, from $15 to $10. Because the potential DEMO
is associated only with the calculator, the price of the
jacket DEMO not included in the topical account. The
price of the jacket, DEMO well as other expenses, could
well be included in a more DEMO account
in which the saving would be evaluated in relation
to, DEMO, monthly expenses.
The formulation of the preceding problem ap-
pears neutral DEMO respect to the adoption of a min-
imal, topical, or comprehensive account. Wesuggest,
however, that people will spontaneously frame deci-
sions in terms of topical accounts that, in the context
of decision making, DEMO a role analogous to that of
"good forms" in perception and of basic-level cate-
gories in cognition. Topical organization, in con-
junction with the concavity of value, entails that the
willingness to travel to the other store for a saving of
$5 on a calculator should be DEMO related to the
price of the calculator and should be independent of
April 1984 • American Psychologist
the price of the jacket. To test DEMO prediction, we
constructed another version of the problem in which
the DEMO of the two items were interchanged. The
price of the calculator was given as $125 in the first
store and $120 in the other DEMO, and the price of
the jacket was set at $ 15. DEMO predicted, the proportions
of respondents who said they would make the DEMO
differed sharply in the two problems. The results
showed that 68% of the respondents (N = 88) were
willing to drive to the DEMO branch to save $5 on a
$15 calculator, but only 29% DEMO 93 respondents were
willing to make the same trip to save $5 on a $125
calculator. This finding supports the notion of topical
organization DEMO accounts, since the two versions are
identical both in terms of DEMO minimal and a compre-
hensive account.
The significance of topical accounts for consumer
behavior is confirmed by the observation that the
standard deviation of DEMO prices that different stores
in a city quote for the same product is roughly pro-
portional to the average price of that product (Pratt,
Wise, & Zeckhauser, 1979). Since the dispersion of
prices DEMO surely controlled by shoppers' efforts to find
the best buy, these results suggest that consumers
hardly exert more effort to save $ 15 DEMO a $ 150 pur-
chase than to save $5 on a $50 purchase.
The topical organization of mental accounts
leads people to evaluate gains DEMO losses in relative
rather than in absolute terms, resulting in large DEMO
ations in the rate at which money is exchanged for
other things, such as the number of phone calls made
to find a good buy or the willingness to drive a long
distance to get one. DEMO consumers will find it easier
to buy a car stereo system or a Persian rug, respec-
tively, in the context of buying a DEMO or a house than
separately. These observations, of course, run counter
to the standard rational theory of consumer behavior,
which assumes invariance DEMO does not recognize the
effects of mental accounting.
The following problems illustrate another ex-
ample of mental accounting in which the posting of
a DEMO to an account is controlled by topical orga-
nization:
Problem 8 (N = 200): Imagine that you have decided to
see a play and paid the admission price of $10 per ticket.
As you DEMO the theater, you discover that you have lost
the ticket. The DEMO was not marked, and the ticket cannot
be recovered.
Would you DEMO $10 for another ticket?
Yes (46%) No (54%)
DEMO 9 (N = 183): Imagine that you have decided to
DEMO a play where admission is $10 per ticket. As you enter
the theater, you discover that you have lost a $10 bill.
Would you still pay $10 for a ticket for the play?
Yes (88%) No (12%)
The difference between the responses to the two DEMO
347
lems is intriguing. Why are so many people unwilling
to spend $10 DEMO having lost a ticket, if they would
readily spend that sum DEMO losing an equivalent
amount of cash? We attribute the difference to DEMO
topical organization of mental accounts. Going to the
theater is normally viewed as a transaction in which
the cost of the ticket is exchanged DEMO the experience
of seeing the play. Buying a second ticket increases
the cost of seeing the play to a level that many re-
spondents DEMO find unacceptable. In contrast,
the loss of the cash is not posted to the account of
the play, and it affects the purchase of a ticket only
by making the individual feel slightly less affluent.
DEMO interesting effect was observed when the two
versions of the problem were presented to the same
subjects. The willingness to replace a lost ticket DEMO
creased significantly when that problem followed the
lost-cash version. In contrast, DEMO willingness to buy
a ticket after losing cash was not affected by prior
presentation of the other problem. The juxtaposition
of the two problems DEMO enabled the subjects
to realize that it makes sense to think of the lost ticket
as lost cash, but not vice versa.
The normative status of the effects of mental
accounting is questionable. Unlike earlier examples,DEMO
such as the public health problem, in which the two
versions DEMO only in form, it can be argued that
the alternative versions DEMO the calculator and ticket
problems differ also in substance. In particular, DEMO
may be more pleasurable to save $5 on a $ 15 purchase
than on a larger purchase, and it may be more an-
noying to pay twice for the same ticket than to lose
$10 in DEMO Regret, frustration, and self-satisfaction
can also be affected by framing (DEMO & Tver-
sky, 1982). If such secondary consequences are con-
DEMO legitimate, then the observed preferences do
not violate the criterion of DEMO and cannot
readily be ruled out as inconsistent or erroneous. On
the other hand, secondary consequences may change
upon reflection. The satisfaction of saving $5 on a
$ 15 item can be marred if the consumer DEMO
that she would not have exerted the same effort to
save $10 on a $200 purchase. We do not wish to
recommend that any DEMO decision problems that have
the same primary consequences should be resolved
in the same way. We propose, however,that systematic
examination of alternative framings offers a useful
reflective device that can help decision makers assess
the DEMO that should be attached to the primary and
secondary consequences of their choices.
Losses and Costs
Many decision problems take the form of a DEMO
between retaining the status quo and accepting an
alternative to it, DEMO is advantageous in some re-
spects and disadvantageous in others. The analysis of
value that was applied earlier to unidimensional risky
348
prospects can DEMO extended to this case by assuming
that the status quo defines the reference level for all
attributes. The advantages of alternative options will
then DEMO evaluated as gains and their disadvantages as
losses. Because losses loom larger than gains, the de-
cision maker will be biased in favor of retaining the
status quo.
Thaler (1980) coined the term "endowment ef-
fect" to describe the reluctance of people to part from
assets that belong to their endowment. When it is
more painful to give up DEMO asset than it is pleasurable
to obtain it, buying prices will DEMO significantly lower
than selling prices. That is, the highest price that DEMO
individual will pay to acquire an asset will be smaller
than the minimal compensation that would induce
the same individual to give up that DEMO, once ac-
quired. Thaler discussed some examples of the en-
dowment DEMO in the behavior of consumers and
entrepreneurs. Several studies have reported substan-
tial discrepancies between buying and selling prices
in both hypothetical and real DEMO (Gregory,
1983; Hammack & Brown, 1974; Knetsch & Sinden,
in press). These results have been presented as chal-
lenges DEMO standard economic theory, in which buying
and selling prices coincide except DEMO transaction costs
and effects of wealth. We also observed reluctance to
trade in a study of choices between hypothetical jobs
that differed in weekly DEMO (S) and in the temper-
ature (T) of the workplace. Our respondents were
asked to imagine that they held a particular position
(S,, T|) and were offered the option of moving to a
different position (S2, T2), which was better in one
respect DEMO worse in another. We found that most
subjects who were assigned to (S1} T,) did not wish
to move to (S2, T2), and that most subjects who were
assigned to the latter position DEMO not wish to move
to the former. Evidently, the same difference DEMO pay
or in working conditions looms larger as a disadvan-
tage than as an advantage.
In general, loss aversion favors stability over
change. Imagine two hedonically identical twins who
find two alternative environments equally attractive.
Imagine DEMO that by force of circumstance the
twins are separated and placed in the two environ-
ments. As soon as they adopt their new states DEMO ref-
erence points and evaluate the advantages and dis-
advantages of each other's environments accordingly,
the twins will no longer be indifferent DEMO the
two states, and both will prefer to stay where they
DEMO to be. Thus, the instability of preferences
produces a preference for DEMO In addition to fa-
voring stability over change, the combination of DEMO
aptation and loss aversion provides limited protection
against regret and envy by reducing the attractiveness
of foregone alternatives and of others' endowments.
Loss aversion and the consequent endowment
effect are unlikelyto play a significant role in DEMO
April 1984 • American Psychologist
economic exchanges. The owner of a store, for ex-
ample, does DEMO experience money paid to suppliers
as losses and money received from customers as gains.
Instead, the merchant adds costs and revenues over
some period of time and only evaluates the balance.
Matching debits and credits are DEMO cancelled
prior to evaluation. Payments made by consumers
are also not evaluated as losses but as alternative pur-
chases. In accord with standard economic DEMO,
money is naturally viewed as a proxy for the goods
and services that it could buy. This mode of evaluation
is made explicit DEMO an individual has in mind a
particular alternative, such as "I can either buy a new
camera or a new tent." In this analysis, a person will
buy a camera if its subjective value exceeds the value
of retaining the money it would cost.
There are cases DEMO which a disadvantage can be
framed either as a cost or as a loss. In particular, the
purchase of insurance can also be framed as a choice
between a sure loss and the risk of a DEMO loss. In
such cases the cost-loss discrepancy can lead to fail-
ures of invariance. Consider, for example, the choice
between a sure loss DEMO $50 and a 25% chance to lose
$200. Slovic, Fischhoff, and Lichtenstein (1982) re-
ported that 80% of their subjects expressed a DEMO
seeking preference for the gamble over the sure loss.
However, only DEMO of subjects refused to pay $50 for
insurance against a 25% risk of losing $200. Similar
results were also reported by Schoemaker and Kun-
DEMO (1979) and by Hershey and Schoemaker
(1980). We suggest DEMO the same amount of money
that was framed as an uncompensated loss in the first
problem was framed as the cost of protection in DEMO
second. The modal preference was reversed in the
two problems because losses are more aversive than
costs.
We have observed a similar effect in DEMO positive
domain, as illustrated by the following pair of prob-
lems:DEMO
Problem 10: Would you accept a gamble that offers a 10%
DEMO to win $95 and a 90% chance to lose $5?
Problem 11: Would you pay $5 to participate in a lottery
that offers a 10% chance to win $100 and a 90% chance
to win DEMO?
A total of 132 undergraduatesanswered the two ques-
tions, which DEMO separated by a short filler problem.
The order of the questions was reversed for half the
respondents. Although it is easily confirmed that the
DEMO problems offer objectively identical options, 55
of the respondents expressed different DEMO in
the two versions.Among them, 42 rejected the gamble
in Problem DEMO but accepted the equivalent lottery in
Problem 11. The effectiveness of this seemingly in-
consequential manipulation illustrates both the cost-
loss discrepancy and the DEMO of framing. Thinking
April 1984 • AmericanPsychologist
of the $5 as a payment makes the venture more ac-
ceptable than thinking of the same DEMO as a loss.
The preceding analysis implies that an individ-
ual's subjective state can be improved by framing
negative outcomes as costs rather DEMO as losses. The
possibility of such psychological manipulations may
explain a paradoxical form of behavior that could be
labeled the dead-loss effect. Thaler (1980) discussed
the example of a man who develops tennis elbow soon
after paying the membership fee in a tennis club and
continues to play DEMO agony to avoid wasting his in-
vestment. Assuming that the individual would not
play if he had not paid the membership fee, the ques-
tion arises: How can playing in agony improve the
individual's lot? Playing in pain, we suggest, maintains
' the evaluation of the membership fee as a cost. If the
individual were to stop playing, he would be forced
to recognize the fee as a dead loss, which may be
more aversive than playing in pain.
Concluding Remarks
The DEMO of utility and value are commonly used
in two distinct senses: (a) experience value, the degree
of pleasure or pain, satisfaction or anguish in the
actual experience of an outcome; and (b) decision
value, the contribution of an anticipated outcome to
the overall attractiveness or aversiveness of an option
in a choice. The distinction is rarely explicit DEMO de-
cision theory because it is tacitly assumed that decision
values and experience values coincide. This assump-
tion is part of the conception of DEMO idealized decision
maker who is able to predict future experiences with
perfect accuracy and evaluate options accordingly.
For ordinary decision makers, however, the DEMO
spondence of decision values between experience val-
ues is far from perfect (March, 1978). Some factors
that affect experience are not easily DEMO, and
some factors that affect decisions do not have a com-
DEMO impact on the experience of outcomes.
In contrast to the large amount of research on
decision making, there has been relatively little sys-
tematic exploration of the psychophysics that relate
hedonic experience to objective states. The DEMO basic
problem of hedonic psychophysics is the determi-
nation of the level of adaptation or aspiration that
separates positive from negative outcomes. The he-
DEMO reference point is largely determined by the
objective status quo, but DEMO is also affected by expec-
tations and social comparisons. An objective im-
provement can be experienced as a loss, for example,
when an employee receives a smaller raise than ev-
eryone else in the office. DEMO experience of pleasure
or pain associated with a change of state is also crit-
ically dependent on the dynamics of hedonic adap-
tation. Brickman & Campbell's (1971) concept of the
hedonic treadmill suggests the radical hypothesis that
349
rapid adaptation will cause the effects of any objective
improvement to be DEMO The complexity and
subtlety of hedonic experience make it difficult for
the decision maker to anticipate the actual experience
that outcomes will produce. Many DEMO person who or-
dered a meal when ravenously hungry has admitted
to a big mistake when the fifth course arrived on the
table. The DEMO mismatch of decision values and
experience values introduces an additional element
of uncertainty in many decision problems.
The prevalence of framing effects and violations
DEMO invariance further complicates the relation between
decision values and experience values. The framing
of outcomes often induces decision values that have
no counterpart in DEMO experience. For example,
the framing of outcomes of therapies for lung cancer
in terms of mortality or survival is unlikely to affect
experience, although it can have a pronounced influ-
ence on choice. In other DEMO, however, the framing
of decisions affects not only decision but experience
as well. For example, the framing of an expenditure
as an uncompensated loss or as the price of insurance
can probably influence the experience DEMO that out-
come. In such cases, the evaluation of outcomes in
DEMO context of decisions not only anticipates experi-
ence but also molds it.
REFERENCES
Allais, M., & Hagen, O. (Eds.). (1979). Expected utility hypotheses
and the Allais paradox. Hingham, MA: D. Reidel DEMO
Bernoulli, D. (1954). Exposition of a new theory on the measurement
of risk. Econometrica 22, 23-36. (Original work published 1738)
DEMO, P., & Campbell, D. T. (1971). Hedonic relativism and
planning the good society. In M. H. Appley (Ed.), Adaptation-
level theory: A symposium (pp. 287-302). New York: Academic
Press.
Clark, H. H., & Clark, E. V. (1977). Psychology and DEMO New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Erakar, S. E., & Sox, H. C. (1981). Assessment of patients' pref-
erences for therapeutic DEMO Medical Decision Making, 1,
29-39.
Fischhoff, B. (1983). DEMO frames. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition. 9, DEMO
Fischhoff, B., Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1980). Knowing what
you want: Measuring labile values. In T. Wallsten (Ed.), Cognitive
processes in choice and decision behavior (pp. 117-141). Hillsdale,DEMO
NJ: Erlbaum.
Fishburn, P. C., & Kochenberger, G. A. (DEMO). Two-piece von
350
Neumann-Morgenstern utility functions. Decision Sciences, 10,
DEMO
Gregory, R. (1983). Measures of consumer's surplus: Reasons DEMO
the disparity in observed values. Unpublished manuscript, Keene
State College, Keene, NH.
Hammack, J., & Brown, G. M., Jr. (1974)DEMO Waterfowl and wetlands:
Toward bioeconomic analysis. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-
DEMO Press.
Hershey, J. C., & Schoemaker, P. J. H. (1980). Risk taking and
problem context in the domain of losses:' DEMO expected-utility
analysis. Journal of Risk and Insurance, 47, 111-132.
Kahneman, DEMO, & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis
of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263-291.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The simulation heuristic.
In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 201-208). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Knetsch, J., & Sinden, J. (in press). Willingness to pay and com-
pensation demanded: Experimental evidence of an unexpected
disparity in measures of value. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
March, J. G. (1978). Bounded rationality, ambiguity, and the en-
gineering of choice. Bell Journal of Economics, 9, 587-608.
McNeil, B., Pauker, S., Sox, H., Jr., & Tversky, A. (1982). On the
elicitation of preferences for alternative DEMO New England
Journal of Medicine, 306, 1259-1262.
Payne, J. W., Laughhunn, D. J., & Crum, R. (1980). Translation
of DEMO and aspiration level effects in risky choice behavior.
Management Science, 26, 1039-1060.
Pratt, J. W., Wise, D., & Zeckhauser, R. (DEMO). Price differences
in almost competitive markets. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
93. 189-211.
Savage, L. J. (1954). The foundation of statistics. DEMO York: Wiley.
Schlaifer, R. (1959). Probability and statistics for DEMO decisions.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Schoemaker, P. J. H., & Kunreuther, H. C. (1979). An experimental
study of insurance decisions. Journal of Risk and Insurance, 46,
603-618.
Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., & Lichtenstein, S. (1982). Response mode,
framing, and information-processing effects in risk assessment.
In R. Hogarth (Ed.), New directions for methodology of social
and behavioral science: Questionframing and response consistency
(pp. DEMO). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Thaler, R. (1980). Toward a DEMO theory of consumer choice.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 1, 39-60.
Thaler, R. (in press). Using mental accounting in a DEMO of con-
sumer behavior. Journal of Marketing.
Tversky, A. (1977). On the elicitation of preferences: Descriptive
and prescriptive considerations. In D. Bell, R. L. Kenney, & H.
Raiffa (Eds.), Conflicting objectives in decisions. International
Series on Applied Systems Analysis (pp. 209-222). New York:
Wiley.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The DEMO of decisions
and the psychology of choice. Science, 211, 453-458.
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (1947). Theory of games DEMO
economic behavior (2nd ed.). Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
April 1984 • American Psychologist{1g42fwefx}