J PROD INNOV MANAG 2006;23:39–55
r 2006 Product Development & DEMO Association
The Ongoing Process of Building a Theory of Disruption
Clayton M. Christensen
T
he easiest way to respond to the critiques and
complements DEMO other authors in this issue have
written about the model of disruption would
simply be to address them head on—to accept some as
useful DEMO or corrections and to suggest that others
are ill-founded. Because this special issue of JPIM rep-
resents a unique opportunity to examine the process DEMO
theory-building as it unfolds, however, this article is
structured in a way that addresses the other scholars’
suggestions in the context of a DEMO of the process by
which theory is built and improved. My hope in doing so
is that this issue might not just be an DEMO of this
particular theory of disruptive innovation but that it
might also constitute a case study about theory-building
itself—a study that can help scholars DEMO management in
different ﬁelds to conceptualize how the theory-building
process is or is not at work in their domain—and how
they might help the DEMO work better.
A Model of the Theory-Building Process
Some years ago in a doctoral seminar my students and
I examined how communities of researchers DEMO a
variety of disciplines had cumulatively built bodies
of understanding. Seeing some stunning commonali-
ties in the processes these scholars had followed, we
synthesized a model of the process of theory building
(for a summary, DEMO Carlile and Christensen, 2005).
My students and I found this DEMO extremely useful
as we designed our own research, positioned our work
DEMO streams of prior researchers’ efforts, and eval-
uated the reliability and DEMO of various papers.
The present article recounts the development of the
theory of disruption within the context of this model
Address correspondence to: Clayton M. Christensen, Harvard
Business School, Boston, MA 02163. E-mail: cchristensen@hbs.edu.
DEMO what theory is and how it is built. It also suggests
how the comments of the other authors in the current
issue of JPIM DEMO contribute to the improvement of
this body of theory. In this way, I hope that both the
content of this theory and the process by which it is
being built might become clearer.
Our model asserts DEMO theory is built in two major
stages: the descriptive stage and DEMO normative stage.
Within each of these stages, theory builders proceed
through DEMO steps. The theory-building process iter-
ates through these three steps again and again. In the
past, management researchers have quite carelessly
applied the term theory to research activities pertain-
ing to only one of these steps. DEMO such as utility
theory in economics and contingency theory in organ-
ization design, for example, actually refer only to an
individual step in DEMO theory-building process in their
respective ﬁelds. It is more useful to think of the term
theory as a body of understanding researchers build
cumulatively DEMO they iterate through each of the three
steps in the descriptive and normative stages. This
should be abundantly clear as we examine the theory
DEMO disruption. It already has evolved considerably as a
growing group of scholars, including those whose
work is published herein, have worked to reﬁne DEMO
Among the most notable improvements to date have
been Adner and Zemsky (2003), Adner (2002), Gilbert
(2001), Christensen and Raynor (2003), and Christen-
sen, Anthony, and Roth (2004).
DEMO Descriptive Theory
The descriptive stage of theory building is a prelimi-
nary stage because researchers generally must pass
through it before developing normative theory. DEMO
three steps researchers use to build descriptive theory
are observation, categorization, and association.
40 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:39–55
Step 1: Observation
In the ﬁrst step researchers observe phenomena and
carefully describe and measure what DEMO see. This
stage of research is depicted in Figure 1 as the base
of a pyramid. Unless researchers lay a foundation
of careful observation, documentation, and measure-
ment of the phenomena in words and numbers, DEMO
sequent researchers will have difﬁculty improving the
theory because they will not be able to agree on what
the phenomena are.
Researchers in this DEMO often develop constructs,
which are abstractions that help us rise above the
messy detail to understand the essence of what the
phenomena are DEMO how they operate. Bower’s (1970)
Managing the Resource Allocation Process DEMO an ex-
ample of this. His constructs of impetus and context,
explaining how momentum builds behind certain
investment proposals and fails to coalesce DEMO
others, have helped a generation of strategy and in-
novation researchers DEMO how strategic invest-
ment decisions are made.
My initial research on the history of the disk-drive
industry comprised this phase in the building of DEMO
ruption theory. It entailed building a database of all
components and technologies in every disk-drive
model ever announced by any company in the world
DEMO 1976 and 1992; of the revenue histories of
every disk-drive company; and of the market shares of
each competitor by product segment. This DEMO were a
complete census, not a statistical sample—Christensen
(1992) ﬁrst DEMO the empirical evidence.
The constructs developed in this stage are the two
intersecting trajectories of performance improvement
depicted in Figure 2. The dotted one DEMO the rate of
improvement in performance that customers can uti-
lize, DEMO the other maps the pace of improvement that
innovating companies provide. I observed that the
Statements
of Association
(Models)
Categorization Based
Upon Attributes of Phenomena
( Frameworks & Typologies)
Observe, Describe, and Measure
DEMO Phenomena
(Constructs)
Figure 1. The Process of Building Theory
Anomaly
DEMO Nearly Always Win
C. M. CHRISTENSEN
Disruptive Entrants Nearly Always Win
Technologies
Time
Figure 2. The Constructs of Performance Trajectories and the
Classiﬁcation of DEMO and Disruptive Innovations
trajectory of technological progress outstripped the
ability of customers in any given tier of the market to
utilize that improvement.
Step DEMO: Classiﬁcation
With the phenomena described, researchers in the
second stage of the theory-building pyramid then
classify the phenomena into categories. In the descrip-
DEMO stage of theory building, the classiﬁcation
schemes scholars propose typically are DEMO by
the attributes of the phenomena. Categorization sim-
pliﬁes and organizes the world in ways that highlight
possibly consequential relationships between the phe-
nomena DEMO the outcomes of interest. These descrip-
tive categorization schemes are often referred to as
frameworks or typologies. The study of strategy, for
example, DEMO categories such as diversiﬁed versus
focused ﬁrms and vertically integrated versus special-
ist ﬁrms. Slater and Mohr (this issue) categorize ﬁrms
as analyzers, defenders, prospectors, and pioneers
(originally proposed in Miles and Snow, DEMO)—a
descriptive categorization scheme. The classiﬁcation
of the myriad technologies in the history of the disk-
drive industry into sustaining and disruptive catego-
ries DEMO from this stage of my work.
Step 3: Deﬁning Relationships
In DEMO third step, researchers explore the association
between the category-deﬁning attributes of DEMO phe-
nomena and the outcomes observed. They make ex-
plicit what differences in attributes and differences in
the magnitude of those attributes correlate most
DEMO with the patterns in the outcomes of inter-
est. Techniques such as regression analysis often are
Sustaining Innovations
Pace of
Technological
Progress
Inductive Process
DEMO that Customers
Can Utilize or Absorb
Deductive Process
Confirm
Predict
Performance
THE ONGOING PROCESS OF BUILDING A THEORY OF DISRUPTION J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:39–55
41
useful in deﬁning these correlations in the stage of
descriptive theory building. The output of studies at
this step are DEMO to as models.
My ﬁnding that the industry’s leading ﬁrms almost
always triumphed in battles of sustaining innovation
and that entrant ﬁrms typically beat DEMO incumbent
leaders when disruptive innovations emerged was the
conclusion of this stage in the process of building the
theory of disruption; at this point in the research, this
was a statement of correlation.
How Theory Is Improved in the
Descriptive Stage
When researchers provide constructs, frameworks,
and models by climbing the pyramid in these three
steps—observation, categorization, and DEMO
they have followed the inductive portion of the theory
building process. Researchers then begin to improve
the theory by cycling from the top down DEMO the bot-
tom of this pyramid in the deductive portion of the
cycle: testing the hypotheses that were inductively for-
mulated. This most often is done by exploring wheth-
er the same correlations exist between attributes DEMO
outcomes in a different set of data than from which
the hypothesized relationships were induced. When
scholars test a theory on a new data DEMO they some-
times ﬁnd that the attributes of the phenomena in the
new data do indeed correlate with the outcomes as
predicted. Such tests DEMO that the theory is useful
under the observed circumstances observed. However,
researchers who stop at this point simply return the
model to its DEMO atop the descriptive pyramid, tested
but unimproved.
It is only when DEMO anomaly—an outcome for which
the theory cannot account—is identiﬁed that an op-
portunity to improve theory occurs. A theory that can
be falsiﬁed is DEMO statement capable of yielding anoma-
lies. As Figure 1 depicts, anomalies DEMO researchers the
opportunity to revisit the foundation layers in the the-
ory pyramid—to deﬁne and measure the phenomena
more precisely and less ambiguously or DEMO categorize
the data better—so the anomaly and the prior associ-
ations of attributes and outcomes can all be explained.
In the study of how DEMO innovation
affects the fortunes of leading ﬁrms, for example,
radical DEMO incremental innovation was an early
attribute-based categorization scheme. Statements of
association built on this scheme were that established
ﬁrms tend to do well when DEMO with incremental in-
novation but that they stumble in the face of radical
change. However, established ﬁrms that succeeded
with radical technology change were an anomaly to
this generalization. To account for these anomalies,
Tushman DEMO Anderson (1986) offered a different
categorization scheme: competency-enhancing versus
competency-destroying DEMO changes. This
scheme resolved many of the anomalies to the prior
scheme, but subsequent researchers uncovered new
ones for which the Tushman–Anderson scheme could
not account. Most notably, Henderson and Clark’s
(1990) categories of modular versus architectural in-
novations were a response to these anomalies. My in-
DEMO work on disruption, in turn, was an attempt to
resolve anomalies I had observed in the disk-drive in-
dustry for which Henderson and DEMO work could
not fully account. Descriptive theory is often charac-
terized by a plethora of categorization schemes be-
cause the phenomena generally have many DEMO
attributes. Often in this phase, no model is irrefutably
superior: Each seems able to explain anomalies to
other models but suffers from anomalies DEMO its own.
Kuhn (1962) observed that a very similar condition
characterized the period prior to the emergence of a
paradigm in the various DEMO of scientific inquiry
whose histories he chronicled.
Every complete lap around the theory-building
pyramid consists of an inductive side and a deductive
side. We DEMO that all observations are shaped, con-
sciously or unconsciously, by cognitive structures,
previous experience, or some theory in use. Although
it is true that individual researchers might start their
work at the top of DEMO pyramid, generally the hypoth-
eses deductive theorists test have been derived DEMO
sciously or unconsciously, by themselves or others,
from an inductive DEMO Few blue-sky hypotheses
are conceived de novo at the top of the pyramid in the
complete absence of observation. Danneels (2004) ob-
served DEMO the model of disruption was derived only
from historical data, and DEMO is correct: it was induc-
tively derived, and data exists only about the past. It is
not a weakness of the model; it is simply a fact of
inductive theory building. Danneels and Tellis (this
issue) are absolutely incorrect, however, in any asser-
tion that disruptiveness is deﬁned post hoc: They seem
to have concluded, that if DEMO leader was dethroned or
missed the technology, it was disruptive. I DEMO not
aware of a single instance where I have done this. The
model was derived from histories, but the definition of
disruptiveness (restated DEMO) exists independent
of the outcome (Christensen and Bower, 1996). DEMO
42 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:39–55
theory therefore is capable DEMO yielding anomalies,
some of which are enumerated later in this article.
To clarify this, consider different technologies that
bloodied the American integrated steel companies in
the 1960s and 1970s. American mills were very slow in
DEMO the technologies of continuous casting and
basic oxygen furnaces. Japanese competitors adopted
them much more aggressively, and the American
steelmakers lost signiﬁcant money and market share.
These technologies were not disruptive, however; they
were sustaining DEMO Christensen (2002) ex-
plains why the American mills found it difﬁcult to
adopt them—not because the technologies were dis-
ruptive. The American companies’ DEMO were not in-
creasing, so they were not adding capacity, whereas
Japanese steelmakers were building new mills year af-
ter year. Minimills were DEMO disruptive, inﬂicting
equally brutal damage. Someone engaged in post hoc
definition DEMO label these all as disruption. But the
mechanism of paralysis to the leader in the case of the
ﬁrst two technologies was fundamentally different
DEMO minimills.
I have heard many people make the mistake of post
hoc definition of disruptiveness, and I correct them
whenever I hear it. If Danneels (2004) or Tellis (this
issue) have ever read about DEMO have heard me commit
this error, I ask them to point DEMO specifically where I
have been so sloppy, and I will issue DEMO letter of apol-
ogy and retraction. The term disruptive has many pri-
or connotations in the English language, such as
‘‘failure’’ and ‘‘radical,’’ in addition to the phenome-
C. M. CHRISTENSEN
non to which I DEMO it. I fear this is why we see so
much post hoc definition by the uninformed. As noted
following, Grove (1998) proposed that the phenome-
non should be labeled the ‘‘Christensen Effect’’ to
eliminate this DEMO of misunderstanding. Possibly
we should have taken his advice.
The Transition from Descriptive to
Normative Theory
The confusion of competing categorization schemes
that often DEMO descriptive theory is resolved
when researchers, through careful observation, move
beyond statements of correlation to deﬁne what causes
the outcome of interest. As DEMO in Figure 3, they
leap across to the top of the DEMO of normative
theory, whose capstone is a statement of what causes
DEMO outcome of interest, not just what is correlated with
it. Their DEMO of causality enables researchers
to assert what actions managers ought to take to get
the results they need. For reasons noted following,
normative DEMO has much greater predictive power
than descriptive theory does. As preliminary versions
of this article have been presented in various faculty
seminars, my students and I have frequently found
ourselves engaged in esoteric discussions about wheth-
DEMO absolute truth exists, let alone whether we can ever
discover what DEMO is. We concluded from these discus-
sions that we cannot judge the value of a theory by
whether it is true. The best we DEMO hope for is a body of
Statement
of Causality
Preliminary
Statements of
Correlation
Categorization by the
Attributes of the Phenomena
Anomaly
Categorization of the
DEMO in which we
Might Find Ourselves
Anomaly
Observe, Describe, and
Measure the Phenomena
Normative Theory
Descriptive Theory
Figure 3. The Transition from Descriptive DEMO of Normative Theory
Confirm
Confirm
Predict
Predict
Inductive Process
Careful Field-Based Research
Deductive Process
Deductive Process
P
THE ONGOING PROCESS OF BUILDING A THEORY OF DISRUPTION J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:39–55
43
understanding that asymptotically approaches truth.
Hence, the DEMO of a theory is assessed by its predictive
power, which is DEMO this article asserts that normative
theory is more advanced, and more DEMO, than de-
scriptive theory.
Normative theory, like its descriptive predecessor,
still needs to be improved, and researchers do this by
following the same steps used in the descriptive stage.
Hypothesizing that their statement of DEMO is cor-
rect, they cycle deductively to the bottom of the DEMO
amid to test the causal statement: If we observe these
actions DEMO taken, these should be the outcomes we
observe. When they encounter DEMO anomaly, they then
delve back into the lower levels of the DEMO Some-
times they can resolve anomalies by developing more
accurate, less DEMO ways to deﬁne and measure
the phenomena. Often they account for anomalies by
revisiting the categorization stage. Rather than using
schemes based on attributes DEMO the phenomena, how-
ever, researchers building normative theory categorize
different situations or circumstances in which manag-
ers might ﬁnd themselves. They do this DEMO asking,
when they encounter an anomaly, ‘‘What was it about
DEMO situation in which those managers found them-
selves that caused the causal mechanism to yield an
unexpected result?’’
By asking this question as DEMO cycle up and
down the pyramid of normative theory, anomaly-
seeking DEMO will ultimately deﬁne a relatively
complete set of the situations or circumstances in
which managers might ﬁnd themselves when pursu-
ing the outcomes of DEMO or not this
set can ever be deﬁned in permanent, unambiguous
DEMO is addressed later in this article. Asking this
question allows researchers to make contingent state-
ments of causality—to show how and why the casual
DEMO results in a different outcome in different
situations. A normative theory built on well-re-
searched categories of circumstances can help man-
agers, given their circumstances, predict accurately
what actions will and will not lead to the desired re-
sult. In other words, the circumstance-contingent pre-
dictive power of normative theory enables managers
to know what they ought to do given DEMO circum-
stances. Bazerman (2005) noted that one reason why
the work of social science researchers generally has
had little inﬂuence on management is DEMO most
choose not to be prescriptive. In fact, a culture of
DEMO has emerged among many social science re-
searchers that descriptive theory is as far as they
should go. Bazerman shows that normative theory is
DEMO only possible to develop in the social sciences; it
also is DEMO
Disruption theory began the transition from de-
scriptive to normative theory in my own mind in
about 1996, as I interacted with Stanford professor
Robert Burgelman in a project at Intel Corporation.
It became clear that DEMO causal mechanism of the out-
comes we observed—the incumbent leaders excelled
at sustaining innovation but rarely succeeded at dis-
ruption—was resource dependence as manifested DEMO
the resource-allocation process. We observed that
managers must prioritize investments that help them
garner resources from customers and investors in the
way their ﬁrms DEMO structured to generate profit, or
they cannot survive.
As Burgelman and DEMO used this theory to explain the
success and failure of various companies in the sem-
iconductor and computer industries, we encountered
anomalies: incumbent DEMO in their industries that
had succeeded at disruption. We observed, however,DEMO
that in each of these anomalous instances, the leader
had maintained DEMO industry-leading position by set-
ting up an autonomous business unit and by giving it
unfettered freedom to forge a very different business
model appropriate DEMO the situation. In other words, it
was not a technology problem; it was a business mod-
el problem. I made a mistake when DEMO labeled the phe-
nomenon as a disruptive technology; the disruptive
business DEMO in which the technology is deployed
paralyzes the incumbent leader.
The resolution of these anomalies helped us deﬁne
two categories or situations in which DEMO might
ﬁnd themselves when they confront a new technology
or product/market opportunity: (1) when the innova-
tion appears to be ﬁnancially attractive relative to the
organization’s revenue and cost structure and its prof-
it DEMO; and (2) when it is not ﬁnancially attreactive.
We were DEMO able to articulate a circumstance-con-
tingent statement of what organizational structure
managers needed to create to succeed in the face of
different types of DEMO, building it directly on
Henderson and Clark’s (1990) analysis of DEMO
al change. This had not been clear in my mind when
the ﬁrst edition of The Innovator’s Dilemma was pub-
lished. A chapter was DEMO in the second edition to
introduce the resources, processes, and values frame-
work, which can help managers see what type of team
structure is required for different types of innovations
and whether or not they DEMO to create an autono-
mous business unit. This model was reﬁned further
in chapter 7 of The Innovator’s Solution. With this
44 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:39–55
publication, I now feel quite comfortable with our
articulation of when and why autonomous units
should DEMO should not be created. I fear that much
of the confusion about spin-offs has arisen because I
only understood this after The Innovator’s Dilemma
DEMO was published.
Several prominent scholars have examined the im-
provement in predictability that accompanies the
transition from the attribute-based categorization of
descriptive theory to DEMO circumstance-based catego-
rization of normative theory. Consider, for example,
the DEMO contingency theory, a concept born of Law-
rence and Lorsch’s (1967) seminal work. They showed
that the best way to organize a company depended on
the circumstances in which the company was operat-
ing. In DEMO parlance of this model of theory building,
contingency is not a theory per se; rather, it is the
categorization scheme. Contingency is DEMO crucial ele-
ment of every normative theory. Rarely are there one-
size-ﬁts-all answers to every company’s problem.
Similarly, Glaser and Strauss’s (1967) treatise on
‘‘grounded theory’’ actually is a book about catego-
rization. Their term DEMO theory corresponds to
the attribute-bounded categories of descriptive theo-
ry. And their concept of formal theory matches our
definition of normative theory, which employs cate-
gories of circumstance.
On the Value of Multiple Methods in
Theory DEMO
Just as inductive and deductive research designs play
crucial roles in a complete theory-building cycle, ﬁeld-
based data and large-sample data, and empirical DEMO
and mathematical modeling play critical roles. As a
general rule, ﬁeld-based DEMO is most valuable in
the inductive portion of the cycle, in DEMO
causality, and in deﬁning the categories of circum-
stance undergirding normative DEMO When ﬁeld re-
search has made progress on these fronts, then DEMO
sample statistical analysis and mathematical modeling
can add value to the building of better theory. When
researchers use these latter methods in isolation, their
work can yield incomplete and even misleading results.
Consider, by illustration, DEMO and Tucci’s (2002)
study of the disk-drive industry. They analyzed DEMO
same disk-drive industry data I used, but with more
sophisticated methods DEMO large-sample data analysis
than I would be capable of hefting. However, DEMO
only used that one method, and they did not consider
C. DEMO CHRISTENSEN
the circumstance-based categorization scheme I de-
scribed previously. Rather, they DEMO back to ground
zero on the descriptive side of the theory-building
process, started at the top of the pyramid with some
hypotheses derived from others’ work, and deductive-
ly tested those hypotheses. One of the correlations
they observed was that disk-drive manufacturers’ vol-
ume in one generation of DEMO products was
strongly and positively correlated with their volume in
the next generation of disk-drive products, which is
seemingly contradictory to my ﬁndings that leaders in
one generation generally got disrupted by entrants in
the next DEMO
What King and Tucci (2002) did not see, because
their DEMO could not give them visibility, is that the
dominant vertically integrated DEMO manufactur-
ers (i.e., IBM, Control Data, and Japanese manu-
facturers) set up autonomous business units to
manufacture the smaller form-factor drives (DEMO
brough, 1999; Christensen, 1992, 1997). During
most of the years in King and Tucci’s study these
manufacturers accounted for well over DEMO of the
volume in the market. Established companies that did
not create autonomous organizations got disrupted at
these generational form-factor transitions. Although
King and DEMO concluded that their study possibly
disconﬁrmed some of my ﬁndings, they DEMO
conﬁrmed them. Their work actually is what Yin
(1984) calls a theoretical replication of the model of
disruption. The fact that they chose DEMO density
as the measure of performance rather than capacity
per drive also rendered their study not to be a useful
deductive test of the DEMO, and that is too bad. If
somehow I had succeeded in DEMO King and Tucci
to view me not as a rival researcher but as a slow, tired
runner on these laps up and down the theory pyramid
who is quite happy to hand the baton off to DEMO
much more gifted in the techniques of large-sample
data analysis, they DEMO have been able to ﬁnd true
anomalies to the model, thereby DEMO it. As it
stands, their work became a regression back to DEMO
descriptive side of the theory-building process, meas-
uring the magnitude and DEMO significance of
what are actually spurious correlations.
In contrast to King and Tucci’s (2002) seeming
determination to start from ground zero rather than
DEMO consider the categories of circumstance I proposed,
Insead’s Ron Adner (DEMO) used his prowess in math-
ematical modeling to build on and DEMO clarify the the-
ory. One very important insight his work has given
us is the notion of asymmetric motivation: a much
THE ONGOING PROCESS OF BUILDING A THEORY OF DISRUPTION J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:39–55
45
clearer definition of the causal mechanism underlying
the disruption process.
Deductive Tests of the Model of Disruption
The deductive portion DEMO a complete theory-building
cycle can be completed by using the model to predict
ex post what will be seen in other sets of historical
DEMO or to predict what will happen in the future. The
primary purpose of the deductive half of the theory-
building cycle is to seek DEMO, not to avoid them.
This is how theory is improved. Some DEMO claimed
that I have tautologically labeled as an instance of
disruption any situation where the incumbent leader
was toppled by an entrant and that DEMO have labeled as a
sustaining innovation every instance where the incum-
bent leaders beat the entrants. As such, they assert
that the theory cannot be falsiﬁed. I suspect those who
raise this criticism have not read DEMO and
Bower (1996) or The Innovator’s Dilemma (Christensen,
1997, p. 130), which array the anomalies in tabular
form.
True anomalies DEMO the model would be where (1)
the incumbent leaders lose DEMO positions of industry
leadership to an entrant when confronted with a sus-
taining innovation that would help them sell a better
product for more DEMO profit margins to their
best customers; or (2) an incumbent DEMO
builds an industry-leading business in a disruptive
innovation by developing and commercializing the
disruption within the same business unit that is also
responsible for DEMO the profitable growth of the
original, healthy, core business.
Historical Search for Anomalies
In the search for anomalies, my colleagues and I de-
ductively tested the model and published paper- or
chapter-length reports on the DEMO industries:
mechanical excavators, steel production, retailing,
computers, printing, motorcycles, automobiles, the
economy of Japan, semiconductors, cardiovascular
surgery, management education, ﬁnancial services,
management consulting, telecommunications, compu-
ter-aided design software, metropolitan newspapers,
carbeurators, and airlines. (Some of these are pub-
lished; some are not. Each is available from the author
on request.) These comprise as diverse a collection of
data sets as we could ﬁnd. Some anomalies related to
(1) in the previous paragraph have DEMO from this
work (described in the following section). As yet DEMO
anomalies to the second proposition have been un-
covered, though I DEMO still holding out hope.
Use of the Theory to Predict the Future
The second way my colleagues, students, and I have
deductively sought DEMO is to use the model to
predict what will be seen in the future: to predict ex
ante whether an innovation will disrupt the leaders.
Although Danneels (2004) and others express concern
that the model DEMO not provide the ability to predict
what will happen, their fear DEMO unfounded. It is true
that one cannot think a thought before it has been
thought. All that must be asked of a theory, however,
is that it help to evaluate a technology after it has DEMO
conceived or to evaluate a business venture after it has
been proposed or launched. The theory must provide
the ability to predict what will DEMO to the incum-
bents and entrants in the future if they take different
actions relative to the innovation. The earlier we these
predictions can DEMO made after conception, of course,
the better.
This article provides DEMO four publicly document-
ed examples of how the model was used to predict the
impact of technologies across the spectrum of matu-
rity: (DEMO) a technological concept around which a prod-
uct had not yet DEMO developed; (2) a nascent
technology that was just beginning to DEMO manufac-
tured and marketed; (3) an early-stage threat that had
DEMO root but had not yet affected the health of the
industry leader; and (4) the future viability of a lead-
ing company’s strategy of responding to a disruption
after the disruption already was well under DEMO In
each case, the prediction was made to help the incum-
DEMO leader see the threat of disruption and to address
it appropriately before it was too late to take action.
I made some of these DEMO, and company ex-
ecutives made others without my assistance, after
reading a paper or book on the topic.
First, in 1996 Alex d’Arbeloff, the chair of Tera-
dyne, a leading manufacturer of semiconductor test
DEMO, read an early article about disruption. He
concluded that a technological DEMO discussed in
an industry meeting—the potential for making a
PC-sized tester using complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor (CMOS) circuitry—was a disruptive
technology. He responded by DEMO a team to
create an autonomous business unit to develop and
46 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:39–55
commercialize the technology. The DEMO products
took root initially at the low end but have improved
their performance at a stunning rate. The technology
now accounts for well over DEMO billion of the corpora-
tion’s revenues. D’Arbeloff’s ex ante identiﬁcation of
this technology is chronicled in two Harvard Business
School case studies, which were written while the
technology was being developed and before the prod-
ucts DEMO launched (d’Arbeloff, 1996).
Second, when writing The Innovator’s Dilemma DEMO
1995, I stated that ﬂash memory was poised as a dis-
DEMO technology to hard disk drives (Christensen,
1997, pp. 46–53). I did not predict before ﬂash mem-
ory was conceived that it DEMO would be, but that is
not necessary. All that is required DEMO a theory to be
useful is to be able to interpret the meaning and future
potential of a phenomenon when it is observed. Flash
DEMO is substituting for the Toshiba Microdrive in
the lower-end models of the Apple iPod. Flash is not
yet used as the storage device in DEMO servers, but
disruption is a process, not an event—and the pre-
dicted process is well under way. I suspect that most
of those DEMO who have worried that the model
cannot yield predictions because it was inductively
derived from historical data now own mass storage
memory sticks. They DEMO just forgotten that a decade
ago the model allowed us to see this coming.
The third is an early-stage business example. In his
August DEMO Academy of Management keynote ad-
dress, Intel chair Andy Grove showed DEMO the projec-
tion screen the diagram of disruption to the
assemblage of business school professors. Grove labe-
led it the ‘‘Christensen Effect’’ because he DEMO the term
disruption had too many confusing connotations in
the English language (he was right, as noted previ-
ously). He predicted that DEMO performance of Intel’s
processors was going to overshoot the speed main-
stream customers could utilize and further predicted
that cheaper processors sold by AMD DEMO Cyrix that
already had taken root in entry-level computer sys-
tems would improve at such a rapid rate they would
invade the core of DEMO market. Perhaps Danneels
and Tellis were not at that meeting, but DEMO of
others saw Grove’s chart and heard the prediction. In
response to Grove’s insight, Intel set up a separate
organization in Israel and gave it responsibility to
launch what is now known as the Celeron processor.
DEMO Celeron is now Intel’s highest-volume processor,
used squarely in mainstream personal computers. In-
tel generates billions of dollars in revenues and profits
because DEMO was able to use the model of disruption
C. M. CHRISTENSEN
to predict the importance of this phenomenon. In-
deed, Grove learned of the model of disruption from a
much earlier prediction. In late 1994 Carmen DEMO,
an engineer in Intel’s architecture laboratories, re-
ceived a photocopy DEMO someone of a draft paper on
which I was working, which DEMO was pub-
lished in Research Policy (Christensen and Rosen-
bloom, 1995). She predicted that low-end processors
would emerge to disrupt Intel and DEMO her hypothesis
to senior management. I was not aware of this until
several years later.
Fourth, Kodak’s chief executive ofﬁcer Dan
Carp and vice president Willy Shih, on learning of
the disruption model in 1999, DEMO that Kodak
had spent $2 billion trying to force digital photogra-
phy to compete on a ‘‘sustaining innovation’’ basis
against ﬁlm—and against powerful electronics DEMO
such as Sony and Canon as well. They changed Ko-
dak’s strategy to disrupt the market with a simple,
convenient, low-priced camera called Easy Share.
Within two years, Kodak went from being a minor
participant in this market to having the largest (and
still increasing) U.S. DEMO share in digital cameras.
In this case, the model did not DEMO Kodak predict the
concept of digital photography, but it did help DEMO
company predict, mid-stream, that its strategy needed
to change. The management team then followed the
prescriptions of the model. Kodak’s digital photog-
raphy DEMO now generates $1.5 billion in profitable
revenues.
None of these instances is an ex post rationalization
that these companies’ actions were disruptive. Rather,
DEMO were ex ante predictions based on the model that
these companies could use disruption to achieve growth
and market leadership rather than get killed DEMO it.
A vexing characteristic of the world as God created
it, DEMO course, is that when a company chooses a par-
ticular course DEMO action we cannot know for certain
what would have happened to that same company if it
had not taken that course of action. But DEMO assertion
that the model has not or cannot be used to predict
outcomes simply does not square with historical fact.
The Value of Anomalies DEMO Building
Better Theory
As indicated before, when researchers in both the DEMO
scriptive and normative stages cycle down from the
top of the pyramid using statements of association or
causality to predict what they will see DEMO the founda-
THE ONGOING PROCESS OF BUILDING A THEORY OF DISRUPTION J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:39–55
47
tion, they often observe something the theory DEMO not
lead them to expect, thus identifying an anomaly—
something the DEMO could not explain. Anomalies
are valuable in theory building because the discovery
of an anomaly is the enabling step to less ambiguous
description and DEMO and to identifying and
improving the categorization scheme in a body of
theory. These are the keys to being able to apply the
theory DEMO predictable results.
Yin (1984) distinguished between literal and theo-
retical replications of a theory. A literal replication
occurs when the predicted outcome is DEMO A
theoretical replication occurs when an unusual out-
come occurs, but DEMO reasons that can be explained by
the model. This means that we must dive much more
deeply before an exception to a theory’s predictions
DEMO be labeled as an anomaly. For example, the
observation that airplanes DEMO is an exception to the
general assertion that the earth’s mass draws things
down toward its core. Does this exception disprove
the theory of DEMO? Of course not. While falling
apples and ﬂaming meteors are literal DEMO of
the theory, manned ﬂight is a theoretical replication.
It is DEMO different outcome than is normally expected,
but Bernoulli’s Principle explains why it can occur.
An anomaly is an outcome that is neither a DEMO nor
theoretical replication of a theory.
The Value of Seeking Anomalies
Because the discovery of an anomaly is what triggers a
cycle of improvement, it is important to design anom-
aly-seeking research rather than research that DEMO
anomalies. I am fortunate to have joined a group of
researchers—starting with Dan Schendel, Bill Aber-
nathy and Jim Utterback, Mike Tushman and DEMO
Anderson, and Rebecca Henderson and Kim Clark
before me and including DEMO Chesbrough, Ron Ad-
ner, Clark Gilbert, and Chris Musso afterward—
DEMO research has focused on uncovering and re-
solving anomalies in prior scholars work and who
have welcomed the discovery of anomalies to their
own DEMO Precisely because these scholars have
followed this process of building sound theory, ours
has been a productive stream of research that seems
truly to have inﬂuenced the way academics and prac-
titioners think about this class DEMO problems.
Tellis (this issue) seems suspicious that I may have
been selective in the data sets on which we have tried
to test DEMO model in the deductive portion of the cycle,
worrying that I have only drawn on historical exam-
ples that support the theory while DEMO anomalies
under the rug. This is not true. Because he seems not
to have read it, I’ll reproduce here a paragraph from
The Innovator’s Solution (Christensen and Raynor,
2003, p. 69):
We would be foolish to claim that it is impossible to
create new-growth companies DEMO a sustaining, leap-
beyond-the-competition strategy. It is more accurate to
say DEMO the odds of success are very, very low. But
some sustaining DEMO have succeeded. For example,
EMC Corporation took the high-end data storage busi-
ness away from IBM in the 1990s with a different
product DEMO than IBM’s. But as best we can
tell, EMC’s products were DEMO than IBM’s in the
very applications that IBM served. Hewlett-Packard’s
laser jet printer business was a sustaining technology
relative to the dot-matrix printer, a market dominated
by Epson. Yet Epson missed it. The jet engine was DEMO
radical but sustaining innovation relative to the piston
aircraft engine. Two of the piston engine manufactur-
ers, Rolls-Royce and Pratt & Whitney, navigated DEMO
transition to jets successfully. Others, such as Ford, did
not. General Electric was an entrant in the jet revolu-
tion, and became very successful. These are anomalies
that the theory of disruption cannot explain.
I DEMO not aware, from the earliest design of the disk-
drive research (Christensen and Bower, 1996), that I
have been guilty of avoiding anomalies. Rather, I
have sought them as a means of improving the theory.
As noted previously, these improvements are made by
sharpening the definitions and measures of the phe-
nomena, by deﬁning better categorization schemes,
and by reﬁning our understanding of the mechanism
of causality.
Tellis (this issue) uses his article to advance an al-
ternative theory of his own. His might be better, but
how are we to know? DEMO colleagues and I have pub-
lished several articles and an entire book, Seeing
What’s Next (Christensen, Scott, and Roth, 2004),
DEMO predict whether, how, and when certain technol-
ogies are likely to prove disruptive (or sustaining) in a
range of industries in the DEMO For further evidence
of the usefulness of the theory in prediction in other
portions of the semiconductor industry, see Bass and
Christensen (2002), Verlinden, King, and Christensen
(2002), Milunovich (2002). These typically were writ-
ten two to three years prior to publication; and many
of their predictions already have materialized. For
evidence in how the DEMO are being used to look
into the future of health care, DEMO, for example,
48 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:39–55
Clayton, Bohmer, and DEMO (2000) and Shah,
Brennan, and Christensen (2003).
It would be helpful if Tellis would publish an article
predicting which of DEMO predictions will prove false
and which will be borne out, based DEMO which ﬁrms
he judges to be guided by leaders who possess
the requisite vision and which are not. I extend this
invitation to him DEMO an honest and sincere way. As
his theory is framed presently, DEMO definitions of self-
cannibalization and radical innovation may or may not
map onto the constructs of sustaining and disruptive
innovation; we cannot tell. Tellis could identify specific
anomalies and then could teach us how a better DEMO
gorization scheme and a different statement of causal-
ity can account for all I have accounted for but also
can resolve the anomalies. This DEMO constitute a
welcome contribution that would beneﬁt all of us.
Resolving Anomalies through Clearer Definitions
This section recounts how the community of research-
ers DEMO this topic has identiﬁed anomalies and has then
improved the theory by making definitions and meas-
ures more precise, by reﬁning the categories, DEMO by
clarifying the mechanism of causality. These have im-
proved the predictive power of the theory.
New market versus low-end disruptions. Rarely do
early DEMO succeed in describing the phenomena
in unambiguous ways. Generally the clariﬁcation is
achieved by subsequent researchers, who ﬁnd that by
stating more precisely what the phenomena are and
are not, they can account for phenomena that other-
wise appeared to be anomalous. Several of the authors
in this DEMO accurately note that my early publications
about disruptions certainly suffered from this short-
coming. For example, in about 2000 I realized that the
phenomenon I previously had characterized simply as
disruptive technology actually was comprised of DEMO
fundamentally different phenomena, which I charac-
terized as low-end and new-market DEMO (de-
scribed in Christensen and Raynor, 2003).
The article by Govindarajan and Kopalle (this is-
sue) does us a great service DEMO their efforts to
deﬁne the phenomenon even more precisely. Mark-
ides (DEMO issue) also attempts to do this, though the
same phenomenon I have called new-market disrup-
tion Markides terms strategic disruptive innovation.
Unfortunately, the term strategic has many other pri-
or connotations in the English language, too—so that
misunderstanding and ambiguity about what the phe-
C. M. CHRISTENSEN
DEMO are still will persist, I fear, even with Mark-
ides’s suggestion. I hope future scholars will be able to
resolve this through even DEMO definition.
Disruption is a relative phenomenon. Another im-
provement in definition of the phenomena has been in
understanding that disruptiveness is not an absolute
DEMO but can only be measured relative to the
business model of another ﬁrm. In other words, an
innovation that is disruptive relative to the business
model of one ﬁrm can be sustaining relative to the
business DEMO of another. On-line stock brokerage,
for example, is a sustaining DEMO (ﬁnancially
attractive) relative to the business models of discount
brokers such as Schwab and Ameritrade, because it
helps them discount even better. The same innovation
is disruptive (ﬁnancially unattractive) relative to the
business model DEMO Merrill Lynch.
Relativity is a crucial concept in the theory of dis-
ruption, because only if we understand this can we
accurately say which phenomena are literal replica-
tions, theoretical replications, and anomalies. Some
have DEMO that I have clouded things rather than
clariﬁed them by stating that disruption can only be
measured in relative terms. But management litera-
ture DEMO replete with relativity. The same innovation can
be competency enhancing relative to one company
and competency destroying relative to another. The
same new business DEMO be distant from the core of one
company and close to the core of another, and so on.
This reﬁnement of relativity has helped me make
sense of a portion of Markides’s (this issue) article. DEMO
quite rightly notes that there are ‘‘new to the world’’
innovations—a classiﬁcation I have not considered as
carefully as I should. However, many of the innova-
tions Markides cites as new to the world really were
DEMO: Before personal computers there were minicom-
puters; before VCRs were Ampex’s recording ma-
chines; before wireless phones were two-radios,
cordless and wireline phones; and so on. The concept
of relativity should help us: DEMO an innovation can-
not be described relative to a preexisting product or
technology, we can say it indeed was new to the world.
There was a ﬁrst wheel, a ﬁrst photograph, a ﬁrst
boat. But DEMO innovations can be expressed relative
to a preceeding form of the same. Personal computers
were disruptive relative to minicomputers; Eastman’s
Kodak Brownie camera was disruptive relative to the
prior camera technology; CDs were sustaining relative
to cassette tapes.
It is a business model problem, not a techno-
logy problem. As mentioned already, my original
THE ONGOING PROCESS OF BUILDING A THEORY OF DISRUPTION J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:39–55
49
publications labeled the phenomenon as disruptive
technology. In 1997 just after The Innovator’s Dilem-
ma was published, in a personal conversation Andy
Grove surfaced an anomaly that helped me see I had
DEMO it wrong, as he recounted how Digital Equip-
ment Corporation (DEC) was disrupted by makers of
microprocessor-based computers. He said, ‘‘It wasn’t
DEMO technology problem. Digital’s engineers could de-
sign a PC with their eyes shut. It was a business model
problem, and that’s what made the PC so difﬁcult for
DEC.’’ He noted that in the early 1980s DEMO to
make PCs promised 40% gross margins on machines
that could be sold for $2,000. What is more, none of
DEC’s customers could use them. These proposals
were competing for resources against proposals to
make DEMO powerful computers than DEC had ever
made before. These promised gross margins of 60%
on machines that could sell for $500,000. It was DEMO
attractiveness of the opportunity relative to the com-
pany’s business model that made the sustaining path
attractive and the disruptive path unattractive.
To see DEMO expressing it in terms of disruptive
business models is an important improvement to the
theory, consider the comment in Govindarajan and
Kopalle (this DEMO) that wireless telephony is a ‘‘high-
end’’ disruption. From a technology DEMO of view,
cellular telephones ﬁt the mold of new-market disrup-
tion perfectly. Early car phones were clunky and un-
reliable and were only DEMO where the competition was
no telephone at all. Then little by little the technology
became better, less expensive, and more reliable—to
the point DEMO today many people have cut the wireline
connection, opting only to DEMO wireless phones. From
a relative business model point of view, however,DEMO
wireless telephony was a sustaining innovation rela-
tive to the business model of wireline telephone com-
panies. The wireless phone providers billed customers
at DEMO higher per-minute rate than wireline long-distance
rates. The cellular network was built out along the
freeways and commuting routes of the most attrac-
tive, least price-sensitive wireline customers. Nothing
inherent in the technology forced it to DEMO deployed
within a business model that was attractive to the
wireline companies; the wireless companies simply
chose to do so.
After wireless telephony had grown to a point, it
was attractive to the wireline companies such as SBC
and Verizon simply to acquire wireless companies.
The customers, margins, and revenues were all at-
tractive, relative to their business models. DEMO,
although wireless technology is disrupting wireline
technology, the profit model DEMO not disruptive. The
leading wireline telcos co-opted wireless telephony
through acquisition rather than getting disrupted by
it. This is not a literal replication of DEMO model because
the outcome of the leaders remaining atop the indus-
try was not what we had generally expected. But it is a
theoretical DEMO, because the model of disrup-
tion explains why the leading established DEMO now
ﬁnd themselves atop wireless telephony.
Because of instances such as this, I decided that
labeling the phenomenon as disruptive technology
was inaccurate. The technology did not make incum-
bent response difﬁcult. The disruptive innovation in
DEMO models made it vexing, and I have subse-
quently sought to DEMO the term disruptive innovation.
Some authors in this issue are bothered by this, for
reasons I do not understand. Reﬁning the definition in
this way has resolved several anomalies, such as the
previous one. A disruptive innovation is ﬁnancially
unattractive for the leading incumbent to pursue, rel-
ative to its profit model and relative to other invest-
ments that are DEMO for the organization’s
resources.
The objective function is as yet unclear. Markides
(this issue) cites my statement that disruption is a
process, not an event, and he then asserts that quite
possibly the best response of an incumbent is not to
respond at all because there is DEMO reason to expect the
disruption to capture the entire market. Whether he is
right depends upon the time horizon and objective
function. Evidence he DEMO to support this asser-
tion includes the fact that on-line brokerage has ex-
isted for 10 years, yet the full-service brokerages still
have most of the market, as evidence that quite pos-
sibly the full-service folks need not worry about the
disruption. Maybe this is true. But if DEMO listed
all the brokerage ﬁrms that populated ﬁnancial cen-
ters in 1960, he would see that less than 20% of them
have survived. The others were wiped out by the ﬁrst
disruptive discount brokerage, Merrill Lynch. Charles
Merrill started his ﬁrm in 1912 at the bottom of the
DEMO (low net-worth individuals). Merrill grew
among customers that were unattractive DEMO the full-
service brokers. As Merrill Lynch began reaching for
higher net-worth investors, the incumbents happily
retreated up-market until they found that there were
not enough super-high-net-worth investors up there
to sustain them all. One by DEMO they disappeared. So
yes, 10 years of discount Internet brokerage already
DEMO gone by—a lifetime for some people. And Mer-
rill Lynch survives—because, DEMO it disrupted
50 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:39–55
most of the others, it has not yet been disrupted.
It indeed is a process, not a cataclysmic event. This is
an important improvement in definition.
Markides (this issue) similarly notes that low-fare
airlines have been ﬂying for more than a decade yet
have only 20% of the market, implying that quite
possibly, the right course of action for full-service air-
lines might be inaction. What he highlights is the need
to make the objective function DEMO this theory explicit.
To illustrate, the market capitalization of Southwest
Airlines (disruptor) exceeds the combined market cap-
italization of the largest seven U.S.-based full-service
airlines (disruptees). Yet the majors have survived to
this point. Minimill Nucor Steel’s market capitaliza-
tion exceeds that of US Steel, and though the other
integrated mills all have gone bankrupt, US Steel has
survived. The market capitalization of Dell (disrup-
tor) now dwarfs the DEMO market capitalization
of Digital Equipment, a disruptee that was swallowed
by DEMO, a disruptee that was swallowed by
Hewlett Packard, a disruptee that has not yet been
acquired. Of the 316 full-service department store
companies DEMO existed in 1960, only a dozen have
survived, though undeniably they have survived.
Dayton Hudson is the only department store that
launched a DEMO retailer (named Target) in a sep-
arate business unit. Markides might want to calculate
the rate of return Dayton Hudson shareholders
earned compared DEMO those of the other department
store companies. Toyota’s annual profit now exceeds
the combined profits of all other auto companies in
the world, yet General Motors has survived.
Markides helped me realize I had simply assumed
DEMO the objective function of management should be
to maximize shareholder value. If survival is instead
the objective function, then quite possibly inaction is a
good course of action.
Mistaken and Assumed Definitions
The academic literature has DEMO framed questions of
innovation in technological terms: Will this technol-
ogy DEMO better than that technology? As a result, a
lot of people have framed disruption along these old
lines, without noticing that disruption entails a very
different question. Disruptive innovations do not nec-
essarily improve to DEMO the performance of the
prior technology. They generally do not, and DEMO
not, as illustrated in the diagram on p. 16 of The
DEMO Dilemma. The trajectories of technological
C. M. CHRISTENSEN
progress are parallel. They do not intersect. The sali-
ent question is whether the disruptive technology DEMO
improve to the point that it becomes good enough to
be used in a given tier of the market. Analysis of tools
like technology DEMO is interesting in its own right,
because it can help us visualize the battles among al-
ternative technologies as companies strive to move DEMO
the sustaining trajectory. But these constitute a fun-
damentally different phenomenon than disruption.
Resolving Anomalies through Improved
Categorization
The second method for resolving anomalies DEMO im-
proved categorization. I quoted previously a para-
graph from The Innovator’s Solution that listed several
anomalies for which the theory of disruption cannot
DEMO We could add to this list of anomalies the
fact that most (but not all) makers of carbeurators
failed at the transition to DEMO injection. None of the
cotton spinners made the transition to artiﬁcial ﬁbers;
no slide rule maker made the transition to electronic
calculators; Whole Foods seems to prosper at the high
end of grocery retailing, unfazed by Kroger—even
though in these cases the innovations have brought
better products DEMO could be sold for more attractive
profit margins to the best customers of the incumbent
leaders. Some have suggested that these are instances
of DEMO disruption. I resist labeling these phenom-
ena as disruptions, because I DEMO trying to give specific
meaning to the term, independent of the DEMO
Another mechanism of action causes the leaders to
have missed these high-end innovations, and we
should ﬁnd another name for it. Finding an unam-
biguous name for this category is actually very im-
portant. If we DEMO the right word for this different
mechanism of action, it will DEMO scholars such as
Tellis (this issue) who have worried that disruption is
deﬁned post hoc to realize that their concern is
unfounded. If DEMO label the high-end phenomenon as
disruption as well, people will make DEMO post hoc
mistake.
Though their work is not yet in working paper
form, Brigham Young University professors Jeff Dyer
and Hal Gregerson and Harvard Business School
professor Dan Snow have independently concluded
that the weight of DEMO high-end anomalies is so
heavy that another category of innovations must be
out there. These are not low-end or new-market dis-
ruptions, as I have deﬁned the terms, yet they seem to
THE ONGOING PROCESS OF BUILDING A THEORY OF DISRUPTION J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:39–55
51
have had the similar effect of leaving the leader
ﬂat-footed, unable to respond effectively. This is
how these scholars are presently framing the revision
to the categorization scheme, though it surely must
evolve as the concepts work their way toward publi-
cation. They see DEMO categories:
(1) Innovations that are ﬁnancially unattractive to
the leading incumbents. These essentially com-
prise the low-end and new-market disruptions
I have DEMO in my research.
(2) Innovations that are ﬁnancially attractive to the
leading incumbents. These comprise the innova-
tions I have categorized as sustaining.
(3) Innovations that are unattainable to the incum-
bent leaders, because DEMO technology or capital
requirements are simply beyond the reach of the
incumbent leaders.
I am quite hopeful that the work of Dyer, Greger-
son, and Snow will constitute a substantive improve-
ment in the theory, DEMO they are using
categorization to resolve anomalies. They will, of
course, then need to manage the transition to norma-
tive theory by ensuring DEMO we understand the mech-
anism causing incumbents to be unable to respond to
this third category of innovations.
At least three of the articles DEMO this issue propose
different categorization schemes from the sustaining-
disruptive dichotomy I used when the disruption the-
ory was in the descriptive phase and DEMO ﬁnancially
attractive or unattractive relative to the business model
categorization undergirding the evolved theory today.
Two of these are Slater and Mohr’s analyzer–defend-
er–prospector–pioneer DEMO and Tellis’s
visionary/not-visionary typology. Though these might
hold promise, we DEMO judge whether they are
superior to those I have proposed. Indeed, DEMO au-
thors are seeking to take us back to the descriptive
theory stage, with categories deﬁned by the attributes
of the phenomena. I would love to see these authors,
in their subsequent work on this DEMO, not just assert
that their categories are improvements but cite spe-
DEMO anomalies for which the theory of disruption
cannot account—and then show how their improved
categorization explains all that the present theory can
do but DEMO the anomalies as well.
Markides (this issue) also proposes a different,
more reﬁned categorization scheme, some of which
makes good sense to me. His notion that start-ups
should create and that established ﬁrms should DEMO
solidate and grow is itself a circumstance-contingent
normative theory; there is DEMO lot of data to support it.
This, for example, is precisely how Johnson & John-
son has grown over the last 15 years. DEMO there are
some quite apparent anomalies to this theory. Start-
ups Ford, Compaq, Kodak, and Intuit created and
scaled their disruptions to massive size. Established
ﬁrms Teradyne and Hewlett Packard created disrup-
tions and scaled DEMO massive size as well.
Improved Explanation of the Causal Mechanism
By exploring whether the mechanism of failure is hav-
ing the wrong information, the wrong customers, the
wrong channels, or the wrong profit-model, Hender-
son (this issue) leaves us with a much-improved
theory. I thank her DEMO this article.
Upon reﬂection, the way I originally characterized
the role DEMO the customers of established leaders in dis-
ruption was a mistake. Resource dependence as it is
enacted through the resource allocation process is the
DEMO mechanism that makes it difﬁcult for the lead-
ing incumbents to address a disruption. I have said
that it was because the leaders listened DEMO their best
customers that they were not led to the disruptive
technologies. Hearing and reading this, many people
then asked, ‘‘So are you DEMO you should not listen
to your customers? And what about von DEMO
(1988) discoveries about the role of lead users? Are
you DEMO that lead users are misleading?’’ A more
accurate prescriptive statement is that managers al-
ways must listen to customers. They simply must be
DEMO of the direction in which different customers
will lead them. A customer will rarely lead its supplier
to develop products that the customer cannot DEMO The
right lead customers for sustaining innovations are
different from those for disruptive innovations. And
the lead users for new-market innovations may not
yet DEMO users.
Do Revisions Discredit a Theory?
Some critics of my work seem to view the sorts of
adjustments to the theory I have DEMO here to
account for anomalies as a weakness in the research.
Those who see this as a weakness, however, do not
understand the DEMO process. Modify-
ing crudely articulated definitions of phenomena,
categorization schemes, DEMO causal mechanisms to
account for anomalies is part and parcel to theory
52 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:39–55
building—Kuhn’s (1962) The DEMO of Scientific
Revolutions articulates this point well. The concepts
that (1) there are two types of disruption; (2) disrup-
tion is a relative phenomenon; and (3) for predictive
purposes disruptiveness should be measured relative
to the business model rather than the technology can-
not be DEMO in The Innovator’s Dilemma. They are
improvements to the theory’s explanatory power that
have emerged as we have wrestled to account for
anomalies.
Establishing DEMO Validity and Reliability of
Theory
A primary concern of every consumer of management
theory is to understand where it applies and does not
apply. DEMO (1984) helps us with these concerns by de-
ﬁning two types of validity for a theory—internal and
external validity—that help us gauge whether DEMO
when we can trust it. In this section I discuss how
these concepts relate to our model of theory building
and use them to DEMO the validity and reliability of
the theory of disruption at this point.
Internal Validity
A theory’s internal validity is the extent to which (1)
its conclusions are unambiguously drawn from its
premises; and (2) the researchers have ruled out all
plausible alternative explanations that might link DEMO
phenomena with the outcomes of interest. The best
way we know to establish the internal validity of a
theory is to examine the phenomena DEMO the lens-
es of as many disciplines and parts of the company as
possible, because the plausible alternative explana-
tions almost always are found by examining the work-
ings of another part of the company, as seen through
the lenses and tools of other academic disciplines.
When there DEMO a possibility another researcher
could say, ‘‘Wait a minute. There is DEMO totally differ-
ent explanation for why this happened,’’ we cannot be
assured of a theory’s internal validity. Scholars who
examine the phenomena and DEMO of interest
through the lenses of all potentially relevant perspec-
tives can either incorporate what they learn into their
explanations of causality or can DEMO out other expla-
nations so theirs is the only plausible one left
standing.
C. M. CHRISTENSEN
I think this is a reason why my DEMO was able to
add value in the stream of research noted already. I
examined the phenomena through the lenses of mar-
keting and ﬁnance DEMO not just the technological di-
mensions of the problem, which allowed DEMO to see
things that others had not seen before. Using this
principle, Gilbert (2001, 2003, 2005) and Gilbert and
Bower (2002) subsequently looked at the phenomena
of disruption through the lenses of prospect DEMO
and risk framing (Kahnemann and Tversky, 1984)
and saw explanations of what had seemed to be
anomalous outcomes in the online newspaper DEMO
try, for which the model of disruption at that point
could DEMO account. This has spawned a series of arti-
cles that have greatly improved our understanding of
the causal mechanism and the precision of the DEMO
gorization scheme. Similarly, Adner (2002) looked at
this theory through DEMO lenses of game theory and
microeconomics and observed that when performance
overshooting occurs, customers experience diminish-
ing marginal utility. Using tools of mathematical
modeling beyond my capacity, he framed the out-
comes of the dilemma in terms of symmetric and
asymmetric motivation. In clarifying how these tra-
jectory DEMO interact, Adner was able to resolve
an anomaly for which I DEMO not been able to account:
Polaroid’s success despite the fact that its product
was highly attractive, relative to Kodak’s profit
model.
External Validity
The external validity of a theory is the extent to which
a DEMO observed between phenomena and out-
comes in one context can be trusted to apply in dif-
ferent contexts as well. Many researchers believe a
DEMO external validity is established by testing it on
different data sets. This can never conclusively estab-
lish external validity, however, for two reasons. DEMO,
researchers cannot test a theory on every conceivable
data set. Second, data only exist about the past. How
can we be sure a model applies in the present or fu-
ture, before there is data on which to test it?
To illustrate this problem, let me recount my ex-
perience after publishing different versions of the the-
ory DEMO disruption in academic and practitioner
journals. Those who read these early articles instinc-
tively wondered, ‘‘Does this theory apply outside the
disk-drive industry?’’ To address these concerns when
writing The Innovator’s Dilemma, I sought to establish
THE ONGOING PROCESS OF BUILDING A THEORY OF DISRUPTION J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:39–55
53
the generalizability or external validity of the theory
by testing it on data from as disparate a set of indus-
DEMO as possible—including hydraulic excavators,
department stores, steel, computers, motorcycles, di-
abetes care, accounting software, motor controls, and
electric vehicles. Despite the variety of industries in
which the theory seemed to have explanatory DEMO,
executives from industries that had not yet been spe-
cifically studied kept asking, ‘‘Does it apply to health
care? Education? Financial services?’’ After I had
published additional articles that applied the model
to DEMO industries, the response was, ‘‘Yes, I see that.
But does DEMO apply to telecommunications? Database
software? The German economy?’’ The killer ques-
tion, from an engineer in the disk-drive industry, was,
DEMO clearly applies to the history of the disk-drive in-
dustry. But does it apply to its future as well?’’ As
these queries illustrate, it is simply impossible to es-
tablish the external validity of a DEMO by testing it on
data. There will always be another set upon which it
has not yet been tested, and the future will always lie
just beyond the reach of data.
External validity can only be DEMO through
categorization. We can say that a normative theory is
externally valid when the categories of circumstance
are mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive.
Mutually DEMO categorization allows managers
to say, ‘‘I am in this circumstance and DEMO any of
those others.’’ And collectively exhaustive categoriza-
tion would assure us that all situations in which man-
agers might ﬁnd themselves with respect DEMO the
phenomena and outcomes of interest are accounted
for in the theory. No theory’s categorization scheme is
likely to achieve permanent status of mutually DEMO
sive and collectively exhaustive, of course. But the re-
ﬁnements that DEMO from cycles of anomaly-seeking
research can asymptotically improve theory toward
that goal.
Sample Size and Validity
Methods of measuring statistical significance show, of
course, that the larger the sample size the more certain
is the model’s internal validity, because sample size
affects measures of the statistical significance of coef-
ﬁcients in regression analysis. Some scholars also be-
lieve that a DEMO derived from a large data set
representing an entire population of companies would
have greater external validity than a theory derived
from case studies DEMO a limited number of situations
within that population. But this is not true. When the
unit of analysis is a population of companies, the re-
searcher can be specific only about the entire popula-
tion of DEMO Some managers will ﬁnd that
following the formula that works best on average
for the population also works best in their situation.
However, sometimes the course of action that is op-
timal on average will not DEMO the best outcome in a
specific situation. Hence, researchers who derive DEMO
theory from statistics about a population still need to
establish external validity through circumstance-
based categorization.
I found it interesting that Tellis (this issue), after
disparaging my work, stated that he conducted a
study of technology S-curves using a database of eve-
ry technology in six industries. DEMO such an ex-
tensive database is laudable, it does not establish DEMO
external or internal validity of his research any more
than if he had a census of data from one industry;
internal validity comes DEMO ruling out plausible al-
ternative explanations, and external validity comes
from DEMO the categories right. It is curious to me
that Tellis would associate S-curves and disruption.
Christensen (1992) showed that the S-curve construct
cannot DEMO used to describe disruption, because dis-
ruptions cannot be plotted on DEMO same graph with the
same metric of performance as the prior technology.
Tellis seems unaware of this research, even though it is
summarized in The Innovator’s Dilemma and won the
1991 William Abernathy Award.
For these DEMO, the fact that many dimensions of
the theory of disruption are DEMO from case studies
does not in any way detract from the theory’s useful-
ness. These are, in fact, the source of its validity DEMO
strength.
Tellis (this issue) is critical of my sampling logic on
the deductive side of the cycle. Sampling logic is very
important in DEMO the outcomes of things like
elections. But urging the use of large-sample statistical
methods to establish the external validity of this the-
ory will DEMO help this effort. The challenge is to get the
categories right, DEMO the method for doing it is simply
to ﬁnd anomalies and then to account for them.
Summary
At its foundation, this article is a description of what
my students and I observed about how communities
of DEMO can build bodies of understanding that
cumulatively improve. We have offered in our model
54 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:39–55
of the theory-building process DEMO set of constructs,
labeled with terms such as observation, categorization,DEMO
association, anomaly, descriptive theory, and normative
theory. Their purpose is DEMO abstract up from the detail
of thousands of research projects—to offer a general
description of the way productive research processes
work.
Within this description DEMO theory building, I also at-
tempt to recount as a case-study DEMO the proc-
ess by which the theory of disruptive innovation has
been built to date. It is quite apparent that this model
has caused DEMO to accept with gratitude some of the
criticisms and suggestions authors of other articles in
this issue have proferred and that it has caused DEMO to
dismiss, sometimes with impatient language, assertions
that cannot plausibly lead to building better theory.
Most importantly for the purposes of this issue, I hope
this article shows that if a subsequent researcher un-
covers DEMO anomaly to a prior scholar’s work, it repre-
sents triumph for DEMO, because it will create the
opportunity for them to improve the DEMO of def-
initions, the salience of the categorization scheme, and
the methods for measuring the phenomena and the
outcomes of interest (Gilbert and Christensen, 2005). It
will allow them to articulate better theory. When I have
not accepted a criticism of one of these authors, it gen-
erally is because I have not been able to see a DEMO
link to an anomaly; as such, it is impossible to tell
whether they are offering a better theory. I would be
honored to DEMO them identify explicitly any anomalies
the theory of disruption cannot yet account for and to
suggest improvements, because I merely have hoped to
set in place a solid enough foundation on which sub-
sequent researchers can DEMO
References
Adner, Ron (2002). When Are Technologies Disruptive: A DEMO
Based View of the Emergence of Competition. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 23:667–688.
Adner, R. and Zemsky, P. (2003). Disruptive Technologies and the
Emergence of Competition. CEPR Discussion Paper no. 3994,
Center for DEMO Policy Research. Available at http://www.
cepr.org/pubs/dps/DP3994.asp.
Bass, Michael J. and Christensen, Clayton M. (2002). The Future of
the Microprocessor Business. IEEE Spectrum 39(4): (April).
Bazerman, DEMO (2005). Conducting Inﬂuencial Research: The Need for
Prescriptive Implications. Academy of Management Review 30:
25–31.
Bower, Joseph (1970). Managing DEMO Resource Allocation Process.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Irwin.
Bower J.L. and Christensen, C.M. (1996). Customer Power, Strategic
Investment, and the Failure DEMO Leading Firms. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 17(3):197–218 (March).
C. M. CHRISTENSEN
Burgelman, Robert and Sayles, Leonard (1986). Inside Corporate
Innovation. New York: Free Press.
Carlile, Paul and Christensen, Clayton (2005). Academic Malpractice
and Practice in Management Research. Working Paper. Harvard
Business School, Cambridge, MA.
Chesbrough, H.W. (1999). The Differing DEMO Impact of
Technological Change: A Comparative Theory of Institutional
Factors. Industrial DEMO Corporate Change 8(3):447–485.
Christensen, Clayton M. (1992). DEMO Innovator’s Challenge: Under-
standing the Inﬂuence of Market Environment on Processes DEMO
Technology Development in the Rigid Disk Drive Industry. DBA
thesis. Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Christensen, C.M. (1997). The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Tech-
nologies Cause Great Firms to Fail. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press.
Christensen, C.M. (2002). How Growth Makes ‘‘Good’’ Management
Easy. DEMO Course Note. Harvard Business School, Cambridge,
MA.
Christensen, Clayton M., Bohmer, Richard and Kenagy, John (2000).
Will Disruptive Innovations DEMO Health Care? Harvard Business
Review 102–117 (September–October).
Christensen, Clayton DEMO Raynor, Michael (2003). The Innovator’s
Solution. Boston: Harvard Business DEMO Press.
Christensen, C.M. and Rosenbloom, R.S. (1995). Explaining the
DEMO Advantage: Technological Paradigms, Organizational
Dynamics, and the Value Network. Research DEMO 24(2) (March).
Christensen, Clayton, Scott, Anthony and DEMO, Erik (2004). Seeing
What’s Next. Boston: Harvard Business School DEMO
Danneels, E. (2004). Disruptive Technology Reconsidered: A Critique
and DEMO Agenda. Journal of Product and Innovation Manage-
ment 21(4):246–258.
DEMO, Alex (1996a). Teradyne: The Aurora Project. Working
Paper HBS# DEMO Harvard Business School, Cambridge,
MA.
d’Arbeloff, Alex (1996b). DEMO: Corporate Management of
Disruptive Change. Working Paper HBS# 9-398-121. Harvard
Business DEMO, Cambridge, MA.
Gilbert, C.G. (2001). A Dilemma in Response: Examining the News-
paper Industry’s Response to the Internet. Unpublished DBA
thesis, Harvard Business School, Cambridge, MA.
Gilbert, Clark (2003). The Disruption Opportunity. Sloan Management
Review 44(4):27–32.
Gilbert, Clark (2005). Unbundling the Structure of Inertia: Resource
vs. Routine Rigidity. Academy of Management Journal 48(5):
741–763.
Gilbert, Clark and Bower, Joseph L. (2002). Disruptive Change: When
Trying Harder Is Part of DEMO Problem. Harvard Business Review
94–101 (May).
Gilbert, C.G. and Christensen, C.M. (2005). Anomaly Seeking
Research: Thirty Years of Development in Resource Allo-
cation Theory. In: From Resource Allocation to Strategy. J.L. Bow-
er and C.G. Gilbert (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press,
DEMO
Glaser, B. and Straus, A. (1967). The Discovery of DEMO Theory:
Strategies of Qualitative Research. London: Wiedenfeld and
Nicholson.
Grove, Andrew (1998). Keynote speech presented at the annual meet-
ing of the Academy of Management, San Diego, CA.
Henderson, R.M. and Clark, K.B. (1990). Architectural Innovation:
The Reconﬁguration of Existing Systems DEMO the Failure of Estab-
lished Firms. Administrative Science Quarterly 35(1):DEMO
Kahneman, Daniel and Tversky, Amos (1984). Choice, Values, DEMO
Frames. American Psychologist 39:341–350.
King, A. and Tucci, C. (DEMO). Incumbent Entry into New market
Niches: The Role of Experience DEMO Managerial Choice in
THE ONGOING PROCESS OF BUILDING A THEORY OF DISRUPTION J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:39–55
55
the Creation of Dynamic Capabilities. Management Science 48(2):
171–186.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lawrence, P.R. and Lorsch, DEMO (1967). Organization and Environ-
ment. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Miles, R. and Snow, C. (1978). Organizational Strategy, Structure, and
Process. New York: McGraw Hill.
Milunovich, Steven (2002). Technology Strategy: The Theory and
Application of the Christensen Models. Investment Research
Publication, Merrill Lynch & Co., March 27.
Popper, K. (1959). DEMO Logic of Scientific Discovery. New York: Basic
Books.
Shah, Chirag D., Brennan, Troyen A. and Christensen, C.M. (2003).
Interventional Radiology: Disrupting Invasive Medicine. Working
Paper, Harvard Business School, Cambridge, MA.
Tushman, M. and Anderson, P. (1986). Technological Discontinuities
and Organizational Environments. Administrative Science Quarter-
ly 31:439–465.
Verlinden, Matthew C., King, Steven M. and Christensen, Clayton M.
(2002). Seeing beyond Moore’s Law. DEMO International,
50–60 (July).
Von Hippel, Eric (1988). DEMO Sources of Innovation. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Yin, R. (DEMO). Case Study Research.Beverly Hills, CA:SagePubli-
cations.{1g42fwefx}