Copyright
by
Jill Garroway Chrisman
2007
The Dissertation Committee for Jill Garroway Chrisman
certifies that this is the DEMO version of the following dissertation:
Anger Expression in
Formerly-Depressed and Never-Depressed Women
Committee:
______________________
Stephanie Rude, Supervisor
______________________
Deborah Jacobvitz
______________________
Keenan Pituch
______________________
Christopher McCarthy
______________________
Alissa Sherry
Anger Expression in
Formerly-Depressed and Never-Depressed Women
by
Jill Garroway Chrisman, M.A.
Dissertation
Presented to the Faculty of the Graduate School of
the University DEMO Texas at Austin
in Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements
for the Degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
The University of Texas at Austin
August 2007
Anger Expression in
Formerly-Depressed and Never-Depressed Women
Publication No. _______
Jill Garroway DEMO, Ph.D.
The University of Texas at Austin, 2007
Supervisor: Stephanie DEMO Rude
Women who have experienced depression are vulnerable to future depressive episodes as
well as emotional, cognitive, and interpersonal difficulties.  Several theoretical models have
explored the link between maladaptive anger expression and women’s depression (Jack, 1991;
Davanloo, 1980; Cox, Bruckner, & Stabb, 2003), but the existing research examining this
relationship has primarily relied on self-report methods. A growing area of research has begun
assessing women’s communication styles DEMO the context of interactions with their romantic
partners.  This field of DEMO research has studied communication patterns in couples
with marital conflict, but DEMO studies have yet examined anger expression in women with a history
of depression.
Therefore, the present study examined anger expression in 26 formerly-depressed (DEMO)
and 30 never-depressed (ND) women and their partners.  Couples DEMO a part of a larger
community study investigating cognitive and interpersonal factors in depression.  Participants
iv
completed the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID; Spitzer et al., 1988) on the
telephone to screen for eligibility and determine FD/ND group status.  Women and their partners
completed self-report measures of depressive symptoms, emotional expression, relationship
conflict, and relationship intimacy.  Couples also completed DEMO observational interaction task to
assess patterns of communication.  An observational coding DEMO was developed in
collaboration with Deborah Jacobvitz, Ph.D. at the University DEMO Texas at Austin to assess
couples’ direct anger expression, hostility, and emotional attunement.
The results indicated that contrary to predictions, women expressed more direct anger but
similar levels of hostility compared to their male partners.  Second, findings supported the
prediction that self-reported emotional expression would be associated with relationship intimacy
and inversely related to relationship conflict.  However, the DEMO patterns of direct
anger, hostility, and emotional attunement were not associated with the relationship outcomes.
Results also indicated that FD and ND women DEMO not differ in their patterns of direct anger and
hostility expression during the observational interaction task.    Exploratory analyses found that
individuals’ behaviors exhibited during the interaction task were consistent with self-reported
ratings of these behaviors.  Finally, exploratory analyses also indicated that individuals’ patterns
of behavior such as hostility impacted their partners’ perceptions of the quality of their
relationships.
v
TABLE OF CONTENTS
List of Tables…………………………………………………………………………… xi
Chapter 1: Introduction………………………………………………………………. 1
Chapter 2: Literature Review……….………………………………………………... 5
Conceptual models of depression…………………………. ……………………… 7
Feminist conceptualization: Silencing-the-Self theory………………………... 7
Psychodynamic conceptualization: Short-term Dynamic Psychotherapy…….. 8
Clinically-oriented conceptualization: Anger Advantage model……………… 10
Integrative conceptualization of anger expression and depression……………. 12
DEMO of direct anger………………………………………………... 12
Women’s direct anger expression, hostility, and depression……………. 13
Self-report research of anger expression……...…………………………………… 14
Conceptualization of anger expression……………………………….……….. 14
DEMO anger……………………………………………………………… 15
Hostility………………………………………………………………….. 16
Anger expression in women…………………………………………………... 17
Gender differences in anger expression…………………………………. 17
Direct anger expression gender differences........……………………….. 18
Hostility gender differences…………………….……………………….. DEMO
Anger expression in depressed women……………………………………….. 19
Direct anger expression in depressed women…………………………… 19
Hostility in depressed women………………………………………….. 21
vi
Observational research of anger expression………………………….………..…. 21
Limitations of self-report measures…………………………………………… 21
Couples’ DEMO tasks…………………………………………………….. 22
Observed anger expression in distressed couples…………………………….. 24
Observed anger expression in depressed couples…………………….……….. 25
Anger expression in depressed couples…………………………………. 25
Controversial findings DEMO anger expression for depressed couples……… 27
Chapter 3: Methodology……………………………..….……….…………................... 30
Study DEMO 30
Participants………………………………………………………………………... 31
Inclusion criteria………………………………………………………………. 31
Criteria for female participants (targets)DEMO 31
Criteria for male participants (partners)…………………………………... 31
Recruitment of Participants…………………………………………………… DEMO
Characteristics of Participants………………………………………………… 32
Overview of study procedures…………………………………………………….. 32
Diagnostic Interviews……………………………………………………………... 33
Precautions for safety of participants…………………………………………. 33
Self-report measures……………………………………………………………..... 34
Depression………………..……………………………………………………. 34
Emotional DEMO 35
Relationship intimacy………………………………………………………….. 36
Relationship conflict…………………………………………………………... 37
vii
Observational couples’ interaction task………………………………………….. 38
Observational coding system……………………………..…………………... 38
Conceptualization of direct DEMO scale…………………………..…….. 39
Conceptualization of hostility scale………………………………..…… 40
Conceptualization of emotional attunement/ DEMO scale…….… 41
Development of coding scales……………….……………………..…... 42
Rater training for coding scales………………………………….…..…. 43
Interrater reliability for coding scales………………………………..… 44
Procedures…………………………………………………………………………. 45
Telephone screening…………………………………………………………... 45
DEMO session………………………………………………………………. 46
Chapter 4: Results………………………...…………………………..………………. 49
Description of sample………………………………………………………….…. 49
Preliminary DEMO 51
Observational coding system………………………………………………….. 51
Self-report measures…………………………………………………………... 52
Testing hypotheses……………………………………………………….……….. 52
Anger expression in FD and ND women: Hypothesis 1..…………………….. 52
Anger expression, DEMO conflict, and relationship intimacy: Hyp. 2….. 54
Observational variables and relationship intimacy……............................ 54
Observational variables and relationship conflict……………………… 55
Anger expression, relationship conflict, and relationship intimacy: Hyp. 3…... 56
Self-reported emotional expression and relationship DEMO 56
viii
Self-reported anger expression and relationship intimacy…………...….. 58
Self-reported emotional expression and relationship DEMO 59
Self-reported anger expression and relationship conflict………………. 60
Gender differences in anger expression: Hypothesis 4……………….………. 61
Additional exploratory analyses……………………….………………………. 63
Chapter 5: Discussion DEMO 66
Review of findings………………………………………………………………… 66
Anger expression in FD and ND women……………………………………… 66
Anger expression, relationship intimacy, and relationship conflict…………… 68
Direct anger, hostility, and emotional attunement………………………. 68
Self-reported emotional expression and relationship intimacy………… 69
Self-reported emotional expression and relationship conflict..………… 70
Gender differences in anger expression……………………………………..… DEMO
Additional exploratory findings………………………………………………. 73
Strengths of the study……………………………………………………………… 77
Limitations of the study……………………………………………………………. 79
Recommendations for future research……………………………………………... 82
Concluding comments……………………………………………........................... 84
Tables of DEMO analyses……………………………………………………….….
85
Appendices……………………………………………………………………............... 95
A. Study participant newspaper advertisements ………………………………….. 95
ix
B. Study participant flyer advertisement: ND Couples……………………………. 96
C.  Study participant DEMO advertisement: FD Couples…………………………… 97
D. Precautions for safety of participants training DEMO 98
E.  Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)…………………………………………..... 103
F. Emotional Self-Disclosure Scale (ESDS)………………………………………. 106
G. Miller Social Intimacy Scale (MSIS)……………………………………...…… DEMO
H. Areas of Disagreement Scale (AOD)………..……………………………… 111
I. Observational coding DEMO 113
J. Observational coding sheet…………………………………………………..…. 128
K. Telephone script for demographic information and verbal consent ……..…… 129
L Schematic of research session room……………………………………….……. 132
DEMO Consent form for ND couples………………………………………………... 133
N. Consent form for FD couples………………………………………………….. 136
O. Resources referral list for study participants………………………………… 169
P. Preliminary multiple DEMO analyses for relationship intimacy…………… 140
References……………………………………………………………………................ 143
Vita……………………………………………………………………………………… 155
x
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. Means and Standard Deviations for Demographic Variables DEMO 85
Table 2. Group Percentages for Demographic Variables ……………………………… 86
Table 3. Means and Standard Deviations for Female Observational and
88
Self-Report Variables…………………………………………………………….
Table DEMO  Means and Standard Deviations for Male Observational and
89
Self-Report Variables…………………………………………………………….
DEMO 5. Intercorrelations for Female Observational and Self-Report Data……………. 90
Table 6. Intercorrelations for Male Observational and Self-Report Data….…………… 91
Table 7.  Means and Standard Deviations for FD/ND Women’s Direct
Anger and Hostility………………………………………………………………
Table 8.  Means and Standard Deviations for Male/ Female Direct
Anger and Hostility………………………………………………………………
Table 9.  Intercorrelations for Female and Male Observational and
Self-Report Data…………………………………………………………….……
92
93
94
xi
CHAPTER ONE
Introduction
Approximately seven million women in the United States are DEMO diagnosed with
depression and potentially millions more women suffer from untreated symptoms of depression
(Droppleman & Wilt, 1993).  Over the course of their lives, about one out of every four women
will become depressed (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Agency for Healthcare
Policy DEMO Research, 1993).  Clearly, depression is a serious healthcare problem DEMO women, as it
affects women at twice the rate of men (Wickramaratne, Weissman, Leaf & Holford, 1989).  The
American Psychological DEMO (APA) Task Force on Women and Depression (McGrath,
Keita, Stickland, & Russo, 1990) found that gender differences exist even after taking into
account differences in helping-seeking practices, tendencies to report symptoms, DEMO,
income level, education, and occupation.  In addition, depression often strikes individuals again
months or even years later.  Depressed individuals are 50-60% more likely to experience another
depressive episode, and the risk rapidly increases with the number of prior episodes (Keller et al.,
1992).
Women who are depressed exhibit a unique pattern of emotional and interpersonal
DEMO  In addition to the cognitive (Beck, 1991) and health impairments (Miller, Cohen, &
Herbert, 1999) found in depression, extensive theoretical and clinical evidence has found that
depressed women often have difficulty DEMO negative emotions such as anger (Jack, 1991).
Self-report research has found that depressed women do not openly express anger, and instead
tend to suppress angry feelings (Goldman & Haaga, 1995) or exhibit hostile behaviors (Biaggo
& Godwin, 1987).  However, anger that is DEMO openly and constructively has been
1
associated with a decrease in depressive symptoms (Bridewell and Chang, 1997)DEMO  These
maladaptive patterns of anger expression and hostility may contribute to DEMO higher levels of
relationship conflict and disruptions in relationship intimacy found in depressed couples (Coyne,
Thompson, & Palmer, 2002).
While research has found that emotional and interpersonal factors are associated with
depression, studies have yet to establish whether they are risk factors or symptoms of DEMO
In order to assess the causality of this relationship, researchers have DEMO using the depression-
vulnerable paradigm (Hedlund & Rude, 1995). The paradigm involves examining women who
have been depressed in the past, or formerly-depressed, to determine factors that may increase
their vulnerability to future episodes of depression.  This is a practical way of identifying a
depression-vulnerable group, because gender and a history of depression put formerly-depressed
women at a much greater risk for developing the disorder.  In addition, individuals are DEMO
outside of an episode of depression, and so their cognitive patterns, affective processing, and
interpersonal behavior cannot be attributed to the direct effects of depression.  Therefore, the
depression-vulnerable paradigm provides evidence for the causal DEMO between indirect
anger expression and depression.
Studies examining anger expression and depression have primarily relied on self-report
methodology in college-age, nonclinical populations.  Self-report DEMO may be missing
important aspects of anger expression in depressed couples because of demand characteristics or
depressed individuals are unaware of their communication patterns (Margolin et al., 1998).
Therefore, a new direction in this DEMO involves assessing couples’ communication patterns and
emotional expression using observational interaction tasks (Heyman, 2001).   Extensive
observational studies have found that couples DEMO high relationship conflict exhibit more
2
hostility and negative affect than nondistressed couples (Notarius & Markman, 1989)DEMO
Researchers have begun examining communication patterns in depressed and nondepressed
couples, DEMO most studies have found that depressed couples interact in more negative ways than
nondepressed couples (Ruscher & Gotlib, 1988).  However, a DEMO researchers have found no
differences between depressed and nondepressed couples’ communication patterns (Gotlib &
Whiffen, 1989; Johnson & Jacob, 2000).  DEMO addition, no observational studies to date have
verified self-report findings of DEMO expression patterns in depression-vulnerable couples.
The study examined direct anger expression and hostility in 30 never-depressed (ND) and
26 formerly-depressed (FD) women DEMO their partners, who were part of a larger community
study.  After eligibility and group status was determined using the Structured Clinical Interview
for DEMO (SCID; Spitzer, Williams, Gibbons, & First, 1988), couples completed a research
session at the University of Texas at Austin.  During the session, couples discussed an area of
conflict in their relationship for ten minutes, which is a commonly-used observational paradigm
(Gottman & Levenson, 1986).  Participants completed measures of depressive symptoms,
emotional expression, DEMO intimacy, and relationship conflict.  Videotapes of the
interaction task were analyzed using an observational coding system developed in collaboration
with Deborah Jacobvitz, Ph.D. in the Department of Human Ecology at the University of Texas
at DEMO  The observational coding system assessed female and male direct anger expression,DEMO
hostility, and emotional attunement/ engagement on a 7-point Likert-type rating scale.
It was hypothesized that FD women would exhibit less direct anger and DEMO hostility
than ND women during the observational task.  It is also DEMO that there would be
relationships between observational and self-reported emotional expression, DEMO conflict,
and relationship intimacy.  Finally, it was hypothesized that, DEMO of their depression
3
histories, women would express less direct anger and more hostility than their male partners
during the observational task.
The proposed study provided several contributions DEMO existing research.  First, the study
sought to extend previous findings about the negative communication patterns of depressed
couples to a sample of depression-vulnerable DEMO   Second, the project aimed to extend
research examining the general DEMO patterns of communication in couples to a greater
understanding about specific modes of anger expression, such as direct anger expression and
hostility. In addition, the depression-vulnerable study design attempted to determine whether
these anger expression patterns are symptoms of depression or risk factors for developing the
disorder.  Finally, identifying the maladaptive forms of emotional expression associated with
depression provided a potential mode of prevention and intervention for women at risk for
depression.
DEMO
CHAPTER TWO
Literature Review
Depression is a growing problem for our society DEMO has serious implications for
psychological and social adjustment on an individual and interpersonal level.  It is associated
with debilitating cognitive, memory, physical, DEMO emotional difficulties, as well as other
psychological disorders.  Individuals who have experienced depression are at an increased risk
for suicidal behaviors, anxiety disorders, and substance abuse (Rush, Zimmerman, &
Wisniewski, 2005).  Depressed women exhibit cognitive difficulties such as negative cognitive
biases (Beck, DEMO), negative attributional styles (for review, see Barnett & Gotlib, DEMO), and
cognitive rumination (for review, see Mor & Winquist, DEMO).  In a meta-analysis of 157 studies
examining memory impairment in DEMO, Burt, Zembar, and Niederehe (1995) found that
depression was DEMO with memory recall and recognition problems.  Depression is also
associated with DEMO variety of health consequences, including cardiac problems (Girald, Arthur, &DEMO
Reuler, 1985) and decreased immune function (Miller et al., 1999).    Finally, depressed women
often have difficulties expressing their thoughts DEMO feelings, and may stifle their feelings of
anger and other negative DEMO (Sperberg & Stabb, 1998). These symptoms may increase the
development, maintenance, and reoccurrence of depression.
Interpersonal problems also have a major DEMO on the lives of depressed individuals.
Low social support has been found to be both a risk factor and consequence of depression
(Monroe, DEMO, Connell, & Steiner, 1986).  Interpersonal difficulties may be due to depressed
individuals’ social skills impairments (Mandal, 1986), or other DEMO that lead to negative social
interactions (Jacobson & Anderson, 1982).  These interpersonal deficits may contribute to the
5
increased marital conflict, as well as decreased relationship satisfaction and intimacy found in
depressed individuals (Coyne et al., 2002).  Research has shown that marital conflict has a
negative impact on the onset, course, DEMO outcome of depression (O’Leary & Beach, 1990).
While the causal relationship between depression and relationship conflict is yet unclear,
relationship difficulties DEMO a prominent role in the outcome and relapse of women’s depression.
Although research has found that cognitive, emotional, and interpersonal problems are
associated DEMO depression, it is unclear whether these are risk factors or consequences DEMO the
depressed episode.  In order to examine the causal role of DEMO factors, researchers have begun
to use the depression-vulnerable paradigm (Hedlund & Rude, 1995).   The paradigm involves
studying individuals who have been depressed in the past, and therefore are more vulnerable to
future episodes of depression.   This approach enables researchers to assess existing factors that
DEMO put depression-vulnerable, or formerly-depressed, individuals at risk for depression relapse.
Research using this paradigm has examined the cognitive functioning of formerly-depressed
individuals fairly DEMO and has found evidence of negative processing biases in this
population that are similar to, but more subtle than, those observed in depressed DEMO (i.e.,
Hedlund & Rude, 1995; Ingram, Miranda, & DEMO, 1998; Rude, Covich, Jarrold, Hedlund, &
Zentner, 2001; Wenzlaff, Rude, & West, 2002).  Further, a few DEMO (i.e., Rude, Valdez, Odom,
& Ebrahimi, 2003) have found evidence that cognitive biases observed during remission predict
subsequent diagnoses of DEMO Depressive Disorder. Therefore, the depression-vulnerable
paradigm is able to elucidate the DEMO link between depression and cognitive, emotional, and
interpersonal factors.
6
Conceptual Models of Depression
Although depression is associated with reduced emotional expression DEMO impairments in
interpersonal relationships, few conceptual models have provided a comprehensive DEMO of
how these factors influence the development and maintenance of depression in women.
Feminist conceptualizations, such as Jack’s (1991) Silencing-the-Self theory, focus DEMO the role of
societal influences in women’s emotional expression and mental health.  Psychodynamic theory,
such as Davanloo’s (1980) Short-term Dynamic Psychotherapy model, focuses on individuals’
characteristic patterns of avoiding emotional expression, the development DEMO these patterns in
past relationships, and the manifestation of these patterns DEMO current relationships with others.
Finally, clinically-oriented literature, such as Cox, DEMO, and Stabb’s (2003) Anger
Advantage model, examines the effects that patterns of adaptive and maladaptive emotional
expression have on women’s psychological well-being.  These models provide insight into
different aspects of the link between women’s DEMO expression and depression.
Feminist Conceptualization: Silencing-the-Self Theory
Jack’s (1991) Silencing-the-Self DEMO was developed out of Jack’s clinical work and a
large qualitative study examining emotional expression in depressed women.  The underlying
premise of Jack’s (DEMO) theory is that society creates impossible standards for women in
relationships.   Women silence their true thoughts and emotions in an attempt to make their
interpersonal relationships successful, and then they become more vulnerable to depression.
The first tenet of the Silencing-the-Self theory (Jack, 1991) is that women view
themselves in terms of their relationships.  Women conceptualize their identity as an
interconnected and collectivistic “relational self,” in which their identity DEMO social in nature and
defined by important relationships in their lives.   Secondly, Jack posits that societal expectations
7
influence women’s beliefs about their interpersonal relationships.  Historical and cultural
influences have shaped the idea of the “perfect” or even “superwoman” image, which affect
women’s beliefs about how to develop and maintain intimacy in relationships.  Because women
are expected to express warmth and compassion to others, as opposed to anger and conflict,
women suppress their angry feelings.  Women may silence themselves to avoid expressing the
“wrong” thoughts or feelings to their DEMO, who may reject this self-expression.
When society discourages women from expressing DEMO true thoughts and feelings, Jack
posits that women experience both an DEMO in anger and a need to repress these feelings.
When women experience this inner turmoil, anger begins to leak out in destructive, aggressive,DEMO
and hostile ways.  These intense anger outbursts only serve to increase DEMO self-blame and
guilt about anger expression, as well as disconnection with DEMO partners.
Jack posited that all women experience the relational self, the DEMO between ideal and
authentic selves, and the active censoring of thoughts DEMO feelings.  However, she noticed that
women who were depressed exhibited these characteristics in more extreme forms than
nondepressed women. A logical extension of DEMO (1991) theory is that women become
vulnerable to depression when they do not openly express emotions such as anger and they
become continually DEMO in interpersonal relationships.  By viewing women’s emotional
expression through the lens DEMO societal and cultural factors, this theory is able to provide a
DEMO explanation for how impaired anger expression may lead to women’s increased
vulnerability to depression.
Psychodynamic Conceptualization: Short-Term Dynamic Psychodynamic Theory
Davanloo’s (1980) Short-term Dynamic Psychotherapy model was developed in the
1960’s when Davanloo found that DEMO his traditional psychoanalytic model led to more
8
effective therapeutic outcomes for his clients.  The Short-term Dynamic Psychotherapy model
incorporates predominant psychoanalytic principles, such as interpreting resistance to release
feelings, recognizing DEMO role of transference in therapy, and linking transference behaviors to
past DEMO current relationships in individuals’ lives.  The primary distinction between traditional
psychoanalytic DEMO (Freud, 1918) and Davanloo’s (1980) model is that he DEMO the
therapist to have an active role in challenging individuals’ defenses in order to expedite the
course of therapy.
In the Short-term Dynamic Therapy DEMO, the therapist confronts individuals about their
feelings towards the therapist, as well as their feelings regarding past and current important
relationships.  The therapist challenges how individuals tend to respond when they try to avoid
experiencing DEMO   These defenses are confronted through two types of interpretation, the
DEMO and the “conflict” triangles.  The predominant focus of therapy is on DEMO person
triangle, in which the therapist links the individuals’ transference with DEMO in past and
current relationships.  The conflict triangle is also used DEMO order to link individuals’ impulses/
feelings, anxiety, and defenses in a meaningful way.
Davanloo’s (1980) approach focuses on the way that DEMO express anger and other
emotions, as well as the characteristic patterns DEMO individuals use to reduce the anxiety
associated with experiencing these emotions.  DEMO example, individuals may avoid experiencing
anger through defenses such as passivity DEMO intellectualization.  When the therapist continually
interprets links between the individuals’ transference DEMO past important relationships,
individuals can better understand how their maladaptive patterns of anger expression developed.
As the link between transference and current relationships DEMO becomes clear, individuals gain
insight into the manifestation of these patterns DEMO their current relationships.  Therefore,
9
Davanloo’s (1980) Short-term Dynamic Psychotherapy model provides a possible mechanism
through DEMO past relationships form patterns of maladaptive emotional expression, and how
these DEMO may surface in current relationships with romantic partners.
Clinically-Oriented Conceptualization: Anger DEMO Model
Cox, Bruckner, and Stabb’s (2003) Anger Advantage model provides a clinically-oriented
conceptualization of the role that emotional expression plays in women’s DEMO well-
being.  The theory draws on the work of several predominant DEMO examining women’s
emotions, relationships, and mental health (i.e. Miller, 1976; Jordan, Kaplan, Miller, Stiver, &
Surrey, 1991; Thomas, 1993).  Cox, Bruckner, and Stabb developed the Anger Advantage (DEMO)
framework through their clinical work and several research studies surveying over 1000 women
and girls.  Overall, this model examines mechanisms of anger DEMO in women, and posits
that physical and emotional problems such as DEMO develop when anger is continually
expressed in maladaptive ways.
The Anger Advantage model (Cox, Bruckner, & Stabb, 2003) posits that women’s beliefs
about anger influence their patterns of emotional expression.  For example, women DEMO believe
that anger is destructive or inappropriate; the expression of anger DEMO conflict shows weakness or
emotional instability; or that anger disrupts intimacy DEMO connectedness in relationships.  Similar
to Jack’s (1991) Silencing-the-Self model, Cox et al. (2003) posit that interpersonal experiences
and societal influences reinforce DEMO messages about anger expression. Women may eventually
lose the ability to recognize the internal physiological and psychological signs of anger, which
further continues the pattern of maladaptive anger expression.
The model presents four categories of diverting DEMO indirectly expressing anger:
internalization, externalization, segmentation, and containment.  Internalization occurs when
10
women absorb feelings and blame themselves for anger that is meant for DEMO  Alternatively,
externalization is the tendency for women to project feelings DEMO anger outwards onto others,
often in aggressive and hostile behaviors.     Segmentation occurs when women disconnect
themselves from angry feelings to the DEMO that angry feelings leak out in passive-aggressive
ways.  The final category DEMO maladaptive anger expression is containment, in which women
consciously inhibit and DEMO their feelings of anger to avoid expressing their feelings in front
of others.  Women using this strategy may exhibit behaviors such as crying when angry, or
appearing as if they are “holding back” in expressing angry feelings.
In addition to these maladaptive modes of anger expression, the Anger Advantage model
(Cox, Bruckner, & Stabb, 2003) proposes that there are several adaptive ways to express angry
feelings.  First, anger consciousness DEMO women to become comfortable experiencing
anger through facial expression, verbal tone, and body posture, as well as an overall congruence
between verbal and nonverbal language about feelings.  Cox, Bruckner, and Stabb (2003) posit
that “think tanking” feelings presents a way to study anger in an DEMO and non-judgmental
way to understand what led to the feelings as well as how to address them. The authors also
describe constructive anger language DEMO use when discussing feelings with others, which includes
using “I” statements DEMO express feelings, specifically addressing situations and contexts which led
to the DEMO, respecting the other person’s boundaries by not engaging in hostile behavior, and
avoiding apologizing for angry feelings.
The Anger Advantage model (Cox, DEMO, & Stabb, 2003) posits that maladaptive
modes of anger expression DEMO as internalization, externalization, segmentation, and
containment may lead to depression DEMO other psychological problems because emotions are not
openly expressed.  In other DEMO, any type of maladaptive anger expression in which feelings
11
are expressed in indirect, hostile, and/or passive-aggressive ways may lead DEMO women’s
depression.  Cox, Bruckner, and Stabb’s (2003) model provides DEMO of adaptive
maladaptive anger expression, as well as the role of DEMO expression in women’s mental
health.
Integrative Conceptualization of Anger Expression and Depression
Definition of direct anger.  Before conceptualizing the link between women’s anger
expression and the development of depression, it is necessary to examine the construct and
manifestations of anger.  The researcher proposes the construct of “direct anger,” which
incorporates ideas from Cox, Bruckner, and Stabb’s (2003) DEMO of anger consciousness,
“think tanking,” and constructive anger language.  DEMO anger is conceptualized as the ability to
recognize the internal physiological sensations of anger, as well as the awareness and experience
of angry feelings in a conscious, mindful, and deliberate manner.  Individuals are clear and open
to their experience and expression of anger, and do not inhibit or suppress their angry feelings. In
addition, direct anger expression involves a deliberate and constructive pattern of anger
expression, in which feelings are communicated without hostility or escalation.
Extending Cox, Bruckner, and Stabb’s (2003) DEMO of adaptive anger
expression, the proposed conceptual model posits that the DEMO component of direct anger
involves individuals communicating their thoughts and needs to others.  Individuals focus on
specific areas of conflict or disagreement that are addressed openly, rather than hostilely blaming
or attacking their partners. Nonverbally, DEMO seem to “make space” for their anger
through angry verbal tone, DEMO expression, and engaged body language.  The researcher’s
model proposes that there is also congruence between body language and verbal messages about
anger; for example, individuals do not smile while saying they are frustrated. Although
12
individuals may express direct anger through varying degrees of verbal and nonverbal DEMO,
the construct of direct anger involves an overall pattern of expressing anger in an open,
straightforward manner.
Women’s direct anger expression, hostility, and depression.  The Anger Advantage model
(Cox, Bruckner, & Stabb, 2003) posits that women’s maladaptive patterns of anger expression
may lead DEMO psychological problems, but does not thoroughly describe the mechanism through
which DEMO patterns of emotional expression develop and contribute to women’s emotional
difficulties.  DEMO proposed conceptual model presents two possible ways through which this
relationship occurs, building on Davanloo’s (1980) Short-term Dynamic Psychotherapy model
and Jack’s (DEMO) Silencing-the-Self theory.
The Short-term Dynamic Psychotherapy model (Davanloo, 1980) proposes that women
may develop maladaptive patterns of anger expression through their experiences DEMO important
relationships.  Extending Davanloo’s (1980) model, women’s early interactions with their parents
and other family members lead to the development of characteristic DEMO of avoiding
emotions.  These defenses manifest in current relationships, such as with romantic partners.
Because emotions are not expressed openly in past and DEMO relationships, women may
develop a variety of psychological problems including depression.
DEMO alternative mechanism through which maladaptive patterns of anger expression
develop is based on Jack’s (1991) model.  Women have more difficulty than men recognizing
and openly expressing anger due to societal influences on women’s roles in DEMO
relationships.  It may become increasingly difficult for women to recognize and DEMO their needs
in relationships, and they may lose a sense of DEMO true thoughts and feelings.  Integrating Jack’s
model with the ideas of DEMO, Bruckner, and Stabb (2003), when women silence their thoughts
DEMO
and feelings, they may internalize angry feelings and engage in other patterns of maladaptive
anger expression.
The proposed conceptual model posits that indirect anger DEMO may lead to an
ongoing pattern of hostility, disconnection, and depression.  When women do not openly express
feelings of anger, hostility may DEMO in close relationships and lead to depressive symptoms
(Jack, 1991).  An emerging pattern of internalization and hostility may develop, in which DEMO
emotions are expressed through maladaptive patterns of anger expression described by Cox,
Bruckner, and Stabb (2003).  Instead of effectively resolving the underlying conflict and angry
feelings, hostility creates further distance and disconnection in relationships.  Women do not
express anger in direct, straightforward ways and DEMO minor interpersonal disagreements lead to
increased relationship conflict.  Women may focus DEMO superficial areas of communication with
their partners to avoid hostility often expressed during arguments, and so relationship intimacy
may decline.  Because their partners DEMO not seem to understand their thoughts and feelings,
individuals may feel misunderstood and isolated within important relationships.  Therefore, the
conceptual model proposes DEMO women develop depression through decreased direct anger
expression, increased hostility, and an escalating sense of isolation and disconnection with
themselves and their partners.
DEMO Research of Anger Expression
Conceptualization of Anger Expression
Researchers have yet to develop a comprehensive picture of the multifaceted concept of
anger (Fehr, DEMO, Collins, Patterson, & Benditt, 1999).    This field DEMO research has been
impaired by varying conceptualizations and assessments of anger expression (Edmondson &
Conger, 1996).  Based on researchers’ conceptualizations of DEMO, studies assess anger through
14
behavioral manifestations such as yelling or controlling behaviors, cognitive appraisal of a threat,
triggers for anger provocation, or physiological reactions to anger (DEMO et al., 1999).  One main
field of anger expression research involves defining anger through coping mechanisms, such as
internalized methods of “anger-in,” and externalized ways of “anger-out” (Spielberger, Johnson,
Russell, & Crane, 1985).  Researchers using Spielberger et al.’s (1985) anger DEMO mechanisms
often focus on the negative health consequences associated with maladaptive anger expression
(i.e., Porter, Stone & Schwartz, 1999; Wenneberg, Schneider, & Walton, 1997), and so are
beyond the scope of the present study.  In addition, three predominant theoretical models used to
examine DEMO expression include psychodynamic (i.e. Davanloo, 1980), feminist (i.e. Jack,DEMO
1997), and clinical-oriented literature (i.e. Cox, Bruckner, & Stabb, 2003).  (Please refer to the
Conceptual Models of Depression section DEMO further discussion of these theoretical models.)
Some of the controversial findings examining anger expression discussed below may be due to
the lack of DEMO integrative conceptualization and assessment of anger expression.
Direct anger.  One distinct DEMO of anger expression is the proposed concept of
direct anger.  As DEMO described in the Conceptual Models of Depression section, direct
anger involves DEMO recognition, awareness, and expression of anger in deliberate and constructive
ways.  Although no research to date has examined the specific construct of direct anger, a few
studies have examined similar concepts of anger expression.  DEMO anger was developed from
Cox, Bruckner, & Stabb’s (2003) research, in which the researchers examined the constructs of
anger consciousness, “think DEMO,” and constructive anger language based on a large
qualitative study of women.    Direct anger is also similar to Spielberger et al.’s (DEMO) “anger-
control” coping mechanism, in which individuals monitor the experience or expression of anger.
Expanding on Spielberger et al.’s (1985) anger coping DEMO, Linden et al. (2003)
15
developed a rating scale of anger expression based on a six-factor model DEMO anger expression.
This scale included factors related to direct anger such as “assertion,” in which individuals
delayed the expression of anger and in DEMO to directly express their feelings to the person whom
angered them.   In addition, the concept of constructive anger expression was recently examined
in health psychology literature (Davidson, Macgregor, Stuhr, Dixon, & MacLean, DEMO).  The
authors proposed that constructive anger expression involved behaviors such DEMO expressing anger
to determine a resolution, discussing ways to deal with DEMO more effectively in the future,
and developing a better understanding of the other person after expressing angry feelings.
To date, health psychology literature assessing anger-control and constructive anger
expression is the only field that has DEMO examined constructs similar to direct anger.
These studies have found that constructive anger expression and assertive anger coping
mechanisms are associated with adaptive health DEMO such as reduced blood pressure
(Davidson et al., 2000; Hogan & Linden, 2004).
Hostility.  Many researchers use the terms of anger and hostility interchangeably
(Novaco, 1975), or use other varying definitions DEMO describe the construct of hostility.  Overall,
most fields of hostility DEMO view hostility in terms of a stable personality trait based on
characteristics of disgust, contempt, resentment, and a predisposition to become angry (DEMO,
1980).  Measures assessing hostility focus on the externalizing pattern DEMO expressing anger in
aggressive, critical, judgment, or passive-aggressive ways.  For example, a commonly-used
measure of hostility conceptualizes it in terms of assaulting or attacking others, indirect passive-
aggressive behavior, irritability, negativism, resentment, suspicion, and verbal expression of
angry feelings (Buss & Durkee, 1957).  In addition, Spielberger et al.’s (1985) coping
mechanism of DEMO may be similar to the concept of hostility, in which anger DEMO externalized
16
through verbally or physically aggressive ways.  Most of research examining the construct of
hostility has been in the field of health psychology, in which extensive studies have found that
hostility is associated with physical health problems DEMO as cardiovascular disease (i.e.
Barefoot, Dahlstrom, & Williams, 1983; DEMO, 1998).
Anger Expression in Women
Gender differences in anger expression.  Although women tend to be more emotionally
expressive than men (Snell, DEMO, Belk, Garcia-Falconi, & Hernandez-Sanchez, 1988), anger is
the one exception (Sharkin, 1993).  This may be due to the strong cultural beliefs about the
expression of anger for women (Jack, 1991)DEMO  Miller (1976) suggested that the gender differences
found in anger DEMO may be due to societal influences restricting the expression of negative
emotions in subordinate groups such as women.  Based on these cultural influences, DEMO may
feel that they cannot express anger with significant people in their lives and so they tend to
inhibit the expression of their emotions (Thomas, 1993).
Many studies have supported the existence of gender differences in anger expression
using self-report measures in predominantly non-clinical college populations (Sharkin, 1993).
Studies have indicated that men experience anger more frequently than women, such as
Biaggio’s (1989) findings that male college students reported more anger-arousing incidents than
female students.  Researchers have also found that women tend to respond to anger in less open
and straightforward ways than DEMO   For example, Fehr et al. (1999) found that when
DEMO students were asked to describe their responses to anger-inducing scenarios in
interpersonal relationships, men were more likely to discuss angry feelings than women.   On the
other hand, women were more likely to respond to anger-inducing situations with hurt feelings,
or express anger indirectly through complaining to DEMO else or misdirecting their anger to
17
another person.  Similarly, Averrill (1983) found that women were four DEMO more likely to cry
than men when they were angry, suggesting DEMO women do not openly express angry feelings.
Recent research has supported these findings, such as findings that women were more likely to
use anger coping strategies such as diffusion, in which individuals distract themselves or “work
off” their frustration through other activities (Linden et al., 2003).
DEMO, several researchers have found that women and men’s patterns of anger
DEMO do not differ.  Although Biaggio (1989) found gender differences using DEMO
measures, the findings were not replicated when using a confederate design DEMO experimentally
provoke students.  In a study involving a college population and DEMO community sample, Averrill
(1983) found that women described similar anger DEMO, intensities, and open expression of
anger as men.  In addition, Stoner and Spencer (1987) found that there were no gender
differences DEMO outwardly expressed anger in a broader community sample of participants aged 21
to 83 years.  These controversial findings about the gender differences in anger expression may
be due to the varying constructs of anger, differing conceptualizations of coping strategies, focus
on college-age convenience samples, and reliance on DEMO measures.  As previously
discussed, researchers’ varied definitions and assessments of anger expression may also
contribute to the contrasting study findings.  Gender differences may be difficult to detect in non-
clinical and college-age samples, possibly because societal influences may not have exerted as
much influence this population.  Therefore, there is a need for research examining gender
differences in women in a clinical, community population.
Direct anger expression gender differences.  Qualitative research DEMO suggest that
women express anger less frequently and openly than men (DEMO, Bruckner, & Stabb, 2003; Jack,
1991).  (Please refer to the Conceptualization of Depression section for further discussion of
18
these qualitative findings.)  Researchers have not yet examined gender differences in DEMO
proposed construct of direct anger, or related concepts of the anger-control DEMO mechanism
(Spielberger et al., 1985), assertion strategies of anger expression (Linden et al., 2003), and
constructive anger expression (Davidson et al., 2000).
Hostility gender differences.  Theoretical, clinical, and qualitative DEMO suggests that
women have more difficulty openly expressing anger than men (DEMO, 1991; Davanloo, 1980;
Cox, Bruckner, & Stabb, 2003).  When women are unable to constructively express their
feelings, they DEMO be more likely to express anger in hostile or passive-aggressive ways (DEMO,
1976).  Few quantitative studies have examined gender differences in DEMO expression, and
the self-report studies that have explored this relationship have DEMO found that men express
anger in more hostile and aggressive ways than women.  For example, Biaggio (1989) found that
male college students DEMO anger in more physically and verbally aggressive ways than
female students. Recent studies have also suggested that males express more hostility than
females; for example, Linden et al. (2003) found that male college students were more likely to
use aggressive anger coping strategies than women.  It is possible that the varying definitions of
hostility used in the theoretical and DEMO literature may contribute to these contradictory
results.
Anger Expression in Depressed Women
Direct anger expression in depressed women.  Clinical and qualitative evidence suggests
that women who are depressed are at an even greater risk for anger DEMO problems than
nondepressed women (Jack, 1991).  Research has lagged DEMO these ideas, but overall, self-
report studies have found that depressed individuals have difficulty expressing anger directly.
One predominant area in anger expression DEMO depression research involves examining the role
19
of anger suppression, or the inhibition of anger expression.  For example, Goldman and Haaga
(1995) found that clinically depressed participants reported higher DEMO of anger suppression
towards their spouses and other individuals, as compared DEMO nondepressed participants.  Because
it is possible that these differences in anger DEMO may be due to the comparison between
clinical and nonclinical samples, DEMO have compared anger expression among different
diagnostic groups.  For instance, Riley, Treiber, and Woods (1989) examined patterns of anger
expression in DEMO, PTSD, and nonclinical participants.  Although individuals diagnosed
with PTSD reported DEMO levels of anger overall, depressed individuals exhibited higher levels
of anger DEMO than the PTSD and nonclinical groups.  Examining gender differences in
the DEMO between anger expression and depression, Newman, Gray, and Fuqua (1999)
found that anger suppression was more highly correlated with depression in DEMO than men.
These studies suggest that the inhibition of anger expression poses the most problems for
depressed women.
While many studies have examined the DEMO between depression and the
inhibition of anger expression, few studies have DEMO the role of direct, constructive anger
expression in depressed women.  In health psychology literature, constructive anger expression
has been found to be inversely associated with depression (Davidson et al., 2000).  Researchers
have examined the relationship between depression and other constructs similar to direct anger,
DEMO as Spielberger et al.’s (1985) anger-control coping mechanism.  For example, studies have
found that the anger-control was inversely associated with depressive symptoms DEMO college
students (Biaggio & Godwin, 1987; Bridewell and Chang; 1997).  In other words, depressed
individuals were more likely to use DEMO patterns of anger expression, rather than anger-
control strategies.   Similarly, factor analyses of several self-report measures of anger expression
20
found that depression was associated with poorly controlled anger expression, described as less
physical anger expression and more indirect, nonverbal communication (Kopper & DEMO,
1996).
Hostility in depressed women.  Research has also suggested DEMO depression is associated
with aggressive patterns of anger expression such as hostility.  Using several self-report measures
of hostility and anger expression, Biaggio and DEMO (1987) found that depressed college
students exhibited higher levels of hostility towards others than did nondepressed individuals.
Recent studies have supported these findings; for example, higher levels of externalized anger-
out patterns of expression were associated with depression in college students (Sperberg &
Stabb, 1998).  Weissman, Klerman, and Paykel (1971) reported similar findings in a community
sample of clinically depressed women.  Depressed women were more likely to express hostility
towards close family members, as compared to nondepressed women.  DEMO addition, Moreno et al.
(1993) found that the cognitive, behavioral, and overall levels of hostility increased with the
severity of depression in a college counseling center population.  While research suggests that
depressed women exhibit more hostility and less direct anger expression than nondepressed
women, the self-report methodology used in these studies was unable to examine the subtle
patterns DEMO interpersonal communications in depressed individuals.
Observational Research of Anger Expression
Limitations of Self-report Measures
Research examining anger expression in depressed women has focused on DEMO
measures, but there are several limitations in this methodology.  The primary disadvantage of
self-report measures is that they are vulnerable to the distortions DEMO the participant.  That is, self-
report measures can involve demand characteristics in which participants respond in a way to
21
make themselves appear socially desirable (Heppner, Kivlighan, & Wampold, 1999)DEMO  Given the
societal messages about anger expression in women (Jack, DEMO), demand characteristics may
especially influence self-reported patterns of anger expression.  DEMO, depressed woman may
inadvertently respond in ways to appear more distressed, due to the negative cognitive biases
associated with depression (Beck, 1991), or the increased relationship conflict found in
depressed couples (Coyne et DEMO, 2002).  In addition, women may have difficulty accurately
reporting DEMO patterns of anger expression because they are not fully cognizant of how they
interact with their partners. Finally, because self-report questionnaires tend to involve
retrospective and global descriptions of constructs (Margolin et al., 1998), DEMO may
describe their communication patterns in broad terms instead of focusing on specific aspects of
their interaction.  Due to these limitations of self-report measures, studies based solely this
method may be missing or underestimating the role of indirect anger expression in depression.
Couples’ Interaction Tasks
Based on the DEMO of self-report methods and skepticism about couples’ ability to
accurately report their patterns of interaction, studies have begun to include observational data to
examine communication in romantic relationships.  Despite the time-consuming and costly
nature of observational methods (Gottman, 1998), this approach has been gaining popularity
because DEMO allows researchers to draw their own conclusions about interpersonal communication
instead of relying on participants’ descriptions (Heyman, 2001).  Observational data links
qualitative and quantitative research methods because it allows for descriptive data as well DEMO
analysis of quantitative constructs (Margolin et al., 1998).  Unlike DEMO measures, these
methods assess ongoing, moment-to-moment processes and can target subtle communication
22
patterns such as anger expression of which participants are not necessarily aware (Margolin et
al., 1998).
Researchers have used observational methods such as couples’ interaction tasks to
examine patterns of communication in romantic relationships.  Depending on the type of
research problem, couples’ interaction tasks can vary on a variety of dimensions, such as the
activity, amount of instructions DEMO by the researcher, family unit observed, and setting
(Margolin et DEMO, 1998).  A commonly-used procedure to observe couples’ verbal and nonverbal
expression is the conflict interaction task, which involves the researcher asking the couple to
discuss one to two areas of conflict in their relationship (Gottman & Levenson, 1986).
Observational data from the couples’ conflict interaction task can be coded in primarily
two different ways: the detailed, DEMO coding system and the more global,
macroanalytic method (Baucom & DEMO, 2004).  In the 1960’s and 1970’s, researchers
developed microanalytic DEMO systems to provide a comprehensive analysis of couples’
interactions. For example, DEMO frequently-used microanalytic Marital Interaction Coding System
(MICS; Weiss & Summers, DEMO) is comprised of thirty codes organized into seven behavioral
categories: blame, invalidation, problem description, proposals for change, facilitation,
validation, and irrelevant off-topic discussion.  The actual coding of these variables is extremely
complex, but in general, both partners are coded continuously in “data streams” DEMO the
interaction.  This analysis enables the researcher to examine the level DEMO behaviors exhibited by
each partner, as well as the sequential pattern DEMO the couples’ interaction.  However, due to the
detailed analysis of behaviors, microanalytic coding systems tend to be extremely time-
consuming in coder training and data analysis (Heyman, 2004).
23
The limitations of the microanalytic coding techniques led to the development of DEMO new
generation of global, macroanalytic coding systems in the 1980’s (Baucom & Kerig, 2004).
These systems focus on more global ratings of behaviors observed in the interaction tasks.  For
example, the Rapid Marital DEMO Coding System (RMICS; Heyman & Vivian, 1993)
assesses positive, negative, and neutral codes such as hostility, dysphoric affect, withdrawal,
constructive problem discussion, and self-disclosure.  The RMICS uses coders’ existing
knowledge DEMO rate the frequencies of these behaviors and behavioral patterns on a rating scale.
While this approach to coding observational data leads to more efficient DEMO and data
analysis, it reduces the ability to detect complex patterns DEMO interaction (Notarius & Markman,
1989).  Researchers must weight the contrasting advantages and limitations to the global and
microanalytic coding systems to DEMO an appropriate approach to observational studies.
Observed Anger Expression in Distressed Couples
Several common patterns of interaction have been identified using both microanalytic
and DEMO coding systems, because researchers initially developed the interaction task paradigm
to DEMO communication patterns in distressed and nondistressed couples (Gottman &
Notarius, DEMO).  In a large metaanalysis, Notarius and Markman (1989) found several “stubborn
facts” of distressed couples compared to nondistressed couples.  First, DEMO with high
relationship conflict exhibited higher levels of negative affect and hostility during interaction
tasks.  This was reflected in findings that couples were more likely to start conversations
hostilely, and both partners maintained the negative behavior throughout the discussion.  Second,
distressed couples showed increased negative reciprocity, DEMO that they were more likely to
reciprocate and escalate their partners’ hostility. These couples also emitted less positive
behavior towards their partners during the DEMO tasks.  In addition, distressed couples were
24
more likely to exhibit demand-withdrawal patterns.  In this type of interaction, DEMO partner, often
the female, become more aggressive and demanding, while DEMO male partner reacts by sulking or
withdrawing from the discussion.
Closer examination into observational studies of distressed couples suggests gender
differences in their communication DEMO, as well as that distressed couples exhibited more
hostility than nondistressed DEMO  Gottman and Levenson (1986) illustrated gender
differences in the expression DEMO negative affect by describing the interactions of a married couple
with high relationship conflict.  Using a microanalytic coding system, they found that only DEMO
of the wife’s negative affect was expressed in terms of anger and contempt, as compared to that
77.7% for her husband.  The other DEMO of her negative affect was expressed through whining,
sadness, and DEMO during the interaction task.  Because the man expressed his anger directly DEMO
his wife did not, the researchers suggested that this pattern provided DEMO for the man’s
dominance in their relationship. These findings also supported previous evidence that women do
not express anger directly (Jack, 1991).  Gottman (1994, 1999) later expanded these findings into
four factors that have detrimental impacts on relationship satisfaction and future divorce rates.
Based on DEMO effects on couples’ relationships, he termed the following factors as the DEMO
Horseman of the Apocalypse:” criticism, contempt, defensiveness, and withdrawal.  These
communication factors, similar an overall pattern hostility, are associated with DEMO concurrent
and longitudinal relationship distress (Gottman & Krokoff, 1989; Roberts, 2000).
Observed Anger Expression in Depressed Couples
Anger expression in depressed DEMO  As observational research of distressed and
nondistressed couples expanded, studies began assessing how clinical factors such as depression
may affect couples’ communication patterns.  Overall, studies have suggested that depressed
25
couples exhibit more negative and less positive behaviors than nondepressed couples, reflecting
patterns of hostility in depressed couples.  Extensive research by Biglan, Hops, and associates at
the Oregon Research Institute (Biglan et al., 1985; Hops et al., 1987) has examined
communication patterns during problem-solving interaction DEMO and home observations in
depressed and nondepressed married couples.  Using the DEMO coding system (Arthur, Hops, &
Biglan, 1982), the DEMO found that depressed women exhibited higher rates of depressive
behavior, such DEMO complaining, ignoring, self-derogatory behavior, and other dysphoric
behaviors.  Depressed women also showed lower rates of problem-solving behaviors than their
partners and other DEMO individuals, such as less approving, affirming, empathizing, and
accepting responsibility.
Subsequent research has supported the Oregon Institute’s findings (Biglan et al., DEMO;
Hops et al., 1987) regarding depressed couples’ negative communication styles in observational
interaction tasks.  Using the Interaction Coding System (Gotlib & DEMO, 1985), Ruscher &
Gotlib (1988) found that depressed couples exhibited higher levels of negativity, such as direct
disagreement, denying responsibility, noncompliance, and commands.  Compared to
nondepressed couples, depressed couples also showed reduced positive behaviors, including less
agreement, accepting responsibility, compromise, and DEMO assistance.  Studies using an
abbreviated form of the Marital Interaction Coding DEMO (Weiss, Hops, & Patterson, 1973)
have also found that depressed couples exhibit more negative behaviors and less positive
behaviors than nondepressed DEMO (Johnson & Jacob, 2000).
Examining depressed couples’ communication patterns over the course of the interaction
tasks, McCabe and Gotlib (1993) found that depressed wives became increasingly more negative
over the course of the DEMO task, exhibiting behaviors such as criticism, justification, and
26
mind-reading.  These negative patterns of interaction may be stronger in couples in which the
wife is depressed rather than the husband (Johnson & Jacob, 2000).  The wide use of coding
systems collapsed into broad DEMO and negative behaviors has made it difficult to assess
specific patterns of anger expression in depressed couples.  However, examination of depressed
couples’ negative DEMO across these studies suggest an overall pattern of hostility including
criticism, DEMO, complaining, ignoring, commanding, disagreement, denying
responsibility, and noncompliance.
To date, few observational studies have examined constructs similar to direct anger
expression in depressed couples.  Depressed individuals have been shown to express fewer
emotions such as anger with their partners, as compared to nondepressed individuals (DEMO et
al., 1985; Hops et al., 1987).  Extending these findings, Cohan and Bradbury (1997) used the
SPAFF coding system to examine anger expression in newlywed couples.   Assessing anger
expression through verbal DEMO, volume, and content, the researchers found that anger expression
was DEMO with decreased depressive symptoms and increased marital satisfaction at the 18-
month longitudinal follow-up.  Observational research has yet to thoroughly examine patterns of
direct anger expression in clinically depressed women and their partners.
Controversial findings in DEMO expression for depressed couples.  Although these studies
suggest that depressed couples DEMO negative communication patterns, some researchers have
found that depressed and nondepressed DEMO interactions do not differ.  A few studies have
suggested that the DEMO and hostility observed in depressed couples is due to the marital
conflict found in couples with depression (Coyne et al., 2002).    While Gotlib and Whiffen
(1989) found that inpatient depressed individuals and DEMO partners exhibited more negative
behaviors than nondepressed couples during interaction tasks, DEMO couples’ negativity did
27
not differ from nondepressed hospitalized patients and their partners.  The researchers proposed
that the high marital conflict in both groups accounted for these patterns DEMO negative
communication.  However, the researchers only assessed gestures, facial expressions, and
nonverbal behaviors associated with negative communication, rather than using an overarching
microanalytic or global coding system.  In addition, the researchers included 14 DEMO and 8
female depressed targets, and so it is possible that DEMO a larger group of female depressed
individuals and their partners would lead to more robust differences between the groups.
Schmaling and Jacobson (1990) DEMO found that depressed couples displayed negative
affect and aggressive behavior similar to nondepressed couples with high marital distress.  The
researchers assessed communication patterns during the interaction tasks using the microanalytic
Interactional Coding System (Hahlweg & Conrad, 1983) and depressive content/ affective codes
from the LIFE coding system (Arthur, Hops, & Biglan, 1982).  While the findings suggest the
possibility of the confounding factor of marital conflict, these findings are not definitive.
Nondepressed couples with high marital conflict had significantly higher depressive DEMO
than the normal control couples, and so it is possible that DEMO symptoms still impacted the
negative communication patterns found in these couples.  DEMO, the studies by Gotlib and
Whiffen (1989) and Schmaling and DEMO (1990) highlight the importance of examining the
relationship between depression, DEMO expression, and relationship conflict.
In addition, a few studies have suggested that depressed women and their partners do not
exhibit negative interactions during DEMO tasks.  For example, Johnson and Jacob (2000)
found that DEMO husbands and their partners showed negative interactions, but
communication between depressed DEMO and their partners did not differ from nondepressed
couples.  The researchers DEMO a revised version of the Marital Interaction Coding System
28
(Weiss, Hops, & Patterson, 1973) to assess negative behavior such as criticizing, disagreeing,
putting down, and exhibiting other negative responses.  It is possible that using a broad
categorization of negative affect is DEMO sensitive enough to assess the subtle verbal and nonverbal
patterns of communication found in women as compared to men (Jack, 1991; Averrill, DEMO).
Overall, existing observational research suggests that depressed women and their DEMO
exhibit more negative patterns of interaction than nondepressed couples.  Several findings
DEMO that there are no differences between depressed and nondepressed couples’
interactions highlight the importance to further examine the relationship between depression and
negative communication DEMO  In addition, these studies suggest the need for observational
coding systems that are able to capture women’s subtle nonverbal and verbal communication
patterns.  Although research has grouped these negative and positive behaviors broadly,
examining DEMO specific role of direct anger expression and hostility may provide a more
comprehensive picture of depressed women’s communication patterns in interpersonal
relationships.  Observational research examining anger expression patterns in depressed women
would provide conclusive support for DEMO findings using self-report measures (Goldman &
Haaga, 1995; Biaggio & Godwin, 1987).
29
CHAPTER THREE
Methodology
Study Overview
The objective of the present study was DEMO examine anger expression in 26 formerly-
depressed (FD) and 30 never-depressed (ND) women and their partners.  It was hypothesized
that FD women would exhibit less direct anger and more hostility than ND women during DEMO
observational interaction task.  An observational coding system was developed in collaboration
DEMO Deborah Jacobvitz, Ph.D. at the University of Texas at Austin, to assess couples’ direct
anger expression, hostility, and emotional attunement.  In addition, it was expected that direct
anger expression and emotional attunement would be associated with relationship intimacy and
inversely associated with relationship conflict, while the reverse associations would exist
between hostility and the relationship variables.  Self-reported emotional expression was
expected to be associated with relationship intimacy and inversely associated DEMO relationship
conflict.  Finally, it was predicted that women will exhibit less direct anger and more hostility
than their male partners.
This study extended DEMO research in several important ways.  Based on the
limitations of self-report DEMO and recent developments in observational techniques, the
present study used an DEMO task to objectively assess anger expression.  Because
observational studies have been DEMO for lacking a theoretical rationale for their hypotheses
(Heyman, 2001), the study approached women’s emotional expression using an integrative
conceptualization based on DEMO (1991) Silencing-the-Self theory, Davanloo’s (1980) Short-
term Dynamic Psychotherapy DEMO, and Cox, Bruckner, and Stabb’s (2003) clinically-oriented
30
Anger Advantage model.  The study assessed couples’ patterns of anger expression in a
community sample in order to extend previous research that has been DEMO to anger expression
in college-age and nonclinical samples.  Finally, communication patterns in FD and ND women
were examined to contribute to causal link DEMO depression, interpersonal relationships, and
emotional factors.
Participants
Women and their partners came from a larger community study investigating cognitive
and interpersonal factors in DEMO  The study consisted of 26 formerly-depressed (FD) and
30 never-depressed (ND) women and their partners, for a total of 56 couples.
DEMO Criteria
To participate in the study, couples had to be married DEMO cohabiting for at least six
months.  The present study was limited DEMO heterosexual couples because research has found that
some communication patterns may differ in gay and lesbian relationships (Kurdek, 1998).
Criteria for female DEMO (targets).  Women had to be at least 25 years old to
qualify for the study.  The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (DEMO; Spitzer et al., 1988)
was used to determine that women had not ever met criteria bipolar disorder or psychosis, as
well as for substance abuse in the past 6 months.  Based on women’s depression status on the
SCID, couples were assigned to the FD or ND group.  FD women had at least one episode of
depression lasting 2 weeks or longer in the past five years, with no residual symptoms in the last
4 months.  ND women had no episode of depression lasting 2 weeks or longer in the past five
years.
Criteria for DEMO participants (partners).  The targets’ romantic partners must have been
at least 21 years old.  Regardless of the couples’ FD/ ND group DEMO, male partners could not
31
have endorsed psychosis over the course of their lifetimes.  However, male DEMO could have
had depression, bipolar disorder, or substance abuse if the interviewer determined that they were
psychologically stable at the time of the DEMO
Recruitment of Participants
Participants were recruited from the community in Austin, DEMO  Couples were
primarily recruited through bi-monthly advertisements in a free local DEMO  Some flyers
were posted around the university campus, grocery stores, DEMO laundromats, but few participants
were recruited through this method.  Individuals interested in participating were asked to contact
the study via telephone or email.  (Please refer to Appendix A for newspaper advertisements, as
well as DEMO B and C for flyer advertisements.)
Characteristics of Participants
The following participant demographic information was obtained: gender, age, race/
ethnicity, DEMO level of completed education, length of marriage or co-habitation, and whether
the couple had children.  It was expected that the demographic characteristics of the FD and ND
groups would not differ significantly.
1.
Telephone Screening
DEMO of Study Procedures
a.
Introduction and verbal consent
b.
Demographic information
c.
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID; Spitzer et al., 1988)
d.
If eligible, couple was scheduled for research session.
2.
Research Session
a.
Introduction and informed consent
32
b.
Questionnaires*- Beck Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck, Ward, Mendelson, Mock,
& Erbaugh, 1961), Miller Social Intimacy Scale (MSIS; Miller and Lefcourt, 1982),
and Areas of Disagreement Questionnaire (AOD; DEMO, Butler, & Gross, 2003)
c.
Couples’ Interaction Task
d.
DEMO Emotional Self-Disclosure Scale (ESDS; Snell, Miller, & Belk, 1988)DEMO
e.
Debriefing
* Note: As part of a larger study, additional self-report measures and other tasks were
completed during the research session.
Diagnostic DEMO
As described above, inclusion criteria were determined using the Structured Clinical
DEMO for DSM-IV (SCID; Spitzer et al., 1988).  Doctoral students in the Counseling
Psychology program at the University of Texas with some DEMO and interviewing
experience administered these diagnostic semi-structured interviews.
Precautions for Safety of Participants
The faculty advisor, Stephanie Rude, Ph.D. who is a licensed DEMO practicing
psychologist, provided interviewers with brief training regarding suicidal and homicidal
DEMO that may have arisen during the study.  She addressed guidelines to DEMO if clients
were experiencing significant psychological distress.  The training also included DEMO to
ensure that the interviewers could appropriately assess risk and respond to these situations.  All
diagnostic interviews were audio-taped with the participants’ permission to assess interviewer
accuracy and reliability.  In addition, all data and audiotapes DEMO stored in a locked office
separate from any identifying participant information.
33
If interviewers were informed of a participant’s suicidality, homicidality, or significant
DEMO, they immediately consulted with the faculty advisor about what course of DEMO, if any,
was warranted.  Interviewers provided participants with telephone numbers for mental health
providers in the area.  Interviewers and Dr. Rude were prepared to intervene if a participant
seemed to pose an immediate harm DEMO themselves or someone else by contacting the Travis
County Mental Health Unit of the Sheriff’s Department.  All consultations about research
participants who appeared to be experiencing significant distress, suicidality, or homicidality
were carefully documented.  Please refer to Appendix D for Precautions for Safety of
Participants Training Guidelines.
DEMO Measures
Depression
Beck Depression Inventory.  The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI; DEMO et al., 1961;
Appendix E) was used to assess participants’ level of current depressive symptoms.  Although a
more recent version of the Beck Depression Inventory has been published in accordance with the
DSM-IV guidelines (BDI-II, Beck, Steer, & Brown 1996), the previous version was selected for
financial considerations as part of the larger community study.  Because depressed mood has
been shown to affect interpersonal communication and relationship conflict (Coyne et al., 2002),
this variable was included as a DEMO in the relevant analyses.  The BDI is a 21-item
questionnaire addressing DEMO mood, cognitive difficulties, low self-esteem, sleep
disturbance, and fatigue.  DEMO are asked to rate how much they have experienced each
symptom over the past week on a 4-point scale.  For example, participants selected DEMO of the
following items:  “0) I do not feel sad; 1) I feel sad; 2) I am sad all the time and I can't snap out
34
of it; 3) I am so sad or unhappy that I DEMO't stand it.”  Items are being summed to determine a
total DEMO
Previous samples examining the internal consistency of the BDI have yielded an average
coefficient alpha of .81 (Beck, Streer, Ball, & Ranieri, 1996).  Previous samples assessing
convergent validity have also yielded of an average of r = .60 with clinical ratings of depression
(Beck, DEMO, Ball, & Ranieri, 1996).   In addition, previous samples examining content validity
have indicated that the BDI measures many symptoms considered DEMO be indicative of depression
(Beck, Streer, Ball, & Ranieri, DEMO).  In the present sample, the convergent validity was r= .42
with the AOD, and the divergent validity was -.40 with the MSIS.
Emotional Self-Disclosure
Emotional Self-Disclosure Scale.  The Emotional Self-Disclosure Scale (ESDS; Snell et
al., 1988; Appendix F) was used to measure the participants’ willingness to disclose eight
emotions to a male friend, a female friend, and a romantic partner.  The ESDS assesses emotions
including anger, depression, happiness, jealousy, anxiety, calmness, apathy, and fear.   These
DEMO are on a 5-point scale ranging from “not at all willing to discuss this topic” to “totally
willing to discuss the topic.”   The DEMO version of the ESDS was revised to 24 items to
reduce the length of the questionnaires for participants to complete.  For example, the DEMO
version asked participants to rate their willingness to discuss “Times you felt angry,” rather than
asking five items related to anger, including items such as “Times you felt infuriated” or “Times
you felt irritated.”   DEMO were summed to obtain the subscale and total scores.  The subscale DEMO
emotional expression with a romantic partner was used in analyses because of its relevance to the
research questions.  The one-item subscale of anger expression with a romantic partner was also
used in some exploratory analyses.
35
Previous samples examining the internal consistency of the ESDS have yielded an
DEMO range of r = .83 to .95 (Snell et al., 1988).  Previous samples examining convergent
validity have indicated that the ESDS is correlated with many variables considered to be
associated with emotional self-disclosure, such as gender roles and cultural background (Snell et
al., 1989).  In the present sample, the convergent validity was r= .53 with the MSIS, and the
divergent validity was -.45 with the AOD.
Relationship Intimacy
Miller Social Intimacy Scale.  The Miller Social Intimacy Scale (MSIS; Miller &
Lefcourt, 1982; Appendix G) was used to measure participants’ DEMO of intimacy with their
partners.  The MSIS is a 17-item questionnaire DEMO assesses intimacy in close interpersonal
relationships on a 10-point scale, including DEMO such as confiding in their partner,
expressing feelings, spending time DEMO, exhibiting affection, showing support, and feeling
closeness.  For the first six items, the scale ranges from “very rarely” to “almost always,” and for
the rest of the items, the scale ranges from “not much” to “a great deal.”  For example,
participants are asked to rate the question, “How often are you able to understand his/ DEMO
feelings?”  Items 2 and 14 are reverse-coded, and then items were summed to achieve a total
score.
Previous samples examining the internal DEMO of the MSIS have yielded an
average coefficient alpha of .91 (DEMO and Lefcourt, 1982).  Previous samples have also yielded
an average convergent validity of r = .71 and an average discriminant validity of DEMO = .48 (Miller
and Lefcourt, 1982).   In addition, DEMO samples assessing discriminative validity have
indicated that MSIS scores for married individuals were significantly higher than unmarried
36
individuals (t = 8.17, p < .001) (Miller and Lefcourt, 1982).  In the present sample, the
convergent validity was r= DEMO with the ESDS, and the divergent validity was -.47 with the DEMO
Relationship Conflict
Areas of Disagreement Questionnaire.  The Areas of Disagreement Questionnaire (AOD;
Richards et al., 2003; Appendix H) was used to assess relationship conflict and areas of
disagreement.  This measure was an adapted version of the Couples Problem Inventory (CPI;
Gottman, Markman, & Notarius, 1977) for use in both dating and married couples.  The AOD is
a 13-item questionnaire that asks participants to rate how much DEMO disagree with their partners
on topics such as money, communication, and family/ relatives.  In addition, participants could
rate two additional areas of disagreement not captured in the 13 listed topics, as well as rank the
three greatest areas of disagreement in their relationship.  These ratings are on a 101-point scale
ranging from “0= you don’t disagree at all” DEMO “100= you disagree very much.”  An overall level
of relationship conflict DEMO was achieved by summing the ratings on the areas of disagreement.
Because the AOD was an experimental measure, there was no existing data published
regarding its reliability and validity.  The proposed study contributed to the reliability and
validity of the measure.  Internal consistency was difficult to determine because of the nature of
relationship conflict; that is, couples’ disagreement levels DEMO widely across the measure
according to the areas of conflict.  However, the sample in the six-month longitudinal portion of
the study yielded a DEMO stability of r= .94.  Examination of the convergent validity in the
DEMO sample indicated that the AOD was correlated with several variables considered to be
associated with relationship conflict (Coyne et al., 2002), such DEMO depressive symptoms (r = .42,
p < .01).  Examination of the divergent validity in the study sample also indicated that the DEMO
was inversely correlated with several variables considered to be negatively associated with
37
relationship conflict (Roberts, 2000), such as relationship intimacy (r = -.47, p < .01) and
emotional expression (r = -.25, DEMO < .01).
Observational Couples’ Interaction Task
In the proposed study, DEMO completed a 10-minute conflict interaction task because
this period of time has been shown to provide an adequate sample of positive and negative
behavior (Heyman et al., 2001).  Graduate research assistants described the interaction DEMO to
couples and then facilitated their selection of a topic for the conversation.  These doctoral
research assistants were Counseling Psychology students at the University of Texas at Austin
with counseling and interviewing experience.  The faculty advisor, Stephanie Rude, Ph.D. who is
a licensed and practicing psychologist, provided the research assistants with brief training
regarding situations that may have arisen DEMO the session.  Similar to the interviewer training,
she addressed guidelines DEMO follow if it was discovered that clients were experiencing significant
psychological distress, suicidality, or homicidality during the session.  The training also included
role-playing to ensure that the interviewers and experimenters could appropriately introduce the
observational DEMO, facilitate the couples’ selection of a topic, and ensure that both members of
the couple were comfortable discussing the topic.  (Please refer DEMO Appendix D for Precautions
for Safety of Participants Training Guidelines.)
Observational Coding System
As previously discussed, incorporating aspects of microanalytic and global coding
systems would maximize the benefits of both systems while minimizing their inherent
DEMO  Therefore, the present study developed an integrative coding system in collaboration
with Deborah Jacobvitz, PhD in the Department of Human Ecology at the University of Texas at
38
Austin.  The coding system assessed male and female interactions on three 7-point Likert-type
rating scales: direct anger, hostility, and emotional attunement.
Conceptualization of direct anger scale.  Few observational coding systems to date have
assessed the construct of direct anger, and so the researcher developed a scale incorporating ideas
from Cox, Bruckner, and Stabb’s (2003) Anger Advantage model.  As previously described in the
Conceptual Models of Depression section, the concept of direct anger integrates constructs of
anger consciousness, “think tanking,” and constructive anger language.  Direct anger is
conceptualized as the ability to recognize the internal physiological sensations of anger, as well
as the awareness and experience of angry feelings in a conscious, mindful, and deliberate
manner.  Individuals are clear and open to their experience and expression of anger, and do not
inhibit or suppress their angry feelings. In addition, direct anger expression involves a deliberate
and constructive pattern of anger expression, in which feelings are communicated without
hostility or escalation.
The direct anger coding DEMO assessed verbal and nonverbal indices of anger expression.
Extending Cox, Bruckner, and Stabb’s (2003) conceptualization of adaptive anger expression, the
coding system assessed how individuals verbally communicate their thoughts and needs to their
partners.  Behavioral indices included addressing areas of disagreement in open and direct ways,DEMO
focusing on specific areas of conflict, and not hostilely blaming or DEMO their partners. For
example, individuals may have used “I messages” to DEMO their feelings, such as “I feel angry
about this issue.”
In DEMO, the observational coding scale examined nonverbal components of direct
anger expression.  These behavioral indices focus on ways that individuals seemed to “make
space” DEMO their anger through angry verbal tone, facial expressions, and engaged body language.
39
The direct anger scale focused on ways in which there was congruence DEMO body language
and verbal messages about anger; for example, individuals did not smile while saying that they
were frustrated. Although individuals may have DEMO direct anger through varying degrees
of verbal and nonverbal language, the DEMO of direct anger involved an overall pattern of
expressing anger in an open, straightforward manner.  (Please refer to the Observational Coding
Handbook and Observational Coding Sheet in Appendices I and J for further description of DEMO
direct anger coding scale.)
The direct anger scale was developed in order to contribute to the field of emotional
expression research in several DEMO  Based on the lack of research examining adaptive modes of
anger DEMO, the researcher proposed the construct of direct anger and developed the DEMO
scale as a way of assessing this concept.   The direct anger coding scale provides an objective
measure of emotional expression based on observational DEMO of communication, as opposed
to self-report questionnaires of anger expression.  In addition, the assessment of verbal and
nonverbal anger expression presents a more comprehensive picture of emotional expression.  The
researcher hopes to contribute to further research examining direct anger expression through the
development of this coding scale.
DEMO of hostility scale.  The construct of hostility was selected as an DEMO
of behaviors that individuals may exhibit when they are unable to express anger in constructive
ways.  The conceptualization of hostility and the coding scale were adapted from the Dyadic
Hostility Scale (Jacobvitz, 2005) in order to assess male and female partners’ interactions
separately.  Hostility was conceptualized as a pattern of behaviors which created distance in
individuals’ relationships with their DEMO  The predominant indices of hostility included
hostile, sarcastic, and hurtful DEMO, as well as critical and judgmental comments.  For
40
example, the scale assessed verbal components of hostility such as cynical, DEMO, or
impatient tone; derisive comments; defensiveness; and unnecessary escalation or yelling.  The
hostility scale also captured nonverbal behaviors such as sneers, DEMO, eye rolling, and other
hostile body language.
Previous samples examining the Dyadic Hostility Scale’s convergent validity have found
that it is correlated with DEMO expected to be associated with couples’ hostility.  For example,
couples’ DEMO has been shown predict their children’s ADHD and somatic symptoms
(Jacobvitz, Hazen, Curran, & Hitchens, 2004).  (Please refer to the Observational Coding
Handbook and Observational Coding Sheet in Appendices I and J DEMO further description of the
hostility coding scale.)
Conceptualization of emotional attunement scale.  The emotional attunement and
engagement scale was selected as an index of individuals’ connectedness and understanding with
their partners.  The conceptualization of emotional attunement/ engagement and the coding scale
were adapted from the Dyadic Emotional Attunement/ Engagement Scale (Booher, 2000) in
order to assess male DEMO female partners’ interactions separately.  Emotional attunement was
conceptualized as individuals’ awareness DEMO attentiveness to their partners’ thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors.  Emotional engagement was a related construct, but focused on individuals’
commitment to the relationship and connection with their partners. Individuals who were
emotionally attuned/ engaged with their partners often exhibited reciprocity of affect, that is, they
matched DEMO partners’ emotions and intensity of affect.  In other words, individuals seemed to
be on the “same wavelength” with their partners, such as mirroring their partners’ frustration
about the conflict area instead of disregarding their partners’ DEMO  Verbal indices of
emotional attunement/ engagement included rephrasing partners’ thoughts and emotions,
41
expressing emotions without escalation or disengagement, asking partners to clarify statements,
and exhibiting mutual laughter and humor about the areas of conflict.  The emotional attunement/
engagement scale also assessed nonverbal indices, such as consistent eye contact, open posture
oriented towards their partners, and nodding.
Emotional DEMO/ engagement was included in the coding system to provide a more
DEMO picture of the couples’ relationship and how partners communicate emotions to
each other.  In addition, emotional attunement and engagement were expected to be DEMO
components of relationship intimacy and conflict.  (Please refer to the Observational Coding
Handbook and Observational Coding Sheet in Appendices I and J for DEMO description of the
emotional attunement/ engagement coding scale.)
Development of DEMO scales.  Using the theoretical conceptualization of constructive
anger expression as a DEMO (Cox, Bruckner, & Stabb, 2003), the first stage of developing
the coding scales was to examine several couples’ videotaped interaction tasks.  The researcher
examined interaction tasks of two couples from the study’s pilot DEMO, three ND couples, and one
FD couple.  The couples from DEMO pilot dataset and ND couples were not used in the data
analyses; however, to increase the sample size of the FD group, the FD couple was later assigned
a random identification number and reanalyzed as DEMO of the study dataset.
In collaboration with Deborah Jacobvitz, Ph.D. at DEMO University of Texas at Austin,
behavioral indices of direct anger were identified and endpoints of the Likert-type scale were
defined.  The Dyadic Hostility (Jacobvitz, 2005) and Emotional Attunement/ Engagement Scales
(Booher, 2000) were adapted to individual level behaviors observed in the interaction tasks.
After DEMO a concrete framework of the direct anger, hostility, and emotional attunement/
engagement scales, the next stage involved clarifying behaviors observed for each Likert-type
42
scale point.  In addition, the six couples’ interaction tasks described above DEMO examined to
determine an appropriate range of behaviors expected in the larger study sample.
Several important decisions were made in the course of developing DEMO coding scales.
First, couples were assessed on an individual rather than DEMO level because of the theoretical
conceptualization focused on women’s anger expression and depression.  Second, although
women were the target participants in the study, their male partners were also assessed using the
individual level coding system DEMO order to examine gender differences in anger expression.
Third, to reduce DEMO in the coding procedure, each coding scale was analyzed sequentially
in DEMO order of direct anger, hostility, and emotional attunement/ engagement.  Finally, each of
the scales was analyzed separately, so that the scales DEMO able to assess distinct constructs.  For
example, an individual incorporated both direct anger and hostility when she said to her partner,
“I DEMO so angry when you do that.  Well, what can I expect, you’re so insensitive.”  Her
expression of angry feelings was captured on DEMO direct anger expression, and then the hostile
comment attacking her partner DEMO captured on the hostility scale.
Rater training for coding scales.  Researchers DEMO found that graduate-level raters tend
to be more sensitive than undergraduate student in detecting subtle emotional and behavioral
patterns, as well as providing more reliable and accurate ratings (Kline et al., 2004).  Therefore,
the researcher was the primary rater and her observational ratings were used DEMO the data analyses.
For reliability purposes, a graduate student in the DEMO Psychology program at the
University of Texas at Austin was selected as a second coder.
Before raters analyzed the dataset, the observational data was prepared so that raters were
blind to the couples’ group status.  First, a new coding identification number replaced the original
couples’ identification number used during the research screening and sessions.  A research
43
assistant, who was not involved in the observational data analysis, randomly DEMO the coding
identification numbers to combine the FD/ ND groups and DEMO periods during which the couples
completed the study.  This process ensured DEMO both raters were blind to any potentially
identifying information regarding the couples’ group status.  In addition, the order in which raters
analyzed the DEMO and female partners was randomized to reduce any potential biases in the
sequential coding of the couples’ interactions.
Training the raters on the observational DEMO system took approximately two months.
Raters first read the Observational Coding Manual (Appendix I), as well as discussed each
scales’ conceptualizations and examples.  They practiced analyzing the two pilot interaction tasks
and two ND couples’ interaction tasks on each of the rating scales, and discussed discrepancies
with the faculty advisor.  When raters became familiar with the coding system, DEMO rater coded
the remaining two practice tapes separately and then met to discuss their ratings.  At this point,
coders were relatively consistent in their ratings on each coding scale, and so they began
analyzing the study dataset.  Weekly meetings were held to discuss questions about the coding
system, prevent rater drift, and maintain high interrater reliability.  Although it was not necessary
for the present study, if interrater reliability significantly dropped during the course of data
analysis, raters would have reviewed the Observational Coding Manual (Appendix I) and
analyzed all videotapes until the interrater DEMO improved.
Interrater reliability for coding scales.  Based on the relatively small DEMO size of the
present study, the second coder analyzed 50% of DEMO selected couples’ interaction tasks.
This exceeds most researchers’ recommendations to assess at least 20-30% of the observational
tasks for interrater reliability (Floyd & Rogers, 2004).  The first ten videotapes were selected to
determine preliminary DEMO reliability.  The faculty advisor then randomly selected the rest
44
of the tapes the second rater analyzed, and so the raters were unaware of which tapes would be
used for interrater reliability.
Although interrater DEMO can be difficult to achieve with observational coding
system (Heyman, 2004), Pearson correlations of .7 to .8 were determined to be acceptable.  For
females, interrater reliability was r = .77 for direct anger (DEMO = 4.36), r =.86 for hostility
(Mean = 3.09), DEMO r =.78 for emotional attunement (Mean = 4.23).  For males, interrater
reliability was r =.70 for direct anger (Mean = 3.46), r =.70 for hostility (Mean = 2.80), and r
=.85 DEMO emotional attunement (Mean = 3.82).  Correlations among the observational variables,
as well as associations between the observational and self-report measures, are discussed in the
Results section.
Procedures
Telephone screening
Graduate research assistants contacted DEMO participants interested in the study and
conducted telephone screening with both members of the couple.
a.
Introduction and verbal consent.  The interviewer ensured that participants were
available to complete telephone screening, and then discussed confidentiality and
verbal consent.  To ensure the accuracy and reliability of the telephone screening,
the interviews were audio-taped with participants’ permission.  Please refer to
Appendix K for the Telephone Script for Demographic Information and Verbal
Consent.
b.
DEMO information. Potential participants were considered ineligible if
they did not meet the age or relationship length inclusion criteria.  Please refer to
45
Appendix K for Telephone Script for Demographic Information and Verbal
Consent.
c.
DEMO clinical interview for DSM-IV- Nonpatient, Lifetime (SCID-NP;
Spitzer et al., 1988). The interviewer assessed the couple’s history of depression
and other inclusion criteria.
d.
If the couple was eligible, they were scheduled for a research session.
Research session
Research sessions were conducted at the University DEMO Texas at Austin, Department of
Educational Psychology, TARA rooms.  The DEMO used for the couple’s interaction task included
a couch for the couple to sit on, as well as other furnishings to emulate a living room.  The room
included a one-way mirror through which the couple was videotaped, but blinds were placed
over a portion of the mirror so as to seem less intrusive.  Please refer to Appendix L for a
schematic of the room.   An additional smaller room across the hall DEMO used so that the couple
could complete self-report measures separately.  A DEMO research assistant obtained informed
consent and explained the interaction task, and DEMO to two trained research assistants aided in
conducting and videotaping the session.
a.
Introduction and informed consent.  The graduate research assistant greeted
participants, DEMO the research assistants, and described the session length
and structure.  She then explained the consent form, highlighting the study’s
contact information, confidentiality, and that portions of the session would be
videotaped with their permission. DEMO clarified that her role during the session
was to listen but not to give any advice.  Finally, she addressed the mental health
provider DEMO on the back of the consent form, which was provided to DEMO couples
46
involved in the study as a resource. Please refer to Appendices M DEMO N for
consents for ND and FD couples.  In addition, please see Appendix O for
b.
c.
Resources Referral List for Study Participants.
DEMO  As part of the larger study, couples completed the Overgeneral
Memory Test (Williams & Broadbent, 1986) and the Scrambled Sentences Test
(DEMO; Wenzlaff, 1988) in a randomized order.  Couples were asked to complete a
packet of questionnaires which included the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI;
Beck et al., 1961), Miller Social Intimacy Scale (MSIS; Miller and Lefcourt,
1982), and Areas of Disagreement Questionnaire (AOD; Richards et al., 2003).
Couples completed the questionnaires separately to DEMO that they responded as
accurately as possible.
Couples’ interaction task. A research assistant turned on the cameras placed
behind the one-way observation mirror and DEMO couple began the conflict
interaction task. Common areas of disagreement included communication
problems, financial concerns, and housekeeping duties.  The graduate research
assistant asked the couple to mutually agree on an area of disagreement.  She
asked if both members were willing to discuss the topic to ensure their DEMO
during the interaction task.  Because using a standardized set of procedures DEMO
the conflict interaction task reduces measurement error in the task (Heyman,DEMO
2001), the graduate research assistant introduced the task as follows:
Every couple has issues that they struggle with.  This part of the study is going to be a
conversation about areas in which you DEMO not to agree (or areas of disagreement).  The
point of this is to see how you interact when you have a disagreement DEMO your
relationship.  I am going to leave the room for the DEMO, to give you some privacy.  To
help you get started on it though, let us first identify a topic for the conversation.  DEMO
an important area of disagreement?
47
To help the couple begin the conversation and focus the discussion, the
graduate research assistant asked the couple to each briefly state their main
DEMO about the area of disagreement (Heyman, 2001).   She encouraged each
member of the couple to describe their primary concern in a DEMO sentences.  She
then described the guidelines for the conversation:
Just DEMO you have been, try to talk like you’re in your own DEMO room.  Try to keep
discussing (name area of conflict) until DEMO I get back.  It is important to stay focused on
the DEMO of disagreement, as opposed to just chatting.  It is okay to talk about other areas
of disagreement as well, if they come up.  I am going to knock on door in about 10
minutes to let you know that you have about a minute to wrap up.  Then, I’ll knock on the
door in another minute, come in, and ask it how went.
The graduate research assistant left the room DEMO allow the couple to begin
the conversation.  She knocked on the DEMO in 9 minutes, and then returned to the
d.
e.
room DEMO 10 minutes to end the task.
Questionnaire. As part of the larger study, the couple completed an interview
about their self-perceptions and perceptions of their partners.  They also
completed a second packet of questionnaires, which DEMO the Emotional Self-
Disclosure Scale (ESDS; Snell et al., 1988)DEMO  The order of the interview and
second questionnaire packet was randomized DEMO male and female partners.
Debriefing. The graduate research assistant asked the couple how the session
went and thanked them for their time.  She paid the couple $40 for their
participation and validated their garage parking ticket.  As a part of the larger
study for FD couples, she stated that a research assistant would contact them in
six months for the DEMO follow-up portions of the study.  The graduate
research assistant gave them DEMO copy of their informed consent form and asked
them to contact the research study if that had any questions in the future.
48
CHAPTER FOUR
Results
Description of Sample
In the present study, the sample was composed of 56 couples, 26 in the FD group and 30
in the ND group.  An additional 11 couples, 2 in the DEMO group and 9 in the ND group, were
eliminated from the DEMO because the researcher was unable to analyze the videotaped
interaction tasks.  DEMO videotaped interaction tasks exhibited problems such as poor video
camera microphone sound quality or equipment malfunction in eight of the couples, data being
misplaced in two of the couples, and one couple speaking Portuguese during the interaction task.
In addition, the 2 couples from the pilot study and the first 4 ND couples who completed the
study were used to DEMO the observational coding system and so were not included in the
dataset.
FD/ ND groups were compared on the following demographic variables: age, race/
ethnicity, education level, marriage or co-habitation, length of marriage or co-habitation, and
whether or not the couples had children.  It DEMO not expected that there would be significant
differences between the FD and ND samples on any of the demographic variables.
As shown in Table DEMO, independent sample t-tests were conducted to examine participants’
ages in the DEMO and ND groups.  There were no significant differences in age for DEMO partners
between the FD/ND groups (Mean FD = 33.81; M ND = 34.57), t (54) = -.32, p = ns.  There were
also no significant differences in age for male partners in each group (Mean FD = 33.58; M ND =
36.97), DEMO (54) = -1.18, p = ns.
49
Participants were not racially or ethnically diverse for a community sample in DEMO,
Texas.  Percentages of the racial/ ethnic groups represented in the FD and ND participants are
shown in Table 2.  The expected sizes of Caucasian/ non-Caucasian cells were too small to
perform chi-squared analyses, DEMO so it is uncertain whether racial/ethnic backgrounds differed
between the FD/ND groups.
As shown in Table 2, chi-squared analyses were conducted to examine the highest level
of education for participants in the FD and DEMO groups.  There were no significant differences for
education level of female DEMO in the FD/ ND groups, χ2 (1, N = 56) = 1.52, p = ns.  For
males, there was a DEMO trend for participants in the FD group to have lower education levels
than those in the ND group, χ2 (1, N = 56) = 2.34, p = .12.
Chi-squared analyses were conducted to examine DEMO and co-habitation in the FD
and ND couples.  As shown in DEMO 2, FD couples, 61.5% of couples were married and 38.5%
of the couples were living together.  For ND couples, 60.0% of couples DEMO married and 40.0%
of the couples were living together.  There were DEMO significant differences in marriage or co-
habitation between the FD/ND groups, χ2 (1, N = 56) = .01, p = ns.
Couples’ length of marriage/ co-habitation was not normally distributed in the sample,
and so square root transformations were conducted on the data before DEMO analyses. As
shown in Table 1, an independent t-test was completed DEMO examine any differences between the
lengths of the relationships for the FD/ ND couples.  There was a trend that the ND couples had
DEMO relationships than the FD couples, t (53) = -1.78, p = .10.
Chi-squared analyses were conducted to examine whether the FD and DEMO groups differed
in having children.  As shown in Table 2, 38.5% of the FD couples had children and 61.5% did
not have children.  In the ND group, 30.0% of the couples had children and 70.0% did not have
50
children.   There were no significant differences in having children between the DEMO/ND groups,
χ2 (1, N = 56) = .01, p = ns.
Observational Coding System
Preliminary Analyses
To examine the interrater DEMO of the observational coding system, 50% of the
sample (N = 26) was randomly analyzed by an additional rater.  Pearson correlations were
DEMO to assess interrater reliability between the two raters on each of the coding system
variables of direct anger, hostility, and emotional attunement (Heyman, 2004).  Pearson
correlations of r = .70- .80 were considered DEMO be sufficient levels of interrater reliability.  For
females, interrater reliability was r = .77 for direct anger (Mean = 4.36), r = .86 for hostility
(Mean = 3.09), and r = .78 for emotional attunement (Mean = 4.23).  For males, interrater
reliability was r = .70 for direct anger (Mean = 3.46), r = .70 for hostility (Mean = 2.80), and r =
.85 for emotional attunement (Mean = 3.82).   Means and standard deviations of the coding
scales for females and males are shown in Tables 3 DEMO 4.
Pearson correlations were conducted to examine relationships between the observational
variables and self-report questionnaires.  As shown in Table 5, females’ direct anger DEMO
associated with their hostility, r = .49, p < .01.  DEMO hostility was inversely correlated with
their emotional attunement, r = - DEMO, p < .01.  Females’ depressive symptoms were associated
with their hostility, r = .31, p < .05.  However, females’ BDI scores DEMO not significantly
correlated with their levels of direct anger, r = DEMO .02, p = ns.  As shown in Table 6, males’ DEMO
anger was associated with their hostility, r = .35, p < .01. Males’ hostility was inversely
correlated with their emotional attunement, r = - .55, p < .01.  Males’ emotional attunement was
51
inversely correlated with their depressive symptoms, r = - .29, p < .01.  In addition, males’
emotional attunement was also associated with relationship intimacy, r = .37, p < .01.
Self-report Measures
The means DEMO standard deviations for the BDI, ESDS, MSIS, and AOD self-report
DEMO for females and males are shown in Tables 3 and 4.  DEMO few participants did not
complete all the questionnaire items, and so DEMO questionnaires were removed from the
analyses.  For females, three ESDS, DEMO MSIS, and one AOD were removed from the analyses.
For males, one ESDS and one MSIS were removed from the analyses.
Pearson correlations DEMO conducted to examine relationships among study variables.
As shown in Table 5, female depressive symptoms were correlated with decreased emotional
self-disclosure to their romantic partners, r = -.27, p < .05; decreased relationship intimacy, DEMO = -
.32, p < .05; and increased relationship conflict, DEMO = .50, p < .01.  As shown in Table 6, DEMO
depressive symptoms were correlated with decreased emotional self-disclosure to their romantic
partners, r = -.22, p = ns; decreased relationship intimacy, r DEMO -.54, p < .01, and increased
relationship conflict, r = DEMO, p < .05. There was an interest in examining how anger DEMO hostility
were associated with relationship variables, such as intimacy, without the confounding influence
of depression.  Therefore, in the following analyses, depressive symptoms were used as a
covariate whenever it was significantly correlated with the DEMO variables.
Testing Hypotheses
Anger expression in FD and ND women: Hypothesis DEMO
It was hypothesized that the FD women would exhibit lower levels of direct anger and
higher levels of hostility than the ND women during DEMO observational interaction task.
52
A univariate ANOVA was conducted to examine direct anger expression in the DEMO and
ND groups, as shown in Table 7.    Prior to conducting the analysis, the data was examined to
ensure that the ANOVA assumptions were met.  Because participants were assessed
independently of each other and no repeated measures were used, the independence assumption
seemed reasonable.  There DEMO no serious violations of the constant variance and normality
assumptions; for DEMO, Levene’s test supported the assumption of equal population variances
at the DEMO level, F (1, 54) = .05, p = ns.  The effect of group was not significant (Mean FD = 4.15;
M ND = 4.57), F (1, 54) = 1.86, DEMO = .18, although the mean difference was in the expected
direction. DEMO direct anger expression was not correlated with current depressive symptoms, r
DEMO - .02, p = ns, and so BDI was not entered as a covariate in the ANOVA analysis.
An ANOVA parallel to that DEMO above was used to examine hostility expression
between the FD and ND groups.  As above, the data was examined to ensure that the DEMO
assumptions were not seriously violated.  The effect of group was not DEMO (Mean FD =
3.23; M ND = 2.97), F (DEMO, 54) = .42, p = ns.
Because female hostility and DEMO symptoms were correlated, r = .31, p < .05, the
DEMO analysis was also conducted using BDI as a covariate.  Prior to DEMO the ANCOVA
analysis, the data was examined to ensure that the DEMO, constant variance, and
normality assumptions were met.  In addition, inspection of the data did not indicate any serious
violations of the homogeneity DEMO regression slopes and linearity of regression ANCOVA
assumptions.  Using BDI as DEMO covariate, the difference in hostility expression between FD and
ND women DEMO also not significant (Mean FD = 3.23; M ND = 2.97), F (1, 54) = .04, p = ns.
53
Emotional expression, relationship intimacy, and relationship conflict: Hypothesis 2
It was hypothesized that direct anger expression and emotional attunement would be
associated with DEMO intimacy and inversely associated with relationship conflict.  On the
other hand, hostility was predicted to be associated with relationship conflict and disruptions in
DEMO intimacy.
Observational variables and relationship intimacy.  Because study participants were
nested DEMO couples, mixed model analyses were conducted to examine the relative
associations DEMO the observational variables and relationship intimacy.  As preliminary
analyses, multiple regression analyses were conducted to explore the relative associations among
these variables for DEMO and women (shown in Appendix P).  Prior to conducting the mixed
model analyses, a case analysis identified two outliers in the dataset.  A sensitivity study showed
that removing the two couples from the dataset greatly impacted the analysis results, and so these
observations were dropped from the analysis.  The data was also examined to ensure that the
mixed models assumptions were not seriously violated.  The conditional independence
assumption seemed to be reasonable.  In other words, given that the random effects variable DEMO
into account the paired nature of the couples’ level data, the DEMO variables were considered to
be independent.  That is, each couple was recruited independently from other couples and no
repeated measures were used in DEMO study.  Examination of the scatter plots of the residuals and
study DEMO supported that there were no serious violations of the constant variance and
normality assumptions for the error terms.
Using mixed model analyses, direct anger, hostility, and emotional attunement were used
to predict relationship intimacy.   DEMO fixed effects were the predictors of direct anger, hostility,
54
and emotional attunement.  A random couple-level intercept was included to control for the
dependence within couples.
Mixed model analysis found that when controlling for DEMO other predictors, direct anger, b
= .22, t = .14, p = ns; hostility, b = .27, t = .24, DEMO = ns; and emotional attunement, b = 1.19, t =
DEMO, p = ns; did not significantly predict relationship intimacy.   The model did not explain any of
the within couple explained variance; it actually increased the unexplained within couple
variance by 3.66% (Kreft & de Leeuw, 1998; Singer, 1988).  A small portion of the DEMO
couple variance was explained by the predictors.  The model reduced the DEMO between
variance from 69.90 to 67.21, a 3.85% reduction in unexplained DEMO between the predictors
and relationship intimacy.  The estimated intraclass correlation for DEMO analyses was .37,
indicating that without using mixed models to account for the non-independent nature of the
couples data, statistical results would have been inaccurate (Singer, 1998).
Observational variables and relationship conflict.  Because male and female relationship
conflict were not highly correlated, r = .23, p = ns, mixed model analysis was not necessary to
examine DEMO relative associations between the observational variables and relationship conflict.
Therefore, a DEMO regression analysis was conducted to determine whether female direct
anger, hostility, and emotional attunement predicted female relationship conflict.  A parallel
multiple regression analysis was completed for male participants.
Prior to conducting the multiple regression analyses, case analyses found that there were
two observations for males and one DEMO for females with standardized residuals greater
than 2.5.  However, sensitivity studies indicated that removing these observations did not greatly
impact the study results.  The data were also examined to ensure that the multiple regression
assumptions DEMO not seriously violated.  The independence assumption seemed to be reasonable
55
given the recruitment procedures of the study and that no repeated measures DEMO used.
Examination of the data supported that there were no serious violations of the constant variance
assumption for males and females, and well as the normality assumption for females.  However,
examination of the male relationship conflict variable indicated that it was not normally
distributed in the sample DEMO so may have violated the normality assumption.  Square root
transformations were DEMO on the male relationship conflict variable, but it did not improve
DEMO distribution of the variable.  Therefore, a nonlinear regression analysis was conducted using a
binary outcome for relationship conflict, and the results did not greatly differ from those
discussed below.
For females, the overall regression model of direct anger, hostility, and emotional
attunement did not significantly predict DEMO conflict, Adjusted R2 = -.02, F (3, 51) = DEMO,
p = ns.  For males, the overall regression model of direct anger, hostility, and emotional
attunement also did not predict relationship DEMO, Adjusted R2 = .005, F (3, 52) = 1.09, p = ns.
Emotional expression, relationship conflict, and relationship intimacy: Hypothesis 3
Self-reported emotional expression with romantic partners was predicted to be associated
DEMO relationship intimacy, and inversely associated with relationship conflict.
Self-reported emotional expression DEMO relationship intimacy.  Mixed model analysis was
conducted to examine the association DEMO self-reported emotional expression to romantic
partners and relationship intimacy.  As preliminary DEMO, multiple regression analyses were
conducted to explore the relative associations among DEMO variables for men and women (refer to
Appendix P).  Prior to conducting the mixed model analyses, a case analysis identified two
observations that were outliers in the dataset.  However, a sensitivity study found DEMO removing
these couples from the dataset did not greatly impact the analysis results.  As previously
56
described, the data was examined to ensure that the mixed model analysis assumptions were not
seriously violated.
A mixed model analysis indicated that emotional DEMO significantly predicted
relationship intimacy, b = 1.34, t = 4.64, DEMO < .001.   The model accounted for 14.23% of the
explained within couple variance (Kreft & de Leeuw, 1998; Singer, 1988).  In addition, a
substantial proportion of the between couple variance was explained by self-reported emotional
expression.  The model reduced the between couple variance from 163.06 to 125.32, a 23.14%
reduction in the unexplained variance between the predictors and relationship intimacy.  The
estimated intraclass correlation for these analyses was .48, indicating that without using mixed
models to account for the non-independent nature of the couples data, statistical results would
have been inaccurate (DEMO, 1998).
Because depressive symptoms were correlated with self-reported emotional expression
DEMO relationship intimacy, an additional area of interest was whether the relationship DEMO
emotional expression and relationship intimacy would hold after accounting for depressive
symptoms.   Therefore, a mixed model analysis was conducted using depressive symptoms and
self-reported emotional expression as fixed factors, and a random couples' level DEMO to
control for the dependence of the couple level data.  When DEMO for the depressive
symptoms, emotional expression, b = 1.29, t DEMO 4.38, p < .001 significantly predicted relationship
intimacy.   The model DEMO for 2.54% of the explained within couple variance; that is, very
little of the within couple variance was explained using this model (Kreft & de Leeuw, 1998;
Singer, 1988).  However, a DEMO proportion of the between couple variance was explained
by depressive symptoms and emotional self-disclosure.  The model reduced the between couple
57
variance from 163.06 to 77.64, a 52.39% reduction in the unexplained variance between the
predictors and relationship intimacy.
Self-reported anger expression and relationship intimacy.  Because the subscales of anger
expression to romantic partners for males and DEMO were not highly correlated, r = .09, p = ns,
mixed model analysis was not necessary to examine the relative associations between DEMO
reported anger expression and relationship intimacy.  Therefore, a multiple regression analysis
was conducted to determine whether the female subscale of anger expression predicted DEMO
relationship intimacy.  A parallel regression analysis was conducted for males.
Prior DEMO conducting multiple regression analyses, case analyses found that there was one
DEMO for males and two observations for females with standardized residuals greater than
2.5.  Sensitivity studies indicated that removing these observations greatly impacted the study
results, and so these couples were dropped from the analyses.  As DEMO described, the data
was examined to ensure that the multiple regression DEMO were not seriously violated.
For females, the overall regression model significantly DEMO relationship intimacy,
Adjusted R2 = .09, F (1, 51) = 5.89, p = .02.  Female anger expression to romantic partners DEMO
associated with relationship intimacy, β = .32, t = 2.43, DEMO = .02.   For males, the overall
regression model did not DEMO predict relationship intimacy, Adjusted R2 = .02, F (1, 52)
= .86, p = ns.
Because depressive symptoms were correlated with self-reported anger expression and
relationship intimacy, an additional area of interest was whether the relationship between female
anger expression and relationship intimacy would hold DEMO accounting for depressive
symptoms.   Therefore, a multiple regression analysis was DEMO using self-reported anger
expression to predict relationship intimacy, controlling for depressive DEMO  The overall
58
regression model significantly predicted relationship intimacy, Adjusted R2 = .17, F (2, 50) =
6.41, p = .003.  Controlling for depressive DEMO, female anger expression to romantic
partners was associated with relationship intimacy, β = .30, ΔR2 = .09, t = 2.40, p = .02.
Self-reported emotional expression and relationship conflict.  Because male and female
relationship conflict were not highly correlated, r = .23, p = ns, mixed model analysis was not
necessary to examine the relative associations between DEMO expression and relationship
conflict.  Therefore, a multiple regression analysis was conducted to determine whether female
emotional expression predicted female relationship conflict.  A parallel multiple regression
analysis was completed for male participants.
Prior to conducting the DEMO regression analyses, case analyses found that there were
two observations for DEMO and one observation for females with standardized residuals greater
than 2.5.  DEMO, sensitivity studies indicated that removing these observations did not greatly
impact DEMO study results.  The data was also examined to ensure that the DEMO regression
assumptions were not seriously violated.  The independence assumption seemed to DEMO reasonable
given the recruitment procedures of the study and that no repeated measures were used.
Examination of the data supported that there were no DEMO violations of the constant variance
assumption for males and females, as DEMO as the normality assumption for females.  However,
examination of the DEMO relationship conflict variable indicated that it was not normally
distributed and so may have violated the normality assumption.  Square root transformations
were conducted on the male relationship conflict variable, but it did not improve the distribution
of the variable.  Therefore, a nonlinear regression analysis was conducted using DEMO binary
outcome for male relationship conflict, and results did not greatly DEMO from the results
discussed below.
59
For females, the overall regression model significantly predicted relationship conflict,
Adjusted R2 = .07, F (1, 50) = 4.57, p = .04.  Female emotional self-disclosure to romantic
partners was inversely associated with relationship conflict, β = -.89, t = -2.14, p = .04.   For
males, there was a trend of the overall regression model significantly predicting relationship
conflict, Adjusted R2 = .04, F (1, 53) = 3.03, p = .09.  Male emotional self-disclosure was
inversely associated DEMO relationship conflict, β = -.23, t = -1.74, p = DEMO
Because depressive symptoms were correlated with self-reported anger expression and
relationship conflict, an additional area of interest was whether the relationship between anger
expression and relationship intimacy would hold after accounting for depressive symptoms.
Therefore, a multiple regression analysis was conducted using female self-reported anger
expression to predict DEMO relationship conflict, controlling for female depressive symptoms.
A parallel multiple regression DEMO was completed for male participants.
For females, the overall regression model DEMO predicted relationship conflict,
Adjusted R2 = .24, F (2, DEMO) = 8.99, p < .001.  Female emotional self-disclosure to romantic
DEMO was not significantly associated with relationship conflict when controlling for
depressive symptoms, β = -.15, ΔR2 = .02, t = -1.19, p DEMO ns.   For males, the overall regression
model significantly predicted relationship DEMO, Adjusted R2 = .12, F (2, 52) = 4.71, p = .01.
Male emotional self-disclosure was not significantly associated with relationship DEMO when
controlling for depressive symptoms, β = -.16, ΔR2 = .02, t = -1.23, p = ns.  Therefore, although
there was DEMO relationship between self-reported emotional expression and relationship conflict, it
became non-significant DEMO depressive symptoms were added into the regression models.
Self-reported anger expression and relationship conflict.  Regression analyses were also
completed using the one-item subscale of anger self-disclosure to romantic partners.   Prior to
60
conducting multiple regression analyses, case analyses found that there were two observations
for males and one observation for females with standardized residuals greater than DEMO
Sensitivity studies indicated that removing these observations greatly impacted the study results,
and so these observations were dropped from the analyses.  As previously described, the data
was examined to ensure that the multiple regression assumptions were not seriously violated.
For females, the overall regression model of self-reported anger expression did not
predict relationship conflict, Adjusted R2 = -.02, DEMO (2, 52) = .01, p = ns.  For males, the overall
regression model of self-reported anger expression did not significantly predicted DEMO
conflict, Adjusted R2 = -.02, F (1, 52) =.06, p = ns.
Gender differences in anger expression: Hypothesis 4
It was predicted that the FD and ND women would express less direct anger DEMO more
hostility than their male partners during the observational interaction task.
A univariate repeated measures ANOVA was used to examine female and male direct
DEMO, in order to take into account the paired couples’ level data.  Prior to conducting the
analysis, the data was examined to ensure that the repeated measures ANOVA assumptions were
met.  Because couples were assessed independently of each other and no repeated measures were
used, the independence assumption seemed reasonable.  There were no serious violations of the
constant variance and sphericity assumptions; for example, Mauchly’s test supported the
assumption of equal DEMO variances for the all pairs of the repeated measures at the .05
level.
Examining female and male direct anger, the effect of gender was significant, (Mean
female= 4.38; Mean male= 3.46), Wilks’ lambda= .53, F (1, 55) = 48.61, p < .001.  Contrary DEMO
predictions, females exhibited more direct anger during the interaction task than DEMO male
61
partners.  Female and male direct anger expression were not correlated with depressive
symptoms, rfemale = -.02, p = ns; rmale = -.16, DEMO = ns; and so the BDI was not entered as a DEMO
in the ANOVA analysis.  Means and standard deviations of male/ female direct anger are shown
in Table 8.
As shown in Table 8, a repeated measures ANOVA analysis parallel to that described
above was used DEMO examine hostility expression between men and women.  Prior to conducting
the DEMO, a case analysis identified one observation in the dataset that had DEMO standardized
residual larger than 2.5.  However, a sensitivity study found that removing this couple did not
greatly impact the analysis results.  As described above, the data was examined to ensure that
there were no serious violations of the repeated measures ANOVA assumptions.  The effect of
gender was not significant, (Meanfemale= 3.09; Meanmale= 2.80), Wilks’ lambda= .22, DEMO (1, 55) =
1.43, p = ns.
Because female hostility was correlated with depressive symptoms, rfemale = .31, p < .05;DEMO
rmale = .13, p = ns, male and female hostility was also examined using mixed model analysis in
order to include the BDI DEMO a covariate.  The fixed effects were gender and depressive symptoms,
DEMO a random couple-level intercept was included to control for the dependence within couples.
A case analysis was conducted prior to data analysis, but it did not identify any potential outliers
in the dataset. As previously discussed, the data was examined to ensure that the mixed model
analysis assumptions DEMO not seriously violated.
Depressive symptoms were associated with hostility when accounting for gender, b = .05,
t = 2.08, p < .05.  As in the repeated measures ANOV
A analysis, the effect of gender was not
significant when accounting for depressive symptoms, b = -.21, DEMO = -.87, p = ns.   The model only
reduced .15% DEMO the within couple variance, that is, it did not substantially reduce the
62
unexplained within couple variance (Kreft & de Leeuw, 1998; Singer, DEMO).  However, a
substantial amount of the between couple variance was explained by depressive symptoms.  The
model reduced the unexplained between variance from .94 to .83, an 11.41% reduction in
unexplained variance between gender, DEMO symptoms, and hostility. The estimated
intraclass correlation for these analyses was DEMO, indicating that statistical results would have
been inaccurate when collapsing across DEMO and female participants without using mixed
models to account for the non-independent nature of the couples data (Singer, 1998).
Additional exploratory analyses
DEMO addition to the relationships among the study variables that were hypothesized, DEMO was
interested in exploring how individuals’ patterns of communication exhibited during the conflict
interaction task were associated with their ratings of the behaviors (shown in Table 9). For
instance, males who were emotionally attuned to their partners during the interaction task, such
as reflecting their partners’ feelings and using consistent eye contact, reported higher levels of
intimacy in their relationships (r = .37, p < .01).  The partners of emotionally attuned men also
reported feeling closer and more connected in their DEMO (r = .28, p < .05).   When
women exhibited patterns of being emotionally attuned with their partners, they reported
somewhat higher levels of intimacy in their relationships, but to a much lesser extent than men (r
= .16, p= ns).  Similarly, the DEMO of emotionally attuned women reported higher levels of
relationship intimacy (r DEMO .43, p < .01).  These findings suggest that even when one partner
exhibits patterns of emotional attunement, the couple will report feeling closer and more
connected with one another.
Building on these findings, I was interested in the role that emotional attunement may
play in the DEMO between depressive symptoms and disruptions in relationship intimacy.   When
63
individuals reported higher levels of depressive symptoms, they also indicated reduced closeness
and intimacy with their romantic partners (r females = -.32, p < .05; r males = -.54, p < .01).  The
DEMO depressive symptoms individuals reported, the less behaviors of emotional attunement and
DEMO they exhibited with their partners (r females = -.17, p < .05; r males = -.29, p < .05).  In
addition, lower levels of men’s emotional attunement during the interaction task was associated
with perceptions of reduced intimacy with their partners (r = .37, DEMO < .05); a similar relationship
existed for women to a lesser extent (r females = .16, p = ns).  While it is possible that this lack of
emotional attunement may reflect symptoms of DEMO, the impaired emotional attunement
with romantic partners may be a mechanism DEMO which depression leads to disruptions in
relationship intimacy.
Another area of interest was how individuals’ behaviors affected their partners and their
romantic relationships.  Specifically, I was interested in the role that hostility plays in
interpersonal relationships, and how individuals feel about their relationships when their partners
are hostile, critical, and passive-aggressive.  Females who were hostile with their partners during
the interaction task did not report elevated levels of relationship conflict (r = .12, p = ns) or
disruptions in relationship intimacy (r = -.06, p = ns).  Interestingly, the partners of these women
did report elevated levels of relationship conflict (r = .30, DEMO < .05) and disruptions in relationship
intimacy (r = -.34, DEMO < .05).  It is possible that the men reacted negatively DEMO their partners’
hostility and exaggerated relationship discord when reporting the quality of the relationship.
Alternatively, women who were hostile during the interaction task may have been underreporting
the levels of conflict and the impaired intimacy with DEMO partners.
I was also interested in the constructive role that behaviors such as direct anger
expression and emotional engagement may have on psychological well-being.  Specifically,
64
findings indicated that the more women expressed angry feelings in open and DEMO ways
during the conflict interaction task, the less depressive symptoms their DEMO reported
experiencing (r = -.36, p < .01).  In DEMO, when women were emotionally connected, attuned,
and sensitive to their partners’ feelings while discussing an area of conflict, their partners
reported less depressive symptoms (r = -.47, p < .01).
Another area DEMO interest involved the impact that individuals’ depressive symptoms had
on the quality of their interpersonal relationships.  When women reported higher levels of
depressive symptoms, both members of the couple rated the relationship as being less intimate
(rfemale = -.32, p < .05; rmale = -.33, p < .05) and having more conflict (rfemale = .50, p < DEMO; rmale =
.27, p < .05).   A similar relationship existed between male depressive symptoms and the couples’
perceptions of the relationship DEMO  The more depressive symptoms that men endorsed, the
more relationship conflict (rfemale = .32, p < .05; rmale = .34, p < .05) and less intimacy (rfemale = -
.30, p < DEMO; rmale = -.54, p < .01) the couples reported.
Finally, I was interested in whether individuals’ ratings of their emotional expression to
DEMO partners would be associated with the quality of their relationships.  The DEMO that men
reported being emotionally expressive with their partners, the more DEMO and close both
members of the couple perceived the relationships to be (rfemale = .28, p < .05; rmale = .41, p <
.01).  When women reported higher levels of emotional expression, DEMO rated the relationship as
being more intimate (r = .48, p < .01).  Their partners also reported that the relationships were
more intimate(r= .17, p = ns), but to a much lesser extent than women’s perceptions.
65
CHAPTER 5: DISCUSSION
Review of Findings
The present study had three main objectives.  First, it examined patterns of direct anger
and hostility expression DEMO women with a history of depression, compared to women who had
DEMO been depressed.  Second, this study assessed whether couples’ observational and self-
reported anger expression was associated with their relationship intimacy and conflict.  Third, the
study examined gender differences in direct anger and hostility expression.  DEMO main results of
the study are reviewed below, along with a DEMO of these findings in the context of previous
research.
Anger expression in FD and ND women
The prediction that FD women would exhibit less DEMO anger expression and more
hostility than ND women was not supported.  DEMO results were contrary to previous self-report
findings that depressed individuals had difficulty expressing anger directly (Goldman & Haaga,
1995; Riley et al., 1989) and reported higher levels of hostility than nondepressed individuals
(Biaggio & Godwin, 1987; Sperberg & Stabb, 1998).  The present findings were also contrary to
previous observational studies which found that depressed individuals DEMO more negative
and hostile patterns of emotional expression than nondepressed individuals (DEMO et al., 1985;
Hops et al., 1987; McCabe & DEMO, 1993).
One possible explanation is that formerly-depressed women exhibit more DEMO patterns
of anger expression than previously found in clinically depressed women (DEMO & Haaga,
1995; Biaggio & Godwin, 1987), and these communication styles were too subtle to be assessed
using the existing observational DEMO system.  This explanation is consistent with previous
66
findings that formerly-depressed individuals exhibit negative processing biases that are similar
to, but more subtle than, those observed in depressed groups (Hedlund & DEMO, 1995, Ingram et
al., 1998; Rude et al., 2001; Wenzlaff et al., 2002).   In addition, while the differences DEMO
the FD and ND groups were not significant, the means were DEMO the expected directions.  It is
possible that examining anger expression in DEMO larger sample size would be better able to detect
these subtle differences in anger expression between FD and ND women.  If formerly-depressed
women did exhibit less direct anger expression and more hostility than never-depressed women,
DEMO would suggest that FD women experience residual patterns of maladaptive anger expression
long after depressed episodes have ended.  Research has yet to determine why experiencing
depression makes women more vulnerable to future episodes of depression (Keller et al., 1992),
but it is plausible that residual patterns DEMO maladaptive anger expression may play a role in FD
women’s increased vulnerability to depression.  When FD women express angry feelings through
hostility instead of constructive anger expression, they may develop feelings of isolation and
disconnection with themselves and their romantic partners (Jack, 1991; Davanloo, 1980; Cox,
Brucker, & Stabb, 2003).   Therefore, FD women’s patterns of impaired direct anger expression
and increased hostility may lead them to DEMO more vulnerable to psychological problems such as
depression.
An alternative explanation is that the patterns of emotional expression previously found
in depressed women (Goldman & Haaga, 1995; Biaggio & Godwin, 1987) are not present DEMO
formerly-depressed women.  It is possible that maladaptive emotional expression is associated
DEMO depression itself, and FD individuals do not exhibit these patterns of DEMO outside
an episode of depression.  This explanation supports the viewpoint that DEMO anger
expression may be a symptom of depression, rather than a DEMO or risk factor for developing
67
depression. No studies to date have been able to assess the causal DEMO between emotional
expression and depression using the depression-vulnerable paradigm, or alternative DEMO
assessing the emergence of depression in women longitudinally.  Therefore, the present study
provides a first step in clarifying the complex relationship between emotional DEMO and
depression in women.
Anger expression, relationship intimacy, and relationship conflict
Direct anger, hostility, and emotional attunement.  The predictions that observational
ratings of direct anger, hostility, and emotional attunement would be associated with DEMO
intimacy and conflict were not supported.  Few observational studies have examined DEMO
construct of direct anger expression in couples, and so it is DEMO to examine these findings in
the context of previous studies.  However, the present results were contrary with a previous study
that has examined DEMO construct similar to direct anger, in which the researchers found that
DEMO anger expression was associated with increased relationship satisfaction (Cohan &
Bradbury, 1997).   The findings that hostility was not associated with relationship intimacy were
also contrary to previous observational studies which found a link DEMO hostility and negative
relationship outcomes (Gottman, 1994, 1999; Gottman & Krokoff, 1989; Roberts, 2000).  In
addition, few observational studies to date have examined the relationship between couples’
emotional attunement, engagement, DEMO relationship outcomes.  Yet, the study findings were
inconsistent with previous results that emotional disengagement has negative impacts on family
interactions (Kretchmar & Jacobvitz, 2002).  It is possible that the present study’s relatively
small DEMO size reduced its ability to detect the mild to moderate associations between direct
anger, hostility, emotional attunement, and relationship outcomes.
68
Although the observational variables did not predict relationship intimacy and conflict,
DEMO is still may be a relationship between these variables.  Further examination DEMO the dataset
provides evidence consistent with this explanation.  For instance, male’s patterns of emotional
attunement and engagement exhibited during the interaction task were DEMO with their
perceptions of intimacy with their romantic partners.  These findings DEMO that when
individuals exhibit patterns of being attuned, connected, and engaged during times of conflict
with their partners, they feel more intimate in the relationship overall.  In addition, the results
suggest that the patterns DEMO communication such as emotional attunement observed during the
interaction tasks were consistent with individual’s perceptions of these behaviors.  In other
words, the observational DEMO of direct anger, hostility, and emotional attunement during the
10-minute interaction task seemed to accurately target patterns of behavior that were present in
DEMO daily lives.  Some previous studies have found conflicting results between self-report
DEMO observational findings (i.e. Biaggio, 1989), and so the present findings make an important
contribution towards integrating self-report and observational methodology to examine DEMO
patterns of emotional expression.
Self-reported emotional expression and relationship intimacy. The prediction that self-
reported emotional expression to romantic partners would be associated with DEMO
intimacy was supported.  Individuals’ ratings of emotional expression were strongly associated
DEMO their perceptions of closeness with their partners, even when controlling for DEMO effects of
depressive symptoms.  These results were consistent with previous studies DEMO found that self-
reported emotional expression was associated with relationship outcomes such as satisfaction
(King, 1993).  The present findings suggest that, DEMO of depressive symptoms, individuals
feel intimate in their romantic relationships when DEMO express feelings to their partners.
69
In addition, results indicated that the subscale of anger expression to romantic partners
was associated with relationship intimacy for women.  Women’s self-reported anger expression
was related to feeling intimate with their partners, even when controlling for depressive
symptoms.  Interestingly, men’s reports of anger expression were not associated DEMO feelings of
closeness with their partners.    Therefore, only women seem to feel more intimate with their
partners when they openly express angry DEMO  One potential explanation for these findings
is that men feel comfortable DEMO anger regardless of the interpersonal situation, and so
they do not DEMO to express angry feelings in order to feel close and connected with their
partners.  Alternatively, women may have difficulty expressing anger in romantic DEMO,
and so they feel intimate with their partners when they are able to express these negative feelings
without fear of harming the relationship.  These explanations are consistent with previous
theoretical models examining women’s beliefs about DEMO expression within the context of
romantic relationships (Jack, 1991), as well as study findings that men feel more comfortable
expressing anger than DEMO (Cox, Bruckner, & Stabb, 2003; Sharkin, 1993; Biaggio, 1989).
Self-reported emotional expression and relationship conflict. The prediction that self-
DEMO emotional expression to romantic partners would be inversely associated with
relationship conflict was supported.  The results indicated that when individuals expressed
emotions to their romantic partners, they perceived that there was less conflict and discord in the
relationship.  Combined with the above findings that self-reported emotional expression was
associated with relationship intimacy, these results indicate that there is a clear relationship
between emotional expression and relationship quality.   However, the relationship between
emotional expression and relationship conflict became non-significant when controlling for
depressive symptoms. DEMO findings suggest that depression overlaps with the effects that
70
emotional expression has on relationship conflict, which is reasonable based on the strong
association between depressive symptoms and relationship conflict.
One explanation for the DEMO link between emotional expression and relationship
quality is that expressing emotions to romantic partners improves the lines of communication
and makes partners feel closer DEMO each other, and so daily problems are less likely to develop
DEMO overall conflict in the relationship.   This conceptualization is consistent with previous
findings that self-reported emotional expression was associated with positive relationship
outcomes such DEMO relationship satisfaction (King, 1993).  In addition, depression may reduce
emotional expression as well as increase relationship conflict, and so the association between
emotional expression and relationship conflict becomes obscured.  Previous findings support the
explanation that depression is associated with reduced emotional expression and increased
relationship DEMO (Goldman & Haaga, 1995; Coyne et al., 2002).
The present study did not find an association between self-reported anger expression and
DEMO conflict.  It is interesting that women’s anger expression to romantic partners DEMO
associated with their perceptions of relationship intimacy, but not relationship conflict.  It is
possible that there is an association between self-reported anger expression DEMO relationship
conflict, but the relatively small sample size of the study DEMO it difficult to detect the mild to
moderate effects of this relationship.  Alternatively, anger expression may play a role in
relationship intimacy but DEMO little impact on relationship conflict.   It is plausible that when
couples openly express anger to their partners, they are better able to discuss areas of conflict
and subsequently feel closer to one another.  While couples may resolve issues more effectively
through expressing anger, they still may experience similar levels of conflict in the relationship.
71
Because the AOD is only able to measure self-reported levels of overall DEMO conflict, it
may not be sensitive enough to assess the subtle DEMO that anger has on relationship quality.
Gender differences in anger expression
The prediction that women would express less direct anger than men was not DEMO;
instead, results indicated that women expressed more direct patterns of DEMO expression than
men.  These results were contrary to previous self-report studies DEMO found that men express
anger more frequently and openly than women (DEMO, 1989; Fehr et al., 1999; Averrill, 1983),
as well as other findings that there are no gender differences in anger DEMO (i.e. Stoner &
Spencer, 1987).
There are several possible DEMO for this unexpected finding.  One explanation is
that women may have DEMO more direct anger expression during the conflict interaction task
because of their investment to resolve the area of conflict and strengthen the relationship with
DEMO romantic partners.  This idea is supported by Jack’s (1991) conceptualization DEMO women
define themselves in terms of their important relationships, and so DEMO be more likely than men
to be committing to resolving interpersonal conflicts.  In addition, Fehr et al. (1999) suggested
that women are DEMO attuned to the quality of their relationships than men, as they DEMO that
women were more likely to report that they would express anger in interpersonal contexts in
which their partners were inconsiderate or neglectful.  Another explanation for these results is
that the observational coding system was more DEMO to patterns of anger expression in
women than men.  The development DEMO analysis of the observational coding system was
conducted by women, and DEMO it is conceivable that the variables were inadvertently biased to
focus on positive attributes of anger expression in women.
72
In addition, the prediction that women would express more hostility than men was not
confirmed.   The results were contrary to previous studies which DEMO that women were more
likely than men to express anger through hostile and passive aggressive ways (Miller, 1976;
Jack, 1991).  DEMO explanation for these findings is that women felt comfortable enough to
express their angry feelings directly to their partner, and so they did not need to rely on
maladaptive patterns of anger expression such as hostility.  This explanation is consistent with
previous conceptualizations that individuals exhibit maladaptive patterns DEMO anger expression
only when they cannot adequately express their angry feelings in open and direct ways
(Davanloo, 1980; Cox, Bruckner, & Stabb, 2003).
Alternatively, it is possible that women’s communication styles were DEMO to social
desirability influences, and they did not engage in patterns DEMO hostility usually exhibited in their
relationships.  Although many researchers use similar DEMO observational task to assess
couples’ communication patterns (Heyman et al., 2001), some researchers have used 20 to 30
minutes of observational tasks DEMO examine a broader sample of couples’ behavior (i.e. Jacobvitz
et al., 2004; Kretchmar & Jacobvitz, 2002).  A longer sample of observational data may better
capture negative communication styles such as hostility because couples DEMO more involved
in the observational task and are less likely to censor negative behaviors due to social
desirability.
Additional exploratory findings
In addition to DEMO relationships among the study variables that were hypothesized, I was
interested DEMO exploring how individuals’ patterns of communication observed during the conflict
interaction task were associated with their self-reported ratings of the behaviors.  Results
indicated that males who exhibited patterns of emotional attunement and engagement during the
73
observational interaction task reported higher levels of relationship intimacy.  The partners of
emotionally attuned men also reported feeling closer and more connected in their DEMO
A similar but somewhat weaker relationship existed for women.  That is, when women were
emotionally attuned during the observational task, both members of the couple reported higher
levels of relationship intimacy.   These findings suggest DEMO when individuals exhibit patterns of
being attuned, connected, and engaged with their partners, both members of the couple feel
intimate in the relationship.  In addition, it is of interest that the observational ratings of
DEMO emotional attunement were consistent with their self-reported relationship intimacy.
The congruence between observational and self-reported behavior highlights the ability of the
observational coding system DEMO assess patterns of communication that individuals experience in
their relationships.   The impact of the results is magnified due to the fact that previous DEMO
have had difficulty finding consistency between self-report and observational methods (i.e.
DEMO, 1989). Therefore, these findings provide strong support for the association between
emotional attunement and relationship intimacy.
Another area of interest was exploring DEMO possible role that emotional attunement plays
in the relationship between depressive symptoms and disruptions in relationship intimacy.  When
individuals reported higher levels of depressive symptoms, they experienced reduced intimacy
and closeness with their romantic partners.  DEMO more depressive symptoms individuals reported,
the less emotionally attuned they were with their partners during the conflict interaction task.  In
addition, reduced DEMO attunement with romantic partners was associated with disruptions
in relationship intimacy.  DEMO the causal relationship between these variables has yet to be
established, DEMO explanation for the results is that depressive symptoms lead to problems with
being emotionally attuned to others, and these disruptions in emotional attunement exacerbate
74
the difficulties that depressed individuals experience with relationship intimacy.  These findings
provide support for a new conceptual mechanism of the link between depressive symptoms DEMO
disruptions in relationship quality.
I also wanted to examine how individuals’ behaviors such as hostility affected their
interpersonal relationships.  Results indicated that women who were hostile, critical, and passive-
aggressive with their partners during the DEMO task did not report elevated relationship
conflict or disruptions in relationship intimacy.  Interestingly, these women’s partners reported
feeling less intimate in the relationship, and indicated higher levels of discord and conflict.
One explanation for these DEMO is that women play a central role in maintaining the well-
being of romantic relationships, and in order to preserve intimacy with their partners, they resist
expressing hostility and conflict.  Therefore, when women do express hostility in romantic
relationships, it has a great impact on their partners’ perceptions of relationship conflict and
intimacy.  This explanation is consistent with Jack’s (1991) findings about the impact of societal
beliefs on women’s inhibition DEMO angry feelings in close relationships.  The present findings also
support previous DEMO which have found that women who express hostility are perceived more
negatively than men (MacGregor & Davidson, 2000).
It is interesting that DEMO hostility was not associated with their own ratings of
relationship conflict and intimacy, as would be expected based on previous observational
findings of the link between hostility and relationship discord (i.e. Gottman & Krokoff, 1989;DEMO
Roberts, 2000).  It is possible that women were underreporting their own levels of relationship
conflict and intimacy based on social desirability influences, or that men were exaggerating the
problems in the relationship based on DEMO negative perceptions of their female partners.
Regardless, further exploration is warranted DEMO understanding female anger expression in the
75
context of interpersonal relationships, as well as the impact that anger expression has on the
quality of romantic relationships.
Another area of interest involved DEMO the constructive role that behaviors such as
direct anger expression and emotional attunement had on partners’ psychological well-being.
When women expressed angry feelings openly DEMO were attuned to their partners’ feelings during
the conflict interaction task, DEMO partners reported less depressive symptoms.  However, when
men exhibited patterns of direct anger expression and emotional attunement, their partners did
not report reduced levels of depression.  It is interesting that only females’ direct anger and
emotional attunement was associated with decreased depressive symptoms in their partners.  One
explanation for these findings is that women play an important role in DEMO partners’
psychological and physical health, but men do not have such DEMO strong impact on their partners’
well-being.  Little research to date has DEMO the effects of women’s emotional expression
and attunement on men’s psychological well-being.   However, the explanation that men benefit
from their partners’ behaviors more than women is consistent with health psychological literature
which has found that DEMO social support of marriage leads to a greater improvement in men’s
psychological health than it does for women (Segraves, 1987).
Finally, I was interested in the impact that individuals’ depressive symptoms had on the
DEMO of their interpersonal relationships.  Results indicated that when individuals had higher
DEMO of depressive symptoms, both members of the couple rated the relationships DEMO being less
intimate and having more conflict. One explanation for these findings is that depression has a
variety of effects on individuals, including impairing their ability to maintain close interpersonal
relationships.  The present results were consistent with previous studies about the association
76
between depression and disruptions in the quality of interpersonal relationships (Coyne et al.,
2002).
Strengths of the Study
One of the strengths DEMO the present study involved the integrative conceptualization of
anger expression, including DEMO distinction between different forms of anger expression such as
direct anger and hostility.  The cohesive definition of anger expression and exploration of
possible mechanisms through which maladaptive patterns of anger expression develop (Jack,
1991; DEMO, 1980; Cox, Bruckner, & Stabb, 2003) may clarify discrepant findings of
previous studies examining anger expression.  The construct of direct anger links several bodies
of research, including health psychology, self-report, and observational research, which have
separately begun examining the adaptive outcomes of the constructive anger expression.  Results
of the present study, such as those indicating DEMO women differ from men in direct anger
expression but not hostility expression, emphasize the value of assessing different forms of anger
expression.  The DEMO differences in direct anger expression found in the present study also
underline the importance of continuing to examine how men and women develop differing
DEMO of anger expression.
Another positive aspect of the present study is the use of observational and self-report
methods to examine patterns of anger expression.  Self-reported emotional expression was
associated with relationship intimacy and conflict, and the specific construct of anger expression
to romantic partners was associated with relationship DEMO   However, the observational
measures of anger expression were not associated DEMO the relationship outcomes.  Previous
studies have found similar discrepancies between self-report DEMO observational methods of anger
expression; for example, Biaggio (1989) found gender differences using self-reported measures
77
of anger expression, but he was unable to replicate these findings using a confederate design to
observe patterns of anger expression.  These findings highlight the importance of continuing to
develop observational methodology to reduce social desirability DEMO demand characteristics in
interaction tasks, as well as refine observational coding DEMO to capture couples’ subtle
patterns of anger expression.
A third strength of the study involved using a community sample of formerly-depressed
and never-depressed women DEMO their partners.  Many previous studies examining anger
expression and depression have DEMO on nonclinical, college-age populations, and so it was
important to determine whether similar relationships existed for a sample of adult couples from
the DEMO    In addition, no studies to date had examined the patterns of anger expression
and FD and ND women.  It is possible that there were no differences in FD and ND women’s
anger expression because DEMO individuals’ patterns of emotional expression were more subtle
than could be detected using the existing observational methods.  However, it is also possible
that DEMO individuals do not exhibit patterns of anger expression similar to those found in
depressed individuals (Goldman & Haaga, 1995; Biaggio & Godwin, DEMO). Further examination
of anger expression in FD women is necessary to clarify whether the patterns of anger expression
previously found in depressed women DEMO risk factors or residual effects of depression.
Finally, the study has DEMO important clinical implications.  Results that women
expressed more direct anger than DEMO suggest that constructive anger expression is an important
aspect of women’s communication during interpersonal conflicts.  Based on the unexpected
direction of these findings, DEMO should be aware of not making assumptions about the
patterns of emotional expression and anger expression in their male and female clients.
Consistent with DEMO (1980) theory, therapists should also recognize the role of anger
DEMO
expression in interpersonal relationships, depression, and overall psychological well-being.
Clients that DEMO difficulty expressing anger may also experience disconnection, decreased
intimacy, and increased conflict in relationships.  Based on the correlations in the present study
between depressive symptoms and anger expression patterns such as hostility, therapists should
also be aware of that even clients with subclinical depressive symptoms may have DEMO
expressing their angry feelings in constructive ways.
Limitations of the Study
There were several limitations in the study.  First, the present study focused DEMO patterns of
anger expression in a community sample of FD women and their male partners, and serves as a
foundation to examining emotional expression in other populations.   However, in using this
approach, the study DEMO have limited generalizability to other populations of participants.
The results may not apply to a diverse racial/ ethnic population given the predominately
Caucasian sample.  Participants were limited to heterosexual individuals who had been married
or living together for at least 6 months, and so the study results may not apply to GLBT couples
or couples who are not in committed DEMO  Couples were recruited based on the
depression history of the female DEMO, and so the results may also not generalize to couples in
DEMO only the male partner has a history of depression.  In addition, the results based on a
community sample of FD women with a DEMO diagnosed history of depression may not
generalize to nonclinical, college-age populations.
DEMO, there are several limitations related to the measurement of self-report variables.
DEMO study found it was important to examine perceptions of relationship intimacy and conflict, as
well as compare self-report measures to observational ratings of similar behaviors.  Nevertheless,
the variables of emotional expression, depressive symptoms, relationship conflict, and
79
relationship intimacy were measured by self-report, and so were vulnerable to issues such as
inaccurate reporting and social desirability.  Analyses involving self-reported anger expression
with romantic partners were based on the one-item subscale of the ESDS DEMO, and so the
results were tentative.  Although the reliability and validity of the AOD in the present sample
yielded adequate temporal stability, convergent validity, and divergent validity, findings
involving relationship conflict were restricted by DEMO experimental nature of the AOD and limited
availability of reliability and validity data in previous samples.
There were also limitations involved in the measurement DEMO the observational variables of
direct anger, hostility, and emotional attunement.  DEMO present sample yielded adequate interrater
reliability ratings, expected intercorrelations of observational DEMO, and expected
associations between the observational and self-report variables.  However, DEMO study results
were tentative given the limited reliability and validity of the observational coding scales in
previous samples.  The construct of direct anger and behavioral indices were based on theoretical
and research findings about constructive patterns DEMO anger expression (i.e. Cox, Bruckner, &
Stabb, 2003; Spielberger et al., 1985; Davidson et al., 2000; Fleeson, 1988), but the direct anger
coding scale was developed for the present study DEMO so there was no reliability or validity data
based on previous samples.  Reliability and validity data in previous samples for the hostility
(Jacobvitz, 2005) and emotional attunement (Booher, 2000) scales were based on DEMO original,
dyadic versions of the scales rather than the individual-level revised scales.   In addition, while
many researchers use a similar 10-minute observational task to assess couples’ communication
patterns (Heyman et al., 2001), DEMO researchers have used 20-30 minutes of observational tasks
to examine a broader sample of couples’ behavior (i.e. Jacobvitz et al., 2004; Kretchmar &DEMO
80
Jacobvitz, 2002).  Therefore, the observational ratings of behavior in the present sample may not
have examined a complete spectrum of couples’ interactions.
DEMO area of limitations involved the potential confounding variables that may have
impacted the study results.  Based on the recruitment of participants who had been depressed in
the past, depressive symptoms represented an important possible confounding variable in the
analyses.  In fact, results indicated that depressive symptoms were DEMO with several of the
observational and self-report variables, and so depressive DEMO were included as a covariate
in the relevant analyses to reduce confounding effects.  Other variables that may have affected
the study results were demographic variables which differed between the FD and ND groups,
such as DEMO length and education level in males.  It is also possible that DEMO and
ethnicity was a confounding variable in the present results, because DEMO to determine
whether the study groups differed in terms of race and ethnicity could not be completed due to
the small number of non-Caucasian DEMO  In addition, there may have been other
variables that affected the study results, but were not examined in the present study.  For
DEMO, some previous research has suggested that marital conflict mediates the association
DEMO depression and negative communication styles (Gotlib & Whiffen, 1989; Schmaling &
Jacobson, 1990), but marital conflict could not be assessed in the present study design comparing
FD and ND couples.
Finally, there were some limitations regarding the statistical analyses.  First, the relatively
small sample DEMO of the study may have limited the power of the statistical analyses to detect
mild or moderate effects.  Second, although mixed model analyses DEMO used for the relationship
intimacy hypotheses to take into account the dependent nature of the couples’ level data, male
and female relationship conflict was not highly correlated and so mixed model analyses were not
81
necessary.  Therefore, multiple regression analyses were conducted for male and female
DEMO, but it is possible that some relationships were difficult to detect DEMO completing
separate male and female analyses.  Third, the male relationship conflict variable was not
normally distributed in the sample, and so the normality assumptions in several analyses may
have been violated.  Because nonlinear multiple regression analyses supported the study
findings, it is expected that the violation of the normality assumption did not severely impact the
results.  However, these DEMO should still be considered tentative.   In addition, the
supplemental exploratory DEMO examining the relationships between the observational and
self-report variables were conducted using Pearson correlations, and so these results should also
be interpreted with caution.
Recommendations for Future Research
The present study presents several implications for future DEMO and self-report
studies examining the links between anger expression and depression in women.  In the growing
field of observational research, it is important DEMO continue developing observational coding
systems to enable researchers to assess couples’ subtle patterns of communication.  Studies
should further examine the proposed construct of direct anger, as well as contrast direct anger
expression with other modes of emotional expression.  Researchers should also determine
whether there are gender differences in the adaptive and maladaptive patterns of anger
expression in larger sample populations.  In addition, research should assess whether direct anger
expression has any adaptive impacts on individuals’ well-being, such as decreasing depressive
symptoms and improving relationship quality.    In order to improve researchers’ abilities to
assess couples’ maladaptive anger expression and other negative communication styles, studies
should also explore ways to reduce demand characteristics, such as increasing the length of the
82
observational interaction tasks. It is also important to explore ways to supplement DEMO
measures of relationship conflict and intimacy, due to the potential impact DEMO social desirability
on the study findings.
Although the study results did not support predictions that FD women would exhibit
more maladaptive patterns of anger DEMO than ND women, the present study provides a
foundation for further DEMO of the relationship between observed patterns of anger
expression and depression.  DEMO studies should examine observational ratings of direct anger
and hostility in a larger sample of FD and ND women, as well as contrast observational and self-
report ratings for specific aspects of anger expression.  Researchers should also compare patterns
of direct anger expression and hostility in depressed and DEMO women to determine
whether FD women exhibit distinct patterns of emotional expression.
Future studies should also examine the impact that women’s anger expression with DEMO
partners has on the quality of their relationships.  Based on the DEMO finding that women’s
hostility during interactions tasks was associated with their partners’ ratings of relationship
problems but not their own perceptions, researchers should continue examining this relationship
using other types of observational coding systems.  Further examination is also necessary to
understand how females’ direct anger expression and emotional DEMO may improve their
partner’s psychological well-being and reduce symptoms of depression.  DEMO addition, researchers
should examine the possible mechanism through which emotional attunement DEMO the
relationship between depression and disruptions in relationship intimacy.
Finally, research DEMO examine additional confounding variables that may have affected
the relationship between anger expression and depression.  Because potential differences in
race/ethnicity, relationship length, and educational level may have impacted differences between
83
the FD and ND groups, further examination is necessary to determine whether the present study
results hold for a more diverse participant population.  In addition, studies should explore the
role of other variables that may be impacting the relationship between patterns of emotional
expression and depression.
Concluding Comments
DEMO conclusion, this was the first known study to examine self-report and DEMO
patterns of emotional expression in depression-vulnerable women.  One of the most DEMO
contributions of the present study was the integrative conceptualization of direct anger
expression, as well as using observational methods to assess subtle patterns of couples’
emotional expression.  Constructive anger expression poses a new direction in emotional
expression research, and deserves further clinical and research exploration to understand its role
in women’s psychological and interpersonal well-being.
84
Tables of Statistical Analyses
Table 1
Means and Standard Deviations for Demographic DEMO
Demographic Variable  FD group          ND group t-value
df p-value
M SD   M SD
Participants’ age (yr)
Females
33.81
8.62
34.57
9.21
-.32
54
ns
Males
33.58    10.19    36.97
11.22
-1.18
54
ns
Length relationship (yr) 33.151 32.03 74.071 103.81 -1.78* 53 .10
1 The variable length of relationship was not DEMO distributed in the FD and ND groups, and so square root
DEMO were completed on the data before conducting the independent sample t-test.
Note: yr = years
* p < 0.10
85
Tables of Statistical Analyses
Table 2
Group Percentages for Demographic Variables
Variable  FD group          ND group
Race/ Ethnicity
Females
DEMO/ Ethnicity
Males
Education
Females
88.5% Caucasian
7.7% Hispanic/ Latina
0% African American
0% American Indian
3.8% bicultural/ other
84.6% Caucasian
3.8% Hispanic/ DEMO
0% African American
0% American Indian
11.5% bicultural/ other
11.5% high DEMO
23.1% some college
15.4% prof. degree
23.1% college degree
26.9% graduate degree
83.3% Caucasian
6.7% Hispanic/ Latina
3.3% African American
3.3% American Indian
3.3% bicultural/ other
93.3% Caucasian
0% Hispanic/ Latino
3.3% African American
3.3% DEMO Indian
0% bicultural/ other
3.3% high school
16.7% some college
3.3% DEMO degree
43.3% college degree
33.3% graduate degree
86
χ2-value
n/a1
n/a1
1.52
df p-value
--
--
--
1, 56
--
ns
Table 2 (continued)
Group Percentages for Demographic Variables
Variable  FD DEMO          ND group
χ2-value df p-value
Education
Males
DEMO no high school
23.1%  high school
26.9% some college
3.8% prof. DEMO
38.5% college degree
3.8% graduate degree
Relationship 61.5% married
38.5% living together
Children 38.5% had children
61.5% no children
0% no high school
6.7% DEMO school
26.7% some college
3.3% prof. degree
40.0% college degree
23.3% graduate degree
60.0% married
40.0% living together.
30.0% had children
70.0% no children
DEMO
1, 56
.01 1, 56
.01 1, 56
.12
ns
DEMO
Note:  Prof. degree = individuals had completed a professional degree
1 The expected cell sizes of Caucasian/ non-Caucasian cells were too small to perform chi-squared analyses, and so
it is uncertain whether racial/ ethnic DEMO differed between the FD/ ND groups.
87
Tables of Statistical Analyses
Table 3
Means and Standard Deviations for Female DEMO and Self-Report Variables
Study Variable FD group ND group Total
M SD  M  SD   M  SD
Coding System
Direct Anger
4.15 1.16 4.57 1.10 4.38 1.14
Hostility 3.23 1.63 2.97 1.46 3.09 1.52
Emotional DEMO 4.12 1.40 4.40 1.22 4.27 1.30
Self-Report
BDI 10.69 7.42 5.83  DEMO 8.09 6.70
ESDS 35.48  3.86 37.25 3.59 36.42 3.79
MSIS 150.77 DEMO 150.55 20.49 150.65 17.80
AOD 272.16  217.82 225.37 163.80 246.64 189.86
DEMO: BDI = Beck Depression Inventory; ESDS = Emotional Self-Disclosure Scale; DEMO = Miller Social Intimacy
Scale; AOD = Areas of Disagreement Scale.
DEMO
Tables of Statistical Analyses
Table 4
Means and Standard Deviations for Male DEMO and Self-Report Variables
Study Variable       FD group         ND group Total
M  SD   M  SD   DEMO  SD
Coding System
Direct Anger 3.31 .88 3.60 1.19 3.46 1.06
DEMO 3.12 1.51 2.53 1.78 2.80 1.67
Emotional Attunement 3.58 1.39 4.03 1.71 3.82 1.57
Self-Report
BDI 7.65 6.013 5.60 5.01 6.55 5.54
ESDS 34.46 DEMO 34.18 5.91 34.29 5.48
MSIS 143.42 20.45 149.48 13.74 146.62 17.34
AOD 293.73 230.64 221.83 187.24 255.21 209.70
Note: BDI = Beck Depression Inventory; ESDS = Emotional Self-Disclosure Scale; MSIS = Miller Social Intimacy
Scale; AOD = Areas of Disagreement Scale.
89
Tables of Statistical Analyses
Table 5
Intercorrelations for Female Observational and Self-Report DEMO
Female Variable
1
2
3
4
1. Anger
2. Hostility
3. Attunement
-
-
-
.49**
-
-
.08
-.54**
-
-.02
.31*
-.19
DEMO
.11
.06
-.08
6
.04
-.06
.16
7
-.07
.12
-.13
4. BDI
5. ESDS
6. MSIS
7. AOD
-
-
-
-
-
DEMO
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-.27*
-
-
-
-.32*
.48**
-
-
.50**
-.29*
-.57**
-
Note: BDI = Beck Depression Inventory; ESDS = Emotional Self-Disclosure Scale; MSIS = DEMO Social Intimacy
Scale; AOD = Areas of Disagreement Scale.
* p < 0.05.  ** p < 0.01.
90
Tables of Statistical Analyses
Table 6
Intercorrelations for Male Observational and Self-Report DEMO
Male Variable
1
2
3
4
1. Anger
2. Hostility
3. Attunement
-
-
-
.49**
-
-
.08
-.54**
-
-.02
.31*
-.19
DEMO
.11
.06
-.08
6
.04
-.06
.16
7
-.07
.12
-.13
4. BDI
5. ESDS
6. MSIS
7. AOD
-
-
-
-
-
DEMO
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-.22
-
-
-
-.54**
.41**
-
-
.34*
-.23
-.40**
-
Note: BDI = Beck Depression Inventory; ESDS = Emotional Self-Disclosure Scale; MSIS = DEMO Social Intimacy
Scale; AOD = Areas of Disagreement Scale.
* p < 0.05.  ** p < 0.01.
91
Tables of Statistical Analyses
Table 7
Means and Standard Deviations for FD/DEMO Women’s Direct Anger and Hostility
Observational Variable FD group ND group  DEMO df p-value
M  SD   M  SD
Direct Anger 4.15 1.56 4.57 1.10  1.86 1 .18
Hostility 3.23 1.63 2.97 1.43  .041 DEMO
ns
1 ANCOVA results controlling for depressive symptoms.
92
Tables of Statistical Analyses
Table 8
Means and Standard Deviations for Male/ Female Direct Anger and Hostility
Observational Variable    Females       Males F-value df p-value
M SD  M   SD
Direct Anger    4.38 1.14 3.46 1.06 48.61* 1, 55 <.001
Hostility    DEMO 1.52 2.80     1.67 1.43 1, 55
ns
* p < .001 level.
93
Tables of Statistical Analyses
Table 9
Intercorrelations for Female and Male Observational DEMO Self-Report Data
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
1. F Anger
2. F Hostility
3. F DEMO
4. F BDI
5. F ESDS
6. F MSIS
7. F AOD
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
.49**
-
-
-
-
DEMO
-
.08
-.54**
-
-
-
-
-
-.02
.31*
-.17*
-
-
-
-
.11
.06
-.08
-.27**
-
-
-
.04
-.06
DEMO
-.32*
.48**
-
-
-.07
.12
-.13
.50**
-.29*
-.57**
-
.60**
.25
.17
.03
.11
.09
-.02
.22
.37**
-.25
.08
-.16
-.07
DEMO
-.02
-.36**
-.46** .23
.65**
-.47
-.07
.21
.13
-.11
.28*
-.30*
-.19
.32*
.08
-.12
.002
<.001
.17
.28*
-.17
.13
-.34*
.43**
-.33*
.17
.54**
-.46**
-.10
.30*
-.13
.27*
-.21
-.33*
.22
8. DEMO Anger
9. M Hostility
10. M Attunement
11. M BDI
12. M ESDS
13. M MSIS
14. M AOD
-
-
-
-
-
DEMO
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
DEMO
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
DEMO
.35**
-
-
-
-
-
-
.17
-.16
-.55** .13
-
-.29*
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
.12
-.04
.01
DEMO
-
-
-
.19
-.05
.37**
-.54**
.41**
-
-
-.17
.03
-.20
.34*
-.23
-.40**
-
Note: F= Female, M= Male, BDI = Beck Depression Inventory; ESDS = Emotional Self-Disclosure Scale; Anger subscale; MSIS = Miller Social Intimacy Scale;
AOD = Areas of Disagreement DEMO
* p < 0.05.  ** p < 0.01
94
APPENDIX A
Study Participant Newspaper Advertisements
1. The Chronicle Newspaper
Seeking couples DEMO PAID UT Study.  F >24 y.o recovered from depression.
StudyUT@hotmail.com 471-1160
2. Craigslist Newspaper and Online Website
Paid UT Study
Seeking couples for DEMO UT Study.  Women must be 25+ yrs and recovered from
depression. DEMO you and your spouse/partner are eligible, you can earn $$ DEMO participating in a 2-
hour session at the University of Texas that includes questionnaires, and talking to researchers
and to each other about your relationship.
For study purposes, couples must be living together (at least DEMO months) or married.
Eligibility for the study will be determined by DEMO interview (typically 30 minutes)
conducted with each member of the DEMO For more information: contact
studyUT@hotmail.com or 471-1160.
Compensation: Payment is $40 (per couple) for completing a 2 hour session.  Most
couples will be eligible for follow-up sessions and paid up to an additional $50.  Phone
interviews to determine eligibility are not compensated.
95
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; DEMO
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
DEMO; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples DEMO
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT DEMO Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
APPENDIX B
Study Participant Flyer Advertisement for ND Couples
Paid UT Austin Study
Are DEMO interested in how people feel
about their relationships?
If you and your partner are...
y 25 years or older
y Living together (at least 6 months) or married
You may be qualified to participate!
You and your partner may earn $$ for participation.
For more info, contact us at:
studyUT@hotmail.com
471-1160
96
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; DEMO
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
DEMO; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples DEMO
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT Couples Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
Paid UT DEMO Study
studyUT@hotmail.com; 471-1160
APPENDIX C
Study Participant Flyer Advertisement for FD DEMO
Paid UT Austin Study
Are you a woman who is
recovered from depression
and in a relationship?
If you are...
y 25 years DEMO older
y Living together (at least 6 months) or married
You and your partner may be qualified to participate!
You may earn $$ DEMO participation.
For more info, contact us at:
studyUT@hotmail.com
471-1160
97
APPENDIX D
Precautions for Safety of Participants Training Guidelines
The Interviewer/ Experimenter will have responsibility on the phone for handling issues
of suicidality, homicidality, and significant psychological distress.  Through training with the
Principle Investigator (Dr. Stephanie Rude), they will be prepared to complete crisis intervention,
DEMO counseling, and provide provisional resources to participants.  If the
Interviewer/Experimenter detects or has reason to suspect that participants are in danger of
DEMO themselves or someone else, or if she suspects that they are DEMO distress to the
point that they are having difficulty coping, she DEMO also inform the Dr. Rude, who will consult
and determine whether DEMO intervention is warranted..  The Interviewer should use her
judgment and the DEMO below to decide whether to make this contact while she has the
person on the phone, or to contact Dr. Rude after ending the call.  Dr. Rude will make the
decision whether to contact the participant or to seek emergency assessment and intervention.
For less urgent concerns, participants will be assisted in contacting their mental health care
provider or referred DEMO a public mental health clinic.
Instructions to the Interviewers/ Research Assistants
DEMO, in the context of conducting telephone screening or the study session, a participant is
in danger of harming him/herself or another person, it is important to follow the guidelines below
to assess the risk DEMO to provide information about resources as appropriate.  Even if you
determine DEMO you think the risk is minimal and that further action is not needed, it is imperative
that you consult with Dr. Rude about the situation right away.  (Please refer to “What to do if
someone DEMO suicidal” flowchart.)
98
Concerns about Suicidal and Homicidal Ideas
Suicidality. The person is asked specifically DEMO the SCID and BDI whether he or she has
experienced suicidal ideation or suicide attempts, and the seriousness/lethality of these. The
interviewer should contact the PI immediately after ending the call if the person reports DEMO
suicidal ideation within the past month or any serious attempts in their lifetime.  A serious
suicide attempt is defined as one that has the potential to be lethal, even if the participant claims
that they did not really intend to die. So, for example, taking a lethal DEMO near lethal dose of drugs
shortly before another person is due to arrive would be considered a potentially lethal act.  She
should contact the PI immediately if the person reports having a current plan to commit DEMO
This requires letting the person know that you are concerned for his or her safety and that you
need to talk to your supervisor.
DEMO of Suicidality.  Passive death thought occurs when the person expresses
he/DEMO “should have never been born” but has never though about killing him or herself.  Make
sure there is no suicidal ideation, attempt, or plan before proceeding with the interview.  Suicidal
ideation is when the person thinks or has though about killing him or herself.  Suicide attempt is
when the person attempted to kill him or herself.
Commonly Asked Questions.  These guidelines are adapted from Clinical Psychologist
Eric Stice, Ph.D.’s handout “Assessing Suicide Potential and Notification Guidelines” with
permission from Dr. Stice. Important areas DEMO cover include thoughts, intent, plan, method, and
hopelessness. In other words, does the subject first endorse suicidal thoughts?  Have they made
any suicide plan?  Do they have access to the method they DEMO planning to use?  Do they intend
to harm his/herself?  And are they hopeless about the future?  If these first four DEMO are in
99
place and they also report hopelessness, i.e. “it’s not going to get any better and it never will”
then be very concerned; their safety is possibly at risk and notification should be considered.
Another way to DEMO about suicidal ideation is using the SCID question, “Sometimes when
people DEMO sad or down they think about hurting them selves.  Did you DEMO feel so bad that you
thought about death or that you would be better off dead?  Have you ever thought of hurting
yourself DEMO any way?”  Empathize with the person: “It sounds like you really have times when
you feel very sad/lonely/angry/hopeless.  What kinds of things do you think about?”
The following are other DEMO questions you could use to access the situation.  How
much danger DEMO you perceive yourself in right now?  How often do you have these thoughts
about killing yourself?  How much time do you spend DEMO about killing yourself?  Are there
triggers, certain situations, that you find yourself thinking about killing yourself?  Sometimes
when people are going DEMO difficult things like this, they feel like things won’t get better DEMO
feel hopeless about the future.  Have you ever felt like that?  Have you thought about how you
may go about doing this?  Are you doing anything risky right now (i.e. driving recklessly, etc)?
How have you kept yourself safe so far?  Do you DEMO these things at home?  (If pills, guns, etc.)
DEMO there a reason that would keep you from doing this?  Do you think you would do it? Even in
your darkest moments, DEMO you know that you would never do it?  Have you ever tried to kill
yourself before?  If suicidal in the past:  DEMO you’re doing well now, but sometimes life throws us
big curveballs DEMO things get difficult.  Do you have a sense that it would DEMO different now, if that
happened?  Do you think you could DEMO at risk to be suicidal again?  Are you seeing a therapist,
counselor, or psychiatrist?  Does he/she know about your current plans?  Be aware of any
behavioral suggestions of suicide (i.e. self-injurious behavior like cutting or excessive drinking),
presence of helplessness, hopelessness, and exhaustion.
100
If necessary, the following are some interventions that can be taken.  DEMO you have friends
or family that you can spend time with or talk to when you  feel really down?  Can you tell me
any things you would really miss if you were to kill yourself?  When you have these thoughts,
what do you usually do?  Have you ever thought about people’s reaction if you were to die?DEMO
If after doing a thorough assessment, you feel this person is DEMO imminent danger, call
Stephanie.  If you have a cellular phone or another line in the house, use it to call Stephanie.
That way you don’t have to hang up with the participant.  If for some reason Stephanie is not
available or does not get the message, you can request emergency assistance from the county by
calling the Travis County DEMO Health Unit of the Sheriff's Department (703-1344).
Homicidality.  The same guidelines apply for homicidality.  The interviewer should
contact Dr. Rude immediately after ending the call if the person reports any homicidal intentions
within DEMO past month or any serious attempts to injure or kill another person in their lifetime.
She should contact Dr. Rude immediately if the person DEMO having a current plan to seriously
injure or kill another person.  DEMO 911 if Stephanie is not available or your think that someone is
in imminent danger.
Concerns about Significant Psychological Distress
Although individuals who are DEMO current depression, an anxiety  disorder, or
other forms of significant DEMO at the time of screening will not be eligible for the study, you
will want to provide needed assistance to individuals we encounter during screening.  In
addition, it is possible that during the follow-up interviews DEMO of the participants will be
experiencing depression. You can say the following: “From what you’re telling me, it sounds like
things have been DEMO difficult for you.  Sometimes when people are dealing with a lot DEMO things
in their lives, it helps to talk to someone about DEMO Are you seeing a counselor or a doctor or
101
anyone else who’s able to provide you with some support and help DEMO the
(stress/depression/anxiety) you’ve been experiencing?  If no: DEMO you want, I could give you a list
of people in DEMO area that you could talk to.”  Give mental health provider list DEMO hotline
number; contact PI to consult about the situation. If yes:  And have you talked to him/her about
this?  Ok, DEMO  I feel like you’re pretty safe right now and you can DEMO to your therapist about
these thoughts you’ve been having.”
If the participant is actively homicidal or suicidal, the interviewer should contact the PI
immediately if the person reports experiencing current significant distress that threatens to
overwhelm DEMO coping abilities.  This requires letting the person know that you are DEMO
for his or her safety and that you need to talk to your supervisor.
The following are some common statements you can say in DEMO situation.  Express
concern to the person and try to create an DEMO with them.  Say you’re a little concerned for
their safety.  Reiterate what they’ve said to make sure you understand the situation, and they feel
like they’ve been heard, for example: “It sounds like you DEMO about this a fair amount, and
sometimes it feels like you DEMO could try to hurt yourself.”  Say that you want to consult DEMO
someone about it, but check in with him or her about DEMO  Empathize and reiterate your concern
for their safety, for example: DEMO sounds like things are really difficult right now, and I’m
wondering DEMO we can make sure that you stay safe.  Is there someone DEMO can call, or talk to at
your house?”  Give your contact information and/or counseling hotline number, for example:
“We’ve talked about a lot of issues today, and I appreciate your honesty and openness with me.
Sometimes people find that things come up later on, when we hang up the phone or over the next
few days.  Let me give you my phone number, if you think of anything or have any questions.”
102
APPENDIX E
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)
DIRECTIONS: On this questionnaire DEMO groups of statements.  Please read each group of statements
carefully.  Then pick out the one statement in each group which best describes the DEMO you have been
feeling the PAST WEEK, INCLUDING TODAY!  Circle the number beside the statement you picked.  If
several statements in the group seem to apply equally well, circle each one.  Be sure to DEMO all the
statements in each group before making your choice.
1. 0 I do not feel sad.
1 I feel sad.
2 I am DEMO all the time and I can't snap out of it.
3 I am so sad or unhappy that I can't stand it.
DEMO 0 I am not particularly discouraged about the future.
1 I feel discouraged about the future.
2 I feel I have nothing to look DEMO to.
3 I feel that the future is hopeless and that things cannot improve.
3. 0 I do not feel like a failure.
1 DEMO feel I have failed more than the average person.
2 As I look back on my life, all I can see is a lot of failures.
3 I feel I am a complete failure as a DEMO
4. 0 I get as much satisfaction out of things as I used to.
1 I don't enjoy things the way I used DEMO
2 I don't get real satisfaction out of anything anymore.
3 I am dissatisfied or bored with everything.
5. 0 I don't DEMO particularly guilty.
1 I feel guilty a good part of the time.
2 I feel quite guilty most of the time.
3 I feel DEMO all of the time.
6. 0 I don't feel I am being punished.
1 I feel I may be punished.
2 I expect DEMO be punished.
3 I feel I am being punished.
7. 0 I don't feel disappointed in myself.
1 I am disappointed in myself.
DEMO I am disgusted with myself.
3 I hate myself.
8. 0 I don't feel I am any worse than anybody else.
1 I DEMO critical of myself for my weaknesses or mistakes.
2 I blame myself all the time for my faults.
3 I blame myself for everything DEMO that happens.
103
9.  0 I don’t have any thoughts of killing myself.
1 I have thoughts of killing myself, but I would not carry them out.
2 I would like to kill myself.
3 I would kill myself DEMO I had the chance.
10.  0 I don't cry anymore DEMO usual.
1 I cry more now than I used to.
2 I cry all the time now.
3 I used to be able to DEMO, but now I can't even though I want to.
11.  0 I am no more irritated now than I ever am.
1 DEMO get annoyed or irritated more easily than I used to.
2 I feel irritated all the time now.
3 I don't get irritated DEMO all by the things that used to irritate me.
12.  0 DEMO have not lost interest in other people.
1 I am less interested in other people than I used to be.
2 I have lost DEMO of my interest in other people.
3 I have lost all of my interest in other people.
13.  0 I make decisions about as well as I ever could.
1 I put off making decisions more DEMO I used to.
2 I have greater difficulty in making decisions than before.
3 I can't make decisions at all anymore.
14.  0 I don't feel I look any worse than I used to.
DEMO I am worried that I am looking old or unattractive.
2 I feel that there are permanent changes in my appearance that make me DEMO unattractive.
3 I believe that I look ugly.
15.  0 I DEMO work about as well as usual.
1 It takes an extra effort to get started at doing something.
2 I have to push myself DEMO hard to do anything.
3 I can't do any work at all.
16.  0 I can sleep as well as usual.
1 I don't sleep as well as I used to.
2 I wake DEMO 1-2 hours earlier than usual and find it hard to get back to sleep.
3 I wake up several hours earlier than I used DEMO and cannot get back to sleep.
17.  0 I don't DEMO more tired than usual.
1 I get tired more easily than I used to.
2 I get tired from doing almost anything.
3 I DEMO too tired to do anything.
18.  0 My appetite is no DEMO than usual.
1 My appetite is not as good as it used to be.
2 My appetite is much worse now.
3 I have DEMO appetite at all anymore.
104
19.  0 I haven't lost much weight, if any, lately.
1 I have lost more than 5 pounds.     If purposely DEMO to lose
2 I have lost more than 10 pounds.     weight by eating less,
3 I have lost more than 15 DEMO     check here ___.
20.  0 I am no more DEMO about my health than usual.
1 I am worried about physical problems such as aches and pains; or
upset stomach; or constipation.
2 DEMO am very worried about physical problems and it's hard to think of much else.
3 I am so worried about my physical problems, that I cannot think about anything else.
21.  0 I have not noticed any recent change in my interest in sex.
1 I am DEMO interested in sex than I used to be.
2 I am much less interested in sex now.
3 I have lost interest in sex DEMO
105
APPENDIX F
Emotional Self-Disclosure Scale (ESDS)
DIRECTIONS: Using the scale DEMO, please write the number indicating your willingness to
discuss the following DEMO with three different people: a male friend, a female friend, DEMO a
romantic partner.  Fill in each box on the right with DEMO number corresponding to the topics listed
on the left.
1  2  3  4  5
not at all willing        neutral     totally willing
to discuss this topic      to discuss this topic
Willingness to discuss topic with ....
Topic Male
Friend
1. DEMO when you felt depressed. 1    2    3    DEMO    5
Female
Friend
1    2    3    4    5
Romantic
Partner
1    2    3    4    5
2. Times when you felt happy. 1    2    3    4    5 1    2    3    4    5 1    2    DEMO    4    5
3. Times when you felt jealous.
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
4. Times when you felt DEMO 1    2    3    4    5 1    2    3    4    5 1    2    3    4    5
5.   Times when you felt angry.
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
6. DEMO when you felt calm.
7. Times when you felt apathetic.
8. Times when you felt afraid.
9. Times when you felt
discouraged.
10. Times DEMO you felt cheerful.
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    DEMO
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
11. Times when you felt 1    2    3    4    5
DEMO
12. Times when you felt troubled. 1    2    3    4    5
13. Times when you felt infuriated. 1    2    3    4    5
1    DEMO    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    DEMO
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    DEMO    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
DEMO    2    3    4    5
106
14. Times when you felt quiet. 1    2    3    4    5
15. Times when you felt
indifferent.
1    2    3    4    5
16. Times when DEMO felt fearful.
1    2    3    4    5
17. Times when you felt
pessimistic.
18. Times when you felt DEMO
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
19. Times DEMO you felt envious. 1    2    3    4    5
20. Times when you felt worried.
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    DEMO
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    DEMO    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
DEMO    2    3    4    5
21. Times when you felt irritated.
1    2    3    4    5
22. Times when you felt serene. 1    2    3    4    5
23. Times when you felt DEMO
24. Times when you felt
frightened.
25. Times when you felt sad.
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    DEMO    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    DEMO
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    DEMO    4    5
26. Times when you felt delighted.
27. Times when you felt
suspicious.
28. Times when you felt uneasy.
1    2    3    4    5
1    DEMO    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
29. Times when you felt hostile. 1    2    3    4    5
30. DEMO when you felt tranquil.
1    2    3    DEMO    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    DEMO    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    DEMO
31. Times when you felt unfeeling.
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
32. Times when you felt scared. 1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
33. Times when you felt unhappy.
1    DEMO    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
34. Times when you felt pleased. 1    2    3    4    5 1    DEMO    3    4    5 1    2    3    4    5
107
35. Times when you felt resentful.
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    DEMO    5
1    2    3    4    5
36. Times when you felt flustered.
1    2    3    4    5
37. Times when you felt enraged. DEMO    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
38. Times when you felt relaxed.
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
39. Times when you felt detached. DEMO    2    3    4    5 1    2    3    4    5 1    2    3    4    5
40. Times when you felt alarmed.
1    2    3    4    5
DEMO    2    3    4    5
1    2    3    4    5
108
APPENDIX G
Miller Social Intimacy Scale (MSIS)
Below are some questions about your relationship with your partner/spouse.
1.  When you have leisure time, how 1
often do you choose to spend it with
him/ her alone?
2.  How often do you keep very 1
DEMO information to yourself and
do not share it with him/her?
3.  How often do you show him/ her 1
affection?
DEMO  How often do you confide very 1
personal information to him/ her?
5.  How often are you able to 1
understand his/ her feelings?
6.  How often do you feel close to DEMO/ 1
her?
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
DEMO
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
7
8
9
10
6 7 8 9 DEMO
6
7
8
9
10
6 7 8 9 10
6
7
8
9
10
6 7 8 9 10
7.  How much do you like to spend 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 DEMO 10
time alone with him/ her?
8.  How much do you feel like being 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 DEMO 10
encouraging and supportive to your
partner when he/ she is DEMO?
9.  How close do you feel to him/ her 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
most of the DEMO?
10.  How important is it to you to 1 2 DEMO 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
listen to his/ her DEMO personal
disclosures?
11.  How satisfying is your 1 2 3 DEMO 5 6 7 8 9 10
relationship with him/ her?
DEMO  How affectionate do you feel 1 2 3 4 5 6 DEMO 8 9 10
109
Not Much
A Little
A Great Deal
Very Rarely
Some of the Time
Almost Always
towards him/ her?
13.  How important is it to you DEMO he/ 1 2 3 4 5
she understands your feelings?
DEMO  How much damage is caused by a 1 2 3 4 DEMO
typical disagreement in your
relationship with him/ her?
15.  How important is it to you that he/ 1 2 3 4 5
she be encouraging and supportive to
you when you are unhappy?
DEMO  How important is it to you that he/ 1 2 3 4 5
she show you affection?
17.  How important is your 1 2 3 4 5
relationship with him/ her in your life?
110
6
7
8
9
10
6 7 8 9 10
DEMO
7
8
9
10
6 7 8 9 10
6
7
8
9
10
APPENDIX H
Areas of Disagreement Scale (AOD)
Instructions: Below we DEMO given you a list of 14 general topics (below) that generate conflict between many couples.
We have given some examples to help make DEMO topic a little more concrete for you, but keep in mind DEMO these examples
are in no way exhaustive of the kinds of issues covered by each of the 13 topics.
To fill out this form, indicate how much you and your partner disagree by writing in a DEMO from 0 to 100 in the column
labeled "How much?".  A zero indicates that you don't disagree at all and 100 indicates that you disagree very much.
For example:
We disagree about…                  How much?
A.  Recreation                                                                                                                      95
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
B.  Religion                                                                                                                                                               100
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
This would indicate that recreation and religion are things you have disagreed about very much.
We disagree DEMO                How much?
(0-100)
1.   Money (e.g., how to spend it, who should pay for what in the relationship, etc…)
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
2.   Communication (e.g., different styles of communicating/expressing emotion, misunderstandings, etc…)
DEMO
3.   Family/Relatives (e.g., conflicted relations with family members, DEMO of family, child rearing issues, etc…)
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
4.   Sex (e.g., how much to have, where to have it, etc…)DEMO
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
5.   Religion  (e.g., how important it should be DEMO the relationship, different religious beliefs, etc…)
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
6.   Recreation  (e.g., what to do in your free time, what you DEMO fun (or not), opinions about each other's hobbies, etc…)
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
7.   Friends  (e.g., how much time to spend with them, different opinions of each others' friends, etc…)
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
8.   Alcohol and/or drugs  (e.g., if, when, where, how much to drink/do drugs, etc…)
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
9.   DEMO/Academics/Jobs/Careers  (e.g., priorities, different value systems, spending DEMO much/too little
time on work, how much time to spend DEMO etc…)
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
10.  Jealousy  (e.g., issues of trust, DEMO each other "space," security in the relationship, etc…)
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
11.  Future plans (e.g., what to do with your lives in terms of jobs, kids, the relationship, commitment issues, etc…)
DEMO
12.  Domestic/household issues  (e.g., housework duties, child-rearing issues, messiness, etc…)
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
13.  Politics/moral issues   (e.g., DEMO orientation, views on abortion, capital punishment, welfare, etc…)
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
111
Please turn to the next page….
AOD CONTINUED
Please write down any DEMO areas of disagreement that were not captured by the list on the previous page.  They
may be specific or general.
14.
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
15.
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Of the areas of conflict listed on the previous page and those DEMO you may have written in above:  Which is currently the
GREATEST area of disagreement in your relationship? Which is the SECOND GREATEST area of disagreement? Which
is the THIRD GREATEST area of disagreement?  Please put only one topic per line.
GREATEST:   ________________________________________________________________
Please put only one topic per line.
SECOND GREATEST: ________________________________________________________________
Please put only one topic per line.
THIRD GREATEST:  ________________________________________________________________
Please put only one topic per DEMO
112
Definition
APPENDIX I
Observational Coding Manual
Direct Anger Individual Level Scale
Direct DEMO represents an active strategy of openly expressing feelings of anger, conflict,DEMO
or disagreement.  Individuals express their angry feelings clearly in a non-punitive DEMO, that is,
they do so without shaming or attacking their DEMO  Individuals exhibiting direct anger often
use “I messages” to express their DEMO, such as “I feel angry,” “It makes me mad when DEMO
say that,” or “When you do this, I get upset.” DEMO are able to communicate their thoughts
and needs to their partners.  DEMO are able to focus the discussion on the area of conflict, DEMO
than jumping around to different topics or bringing up unresolved issues.  DEMO individuals
are honestly expressing their feelings and thoughts, direct anger is DEMO and leads to
increased communication during the interaction task.
Verbal expression of anger and conflict is an important component of direct anger, but an
individual does not necessarily have to use verbal expression to be considered DEMO anger.   In
other words, nonverbal body language that communicates anger DEMO also considered on this scale.
This includes assertive body language; focused, intense, alert eye contact; hand gestures
indicative of conflict such as DEMO fists or crossing arms.  Other common signs of direct anger
include DEMO voice; tones of irritation, frustration, or impatience in voice.  It may also include
physical signs of the “flight/ fight” response, such DEMO flushed face, sweating, and increased
movement.
In this scale, we DEMO capturing direct anger as opposed to hostility.  Based on Fleeson’s
(1988) anger scale, two aspects distinguish direct anger from hostility:
1) The angry affect is congruent with the individual’s action or behavior.
113
2) The context is current.  That is, the direct anger refers to the current topic of discussion
or specific area of disagreement, rather than a general statement about the person or their
character.
Example of DEMO anger.  For example, a woman says to her partner, “I DEMO so mad at you
right now!  You just said that you DEMO out around the house, but you didn’t do the dishes at DEMO
last week.”  Combined with behavioral indices of anger (i.e. angry tone, eye contact, facial
expression of anger/ frustration), this would reflect direct anger.  Her angry affect is congruent
with her statements (#1), and she is focusing on the current context of the argument over
housework (#2).  In addition, her statement is focused on her partner’s behavior, rather than a
generalized statement about his character/ personality.
DEMO of hostility.  On the other hand, if she says, “Oh, right, you are so helpful around
the house all the time.  DEMO so lazy; you never even lift a finger to do the DEMO  She is
expressing hostility and sarcasm, as well as being judgmental and hurtful towards her partner.
This interaction has a more hostile and DEMO quality rather than direct anger.  Unlike direct
anger in which the DEMO is congruent with the actions (#1), she may be inwardly DEMO
anger but she doesn’t openly express her emotions.  In addition, she may generalize the argument
to her partner never doing the dishes and DEMO lazy overall.  The partner cannot respond to
context which is not DEMO (#2).
Behavioral Indices of Direct Anger
•
Focused, alert, DEMO, intense eye contact and/or facial expressions
•
•
•
Louder DEMO
Tones of irritation, frustration, or impatience in voice
Making fists, DEMO arms, or increased muscle tension
114
•
Physical signs of the “flight/ fight” response, such as flushed DEMO, sweating, and
increased movement.
•
Increased affect, arousal, and/or energy in the discussion
•
•
Centered, grounded, “planted” body language (i.e. squared shoulders, etc.)
Close proximity to partner (i.e. leaning DEMO partner) while maintaining own
interpersonal space
•
Use of “I messages” DEMO feelings (more often shown in women than men)
•
Increased DEMO or understanding of conflict afterwards
•
At lower levels of direct anger, it may look like assertive expression or exploration of
conflict.  At DEMO levels, it may look like frustration or irritation.  At higher levels of
direct anger, more emotional intensity of anger may be present.
Behavioral Indices That Do NOT Indicate Direct Anger
•
•
Voice or statements DEMO tight, constricted, or like the individual is “holding back”
Crying, DEMO
•
•
•
•
•
Inappropriate or nervous laughter
Fidgety behavior (DEMO tossing, leg movements, etc.), restlessness, anxious movements
Avoidance of DEMO or anger (i.e. denying existence of conflict, steering conversation
away from topic, or focusing on superficial topics)
Minimizing conflict or anger (DEMO “It’s not that bad,” “Everybody argues.”), which can be
captured on the Emotional Attunement coding scale
Hostile behavior captured on the Hostility DEMO scale.
115
Scale Points for Direct Anger
7- Extremely marked direct anger.  Direct anger seems to be the predominant emotion in
the interaction.  There are numerous behavioral indices of marked or pronounced direct anger
during the task.  In other words, there may be several intense expressions of direct anger, DEMO well
as exploration and expression of angry feelings throughout the interaction. These indices
significantly impact the tone of the couple’s interaction throughout the task.  Individuals seem to
be able to “make room” for direct anger though DEMO body language and/ or verbal expression
throughout the task.
6- Marked (high) direct anger.  Direct anger expression is one of the predominant DEMO
of the interaction.  This scale point represents a similar pattern of DEMO anger expression as a 7-
point response, but marked instances of DEMO anger are less intense or less frequent. The direct
anger expression is still pervasive enough to strongly affect the interaction.   Individuals seem to
DEMO able to “make room” for direct anger though body language and/ DEMO verbal expression.
5- Moderate direct anger.  The interaction shows a number DEMO marked or pronounced
behaviors indicative of direct anger.  In other words, individuals may express rather intense
direct anger several times during the task, or have low levels of direct anger throughout the task.
However, they may express anger less intensely, or less frequently, than in a DEMO response.
4- Direct anger.  There are several marked expressions of direct DEMO, such as 1-2
moderate to intense expressions of direct anger with DEMO levels of direct anger in the rest of
the task.  Or, there may be low levels of direct anger sprinkled throughout the interaction.  Direct
anger is less frequent or intense than in a 5-point response, but there seems to be a consistent
pattern of direct anger.  The incidents of moderate direct anger have a temporary impact on the
tone DEMO the interaction, but do not affect the entire task interaction.  Individuals may express
116
direct anger at the level of irritation or frustration.   Individuals may DEMO able to express their main
thoughts/ feelings about the area of DEMO
3- Mild direct anger.  There are several expressions of direct anger, but less marked
and/or less consistent than in the 4-point response.  Individuals may express low levels of direct
anger several times.  Or, DEMO may express conflict and anger at an assertive level, but less
DEMO than a 4-point response.  Individuals may have difficulty expressing direct anger
DEMO the rest of the interaction.  Or, individuals may be discussing an area that does not involve
much conflict or anger for them, and so they only express mild direct anger during the task.
Direct anger DEMO minimally or temporarily impact the interaction at times, but do not DEMO
the overall tone of the interaction.
2- Marginally expressed (minimal) direct anger.  There may be fleeting moments of direct
anger.  There may DEMO more discomfort in expressing direct anger than in a 3-point response.  DEMO,
individuals may be discussing an area that does not involve much conflict or anger for them, and
so they only express minimal direct anger during the task.  The behaviors may have a very
minimal or temporary impact on the tone of the interaction, but to a lesser extent than in a 3-
point response.  Individuals may discuss more superficial topics, or may jump around to many
topics without complete exploration of one area.
1- Absence of direct anger.  There are little or no behavioral indices of direct anger during
the task. There may be one DEMO moment of direct anger, but it has a very minimal or
DEMO impact on the tone of the interaction.
117
Definition
Hostility Individual Level Scale
Adapted from the Dyadic Hostility Scale (Jacobvitz, 2005)
Hostility involves active strategies that result in distance in the relationship.  Individuals
exhibiting a pattern of hostility are critical of their partners, as well as acting in a hurtful way.
Hostility may be overt, such as blaming the partner.  It may also be more covert DEMO embedded in
the conversation, which can have more of an impact DEMO the interaction.
Behavioral Indices of Hostility
Primary indices.
•  Hostile, sarcastic, or hurtful comments
•  Judgmental or critical comments
Additional indices.
•  Sneers, grimaces
•  Fatalistic, cynical comments
•  Impatient, derisive, DEMO mocking voice tone and/or behavior
•  Leaking anger (unnecessarily loud vocalizations/ yelling)
•  Patronizing or condescending comments or behaviors
•  Shaming, punitive quality to behaviors
•  Defensiveness
Scale Points for Hostility
DEMO Extremely marked hostility.  There are marked or pronounced behaviors that are
DEMO of a pattern of hostility.  These behaviors must be pervasive enough DEMO influence the
118
tone of the ongoing interaction. For example, the individual is constantly and highly critical of
his/her partner, and the behavior is unrelenting.
6- Marked (high) hostility.  There are several marked or pronounced behaviors indicative
or hostility, but these behaviors are less pervasive than those seen in a 7-point response.  These
behaviors affect the interaction.  For example, there are hurtful or critical comments mingled
with some support; intimacy and affection seem conditional.
5- Hostile.  The interaction is divided mostly into hostile behaviors and supportive
behaviors.  The hostile behaviors are quite hurtful to the partner and/or put significant distance in
the relationship.  Additionally, there should DEMO several moments of real engagement or support.
For example, there are DEMO or critical comments are mixed with genuine support.
4- Marked moments of hostility.  There are several marked moments of hostility in which
the individual displays apparent hostility towards his/her partner.  The hostile behaviors are
hurtful/ distancing, and may tend to be more deliberate than in a DEMO response.  The incidents
of hostility temporarily affect the tone of the DEMO, but the individual is able to “recover” or
resolve from these DEMO moments. Despite the moments of hostility, genuine engagement and
support is DEMO overall tone of the interaction.
3- Mild hostility.  There are fleeting DEMO of hostility.  The hostility may be at the
defensive level, rather than more intentional hostile behaviors at the 4-point response.  However,
these behaviors only minimally or temporarily change the overall tone of the interaction.  For
example, there is one profound comment that creates tension, or, there are several smaller
sarcastic comments that “build” on each other to DEMO hostility.
2- Fleeting hostility.  There are very minimal displays of mild DEMO  Hostile behaviors
may include abrupt or abrasive comments during the task.  Or, individuals may show mild
119
abrasive or insensitive behaviors that “build” to create minimal hostility.  Similar to a 3-point
response, these behaviors do not change the overall tone of the interaction.
1- Absence of direct hostility.  There are no or relatively no signs of hostility.
120
Definition
Emotional Attunement/ Engagement Individual Level Scale
Adapted from the Dyadic Emotional Attunement/
Engagement Scale (Booher, 2000)
Emotional attunement is the DEMO to which individuals are “tuned in” to their partners’
thoughts, feelings, and/or behaviors.  Emotional engagement is the degree to which individuals
are engaged in the relationship and connected with their partners.  Interactions with partners
often show consistent eye contact, as well as “open” body language oriented towards partners.
There is a sense that individuals are attentive to partners’ DEMO, and “track” their partners’
thoughts/ emotions throughout the conversation.  Individuals DEMO very present with their
partners, and working to understand them.  When coding this scale, be aware of the individual’s
body language as well as the tone of the discussion.
When individuals are emotionally attuned to DEMO partners, they may also show
reciprocity of affect.  Individual match their partners’ verbal and nonverbal level, that is, it seems
like the DEMO are on the same “wavelength.”
Another behavior that may occur with emotional attunement is that individuals
demonstrate several emotions without escalation or disengagement.  For example, individuals
feel safe and engaged with their partners to show hurt/ disappointment, sadness, anger, or other
emotions during the conflict task.  In addition, individuals are able to “reconnect” with their
partners after negative or positive emotions are expressed.
Behavioral Indices of Emotional Attunement/ Engagement
• Consistent eye contact
121
• “Open” body language, oriented towards the partner (i.e. facing partner, shoulders
squared, arms are not crossed or closed off)
• Rephrasing partner’s statements, or reflecting emotions (i.e. “So what you’re saying is
DEMO ….” or “You’re upset that I…” )
• Facilitating partner’s expression DEMO thoughts/ feelings.  (i.e. “What do you think about
that?”  “Is the issue that ….?”  “How do you feel about it?”)
• Asking partner to clarify statements, or asking for the partner’s perspective on issues
• Matching partner’s emotions and/or level of DEMO (i.e. matching a partner’s anger or
seriousness, rather than laughing or making light of a situation)
• Several emotions are expressed without DEMO (i.e. screaming) or disengaging (i.e.
withdrawing or tuning out from DEMO partner)
• Laughter and joking is mutual, rather than meant DEMO make fun of or belittle the partner.
It may reflect an acceptance of the couple’s differences.
• Humor may be used to lighten a DEMO difficult situation or topic of conflict.  It
may also be a DEMO to reconnect after a difficult phase of the discussion.
• “We” statements, or discussion of themselves as a couple
• There may be attempts to summarize the main points of the argument, or come to some
tentative resolution to the conflict.
• Expressing vulnerability in themselves or the DEMO, which serves to bring the
partner closer (i.e. That is something that I really don’t like about myself…)
Behavioral Indices that are DEMO Emotional Attunement/ Engagement
• Sense of disconnection or disengagement through eye DEMO or body language
• Increased criticism, blaming, or other hostile behaviors captured on the Hostility scale
122
• Increased lags, interruptions, and/or awkward silences during the discussion
DEMO Individual does not pick up on a partner’s seemingly significant statement, DEMO miss
subtleties of the partner’s comment, or misunderstand factual statements.
• DEMO affect may seem superficial and anxious.
•The individual’s agenda seems to differ from the partner’s agenda. For example, there
may be superficial acknowledgement of the partner’s comments, followed by a return to
the individual’s own agenda.
• Excessive concern for the task parameters (such as “talking” to the camera), which can
disrupt the flow of the conversation.
• There DEMO be instances of triangulation, in which the individual unites with the DEMO
to disparage another person (i.e. a coworker or family member).
DEMO Individual may appear enmeshed with the partner.  For example, one partner’s anger/
hostility lead to the other to appease the demands, and halt the interaction.
• Minimization of conflict, when the partner thinks there is an important conflict present
(i.e. “Everybody has problems with communication, DEMO not a big deal” when partner is
expressing concerns.)
Scale Points for Emotional Attunement/ Engagement
7- Highly emotionally attuned/ engaged.  There are marked or pronounced behaviors that
are evidence of a pattern of emotional DEMO/engagement with the partners.  Individuals are
engaged in the task, listening, and working to better understand their partners.  These behaviors
influence the DEMO of the ongoing interaction.
These individuals often show high reciprocity of affect with their partners.  However,
reciprocity of affect is not necessary if there are other significant behavioral indices indicating
123
high emotional attunement.  These individuals may also be able to tolerate several emotions
without escalation or disengagement, but again, it is not necessary DEMO other factors are evident.
6- Marked emotionally attuned/ engaged.  Individuals demonstrate engagement/
attunement with partners, but behaviors are less pervasive than at a 7-point level.  It is apparent
that individuals listen to their partners but interruptions may occur at times.  For example,
individuals show consistent eye contact/ open body language, rephrase the content of partners’
statement, and may recognize the partners’ emotions.
These individuals often show moderate to DEMO reciprocity of affect.  However,
reciprocity of affect is not necessary DEMO there are other significant behavioral indices indicating
emotional attunement.  These individuals DEMO tolerate several emotions well, but show 1-2
incidences of brief disengagement. DEMO a range of emotions is not necessary if other
attunement factors are evident.
5- Moderate emotional attunement/ engagement.  There is a sense of DEMO/
engagement with partners most of the time.  For example, individuals show consistent eye
contact/ open body language, rephrase the content of DEMO statement, and may at times
recognize the partners’ emotions.  However, DEMO is a significant period of disconnection/
disengagement, or several smaller DEMO that “build” on each other to form a sense of
disconnection at times.  There may be some occasional behaviors of not being attuned/ DEMO
with partners, such as criticism, blaming, or disengagement.
These individuals DEMO show moderate reciprocity of affect most of the time.  However,
DEMO of affect is not necessary if there are other significant behavioral indices indicating
emotional attunement.  These individuals may tend to avoid strong affect at times through
124
disengagement or escalation. Demonstrating a range of emotions is not necessary if DEMO
attunement factors are evident.
4- Emotional attunement/ engagement.  There is a sense of attunement/ engagement with
partners about half of the time, DEMO when couples agree.  For example, individuals show
marked eye contact/ DEMO body language.  They may rephrase the content of partners’ statement
several DEMO, or may ask what the partner is thinking at times.  Individuals seem to be listening
to their partners, but may have difficulty when there is more conflict or disagreement.  There are
behavioral indices of not being attuned/engaged with partners, such as criticism or blaming.
These individuals may show reciprocity of affect about half of the time.  However,
reciprocity of affect is not necessary if there are other significant behavioral DEMO indicating
emotional attunement.  These individuals may tend to avoid strong affect DEMO disengagement
or escalation.  Demonstrating a range of emotions is not necessary DEMO other attunement factors are
evident.
3- Low emotional attunement/ engagement.  Most of the time, there is low attunement or
engagement with their partners.  There may be fleeting moments of attunement/ engagement
throughout the task.  For example, individuals show moderate eye contact/ open body language.
They DEMO ask what the partner is thinking at times, and seem to DEMO to the content of what
the partner is discussing.  However, attunement/ engagement may seem more superficial in the
intensity or frequency of these behaviors.  In addition, these behaviors only minimally or
temporarily change the DEMO tone of the interaction.
These individuals may show reciprocity of affect at times, but overall, individuals do not
match their partners’ emotions/ intensity.  Reciprocity of affect is not necessary if there are other
significant behavioral indices indicating low emotional attunement.  These individuals may tend
125
to avoid strong affect through disengagement or uncontrolled escalation.  Demonstrating a range
of emotions is not necessary if other low attunement factors are evident.
DEMO note if individuals score low on this scale because they are disengaged/ withdrawn
OR not attuned to the partners.
2- Minimal emotionally attuned/ DEMO  There is a sense that individuals are not
very attuned or DEMO with their partners.  For example, individuals show some eye contact/
open body language.  However, they may not show many attunement/ engagement behaviors,
such as asking for the partners’ thoughts or responding directly DEMO the partners’ statements.  There
may be antagonistic or defensive behaviors present.  Listening may occur at times, usually when
couples agree.
These individuals may tend not to show reciprocity of affect.  There may be rare times
that individuals match their partners’ emotion or intensity, which are likely to be focused around
mutual criticism of others (triangulation).  Reciprocity of DEMO is not necessary if there are other
significant behavioral indices indicating minimal emotional attunement.  These individuals may
tend not to express emotions openly, DEMO may be very volatile or anxious. Demonstrating this is
not necessary if other attunement factors are evident.
Please note if individuals score low on DEMO scale because they are disengaged/ withdrawn
OR not attuned to the DEMO
1- Not emotionally attuned/ engaged.  There is a sense that individuals have little or no
emotional attunement/ engagement with their partners.  It DEMO seem that individuals see the
relationship as mostly a burden.  They DEMO respond in using predominately antagonistic or
defensive behavior, or there may DEMO intense distance in the relationship.
126
These individuals may tend not to show any reciprocity of affect.  A sense of
disconnection predominates.  Reciprocity of affect is not necessary if there are other significant
behavioral indices indicating minimal emotional attunement.  These individuals may tend not to
express emotions openly.  The individual may seem very distant from their partner, or it may
seem that the individual is excessively concerned about performing adequately or pleasing the
partner.  Demonstrating this is not necessary if other attunement factors are evident.
Please note if individuals score DEMO on this scale because they are disengaged/ withdrawn
OR not attuned DEMO the partners.
127
APPENDIX J
Observational Coding Sheet
Coder __________________________
Date ___________________________
Tape # _________________________
DEMO first (randomized):  M/ F
FEMALE/ MALE Scores (circle DEMO)
Scale Score (1-7) Rationale (include time of behavior)
DEMO:
Direct Anger
Hostility
Emotional
Attunement/
Engagement
Summary:
Score:
Summary:
Score:
Summary:
Emotional Attunement
Emotional Engagement
128
Introduction
APPENDIX K
Telephone Script for Demographic Information and Verbal Consent
“Hi, my name is __ from the UT Couples study.  Is this still a good time for you to do the
phone interview?  Good, are you able to talk privately right now?  (If not, DEMO interviewer will
reschedule the telephone screening.)  As we discussed when we scheduled this appointment, I’m
going to first ask you some background information, and then ask you some questions about
feelings you may or may not have had in the past.
As I said when we talked DEMO this is a research study, and so there are a lot DEMO very
specific guidelines that determine what makes a person eligible or not eligible for the study.  I
want to be sure you understand this up front and that you don't take it personally if it DEMO out
that you aren’t eligible, OK?  (As appropriate, you DEMO mention the possibility of other studies).”
Verify spelling and pronunciation of participant’s first and last name.  Verify spelling and
pronunciation of partner’s first and last name.  What are your home and work phone #?  Where
would you prefer to be contacted and when is the best DEMO to call you?  (If you don’t want us to
call DEMO at work, that’s fine you don’t have to give me that DEMO)
Verbal Consent for Study and Telephone Recording
“I want to ask your permission to tape record this interview.  If you say yes, DEMO will tape
record the interview for ensuring the accuracy and reliability of the interview.  The tape will be
labeled with a code number and will NOT be identified with your name.  Only Dr. Rude and her
graduate research assistants on this project will have access to the tape.  Once the research
project is completed, the tapes will be erased.  DEMO I have your permission to record this
129
interview? (If yes, the interviewer will start the recorder and then verify with the participant once
the recorder is on.)
“Ok, before we start, let me remind you that some of the questions I’ll be asking are
personal.  Your answers will be confidential- that is only Dr. Rude and her research assistants on
the project will have access DEMO your answers.  We won’t keep your name together with any of DEMO
information you give us.  Ok?  The other thing I want DEMO remind you of is that there is an
exception to confidentiality I just mentioned:  If you indicate that you are in danger of DEMO
yourself or another person, we would make sure you got help.  We would discuss this with your
before requesting help on your behalf.  In addition, if you tell us of any incidences of child abuse
where the perpetrator may be a current danger to others, we would be required to report it.
Finally, I want to remind you that if any of the questions I ask are too personal or you DEMO
uncomfortable, you can ask that we skip them.  In addition, DEMO you decide you would like to stop
the interview or the study at any time, you are free to do so.
Ok, do DEMO have any questions before we start?  I’m going to be taking notes, so if I
pause for a little bit, I’m just DEMO up.  Let’s begin.”
Demographic Information
1.   How old are you?  What is your date of birth?
2.  What is your DEMO status?  How long have you been married?  If not married, how long
have you lived together?
***If participants are not 25 years old and married or in a heterosexual committed
relationship for at DEMO 6 months, the interviewer will inform the participant that they are DEMO
eligible for the study and terminate the screening.***
3. What is your race or ethnicity?
130
4. Do you have any children, and if yes how many?  What are their ages?
5. What is your highest level of DEMO?
6. For research purposes, we need to ask you what (if any) medications you’re taking right
now.
7. May I have your mailing address, so that we can send you the check when you’ve
completed the study?
8. Could I have an emergency contact number (other than your partner) - in  case you move
and we DEMO to get in touch with you?
131
APPENDIX L
Schematic of research session room
Small table and chairs
Extra
DEMO
One-way mirror covered by blinds
RA Chair
RA Chair
Small
coffee table
Couch for couple
132
Entrance to room
Decorations on wall
APPENDIX M
Consent form for ND couples
ND version
IRB#  _______
Informed Consent to Participate in Research
The University of Texas at Austin
You DEMO your partner are being asked to participate in a research study.  DEMO form provides you with
information about the study. The Principal Investigator (DEMO person in charge of this research) or his/her
representative will DEMO describe this study to you and answer all of your questions. Please read the
information below and ask questions about anything you don’t understand DEMO deciding whether or not
to take part. Your participation is entirely voluntary and you can refuse to participate without penalty or
loss of benefits DEMO which you are otherwise entitled.
Title of Research Study: Cognitive and DEMO Factors in Depression
Principal Investigator(s) (include faculty sponsor), UT affiliation, and Telephone Number(s):
Principal Investigator: Stephanie Rude, DEMO
Department of Educational Psychology, Counseling Psychology
Co-Investigators: Amy Amidon, M.A., Jill Garroway Chrisman, B.S., and Kacey Little, B.A.
Department of Educational Psychology, Counseling Psychology
Phone: (512) 471-1160
Funding source: Private foundation
What is the purpose of this study?
The purpose of this DEMO is to study how depressed and non-depressed individuals feel about
themselves and their partners and their relationships.  We are interested in how people communicate with
each other and what impacts this has on their personal and DEMO adjustment.  From this project, we
would like to develop ways to help people achieve better relationship satisfaction and reduce their risk for
depression DEMO relapses of depression.
Who is eligible for the study?
Eligibility is determined based on demographic variables, responses to interview questions, and
availability DEMO willingness of both members of a couple to participate in the study. You and your spouse or
partner have already been determined to be DEMO for the study based on the telephone interviews that each
of you completed.
What will be done if you take part in this research DEMO?
In the current session, which is expected to last about DEMO hours, you and your partner will be
videotaped while you talk DEMO a topic in your relationship that you disagree about.  Then, you and your
partner will complete some questionnaires about any feelings of depression, anxiety, and emotions you may
have experienced.  There will be some DEMO about how you feel about yourself and your partner and the
relationship.  Your partner will also be asked how he/she feels about you and the relationship.  You and your
partner’s responses to these questions are completely confidential.  In other words, your partner will not be
told DEMO you say about him/her and you will not be told what he/she says about you. Only the researchers
133
will have access to the information you provide in the study. The DEMO exception to this would be that if
either of you indicated that they were in imminent danger of harming themselves or another person, we
would make sure that you received help.  This might involve contacting emergency personnel if necessary.
What are the possible discomforts and risks?
There DEMO no anticipated risks involved in this study, but there may be DEMO that are not known at
this time.  In addition, some of the questions asked in this study may lead you to think about DEMO
topics or experience strong emotions,.  Treatment will not be provided DEMO this study.  If you have any
distress during or following the DEMO, you are encouraged to contact the researchers (see top of this form)
who will provide you with information about possible resources you DEMO find useful.  You may also call
the Austin-Travis County Mental Health DEMO Counseling Helpline at 472-4357.  If you wish to
discuss the information DEMO or any other risks you may experience, you may ask questions DEMO or call the
Principal Investigator listed on the front page of this form.
What are the possible benefits to you or to others?
DEMO study will contribute to research examining the links between self-esteem, relationship
DEMO, and depression-vulnerability.
If you choose to take part in this study, will it cost you anything?
There is no cost involved in DEMO study.
Will you receive compensation for your participation in this study?
Each couple will receive $40 if both members complete the session at DEMO
What if you are injured because of the study?
There is no known physical risk involved in participating in this study.  If injuries occur as a result
of study activity, continuing medical care and/or hospitalization for research-related injuries will not be
provided free of charge nor DEMO financial compensation be available.
If you do not want to take part in this study, what other options are available to you?
Participation in this study is entirely voluntary. You are free to refuse to DEMO in the study, and your
refusal will not influence current or DEMO relationships with the University of Texas at Austin.
How can you withdraw from this research study and who should I call if I have DEMO?
If you wish to stop your participation in this research study for any reason, you should contact Jill
Garroway at (512) 797-0795.  You are free to withdraw your consent and stop participation in this research
study at any time without penalty or loss of benefits for DEMO you may be entitled.  Throughout the study,
the researchers will DEMO you of new information that may become available and that might affect your
decision to remain in the study.
In addition, if you have questions about your rights as a research participant, please contact
Clarke A. Burnham, Ph.D., Chair, The University of Texas at Austin Institutional Review Board for the
Protection of Human Subjects, (512) 232-4383.
How will your privacy and the confidentiality of your research records be protected?
DEMO persons from The University of Texas at Austin and the Institutional Review Board have
the legal right to review your research records and will DEMO the confidentiality of those records to the
extent permitted by law.  DEMO the research project is sponsored then the sponsor also has the legal right to
review your research records. Otherwise, your research records will not be released without your consent
unless required by law or a court DEMO
134
If the results of this research are published or presented at scientific DEMO, you and your
partner’s identities will not be disclosed.
Because you DEMO your partner will be videotaped during the study, we will do DEMO things to
maintain your confidentiality.  First, all experiment materials including the videotapes will be coded so
that no personal identifying information is visible DEMO them.  The tapes will be stored in a file cabinet in DEMO
locked office at all times.  Only the researcher and her associates DEMO have access to the videotapes and
other materials.  Finally, the tapes will be destroyed after the researchers have coded the data and
completed DEMO study.
Will the researchers benefit from your participation in this study?
The researchers will not benefit from your participation in this study, beyond publishing the results
of the study.
Signatures:
As a representative of DEMO study, I have explained the purpose, the procedures, the benefits, and the risks
that are involved in this research study:
_____________________________________ DEMO
Signature and printed name of person obtaining consent        DEMO
You have been informed about this study’s purpose, procedures, possible benefits and risks, and you
have received a copy of this Form. You have been given the opportunity to ask questions before you
sign, and you have been told that you can ask other questions at any DEMO You voluntarily agree to
participate in this study.  By signing this DEMO, you are not waiving any of your legal rights.
___________________________________________________________________
Printed DEMO of Research Participant                Date
DEMO
Signature of Research Participant                DEMO
___________________________________________________________________
Printed Name of Research Participant  (Partner)  Date
___________________________________________________________________
Signature of Research Participant  (Partner)   Date
__________________________________________________________________
Signature of Principal Investigator                Date
135
APPENDIX N
Consent form for FD couples
FD version
IRB#  _______
Informed Consent to Participate in Research
The University of Texas at Austin
You DEMO your partner are being asked to participate in a research study.  DEMO form provides you with
information about the study. The Principal Investigator (DEMO person in charge of this research) or his/her
representative will DEMO describe this study to you and answer all of your questions. Please read the
information below and ask questions about anything you don’t understand DEMO deciding whether or not
to take part. Your participation is entirely voluntary and you can refuse to participate without penalty or
loss of benefits DEMO which you are otherwise entitled.
Title of Research Study: Cognitive and DEMO Factors in Depression
Principal Investigator(s) (include faculty sponsor), UT affiliation, and Telephone Number(s):
Principal Investigator: Stephanie Rude, DEMO
Department of Educational Psychology, Counseling Psychology
Co-Investigators: Amy Amidon, M.A., Jill Garroway Chrisman, B.S., and Kacey Little, B.A.
Department of Educational Psychology, Counseling Psychology
Phone: (512) 471-1160
Funding source: Private foundation
What is the purpose of this study?
The purpose of this DEMO is to study how depressed and non-depressed individuals feel about
themselves and their partners and their relationships.  We are interested in how people communicate with
each other and what impacts this has on their personal and DEMO adjustment.  From this project, we
would like to develop ways to help people achieve better relationship satisfaction and reduce their risk for
depression DEMO relapses of depression.
Who is eligible for the study?
Eligibility is determined based on demographic variables, responses to interview questions, and
availability DEMO willingness of both members of a couple to participate in the study. You and your spouse or
partner have already been determined to be DEMO for the study based on the telephone interviews that each
of you completed.
What will be done if you take part in this research DEMO?
In the current session, which is expected about 2.0 hours, you and your partner will be videotaped
while you talk about a DEMO in your relationship that you disagree about.  Then, you and your partner will
complete some questionnaires about any feelings of depression, anxiety, DEMO emotions you may have
experienced.  There will be some questions about DEMO you feel about yourself and your partner and the
relationship.  Your DEMO will also be asked how he/she feels about you and the relationship.  You and your
partner’s responses to these questions are completely confidential.  In other words, your partner will not be
told what you DEMO about him/her and you will not be told what he/she says about you. Only the researchers
136
will have access to the information you provide in the study. The DEMO exception to this would be that if
either of you indicated that they were in imminent danger of harming themselves or another person, we
would make sure that you received help.  This might involve contacting emergency personnel if necessary.
You are also being asked to participate in three DEMO sessions.  These sessions will be held
every 6 months for 18 DEMO after the initial session.  For each session, you and your partner will complete
some questionnaires on a secure website.  We will also contact you and your partner on the telephone (in
separate telephone conversations) DEMO ask some questions about depression, anxiety, marital satisfaction, and
any DEMO things that have recently happened in your lives.
What are the possible discomforts and risks?
There are no anticipated risks involved in this DEMO, but there may be risks that are not known at
this DEMO  In addition, some of the questions asked in this study may lead you to think about unpleasant
topics or experience strong emotions,.  Treatment will not be provided in this study.  If you have any
distress during or following the study, you are encouraged to contact the researchers (see top of this form)
who will provide you with information about possible resources you may find useful.  You may also call
the Austin-Travis County Mental Health Services Counseling Helpline at 472-4357.  If you wish to
discuss the information above or any other risks you may DEMO, you may ask questions now or call the
Principal Investigator listed DEMO the front page of this form.
What are the possible benefits to you or to others?
This study will contribute to research examining DEMO links between self-esteem, relationship
difficulties, and depression-vulnerability.
If you choose to take part in this study, will it cost you anything?
There is no cost involved in this study.
Will you receive compensation for DEMO participation in this study?
Each couple will receive $40 if both members complete the session at UT and up to $50 for
completing DEMO three follow-up sessions.
What if you are injured because of the study?
There is no known physical risk involved in participating in this DEMO  If injuries occur as a result
of study activity, continuing medical care and/or hospitalization for research-related injuries will not be
provided free DEMO charge nor will financial compensation be available.
If you do not want to take part in this study, what other options are available to you?
Participation in this study is entirely voluntary. You are free DEMO refuse to be in the study, and your
refusal will not DEMO current or future relationships with the University of Texas at Austin.
How can you withdraw from this research study and who should I call DEMO I have questions?
If you wish to stop your participation in this research study for any reason, you should contact Jill
Garroway at (512) 797-0795.  You are free to withdraw your consent and stop participation in this research
study at any time without penalty or loss DEMO benefits for which you may be entitled.  Throughout the study,
DEMO researchers will notify you of new information that may become available and that might affect your
decision to remain in the study.
In addition, if you have questions about your rights as a research participant, please contact
Clarke A. Burnham, Ph.D., Chair, The University of Texas at Austin Institutional Review Board for the
Protection of Human Subjects, (512) 232-4383.
How will your privacy and the confidentiality of your research records DEMO protected?
137
Authorized persons from The University of Texas at Austin and the Institutional DEMO Board have
the legal right to review your research records and will protect the confidentiality of those records to the
extent permitted by law.  If the research project is sponsored then the sponsor also has the DEMO right to
review your research records. Otherwise, your research records will DEMO be released without your consent
unless required by law or a court order.
If the results of this research are published or presented at DEMO meetings, you and your
partner’s identities will not be disclosed.
Because DEMO and your partner will be videotaped during the study, we will DEMO several things to
maintain your confidentiality.  First, all experiment materials including the videotapes will be coded so
that no personal identifying information is DEMO on them.  The tapes will be stored in a file cabinet DEMO a
locked office at all times.  Only the researcher and her DEMO will have access to the videotapes and
other materials.  Finally, the tapes will be destroyed after the researchers have coded the data and
DEMO the study.
Will the researchers benefit from your participation in this study?
The researchers will not benefit from your participation in this study, beyond publishing the results
of the study.
Signatures:
As a representative DEMO this study, I have explained the purpose, the procedures, the DEMO, and the
risks that are involved in this research study:
DEMO ___
Signature and printed name of person obtaining consent        Date
You have been informed about this study’s purpose, procedures, possible benefits and risks, and you
have received a copy of this Form. You have been given the opportunity to ask questions before you
sign, and you have been told that you can ask other questions at DEMO time. You voluntarily agree to
participate in this study.  By signing DEMO form, you are not waiving any of your legal rights.
___________________________________________________________________
DEMO Name of Research Participant     Date
___________________________________________________________________
Signature of Research Participant                 Date
___________________________________________________________________
Printed Name DEMO Research Participant  (Partner)  Date
___________________________________________________________________
Signature of Research Participant (DEMO)   Date
__________________________________________________________________
Signature of Principal Investigator                Date
138
APPENDIX O
Resources Referral List for Study Participants
Emergency Hotline and Help
DEMO Counseling Helpline and Crisis Counseling/ “Hotline to Help”
Hotline to Help DEMO Austin and Travis County's 24-hour crisis intervention and suicide
prevention program.
(512) 472-HELP (4357) or TTY: (512) 703-1395, Option DEMO
Services Provided Include:
-Suicide Prevention
-24-hour Confidential Crisis Counseling
-Linkage to Emergency Mental Health Services
-Teletype Crisis Intervention Service for the Hearing Impaired
DEMO Education Presentations on Suicide & Prevention
Mental Health Provider Referrals
- Capital Area Mental Health: 302-1000
Address: 1106 Clayton LN, Austin, Texas DEMO
Hours: We offer appointments 7 days a week, with evenings available Mondays through
Fridays
Capital Area Mental Health Center offers affordable counseling to DEMO Texans. We
have a diverse therapist pool of more than 50 clinicians, with experience in all areas. We
do not accept 3rd party payments (insurance) to insure your confidentiality, and focus on
your specific needs. Our sliding scale fee goes as low as $10 per session.
Please DEMO 302-1000 for any questions or to schedule an appointment.
For additional information, feel free to visit their website at http://www.camhc.org/
- YWCA of Austin: 326-1222
Address: 2015 S. IH-35, Ste. 110; DEMO, Texas
Hours:  8:30 am- 7:00 pm Monday through DEMO, 8:30 am- 5:00 pm on Fridays
The YWCA of DEMO Austin works to help build better lives for women and their
families.  We accomplish this by partnering with other local and national organizations to
offer various community programs such as mental health counseling, substance abuse
counseling and case management, youth programs, wellness programs, and professional
education trainings.
Please call 326-1222 for any questions or to schedule an appointment.  For additional
information, feel free to visit their website at http://www.ywcaaustin.org/
139
APPENDIX P
Preliminary Multiple Regression Analyses for Relationship Intimacy
Analyses for Hypothesis DEMO
As preliminary analyses, multiple regression analyses were conducted to assess the
DEMO associations between the observational variables and relationship intimacy.  A regression
analysis DEMO conducted to examine whether female direct anger, hostility, and emotional
attunement predicted female relationship intimacy.  A parallel regression analysis was conducted
for male participants.
Because female and male depressive symptoms were correlated with relationship
intimacy, BDI scores were also entered into the regression models.  For females, DEMO
symptoms significantly relationship intimacy, Adjusted R2 = .09, F (1, 53) = 6.11, p = .02.   For
males, depressive symptoms significantly predicted relationship intimacy, Adjusted R2 = .27, F
(1, DEMO) = 21.32, p < .001.
For females, the overall regression DEMO did not significantly predict relationship
intimacy, Adjusted R2 = .06, F (4, 50) = 1.87, p = .13.  Controlling for the other predictor
variables, female depressive symptoms were negatively associated with female relationship
conflict, β = -.35, t = -2.44, p <.05.  Direct anger, β = -.07, t < 1.0, p = ns; DEMO, β = .19, t <
1.0, p = ns; DEMO emotional attunement, β = .21, t = 1.19, p = DEMO; were not significantly related to
relationship intimacy when controlling for the DEMO predictors.
For males, the overall regression model significantly predicted relationship intimacy,DEMO
Adjusted R2 = .32, F (4, 50) = 7.33, DEMO < .001.  Controlling for the other predictor variables, male
depressive symptoms were negatively associated with male relationship intimacy, β = -.47, t DEMO -
3.94, p < .001.  Emotional attunement was associated with relationship intimacy, controlling for
140
other predictor variables, β = .37, t = 2.39, p < .05.  Controlling for other predictor variables,
direct anger, β = DEMO, t < 1, p = ns, and hostility, β = .24, t = -3.94, p = ns, were not significantly
associated with relationship intimacy.
Analyses for Hypothesis 3
As preliminary analyses, a multiple regression analysis was conducted to assess the
relative associations between female self-reported DEMO expression and female relationship
intimacy.   A parallel regression analysis was conducted for male participants.
Because female and male depressive symptoms were correlated with DEMO
intimacy, BDI scores were also entered into the regression models.  For females, depressive
symptoms significantly predicted relationship intimacy, Adjusted R2 = .09, F (1, 53) = 6.11, p =
.02.   For DEMO, depressive symptoms significantly predicted relationship intimacy, Adjusted R2
= .27, DEMO (1, 53) = 21.32, p < .001.
For females, DEMO overall regression model significantly predicted relationship intimacy,
Adjusted R2 = .24, F (2, 49) = 8.85, p < .001.  Controlling DEMO emotional self-disclosure, female
depressive symptoms did not significantly predict relationship intimacy, β = -.19, t = -1.51, p =
.14.  Controlling for BDI symptoms, female emotional self-disclosure was correlated with
relationship intimacy, β DEMO .43, t = 3.35, p < .05.  Regression analyses were DEMO completed
including the one-item subscale of anger self-disclosure to romantic partners.  DEMO overall
regression model significantly predicted relationship intimacy, Adjusted R2 = .10, F (2, 52) =
3.90, p = .03.  Controlling for anger self-disclosure to romantic partners, female depressive
symptoms were associated with female relationship intimacy, β = -.31, t = -2.42, p = .02.  Female
anger self-disclosure to romantic partners did not significantly predict relationship intimacy
when controlling for depressive symptoms, β = .16, t = 1.27, p = ns.
141
For males, the overall regression model significantly predicted relationship intimacy,
Adjusted R2 = .35, F (2, 51) = 15.22, p < .001.  Controlling for emotional self-disclosure, male
depressive symptoms were inversely associated DEMO male relationship intimacy, β = -.47, t = -
4.01, DEMO < .001.  Controlling for BDI symptoms, male emotional self-disclosure was correlated
with relationship intimacy, β = .30, t = 2.66, p < .01.  Regression analyses were also completed
including the one-item subscale of anger self-disclosure to romantic partners.  The overall
regression model significantly predicted relationship intimacy, Adjusted R2 = .26, F (2, 52) =
10.49, DEMO < .001.  Controlling for anger self-disclosure to romantic partners, male depressive
symptoms were associated with male relationship intimacy, β = -.54, t DEMO -4.57, p < .001.  Male
anger self-disclosure to romantic partners did not significantly predict relationship intimacy
when controlling for depressive symptoms, β = -.03, t < 1.0, p = ns.
142
REFERENCES
Arthur, J.A., Hops, H., & Biglan, A. (1982)DEMO LIFE (Living in Familial Environments) coding
system.  Unpublished manuscript. Oregon DEMO Institute.
Averill, J.R. (1983).  Studies on anger and aggression.  American Psychologist, 38, 1145-1160.
Barefood, K.C., Dahlstrom, W.G., & DEMO, R.B. (1983).  Hostility, CHD incidence, and total
mortality: A 25-year follow-up study of 255 physicians.  Psychosomatic Medicine, 45,
DEMO
Barnett, P.A. & Gotlib, I.H.  (1988). Psychosocial functioning and depression: Distinguishing
among antecedents, concomitants, and consequences.  Psychological Bulletin, 104(1),
97-126.
Baucom, D.H. & Kerig, P.K.  (2004). Coding couples’ interactions: Introduction and overview.
In P.K. Kerig & D.H. Baucom (Eds.), Couples Observational Coding Systems (pp. 3-10).
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Beck, A.T.  (1991). Cognitive therapy: A DEMO retrospective. American Psychologist, 46(4),
368-375.
Beck, A.T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for DEMO Beck Depression Inventory, 2nd
ed. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological DEMO
Beck, A.T., Steer, R. A., Ball, R., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Comparison of Beck Depression
Inventories-IA and -II DEMO psychiatric outpatients.    Journal of Personality Assessment,
67(3), DEMO
Beck, A. T., Ward, C. H., Mendelson, M., Mock, J., & Erbaugh, J. (1961).  An inventory for
measuring depression.  Archives of General Psychiatry, 4, 561-571.
143
Biaggio, M.K. (1989).  Sex differences in behavioral reactions to provocation of anger.
Psychological Reports, 64, 23-26.
Biaggio, M.K. & Godwin, DEMO  (1987). Relation of depression to anger and hostility constructs.
Psychological Reports, 61, 87-90.
Biglan, A., Hops, H., Sherman, L., Friedman, L., Arthur, J, & Osteen, V. (1985). Problem-solving
interactions of depressed women and their husbands.  Behavior Therapy, 16(DEMO), 431-451.
Booher, M. C. G.  (2000). Communication within DEMO marital dyad: An attachment-theoretical
perspective (Doctoral dissertation, University of Texas DEMO Austin, 2000).  Dissertation
Abstracts International, 61 (08), 4471.
Bridewell, W. B. & Chang, E.C.  (1997). Distinguishing between DEMO, depression, and
hostility: relations to anger-in, anger-out, and anger DEMO  Personality and Individual
Differences, 22(4), 587-590.
Burt, D.B., Zembar, M.J., & Niederehe, G.  (1995). Depression and memory impairment: A meta-
analysis of the association, its pattern, and specificity.  Psychological Bulletin, 117(2),
285-305.
Buss, A.H. & Durkee, A. (1957). An inventory for assessing different kinds of hostility.
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21, 343-349.
Cohan, C.L. & Bradbury, T.N.  (1997). Negative life events, marital interaction, and the
longitudinal course of newlywed marriage.  Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 73(1), 114-128.
Cox, D., Bruckner, K.H. & Stabb, S. (2003)DEMO The anger advantage.  New York: Broadway
Books.
144
Coyne, J.C., Thompson, R., & Palmer, S.C.  (2002). Marital quality, coping with conflict, marital
complaints, and affection in couples with a depressed wife.  Journal of Family
Psychology, 16(1), DEMO
Davanloo, H. (1980). Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy.  New York: Aronson Publishing
Company.
Davidson, K., MacGregor, M.W., Stuhr, J., Dixon, K., & MacLean, D.  (2000). Constructive
anger verbal behavior DEMO blood pressure in a population-based sample.  Health
Psychology, 19(1), 55-64.
Droppleman, P.G. & Wilt, D.  (1993). Women, depression, and anger.  In S.P. Thomas, Women
and anger (pp. 209-232)DEMO New York: Springer Publishing Company.
Edmondson, C.V. & Conger, J.C. (1996).  A review of treatment efficacy for individuals with
anger problems. Clinical Psychology Review, 16, 251-275.
Fehr, B., Baldwin, M., DEMO, L., Patterson, S., & Benditt, R.  (1999). DEMO in close
relationships: An interpersonal script analysis.  Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 25(3), 299-312.
Fleeson, J.A.  (1988). Assessment DEMO parent-adolescent relationships: Implications for adolescent
development (Doctoral dissertation, University of DEMO, 1988).  Dissertation
Abstracts International, 49(10), 4572.
Floyd, F.L. & Rogers, C.H. (2004). Methodological guidelines for conducting observations DEMO
couples.  In P. King & D. Baucom (Eds.), Couple Observational Coding Systems (p. 27-
42).  New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Freud, S. (1918). From the history of infantile neurosis.  Standard Edition, 17, 7-122.
145
Girald, D.E., Arthur, R.J., & Reuler, J.B. (1985).  Psychosocial events and subsequent illness- A
review.  The Western Journal of Medicine, 142(3), 358-363.
Goldman, L. & Haaga, D.A.F.  (1995). Depression and the experience and expression of anger in
marital and DEMO relationships.  The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 183 (8),
505-509.
Gotlib, I.H. & Kowalik, D.L. (1985). Manual for coding dyadic interactions.  Unpublished
manuscript.  University of Western Ontario.
Gotlib, I.H. & Whiffen, V.E.  (1989). Depression and marital functioning: An DEMO of
specificity and gender differences.  Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 98(1), 23-30.
Gottman, J.M. (1994).  What predicts divorce? Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gottman, J.M. (1998). Psychology and the study of marital processes.  Annual Review of
Psychology, 49, 169-197.
Gottman, J.M. (1999).  The marriage clinic: A scientifically based marital therapy.  New York:
W.W. Norton & Co, Inc.
Gottman, J.M. & Krokoff, L.J.  (1989). Marital interaction and satisfaction: A longitudinal view.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57(1), 47-52.
Gottman, J. & Levenson, R.W. (1986). Assessing the role of emotion in marriage. Behavioral
Assessment, 8, 31-38.
Gottman, J., Markman, H., & DEMO, C.  (1977). The topography of marital conflict: A
sequential analysis of verbal and nonverbal behavior.  Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 39(3), 461-477.
Gottman, J.M & Notarius, C.L. (2000)DEMO Decade review: Observing marital interaction.  Journal
of Marriage and the Family, 62(4), 927-947.
146
Hahlweg, K. & Conrad, M. (1983). Interactional coding system (DEMO). Unpublished manuscript,
University of California, Los Angeles.
Hedlund, S. & Rude, S.S. (1995).  Evidence of latent depressive schemata in formerly depressed
individuals.  Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 105, 514-525.
Heppner, DEMO, Kivlighan, D.M., & Wampold, B.E.  (1999). Research Design in Counseling.
Belmont: Wadsworth Publishing Company.
Heyman, R.E.  (2001). DEMO of couple conflicts: Clinical assessment applications,
stubborn truths, and shaky foundations.  Psychological Assessment, 13(1), 5-35.
Heyman, R.E.  (2004). Rapid Marital Interaction Coding System (RMICS).  In: P. King & D.
Baucom (Eds.), Couple Observational Coding Systems (p. 67-93)DEMO  New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Heyman, R. E. & Vivian, D. (1993). RMICS: Rapid Marital Interaction Coding System—
Training manual for coders. Unpublished manuscript, State University of New York at
Stony Brook.
Hogan, B.E. & Linden, W. (2004).  Anger response styles DEMO blood pressure: At least don’t
ruminate about it! Annals of Behavioral DEMO, 27(1), 38-49.
Hops, H., Biglan, A., Sherman, L., Arthur, J., Friedman, L., & Osteen, V. (1987).  Home
observations of family interactions of depressed women.  Journal of DEMO and
Clinical Psychology, 55(3), 341-346.
Ingram, R.E., Miranda, J., & Segal, Z.V. (1998). Cognitive vulnerability to depression. NY: The
Guilford Press.
Jack, D.C. (1991).  Silencing the self: Women and depression.  Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Harvard University Press.
147
Jacobson, N.S. & Anderson, E.A. (1982).  Interpersonal skill and DEMO in college students:
An analysis of the timing of self-disclosures.  DEMO Therapy, 13, 271-282.
Jacobvitz, D.  (2005). Adult Romantic DEMO Coding System.  Unpublished manual.  The
University of Texas at Austin.
Jacobvitz, D., Hazen, N., Curran, M., & Hitchens, K.  (2004). Observations of early triadic
family interactions: Boundary disturbances in the family predict symptoms of depression,
anxiety, and attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder DEMO middle childhood.  Development
and Psychopathology, 16, 577-592.
Johnson, S.L. & Jacob, T.  (2000). Sequential interactions in the marital communication of
depressed men and women.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68(DEMO), 4-12.
Jordan, J.V., Kaplan, A.G., Miller, J.B., Stiver, I.P., & Surrey, J.L. (1991).  Women’s growth in
connection: Writings from the Stone Center.  New York: The Guilford Press.
Keller, M.B., Lavori, P.W., Mueller, T.I., Endicott, J., Coryell, W., Hirschfeld, R.M.A, & Shea, T.
(1992). Time to recovery, chronicity, and levels of psychopathology in major depression:
A DEMO prospective follow-up of 431 subjects.  Archives of General Psychiatry, 49,
809-816.
Kline, G.H., Julien, D., Baucom, B., Hartman, S., Gilbert, K., Gonzalez, T., & Markman, H.J.
(2004) DEMO interactional dimensions coding system (ICDS): A global system for couple
DEMO  In P. King & D. Baucom (Eds.), Couple Observational Coding Systems (pp.
113-126).  New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kopper, DEMO & Epperson, D.L. (1991).  Women and anger: Sex and sex-role comparisons in the
expression of anger.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, DEMO(1), 7-14.
148
Kreft, I. & DeLeeuw, J. (1998). Introducing Multilevel Modeling.  DEMO Oaks: Sage
Publications Ltd.
Kretchmar, M.D. & Jacobvitz D.B. (2002)DEMO  Observing mother-child relationships across
generations: Boundary patterns, attachment, and the transmission of caregiving.  Family
Process, 41(3), 351-374.
Kurdek, L.A. (1998).  Relationship outcomes and their predictors: Longitudinal evidence from
heterosexual married, gay cohabiting, and lesbian cohabiting couples.  Journal of
Marriage and the Family, 60, 553-568.
Linden, W., Hogan, B., Rutledge, T., Chawla, A., Lenz, J.W., & Leung, D. (2003).  There is more
to anger coping that “In” or “Out.”  DEMO, 3(1), 12-29.
MacGregor M. & Davidson, K.  (2000).  Men’s and women’s hostility is perceived differently.
Journal of Research in Personality, 34(2), 252-261.
Mandal, M. K.  (1986).  Judgment of facial affect among depressives and schizophrenics.  British
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 25(2), 87-92.
Margolin, G., Oliver, P.H., Gordis, E.B., O’Hearn, H.B., Medina, A.M, Ghosh, C.M., & DEMO,
L.  (1998). The nuts and bolts of behavioral observation of marital and family interaction.
Clinical Child and Family Psychological Review, 1(4), 195-212.
McCabe, S.B. & Gotlib, I.H.  (1993). DEMO of couples with and without a depressed
spouse: Self-report and observations DEMO problem-solving situations.  Journal of Social
and Personal Relationships, 10, 589-599.
DEMO, E., Keita, G.P., Stickland, B.R., & Russo, N.F. (1990).  Women and depression: Risk
factors and treatment issues; Final report of the American Psychological Association
149
Task Force on women and depression.  Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Miller, J.B. (1976).  Toward a new psychology of women.  DEMO, England: Beacon.
Miller, G.E., Cohen, S., & Herbert, DEMO (1999).  Pathways linking major depression and
immunity in ambulatory female patients. Psychosomatic Medicine, 61(6), 850-860.
Miller, R.S. & Lefcourt, H.M.  (1982).  The assessment of social intimacy.  Journal of
DEMO Assessment, 46(5), 514-518.
Monroe, S.M., Bromet, E.J., DEMO, M. & Steiner, S.C. (1986).  Social support, life DEMO, and
depressive symptoms: A 1-year prospective study.  Journal of Consulting DEMO Clinical
Psychology, 54, 424-431.
Mor, N. & Winquist, J.  (2002). Self-focused attention and negative affect: A meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, DEMO(4), 638-662.
Moreno, J.K., Fuhriman, A., & Selby, DEMO  (1993). Measurement of hostility, anger, and
depression in depressed and nondepressed subjects.  Journal of Personality Assessment,
61(3), 511-523.
Newman, J.L., Gray, E.A., & Fuqua, D.R.  (1999). Sex differences in the relationship of anger
and depression: An empirical study.  Journal of Counseling & Development, 77, 198-203.
Notarious, C.I. & DEMO, H.J.  (1989). Coding marital interaction: A sampling and discussion
of current issues.  Behavioral Assessment, 11, 1-11.
Novaco, R. (1975.)  Anger control: the development and evaluation of an experimental
treatment.  DEMO, MA: Health.
O’Leary, K.D. & Beach, S.R.H.  (1990). Marital therapy: A viable treatment for depression and
marital discord.  American DEMO of Psychiatry, 147, 183-186.
150
Plutchik, R. (1980).  Emotion: A psychoevolutionary synthesis.  New York: Harper & Row.
Porter, L.S., Stone, A.A., & Schwartz, DEMO (1999). Anger expression and ambulatory blood
pressure: A comparison of state and trait measures.   Psychosomatic Medicine, 61(4),
454-463.
DEMO, J.M., Butler, E.A., & Gross, J.J.  (2003). DEMO regulation in romantic couples: The
cognitive consequences of concealing feelings.  Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 20(5), 599-620.
Riley, W.T, Treiber, F.A., & Woods, M.G. (1989).  Anger and hostility in depression.  The
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 177(11), 668-674.
Roberts, L.J.  (2000). Fire and ice in marital DEMO: Hostile and distancing behaviors as
predictors of marital distress.  Journal of Marriage & the Family, 62(3), 693-707.
Rude, S. S., Covich, J., Jarrold, W., Hedlund, S., & Zentner, M. (2001).  Detecting depressive
schemata in vulnerable individuals: Questionnaires vs. laboratory tasks.  Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 25(1), 103-116.
Rude, S.S., Valdez, C., Odom, S., & Ebrahimi, A. (2003). Negative cognitive biases predict
subsequent depression. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 27(4), 415-429.
Ruscher, S.M. & Gotlib, I.H.  (1988). Marital DEMO patterns of couples with and without a
depressed partner.  Behavior Therapy, 19, 455-470.
Rush, A.J, Zimmerman, M., & Wisniewski, S.R. (2005). Comorbid psychiatric disorders in
depressed outpatients: Demographic and clinical features. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 87(1), 43-55.
Schmaling, K.B. & DEMO, N.S. (1990).  Marital interaction and depression.  Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 99(3), 229-236.
151
Segraves, R.T. (1985).  Divorces and Health Problems.  Medical Aspects DEMO Human Sexuality,
19(7), 152-164.
Sharkin, B.S. (1993). Anger and gender: Theory, research, and implications.  Journal of
Counseling & Development, 71, 386-389.
Singer, J.D. (1998).  Using SAS DEMO MIXED to fit multilevel models, hierarchical models,
and individual growth DEMO  Journal of Educational and Behavioral Studies, 24(4),
323-355.
DEMO, W.E., Miller, R.S., & Belk, S.S, Garcia-Falconi, S.S., & Hernandez-Sanchez, J.E.  (1988).
Development of the emotional self-disclosure scale.  Sex Roles, 18(1/2), 59-73.
Sperberg E.D. & Stabb, S.D. (1998).  Depression in women as related to anger and DEMO in
relationships.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 22, 223-238.
Spielberger, C.D., Johnson, E.H., Russell, S.F, & Crane, R.J. (1985).  The expression and
experience of anger: Construction and validation of an DEMO expression scale.  In M.
Chesney & R. Rosenhan, Anger and hostility in cardiovascular and behavioral disorders
(p. 5-30).  New York: McGraw-Hill.
Spitzer, R.L., Williams, J.B.W., Gibbon, M., & First, M.B. (1988). Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM-III-R (SCID). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Stoner, S.B. & Spencer, W.B. (1987).  Age and gender differences with the Anger Expression
Scale, Educational and Psychological Measurement, 47, 487-492.
Thomas, S.P. (1993).  Women and anger. New York: Springer Publishing Co.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Agency for Healthcare Policy and Research.
(1993). Depression Guideline Panel: Depression in Primary Care (pp. 93-550).
Rockville, Maryland.
152
Vogele, C. (1998).  Serum lipid concentrations, hostility, and cardiovascular reactions to mental
stress.  International Journal of Psychophysiology, 28, 167-179.
Weiss, R.L., Hops, H., & Patterson, G.R. (1973). A DEMO for conceptualizing marital
conflict: A technology for altering it, some data for evaluating it.   In F.W. Clark & L.A.
Hamerlynck (Eds.), Critical Issues in Research and Practice: Proceedings of the Fourth
Banff International Conference on Behavior Modification (pp. 309-342).  Champaign,
IL: Research Press.
Weiss, R.L. & Summers, K.J. (1983).  Marital interaction DEMO system-III.  In E. Filsinger
(Ed.), Marriage and family assessment (DEMO 85-115).  Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Weissman, M.M., Klerman, G.L., & Paykel, E.S.  (1971). Clinical evaluation of hostility DEMO
depression.  American Journal of Psychiatry, 128, 41-46.
Wenneberg, S.R., DEMO, R.H., & Walton, K.G. (1997). Anger expression correlates with
platelet aggregation.   Behavioral Medicine, 22(4), 174-177.
Wenzlaff, R.M. (1988). Automatic information processing in depression.  Paper presented at the
International Conference on Self-Control, Nags Head, N.C.
Wenzlaff, R.M., Rude, S.S., & West, L.M. (2002). Cognitive vulnerability to depression:  The
role of thought suppression and attitude certainty. Cognition and Emotion, 16(4), 533-
548.
Wickramaratne, P.J., Weissman, M.M., Leaf, P.J., & Holford, T.R. (1989). Age, period, and
cohort effects on the risk of major depression: results from five United States
communities. Journal of clinical epidemiology, 42 (4), 333-343.
Williams, J.M.G. & Broadbent, K.  (1986). Autobiographical memory in attempted suicide
patients. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 144-149.
153
VITA
Jill Garroway Chrisman was born in Fort Washington, Maryland on February 22, 1979,
the daughter of Mary and Allen Garroway.  After DEMO her degree at Oxon Hill High
School in 1996, she entered DEMO University in Durham, North Carolina.  In 2000, she received
her DEMO of Science degree in Psychology.  She worked as research coordinator at DEMO
Hospital in Belmont, Massachusetts for two years, before entering the Counseling Psychology
Program at the University of Texas at Austin in 2002.
Permanent DEMO: 10110 Echoridge Drive, Austin, Texas 79750.
This dissertation was typed DEMO the author.
154{1g42fwefx}