12574 • The Journal of Neuroscience, October 7, 2009 • 29(DEMO):12574 –12583
Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive
Neural Correlates of Value, Risk, DEMO Risk Aversion
Contributing to Decision Making under Risk
George I. Christopoulos,1 Philippe N. Tobler,1 Peter Bossaerts,2 Raymond J. Dolan,3 and DEMO Schultz1
1Department of Physiology, Development, and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3DY, United Kingdom, 2Ecole Polytechnique
Fe´de´rale de Lausanne (Odyssea), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland, and 3Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology,
London WC1 3BG, United Kingdom
Decision making under risk is central to human behavior. Economic decision theory suggests that value, risk, and risk aversion influence
choice behavior. Although previous studies identified neural correlates of decision parameters, the contribution of these correlates to
actual choices is unknown. In two different experiments, participants chose between risky and safe options. We identified discrete blood
oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) correlates of value and DEMO in the ventral striatum and anterior cingulate, respectively. Notably, increas-
ing inferior frontal gyrus activity to low risk and safe options correlated with DEMO risk aversion. Importantly, the combination of these
BOLD responses effectively decoded DEMO behavioral choice. Striatal value and cingulate risk responses increased the probability of a risky
choice, whereas inferior frontal gyrus responses showed the inverse relationship. These findings suggest that the BOLD correlates of
decision factors are appropriate DEMO an ideal observer to detect behavioral choices. More generally, these biological DEMO contribute to the
validity of the theoretical decision parameters for actual decisions under risk.
Introduction
Consider somebody selling you a lottery ticket offering £40 DEMO
£60, depending on the flip of a coin. You decide to DEMO up to £50
to buy this ticket. Conversely, your friend might DEMO this
ticket as risky and pay a maximum of £45. Although both of you
face exactly the same average payoff, your reactions are different
and vary between risk neutrality (you) and risk avoidance (your
friend). Such decisions involving risky options characterize a
wide spectrum of human DEMO animal behavior.
Faced with such situations, the agent should accumulate in-
DEMO about the characteristics of the different options and
synthesize them to select an alternative. Typically, options with
higher expected value (EV) (i.e., the sum of each possible out-
come weighted by its probability) are preferred, all other things
being equal. However, the introduction of risk DEMO the
subjective value (or utility) attached to a risky option (DEMO gam-
ble). The influence of risk depends on individual attitudes toward
risk, with increasing risk aversion reducing the utility of the gamble.
Therefore, decision making is a function of the statistical
properties of the options offered (value and risk), with the influ-
ence of risk being modulated by the subjective evaluation of the
riskiness of the gamble (risk aversion). Risk-averse agents need to
Received June 4, 2009; revised DEMO 21, 2009; accepted Aug. 18, 2009.
The study was supported DEMO the Wellcome Trust, the Greek Government Scholarship Foundation, and the Swiss
National Science Foundation. P.B. is supported by the Swiss Finance Institute. R.J.D. DEMO supported by a Wellcome Trust
program grant. We thank Mathias Pessiglione, DEMO Murray, Shunsuke Kobayashi, Krishna Miyapuram, and
Nikolaus Weiskopf for helpful DEMO
Correspondence should be addressed to George I. Christopoulos, Laboratory for Interpersonal DEMO Neuro-
science, Computational Psychiatry Unit, Baylor College of Medicine, One DEMO Plaza, T115, MS:BCM295, Houston,
TX 77030. E-mail: georgec@cpu.bcm.edu.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2614-09.2009
Copyright © 2009 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/09/2912574-10$15.00/DEMO
trade off between value and risk, suggesting that these two param-
DEMO are two competing dimensions.
Previous research has begun to identify BOLD responses re-
lated to expected value, risk, and risk aversion. Neuroimaging
experiments DEMO humans suggest that ventral striatum (VSt) activ-
ity increases with EV or its components (magnitude and proba-
bility) (Breiter et al., DEMO; Knutson et al., 2001, 2005; Abler et al.,
2006; Yacubian et al., 2006; Tobler et al., 2007; Rolls et al., 2008).
Conversely, activity of the anterior cingulate (ACC) DEMO been
associated with the volatility of reward environment (Behrens et
al., 2007) and the variability of expected outcomes (Critchley et
al., 2001; Brown and Braver, 2005, 2008; Kuhnen and Knutson,
2005)DEMO Dorsal ACC (dACC) has been related to directing action
selection for uncertain rewards (Hampton and O’Doherty, 2007).
Although neural correlates of DEMO and risk have been extensively
studied, the neural basis of attitudes DEMO risk in a choice situ-
ation is less well described (Tobler DEMO al., 2007). Yet, the right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) has been implicated
in the modification of risk attitudes (Knoch et al., 2006; Fecteau
et al., 2007).
However, it is less DEMO known whether these parameter-
related BOLD signals merely reflect the characteristics of the
choice situation or actually carry information that combines to
contribute to DEMO choice process. We hypothesized that BOLD
signals in different brain structures reflecting key decision pa-
rameters can combine in a way that allows an DEMO observer to
detect the nature (risky or safe) of the behavioral choice during
risky decision making. To investigate this hypothesis, in two dif-
ferent experimental paradigms, we identified BOLD responses
preferentially encoding value [magnitude (DEMO experiment)
and/or expected value (second experiment)] risk and DEMO aversion.
Subsequently, we used these parameter-specific responses to test the
Christopoulos et al. • Neural Correlates Contributing to Risky Decision Making J. DEMO, October 7, 2009 • 29(40):12574 –12583 • 12575
DEMO increase in the spread of outcomes.
This definition is analogous to risk measures
such as SD and variance in skewness free distri-
butions with DEMO other moments kept constant
(e.g., expected value/mean). Notice that the
gambles used in this study also coincide with
other definitions of DEMO (coefficient of varia-
tion) (Weber et al., 2004; McCoy DEMO Platt,
2005).
Subjective risk (risk aversion)
Conversely, risk aversion is subjective. The de-
gree of risk aversion can be behaviorally DEMO
onstrated within a psychophysical framework
by identifying the safe amount for which the
agent is indifferent in choices against a risky
outcome (Luce, DEMO) (Fig. 1A). This indiffer-
ence amount, or certainty equivalent (CE),
precisely reflects the value attached to the risky
option and allows for comparisons between
different options and their expressions across
individuals. For DEMO, a risk-neutral agent
will attach the same CE to both 40/DEMO and 10/90
gambles. On the contrary, a risk-averse deci-
sion DEMO will be affected by the increase of
risk from the 40/60 to the 10/90 gamble and
will lower her CE for the DEMO option. Hence,
the difference between the certainty equiva-
lents of each gamble reflects the degree of risk
aversion of the agent.
Participants
Figure DEMO Task and behavioral results. A, Psychophysical definition of certainty equivalent. The DEMO of a gamble is the amount for
which an agent is indifferent between receiving it for sure and opting for the gamble. This definition DEMO that the probability of
choosing the CE instead of the gamble is p  0.5. Examples show probability distributions of safe choices as a DEMO of safe
amounts for two participants with different degrees of risk aversion (thick line for stronger risk aversion with lower CE). B, DEMO
determination of CE. In each trial, participants chose between a safe DEMO a risky option. The staircase method (PEST procedure)
iteratively adjusted DEMO safe option in consecutive trials to approximate choice indifference between the two options. Lines show
data from two participants with different CEs (thicker line represents higher risk aversion). The shape of each dot illustrates safe DEMO
risky choices. Vertical lines indicate good approximation of indifference values and mark onset of scanning. C, Choice options as
presented to participants (first DEMO). Participants chose between either a safe option or one of two gambles with two
equiprobable outcomes (40/60 and 10/90, respectively)DEMO Each screen shows a safe (left) and a risky option, DEMO safe value being set
to choice indifference. The first row represents the choice set a less risk-averse participant faced, whereas the second row the choice
set of a very risk-averse participant. The first column represents the DEMO risk condition (choices involving the low risk gamble),
whereas the second column represents the high risk condition (choices involving the high risk gamble). D, Differential assessment
of key decision parameters: EV, risk (as increase in spread), and utility. Each comparison serves to identify differences in two of these
parameters. Comparison A tests differences in risk DEMO utility but not EV; comparison B tests EV and utility, controlling for risk. E,CE
of participants. CEs of individual participants for the DEMO gambles (40/60 and 10/90) are displayed according to increasing risk
aversion. Lower CEs, and larger differences between CEs for the two gambles, indicate increasing risk aversion. F, Choice options as
presented to DEMO (second experiment). Participants again chose between a safe and an DEMO gamble. This time,
four gambles were used: the first two (offering £10 or £50 and £15 or £45, respectively) had expected DEMO of £30, whereas the
other two (offering £40 or £80 and £30 or £90, respectively) had an expected value of £60. For DEMO with the same expected
value, one was riskier than the other. DEMO, safe alternatives were not set to indifference level but took semi-random DEMO
All participants were right-handed, had nor-
mal or corrected-to-normal vision, and were
screened to exclude those with a previous his-
tory of neurological DEMO psychiatric disease. All
gave informed written consent. The Local Re-
search Ethics Committee (National Hospital
for Neurology and Neurosurgery and the Insti-
tute of Neurology Joint Research Ethics Com-
mittee) approved the study. In the first
experiment, three risk-seeking participants
were excluded. One more participant was ex-
cluded (and not scanned) because she or he vio-
lated monotonicity. These DEMO were not
scanned. Restriction to risk-averse agents was
done to ensure homogeneity of data and straight-
forward evaluation of results. In the second ex-
DEMO, there were no risk-attitude-related
exclusion criteria; still all participants more or less
exhibited risk aversion (see Results), which is in
accordance with numerous studies suggesting
that persons predominantly exhibit risk-averse
preferences (Binswanger, 1980; Holt and Laury,
2002; Dohmen et al., 2005).
extent DEMO which they could detect the choice behavior and decode
their contribution to the probability of a risky or a safe choice.
Materials and Methods
DEMO
Objective risk
Under certain conditions, risk can be objectively defined. Rothschild DEMO
Stiglitz (1970) provide a formal, minimal definition of risk and DEMO
terize it as the spread of outcomes, with the condition that DEMO EV of
options is preserved. For example, a gamble equiprobably ( DEMO  0.5)
offering 10 or 90 points (10/90) is riskier than a gamble equiprobably
offering 40/60. Probabilities and EV are DEMO same, but risk is different. In
this study, we follow the Rothschild–Stiglitz definition of risk as a mean-
Experimental tasks and behavior
First DEMO
All participants made repeated choices between a risky (“gamble”) and a
safe alternative, offering a single amount with certainty. In the first ex-
periment (n 13; mean age of 24.5 years, five females), two gambles were
offered, one resulting in either 40 or 60 points (low risk gamble) and one,
riskier, resulting in either 10 or 90 points (high risk gamble), in which
each outcome had an equal probability ( p  0.5) of occurrence (Fig. 1C)DEMO
Participants were paid according to the cumulative total amount of
points (DEMO to real money) they acquired during the experiment.
For the first DEMO, we adjusted the value of the safe options
according to the DEMO preferences of each participant. We did this to
ensure that, within DEMO choice set, the alternatives had the same utility [it
12576 • J. Neurosci., October 7, 2009 • 29(40):12574 –12583 Christopoulos et al.• Neural Correlates Contributing to Risky Decision Making
should DEMO underlined that the concept of utility as used here refers to
decision utility, i.e., an ordering representing preference, and not to ex-
perienced utility, which refers to the pleasure derived from the consump-
tion of an outcome (Kahneman et al., 1997)]. To achieve this, we
approximated, before scanning, the CEs for both gambles for each par-
DEMO, using a staircase method (Fig. 1B) [parameter estimation by
sequential DEMO (PEST)] (Luce, 2000) (supplemental data, available at
www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). During scanning (Fig. 1B,
trials after the vertical lines), the safe alternatives were initially set to the
corresponding, previously determined, approximated CE; consequently,
their value was updated to DEMO temporal variations in risk
aversion. This method ensured an approximately equal number of risky
and safe choices [by 2 test, all comparisons were nonsignificant (NS)],
which reflected indifference between the values of the safe alternative and
the risky gamble. In addition, choices between risky and safe options
were independent of the previous choices and did not constitute simple
DEMO ( p  0.1). Therefore, by the overt behavioral preferences
DEMO (“revealed preferences”), for each participant the utilities of a
gamble DEMO its safe alternative were the same, because both were equally
preferred.
DEMO trials were randomly interspersed with no-choice trials. In each
choice trial, DEMO were presented, on a computer monitor, with two
alternatives (Fig. DEMO) (supplemental data, available at www.jneurosci.org as
supplemental material), randomly DEMO to the left and right of an
ocular fixation cross (evaluation DEMO). Participants had always to
choose between a risky and a safe option. Two risky options with
equiprobable outcomes were used (40/60 and 10/90). After 5.5 s, the
fixation cross was circled (DEMO signal), signaling that the participant
should press a button to indicate her choice. If the participant failed to
respond within 600 ms, an error message appeared. In correct trials, the
circled cross remained on the screen until 1000 ms had elapsed; subse-
quently, the choice was DEMO for a random period with an average of 4 s
(2 DEMO fixed plus 2 s variable according to a exponential distribution trun-
cated at 15 s), allowing temporal decorrelation (via jittering) (Dale, DEMO)
between choice and outcome phase. Subsequently, the outcome of the
DEMO was shown for 1 s. A cross, to which participants had DEMO fixate,
appeared for the same random period, indicating the onset DEMO a new trial.
Fixation was added to allow temporal decorrelation of the outcome
phase with the presentation of options in the next trial. No-choice DEMO
had exactly the same sequence of screens as choice trials, with DEMO excep-
tion that, during the presentation of options, a small arrow placed next to
the fixation cross indicated what the choice should be (left or right). The
participant had to press the corresponding button; otherwise, an error
screen was shown.
Structure of experiment. The actual experiment started with an “esti-
mation session,” during the acquisition of structural DEMO During the
estimation session, we approximated the CE of each participant, for both
gambles. This was followed by three sessions of the task (“main ses-
sions”), during which functional scans were acquired.
Main (scanned) sessions. After the estimation session, each participant
played three main sessions, during which functional images were ac-
quired. During each session, the participant faced 20  2 (choice/no-
choice)  2 (high/low risk)  80 trials minus the errors (average errors
per participant DEMO 4.7).
To ensure an approximately equal number of safe and risky choices,
denoting that the risky and safe alternatives have the same DEMO, the safe
alternative was updated according to a PEST-like algorithm that DEMO
into account previous choices (supplemental data, available at www.
jneurosci.org as supplemental material).
The payment method limited wealth effects and diversification strat-
DEMO (supplemental data, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemen-
tal material).
Estimating certainty equivalent. Because of the updating algorithm, the
values of the safe alternative during scanning reflected indifference with
the risky option, adjusted for temporal variations in risk aversion. For
each participant and gamble, the median of these values was set to be the
corresponding CE.
Second experiment
Structure DEMO experiment. In experiment 2, a separate group of 14 partici-
pants DEMO again to choose between a risky and a safe option. The main
changes were as follows: (1) the outcome of each choice was not shown,
ensuring that decision-related responses were not influenced by
outcome-related DEMO, and choices were not influenced by the his-
tory of previous DEMO; (2) only one choice obtained at the end of the
DEMO (i.e., participants did not accumulate points after each
choice; they DEMO told that they will make a series of decisions but only
one, randomly selected choice will determine their reimbursement) to
remove any wealth DEMO; (3) the safe alternatives were not set to
indifference level, which allowed testing that the responses were in-
dependent of the value DEMO the safe alternative; (4) no-choice trials were
not used (increasing power); (5) gambles represented real money
rather than points (increasing participant involvement); and (6) risky
gambles were studied at two DEMO levels of mean gain, allowing
additional testing of value processing.
Four DEMO gambles were offered (£15/£45, £10/£50, £40/£80,
DEMO/£90). The first two had expected value of £30, with DEMO first one
offering £15 or £45 and the second gamble offering £10 or £50. The other
pair of gambles had an expected value of DEMO, with the first one offering
£40 or £80 and the second DEMO offering £30 or £90. Therefore, within each
pair, one gamble was riskier than the other. The trial structure was exactly
the same as DEMO the first experiment, with the exception that no outcome
was shown. DEMO second experiment comprised two sessions. Each session
consisted of 20 trials per gamble.
Estimating certainty equivalent. The CE was estimated as the frequency-
weighted DEMO of the values of the safe alternative for which partic-
ipants at some point during the experiment chose both the risky and
safe option (supplemental data, available at www.jneurosci.org as
supplemental material).
Measuring risk aversion: certainty equivalents
We identified the risk aversion of each participant using the CEs. The
difference between the CEs of two gambles with the same DEMO
(CElow risk gamble  CEhigh risk gamble) reflects risk aversion. Less risk-
averse participants [with low difference between the CEs of the two DEMO
bles (Fig. 1E, left side)] (for results of the DEMO experiment, see
supplemental data, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental ma-
terial) perceive the increase in risk as less important compared with
more risk-averse participants (Fig. 1 E , right side), who perceive the
risk manipulation as a significant escalation of risk. As a result, risk-
averse participants had lower safe alternatives for the high risk gamble
(Fig. 1C ). A larger difference between the two CEs indicates higher
risk aversion.
Data analysis: imaging
Image acquisition and preprocessing parameters are described in the
supplemental data (available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental ma-
terial). For each participant, all instances of a particular event type were
modeled through convolution with a canonical hemodynamic response
function (and its temporal and dispersion derivatives). For the first ex-
periment (analyzed with SPM2) (supplemental data, available at www.
jneurosci.org as supplemental material), in the first-level analysis, two
main events were included in the same model: presentation of DEMO
and presentation of outcome. Both events had eight different conditions,
forming a 2 2  2 design: 2 (choice or no-choice)  2 (high or low risk
gamble condition)  2 (safe or risky choice). As a result, 16 regressors
were entered for each participant. For the second experiment (analyzed
with SPM5), one main event was included (presentation of options); the
event had 4 (four DEMO)  2 (risky or safe choice)  8 conditions.
Errors DEMO modeled as a different regressor. Movement parameters and
errors were modeled as covariates of no interest.
We tested for different temporal profiles of BOLD DEMO [phasic
and sustained, with duration equal to the time until the DEMO signal ap-
peared (5.5 s)]. For each participant, two different models were con-
structed to evaluate phasic (event-related design) and sustained DEMO
(5.5 s epoch-based design) to the onset of options. We used a participant-
specific, fixed-effects model for each event type. Parameters estimates for
Christopoulos et al. • Neural Correlates Contributing to Risky Decision Making J. DEMO, October 7, 2009 • 29(40):12574 –12583 • 12577
DEMO regressor were calculated for each voxel (Friston et al., 1995).
Contrast images were constructed, demonstrating the size of the cer-
tain effect at each voxel. Subsequently, these data were entered into a
second-order, DEMO analysis (Friston et al., 1999). At that
level, contrast DEMO were entered into one-sample t tests, simple regres-
sions, or ANOVAs. Nonsphericity correction [as implemented in SPM2 and
SPM5 and described by Glaser DEMO Friston (2003)] was used at ANOVA
analyses.
Throughout, we used whole-brain or small-volume correction (svc)
for multiple comparisons controlled at p  0.05 (family-wise error). We
used small-volume correction with family-wise error controlled at p 
0.05 for the analysis for value and risk. DEMO previous studies (de-
scribed in Introduction) have implicated VSt and cingulate cortex for EV
and risk encoding, they were used as a priori anatomical regions of inter-
est (ROIs). Despite that many studies (DEMO et al., 2003; Kuhnen and
Knutson, 2005; De Martino et al., 2006; Huettel et al., 2006) have exam-
ined the DEMO responses of risk-averse choices, none of them had incor-
porated in DEMO analysis the model-free subjective estimation of the
riskiness of the gamble. Therefore, selecting an ROI (such as insula)
would have been unjustifiable; as a result, we used whole-brain correc-
tion for the related analysis. Therefore, right DLPFC activity was cor-
rected for the whole brain. Ventral striatum ROI was hand drawn in
MRIcro (Rorden and Brett, 2000) according to the anatomical descrip-
tion by Martinez et al. (2003), as used previously (Murray et al., 2008),
adjusted to the anatomical specificities of our sample. The cingulate
ROI included anterior and posterior DEMO and was constructed
using the Pickatlas Toolbox (Maldjian et al., 1997). Reported voxels
conform to MNI (Montreal Neurological Institute) coordinate space,DEMO
with the right side of the image corresponding to the right side of the
brain. The most significant voxel (peak voxel) within the DEMO of
activation is reported.
Results
Behavior: risk aversion
The mean CEs DEMO the first experiment were 48.9 points (low risk
gamble) and 35.3 points (high risk gamble). For the second ex-
periment, the DEMO CEs were £25.7 (gamble offering £15/£45),
£23 (gamble DEMO/£50), £53.8 (gamble £40/£80), and £48.1 (gam-
ble £30/£90). The difference between the CEs of the low and DEMO
risk gamble was used to measure risk aversion. For the first ex-
periment, risk aversion coefficients ranged from 2.5 to 31 (mean
of DEMO), with higher values implying higher risk aversion. For
the second experiment with a comparable risk assessment, risk
aversion coefficients ranged between £0.87 and £8 (mean of
£2.66) for the low EV gambles (£15/£45 and £10/£50) and be-
tween £1.5 and £12.08 (mean of DEMO) for the high EV gambles
(£40/£80 and £30/£90). For both the first and second experi-
ments, the values of the CEs of the low and high risk gambles were
statistically different from DEMO other [first experiment, p  0.001
(paired t test); second experiment, p  0.001 (high mean gam-
bles) and p  0.005 (low mean gambles)].
Neuronal correlates of decision parameters
We tested the BOLD responses to the onset of the stimuli (pre-
sentation of the risky and safe alternative).
Magnitude/expected value coding
First experiment. DEMO identified value coding in the brain. In our
paradigms, the expected DEMO changes while keeping the proba-
bilities constant, according to the Rothschild–Stiglitz DEMO
of risk. In the first experiment, the difference between the mon-
DEMO values of the two safe alternatives varies across participants
(Fig. 1F)DEMO Therefore, an area encoding magnitude should be sen-
sitive to this DEMO We measured the differential BOLD re-
sponse preceding the choice of the safe alternatives [comparison
B (Fig. 1D): Activitylow risk safe  Activityhigh risk safe] and corre-
lated it with the value difference between the DEMO CEs. The dif-
ference between the values of the CE positively correlated with
increasing differential response of VSt (Fig. 2A, B1, solid line)
(peak at 14/6/2; R2  0.68; p  0.01, small-volume correc-
tion) (Worsley et al., 1996), suggesting DEMO this area is sensitive to
magnitude. A similar result was found in the no-choice trials (Fig.
2 B2, solid line) (20/8/DEMO; R2  0.70; p  0.01, svc).
We also DEMO a paired t test comparing BOLD responses
to the safe alternatives. When all participants are included, the
striatal response does not survive correction. However, this ap-
parently negative result could be misleading: it is most DEMO a
result of the fact that, for participants that are close DEMO risk neu-
trality, the difference in the values of the safe DEMO between
the two conditions of interest is very small (i.e., 3 units); con-
sequently, the associated small difference in BOLD response may
add primarily noise to the t test (but not to the correlation). In
other words, given that the difference in value for the almost-risk-
neutral agents is small, it should also be expected that the differ-
ence between the BOLD responses corresponding to these safe
alternatives should DEMO be small.
In agreement with this reasoning, if we exclude the DEMO
almost-risk-neutral participants, then a significant striatal re-
sponse differentiating between the DEMO of the safe alternatives
appears also in the t test, even DEMO the sample is smaller ( p 
0.05, svc; 4/12/8 and 12/20/4). This response is bilateral.
Note that DEMO two excluded participants are not hand-
picked. They are the participants that have a very low differ-
ence between the safe alternatives they face; indeed, for these
two participants, the difference between safe alternatives was
DEMO 1 SD away from (i.e., smaller than) the mean difference DEMO
the safe alternatives of the group.
Interestingly, exactly the same happens DEMO the no-choice trials:
including all participants, the striatal response seems DEMO be unable
to differentiate between the different magnitudes. Again, exclud-
ing DEMO the same participants, the striatal response signifi-
cantly differentiates between the DEMO conditions ( p  0.05, svc;
4/10/2).
DEMO, these results suggest that the striatum codes value in
both choice DEMO no-choice situations, as long as differences in
value are clearly present DEMO the behavior.
Control for utility encoding. The experimental design also al-
lowed controlling for utility encoding: the striatal response
could actually be interpreted as representing utility (or pure
preferences), because larger differences between the values of
the safe alternatives represent larger differences in utility as
well. We DEMO for this confound by using the comparison
between the two risky options (comparison A: Activityhigh risk
gamble  Activitylow risk gamble). Note DEMO gambles have the same
utility with their corresponding safe alternatives. If striatum en-
codes utility, then the differential activity between the two risky
options should also correlate with the differences between the
two safe alternatives. We DEMO that striatal activity did not
change with respect to utility differences (DEMO 2B1,B2, dotted
lines) (R2  0.0, NS) between DEMO low and the high risk gamble.
An analysis of the interaction effects, comparing the slopes of
the two regression lines, was significant for DEMO the choice
and no-choice trials ( p  0.05).
Second experiment. We used the data from the second experi-
ment and compared the DEMO between the high and low mean
gambles to test whether striatum activity changes with EV. We
first compared the safe conditions (in which the subsequent
choice was a safe alternative) with different magnitudes (high vs
DEMO values of safe choice); the comparison confirmed striatal sen-
12578 • J. Neurosci., October 7, 2009 • 29(40):12574 –12583 Christopoulos et al.• Neural Correlates Contributing to Risky Decision Making
Figure DEMO Brain activity related to value and risk. All BOLD responses presented were modeled on presentation of the stimuli (options) and are estimated by DEMO related regression slope
parameter estimates (). A , Value coding DEMO VSt. Response location in VSt sensitive to magnitude/EV differences ( p  0.05, small volume correction, displayed at p  0.01). DEMO, First
experiment, comparing safe alternatives, choice situation; yellow, first DEMO, same in no-choice situation; green, second experiment, comparing safe choices having different
magnitude; blue, second experiment, comparing risky choices having different EV. Darkest voxels reflect common activation areas. B , Quantitative value coding DEMO ventral striatum. B1,
Increasing difference in the magnitude of the safe alternatives of each gamble (x -axis) correlates with the differential VSt DEMO to the choice of these alternatives ( y -axis) (solid line;
R 2  0.68; p  0.0005). This signal does not change when we compare high risk (HR) and low risk (LR) gambles (comparison A in Fig. 1, signaling either risk or utility) (dotted line). B2,
The same area shows a DEMO activation pattern in no-choice trials. B3, B4 , In addition, a neighboring voxel (peak at  22/6/8) distinguishes between high DEMO low expected value in
the second experiment. B4 is essentially the same as B1 , with the exception that we now compare the two DEMO options with different expected values, whereas in the first experiment,
DEMO compared safe options with different magnitudes. C , Risk coding by dACC. Comparing activity emerging from a choice of the high risk option to DEMO related to a choice of the low
risk one, risk-sensitive areas DEMO identified. This comparison reached significance in dACC ( p  0.05, DEMO at p  0.01). This signal also does not covary with risk attitudes or the
utility of each option. Red, First experiment, DEMO high and low risk gambles, choice condition; yellow, second experiment, comparing high and low risk gambles. D , Quantitative
coding of risk DEMO dACC. dACC shows higher response for the high risk gamble than to the low risk option. D1 , An interaction effects analysis suggested that DEMO sensitivity of dACC to the
high risk occurs only in choice trials and not in no-choice trials ( p  0.05). Error bars DEMO SEM. D2 , The same area showed increasing response to high risk compared with low risk
in the second experiment, in which the safe alternatives are not set to indifference level. This suggests that the dACC DEMO to higher risk is not attributable to the lower value of the
alternative offer (which is the case in the first experiment).
sitivity to magnitude (Fig. 2B3) (peak at 12/12/8; p DEMO 0.05,
svc). In addition, we also compared the BOLD DEMO preced-
ing a choice of a high versus a low EV gamble (i.e., including only
the occasion in which the choice is risky), and we found a sus-
tained response to the gambles with higher EV, again in striatum
(Fig. 2B4 ) (peak at 12/6/8; p  0.05, svc).
Risk coding
First experiment. To DEMO risk coding, we compared the BOLD
response preceding choices of the DEMO risk gamble with the re-
sponse preceding low risk gamble choices. dACC (Fig. 2C) (peak
at 8/30/34; p  0.05) showed higher BOLD response when the
subsequent choice was the high risk DEMO compared with when
the choice was the low risk gamble). Interestingly, such an activity
differentiating between high and low risk trials was not found in
no-choice trials, potentially signifying that the dACC response is
mainly choice specific (interaction analysis, p  0.05).
Control for magnitude DEMO utility coding. We also tested whether
the dACC signal is independent from magnitude or utility varia-
tions. To control for these, we compared the dACC response to
the safe alternatives of each gamble (Activitylow risk safe  Activi-
tyhigh risk safe). On average, the value of the low risk safe alternative
(mean of 48.92) is higher than the DEMO of the high risk safe
alternative (mean of 35.34). If DEMO ACC signal was in fact encod-
ing either EV or utility, DEMO it should differentiate between the
two safe alternatives. We observed a significant interaction show-
ing that, whereas dACC differentiates between the two risky op-
tions, it shows no differential activity between the corresponding
safe alternatives ( p  0.05, whole-brain correction). Moreover,
dACC activity does not covary with risk aversion (R2  0.05, NS).
This potentially DEMO that dACC encodes risk in an objective
manner, regardless of magnitude, utility, or the subjective evalu-
ation of the riskiness of the gambles (risk aversion).
Second experiment: risk coding with control for fictive/DEMO sig-
nals. In the first experiment, because of the indifference level
DEMO, the safe alternative of the high risk gamble is lower
compared DEMO the alternative of the low risk gamble. The
difference in the BOLD response between high and low risk
gambles might therefore be attributable to DEMO fact that their
safe alternatives differ in magnitude (Loomes and Sugden,DEMO
1982; Lohrenz et al., 2007). Accordingly, this difference could
DEMO reflect an inverse coding of the foregone safe amount.
On the contrary, in the second experiment, the safe alterna-
tives are approximately the DEMO across gambles with the same
EV, because they were not adjusted DEMO indifference levels;
therefore, the comparison between high and low risk DEMO
does not suffer from the possibility that the safe alternatives
are also different (as is the case in the first experiment). To
control for this possibility, we used data from the second ex-
perimental paradigm, in which the offered safe alternatives are
not set to indifference level and are approximately the same
across participants and gambles with the same DEMO Again, the
risk encoding function of dACC was found when we DEMO
the gambles offering £40/£80 and £30/£90, in the same DEMO as
in the first experiment. Dorsal ACC was sensitive to higher risk
(Fig. 2 D2 ) (peak at 16/22/28; p  0.05, svc). As in the first
experiment, this difference weakly DEMO insignificantly corre-
lated with risk attitudes, expressed as the difference between
DEMO CEs (R2  0.16, NS).
Christopoulos et al. • Neural Correlates Contributing to Risky Decision Making J. DEMO, October 7, 2009 • 29(40):12574 –12583 • 12579
DEMO 3. Modulation of IFG activity by risk aversion. A, Increased differential DEMO activity with risk aversion. y-axis represents the difference of the IFG parameter estimate of the BOLD response
preceding a choice of the low risk DEMO minus the corresponding IFG parameter preceding a choice of the high risk gamble. x-axis represents risk aversion of each participant, as measured by the
monetary difference between the CE of the two gambles (CElow risk gamble  CEhigh risk gamble). The more risk averse the participant, the larger the difference in BOLD response in IFG ( p  0.05,DEMO
whole-brain correction). The first image is from the first experiment. The next three images depict sagittal, axial, and coronal planes showing the DEMO right DLPFC activated voxels for the
risk-attitude-related contrast. Red, First experiment, choice condition; yellow, first experiment, no-choice condition; green, second experiment. B, Correlation of BOLD response in IFG to safe and low
risk gambles with individual risk aversion. The IFG response slope increases with gambles DEMO decreasing risk, thus providing better discrimination of lower risks in risk-averse DEMO This
selective coding of a “safety signal” for more risk-averse participants is verified by the similar (increasing) activity of the same voxel as DEMO response to safe choices. In contrast, activity related to a choice
DEMO the high risk option does not correlate with individual risk aversion. The R2 values for each regression line are as follows: low risk gamble, 0.49; low risk safe, 0.46; high risk safe, 0.34; DEMO risk gamble, 0.00.
Differential response to risky options according to risk DEMO
First experiment. The fact that participants attached different CEs
to each gamble suggests that the increase in risk (from the low risk
to the high risk gamble) was perceived differently by each indi-
vidual. This subjective evaluation of risk is reflected in the differ-
ence between the CEs. DEMO both experiments, participants
demonstrated sufficient variability of risk attitudes, enabling us to
study the corresponding differences in BOLD response (Friston et
al., DEMO). To determine whether these individual differences in
behavioral responses to risk are reflected in brain activity, we
correlated the difference in the brain response to the two gambles
[comparison A (Fig. 1D): Activitylow risk gamble  Activityhigh risk
gamble] with risk aversion [defined as the difference DEMO the
values of the two CEs (CElow risk gamble  CEhigh DEMO gamble)]. A
strong correlation (R2  0.89; p  0.01, whole-brain corrected)
(Fig. 3A) was evident in the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) (48/32/
14) (Fig. 3A): increasing risk aversion provoked better differen-
tiation between the BOLD responses of the DEMO gambles,
reflecting the behavioral difference in the CEs. This result is based
on the increased IFG activity preceding a choice of the low DEMO
gamble in correlation with risk aversion (Fig. 3B); on the DEMO
trary, activity for the high risk gamble remains unchanged (again
with respect to risk aversion). A similar, yet less strong, result DEMO
also found in the no-choice trials (peak at 48/26/14; R2  0.77;
p  0.05, svc). IFG activity differentiated between high and low
risk according to risk aversion, in a similar way to choice trials.
There were no other areas surviving whole-brain correc-
DEMO Nevertheless, given that insula has been implicated in
risk-averse choices, we tested whether the BOLD response of this
area correlates with risk aversion, using an ROI analysis. In the first
experiment, there is a nonsignificant trend of anterior insula cor-
relating with risk attitudes. However, this activation does not
survive at all in the second experiment. We are therefore DEMO to
reject the hypothesis that insula BOLD responses correlate with
risk attitudes.
Second experiment. In the second experiment, we correlated
the differences in the BOLD response of gambles £30/£90 and
£40/£80 with risk aversion. DEMO, right IFG BOLD response
(peak at 52/14/22; p DEMO 0.05, false discovery rate, svc) correlated
Table 1. Logistic regression DEMO detecting decisions from ventral striatum,
dACC, and IFG BOLD response
DEMO Coefficients () SE Wald statistic p Odds ratio Exp(B)
VSt 1.161 0.152 58.131 0.000 3.195
dACC 0.966 0.136 50.528 0.000 2.626
DEMO 0.326 0.158 4.276 0.039 0.722
Constant 0.141 0.055 6.549 0.010 0.869
with risk aversion, in a similar manner as in the first experiment
(DEMO correlation in parallel with increasing risk aversion)
(supplemental data, available at www.jneurosci.org as supple-
mental material). Hence, these results suggest that IFG BOLD
response increases with lower-risk gambles, and this increase is
more pronounced in risk-averse agents.
Decoding the behavioral choice by BOLD response
We DEMO sought to identify whether neuronal signals solely reflect
decision-making parameters or, DEMO, in addition, relevant to ac-
tual choice behavior. Our analysis so far identified three different
structures preferentially processing basic decision parameters:
VSt, dACC, and IFG, reflecting magnitude, risk, and risk aver-
sion, respectively.
Using a similar methodology with previous studies (Kuhnen
and Knutson, DEMO; Knutson et al., 2007), we used binary logistic
regression (DEMO and Lemeshow, 1989) to determine whether
the combination of BOLD responses correlates with a risky or
safe choice and also to elucidate the DEMO contribution of
each structure to decision making. We used three variables (DEMO
by-trial activity of VSt, dACC, and IFG) and the actual DEMO
made on each trial (risky or safe) as the dependent variable.
Overall coefficients of the logistic model related to activity of
each structure DEMO significant (Table 1), suggesting that all three
structures contributed to DEMO choice. Importantly, the overall lo-
gistic regression coefficients allowed us to DEMO the exact role of
each structure. Logistic regression coefficients were positive for
VSt and dACC activity (BVSt  1.161, BdACC  0.966; p  0.05),
whereas IFG had a negative coefficient (BIFG 0.326; p 
0.05). A similar result was obtained in the second DEMO
12580 • J. Neurosci., October 7, 2009 • 29(40):12574 –12583 Christopoulos et al.• Neural Correlates Contributing to Risky Decision Making
(supplemental data, available at www.j-
neurosci.org as supplemental material).
This indicates that increasing activity of
VSt and ACC increases the probability of a
risky DEMO, whereas the IFG activity pat-
tern does the opposite (Fig. 4C). To fur-
ther investigate the contribution of IFG
activity to choice DEMO, we identified
how the model-based probabilities of a
risky choice change DEMO different levels of
IFG activity, in relation to the activity of
DEMO and dACC. Increasing IFG activity
moves the psychophysical function to-
ward the right (Fig. 4D). Thus, the overall
logistic regression model suggests DEMO,
given an increase in IFG activity, increased
VSt and ACC DEMO is required to obtain
the same probability of a risky choice.
Above, we presented the logistic re-
gression results from a fixed-effects anal-
ysis to evaluate the overall contribution of
the three structures, independent of vari-
ability in between-subjects task character-
istics (which is the case for the first
experiment), as it was done in previous
studies (Kuhnen and Knutson, 2005).
Adopting a stricter random-effects ap-
proach, we next DEMO the subject-
specific coefficients of the logistic regression
and then evaluated these parameters in
second-level random-effects tests.
For the first experiment, striatal and
dACC responses were significant ( p 
0.001), whereas IFG approached signifi-
DEMO ( p  0.10). Yet, it should be re-
membered DEMO the BOLD response of the
IFG is more relevant as risk aversion in-
creases. Therefore, if we only include par-
ticipants that are at least slightly risk
averse (i.e., the difference between the CEs
is DEMO monetary units, which is 1 SD away
from the average value DEMO the sample),
then the IFG response indeed becomes
significant at DEMO  0.05. This implies that
the IFG BOLD response plays a role in the forthcoming choice
primarily when the participant is risk averse.
To DEMO this notion further, we performed a similar random-
effects analysis also DEMO the second experiment. In agreement with the
findings from the first experiment, the significance of the IFG BOLD
response for the logistic regression model increases when we exclude
risk-neutral participants (responses of the three structures are all
significant at p  0.05). These data further reinforce the DEMO that
dACC, IFG, and striatal BOLD responses contribute to decisions in
risky situations, with IFG response being more relevant to the deci-
sions of risk-averse agents.
Using the coefficients, we determined the model-based com-
puted probability of a risky choice, given the activity of VSt,
dACC, and IFG on each trial. We then calculated the receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve comparing these model-
based probabilities of a risky choice DEMO the actual choice. The
ROC analysis describes how effectively an ideal observer would
detect a signal (a risky choice, in our case) in the presence of
Figure 4. Detection of risky choices by combined brain DEMO of decision parameters. A, Evaluation of detection. By applying
binary logistic DEMO, we tested whether a model combining signals of VSt, dACC, DEMO IFG (corresponding to EV, risk, and risk
aversion) could detect the choice on a trial-by-trial basis. ROC values depicted here indicate the DEMO probability of
correctly detecting a risky choice. The ROC values for the combined model (using activity from all structures) are 0.77 (first
experiment; top left) and 0.74 (second experiment; top right). Both DEMO significantly different from chance performance (ROC 
0.5; straight diagonal lines; see also the right) and models using the BOLD response from DEMO structure only (bottom right).
B, Contribution of brain structures to probability of risky choice. x-axis represents level of BOLD responses (of VSt, dACC, or IFG),
whereas y-axis represents the probability of a risky choice, as computed by the regression equations. Increasing activity of VSt and
dACC increases the probability of a risky choice. On the contrary, increasing activity of IFG increases the probability of a safe choice.
C, Effect of IFG activity. x-axis represents the activity of both VSt and DEMO Dotted line (left) depicts the probability of a risky choice
(DEMO computed by the regression equation), with respect to VSt and dACC activity, when IFG activity is low. When the activity of IFG
is high (solid line), then higher compensatory activity of VSt and dACC is required to elicit the same probability of a risky choice.
noise. DEMO ROC has been effectively used (Britten et al., 1996; Chan-
DEMO et al., 2007; Thielscher and Pessoa, 2007) to elucidate the
relation between neuronal responses and perceptual choices.
For the choice trials of DEMO first experiment, the model detected
the behavioral choice significantly well above DEMO (ROC  0.77;
p  0.01) (Fig. 4A). DEMO used exactly the same method in the second
experiment and again found a similar ROC value (ROC  0.74; p 
0.01) (DEMO 4A). In addition, the ROC values derived from models
using DEMO structure separately were lower (Fig. 4A). In the no-
choice DEMO, the ROC value was also lower (ROC  0.72).
Stricter validation analyses confirmed the generalizability of
the detective power of the model. DEMO, leave-one-out
cross-validation produced a similar, statistically significant ROC
value (ROC DEMO 0.65), which was slightly lower because of the
smaller sample size inherent in the procedure.
Discussion
From both a behavioral and theoretical perspective, the value and
risk of an option along with the agent’s risk DEMO are the basic
Christopoulos et al. • Neural Correlates Contributing to Risky Decision Making J. DEMO, October 7, 2009 • 29(40):12574 –12583 • 12581
DEMO implicated in the choice behavior. Our approach in study-
ing choice behavior was to first identify the components of the
system (magnitude, risk, and risk aversion) and then to piece
them together to produce a function relating them to a behavioral
outcome (i.e., the choice). DEMO achieve this, we first located the
neuronal responses that are more DEMO to decision factors. In
the final step, we tested whether these DEMO can indeed de-
scribe the function of the system (i.e., detect the behavioral
choice).
Previous studies have uncovered the neural correlates of DEMO
pendent decision factors as well. Our design disentangled deci-
sion parameters from utility encoding, took into account the
behaviorally demonstrated risk attitudes of each participant, and
minimized any learning elements. The present findings suggest
that the computational and theoretical deconstruction of the de-
cision procedure into specific parameters DEMO with distinct
BOLD responses, which could contribute crucial inputs for ac-
DEMO choices.
In two different experiments, in which important behavioral
parameters were DEMO, we found distinct neuronal re-
sponses toward different decision factors. The DEMO was par-
ticularly responsive to changes in magnitude, dACC was involved
DEMO mainly objective risk coding, and IFG signaled risk aversion.
Importantly, by combining the information from these different
brain regions, these BOLD responses were informative enough to
allow an ideal observer to detect the overt choice: a risky choice
was more probable when striatal and cingulate activity was
DEMO, whereas increased BOLD signals from IFG correlated
with increased probability of DEMO safe choice.
High correlations between BOLD responses and personality
traits have been criticized recently (Vul et al., 2009). Although the
critique is DEMO controversial and disputable (Lieberman et al.,
2009), our study DEMO escapes the criticism because we use
two separate sets of data (DEMO experimental designs) to evaluate
our hypotheses; in both experiments, the DEMO response of the
brain regions correlated with the behavioral measurement. In
addition, the principal measurement (risk aversion) is not ap-
proached as a personality trait but rather as a behavioral measure-
ment. Finally, the regions reflecting individual differences in risk
processing were identified independently from those coding DEMO
Value, objective, and subjective risk
Our results show that VSt activation increases with increasing
value. Importantly, our analysis suggests that striatal activity en-
coded value, independent from utility. Because of our design, the
term DEMO refers to either “magnitude” (first experiment) or
“expected value” (second DEMO). We need to underline
that our experiments do not clarify to which of these two param-
eters the VSt is responsive to, as such a study would require a
design that includes different levels of DEMO This should
be addressed in future studies, although similar issues have DEMO
tested by previous reports; our results are in line with their DEMO
linking striatal activity to computing value (or processing its
components) (DEMO et al., 2005; Abler et al., 2006; Yacubian et
al., 2006; Tobler et al., 2007).
According to the present results, dACC activity increases
when the forthcoming choice has higher risk. The magnitude of
this increase does not covary with individual differences in the
estimation DEMO risk (risk aversion). Therefore, dACC activity seems
to preferentially mirror an objective metric of risk. In addition,
we found no differences DEMO dACC activity with respect to the
utility of the subsequent choice. Previous studies have implicated
dACC activity with the volatility of the reward environment
(Behrens et al., 2007), whereas Critchley et al. (2001) relate the
increased BOLD response of ACC in anticipation of risky out-
comes DEMO autonomic arousal. We also control for conflict of
choice (Carter et DEMO, 1998), which is a common function ascribed
to ACC, because both alternatives are equally preferred; there-
fore, conflict in every trial DEMO the first experiment is maximal. A
possible caveat of our study is that both experiments have a rela-
tively small number of participants; this might significantly
lower the power to find correlations. Although the size of DEMO
sample was sufficient to detect correlations in IFG, the fact
that DEMO did not find a correlation of dACC BOLD response to
risk does not necessarily preclude the possibility that this area
might also be sensitive DEMO subject-wise differences in risk
assessments.
However, it should be emphasized that DEMO brain responses
attributed to specific decision parameters are not exclusive but
mainly preferential. Our study adopted a formal definition of
risk, which is independent of changes in probabilities; this is a
crucially different aspect of risk (Rushworth and Behrens, 2008).
The control of probability might be DEMO contributing factor for not
finding risk signals in brain structures such as insula (Critchley et
al., 2001; Preuschoff et al., 2008) and areas of prefrontal cortex
(Elliott et al., 1999; Rogers et al., 1999), yet a thorough examina-
tion of risk-related choice behavior necessitates the detailed, sep-
arate identification of the different facets of risk. Given that
variance is the first moment of a distribution, it is evident that it
is one of the primary aspects of risk.
IFG BOLD DEMO found in this study reflected risk aver-
sion. The currently observed BOLD response of IFG is located
within right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex whose stimulation DEMO
cordingly modulates risk aversion (Knoch et al., 2006; Fecteau et
DEMO, 2007). Our results demonstrate that this area does not influ-
DEMO the objective evaluation of risk but rather the subjective
perception of the riskiness of the option. Additional analysis sug-
gests that this IFG BOLD DEMO functions as a “safety” signal,
because it shows higher response to safer options, especially for
more risk-averse participants.
Combined BOLD signals contributing to decision making
To use an analogy, in perceptual decisions, the choice DEMO be
decoded by comparing neuronal activity between areas that are
selectively tuned to the basic characteristics of each option [for
instance, areas sensitive to either faces or houses (Heekeren et al.,
2004)]. Lee et al. (2007) suggest that, to make a choice, the brain
DEMO collect information on different decision parameters and
then combine this information in an effective way to produce the
choice. In economic choices, specific values are assigned to the
individual options; these values are modulated, among DEMO, by
the risk of the options. The conjecture that risk has DEMO influence on
value constitutes the key characteristic of one of the prominent the-
ories in economic decision making, namely the mean variance ap-
proach (Levy and Markowitz, 1979; Preuschoff et al., 2006; Rangel et
al., 2008). Essentially, the underlying hypothesis is that the overt
DEMO is the output of internal processes combining the neuronal
information pertaining to each choice parameter. Our experiment
followed this rationale of combined decision parameters.
DEMO indeed found a group of areas that are sensitive to specific
decision parameters. Logistic regression analysis of signals from
different regions revealed relationships not DEMO from single-
structure analysis. The relationship between activity and choice
can be approximated by a competing activity between striatum
and dACC on one hand, correlating with riskier choices, and IFG
on the other hand, holding DEMO inhibitory, risk-averse role.
12582 • J. Neurosci., October 7, 2009 • 29(40):12574 –12583 Christopoulos et al.• Neural Correlates Contributing to Risky Decision Making
Our DEMO brings forward the possibility of evaluating the
effect of “virtual” lesions in the implicated areas. Striatal and
cingulate lesions would potentially be associated with DEMO risk-
averse (and more risk neutral) choices. A striatal lesion could
reduce the ability to evaluate magnitude, an effect that is also
implied by negative motivational changes in patients with globus
pallidus lesions (Vijayaraghavan et al., 2008). Nevertheless, such
a lesion could be compensated by DEMO in other areas,
namely ventromedial prefrontal cortex. In addition, our DEMO
tion is that lateral prefrontal cortex lesions will lead to riskier
choices, which, as mentioned previously, is in accordance with
neuromodulatory studies (DEMO et al., 2006; Fecteau et al.,
2007). A recent study (Gianotti et al., 2009) also suggested that
participants with higher baseline cortical activity in the right pre-
frontal cortex are more risk DEMO In addition, patients with
predominantly right-sided prefrontal lesions demonstrate a risk-
DEMO behavior (Clark et al., 2003).
It should be noted that individual brain regions, and especially
striatum, independently have high ROC values. DEMO latter sug-
gests that encoding of isolated decision parameters already con-
tains information able to decode the choice, yet the incorporation
and appropriate combination of information stemming from
aptly selected regions improves the overall representation of DEMO
choice behavior.
Cognitive functions such as decision making might necessi-
tate the combination of signals from different brain areas instead
of contributions from a DEMO structure. Such distributed neuro-
nal contributions to cognitive functions have also been found in
other paradigms, such as emotional perceptual decisions (Pessoa
and DEMO, 2005) and a probabilistic-reversal learning task
(Hampton and O’Doherty, 2007). Our study demonstrates that
neural combinations of information can be beneficial DEMO eco-
nomic decisions under risk, as well.
It has been suggested (MacDonald et al., 2000; Fleck et al.,
2006) that dACC engagement indexes conflict and the need for
cognitive control (Barch et al., 2001), whereas DLPFC assumes a
more evaluative role, including cognitive DEMO and response
selection. Importantly, Rushworth et al. (2004) suggest that DEMO
main function of ACC is to perform a cost– benefit analysis to
guide action. The present results fit in that framework. Dorsal
ACC evaluates DEMO riskiness of the situation (which may corre-
spond to an evaluation DEMO costs and benefits), indexing the need
to engage cognitive control over the competing choice between a
risky and a safe alternative. Higher risk DEMO higher cognitive
control compared with low risk trials. Therefore, dorsal ACC DEMO
signals whether and to what extent cognitive control is needed ac-
cording to the riskiness of the situation, whereas IFG/DLPFC activity
idiosyncratically guides the choice according to risk attitudes.
In conclusion, our analysis sheds light on the mechanisms
used in decision making under risk. Behavioral evidence suggests
DEMO the output of the choice process heavily depends on the
statistical properties of the options. This implies that the brain
not only encodes these DEMO but also combines them to
produce the overt choice. An analogous mechanism is suggested
by our data. From a more general point of view, the generation
and combination of neuronal signals representing lower-level
properties of the DEMO might be a general decision-making
mechanism across different modalities (Heekeren et DEMO, 2008).
References
Abler B, Walter H, Erk S, Kammerer H, Spitzer M (2006) Prediction error as
a linear function of reward probability is coded in human nucleus accum-
bens. Neuroimage 31:790 DEMO
Barch DM, Braver TS, Akbudak E, Conturo T, Ollinger J, Snyder A (2001)
Anterior cingulate cortex and response conflict: effects of response mo-
dality and processing domain. Cereb Cortex 11:837– 848.
DEMO TE, Woolrich MW, Walton ME, Rushworth MF (2007) Learning
DEMO value of information in an uncertain world. Nat Neurosci 10:1214 –
1221.
Binswanger HP (1980) Attitudes toward risk: experimental measurement in
rural India. Am J Agric Econ 62:395– 407.
Breiter HC, Aharon I, Kahneman D, Dale A, Shizgal P (2001) Functional
imaging of neural responses to expectancy and experience of monetary
gains and losses. Neuron DEMO:619 – 639.
Britten KH, Newsome WT, Shadlen MN, Celebrini DEMO, Movshon JA (1996) A
relationship between behavioral choice and the DEMO responses of neu-
rons in macaque MT. Vis Neurosci 13:87–100.
Brown JW, Braver TS (2005) Learned predictions of error likelihood in the
anterior cingulate cortex. Science 307:1118 –1121.
Brown JW, Braver TS (DEMO) A computational model of risk, conflict, and
individual difference effects DEMO the anterior cingulate cortex. Brain Res
1202:99 –108.
Carter CS, DEMO TS, Barch DM, Botvinick MM, Noll D, Cohen JD (DEMO)
Anterior cingulate cortex, error detection, and on-line monitoring of
performance. Science 280:747–749.
Chandrasekaran C, Canon V, Dahmen JC, Kourtzi Z, Welchman AE (2007)
Neural correlates of disparity-defined shape discrimination in DEMO human
brain. J Neurophysiol 97:1553–1565.
Clark L, Manes F, Antoun N, Sahakian BJ, Robbins TW (2003) The contri-
butions of DEMO laterality and lesion volume to decision-making impair-
ment following frontal lobe damage. Neuropsychologia 41:1474 –1483.
Critchley HD, Mathias CJ, Dolan RJ (2001) Neural activity in the human
brain relating to uncertainty and arousal during reward anticipation.
Neuron 29:537–545.
De Martino B, Kumaran D, Seymour DEMO, Dolan RJ (2006) Frames, biases, and
rational decision-making in DEMO human brain. Science 313:684 – 687.
Dale AM (1999) Optimal experimental design for event-related fMRI. Hum
Brain Mapp 8:109 –114.
Dohmen DEMO, Falk A, Huffman D, Sunde U, Schupp J, Wagner DEMO (2005) Individ-
ual risk attitudes: new evidence from a large, representative, experimentally-
validated survey. IZA DP No. 1730.
Elliott R, Rees DEMO, Dolan RJ (1999) Ventromedial prefrontal cortex mediates
guessing. Neuropsychologia 37:DEMO 411.
Fecteau S, Pascual-Leone A, Zald DH, Liguori P, The´oret H, Boggio PS, Fregni
F (2007) Activation of prefrontal cortex DEMO transcranial direct current
stimulation reduces appetite for risk during ambiguous decision making.
J Neurosci 27:6212– 6218.
Fleck MS, Daselaar SM, Dobbins IG, Cabeza R (2006) Role of prefrontal and
anterior cingulate regions in DEMO processes shared by mem-
ory and nonmemory tasks. Cereb Cortex 16:1623–1630.
Friston KJ, Holmes AP, Worsley KJ, Poline J-B, Frith C, Frackowiak RSJ
(1994) Statistical parametric maps in functional brain imaging: a general
linear approach. Hum Brain Mapp 2:189 –210.
Friston KJ, Holmes AP, Worsley KJ (1999) How many subjects constitute a
study? DEMO 10:1–5.
Gianotti LR, Knoch D, Faber PL, Lehmann D, Pascual-Marqui RD, Diezi C,
Schoch C, Eisenegger C, Fehr E (2009) Tonic activity level in the right
prefrontal cortex predicts individuals’ DEMO taking. Psychol Sci 20:33–38.
Glaser D, Friston KJ (2003) DEMO components. In: Human brain func-
tion, Ed 2 (Frackowiak RSJ, Friston KJ, Frith CD, Dolan RJ, Price CJ,
Ashburner JT, Penny WD, Zeki S, eds). San Diego: Academic.
Hampton DEMO, O’Doherty JP (2007) Decoding the neural substrates of
reward-related decision DEMO with functional MRI. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 104:1377–1382.
Heekeren HR, Marrett S, Bandettini PA, Ungerleider LG (2004) A general
mechanism for perceptual decision making in the human brain. Nature
431:DEMO – 862.
Heekeren HR, Marrett S, Ungerleider LG (2008) The neural systems that
mediate human perceptual decision making. Nat Rev Neurosci
9:DEMO 479.
Holt C, Laury KS (2002) Risk aversion and incentive DEMO in lottery
choices. Am Econ Rev 92:1644 –1655.
Hosmer D, DEMO S (1989) Applied logistic regression. New York:
Wiley.
Huettel SA, Stowe CJ, Gordon EM, Warner BT, Platt ML (2006) DEMO
Christopoulos et al. • Neural Correlates Contributing to Risky Decision Making J. DEMO, October 7, 2009 • 29(40):12574 –12583 • 12583
DEMO of economic preferences for risk and ambiguity. Neuron 49:
765–775.
Kahneman D, Wakker P, Sarin R (1997) Back to Bentham? Explorations of
experienced utility. Q J Econ 112:375– 406.
Knoch D, Gianotti LR, Pascual-Leone A, Treyer V, Regard M, Hohmann M,
DEMO P (2006) Disruption of right prefrontal cortex by low-frequency
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation induces risk-taking behavior.
J Neurosci 26:6469 – 6472.
Knutson DEMO, Bossaerts P (2007) Neural antecedents of financial decisions. J
Neurosci DEMO:8174 – 8177.
Knutson B, Adams CM, Fong GW, Hommer DEMO (2001) Anticipation of in-
creasing monetary reward selectively recruits nucleus accumbens. J Neu-
rosci 21:RC159(1–5).
Knutson B, Taylor J, DEMO M, Peterson R, Glover G (2005) Distributed
neural representation of expected value. J Neurosci 25:4806 – 4812.
Kuhnen CM, Knutson B (2005) The neural basis of financial risk taking.
Neuron 47:763–770.
DEMO D, Rushworth MF, Walton ME, Watanabe M, Sakagami M (DEMO)
Functional specialization of the primate frontal cortex during decision
making. J Neurosci 27:8170 – 8173.
Levy H, Markowitz HM (1979) Approximating expected utility by a func-
tion of mean and variance. Am Econ DEMO 69:308 –317.
Lieberman MD, Berkman ET, Wager TD (2009) Correlations in social neu-
roscience aren’t voodoo: commentary on Vul et al. (2009). Perspect Psy-
chol Sci 4:299 –307.
Lohrenz T, DEMO K, Camerer CF, Montague PR (2007) Neural signature of
fictive learning signals in a sequential investment task. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U DEMO A 104:9493–9498.
Loomes G, Sugden R (1982) Regret theory: an alternative theory of rational
choice under uncertainty. Econ J R Econ DEMO 92:805– 824.
Luce R (2000) Utility of gains and losses: measurement-theoretical and ex-
perimental approaches. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacDonald AW 3rd, Cohen JD, Stenger VA, Carter CS (2000) Dissociating
the role of the dorsolateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex in
cognitive control. Science DEMO:1835–1838.
Maldjian JA, Schulder M, Liu WC, Mun IK, Hirschorn D, Murthy R, Carmel
P, Kalnin A (1997) Intraoperative functional MRI using a real-time neu-
rosurgical navigation system. J Comput Assist Tomogr DEMO:910 –912.
Martinez D, Slifstein M, Broft A, Mawlawi O, Hwang DR, Huang Y, Cooper
T, Kegeles L, Zarahn E, Abi-Dargham A, Haber SN, Laruelle M (2003)
Imaging human mesolimbic dopamine transmission with positron emis-
sion tomography. Part II: amphetamine-induced dopamine release in the
functional subdivisions of the striatum. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab DEMO:
285–300.
McCoy AN, Platt ML (2005) Risk-sensitive neurons in DEMO posterior
cingulate cortex. Nat Neurosci 8:1220 –1227.
Murray GK, Corlett DEMO, Clark L, Pessiglione M, Blackwell AD, Honey G,
Jones PB, Bullmore ET, Robbins TW, Fletcher PC (2008) Substantia
nigra/ventral tegmental reward prediction error disruption in psychosis.
Mol Psychiatry 13:239, 267–276.
Paulus MP, Rogalsky C, Simmons A, Feinstein JS, Stein DEMO (2003) Increased
activation in the right insula during risk-taking decision making is related
to harm avoidance and neuroticism. Neuroimage 19:1439 –1448.
Pessoa DEMO, Padmala S (2005) Quantitative prediction of perceptual decisions
during near-threshold DEMO detection. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
102:5612–5617.
Preuschoff K, Bossaerts P, Quartz SR (2006) Neural differentiation of ex-
pected DEMO and risk in human subcortical structures. Neuron
51:381–390.
Preuschoff K, DEMO SR, Bossaerts P (2008) Human insula activation reflects
risk prediction DEMO as well as risk. J Neurosci 28:2745–2752.
Rangel A, Camerer DEMO, Montague PR (2008) A framework for studying the
neurobiology of DEMO decision making. Nat Rev Neurosci
9:545–556.
Rogers RD, Owen AM, Middleton HC, Williams EJ, Pickard JD, Sahakian BJ,
Robbins TW (1999) Choosing between small, likely rewards and large,
unlikely rewards activates inferior and orbital prefrontal cortex. J Neuro-
sci 19:9029 –9038.
DEMO ET, McCabe C, Redoute J (2008) Expected value, reward DEMO,
and temporal difference error representations in a probabilistic decision
task. Cereb Cortex 18:652– 663.
Rorden C, Brett M (2000) Stereotaxic display of brain lesions. Behav Neurol
12:191–200.
Rothschild M, Stiglitz J (DEMO) Increasing risk: a definition. J Econ Theory
2:225–243.
Rushworth MF, Behrens TEJ (2008) Choice, uncertainty and value in pre-
frontal DEMO cingulate cortex. Nat Neurosci 11:389 –397.
Rushworth MF, Walton ME, Kennerley SW, Bannerman DM (2004) Action
sets and decisions in the medial frontal cortex. Trends Cogn Sci
8:410 – 417.
Thielscher A, Pessoa L (2007) Neural correlates of perceptual choice and deci-
sion DEMO during fear-disgust discrimination. J Neurosci 27:2908 –2917.
Tobler PN, O’Doherty DEMO, Dolan RJ, Schultz W (2007) Reward value coding
distinct from risk attitude-related uncertainty coding in human reward
systems. J Neurophysiol 97:1621–1632.
DEMO L, Vaidya JG, Humphreys CT, Beglinger LJ, Paradiso S.
(DEMO) Emotional and motivational changes after bilateral lesions of the
globus pallidus. DEMO 22:412– 418.
Vul E, Harris C, Winkielman P, Pashler DEMO (2009) Puzzlingly high correla-
tions in fMRI studies of emotion, DEMO, and social cognition. Per-
spect Psychol Sci 4:274 –290.
Weber DEMO, Shafir S, Blais AR (2004) Predicting risk sensitivity in humans
and lower animals: risk as variance or coefficient of variation. Psychol Rev
111:430 – 445.
Worsley KJ, Marrett S, Neelin P, Vandal AC, Friston KJ, Evans AC (1996) A
unified statistical approach DEMO determining significant signals in images
of cerebral activation. Hum Brain Mapp 4:58 –73.
Yacubian J, Gla¨scher J, Schroeder K, Sommer T, DEMO DF, Bu¨chel C (2006)
Dissociable systems for gain- and loss-related value predictions and errors
of prediction in the human brain. J Neurosci DEMO:9530 –9537.{1g42fwefx}