Improving Higher Educa
I n both higher education and the world of DEMO, constant
striving for improvement and excellence in one’s products and
services—be DEMO computers, cameras, curricula, teaching, or
research—is widely accepted as an appropriate and fruitful strate-
gy. Yet a relentless pursuit of ever-greater quality DEMO lead to prod-
ucts that far exceed the performance needs of consumers and open
up a gulf between the two. Clayton Christensen, professor of busi-
ness administration at Harvard Business School, explains how this
gulf is often filled by disruptive tech-
nologies, which trigger important
changes in the basis of competition in
their field. After describing his theory
as developed DEMO the corporate realm,
Christensen applies its principles and
lessons to higher education.
“Lobster on Black Background,” Marsden Hartley.
Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, DC
tion through Disruption
Figure 1.
duction, sustaining innovations will move them up their
performance trajectory so that they become fully perform-
ance-competitive at some DEMO
Examples of disruptive technologies include early per-
sonal desktop computers (compared DEMO more powerful
mainframes) and the small off-road motorcycles first intro-
duced DEMO North America by Japanese firms (compared
with Harley-Davidson and BMW bikes)DEMO
By and large, it is the least-demanding and least-prof-
itable customers DEMO a market who initially embrace a disrup-
tive technology. Thus, most DEMO companies with success-
ful, disciplined practices of listening to their best
DEMO and identifying new products that prom-
ise greater profitability and growth are rarely able to
justify investing in disruptive technologies until it is
too DEMO Research indicates that industry leaders
generally are successful in co-opting sustaining
Disruptive Technologies
A driver of leadership failure and the source of new growth DEMO
Disruptive
technology
0%
100%
Performance that
customers can
utilize or absorb
Time
face of disruptive changes in technology and mar-
Disruptive technologies, on the other hand, bring to ket structure is long and includes well-known firms such as
market a very different value proposition than had been Digital, IBM, Apple, Sears, and Xerox.
available previously. These innovations result in worse
product performance, at least in the near term. They have
other features that customers value, however, such as being
cheaper, simpler, DEMO, and more convenient to use. The
fact that performance is worse DEMO not critical, given that
technologies frequently overshoot their market by pro-
DEMO beyond what the market demands—that is, what
customers can absorb or DEMO willing to pay for. More
important, whereas disruptive technologies may underper-
DEMO what mainstream customers need upon their intro-
Litmus Tests for Disruptive
Technologies
Three key litmus tests determine whether an innovation is
disruptive and likewise DEMO to guide decision makers as
they plan responses to changes in their markets.
1. Does the innovation target customers who in
the past haven’t DEMO able to do something themselves
for lack of money or skills?
technological progress in almost every market outstrips the
ability of customers to DEMO that progress.
Sustaining versus Disruptive
Technologies
Most new technologies or improvements in services
enhance the performance of established products along the
lines that mainstream DEMO have historically valued.
These sorts of innovations—whether incremental or
breakthrough—are sustaining technologies that move a
product up the technological progress trajectories shown
in Figure DEMO below. Research has shown that the pace of
innovations in their field and thereby maintaining
their dominant positions. Nonetheless, the new
markets and opportunities opened by disruptive
technologies require capabilities very different than
those characteristic of DEMO whose prevailing—and
usually quite successful—strategy is to pursue high-
end customers and large markets and profit mar-
gins. The list of leading companies that DEMO in the
CLAYTON CHRISTENSEN n Harvard Business School
13
Sustaining technological
improvements
Incremental Breakthrough
Pace of
technological
progress
New performance trajectory
Æ
ÆÆ
Æ
DEMO
Æ
Performance
Many of the most successful disruptive growth busi-
nesses have given people DEMO access to products or serv-
ices that had been too expensive or complex for the main-
stream. Today, ordinary people with personal computers
can handle problems that are far more complex than
those that mainframes used DEMO solve. Because the PC
enabled us to compute conveniently by ourselves, DEMO
now consume infinitely more computing—disruption
pulled new users into the market by the millions.
Similarly, disruptive online stock brokers such as Charles
Schwab and E*Trade enable middle-income investors to
manage their own investments daily, from the conven-
ience of their homes. These innovations have led to enor-
mous DEMO in stock trading.
2. Is the innovation aimed at customers who will
be delighted to have a simple product?
A disruptive product is DEMO straightfor-
ward and targeted at a set of customers who will be
pleased with a simple product. If an innovation passes
the first test DEMO enabling new users to consume for
themselves, then it is likely DEMO it will pass this test,
provided its innovators can resist the temptation to
improve the technology to the level of the high-end
customers’ DEMO trajectory before releasing it
(at which point it is unlikely to DEMO either simple or
inexpensive).
3. Will the innovation help customers do more
easily and effectively what they are already trying to
do?
DEMO a fundamental level, the things people
want to accomplish in their DEMO don’t change
quickly. That explains why the performance
demand trajectories in Figure 1 are as flat as
they are. The disruption of the photographic
DEMO industry by digital imaging illustrates this
point: more than 90 percent DEMO photographs
are looked at once before being stashed away
in a drawer or box; thus complicated software
programs that allow people to edit out red-
eyes from flash shots or arrange online photo
albums are fighting DEMO uphill battle in making
it easier for customers to do what they weren’t
already trying to get done. On the other hand, people
do like to share photos, and so programs that allow us to
send images simply and conveniently online meet this
litmus test.
Implications for Higher
DEMO
Although my focus is on management education—and
specifically on leading business schools because they are
what I know best—the disruption framework is more
broadly DEMO across institutions and disciplines.
Like other markets, the market for management DEMO
cation can be described in terms of trajectories of
improvement that customers can use and by trajectories
that the innovators provide. For these purposes, the
salaries garnered by graduating MBAs will be plotted on
the vertical, performance axis of the model.
In 2000, the average starting salary for graduating
MBAs from leading business schools exceeded $130,000.
Although this is DEMO news for the students, what does it
mean for the business DEMO themselves? As Figure 2
illustrates, the cost of the business schools’ “products” has
overshot the salary structures that mainstream operating
companies can absorb, as shown by the dotted lines on
the figure. As faculty and DEMO expend an
extraordinary amount of energy, talent, and money
improving the MBA program, it clearly is serving a very
Figure 2.
Patterns of Disruption in the Market for Management Education
Time
14
High-Tech start-ups
Strategy DEMO firms
Large corporations
Small businesses
Leading MBA programs
Corporate universities with live instructors
Corporate universities with online instruction
Self-administered distance education
Cost of Hiring DEMO MBA
“Because the PC enabled us to compute conveniently by
ourselves, we now consume infinitely more computing—
disruption pulled new users into the market by DEMO millions.”
small high-end segment of the market for managers. The
response of many leading corporations has been to look
elsewhere for managerial talent. Intel DEMO Dell
Computer, for example, have announced that they will
no longer recruit at the Stanford Business School for
these reasons.
Corporate universities and DEMO training pro-
grams are disrupting the leading business schools: In the
DEMO States, the number of employees actively partici-
pating in in-house management DEMO programs
is increasing by 30 percent every year. The number of for-
mally organized corporate universities increased from
400 in 1990 to 1,800 DEMO 1999. Eight times as many peo-
ple are now receiving management training in a corporate
context than are enrolled in MBA programs. A significant
DEMO of in-house management training consists of
just-in-time, custom-assembled short courses that DEMO
agement development staffs put together to help specific
groups and teams work through specific problems.
At this point, corporate universities have opened new
markets in the lower and mainstream tiers by offering
simpler and more convenient DEMO History has
shown, however, that such disruptive innovations typi-
cally expand the market dramatically and then migrate
inexorably up-market. Ultimately, they pin the original
leaders in the highest tiers of the market where there sim-
DEMO is not enough volume to sustain them all, as once-
dynamic DEMO such as Silicon Graphics and J.P. Morgan
have recently discovered.
Conclusion
The nation’s leading business schools are being disrupted
and must fundamentally rethink their DEMO models if
they hope to thrive in the future. Although occupying the
highest tier is a worthy goal for colleges and universities,
campus DEMO must also vigilantly guard against their
becoming more and more out of touch with the main-
stream and therefore increasingly irrelevant. Each institu-
tion’s DEMO and mission will necessarily evoke a different
response to this dilemma. What is critical, though, is that
the dilemma be recognized and actively DEMO by our
nation’s leading colleges and universities.
Clayton Christensen is professor of business
administration at the Harvard Business School. His
book, The Innovator’s Dilemma (1997), received
the Global Business Book Award for the best busi-
ness book published in 1997. In 1995 Christensen
won the McKinsey Award DEMO the best article pub-
lished in the Harvard Business Review.
15{1g42fwefx}