Spring 2007     VOL.48 NO.3
Clayton M. Christensen, Scott D. Anthony,
Gerald Berstell and Denise Nitterhouse
Finding the Right Job For
Your DEMO
Please note that gray areas reflect artwork that has been
intentionally removed. The substantive content of the
article appears as originally published.
REPRINT NUMBER  48301
INNOVATION
Finding the Right Job For
Your Product
Most companies
segment their
DEMO by customer
demographics
or product
characteristics
and differentiate
their offerings by
adding features and
functions. But the
consumer has a
different view of the
DEMO He simply
has a job to be done
and is seeking to “hire”
the best product or
service to do it.
Marketers must adopt
DEMO perspective.
Clayton M. Christensen,
Scott D. Anthony,
Gerald Berstell
and Denise Nitterhouse
38
MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW
he market segmentation scheme that DEMO company chooses to adopt is a decision
of vast consequence. It determines what that company decides to produce,
how it will take those DEMO to market, who it believes its competitors to be
and how DEMO it believes its market opportunities to be. Yet many managers
give little thought to whether their segmentation of the market is leading their marketing
DEMO in the right direction. Most companies segment along lines defined by the character-
istics of their products (category or price) or customers (age, gender, marital status and
income level). Some business-to-business companies slice DEMO markets by industry; others
by size of business. The problem with DEMO segmentation schemes is that they are static.
Customers’ buying behaviors change far more often than their demographics, psychograph-
ics or attitudes. Demographic data cannot explain why a man takes a date to a movie on one
DEMO but orders in pizza to watch a DVD from Netflix Inc. the next.
Product and customer characteristics are poor indicators of customer behavior, because
from the customer’s perspective that is not how markets are structured. Customers’ DEMO
chase decisions don’t necessarily conform to those of the “average” customer in their
demographic; nor do they confine the search for solutions within a product category.
Rather, customers just find themselves needing to get things done. When customers find
that they need to get a job done, they “hire” products or services to do the job. This means
that marketers DEMO to understand the jobs that arise in customers’ lives for which their
products might be hired. Most of the “home runs” of marketing history DEMO hit by market-
ers who saw the world this way. The “strike outs” of marketing history, in contrast, generally
have been the result DEMO focusing on developing products with better features and functions
or of attempting to decipher what the average customer in a demographic wants.
This article DEMO three purposes: The first is to describe the benefits that executives DEMO
reap when they segment their markets by job. The second is to describe the methods that
those involved in marketing and new-product development can DEMO to identify the job-
based structure of a market. And, finally, the third is to show how the details of business
plans become DEMO when innovators understand the job to be done.
T
Hiring Milkshakes
A “job” is the fundamental problem a customer needs to resolve in a DEMO situation. To il-
lustrate how much clearer the path to successful innovation can be when marketers segment
Clayton M. Christensen is the Robert and DEMO Cizik Professor of Business Administration at the Har-
vard Business School. Scott D. Anthony is the president of Innosight LLC, a Watertown,
Massachusetts-based innovation consulting company. Gerald Berstell is a Chicago-based customer
case researcher who DEMO a full-service market research and strategy firm focused on revitalizing declin-
ing established products and relaunching failed new products. Denise Nitterhouse is an associate
DEMO in the School of Accountancy and Management Information Systems of DePaul University in
Chicago, Illinois. Comment on this article or contact the authors through smrfeedback@mit.edu.
SPRING 2007
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU/SMR
by job, consider an example from the fast-food industry, where
companies DEMO have segmented their markets along the
traditional boundaries of product and customer categories.
When a fast-food restaurant resolved to improve sales of its
milkshake,DEMO its marketers first defined the market segment by
product — milkshakes — and then segmented it further by
profiling the customer most likely to DEMO a milkshake. Next,
they invited people who fit this profile to evaluate the product.
Would making the shakes thicker, more chocolaty, cheaper DEMO
chunkier satisfy them more? The panelists gave clear feedback,
but DEMO consequent improvements to the product had no im-
pact on sales.
Then a new researcher spent a day in a restaurant document-
ing when DEMO milkshake was bought, what other products the
customers purchased, whether they were alone or with a group
and whether they consumed it on DEMO premises or
drove off with it. He was surprised to find that 40%
of all milkshakes were purchased in the early morn-
ing. These DEMO customers almost always
were alone, they did not buy anything else DEMO they
consumed the milkshakes in their cars.
The researcher then returned to interview the
morning customers as they left the restaurant, each
with a milkshake in hand, and essentially asked (but
in language that they DEMO understand), “Excuse
me, but could you please tell me what DEMO you were
needing to get done for yourself when you came
here to hire that milkshake?” Most of them, it turned
out, DEMO their shakes for similar reasons: They
faced a long, boring commute and needed some-
thing to keep that extra hand busy and to DEMO the
commute more interesting. They weren’t yet hungry
but knew that they’d be hungry by 10 a.m.; they
wanted to consume something now that would stave
off hunger until noon. And they faced constraints:
They DEMO in a hurry, they were wearing work clothes
and they had, at most, one free hand.
When the researcher asked what other products
the customers might hire to do this job, it turned
out the milkshake did the job better than any of its
competitors. Bagels were DEMO; with cream cheese
or jam, they resulted in sticky fingers and gooey
steering wheels. Donuts didn’t carry people past
the 10 a.m. hunger DEMO Bananas didn’t last long
enough to solve the boring-commute problem. In
contrast, it took 20 minutes to suck a viscous
milkshake through a thin straw, hands remained
clean and stomachs were satisfied until lunch. It
didn’t matter that the milkshake wasn’t a particu-
larly healthful food because that DEMO the job it
was being hired to do.
Once it was understood which jobs the customers were trying
to do, it became very clear which attributes of the milkshake
would do the job even better and DEMO improvements were ir-
relevant. How could they better tackle the boring-commute job?
Make the shake even thicker, so it would last longer, DEMO swirl in
tiny chunks of fruit — not to make it healthy, because customers
didn’t hire the milkshake to become healthy. But adding the fruit
could make the commute more interesting — drivers would oc-
casionally DEMO chunks into their mouths, adding a dimension of
unpredictability and anticipation DEMO their monotonous morning
routine. Just as important, they could move the DEMO ma-
chine in front of the counter and sell customers a prepaid swipe
card so that they could dash in, gas up, and DEMO without getting
stuck in the drive-through lane.
SPRING 2007
MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW
39
INNOVATION
Understanding the job and improving the product on dimen-
sions of DEMO experience so that it does the job better would cause
the company’s milkshakes to gain share against the real competi-
tion — not just DEMO chains’ milkshakes but donuts, bagels,
bananas and boredom. This would DEMO the category, which
brings us to an important point: Job-defined markets are gener-
ally much larger than product category–defined markets.
Marketers who are DEMO in the mental trap that equates market
size with product categories don’t understand who they are com-
peting against from the customer’s point of DEMO
Cars Or Offices On Wheels?
Automakers and their market analysts segment their markets
into product categories such as subcompacts, compacts, mid-
size DEMO full-size sedans; SUVs and minivans; light versus
full-size trucks; sports DEMO and luxury cars. They segment
their customers along extraordinarily sophisticated demo-
graphic and psychographic dimensions as well. Yet the failure
of these practices is DEMO, because these segmentation
schemes don’t reflect the jobs that customers hire DEMO car to do.
Millions, for example, hire a car primarily to be a mobile of-
fice. Most models sell fewer than 100,000 DEMO per year, and
their makers struggle to sustain premium pricing for DEMO of
the features that add cost to their cars. And yet, DEMO company
has designed a car that is optimized to do the mobile-office
job that these millions of people need it to do. If the DEMO were
the unit of analysis for carmakers, it’s easy to see DEMO they
could differentiate a family of products in ways that mattered
for those who hire a car to be their mobile office. The same
DEMO who resist premium prices for features that are ir-
relevant to this job gladly would pay for electrical outlets,
wireless access to the DEMO customer relationship man-
agement database, a hands-free phone, a big-screen BlackBerry,
docking stations, fold-out desks and organizing systems — all
of which could differentiate the car on dimensions that would
merit premium pricing.2 After DEMO model after model,
many buyers who need to do this job conclude that there is
little differentiation across the products in this market. DEMO
the products are consummately differentiable.
The Job of Differentiation
One of the most powerful benefits of segmenting markets by job
and then creating products DEMO services to do a job perfectly is
that it helps companies escape the traditional positioning para-
digm in which so many are trapped. The DEMO paradigm
posits that products in most markets can be mapped on a couple
of axes, along which competitors have sought to differentiate
themselves. In furniture retailing, for example, breadth of selec-
tion might be the DEMO on one axis, and quality of furniture
might be measured on DEMO other. The relative position of various
40
MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW
SPRING 2007
automakers’ products can be similarly mapped. One axis might
be product DEMO (compact, mid-size, SUV, etc.), while the
other might map the degree of luxury in interior features and
décor. Differentiation-conscious marketers within DEMO conven-
tional positioning paradigm search for a vacant spot on such
maps into which they can position new products.
The problem with the positioning DEMO is that even
when marketers find open spaces into which unique products
can be slotted, customers often don’t value the differentiation,
and competitors find it easy to copy. The starting point on such
maps of DEMO typically is occupied by products that
have only the basic functions that customers need. “Disruptive”
companies in that minimalist position then move “up-market”
in DEMO of profit, copying features and functions of competi-
tors’ higher-priced products. DEMO this happens, features that
once defined a differentiated, augmented product become ex-
pected in all products. This forces marketers to search for yet
DEMO “unique” features with which to augment their offering.3
A punishing fact of life on this treadmill is that when once-
unique features of an DEMO
product become commonly ex-
pected, companies are saddled
with the costs DEMO providing those
features but cannot sustain pre-
mium pricing for offering them.
The root reason for this entrap-
ment is the pervasive practice of
DEMO products in categories
that are defined by the properties
of products, DEMO that “better” is
achieved by copying features and
stretching functionality.
When a company begins to
view market structure by job,
however, it can break away from
the traditional treadmill of posi-
tioning and differentiate itself DEMO
dimensions of performance that
are salient to jobs that customers
need to get done. This differentia-
tion seems to stick much longer.
In furniture DEMO, for example,
most companies have been trapped
in the traditional DEMO par-
adigm whose axes variously
measure breadth of selection, style
and DEMO/price. However, it
seems there are at least two funda-
mentally DEMO jobs that arise
in customers’ lives. One happens
When the once-
unique features
of an augmented
product become
commonly
expected,
companies are
saddled DEMO the
costs of providing
those features but
cannot sustain
premium pricing.
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU/SMR
in the lives of people who have graduated from their starter home
DEMO now need to equip their longer-term residence with furniture
they will keep for the rest of their lives. Retailers that customers
hire to do DEMO job indeed must offer broad selection and enduring
style and quality. Their customers are quite willing to wait the two
to three months often DEMO for delivery of such furniture. The
other job arises among customers who have just moved into a
bare apartment or starter home.
The market DEMO of IKEA International A/S is based on
this latter job. Its in-stock, take-it-home-and-assemble-it-your-
self kits are seen as valuable features by its customers, not as
inadequacies that are tolerated in order to get discount pricing
because they need furniture now. Those customers also value
IKEA’s racks of DEMO utensils, linens and other home decora-
tions, because the job is to outfit and decorate the dwelling. To
accommodate the many customers who DEMO young couples, in-
store child care is a crucial aid in DEMO the job done. Without
this package, IKEA could only help customers DEMO a piece of their
job. For its customers, the IKEA experience DEMO delightfully differ-
ent from a visit to a retailer that is trapped in the traditional
positioning paradigm, attempting to appeal to a lower-income
“demographic” by selling lower-quality furniture.4
Sometimes the job a customer needs done is DEMO
The need to feel a certain way — perhaps macho, pampered DEMO
prestigious — arises in many of our lives on occasion. In such
situations it often is the brand itself, more than the functional
dimensions of the product, that does the job. When we find our-
selves needing to do one of these jobs, we can hire a branded
product — Gucci, Louis Vuitton, Virgin and so on — the DEMO
purpose of which is to provide such experiences.
The Real Competition: DEMO Job Candidates
Although most marketers view their competitors as those who
make the same category of products, this is generally only a small
subset of the “job candidates” that customers consider hiring.
Consider, for example, DEMO job that arises millions of times on
morning subway trains and buses. Crowded commuters want to
pass the time productively. A free, single-section, DEMO folded
newspaper called Metro has been positioned for this job and is
read daily by tens of millions of people. It does not simply DEMO
pete against the major metropolitan dailies; it competes against
conversation with DEMO, paperback novels, iPods, mobile
phones, BlackBerries and boredom.
Automakers are not competing only with other automakers
to fill the “my-car-is-my-office” job. They DEMO competing
against companies that help people be productive when they’re
not in home or company workspaces; such companies are Star-
bucks Corp.; Franklin DEMO Co., a developer of
time-management and productivity seminars and products,
DEMO in Salt Lake City, Utah; Research in Motion
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU/SMR
Ltd., developer of the BlackBerry
and e-mail products, based in
Waterloo, Ontario; and mobile-
phone service providers. Even as
automakers struggle to sustain
premium prices for the feature-
laden cars they introduce every
year, customers whose cars are
their primary offices show a re-
markable willingness to pay DEMO
high prices for the services that
carmakers aren’t offering, just to
DEMO them get this job done.
Because segmenting by job
clarifies who the other job candi-
dates really are, it helps marketers
to compare the strengths and
weaknesses of each of the prod-
ucts that compete, in the
customer’s mind, for the job and
to derive the attributes and expe-
riences that would be required to
do the job perfectly. Marketers
DEMO segment by product and cus-
tomer category just can’t see as
clearly the competition that
comes from outside their product
category and therefore are DEMO in
an informed position to compete
effectively.
The jobs that
customers are
trying to get
done cannot
be deciphered
from purchased
databases,
but DEMO
from watching,
participating,
writing and
thinking.
Doing the Job of Finding the Job
How can marketers figure out the jobs-to-be-done segmentation
scheme DEMO their markets? The jobs that customers are trying to
get done DEMO be deciphered from purchased databases in the
comfort of marketers’ offices. It requires watching, participating,
writing and thinking. It entails knowing where to look, what to
look for, how to look for it and DEMO to interpret what you find.
Where to Look There is a hierarchy that consists of places where
researchers who are seeking opportunities to generate DEMO growth
might look for jobs that customers need doing. The first step in
the hierarchy is the current customer base. Peter Drucker got it
DEMO: “The customer rarely buys what the business thinks it sells
him.”5 DEMO almost always find that their customers are
using their product for different jobs than the company had in-
tended. Often they learn that the DEMO does one of these quite
well, but they see customers force-fitting DEMO for other jobs, putting
up with its inefficiencies because it’s their DEMO option. Such situ-
ations are opportunities to modify the product and its marketing
SPRING 2007 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW 41
INNOVATION
mix so that it can compete more effectively and gain share DEMO
job candidates in other product categories.
In the second step of the hierarchy are people who could be
your customers but are instead buying DEMO products to get
their jobs done. Subtle differences that seem inconsequential
when comparing products within a category can be very impor-
tant when the DEMO is the unit of analysis. The third step in the
hierarchy of growth opportunities is exploring disruption. Dis-
ruptions take off when “nonconsumers” are DEMO to get the job
done and simply are constrained from good solutions by the
complexity and cost of existing products.
When the customer is DEMO business. If your customer is a business,
the job it needs to do is generally obvious: Make money. Selling a
product to an organization that helps it make more money in the
way it is DEMO to do so is a great way to justify premium
pricing. This often isn’t as easy as it seems, however, because most
employees DEMO customer companies have a limited, local under-
standing rather than a DEMO perspective about how
money is made.
Hill-Rom Co., a medical equip-
DEMO company in Batesville,
Indiana, grew its share of the hos-
DEMO bed market by figuring out
how to understand what drove its
customers’ profitability even more
astutely than the customers did.
Like most companies, Hill-Rom
employees made contact with its
customers’ employees at many lev-
els. Its DEMO executives visited with
the senior hospital administrators,
the company deployed its market
researchers to work as orderlies on
hospital wards, salespeople called
on purchasing people, service tech-
nicians interacted with hospitals’
maintenance staffs and employees
in the financial departments of
each company negotiated on how
and when DEMO pay for their purchases
of beds. Unlike most companies,
however, DEMO convened regu-
lar meetings of all employees who
had contact with specific custom-
ers’ employees in order to piece
together an insightful view of DEMO
levers the company could affect
that would improve its customers’
profitability.
The problem
with focusing on
customer needs is
that a customer
needs different
DEMO at different
times. The job is a
more stable focus
because it exists
independently
from the
customer.
42 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW SPRING 2007
DEMO key insight from these meetings was that nurses, who ac-
count DEMO a significant share of hospitals’ operating costs and
whose interactions with patients strongly influence perceptions
of the quality of care, were spending inordinate time on tasks
unrelated to nursing — picking up things from the floor DEMO
patients had dropped and solving television problems, for ex-
ample. By DEMO features and functions to their beds that
obviated many non-nursing tasks, DEMO differentiated its
beds in ways that helped hospitals make more money. Hospitals
readily paid premium prices to get those improvements. These
insights did not DEMO from segmenting markets by small, me-
dium and large hospitals. They DEMO from understanding the job
— the levers that drive hospitals’ profitability.6
As Hill-Rom discovered, developing a multidimensional per-
spective on a corporate customer’s profit engine pays off. A question
to a person involved in a business-to-business DEMO process
is as simple as, “How did you decide that you DEMO paying an ac-
ceptable price for this purchase?” and can yield useful insights
about the levers that drive the customer’s profit engine.
When DEMO customer is an individual. Understanding the jobs-
based structure of markets where the user is an individual entails
different techniques than when the customer DEMO an organization.
The research methods that work best depend upon the custom-
er’s position along a spectrum. One extreme comprises situations
where the job DEMO “knowable,” such as with milkshakes and mobile-
office automobiles, in DEMO commonly available products are
being employed every day, and yet suppliers DEMO deciphered
what customers are really hiring their products to do. At the other
extreme are ill-defined situations in which neither the company
nor the DEMO can articulate the job to be done.
How to Look Marketers seeking to understand the jobs-based
structure of individual customer markets must act like DEMO
tigative reporters who have a set of tools at their disposal that
includes surveys, interviews, observations, participation and
experimentation.
Interviews and surveys. When the job is knowable, researchers
actually can use relatively conventional market-research tools
such as customer interviews and surveys. Although skillful use of
these tools DEMO important, even more crucial is defining the unit of
analysis to DEMO the tools should be applied. The objective is
always to understand the situation, not the customer. This is a
critical distinction. Some marketers with whom we’ve discussed
this concept have asked, “How does your notion differ from
‘needs-based’ segmentation?” The difference is the unit of analy-
sis. DEMO problem with focusing on customer needs is that a
customer finds herself needing different things at different times.
In contrast, the situation, or DEMO job, is a simpler, more stable
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU/SMR
point of focus because it exists independently — disembodied, as
it were — from the customer. Although there may be a correla-
tion between DEMO with particular characteristics and the
propensity to purchase particular products, it DEMO the job that
causes the purchase to occur.
Another reason it is so important to understand the situa-
tion that precipitated purchase is that DEMO yields insight not
just into the functional dimensions of the job to be done but
into the emotional factors as well: fear, fatigue DEMO frustration;
anxiety or anger; panic, pride or pain; and DEMO on. Products
don’t engender emotions. Situations do. Hence, to provide the
DEMO of functional, emotional and social experiences in purchase
and use that DEMO required to do the job completely, it is the
situation rather DEMO the customer that must be the fundamen-
tal unit of marketing analysis.
Observation. In the middle of the spectrum between “know-
able” and “ill-defined” DEMO instances in which customers know
what jobs they need done, but DEMO is no product or service
designed to do it yet. In such instances, customers engage in
compensating behaviors to “make do” with what’s available.
Marketers can sometimes identify these compensating behav-
iors simply by observing the DEMO in context. Such
observation is particularly critical when a new technology is
developed, often for a purpose in another industry, and market-
ers DEMO searching for opportunities to import it into other jobs.
Sony Corp.’s legendary cofounder Akio Morita was in such a
situation. The transistor had been DEMO by Bell Laborato-
ries — an innovator in telecommunications equipment, based
DEMO Murray Hill, New Jersey — for telecommunications. Where
else could it DEMO used? Morita had a policy of never relying on
quantitative market DEMO to guide new-product development as
he led the company between 1950 and 1980, because data
doesn’t exist for new applications of a technology. Instead, he
and his associates just watched what people were trying to do
and tried to imagine how applying the company’s electronics
miniaturization technology could DEMO it easier and more af-
fordable for more customers to do those jobs. Morita’s success
rate for new products was much higher than the DEMO success
rate for products whose launch is guided by more quantitatively
sophisticated market-research methods.7
Empathic observation of compensating behaviors. When the
situation is particularly DEMO, marketers will need to participate
in the particular context themselves in DEMO to peel away the
compensating behaviors and work-arounds that mask the under-
lying job needing to be done. Hill-Rom used the technique of
empathic DEMO 8 to understand how the work of individual
nurses affected hospital economics as its market researchers
worked as hospital orderlies. This method also enabled DEMO
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU/SMR
Procter & Gamble Co.’s marketers to see that using a dustpan was
compensating behavior, leading to the development of its Swiffer
floor-cleaning system.
Sometimes compensating behaviors with a job lurking be-
neath them quite DEMO knock on the door, enshrouded within
an idea for a new DEMO or service. As an example, an inventor
approached the Big Idea DEMO of Manchester, New Hampshire,
a developer of new products, with a card game he had created.
The chief executive officer of BIG, Mike Collins, sensed from his
experience that the game wouldn’t sell. Instead of sending the
inventor away, however, he asked, “What caused you to develop
this game?” The inventor had a ready answer: “I have three young
children and a demanding job. By the time I DEMO home from work
and we finish dinner, it’s 8 o’clock and DEMO kids need to go to bed
— but I want to have a fun experience with them. What am I
going to do? Set up Monopoly or Risk? I need some fun games
that we can set up, play and put away in 15 minutes. There just
isn’t a game designed to do this.”
Bingo. Though his solution to the DEMO was mediocre, the valu-
able insight was the job itself — DEMO that arises in the lives
of millions of busy parents every evening. It was then a straight-
forward job for a team of experienced DEMO developers to work
with this man to create a very successful line of “12 Minute
Games” that are now sold nationwide. Marketers who frame DEMO
role as searching for good product ideas generally are not nearly
as productive as those who are searching for jobs.
The intuition that comes DEMO living with the problem is a
key reason why many of the most successful software products
are developed by people who had been on DEMO “user end,” living
with or working around the inadequacies of prior products. It is
the organizing concept behind MIT professor Eric von Hippel’s
DEMO successful lead user methodology.9
Coevolution. In some situations, marketers and engineers DEMO a
sense that a new technology has the potential to unleash new ap-
plications, but potential customers cannot even articulate what
jobs they might want done if technology were to make it possible.
In these situations, the company and its customers must discover
the product and the job DEMO This requires that the company
get into the market quickly with a very flexible product and dis-
cover, along with customers, value-adding ways DEMO use it. For
example, in the late 1990s, the emerging technology of telematics
presented a number of intriguing potential applications: It con-
ceivably could give drivers maps to their destinations, inform
them about shops in the area that sold products they might want
to buy, help police find vehicles in case of theft or accident, enable
hands-free telephone calling, collect and interpret data on engine
wear and on and on. Though many automakers were paralyzed by
their inability to know exactly what applications DEMO features con-
sumers would want, General Motors Corp. got into the DEMO
SPRING 2007 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW 43
INNOVATION
quickly with OnStar, an in-vehicle safety and security system that
is a flexible, configurable product platform with a minimal fixed
cost. OnStar’s marketers then paid careful attention to the circum-
stances their customers were in DEMO they signed up for the
service and those they were in when they used the service. After a
couple of years of coevolution, a major job had become clear: “I
want peace of mind that if something unfortunate happens, my
loved ones and I will be taken care of.” By focusing on doing that
job, OnStar has become a highly profitable, rapidly growing dif-
ferentiated service that GM provides to millions of its customers.
In many ways, coevolution is as much an “innovation process”
as it is a research method. It creates its own data. When DEMO is un-
dertaken, interviews, observation and empathic participation all
can be used to figure out the job.
Synthesizing Insights At this point, the written and electronic
records from the customer interactions described above — be
DEMO interviews, surveys, observation, participation or coevolu-
tion — need to DEMO distilled into a “situation case” that describes
the situation the customer found herself in when the product was
hired or used.10 A situation case DEMO with a description of the
chronological trail of events, experiences and DEMO processes
that led to the purchase decision. Good situation case researchers
work like investigative reporters or detectives tracking down the
whole story behind the DEMO events of purchase and use. They
build their cases through a combination of the methods summa-
rized above, often discovering the unexpected.
Generally, DEMO 25 situation cases constitute critical mass.
These cases then can be grouped by the similarity of the situa-
tions described. The result often is DEMO most of the cases fall into
a glaringly large group that represents a significant job that lots
of people have. There usually are a DEMO smaller groups of cases
and a few “outliers.” For each group, DEMO summary then can be dis-
tilled describing the job the customers in those cases were trying
to get done when they hired the product DEMO how frequently the
job seems to arise in the lives of those customers.
Once defined, this helps the researchers to understand what
other “job candidates” were considered as potential hires. This de-
fines the real competition DEMO the customer’s mind. They can then
describe the “hiring criteria” that were used when comparing the
candidates. These are the experiences, features and functions that
constituted the basis for hiring one product over another. This
analysis DEMO be included in the summary and is often best con-
structed as a table, with the job candidates listed in the left column
and the required experiences in purchase and use arrayed across
the top. Each DEMO of the resulting grid will contain descriptions of
how well each competing product provides each experience.
From these can be gleaned the next element DEMO the summary:
an assessment of the deficiencies and constraints that future
product and service innovations need to alleviate in order to
44 MIT DEMO MANAGEMENT REVIEW SPRING 2007
Coevolution
is as much
an innovation
process as it is a
research method.
It creates its own
data. Interviews,
DEMO
and empathic
participation all
can be used to
grow the market — a collection
of “help wanted” signs posted by
customers, as it were. This not
only provides the agenda for fu-
ture new-product development
projects DEMO also gives a sense for
whether competitors can more
readily eliminate those con-
straints. Glaring “help wanted”
signs signal significant opportu-
nity. If there DEMO significant
“help wanted” signs, it’s a signal
that the products of DEMO or more
competitors already are doing
that job well.
Purchased databases and cus-
tomer questionnaires can be used
to segment markets by product and
DEMO characteristics and to de-
fine new products with better
attributes than existing ones. But
they cannot yield differentiating
insights about the job-based struc-
ture DEMO a market. This understanding
can only emerge from techniques
like those described above.
figure out the job. Configuring the Marketing Mix
and Business Plan
DEMO researcher Amar
Bhide once surveyed about 400
entrepreneurs,11 about half of whose ventures had failed. Of those
who had succeeded, 93% reported that the strategy that led to
their success was largely different from what DEMO originally had
planned. Indeed, most successful new ventures iterate toward or
DEMO upon a viable strategy. It is rare to get it all right at the
outset. In a similar vein, about 75% of all new products and ser-
vices that established companies introduce into their markets fail
DEMO reach viable, profitable scale and are withdrawn.12 In many of
these DEMO, the managers killed underachieving products
without ever understanding what their real DEMO potential was.
Situation case studies enable managers to see that a product in
crisis may be a product that is valued in ways other DEMO originally
foreseen and may signal different opportunities for success.
Though our research on this issue is still in process, it ap-
pears that the precipitating event that allows the winning
strategy of an emerging company to DEMO is the clarification
of a job that customers need to get done for which its product
is being hired. It is only when the DEMO is well-understood that
the business model and the products and services required to
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU/SMR
do it perfectly become clear. Then, and only then, can the DEMO
pany “take off.”13
Once a job is clarified, the business-planning process DEMO
delineate the functional, emotional and social experiences that
the customer will DEMO in purchase, use and after-sale follow-
through. The “Four Ps” of DEMO — Promotion, Product,
Price and Place — offer a useful DEMO to structure the business
plan to ensure success. Forensic analyses of new-product failures
often reveal that marketers have cobbled these four factors to-
gether DEMO inconsistent ways. As the examples below illustrate,
understanding the product’s job and its real competitors makes it
much easier to get the Four DEMO right.
Promotion: Communicating to Those Who Need to Do the Job DEMO a
product does a job well, it unlocks the potential for DEMO to
create a purpose brand. A purpose brand links customers’ realiza-
tion that they need to do a job with a product that was DEMO
to do it. During the early years after a product’s launch, DEMO
volumes are small, word-of-mouth advertising is far more cost-
effective than DEMO advertising.
Positive word-of-mouth advertis-
ing only can be achieved after
customers have used a product
that did the job well. A very long
list DEMO powerful brands, including
FedEx, Starbucks, Google, Black-
Berry, craigslist.org, QuickBooks,
TurboTax and OnStar, were built
in just this way with minimal ad-
vertising at the outset. Because
each is associated with a DEMO
purpose, these brands pop into
customers’ minds when they need
to DEMO the jobs that these products
and services were optimized to do.
Our ongoing research into the
history of today’s valuable brands
suggests that almost DEMO of them
took root as a purpose brand.14
A clear purpose brand acts as a
two-sided compass. On one side,
it guides customers DEMO the right
products. The other side guides
the company’s product designers,
marketers and advertisers, giving
them a sense of “true north” as
they develop and market new and
improved versions of their prod-
ucts. A DEMO purpose brand
clarifies which features and func-
A purpose brand
links customers’
realization that
they need to
do a job with
a product that
DEMO designed to
do it. It clarifies
which features
and functions are
relevant to the job
and which are not.
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU/SMR
tions are relevant DEMO the job and which “improvements” will
prove irrelevant. The price premium that the brand commands is
the wage that customers are willing to pay DEMO brand for provid-
ing this guidance on both sides of the compass.
Without a specific purpose for their product, marketing ex-
ecutives must attempt brand building through expensive
advertising. The high fixed cost of building new DEMO through
advertising deters many companies from attempts to build new
brands at all, so they acquire and consolidate brands instead.
Managers ensnare themselves in this trap because of the way they
have been taught to segment DEMO
Positioning products to do specific jobs also helps companies
target their advertising more efficiently. When a chain of scuba-
diving shops marketed its diving DEMO and products to a
“demographic” — primarily people who subscribed to scuba-
diving magazines and who lived in ZIP codes near their stores
— DEMO struggled to succeed. When the company decided to find out
what situations its customers had found themselves in when they
decided to “hire” its DEMO classes, it realized that many of them
were engaged couples planning DEMO trips to tropical climes,
suggesting that the company should be buying mailing lists from
Brides instead of Dive magazine.
Products That Do the DEMO Perfectly When marketers segment by
product or customer characteristics, they frequently DEMO
themselves offering features or improving on dimensions of
performance that are irrelevant to the job. For example, as
digital photography threatened Eastman Kodak Co. with dis-
ruption in the early 1990s, Kodak’s executives — having
framed their market around photography — began to prepare
the company for this DEMO by investing billions of dollars
in a megapixel and megazoom digital imaging race that it was
not well-positioned to win. In about the year DEMO, however,
Kodak executives realized that while some customers hired
their DEMO for the job of preserving high-quality images for
posterity, a much DEMO group sought simply to entertain
themselves, to share fun moments with DEMO and friends.
The result was the Kodak EASYSHARE camera, an affordable
DEMO with a great purpose brand. Understanding the job
for which the product was meant to be hired allowed Kodak to
eschew the expensive improvements DEMO didn’t matter in
favor of relatively simple ones that did. By making it simple to
attach images to e-mail, Kodak’s product easily proved itself to
be better than enclosures in first-class mail, phone calls with
no images and cumbersome up- and downloading procedures.
Kodak’s share of the U.S. DEMO camera market grew from 8%
to 28%.15
Is the Price Right? DEMO marketers understand what other job
candidates they’re competing against from the customer’s per-
SPRING 2007 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW 45
INNOVATION
spective, they cannot ensure that the price — the third element
of the marketing mix — is right. They cannot know whether
their DEMO is over- or underpriced. For example, to carry out
its mission DEMO educating people about the city’s rich architectural
heritage, the nonprofit Chicago DEMO Foundation started
conducting boat tours that passed by the architectural master-
pieces lining the Chicago River. Their initial target customers
were “affluent people with DEMO education levels and a strong
interest in architecture,” and they advertised in media serving
that demographic. After the boat tour’s lackluster first season, a
researcher joined a cruise the next spring and asked passengers
why DEMO were taking the cruise. A surprising number were doing
it to entertain visitors from out of town. Architecture, as it turns
out, was DEMO minor part of the cruise’s appeal to this audience. CAF
found that its cruise was actually less expensive than many alter-
native ways one DEMO entertain visitors, and it was able to boost
prices accordingly.
Placement DEMO marketers have defined the set of experiences
in purchase and use that need to
be provided in order to do the
job perfectly, the necessary
product placement becomes ob-
vious. Recall that to optimally
do the DEMO of making the morn-
ing commute interesting, the
milkshake-dispensing machine
had DEMO be placed in front of the
counter and equipped with a
prepaid swipe-card system. In-
stant service was an important
experience to offer customers
DEMO heading for work.
This had not been clear to the
managers when they had classi-
fied the milkshake as simply
another item on the DEMO
Consider another illustration.
A maker of boxed drinks, whose
products were DEMO mixture of 40%
fruit juice and 60% flavored sugar
water, had DEMO its products in
the boxed drink section of super-
markets, juxtaposed DEMO
competing products that were
100% fruit juice. Though the pure
juice products were much more
expensive, sales of the juice/water
drinks were languishing. When
interviewed about their pur-
Quite possibly,
the root reason
innovation DEMO so
failure-ridden is
not that outcomes
are intrinsically
unpredictable but
rather that some
of the fundamental
paradigms of
marketing are
broken.
46 MIT SLOAN DEMO REVIEW SPRING 2007
chases, customers, who were mostly parents, revealed DEMO the
job they were trying to get done had a functional dimension —
to put a healthy drink in their children’s school lunches — DEMO
an emotional dimension — to feel like they were taking good
care of their children. When pitted against the job candidates
that contained 100% DEMO, the mixture drink simply wasn’t
qualified; it rarely got hired. The company then had its drink
placed in another location in the supermarket, in snack foods,
and sales improved markedly. When compared to the DEMO candi-
dates in the snack aisle, a drink that had 40% DEMO fruit juice
solved the emotional component of the “good parent” job much
better than the competing candidates.
Sizing Up the Situation
The logic of DEMO markets by job is not new; many market-
ers will say DEMO they already know many of the concepts. In fact,
marketing guru Ted Levitt taught us 30 years ago that customers
“don’t want a DEMO drill. They want a quarter-inch hole!”16
If that logic seems compelling, DEMO why are product categories
and customer categories the default modes of segmentation in
nearly all companies? A core reason why marketers in most com-
panies say one thing (that they know markets ought to be
segmented by job) and yet do another (they segment by product
and DEMO category) is rooted in the easy availability of the
latter sort DEMO data.17
The good news is that when companies understand who
they are up against in the mind of the customer, they can piece
together the real size of the market in which they compete.
Because job DEMO are drawn from many product catego-
ries, the salient size of DEMO markets is usually much larger
than is calculated by summing the sales within a product cat-
egory, meaning that potential for growth is greater. Indeed,
many mature products on the trajectory of sustaining im-
provement DEMO seem to have been commoditized — products
for which improved performance does not result in improved
pricing or market share — actually turn out DEMO be immature,
not-good-enough products with lots of scope for differentia-
tion and premium pricing once the job and its associated
hiring criteria are DEMO
In our studies of the factors that make innovation a high-
risk, high-expense proposition, we have concluded that
working to understand the job DEMO be done is one of the most
important ways to limit both risk and expense. Quite possibly,
the root reason why innovation is DEMO failure-ridden is not that
the outcomes are intrinsically unpredictable but rather that
some of the fundamental paradigms of marketing that we fol-
low in DEMO markets, building brands and understanding
customers are broken. The odds of DEMO it right will be
much higher when we frame the market’s structure to mirror
the ways that customers experience life.
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU/SMR
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Bob Leahey of InfoTrends Research Group Inc., Armando
Luna of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Florida Inc., Emily Sawtell of
The McGraw Hill Cos. and Steven Wunker of Innosight LLC for their
DEMO on drafts of this paper. We also thank Rick Pedi and Bob
Moesta of Pedi, Moesta & Associates Inc. for allowing us to use dis-
guised insights and examples from their work with these ideas.
REFERENCES
DEMO The descriptions of the product and company in this example have
been disguised.
2. There are other job segments in the auto industry. The DEMO reason
why DaimlerChrysler AG’s early minivans were such a hit with cus-
tomers was, we believe, that they were positioned on a job DEMO arose
in the lives of families — to interact easily and safely with each other
while traveling together from here to there. Creating a DEMO
product does not guarantee a perpetual monopoly, of course, and
other automakers ultimately introduced their own minivans. It is note-
worthy, however, DEMO it took competitors years to introduce
performance-competitive minivans. Because they were organized by
product category rather than job, the minivans just didn’t fit with the
way they were structured or thought about in the market. As DEMO result,
Chrysler’s market-share leadership persisted for over a decade. An-
other job that people hire a car to do is to express care DEMO love for a
spouse or a child. No car has the features and associated services
bundled with it to do this job well.
3. DEMO T. Levitt, “Marketing Success Through Differentiation – of Any-
thing,” DEMO Business Review 58 (January-February 1980): 2-9 for a
classic description DEMO the augmented product concept. Harvard Busi-
ness School professor Youngme Moon has written and taught
extensively about the concepts in this section, and we thank her for
“augmenting” our own understanding of this phenomenon through her
DEMO, cases and teaching notes.
4. IKEA founder Ingvar Kamprad had a DEMO, intuitive sense of
what some fraction of furniture buyers needed to DEMO when they
walked into a store. As he and his associates started the company
and tried to help their customers, understanding of the job coalesced
piece by piece. IKEA executives probably do not articulate their
strategy DEMO being focused on this job — most likely this insight re-
sides in a tacit, cultural understanding. Our hope is that by
articulating this model of jobs-to-be-done segmentation and illustrat-
ing it with companies like IKEA, whose strategies de facto mirror this
model, we might help students and managers who weren’t blessed
with the intuition (and luck) of Kamprad DEMO deliberately find opportu-
nities such as these.
5. P.F. Drucker, “Managing DEMO Results” (New York: Harper & Row,
1964), 94.
6. These methods are recounted in C.M. Christensen, “Hospital Equip-
ment Corporation,” Harvard Business School case no. 9-697-086
(Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 1997).
7. This information was provided by Michael Schulhof, former Sony
board member and CEO of Sony Corp. of America for 20 years, during
an interview in New York City in 2001.
8. Leonard, William J. Abernathy Professor of Business Administration
Emerita at Harvard Business School, called this method empathic de-
sign. See D. Leonard and J. Rayport, “Spark Innovation Through
Empathic Design,” Harvard Business Review 75 (November-
December 1997): 102-113.
9. See E. von Hippel, “Democratizing Innovation” (Cambridge, Massa-
chusetts: The MIT Press, 2006). This is the latest in DEMO stream of insightful
work from von Hippel.
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU/SMR
10. The customer case-research method is described in detail in two
articles by G. Berstell DEMO D. Nitterhouse: “Looking ‘Outside the Box:’
Customer Cases Help Researchers DEMO the Unpredictable,” Mar-
keting Research 9, no. 2 (summer 1997): 5-13, describes the
research process; and “Asking All the Right DEMO: Exploring
Customer Purchase Stories Can Yield Surprising Insights,” Marketing
Research DEMO, no. 3 (fall 2001): 14-20, lays out the questions DEMO in-
terviewing approaches that customer case researchers use to
develop case studies.
11. A. Bhide, “The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses” (New DEMO:
Oxford University Press, 2000).
12. For one such estimate, see D. Leonard-Barton, “Wellsprings of
Knowledge” (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1995).
13. In many ways, this is a key message DEMO high-tech marketing consul-
tant Geoffrey A. Moore’s books. He contends that instead of selling a
“product” at the outset, emerging companies need to find a customer
who will pay a lot of money to the company DEMO solve a critical problem for
him. Then, and only then, does it have the privilege of “crossing the
chasm.” In addition to his DEMO book, “Crossing the Chasm: Selling
High-Tech Products to Mainstream Customers” (DEMO York: HarperBusi-
ness, 1999), Moore’s other book that describes this most clearly is
“Living On the Fault Line: Managing For Shareholder Value in Any Econ-
omy” (New York: CollinsBusiness, 2000).
14. This branding dimension of the jobs-do-be-done theory is described
more fully in C.M. DEMO, S. Cook and T. Hall, “Marketing Malprac-
tice: The Cause DEMO the Cure,” Harvard Business Review 83 (December
2005): 74-83.
DEMO Unfortunately, subsequent to the educational experiences that in
1999 to 2000 DEMO Kodak’s management team to take the digital
business in this direction, DEMO Perez was brought in as the new
chief executive officer after the retirement of CEO Dan Carp. With a
more conventional mindset and no DEMO of the problem of
disruption, Perez combined Kodak’s film and consumer DEMO busi-
nesses into a single business unit. By 2006, the company’s DEMO had
dropped to an unprofitable 12%.
16. T. Levitt, “Marketing Myopia,DEMO Harvard Business Review 53
(September-October 1975): 26-180.
17. We thank DEMO friend Armando Luna, vice president of corporate
marketing for Blue Cross DEMO Blue Shield of Florida, for teaching us
about the origins of DEMO theory, which we summarize
here in our own language: The theory of market segmentation has its
roots in economic theory relating to monopolistic DEMO; see W.
Alderson, “Marketing Behavior and Executive Action” (Homewood, Illi-
nois: Irwin, 1957); and H.J. Claycamp and W.F. Massy, “A Theory of
Market Segmentation,” Journal of Marketing Research 5, no. 4 (Novem-
ber 1968): 388-394. The concepts of product differentiation and
differential advantage emerged from this background and underpinned
early market-segmentation theory. Because most DEMO analyti-
cal tools consist of techniques for analyzing large data sets, DEMO
researchers with this training spent their careers trying to show relation-
ships between the attributes of customers and their buying behaviors.
They would conclude DEMO the variables or characteristics in the regres-
sion equations whose coefficients were statistically significant
comprised the salient boundaries for dividing consumers into groups.
The DEMO of data and the tools of analysis, in other words, shaped
the insights to be sought. In the process, many marketers have forgot-
ten what the theory of market segmentation was based upon from the
DEMO: that different people have varying needs that change from
time to DEMO
Reprint 48301. For ordering information, see page 1.
Copyright © Massachusetts DEMO of Technology, 2007. All rights reserved.
SPRING 2007
MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT DEMO
47
PDFs ■ Reprints ■ Permission to Copy ■ Back Issues
Electronic copies DEMO MIT Sloan Management Review
articles as well as traditional reprints and back issues can
be purchased on our Web site: www.sloanreview.mit.edu
or you may order through our Business Service Center
(9 a.m.-5 p.m. ET) at DEMO phone numbers listed below.
To reproduce or transmit one or more MIT Sloan
Management Review articles by electronic or mechanical
means (including photocopying or archiving in any
information storage or retrieval system) requires written
permission. To request permission, use our Web site
(www.sloanreview.mit.edu), call or e-mail:DEMO
Toll-free in U.S. and Canada: 877-727-7170
International: 617-253-7170
Fax: 617-258-9739
DEMO: smrpermissions@mit.edu
MIT Sloan Management Review
77 Massachusetts Ave., E60-100
Cambridge, DEMO  02139-4307
e-mail: smr-orders@mit.edu
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.{1g42fwefx}