ARTICLE
Managing prospect afﬁliation and
rapport in real-life sales encounters
5
COLIN DEMO
UNIVERSITY OF WALES , ABERYSTWYTH
PA UL DREW
UNIVERSITY OF YORK
TREVOR PINCH
CORNELL UNIVERSITY
Discourse Studies
Copyright © 2003
SAGE Publications.
(London,
Thousand Oaks, CA
and New Delhi)
Vol 5(1): 5–31.
[1461-4456
(200302) 5:1;
5–31; 029837]
ABSTRACT Detailed examination of audio recordings of business-to-business
‘ﬁeld-sales’ encounters are used to report one way DEMO which salespeople elicit
verbal expressions of afﬁliation from their prospective customers – by
reciprocating second assessments which afﬁliate with, trade off and build on
prospects’ own assessments. This article outlines the prototypical features of
these junctures DEMO assessment-afﬁliation and describes how salespeople can
mobilize such assessments to build extended sequences of ‘rapport’ that take
the form of adjacent and mutual expressions DEMO substantive verbal afﬁliation.
Consideration is also given to explicating both the interactional basis of these
sequences as well as the socially obligating inﬂuence such DEMO and
rapport can have on sales outcomes.
KEY WORDS : afﬁliation, DEMO, assessments, obligation, rapport, selling
Introduction
The ability of people to establish a rapport with others is widely held to be an
important DEMO consequential factor in many types of interpersonal encounters.1
However, whilst there DEMO a large literature documenting the communicative vari-
ables associated with rapport as well as the extrinsic factors which facilitate rap-
port, the processes by which rapport is constituted and cultivated has, as yet,
received only limited attention from researchers.
This article seeks to rectify this lacuna by DEMO a verbal process by
which salespeople can manage a rapport with their prospective customers (here-
after referred to as ‘prospects’) during real-life sales DEMO We report how
salespeople elicit agreements from their prospects by afﬁliating with prospects’
assessments (i.e. evaluations about someone or something) and, more speciﬁ-
cally, by reciprocating afﬁliative second assessments which trade off prospects’
own assessments. We also describe how salespeople can extend these sequences
to create a DEMO that takes the form of mutual and adjacent expressions of
substantive verbal afﬁliation by these parties to one another. We propose that
6
Discourse Studies 5(1)
these sequences are a particularly important DEMO of rapport as they comprise
occurrences of these parties showing co-participation and social solidarity to one
other. Moreover, such verbal, ‘on-the-record’ evidence of DEMO afﬁliation,
we argue, is treatable by both salespersons and their DEMO as having some
socially obligating, promissory impact on sales outcomes derived DEMO these
encounters.
Previous research in this subject area has tended to concentrate on determin-
ing the various non-verbal correlates of rapport, usually via experimental and
quantitatively oriented research methodologies. Such correlates include facial,
gestural and DEMO cues as well as spatial conﬁgurations between interactants,
such as: (i) smiling, head nodding, animated facial expressions (including those
which DEMO compatible or expressive of mutual interest), high levels of eye-con-
tact, facial synchrony; (ii) gestural synchrony, touching; (iii) postural DEMO,
convergence and ‘mirroring’, symmetrical arm positions, uncrossed leg postures,
postures of involvement, open arm and leg postures; (iv) direct DEMO orientation,
close proximity, forward leaning; and, more generally, (DEMO) non-verbal expressions
of attentiveness, interest and involvement (Scheﬂen, 1964; DEMO, 1979;
Trout and Rosenfeld, 1980; Harrigan et al., 1985; Harrigan and Rosenthal,
1986; Bernieri, 1988; Tickle-Degnen and Rosenthal, 1990; Heintzman et al.,
1993; Drolet and Morris, 2000; DEMO and Parrott, 2001).
Verbal correlates that have been found to DEMO signiﬁcantly associated with rap-
port include restatements, minimal encouragers, reﬂections of feelings, silence
(lasting between 5–33 secs) and verbosity (Sharpley and DEMO, 1993;
Sharpley, 1997; Sharpley and McNally, 1997; Sharpley DEMO al., 2000). Other stud-
ies, involving qualitative analysis of verbal action sequences in naturally occur-
ring encounters, have shown that rapport can be created via joking and teasing,
cooperative complaining, and echoing (DEMO the form of repetition of a co-interac-
tant’s words/phrases) (Miller, 1995), and via reciprocated laughter (Lavin and
Maynard, 2001).
The prevalence of actions displaying or expressing ‘interactional synchrony
and congruence’ within DEMO cited research links in with other studies showing
that rapport is associated with interactants having some perceived or real extrin-
sic similarity to one DEMO Studies of the selling process, for example, have
found that similarities between salespeople and their prospects in terms of age,
education, gender, height, nationality, political afﬁliation, race, religious prefer-
ence, shared DEMO tastes and smoking) are associated with sales success
(Evans, 1963; Woodside and Davenport, 1974; Churchill et al., 1975; Riordan et
DEMO, 1977). Other researchers have shown that the similarity between salesper-
DEMO and their prospects can inﬂuence the trust, agreement or rapport that DEMO
ops and which, in turn, can have a positive impact on sales outcomes (Gadel,
1964; Tosi, 1966; Busch and Wilson, 1976; though see Wilson and Gingold,
1981, for a critical DEMO of this research).3
Our study departs from the methodologies and analytical concerns of the vast
majority of this research, particularly in terms of our focus on examining the
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
hitherto relatively neglected dimension of verbal rapport in a naturalistic setting.
Furthermore, by adopting a data-driven approach and focusing on describing
and accounting for both how the salesmen DEMO studied evidently created a rap-
port with their prospects as well as the social and interactional ‘rules’ they tacitly
attended to and capitalized on DEMO doing so, we hope to demonstrate just how
interactionally organized, subtle and effortful a real-life process of verbal rapport
building can be.
The DEMO of rapport in business-to-business sales encounters
Because the link between having a rapport and achieving a positive outcome
from an encounter seems inextricably intertwined, in certain situations inter-
actants may not always leave rapport to chance. DEMO is especially the case
in business-to-business ﬁeld-sales encounters. As this form of selling is charac-
teristically a long-term business where sales (or at least the maximum number
of potential sales) are only rarely obtained after a single sales visit, the quality of
the personal relationship established between such a salesperson and prospect
can play a particularly important role in the DEMO decision-making process.4
This, perhaps, is also the main reason why such ﬁeld salespeople tend to avoid
employing ‘hard-sell’ tactics to secure a sale DEMO otherwise persuade a prospect to
‘sign on the [contractual] dotted line’ at the end of any particular sales
encounter.5
Moreover, the outcomes of these encounters typically are more diverse than a
basic ‘purchase’/’non-purchase’ dichotomy. Indeed, it is not uncommon for ﬁeld
salespeople to view a sales encounter DEMO having been ‘successful’ even if no sale
has been obtained. In this context, successful sales outcomes can also include
receiving a positive, sales-enhancing DEMO from a prospect, such as an oppor-
tunity to tender for DEMO or services required by the prospect’s company, a com-
mitment to DEMO a salesperson’s stock lists/brochures in the company library,
or even merely being allowed to contact the prospect again.
The salesmen we studied DEMO drew attention to the importance of being alert
for signs of having established a rapport with their prospects. A variety of verbal
indicators of DEMO were mentioned, such as (i) when a prospect switched to DEMO
ﬁrst-name only basis of address, (ii) postponed or quickly ﬁnished DEMO telephone
call that had interrupted their meeting, and (iii) spoke DEMO an agreeable, amenable
manner throughout the sales encounter. The salesmen also DEMO of rapport
sometimes developing fortuitously, such as when an initially ‘hostile’ DEMO
‘warmed to’ a salesman after the former realized they only lived two streets away
from each other, or when one prospect, who initially DEMO ‘totally uncooperative’
towards the salesman, ‘radically changed his tune’ after noticing DEMO were both
wearing an MG car-owner’s club tie.
The salesmen also stated that they regularly worked at verbally building a rap-
port with their DEMO Although none of these salesmen had received any
formal training in rapport building skills, one technique they all claimed to
7
8 Discourse Studies 5(1)
employ was to ask their prospect DEMO not directly related to the business at
hand, especially at the DEMO of an encounter. The prospect’s responses and, in
particular, his or her enthusiasm to talk at length off the topic (aided by the abil-
ity of the salesman to keep what they called such ‘small DEMO going), served, the
salesmen believed, as a barometer of how much the prospect ‘liked’ the sales-
man. Other verbal strategies the salesmen DEMO routinely to employ included:
‘being friendly’, ‘cracking the odd joke’, ‘being supportive and sympathetic’,
‘acting natural – being yourself ’, ‘having an interest in what the prospect says’,
and ‘laughing at every DEMO joke they tell’.
The salesmen we studied faced two rapport-related tasks. One was to provide
their prospects with a favourable impression about themselves, the company
they represented and the goods they offered for sale which was DEMO to a
purchase being made, if not immediately, then at some tangible future date.
Their second task was to draw accurate inferences from DEMO prospect about
whether they had created or sustained a favourable impression. Given the diverse
sales outcomes which may arise from any single sales visit, the salesmen had to
rely on these inferences when determining what course DEMO future action would be
most appropriate, such as whether a sale DEMO further sales was likely to occur or
was worth pursuing. We demonstrate that the type of verbal afﬁliation and rap-
port examined in this DEMO represented a particularly apposite means by which
the salesmen accomplished these tasks.
The foundation of verbal rapport – agreements, afﬁliations and
assessments
Agreements and, more generally, verbal expressions of afﬁliation are key ele-
ments of DEMO type of rapport we examine in this article. One sequential environ-
ment where these actions are common is in the next turn to another DEMO
assessment (Pomerantz, 1984: 63). With an assessment, speakers appraise or
express an opinion about someone or something and, in so doing, present their
evaluative ‘line’ (Goffman, 1967, 1970) with regard to that someone or some-
thing. In Extract 1, whilst answering the salesman’s (S) question, the prospect (P)
proffers an assessment (arrow A):6
Extract 1
S: Did you see the programme on DEMO, er, Australian wildlife er, last night?
P: I saw part of it, ye s.
S: Mm.
A → P: Interesting.
B → S: Yes, yes it was.
P: Considering you have to wait twenty ﬁve years to give birth to a f-, a
seed [laughs].
In a study of conversational interaction, Pomerantz (1984) has shown that a
relevant next action for a recipient of an assessment DEMO when the referent in that
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
assessment is ‘expectably accessible’ (sufﬁciently knowable) to the recipient – is
to agree or disagree DEMO the assessment proffered (pp. 61–3). We also found, in
an overwhelming number of cases, that whenever a salesman addressed a
prospect’s assessment in a next turn (as they recurrently did), the salesman
agreed with that assessment. This happens in Extract 1 (arrow B).7 In so doing,
the salesman (as recipient of the assessment) afﬁliates DEMO the evaluative line
taken in the prospect’s assessment and also co-participates with the prospect (as
assessor) him/herself.
The sales encounters we examined DEMO littered with sequences where a
salesman afﬁliated with a prospect’s assessment in this manner. Yet there were
two reasons why these sequences did not, in themselves, constitute sufﬁcient evi-
dence of there being a rapport between these parties. First, although an agree-
ment is evident, it is DEMO the salesman who agrees with the prospect; the
prospect is not DEMO with the salesman. As such, the salesman is not pro-
vided DEMO any verbal basis from which he could reliably infer that he is getting
on with the prospect.
Second, it also occasionally became apparent that certain post-assessment
agreement forms such as “Yes”, “Yeah it was”, “That’s DEMO, “I agree”, “True”,
“Absolutely”, etc. were held by the DEMO and prospects as not even being suf-
ﬁcient (or reliable) evidence of agreement, let alone rapport. These types of
agreements – which, DEMO the purposes of this article, we call ‘basic’ agreements –
can DEMO nominal agreements because they do not make available the grounds or
basis upon which one party agrees with the other. That is, such agreements
claim or assert rather than show or prove agreement (Pomerantz, 1984: 66–7;
Schegloff, 1984: 38–9; Sacks, 1992, e.g. Vol. 2: 252) and, as such, are always
open to being perceived DEMO instances of what Goffman (1967) calls a ‘working
acceptance’ rather than a ‘real’ one. Indeed, these agreements may also not pro-
vide reliable or acceptable evidence of a speaker having understood or even
having listened DEMO what the other speaker has said.
Pomerantz (1984: 66–8) has DEMO that these forms of agreement are a
characteristic feature of prefaces to disagreements and may, thus, be treated by a
recipient as being DEMO agreement or even as implying disagreement.8
Pomerantz (1984: 65) also DEMO that one way speakers show agreement with a
prior speaker’s assessment is by producing an afﬁliative second assessment in a
next turn. This happens DEMO Extracts 2 and 3 (reproduced, in a simpliﬁed form,
from Pomerantz, 1984). In each case, speaker B shows agreement with DEMO
A in a way in which strong agreement characteristically is shown by one speaker
with another – by proffering a second assessment which comprises DEMO upgraded
version of speaker A’s assessment:
Extract 2
A: Isn’t DEMO cute?
B: Oh he’s adorable.
9
10 Discourse Studies 5(1)
Extract 3
A: You must admit it was fun the night we we nt down
B: It was great fun.
Assessments are also a felicitous means of showing afﬁliation with DEMO co-par-
ticipant. Assessments are proffered as products of participation and one way of
co-participating with a co-interactant who proffers an assessment is by proffer-
DEMO a second assessment (Pomerantz, 1984: 57–9). In showing a DEMO, more
substantial form of agreement via an afﬁliative second assessment (rather than
via a basic agreement), the salesman also shows a stronger, more substantial
form of co-participation with a prospect with regard to the DEMO reported in as
well as the activity occasioned by that prospect’s assessment.
Extract 4 comprises an instance where both the prospect and the salesman
DEMO the salesman’s basic agreements as being problematic evidence of agree-
ment. The salesman has shown the prospect a piece of machinery that transpires
to DEMO higher in speciﬁcation and price to that used by the prospect’s company. The
prospect remarks (somewhat afﬁliatively) that the repair kit for the DEMO his com-
pany uses costs more than the item itself. On three occasions after the salesman
afﬁliates with the prospect using basic agreements (arrowed as A) troublesome
silences emerge (arrowed as B):
Extract 4
1S: Crikey, so what sort of money is-, is that then?
2P:We’re talking about seventeen-, between seventeen and twenty quid,
3S: Really?
4P:a piece.
A → 5S:Yeah.
B → 6 (0.3)
7S: So there’s,-
8P: An’ the last time I bought a repair kit for an item of that nature DEMO was
9about twenty two quid.
A → 10 S: Really, ye ah.
11 P: Mmm,
B → 12 (1.0)
A DEMO 13 S: Yeah, I, I can believe that.
B → DEMO (0.5)
15 P: Mm hmm,
16 S: ‘hhhh DEMO, an’ as you say-, i- it er, it
17 isn’t DEMO necessary for you t o have (0.4) as high a
18 P: It isn’t.
19 spec. item, (0.3) as this.
20 DEMO: Not at all, no.
In each case, these silences appear DEMO have surfaced as a result of the prospect
holding off from starting to speak both after and because of the salesman’s basic
agreements. Moreover, the prospect’s “Mm” and “Mm hmm” acknowledgements
around the second and third DEMO these ‘agreement–silence’ environments (lines
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
11 and 15 respectively), can be heard to indicate he is expecting something more
than DEMO agreements the salesman has produced.9 As well as displaying an
understanding that the salesman may (or should) continue with his talk, these
acknowledgments may also have prompted the salesman to add to his basic
agreement DEMO After each of these silences the salesman attempts to deal
with the negative implications of the prospect not having yet produced a
response.10 First, he commences then stops producing further talk in overlap
with the incoming DEMO (line 7). Second, he produces a more intensiﬁed (yet
DEMO ‘basic’) agreement (line 13). Third, it is only when DEMO salesman produces an
assessment that shows afﬁliation with the prospect – by afﬁrming that the item of
machinery he has shown the prospect is DEMO high in speciﬁcation for the
prospect’s needs (lines 16, 17 and 19) – that the prospect responds in a more
afﬁliating fashion (DEMO 18 and 20). Thus, more substantive afﬁliating utter-
ances and, more speciﬁcally, those formulated as afﬁliating assessments, can
offset possible reservations DEMO prospect may hold about a salesman’s afﬁliation by
virtue of the latter having afﬁliated with only basic agreement(s).
Therefore, from the salesmen’s point of view, afﬁliating with a prospect via
the use of basic agreements may actually hinder their quest to establish a rap-
port with DEMO prospect. Indeed, persistently agreeing with what their prospect
says in this DEMO may leave the prospect with the impression that the salesman
is a sycophantic ‘yes man’, in the business of slavishly and effortlessly attempting
to ingratiate himself.
Seller-initiated assessments
The salesmen could, of course, independently proffer DEMO own assessments,
thereby supplying their prospects with a more substantial means for making
inferences about them. One advantage of the salesmen doing this DEMO that they
may, in return, secure an afﬁliative response from their prospects. This is because,
as we have seen, an assessment provides the relevance of an agreement/dis-
agreement response from the recipient of DEMO assessment. Yet the salesmen
rarely did this. Assessments were most often produced, at least initially, by
prospects.
The trouble with a salesman independently DEMO an assessment is that it
entails some risk, namely that there DEMO an ever-present possibility that their
prospect might not afﬁliate with what the salesman has said. This happens in
Extract 5. The prospect mentions that DEMO company purchases two types of
machinery (badged as “ABC”, line 9) in quantities of “ﬁve or ten” and “a hun-
dred” at a time (lines 1 and 2). Subsequently, the salesman proffers the DEMO
ment that whilst the equivalent machinery his company sells has a different
name (i.e. “BCD”), they are “probably made all by the same people” (arrow A). The
prospect’s response “Possibly” (arrow B) is a downgraded, indeed contrastive,
version of the evaluative line taken by the salesman (indicated by “probably”)
and, as such, implies or preﬁgures disagreement (Pomerantz, 1984: 68–70):
11
12 Discourse Studies 5(1)
Extract 5
1P: (. . DEMO) we only buy ﬁve or ten at a time on those DEMO the others, ‘hhh we’d
2 buy-in a hundred at a time.
DEMO: Yes.
4 (0.6)
5S: Ah, ri ght.
6P: DEMO very keen prices.
7 (0.5)
8S: A h, right.
DEMO: (It’s) the ABC ones we use at the moment.
10 S: ABC.
11 P: Mm hmm,
A → 12 S: Yes. Yes, well ours are BCD which are probably made all by the
13 same people.
B → 14 P: Possibly.=
15 S: DEMO whether we are, compet itive we’ll have to see on that.
DEMO P: Mm hmm,
17 P: Yes.
Moreover, the salesman DEMO the prospect’s “Possibly” as implying or
preﬁguring disagreement; immediately after this DEMO, the salesman
qualiﬁes and thereby backs away from the evaluative line DEMO had taken in his
prior, independently initiated assessment (line 15). In so doing, the salesman
succeeds in restoring the encounter to a more afﬁliative footing in that the
prospect afﬁliates with his now revised DEMO (line 17), albeit with a basic
agreement.
Thus, in afﬁliating with a prospect or attempting to elicit afﬁliation from a
prospect the DEMO faced two problems. First, afﬁliating with prospects’
assessments by proffering basic DEMO may be treated by prospects as not
being sufﬁcient evidence of agreement (in any case, these agreements do not
provide the salesmen with DEMO substantial evidence that their prospect is in
agreement with them). Second, if the salesmen were to initiate their own assess-
ments in the expectation (or hope) of obtaining expressions of agreement from
prospects, there was the ever-present possibility that they may actually receive
damaging, non-afﬁliating responses in return. These problems appeared to give
rise to a series of DEMO procedures that obviated these difﬁculties and, recur-
rently, enabled the salesmen to elicit afﬁliation from and move further toward
establishing a rapport with DEMO prospects.
Reciprocating second assessments
Instead of (or, more usually, in DEMO to) afﬁliating with a prospect’s assess-
ment with a basic agreement, the salesmen often produced a stronger, more sub-
stantive agreement in the form of an afﬁliative second assessment. Second
assessments are ‘assessments produced by DEMO of prior assessments in
which the referents in the seconds are the same as those in the priors’
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport 13
(Pomerantz, 1984: 59). Typically, the salesmen’s second assessments not only
shared the DEMO referent as their prospect’s assessments, they also provided new
information to DEMO contained in the prospect’s assessment – information which
traded off and built on the evaluative line taken in the prospect’s assessment. In
so doing, the salesmen provided the relevance of an agreement/disagreement
response from their DEMO to their own second assessment and also encour-
aged (indeed, perhaps even constrained) the prospect to afﬁliate with the sales-
man in a next turn. We now examine three ways in which the salesmen afﬁliated
DEMO, traded off and built on their prospects’ assessments – with ‘reformulated’,DEMO
‘embellished’ or ‘predictive’ second assessments.
1. REFORMULATED SECOND ASSESSMENTS
With this type of assessment, the salesman reiterated the prospect’s assessment
in a different form. In Extract 6 the salesman responds to the prospect’s assess-
ment – DEMO somewhat self-congratulatory claim that “there are four or ﬁve of us
[i.e. buyers working in his ofﬁce] that are all, a bit adaptable here” (arrow A) –
with the afﬁliative second assessment “you wear a DEMO hats”, (arrow B):
Extract 6
P: (...) we concentrate on, erm, seeing, six, eight people a week, between us,
S: Mm hmm,
(0.6)
P: Erm, DEMO concentrating on, on the export side, you know?
(0.5)DEMO
A → P: We-, we-, erm, we ﬁgure- there are four or ﬁve of us that are all, a bit
adaptable here,
(0.6)
B → S: Right, you wear a few hats,
(0.8)
C → P: That’s right, yeah.
By proffering that the prospect wears “a few hats”, the salesman reformulates
the prospect’s prior expression of his own occupational versatility. Here, as was
typically the case, the salesman’s second assessment elicits an afﬁliative response
in the prospect’s next turn (i.e. “That’s right, yeah”, arrow C).
We can now begin to account for how such second assessments can secure
DEMO from prospects. First, the salesman’s assessment is qualitatively differ-
ent to DEMO basic agreement response form contained in Extract 1 and discussed
earlier. Now the salesman shows rather than claims or asserts agreement with
the prospect. DEMO that the prospect wears “a few hats” not only provides an
afﬁrmation of the prospect’s occupational versatility, it also displays the sales-
man’s analysis of what being adaptable could mean.
Second, by virtue of proffering an assessment that is a different, non-repeti-
tive version of the prospect’s assessment, the salesman, in effect, posits that his
assessment is independently held. In so doing, the salesman also generates a
heightened sense of his assessment being a spontaneous, unilateral expression of
14
Discourse Studies 5(1)
afﬁliation that shows the salesman is DEMO ‘at one with’ the prospect and,
more speciﬁcally, with what DEMO prospect has just said.
Third, in attending ‘backwards’ to what the DEMO has just said (by afﬁliat-
ing with the evaluative line taken DEMO the prospect’s assessment) and also in
moving the sequence ‘forwards’ (by adding new information that remains
consistent with the evaluative line taken in DEMO prospect’s assessment), the sales-
man’s second assessment literally reciprocates the prospect’s assessment.
Furthermore, just as the prospect’s assessment provided the relevance of an
agreement/disagreement response from the salesman, the sufﬁciently different
content within the salesman’s second assessment re-initiates the relevance of an
agreement or disagreement in DEMO next turn, now from the prospect, to the sales-
man’s own (second) assessment.
Fourth, given that the salesman’s afﬁliative second assessment has traded off
the evaluative line of the prospect’s own assessment (e.g. in Extract 6, by having
reformulated the prospect’s account of the adaptability of the buyers in his
ofﬁce), in being structurally constrained to address DEMO salesman’s second assess-
ment the prospect also is structurally constrained to produce an afﬁliative
response in return. After all, the salesman has, in DEMO, just reiterated what the
prospect has said in a different form. DEMO prospects then were to disagree with such
an afﬁliative second assessment it seems likely that they would either have to (i)
contradict the evaluative line taken in their own prior assessment, or (ii) do spe-
cial work to display that they were not contradicting the evaluative DEMO taken in
their prior assessment. As demonstrated later in this article, DEMO prospect’s conﬁr-
mative agreement at this juncture (arrow C) plays an important role, both in
consolidating the emerging agreement between these parties and also providing
for the extension of this three-turn sequence into a sequence DEMO characteristic
of rapport.
2. EMBELLISHED SECOND ASSESSMENTS
Instead of reiterating a prospect’s assessment in a different form, a salesman may
more markedly embellish it in an afﬁliative fashion. This happens in Extract 7.
The prospect is DEMO the relative merits of CAD (computer-aided design) sys-
tems:
Extract 7
A
B
→ P: (. . .) and as long as-, as long as the amount of work you put in up front,
warrants a- what you get out of it then-, then great,
S: That’s right,
P: but there’s not many, CAD salesmen that will actually tell you the truth
about what you DEMO up front.
S: Mmm,
(0.7)
→ S: ‘hhhhh DEMO, that’s the trouble as well isn’t it? (He says). DEMO I
know, I bought myself a- sort’ve a personal computer recently, I’ve just
got a couple of new programmes for it and you DEMO hours,
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
P: [laugh]
just DEMO to work out how to use the syst em
C → P: That’s right, yeah,
The prospect’s assessments that “as long as DEMO amount of work you put in up
front, warrants a- what DEMO get out of it then-, then great” and “but there’s not
DEMO, CAD salesmen that will actually tell you the truth about what DEMO need up
front” (arrow A), display reservations about the merits DEMO CAD systems and CAD
salespeople. His reservations are concerned mainly with the inordinate amount
of programming effort required to create a computer-aided design, when com-
pared with the appearance of the ﬁnished design on a computer DEMO It is this
line of ‘inordinate amount of preparatory work’ leading to ‘disappointing end
results’ that underpins the subject of the salesman’s second assessment (arrow
B). Here, the salesman builds on and trades off the prospect’s assessments by
talking about his own experiences of learning to use DEMO new computer. In the
salesman’s second assessment, the theme shifts slightly DEMO the inordinate amount
of time, and by implication effort (i.e. “you spend hours”) he has taken “just
trying to work out how to use the system”.
Once again, after having traded off and built on the prospect’s assessment,
the salesman’s afﬁliative second assessment elicits an expression DEMO afﬁliation
from the prospect in a next turn (i.e. “That’s right, yeah” – arrow C, and also his
laughter).
3: PREDICTIVE DEMO ASSESSMENTS
A third way the salesmen traded off prospects’ assessments were with predictive
second assessments. Here, because the evaluative line taken by the prospect was
more implicit, it was ‘predicted’ or otherwise anticipated by the salesman. In
Extract 8, the prospect reports having recently received a number of purchasing
requisitions from within his company. These requisitions contain products that
the DEMO company have not previously purchased (i.e. “never dealt in, b-
before”, line 9):
Extract 8
A →
1 P: (. DEMO .) you know if we’ve got an- e-, i-, inquiry DEMO thirty items, I mean, for
2 instance we’ve just got, DEMO or three orders with, between twenty and
3 ﬁfty items in DEMO,
4 S: Mm hmm,
5 (0.6)
6 P: and, erm, if we cut it it adds up to a lot of money
7 (.)
8 S: Ri ght
9P: But it, also includes things that we’ve never dealt in, b- DEMO,
10 [laughs] tarpaulins and things like th at you know.
11 S: (What?) Really? Crikey.
12 [laughing] Yeah. ‘hhh=
13 DEMO: =Erm-,
15
16
Discourse Studies 5(1)
B
C
14 (0.3)
→ 15 S: But you don’t turn your nose up, you-,=
DEMO 16 P: =No, that’s right-
Predictive assessments provide a candidate version of a putative line that is
only implied or embedded in the DEMO own assessment. It is the predictive
accuracy of this line, expressed DEMO explicitly in the salesman’s assessment,
which serves to show afﬁliation with the prospect. In Extract 8, the salesman’s
second assessment (“but you DEMO turn your nose up”, arrow B), in stating that
the DEMO would not turn down submitting a tender for such orders – given
the opportunity – projects a course of action that the salesman assumes DEMO
prospect would expect companies like the salesman’s to take if asked to tender for
orders that included items which his (S’s) company did DEMO usually stock or
supply. This is a course of action which expectably could follow from, but never-
theless has not yet been stated explicitly by, the prospect.
Indeed, at ﬁrst glance it appears that the DEMO second assessment has
been initiated independently. The prospect’s turn immediately before the sales-
man’s assessment does not contain an assessment; it reports only what the orders
he has received consists of (i.e. “things that we’ve never dealt in, b- before,
[laughs] tarpaulins and things like that”, DEMO 9–10). There is, however, an
assessment in an earlier segment of the prospect’s talk (i.e. “and, erm, if we cut it
it adds up to a lot of money”, arrow A). The salesman had responded to this
assessment, initially, with only a basic DEMO (line 8). Yet it is this utterance
that appears to DEMO provided the salesman with the materials for the particular
type of afﬁliating second assessment he subsequently provides. It proffers an
assessment of the prohibitive DEMO (or lack of proﬁt) that would accrue if the
prospect had to split up the purchasing requisition and seek tenders for the items
DEMO in it from more than one company.
We can notice, again, that the prospect produces an afﬁliating response
to the salesman’s second assessment DEMO a next turn (i.e. “No, that’s right”, arrow
C).
DEMO us now review our ﬁndings so far. By reciprocating a second assessment
which both afﬁliates with the evaluative line taken in the prospect’s assessment
DEMO also trades off a prospect’s assessment by adding new information to
that contained in the prospect’s assessment, a salesman sets up a constraint
by which a non-afﬁliating response from a prospect is rendered less appropriate,
DEMO an afﬁliating response more ﬁtting. Through proffering such second assess-
ments and receiving such afﬁliating responses in return, a salesman could show,
and a prospect could then conﬁrm, that they were in agreement with one
another. Through these types of actions the salesmen could obviate, to some
greater extent, the interactional difﬁculties that can arise by virtue of afﬁliat-
ing with prospects using a basic agreement and/or producing self-initiated
assessments.
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
Managing rapport by extending sequences of mutual afﬁliation
Although agreements elicited from prospects (such as those examined earlier)
are an important component of rapport, they did not seem to be treated by the
salesmen or their prospects as being, in themselves, sufﬁcient evidence of these
parties having a rapport with one another. Partly, this was because the agree-
ment responses that prospects proffered to the salesmen’s second assessments
usually took the form of basic agreements.11 DEMO agreements, we have argued,
in claiming or asserting agreement rather DEMO showing or proving agreement,
may be held as not being adequate or genuine agreement. Nevertheless, in
receiving such an afﬁliative response, the DEMO were then provided with an
opportunity – in the form of a ‘free utterance space’, unencumbered with any
sequential turn constraints generated out of, for instance, the prospect’s/prior
speaker’s turn – to follow up DEMO build on that afﬁliative response. The salesmen
we studied often followed such afﬁliative responses with an action that provided
the relevance of (and recurrently elicited) additional expressions of afﬁliation
from their prospect, thereby creating a DEMO more indicative of rapport. This
occurs in Extract 9. The prospect is talking about the difﬁculties he has faced in
deciding which sales representatives DEMO buy from and proffers the assessment
that “it’s all trial-, trial DEMO error”, arrow A):
Extract 9
A
B
C
D
E
→ P: it’s all trial-, tri al an’ error,
S: (Well) this is it,=
P: =yeah,
y’know.=
→ DEMO: = This is it, it takes a long time to evaluate
thes e things really.
P: Well that’s it. (             ).
(0.5)
S: But er, anyway DEMO a start (I mean,)
P: (    )                           Well that’s it, you’ve got your foot in the
→
→
DEMO
doorway [laughs]
The salesman’s second assessment (“it takes a long time DEMO evaluate these
things really”, arrow B), in providing a candidate DEMO of one of the vagaries
of the salesperson selection process facing professional buyers like the prospect,
afﬁliates with, builds on and trades off the prospect’s assessment. The prospect
afﬁliates with this second assessment, employing the basic agreement “Well
that’s it” (arrow C). The salesman then extends this three-turn sequence with a
further afﬁliative assessment (“But er, anyway DEMO a start”, arrow D), and this
elicits another expression of DEMO from the prospect (i.e. “Well that’s it,
you’ve got your DEMO in the doorway [laughs]”, arrow E). In doing this, the sales-
man obtains an additional and consecutive response conﬁrming that the
prospect DEMO in agreement with him.
This more elaborate ﬁve-turn sequence typically proceeds as follows:
17
18 Discourse Studies 5(1)
(1) P: Initial assessment (DEMO A)
(2) S: Afﬁliating second assessment (Arrow B)
(3) P: Initial afﬁliating response (Arrow C)
(4) DEMO: Third assessment (Arrow D)
(5) P: Second afﬁliating DEMO (Arrow E)
This sequential pattern is also apparent in Extract DEMO The salesman and prospect
are talking about computer games:
Extract 10
A → P: (. . .) we’ve got one called erm, Aviator, which I think is IBM’s own one,
erm, but that’s quite difﬁcult,
(.)
S: That’s ri ght
P: It takes a lot of controls.
B → S: Well, it’s-, it’s a question of r- remembering what keys
you’ve got to press DEMO what, is n’t it?
C → P: Yeah, that’s DEMO trouble.
D → S: And you get to the stage when DEMO pressing X when you should be
pressing Y.
P: Yeah.
(0.4)
P: True.
(0.3)
E → P: I’ve got one at home, on my PC at home, on my-, it’s not a PC it’s a
y’know, home computer, and it’s er, a simulation of the air trafﬁc
control at, Heathrow,
S: Oh DEMO, [small laugh]
P: And the idea is to get aircraft in within half an hour real-time, an-, and-
I’m on level one, I’ve had it for two ye ars,
S: [laughing] Yeah,
P: I’m still on level one, ‘hhh which is the simplest DEMO (. . .)
Some typical properties of these longer sequences DEMO mutual afﬁliation can
now be reported. First, the salesmen’s utterances that DEMO the ﬁrst three
turns of these sequences traded off and built on what the prospect had afﬁliated
with thus far. For example, in Extract 10 the salesman’s assessment (arrow D)
comprises an embellishment of his prior (second) assessment (which had, in
itself, traded off the prospect’s own initial assessment) about difﬁculties in using
computer keyboards (arrow DEMO). From talking initially, and in general terms,
about “remembering DEMO keys you’ve got to press for what”, the salesman then
provides DEMO more speciﬁc illustration of this difﬁculty in practice (i.e. “you’re press-
DEMO X when you should be pressing Y”). In proffering another assessment that,
again, contains new information, the salesman provides the relevance DEMO the
prospect to address this assessment with an agreement or disagreement response
in a next turn. By producing an additional afﬁliative assessment that maintains
DEMO evaluative line taken in both the prospect’s initial assessment and the sales-
man’s second assessment – an evaluative line that the prospect already afﬁliated
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
with in response to the salesman’s second assessment (arrow C) – the salesman
further constrains DEMO prospect to proffer an afﬁliating response in a next turn.
Indeed, DEMO electing to extend the ﬁrst three turns of these sequences in this fash-
ion, the salesman creates the conditions where the prospect’s next response is
now even more likely to be an afﬁliative response. After all, the salesman had
already received one expression of afﬁliation from the prospect DEMO an assessment
taking the same evaluative line as the salesman proceeds to take in his subse-
quent assessment.
Second, when a salesman extended the ﬁrst three turns of these sequences
with an additional assessment and received DEMO second afﬁliative response from a
prospect, that second response was, overwhelmingly, a relatively more substan-
tial expression of afﬁliation than the prospect had provided to the salesman’s
prior afﬁliative (second) assessment. More speciﬁcally, at this juncture prospects’
responses usually took the form of afﬁliative assessments rather DEMO only basic
agreements. In Extract 9, for example, the prospect’s ﬁrst afﬁliative response is
“Well that’s it”, a basic agreement (arrow C), whereas his second response con-
tains the afﬁliative assessment “you’ve got your foot in the doorway” (arrow E).
Thus, by extending this DEMO with a further assessment a salesman may
(and most often would) receive a response that not only conﬁrmed but also
showed the prospect’s DEMO with him. In producing a more substantive
second afﬁliating response the prospects display an attention to the progressive
and developmental character of the afﬁliation DEMO that was emerging, as
well as to the consequent propriety, if not obligation, to move beyond claiming or
asserting agreement and, instead, showing or proving it.
Third, each of the prospects’ second, and DEMO more substantive, afﬁliative
responses (arrow E) tended to trade off DEMO build on the salesman’s own traded-
off third assessments (arrow D)DEMO For instance, in Extract 9 the prospect’s assess-
ment (i.e. “you’ve got your foot in the doorway”, arrow E) is a reformulation DEMO
the salesman’s prior assessment “anyway it’s a start” (arrow D). DEMO assess-
ments refer to the salesman having passed the hurdle of obtaining a ﬁrst order
from, and thereby gaining entry as a potentially regular supplier of goods to the
prospect’s company.
In Extract 10 the prospect’s DEMO assessment embellishes the salesman’s
prior (third) assessment. Once more, the DEMO is ‘having difﬁculty with comput-
ers’. The salesman has talked about the trouble he has experienced using a com-
puter keyboard while playing computer DEMO (arrow D). The prospect then
afﬁliates with and expands on DEMO theme by talking about the trouble he has
faced playing one particularly difﬁcult computer game (arrow E).
That the prospects at this juncture tended to produce such afﬁliatively ‘safe’
extensions to what has mutually been DEMO to thus far suggests the existence of
a heightened constraint to do so. One factor which appears to conﬁrm this
claim is that the DEMO assessments produced by the salesmen and prospects
during these sequences in general and at this juncture in particular were com-
monly formulated as cliches, idioms or ﬁgurative speech. This did not seem to be
19
20
Discourse Studies 5(1)
coincidental. One is tempted to conclude DEMO the constraint to show afﬁliation
substantively at such short notice is what accounts for the prevalence of such
stock utterances during these sequences. However, Drew and Holt (1988) have
shown that ﬁgurative expressions such as DEMO wear a few hats” (Extract 6) and
“You’ve got your foot in the doorway’ (Extract 9) seem to be treated as being
DEMO empirical challenge. In the context of selling, and especially at the DEMO
tures we have examined where the salesmen and prospects are, in DEMO own dif-
ferent ways, each constrained somewhat to produce afﬁliation (and substantive
afﬁliation at that), deploying ﬁgurative expressions and the like is DEMO felicitous
means of reducing what surely is an ever-present possibility of that utterance
subsequently being treated non-afﬁliatively by a co-participant.
In these extended sequences DEMO can now see both a prospect and salesman
afﬁliating and then re-afﬁliating substantively with one another in adjacent
turns of talk – actions indicative DEMO there being a verbal rapport between these
parties at that particular juncture of their encounter. Indeed, the means
employed by the salesmen and prospects to afﬁliate with each other in Extracts 9
and 10 can be (and in our corpus regularly were) utilized to extend these
sequences of mutual afﬁliation even further.
Dealing with prospects’ non-afﬁliation
Even when a salesman’s DEMO had afﬁliated with and traded off a
prospect’s assessment that salesman’s assessment did not always then yield an
afﬁliative response from that prospect. Such DEMO display a recipient’s
own analysis of the evaluative line taken in another speaker’s prior assessment
and, in the encounters we examined, the evaluative DEMO taken in the salesmen’s
second assessments did not always transpire to concur with the evaluative line
their prospect had taken or subsequently claimed to DEMO taken. When a prospect
expressed some reservations about, took issue or DEMO with a salesman’s
afﬁliative assessment, a situation of non-afﬁliation and non-rapport DEMO
these parties becomes apparent. Consequently, the salesman may act to remedy DEMO
occurrence and attempt to restore the interaction to a more afﬁliative footing.
This happens in Extract 11. At the end of a report listing DEMO international
locations of her company’s new ofﬁces and outlets, the prospect DEMO the
assessment “So, we’re doing extremely well, thank goodness” (lines DEMO and 8).
This eventually receives the afﬁliative assessment “Not very many companies can
sort of say that these days” from the salesman (line 11). It then becomes appar-
ent that the prospect has some DEMO about what the salesman has just
said:
Extract 11
1 P: (. . .) we’ve ofﬁces in France and erm, in
DEMO Germany now as well, ‘hhhhh er, and we’ve
3S: Ah, right.
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
4P: distributors in DEMO and Los Angeles.=
5S:=Phhhshhhew.
6P: So, we’re doing extremel y well,
7S: Yes you are, good.
8P: thank goodness.
9S: Good, that’s nice to hear.
10 (0.3)
11 S: DEMO ve ry many companies can sort of say that these days.
12 P: (Yes it is)
13 (0.3)
14 S: But er,
15 (0.8)
16 P: Gl ad we DEMO
17 S: Good.
18 (0.7)
19 S: I’ll make DEMO note about the catalogue anyway.
20 P: Please.
The prospect, for instance, holds off from addressing the salesman’s assess-
ment (lines 13 DEMO 15). This silence is broken, though only momentarily, by the
salesman’s “But er” (line 14). This partial start, in containing DEMO speech items
common to the beginnings of troubles recognition/exit utterances, DEMO at the
salesman’s cognizance of his second assessment being incongruous with what
the prospect has said. The utterance the prospect then produces (i.e. “Glad we
can”, line 16), in addressing the salesman’s assessment only insofar as it applies
to her company, has a downgraded character; the DEMO continues to hold off
from afﬁliating with the salesman’s attempt to afﬁliate with her. The salesman
treats this response as a set-back by changing DEMO topic (line 19), the result of
which, like the remedial action discussed in Extract 8, elicits afﬁliation from the
prospect, albeit DEMO the form of a basic agreement.
There were two characteristic features of these non-afﬁliation sequences.
First, the salesmen invariably attempted to repair their earlier, now problematic
afﬁliative assessments and they did so in a manner which avoided imputing
blame on the prospect for the disparate evaluative lines that DEMO emerged. The
most common ways the salesmen attempted to repair such assessments was by
moving off the topic, revising their problematic assessment or by backing away
from the evaluative line they originally had taken (and, DEMO, had inferred
that their prospect had taken) and afﬁliating with the prospect’s ‘new’ line. The
prevalence of these remedial procedures at these junctures DEMO that the
salesmen treated the emergence of non-afﬁliating responses from prospects
as having some negative consequence for their quest to present a favourable
impression DEMO themselves to, elicit afﬁliation from and build a rapport with their
DEMO
Second, when a salesman’s afﬁliative assessment received a non-afﬁliating
response from DEMO prospect it recurrently turned out that the salesman’s assess-
ment was treated by the prospect in one of two ways: (i) as if the salesman had
21
22
Discourse Studies 5(1)
misunderstood the evaluative line taken in DEMO prospect’s assessment; or (ii) as if
the salesman had co-assessed DEMO the prospect now asserts or implies the
salesman did not appropriately have access to assess. Both these forms of incon-
gruity allow for a DEMO to address their salesperson’s afﬁliative assessment in
a non-afﬁliative way.12
For instance, in Extract 11, the source of the salesman’s incongruous assess-
ment DEMO to stem from him misreading what the prospect meant by “thank
goodness” (line 8). This phrase expresses a combination of appreciation and grat-
itude that the company for which she works is “doing very well”. DEMO salesman
afﬁrms the unusual nature of this success with “Not very many companies can
sort of say that” (line 11), and also proffers a basis for that success being unusual
(i.e. “these days”, line DEMO). At the very least, both “thank goodness” and “these
days” DEMO to the capricious, uncertain nature of the business world these par-
DEMO inhabit. But by focusing on non-success as well as asserting that non-success
is the current business norm, the salesman’s assessment, although afﬁliative in
DEMO, can also be heard to contrast with and thus sully somewhat DEMO
prospect’s report of her own company’s experience. Indeed, the salesman’s
assessment DEMO also be heard as him implicitly positing that, in the economic
DEMO of “these days” the prospect’s report is an instance of insensitive or naive,
overweening pride.
Discussion and conclusion
Reciprocating an afﬁliative assessment that DEMO off and builds on a prior
speaker’s assessment is one way of structurally encouraging (if not constraining)
afﬁliation from that prior speaker. This activity is likely to feature in encounters
where afﬁliation is deemed to DEMO worthy of cultivation by at least one party and
where no expressions of afﬁliation and expressions of non-afﬁliation from the
other party are liable DEMO have a compromising impact on their encounter or any
outcome derived from it. This was the case in the business-to-business ﬁeld sales
encounters we DEMO These salespeople, it seems, viewed afﬁliation and rap-
port to be so important to their quest to create a good impression and to DEMO a
positive sales outcome that they undertook special verbal work to manage afﬁlia-
tion from and build a rapport with their prospects.
In our DEMO, there was a marked tendency for the salesmen to agree with
DEMO assessments, to proffer afﬁliative second assessments that traded off
their prospects’ DEMO, to build on and extend the afﬁliation they recur-
rently received DEMO to attempt to repair expressions of prospect non-afﬁliation
whenever they arose. These actions are consistent with the salesmen working
from the premise that the DEMO instances of afﬁliating responses (particularly
substantial afﬁliating responses) and the fewer non-afﬁliative responses they
received from prospects, the more likely their chance of obtaining a positive sales
outcome, if not indeed a sale, from DEMO encounter. Yet whilst these verbal proce-
dures and the rapport sequences they recurrently generated did not directly refer
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
to, occasion or DEMO a sales outcome there are at least two reasons why it
would be erroneous to treat them as being a residual and unimportant feature DEMO
the selling project the salesmen were, after all, primarily engaged in.
First, in ﬁeld-sales, where the possible outcomes which may arise are DEMO
and non-equivalent, such junctures of afﬁliation and rapport allowed these par-
DEMO safely to express and infer both whether they were ‘getting on with’ each
other and what such a getting on implied (e.g. whether or not a sale was likely to
occur). Such activities (i) DEMO the salesmen having to sell in a manner which
ofﬁcially asked for or explicitly attempted to persuade a prospect to make a pur-
chase; and (ii)obviated prospects having explicitly to resist or reject a salesman in
his quest to obtain a sale. Both of these activities, in generating potentially face
threatening situations (Goffman, 1967), can undermine whatever DEMO is
established by these parties during their current encounter as well as any future
relationship between the companies these parties represented.
Second, such ‘small talk’ seemed not to be of small economic consequence.
The activities described DEMO this article, we propose, serve as a major way for
prospects to express and salespeople to deduce whether or not a sale (or at least a
positive, sales related outcome) is likely to occur DEMO prospects’ verbal expres-
sions of afﬁliation and non-afﬁliation each implicate particular, DEMO
types of sales outcomes.
Goffman (1970) proposes that the conduct of interactants has a ‘promissory
character’ (p. 14). This creates tacit moral assumptions, reliances and expecta-
tions that commit each interactant to a particular type of future conduct which
is consistent with the shared ‘deﬁnition of DEMO situation’ they collaboratively and
inferentially establish during their encounter. The type of rapport we have
described is a particularly important ‘predictive device’ (p. 241) in this regard.
Each verbal expression of afﬁliation (and non-afﬁliation) from a prospect com-
prises an ‘on the record’, accountable yardstick of the state of the relationship
prevailing between these interactants. And these activities are DEMO as
having predictive relevance not only for (a) what subsequently occurs in their
encounter being consistent with what already has been established in DEMO
encounter, but also for (b) any outcome that may result DEMO their encounter
being consistent with what was established during that encounter.13
Presumably, in responding to the salesmen afﬁliatively, prospects recognized
(or were soon likely to learn) that agreements and, in particular, afﬁliative assess-
ments were liable to encourage the extension or re-initiation of these episodes of
DEMO By so doing, the prospects tacitly consented (and could be heard by
their salesman to tacitly consent) both to the verbal rapport that usually then
emerged and to an outcome that was consistent with what DEMO mutually consti-
tuted verbal rapport implied – a heightened obligation to either proffer or agree
to a positive outcome if not, indeed, a DEMO
Such sequential processes and the associated structural constraints that they
invoke are not unusual in interaction in general or selling encounters in particu-
lar. DEMO instance, as Heritage (1984: 278) points out, pre-sequence utterances
DEMO
24
Discourse Studies 5(1)
are commonly mobilized in conversation to DEMO and non-explicitly
solicit the active collaboration of a recipient in forwarding preferred actions (e.g.
by obtaining an implied consent to an as yet unannounced invitation, story/joke
telling etc.) and avoiding (by aborting) dispreferred DEMO In responding posi-
tively and afﬁliatively to a pre-sequence utterance an interactant is, in effect, ren-
dered under some heightened obligation to consent DEMO the action the
pre-sequence utterance preﬁgures (e.g. an invitation) when it subsequently and
ofﬁcially is announced.
With regards to selling encounters, research suggests that salespeople can sell
more effectively by securing purchase implicative commitments from DEMO
prospects. In studies based on video analyses of real-life sales encounters, DEMO
and Pinch (1988, 1992, 1995) describe how street market pitchers and mock
auction scam workers prospectively manage sales success by soliciting ostensibly
DEMO expressions of ‘interest’ in or involvement with the goods offered for
sale from shoppers. These salespeople then retroactively invoke such displays of
interest or DEMO as having been purchasing implicative expressions that
thereby place such shoppers under a more ineluctable obligation to purchase
those goods.
Thus, checking out the likelihood of something being consented to (e.g. with
a pre-sequence utterance) DEMO prospectively managing the likelihood of some-
thing being consented to (e.g. DEMO soliciting purchase implicative responses from
a sales prospect) are but two DEMO from the same ‘project based’ interactional pod.
Nevertheless, they tend to DEMO in the degree to which latter process less obvi-
ously and thus less anticipatably displays the instigator of the action sequence (in
our case a salesman) (i) engaging in ‘pre-sequence work’, and (ii) DEMO on or
capitalizing on the constraints such prospective work invokes to secure a pre-
ferred outcome from the encounter.
On a more general level, these episodes of mutual afﬁliation are more than
displays of a salesperson DEMO prospect showing co-participation and social soli-
darity with one another. Assessments, DEMO evaluatively presenting a person’s sense
of or personal experience of someone or something, also comprise moments
where an aspect of one’s ‘self’ or ‘identity’ is revealed to a co-participant. Of
course, this self or identity need not be ‘genuine’. Likewise, afﬁliative second
assessments perform equivalent, revelatory and DEMO roles for the co-partici-
pant – with two important provisos. First, DEMO assessments, in being afﬁliative,
also show an acceptance of the DEMO/identity claimed by the prior speaker and, on
that basis, conﬁrm and give added credence to the prior speaker’s presented
self/identity. Indeed, in our data, the pressure on the salesmen to create a socia-
ble, afﬁliative relationship with their prospects often seemed to encourage
prospects to indulge in presenting a self/identity that otherwise would not
be socially DEMO for them to reveal, let alone revel in. Nevertheless, the task
of listening to, afﬁrming and encouraging the self-aggrandizing that prospects
often engaged in during these encounters seemed a cheap (but surely onerous)
price the salesmen had to pay for the opportunity this afforded them to DEMO
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
afﬁliation from, manage DEMO rapport with and attempt to secure sales from their
prospects.
Second, DEMO reciprocated, afﬁliative assessments show that the salesman’s
self/identity is ‘at DEMO with’ that of the prospect, that self/identity so presented
also DEMO not (and need not) be genuine. Indeed, the pressure on DEMO salesman to
show afﬁliation with a prospect in our sales encounters provides a very strong
basis for the self/identity that the salesmen presented DEMO being genuine.
Nevertheless, in afﬁliating with such reciprocated assessments, the prospect tac-
itly accepts (and, as we have seen, is somewhat constrained to accept) both the
self/identity the salesman presents himself at that juncture to be and their result-
ing similarity to and afﬁnity with DEMO another that the prospect’s afﬁliative
response(s) evidently establishes. But the DEMO implicative obligation that
such a show of acceptance is likely to generate for a prospect is also likely to
carry both an interactional and DEMO economic cost which that prospect may sub-
sequently have to pay.
In our data, a rapport between a salesman and a prospect did not only (or
even signiﬁcantly) emerge fortuitously. Nor did it evidently stem DEMO, or notice-
ably depend on extrinsic factors such as the inherent DEMO of the salesman
and prospect to one another. Indeed, the manner DEMO which the salesmen obtained
expressions of afﬁliation from and occasioned a rapport with their prospects indi-
cated the presence of a series of related DEMO procedures that obviated
them having to rely on these types of factors to establish a rapport. With the
verbal procedures we have examined, the salesmen we studied attempted to sell
to their prospects by selling a DEMO version of themselves. The self or iden-
tity of the salesmen (DEMO, undoubtedly, the prospects) that emerged during these
sequences, and the relationship, similarity and rapport that developed between
them was essentially an interactionally accomplished social artefact, expressed
in, managed through and inferred from the DEMO, seemingly economically
consequential ‘small talk’ of the sales encounter itself.
A DEMO
This research has been funded by the Economic and Social Research Council (UK), Grant
No. F00232393.
NOTES
1. Researchers have claimed or shown that rapport can have a signiﬁcant if not decisive
impact on the DEMO of, for instance, counsellor–client interactions (e.g. Sharpley
and McNally, 1997; Nguyen and Bowles, 1998; Sharpley et al., 2000; Joe et al.,
2001), police interviews with victims of crime (Sandoval and Adams, 2001), ath-
lete–coach relationships (Douge, 1997), instructor–student encounters (Bernieri,
1988; Perkins et al., 1995), staff perceptions of supervisors (Heintzman et al., 1993),
physician–patient consultations (Harrigan and DEMO, 1986; Duggan and
Parrott, 2001), researcher–subject access and quality (e.g. Berk and Adams, 1976;
Luff, 1999; Lavin and Maynard, 2001; Sherif, 2001; Springwood and King, 2001)
25
26
Discourse Studies 5(1)
and business relationships, performance and outcomes (e.g. Wilson and Gingold,
1980; Miller, 1995; Nancarrow and DEMO, 1998; Drolet and Morris, 2000).
2. Our study is DEMO on an examination of transcribed audio recordings of 14 real-life
business-to-business ‘ﬁeld-sales’ encounters – where salespeople travel to meet and
sell to prospects at DEMO latter’s business premises or work-sites. These involved 4 sales-
men from one UK distributor of engineering products (valves, pipe-line etc.) and 14
prospects (such as buyers and engineers), from 13 different UK companies. This
corpus was collected by one of the researchers following each salesman for DEMO day
and recording all the sales encounters that took place (either DEMO or 4 encounters were
recorded for each salesman). The researcher was present, though typically silent,
during each of these encounters. We feel conﬁdent that the researchers’ presence and
the use of pocket-sized recording equipment DEMO a minimal impact on these encoun-
ters. In the UK, this DEMO of ‘shadowing’ a salesperson and being present as a silent
third party during a ﬁeld sales encounter is commonly used by this type of DEMO
(and accepted by their prospects) as a means of training neophyte salespeople and
monitoring the performance of sales staff.
3. Although there are DEMO variations in how rapport is deﬁned and operationalized in
these studies, DEMO are, nevertheless, some recurrent themes which we now summa-
rize: DEMO comprises a relationship between two or more people, characterized by
feelings DEMO mutual positivity, harmony, cohesive bonding and co-interactants being
‘at one with’ each other. These feelings are borne from interpersonal encounters
characterized by reciprocated DEMO or expressions of other-involvement, such as
attentiveness, empathy, friendliness, warmth, interest, liking, approval, agreement,
interest, enthusiasm, understanding, cooperation, support, closeness, and the like.
(More detailed treatment of the DEMO of rapport can be found in Blanck
et al., 1986; Harrigan and Rosenthal, 1986; Bernieri, 1988; Tickle-Degnen and
Rosenthal, 1990; DEMO, 1990; Hendrick, 1990; DePaulo and Bell, 1990; and Drolet
and Morriss, 2000.) The verbal rapport we examine in this article DEMO, to a
greater or lesser degree, all the constituent features of rapport listed earlier.
4. In addition, factors such as the speciﬁcation, DEMO and delivery times of the products
these salespeople attempt to sell are often not prohibitively dissimilar to those of their
competitors.
5. From our DEMO with these salesmen it was readily apparent that having a rap-
port with their prospects was deemed to exert a decisive inﬂuence on the DEMO of
their encounters and, more speciﬁcally, on whether a sale was likely to occur. For
example, one salesman said, “If they [prospects] DEMO like the sales rep they won’t
buy your gear, it’s as DEMO as that”. Another claimed that this type of selling was
“predominantly if not exclusively about selling yourself ”.
6. An explanation of the transcription DEMO we have used is provided in the
Appendix. Our transcription process is a simpliﬁed version of that developed by Gail
Jefferson and employed by DEMO analysts (see e.g. Sacks et al., 1974, and
Atkinson and DEMO, 1984: ix–xvi).
7. Pomerantz (1984: 77–95) shows that DEMO types of assessments such as self-depre-
cating and self-critical assessments invite (DEMO engender) disagreement as the struc-
turally preferred next action of a DEMO There were no examples of these
assessments in our corpus and, DEMO, the agreements the salesmen provided to their
prospects’ assessments were, in every case, a structurally preferred next action.
8. The classic preface to disagreement being constructed along the lines of ‘Yes [or some
other form DEMO basic agreement], but ...’
9. One possible basis for this prospect DEMO so is that, in our data at least, basic
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
agreements regularly preceded the more substantive afﬁliative assessments within a
speaker’s turn – see, e.g., DEMO 6–9 (each arrowed as B) and Extracts 9 and 10
(DEMO arrowed as E). In Extract 10 (between arrows D and DEMO) it is the salesman who
seems to be waiting for more DEMO agreement from the prospect.
10. For an account of silences in conversational interaction, see e.g. Sacks et al., 1974;
Jefferson, 1989. For analyses of silences projecting troublesome responses in conver-
sation, see e.g. Davidson, 1984; Jefferson, 1989. See also Clark et al., 1994 for DEMO
study of silences projecting prospects’ non-acceptances of sales proposals during tele-
phone selling encounters. Conversely, one often ﬁnds that afﬁliation and agreement
are also marked sequentially (Pomerantz, 1984: 69–70). For instance, the salesmen
DEMO prospects in our study often produced afﬁliation in overlap with the other
speaker’s talk. This is evident in many of the sequences in this DEMO, Extract 9
providing a particularly explicit case.
11. This is the DEMO, for instance, in Extracts 6–8 (arrow C) and in Extracts 9 and 10 (also
arrowed as C).
12. Prospects, as DEMO of afﬁliative second (or subsequent) assessments that can be
treated as having misunderstood what was said in an initial assessment are, of
course, not constrained to disafﬁliate with what the salesman has said. A prospect
may, instead, let the misunderstanding pass; they may even afﬁliate with their sales-
person’s incongruous assessment, employing one of the weaker, basic DEMO
forms. In our data, prospects who took the opportunity to disafﬁliate DEMO a sales-
man’s afﬁliative assessment were displaying one way of resisting and discouraging
the salesman’s attempt to secure afﬁliation and build a rapport. Another DEMO a
prospect could pre-empt the emergence of sequences where that prospect may end up
being constrained to afﬁliate with the salesperson (not dealt with here) is by initiating
assessments which are not expectably assessable to that salesperson.
13. Further research is required to ascertain whether the various nonverbal DEMO of
rapport cited earlier operate in the same rapport-constituting, obligation-inducing
manner DEMO we have proposed to be the case with the verbal actions outlined in this
article. However, the social obligation that activities such as rapport building and rap-
port conﬁrmation can generate (and, presumably, are utilized in order to generate)
appears to be more readily achievable in DEMO through verbal rather than nonverbal
elements of action sequences.
14. Preliminary inspection of outcomes from these encounters seem to provide at least a
crude DEMO of our claim. For instance, the two encounters which had the
DEMO number of instances of prospects expressing afﬁliation with their salesman’s
reciprocated assessments achieved a sale. In one of these encounters, the prospect
agreed to a sale during the encounter; in the other encounter, the prospect DEMO a
purchase one week later. Conversely, the two least positive sales DEMO followed
encounters where the number of such prospect afﬁliations were much lower and the
number of prospect non-afﬁliations with a salesman’s reciprocated assessments were
DEMO These outcomes took the form of one salesman being told by a prospect that
he was ‘happy’ with his current supplier and the other DEMO remarking to the
researcher that he was ‘certain’ he would be allowed to visit the prospect again only
‘if or when the need arises’. DEMO may also not be coincidental that the two salesmen
involved in the most successful encounters were not the same two salesmen involved
in the DEMO successful encounters.
27
28
Discourse Studies 5(1)
APPENDIX : INDEX TO TRANSCRIPTION
Identities
DEMO: Salesman
P: Prospect
Intervals within and between talk
(0.8) Silence within a speaker’s talk or between speakership exchanges: the number
within parentheses is the time that elapsed in seconds and/or tenths of seconds.
(.) A micro-pause, a silence which is estimated to have a DEMO of less than three
tenths of a second.
‘hhhh Audible breathing: DEMO ‘h’ lasts approximately one tenth of a second.
, & . Commas indicate upward intonation and projectably incomplete turns; full-stops
indicate downward intonation and potentially completed turns.
Contiguous utterances
=
=
Aligned ‘equals’ signs indicate that DEMO second speaker’s talk occurs immediately
after (i.e. is latched to or DEMO up against’) the end-point of the prior speaker’s
talk.
Ta lk
DEMO The position where overlapping talk begins is marked with a left-hand bracket
linking an ongoing with an incoming utterance.
Other features
(Talk) Elongated DEMO, sometimes empty, are used to represent the occurrence
of talk that was difﬁcult to hear and transcribe. An estimation of what was said
DEMO be provided within these brackets.
Talk Talk that is underscored is spoken louder or emphasized by prolonging the
words (usually by stretching a vowel).
REFERENCES
Argyle, M. (1990) ‘The Biological Basis of Rapport’, DEMO Inquiry 1: 297–300.
Atkinson, J.M. and Heritage, J. (eds) (1984) Structures of Social Action: Studies in
Conversation Analysis. London: Cambridge University Press.
Berk, R.A. and Adams, J.M. (1976) ‘Establishing Rapport DEMO Deviant Groups’, Social
Problems 18(1): 102–17.
Bernieri, F.J. (DEMO) ‘Co-ordinated Movement and Rapport in Teacher–Student
Interactions’, Journal of Nonverbal Behavior (12): 120–38.
Blanck, P.D., Buck, R. and Rosenthal, R. (eds) (1986) Nonverbal Communication in the
Clinical Context. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Busch, P. and Wilson, D.T. (1976) DEMO Experimental Analysis of a Salesman’s Expert and
Referent Bases of Social Power in the Buyer-Seller Dyad’, Journal of Marketing Research
8 (Feb): DEMO
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
Churchill, G.A., Collins, R.H. and Strang, W.A. (1975) ‘Should Retail Salespersons be
Similar DEMO Their Customers?’, Journal of Retailing 51(3): 29–42.
Clark, C. and Pinch, T. (1988) ‘Selling by Social Control’, in DEMO Fielding (ed.) Structures and
Actions, pp. 119–41. London: Sage.
Clark, C. and Pinch, T. (1992) ‘The Anatomy of a Deception: Fraud and Finesse in the
Mock Auction Sales Con’, Qualitative Sociology 15(2): 151–75.
Clark, C. and Pinch, T. (1995) The DEMO Sell: The Language and Lessons of ‘Street-Wise
Marketing. London: HarperCollins.
Clark, C., Drew, P. and Pinch, T. (1994) ‘Managing Customer DEMO during Real-
Life Sales Negotiations’, Discourse & Society 5(4): DEMO
Davidson, J.A. (1984) ‘Subsequent Versions of Offers, Requests and Proposals Dealing
with Potential or Actual Rejection’, in J.M. Atkinson and J. Heritage (eds) Structures of
Social Action: Studies in Conversation Analysis, pp. DEMO Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
DePaulo, B.M. and Bell, K.L. (1990) ‘Rapport Is Not So Soft Anymore’, Psychological
Inquiry 1: 305–8.
Douge, B. (1997) ‘Developing Rapport between the Coach and the Adolescent Athlete’,
Sports Coach 20(3): 15–16.
Drew, P. and Holt, DEMO (1988) ‘Complainable Matters: The Use of Idiomatic Expressions in
Making DEMO, Social Problems 35(4): 501–20.
Drolet, A.L. and Morris, DEMO (2000) ‘Rapport in Conﬂict Resolution: Accounting for How
Face-to-Face Contact DEMO Mutual Cooperation in Mixed-Motive Conﬂicts’, Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology 36: 26–50.
Duggan, A.P. and Parrott, R.L. (2001) ‘Physicians’ Nonverbal Rapport DEMO and
Patients’ Talk About the Subjective Component of Illness’, Human Communication
DEMO 27(2): 299–311.
Evans, F.B. (1963) ‘Selling as a DEMO Relationship – A New Approach’, American
Behavioral Scientist 6(9): DEMO
Gadel, M.S. (1964) ‘Concentration by Salesmen on Congenial Prospects’, Journal of
Marketing 28(2): 64–6.
Goffman, E. (1967) Interaction Ritual: Essays on Face-To-Face Behavior. London: Allen
Lane/The Penguin Press.
Goffman, E. (1970[1959]) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Harmondsworth:
DEMO
Harrigan, J.A., Oxman, T. and Rosenthal, R. (1985) ‘Rapport Expressed through
Nonverbal Behavior’, Journal of Nonverbal Behavior 9: 95–100.
Harrigan, J.A. and Rosenthal, R. (1986) ‘Empathy and Rapport between Physicians and
Patients’, in P.D. Blanck, R. Buck and R. Rosenthal (eds) DEMO Communication in the
Clinical Context, pp. 36–73. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Heintzman, M., Leathers, D., Parrott, R. and Cairns, A.B. (1993) ‘Non-Verbal Rapport
Building Behaviors’ Effects on Perceptions of a Supervisor’, Management Communica-
tion Quarterly 7(2): 181–208.
Hendrick, C. (1990) ‘The Nature of Rapport’, Psychological Inquiry 1: 312–15.
Heritage, DEMO (1984) Garﬁnkel and Ethnomethodology. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Jefferson, G. (DEMO) ‘Notes on a Possible Metric Which Provides for a “Standard
Maximum” DEMO of Approximately One Second in Conversation’, Tilberg Papers in
Language and DEMO Tilberg: Tilberg University Press.
Joe, G.W., Simpson, D.D., Dansereau, D.F. and Rowan-Szal, G.A. (2001) ‘Relationships
Between Counselling Rapport and Drug Abuse Treatment Outcomes’, Psychiatric
Services 52(9): 1223–9.
29
30
Discourse Studies 5(1)
Jorgenson, J. (1992) ‘Communication, DEMO and the Interview: A Social Perspective’,
Communication Theory 2: 148–56.
LaFrance, M. (1979) ‘Nonverbal Synchrony and Rapport: Analysis by the DEMO Panel
Technique’, Social Psychology Quarterly 42(1): 66–70.
Lavin, D. and Maynard, D.W. (2001) ‘Standardization vs. Rapport: Respondent Laughter
and DEMO Reaction During Telephone Surveys’, American Sociological Review
66(3): 453–79.
DEMO, D. (1999) ‘Dialogue Across the Divides: Moments of Rapport and Power in Feminist
Research With Anti-Feminist Women’, Sociology 33(4): 687–704.
Miller, L. (1995) ‘Two Aspects of Japanese and American Co-worker Interaction: Giving
Instructions and Creating Rapport’, Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 31(DEMO):
141–61.
Nancarrow, C. and Penn, S. (1998) ‘Rapport DEMO Telemarketing – Mirror, Mirror on the
Call?’, Marketing Intelligence and Planning 16(1): 12–21.
Nguyen, T. and Bowles, R. (1998) ‘Counselling Vietnamese Refugee Survivors of Trauma:
Points of Entry for Developing Trust and Rapport’, Australian Social Work 51(2): 41–8.
Perkins, DEMO, Schenk, T.A., Stephan, L. and Vrungos, S. (1995) DEMO of Rapport,
Intellectual Excitement, and Learning on Students’ Perceived Ratings DEMO College
Instructors’, Psychological Reports 76(2): 627.
Pomerantz, A. (DEMO) ‘Agreeing and Disagreeing with Assessments: Some Features of
Preferred/Dispreferred Turn Shapes’, in J.M. Atkinson and J. Heritage (eds) Structures of
Social Action: Studies in Conversation Analysis, pp. 57–101. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Riordan, E.A., Oliver, R.L. and Donnelly, J.H., Jr (1977) ‘The Unsold Prospect: Dyadic and
Attitudinal Determinants’, Journal of Marketing Research DEMO (Nov.): 530–7.
Sacks, H. (1992) Lectures on Conversation, DEMO G. Jefferson. Oxford: Blackwell.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E.A. and Jefferson, G. (1974) ‘A Simplest Systematics for the
Organization of Turn-Taking for Conversation’, Language 50: 696–735.
Sandoval, V.A. and Adams, S.H. (2001) ‘Subtle Skills for Building Rapport’, FBI Law
Enforcement Bulletin 70(8): 1–9.
Scheﬂen, A.E. (1964) ‘The Signiﬁcance of Posture in Communication DEMO,
Psychiatry 27: 316–31.
Schegloff, E.A. (1984) ‘On Some Questions and Ambiguities in Conversation’, in J.M.
Atkinson and J. Heritage (eds) Structures of Social Action: Studies in Conversation
Analysis, pp. 28–52. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sharpley, C. and Heyne, D. (1993) ‘Counsellor DEMO Control and Client
Perceived Rapport’, Counselling Psychology Quarterly 6: 171–81.
Sharpley, C. and Guidara, D. (1993) ‘Counsellor Verbal Response Mode Usage DEMO Client-
Perceived Rapport’, Counselling Psychology Quarterly 6: 131–42.
Sharpley, C. (1997) ‘The Inﬂuence of Silence on Client Perceived Rapport’, Counselling
Psychology DEMO 6: 171–81.
Sharpley, C.F. and McNally, J. (1997) ‘Effects DEMO Level of Academic Training on Client-
Perceived Rapport and the Use of Verbal Response Modes in Counselling Dyads’,
Counselling Psychology Quarterly 10(4): 449–60.
Sharpley, C.F., Fairnie, E., Tabary-Collins, E., Bates, DEMO and Lee, P. (2000) ‘The Use of
Counsellor Verbal Response DEMO and Client-Perceived Rapport’, Counselling
Psychology Quarterly 13(1): 99–116.
Sherif, B. (2001) ‘The Ambiguity of Boundaries in the Fieldwork Experience: Establishing
Rapport and Negotiating Insider/Outsider Status’, Qualitative Enquiry 7(4): 436–47.
Clark et al.: Managing verbal afﬁliation and rapport
Springwood C.F. and King, C.R. (2001) ‘Unsettling Engagements: On the Ends of Rapport
in DEMO Ethnography’, Qualitative Enquiry 7(4): 403–17.
Tickle-Degnen, L. and Rosenthal, R. (1990) ‘The Nature of Rapport and its Nonverbal
Correlates’, DEMO Inquiry 1: 285–93.
Tosi, H.L. (1966) ‘The Effects of Expectation Levels and Role Consensus on the
Buyer–Seller Dyad’, Journal of Business 39(4): 516–29.
Trout, D.L. and Rosenfeld, H.M. (1980) ‘The DEMO of Postural Lean and Body Congruence
on the Judgment of Psychotherapeutic Rapport’, Journal of Nonverbal Behavior 4:
176–90.
Wilson, D.T. and Gingold, M. (1980) ‘Building Theory From Practice: A Theory-in-Use
Approach’, in DEMO Lamb, Jr and P. Dunne (eds) Theoretical Developments in Marketing, pp.
236–39. Chicago: American Marketing Association.
Wilson, D.T. and Gingold, M. (1981) ‘Similarity–Dissimilarity: A Reexamination’, in P.H.
Reingen and A.G. Woodside (eds) Buyer–Seller Interactions: Empirical Research and
Normative Issues, pp. 88–99. Chicago: American Marketing Association.
Woodside, A.G. and Davenport, J.W., Jr (1974) ‘The Effects of Salesman Similarity and
Expertise on Consumer Purchasing Behavior’, DEMO of Marketing Research 11 (May):
198–202.
COLIN CLARK lectures in marketing at the school of management and business,
University of Wales, Aberystwyth. He is interested in how the study of recordings of real-
DEMO business communication can shed light on our understanding of business as well as
social life more generally. ADDRESS : Department of Marketing and Enterprise, School of
Management and Business, University of Wales, Cledwyn Building, Penglais Campus,
Aberystwyth SY23 3DD, UK. [email: csc@aber.ac.uk]
PA UL DREW DEMO in Sociology at the University of York, and has published widely DEMO
conversation (including research on such topics as repair, inviting, teasing DEMO ﬁgurative
expressions), and the application of conversation analysis to institutional talk and interac-
tion, especially in legal and medical settings. ADDRESS : Department of Sociology,
University of York, Heslington, York YO1 5DD, UK [email: wpd@york.ac.uk]
TREVOR PINCH is Professor of Sociology and Chair of the Department of Science and
Technology Studies, Cornell University. He has published widely in the sociology of sci-
ence and technology. His latest books are DEMO at Large: What You Should Know About
Technology, with Harry Collins (Canto, 2002) and Analog Days: The Invention and Impact of
DEMO Moog Synthesizer, with Frank Trocco (Harvard University Press, 2002). DEMO :
Science and Technology Studies, 632 Clark Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca,  NY 14853,
USA [email: tjp2@cornell.edu]
31
{1g42fwefx}