This article was downloaded by: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network]
On: 18 DEMO 2008
Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 783016864]
Publisher Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: DEMO House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Venture Capital
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713798069
The impact of entrepreneurs' oral 'pitch' presentation skills on business angels'
initial screening investment decisions
Colin Clark a
a DEMO of Marketing, Minas Gerais, Brazil
Online Publication Date: 01 July DEMO
To cite this Article Clark, Colin(2008)'The impact of entrepreneurs' oral 'pitch' presentation skills on business angels' initial screening
investment DEMO',Venture Capital,10:3,257 — 279
To link to this DEMO: DOI: 10.1080/13691060802151945
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691060802151945
PLEASE DEMO DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://DEMO/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article may be used for research, teaching and private DEMO purposes. Any substantial or
systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or DEMO, systematic supply or
distribution in any form to anyone is expressly DEMO
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or accurate or up DEMO date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses
should DEMO independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss,
actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly
or indirectly in connection with or DEMO out of the use of this material.
Venture Capital
Vol. 10, No. 3, July 2008, 257–279
The impact of entrepreneurs’ oral ‘pitch’ presentation skills on business
angels’ initial screening investment DEMO
Colin Clark*
Department of Marketing, Fundac¸a˜ o Dom Cabral, Nova Lima, Minas Gerais, Brazil
(Accepted 7 April 2008)
This study adds new insights to the growing body of research showing that
entrepreneurs’ communication DEMO and personal attributes inﬂuence investor decision
making. Twenty-four business angels attending a UK investor forum completed
questionnaires evaluating 32 ‘presentational’ and ‘non-presentational’ aspects of DEMO
entrepreneurs’ oral pitch presentations. The business angels’ level of investor interest
was signiﬁcantly related to their evaluations of the quality and content of the
DEMO presentations: the higher an entrepreneur’s overall presentation score, the
greater the likelihood that the business angels would be interested in pursuing that
investment DEMO Presentational factors (relating to the entrepreneurs’ style of
delivery, etc.) DEMO to have the highest inﬂuence on the overall score an entrepreneur
received as well as on business angels’ level of investment interest. However, the business
angels appeared to be unaware of (or were reluctant to acknowledge) the inﬂuence
presentational factors had on their investment-related decisions: the stated DEMO for
their post-presentation intentions were focused ﬁrmly on substance-oriented non-
presentational criteria (company, market, product, funding/ﬁnance issues, etc.). More
generally, comments about the entrepreneurs’ presentations centred on presentational
issues relating to clarity/understandability and structure, the level of information
provided, the entrepreneurs’ personal DEMO, and their ability to sell themselves
and their investment opportunity.
Keywords: entrepreneurship; business angels; investor decision making; oral
presentations; communication skills
DEMO
One way entrepreneurs seek funding for their business ventures is by delivering an oral
presentation (or ‘pitch’) of their investment opportunity to potential DEMO While
many of these presentations are delivered to individuals or small groups of investors/fund
managers (Malmsten, Portanger, and Drazin 2002), there has been a growing trend,
particularly over the past 20 years, for business angel networks and other private investor
agencies to invite entrepreneurs DEMO deliver such presentations to an audience of their
members at investor forums, enterprise societies, dinner clubs and the like (May 2002;
Payne and Macarty 2002; Mason and Harrison 2003). These presentations, which DEMO
last between 15 and 30 minutes but can also take the form of one- to ﬁve-minute ‘rocket’
or ‘elevator’ pitches, are almost always delivered at an early, ‘pre-contact’ stage of the
investor decision-making process – often before investors have met the entrepreneurs or
*Email: colinsclark@hotmail.com
ISSN 1369-1066 print/ISSN 1464-5343 online
 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13691060802151945
http://www.informaworld.com
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 DEMO August 2008
258
C. Clark
seen their business plan. As a result, the most common objective of these presentations is
for the entrepreneurs to successfully persuade DEMO in their audience to ‘get their bums
oﬀ their seats’ (as DEMO pitch presentation skills consultant put it to the author), request a
copy of their business plan and agree to a subsequent meeting to DEMO their investment
opportunity in greater detail. The economic impact of these presentations for the viability
and success of an entrepreneur’s business venture can be DEMO Those entrepreneurs
who are unable to convince anyone to pursue their orally presented investment
opportunity are likely to seriously compromise their chances (at least with the particular
investors in their audience) of reaching even the traditional ﬁrst screening stage of the
investor decision-making process – the evaluation of DEMO business plan – let alone those
stages where, once over these DEMO and major hurdles, funding decisions are most often
made.
This paper, which reports the results of a study of business angels’ evaluations of
DEMO real-life oral pitch presentations and the relative impact that ‘communica-
tion style’-based presentational factors and ‘substance’-based non-presentational factors
had on their post-presentation screening decisions, examines a dimension of the investor
decision process – the role and DEMO of entrepreneurs’ communication skills on
investors’ funding/non-funding-related decision making – that has only rarely been
explored by researchers. Studies by sociologists have shown DEMO the verbal and non-verbal
skills of presenters/speakers in a wide variety of real-life communication situations can
have a decisive impact on audience members’ DEMO Such skills have been shown to
inﬂuence the level of applause political speakers receive at party conferences (Atkinson
1984; Heritage and Greatbatch 1986), the sales obtained by persons pitching goods on
street markets and in TV infomercials (Clark and Pinch 1995), the memorability and
success of tasks and targets delivered by managers when brieﬁng staﬀ teams (Clark 1999),
the monetary contributions proﬀered by the public to street entertainers (DEMO and
Howe 1994) and the occurrence of bids at auctions (Heath and Luﬀ 2007). Although many
business and government agencies, investor forum organizers and private companies can
readily be found on the internet oﬀering DEMO and training courses for entrepreneurs to
deliver more eﬀective oral presentations to potential investors, the evidence for entre-
preneurs’ presentation skills actually having an inﬂuence on investors’ screening and
funding decisions is still largely intuitive and DEMO This exploratory study shows that
entrepreneurs’ presentational skills had a signiﬁcant impact on the business angels’ post-
presentation screening decisions and, by so doing, also suggests that the communicative
interface between entrepreneurs and investors is likely to be a highly consequential
interface that merits greater attention from researchers.
DEMO review
The decision by potential funders to invest in an entrepreneurial business has largely been
viewed as being if not a rational process, then at least a ‘hard evidence’-oriented,
‘substance’-based process. Diﬀerent kinds of funders DEMO entrepreneurs’ business
proposals in diﬀerent ways and employ diﬀerent funding criteria and place emphasis on
diﬀerent kinds of information when doing so (Harrison and Mason 2002; Mason and
Stark 2004). However, one characteristic feature DEMO the research conducted into investor
decision making per se is that the potential risks and returns of an investment opportunity
are determined by an DEMO of the ﬁnancial facts and ﬁgures of an entrepreneur’s
company and via other similarly tangible and veriﬁable factors such as the level of sales DEMO
the company’s products, evidence of marketplace acceptance and patent protection, the
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August DEMO
Venture Capital
259
size and accessibility of the market, and the existence, strength and potential threats of the
competition or business environment. (For DEMO and research highlighting the
importance of this type of evaluation criteria see Tyebjee and Bruno 1984; MacMillan,
Siegel, and Subba Narisimha 1985; Sandberg, Schweiger, and Hofer 1988; Hall and Hofer
1993; Deakins DEMO Hussain 1994; Fried and Hisrich 1994; Fletcher 1995; Zacharakis and
DEMO 1995, 1998; Manigart et al. 1997; Shepherd and Zacharakis 1999; Manigart and
Sapienza 1999; Mason and Stark 2004.)
A second characteristic feature of this research is that many investors also place high
levels DEMO importance on relatively tangible and veriﬁable ‘human capital’ factors such as
the skills, experience, track record, characteristics and composition of entrepreneurs and
their management team (Tyebjee and Bruno 1984; MacMillan, Siegel, and Subba
DEMO 1985; Goslin and Barge 1986; Sandberg, Schweiger, and Hofer 1988; Hisrich
and Jankowitz 1990; Hall and Hofer 1993; Zacharakis and Meyer 1995, 1998; Smart 1999;
Haines, Madill, and Riding 2003; Mason and Stark 2004).
However, there is a small body of research (including the research cited above) showing
that other, more subjective and far less tangible, ‘human’ factors such as the personal
attributes, DEMO competencies and the communication skills of the entrepreneurs
themselves also inﬂuence investors’ decisions. For instance, MacMillan, Siegel, and
Subba Narisimha (1985) conducted a survey of the criteria US venture capitalists
employed when evaluating new DEMO Three of the 10 criteria the VCs most frequently
rated as being essential (meaning they would otherwise ‘reject the entrepreneur’s plan
regardless of any other characteristics, no matter how redeeming’) related to aspects of an
DEMO ‘personality’, namely ‘capable of [making a] sustained intense eﬀort’ (the
top ranked category); ‘evaluates and reacts to risks well’; and ‘articulate in discussing [their
business] venture’. Fried and Hisrich (1994) note that VCs DEMO entrepreneurs seeking
ﬁnance to display high levels of ‘personal integrity’, ‘realism’ DEMO ‘ﬂexibility’. In their study
of Canadian business angels’ evaluations of investment opportunities, Feeney, Haines, and
Riding (1999) found that attributes of the owners of the business seeking ﬁnance (e.g. their
‘openness’, ‘honesty’, ‘realism’ and ‘integrity’) tended to be valued more highly by
investors than were attributes of the owner’s business (e.g. ‘proper security’ and ‘low level
of perceived risk’). Haines, Madill, and Riding (2003) found that DEMO angels look for
entrepreneurs who are ‘honest’, ‘exhibit a strong work DEMO, ‘understand what it takes to
make their business succeed’ and have DEMO ‘realistic notion of how to value their business’.
Entrepreneurs’ social competencies have also been shown to have an impact on
investors’ decisions. Baron and DEMO (1999), in a study based on evaluations of extracts
from DEMO practice pitch presentations, found that entrepreneurs’ levels of social
adaptability (the ability to change their behaviour in a variety of diﬀerent social situations)DEMO
was a signiﬁcant predictor of whether a consulting company specializing in helping
entrepreneurs obtain ﬁnancial backing decided to assist the entrepreneurs in obtaining
ﬁnancing. DEMO studies have indicated that entrepreneurs’ communication skills inﬂuence
investors’ decisions. For instance, in the single case analysis of a VC thinking aloud while
evaluating an entrepreneur’s business plan conducted by Sandberg, Schweiger, and Hofer
(1988), presentational factors relating to the business plan’s content, organizational style,
format and understandability featured in over 20% of the VCs’ investment decision-
DEMO comments. Similarly, research by Mason and Rogers (1996, 1997) of business
angels’ reactions to an entrepreneur’s written business plan found that presentation-
DEMO issues such as not providing suﬃcient information and failing to adequately
address the concerns the business angels have when evaluating investment opportunities
were key DEMO that resulted in the entrepreneur’s investment opportunity being rejected.
Downloaded By: DEMO Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
260
C. Clark
Evaluations of, and decisions about, many of these DEMO tangible factors are most often
based not on ‘hard’ or veriﬁable evidence but, rather, on inferences drawn from a person’s
appearance, communication and conduct (Goﬀman 1959). This process of inference
making, which is DEMO process altogether diﬀerent from the way investors apparently prefer to
evaluate investment opportunities, relies on members of a society sharing a conventio-
nalized idiom of communicative signiﬁcation. By this means a person’s appearance,
communication or DEMO can ordinarily be relied upon by others to indicate and predict
particular things, and the person(s) from whom the inferences have been DEMO can rely on
their conduct, etc. to be interpreted and acted DEMO in a way that is consistent with the
conduct, etc. they DEMO displayed (Goﬀman 1959). Put simply, these social skills, which DEMO
shared by persons by virtue of being competent and experienced members of society,
comprise the most fundamental of all forms of ‘human capital’ DEMO it is these practices and
resources that enable social life to be possible.
One context in which entrepreneurs’ personal attributes, social competencies and, DEMO
particular, their communication skills would be expected to have a major DEMO on
investors’ decisions are entrepreneurs’ oral pitch presentations. Given the popularity and
potential economic consequence of these presentations, however, it is surprising that DEMO
little research has been conducted into this method of communicating an investment
opportunity. Indeed, aside from the aforementioned research conducted by Baron and
Brush (1999), the author has been able to ﬁnd only one other such study, conducted in the
UK by Mason and Harrison (2003)DEMO Mason and Harrison analysed the reactions of 30
business angels to a video recording of an entrepreneur’s real-life pitch presentation
(delivered at a previously held investor forum) and found that the entrepreneur’s
presentational skills had a decisive impact on the business angels’ post-presentation
evaluations. Most of the business DEMO stated they would have rejected this
entrepreneur’s investment opportunity and cited presentational weaknesses relating to
the clarity, content and structure of the presentation as their main reasons for doing so.
This study builds on Mason and DEMO (2003) research in three distinct and novel
ways. Mason and Harrison employed two qualitative research methodologies to capture
comments about the entrepreneur’s presentation DEMO was evaluated – a real-time method
where the participating business angels were invited, while watching the video recording of
the entrepreneur’s presentation, to DEMO down their remarks about that presentation, and a
post-presentation focus group DEMO provide additional information about the participants’
collective opinions of that presentation. These comments were then linked to the business
angels’ decisions about whether or DEMO they would have been interested in pursuing the
entrepreneur’s investment opportunity. For the present study, however, and in addition to
providing the potential DEMO studied with the opportunity to make real-time comments
about the entrepreneurs’ presentations and to state their likely post-presentation investment-
related intentions, a more quantitative approach was adopted: the business angels also
evaluated each presentation with respect to a variety of pre-speciﬁed ‘presentational’ and
‘non-presentational’ criteria using percentage-based rating DEMO By these means this study
was able to more formally determine and statistically quantify two things – ﬁrst, whether and
to what extent the business angels’ perceptions of the general quality and content of the
entrepreneurs’ DEMO inﬂuenced their investment-related screening decisions, and
second, what level of relative inﬂuence presentational and non-presentational factors had on
their presentation evaluations and screening DEMO
Thirdly, and more generally, the decision making that investors engage in when
evaluating entrepreneurs’ oral presentations appears to have all the character of DEMO a
highly unsystematic, idiosyncratic and error-prone process that is the very DEMO of the
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
Venture Capital
261
diligent, ‘hard evidence’, ‘substance’-based appraisal process preferred by DEMO In the
data collected for this study the business angels’ screening decisions were reached very
quickly (immediately after or, according to many of DEMO business angels studied, even
during the entrepreneurs’ 15-minute presentations) – a practice that is similar to the speed
at which investors reach decisions DEMO the merits of entrepreneurs’ written business
plans – VCFMs typically spending less than six minutes (Hall and Hofer 1993) and, in
another study, between 10 and 15 minutes (Sweeting 1991) and, in the DEMO of business
angels, a median time of six minutes (Mason and Rogers 1997). Moreover, the business
angels’ screening decisions, like those DEMO after evaluating entrepreneurs’ written
investment opportunities, appeared to have been based DEMO highly subjective factors such as
‘intuition’ and ‘gut feel’ (Kahn 1987; Hall and Hofer 1993; Mason and Rogers 1996, 1997;
Van DEMO and Robinson 2000; Douglas and Shepherd 2002; Mason and Harrison
2003). By having analysed business angels’ reactions to three entrepreneurs’ presentations
(rather than a single entrepreneur’s presentation) and having adopted a more formalized
research methodology, based on a rating scale, this study was also able DEMO quantify the
level of similarity between the business angels’ evaluations of the diﬀerent entrepreneurs’
presentations and begin to determine how just subjective, idiosyncratic and potentially
error-prone this particular type of screening decision-making process may actually be.
DEMO rest of this paper proceeds as follows. First, the data collected DEMO described in
greater detail. Second, the business angels’ evaluations of the DEMO presentations,
and the relationship between these evaluations and their subsequent screening decisions,
are reported. Third, ﬁndings from an analysis of the business angels’ comments about the
entrepreneurs’ presentations are outlined. Finally, the principal implications and practical
recommendations of these ﬁndings are provided.
Data and methodology
Three DEMO oral pitch presentations delivered at a UK business angel investor forum
were used as the basis for analysis. Each presentation was delivered by an DEMO
entrepreneur who was male, the managing director of his company and DEMO native English
speaker. The ﬁrst company had developed a digital printing system and was seeking funds
for expansion; the second, an early stage DEMO, had produced a number of medical
monitoring devices; the third company, an established computer software developer, was
also seeking funds for expansion. DEMO entrepreneurs were allowed 15 minutes to present
their investment opportunity and each presentation ended within +7% (i.e. one minute)
of this time. The word count of each presentation (mean ¼ 2693 words) was within DEMO
(i.e. 78 words) of the other presentations. An approximately ﬁve-minute audience–
entrepreneur question and answer session followed each presentation.
After the question and DEMO session for each presentation, 24 business angels
independently completed a questionnaire DEMO the quality and content of that
presentation. (Questionnaire booklets, each containing three questionnaires, were
distributed to 30 business angels and 24 were returned completed.) These respondents,
who comprised approximately 30% of the business angels present at the investor forum,
were all active and experienced angel DEMO and had been selected by the forum
organizers to participate in the study on this basis.
The main part of the three identical questionnaires DEMO business angel completed (one
for each presentation) listed 32 ‘presentational’ and ‘non-presentational’ factors
comprising criteria relating, respectively, to the structure, style and delivery of each
presentation (n ¼ 12), and to the entrepreneur’s company, market, product(s), and
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
262
C. Clark
funding/ﬁnance requirements (n ¼ 20). A list of the 32 factors evaluated is provided in
Appendix A. These factors DEMO selected from:
(1) research describing the criteria investors report they take into account when
evaluating the communicative quality, delivery style and content of an
entrepreneur’s oral presentation (Mason and Harrison 2003) and investment
DEMO more generally (Tyebjee and Bruno 1984; MacMillan, Siegel, and
Subba Narisimha 1985; Sandberg, Schweiger, and Hofer 1988; Fried and Hisrich
DEMO; Zacharakis and Meyer 1998; Baron and Brush 1999; Mason and DEMO 2004);
(2) studies describing the communication skills employed by DEMO when delivering
short, ‘one-to-group’ oral presentations, such as business managers brieﬁng their
staﬀ teams (Clark 1999) and police oﬃcers addressing subordinate oﬃcers (Bull
1978, 1979);
(3) advice published online by business DEMO and investor forum organizers for
entrepreneurs preparing to deliver oral presentations to investors (‘Xenos’,
‘Connect Yorkshire’, ‘Springboard Enterprises’ and ‘Spoken Impact’); DEMO
(4) informal discussions between the author, business angels and pitch DEMO
trainers.
In the questionnaires the business angels were asked to circle a number on a 21-point
double-percentage scale (ranging from ‘7100%’ to ‘þ100%’) DEMO under each factor to
be evaluated. To encourage consistency between each business angel’s responses as well as
between the responses of diﬀerent business angels, a seven-point word scale – ranging from
‘Terrible’ to ‘Exceptional’, with ‘0’, the mid-point of the numerical scale, being ‘Average’ –
was placed DEMO each numerical scale.1 Figure 1 reproduces the rating scale used.
This rating scale enabled statistically quantiﬁable comparisons to be made between the
evaluations provided DEMO individual business angels (both within and between the three
questionnaires they DEMO completed) and between the evaluations provided by diﬀerent
business angels. Such DEMO is possible because the numerical scale employed is
based on common and constant intervals which have mathematical (isomorphic) meaning
(Siegel and Castellan 1988) and also, by virtue of being a word-guided percentage scale,
DEMO (it was assumed) a standard and readily understandable meaning for the respondents
themselves. The business angels were also invited to state what they DEMO likely to do
regarding each entrepreneur’s investment opportunity, why they had DEMO that
particular decision and what they thought were the best and worst parts of each
presentation. In addition, a blank page was left at the front of each questionnaire for the
business angels to write ‘any DEMO comments’ they had about a particular presentation.
The rating scale section of this questionnaire has three particular limitations that
should be borne in mind DEMO reading the study ﬁndings. First, the 32 factors examined
almost certainly DEMO only a small proportion of the factors investors actually take
into consideration when evaluating orally presented investment opportunities. The
number of factors that were DEMO was the result of an attempt by the author to
include as many of the potentially most important presentational and non-presentational
criteria without overly DEMO the real-life setting that was studied or compromising the
Figure 1. Rating scale used for the 32 factors evaluated.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
Venture Capital
263
quality and number of responses the business angels were DEMO to provide. (The
completion rates for the 32 factors evaluated and DEMO response rates for the other questions
in this questionnaire were, in DEMO case, 490%.) Second, and partly as a consequence of
this DEMO limitation, the scores the business angels provided for the factors evaluated DEMO
likely to be an imperfect measure of the actual inﬂuence as well as the relative inﬂuence
that the 32 factors had on their evaluations DEMO the entrepreneurs’ presentations. Previous
studies have indicated that investors tend to weight the diﬀerent criteria they employ when
evaluating investment opportunities (see reviews and research in Tyebjee and Bruno 1984;
MacMillan, Siegel, and Subba DEMO 1985; Zacharakis and Meyer 1995, 1998).
However, the 32 DEMO in this study were not weighted. Such a priori weighting was
thought to be an analytically premature exercise given the lack of research into
DEMO oral pitch presentations and the general absence of any mention of
(DEMO alone the relative importance of) communicative and presentational factors in the
DEMO decision-making criteria literature.
Third, another criticism that can be levelled at DEMO investigating the impact of
communicated information in real-life settings is that it is diﬃcult if not impossible to
separate the ‘substance’ of a communicated DEMO from the ‘style’ via which it was
delivered, and thus distinguishing DEMO from non-presentational factors is both an
artiﬁcial and methodologically problematic distinction. However, making such a distinction
did not seem to be a problem for any of the respondents in this study. There were no
occasions where DEMO business angels voiced any concerns or diﬃculties about evaluating the
32 factors analysed on the basis of segregated presentational/non-presentational criteria.2
Findings
Relative rating DEMO the presentations
The business angels displayed a high level of agreement about which presentation was
‘best’ and ‘worst’ in terms of overall quality and DEMO, how similar the presentations
were to one another, and how they compared to an ideal presentation. By adding the 32
factor scores in DEMO questionnaire an ‘overall presentation score’ was obtained from each
business angel for each presentation. Table 1 shows the number of occasions each
presentation had DEMO placed ﬁrst, second or third in this manner by the business DEMO
On this basis the business angels most often preferred presentation 1 (DEMO digital printing
system entrepreneur), almost unanimously least preferred presentation 2 (DEMO medical
monitoring devices entrepreneur), with presentation 3 (the computer software DEMO
neur) most often being placed second. The level of agreement among DEMO business angels
about the relative quality and content of the presentations was statistically signiﬁcant
(Kendall’s coeﬃcient of concordance W ¼ 0.609; p 5 DEMO). Indeed, of the six possible
ways these presentations could have DEMO ranked (e.g. ‘1-2-3’, ‘2-3-1’, ‘3-1-2’), by far the
most DEMO ranking, based on overall presentation score, was a ‘1-3-2’ ranking (DEMO ¼ 14;
58.3%). This ﬁgure comprised a 41 percentage point increase above what would have been
Table 1. Relative rating of the DEMO by overall presentation score.
Placed 1st Placed 2nd Placed 3rd
Presentation 1 16 (66.7%) 8 (33.3%) 0 (0.0%)
Presentation 2 0 (0.0%) 2 (8.3%) 22 (91.7%)
Presentation 3 8 (DEMO) 14 (58.4%) 2 (8.3%)
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research DEMO Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
264
C. Clark
the case if the presentation rankings had been distributed DEMO (i.e. n ¼ 4; 16.7% for
each of the six possible relative rankings).
By adding the 24 overall presentation scores for each DEMO and dividing this sum
by the number of business angels studied (DEMO ¼ 24) an ‘overall mean factor score’ was
obtained for each DEMO This measure comprises one way of quantifying how similar
the presentations generally were perceived to be by the business angels. The overall mean
factor DEMO for presentation 1 was 32.3; for presentation 2, –6.2; and DEMO presentation 3,
25.9. While reaﬃrming the general ‘1-3-2’ ranking of these presentations, these ﬁgures also
indicate that presentations 1 and 3 tended to be viewed as not only being higher in quality
and content but DEMO more similar in quality and content than presentation 2. These ﬁndings
were conﬁrmed in two other ways. First, 19 (79.2%) business angels rated presentations 1
and 3 as the top two presentations in terms of DEMO presentation score. Second, in 18
(75.0%) of the 24 business DEMO questionnaire booklets the percentage diﬀerence between
the overall presentation scores of presentations 1 and 3 was smaller than the equivalent
diﬀerence between presentation 2 DEMO both presentations 1 and 3.
The overall mean factor scores also provided a general indication of how similar these
presentations were perceived to be DEMO to an ‘ideal’ presentation – that is, a
presentation where an DEMO would have scored the maximum possible ‘þ100’
score for all 32 of the factors evaluated. On this basis presentations 1 and 3 corresponded
to DEMO that were, respectively, just above and just below ‘Good’ on the rating scale used
for this study, and presentation 2 corresponded to a point that was just below ‘Average’ –
ﬁndings which suggest the three DEMO tended to be viewed as being neither the best
nor the worst the business angels had seen.
Business angels’ post-presentation intentions
For the question DEMO invited the business angels to state what their post-presentation
intentions were likely to be regarding each entrepreneur’s investment opportunity, three
answer options were provided: (1) ‘Interested’ (i.e. ‘will consider this investment
opportunity further’); (2) ‘Undecided’ (i.e. ‘still uncertain about what to do’); and (3)
‘Not interested’ (i.e. ‘will not consider this investment opportunity further’). Table 2 shows
the number of business angels that stated they DEMO ‘Interested’, ‘Undecided’ or ‘Not
interested’ in pursuing one or more of DEMO entrepreneurs’ investment opportunities, and the
number of each type of post-presentation DEMO response each entrepreneur received.
This table shows that the majority of the business angels treated the entrepreneurs’
presentations as an adequate enough basis to DEMO screening judgements about the merits
of pursuing the entrepreneurs’ investment opportunities. Over half of the business angels’
post-presentation intention responses were negative and 55 (76.4%) of their 72 responses
took the form of ﬁrmly positive (DEMO) or negative (‘Not interested’) decisions.
Table 2. Type and frequency DEMO the business angels’ post-presentation intentions.
Interested Undecided Not interested Total
No. of diﬀerent business angels 14 (58.3%) 12 (50.0%) 23 (95.8%)
Presentation 1 9 (37.5%) 7 (29.2%) 8 (33.3%) 24
DEMO 2 2 (8.3%) 3 (12.6%) 19 (79.2%) 24
Presentation 3 7 (29.2%) 7 (29.2%) 10 (41.6%) 24
Total DEMO (25.0%) 17 (23.6%) 37 (51.4%) 72
Downloaded By: DEMO Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
Venture Capital
265
In addition, 23 (95.8%) business angels stated on at least one occasion that they were
either ‘Interested’ or ‘Not interested’ DEMO pursuing an entrepreneur’s investment
opportunity, 14 (58.3%) business angels marked DEMO least one of each of these two options
in the three questionnaires they completed, and only one business angel stated s/he was
‘Undecided’ about all three presentations.
Moreover, the business angels’ post-presentation intentions appeared to have been
inﬂuenced by the perceived quality and content of the presentations. DEMO, as can be seen
in Table 2, the number of ‘Interested’ and ‘Not interested’ responses each entrepreneur
received corresponded (positively and negatively respectively) with the business angels’
typical ‘1-3-2’ ranking of the presentations. Second, DEMO relationship was also conﬁrmed
statistically: the higher the overall presentation score DEMO entrepreneur received from a
particular business angel the more likely it was that business angel would state s/he was
‘Interested’ in pursuing that DEMO investment opportunity (Spearman’s rho,
3
hereafter ‘rs’ ¼ 0.600; p 5 0.01).
It was also apparent that at least those business DEMO who stated they were
‘Interested’ in pursuing an entrepreneur’s investment opportunity tended not to require
the entrepreneurs to deliver anything like a perfect presentation DEMO be convinced about
doing so. The overall presentation scores for the 18 questionnaires where the business
angels (n ¼ 14) had stated they DEMO ‘Interested’ in pursuing an entrepreneur’s investment
opportunity averaged 35.3. This ﬁgure, DEMO average 64.7 percentage points below the score
an ideal presentation would receive, corresponded to a point that was only just above
‘Good’ on the rating scale used in this study. In contrast, for the 17 ‘Undecided’
questionnaires this average was 27.0, and for the 37 ‘Not interested’ questionnaires this
average was 5.2 – ﬁgures that suggest there was also a DEMO point (around the ‘Average’
point of the rating scale) below which an entrepreneur’s investment opportunity tended
not to be considered as being worth DEMO
The inﬂuence of presentational factors
After making allowances for the unequal number of ‘presentational’ and ‘non-
presentational’ factors in each questionnaire (n ¼ 12 and 20 respectively), presentational
factors tended to have the highest level DEMO relative inﬂuence on the overall score an
entrepreneur received. This can be seen in Table 3, which shows the overall mean factor
scores for both presentational and non-presentational factors for each entrepreneur’s
presentation. Presentation 1, which received the highest number of ‘Interested’ responses
(n ¼ 9) and DEMO lowest number of ‘Not interested’ responses (n ¼ 8) also had the highest
overall mean factor score for presentational factors and the largest DEMO diﬀerence
between presentational and non-presentational overall mean factor scores (19.6 percentage
DEMO). In contrast, presentation 2, which received the lowest number of ‘Interested’
responses (n ¼ 2) and the highest number of ‘Not DEMO responses (n ¼ 19), had the
Table 3. Overall mean DEMO scores for ‘presentational’ and ‘non-presentational’ factors each
entrepreneur received.
Presentational factors Non-presentational factors
Presentation 1 44.6 25.0
Presentation 2 711.6 72.8
Presentation 3 32.1 DEMO
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
266 C. Clark
lowest overall mean factor score for presentational factors and DEMO smallest average
diﬀerence between presentational and non-presentational overall mean factor scores (DEMO
percentage points). Furthermore, in 23 (95.8%) of the 24 DEMO for presentation
1, the overall mean factor score for presentational factors DEMO higher than the equivalent
score for non-presentational factors in the same questionnaire. For presentation 3 this
ﬁgure was 19/24 (79.2%). In contrast, in 17 (70.8%) of the 24 questionnaires for
presentation 2, DEMO overall mean factor score for presentation factors was lower than the
equivalent score for non-presentational factors in the same questionnaire.
Presentational factors also had DEMO highest level of relative inﬂuence on the business
angels’ post-presentation intentions. For instance, on 15 (83.3%) of the 18 occasions
where the business angels stated they were ‘Interested’ in pursuing an entrepreneur’s
investment opportunity, the overall score for presentational factors was higher than the
equivalent score for DEMO factors in the same questionnaire. This type of
diﬀerence was also evident in 13 (76.5%) of the 17 questionnaires where the business
angels DEMO they were ‘Undecided’ about a presentation and in 20 (54.1%) of the 37
questionnaires where they were ‘Not interested’.
Business angels’ reasons for DEMO post-presentation intentions
The business angels were also invited to provide reasons for their stated post-presentation
intentions and in 68 (94.4%) of the 72 DEMO analysed they did so. Three distinct
types of reasons were provided:
(1) Non-presentational reasons. These referred exclusively to one or more of DEMO
company, market, product or funding/ﬁnance aspects of an entrepreneur’s
presentation or to issues pertaining to investor ﬁt, not to some aspect relating to
how a presentation had been delivered. Examples included: ‘The competition is very
well established and of a big scale – getting into this DEMO with broadly similar
technology, where prices are tumbling already, will be very diﬃcult’; ‘Financials not
realistic’; and ‘[The entrepreneur’s company] already has DEMO, long-term
relationships and a proven, creative and production capability’.4 Examples
pertaining to investor ﬁt included: ‘Not interested in this sector’; ‘Outside my
DEMO; and ‘Very good proposition but not my area of knowledge’.
(2) Presentational reasons. These referred exclusively to how a presentation had been
delivered. Three such reasons were provided: ‘A truly dreadful presentation which
failed to excite’; ‘Confusing presentation’; and ‘Poorly presented’.
(3) Combined reasons. These DEMO contained at least one presentational and at least
one non-presentational reason. Examples included (note: the ‘presentational’
reason within each example is in bold DEMO): ‘Good, well presented proposition.
[The entrepreneur] has experience in [his DEMO market despite changing
business model’; ‘The company and product has been DEMO very poorly but there
may be an interesting proposition underneath this’; DEMO ‘Weaknesses in manage-
ment team. Not clear about the proposition due to weak presentation’.
Table 4 shows the number of times the business angels DEMO presentational or non-
presentational reasons for each of the three post-presentation intention options. Because
of the small number of exclusively presentational reasons (n ¼ 3), the ‘Presentational
reason(s)’ column includes both the ‘Combined’ DEMO the exclusively ‘Presentational’
reasons.5 On almost all of the occasions where the business angels provided reasons for
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
Venture Capital
267
Table 4. Type of reason(s) the business angels cited for their post-presentation intentions.
Post-presentation
intention
Non-presentational
reason(s)
Presentational
DEMO(s) Total
Interested 16 (88.9%) 2 (11.1%) 18 (26.5%)
(33.3%) (10.0%)
Undecided 12 (85.7%) 2 (14.3%) 14 (20.6%)
(25.0%) (10.0%)
Not interested 20 (55.6%) 16 (44.4%) 36 (52.9%)
(41.7%) (80.0%)
Total 48 (70.6%) 20 (29.4%) 68
their post-presentation intentions these comprised DEMO reasons or
contained at least one of these reasons (n ¼ DEMO; 95.6%). Conversely, there were only 20
(29.4%) occasions where the reasons the business angels provided comprised either
exclusively presentational reasons (n ¼ 3; 4.4%) or contained one or more of these
reasons. DEMO was a weak but nevertheless statistically signiﬁcant association between the
type of reason(s) the business angels cited and their level of investor interest: the more the
business angels’ post-presentation intentions were positive the less likely the reason(s) they
cited for their intentions contained one or more presentational factors (Pearson’s
phi ¼ 0.351; p 5 0.015).
Business DEMO presentation comments
When invited to provide reasons for their post-presentation intentions some business
angels provided more than one non-presentational reason and/or more than DEMO combined
reason. The 35 exclusively non-presentational reasons the business angels cited for being
‘Interested’ in pursuing an entrepreneur’s investment opportunity were focused on four
DEMO issues:
(1) The strength or high quality of the entrepreneur’s management team (n ¼ 9) (e.g.
‘Well balanced management team’; DEMO management team’; and ‘Good team’).
(2) The high potential DEMO the entrepreneur’s business/market (n ¼ 9) (e.g. ‘Large
international DEMO; ‘Good market potential’; and ‘Interesting space’).
(3) The quality or marketability of entrepreneur’s product(s) (n ¼ 8) (e.g. DEMO
product with international potential’; ‘Strong product’; and ‘Innovative
technology’).
(DEMO) The previous track record of the business, entrepreneur or management team
(n ¼ 7) (e.g. ‘A going concern that has already proved itself’; ‘Experienced
management team’; and ‘In business for 10 years’).
DEMO 52 exclusively non-presentational reasons cited for being ‘Not interested’ in
pursuing an entrepreneur’s investment opportunity, though more diverse, were focused on
ﬁve issues:DEMO
(1) Lack of investor ﬁt (n ¼ 9) (for DEMO see point (1) page 266).
(2) Reservations about the strength or extent of the competition (over the competition’; ‘Technology can DEMO be leapfrogged’; and ‘Market toon ¼ 8) (e.g. ‘Worry
competitive DEMO my liking’).
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
268
C. Clark
(3) Problematic or unproven business model (n ¼ 7) (e.g. ‘Not proved business model
yet’; and ‘Don’t like the change in business model’).
(4) Small market size or poor DEMO potential (n ¼ 6) (e.g. ‘Market not large enough’;
DEMO about their ability to sell their products internationally’; and ‘Sales
problems’)DEMO
(5) Poor composition of or weaknesses in the management team (DEMO ¼ 6) (e.g. ‘Team
not strong enough’; ‘Poor management team’; and ‘Needs charismatic ﬁgurehead’).
Other factors, cited on three or fewer occasions, included the lack of sales, the
perceived high risk of DEMO, and criticisms about the ﬁnancials, sales projections and
the stated/unstated value of their company. Here, it is also worth pointing out that
although the second entrepreneur’s company was at an earlier stage of development DEMO
the other two presenting companies (both of which were established businesses), only one
business angel mentioned this factor, along with another presentational DEMO, as a reason
for his/her decision not to pursue presenter DEMO investment opportunity. In fact, this early
stage issue was not mentioned DEMO any of the business angels in any other section of their
questionnaires, although some business angels indicated that the previous track record of
an entrepreneur’s business had been a positive factor in their screening decision(s) (see e.g.
point (4) of the non-presentational reasons provided for being ‘Interested’ in an
investment opportunity, p. 267).
The various non-presentational reasons the business angels cited for their ‘Interested’
and ‘Not interested’ responses will DEMO few surprises in the light of the substance-
oriented factors highlighted by investors in previous studies of investor decision making.
Worthy of note, though, is the ﬁnding (again consistent with previous research) that the
factors mentioned most by the business angels related to the presenting entrepreneurs or
DEMO management team – that is, the ‘human capital’ elements of their DEMO
opportunity. Positive and negative versions of these types of comments (n DEMO 24) accounted
for over one-quarter of the business angels’ non-presentational comments. DEMO respect to
the presentational reasons the business angels cited for being ‘Not interested’ in pursuing
an entrepreneur’s investment opportunity, 22 (91.7%) of the 24 comments were addressed
to the second (medical monitoring devices) entrepreneur. DEMO (63.6%) of these
comments referred to the lack of clarity/understandability of his presentation and four
(18.2%) to his inability to sell DEMO and/or his investment opportunity.
More generally, in their questionnaires the DEMO angels provided a total of 382
semantically distinct comments about the presentations they evaluated (including the
reasons cited for their post-presentation intentions reported above). In addition,
presentational comments (n ¼ 249; 65.2%) outnumbered non-presentational comments
(studied. Table 5 shows the subject matter of the ﬁve most common types of presentationaln ¼ 133; 34.8%) by almost two DEMO one and did so for each of the three presentations
comments the business angels mentioned and the number of business angels that provided
one DEMO more of each type of comment.
Most of the business angels’ presentational comments were negative. This can be seen
in Table 6, which shows the number of positive and negative comments the business angels
made for (1) the ﬁve most common types of presentational comments outlined in Table 5;
and (2) for each entrepreneur. This table also shows DEMO the number of positive and
negative presentational comments each entrepreneur received corresponded (positively
and inversely respectively) with the business angels’ typical ‘1-3-2’ quality DEMO content
ranking of the entrepreneur’s presentations. The lowest ranked entrepreneur (presenter DEMO)
received the highest number of negative comments for each type of presentational
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 DEMO 2008
Venture Capital
269
Table 5. Type and frequency of business angels’ presentational DEMO
Subject matter
n
Total No. of angels
making one or
(%) more comment
Clarity/understandability 95 (37.4) 23 (95.8%)
Level/type of information provided 63 (24.8) 21 (87.5%)
Persuasiveness of presentation/entrepreneur 28 (11.0) 17 (70.8%)
Personal characteristics of entrepreneur 27 (10.6) 15 (62.5%)
Presentation structure 16 (6.3) 9 (DEMO)
Other presentational commentsa 20 (9.9) 12 (50.0%)
Total DEMO (100.0)
Note: aThese comments included references to the quality of one or more of the entrepreneurs’ presentation slides,
product demonstrations, gesturing, or to the length of their presentation.
Table 6. Frequency of business angels’ positive and negative presentational comments.
No. of
negative
comments
Presentation
123
DEMO(%)
þ
–
þ
–
þ
–
Clarity/understandability (n DEMO 95) 60 (63.2) 24 6 0 50 11 4
Level/DEMO of information provided (n ¼ 63) 59 (93.7) 2 20 1 26 1 13
Persuasiveness of presentation/entrepreneur (n ¼ 28) DEMO (75.0) 4 2 1 15 2 4
Personal characteristics of entrepreneur (n ¼ 27) 15 (55.6) 4 2 3 10 5 DEMO
Presentation structure (n ¼ 16) 8 (50.0) 5 2 1 4 2 2
Other presentational comments (n ¼ 20) 11 (55.0) 5 3 1 5 3 3
Total (n ¼ 249) 174 (69.9) 44 35 7 110 24 29
comment. Furthermore, in every category except ‘Personal characteristics of entrepre-
neur’, the highest ranked entrepreneur (DEMO 1) received the largest number of positive
comments although, on most of these occasions, the relative diﬀerence in the number of
comments each entrepreneur received was slight and not statistically signiﬁcant. These
presentational comments are DEMO described in greater detail.
Clarity and understandability
The most common presentational comment, made by the largest number of business
angels, referred to the DEMO or understandability of the entrepreneurs’ presentations.
Although each entrepreneur was criticized for the lack of clarity/understandability of at
least one aspect of their DEMO (e.g. ‘Did not clearly explain why competing products
were not oﬀering DEMO networking capability’; ‘Didn’t understand [the entrepreneur’s]
business model’; and ‘Incoherent explanations’), most of the negative comments (n ¼ 50;
83.3%) DEMO addressed to the second (medical monitoring devices) entrepreneur who was
repeatedly criticized for his persistent non-ﬂuency and unclear speech (e.g. ‘Too much
hesitation and repetition’; ‘Stuttering delivery’; and ‘Mumbled’). Nevertheless, over one-
third of the clarity/understandability comments were positive (e.g. ‘Very clearly presented’;
‘Clear, concise and understandable’; and ‘Clearly explained the product and management
DEMO).
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
270 C. Clark
Presentational structure
Another category of comments relating to the DEMO and understandability of the
presentations were those referring to presentational structure. Before delivering their
presentations the entrepreneurs received coaching provided by the investor forum
DEMO that emphasized the information they needed to address and the order in
which this information should be delivered. Twelve general topics/issues were addressed
DEMO each entrepreneur: ‘introduction/overview’, ‘management team’, ‘product(s)’, ‘target
market’, ‘competition’, ‘business/revenue model’, ‘ﬁnancial forecast’, ‘funds required’,
DEMO of requested ﬁnance’, ‘exit strategy’, ‘oﬀer to investors’; and, as a conclusion,
‘Why invest in us?’ This is likely to DEMO been the main reason why the general topics/
issues each entrepreneur did address were almost identical and were delivered in essentially
the same DEMO Nevertheless, even with the advantage of a detailed and common
‘backbone’ DEMO their presentations (Clark 1999), the business angels still perceived positive
DEMO negative diﬀerences in the quality of the structure of the presentations. Again, most of
the positive comments (e.g. ‘Well laid out presentation’; ‘Opening very measured and
structured’; and ‘Well focused, logical ﬂow’) were addressed to entrepreneurs 1 and 3;
negative comments (e.g. ‘Disjointed’; ‘Unfocused’; and ‘Lost momentum in the middle
part’) were addressed to each entrepreneur but primarily to entrepreneur 2.
Level/type of information provided
The second DEMO common presentational comment related to the level or type of information
the entrepreneurs provided. Table 6 shows that almost all of these comments were DEMO
(the business angels on each occasion citing a lack of information DEMO some particular topic
or issue) and none of the entrepreneurs escaped DEMO from this criticism. Perhaps because
the type and the number of general topics each entrepreneur did address were essentially the
same, the vast majority of the business angels’ negative comments referred to their need to
have DEMO provided with additional detail about some issue or information that already had
been mentioned (e.g. ‘Needed to provide more information about the competition’; DEMO
enough about how they will achieve sales projections’; and ‘Not much DEMO sales pipeline’).
Three types of additional detail were most commonly requested:
(1) ‘How’ type detail (e.g. ‘Didn’t say how they would compete with larger
competitors’; ‘Moving from [one business model to another] but did not explain
how this was going to be done’; and ‘Didn’t say how [the entrepreneur’s product]
worked’).
(2) ‘Why’ type detail (e.g. ‘Why is [the entrepreneur’s product] important? I am at a
loss’; ‘The need for [the entrepreneur’s product] was not given’; and ‘Why DEMO they
going to do [a particular type of business strategy]?’).
(3) Substantiation of some claim or point of information (e.g. ‘Leap in turnover in
ﬁgures unsubstantiated’; ‘Didn’t demonstrate any evidence of knowledge of
distribution business’; and ‘No evidence of beneﬁts to market of purchasing the
product’).
Persuasiveness of entrepreneur/presentation
Comments were also made about the DEMO of the entrepreneurs or their
presentations. All three entrepreneurs were criticized for not selling themselves or their
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
Venture Capital 271
investment opportunity (e.g. ‘Didn’t persuade me at all’; DEMO sales pitch’ and ‘Not very
good at selling ‘‘the product’’’ ) although again, most of these criticisms were addressed to
entrepreneur 2. Positive comments were also made (e.g. ‘Very good sales pitch’; ‘Good
sales pitch’; and ‘Presenter was convincing’), most of which were addressed to
entrepreneur DEMO
Personal characteristics of the entrepreneurs
The business angels also made comments about the personal characteristics of the
entrepreneurs. Again, positive comments (e.g. ‘Safe DEMO of hands’; ‘[Entrepreneur] seemed
genuine’; ‘Warmth of presenter’) and negative DEMO (e.g. ‘There was a general lack of
passion and commitment’; ‘Needed a bit more enthusiasm’; and ‘Fellow seemed a bit
arrogant’) were DEMO, with entrepreneur 2 again receiving the vast majority of negative
comments. DEMO the general absence of any contact between the business angels and
entrepreneurs before these presentations, such comments are most likely to have come
from inferences the business angels had drawn from the way the entrepreneurs had
DEMO themselves and their investment opportunity.
Occasionally, this inference-drawing process appeared to DEMO manifested itself in the
business angels’ comments about the presentations. When making a presentational
comment, eight (33.3%) business angels, on 14 occasions, then added another comment
referring to some aspect of the presenting entrepreneur’s DEMO attributes, credibility or
business/entrepreneurial capabilities. More speciﬁcally, this ‘other’, DEMO comment –
by virtue of being written immediately after the presentational comment (and often in the
same sentence) – suggests that the business DEMO had inferred the entrepreneur’s cited
personal characteristic(s) from the particular DEMO feature(s) they had just
commented on. Positive examples (with the personal characteristic(s), etc. in bold
lettering) included:
. ‘Excellent, clear and logical presentation – I felt conﬁdent that this MD could sell and
inspire others to do so’.
. ‘[The best part of DEMO presentation was] the obvious clarity and competence of the
presenter’.
. ‘Good delivery, gave conﬁdence in the product and business’.
Negative examples included:
. ‘Stuttering, hesitant and repetitive delivery – did not inspire any conﬁdence in the
ability of the management team to deliver’.
. ‘Bad presentation. DEMO entrepreneur] didn’t give an impression that he would make a
good salesman, however good the idea’.
. ‘Presenter too hesitant. Does he believe in what he is saying?’
Discussion and conclusion
This study found a DEMO and statistically signiﬁcant relationship between the business
angels’ perceptions of the quality and content of the entrepreneurs’ presentations and their
decisions whether or not DEMO pursue an entrepreneur’s investment opportunity. Presenta-
tional (rather than non-presentational) factors also tended to have the highest impact on
the overall score a DEMO received as well as on business angels’ level of investment
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
272
C. Clark
interest. While at least the ‘Interested’ business angels did DEMO seem to require the
entrepreneurs to deliver anything like a perfect presentation to be convinced about the
merits of pursuing an investment opportunity, their presentational comments consistently
revealed that the clarity, understandability and structure of a presentation, the level and
type of investment-related information provided, the personal DEMO of the
entrepreneur, and whether the entrepreneurs had managed to sell DEMO and their
investment opportunity all comprised criteria that had inﬂuenced their screening decisions.
Collectively, these ﬁndings indicate that the business angels’ judgements about what
constituted a pursuable investment opportunity had been derived not only from the
DEMO substance of the entrepreneurs’ presentations or the traditional ‘human
capital’ elements of an investment opportunity, but also from the way that substance had
been delivered and the perceived attributes of the entrepreneurs that had delivered it.
DEMO ﬁndings, however, should be treated with some caution. Because of the small
number of entrepreneurs and business angels studied – which cannot be DEMO to comprise
anything like a representative sample of the diverse range and types of ﬁnance-seeking
entrepreneurs, investors, presentational formats or settings where pitch DEMO are
delivered – it would be unwise to generalize the ﬁndings beyond the particular participants
and investor decision-making context examined. Nevertheless, there are striking
similarities between the ﬁndings reported in this paper, especially the general subject
matter of the business angels’ presentational comments (see Table 5), and those reported
in Mason and Harrison (2003), from a diﬀerent but similarly small entrepreneur–business
angel dataset. In particular, the business angels’ comments in Mason and Harrison (2003)
were also focused on issues relating to clarity, understandability and presentational
structure, and the entrepreneur was criticized for DEMO insuﬃcient detail (about the
market, product and pricing strategy) and, more generally, for not being able to sell
himself or his investment opportunity. At the very least the ﬁndings reported in this paper
provide DEMO evidence showing that the ways in which an investment opportunity is
presented and via which entrepreneurs communicate themselves, their company and their
investment opportunities is a subject that deserves to receive much further attention from
researchers. DEMO the above caveats in mind, the rest of this paper attempts DEMO draw out
the principal implications and practical recommendations of the study ﬁndings.
Perhaps the ﬁrst issue that needs to be addressed is the evidence DEMO appears to
contradict the ﬁndings that the entrepreneurs’ presentation skills had a signiﬁcant impact
on the business angels’ screening decisions – nearly all the DEMO the business angels cited
for their post-presentation intentions comprised exclusively non-presentational and/or the
traditional ‘human capital’, ‘substance’-oriented reasons, or contained at least DEMO such
reason. This ﬁnding was particularly surprising given the high level of unsolicited
presentational comments in other sections of the business angels’ questionnaires and, in
particular, that the scores for presentational factors recurrently had the highest level of
impact on both the overall presentation score each entrepreneur received DEMO on business
angels’ post-presentation levels of investor interest. Two possible explanations for this
discrepancy are that the business angels may have been unaware of DEMO level of inﬂuence
presentational factors had on their screening decisions, and/DEMO they were reluctant to
acknowledge this inﬂuence – even at this early and explicitly presentational stage of the
investor decision-making process. Somewhat fortuitously, because of the way diﬀerent
elements of the post-presentation questionnaire were completed by DEMO business angels,
this study may have captured this lack of awareness and/or highlighted this form of post-
hoc rationalization bias. More speciﬁcally, the act of evaluating each entrepreneur’s
presentation by rapidly circling a number DEMO the rating scale for each factor evaluated
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research DEMO Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
Venture Capital
273
(rather than the answer(s) to the question DEMO explicitly invited the business angels to
specify their reason(s) for DEMO post-presentation intentions) may have captured more
accurately both the tacit, gut-reaction, inference-based process entrepreneurs engage in
when making screening decisions as well as the actual level of inﬂuence presentational
factors had on the business angels’ DEMO decisions. Although it is diﬃcult to
substantiate these claims without conducting further research, discrepancies between
investment-related decisions consciously made by investors and those tacitly made by
investors have been found in previous research in this subject DEMO (Shepherd and
Zacharakis 1999). Similarly, post-hoc rationalization has been recognized as a potential
methodological problem in other investor decision-making research (Tyebjee and Bruno
1984; Sandberg, Schweiger, and Hofer 1988; Zacharakis and Meyer DEMO). At the very
least, the ﬁndings that the business angels DEMO most often in agreement about the relative
ranking of the entrepreneurs’ presentations and that the overall mean factor score for
presentational factors recurrently and DEMO outweighed the equivalent score for
non-presentational factors in the same questionnaires strongly suggest that the rapidity of
the business angels’ responses did not automatically DEMO unconsidered or randomly
produced responses.
The high level of agreement among the business angels about the relative quality and
merits of the entrepreneurs’ presentations DEMO deserves further comment. Such agreement
suggests that their screening decisions, though DEMO and independently reached, were
not as unsystematic or idiosyncratic as the DEMO ‘gut feel’ implies.6 But upon what grounds
was this level of agreement likely to have been based? One possible explanation is that
because the business angels were similar to one another in terms of being active DEMO
experienced angel investors, their prior, investment-related knowledge and experience
furnished them with the same kind of ‘hard evidence’, ‘substance’-based decision-making
heuristics that, DEMO turn, resulted in their evaluations of the entrepreneurs’ presentations
also being DEMO Yet the evident inﬂuence of presentational factors on the business
angels’ evaluations and screening decisions suggests another possible explanation: that
their high level of agreement was the result of a reliance, to some signiﬁcant and
consequential extent, on the same kinds of everyday social knowledge, experiences and
DEMO heuristics that all members of a society generally share and necessarily rely
on when evaluating and making decisions involving communicated information or persons
communicating DEMO – that is, knowledge and experience obtained by inference and
drawn DEMO how the person(s) had presented themselves and the manner and DEMO in
which they had communicated information (Goﬀman 1959). Although determining DEMO
relative inﬂuence of these undoubtedly interrelated explanations requires further and
comparative research, it is likely that presentational factors and, more generally, the
communicative dimension of this ‘substance’ versus ‘style’ dichotomy is far more
important and DEMO than has hitherto been recognized by entrepreneurship and
investor decision-making researchers. Communication is a constitutive feature – perhaps
the constitutive feature – of social DEMO (see e.g. Goﬀman 1959, Sacks, Schegloﬀ, and
Jeﬀerson 1974) DEMO therefore it is diﬃcult to imagine how it could ever be possible for
entrepreneurs to relay any of the substance of their investment opportunities DEMO this
most fundamental of all ‘human capital’ elements not having inﬂuenced the way that
substance was relayed and interpreted by the potential investors.
This DEMO was not able to provide any clear-cut support for two potentially important
mediating factors raised in Mason and Harrison’s study (2003) which might DEMO any
association between the presentational quality of an entrepreneur’s presentation and
investors’ subsequent level of interest: (1) that an investor with a pre-existing knowledge of
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 DEMO August 2008
274
C. Clark
the entrepreneur’s industry, market or technology may be less likely to be put oﬀ by a poor
presentation; and (2) that a good presentation may enable investors to better understand
the key DEMO of the investment thereby enabling them to reject the proposal on content
grounds, whereas a poorly delivered presentation that leaves an investor ‘in the dark’
would encourage him/her to reject the proposal on presentational grounds. DEMO, there
were ﬁndings in this study that actually called into question DEMO two possibilities. First,
the relative impact of presentational factors tended to increase with business angels’ level
of investor interest. This, however, was DEMO a strong correlation. Second, the fact that the
business angels often DEMO positive comments about the presentational features of the
entrepreneurs’ presentations (Table DEMO) suggests that they not only ‘ruled out’ a
presentation as a DEMO investment opportunity because of particular types of
presentational failings but also employed positive evidence of presentational factors as a
basis for ‘ruling in’ an DEMO opportunity as one that was worth pursuing. All of these
important possibilities, however, require further research.
Implications for policy and practice
If the DEMO reported in this paper are representative of the impact that entrepreneurs’
presentational skills have on investors more generally and the role that inference-based,
DEMO feel’ reactions play in the investment-related decision process, this study has DEMO
implications for entrepreneurs preparing to communicate their investment opportunities
to potential investors and for those agencies, companies and investor forum organizers
that provide advice and training to assist entrepreneurs to be more ‘investor ready’ before
they DEMO so. Brieﬂy, the message is that entrepreneurs who do not sell DEMO and the
substance of their investment opportunities eﬀectively are less likely to succeed in
convincing investors to seriously consider, let alone pursue their investment opportunity.
Yet how entrepreneurs could best do this, and how companies, DEMO and investor
forum organizers could best prepare them to do this, DEMO still very much a matter of
conjecture that requires detailed analysis of what types of information investors rely on –
other than the basic DEMO of substance-oriented content – when evaluating the
merits of an entrepreneur and his/her presented investment opportunity. Of course, the
ﬁndings relating to the business angels’ presentational and non-presentational comments
indicate how the three entrepreneurs (particularly the second entrepreneur) could have
delivered their presentations more eﬀectively. But these kinds of comments do not tell us
much about how a particular DEMO of presentational skill can best be implemented by
entrepreneurs and why a particular skill is likely to be inﬂuential and beneﬁcial when
employed. Indeed, the types of presentational skills entrepreneurs may beneﬁt from
employing are likely DEMO be far more subtle, complex and consequential than many
entrepreneurs and DEMO providers appear to presume them to be. Here are two
illustrative examples from the study ﬁndings.
First, each of those occasions where the business angels commented on the lack of
some particular ‘how-’, ‘why-’ or ‘substantiation-’ type of detail comprised separate
junctures in the entrepreneurs’ presentations where they DEMO not succeeded in adequately
addressing the needs or concerns of the business angels (Mason and Rogers 1996, 1997)
and therefore could have DEMO themselves and their investment opportunity more
eﬀectively. Preliminary inspection of the content of the entrepreneurs’ presentations
reveals that this information recurrently occurred after or DEMO beyond a basic description
of the feature(s) of some aspect DEMO their investment opportunity and involved addressing
the upshot and investment-related implications of that basic description. This additional
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
Venture Capital
275
information thereby comprised a particularly important means where the DEMO
could demonstrate they had recognized (and perhaps show they had already DEMO on) not
only the business/investment-related beneﬁts of some attribute, activity or opportunity
pertaining to themselves, their company or their investment opportunity, DEMO also the
central motivations and concerns potential investors have when evaluating an investment
opportunity – e.g. ‘Is this investment opportunity likely to make me DEMO?’. By omitting
to provide this type of information, therefore, the entrepreneurs left it to the business
angels, on many occasions, to DEMO their own conclusions about the information that was
provided – a situation that may have encouraged the business angels to draw alternative
and less DEMO conclusions about that information and the qualities and abilities of
the entrepreneur that had delivered it.
Second, even the fundamental prerequisites of successful communication, such as
speaker clarity and understandability can be a vitally important means via which
entrepreneurs can sell themselves and their investment opportunity. For instance, there
were two types of evidence indicating that this apparently innocuous and DEMO
element of entrepreneurs’ presentations was in fact a highly consequential factor in the
business angels’ evaluations and screening decisions. First, the rate of positive comments
for clarity/understandability issues, which was over twice as high as the next highest
number of positive presentational comments for a particular presentational DEMO
(Table 6), highlights just how much of an asset the DEMO and understandability of an
entrepreneur’s presentation was held to be by the business angels. Second, the ‘Clarity of
Expression’ score each entrepreneur received (DEMO 5 in Appendix A) was presenter 1’s
highest overall mean factor DEMO (54.0), presenter 2’s lowest overall mean factor score
(–35.4) DEMO presenter 3’s second highest overall mean factor score (43.3). Indeed, for
presenters 1 and 2, these scores were, respectively, the highest and lowest of all the 96
overall mean factor scores in this DEMO One obvious reason for the importance of this
factor is that non-ﬂuent speech – the classic compromiser of speaker clarity and
understandability – can DEMO the intelligibility of a message (Fayer and Krasinski 1987)
and DEMO a detrimental eﬀect on listener understanding (Fox Tree 1995) thereby
preventing potential investors from being able to properly evaluate the merits of an
DEMO opportunity. But this is just the tip of the iceberg of the negative impact that
non-ﬂuent speech can have on recipients such as investors. DEMO speech can irritate
listeners (Fayer and Krasinski 1987), is associated DEMO a speaker’s lack of pre-planning or
rehearsal (Goldman-Eisler 1968), is DEMO as evidence of a speaker not being
knowledgeable about what s/he is talking about (Crystal and Davy 1969), and can result
in negative listener attitudes about the speaker’s competence and dynamism (Miller and
Murray 1964) and credibility (McCroskey and Mehrley 1969). And such conclusions
DEMO the entrepreneurs were evidently reached by the business angels in this study. Many
of the personal characteristic inferences (both positive and negative) that DEMO to have
been drawn from communicative features of an entrepreneur’s presentation (DEMO 271)
occurred in tandem with comments speciﬁcally related to the clarity/understandability of
that entrepreneur’s presentation.
Finally, the extent to which entrepreneurs’ presentation skills inﬂuenced the business
angels’ actual funding/non-funding decisions has been beyond DEMO scope of this paper.
Nevertheless, it may not be a coincidence DEMO, during the six-month period after these
three presentations had been delivered, entrepreneurs 1 and 3 (who delivered the two most
favourably rated presentations) both managed to secure funds from business angels
present at this investor forum. The second and lowest rated entrepreneur did not secure
any such DEMO
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
276
C. Clark
Notes
1. The decision to use a seven-point word DEMO (as opposed to, say, a word scale of three, ﬁve, 10
or even 21 points) was made on the grounds that DEMO provided the best possible com-
promise between giving the respondents an explicit indication of what the various numbers
on the scale represented without making DEMO rating scale as a whole diﬃcult to read or
understand.
2. While recognizing that ‘two wrongs do not make a right’, this issue also raises the important
question that if such a distinction is diﬃcult or DEMO to make then why has the vast
majority of prior investor decision-making research largely ignored or at least not explicitly
addressed the communicative style DEMO of this dichotomy?
3. Because this test requires both variables to be ranked (Siegel and Castellan 1988), the overall
mean factor score for each presentation from each business angel was correlated with each
business DEMO stated post-presentation intention for the three presentations they evaluated.
‘Interested’ was ranked as being the most favoured response, ‘Not interested’ the least favoured.
4. To preserve the anonymity of the study participants, in the excerpts from the business angels’
comments all features identifying the entrepreneurs, their company (DEMO any other company
mentioned), the speciﬁc nature of their product(s) and their investment opportunity have been
changed or omitted.
5. All three of the exclusively presentational reasons provided were produced in tandem with a
DEMO interested’ post-presentation decision.
6. But whether this agreement was an accurate determination of the relative quality and content of
the entrepreneurs’ presentations is, however, another issue altogether.
References
Atkinson, J.M. 1984. Our master’s voices: The language and body-language of politics. London:
Methuen.
Baron, R.A., and DEMO Brush. 1999. The role of social skills in entrepreneurs’ success: Evidence DEMO
videotapes of entrepreneurs’ presentations. In Frontiers of entrepreneurship research, ed. P.D.
DEMO, W.B. Bygrave, S. Manigart, C.M. Mason, G.D. Meyer, H.J. DEMO, and K.G.
Shave, 45–57. Babson Park, MA: Babson College.
Bull, R.H.C. 1978. Improving the eﬀectiveness of daily brieﬁngs. Police Research Bulletin 31: 4–7.
———. 1979. A further study of improving the eﬀectiveness of daily brieﬁngs. Police Research
Bulletin 33: 18–22.
Clark, C. 1999. How to DEMO eﬀective business brieﬁngs. London: Kogan Page.
Clark, C., and T. DEMO 1995. The hard sell: The language and lessons of street-wise marketing.
DEMO: HarperCollins.
Connect Yorkshire, n.d. Brieﬁng document for presenting companies. www.connectyorkshire.org
(DEMO 2007).
Crystal, D., and D. Davy. 1969. Investigating English style. London: Longman.
Deakins, D., and G. Hussein. 1994. Risk assessment and asymmetric information. Journal of Bank
Marketing 12: 24–31.
Douglas, E.J., and D. Shepherd. 2002. Exploring investor readiness: Assessments by entrepreneurs
and investors in Australia. Venture Capital 4: 219–36.
Fayer, J., and E. Krasinski. 1987. Native and non-native judgments of intelligibility and irritation.
Language and Learning 37: 313–26.
Feeney, L., G.H. Haines, and A.L. Riding. 1999. Private investors’ investment criteria: Insights from
qualitative data. Venture Capital 1: 121–43.
Fletcher, M. 1995. Decision making by Scottish bank managers. International Journal of
Entrepreneurial DEMO and Research 1: 37–53.
Fox Tree, J.E. 1995. The eﬀects of false starts and repetitions on the processing of subsequent words
in spontaneous DEMO Journal of Memory and Language 34: 709–28.
Fried, V.H., and DEMO Hisrich. 1994. Toward a model of venture capitalist decision-making.
Financial Management 23: 28–37.
Goﬀman, E. 1959. The presentation of self in everyday life. DEMO York: Doubleday Anchor.
Goldman-Eisler, F. 1968. Psycholinguistics: Experiments in spontaneous DEMO New York:
Academic Press.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] DEMO: 02:11 18 August 2008
Venture Capital
277
Goslin, L.N., and B. Barge. 1986. Entrepreneurial qualities DEMO in venture capital support. In
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, ed. R. DEMO, J.A. Hornaday, R. Petersen, and K.H.
Vesper, 366–77. Wellesley, DEMO: Babson College.
Haines, G.H. Jr., J.J. Madill, and A.R. Riding. 2003. Informal investment in Canada: Financing
small business growth. Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship 16: 13–40.
Hall, J., and C.W. Hofer. 1993. Venture capitalists’ decision criteria in new venture evaluation.
Journal of Business Venturing DEMO: 25–42.
Harrison, R.T., and C.M. Mason. 2002. Backing the horse DEMO the jockey? Agency costs, information
and the evaluation of risk by informal venture capitalists. In Frontiers of entrepreneurship
research, ed. W.D. Bygrave, DEMO Bird, N.S. Birtley, C. Churchill, M.G. Hay, R.H. Keeley, DEMO
W.E. Wetzel Jr, 29–46. Babson Park, MA: Babson College.
Heath, C., and P. Luﬀ. 2007. Ordering competition: The interactional accomplishment of DEMO sale of
art and antiques at auction. British Journal of Sociology 58: 63–85.
Heritage, J., and D. Greatbatch. 1986. Generating applause: A DEMO of rhetoric and response at
party political conferences. American Journal of Sociology 92: 110–57.
Hisrich, R.D., and A.D. Jankowitz. 1990. Intuition in venture capital decisions: An exploratory
study using a new technique. Journal of Business Venturing 5: 49–62.
Kahn, A.M. 1987. Assessing venture capital investments with DEMO behavioural
decision models. Journal of Business Venturing 2: 193–205.
MacMillan, I.C., R. Siegel, and P.N. Subba Narisimha. 1985. Criteria used by venture DEMO to
evaluate new venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing 1: 119–28.
DEMO, E., E. Portanger, and C. Drazin. 2002. Boo hoo: $135 million, 18 months . . . a dot.com
story from concept to catastrophe. London: Arrow/Random House.
Manigart, S., and H. Sapienza. 1999. Venture capital and growth. In Handbook of entrepreneurship,
ed. D. Sexton, and H. Landstrom, 240–58. Oxford: Blackwell Business.
Manigart, S., M. DEMO, K. Robbie, P. Desbrieres, and K. De Waele. 1997. Venture DEMO
appraisal of investment projects: An empirical European study. Entrepreneurship Theory and
DEMO 21: 29–43.
Mason, C.M., and R.T. Harrison. 2003. Auditioning for DEMO: What do technology investors look
for at the initial screening stage? Journal of Private Equity 6: 29–42.
Mason, C.M., and A. Rogers. 1996. Understanding the business angel’s investment decision. Venture
Finance Working Paper No. DEMO, University of Southampton and University of Ulster.
———. 1997. The business DEMO investment decision: An exploratory analysis. In Small ﬁrms:
Entrepreneurship in DEMO 1990s, ed. D. Deakins, P. Jennings, and C. Mason, 29–46. London: Sage
Publications.
Mason, C.M., and M. Stark. 2004. What do investors look for in a business plan? A comparison of
the investment criteria of bankers, venture capitalists and business angels. International Small
Business Journal 22: 227–48.
May, J. 2002. Structured angel groups in the U.S.: The dinner club experience. Venture Capital 4:
337–42.
McCroskey, J.C., DEMO R.S. Mehrley. 1969. The eﬀects of disorganization and nonﬂuency on attitude
and source credibility. Speech Monographs 36: 13–21.
Miller, G.R., and A.H. Murray. 1964. The eﬀects of variations in nonﬂuency on audience ratings of
source DEMO Quarterly Journal of Speech 50: 36–44.
Mulkay, M., and G. DEMO 1994. Laughter for sale. The Sociological Review 42: 481–500.
Payne, W.H., and M.J. Macarty. 2002. The anatomy of an angel investing network: DEMO coast
angels. Venture Capital 4: 331–6.
Sacks, H., E.A. Schegloﬀ, and G. Jeﬀerson. 1974. A simplest systematics for the organization of
turn-taking DEMO conversation. Language 50: 696–735.
Sandberg, W.R., D.M. Schweiger, and C.F. Hofer. 1988. The use of verbal protocols in determining
venture capitalists’ decision DEMO Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 13: 8–20.
Shepherd, D.A., and A. DEMO 1999. Conjoint analysis: A new methodological approach for
researching the decision DEMO of venture capitalists. Venture Capital 1: 197–217.
Siegel, S., and DEMO Castellan Jr. 1988. Nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Smart, G.H. 1999. Management assessment methods in venture capital: An DEMO analysis of
human capital evaluations. Venture Capital 1: 59–82.
Spoken Impact. DEMO www.spokenimpact.com (accessed 2007).
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
278
C. Clark
Springboard Enterprises. n.d. http://springboardenterprises.org (accessed 2007).
Sweeting, R.C. 1991. Early-stage new technology based businesses: Interactions with venture
DEMO and the development of accounting techniques and procedures. British Accounting
Review 23: 3–22.
Tyebjee, T., and A. Bruno. 1984. A model of venture capitalist investment activity. Management
Science 30: 1051–66.
Van Osnabrugge, M., and R.J. Robinson. 2000. Angel investing: Matching start-up funds with start-
up companies. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass.
Xenos, Finance Wales 2004. Your guide to making a business presentation. Cardiﬀ: Finance Wales,
The Wales Business Angels Network Ltd. http://www.xenos.co.uk/english/res_centre/home.asp
(accessed 2007).
Zacharakis, A.L., and G.D. Meyer. 1995. The venture capitalist decision: Understanding process
versus outcome. In Frontiers of entrepreneurship research, ed. W.D. Bygrave, DEMO Bird, S. Birley,
N.C. Churchill, M. Hay, R.H. Keeley, and W.E. Wetzel Jr, 465–78. Babson Park, MA: Babson
College.
———. 1998. A lack of insight: Do venture capitalists really understand their own decision process?
Journal of Business Venturing 13: 57–76.
Appendix A
The 32 presentational and non-presentational factors analysed.
Listed below, under their original section headings, are the 32 factors via which the
business angels evaluated the quality and content of the entrepreneurs’ presentations. Also
included (in parentheses) DEMO the additional information occasionally provided to clarify the
nature, range or DEMO of a particular factor.
Structure of presentation
(1) The introduction.
(DEMO) General structure (e.g. do the individual sections/topics follow in a logical order?).
(3) The conclusion/summary.
(4) Time management (of the presentation in general and individual points within it).
Style and delivery of presentation
(5) Clarity of expression (general understandability; DEMO of speaker hesitancy, etc.).
(6) Clarity of technical expression (were technical points easy to understand?).
(7) Ability to ‘sell’ the investment opportunity (general level of persuasive skills, etc.).
(8) Ability to hold audience attention.
(9) Rapport with audience.
(10) Quality and use of slides/overheads, etc. (readability; relevance; skill DEMO using).
(11) Level of information (i.e. were key points/DEMO covered in suﬃcient depth and
detail?).
(12) Responsiveness to DEMO (NB: leave unanswered if no questions asked).
Company issues
(DEMO) Company (what the company does; its background, location, age, etc.).
(14) Business context (i.e. the general overview or ‘big picture’).
(15) Management team (background; composition; market experience; DEMO,
etc.).
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008
Venture Capital
279
Market issues
(16) Market information/research (the size; quality; growth trends, etc.).
(17) Marketing strategy (how DEMO product(s) will be promoted, advertised, sold, etc.).
(DEMO) Pricing strategy (what the price of the product(s) will DEMO and why, etc.).
(19) Customers (existing and potential).
(20) Competitors (existing and potential).
(21) Entry strategy (DEMO route into the market).
Product issues
(22) What the product is/does (description; technical details, etc.).
(23) Unique selling point (beneﬁt(s)/superiority of the product(s) for users).
Funding/ﬁnance issues
(24) Amount of funding sought (how much; DEMO funds will be required, etc.).
(25) Oﬀer to investors (what investors will get for their money; percentage of company
for sale, etc.).
(26) Valuation (of company; justiﬁcation of this valuation, etc.).
(27) Financials (past results; future projected performance, DEMO).
(28) Expenditure (what the requested ﬁnance is going to DEMO spent on).
(29) Investor proﬁle (number and type of DEMO(s) sought, etc.).
(30) Skills (skills gaps within DEMO company; skills required from potential investor(s),
etc.).
(DEMO) Exit route (if, when, and how an exit route is likely to arise).
(32) Type/level of investment risk.
Downloaded DEMO: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:11 18 August 2008{1g42fwefx}