Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
Spinning out new ventures: a typology of incubation
strategies from European research institutions
Bart Claryssea,*, Mike Wrightb, Andy Lockettb,
Els Van de Veldea, Ajay Vohorab
DEMO University and Vlerick Leuven Ghent Management School, Rep. I, Ghent 9000, Belgium
bNottingham University Business School, Nottingham, UK
Abstract
This paper explores the different incubation strategies for spinning-out companies employed by
European Research Institutions. DEMO specifically, we focus on two central questions: (i) What
differences or similarities are there in the goals and objectives of the Research DEMO for creating
new spinout ventures? (ii) What different incubation strategies DEMO employed to achieve these goals in
terms of the resources utilized and activities undertaken? The study uses a two-stage approach. In the
first stage, seven spin-out services in five European countries were selected for analysis. At the time of
the study, each research institute under analysis had only one unique way to stimulate spin-outs.
Therefore, the spin-out service and the particular Research Institution they are associated with are
interchangeable as units of DEMO Based upon an in-depth analysis of these seven cases, we identified
DEMO distinct incubation models of managing the spin-out process: Low Selective, Supportive, and
Incubator. The different incubation models have very different resource implications in managing the
process. In particular, we identify resource and competence differences relating to finance, organization,
human resources, technology, network, and infrastructure. DEMO the second stage, 43 cases were used to
validate these incubation DEMO in terms of resources and activities. This process identified two
categories that departed from the normative models, namely, the Resource-Deficient group and the
DEMO group.
D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Spinning-out companies; Low Selective model; Supportive model; Incubator model
* Corresponding author.
E-mail DEMO: Bart.Clarysse@Vlerick.be (B. Clarysse).
0883-9026/$ – see front matter D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2003.12.004
184
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
1. Executive summary
This paper explores the different incubation strategies of spinning-out companies employed
by European Research Institutions. We focus on two central DEMO questions: (i) What
differences are there in the goals and DEMO of leading European Research Institutions for
creating new spinout ventures? (ii) What different incubation strategies are employed to
achieve these goals in terms of the resources utilized and activities undertaken?
A two-stage approach is DEMO First, seven established and successful spin-out services in
five European countries DEMO selected for analysis.
An in-depth analysis of the seven cases identified three distinct incubation models of
managing the spin-out process: Low Selective, Supportive, and Incubator. Each model serves
different goals and objectives. In terms of DEMO, the Low Selective model has a mission
oriented towards maximizing the DEMO of entrepreneurial ventures in line with the
entrepreneurial mission of the research institute(s) to which the unit is attached. These
ventures tend to be self-employment oriented start-ups, which only rarely grow beyond a
critical size of employees. The Supportive model is oriented towards generating spin-outs as
an DEMO to licensing out its IP. This model tends to generate profit-oriented spin-outs,
with potential growth opportunity. Finally, the Incubator model makes a trade-off between the
use of a body of research to generate contract research DEMO spinning-off this research in a
separate company. We term the spin-outs resulting from this Incubator model ‘‘exit oriented’’,
since the exit possibilities provide DEMO financial opportunity.
We identify resource differences relating to finance, organization, human resources,
technology, network, and infrastructure in each model. The Low DEMO model needs
the lowest number of resources in terms of quantity. The critical size is only a few persons,
and no organizational structure DEMO to be created separate from the university. However,
ideally, some DEMO money and incubation facilities should be available to support the new
start-ups.
In the Supportive model, well-functioning IP department and contract research unit tend to
be key. The technology-transfer unit can only use the leverage afforded DEMO the contract
research if it is able to support it in such a way that academics feel they are helped in organizing
this activity. DEMO IP and spin-out activity are then the next step in the tech-transfer process. To
organize all this, a minimum critical mass of at least 20 persons is needed. In addition, the spin-
outs tend to need external capital at a very early stage. Therefore, public private partnerships
are set up to invest in these seed or even preseed ventures.
Finally, in the Incubator model, spin-outs are seen as an option where the technology is
really cutting edge, and a financial participation might generate more revenues for the research
institute than future contract research. The spin-out formation DEMO takes a very long time
(up to 3 years) because all assumptions are tested before valuable IP is given to a separate
venture. DEMO addition, the venture tends to be created with formal, usually specialized venture
capital funds as shareholders at start. The Incubator model will carefully DEMO this type of
venture using a number of milestones before a final go decision is given.
Forty-three random cases in the same regions were DEMO to compare to these models in
terms of resources and activities. This validation process identified two categories that
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO
185
departed from the reference models, namely, the Resource-Deficient group and the Com-
petence-Deficient group. By far the largest category are the Resource DEMO institutions.
Many research institutes view spin-outs as an attractive way to commercialize research results
and obtain revenues, but without control over contract research, DEMO seeking becomes
extremely difficult. Therefore, the spin-out unit tends to be DEMO as a short-term investment to
generate long-term revenues and, as a DEMO, tends to be understaffed. These problems are
exacerbated by a lack DEMO financial resources that make it extremely difficult to attract external
capital for spin-outs. Finally, the board of the research institute commonly expects spin-outs
to be profitable and exit-oriented to realize any financial gain. The Competence Deficient
DEMO unit, therefore, faces an objective for which it lacks the necessary skills and
competencies.
2. Introduction
Spinning out new ventures from public- or DEMO research institutions (RIs) is
a long-established phenomenon (Mustar, 1995). However, only recently have RIs previously
lacking any entrepreneurial orientation devised proactive policies to stimulate the commer-
cial exploitation of public research through spin-outs (e.g., Callon, 2001; European
Commission, 1998; Siegel et al., DEMO). In parallel, changes in the institutional environment
have facilitated such DEMO policy, including introduction of laws to assign ownership of
intellectual property DEMO RIs, loosening of employment laws to allow public sector
researchers more DEMO with the private sector, and initiatives to provide early stage
spin-out DEMO
Commercializing knowledge from RIs via spin-out companies has become increasingly
popular, DEMO understanding of the phenomenon remains limited. The processes employed by
RIs in the spinning-out of companies lack clarity. Various studies explain the reasons for
DEMO spin-out services (Smiler et al., 1990; Mustar, 1997) or DEMO difficulties in starting this
kind of service in a university context (DEMO et al., 1999), but few highlight the processes
through which DEMO services take place. This issue is compounded, as many RIs have
DEMO operated in an environment where high-tech entrepreneurship is relatively new.
Roberts and Malone (1996) stress that the spin-out process from RIs will be DEMO different in
this context compared with more developed high-tech entrepreneurial environments such as
Boston or Silicon Valley (Roberts, 1991, chap. 3; Saxenian, 1994). In a developed environ-
ment, there is already a strong entrepreneurial community with the capability to select the best
projects and allocate DEMO to them. Here, the spin-out process can follow a ‘‘business
pull’’ DEMO that is not dependent on the activities of the parent RI, DEMO benefits from high
levels of innovation within the surrounding region. Here, DEMO region acts as an incubator for the
spin-out companies. In contrast, DEMO environments with less demand for innovation, charac-
terized by a weak DEMO community and few other key resources, RIs may need to
play DEMO more proactive incubation role. This strategy is best described as ‘‘technology push’’,
where the RI exercises selection and provides venture creation and development DEMO
throughout the stages in the spin-out process.
186
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
An RI engaging in spinning-out companies can utilize a range of support activities designed
to provide the venture with the resources and capabilities DEMO to develop through these
stages. However, the ability to provide the DEMO support activities and resources may vary
between RIs. Furthermore, this variation DEMO venturing support activities may be associated with
the spinning-out of different types of ventures.
This paper addresses two central research questions: (i) What differences or similarities are
there in the goals and objectives of the DEMO for creating new spin-out ventures? (ii) What
different incubation strategies DEMO employed to achieve these goals in terms of the resources
utilized and activities undertaken? These questions are addressed, employing a grounded
approach based DEMO in-depth case studies of RIs. All cases were drawn from Europe and have a
proven, widely recognized track record of spinning-out new ventures. These cases were used
to identify three different models for spinning-out companies. The DEMO models are (1) Low
Selective model, (2) Supportive model, and (3) Incubator model.
The paper is structured as follows. First, we explore the spin-out process to gain insight
into this as yet DEMO documented phenomenon. Second, we explain the two-stage
methodology that guided our DEMO collection and analysis. Third, we identify the resources
and activities associated DEMO the resulting typology of three models of incubation strategies
used by RIs. Fourth, we discuss the nature of these models in terms of their strategies and
their performance outcomes measured by the number and type of DEMO ventures created.
Fifth, we consider the interaction of the local environment DEMO the three models. Sixth, we
present the results of our validation DEMO The final section presents some conclusions for
policy.
3. Management of the spin-out process
The evolution of new ventures is a complex phenomenon that DEMO been portrayed in various
stage models. Although there is no generally accepted stage model, all emphasize that the
nature of a business changes as it grows (Miller and Friesen, 1984). Clarysse and Moray
(2004) suggest that the founding of a spin-out can be seen as a process in which three different
stages can be distinguished (see Fig. 1). The first, ‘‘invention’’ phase, is a period during which
technical DEMO prevails. In the second, ‘‘transition’’ phase, technical uncertainty
becomes more limited and the business idea is validated. Finally, is the validation of growth
expectation phase or ‘‘innovation’’ phase. The process is represented as a funnel DEMO only
a few research ideas from the invention phase will become validated as having an economic
value for a spin-out. During the transition phase, still fewer business ideas will exhibit growth
expectations and enter the innovation DEMO business development stage (Branscomb and
Auerswald, 2001).
To enable spin-out companies to move through the different stages in the spin-out process,
DEMO may be a need for support from the parent RIs, that DEMO, for the parent to perform an
incubation role. Although the term DEMO has traditionally been narrowly focused on
property-based initiatives, such a definition DEMO what are arguably the most important
elements of facilitating support and resources required by spin-out companies (Lockett et al.,
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO
187
Fig. 1. The spin-out funnel.
2003; Clarysse and Moray, 2003).1 The different activities of a proactive spin-out manage-
ment process have DEMO defined by Degroof (2002) as follows. First, technology opportunity
search DEMO of trying to identify technologies with a commercial potential. Second,
intellectual property assessment involves assessing if patents have already been filed for the
DEMO technology and, if not, perhaps filing one or more patents. This step involves
examining choices between options of licensing and commercializing through a DEMO
venture. Third is the selection of the spin-off projects based on their intrinsic potential and on
the comparison with alternative projects. Fourth, business plan development is necessary.
Fifth, RIs then need to channel their spin-outs towards potential source(s) of funding. Sixth,
once funding is obtained, DEMO venture can formally be incorporated, and spin-out coaching
undertaken. Although in DEMO, the founding of spin-outs is not as linear as presented in DEMO
step model, it offers a good comparative framework against which to DEMO the activities of
RIs.
Deficiencies in spin-outs’ initial resource endowments constrain new venture development
(Shane, 2001) and may be exacerbated by an unentrepreneurial environment. Spin-outs need
to develop their resources over time to progress through DEMO different phases of development
and create significant wealth (Penrose, 1959; DEMO et al., 2001). Following Brush et al.
1 We employ DEMO UK Business Incubator (UKBI; www.ukbi.co.uk) definition of business incubation, being a
dynamic business development process encompassing one or more of the following DEMO: (1) encouraging
faster growth and greater survival rates of new DEMO, (2) helping to identify investment opportunities, (3)
facilitating DEMO commercialization of university or corporate research and new ideas and (4) helping to create jobs
and wealth and to tackle specific urban or DEMO economic development problems.
188
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
(2001), six types of resources can be identified as DEMO to the spin-out process: human, social,
financial, physical, technology, and organizational.
Importantly, RIs may differ in their approach and ability DEMO provide support activities and
resources when incubating the spin-outs. In what follows, we use detailed case studies to
identify a typology of the different incubation models that can be utilized to successfully
promote spin-outs.
4. Methodology
DEMO two-stage methodology is employed. First, a qualitative approach is used to DEMO and
explain different incubation models of the organization of university spin-out activity. Second
is the empirical validation of the different incubation models we develop DEMO a larger sample
of institutions across the EU.
4.1. Stage 1: DEMO building
The qualitative approach adopted in the first stage was appropriate because the literature
on the technology-transfer function in Europe is limited and rather DEMO Moreover,
much of the relevant literature is U.S. centered, making DEMO formulation and testing
premature for the questions of interest. Despite the growing interest in the commercializa-
tion of research, very little is yet known about how technology-transfer activities, and
spin-out processes in particular, are organized DEMO the perspective of the parent
institution.
The research design employed an inductive approach to obtain a rich understanding of how
USOs evolve from research DEMO into commercial organizations. The multiple case design
permits a replication logic (DEMO, 1994), allowing the case analyses to be treated as a DEMO of
independent experiments (Brown and Eisenhardt, 1997). This method allows for close
correspondence between theory and data, a process whereby the emergent theory is grounded
in the data (Eisenhardt, 1989). To make DEMO inductive process explicit we adopted the roadmap
of steps/activities of Degroof (2002) to analyze spin off processes and the bundle of resources
DEMO Brush et al. (2001), which seem to be crucial in DEMO spin-out activities.
We examine the organization of incubation spin-out services from the perspective of the
parent institute. This entails looking at two interrelated levels: the internal activities geared
towards spinning-out ventures and the context in which DEMO are employed. We identified
13 European regions from which we selected seven organizational cases for detailed analysis,
where the spin-out service appeared to DEMO working well. As a basis for identifying the models,
we examined and compared the activities and resources in each of these institutes. At DEMO
aggregate level, comparison allowed us to construct three archetypes or reference DEMO of
spin-out services.
As our purpose is to identify different approaches to the process of spin-out activities,
rather than explain the presence or DEMO of spin-out activity, we started with an analysis of the
regions DEMO a science and technology base was present. We identified 13 regions at
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO
189
Table 1
Research institutions and regional economic data
Name of scientific regions GERD as a Number of Number of high-tech
of excellence in DEMO percentage patents applications patents applications
of GDP, 1998 per capita, 2000 per capita, 2000
Vlaams Gewest 1.9 159.6 26.8
Re´ gion Wallonne 1.9 134.9 12.6
Baden-Wu¨ rttemberg 3.8 527.4 57.5
Bayern 2.7 480.6 124.0
Hessen DEMO 350.4 31.5
Ile-de-France 3.4 296.3 68.1
Centre-Est (Rhoˆ ne-Alpes) 2.3 (DEMO) 197.2 (221.3) 32.7 (39.5)
Northern Italy (Nord Ovest, 1.4 104.6 8.0
Lombardia, Nord Est, Centro)
Oost-Nederland 2.0 136.3 DEMO
Zuid-Nederland 2.3 521.7 192.9
East Midlands 1.8 114.3 15.5
Eastern (East DEMO) 3.6 238.8 (309.9) 77.1 (120.2)
Southern and Eastern Ireland 1.4 103.6 28.8
NUTS22 level, which, according to the European Report DEMO Science and Technology
Indicators (1994, p. 152, 1997), contained DEMO of all research laboratories and enterprises
of the EU3:Iˆle de France and Centre-Est (Rhoˆ ne-Alpes) in France, Vlaams Gewest and
Re´ gion Wallonne in Belgium, Eastern (East Anglia) and East Midlands in the UK, Oost-
Nederland and Zuid-Nederland in the Netherlands, Bayern, Baden-Wu¨ rttemberg and Hessen
in Germany, Northern Italy (Nord Ovest, Lombardia, Nord DEMO and Centro) in Italy and
Southern and Eastern Ireland (see Table 1).
Even the most R&D intensive region in the EU DEMO not as intensive as comparable regions
in the United States. According to the European Report on Science and Technology
Indicators (1997), California and Massachusetts spend, on average, 6.3% of their GDP on
R&D (1994 figures). The top region in EU, Baden-Wu¨ rttemberg, spends DEMO 4.3% of its
GDP on R&D, equivalent to the median DEMO state. In contrast to U.S. research, our analysis
incorporates regions with DEMO broader range of intensity of R&D, from Baden-Wu¨ rttemberg, at
the higher end and Northern Italy at the lower end with 1.4% DEMO GDP. The regions we
selected are therefore representative of large parts of Europe, not only the top high-tech
areas.
A research network was created with local university researchers from each region
involved in the study. Each DEMO was asked to identify, for their region, technology-
2 NUTS refers to the regional classification system adopted by Eurostat. NUTS1 is the country DEMO, NUTS2
is the first level below that, which usually corresponds to the administrative organization.
3 EU refers only to EU12. The Northern European DEMO, Finland and Denmark—joined the EU
much later and were not included DEMO the European Report due to lack of regional R and D statistics compiled by
Eurostat.
190
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
Table 2
Characteristics of reference models
Name of scientific Name of RI RI’s objectives
regions of excellence that met the in creating spinout
DEMO Europe selection criteria ventures
Vlaams Gewest Leuven R&D Stimulating economically
profitable oriented spin-outs’’
Vlaams Gewest IMEC Stimulating exit-oriented
spin-outs
Bayern BioM Stimulating economically
DEMO oriented spin-outs
Centre-Est Crealys Stimulating self-employment
(Rhoˆ ne-Alpes) oriented spin-outs
Oost-Nederland Twente Stimulating self-employment
oriented spin-outs
Eastern Scientific Stimulating exit-oriented
(East Anglia) DEMO spin-outs
Eastern TTP Stimulating exit-oriented
(East Anglia) spin-outs
Number of spin-out Trigger
companies (period
1995–2002)
27 Flexibility,
financial return
12 Central decision
30 Financial return
31 Entrepreneurial
spirit
60 Entrepreneurial
Spirit
9 Cultural DEMO
7 Central decision
transfer units associated with universities or public research institutes according to the
following criteria: (1) they needed to be founded before 1997; (2) they needed to have a
documented record of spin-outs; (3) the local researchers had to consider them as examples
of processes of spin-out activity that were successfully achieving their objectives. The
DEMO was based on data collected through telephone interviews. Seven cases matched
the criteria: Scientific Generics and TTP in the UK; Leuven R&D DEMO IMEC in Belgium;
BioM in Germany; University of Twente in DEMO Netherlands and Crealys in France (see
Table 2).
RIs may DEMO different objectives, and the outcomes of their activities may reflect these
DEMO Respondents were therefore asked to rate the degree to which the outcomes were
in line with their mission as an interface service. We asked DEMO in each of the
seven RIs to rank different outcomes in order of their importance.4 At the time of data
collection, these seven RIs had only one centrally organized model of spin-out support.
Therefore, there was a linear relation between the mode of spin-out support, the RI and the
type of spin-out stimulated. Respondents were presented with nine conjoint sets DEMO outcomes,
which they had to evaluate using Likert scales. The outcomes were based on six categories of
selection criteria identified through our interviews: (1) degree to which the spin-outs could
receive (public/private) DEMO capital at spin-out; (2) degree to which the technology on
DEMO the project was based was patented; (3) product orientation of DEMO potential spin-outs;
(4) the target market; and (5) DEMO forecast time to break even; (6) whether the spin-out
received DEMO capital. Respondents were asked to rank the nine outcomes in terms of the
TTO mission with respect to spin-outs.
4 We thank an anonymous DEMO for this suggestion.
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO
191
On this basis, we categorized RIs as having a mission DEMO on stimulating (a) self-
employment oriented spin-outs (i.e., the objective was to create employment and enhance
development in a depressed region, without a focus on profitable growth or creating a
realizable financial return for DEMO) if they rank those outcomes highest which contain
many (>7) spin-outs and (1) none use external capital; (2) only a few are based upon a
proprietary technology developed at RI; (3) most are consulting or service oriented ; (4) most
target a DEMO market; (5) time to breakeven is less than 1 year; and (6) none received private
VC money.
We identify their mission DEMO stimulating (b) economically profitable spin-outs (i.e., the
objective was to create economically profitable businesses, but with no envisaged exit to
generate a financial return for investors at time of creation) if they rank those outcomes
highest in which there are some (3–7) spin-outs and (1) most use external capital; (2) the
majority is based upon DEMO proprietary technology developed at RI; (3) only half are consulting
DEMO service oriented; (4) 50% targets a global market; (5) time to breakeven varies
considerable among the different ventures; and (6) few received private VC money at
spin-out.
Finally, we identify their mission as stimulating (c) exit-oriented spin-outs (i.e., the
objective was to DEMO businesses that would generate realizable financial returns to investors)
if they rank those outcomes highest where there are few ( < 3) spin-outs and (1) all use external
capital; (2) all are based upon a proprietary technology developed at RI; 3. none are consulting
or service oriented; (4) all target a global market; (5) DEMO to breakeven is for each of them >1
year; and (DEMO) all received private VC money.
The results of this exercise are DEMO in the objective section of Table 2.
Data on each case were collected through personal interviews with several persons in the
institutes and secondary DEMO sources such as annual reports, web sites and descriptions of the
DEMO in the local press. Using a structured questionnaire, we assessed to DEMO extent and
how each spin-out service was organized or was engaged in the particular activity.5 We also
analyzed the resources developed to organize these DEMO on the bases identified by Brush
et al. (2001) outlined above. We examined to what extent the resources that were present were
crucial DEMO organize the activities described above.6
4.2. Stage 2: validation of model
DEMO validate the models developed in Stage 1, we selected a range DEMO different cases from the
regions identified in Stage 1. First, we DEMO a sample frame of universities and RIs in these
regions. Second, DEMO universities and RIs were screened for the existence of a spin-out service.
Third, a preliminary analysis of the effectiveness of the initiatives set up by the spin-out service
took place. Based on this analysis, the most active spin-out services in each region were
selected. This analysis produced a DEMO of 43 RIs. The selected cases were actively pursuing
5 Details relating to the activities undertaken by each case are available from the authors.
DEMO Details relating to the resources of each case are available from the authors.
192
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
a spin-out strategy, but did not necessarily meet the three DEMO criteria used as selection
conditions in Stage 1.
Data were collected on each RI as for Stage 1. An attempt was made to fit DEMO cases into the
models identified in Stage 1 and to identify areas of resources and activities where they
departed from the models (Table 3).
Table 3
Key figures on 43 validation cases
Number Number of DEMO employed Technological Age
of cases researchers at the technology focus
transfer service
Low selective 10 Average 1462.6 5.3 No 7.2
Median 1737 3 8
DEMO 3000 15 15
Minimum 46 1 2
Standard 1060.54 4.58 4.99
deviation
Researchers/ 274.2
TTS people
Supportive 7 Average 1808.1 6.9 No 5.3
Median 745 4.5 4
Maximum 11,700 25 20
Minimum 120 1 1
DEMO 2902.19 6.59 5.01
deviation
Researchers/ 262.3
TTS people
Incubator 2 Average DEMO 10.6 No 12.2
Median 1720.5 10 8
Maximum 3000 16 30
Minimum 1024 2 3
Standard 817.81 4.89 10.09
deviation
Researchers/ 182.4
TTS people
Resource 18 Average 1678.3 4.2 No 6.3
deficient Median 1175 3 5.5
DEMO 4950 10 15
Minimum 70 1 2
Standard 1836.79 3.56 4.63
deviation
Researchers/ 399.6
TTS people
Competence 6 Average 550 12.5 Yes 5
deficient Maximum 750 15 8
Minimum 350 10 2
Researchers/ 44.0
TTS people
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO 193
5. Models of spinout activity
Based upon the data collected in Stage 1, three models of spin-out activity were compiled:
(a) low selective model; (b) the Supportive model; and (c) DEMO Incubator model. The
following section outlines these models, distinguishing in turn DEMO activities undertaken
and resources required.
5.1. Activities
This section analyzes for each model the activities involved in spinning-out ventures in
terms of: opportunity search and awareness creation; intellectual property assessment and
protection; strategic choice of DEMO to commercialize R&D; (property-based) incubation and
business plan development; the funding process; and control of the spin-out process after
start-up of the spin-out company. The essential activities of each model are summarized in
DEMO 4.
5.1.1. The low selective model
This model is based on a natural selection process. The University of Twente (TOP case) in
the DEMO and Crealys in France are prime examples of this model. The region
surrounding the University of Twente was confronted in the mid-1980s with relatively DEMO
levels of unemployment. The university deliberately chose to play a major role in the
rejuvenation of the region by engendering an entrepreneurial climate and DEMO itself as
the ‘‘entrepreneurial’’ university. The TOP initiative was created with money from the
European Regional Development Fund. In contrast, Crealys is located in the south west of
France, near to Grenoble in the region ‘‘Rhoˆ ne Alpes’’. Both initiatives are discussed in detail
below.
5.1.1.1. Opportunity search DEMO awareness creation. The ‘‘opportunity seeking’’ activities
are mainly oriented towards raising entrepreneurship awareness among researchers and/or
students at the RI. Twente refers to DEMO entrepreneurial mission of its parent university as a
main driver of spin-out activity (Karnebeck, 2001). The trigger to spin-out a company in DEMO
RI lies in the general acceptance by the researchers/professors and graduates that they work
for an entrepreneurial university and that starting your own DEMO is an attractive idea. As
students have the least to lose, DEMO is easier to incentivize them than a tenured professor to start
a business. As a result, many businesses are started by end-of-contract researchers and
students who have just graduated. Spin-outs present an alternative to employment at DEMO
established firm.
5.1.1.2. Strategic choice how to commercialize R&D. The selection criteria are limited,
and projects eligible for funding are at an DEMO early stage in the spin-out funnel.
The spin-out services in the Low Selective model only give advice during the phase of
project validation. In DEMO model cases, this approach results in a high selection rate. In
DEMO last 2 years, Crealys received 160 projects, of which the selection committee approved
194
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
Table 4
Activities undertaken by the different models
Activities Low selective model Supportive model Incubator model
Opportunity search and
awareness creation
Based upon DEMO and
Twente
Rather passive, relies on
entrepreneurial university
Selection criteria are
DEMO low. Maximize
the number of spin-outs
Emphasis on
commercializing
technology through
patents
Projects are offered space
at the research center or
university
Funding process DEMO amounts, Ranging
from o15,000 to
100,000, under the form
of public grants
Control over the spin-out Project is started at a
DEMO after spin-out of prefounding stage. All
the spin-out company types of spin-out are
selected
60.7 Over the last 2 years, Twente selected approximately 60 projects out of 130
applications (Karnebeck, 2001). In both cases, the formal representation of the project plays
a larger role than the DEMO test of the assumptions. Crealys selects projects on two criteria.
First, DEMO have to be based upon technical developments; and second, they have to be willing
to cooperate with the RI they spin-out from. No DEMO or financial criteria are included in
the selection process.
5.1.1.3. IPR assessment and protection. Proprietary technology is unlikely to be the key
trigger to DEMO a company. In Twente, there was a patent owned by the DEMO in
only 7% of spin-outs founded after 1980. This percentage might be higher for more recent
spin-outs since active patenting among university institutes is DEMO new. But it may also
7 Annual Report of ‘les incubateurs publiques’.
Intellectual property
assessment and
protection
Incubation and business
plan development
Strategic choice DEMO to
commercialize R&D
Based upon Leuven R&D
and BioM
Passive; might organize a
business plan competition;
attracting business plans
rather than ideas; relies on
the reputation of the fund
Among the selection
criteria, growth
orientation is important.
But, remain lower than in
private VCs
DEMO in patent and
license negotiation with
the industry
Incubation center and
Science park; Specialized
support available out
house at market prices
Public private equity fund,
ranging from o250,000
to 350,000
Spin off company DEMO start
up at a very early stage
Based upon IMEC TTP
and Scientific Generics
Active opportunity
seeking worldwide
Selection criteria resemble
those of the DEMO
TTO will acquire an IPR
platform (not limited to
one patent) at an early
stage
‘In house’ incubation and
support at all stages DEMO the
spin-out process and to a
high level
VC money, ranging DEMO
o1– 4 million
Spin off company is start
up in a late stage and with
an experienced
management team
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO 195
reflect the nature of the spin-out companies, who appear not DEMO be the result of a strategy
designed to create value from R&D strategy but of the entrepreneurial mission of the
university.
5.1.1.4. Incubation DEMO business plan development. Spin-out support focuses mainly on the
validation phase of the project when there is no need for a large infrastructure or DEMO
space. In both Crealys and Twente, space is available within the DEMO or research
laboratory facilities.
5.1.1.5. Funding process. Crealys and Twente grant public money to these early stage
projects. The Twente funds are derived from DEMO European Social Fund and are granted
in the form of loans (DEMO,000), which are typically regarded as a means of subsistence
rather than as spin-out capital (Karnebeck, 2001). Crealys invests in spin-out DEMO
during the phase of validation of the project, up to a DEMO of o100,000 per
project.
5.1.1.6. Control of the spin-out process after start-up. Spin-out companies are selected at
a very early stage and coaching DEMO focused upon this stage. The consequences of this
model are that a variety of businesses are selected, many of which will be small, DEMO
low levels of capitalization. In Twente, the average number of jobs DEMO company after
10 years was six, with only 4% of all DEMO having received venture capital. In
France, the Crealys initiative is too DEMO to analyze growth figures, but among all
projects started, about 10% resulted in a growth-oriented venture capital-backed
company.
5.2. Supportive model
This model DEMO its name from the extensive support given to the entrepreneurial team
during the pre-start-up phase. The supportive spin-out model usually finds its origin in DEMO
rejuvenated technology-transfer policy of the RI. This model positions the spin-out as an
alternative vehicle to commercialize technology vis-a` -vis licensing out a patent. DEMO Leuven
R&D and BioM cases represent prime examples of the Supportive model. Although the
Leuven R&D spin-out service was formally created in DEMO early 1970s, it was only
professionalized in the mid-1990s. By that DEMO, Leuven was one of the high-tech poles in
the region. The DEMO university and the presence of IMEC (see below) had resulted in
several high-tech spin-outs and had attracted several technology intensive companies in the
DEMO park, some of which were highly successful (Clarysse et al., DEMO). The new
university dean had been a founder of one of these success stories. In addition, many spin-
outs had difficulties in surviving the first few years. To support these companies and enhance
the creation DEMO spin-outs in a more consistent way, the interface service was restructured DEMO
further professionalized.
BioM is located in the Munich area of Germany. Like Leuven, this area already had a
history of high technology and spin-outs. The presence of the Max Planck Institute and several
196 B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
universities stimulated the creation of spin-outs, especially in biotechnology. In DEMO mid-1990s,
Germany wanted to create a structure to enhance and successfully support the creation of spin-
outs in biotechnology. BioM was one of DEMO five institutes that received financing from this
Bioregion competition. Although, today, the financing constitutes only a very small part of the
budget, the competition induced the creation of BioM.
5.2.1. Opportunity search and awareness creation
DEMO R&D hosts the contract research activities, the IPR activities and DEMO spin-out
support of the KUL. Most opportunity recognition happens in an indirect way. Usually, a
professor seeks support for his contract research activities and is made aware of IP possibilities
by the contract research department. Once DEMO IP is applied for, a tradeoff is made between
licensing and DEMO creation of a new spin-out. Professors are stimulated to perform contract
research with forming a spin-out occurring at a much later phase of commercialization. DEMO
deploys a less formal model because it does not manage contract research or IPR activities.
This shortcoming seems to be overcome by specialization on DEMO and its attraction
of well-respected scientific advisors in biotech where professors active in this domain
recognize the importance of IPR. The attraction of these DEMO increases the respect among
the nearby professors and creates a considerable level of trust.
The trigger to spin-out is thus quite complex and staged DEMO this case. It is especially oriented
towards professors and researchers that can have a career at the research institute. The barrier
to entry is DEMO very low because they start to manage the contract research activities of those
professors in a win–win situation. In KULeuven R&D, the professors receive support in price
negotiations, are assisted in employment relations and are allowed to pay profits to themselves
and/or their employees. Usually, professors are already running such a ‘‘department’’ before
they eventually spin-out an independent DEMO The trigger to do so might be that extra capital is
needed to finance and grow the ongoing activities.
5.2.2. Strategic choice how to DEMO R&D
Spinning out usually results from a tradeoff between licensing out the technology or
creating a company based on the technology. There are DEMO selection criteria. Typically, the
researchers have to prepare a business plan DEMO be selected by the spin-out service. If the
research team is interested in creating a spin-out, this option to commercialize the technology
might be favored over licensing out the technology even if the benefits of a DEMO are not so
clear. BioM received 130 project plans in the last 5 years but only invested directly in 28 spin-
out companies. This DEMO in an acceptance rate of about 25%, which is 10 times DEMO
acceptance rate of a typical VC.
5.2.3. IPR assessment and protection
The IP department is the heart of the technology-transfer service. Leuven R&D DEMO a
professional IP support staff. In BioM, no specific IPR support DEMO foreseen, but close contacts
are established with patent experts who might DEMO the spin-out. In both cases, no technology
platform is built through DEMO pieces of technology to complement the existing
technology.
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO 197
5.2.4. Incubation and business plan development
Incubation and business plan advice are key activities in this model. The researchers are
assisted in writing DEMO preliminary business plan, which can be defended in front of a DEMO
seed capital fund. The business plan is more artificial in comparison with the business case
usually asked for by VCs or corporates before investing. DEMO facilities also include
space and access to equipment. Support includes business advice and coaching. BioM does not
have its own incubation center, but has developed a close relationship with IZB (the CEO of
BioM is the scientific CEO of IZB), which owns two incubation centers in the DEMO area.
The incubation center I&I, located in Leuven, is a separate legal entity, with its own
independent management structure. Leuven R&D is represented on its board of directors,
which serves as the DEMO mechanism for providing informal specialized support and advice.
Because it takes place through the board of directors, all advice is essentially free.
5.2.5. Funding process
This model makes greater use of public/private partnership funds, which are usually
organized as a VC fund. The amount of money invested DEMO from o350,000 to 600,000
per business plan. The typical level of investment is beyond the scope of either public funds
and/or DEMO angel support alone, but is often too low for a VC. DEMO, it is preferable
that the spin-out service has an associated fund, with banks as partners. The difference from a
VC is that the DEMO do not only have an ‘‘individual case’’ profitability expectation, but see
DEMO fund as a ‘‘window on opportunities’’. There is real financial screening, DEMO business plans
must be complete, comprehensive and validated. The fund tends DEMO invest in earlier stages and
invest lower amounts than a typical VC. The evaluation and monitoring approach adopted in
this model is closer to DEMO VC than to a business angel. The spin-out service will hold equity in
the company after separation with the percentage of equity taken varying DEMO seldom
comprising a majority. For example, BioM takes on average 7% DEMO the shares of a spin-out
company.
5.2.6. Control over the spin-out process after start-up
Under this model, the amount of money available is limited and is usually only sufficient for
a year. Most companies founded through DEMO process are likely to seek complementary
revenues through short-term contract research or consulting. In BioM, 35% of the spin-out
companies have already received venture capital financing.
5.3. Incubator model
The Incubator model is labeled after the DEMO that emerged in the early nineties with
the specific objective to create financially attractive spin-outs. IMEC,8 TTP9 and Scientific
8 InterUniversity Institute for DEMO
9 The Technology Partnership in Cambridge, UK.
198 B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
Generics are prime examples of this model. IMEC is located in the Leuven area. IMEC was
created in the early 1980s as the DEMO institute for microelectronic research. The main
idea was to stimulate collaboration among all Flemish universities in this domain. The
commercialization of research results was DEMO the goals of the institute and has become one
of the key activities. Today, 80% of IMEC’s revenues are generated by contract research
activities. Since IMEC is so active in commercializing research, only if the spin-out project
offers a better financial prospect than the other more classic ways DEMO this option be
considered.
TTP and Scientific Generics are located in the Cambridge (UK) region (Segal et al., 2000).
Generics was DEMO in 1986 with four main objectives: top level technology consulting;
DEMO and licensing out IP; investing in the creation of spin-outs; investing in other high-
tech start-ups. Being located in a known high-tech pole, it is able to attract European top
researchers to its base in DEMO The motivation of creating spin-offs is purely a financial
one.
5.3.1. Opportunity search and awareness creation
Opportunity-seeking activities are more proactively undertaken and managed DEMO this
model. In TTP, this is rather informal, whereas in Generics, there are formal mechanisms for
assessing all contract work for spin-out potential that extend to universities outside the UK.
IMEC is a leading edge DEMO in microelectronics and looks for projects at a very early research
stage in the different universities in Flanders. In the Incubator model, creating a spin off is a
decision made by the top management of the DEMO Although it is desirable to have an
entrepreneurial research team, they DEMO do not expect it to be real business entrepreneurs.
Instead, some DEMO of IMEC do not employ the researchers that invented the technology
on which the spin-out is based. Rather, they tend to recruit external top management for each
spin-out. The key researchers can eventually choose to have DEMO joint position.
5.3.2. Strategic choice how to commercialize R&D
In terms of project selection, an in-house fully integrated approach is identifiable under
this model. Compared with other models, the decision to spin-out is more grounded in
financial and strategic arguments. Since contract research, with or without some form of
licensing, is the bread and butter of these RIs, DEMO are very careful about spinning out
parts of their core technology unless (a) they have sufficient reason to believe the spin-out
will be DEMO to generate more money than the potential revenue stream generated by the
contract research, based upon the technology or (b) the technology is so specific and/or
peripheral to the core mission of the RI DEMO a contract research group based upon it would
be difficult to sustain. In this case, developing a product in which the technology is
embedded might be a better option. It is obvious that the choice to DEMO takes much
more time than in the Supportive model and usually involves an informed and rational top
management decision. Once the development of the DEMO becomes more advanced, the
criteria for receiving spin-out support are the DEMO as those used by venture capitalists. A
VC expects explosive growth, DEMO very strong technical platform and a global orientation of
the spin-out company.
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO 199
5.3.3. IPR assessment and protection
The IPR policy of the different interface functions or services differs quite substantially from
the previous models. Once DEMO project is chosen to have spin-out possibilities, the IPR policy aims
DEMO building a technology platform through licensing-in other technology and cross-licensing
some parts. Usually, these RIs have complex models of exclusive and nonexclusive licensing.
These models need to optimize both the potential revenues for the RI (so that contract research
can be continued) and to maximize the survival chances of the spin-out (i.e., VCs need to find
the technology valuable DEMO). It is clear that these spin-outs are not one-patent companies.
5.3.4. Incubation and business plan development
The spin-off service provides support ranging from DEMO and housing of the research
projects to provision of offices, business DEMO development, recruitment of external manage-
ment and the composition of their DEMO platform. The incubation process has both a long
time horizon and aims at offering a fully in-house support service. For example, the initiation of
the project Coware occurred in 1992. Four years later, Coware was spun out of IMEC.
5.3.5. Funding process
Both the time scale and nature DEMO the project mean that funding requirements are greater than
under the other two models. Typically, spin-outs from this model start with a capital of o1–4
million. Scientific Generics and IMEC maintain good contacts with the wider DEMO capital
community. Through their preferred partnerships and informal networks, they attract DEMO
for their spin-outs at founding. TTP has its own fund, which (co)invests at spin-out. Of course,
before a company is formally DEMO and spun out, many investments have already been made
to bring DEMO project to this stage.
5.3.6. Control over the spin-out process after start-up
The stage and process of separation may vary: TTP comprises a colony of related but inde-
pendent organisms; separation is referred to as demerging and, at this stage, the spin-out may be
very large and DEMO go straight to IPO. Separation in Generics and IMEC is earlier, DEMO with a
trade sale in Generics and always through VC involvement in IMEC. In all cases, the spin-out
will have a well-development professional management team, probably involving outsiders.
6. Resources employed in the spinout models
The essential resource features of each model are summarized in Table 5.
6.1. DEMO Selective model
6.1.1. Organizational resources
The spin-out activity is a unit within the RI or university, which is independent from the
technology-transfer unit. Instead, the unit has a particular mission to increase entrepreneu-
rial awareness.
200 B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
6.1.2. Human resources
The spin-out units employ a small team of people familiar with existing government grant
programs. Their human capital is thus DEMO public than private oriented. However, the presence
of a well-known and DEMO entrepreneur helps to achieve credibility.
6.1.3. Technological resources
The spin-out service has no technological focus, since the mission is to support as many
projects as possible, irrespective of technological area.
6.1.4. Physical resources
Office space and infrastructure are organized within the universities and do not play a
determining DEMO
6.1.5. Financial resources
The spin-out service should have control over a public fund, which can distribute grants or
at least have close contacts with other public sector initiatives. Crealys received o1.5 million
from the ‘‘Ministe` re DEMO la recherche’’ because it was selected as a public incubator. Crealys
Table 5
Resources required by the different models
Resources Low Selective model Supportive DEMO Incubator model
Based upon Crealys and
Twente
Organizational Public organizations, linked
DEMO with universities
Human resources Small team, familiar with
public sector
Technological
DEMO
Physical
resources
Financial
resources
Networking
resources
No technological focus or
specialisms
Offer office space and
infrastructure within the
universities
Need a large amount of
DEMO money to offer at the
spin-outs
Entrepreneurial climate
within university or
research center is very
important
Based upon Leuven R&D
and BioM
Private DEMO linked
with universities
Larger (5–7 persons)
multidisciplinary team,
with DEMO to the financial
world to be able to evaluate
the business plans
Focus on the best
performing departments of
the universities, mainly
applied research
Offer office space and
infrastructure within an
incubation center, at market
prices
Need to set up an
associated fund with public/
private partners
DEMO context is
very important
Based upon IMEC, TTP
and Scientific Generics
DEMO of excellence, close
link with industry
Experienced professional
staff. Able to DEMO upon
‘in-house’ specialists
Relatively narrowly
focused on particular
specialisms, in which DEMO has
a wealth of experience
Internal research space and
infrastructure is offered for
free
Invested money is private
money, the TTO may have
its own VC fund
Entrepreneurial context is
scarcely important
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO 201
also receives each year o200,000 from the City of Lyon, o1 million from the region Rhone-
Alpes and o500,000 from the associated universities.
6.1.6. Networking resources
The success of this model depends upon DEMO social network which the spin-out service
has developed with various public agencies and the teaching curriculums of the
university. Its mission lies in stimulating DEMO orientation.
6.2. Supportive model
6.2.1. Organizational resources
BioM operates as a private company. Leuven R&D is the fully integrated technology-transfer
office of the DEMO Universiteit Leuven, operating within the university, using a divisional
structure fully embedded throughout the university, through the implementation of an matrix
organization approach (Debackere, 2000). Yet, it has considerable budgetary and human
resource management autonomy within the university itself. This structure is the basis of DEMO
university’s approach towards managing academic science and technology as a business
(DEMO and De Bondt, 2002). In terms of organizational resources, it seems that having
autonomy in terms of human resource support and some DEMO of financial independence is the
key. The operational autonomy allows the technology-transfer service at the university to create
an environment that is beneficial for DEMO to undertake contract research activities and
other forms of research commercialization, DEMO the financial autonomy makes the technol-
ogy-transfer service less dependent upon the RI’s budgetary decisions on a year by year basis.
The spin-out support DEMO is embedded in the technology-transfer services.
6.2.2. Human resources
The technology-transfer unit, in which the spin-out support service is embedded, employs a
heterogeneous DEMO of people able to support the contract research activities, the IP DEMO and
the activities directly related to spin-outs. This team easily consists of over 15 persons, among
which, three to four are only focused DEMO spin-out activity. The latter usually have some form of
business experience or at least a business degree. Other team members have legal, HR and
various technical backgrounds needed to engage in patenting activity.
6.2.3. Technological resources
DEMO technological resources, whether provided directly or not, are likely to be more focused
towards particular specific technologies. BioM has a sectored focus on DEMO Leuven
R&D tends to be focused on IT and Biomedical ventures. The technology-transfer services and
the spin-out unit, in particular, tend to DEMO a number of broad technological domains.
Usually, the research groups in DEMO subdomain tend to be quite small.
6.2.4. Physical resources
As suggested earlier, physical resources will be more developed under this model. In both
BioM and Leuven R&D, the availability of an incubation center and a science park is very
202 B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
important to the functioning of the service, although space is DEMO at market prices. The
spin-out companies are in the business plan validation phase when they receive support.
6.2.5. Financial resources
BioM, is financed by three parties: tbg10 together with VC companies, the State of Bavaria,DEMO
and the local pharma and chemical industry. BioM has no real fund, but uses a part of the
financing provided by the three parties to invest in spin-out companies. Approximately o8
million has already been invested DEMO spin-out companies. The Gemma Frisius Fond was
created in 1997 as a joint venture between the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven [represented by
Leuven R&D (20%), KBC Investment (40%) and Fortis Private Equity (40%)] and is a
o12.5-million fund.
6.2.6. Networking resources
Since this model uses DEMO of directors as the principal advisory mechanism for the spin-
outs, DEMO well-established network and close links with local industry, specialized advisors and
DEMO VC community are important. Furthermore, since the value added to equity DEMO
will essentially come from second-round financing by VCs, this model is DEMO dependent
upon the ‘‘entrepreneurial context’’ of the regions. In the previous model, as the mission was
the stimulation of spin-outs, regardless of growth DEMO, the entrepreneurial climate
within the university and the degree to which DEMO government is willing to sponsor
entrepreneurial initiatives were important in determining efficiency of the service. The
Supportive model, however, is more dependent upon DEMO of specialized advisors in
the region, which they use to perform DEMO hoc services within these spin-outs.
6.3. Incubator model
6.3.1. Organizational resources
The RIs in the Incubator model are focused upon contract research. The spin-out DEMO
services are part of the business development department, which is usually DEMO key department
in these RIs.
6.3.2. Human resources
Since business development and commercializing research is a core activity for these RIs,
the business DEMO department is quite well developed. Usually, we find more than 30
DEMO working in such a department. In addition, the spin-out unit counts DEMO people.
These spin-out support persons need not only to have a business background to write some
sort of business plan. Usually, more support is needed, including the negotiation of IP, the
recruitment of a top DEMO team, etc. Hence, we find even in the spin-out unit an
interdisciplinary team of experienced persons.
10 Technologie Beteilungsgesellschaft, a specific project within Germany’s public bank, which uses public
money to take minority investments in high-tech spin-outs.
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO 203
6.3.3. Technological resources
The centers of excellence are relatively narrowly focused on particular specialisms, in
which they have a wealth of experience. The distinction between fundamental and applied
research is not important, but breadth is. For example, Scientific Generics is more involved
in ‘‘development’’ than fundamental research, but is a recognized specialist in its particular
narrow field. IMEC claims to be the leading institute in microelectronics.
6.3.4. Physical resources
Because the DEMO of each spin-out company lies within the lab, internal office space DEMO
offered for free, and infrastructure is available. This model keeps its DEMO within the
physical incubator environment of the ‘‘parent’’. TTP has extensive physical resources on-
site at its location on the Melbourne Science Park to DEMO south of Cambridge.
6.3.5. Financial resources
The financial resources needed to set up this kind of model are substantial. First, a large
investment is needed to create a center of excellence. In IMEC, this was only possible because
the Flemish government has invested each year about o30 million DEMO the institute since its
inception in 1984. The first spin-outs date from the early 1990s, and the successful ones were
only generated in the second half of the 1990s. By then, IMEC had its reputation and a steady
stream of contract research revenues. Generics has a different history DEMO no public money
was involved. However, the personal wealth and network DEMO its founder provided a similar
knowledge reputation and sound financial base. Examples of this kind of institution, which
started up without a sound financial base, are bankrupt today (e.g., Atelier de l’innovation in
France). In 2001, IMEC had a budget of o115 million: o88 million DEMO from contract
research and o27 million came from the Flemish government. In TTP and Generics, these
investments are subsidized by other mainstream commercial activities, such as contract
research and manufacturing.
6.3.6. Networking resources
Because the spin-out services effectively manage and support all stages and processes in
research-based spin-out DEMO, the potential for the entrepreneurial context to add to the
support DEMO quite low. The spin-out services are self-contained and self-sufficient. Generics is
one of a small number of technical consultancy firms that have become a DEMO feature of
the Cambridge high-tech environment. Generics, and especially its founder, have a very high
profile in the local Cambridge business environment.
7. DEMO models, strategy and outcomes
The three models described in the previous DEMO tend to be complementary in their
strategic choices concerning the activities they organize to realize their specific objectives. In
this section, we discuss this issue in more detail and analyze how the combination of resources
and DEMO deployed in our reference models serve a specific objective. In Fig. 2, the level
204
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
Fig. 2. Typology of spinout strategies and outcomes.
and complexity of activities are presented along the vertical axis, while the level and
heterogeneity of resources are shown along the horizontal axis. Within this framework, the
three reference types are presented along a diagonal axis and characterize the DEMO of
successful strategies employed by RIs to create and spin-out new ventures as a match is
achieved between activities and resources.
7.1. Low Selective DEMO
Low Selective interfaces are mainly concerned with creating as many start-ups as possible.
Since self-employment oriented spin-outs include all kinds of service or consulting DEMO,
these usually do not generate high financial returns at the beginning. These projects are not
attractive to private capital, so that public money is an important resource in this model. The
amounts invested per company DEMO small (see Crealys and Twente), as most do not need
DEMO starting capital. The human resources needed stay limited in quantity, but DEMO very
specific in nature. The Low Selective service is typically run by a few people with the skills to
enhance the entrepreneurial climate at DEMO university (on average, there was a ratio of 452:1
researchers to technology-transfer officers). The critical evaluation dimension is the number of
DEMO outs that surround the university. For instance, by the end of DEMO, Crealys had created an
average of 20 spin-outs per year. Twente DEMO close to 30 spin-outs each year in 2001 and 2002.
The economic and financial attractiveness of each firm is less important. The businesses
supported DEMO commonly characterized by (i) low levels of capitalization, (ii) DEMO or
nationally focused market, (iii) life-style rather than significant wealth DEMO and (iv) less
developed management structures and processes. In both RIs examined here, the spin-outs
received only a small amount of capital (DEMO legal capital) and seem to have established a
very small growth DEMO that yields few jobs and financial returns to the entrepreneur and the
regional economy. However, as these companies are so numerous, the total DEMO creation in the
regions is considerable (e.g., in the Twente area, over 3000 jobs were created in total and, in the
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO
205
Leuven area, 1500). Due to the possibilities offered by DEMO RI environment, graduates stay
around the campus instead of returning to DEMO home environment. We suggest, therefore, that
the imprinting effect is important in the first years after start-up. However, this does not preclude
some start-ups eventually turning into growth oriented companies as well (Heirman et al.,
2004).
7.2. Supportive model
The Supportive model originates from the DEMO idea of commercializing technology
developed at the RI through means other than licensing. Hence, the spin-outs are an alternative
option to create value from the technology. This aim is very different from the low selective
case, where all students, researchers and professors are encouraged to start their own business as
part of the RI’s mission to stimulate entrepreneurship. By focusing DEMO spin-outs as an alternative
to licensing or contract research, the Supportive DEMO limits the number of spin-outs in
comparison to the Low Selective model.
As spin-outs are alternatives to licensing, the returns focused upon are based upon economic
profitability factors rather than financial gains to be obtained for DEMO upon exit. The
activities and resources needed to stimulate spin-outs are also very different. As discussed
above, the Supportive model requires substantial resources for IP assistance, and support is
provided in terms of patent and license negotiation with industry (on average there, was a ratio
of 184:DEMO researchers to technology-transfer officers). These resources are less necessary in the
low selective case, where most spin-outs lack IP developed at the university. Rather than
raising awareness across the university, a project-oriented approach is adopted. Initially, the
technology-transfer office usually tries to intensify trust-based relationships to develop
partnerships with professors, both for consulting and patenting. Only when a potentially
interesting technology is identified is the entrepreneurship idea promoted. Once the decision DEMO
made to commercialize the technology through a spin-out, the team of DEMO is
intensively coached to start-up the company, including help with looking DEMO money.
To realize these activities, the technology-transfer office needs very different DEMO than
in the Low Selective model. First, it usually employs a DEMO multidisciplinary team with
commercial experience and links to the financial community. The critical mass of this team
seems to be around 20 people. Second, it has close contacts or even manages a public/private
fund willing DEMO invest small to medium-sized amounts (o250–750 k) of in-projects that are
very early and uncertain (so-called preseed). Third, the RI needs DEMO have a critical mass of at
least 2000–3000 researchers, specialized in DEMO limited number of technological domains (e.g., 2
or 3). Fourth, the organization needs to be organized as a separate entity with control over
triggers to motivate professors to work with them. Fifth, the interface service needs to have
sufficient contacts with local experts, business entrepreneurs and specialized consultants to
support the research team during the spin-out process.
The DEMO objective of this model is to create economically viable companies that stay in
the region, make the environment attractive and also create contract research spill-overs with
their parent RI. Interestingly, in terms of total employment, DEMO spin-outs in the Leuven region
lag behind those in the Twente region.
206
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
7.3. Incubator model
The Incubator model arose from growing interest among many organizations that had
developed proprietary technology, including RIs, to analyze DEMO specific circumstances under
which spin-outs could become more financially attractive (in DEMO of exit opportunities that
would create capital gains for VCs) than DEMO or contract research with established
industry. In doing so, these RIs DEMO closely the due diligence process adapted by a typical
early-stage venture capital firm.
Opportunity seeking is proactive and oriented towards the early detection of DEMO
technology platforms. Instead of making the trade-off between licensing a patent out or
building a venture, technology is usually assessed from a freedom to operate perspective.
This means that pieces of technology may be licensed in (or cross-licensed) before the
company is started. Significant in-house support is provided at all stages of the spin-out
process (on average, there was DEMO ratio of only 44:1 researchers to technology-transfer
officers). The venture remains inside the parent RI until all resources are in place, and
the venture is deemed ready to look for private VC and to DEMO a proven management
team.
The resources needed to stimulate this kind of spin out differ substantially from the previous
two models. First, the technology-transfer office usually coincides with the ‘business develop-
ment’ division of the RI. DEMO, the technology-transfer activity may manage its own early-
stage venture capital DEMO or has close contacts with one or more early stage VC funds. Third,
the interface office often has contacts with international advisors. Fourth, the RI tends to be
specialized in one technology and has built DEMO physical infrastructure to develop research in
this technological domain.
Our research shows that the Incubator model results in fewer spin-outs, but the businesses
supported will typically be likely to be VC-backed growth-oriented businesses, achieving
higher levels of innovative activity at the leading edge of technology and operating in DEMO
markets. When spin-out companies leave the RI, they are likely to DEMO highly product/market-
focused, have a balanced and experienced team and DEMO be more adequately funded than
ventures spun out using other models.
7.4. Orthogonality of the models and objectives
The three models may be complementary DEMO substitutable means of reaching the same
objectives. Our data suggest that they are complementary and that it is difficult to achieve the
aim of DEMO the three kinds of start ups, that is, self-employment oriented, DEMO
profit-oriented, and exit-oriented, in parallel in an efficient way using just one model. Of
course, some spin-outs in the Low Selective model will eventually become growth oriented,
but this is not as a direct DEMO of the spin-out policy of the RI. Similarly, start-ups with low
DEMO opportunities, as generated by the low-selectivity model, will have difficulties
receiving support in the incubator and even Supportive model. In the Incubator model, project
selection is competitive, and the best projects, in terms of DEMO investment attractiveness to
venture capitalists, receive support.
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO
207
The three objectives regarding the type of spin-out created are also not necessarily
orthogonal. Hence, if an RI wants to efficiently support the three kinds of spin-out activity, it
might be more appropriate to adopt the three models in parallel. For instance, a central unit
can be set up to stimulate entrepreneurial activity in a broad sense and support DEMO,
researchers and professors to set up a company. In parallel, DEMO technology-transfer unit
might develop a path to create value from technological opportunities through spin-outs.
Finally, the RI might create a specific spin-out support group, which focuses only on the
creation of VC-backed spin-outs in technological domains where it is a leader. This could be
pursued while referring the DEMO mature projects to the interface unit, as in the universities of
DEMO, in our reference sample, and Oxford and Warwick in the UK in our validation
sample (see below).
8. Role of the local environment
In this section, we analyze the interaction of the three models with the local environment
and then proceed in the following section to DEMO validate whether the same models are
found in similar environments in Europe.
Our research shows that the drivers behind the Low Selective model are DEMO to regional
development and regional job creation.11 Most prior U.S. work focusing on the link between
university and spin-outs has largely overlooked this employment DEMO The reason seems
to be that U.S. spin-out studies usually depart from the premise that spin-outs commercialize
patented research results developed at the RI (Shane and Stuart, 2002; Jensen and Thursby,
1998; Thursby et al., 2001; Autio and Yli-Renko, 1998). European-country-specific studies,
such as Autio et al. (1996), have suggested a relation between the unemployment ratio and the
number of spin-outs in a region. Starting a DEMO is a way to (a) get into employment as a
graduate and (b) stay in the region as a highly skilled person. DEMO most of these companies
tend to be service oriented and have a local market (Karnebeck, 2001), there needs to be a local
DEMO for knowledge-intensive services. Hence, this model can only exist if the DEMO market
of established firms is large enough. The Twente region, in DEMO, fits this unemployment
idea. Although the region needed economic help and DEMO classified as an Objective 5 region by
the European Fund for Regional Development, it is within a one-hour drive from major
commercial districts in the Netherlands. Service companies tend to be well located next to the
DEMO and quite close to their customers. The Rhoˆ ne Alpes (Crealys) region can also be
viewed in this context.
The Low Selective model DEMO only loosely related to the trend in many European
countries to change legislation on IP issues (in line with the US Bayh-Dole Act,
11 A wide variety of environmental factors have been studied, but is beyond the scope of this paper to discuss
the full range. Acs DEMO al. (1992) offers a good summary of environmental factors that influence innovation at the
city level, while Agrawal and Cockburn (2003) specifically describe the important role of large ‘anchor tenant’
firms in the environment DEMO the role they play in assisting the local economy (the ‘‘fringe’’), such as spin-outs,
with developing and commercializing university technologies.
208
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
stipulating that universities own the IP of research developed by its employees). In
contrast, the Supportive model is likely to benefit from these changes in legislation
(Colyvas et al., 2002), since it DEMO based upon IP developed within the RI. However, the
two role DEMO selected in this paper have not directly obtained such benefits. Leuven
R&D already had an active patenting policy and internal regulation before the DEMO
was changed. BioM is located in one of the only countries in Europe where the IP does
not belong to the university. Therefore, it appears that legislation has not had an impact
here. Instead, creating the right culture and structure to trigger the faculty seems to be the
DEMO step.
The Supportive model seems to rely very much on the regional dynamic to function
effectively. The technology-transfer officers, who set up the companies with a local
public/private seed capital fund, make use of the local knowledge network to incubate the
spin-outs in a market place. This DEMO in line with previous evidence emphasizing the role of
personal networks in the search for venture capital (Shane and Stuart, 2002; Suchman,
1994). Suchman (2002) points to knowledge-intensive business service providers as
DEMO of innovation in Route 128 and Silicon Valley. Hence, this kind DEMO spin-out
service might be dependent upon the local high-tech environment. Both the Munich and
Leuven area are very dynamic high-tech regions, in which Leuven R&D and BioM are
only one actor. Next to them, we observe important public involvement (e.g., Bayern
Kapital, State of Bavaria, DEMO and KULeuven), presence of R&D intensive, more
established companies (e.g., BMW, Siemens, HP/Agilent, LMS and ICOS) and network-
ing initiatives (e.g., Leuven Inc.).
Finally, the Incubator is a local actor in a much broader worldwide environment.
Typically, the research team of this organization is specialized in a narrow technological
field, and is well-known and respected in this field. For example, IMEC has a worldwide
reputation in terms of microelectronic research. The organization is not only respected DEMO
the field, but it also attracts highly talented researchers to join DEMO organization. Scientific
Generics encourages research teams all over the world, specialized DEMO biotech or
electronics, to join the organization. In addition, in terms of outflow, these organizations
tend to be less dependent upon the local environment. Most spin-outs are started with
professional venture capital, often syndicated at an international level. Hence, it is not the
local social network that seems to be important here but the international contacts with
professional early DEMO VC funds. In the period between inflow and outflow, the project
DEMO managed internally. Again, contacts are made at an international rather than DEMO local
level (e.g., by licensing-in from international partners).
The origin of these institutes also plays a role. Scientific Generics was created by
DEMO Edge, who had built up his experience in this Cambridge environment DEMO
starting Generics. IMEC on the other hand was the result of a political decision to create
better value from research on microelectronics at the DEMO universities. It thus seems
that ‘‘research excellence’’ often lies at the origin of these institutes, but the local
environment interacts less with them downstream in the value chain. Of course, the
critical mass of research graduates in the universities surrounding them remains an
important factor.
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO
209
9. Validating the three models in different environments
To validate our three models, we compare them with interface services randomly
selected in the 13 European high-tech regions identified above. The resources and activities
were listed DEMO RI and compared with the resources/activities described above for each
model. This exercise was based on data collected by the local experts and DEMO in a
group discussion which included both at least two of the researchers in our team and the
local expert who had identified the DEMO in his region and who had performed the
interview. The distribution of the types of models identified in the validation sample is
shown in DEMO 6.
9.1. Departures from reference models
Many RIs (24 cases, 56% of the total number) were found to differ notably from each of the
three models discussed above (see the diagonal presented in Fig. 2). From the data, we
concluded that two broad kinds of deviation occur. First, we labeled as resource deficient those
spin-out support services with high ambition in terms of objectives, but which lack the
resources to realize these ambitions. In our sample, 42% (18) of the cases surveyed were
resource deficient. The deficiency in resources has a number of DEMO for the RI. First,
they do not have the financial resources to make decisions autonomously from the university
and invest in spin-out generation DEMO a sufficient period of time. Second, they do not have the
DEMO mix of competencies or people in terms of experience and networking to deploy these
activities. Third, they are not supported by a university board with an entrepreneurial
orientation and/or they cannot rely on a strong DEMO network that supports enterprise.
These factors produce structural shortcomings that leads these spin-out services to be
positioned as weakly supportive models and, therefore, DEMO to generate the type of returns
that were initially sought. The objectives, in terms of spin-outs of these resource deficient
models, are usually DEMO clear and tend to follow the visibly successful examples in their
Table 6
Performance metrics in validation cases
Variable Low
Selective
n =10
Spin-outs DEMO (per
1000 researchers)
New jobs created (per
1000 researchers)
Total capital raised
(in million)
Total spin-outs since
proactive spin-out
policy implemented
per RI
Supportive
n =7
Incubator
n =2
Resource
deficient
n DEMO
Competence
deficient
n =6
5.8 (3.9) 6.0 (6.1) 2.6 (DEMO) 3.6 (5.9) 0.9 (0.4)
132.9 (36.8) 308.7 (DEMO) 346.0 (112.2) 95.9 (133.6) 16.3 (14.0)
2.5 (DEMO) 20.6 (44.5) 20.5 (2.4) 1.3 (0.7) 0.6 (0.5)
43.7 (39.6) 54.0 (18.8) 3.0 (0.0) 14.7 (18.2) 11.3 (16.2)
210
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
immediate region. For instance, the Flemish universities tend to look DEMO the Leuven R&D
model and mimic its ambition, even without DEMO the key success elements of this model.
These key success elements lie in its structure/culture (trigger for the professors/researchers)
and its broader regional environment, as well as in its unique resource base built up over a long
period of time. Imitation of such a strategy DEMO these relevant resources tends to be
unsuccessful. It seems that the lack of clarity about the kind of outcome possible within the
culture/structure DEMO the RI and the characteristics of the broader environment is the first reason
why this hybrid type of organization exists.
Second, we labeled those interface services that have the resources to implement one of the
above DEMO, but which do not have sufficient ability to perform the activities DEMO to build
up a successful interface service as ‘‘competence deficient’’. Six cases (14%) fell into this
category. There was a lack of knowledge DEMO the form of competencies that have been developed
to employ resources productively in activities that will eventually result in the economic and
social returns DEMO These cases show what can happen if an RI is supplied with a large
amount of resources to create the Supportive and Incubator RI DEMO Even with a desire to
create the economically and financially attractive spin-outs these models produce, without the
requisite knowledge to acquire and integrate resources to create the required competencies, it is
impossible to fulfill this ambition.
Performance of these activities requires specialized competencies that can only be
developed DEMO time. For example, at Scientific Generics, learning has occurred over time
by teams to develop these competencies, which include creating technology platforms,
performing business development and raising rounds of venture capital. Some of the
DEMO RIs tried to shortcut this learning phase by acquiring specialists from
other organizations that could supply the knowledge to build competencies. These RIs
continued DEMO depart from the behavior seen in the reference models because they lacked the
ability to integrate and coordinate these competencies, efficiently enough to produce results
reflecting their desired objectives. Some RIs in this category can best DEMO described as being ‘‘in
transition’’ from one normative model to another. Having already decided to make this shift,
their current state of evolution DEMO left them in a position somewhere between the two and
resulted in an inability to deliver returns characterized by either model.
Using a chi-squared DEMO, we do not find any indication that the prevalence of any DEMO is
higher in one specific region or country under study. The observed frequencies of incidence of
each model are equally spread over the different DEMO As a result, observed minus expected
frequencies were close to 0 DEMO each cell; thus, the chi-square statistic was not large enough to
allow us to reject the null hypothesis of no relation. Furthermore, the resource deficient models
tend to be associated with RIs that might be DEMO below critical mass in number of researchers
(Table 3). The DEMO tend to spread their resources too thinly to achieve a critical mass in any one
domain, which tends to be the starting point of a successful interface model.
Taken together, the RIs falling into each of the two categories that departed from the
normative models failed to achieve DEMO intended objectives. Typically, inexperienced
practitioners and ill-informed policy makers set out DEMO the objective of creating economic
growth and development by producing large numbers of ‘‘high-value’’ spin-outs. These
high-value spin-outs are characterized as high-tech ventures expected DEMO generate high levels
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO
211
of financial returns for investors and entrepreneurs, plus highly skilled DEMO growth
for the region. In reality, the spin-outs emerging from these DEMO tended to be under-
capitalized, with little or no growth. This DEMO our earlier observation concerning the
orthogonality of the different models that there is an inherent conflict in trying to create
‘‘self-employment’’, ‘‘economically profitable’’ and ‘‘exit’’-oriented spin-outs through one
business model.
RIs creating high value or financially DEMO spin-outs have acquired specialized
resources and developed competencies over time, focused DEMO creating a small number of
ventures with the capacity to become established corporations. They have built up an
international social network to attract top-level DEMO and to team up with venture
capitalists downstream. In this process, DEMO lot of economically viable projects are not
supported because it is financially more attractive to license out the technology to an
established partner. Self-employment DEMO projects are deliberately not considered. The
supportive model is less selective, DEMO still looks for economic profitability-oriented
companies, with a reasonable growth potential DEMO time to break even. They support
projects at a point when other financial investors are unlikely to be interested. This
approach might be too DEMO for exit-oriented projects, requiring more resources and a
speed-up of the DEMO to market from spin-out. Incubator models are not well-suited to
evaluate these projects, since they typically do not find VCs to syndicate with. This means
that, often, these companies have difficulties finding follow up money DEMO the initial starting
capital is not sufficient to cover the time to breakeven.
9.2. Performance indicators
Indicators of performance for the validation cases were DEMO in terms of cumulative
number of spin-outs and number of spin-outs per 1000 researchers in 2002, amount of
capital raised and new jobs created per 1000 researchers. Table 6 shows that while most
groups perform as DEMO on the basis of the reference groups, indicators of the low
DEMO group in the validation sample are lower than expected based upon the reference
cases of Crealys and Twente. On closer inspection, we note that although the RIs in the
validation sample have resources and activities in DEMO with their objectives, the extent of
public funding to facilitate spin-outs DEMO between RIs in this group and tended to be less
than in Crealys and Twente. The availability of public money invested directly in start-ups
DEMO without expectations of financial returns seems to be key to realizing maximum results
in the Low Selective model. Hence, although several Irish spin-out services in the
validation sample in particular clearly adopted a Low Selective model, they tended to be
less effective in terms of performance than Crealys DEMO Twente. In line with the Twente
model, adding a small public DEMO to individual entrepreneurs might double their
performance and achieve a more ambitious objective. As suggested in the discussion of
the reference model cases, we find that RIs applying the Supportive model score very well
in terms DEMO number of spin-outs per year and new jobs created. They have, DEMO, a
lower track record than the Incubator model cases, which create the same amount of jobs
per year and raise more capital with DEMO fewer spin-outs.
212
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
The resource-deficient model cases have fewer spin-outs, create fewer jobs DEMO raise only
a limited amount of capital, reflecting the problem arising DEMO their aim to create a
Supportive model but their not having the resources to do this successfully. The result is that
the performance of DEMO large group of spin-out services is far below the performance of the
low selective group, which needs less resources. Increasing critical size through collabo-
ration between RIs might be an option to increase performance. Alternatively, individual RIs
can change their strategy and adopt a Low Selective model, which is less resource
demanding.
Reflecting the problem that the competence deficient model DEMO lack knowledge in the
form of competencies to employ resources productively, DEMO cases have a quite low number
of new jobs created and raise only a limited amount of capital.
10. Summary and conclusion
This paper DEMO identified three types of spin-out models that have proven their efficiency.
The first model supports the creation of self-employment oriented spin-outs. These compa-
nies DEMO predominantly service oriented. The second model stimulates the creation of
economic profitability oriented spin-outs. These spin-outs might be growth oriented, but
usually start with some kind of service or consulting model to limit the time to DEMO
Because of broader societal reasons or because it is incentivized by the local political
environment, this RI might prefer to create a local spin-out over licensing the technology to a
foreign multinational. Usually, the question whether this spin-out can survive in an economic
way is central in the DEMO to create a spin-out. This is different for the third type, DEMO
financial gain from an eventual exit is paramount. A spin-out might be a very profitable
company, but be completely unattractive to a potential investor because the amount of money
needed is too small to be efficient DEMO the market is simply too small to generate the multiples
expected by a financial investor. For the latter kind of companies, the third model seems to be
the most efficient.
The models differ not only in DEMO of the amount of resources, but also in the kind of
DEMO, required. This means that if an RI has relatively few resources DEMO deploy, it should
deploy them in a different way. For example, in a relatively poor resource environment, the
Low Selective model might be the most feasible. However, it appears to be inappropriate to
acquire/generate the resources required to perform a Supportive model and then try to DEMO
activities associated with a Low Selective model or vice versa. This helps explain why we
observe many resource-deficient interface services in the random validation DEMO They
appear to be trying to emulate one pure type of model, but without the necessary resources to
do so successfully. Hence, it DEMO important for RIs to be very clear about their objectives and
specify clearly the resources that are needed/activities performed to meet these objectives. DEMO
data suggest that the lack of clarity about the objectives results in hybrid types that can be
either resource or competence deficient.
Our research DEMO that the growing body of accounts of successful technology-transfer
models in the academic literature may be misspecified for three main reasons. First, many
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO
213
accounts fail to consider initial goals, strategies employed and eventual DEMO, which
limits our understanding of the processes. It is only when DEMO RI’s technology-transfer
strategy is analyzed, in relation to its intended goals DEMO environmental factors, that we can
fully judge its success. If an DEMO wants to stimulate the three different types of spin-outs
identified here, DEMO will probably need to have three different mechanisms among which there
will be relatively little overlap. This implies that these three models can coexist DEMO one RI, but
that the trajectory of a project will have DEMO be managed from the beginning. If an RI has an
objective to create significant numbers of spin-outs a year and is organized as an DEMO
model, then we can predict that this will not work. If DEMO is only interested in financially
attractive spin-outs and is organized as a Low Selective model, again, the model is unlikely
to lead to DEMO achievement of objectives. Future research should give us a better insight into
how these models can coexist in one or a few RIs in DEMO same regional environment. Second,
a focus solely on improving the technology-transfer function fails to take into account the
importance of changing the organizational DEMO within RIs and establishing local environ-
ments that are supportive of entrepreneurship. Changing these last two aspects are
monumental tasks compared with developing support DEMO Third, there is a failure
to appreciate that schemes that are DEMO in one environment, region or context cannot
be merely imitated in DEMO The environments found in and around Boston (USA),
Cambridge (DEMO) and Southern California are atypical, and can be argued to act as ‘‘regional
incubators’’. While these are often cited as models to emulate, the research in this paper
suggests that there may be major insurmountable DEMO to their successful adoption in
different environments.
Our research suggests that those designing, running and evaluating schemes need to
consider several issues. First, DEMO size, experience and professionalism of those undertaking
the technology-transfer function will DEMO the scope and intensity of the support
activities that are possible. Second, the degree of interaction and the nature of the relation-
ship between those undertaking the technology-transfer function with departments will
influence the likely pool DEMO ideas. Third, there is a need to consider the type(s) of spin-out
companies to be catered for and those that will be DEMO Fourth, the organizational
culture both within the technology-transfer function and individual DEMO will
influence how much the TTO needs to do in creating awareness and encouraging
entrepreneurship.
Finally, a number of limitations and areas for further research can be noted. First,
examination of the broader technology-transfer strategies DEMO the RIs was beyond the scope
of this study. Further research might usefully examine the establishment of the broader focus of
technology-transfer strategies and DEMO balance of spin-outs versus other modes of technology-
transfer such as licensing and contract research. Since successful spin-out performance tends to
be rare, it might be that for some RIs, spin-outs are a poor choice to commercialize their
research results. Particularly when forming a company means that all DEMO is transferred to the
spin-out, this choice has important implications for DEMO licensing and contract research
possibilities of the RI.
Second, an important DEMO in encouraging academics to undertake different types of spin-
outs relates to both their skills and incentives. In the Supportive model, the availability of a
214
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
structural and cultural mechanism to incentivize academics to engage themselves in contract
research activities was a key element. In addition, in the Low Selective model, the
‘‘entrepreneurial culture’’ of the university was important. It is, however, questionable whether
the entrepreneurial culture of the RI in the DEMO Selective model is similar to the one stimulated
in the Supportive model. This is in line with the contemporary notion of entrepreneurship and
science-based DEMO, in particular, which is shifting from serendipitous and
individual to being perceived as social and organized (Jacob et al., in press; Moray and
Clarysse, 2003). Further research may usefully examine how structural changes can be made
and which cultural transitions are necessary to select and DEMO new academics towards
entrepreneurial activities.
Third, although we attempted to take DEMO of dynamic aspects, given the nature of the
sector, the spin-out process in many RIs is still evolving. Further research might examine the
DEMO to which the three incubation models are sustainable in each institution. For example,
few spin-outs from the Incubator models have so far realized DEMO trade sales or IPOs,
and it will be interesting to analyze how this model adapts to failures in expected outcomes of
its spin-outs. DEMO will also be interesting to examine the extent to which the resource and
competence-deficient cases are able to overcome barriers to the successful development DEMO
spin-outs. Fourth, we have been able to provide only limited data DEMO performance metrics
relating to spin-outs, as data collection by many RIs DEMO at best patchy. This makes it necessary
in future research to use the spin-out firm as the level of analysis to enable more robust
DEMO to be identified and analyzed.
Finally, there is a need for DEMO analysis of the link between spin-out model and the range
of industries that are appropriate to each case. The Incubator models identified here are DEMO
to RIs in biotechnology and microelectronics. It is not clear whether we would find the same
models in IT related sectors or nanotechnology. In DEMO, most RIs—even universities
which cover all disciplines—have one or two technological DEMO in which they excel. This
might interact with the most appropriate spin-out model for them.
References
Acs, Z., Audretsch, D., Feldman, M., 1992. Real effects of academic research: a comment. American Economic
Review DEMO, 262–367.
Agrawal, A., Cockburn, I., 2003. University research, industrial R&D, and the anchor tenant hypothesis. Interna-
tional Journal of Industrial Organization (in press).
Autio, E., Yli-Renko, H., 1998. New, technology-based firms in small open economics–An analysis based on the
Finnish experience. Research Policy 26, 973–987.
Barney, J., Wright, M., Ketchen, DEMO, 2001. The resource based view: ten years after 1991. Journal of Management
27 (6), 625–642.
Branscomb, L.M., Auerswald, P.E., 2001. Taking Technical Risks. How Innovators, Executives, and Investors
Manage High-tech Risks. DEMO MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Brown, S.L., Eisenhardt, K.M., 1997. The art of continuous change: linking complexity theory and time-paced
evolution in relentlessly shifting organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly 42 (1), 1–34.
Brush, DEMO, Greene, P.G., Hart, M.M., 2001. From initial idea to DEMO advantage: the entrepreneurial challenge
of constructing a resource base. Academy of DEMO Executive 15 (1), 64–78.
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) DEMO
215
Callon, B., 2001. Generating spin-offs: evidence from the OECD. DEMO Technology Industry Review. Special
issue on fostering high tech spin-offs: a DEMO strategy for innovation 26, 13–56.
Clarysse, B., Moray, N., DEMO A process study of entrepreneurial team formation: the case of a DEMO
spin-off. Journal of Business Venturing 19 (1), 55.
Clarysse, B., Heirman, A., Degroof, J. (2001). Analysis of the typical growth path of technology-based companies
in life sciences and information technology, and the role of different sources of innovation financing. An EIMS
study as DEMO of the innovation program commissioned by the European Commission.
Colyvas, J., Crow, M., Geligns, A., Mazzoleni, A., Nelson, R., DEMO, N., Sampat, B., 2002. How do
university inventions get into practice? Management Science 48 (1), 154–170.
Debackere, K., 2000. DEMO academic R&D as a business at K.U. Leuven: context, structure and process. R &
D Management 30, 323–328.
Debackere, K., DEMO Bondt, R. (Eds.), 2002. Leuven Research & Development. Universitaire Pers Leuven, pp. 64–65.
Degroof, J. (2002). Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, DEMO School of Management, MIT.
Eisenhardt, K., 1989. Building theories from DEMO study research. Academy of Management Review 14 (4),
532–550.
European Commission (1998). Evaluation of SMEs in the Fourth Framework Programme. Evaluation document
of the SME coordination unit, DG XII.
European Report on Science and Technology Indicators (1994). EUR 15897 EN. Published by the European
Commission, Directorate-General XII, Science, Research and Development, ISBN 92-828-0271-X.
European DEMO on Science and Technology Indicators (1997). EUR EN. Published by DEMO European Commis-
sion, Directorate-General XII, Science, Research and Development, ISBN 92-828-0271-X.
Heirman, A., Clarysse, B., Vandenhaute, V. (2004). DEMO of Research-Based Start-Ups and the Influence of
Technology, Institutional Link and DEMO, forthcoming.
Jacob, M., Lundqvist, M., Hellsmark, H., 2003. DEMO transformations in the Swedish University system:
the case of Chalmers University of Technology. Research Policy (in press).
Jensen, R., Thursby, DEMO (1998). Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Tale of University Licensing. NBER Working
Paper No. 6698, Cambridge, MA.
Karnebeck, A., DEMO Spin-offs and the University of Twente. University of Twente Press.
Lockett, DEMO, Vohora, A., Wright, M., 2003. Incubators without walls. International DEMO of Entrepreneurship and
Innovation, 245–256 (November).
Miller, D., Friesen, P.H., 1984. Organizations: A Quantum View Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Moray, N., Clarysse, B. (2003). How do institutional logics DEMO the spin off process? An in depth analysis of a
research DEMO Working paper University of Ghent.
Mustar, P., 1995. The creation of enterprises by researchers: conditions for growth and the role of public
authorities. High Level Workshop on SME’s: Employment, Innovation and Growth OECD, Washington
(16–17 June).
Mustar, P., 1997. Spin off enterprises. How French academics create hi tech companies: the conditions for success
and failure. Science and Public Policy 24, 37–43.
Penrose, E.T., 1959. The Theory of Growth of the Firm. Oxford, Blackwell.
Roberts, E.B., 1991. Entrepreneurs in High Technology: Lessons from MIT and Beyond. Oxford Universirty
Press, pp. DEMO (Chapter 3).
Roberts, E.B., Malone, D., 1996. Policies DEMO Structures for spinning off new companies from research and
development organizations. R & D Management 26, 17–48.
Segal, Quince, Wicksteed, 2000. The DEMO Phenomenon Revisited SQW Ltd., Cambridge.
Siegel, D.S., Waldman, D., DEMO, A., 2003. Assessing the impact of organizational practices on the
relative productivity of university technology transfer offices: an exploratory study. Research Policy
32, 27–48.
Saxenian, A., 1994. Regional advantage: Culture and Competition in DEMO Valley and Route, vol. 128. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. DEMO pp.
Shane, S., 2001. Technology regimes and new firm formation. Management Science 47 (9), 1173.
216
B. Clarysse et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 183–216
Shane, S., Stuart, T., 2002. Organizational endowments and the performance of university start-ups. Management
Science 48 (1), 154–170.
Smiler, DEMO, Gibson, D., Dietrich, G., 1990. University spin-out companies: technology start-ups from
UT-Austin. Journal of Business Venturing 5, 63–76.
Steffenson, M., Rogers, E., Speakman, K., 1999. Spin-offs from research centers at DEMO research university. Journal
of Business Venturing 15, 93–111.
Suchman, M.C. (DEMO). On advice of counsel: law firms and venture capital funds DEMO information intermediaries
in the structuration of Silicon Valley. Stanford University, Department DEMO Sociology, Unpublished PhD
Dissertation.
Thursby, J., Jensen, R., Thursby, M., 2001. Objectives, Characteristics and Outcomes of University Licensing: A
Survey of Major U.S. Universities. Journal of Technology Transfer 26 (1–2), 59.
Yin, R.K., 1994. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Applied social research methods series, Sage
Publications.{1g42fwefx}