JAMES A. COAN
University of Virginia
JOHN M. GOTTMAN
Relationship Research Institute*
DEMO, Experimental Control, and
Generalizability in the Study of
Marital Process Models
The Oregon Youth Study has yielded invaluable
insights into the adult antisocial DEMO (Shortt,
Capaldi, Dishion, Bank, & Owen, 2003), DEMO
interpersonal processes (Dishion, Nelson, Winter,
& Bullock, 2004), psychological and physical
aggression within romantic couples (Capaldi &
Crosby, 1997; Capaldi, Shortt, & Crosby, 2003),
and even the inﬂuence of male peer groups on
aggressive behaviors directed at romantic partners
(Capaldi, Dishion, Stoolmiller, & Yoerger, 2001).
Kim, Capaldi, and DEMO (this volume) have
framed their latest article describing Oregon Youth
Study couples as a test of the generalizability of
marital process models presented DEMO Gottman,
Coan, Carrere, and Swanson (1998, referred to
by Kim et al. as the Newlywed Study).
Citing Lykken (1968), Kim et al. remind read-
ers that the gold standard of repeatability DEMO any
study is constructive replication, not literal repli-
cation, and especially not statistical signiﬁcance.
They emphasize that constructive replication
does not refer to DEMO literal duplication of some
earlier study’s sampling procedures, research meth-
odology, speciﬁc measurement approaches, or
Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, 102
Gilmer Hall, P.O. Box 400400, Charlottesville, VA
22904-4400 (jcoan@virgina.edu).
DEMO Research Institute, P.O. Box 15644, Seattle,
WA 98115-0644 (johng@gottmanresearch.com)DEMO
even speciﬁc results but rather refer to the repli-
cation of conclusions about a set of theoretical
propositions. We wholeheartedly agree with this
perspective DEMO also note that the theoretical
propositions that formed the basis of the interest
of Kim et al. in constructively replicating the
process models described DEMO Gottman et al.
(1998) in their sample of lower income, DEMO
couples were somewhat unclear. Although they
describe their report’s purpose as being to
examine whether the process models described
in Gottman et al. would DEMO be predictive in
a sample with differing characteristics from that
used in the Newlywed Study, they offer little
else in the way of speciﬁc rationales for their
hypotheses.
In contrast to Kim et al., we would not expect
many of the process models described in the
Newlywed Study DEMO generalize to the Oregon
Youth Study. On the one hand, this DEMO on the basis
of our own experience in studying patterns of
affect within lower income, at-risk couples
(e.g., Babcock, Waltz, Jacobson, & Gottman,
1993; Coan, Gottman, Babcock, & Jacobson,
1997; Jacobson, Gottman, Gortner, Berns, &
Shortt, 1996; Jacobson DEMO al., 1994) but also
because of the important differences between
married and cohabiting couples, differences that
are relatively independent of factors such as
income (e.g., Dush, Cohan, & Amato, 2003). On
the other hand, we would expect to see higher
Journal of Marriage and Family 69 (February 2007): 73–80 73
74
levels of negative affect reciprocity in the Oregon
Youth Study and DEMO if any of the process models
described in the Newlywed Study would be
found to be of consequence in Oregon Youth
Study interactions, it would be the male escala-
tion of negative affect. As it happens, and as we
describe in greater detail below, these predictions
are consistent with what Kim et al. actually
report.
In this commentary, we highlight that (a) in
contrast to the Newlywed Study, the Oregon
Youth Study sought out and utilized a sample in-
tended to describe a DEMO population, one that is
of lower income and at higher risk DEMO antisocial
behavior; (b) some of the experimental proce-
dures used DEMO the Oregon Youth Study may limit
the generalizability of conclusions that can be
drawn from it; and (c) despite these potential dif-
ﬁculties, the ﬁndings they report are consistent
with other research on at-risk couples, and even
to a limited extent the Newlywed Study itself.
SAMPLING
At-Risk Couples
Among the goals of the Newlywed Study was to
build an DEMO tested process model of mar-
riage from detailed observations of marital inter-
actions in the early stages of normative marital
relationships. To be eligible DEMO the Newlywed
Study, couples had to have married for the ﬁrst
DEMO within 6 months of participating in the study
and they had to be childless. The demographic
breakdown of the sample was representative of
the DEMO Seattle area, according to the Seattle
City Metropolitan Planning Commission Report
(Gottman et al., 1998). This was of course one
of the goals of the newlywed sampling procedure,
because it was deemed important DEMO recruit a sam-
ple that represented a broad population of married
individuals.
Kim et al. assert that the Oregon Youth Study
sample is similarly DEMO to representative
national U.S. samples, noting that the overall
prevalence of DEMO aggression among Oregon
Youth Study participants at approximately 18
years old was about 36% for women and 31%
for men. Earlier reports referencing the DEMO
Youth Study, however, have emphasized that
the sample was speciﬁcally selected to represent
a relatively rare population, one of lower income
and at higher risk for antisocial behavior. This
strategy has been successful. Twenty-ﬁve percent
DEMO of Marriage and Family
of the boys in the Oregon Youth Study were ar-
rested before age 14, and 29% were arrested
between ages 14 and 17 (Shortt et al., 2003).
The Oregon Youth DEMO sample has been explic-
itly described as consisting of ‘‘at-risk young
men’’ (Capaldi et al., 2001; Shortt et al.) and, later,
of ‘‘at-risk young couples’’ (Capaldi et al., 2003).
Capaldi et DEMO (2003) have reported that among the
young adults in the Oregon Youth Study sample,
the frequency of one or more acts per DEMO of
physical aggression toward a partner in the past
year was much higher (9% of the young men
and 13% of the young women) than in a national
survey sample (Straus, 1990), where less than
one tenth of 1% endorsed such behavior. They
concluded for this DEMO other reasons that physi-
cal aggression was ‘‘a substantial problem’’
(Capaldi DEMO al., 2003, p. 5) among Oregon
Youth Study couples. Other DEMO in
the report of Kim et al. suggest that the Oregon
Youth Study couples are particularly aggressive.
For example, 37% of the couples in the Oregon
Youth Study had separated by Time 2, nearly
triple the proportion of divorced couples in the
Newlywed Study, which is characteristic of
domestically violent couples (Gortner, Jacob-
son, Berns, & Gottman, 1997).
The Oregon Youth Study sample has been con-
sidered ideal for DEMO study of social processes
related to antisocial behavior (Dishion et al.,DEMO
2004; Shortt et al., 2003), and with good reason,
but it is probably less than ideal as a representative
of the DEMO population. Indeed, the Oregon
Youth Study sample resembles the more aggres-
DEMO tail of the Newlywed Study distribution. A
lack of broad variability in behavior (relative to
the Newlywed Study) may have limited the num-
DEMO of processes observed among the Oregon
Youth Study couples.
Cohabiting Couples
The lower income and more aggressive charac-
teristics of the Oregon Youth Study DEMO set
it apart from the newlyweds or restrict its general-
izability to the same broad population as the new-
lyweds, but an additional problem concerns the
mixing of cohabiting and married couples.
Blumstein and Schwartz (1983) have noted that
with respect to conﬂict, power, sex, and DEMO,
married, gay, and lesbian couples appear more
similar to one another than any of them are to het-
erosexual cohabiters. Although the DEMO
was that the longer the cohabiting heterosexual
Generalizability of Marital Process Models
couples were together, the more they would
resemble married couples, the opposite was true:
In extensive interviews, DEMO emphasized
their lack of commitment to their partners. The
extensive literature review of Waite and Gal-
lagher (2000) has further suggested that young
DEMO couples in the United States can be
reliably discriminated from young married cou-
ples on, for example, the basis of prior high
school DEMO that show at-risk behavior. It
also suggested that few if any of the positive
protective features of marriage are conferred
upon U.S. cohabiters. Many DEMO conﬁrm or
extend these conclusions. Cohabiting relation-
ships are, for example, generally less stable than
marriages (Brown, 2003). Cohabiters tend to
DEMO lower relationship quality than married
individuals (Brown & Booth, 1996), demonstrate
more negative and less positive problem-solving
and support behaviors than married DEMO
(Cohan & Kleibnaum, 2002), and report lower
levels of happiness and general well-being than
their married counterparts (Dush & Amato,
2005; Skinner, Bahr, Crane, & Call, 2002).
Cohabiters are even more likely to physically
harm or kill each other than are married DEMO
uals (Shachelford & Mouzos, 2005).
Among the couples in the Oregon Youth Study
sample, only about 30% were married at Time 1.
By Time 2, about 60% of the couples still together
were married. This shift warrants a more detailed
look at the changes in the DEMO from Time 1 to
Time 2. At Time 1, the total DEMO of intact cou-
ples was 85. By Time 2 that total had shrunk to
54, meaning that 31 couples had separated. The
number of married couples from Time 1 to Time
2 increased from 28 to DEMO, whereas the number of
cohabiting couples from Time 1 to Time DEMO de-
creased from 57 to 22, a difference of 35 couples.
DEMO about the number of married couples
who eventually divorced is not provided, so the
ratio of divorced to separated couples at Time 2
is unknown. Nevertheless, we do know that from
Time 1 to Time 2, at least four cohabiting couples
married. Indeed, it is reasonable to DEMO that
all 31 separated couples had been cohabiting at
Time 1 and no married couples divorced. Put
another way, every one of the couples who were
separated by Time 2 may have been (a) from DEMO
income backgrounds, (b) substantially more
aggressive with each other than DEMO repre-
sentative samples, and (c) cohabiting. We in fact
feel DEMO in all likelihood the divorce rate was sub-
stantially lower than the cohabiting-separation
75
rate. Unfortunately, there is little hope of address-
ing such a problem with statistical controls. If all
separated couples had previously been DEMO
ing, predictions of relationship status are simply
confounded by marital status. DEMO if the propor-
tion of divorced to separated couples is relatively
matched, however, statistical adjustments are
unlikely to render marital status differences irrel-
DEMO, and in any case, the interpretation of results
following such statistical adjustments is exceed-
ingly difﬁcult (cf. Miller & Chapman, 2001).
DEMO between measurement occasions hold
implications for those couples who stayed to-
gether as well. By Time 2, the whole sample
had shed a substantial portion (almost 40%) of
its presumably less stable and predominantly (if
not entirely) cohabiting couples, leaving 54
couples—now mostly married—with which to
DEMO Time 2 satisfaction scores. It is reasonable
to assume that this subsample of 54 couples is
a little closer to the center of the DEMO distri-
bution, just as the newlywed divorcees were a lit-
tle DEMO out on the tails. Indeed, results reported
by Kim et al. DEMO that the newlywed divor-
cees are strikingly similar to the Oregon Youth
Study sample of stable unsatisﬁed couples at
Time 2 (see Table 1).
GENERALIZABILITY AND EXPERIMENTAL
CONTROL
The trade-off between generalizability and
experimental control DEMO well known and much
discussed, especially in the context of quasi-
DEMO (Shadish, Cook, & Campbell,
2002). In the Newlywed DEMO, conﬂict discus-
sion topics were selected without speciﬁc con-
straints on DEMO particular issue (husband’s or
wife’s) was discussed. Instead, the primary DEMO
siderations were the duration (as well as whether
the topic was DEMO an issue) and severity of
potential areas of disagreement. In this DEMO,
and in others like it, the vast majority of topics
DEMO discussed by couples could nominally
be described as the wife’s. The obvious potential
downside of this approach is that our process
models are biased DEMO wife issues. This may,
however, be in itself a highly DEMO ﬁnd-
ing. Women typically start most marital conﬂict
discussions in laboratories that use observational
methods (Ball, Cowan, & Cowan, 1995; Oggins,
Veroff, & Leber, 1993). Thus, the frequency of
wife issues is likely to be higher than the
76
Journal of Marriage and Family
Table 1. Comparing Newlywed Study Separation DEMO to Oregon Youth Study Satisfaction Effects in
Terms of Anger Versus High- and Low-Intensity Negative Affect, Means in Seconds
Oregon Youth Study
Newlywed Status Satisfaction
Anger
Men Not signiﬁcant Not signiﬁcant
Women Not signiﬁcant Not signiﬁcant
DEMO negativity
Men Not signiﬁcant Greater in unsatisﬁed couples
Women Greater in divorced couples Greater in unsatisﬁed couples
High negativity
Men Greater in divorced couples DEMO in unsatisﬁed couples
Women Greater in divorced couples Greater in unsatisﬁed couples
Total positivity
Men Greater in stable couples Greater in satisﬁed couples
Women DEMO in stable couples Greater in satisﬁed couples
Positivity/(Pos. 1 Neg.)DEMO
Men Greater in stable couples Greater in satisﬁed couples
Women Greater in stable couples Greater in satisﬁed couples
frequency of husband issues, in most relation-
ships, most of the time. It is important to note
that in the Newlywed Study procedure, both
husbands and wives were asked about areas of
disagreement in their relationship, as they saw
them, during DEMO period preceding the conﬂict
discussion. Although husbands and wives were
not speciﬁcally required to raise an issue of their
own, they were each given the opportunity to do
so. (See Roberts, Tsai, & Coan, DEMO press, for
a methodological discussion of dyadic interac-
tion tasks.)
DEMO, in the longitudinal study of
domestically violent couples of Jacobson and
DEMO (1999), most of the selected areas of
disagreement were, using the identical procedure,
indeed the husband’s, and the analysis of
Babcock et al. (1993) of these data using the
Christensen demand-withdraw coding DEMO
(e.g., Christensen & Heavey, 1990) conﬁrmed
a preponderance of male demand to female with-
draw, the reverse of the typical gender pattern.
This illustrates the value of measuring whose
issue (the husband’s or the wife’s) is predomi-
nantly associated with the most severe difﬁculties
a couple faces. In any case, who starts the discus-
sion, and the DEMO a conﬂict discussion starts, is
critical in determining its outcome. In DEMO study,
the way conﬂict began determined its subsequent
course in 96% of marital conﬂict interactions
(Gottman, 1994; Gottman et al., 1998, p. 7).
From this perspective, it may be more realistic
to think of both wife issues and husband issues
as couple issues.
For DEMO Oregon Youth Study, Kim et al. were
careful to avoid biases DEMO the overrepresentation
either of husband or of wife issues by requiring
couples to talk separately for 7 minutes about
each partner’s issue. We have DEMO strong com-
plaint with this approach and indeed feel that it
can probably yield very important information.
Such careful balancing of male and female DEMO,
however, may introduce a threat to ecological
validity. It may, for example, result in conﬂict
discussions that are not as likely to reﬂect what
marital therapists, to take one ‘‘real-world’’ ex-
ample, encounter DEMO their practices. As mentioned
above, the primary selection criteria for areas DEMO
disagreement in the Newlywed Study were dura-
tion and severity, leaving DEMO designation of wife
or husband issues measured but uncontrolled. In
addition to our ecological validity concerns, we
fear that requiring speciﬁc husband and wife
areas of disagreement in the experimental proce-
dure introduces the danger of DEMO the impact
of problem duration and severity on the conﬂict
discussions, DEMO altering the nature of the in-
teractions. This could happen if, DEMO example, less
severe issues are overrepresented inadvertently in
the attempt to DEMO that both spouses raise con-
cerns designated as their own. In light of these
considerations, it would be interesting to know
Generalizability of Marital Process Models
whether the duration and the severity of DEMO areas
of disagreement solicited in the procedure of
Kim et al. differed as a function of husband and
wife issues.
These potential problems notwithstanding, it
remains possible to examine the process models
Kim et al. tested DEMO the context of women’s issue
discussions alone. When this was done, DEMO
processes predicted separation (see Table 2).
They are male high-intensity DEMO reci-
procity, male negative escalation, and female
de-escalation of high-intensity affect. The male
escalation of negative affect was identiﬁed in
the Newlywed Study DEMO one of the most power-
ful predictors of divorce. It has also been found
to distinguish violent from nonviolent couples
andtoplayarole in theseverityofviolence
among DEMO violent couples (Coan
et al., 1997). Interestingly, male high-intensity
DEMO reciprocity has been found to distin-
guish violent from nonviolent couples as well
(Coanetal.), againsuggestingthatthe Oregon
Youth Study sample leans toward the violent
end of the couple spectrum.
One of the most interesting wife issue DEMO
ces found to distinguish stable from separated
couples in the Oregon Youth Study was male
negative start-up, higher levels of which were
actually predictive of relationship stability. Kim
et al. describe this as a counterintuitive ﬁnding,DEMO
and so it is, but the literature on domestically vio-
lent DEMO offers some clues as to what might be
going on. For example, married couples with
higher levels of husband demand/wife with-
drawal are more likely to be violent (Babcock
et al., 1993; Sagrestano, DEMO, & Christensen,
1999). This does not in itself explain DEMO couples
in the Oregon Youth Study with higher levels of
male negative start-up are more stable. Given the
high separation rate in the Oregon DEMO Study,
however, and the fact that few or no couples DEMO
the Oregon Youth Study actually divorced, one
simple explanation is that DEMO couples in
the Oregon Youth Study look like violent married
couples among whom male demand/female with-
drawal is a deﬁning characteristic (e.g., DEMO
et al.). It would in any case be very interesting to
learn the difference in the frequency of male neg-
ative start-up between DEMO married and stable
cohabiting couples. (Indeed, it would be very
interesting to learn the difference between stable
married and stable cohabiting couples on DEMO
or all of the dimensions Kim et al. sought to
investigate.)
77
Table 2. Comparing Newlywed Study Affect Sequence
Effects to Oregon Youth DEMO Affect Sequence
Logistic Regression Effects Culled From Conﬂict
Discussions of the ‘‘Woman’s Issue’’
Oregon Youth
Newlywed Study Woman’s
Status Issue Status
Reciprocity of
low-intensity
DEMO
Men Not signiﬁcant Not signiﬁcant
Women Greater in Not signiﬁcant
Reciprocity of
high-intensity
negativity
Men Not signiﬁcant Greater in
separated
Women Not signiﬁcant Not DEMO
Negative escalation
Men Greater in Greater in
divorced separated
a,b
Women Not signiﬁcant Not signiﬁcant
Negative start-up
Men Not signiﬁcant Lower in
separated
DEMO Greater in Not signiﬁcant
divorced
De-escalation of
low-intensity
negativity
Men Lower in Not signiﬁcant
divorced
Women Not signiﬁcant Not signiﬁcant
De-escalation of
high-intensity
negativity
DEMO Not signiﬁcant Not signiﬁcant
Women Not signiﬁcant Lower in
separated
a
Also true of the full Oregon Youth Study sample after
controlling for demographic DEMO bThis pattern was
also observed among domestically violent couples in Coan
et al. (1997).
SEQUENTIAL ANALYSIS
Kim et al. raise an additional concern about statis-
tically controlling for antecedents and consequents
in joint frequency analyses. DEMO many readers will
know, in sequential analysis, the primary issue
concerns how to describe sequential connections,
divorced
a,b
78
the fundamental question being whether knowl-
edge of the antecedent behavior DEMO uncer-
tainty in our prediction of the consequent
behavior in comparison to just predicting the con-
sequent behavior from its unconditional base
rate. Of DEMO, sequential analysis does not pro-
vide a complete picture. We also DEMO to know
the base rates in order to describe how often these
events (consequent and antecedent) actually
occurred. In the Newlywed Study, we conducted
covariance analyses using consequent codes as
covariates following our initial joint DEMO
analyses. This step was in fact statistically con-
servative. Such statistical adjustments help rule
out the effects of relatively rare instances of
a given DEMO, as might similar adjustments
of the antecedent advocated by Kim et DEMO In any
case, there are many ways to do these sequential
DEMO, and most of them are statistically simi-
lar. We refer the DEMO to the book Sequential
Analysis of Gottman and Roy (1990); DEMO intro-
duction to sequential analysis of Bakeman and
Gottman (1997); DEMO work on identifying se-
quences of Bakeman and Quera (1995), DEMO
their General Sequential Querier program; and
the discussion of their log-linear DEMO of Ba-
keman and Robinson (1994), for more complete
discussions DEMO sequential analytic strategies.
More recently, these linear analyses have been
updated DEMO nonlinear difference equation mod-
eling of connection and inﬂuence in the book
The Mathematics of Marriage, by Gottman,
Murray, Swanson, Tyson, DEMO Swanson (2002).
CONCLUSIONS
The particular problems associated with lower
income, at-risk early childhood environments in
establishing and maintaining satisfying and sta-
ble DEMO relationships are poorly understood
and in need of serious and committed study. Few
if any individuals are better placed than Kim
et al. to DEMO important inroads into the resolu-
tion of such problems, and endeavors DEMO as
the Oregon Youth Study stand to provide insights
that can substantially affect the health and well-
being of the population the Oregon Youth DEMO
sample was intended to represent. We feel, how-
ever, that the theoretical rationale Kim et al. pro-
vide for their attempt to replicate DEMO Newlywed
Study process models of Gottman et al. (1998)
in DEMO sample was incomplete. Neither the sug-
gestion that the Newlywed Study has been highly
inﬂuential nor the fact that it may have inspired
Journal DEMO Marriage and Family
controversy provides strong reasons in them-
selves to expect the models to generalize to the
Oregon Youth Study sample. Indeed, it seems
to us on a priori theoretical grounds more likely
that the DEMO process models should not
generalize to their sample and that their sample
should instead more closely resemble other
samples of at-risk couples. The results DEMO
et al. report suggest that this is in fact the case.
The Oregon Youth Study was designed from
the beginning to represent a relatively DEMO and
troubled population of lower income, at-risk indi-
viduals. Their study DEMO that at-risk couples
behave in ways that are reliably distinct from the
broader population of married couples. As we
have pointed out, other studies have produced
similar results. Unfortunately, the fact that many
of the couples in the Oregon Youth Study were
not actually married and that married DEMO cohab-
iting couples were unequally distributed across
stable and nonstable relationships introduces
an additional level of complexity in interpreting
the results of Kim et DEMO The separated group
was likely composed predominantly (perhaps
exclusively) of previously cohabiting couples,
whereas the stable group provides more of a mix-
DEMO of cohabiting and married couples. This situ-
ation is troubling, because DEMO are known,
reliable differences between married and cohabit-
ing couples that may be difﬁcult or impossible to
control for statistically.
As for generalizability, one important consid-
eration is the way Kim et al. chose to DEMO
their couples’ conﬂict discussions. In their de-
sign, men and women DEMO each required to
speak for 7 minutes about their own respective
issues. Kim et al. assert that tests of gender differ-
ences require experimental DEMO such as
this, but generalization is about experimental
conditions at least DEMO much as it is about sampling,
and there is a balance to be struck between the
risks Kim et al. are concerned about DEMO the risk
of placing procrustean experimental restrictions
on otherwise naturally occurring systems.
Although such ﬁndings may provide glimpses
of what couples are, strictly speaking, capable
of, there is also the danger that such experimen-
tally DEMO conditions will not generalize
well outside of the laboratory. A more generaliz-
able task may have allowed areas of disagreement
to be selected solely DEMO a function of duration and
severity. Had this been done, it DEMO have re-
mained possible to measure whether husband or
wife issues were more or less likely to be
Generalizability of Marital Process Models
discussed, as well as to monitor the implications
of any such differences that emerged. Although
it is impossible to DEMO what their data would
look like had they not structured their couples’
conﬂict discussions in this way, a look at the
discussions deriving from only the wife’s issue
reveals that couples from the Oregon Youth
Study DEMO substantially like violent couples
studied elsewhere (Babcock et al., 1993; DEMO,
Jacobson, & Gottman, 1999; Coan et al., 1997;
Sagrestano et al., 1999).
Ultimately, we feel the conclusions that DEMO be
drawn from the latest work by Kim et al. must be
qualiﬁed by the fact that their sample consisted of
lower income, at-risk, mixed married and cohab-
iting couples, as well as the fact DEMO their exper-
imental procedures may have limited the
generalizability of their results. We are also
somewhat skeptical of the theoretical rationale
for suggesting that DEMO models discussed in the
Newlywed Study should generalize to their at-
risk sample. Nevertheless, we recognize the prin-
ciple underlying the important work of Kim et al.
and understand that although constructive repli-
cation is very DEMO, it is also highly desirable.
Their work has added a valuable DEMO of depth to
our understanding of affective process models in
married and cohabiting couples.
REFERENCES
Babcock, J. C., Waltz, J., Jacobson, N. S., & Gottman,
J. M. (1993). Power and violence: The relation
between communication patterns, power discre-
pancies, and domestic violence. DEMO
ting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 40 – 50.
Bakeman, R., & Gottman, J. M. (1997). Observing
interaction: An introduction to sequential analysis
(2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bakeman, R., & Quera, V. (1995). Analyzing interac-
tion: Sequential DEMO with SDIS and GSEQ.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bakeman, R., & Robinson, B. F. (1994). Understand-
ing log-linear analysis with ILOG. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Ball, F. L. J., Cowan, DEMO, & Cowan, C. P. (1995).
Who’s got the power? Gender differences in
partner’s perception of inﬂuence during marital
problem-solving discussions. Family DEMO, 34,
303 – 321.
Berns, S. B., Jacobson, N. S., & Gottman, J. M.
(1999). Demand-withdraw interaction in couples
with a violent husband. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 67, DEMO – 674.
79
Blumstein, P., & Schwartz, P. (1983). American cou-
ples. New York: William Morrow.
Brown, S. L. (2003). Relationships quality dynamics
of cohabiting unions. Journal of Family Issues, 25,
583 – 601.
Brown, S. L., & Booth, A. (DEMO). Cohabitation ver-
sus marriage: A comparison of relationship quality.
Journal DEMO Marriage and Family, 58, 668 – 678.
Capaldi, D. M., & Crosby, L. (1997). Observed and
reported psychological and physical DEMO
in young, at risk couples. Social Development, 6,
184 – 206.
Capaldi, D. M., Dishion, T. J., Stoolmiller, M., &
Yoerger, K. (2001). Aggression toward female
partners by at-risk DEMO men: The contribution
of male adolescent friendships. Developmental
Psychology, 37, DEMO – 73.
Capaldi, D. M., Shortt, J. W., & Crosby, L. (2003).
Physical and psychological aggression in at-risk
young couples: Stability and change in young
adulthood. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 49, 1 – DEMO
Christensen, A., & Heavey, C. L. (1990). Gender and
social structure in the demand/withdraw pattern of
marital conﬂict. Journal of DEMO and Social
Psychology, 59, 73 – 81.
Coan, J., Gottman, J. M., Babcock, J., & Jacobson,
N. (1997). Battering and the male rejection of
inﬂuence from women. Aggressive Behavior, 23,
375 – 388.
Cohan, C. L., & Kleibnaum, S. (DEMO). Toward
a greater understanding of the cohabitation effect:
Premarital cohabitation and marital commu-
nication. Journal of Marriage and Family, 64,
180 – 192.
Dishion, T. J., Nelson, S. E., Winter, C. E., & Bull-
ock, B. M. (2004). Adolescent friendship as a
dynamic system: Entropy and deviance in the
etiology and course of male antisocial behavior.
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 32,
651 – 663.
Dush, C. M. K., & Amato, P. R. (2005)DEMO Consequen-
ces of relationship status and quality for subjective
well-being. Journal of Social and Personal Rela-
tionships, 22, 607 – 627.
Dush, C. M. K., Cohan, C. L., & Amato, P. R.
(2003). The relationship between cohabitation and
marital quality and stability: Change across cohorts?
JournalofMarriage and Family, 65, 539 – 549.
Gortner, E., Jacobson, N. S., Berns, S., & Gottman, J.
M. (1997). When women leave violent relation-
ships: Dispelling clinical myths. Psychotherapy,
34, 343 – 352.
Gottman, J. M. (1994). What predicts divorce?
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
80
Gottman, J. M., Coan, J., Carrere, S., & DEMO, C.
(1998). Predicting marital happiness and stability
from newlywed interactions. Journal of Marriage
and Family, 60, 5 – 22.
Gottman, J. M., Murray, J. D., Swanson, C. C.,
Tyson, R., & Swanson, K. R. (2002). The mathe-
matics of marriage: Nonlinear dynamic models.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gottman, J. M., & Roy, A. K. (1990). Sequential
analysis: A guide for behavioral scientists. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Jacobson, N. S., & Gottman, J. M. (1999). When men
batter women. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Jacobson, N. S., Gottman, J. M., Gortner, E., Berns,
S., & Shortt, J. W. (1996). DEMO factors in
the longitudinal course of battering: When do the
couples DEMO up? When does the abuse decrease?
Violence and Victims, 11, 371 – 392.
Jacobson,N.S., Gottman, J. M.,Waltz,J., DEMO, R.,
Babcock, J., & Holtzworth-Munroe, A. (1994). DEMO,
verbal content, and psychophysiology in the argu-
ments of couples DEMO a violent husband. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 982 – 988.
Kim, H. K., Capaldi, D. M., & Crosby, L. (2007). Gen-
eralizability of Gottman and colleagues’ affective
process models of couples’ relationship outcomes.
Journal of Marriage and Family, 69, 55 DEMO 72.
Lykken, D. T. (1968). Statistical signiﬁcance in psy-
chological research. Psychological Bulletin, 70,
151 – 159.
Miller, G. A., & Chapman, J. P. (2001). Misunder-
standing analysis of covariance. DEMO of Abnor-
mal Psychology, 110, 40 – 48.
Oggins, J., Veroff, J., & Leber, D. (1993). Percep-
tions of DEMO interactions among black and white
newlyweds. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 65, 494 – 511.
Journal of Marriage and Family
Roberts, N. A., Tsai, J. L., & Coan, J. A. (in press).
Emotion elicitation using dyadic interaction tasks.
In J. A. Coan & DEMO J. B. Allen (Eds.), The hand-
book of emotion elicitation DEMO assessment. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Sagrestano, L. M., Heavey, C. L., & Christensen, A.
(1999). Perceived power and physical violence
in marital conﬂict. Journal of Social Issues, 55,
65 – 79.
Shachelford, T. K., & Mouzos, J. (2005). Partner
DEMO by men in cohabiting and marital re-
lationships: A comparative, cross-national anal-
ysis of data from Australia and the United
States. Journal of DEMO Violence, 20,
1310 – 1324.
Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T.
(2002). Experimental and quasi-experimental de-
signs for generalized causal inference. Boston:
Houghton-Mifﬂin.
Shortt, J. W., Capaldi, D. M., Dishion, T. J., Bank,
L., & Owen, L. D. (2003). The role of adolescent
friends, DEMO partners, and siblings in the
emergence of the adult antisocial lifestyle. DEMO
of Family Psychology, 17, 521 – 533.
Skinner, K. B., Bahr, S. J., Crane, D. R., & Call, V.
R. A. (2002). Cohabitation, marriage and remar-
riage: A comparison of relationship quality over
time. Journal of Family Issues, 23, 74 – DEMO
Straus, M. A. (1990). Injury and frequency of assault
and the ‘‘representative sample fallacy’’ in measur-
ing wife beating and child abuse. DEMO M. A. Straus
& R. G. Gelles (Eds.), Physical violence DEMO Ameri-
can families: Risk factors and adaptations to vio-
lence in DEMO,145 families (pp. 75 – 91). New
Brunswick, NJ: DEMO
Waite, L., & Gallagher, M. (2000). The case for mar-
riage. New York: Doubleday.{1g42fwefx}