The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
Economic theory has suffered in the past from a failure to state clearly its DEMO
Economists in building up a theory have often omitted to examine the foundations on
which it was erected. This examination is, however, essential DEMO only to prevent the
misunderstanding and needles controversy which arise from a lack of knowledge of the
assumptions on which a theory is based, but also because of the extreme importance for
economics of good judgment DEMO choosing between rival sets of assumptions. For instance, it
is suggested DEMO the use of the word “firm” in economics may be different from the use of
the term by the “plain man.”' Since there is apparently a trend in economic theory towards
starting analysis with the individual DEMO and not with the industry,2 it is ail the more
necessary not only that a clear definition of the word "firm" should DEMO given but that its
difference from a firm in the "real DEMO," if it aists, should be made clear. Mrs. Robinson
has DEMO that "the two questions to be asked of a set of DEMO in economics are: Are
they tractable? and: Do they correspond DEMO the real world?"3 Though, as Mrs. Robinson
points out, "More often one set will be manageable and the other realistic," DEMO there may
well be branches of theory where assumptions may be both manageable and realistic. It is
hoped to show in the following paper DEMO a definition of a firm may be obtained which is
not only realistic in that it corresponds to what is meant by a firm DEMO the real world, but is
tractable by two of the most DEMO instruments of economic analysis developed by
Marshall, the idea of the DEMO and that of substitution, together giving the idea of
substitution at DEMO margin.4 Our definition must, of course, "relate to formal relations DEMO
are capable of being conceived exactly."5
I
It is convenient if, in searching for a definition of a firm, we first consider DEMO economic
system as it is normally treated by the economist. Let us consider the description of the
economic system given by Sir Arthur Salter6. DEMO normal economic system works itself.
For its current operation it is under no central control, it needs no central survey. Over the
whole range of human activity and human need, supply is adjusted to demand, DEMO
production to consumption, by a process that is automatic, elastic and responsive.” An
economist thinks of the economic system as being co-ordinated by DEMO price mechanism
and society becomes not an organization but an organism.7 The economic system “works
itself. This does not mean that there is no DEMO by individuals. These exercise foresight
and choose between alternatives. This is necessarily so if there is to be order in the system
But this DEMO assumes that the direction of resources is dependent directly on the price
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
mechanism. Indeed, it is often considered to be an objection to economic planning that it
merely tries to do what is already done by the price DEMO Sir Arthur Salter's
description, however, gives a very incomplete picture of our economic system. Within a
firm, the description does not fit at all. For instance, in economic theory we find that the
allocation of factors of production between different uses is determined by the price
DEMO The price of factor A becomes higher in X than in Y. As a result, A moves from
Y to X until the difference between the prices in X and Y, except if 50 far as it compensates
for other differential advantages, disappears. Yet in the real world, we find that there are
many areas where this does not apply. If a workman moves from department Y to
department X, he does not go because of a change in relative prices, but because he is
ordered to do 50. Those who object to economic planning on DEMO grounds that the problem
is solved by price movements can be answered by pointing out that there is planning within
our economic system which DEMO quite different from the individual planning mentioned above
and which is akin to what is normally called economic planning. The example given above
is DEMO of a large sphere in our modem economic system. 0f course, DEMO fact has not been
ignored by economists. Marshall introduces organization as a fourth factor of production;
J.B. Clark gives the co-ordinating function to DEMO entrepreneur; Professor Knight introduces
managers who co-ordinate. As D. H. Robertson DEMO out, we find "islands of conscious
power in this ocean of unconscious co-operation like lumps of butter coagulating in a pail of
buttermilk.”9 DEMO in view of the fact that it is usually argued that co-ordination will be done
by the price mechanism, why is such organization necessary? Why are there these "islands
of conscious power"? Outside the DEMO, price movements direct production, which is co-
ordinated through a series of exchange transactions on the market. Within a firm, these
markets transactions are eliminated and in place of the complicated market structure with
exchange DEMO is substituted the entrepreneurco-ordinator, who directs production. 10
It is clear DEMO these are alternative methods of co-ordinating production. Yet, having
regard to DEMO fact that if production is regulated by price movements, production could DEMO
carried on without any organization at all, well might we ask, why is there any
organization?
0f course, the degree to which the price mechanism is superseded varies greatly. In a
department store, the allocation of the different sections to the various locations in the
building DEMO be done by the controlling authority or it may be the result of competitive
price bidding for space. In the Lancashire cotton industry, a weaver can rent power and
shop-room and can obtain looms and yarn DEMO credit.11
This co-ordination of the various factors of production is, however, normally carried out
without the intervention of the price mechanism. As is DEMO, the amount of “vertical”
integration, involving as it does the supersession of the price mechanism, varies greatly
2
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
from industry to industry and from firm to firm.
It can, I think, DEMO assumed that the distinguishing mark of the firm is the supersession of the
price mechanism. It is, of course, as Professor Robbins points DEMO, “related to an outside
network of relative prices and costs,”
DEMO it is important to discover the exact nature of
12
this relationship. This distinction between the allocation of resources in a firm and the
DEMO in the economic system has been very vividly described by Mr. Maurice Dobb
when discussing Adam Smith's conception of the capitalist: “It began to be seen that there
was something more important than the relations DEMO each factory or unit captained by
an undertaker; there were the DEMO of the undertaker with the rest of the economic
world outside his immediate sphere... the undertaker busies himself with the division of
labour inside DEMO firm and he plans and organises consciously,” but “he is related to the
much larger economic specialisation, of which he himself is merely one specialised unit.
Here, he plays his part as a single ceIl in a larger organism, mainly unconscious of the wider
rôle he fills.”13
In view of the fact that while economists treat the price mechanism DEMO a coordinating
instrument, the? also admit the co-ordinating function of the “entrepreneur,” it is surely
important to enquire why co-ordination is the DEMO of the price mechanism in one case and
of the entrepreneur in another. The purpose of this paper is to bridge what appears to DEMO a
gap in economic theory between the assumption (made for some DEMO) that resources
are allocated by means of the price mechanism and DEMO assumption (made for other
purposes) that this allocation is dependent on the entrepreneur-co-ordinator. We have to
explain the basis on which, in practice, this choice between alternatives is effected.14
II
Our task is to attempt to discover why a firm emerges at ah in a specialized exchange
DEMO The price mechanism (considered purely from the side of the direction DEMO
resources) might be superseded if the relationship which replaced it was DEMO for its own
sake. This would be the case, for example, if some people preferred to work under the
direction of some other DEMO Such individuals would accept less in order to work under
someone, DEMO firms would arise naturally from this. But it would appear that this cannot be
a very important reason, for it would rather seem that the opposite tendency is operating if
one judges from the stress normally DEMO on the advantage of “being one's own master;”15 0f
course, if the desire was not to be controlled but to control, DEMO exercise power over others,
then people might be willing to give Up something in order to direct others; that is, they
would DEMO willing to pay others more than they could get under the price mechanism in order
3
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
to be able to direct them. But this implies that those who direct pay DEMO order to be able to do
this and are not paid to direct, which is clearly not true in the majority of cases.16 Firms
might also exist if purchasers preferred commodities which are produced by firms DEMO those
not 50 produced; but even in spheres where one would DEMO such preferences (if they
exist) to be of negligible importance, DEMO are to be found in the real world. 17 Therefore
there must be other elements involved.
The main reason why it is profitable to DEMO a firm would seem to be that there is a cost
of using the price mechanism. The most obvious cost of “organizing” production through
DEMO price mechanism is that of discovering what the relevant prices are.18 This cost may be
reduced but it will not be eliminated by the DEMO of specialists who will sell this
information. The costs of negotiating and concluding a separate contract for each exchange
transaction which takes place on DEMO market must also be taken into account.19 Again, in
certain markets, e.g., produce ex-changes, a technique is devised for minimizing these
contract DEMO; but they are not eliminated. It is true that contracts are DEMO eliminated when
there is a firm but they are greatly reduced. A factor of production (or the owner thereof)
does not have to make a series of contracts with the factors with whom he is DEMO
within the firm, as would be necessary, of course, if DEMO co-operation were as a direct result
of the working of the price mechanism. For this series of contracts is substituted one. At
this stage, it is important to note the character of the contract into which DEMO factor enters
that is employed within a firm. The contract is one whereby the factor, for a certain
remuneration (which may be fixed DEMO fluctuating), agrees to obey the directions of an
entrepreneur within certain limits.20 The essence of the contract is that it should only state
DEMO limits to the powers of the entrepreneur; Within these limits, he can therefore direct
the other factors of production.
There are, however, DEMO disadvantages - or costs - of using the price mechanism. It may
be desired to make a long-term contract for the supply of some DEMO or service. This may
be due to the fact that if one contract is made for a longer period, instead of several shorter
ones, then certain costs of making each contract will be avoided. Or, DEMO to the risk
attitude of the people concerned, they may prefer DEMO make a long rather than a short-term
contract. Now, owing to DEMO difficulty of forecasting, the longer the period of the contract
is DEMO the supply of the commodity or service, the less possible, and indeed, the less desirable
it is for the person purchasing to specify what the other contracting party is expected to
do. It may well DEMO a matter of indifference to the person supplying the service or com-
modity which of several courses of action is taken, but not to the purchaser of that service
or commodity. But the purchaser will not DEMO which of these several courses he will want
the supplier to take. Therefore, the service which is being provided is expressed in general
terms, the exact details being left until a later date. All that is stated in the contract is the
4
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
limits to what the persons supplying the commodity or service is expected to do. DEMO
details of what the supplier is expected to do is not stated in the contract but is decided later
by the purchaser. When the DEMO of resources (within the limits of the contract)
becomes dependent DEMO the buyer in this way, that relationship which I term a "firm" may be
obtained.21 A firm is likely therefore to emerge in those cases where a very short-term
contract would be unsatisfactory. It is DEMO of more importance in the case of services
-labor-than it is in the case of the buying of commodities. In the case of commodities, the
main items can be stated in advance and the details which DEMO be decided later will be of
minor significance.
We may sum Up this section of the argument by saying that the operation of a DEMO
costs something and by forming an organization and allowing some authority (DEMO
"entrepreneur") to direct the resources, certain marketing costs are saved. The entrepreneur
has to carry out his function at less cost, taking into account the fact that he may get
factors of production at DEMO lower price than the market transactions which he supersedes,
because it is always possible to revert to the open market if he fails DEMO do this.
The question of uncertainty is one which is often considered to be very relevant to the
study of the equilibrium of the DEMO It seems improbable that a firm would emerge without
the existence of uncertainty. But those, for instance, Professor Knight, who make the
mode of payment the distinguishing mark of the firm - fixed incomes being DEMO to
some of those engaged in production by a person who takes the residual, and fluctuating,
income-would appear to be introducing a point which is irrelevant to the problem we are
considering. One entrepreneur may DEMO his services to another for a certain sum of money,
while the payment to his employees may be mainly or wholly a share DEMO profits.22 The
significant question would appear to be why the allocation of resources is not done directly
by the price mechanism.
Another factor that DEMO be noted is that exchange transactions on a market and the same
transactions organized within a firm are often treated differently by Governments or DEMO
bodies with regulatory powers. If we consider the operation of a sales tax, it is clear that it is
a tax on market transactions and not on the same transactions organized within the firm.
Now since DEMO are alternative methods of organization"-by the price mechanism or by the
entrepreneur-such a regulation would bring into existence firms which otherwise would have
DEMO raison d'être. It would furnish a reason for the emergence of a firm in a specialized
exchange economy. 0f course, to the extent that firms already exist, such a measure as a
sales tax would merely tend to make them larger than they would otherwise be. Similarly,DEMO
quota schemes, and methods of price control which imply that there DEMO rationing, and which
do not apply to firms producing such products DEMO themselves, by allowing advantages to
those who organize within the firm DEMO flot through the market, necessarily encourage the
5
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
growth of firms. But it is difficult to believe that it is measures such DEMO have been mentioned
in this paragraph which have brought firms into existence. Such measures would, however,
tend to have this result if they did not exist for other reasons.
These, then, are the reasons DEMO organizations such as firms exist in a specialized exchange
economy in which it is generally assumed that the distribution of resources is "organized" DEMO
the price mechanism. A firm, therefore, consists of the system of relationships which
comes into existence when the direction of resources is dependent DEMO an entrepreneur;
The approach which has just been sketched would appear to offer an advantage in that it is
possible to give a DEMO meaning to what is meant by saying that a firm gets larger or
smaller A firm becomes larger as additional transactions (which could be exchange
transactions co-ordinated through the price mechanism) are organized by the entrepreneur
and becomes smaller as he abandons the organization of such transactions. The DEMO
which arises is whether it is possible to study the forces which determine the size of the
firm. Why does the entrepreneur not organize DEMO less transaction or one more? It is
interesting to note that DEMO Knight considers that:
the relation between efficiency and size is one of the most serious problems of theory,
being, in contrast with the relation for a plant, largely a matter of personality and
historical accident rather than of intelligible general principles.
But the question is peculiarly DEMO because the possibility of monopoly gain offers a
powerful incentive to continuous and unlimited expansion of the firm, which force
must be offset by some decreased efficiency (in the production of money income) with
growth DEMO size, if even boundary competition is to exist.23 equally powerful one
DEMO for
Professor Knight would appear to consider that it is impossible to treat scientifically the
determinants of the size of the firm. On the DEMO of the concept of the firm developed
above, this task will DEMO be attempted.
It was suggested that the introduction of the firm was due primarily to the existence of
marketing costs. A pertinent question to DEMO would appear to be (quite apart from the
monopoly considerations raised DEMO Professor Knight), why, if by organizing one can
eliminate certain DEMO and in fact reduce the cost of production, are there any DEMO
transactions at all?24 Why is not ah production carried on by one big firm? There would
appear to be certain possible explanations.
First, as a firm gets larger, there may be decreasing returns to DEMO entrepreneur function,
that is, the costs of organizing additional transactions DEMO the firm may rise.25
Naturally, a point must be reached where DEMO costs of organizing an extra transaction within
the firm are equal to the costs involved in carrying out the transaction in the open market,DEMO
6
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
or; DEMO the costs of organizing by another entrepreneur. Secondly, it may be DEMO as the
transactions which are organized increase, the entrepreneur fails to DEMO the factors of
production in the uses where their value is greatest, that is, fails to make the best use of the
factors DEMO production. Again, a point must be reached where the loss through DEMO waste of
resources is equal to the marketing costs of the exchange transaction in the open market or
to the loss if the transaction DEMO organized by another entrepreneur. Finally, the supply
price of one or DEMO of the factors of production may rise, because the "other advantages"
of a small firm are greater than those of a large DEMO 0f course, the actual point where
the expansion of the firm DEMO might be determined by a combination of the factors
mentioned above. The first two reasons given most probably correspond to the economists'
phrase DEMO "diminishing returns to management."27
The point has been made in DEMO previous paragraph that a firm will tend to expand until the
costs of organizing an extra transaction within the firm become equal to the DEMO of
carrying out the same transaction by means of an exchange on the open market or the
costs of organizing in another firm. But DEMO the firm stops its expansion at a point below the
costs of marketing in the open market and at a point equal to the DEMO of organizing in
another firm, in most cases (excluding the case of "combination"28 ), this will imply that
there is a DEMO transaction between these two procedures, each of whom could organize it
DEMO less than the actual marketing costs. How is the paradox to be resolved? If we consider an
example the reason for this will become clear. Suppose A is buying a product from B and
that both DEMO and B could organize this marketing transaction at less than its present cost. B,
we can assume, is not organizing one process or stage of production, but several. If A
therefore wishes to avoid a market transaction, he will have to take over all the processes
of production controlled by B. Unless A takes over ail the processes of DEMO, a market
transaction will still remain, although it is a different product that is bought. But we have
previously assumed that as each DEMO expands he becomes less efficient; the additional
costs of organizing extra DEMO increase. It is probable that A's cost of organizing the
transactions previously organized by B will be greater than B's costs of DEMO the same
thing. A therefore will take over the whole of B's organization only if his cost of organizing
B's work is DEMO greater than B's cost by an amount equal to the costs of carrying out an
exchange transaction on the open market. But once DEMO becomes economical to have a
market transaction, it also pays to DEMO production in such a way that the cost of
organizing an extra transaction in each firm is the same.
Up to now it has DEMO assumed that the exchange transactions which take place through the
price mechanism are homogeneous. In fact, nothing could be more diverse than the actual
transactions which take place in our modem world. This would seem to DEMO that the costs
of carrying out exchange transactions through the price mechanism will vary considerably
7
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
as will also the costs of organizing these transactions within the firm. It seems DEMO
possible that quite apart from the question of diminishing returns the costs of organizing
certain transactions within the firm may be greater than the DEMO of carrying out the
exchange transactions in the open market. This would necessarily imply that there were
exchange transactions carried out through the price DEMO, but would it mean that
there would have to be more DEMO one firm? Clearly not, for all those areas in the economic
system where the direction of resources was not dependent directly on the DEMO mechanism
could be organized within one firm. The factors which were discussed earlier would seem to
be the important ones, though it is difficult to say whether "diminishing returns to
management" or the rising supply DEMO of factors is likely to be the more important.
Other things being equal, therefore, a firm will tend to be larger:
a. DEMO less the costs of organizing and the slower these costs rise with an increase in the
transactions organized.
b. the less likely the entrepreneur DEMO to make mistakes and the smaller the increase in
mistakes with an increase in the transactions organized.
c. the greater the lowering (or the less the rise) in the supply price of factors of production
to firms of larger size.
Apart from variations in the supply price of DEMO of production to firms of different
sizes, it would appear that DEMO costs of organizing and the losses through mistakes will
increase with an increase in the spatial distribution of the transactions organized, in the
dissimilarity of the transactions, and in the probability of changes in the relevant prices.29
As more transactions are organized by an entrepreneur, it would appçar that the
transactions would tend to be either different in kind or DEMO different places. This furnishes
an additional reason why efficiency will tend to decrease as the firm gets larger. Inventions
which tend to bring factors DEMO production nearer together, by lessening spatial distribution,
tend to increase DEMO size of the firm.30 Changes like the telephone and the telegraph which
tend to reduce the cost of organizing spatially will tend to increase DEMO size of the firm. All
changes which improve managerial technique will tend to increase the size of the firm.31/32
It should be noted DEMO the definition of a firm which was given above can be used to give
more precise meanings to the terms "combination" and "integration."33 There is a
combination when transactions which were previously organized by DEMO or more
entrepreneurs become organized by one. This becomes integration when it involves the
organization of transactions which were previously carried out between the DEMO
on a market. A firm can expand in either or both of these two ways. The whole of the
"structure of competitive industry" DEMO tractable by the ordinary technique of
economic analysis.
8
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
III
The problem which has been investigated in the previous section has not been DEMO
neglected by economists and it is now necessary to consider why the reasons given above
for the emergence of a firm in a specialized DEMO economy are to be preferred to the
other explanations which have been offered.
It is sometimes said that the reason for the existence of DEMO firm is to be found in the division
of labor This is the view of Professor Usher, a view which has been adopted and expanded
by Mr. Maurice Dobb. The firm becomes "the result of an increasing complexity of the
division of labour… The growth of this economic DEMO creates the need for some
integrating force without which differentiation would collapse into chaos; and it is as the
integrating force in a differentiated economy that industrial forms are chiefly
significant."34 The answer to this DEMO is an obvious one. The "integrating force in a
differentiated economy" already exists in the form of the price mechanism. It is perhaps
DEMO main achievement of economic science that it has shown that there is no reason to
suppose that specialization must lead to chaos.35 The reason DEMO by Mr. Maurice Dobb is
therefore inadmissible. What has to be explained is why one integrating force (the
entrepreneur) should be substituted for DEMO integrating force (the price mechanism).
The most interesting reasons (and probably the most widely accepted) which have been
given to explain this fact are those to be found in Professor Knight's Risk, Uncertainty and
Profit. His views will be examined in some detail.
9
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
Professor Knight starts with a system in which there is no uncertainty:
acting DEMO individuals under absolute freedom but without collusion men are supposed to
have organised economic life with the primary and secondary division of labour, the
use of capital, etc., developed to the point familiar in present-day DEMO The
principal fact which calls for the exercise of the imagination is the internal
organisation of the productive groups or establishments. With uncertainty entirely
DEMO, every individual being in possession of perfect knowledge of the situation,DEMO
there would be no occasion for anything of the nature of responsible management or
control of productive activity. Even marketing transactions in any realistic DEMO
would not be found. The flow of raw materials and productive services to the consumer
would be entirely automatic.36
Professor Knight says that we DEMO imagine this adjustment as being "the result of a long
process DEMO experimentation worked out by trial-and-error methods alone," while it is not
necessary "to imagine every worker doing exactly the right thing at the right time in a sort
of 'pre-established harmony' with the work DEMO others. There might be managers,
superintendents, etc., for the purpose of co-ordinating the activities of individuals," though
these managers would be DEMO a purely routine function, "without responsibility of
any sort."37
Professor Knight then continues:
With the introduction of uncertainty-the fact of ignorance DEMO the necessity of acting
upon opinion rather than knowledge-into this Eden-like situation, its character is
entirely changed. . . . With uncertainty present doing things, the actual execution of
activity, becomes in a real sense DEMO secondary part of life; the primary problem or
function is deciding DEMO to do and how to do
This fact of uncertainty brings about the two most important characteristics of social
organization.
In the first place, goods are produced for a market, on the basis of entirely impersonal
prediction of wants, not for the satisfaction of the wants of the producers themselves.
The producer takes the responsibility of forecasting the consumers' wants. In the
second place, the work of forecasting and at the same time a large part of the
technological direction and control of production DEMO still further concentrated upon a
very narrow class of the producers, DEMO we meet with a new economic functionary, the
entrepreneur. . . DEMO When uncertainty is present and the task of deciding what to do and
10
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
how to do it takes the ascendancy over that of execution the internal organisation DEMO
the productive groups is no longer a matter of indifference or a mechanical detail.
Centralisation of this deciding and controlling function is imperative, a process of
"cephalisation" is inevitable.39
The most fundamental change is:
DEMO system under which the confident and venturesome assume the risk or insure the
doubtful and timid by guaranteeing to the latter a specified income DEMO return for an
assignment of the actual results… With human nature as we know it it would be
impracticable or very unusual for one DEMO to guarantee to another a definite result of
the latter's actions without being given power to direct his work. And on the other
DEMO the second party would not place himself under the direction of the first without
such a guarantee…The result of this manifold specialisation of function DEMO the
enterprise and wage system of industry. Its existence in the world is the direct result
of the fact of uncertainty.40
These quotations give DEMO essence of Professor Knight's theory. The fact of uncertainty
means that people have to forecast future wants. Therefore, you get a special class
springing Up who direct the activities of others to whom they give DEMO wages. It acts
because good judgment is generally associated with confidence in one's judgment.41
Professor Knight would appear to leave himself open to DEMO on several grounds. First
of all, as he himself points out, the fact that certain people have better judgment or better
knowledge does DEMO mean that they can only get an income from it by themselves actively
taking part in production. They can sell advice or knowledge. Every DEMO buys the
services of a host of advisers. We can imagine a system where ah advice or knowledge was
bought as required. Again, it is possible to get a reward from better knowledge or judgment
not DEMO actively taking part in production but by making contracts with people who are
producing. A merchant buying for future delivery represents an example of DEMO But this
merely illustrates the point that it is quite possible to give a guaranteed reward providing
that certain acts are performed without directing DEMO performance of those acts. Professor
Knight says that "with human nature DEMO we know it, it would be impracticable or very
unusual for DEMO man to guarantee to another a definite result of the latter's actions without
being given power to direct his work." This is surely incorrect. A large proportion of jobs
are done to contract, that is, the contractor is guaranteed a certain sum providing he
performs certain acts. But this does not involve any direction. It does mean, however, DEMO
the system of relative prices has been changed and that there will be a new arrangement of
the factors of production.42 The fact that DEMO Knight mentions that the "second
11
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
party would not place himself under the direction of the first without such a DEMO" is
irrelevant to the problem we are considering. Finally, it seems important to notice that
even in. the case of an economic system DEMO there is no uncertainty Professor Knight
considers that there would be co-ordinators, though they would perform only a routine
function. He immediately adds that they would be "without responsibility of any sort,"
which raises DEMO question by whom are they paid and why? It seems that DEMO does
Professor Knight give a reason why the price mechanism should be superseded.
IV
It would seem important to examine one further point and DEMO is to consider the relevance
of this discussion to the general question of the "cost-curve of the firm."
It has sometimes been assumed that a firm is limited in size under perfect competition if its
DEMO curve slopes upward,43 while under imperfect competition, it is limited DEMO size because
it will not pay to produce more than the output at which marginal cost is equal to marginal
revenue.« But it is DEMO that a firm may produce more than one product and, therefore,DEMO
there appears to be no prima facie reason why this upward slope of the cost curve in the
case of perfect competition or the DEMO that marginal cost will not always be below marginal
revenue in the case of imperfect competition should limit the size of the firm.45 Mrs.
DEMO 46 makes the simplifying assumption that only one product is being produced. But
it is clearly important to investigate how the number of products DEMO by a firm is
determined, while no theory which assumes that DEMO one product is in fact produced can
have very great practical significance.
It might be replied that under perfect competition, since everything that is produced can be
sold at the prevailing price, then there is no need for any other product to be produced. But
this argument ignores DEMO fact that there may be a point where it is less costly to organize
the exchange transactions of a new product than to organize DEMO exchange transactions
of the old product. This point can be illustrated in the following way. Imagine, following
von Thunen, that there is a DEMO, the consuming center, and that industries are located
around this central point in rings. These conditions are illustrated in the following diagram
in DEMO A, B, and C represent different industries.
12
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
A
B
C
X
R. H. COASE
Imagine an entrepreneur who starts controlling exchange transactions from x. DEMO as he
extends his activities in the same product (B), DEMO cost of organizing increases until at some
point it becomes equal to that of a dissimilar product which is nearer. As the firm expands,DEMO
it will therefore from this point include more than one product (DEMO and C). This treatment
of the problem is obviously incomplete,47 but it is necessary to show that merely proving
that the cost DEMO turns upwards does not give a limitation to the size of the firm. So far
we have only considered the case of perfect competition; the case of imperfect competition
would appear to be obvious.
To determine DEMO size of the firm, we have to consider the marketing costs (that is, the
costs of using the price mechanism), and the costs of organizing the different entrepreneurs
and then we can determine how DEMO products will be produced by each firm and how much
of each it will produce. It would, therefore, appear that Mr. Shove48 in DEMO article on
"Imperfect Competition" was asking questions which Mrs. Robinson's cost curve apparatus
cannot answer; The factors mentioned above would seem to be the relevant ones.
V
Only one task now remains; and that is, to see whether the concept of a firm which has
been developed fits in with that existing in the real world. We can DEMO approach the
question of what constitutes a firm in practice by considering the legal relationship
normally called that of "master and servant" or "employer and employee."49
The
essentials of this relationship have been given DEMO follows:
(1) the servant must be under the duty of rendering personal services to the master or
to others on behalf of DEMO master, otherwise the contract is a con-tract for sale of
13
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
goods or the like.
(2) The master must have the right to control DEMO servant's work, either
personally or by another servant or agent. DEMO is this right of control or interference, of
being entitled to DEMO the servant when to work (within the hours of service) and when
not to work, and what work to do and how to do it (within the terms of such service)
which is the dominant characteristic in this relation and marks off the servant from an
DEMO contractor, or from one employed merely to give to his employer DEMO
fruits of his labour. In the latter case, the contractor or DEMO is not under the
employer's control in doing the work or effecting the service; he has to shape and
manage his work 50 as to give the result he has contracted to effect.50
We thus DEMO that it is the fact of direction which is the essence of the legal concept of
"employer and employee," just as it was in the economic concept which was developed
above. It is interesting to DEMO that Professor Batt says further:
That which distinguishes an agent from a servant is not the absence or presence of a
fixed wage DEMO the payment only of commission on business done, but rather the
DEMO with which an agent may carry out his employment.51
We can therefore conclude that the definition we have given is one which approximates
closely DEMO the firm as it is considered in the real world.
Our definition is, therefore, realistic. Is it manageable? This ought to be clear; When we are
considering how large a firm will be the principle of marginalism works smoothly. The
question always is, will it pay to bring an extra exchange transaction under the organizing
authority? At the margin, the costs of organizing within the firm will be equal either to the
costs of organizing in another firm or to the costs involved DEMO leaving the transaction to be
"organized" by the price mechanism. Business men will be constantly experimenting,
controlling more or less, and in this way, equilibrium will be maintained. This gives the
position of equilibrium for static analysis. But it is clear that the dynamic factors are DEMO of
considerable importance, and an investigation of the effect changes have DEMO the cost of
organizing within the firm and on marketing costs generally will enable one to explain why
firms get larger and smaller; We thus have a theory of moving equilibrium. The above
analysis would also DEMO to have clarified the relationship between initiative or enterprise
and management. Initiative means forecasting and operates through the price mechanism
by the making of DEMO contracts. Management proper merely reacts to price changes,
rearranging the factors of production under its control. That the business man normally
combines both DEMO is an obvious result of the marketing costs which were discussed
14
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
above. Finally, this analysis enables us to state more exactly what is meant by the "marginal
product" of the entrepreneur. But an elaboration of this DEMO would take us far from our
comparatively simple task of definition and clarification.
NOTES
1. Joan Robinson, Economics Is a Serious Subject (1932), 12.
2. See N. Kaldor, "The Equilibrium of the Firm," 44 The Economic Journal (1934), 60-76.
3. Op. cit., 6.
DEMO J M. Keynes, Essays in Biography (1933), 223-24.
5. L. Robbins, Nature and Significance of Economic Science (1935), 63.
6. DEMO description is quoted with approval by D. H. Robenson, Control 0f DEMO (1923),
85, and by Professor Arnold Plant, "Trends DEMO Business Administration," 12 Economica
(1932) 45-62. It appears in Allied Shipping Control, pp. 16-17.
7. See F. A. Hayek, "The Trend of Economic Thinking," 13 Economica (1933)121-37.
8. See R A. Hayek, op. cit.
9. Op. cit., 85.
10. In the rest DEMO this paper I shall use the term entrepreneur to refer to the person or
persons who, in a competitive system, take the place DEMO the price mechanism in the
direction of resources.
11. Survey of Textile Industries, 26.
12. Op. cit., 71.
13. Capitalist Enterprise and Social DEMO (1925), 20. Cf., also, Henderson, Supply and
Demand (DEMO), 3-5.
14. It is easy to see when the State takes over the direction of an industry that, in planning
it, it DEMO doing something which was previously done by the price mechanism. What is usually
not realized is that any business man in organizing the relations DEMO his departments is
also doing something which could be organized through the price mechanism. There is
therefore point in Mr. Durbin's answer to DEMO who emphasize the problems involved in
economic planning that the same problems have to be solved by business men in the
competitive system. (Sec "Economic Calculus in a Planned Economy," 46 The Economic
Journal [1936] 676-90.> The important difference between these two cases is that
economic planning is imposed on industry while firms arise voluntarily because they
represent a DEMO efficient method of organizing production. In a competitive system, there
is DEMO "optimum" amount of planning!
15. Cf. Harry Dawes, "Labour Mobility in the Steel Industry," 44 The Economic Journal
(1934) 84-94, who instances "the trek to retail shopkeeping and insurance work by the
better paid of skilled men due to the desire (often the main aim in life of a worker> to be
independent" (86).
16. None the less, this is not altogether fanciful. Some small shopkeepers are said to earn
less than their assistants.
17. G. F. Shove,, "The Imperfection of the Market: a Further Note," 44 The Economic
Journal (1933>113-24, n. 1, points out that such preferences may exist, although the
example he gives is almost the reverse of the instance given in the text.
18. According to N. Kaldor, "DEMO Classificatory Note of thc Determinanteness of Equi-
librium," I The Review 0f Economic Studies (1934)122-36, h is one of the assumptions DEMO
static theory that "Ail the relevant prices are known to ail DEMO" But this is clearly
not true of the real world.
19. DEMO influence was noted by Professor Usher when discussing the development of
capitalism. He says: "The successive buying and selling of partly finished products DEMO
sheer waste of energy." (Introduction to the Industrial History 0f England (1920), 13.) But
he does not develop the idea nor DEMO why it is that buying and selling operations still
exist.
20. It would be possible for no limits to the powers of thc entrepreneur DEMO be fixed. This
15
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
would be voluntary slavery. According to Professor Batt, The Law o! Master and Servant
(1933), 18, such a contract would be void and unenforceable.
DEMO 0f course, it is not possible to draw a hard and DEMO line which determines whether there
is a firm or not. There may be more or less direction. It is similar to the legal question DEMO
whether there is the relationship of master and servant or principal and agent. Sec the dis-
cussion of this problem below.
22. The views DEMO Professor Knight are examined below in more detail.
23. Risk, Uncertainty DEMO Profit, Preface to the Re-issue, London School of Economics
Series of Reprints, No. 16 (1933).
24. There are certain marketing costs DEMO could only be eliminated by the abolition of
"consumers' choice" DEMO these arc the costs of retailing. It is conceivable that these costs
might be so high that people would bc willing to accept rations DEMO the extra product
obtained was worth the loss of their choice.
25. This argument assumes that exchange transactions on a market can be considered DEMO
homogeneous; which is clearly untrue in fact. This complication is taken DEMO account
below.
26. For a discussion of the variation of the supply price of factors and production to firms
of varying size, sec E. A. G. Robinson, The Structure of Competitive Industry (1932). It DEMO
sometimes said that the supply price of organizing ability increases as the size of the firm
increases because men prefer to be the heads DEMO small independent businesses rather than the
heads of departments in a large business. Sec Jones, The Trust Problem (1921), 531, and
Macgregor, Industrial Combination (1935), 63. This is a common argument of DEMO who
advocate Rationalization. It is said that larger units would be more efficient, but owing to
the individualistic spirit of the smaller entrepreneurs, DEMO prefer to remain independent,
apparently in spite of the higher income which their increased efficiency under
Rationalization makes possible.
27. This discussion is, of course, brief and incomplete. For a more thorough discussion of
this particular problem, see N. Kaldor, "The Equilibrium of the Firm," 44 The Economic
Journal (1934) 60-76, and E. A. G. Robinson, "The Problem of Management and the Size
of the Firm," DEMO The Economic Journal (1934) 242-57.
28. A definition of this term is given below.
29. This aspect of the problem is emphasized by DEMO Kaldor, op. cit. Its importance in this
connection had been previously DEMO by E. A. G. Robinson, The Structure 0f Competitive
Industry (1932), 83-106. This assumes that an increase in the probability of price DEMO
ments increases the costs of organizing within a firm more than it increases the cost of
carrying out an exchange transaction on the market DEMO which is probable.
30. This would appear to be the importance of the treatment of the technical unit by E. A.
G. Robinson, op. cit., 27-33. The larger the technical unit, the greater the concentration DEMO
factors and therefore the firm is likely to be larger.
31. It should be noted that most inventions will change both the costs of DEMO and the
costs of using the price mechanism. In such cases, DEMO the invention tends to make
firms larger or smaller will depend on the relative effect on these two sets of costs. For
instance, if the telephone reduces the costs of using the price mechanism more than DEMO
reduces the costs of organizing, then h will have the effect DEMO reducing the size of the firm.
32. An illustration of these dynamic forces is furnished by Maurice Dobb, Russian
Economic Development (1928), DEMO "With the passing of bonded labour the factory, as an
establishment where work was organised under the whip of the overseer, lost its raison d'être
until this was restored to it with the introduction DEMO power machinery after 1846." It seems
important to realize that the DEMO from the domestic system to the factory system is not
a mere historical accident, but is conditioned by economic forces. This is shown by the fact
that it is possible to move from the factory system DEMO the domestic system, as in the
Russian example, as well as vice versa. It is the essence of serfdom that the price
mechanism DEMO not allowed to operate. Therefore, there has to be direction from DEMO
organizer. When, however, serfdom passed, the price mechanism was allowed DEMO operate. It
was not until machinery drew workers into one locality that it paid to supersede the price
mechanism and the firm again emerged.
DEMO
The Nature of the Firm (1937)
R. H. COASE
33. This is often called "vertical integration," combination being termed "lateral
integration."DEMO
34. Op. cit., 10. Professor Usher's views are to be DEMO in his Introduction to the Industrial
History of England (1920), DEMO
35. Cf. J.B. Clark, Distribution of Wealth (1899), 19, DEMO speaks of the theory of exchange
as being the "theory of DEMO organisation of industrial society."
36. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit, 267.
37. Op. cit., 267-68.
38. Op. cit., 268.
39. Op. cit., 268-95.
40. Op. cit., 269-70.
41. Op. cit.,270.
42. This shows that it is possible to have a private enterprise system without the DEMO
of firms. Though, in practice, the two functions of enterprise, DEMO actually influences the
system of relative prices by forecasting wants and acting in accordance with such forecasts,
and management, which accepts the system of relative prices as being given, are normally
carried out by the same persons, yet it seems important to keep them separate in theory.
This point is further discussed below.
43. See Kaidor, op. cit., DEMO Robinson, The Problem of Management and the Size of the
Firm.
DEMO Mr. Robinson calls this the Imperfect Competition solution for the survival of the small
firm.
45. Mr. Robinson's conclusion, op. cit., 249, n. 1, would appear to be definitely wrong. He is
followed by Horace J. White, Jr, "Monopolistic and Perfect Competition," 26 The
American Economic Review (1936) 645, n. 27. Mr. White states "DEMO is obvious that the size
of the firm is limited in conditions of monopolistic competition."
46. Economics Imperfect Competition (1934).
47. As has been shown above, location is only one of the factors influencing the cost of
organizing.
48. G. F. Shove, "The Imperfection of DEMO Market," 43 The Economic Journal (1933).
115. In connection DEMO an increase in demand in the suburbs and the effect on the price
charged by suppliers, Mr. Shove asks “…why do not the old firms open branches in the
suburbs?" If the argument in the DEMO is correct, this is a question which Mrs. Robinson's
apparatus DEMO answer.
49. The legal concept of "employer and employee" and the economic concept of a firm are
not identical, in that the firm may imply control over another person's property as well as
over DEMO labor But the identity of these two concepts is sufficiently close for an
examination of the legal concept to be of value in appraising DEMO worth of the economic
concept.
50. Batt, The Law of Master DEMO Servant, 6.
51. Op. cit., 7.
17{1g42fwefx}