JOURNAL
Observational Goals
A Theoretical
Behavior
CLAUDIA
Rutgers
and Schema
Framework
Perception
DEMO COHEN
University
Activation:
for
AND
EBBE B. EBBESEN
University of California, San Diego
Received May 15, 1978
A framework for behavioral observation DEMO described in which the processing of
a stream of behavior is influenced by an individual’s prior knowledge about
behavior, organized into cognitive “schemas.” It is proposed that observational
goals determine the selection of goal-relevant schemas which, in turn, influence
the observer’s processing of an actor’s behavior. Subjects watched a series of
videotaped sequences featuring a female actor with instructions either DEMO form an
impression of her or to remember the details of the tasks she engaged in. They
were then asked to answer questions that DEMO either consistent or inconsistent
with these instructions. Subjects were also instructed to unitize the actions or
events that occurred in the sequence (D. A. Newtson, Journal ofPersonality and
Social Psychology, 1973, 28 28-38). According to the unitizing measure, subjects
observing with different goals attended to different behavioral features. Further,
impression-forming subjects were apparently more influenced by their DEMO
theories of personality than were task-learning subjects when asked to give ratings
of the actor’s personality, and task-learning subjects were relatively more accu-
rate in recalling task-related details. Implications of this framework and these
results for DEMO in behavioral unitization and implicit personality theory are
discussed.
The authors wish to thank Richard J. Bowers and Charles F. Schmidt for their helpful
DEMO on the manuscript and Dick Trout for his statistical advice. In addition, the
reactions of two anonymous reviewers to a previous version of the manuscript were very
valuable. The assistance of Jeneva Lane in conducting this DEMO is greatly ap-
preciated. This research was supported by Grant MH 26069 from the National Institute of
Mental Health to Ebbe B. Ebbesen. Requests DEMO reprints should be sent to Claudia E.
Cohen, Department of Psychology, Douglass College, Rutgers University, New Brunswick,
New Jersey 08903.
305
DEMO/79/040305-25$02.00/O
All
Copyright
rights
of reproduction
@ 1979 by Academic
in any form
Press.
Inc.
reserved.
OF
EXPERIMENTAL
SOCIAL
PSYCHOLOGY
15,
DEMO (1979)
306
COHEN
AND EBBESEN
In the course of social interaction, individuals may use the continuous
stream of verbal and nonverbal behavior for various purposes. DEMO exam-
ple, new members of the academic community may use a DEMO
behavior to learn how to chair a committee meeting; or, alternatively,
they may observe the same sequence of behavior and instead form DEMO
personality judgment of the committee chairperson. When two observers
watch the same stream of behavior for different purposes, their cognitive
processing of the behavioral information may differ as a result of these
different observational goals. Compare DEMO observer who attempts to learn
how to chair a meeting effectively with one who tries to form an impres-
sion of the chairperson. First, the two observers may sometimes attend to
different information: One may attend to the semantic relationships be-
tween the words uttered by the speaker, while the other may listen to the
speaker’s voice tone. Second, observers may interpret the same piece of
information differently: For example, speaking DEMO may be seen by one
observer as a technique for commanding attention, while the other ob-
server may interpret it as an indication of extraversion. In addition to
these attentional and interpretive differences observers may remember
DEMO information as a result of their observational goals: e.g., the
outcome of the meeting vs the affect in the speaker’s voice.
To study DEMO operation of cognitive processing strategies that result
from different observational goals, DEMO should distinguish between (a) the
processes that underlie the observation of behavior and (b) the srructure
of the information upon which the DEMO operate (Norman, 1976;
Rumelhart, 1975). We suggest behavioral DEMO processes operate
upon information that is organized into schemas. A schema is an
hypothetical cognitive structure that integrates lower level units of infor-
mation (i.e., the most concrete or closest to peripheral perception) into a
DEMO level cohesive and meaningful unit (Bartlett, 1932; Bobrow &
Norman, 1975). Schemas are assumed to represent an individual’s “world
knowledge”, DEMO is, a schema reflects a knowledge of the co-occurrence
of elements (behaviors, objects, features, etc.) that the individual has
acquired through DEMO To represent prior experiences fully, a
person must obviously have an DEMO number of schemas which
reflect knowledge collected from a variety of situations and domains.
Domains of information ranging from concrete objects (Palmer, 1975) to
complex social information (Cantor & Mischel, 1977; Markus, 1977;DEMO
Taylor, Cracker, & D’Agostino, 1978; Tesser, 1978) have been described
in terms of a schema structure. The relationship between schematic
elements DEMO be spatial (Posner & Keele, 1970), temporal (Schank &
Abelson, 1977), or associative, such as among attributes of a DEMO
(Markus, 1977).
Previous theorists have assumed that schemas may be used at three
different stages of information processing. First, attention may be di-
rected toward those features
particular schema. Second,
framework
ticularly
may serve DEMO guide the reconstruction
Mischel,
A processing
a mechanism
particular
individual’s
ing from the general class of those person and behavior
primed
goal of DEMO
contain
tures of nonverbal
person characteristics
implicit
1972). Alternatively,
activate a set of schemas
vant to task performance,
behavior, the relation between the actor and features of the nonsocial
environment, and the temporal order in which the actions occur (Schank
& Abelson, 1977; Schmidt, 1976).
Consider how goal-selected schemas influence the processing of infor-
mation by (a) an observer who tries to form an impression of DEMO actor and
(b) an observer who tries to learn the task an actor performs. The manner
in which schemas may influence processing at DEMO phases (i.e., atten-
tion, integration, and memory) can best DEMO understood
activation model of processing. First, each observer’s
should determine the DEMO features to which he will attend in order
to achieve his goal. Consequently, the stream of ongoing behavior
sometimes be “chunked up” differently by the two observers
related information is attended to by each. For example,DEMO
forming observer may search for information about “facial
features (e.g., mouth, eyes) in order to determine which particular
expression schema fits the DEMO (e.g., a smiling face).’
facial features are probably irrelevant to the task being
task-learning observer is less likely to have activated “facial
DEMO
by any behavioral
an impression
characteristics
behavior
(Brigham,
theory of DEMO
observing
containing features and
such as nonexpressive
in the environment that are contained
a particular schema may be used
for comprehending
when the information
DEMO an event in memory
1977; Neisser,
model that uses the DEMO of “schema”
for selecting
moment (cf. Schank & Abelson, 1977).
observational goal specifies the selection
schemas that are
For example,
of DEMO that
of personality,
& Friesen,
1976), and the observer’s
1960; Rosenberg
in order to learn a task should
feature relations rele-
aspects of nonverbal
in terms of an
activated schemas
may
as goal-
DEMO impression-
expression”
facial
However,
learned, the
expression”
since
observation.
should DEMO to the selection
indicative
(Ekman
1971; Cohen,
(IFT) (DEMO,
behavior
or integrating
is ambiguous.
Finally,
1976; Norman,
DEMO).
the subset of schemas
incoming
such as expressive
1975), stereotypes
307
in a
as a
information, par-
a particular schema
(Cantor &
should include
in operation at any
We suggest that an
of DEMO, choos-
the observational
fea-
of
& Sedlak,
r Readers
have
(Ekman
order to provide
and require
familiar
identified more
& Friesen,
DEMO clear
elaborate
with
than
1975).
example.
description.
the
a hundred
Our
facial
facial
description of a “facial
It is assumed that
expression
literature DEMO note that some investigators
muscles which contribute to facial expression
expression” schema is superficial
facial expression schemas are complex
in
OBSERVATIONAL
GOALS
AND
SCHEMA
DEMO
308
COHEN
AND
EBBESEN
After information is extracted from the stream of DEMO, each ob-
server presumably interprets the information within the structure pro-
DEMO by his goal-determined schemas. These schemas provide a pattern
of connections between the features extracted from the behavior observa-
tion, contributing meaning to these features. For instance, the task-
learning observer might interpret the behavior of “writing on the
blackboard” as part of a schema for “writing the DEMO of the meeting.”
The observer may have multiple task-relevant schemas or “scripts”
(Schand & Abelson, 1977) for this event, e.g., “writes the entire agenda
before the meeting” vs “writes the agenda throughout the meeting.” DEMO
the other hand, the impression-forming observer might instead interpret
the chairperson’s DEMO from within a schema containing expressive
characteristics (for example, “very neat handwriting” might be as-
sociated with preciseness in other expressive characteristics).
DEMO, the same schemas that are activated during observation of the
actor DEMO presumed to affect the observer’s memory in two ways. First,
they influence which information is abstracted and stored in memory
through their mediating DEMO on the attention to and interpretation of
the original material. Second, DEMO is assumed to be a reconstructive
process (Norman, 1976). When the observer tries to reconstruct the
stream of behavior, the goal-specified schemas are, to some degree,
activated and thus may “fill in” features or relationships that either have
decayed since the initial observation or were DEMO actually present in the
behavior. Thus, if the impression-forming observer remembered DEMO the
actor was “friendly,” his schema for “friendly” might activate the fea-
ture of “a cheerful voice,” even if he had actually DEMO heard the actor’s
voice (e.g., his judgment being based upon the actor’s facial expressions
and posture). However, as the task-learning observer probably never
formed the judgment that the actor was “friendly,” he would DEMO
not incorrectly remember that the actor’s voice was cheerful. Whether he
would remember details about the actor’s face and posture should depend
upon the DEMO between those features and the schemas activated by his
observational goal. This reasoning leads to the prediction that an
impression-forming observer may at times DEMO less accurate about
personality-related features than may observers with other goals.
The application of a schema activation framework to describe the
operation of observational DEMO has implications for previous research in
two areas: the unitization of DEMO stream of behavior and impression
formation (IPT).
Unitization
of the DEMO
of Behavior
In a series of studies by Newtson
Newtson,
actor’s
1976),
behavior
and his colleagues
subjects were instructed
into meaningful actions
to divide
or “units.”
(Newtson, 1973;
the stream of an
DEMO explain this
OBSERVATIONAL
GOALS
AND SCHEMA
ACTIVATION
Interpretation
unitization process, Newtson, Engquist,
DEMO perception be seen as an instance of Neisser’s
cycling theory” in which the perceiver
behavior and defines changes in these features as actions.
Our DEMO of behavioral observation with Newtson’s
approach, but it differs in two DEMO First, Newtson
feature selection process while our treatment the high-level
schema DEMO function of the observational Newtson
states that an observer’s set may influence unitization;
a possible mechanism (i.e., a structure and processing
observer’s DEMO may affect the perception of behavioral units. Second,
Newtson primarily addresses the perception of behavior while our de-
scription of behavior processing includes DEMO interpretation of and the
memory for behavior as well as perception.
of and Memory for Behavior
Reliance on IPT in impression formation. Viewing the DEMO on
implicit personality theory (Hastorf, Schneider, & Polefka, 1970; DEMO
berg & Sedlak, 1972) through the schema structure and processing
framework presented here suggests a potentially interesting new approach
to this body of DEMO Implicit personality theory is seen in the present
treatment as a high-level schema representing the interrelationship be-
tween traits (e.g., “friendly” is related DEMO “warm”). Each trait repre-
sented in IPT is a lower level schema containing behaviors which are
indicative of the trait (e.g., “friendly” DEMO indicated by “smiles broadly,“
“talks to strangers”). When individuals observe someone in order to form
an impression, their IPT schema is primed. When an observer sees an
actor perform one or more actions indicative DEMO a particular trait, the trait
is activated and this activation spreads DEMO related traits in the IPT struc-
ture. “Activation” is used here to mean the stimulation of a concept or
feature that is stored in DEMO memory. (See Collins & Loftus, 1975
and Wyer & Carlston, DEMO, for examples of spreading activation models.)
Once a trait has DEMO activated, the subsequent identification of trait-
related actions is facilitated.
A DEMO exists in the literature about whether the structure ap-
parent in an observer’s ratings of behavior is more reflective of the
knowledge structure of DEMO observer (e.g., IPT) or the behavior of the
person observed (D’Andrade, 1965; Dombusch, Hastorf, Richardson,
Muzzy, & Vreeland, DEMO; Shweder, 1977). This debate is stimulated by
evidence that the pattern of relations among trait ratings of actual persons
is very similar DEMO the semantic relatedness of the traits, considered inde-
2 Our acceptance DEMO the position of Newtson et al. (1977) should be qualified somewhat.
We do not yet endorse nor reject their claims that breakpoints are DEMO points in the stimulus
at which action units are defined.
309
and Bois (1977) suggested that
(1976) “perceptual
monitors features of the DEMO
is consistent
describes an on-line
emphasize
goal.
we have described
steps) DEMO an
(1976)
310
COHEN
AND
EBBESEN
pendently of their presence in a person (Shweder, 1977). IRT researchers
who claim that the raters of behavior are influenced by their notions about
“what traits go with what” have generally DEMO short of describing the
process whereby raters’ implicit knowledge influences the ratings they
give. D’ Andrade (1965) and Shweder (1972,1977) suggest DEMO when raters
make judgment about ratees, they do not estimate the DEMO frequency of
behavioral co-occurrence. Rather, they rely on other irrelevant ways DEMO
which behaviors are conceptually related (e.g., meaning similarity or
sequentiality). Implied in D’Andrade’s and Shweder’s descriptions is the
view that behavior is DEMO perceived but is then forgotten and
replaced by judgments based upon irrelevant information (e.g., similarity
of meaning). While the processing suggested by DEMO schema framework is
sympathetic in spirit to the suggestion of these theorists, it differs by
assuming that observers’ stored notions of behavioral covariation influ-
ence their perception and interpretation of behavior and not simply their
responses DEMO questions of behavioral co-occurrence.
Also novel is our suggestion that an observational goal of forming an
impression primes an observer’s PT. To our knowledge, previous re-
search in IFT has not explicitly considered whether an observer’s DEMO
should influence his reliance upon PT.
Tusk-learning schema. Task-learning schemas may differ qualitatively
from impression-forming schemas. Some tasks seem to require great
attention to DEMO specifics of behavior detail, with relatively little inference
required of the DEMO about the meaning of the task or about the actor’s
intentions. In these cases, the schemas that are activated when an ob-
server attempts to learn the task may specify the extensive degree of
detail required DEMO minimize higher level inferences about the task.
In addition, tasks may DEMO in how novel they are to the observer.
When a task is very novel, a specific schema for that task cannot exist a
priori, so schemas that have been relevant to previously learned tasks will
be activated (e.g., observing how to serve in tennis might activate a
DEMO schema). These schemas and other contextual clues should
activate a set of behavioral features that are likely to be relevant to the
task DEMO a set of possible relations between these features. Some empiri-
cal support for this claim is the identification by Newtson et al. (1977) DEMO
the behavioral features that subjects monitored (e.g., right hand, left
DEMO) when unitizing the actions in some behavioral sequences. Both
novel tasks DEMO tasks that require little inference making should be mini-
mally susceptible to memory distortions. When existing task schemas are
invoked, those that are the most stereotypic or goal oriented (Schmidt,
1976) (e.g., a DEMO car salesman making a pitch) should promote the most
memory errors.
DEMO assess the utility of a schema framework for behavior perception,
we conducted an experiment in which subjects watched and answered
OBSERVATIONAL
GOALS
AND SCHEMA
ACTIVATION
311
questions about the behavior of a DEMO actor. As a manipulation of
observer’s goals, subjects were instructed either DEMO form an impression or
to learn the task of the actor as they observed her. The unitization
measure was used to measure observers’ patterns DEMO attention (Newtson,
1973). Three hypotheses were suggested by the DEMO framework and
the related processing assumptions. They were:
1. Subjects who are instructed to form an impression will unitize the
stream of behavior DEMO than will subjects who are instructed to
learn the tasks performed by the actor.
2. Subjects who are instructed to form an impression of DEMO actor will
form impressions that are more similar to an implicit personality theory
structure than will be the impressions formed by subjects who are DEMO
structed to learn tasks.
3. Subjects who are instructed to learn tasks will be more accurate at
recalling details of the tasks performed by DEMO actor.
METHOD
Overview
Subjects were 32 female undergraduates who were fulfilling a psychology course require-
ment. Subjects were instructed either to form an impression DEMO or to learn the tasks
performed by a single female actor as they observed her in a series of videotapes. After
receiving their observational DEMO, subjects were told to indicate the “units” of in-
formation contained DEMO the stream of the actor’s behavior. After viewing all four experi-
mental tapes, subjects were given a set of dependent measures that corresponded to one
of the two instruction conditions (that is, either memory questions DEMO the actor’s task
behaviors or personality trait ratings). Half of the subjects in each instruction condition an-
swered questions that were consistent with DEMO observational instructions while the other
half answered questions which were inconsistent with their instructions. After a short break,
subjects were then reinstructed with DEMO instructions they had not previously received (i.e.,
impression subjects received DEMO instructions, and vice versa). Subjects watched
and unitized the same DEMO again under these new instructions and responded to the second
set of dependent measures. No subjects were given the same instructions nor the same
DEMO twice: i.e., subjects who answered memory questions after their first viewing gave
trait ratings after their second viewing, and vice versa.
Stimuli
Six behavioral sequences were recorded on videotape, each ranging in length from I .5 to 2
min. Subjects viewed the video portion of the tapes DEMO a 12-in. (.3 m) video monitor. Two
tapes, which featured DEMO different actor than did the four experimental sequences, served as
practice DEMO so that subjects could become familiar with the unitizing measure. In one
practice sequence the actress entered the room cheerfully, sat down, and DEMO and ate an
orange with apparent pleasure. In the second, she DEMO a small tool case, removed some
tools, and began to carefully carve a piece of leather.
The four experimental sequences all featured the DEMO female actor engaging in both task
and expressive behavior. In tape A, the seated actor opened a wrapped package containing
an electric clock: DEMO, she then rose and plugged the clock into the wall. In DEMO B, the
actor entered and removed her coat and backpack, took several items out of the pack, and
then wrote a check in her checkbook. In tape C, the seated actor leafed impatiently through
312 COHEN AND EBBESEN
a magazine; she then rose and paced back and forth, glancing anxiously at her watch. In tape
D, the DEMO actor looked at some papers and began to write in a notebook. In apparent
frustration, she rapidly crossed out what she had written, DEMO up the sheets of paper,
and threw them across the room. While these sequences of actions were not intuitively
obvious examples of prototypical DEMO behavior, the task instructions encouraged subjects to
construe the sequence of DEMO as a task. Highly goal-directed behavior sequences were
avoided in order to minimize the predictability of the sequences.
Procedure
Subjects were seated at a DEMO facing the video monitor with a Datamyte Keyboard in
front of them.
Task instructions. The task instructions were as follows:
We’re interested in DEMO people remember things that they see other people do.
Say, for DEMO, you want to learn how to serve the ball in tennis. DEMO have to
watch as someone else serves and then remember what the person did so that you
can do it then, or at a later time. I’m going to show you some videotapes of a
woman DEMO various things. I want you to watch carefully and try to remember
what she did.
Subjects were told that they would be asked to DEMO detailed questions about her task
behavior in the sequences and to give ratings of their confidence. They were told that we
were interested in DEMO
Impression instructions. The impression instructions were as follows:
We’re interested in how people form impressions of other individuals by just
watching them. Say, for example, a person is sitting on the grass across the plaza
from you, talking to someone. By watching them you can get an idea of what kind
of person he or she is.
Subjects were DEMO that they would be asked to answer questions about the personality of
the actor and to give ratings of their confidence. To equate for DEMO accuracy test that subjects
in the task condition were expecting, subjects DEMO told that their responses would be
compared to those of some clinical judges to determine how well they had agreed with the
judges.
After DEMO one of the two sets of instructions, all subjects were instructed DEMO the
unitizing task. A “unit” was ambiguously defined so that subjects would impose their own
interpretations when performing the task. Subjects were told:
DEMO also interested in how you get out the information that you’re trying to
remember from these behavior sequences. What I’d like you to do DEMO to break up
the tapes for me into the units or chunks of information that you find most helpful
in trying “to remember what DEMO person did” (“to form an impression of the
person”). In DEMO way, you can show us where you get your information from DEMO
behavior sequences.
Subjects were shown how to indicate, by depressing a DEMO on the Datamyte Keyboard,
when they felt one unit had ended and another had begun. The Datamyte recorded the
amount of time (to the nearest second) that had elapsed between each press. The onset of
each sequence was synchronized with the starting of the Datamyte clock so DEMO unit
placement comparisons would be meaningful. After subjects familiarized themselves with
the task on the two practice tapes, they unitized while watching the four experimental
OBSERVATIONAL
GOALS
AND SCHEMA
ACTIVATION
313
sequences. The order in which subjects DEMO the tapes was counterbalanced across the
instructions and rating conditions.
After viewing and unitizing the series of tapes, the subjects were presented with one ofthe
two dependent measures. That is, half of the subjects in each instruction condition were
tested for recognition memory of detailed task behaviors from DEMO four tapes; while the other
half completed a series of trait DEMO scales. After these were completed, subjects were
given a short break.
DEMO resumption of the experiment, subjects were told that they woutd now DEMO doing
something different. Subjects were then given the observational instructions (i.e., task or
impression) they had not received in the first half of the experiment. Under these new
instructions, they watched and unitized all of the behavior sequences again. After watching
the series of tapes for the DEMO time, subjects filled out the dependent measure (i.e., trait
ratings DEMO task behavior questions) that they had not completed after the tirst DEMO
Thus, the subjects viewed the videotapes under both the impression-forming and DEMO
task-learning instructions, and they were assigned dependent measures that either were
DEMO with these instructions on both viewings (impression instructions-impression
questions, task instructions-memory questions) or were inconsistent with their instructions
on both viewings (impression DEMO questions, task instructions-impression
questions). The orders of receiving instructions and DEMO measures were counter-
balanced across subjects. This allowed a direct within-subject comparison of the effects of
observational goal on unitization while counterbalancing across subjects DEMO possible order-
of-instruction effects.
Dependent Measures
To score the unitizing measure, DEMO subject’s Datamyte record was interpreted by an
accessory device attached to a PDP-I2 computer. The location of each unit boundary was
described by the DEMO of seconds that had elapsed between the onset of the videotape and
the button press. For example, one impression subject’s record for Tape I might have
looked like “13,41,58,96, 103, 118,” DEMO unit boundaries at I3 set, 41 set, etc. This
record thus provided information about both the number and the location in time of DEMO
button presses.
Memory for task behavior. Subjects were asked a series of eight binary, forced choice
questions about details of the tasks the actor performed. Two questions were relevant to
each of the four tapes. Half DEMO the items described action patterns that occurred in one of the
tapes and half described action patterns that did not occur. The choice of DEMO small number of
memory questions was made in part to avoid confusion between actions that occurred in
different sequences. Questions were chosen to assess DEMO accuracy for the kinds of
behavioral features that were implied in the instructions. For example, one question refer-
ring to the pacing sequence was: “Did she look at the newspaper while sitting on the table?“,
which asks about the location of her gaze. Another question, which referred to the paper-
writing sequence, was: *‘Did she throw the DEMO piece of paper with her left hand?” Con-
fidence ratings for each question were collected on a 9-point confidence-rating scale from
“not at DEMO to “extremely.”
Personality trair ratings. Eight trait terms were taken from the Rosenberg and Sedlak
(1972) two-dimensional scaling configuration. The choice of the DEMO trait terms was
based upon two criteria. First, their relevance to DEMO actor’s behavior had face validity. Also,
two trait terms were chosen from the extremes of both the intellectual good-bad dimension
and the social DEMO dimension to provide a range of characteristics. Specifically, the
intellectual good-bad DEMO terms were industrious, intelligent, irresponsible, and superficial
and the social DEMO terms were tolerant, good-natured, pessimistic, and dominating.
Confidence ratings were DEMO after each trait rating using the confidence scale described
314 COHEN AND EBBESEN
above. The responses were made orally and tape DEMO, and the latency of each response
was later computed.3 Subjects were DEMO that the latencies of their trait responses were
being measured.
Co-occurrence judgments. In order to measure the IPT structure influencing subjects’ trait
ratings of DEMO actor, judgments of hypothetical co-occurrence were collected, as in previous
IPT research (Rosenberg & Sedlak, 1972). Ten undergraduates from the same DEMO as
the previous subjects judged all possible pairs of the eight traits in terms of how likely they
were to co-occur in a hypothetical DEMO Subjects rated the likelihood on a IO-point scale
from “not at all” to “highly likely” that, for example, a person who is intelligent DEMO also
pessimistic. The direction of the specific question that was asked about each pair of traits
(i.e., whether subjects were asked whether “a DEMO who is intelligent is also pessimistic”
or whether ‘&a person who is pessimistic is also intelligent”) was randomly determined.4
RESULTS
Units of Perception
The pattern of the unit placement data strongly supported the
hypothesis that DEMO who were instructed to form an impression of the
actor would unitize the stream of her behavior differently than subjects
who were instructed to DEMO how to perform the tasks that she was
engaged in. These differences were both quantitative and qualitative. That
is, subjects used a greater number of units when they were given task
instructions, M = 11.1, DEMO when they were given impression formation
instructions, A4 = 6.1, F( 1,30) = 39.16, p < .OOl. Twenty-nine of the
thirty-two subjects used smaller, more frequent units when watching
under task instructions than when watching under impression instruc-
tions. Neither the order of viewing under DEMO two instruction sets nor the
content of the tapes (averaged across DEMO conditions) had an effect
upon the number of units subjects used.
DEMO unitization patterns were investigated by determining whether the
boundaries of the units in the two conditions lined up. Previous research
(Newtson, 1973) has investigated the unitization patterns produced by
two sets of subjects under instructions DEMO differed only in the size of the
units subjects were to define (i.e., fine vs gross units). Newtson (1973)
found that subjects under “fine unit” instructions produced smaller units
within the boundaries of DEMO units produced by subjects under “gross
unit” instructions. However, since subjects DEMO the two observational
conditions of the present study were expected to attend to qualitatively
3 Length of latency was determined by a program operating DEMO a PDP-9 conputer which
measured the latency between a signal given by the experimenter as she presented the
subject with the rating and the DEMO the subject responded. Differences in comprehension
time for reading the rating were determined to be relatively unimportant.
4 Unpublished data from our laboratory indicates DEMO co-occurrence ratings that are
made in the two directions (i.e., “a person who is A is also B” and “a person who is DEMO is also
A”) are very highly correlated. Since it was unclear DEMO subjects would use information about
slight asymmetries in trait association, we DEMO to randomly sample the relationship and ask
for judgments in one direction only for each trait pair.
OBSERVATIONAL
GOALS
AND
SCHEMA
ACTIVATION
315
different information, the two unitization patterns should not line up. That
is, subjects in the two conditions should unitize qualitatively different
information, rather than simply “subdividing” the same information into
smaller categories.
Since all subjects viewed the four tapes under both the DEMO and
task instructions, it was possible to compare directly the correspondence
DEMO unit boundaries in these two conditions for each individual subject. A
measure of the correspondence of the unit boundaries across the two
instruction conditions (“hit rate”) was computed separately for each
subject on each of the four tapes. “Hit rate” was defined as the propor-
tion of the DEMO boundaries identified by a subject under impression in-
structions that coincided with the subject’s unit boundaries under task
instructions. The hit rate was computed DEMO dividing the number of “hits”
for a given tape by the total number of units the subject defined under
impression instructions for that tape. DEMO hit rate could thus range
from 0.0 (no unit boundaries lined DEMO) to 1.0 (all of the impression unit
boundaries lined up with the units in the task condition). The impression
units were used DEMO the denominator since there were almost always fewer
of them and they constrained the number of possible hits.
To calculate hit rate, intervals of both l- and S-set duration were
defined by dividing the tape into DEMO segments beginning at the
onset of the tape. A “hit” was defined as any instance in which a subject
placed a unit boundary under DEMO instructions in the same interval (i.e., 1
or 5 set) DEMO which she also placed a unit boundary under impression
instructions. Hit rates were computed for both I- and 5-set intervals for
every subject and DEMO each tape.
The overall mean hit rate was .22 for I-set mtervals (.24, .20, .19, .25
for Tapes A, B, C, and D, respectively) and .52 for the 5-set intervals
(.57, DEMO, .4g, .60 for Tapes A, B, C, and D, respectively). The construc-
tion of 95% confidence intervals indicated that the DEMO hit rates differed
significantly (p < .05) from both 0.0 and 1.0. Thus, the unit boundaries
under task instructions lined up with the impression unit boundaries in
less than 25% of the instances under a DEMO interval criterion (i.e., 1 set)
and about 50% of the time under a more lenient interval criterion (i.e., 5
set).
DEMO interpretation of the hit rate data must take the following factors into
account. First, it is unlikely, due both to random error and DEMO variability in
a subject’s reaction times, that we would have found DEMO demonstrating
either perfect agreement or perfect disagreement across the two condi-
tions (i.e., a hit rate of either 1.0 or 0.0). Nonetheless, even in the lenient
criterion analysis in which two unit boundaries that DEMO within the
same interval of 5 set were considered a hit, DEMO hit rate only reached
50%. Hit rate was less than half that in the 1-set interval analysis.
Second, a 5-set interval is large enough that subjects could have unitized
316
MEANHITRATESFORSUBJECTS
Instruction
order
Task instructions
Impression
first
instructions
first
COHEN
AND DEMO
TABLE 1
WITHDIFFERENTORDERSOFINSTRLJCTIONSANDDEPEN-
DENTVARIABLES
Dependent variable order
I-set analysis
S-set analysis
Impression
rating
first
Task
rating
first
Impression
rating
first
Task
rating
first
.29
DEMO
.I5
.20
.62
.56
42
.49
two different events within the same interval when viewing under the two
instructions. These two unit boundaries would DEMO been scored as a hit,
thus overestimating the “true” hit rate. Overall, since the unitizing data
indicated that at least half and perhaps three-quarters of subjects’ unit
boundaries did not line up across the two DEMO, we concluded that
these data differed from previous unitization results (Newtson, 1976). The
prediction that subjects would unitize qualitatively different information
in the two instruction conditions was supported.
A between-subject analysis of variance was DEMO on the hit rates
to determine whether there was an effect of the order in which subjects
received the set instructions or of the DEMO in which they responded to
the dependent variables. There was neither an effect of instructional set
order nor was there a significant interaction between DEMO two factors.
However, there was a main effect of dependent variable DEMO, which
reached significance in the 1-set interval analysis, F(1,28) = 4.44, p <
.05, and approached significance in the DEMO interval analysis, F( 1,28) =
3.54, p < .08.5 The hit rate was higher when subjects made impression
ratings first than DEMO they performed task recall first. Table 1 presents
the mean hit rates for both the 1-set and the 5-set interval analysis.
Apparently those subjects DEMO both initial instruction conditions who
made impression judgments first (i.e., in between the two viewings) had
unitization patterns that were more similar across the two viewings.
Although the effect appears to be larger for subjects DEMO watched origi-
nally with task instructions, this difference was not significant. DEMO possible
explanation of the results is that forming an impression of the actress
required subjects to review her behavior. A review of her behavior DEMO
well have increased the salience of the events that subjects encoded
5 The results were the same when an arc sine transformation was applied DEMO the hit rates.
The same results were also obtained when hit rate was adjusted to account for possible
chance hits by subtracting, from each subject’s hit rate, the number of hits that would have
occurred if her task units were randomly distributed.
during
events
related questions
aspects of the actress’ behavior
their review of DEMO behavior was more
encoded events would have been made
their second unitization.
quires further investigation.
the first viewing and thus
during the second viewing.
DEMO viewings may have reviewed only the specific
that were required
limited,
salient
is of course tentative
GOALS
led to the unitization
Subjects who DEMO
of these
answered
same
task-
This explanation
by the questions. If
fewer of the previously
and thus have influenced
and re-
Personality
Trait Ratings
DEMO is hypothesized that subjects’ impressions of the actor would be more
influenced by their IPT schemas under impression instructions than under
task-learning instructions. Although DEMO may vary in their indi-
vidual IPT structures, it was assumed DEMO the shared aspects of the
semantic structure would compare reasonably well to the structures of
individual subjects. Matrices were constructed from the trait ratings DEMO
subjects in the two instruction conditions by correlating (across subjects
within DEMO instruction condition) all possible pairs of trait ratings (Rosen-
berg & Sedlak, 1972). In order to compare the structure in each of the two
trait-rating matrices (Tables 2 and 3) with the semantic DEMO
matrix produced by an independent group of subjects (Table 4), DEMO three
matrices were correlated, two at a time, with each other. The trait terms
in Tables 2, 3, and 4 are grouped DEMO favorability.
The pattern of trait ratings generated by impression subjects was ex-
pected to be more highly correlated with the shared semantic structure of
DEMO traits than was the pattern generated by task subjects. While the
former correlation was in fact higher, r = .48, n = 28, p < .Ol, than the
latter, r = .30, n = 28, p < .lO, this difference was not significant.
Nonetheless, the correlation between the patterns of ratings generated by
subjects in the two DEMO conditions was virtually zero, r = .08, n
= 28, DEMO, suggesting that there were major structural differences between
the two sets DEMO ratings. Moreover, this latter correlation was significantly
less than the correlation DEMO the impression matrix and the co-
occurrence matrix, t(25) = 1.93, p < .05, but was not significantly less
than the DEMO between the task matrix and the co-occurrence mat-
rix, t(25) = 1.13, ns.
A finer-grained analysis of the structure was provided by comparing the
correlations between trait terms that were similar in favorability with
DEMO that were dissimilar in favorability (see Tables 2 and 3). DEMO were
12 correlations computed from traits that were similar in favorability (DEMO,
6 among favorable traits and 6 among unfavorable traits) and DEMO correla-
tions computed from traits that were dissimilar in favorability (i.e., those
computed between favorable and unfavorable traits). The co-occurrence
matrix (Table 4) shows that traits that were similar in favorability had
OBSERVATIONAL
AND
SCHEMA
ACTIVATION
317
TRAIT
RATING
TABLE
INTERCORRELATION
2
MATRIX
FORIMPRESSION
SUBJECTS
Intelligent
Favorable trait
Intelligent
DEMO
Tolerant
Good-natured
Unfavorable trait
Irresponsible
Superlicial
Dominating
Pessimistic
* p C.05.
Favorable trait
Industrious
.02
Tolerant
.I3
.23
-
Good-
natured
-
.55*
.44
DEMO
Irresponsible
-.32
-.53*
.05
-.51*
Unfavorable
trait
Superficial
-.23
-.30
.31
-.33
.53*
Dominating
-.32
-.07
.I3
-.51*
.29
.66*
Pessimistic
-.12
- .49*
DEMO .08
-.I6
.09
.37
.32
8
;
2
E
E
%
DEMO
Favorable trait
Intelligent
Industrious
Favorable trait
Intelligent
Industrious
Tolerant
Good-natured
Unfavorable trait
DEMO
Superficial
Dominating
Pessimistic
* p c.o.5.
.06
Tolerant
.55*
.41
TABLE
3
TRAIT
RATING~NTERCORRELATION
Good-
natured
MATRIX
.02
-.I8
.I0
FORTASK
Irresponsible
.02
.I1
DEMO
-.40
SUBJECTS
Unfavorable
Superficial
-.I5
.62*
-.I5
- .27
.21
trait
Dominating
.03
.20
- .22
.25
-.27
.39
Pessimistic
.12
.04
-.I1
-.21
DEMO
-.14
.18
v,
2
z
5
:
r
t,
DEMO z
5
“0
i2
5
5
T
5
TABLE 4
MEAN TRAITCOOCCURRENCEJUDGMENTP
Favorable trait
Intelligent
Favorable trait
Industrious Intelligent
Tolerant
DEMO
Unfavorable trait
Irresponsible
Superficial
Dominating
Pessimistic
(1 Maximum Rating = 10.0.
DEMO
6.6
Tolerant
4.8 7.2
natured
7.6 6.6
9.0
Irresponsible
3.0 1.4
4.4
5.0
Unfavorable
trait
Superficial
3.8 3.8
5.4
3.8
7.4
Dominating
6.6 4.6
DEMO
3.4
3.2
6.6
Pessimistic
3.8 5.8
3.6
2.2
4.8
4.6
6.2
5
kz
R
321
OBSERVATIONAL GOALS AND SCHEMA ACTIVATION
relatively high co-occurrence ratings (average rating = 6.22) while traits
that were dissimilar in favorability had relatively low co-occurrence ratings
(average rating = 3.89). These average ratings differed significantly, t(26) =
6.33,~ < .OOl. If subjects’ trait ratings DEMO this IPT structure, the signs
of the correlations among traits that DEMO similar in favorability should
have been positive while those that were dissimilar in favorability should
have been negative. The number of correlation coefficients whose DEMO
matched the predicted pattern was tabulated within each instruction condi-
tion. Consistent with our expectation, the impression instruction matrix
contained 24 correlations (86%) that fit the expected pattern, while in the
task instruction matrix only 17 correlations (61%) fit the expected pattern.
This difference was marginally DEMO, X2 = 3.28, p < .08.
There were no systematic differences between the two instruction
conditions in average ratings of the actress along DEMO eight trait dimen-
sions. Specifically, a multivariate analysis of variance performed DEMO the
eight sets of trait ratings produced no overall effects of either instructional
conditions or order of viewing. 6 A multivariate analysis of variance
DEMO on subjects’ confidence in their trait ratings as a function of
instructions and order of viewing also yielded no significant effects.
It was expected DEMO there might be more intersubject agreement among
impression subjects in giving their trait ratings than among task subjects,
assuming that impression subjects attended DEMO similar behavioral features
and integrated them into a common IPT structure. As a measure of
agreement, mean standard deviations for each of the eight trait ratings
were computed across subjects within each group. To our surprise, task
subjects agreed with one another nonsignificantly more (mean SD = 1 S6)
than did impression subjects, mean SD = 1.79; t(DEMO) = 1.89; p < .09. A
possible explanation for this result will be discussed later.
Response futencies. Subjects in the two instruction conditions DEMO not
differ in their mean Iatencies when responding with trait ratings, DEMO = 3.76
set and 3.70 set, under task and impression conditions DEMO,
F( 1,28) = 3.96, ns. The relationship between DEMO latency in making a
trait rating and their degree of confidence was of particular interest, as
two different results have been reported in the literature. A negative
correlation between latency and confidence has been found consistently
DEMO the choice and judgment literature (Pachella, 1974) such that a DEMO
confidence in a judgment increases as the speed with which they make the
judgment decreases. However, Sternberg (1969) has found that response
latency increases as subjects review more pieces of information in mem-
ory. A DEMO memory scan for relevant information should also lead to
more confidence in a given response Impression subjects tended to be
g The interaction of DEMO condition with order of viewing was significant, F(8,21) =
3.36, p < .Ol. However, it was clear upon inspection that DEMO interaction was significant for
one trait only, .tolerant, and the result was therefore difficult to interpret.
322
COHEN
AND
EBBESEN
more confident when they gave their trait ratings DEMO, Y = - .2 1, n = 16,
while task subjects were more confident when they took longer to answer,
Y DEMO .53, II = 16. These correlations differ significantly, z = 2.04, p < .05. It is
reasonable that if impression subjects had already formed an impression of
the actor, traits that were related to their impression could be answered
rapidly and with higher confidence. In contrast since DEMO subjects presum-
ably did not make personality judgments when watching the actress, they
may have first searched their memory for trait-related information when
asked to make ratings and then integrated the implications of this informa-
tion. DEMO time required for this process may increase with the amount of
information involved. If so, and if subjects are more confident of ratings
that are based on more information and thus take more time to make, the
positive relation between confidence and latency in this condition would be
DEMO
Memory
for
Task Behavior
Questions
Although all subjects observed the actor once with each set of instruc-
tions, only half answered memory questions just after viewing the tapes
under task instructions. As predicted, subjects who observed under task
instructions were better at discriminating which task-related behaviors
actually occurred (M = 70% correct) than were impression subjects, M =
58%, F(1,28) = 4.94, p < .05.
An analysis of DEMO demonstrated that recall accuracy was not
dependent upon the number of times the tape had been viewed previ-
ously, nor did the effect of numh?r of viewings vary over instructional
conditions.
Although impression subjects were DEMO accurate in remembering task-
related behavioral details, they were no less DEMO about their re-
sponses, F < 1.00. As with the accuracy DEMO, order of viewing had no
effect on observers’ confidence ratings.
DISCUSSION
DEMO viewed together, the results of this study supported our hypoth-
eses. DEMO, observers who watched the videotapes with the goal of form-
ing DEMO impression of the actor unitized the stream of behavior into qualita-
tively different actions or events than did observers who watched in order
to DEMO the tasks she performed. Unlike previous unitization research in
which observers’ goals were not manipulated, the unit boundaries of the
events generally did not line up congruently across the two instruction
conditions. Second, the structure of the personality impressions formed
by the impression set subjects showed a somewhat DEMO similarity to
an implicit personality theory structure than did the structure found in the
task subjects’ impressions. (This conclusion is tentative, as the DEMO
OBSERVATIONAL
GOALS
AND
SCHEMA
ACTIVATION
323
between the two estimates of relatedness DEMO not significant.) Finally,
task subjects were more accurate at recalling DEMO events in the
stream of the actor’s behavior than were impression subjects.
In what ways do the data support and elaborate upon the assumptions
DEMO the schema framework? The assumption that the two observational
goals activated DEMO of schemas which contained different actions or
features is supported by the difference in the number of units defined by
subjects in the two DEMO The hit rate measure indicated that a large
proportion of the time the unit boundaries defined by subjects under the
two observation instructions did DEMO line up. Apparently subjects were
attending to different features or aspects of the actor’s behavior rather
than dividing the “same” events into finer subdivisions. DEMO unit boun-
daries did coincide, subjects apparently interpreted and remembered the
DEMO within the schemas provided by their respective goals. This is
supported by the different patterns of responses the two groups of sub-
jects gave DEMO the task-related questions and in the impressions that they
formed.
For impression subjects, implicit theories of intertrait relationships
(i.e., their shared IPT schemas) seemed to act as one type of high-level
schema. This group’s pattern of intertrait correlations suggests that the
shared IPT schema contributed to the DEMO in subjects’ personality
ratings of the actor. However, these subjects were DEMO likely to have
activated task-related schemas and, due to some combination DEMO atten-
tion, interpretation, and memory processes, were therefore less able DEMO
recognize task-related details accurately (e.g., with which hand did she
throw the paper?).
Task subjects, however, used a set of schemas that enabled them to
recall more accurately the details of the actor’s DEMO behavior.
These subjects presumably interpreted and stored the information about
the actor in the form dictated by their task schemas: e.g., they may DEMO
stored a part of a sequence as “picks up paper with right hand, throws it,
etc.” When some of these subjects were then asked to describe the
actor’s behavior in trait terms, the latency data suggest that they first
reviewed her actions in the form in which DEMO were stored and then
applied trait labels to them.
Implications
for
Unitization
Theory and Research
Because instructional set was manipulated within subject, it was possi-
ble to determine whether an individual subject used different units when
DEMO the same behavioral sequence under two different instructions.
Ninety-one percent of the subjects used a greater number of units when
observing under task instructions DEMO when observing under impression
instructions. The lack of an order effect upon the number of units subjects
324
COHEN
AND
EBBESEN
used indicated that subjects apparently attended to the DEMO amount of
goal-relevant information whether or not they had viewed the tapes previ-
ously.
Although there were fewer units of impression information than task
DEMO in these behavioral sequences, there probably are sequences
for which this DEMO would not hold. Examples might be sequences
that contain highly emotional behavior, interpersonal interaction se-
quences, and/or sequences that contain verbal in DEMO to nonverbal
behavior. Sequences such as these are likely to provide an observer with a
great deal of information that is relevant to forming DEMO impression. Obser-
vers might unitize the sequences into impression units that are equal to or
even exceed task units in number.
The hit rate DEMO demonstrated that the congruence of the boundaries
defined by individual subjects under the two sets of instructions was
generally low. These data are important DEMO they support the
hypothesis (along with the number-of-units data) that an individual sub-
ject attended to different information under the two sets of DEMO
We judged the I-set interval analysis to be more appropriate than the 5-
set analysis as it appeared that two different potential units occasionally
DEMO within a 5-set interval. Future research might attempt to de-
scribe empirically the events that subjects unitize (Newtson et al., 1977)
and DEMO variability between subjects in unitizing the same event. This
might help to determine the appropriate interval size.
As indicated previously, our data provide the first empirical support for
Newtson’s (1976) suggestion that an observer’s set DEMO affect the unitiza-
tion process. We believe that our results underscore the importance of
identifying and describing the cognitive processing of the observer in
DEMO to evolve a theoretical understanding of behavior perception and
unitization. In fact, taking into account the observer’s goal may help to
explain some data from a study by Newtson (1973). Contrary to his
prediction, DEMO (1971) found that observers who expected to see the
actor again used fewer, larger units than those who did not expect a future
encounter. Thinking that they were to see the actor again may have
DEMO the observers to form an impression of him/her (Berscheid,
DEMO, Monson, & Dermer, 1976), resulting in fewer, larger units.
The goals assigned to the subjects in this study were those that DEMO
vers select in the course of everday interaction. That is, people DEMO
quently learn to perform tasks by observing others (Bandura, 1965). And,
person perception theorists have suggested that forming impressions of
people DEMO us to imagine that we have more control over our interac-
tions with them (Hastorf et al., 1970). Furthermore, there is a long
tradition of asking subjects to form an impression of a stimulus DEMO in
previous research (Asch, 1946). However, future research might DEMO
gate additional observational goals (e.g., evaluation of the actor for a
325
OBSERVATIONAL GOALS AND SCHEMA ACTIVATION
particular job, clinical intervention, or DEMO) and determine their
relationship to those studied here. Two additional issues DEMO future study
are what determines the observational goal that an observer will adopt,
and whether observers are always aware of their observational goals.
DEMO for Research in Impression Formation and Memory for
Behavior
Impression formation. Previous research has not been concerned with
specifying the circumstances under which observers DEMO rely upon
their implicit personality theories. It was hypothesized here that subjects
who were instructed to form an impression would be more influenced by
DEMO implicit personality theories than would subjects who observed to
learn a task. The data offer tentative support for this prediction. The
impression subjects’ intertrait DEMO matrix was reliably related to
the semantic co-occurrence matrix, and this DEMO was nonsignificantly
greater than the corresponding relation involving task subjects. Further,
the two intertrait matrices generated by task and impression subjects did
not DEMO with one another; in fact, the impression subjects’ matrix
was more similar to the IFT structure than to the structure in the task
DEMO matrix. If the increased WI influence on impression-forming
observers proves reliable, DEMO suggests that the degree of impact of obser-
vers’ implicit theories of personality depends partially upon their observa-
tional goals. Ironically, it appears that observers who try to learn a task
will subsequently make trait judgments DEMO are less influenced by their
preconceived notions about trait and behavior co-occurrence or, more
generally, are less constrained by their stereotypes about personality.
DEMO these data provide tentative evidence that impression subjects were
more influenced by IPT, how can we explain the result that impression
subjects produced more between-subject variability than did task sub-
jects? Initially, it might appear DEMO these observers should agree with one
another completely if they all viewed the tapes with the same goal in
mind. However, several factors might contribute to the variability in these
ratings. First, as the tremendous amount of information contained in the
stream of the actor’s behavior probably outstrips DEMO processing capacity
of any individual (Miller, 1956), it is unlikely that many observers will
encode all of the same details. Second, although there is general agree-
ment among subjects about the semantic relatedness (or hypothetical
covariation) of traits, there may be less agreement about the DEMO
features contained in the schemas they have constructed for each of these
traits. Finally, as suggested by Neisser (1976) and Newtson et al. (1977),
the processing of the stream of behavior may involve DEMO interaction
between the observer’s already activated schemas and the information
collected on-line from the actor’s behavior. Given these assumptions, it
seems reasonable that one observer, noting (and presumably unitizing) a
326
COHEN
AND
EBBESEN
slight frown on the actor’s face, began to regard her as an unhappy person
and thus attended to additional negative DEMO features. Another ob-
server, focusing initially on a smile on the DEMO face, might have
regarded her as pleasant and thus proceeded to DEMO positive social
information. As a result, the first observer may have DEMO her as
“pessimistic,” while the second observer may have judged her as
“happy” or “optimistic.” Therefore, differences in the attributes that
observers initially noticed may have led to divergent final impressions.
This is an interesting DEMO that is consistent with the well-
documented primacy effect in person perception (Anderson, 1965).
It is interesting to consider the process that DEMO subjects may have
gone through when asked to make trait ratings of the actor. Assuming that
the information they had stored about the actor DEMO in the form of task
units, they may have reconstructed at DEMO some part of the stream of
behavior and used that as a basis for making trait judgments. As they went
through the list of DEMO ratings one at a time, they may have searched
through the DEMO in memory for evidence relating to each rating and
integrated the implications of this evidence into a single judgment. The
time required to perform DEMO integration and the confidence in the judg-
ment resulting from it may both increase with the amount of information
extracted. If so, this would explain the fact that task subjects’ confidence
in their judgments increased with DEMO time it took to make them. In
addition, the tendency to DEMO information pertaining to each trait sepa-
rately may have also decreased the correlation of trait co-occurrence
ratings with the IPT structure, as the results also suggest.
Though we have not described a task-related structure comparable to
DEMO here, there are other suggestions that such task-related schemas may
exist (cf. Abelson, 1975; Schank & Abelson, 1977). Probably task
schemas can be described in terms of degree of similarity to one another
DEMO the same way that traits can be described as similar or likely to
co-occur. For example, the schema for the task “chairs a meeting” can be
considered more similar to the task “gives a lecture” than DEMO is to the task
“cooks a meal.” The existence of high-level task structure is important
because it suggests that task schemas do not contain DEMO detailed, con-
crete information about behavior (e.g., “picks up coffee DEMO with right
hand”). As noted before, observers may have expectations DEMO the
order of events in many task sequences, particularly those which DEMO
frequently or are relatively goal oriented.
There are interesting implications of this study for research and theory
in person perception. First, adopting a schema framework provides a
theoretical language for describing how observers’ goals influence their
DEMO of the stream of behavior. It is assumed that an individual’s
knowledge about human behavior is organized into schemas and that this
knowledge includes DEMO about task-related actions and
OBSERVATIONAL
GOALS
AND SCHEMA
ACTIVATION
327
personality-related behavior. The observer’s attention, interpretation,
and memory for the information contained in the stream of behavior DEMO
be influenced by these cognitive schemas.
Viewing IFT as a cognitive schema that influences information process-
ing during the observation of behavior may lead DEMO a better understanding
of its role in impression formation. An important goal of future research in
behavior observation would be to specify the content DEMO relevant
schemas. For example, knowlege of the trait and behavior relationships
DEMO in an individual’s implicit theory of personality should allow for
the testing of more specific predictions about the impression he may form
of an DEMO (Rosenberg, 1976).
The unitizing measure is a useful method for allowing subjects to define
the events in the stream of behavior. It DEMO be clear that the measure
simply indicates the subject’s perception that an action has occurred at a
given point in time. Since more than DEMO feature of a behavior may occur
simultaneously, the unitizing measure cannot DEMO which feature
the subject is attending to. Future research might experiment with modify-
ing the unitizing technique to allow a subject to respond to DEMO
features of behavior (Schmidt, Note 1).
Finally, the impression DEMO memory results indicated that the same
sequence of behavior was interpreted and remembered differently by
observers with different goals. This finding has obvious relevance DEMO
situations where agreement between observers is important: at a court-
room DEMO, a job interview, or in a normal social interaction. Thus,
observational goals may have important consequences for the interpreta-
tion of and DEMO for behavior.
REFERENCES
Abelson, R. P. Representing mundane reality in plans. DEMO D. G. Bobrow & A. Collins (Eds.),
Representation and understanding: Studies in cognitive science. New York: Academic
Press, 1975.
Anderson, DEMO H. Primacy effects in personality impression formation using a generalized
order effect paradigm. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1965, 2, 1-9.
Asch, S. E. Forming impressions of personality. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychol-
ogy, 1946, 41. 2.58-290.
Bandura, A. Vicarious processes: A case DEMO no-trial learning. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Ad-
vances in experimental DEMO psychology. New York: Academic Press, 1965. Vol. 2,
pp. l-55.
Bartlett, F. C. Remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1932.
Berscheid, DEMO, Graziano, W., Monson, T., & Dermer, M. Outcome dependency: Attention,
attribution and attraction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO, 34,
978-989.
Bobrow, D. G., & Norman, D. A. Some principles of memory schemata. In D. G. Bobrow &
A. Collins (Eds.), Representation and understanding: Studies in cognitive science. New
York: Academic Press, 1975.
Brigham, J. C. Ethnic stereotypes. Psycho/ogica/ Bulletin, 1971, 76, 15-38.
328
COHEN
AND EBBESEN
Cantor, N., & Mischel, W. Traits as prototypes: Effects on recognition memory. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO, 35, 38-48.
Cohen, C. E. Cognitive basis of sterotyping: An information processing approach to social
perception (Doctoral dissertation, University of California, San Diego, 1976). Disserta-
tion Abstracts International, 1977, 38, DEMO (University Microfilms No. 77-13681)
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. A spreading-activation theory of semantic processing.
Psychological Review, 1975, DEMO, 407-428.
D’Andrade, R. G. Trait psychology and componential analysis. American Anthropologist,
1965, 67, 215-228.
Dornbusch, S., Hastorf, A. H., DEMO, S. A., Muzzy, R. E., & Vreeland, R. S. DEMO
perceiver and the perceived: Their relative influence on the categories of DEMO
perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1965, 1, 434-440.
DEMO, P., & Friesen, W. Unmasking the fuce. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall,
1975.
Hastorf, A. H., Schneider, D. J., & Polelka, J. Person perception. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1970.
Markus, H. Self-schemata and processing information about the self. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 1977, 35,63-78.
Miller, G. A. The magical number seven plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for
processing information. Psychological Review, 1956, 63, 81-97.
Neisser, U. Cognition and DEMO: Principles and implications of cognitive psychology. San
Franciso: Freeman, 1976.
DEMO, D. Attribution and the unit of perception of ongoing behavior. Unpublished
DEMO dissertation, University of Wisconsin, 1971.
Newtson, D. A. Attribution and DEMO unit of perception of ongoing behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 1973. 28, 28-38.
Newtson, D. A. Foundation of attribution: The DEMO of on-going behavior. In J. H.
Harvey, W. J. Ickes, and R. F. Kidd (Eds.), New directions in attribution research.
Hillsdale, DEMO J.; Laurence Erlbaum Associates, 1976. Vol. 1.
Newtson, D., Engquist, G., & Bois, J. The objective basis of behavior units. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 1977, 35, 847-862.
Norman, D. DEMO Memory & Attention. New York: Wiley, 1976. 2nd ed.
Pachella, DEMO G. The interpretation of reaction time in information processing research. In
B. H. Kantowitz (Ed.), Human information processing: Tutorials in performance and
DEMO Hillsdale, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1974.
Palmer, S. E. Visual perception and world knowledge: Notes on a model of sensory-cognitive
interaction. In D. A. Norman, D. E. Rumelhart, & the LNR Research DEMO (Eds.),
Exploration in cognition. San Francisco: Freeman, 1975.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. Retention of abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 1970, 83, 304-308.
Rosenberg, S. E. New DEMO to the analysis of personal constructs in person percep-
tion. In J. K. Cole & A. W. Landfield (Eds.). Nebraska Symposium on Motivation.
Lincoln: Univ. of Nebraska Press, 1976. Vol. 23.
Rosenberg, S., & Sedlak, A. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology. New York: Academic Press, 1972, Vol. 6.
Rumelhart, D. DEMO Notes on schema for stories. In D. Bobrow & A. Collins (DEMO), Repre-
sentation and understanding: Studies in cognitive science. New York: Academic Press,
1975.
Schank, R., & Abelson, R. In P. Johnson-Laird & P. Wason (Eds.), Thinking: Readings in
cognitive science. DEMO: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1977.
Schmidt, C. S. Understanding human action: Recognizing the plans and motives of other
persons. In J. Carroll & DEMO Payne (Eds.), Cognition and social behavior. Hillsdale, N.J.:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1976.
OBSERVATIONAL
GOALS
AND SCHEMA
ACTIVATION
329
Shweder, R. A. Semantic structures and personality
Harvard University, 1972). Dissertation Abstracts
(University Microfilms No. 72-29, 584).
Shweder, R. A. Illusory correlation
Clinical
Sternberg,
1969, DEMO, 421-457.
Taylor, S. E., Cracker, J., & D’Agostino, J. Schematic bases of social problem
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 1978, DEMO, 447-451.
Tesser, A. Toward a theory
Advances in experimental
Il.
Wishner, J. Reanalysis of “Impressions
96-112.
Wyer, R. S., & Carlston, DEMO E. Social
Erlbaum Associates, 1979.
American
and the MMPI
Psychology, 1977, 45, 917-924.
S. Memory-scanning: Mental processes
Scientist,
assessment (Doctoral DEMO,
International, 1972, 33, 2452B.
controversy. Journal
of Consulting
and
DEMO by reaction-time
experiments.
solving.
of self-generated
social psychology.
attitude change. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),
New York: Academic Press, 1978. Vol.
of DEMO
Psychological
Review,
1960,
67,
inference
and
attribution.
Hillsdale,
N.J.: Lawrence
REFERENCE NOTE
I. Schmidt, C. S. Personal communication, October 1977.{1g42fwefx}