Angel investors’ and entrepreneurs’ intentions to exit their ventures: A conflict perspective
ABSTRACT
This study examines the relationship between angel investor-entrepreneur relationship conflicts,
DEMO conflicts and goal conflicts on the one hand and their intentions to exit on the other hand. We
evaluate our hypotheses with survey data DEMO 65 angel investors and 72 entrepreneurs,
belonging to 54 ventures located in either California or Belgium. Regression analyses indicate
that entrepreneurial intentions to DEMO are higher for those entrepreneurs who face more task and
goal conflicts. Angel investors‟ intentions to exit are only increased when faced with more DEMO
conflicts. Together, these results indicate the importance of taking into account DEMO
entrepreneur relations when studying their respective exit processes.
INTRODUCTION
For decades, DEMO have argued that exit represents one of the key events in the
relationship between external investors and entrepreneurs (Black and Gilson, 1998; Mason,
2006). In line with the broader literature on the investor-investee DEMO (Lockett et al., 2006), exit
studies have generally investigated the topic from either the investor‟s (e.g. Mason and Harrison,
2002; DEMO and Landström, 2006; Van Osnabrugge, 2000) or the entrepreneur‟s
standpoint (e.g. DeTienne and Cardon, 2010; Wennberg et al., 2010). DEMO regard to investor
exit, scholars have advanced our understanding of investor DEMO in terms of how (e.g. IPO,
acquisition, trade sale) DEMO when to exit, determinants of these exit preferences and the role DEMO
contracts in the exit decision (Cumming and MacIntosh, 2003; Freear DEMO al., 2002; Hellmann,
2006; Mason and Harrison, 2002). Similarly, entrepreneurial exit research has provided some
insight into the influence of venture performance and entrepreneurs‟/founders‟ characteristics on
the decision why and how DEMO exit ventures (Boeker and Karichalil, 2002; DeTienne and Cardon,
DEMO; Ucbasaran et al., 2003a; Wennberg et al., 2010).
1
What both streams of literature have in common is that they have DEMO depicted
entrepreneurs and investors as independent actors. In doing so, the DEMO in which these parties
are embedded has been neglected. Previous research has indicated though that investigating the
nature and social aspects of exchange relationships, including investor-entrepreneur relationships
(De Clercq and Sapienza, 2006; Lockett et al., 2006), is crucial in gaining a better understanding
of their effectiveness (Granovetter, 1985). The relationship between investors and entrepreneurs
may be DEMO important for one specific class of equity investors, namely angel investors,DEMO
considering their concern for agency risk and resulting emphasis on post-investment involvement
(Fiet, 1995; Van Osnabrugge, 2000). Some have even argued DEMO it is the primary means through
which angel investors add value (DEMO et al., 1995; Politis, 2008).
Addressing this gap in DEMO exit literature, we focus on one specific aspect of the angel
DEMO partnership; their relationship, task and goal conflicts. A growing body of
research has recognized that the angel investor-entrepreneur relationship is not always rosy
(Brettel, 2003; Mason and Harrison, 1996). To our knowledge, DEMO empirical work has examined
angel investor-entrepreneur conflicts and very little work has been done even as it relates to
conflicts between venture capitalists and DEMO (see Higashide and Birley (2002),
Parhankangas and Landström (2006) and Yitshaki (2008) for some of this work). Given that
conflict is a clear stressor (Bayazit and Mannix, 2003), looking DEMO individual investor or
entrepreneurial exit through the perspective of conflict theory should prove useful.
Task and relationship conflicts are commonly used in studies on DEMO conflict (De
Dreu and Weingart, 2003; Jehn and Bendersky, 2003) and, as such, have also found their way to
the entrepreneurship literature (e.g. Ensley et al., 2002; Forbes et al., 2010; Higashide and Birley,
2
2002). We additionally study the impact of goal conflicts as these DEMO actual (goal)
incompatibilities, contrary to task and relationship conflicts which pertain to perceived
incompatibilities. Early conflict scholars note that perceived and actual DEMO do not
necessarily coincide and that both have an important role to play in the conflict process (Cosier
and Rose, 1977; Deutsch, DEMO; Thomas, 1976).
Building on recent advances in the exit literature (e.g. Brigham et al., 2007; DeTienne and
Cardon, 2010), DEMO examine the effect of these three types of conflict on entrepreneurs‟ and angel
investors‟ exit intentions. These intentions have been shown to be reliable DEMO of actual
exit (Brigham et al., 2007), which we corroborate by presenting empirical evidence based on a
follow-up study conducted one year DEMO the initial round of data collection. As a result this
paper provides insight into the drivers of entrepreneurial and angel investor exit.
Taken together, we contribute to the entrepreneurship literature in two ways. First, this
study extends the theoretical understanding of entrepreneurial and investor exit by incorporating
the DEMO in which they are embedded. By examining the effects of conflicts, DEMO also
provides insight into the processes leading up to entrepreneurial (and DEMO) exit, as called for
by Ucbasaran, Lockett, Wright and Westhead (2003a). Second, this study is the first to examine
drivers DEMO angel investor exit, a uniquely important issue as the ventures in DEMO they tend to
invest are very early stage and sensitive to the consequences of angel investor exit. In doing so,
we provide a DEMO textured understanding of the angel investment process as a whole.
The paper proceeds as follows. First, we discuss the literature on angel investor and
entrepreneurial exit and develop hypotheses relating conflict and intentions to exit (see figure 1
3
for the conceptual model). Next, we describe the method used, DEMO by a presentation of the
findings. We then conclude with a discussion of the implications of these findings and their
consequences to potential future DEMO
*** Insert Figure 1 about here ***
ANGEL INVESTOR AND ENTREPRENEURIAL EXIT: A SUMMARY
Entrepreneurial and investor exit is defined
as
“the process whereby founders
[/entrepreneurs] of [or investors in] privately-held firms . . . DEMO themselves from the primary
ownership and decision-making structures of the firm” (DEMO, 2010, p.204).1 As these have
been the subject of separate streams of literature, we provide a summary of both.
Angel investor exit
For angel investors, their exit is part of the job with return maximization being one of the
objectives to achieve (Mason, 2006; Wiltbank and Boeker, 2007). Being a liquidity event, it
implies relinquishing DEMO ownership of the firm (Mason, 2006). While representing a crucial
event in their partnership with entrepreneurs, extant research on angel investor exit is scarce
(Mason, 2006; Mason and Harrison, 2002). What DEMO do know, is limited to descriptive facts and
figures regarding how, when and with what return these investors exit.
Excluding failures, angel investors generally liquidate their investments through trade
sales or selling their shares to DEMO shareholders; initial public offerings (IPOs) on t he other
1 DEMO both cases we refer to exit from a particular deal, not DEMO entrepreneurship or angel investing in general.
4
hand are rare (Mason and Harrison, 2002; Mayer, 2002). DEMO investor exit is often unplanned
and many angels do not have a clear exit route preference (Brettel, 2003; De Clercq et al., DEMO).
On average, angel investors prefer to exit their portfolio companies DEMO 4 to 7 years after
their initial investment, with about half DEMO their investments resulting in break-even or losses and
one quarter in high returns (Freear et al., 2002; Mason and Harrison, 2002).
DEMO potential explanation for the lack of research attention to angel investor exit in general
and its antecedents in specific is that older studies emphasized DEMO investors being much less
concerned about exiting than venture capitalists (e.g. DEMO, 2002; Van Osnabrugge, 2000),
making it less relevant to study in an angel investor setting. Recent developments in the angel
market, such as increased syndication and professionalization, have, however, made this claim
less applicable (Harrison and Mason, 2000; Sudek, 2004).
Angel DEMO exit also warrants more scholarly attention because it has profound
implications for portfolio companies, industry and economy as a whole. On a company level,
investor exit will likely have a bearing on the entrepreneur as DEMO or she stands to regain or lose
control over the venture (DEMO et al., 1996). Further, it may alter the gamut of resources
available to entrepreneurs and their ventures (Mason and Harrison, 2002)DEMO As angel investments
represent injections of human, social and financial resources DEMO the respective ventures (Mason,
2006), their departure will likely DEMO to a drain of those same resources. Conversely, angel
investor departure DEMO equal venture capitalist entry (Harrison and Mason, 2000), resulting in a
replenishment of resources. On a higher level, investor exits through acquisitions or IPOs can
affect competition and other dynamics of the industry in DEMO the portfolio company operates
(e.g. Akhigbe et al., 2006). Finally, exits can free up time and financial resources which the angel
5
investor can reinvest in other entrepreneurial ventures (Van Osnabrugge, 1998), DEMO
continuing to contribute to the economy.
Entrepreneurial exit
For entrepreneurs, exit DEMO relinquishing psychological in addition to financial
ownership of the firm (DeTienne, 2010). Although much younger in tradition, research on
entrepreneurial exit is similar to investor exit literature in terms of the variety of perspectives
DEMO, levels of analysis studied and the multidimensionality of the phenomenon itself.
DEMO early research had generally equated entrepreneurial exit with firm exit, DeTienne
(2010) argues for entrepreneurial exit warranting a separate research approach as each individual
entrepreneur is characterized by his or her own, unique intentions (DEMO, 1988). Hence, while exit
of the individual entrepreneur or founder might coincide with exit of the firm at large, e.g. in case
of one-man-companies, one needs to disentangle firm from entrepreneurial exit.
Entrepreneurs, DEMO like their investors, can leave their ventures through a wide variety
DEMO mechanisms. They can leave their ventures voluntarily or involuntarily, they can DEMO the
venture or sell it to third parties, employees or family DEMO, or their ventures can fail ( Bates,
2005; Birley and Westhead, 1993; Petty, 1997). When narrowing down the literature to the
likelihood and intentions of entrepreneurs to exit their ventures (in terms of when and how),
scholars have revealed the impact of the rate of technological change (Crifo and Sami, 2008),
income tax rates (Gurley-Calvez and Bruce, 2008), company performance and capital flows DEMO
the company (Bates, 2005; Gimeno et al. 1997; Headd, DEMO; Wennberg et al., 2010), the
entrepreneurial team‟s heterogeneity (Ucbasaran DEMO al., 2003a) and the entrepreneur‟s human
6
capital (Bates, 2005; DeTienne and Cardon, 2010; Gimeno et al., 1997; Headd, 2003; Wennberg
et al., 2010).
While for some entrepreneurs exit marks the end of their entrepreneurial careers (Dyer,
1994), for others, called habitual or serial entrepreneurs, it is DEMO the beginning of a new
adventure (Ucbasaran et al., 2003b). Not only does exit hence have huge implications for the
entrepreneur concerned, it also has important implications on company, industry and economy
level. On a company level, entrepreneurial exit may lead to an increase in resources and skills
available, while also potentially resulting in decreased employee morale and performance.
Industry effects are similar to those of investor exits as they DEMO to the exit mechanism rather
than the position of the exiting individual. Finally, entrepreneurial exit may affect the overarching
economy through entrepreneurial recycling (DEMO a more comprehensive discussion of these
effects, see DeTienne, 2010).
Angel investor and entrepreneurial exit: the importance of relationships
In summary, DEMO entrepreneurial and angel investor exits are important and deserving of
our research attention. For both types of exit though the literature has been largely DEMO of
the relationship with key stakeholders. For angel investors, who tend DEMO be personally involved
with the ventures in which they invest and who bring their own unique motivations, intentions,
experience and personality to the table (Freear et al., 2002; Mason, 2006), taking into DEMO the
interpersonal dynamics with entrepreneurs seems crucial. Similarly, from an entrepreneur‟s
DEMO, taking into account conflict with key stakeholders, like angel investors, DEMO
provide insight into their intention to exit.
7
HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT
In an average angel-backed company, angel investors and entrepreneurs are dependent on
each other in that they make a deal to trade DEMO angel investor‟s human, social and financial
capital for the opportunity or DEMO to make financial gains (Mason, 2006; Yitshaki, 2008).
This partnership hence requires exchanges among investors and entrepreneurs that facilitate a
deeper DEMO of each other‟s goals, needs, values and viewpoints and endorse a
cooperative working relationship (Cable and Shane, 1997; Harrison et al., DEMO; Politis, 2008).
As with similar types of exchange relationships (DEMO Amason and Schweiger, 1997; De Clercq et
al., 2009), DEMO is unavoidable in such settings (Mason and Harrison, 1996). Conflict is
generally defined as “perceived incompatibilities or discrepant views among the parties DEMO
(Jehn and Bendersky, 2003, p. 189), with a distinction DEMO made between relationship
and task conflicts (De Dreu and Weingart, 2003; Jehn, 1995). In the setting of angel-financed
ventures, relationship conflicts pertain to perceived interpersonal incompatibilities or personality
clashes between angel investors and DEMO Task conflicts, on the other hand, refer to
perceived disagreements between angel investors and entrepreneurs about what should be done.
Although task and DEMO conflicts often occur together, empirical evidence does
corroborate them both representing DEMO dimensions of intragroup conflict (De Dreu and
Weingart, 2003; Jehn DEMO Bendersky, 2003).
In organizational behaviour literature it is widely accepted DEMO relationship conflicts
among team members are important predictors of their individual intentions to leave their teams
and their subsequent turnover behaviour (Jehn and Bendersky, 2003). Studies focusing on
relationship conflicts have consistently supported it to be detrimental to morale (Bayazit and
8
Mannix, 2003; Jehn, 1995; Jehn et al., 1999; Medina DEMO al., 2005). Its personal nature causes
feelings of anger, stress, anxiety, avoidance, suspicion, cynicism and animosity with the parties
involved (Amason, 1996; Jehn, 1995; Pelled, 1996). A substantive amount of literature has
further shown that individuals do not generally enjoy the DEMO of personal attacks,
criticisms and the along-going bad feelings. As such, relationship conflicts will lead to a general
feeling of dissatisfaction and thus increase individuals‟ intentions to leave the team or company
(Bayazit and Mannix, 2003; Jehn, 1995; Medina et al., 2005). A similar effect is expected for
relationship conflicts between angel investors and entrepreneurs.
Upon DEMO angel investors and entrepreneurs enter their partnership with certain
expectations and assumptions. One of those is a good fit between investors and entrepreneurs, as
this is one of the most important investment criteria for angel investors, more so than for venture
capitalists (Mason, 2006; Mason and Stark, 2004). Even in the latter setting though, fit has also
DEMO shown to matter as investors prefer entrepreneurs who are like them, DEMO in terms of
surface-level attributes such as professional background (Franke et DEMO, 2006) and deeper-lying
attributes such as cognitive reasoning processes (Murnieks DEMO al., 2007). Further, entrepreneurs
expect their angel investors to deliver several services once the investment has been made, such
as serving as a sounding board (Mason, 2006; Sudek, 2004). For this DEMO, they are often
advised to think twice about whom to bring DEMO board (Duxbury et al., 1996; Mason and Harrison,
1996)DEMO Angel investors‟ more active involvement in the venture post-investment combined with
their desire to help fellow entrepreneurs generally results in a relationship of a DEMO personal
nature than is the case for the average VC partnership (DEMO, 1998; Sudek, 2004). This
makes investor-entrepreneur fit an even DEMO crucial requirement for a successful, cooperative
relationship between angel investors and DEMO
9
Hence, when post-investment investors and entrepreneurs become aware of their
(unanticipated) differences in personalities, political norms, values and taste, disappointment will
result. Interpersonal dislikes and associated feelings of resentment and animosity will not only
DEMO entrepreneurs and angel investors disillusioned about their perfect marriage, it will DEMO
undermine their cooperation by hindering their capability to gather and process information from
each other – crucial for the success of their exchange relationship DEMO and by focusing on the
emotional problems rather than on the tasks at hand (Amason, 1996; Bayazit and Mannix, 2003;
Jehn, 1995). As typical responses to interpersonal problems include “psychological and physical
DEMO (Jehn, 1995, p. 258), these conflicts should increase investors‟ DEMO entrepreneurs‟
intentions to exit their ventures. Considering the importance of interpersonal fit between investors
and entrepreneurs to enable active and valuable post-investment interaction between DEMO, we
expect this effect to hold for both angel investors and DEMO Thus,
H1a: Higher levels of relationship conflicts between angel investors DEMO entrepreneurs will
increase entrepreneurs’ intention to exit their ventures.
H1b: Higher DEMO of relationship conflicts between angel investors and entrepreneurs will
increase angel investors’ intention to exit their portfolio companies.
Previous empirical studies on the relationship DEMO task conflict and intentions to exit
have suggested that it should have no effect in settings where tasks embody a certain degree of
complexity, such as strategic decision making, as this would be inherent to the task and hence to
be expected (Bayazit and Mannix, 2003; Jehn, 1995; Jehn et al., 1999). Since angel investors and
entrepreneurs are key strategic decision agents, one could expect the same effect for their task
10
conflicts. While we follow this line of reasoning for task conflicts‟ lack DEMO effect on angel
investors‟ intentions to exit, we expect a positive DEMO on entrepreneurs‟ intentions to exit.
Entrepreneurs have a strong sense of psychological ownership over and emotional
attachment to their ventures (Pierce et al., DEMO), even after receiving external equity funding
(Arthurs and Busenitz, 2003). They have generally invested substantial amounts of sweat equity
into their DEMO, have nurtured and developed it from idea inception onwards and have DEMO firm
idea of where to take it next (Arthurs and Busenitz, 2003; Forbes et al., 2010). As such, they
generally prefer investors whom they suspect will help them in guiding their venture towards
DEMO those ultimate goals (Boot et al., 2006). They tend to welcome and are receptive to
investor advice on how to achieve their DEMO, although the degree to which varies among
entrepreneurs (Barney et al., 1996). However, being confronted with a lot of task conflicts DEMO
create the opposite impression, making entrepreneurs believe investors are working against DEMO
than with them. Entrepreneurs will be more likely to no longer see the investor‟s input as well-
intentioned advice and perceive their conflicts, considering their strategic importance to the
venture and its future, as threatening (DEMO et al., 2009). In addition, they could interpret these
disagreements as investors questioning their ability, judgment and contributions to the venture.
Feeling pressured by external constituents, such as investors, entrepreneurs are likely to DEMO
less committed to their ventures (Dobrev and Barnett, 2005). Taken together, this should make
entrepreneurs more susceptible to feelings of fear and distrust, making them less satisfied with
their investor relationship and leading to detachment and withdrawal.
Angel investors, on the other hand, will frame DEMO disagreements rather differently.
„Suffering‟ less from emotional bonds to the venture, DEMO will likely see these discussions as part
11
of normal business (Mason and Harrison, 1996; Politis, 2008). DEMO investors see it as their job
to probe entrepreneurs to help them find and formalize a vision, without realising the effects this
might have on the entrepreneur‟s self-confidence and commitment. To this end, some have even
developed formal planning tools, such as questionnaires (see, for instance, DEMO, 2006). As
such, debate is innate to their task or job of being an advisor and investor, cancelling out task
conflict‟s potential negative effects (Bayazit and Mannix, 2003). Taken together, we hypothesize:
H2a: Higher levels of task conflicts between angel investors and entrepreneurs will increase
entrepreneurs’ intention to exit their ventures.
H2b: Task conflicts between angel investors and entrepreneurs will have no effect on angel
investors’ intention DEMO exit their portfolio companies.
Thus far, we have focused on conflicts DEMO perceived incompatibilities (Jehn and
Bendersky, 2003). A common assumption made when investigating the effect of such perceived
incompatibilities is that team members DEMO common goals (Jehn, 1995). However, this
assumption does not DEMO hold for angel investors and entrepreneurs. Even though they are
united by an overarching goal of value creation, angel investors and entrepreneurs can namely
have quite different subgoals (Fiet, 1995; Mason, 2006; Politis, DEMO). For example, angel
investors who want to maximize financial gains (Mason, 2006; Sudek, 2004) are likely to be
more focused DEMO short-term growth and development than their respective entrepreneurs (De
Clercq and DEMO, 2007).
Goal incompatibilities, also labelled goal conflicts (Bourgeois, 1985; Cosier and Rose,
1977; Eisenhardt and Bourgeois, 1988), are related to task conflicts. Even stronger, goal conflicts
12
were taken as a starting point to Jehn‟s definition of team task DEMO (Jehn, 1997, p. 532).
While related, these conflict types differ in two important respects. First, whereas goal conflicts
pertain to actual goal incompatibilities, task conflicts include, but are not limited to, perceived
goal incompatibilities (Jehn, 1997). Being key strategic decision agents, task conflicts between
angel investors and entrepreneurs refer to strategic decisions to be DEMO, which is broader than
setting objectives (Eisenhardt and Bourgeois, 1988)DEMO Second and more importantly, conflict
scholars acknowledge that perceptions can be DEMO in that perceived incompatibilities will
not necessarily reflect actual incompatibilities, nor DEMO actual incompatibilities necessarily be
perceived as such (Deutsch, 1973; Fisher, 1998; Thomas, 1976). Even entrepreneurship scholars
recognize that perceived goal DEMO do not necessarily correspond with actual goal
incompatibilities (Arthurs and Busenitz, 2003). Given these differences and the key role goal
incompatibilities play DEMO investor-entrepreneur settings, we included goal conflicts in this study. 2
Previous DEMO indicated that goal conflicts increase the likelihood of using competitive
tactics and will make problem-solving more difficult (Deutsch, 1973; Eisenhardt and Bourgeois,
1988; Fisher, 1998; Tjosvold, 1998). When angel investors and DEMO truly and
substantially differ in terms of the actual objectives they want to achieve, the probability of
finding a compromise and forging a cooperative relationship will thus significantly decrease
(Apfelbaum, 1974; Cable and Shane, DEMO). This could lead investors and entrepreneurs to no
2 Distinguishing this approach from the cooperative and competitive goal approach adopted by Tjosvold and DEMO
colleagues, is the fact that they define cooperative and competitive goals DEMO the perception thereof. In other words,
when team members perceive their goals to be positively or cooperatively linked, conflicts can be constructive to
team effectiveness through increased mutual trust, positive attitudes towards other team members and open-minded
debate (Deutsch, 1973; Tjosvold, 1998). Perceptions of DEMO or negatively linked goals on the other hand
will lead to the opposite. Furthermore, this approach is also distinct from goal conflict as referred to by Higashide
and Birley (2002) as they do not conceptualize, nor measure this concept as actual goal incompatibilities.
13
longer seeing any mutual gain from continuing their partnership, thereby making it less desirable
and useful for them to remain with their companies (Christensen et al., 2009).
We expect this positive effect of goal conflicts on intentions to exit to hold for both angel
investors and entrepreneurs. DEMO though mixed goals are inherent to their partnership, a certain
degree DEMO goal alignment is a conditio sine qua non for both parties to enter into and achieve a
successful cooperation (Brettel, 2003; Politis, DEMO). Angel investors, being particularly
concerned with agency risk (Fiet, DEMO), will not invest unless they are convinced a minimum
threshold of goal alignment is present. In other words, whereas some discussion concerning
actions to be taken, resources to be committed (Mintzberg, 1976, p. DEMO) and other crucial,
strategic discussions is to be expected, investors do not expect their underlying goals to be very
different from the DEMO Similarly, entrepreneurs, not being very experienced with the
process of gathering financing, often do not have a clear view on investors‟ requirements,
characteristics and objectives (Van Auken, 2001). It is hence likely DEMO they will also, at least
initially, expect a certain degree of goal alignment to be present. As for both angel investors and
entrepreneurs DEMO incongruent goals are undesirable and unexpected, the hypotheses are:
H3a: Higher levels of goal conflicts between angel investors and entrepreneurs will increase
DEMO intention to exit their ventures.
H3b: Higher levels of goal conflicts DEMO angel investors and entrepreneurs will increase
angel investor’s intention to exit their portfolio companies.
14
METHODS
Sample and data collection
Data for this study were gathered in DEMO locations, Continental Europe (Belgium) and
USA (California). For the Belgian sample, 20 different data sources were used including a
random directory of start-ups, deal lists of angel networks, GEM data3, directories of high-
technology companies, media articles, incubators and snowballing. This way a DEMO of 305 Belgian
potential angel-backed companies was constructed, who were telephoned DEMO the summer of
2007 in order to identify whether or not they fulfilled the conditions of the research. These
conditions were (1) at DEMO one angel investor needed to be a member of the Board of Directors
or actively involved in strategic decision-making in their portfolio company and (2) the company
had to have received angel financing between January 2003 and August 2006. The latter
condition was imposed in order to avoid DEMO exit period because conflict‟s effects can change as
teams approach the end of their relationship (Jehn and Mannix, 2001). In addition, focusing on
young angel investments should avoid recall and survival bias (Farrell et al., 2008; Paul et al.,
2007). This resulted in DEMO (potentially) eligible companies.4 For the Californian sample, the data
sources DEMO Zephyr, VentureXpert, Growthink and the members‟ or participants‟ lists from
the Angel Capital Association, C21 BioVentures and the California Clean Tech Open
competition. This resulted in a list of 1265 Californian potential angel-backed companies, who
were contacted through e-mails containing a link to a YouTube video in DEMO the research
project and the above-mentioned conditions were explained by the lead researcher. Companies
3 During the data collection process for the Global Entrepreneurship DEMO in Belgium, an additional question was
asked to respondents as to DEMO or not they had made investments that were not family- or friend-related.
4 This includes companies that we were not able to contact and DEMO whose angel-backed nature could not be
verified.
15
were asked to inform us of whether or not they fulfilled the DEMO conditions, which resulted in
588 (potentially) eligible companies.
Responses were DEMO from all entrepreneurial team members and angel investors who
had a seat on the Board of Directors or were actively involved in the company. DEMO
entrepreneurial team was defined as those individuals who, at the time DEMO the study, had an equity
stake and were actively involved or DEMO a key role in strategic decision making (Forbes et al.,
DEMO; Ucbasaran et al., 2003a). The definition used for angel investors was external individual
investors who invest some of their own wealth in DEMO companies in exchange for shares and
who have no family or friend connection to the entrepreneurs (Mason, 2006). When parties
agreed to DEMO, questionnaires were e-mailed either directly to the team members concerned
or, in some cases, through the CEO when angel investors preferred to remain anonymous. This
method of distributing surveys is consistent with previous team research (e.g. Simons et al., 1999;
Srivastava et al., 2006). DEMO necessary, follow-up phone calls were performed. Using a team
member response DEMO criterion of 50% (e.g. Ensley et al., 2002; Mooney et DEMO, 2007) and the
condition that at least one response was needed from the angel investor side and one from the
entrepreneurs‟ side, a final sample was obtained of 28 Belgian teams (representing 35 angel
investors and 40 entrepreneurs) and 26 Californian teams (representing 30 angel investors DEMO 32
entrepreneurs).
Analyses revealed no significant differences between Belgian respondents and non-
respondents in terms of company age in 2007, age at time of investment and industry distribution.
The Californian respondents and non-respondents did not DEMO differ in terms of
company age at time of investment and industry distribution, but ventures of non-respondents
16
were older at the time of the research project. The latter is DEMO surprising in that this research was
targeted towards younger angel investments. As angel investors often tend to invest in the earlier
stages of development (Mason, 2006), older, more mature companies would probably not have
DEMO the second condition of this study and were hence more likely to not respond to the
survey request (547 out of 562 non-respondents could namely not be contacted). Finally, there
were no substantial differences between early and late respondents in both samples regarding the
primary variables of DEMO Taken together, this indicates that non-response bias should be
limited (Armstrong and Overton, 1977).
As the number of respondents was rather small in both locations separately it was deemed
desirable to combine them into DEMO larger sample. In order to do so a multigroup confirmatory
factor analysis was run to check for measurement invariance (Steenkamp and Baumgartner,
1998). The goodness-of-fit indices suggested by Hu and Bentler (1998) were DEMO above the
minimum values (CFI= 0.96, TLI=0.95, SRMR=0.06). As DEMO, this provided support for
combining the Belgian and Californian samples into DEMO larger sample, consisting of 54 teams
and 137 individuals, of which 72 entrepreneurs and 65 angel investors.
Variables
Dependent variable. Intention to exit DEMO measured using two items based on O‟Reilly et
al. (1991) and Brigham et al. (2007). The questions were “How long do you intend to remain
with Venture X?” and “If you have your DEMO way, will you be working for this organization
three years from DEMO?”. Both questions were slightly adapted for the angel investors (for DEMO first
item “remain invested in” was added and “working for this organization” in the second item was
changed into “still be a shareholder”). DEMO in Brigham et al. (2007), the two items were measured
DEMO
on a 7-point scale ranging from less than 1 year to more DEMO 5 years for the first item and from
definitely yes to definitely no for the second item. The first item was reverse scored such DEMO
higher scores indicated a higher intent to exit. For the final score the two items were averaged.
The mean value was 2.31 (st.dev. 1.36) for entrepreneurs and slightly higher, i.e. 3.02 (st.dev.
1.57) for DEMO investors. Both indicate a positive skew (for further details see section DEMO
robustness checks). The Cronbach‟s alpha value was satisfactory (0.74). DEMO order to validate this
measure, angel investors were also asked to DEMO formulate the number of years in which
they wanted to exit. The correlation coefficient with the intention to exit measure was negative
and statistically DEMO (-.61, p < .001), indicating construct validity.5
Independent variables. Task conflict and relationship conflict were measured using three
items for each based DEMO the revised version by Pearson et al. (2002) of Jehn‟s intragroup conflict
scale (Jehn, 1995). For task conflict, respondents were asked to rate how many disagreements
over different ideas, differences about the content of decisions and differences of opinion there
had been between the angel DEMO and entrepreneurs on a scale from 1 (= none) to 5 (= a great
deal). For relationship conflict, they were asked DEMO much tension, personal friction and anger
there had been between the DEMO investors and the entrepreneurs. The mean value for task
conflict was 2.24 (st.dev. 0.72) and 1.80 (st.dev. 0.89) for relationship conflict. Both DEMO
alpha values indicated excellent reliability (0.92 and 0.93 respectively). In DEMO to check whether
aggregation was appropriate, the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) and within-group
agreement index were calculated (James et al., 1984; DEMO and Kozlowski, 2000). Both ICCs are
significant (p < .001) and the median Rwg(J) values for both constructs exceed the DEMO threshold
(0.94 for both task and relationship conflict). This indicates DEMO, per company, there is adequate
5 This correlation coefficient is based on Belgian data only as this question was not included in the DEMO questionnaire.
18
consensus between angel investors and entrepreneurs regarding their conflicts and significant
variation DEMO companies. Together this justifies aggregation.6
Goal conflict was measured as the degree of goal incongruence based on Sapienza and
Gupta (1994). First, DEMO were asked to allocate 200 points across 11 objectives (6
financial DEMO 5 non-financial criteria) and this according to these criteria‟s importance to DEMO
achievement of the short-term financial goals of Venture X. Second, they DEMO asked how much
emphasis should be given to financial and non-financial goals respectively (percentage). For each
criterion a weighted score was then calculated. Illustration: new product development (NPD) is a
non-financial criterion. Assume the respondent allocated 20 out of 100 non-financial points to
this criterion and, in general, thinks that non-financial goals should be given 80% emphasis, DEMO
the weighted score for NPD would equal 20x0.80. After this, the DEMO of the weighted scores
per criterion was calculated for the two subgroups (i.e. angel investors and the entrepreneurs)
separately.  Only then the DEMO differences of the average weighted scores of the angel
investors and entrepreneurs within the same company were taken and summed across criteria.
The mean DEMO was 76.57 (st.dev. 26.29). As a point of comparison, the average degree of goal
incongruence between VCs and CEOs in the study DEMO Sapienza and Gupta (1994) was somewhat
higher, i.e. 93.92 (st.dev. 31.61).
Control variables. Besides relationship-specific factors such as conflicts, several other
aspects pertaining to angel investors, entrepreneurs or their ventures can influence exit in terms of
6 Median Rwg(J) values were also calculated based on triangular and moderately skewed distributions instead of the
generally used uniform DEMO distribution (LeBreton and Senter, 2008). These values also all exceeded the 0.7
threshold, thus confirming adequate within-group agreement for aggregation. Since angel investors and
entrepreneurs could be argued to form subgroups within their overarching DEMO, aggregation statistics were
additionally calculated at the subgroup level. ICCs and DEMO(J) values all exceeded threshold values.
19
its type, success and timing and hence potentially affect angel investors‟ and entrepreneurs‟
intentions to exit. Therefore, several controls were added for the entrepreneur and angel investor
models respectively.
For the entrepreneurs‟ intention to exit model, we added controls for industry, company
age, team size, the entrepreneur‟s age and his/her entrepreneurial and consulting experience. As
industries might vary DEMO terms of
competitive and technological environment, average
performance and exit opportunities (Bates, 2005; Gimeno et al., 1997), two industry dummy
variables were added. Specifically, one dummy variable was added for software (50%) and one
for high-tech manufacturing (17% of the sample), which together represented the two most
common industries in our sample. Based on other DEMO exit studies (DeTienne and
Cardon, 2010; Wennberg et al., 2010), entrepreneurs were asked to indicate the founding year of
their venture DEMO that company age at time of questioning could be calculated and controlled for.
Team size might also affect intragroup dynamics (Jehn, 1995; Simons et al., 1999) and the
probability of entrepreneurial exit (Boeker and Karichalil, 2002). Therefore, a variable was
included to control for DEMO size, measured as the total number of entrepreneurs and angel
investors.7 DEMO addition to being influenced by company- and team-level characteristics (Gimeno et
DEMO, 1997; Ucbasaran et al., 2003a), entrepreneurial exit is also DEMO by individual-level
features (DeTienne, 2010). An entrepreneur‟s human capital has been shown to influence exit
type or success (Bates, 2005; Headd, 2003; Wennberg et al., 2010), intended exit strategy
(DeTienne DEMO Cardon, 2010) and exit likelihood in general (Gimeno et al., 1997; Headd, 2003).
Hence, we controlled for the entrepreneur‟s age (number of years) and his/her entrepreneurial
and consulting experience, all at time of questioning. Entrepreneurial experience was measured
7 As defined in DEMO with sample requirements.
20
by asking entrepreneurs the number of years working experience as founder or DEMO
Additionally, we used number of years consulting experience as it adds DEMO skills such as problem
detection, knowledge generation and dissemination as well DEMO learning how to take advantage of
opportunities (Dimov and Shepherd, 2005; Walske and Zacharakis, 2009). Similar to the
traditionally studied human DEMO variables, such skills are valuable in business management
and help in DEMO strategic business decisions, thereby increasing the probability of achieving
successful exits (Walske and Zacharakis, 2009; Zarutskie, 2010).
For the angel investors‟ intention to exit model, controls for industry, portfolio company
age, angel investor age, time since investment and perceived venture performance were added.
As industry dummies and portfolio company age have been shown to impact investor DEMO they
were included and measured in the same way as in the entrepreneur‟s model (Chahine et al.,
2007). Angel investor’s age was also added as a control variable because of its effect on turnover
DEMO (Bayazit and Mannix, 2003; Jehn, 1995). In addition, DEMO since investment was
included as it could be related to exit success and likelihood (Mason and Harrison, 2002). Finally,
perceived firm DEMO (range 1-5) was also controlled for by asking respondents to rate the
current performance of the venture relative to its competitors (Sapienza and Gupta, 1994).
Considering angel investors‟ financial motives for investment making (DEMO, 2006; Sudek,
2004), perceived venture performance could positively influence the nature of their relationship
with entrepreneurs as well as their intention DEMO keep on investing in the company, just like for
venture capitalists (De Clercq and Sapienza, 2006). As this study aims to explain conflict‟s
effects on angel investors‟ intentions to exit their ventures over and DEMO the venture‟s
performance, it was therefore deemed necessary to include it DEMO a control variable. A quadratic
effect of perceived performance was also added, because one could argue that investors might
21
have a higher intention to exit low- and high-performing ventures than moderately DEMO
ones (hence, a U-shaped relationship).
Data quality: common method DEMO
Since most of the variables used in the analyses were gathered through the same
questionnaire, concerns around common method variance might arise. Several aspects were taken
into account in designing the questionnaire as to reduce the DEMO of this potential bias, e.g. reverse
scoring of items, use of variation in wording of items, use of different scaling anchors for the key
variables and guaranteeing absolute anonymity to respondents (Lindell and Whitney, DEMO;
Podsakoff et al., 2003). Further, all variables were measured using scales which had been
previously validated and shown to have good DEMO properties (see above). In addition to
the design of this DEMO, the Harman‟s single factor test also suggests common method bias may
DEMO limited (Podsakoff and Organ, 1986). The exploratory factor analysis resulted in a 3-factor
solution, with the first factor accounting for only 34% of the total variance (and 31% and 13% for
the second and third factor respectively).
Further, intentions to exit should positively predict subsequent exit behaviour (Brigham et
al., 2007). In order to corroborate DEMO, all entrepreneurs and angel investors from the original
sample were contacted DEMO after one year. Excluding exits due to deaths (2 angel investors, 2
entrepreneurs), 16 individuals (7 angel investors and 9 entrepreneurs) DEMO left their ventures.
Logistic regressions were run with the dependent variable taking the value 1 in case of
entrepreneur or angel investor exit and DEMO for continuation.
*** Insert Table 1 about here ***
22
Table 1 reveals that intentions to exit have a statistically significant, positive effect on
both investor (p < .05) and entrepreneur exit (p < .01). In unreported results, analyses were rerun
on specific exit types in order to account for exit multidimensionality (Wennberg et al., DEMO).
High- versus low-performing exits was defined as exits where the pre-exit performance as
perceived by the CEO was above versus below the (sample) mean. The results indicate that
intentions to exit are also statistically significant predictors of sales exits, i.e. distress and harvest
sales, and high-performing DEMO, i.e. harvest sales as the sample did not include harvest
liquidations.8 DEMO together, this suggests that the risk of common method bias is DEMO
Data analysis
As angel investor and entrepreneurial exit might be driven by different factors, reflected
by the different control variables included in the respective models, separate OLS regressions
were run for the entrepreneur subsample (N=72) and the angel investor subsample (N=65).
Because we investigate the intentions to exit of investors and entrepreneurs belonging to the same
set of DEMO, we employ the seemingly unrelated estimation procedure (SuEst in STATA
10.0). Similar to seemingly unrelated regression, this technique allows for correlated errors across
estimated equations or models by combining the estimation results into a DEMO, simultaneous
covariance matrix (Weesie, 1999; StataCorp, 2007). Additionally, this procedure allows for
clustered standard errors per company (Weesie, 1999), a necessary correction as observations of
investors and entrepreneurs in our sample are non-independent. Finally, this estimation procedure
has the advantage of being statistically more efficient compared to running two separate OLS
regressions.
8 The number DEMO low-performing, i.e. distress, exits was too low for the model to be able to run. However, statistical
results were stronger in the overall exit model than in the high-performing exit model (angel investor: p < .10;
entrepreneur: p < .05), which would suggest that DEMO to exit are also reliable predictors of low-performing exit.
23
RESULTS
Descriptive statistics
Table 2 provides an overview of the means, standard deviations and correlations between
company-, entrepreneur- and angel investor-specific variables. Variables with shared meaning
and values for angel investors and entrepreneurs, such as company age, industry and conflicts,
were labeled company-level variables and were based on the company-level sample size (N=54).
All entrepreneur- and investor-specific variables were measured at the individual level (based on
respective sample sizes of 72 and 65).
*** Insert Table 2 about here ***
While DEMO statistically significant correlations are found between entrepreneurs‟ intentions
to exit and conflict, we do find statistically significant and positive correlations between angel
investors‟ intentions to exit and all conflict constructs. The correlation between task and goal
DEMO is trivial and its 95% confidence interval ranges from -.28 to .26, corroborating that these
are indeed distinct concepts (MacKenzie et al., 2005). Further, the correlation between task and
relationship conflict is very high (.84) and statistically significant. Therefore, a confirmatory
factor analysis was conducted based on the entire sample (N=137) as task and relationship
conflicts DEMO shared, team-level constructs. The two-factor model had a significant better fit DEMO
the one-factor model (one-factor model: CFI = 0.85, GFI = DEMO, RMR = 0.07 compared to the
two-factor model: CFI = 0.98, GFI = 0.94, RMR = 0.04) and the Chi-square difference of 95.20
was significant at p < .001. Consistent with previous conflict studies (De Clercq et al., 2009;
Forbes et al., 2010), DEMO confirms task and relationship conflict‟s discriminant validity. Variance
24
inflation factors further corroborate the limited threat of multicollinearity (maximum values of
4.41 and 4.19 in the entrepreneur‟s and angel investor‟s models respectively).
DEMO testing
The results of the regression analyses with seemingly unrelated estimation for both
entrepreneurs‟ and angel investors‟ intentions to exit are reported in Table DEMO
*** Insert Table 3 about here ***
In both models, we DEMO entered the control variables (base model). For entrepreneurs‟
intention to DEMO, this reveals a statistically significant and positive effect of consulting
experience. DEMO angel investors‟ intentions to exit, a strong, negative linear effect is revealed for
perceived performance. While the curvilinear term is also statistically significant, its significance
is weaker and does not hold in the full model. DEMO, the turning point for the curvilinear
term is out-of-range (1.98 for the mean-centered perceived performance variable), corroborating
a linear effect. As ventures DEMO better performing, angel investors thus have lower intentions to
exit. The DEMO further indicate that angel investors whose portfolio companies operate in high-
tech manufacturing have a statistically significant higher intention to exit. Both base models DEMO
statistically significant (for the entrepreneurs: R² = .22, p < DEMO; for the angel investors: R² = .50,
p < .001).
With regard to entrepreneurs‟ intentions to exit, relationship conflicts (H1a), task conflicts
(H2a) and goal conflicts (H3a) were hypothesized to have a positive effect above and beyond the
impact of the control DEMO The full model in table 3 reveals statistically significant and
25
positive effects for task (p < .01) and goal conflict (p < .05), but not for relationship conflict. This
provides support for DEMO H2a and H3a, but not for H1a. Adding these conflict predictors
DEMO a significant contribution over and above the base model (Δ R² DEMO .07, p < .05).
For angel investors, a positive effect on intentions to exit was hypothesized for
relationship (H1b) and goal DEMO (H3b), while task conflicts were expected to have no effect
(H2b). Similar to entrepreneurs‟ intentions to exit, we found no statistically significant effect of
relationship conflicts on angel investors‟ intentions to exit. Hence, hypothesis 1b could not be
supported. Further, the results reveal a statistically significant and positive effect of goal conflict
(p < .01) and DEMO statistically significant effect for task conflict, which supports hypotheses H2b
and DEMO The addition of the predictor variables to the base model adds significant explanatory
power to the angel investor‟s intention to exit model (Δ R² = .09, p < .01).
Robustness checks
Several additional analyses were performed to check the robustness of these results. First,
based on DEMO research (Gimeno et al., 1997), one could argue that perceived venture
performance will also influence entrepreneurs‟ intentions to exit. Therefore, models were rerun
adding perceived performance as a control variable to the entrepreneurial model (both in linear
and linear plus quadratic form). In both cases, the previous results remained robust, perceived
performance did not have a statistically significant effect on entrepreneurs‟ intentions to exit and
model fit did not DEMO improve. Second, controls were added to both angel investor and
entrepreneur DEMO for location of data collection (Belgium or California), investment stage DEMO
industry-specific experience (measured as the number of years working experience in DEMO same
industry as the current venture/portfolio company). Adding a country dummy would not only
26
control for any potential cultural differences in conflict-intention to exit relationships, it would
also serve as a proxy for potential differences in the development DEMO the respective risk capital
markets and the availability of exit options. Similar to industry, investment stage might be related
to different exit types (DEMO and Harrison, 2002; Wiltbank, 2005). Finally, industry-specific
experience has been shown to affect intended exit strategy (DeTienne and Cardon, 2010) and exit
type (Wennberg et al., 2010; Wiltbank and Boeker, DEMO). However, none of these additional
control variables had a statistically DEMO effect nor did they improve model fit. Results
remained robust. Further, DEMO were also run on a transformed, i.e. squared, version of the
intention to exit variable as this was highly skewed. Again this did DEMO alter the results. Finally,
having no information on exit agreements made between angel investors and entrepreneurs at the
time of investment, we cannot completely rule out the possibility of having included conflicts
about exit. To DEMO this concern, we reran the main analyses excluding all ventures (11) from
which respondents subsequently, i.e. one year later, left. Results were slightly stronger for both
investor and entrepreneur models, indicating that the risk of inflated findings as a consequence of
having included such conflicts should DEMO limited.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In the present study, we set out DEMO explain how conflicts between angel investors and
entrepreneurs affect both parties‟ intentions to exit. Building on conflict literature, we argued and
found that task conflicts between angel investors and entrepreneurs positively
affect
entrepreneurs‟ intentions to exit DEMO ventures and goal conflicts positively affect both
entrepreneurs‟ and angel investors‟ intentions to exit. Their relationship conflicts, however, do
not affect intentions to DEMO These findings are of interest for several reasons.
27
First, this paper is among the first to integrate relational dynamics among venture partners
into the study of entrepreneurial and investor exits. Extant research DEMO entrepreneurial exit has
revealed the impact of individual-, team-, company- and industry-level attributes on intended exit
strategy, exit likelihood and exit type. Research on antecedents of angel investor exit is lacking
altogether. What both streams DEMO literature have in common is that they cannot provide an answer
to the question what processes lead up to entrepreneurial and investor exit nor DEMO stakeholders
affect entrepreneurs and investors desiring to leave their ventures. By providing evidence of
entrepreneur-investor conflicts positively affecting intentions to exit, we uncover the impact of
behavioral processes at play between entrepreneurs (or investors) and DEMO of their key
stakeholders, i.e. their financiers (or investees). In doing so, we contribute to the literature that
seeks to understand the driving forces of entrepreneurial and angel investor exit.
Second, this study addresses a call for opening up the investor-investee dyad (Lockett et
al., DEMO). Thus far, research studying the post-investment relationship between angel investors
DEMO entrepreneurs has focused on both parties‟ expectations regarding their partnership and the
roles angel investors take on in their portfolio companies (e.g. Brettel, DEMO; Mason and
Harrison, 1996). Little to no research, however, has studied the working relationship of active
entrepreneur-angel investor „pairs‟. Considering angel DEMO and entrepreneurs generally
work together for a time period ranging between four and seven years, this lack of research
attention is surprising. While research on investment decision-making processes of angel
investors is certainly valuable and rewarding, it provides little insight into what happens once the
investment decision has DEMO made. Our findings suggest that conflicts between angel investors
and entrepreneurs can substantially increase the likelihood of either one exiting prematurely. This
28
indicates that if scholars want to thoroughly understand the angel investment process, from start
to end, one cannot overlook the relational aspects of the angel investor-entrepreneur partnership.
In addition, entrepreneurial finance research has generally adopted an exclusive investor
or entrepreneur perspective. By integrating both perspectives, we add to this literature in two
ways. While gathering data from just one side DEMO investor-investee dyads is often considered a
limitation of the study concerned (DEMO Parhankangas and Landström, 2006), our findings suggest
that the distortion DEMO doing so might be more limited than previously thought. Evidence regarding
aggregation statistics namely indicates that angel investors and entrepreneurs strongly agree in
terms DEMO the degree of conflict present in their partnership. Thus, if one‟s DEMO regarding
collecting data on behavioral processes within the investor-investee dyad from only one side of
that dyad is that it might not provide a DEMO view of what is really going on, our findings
suggest that DEMO is uncalled for. However, gathering both partners‟ perceptions of their relational
DEMO does allow for a more comprehensive view on their partnership. By providing specific
evidence of how shared goal conflicts affect both angel investors‟ and DEMO intentions
to exit, while task conflicts only affect entrepreneurs‟ intentions to DEMO, this research provides a
finer-grained insight into the specificity and unique DEMO of each of these parties involved.
Third, our study also informs DEMO literature. While task and relationship conflict are
commonly studied in intragroup conflict research (De Dreu and Weingart, 2003), including in
entrepreneurship settings (e.g. Ensley et al., 2002; Higashide and Birley, 2002), goal conflicts are
not. By examining these three types of conflicts, this study ties into a debate that has gained
momentum in the intragroup conflict DEMO, namely that of how to define conflict (Tjosvold,
2007). Our results support the view that both perceived and actual incompatibilities (as in task
29
and goal conflicts) should be considered important as both have a unique, significant role to play
in the conflict process. Theorizing conflict to consist of both a perceptual and an actual
component could provide an alternative DEMO on why conflict studies have produced so many
mixed findings (De DEMO and Weingart, 2003; Jehn and Bendersky, 2003). While early DEMO
theorists defined conflict to include both perceived and actual incompatibilities (Deutsch, 1973),
conflict studies over the years have neglected this distinction, DEMO potentially confounding their
results. Incorporating both elements into future research should allow us to gain a better insight
into the complex relationship between conflict DEMO team effectiveness and could reunite
researchers debating on whether conflict in teams and organizations should be stimulated or
avoided all together (Tjosvold, 2007)DEMO
Limitations, future research and implications
This study is not without its DEMO, which provide opportunities for future research.
First, data were collected in two geographic locations (California and Belgium) and pooled based
on the DEMO from the multigroup CFA. An argument could be made that differences in degree of
development of their respective risk capital markets could have an DEMO on the degree of
professionalization of angel investors and entrepreneurs as well as on their exit opportunities. As
such, it could influence the relationship under study. Although the USA and Western-European
countries are both known to DEMO rather individualistic cultures, it would be interesting to see
whether there DEMO cross-cultural differences in conflict‟s impact in the angel investor-entrepreneur
relationship. This was however beyond the scope of this paper. Furthermore, additional controls
for country were insignificant and did not change the results, indicating that this bias should not
be large.
30
Second, one might argue that desiring to leave a venture does not necessarily equate being
able or willing to do so due to financial DEMO legal restrictions. With regard to the former, angel
investors may only DEMO if it is financially attractive to do so through, for instance, an IPO or by
selling their shares to an interested party (Mason and Harrison, 2002; Birley and Westhead,
1993). Exit likelihood DEMO desirability is, however, not an exclusive function of the potential
financial return achieved as angel investors are driven by a wide range of DEMO and
objectives, including non-financial ones (Mason, 2006). Even if DEMO investors would be willing
to sell their shares at zero dollar value, one could argue that there might also be contractual
covenants limiting their ability to do so. Research has however indicated that angel investor
contracts DEMO do not include exit provisions (Kelly and Hay, 2003). In other words, while
potentially suboptimal from a financial point of view, DEMO investors should be able to exit if
they really want to. The statement that they generally will in case of high intentions to exit DEMO
corroborated by the fact that these intentions are a form of psychological detachment from the
venture, increasing the likelihood of individuals actually leaving (DEMO and Mannix, 2003;
Burris et al., 2008). To accurately reflect this on an empirical level, wording of the intention to
exit measure was altered to emphasize the voluntary aspect of the question and DEMO venture
performance was taken into account. In addition, intentions to exit DEMO significantly and
positively related to turnover, both for entrepreneurs and angel DEMO, indicating that the
problem of them not being able to exit DEMO be limited.
One could also argue that our intention to exit measure does not take into account the
multidimensionality of entrepreneurial, and hence potentially, angel investor exit (Wennberg et
al., 2010; DeTienne, 2010). As we do not have data on intended exit strategy or on DEMO
agreements made prior to investment, this is indeed a limitation of DEMO study. We tried to reduce
31
this bias by controlling for factors that have been to shown to DEMO type of investor or
entrepreneurial exit or intended exit strategy. In addition, analyses indicated that angel investors‟
and entrepreneurs‟ intentions to exit were statistically significant predictors of actual exit and this
for the overall sample of DEMO (distress liquidations, distress sales and harvest sales), for sales
exits only and for all high-performing exits only. Further, previous research has also indicated
that angel investors often do not have a clear exit strategy DEMO (e.g. Brettel, 2003).
Together, this should provide more confidence DEMO our results holding regardless the type of exit
strategy, planned or DEMO
On a similar note, by sampling active angel investors and entrepreneurs, we could be
missing the worst-case scenarios, those where angel investors and/or entrepreneurs have already
voluntarily left. While we acknowledge this limitation, we believe that, based on our theoretical
arguments, incorporating these companies into DEMO sample would have only served to strengthen
the negative results found in this study.
Finally, one could criticize adopting a conflict theory approach to investor exit as angel
investors are assumed to invest with an intention DEMO exit. Whereas exit should be a desirable
outcome for them to achieve, implying it to be a choice (excluding bankruptcies), organizational
behaviour DEMO frames it as an undesirable one, with conflict implying a push DEMO and
hence an obligation to exit. Nonetheless, we argue that our DEMO is appropriate for two
reasons. First, by focusing on young angel DEMO (maximum four years old) for whom exit
should not be an issue yet, the exits included in our sample should mainly be premature. Second,
if exits were desirable, one would expect a positive correlation between conflict and angel
investor satisfaction. Based on unreported results, in our sample, this was not the case for any of
32
the conflict constructs under examination. Taken together, we believe this corroborates viewing
conflict leading up to angel investor exit as a push-relationship.
Based on DEMO results and limitations of this study, there are several avenues for DEMO
research. First, the main explanation provided for the results found for DEMO and goal conflicts is
linked to the entrepreneur‟s psychological ownership over the venture, combined with
expectations concerning the angel investor-entrepreneur partnership (task conflicts DEMO
expected from an investor‟s perspective, but not so for goal conflicts)DEMO Whereas the results are in
line with the hypothesized relationships, more DEMO is needed in order to confirm its
underlying mechanisms. Future research is also needed to explain the lack of effect for
relationship conflicts. Considering DEMO importance of fit in the angel investor-entrepreneur
relationship, we expected this DEMO play a huge role in their intentions to exit, but the DEMO did not
confirm this. Do they not care whether or not they get along? Is there only a minimum of fit
needed for this partnership to work? Second, this study should serve as a first DEMO to further
extend investor and entrepreneurial exit frameworks to include the context or setting that
surrounds them. While this study revealed the importance of DEMO dynamics, important factors
to be included in future studies could be DEMO behavioral processes such as cohesion, potency
and efficacy as well as DEMO distribution, communication processes or the degree of fit or match
between DEMO and entrepreneurs. Finally, while the focus of this paper was on DEMO
investors, it would be interesting to see to what extent the DEMO of this study apply to other
stakeholders, such as family members DEMO venture capitalists. The latter are generally considered
to be more rational (DEMO) than their angel investing counterparts. Therefore, one would
implicitly assume that relational aspects would matter less in their exit decision-making process.
In contrast, several studies have already indicated that even VCs are not always the DEMO
33
decision-making agents we make them out to be (e.g. Franke et al., 2006) and are hence also
subject to „flaws‟ inherent to humans DEMO as biases and interpersonal dynamics.
Finally, this paper also has several DEMO implications. These findings suggest that both
entrepreneurs and angel investors should pay careful attention to conflicts that might arise
between them. Most important in DEMO regard is when the objectives of the angel investors and
entrepreneurs diverge too much. This might result in the exit of one or both DEMO, which, if
prematurely, is less than desirable for both. Having DEMO aligned goals from the very start ,
being clear about these DEMO and upholding goal alignment throughout their entire relationship
should substantially reduce the likelihood of goal conflicts arising subsequently. Further, it is
important for both investors and entrepreneurs to recognize that, while their relationship
represents a business partnership, they are still dealing with human beings, not robots or DEMO
dispensing machines. Angel investors, who tend to rely heavily on their DEMO to bring
the venture to a good end (Fiet, 1995), should carefully craft their post-investment venture
involvement as to not intimidate entrepreneurs. DEMO it might be well-intentioned advice,
entrepreneurs could perceive it as meddling, making them feel threatened. To avoid these
potentially deleterious effects, entrepreneurs DEMO angel investors might want to consider the
importance of crafting a setting where debate is open-minded and welcomed (Jehn and
Bendersky, 2003).
DEMO
Representing the end of their partnership, exiting from their ventures is DEMO key event for
both angel investors and entrepreneurs. While generally treated separately, this paper votes for
integrating these literatures by focusing on the angel investor-investee dyad and its potentially
34
dysfunctional dynamics, i.e. conflict. We show that goal conflicts between angel investors and
entrepreneurs positively affect both parties‟ intentions to exit their ventures and DEMO conflicts
additionally increase entrepreneurs‟
intentions to exit. Thus, this study extends DEMO
entrepreneurial and investor exit literature by addressing three neglected areas: (1) by integrating
and corroborating the importance of the relationships entrepreneurs and angel investors develop
with each other, i.e. their key partners or stakeholders, (2) by shedding more light on the
behavioral processes that lead up to entrepreneurial and investor exit and (3) by examining the
effect DEMO shared group processes on entrepreneurial and angel investor intentions to exit
separately, thereby providing a view on the unique character of both.
35
REFERENCES
Akhigbe, A., Johnston, J., Madura, J. (2006). DEMO industry performance following IPOs.
The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, DEMO, 638-651.
Amason, A., Schweiger, D. (1997). The effects DEMO conflict on strategic decision making
effectiveness and organizational performance. In De Dreu C., Van de Vliert, E. (Eds.), Using
conflict in organizations (pp. 101-115). London: Sage Publications.
Amason, A. (1996). DEMO the effects of functional and dysfunctional conflict on
strategic decision making: DEMO a paradox for top management teams. Academy of
Management Journal, 39, 123-148.
Apfelbaum, E.
(1974). On conflicts and bargaining.
Psychology, 7, 103-156.
Advances in Experimental Social
Armstrong, J., Overton, T. (1977). Estimating non-response bias in mail surveys. Journal of
Marketing Research, 14, 396-402.
Arthurs, J., Busenitz, L. (2003). The boundaries and limitations of agency theory and stewardship
theory in the venture capitalist/entrepreneur DEMO Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
28, 145-162.
Avey, J., Avolio, B., Crossley, C., Luthans, F. (2009). Psychological ownership: DEMO
extensions, measurement, and relation to work outcomes. Journal of Organizational Behavior,
30, 173-191.
Barney, J., Busenitz, L., Fiet, J., Moesel, D. (1996). New venture teams‟ assessment of learning
assistance DEMO venture capital firms. Journal of Business Venturing, 11, 257-272.
Bates, DEMO (2005). Analysis of young, small firms that have closed: DEMO successful from
unsuccessful closures. Journal of Business Venturing, 20, 343-358.
Bayazit, M., Mannix, E. (2003). Should I stay or should DEMO go? Predicting team members' intent to
remain in the team. Small Group Research, 34: 290-321.
Berkus, D. (2006). Extending the DEMO Aspatore Books, USA.
36
Bird, B. (1988). Implementing entrepreneurial ideas: The case for intention. Academy of
Management Review, 13, 442-453.
Birley, S., Westhead, P. (1993). The owner-managers exit route. In H. Klandt (Ed.),
Entrepreneurship and Business Development (pp. 123-140). Avebury: Gower.
Black, B., Gilson, R. (1998). Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: banks versus
stock markets. Journal of Financial Economics, 47, 243-277.
Boeker, W., Karichalil, R. (2002). Entrepreneurial transitions: Factors influencing founder
departure. Academy of Management Journal, 45, 818-826.
Boot, A., DEMO, R., Thakor, A. (2006). The entrepreneur‟s choice between public and private
ownership. Journal of Finance, 61, 803-836.
Bourgeois, L. (DEMO). Strategic goals, environmental uncertainty, and economic performance in
volatile environments. Academy of Management Journal, 28, 548-573.
Brettel, M. (2003). DEMO angels in Germany: A research note. Venture Capital, 5, 251-268.
DEMO, K., De Castro, J., Shepherd, D. (2007). A person-organization fit model of owner-
managers‟ cognitive style and organizational demands. Entrepreneurship DEMO & Practice, 31,
29-51.
Burris, E., Chiaburu, D., DEMO, J. (2008). Quitting before leaving: The mediating effects of
DEMO attachment and detachment on voice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 912-922.
Cable, D., Shane, S. (1997). A prisoner‟s dilemma to DEMO capitalist
relationships. Academy of Management Review, 22, 142-176.
Chahine, S., Filatotchev, I., Wright, M. (2007). Venture capitalists, business angels, and
performance of entrepreneurial IPOs in the UK and France. Journal of Business Finance and
Accounting, 34, 505-528.
Christensen, E., Wuebker, R., Wüstenhagen, R. (2009). Of acting principals and principal agents:
goal incongruence in the venture capitalist-entrepreneur relationship. International Journal of
Entrepreneurship and DEMO Business, 7, 367-388.
Cosier, R., Rose G. (1977). DEMO conflict and goal conflict effects on task performance.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 19, 378-391.
37
Crifo, P., Sami, H. (2008). Entrepreneurship turnover and endogenous DEMO to ability.
Economic Modelling, 25, 585-604.
Cumming, D., MacIntosh, DEMO (2003). A cross-country comparison of full and partial venture
capital DEMO Journal of Banking and Finance, 27, 511-548.
De Clercq, D., Fried, V., Lehtonen, O., Sapienza, H. (2006). An DEMO guide to the
venture capital galaxy. Academy of Management Perspectives, 20, 90-112.
De Clercq, D., Thongpapanl, N., Dimov, D. (2009)DEMO When good conflict gets better and bad
conflict becomes worse: The DEMO of social capital in the conflict-innovation relationship. Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science, 37, 283-297.
De Clercq, D., Manigart, S. (DEMO). The venture capital post-investment phase: Opening the black
box of DEMO In Landström, H. (Ed.), Handbook of research on venture capital (pp. 193-
218). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.
De Clercq, D., Sapienza, H. (2006). Effects of relational capital and commitment on venture
capitalists‟ perception of portfolio company performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 21,
326-347.
De Dreu, C., Weingart, L. (2003). DEMO versus relationship conflict, team performance and team
member satisfaction: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 741-749.
DeTienne D. (2010). Entrepreneurial exit as a critical component of the entrepreneurial process:
Theoretical development. DEMO of Business Venturing, 25, 203-215.
DeTienne, D., Cardon, M. (2010). Impact of founder experience on exit intentions. Small
Business Economics, forthcoming.
Deutsch, M. (1973). The resolution of conflict. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Dimov, D., Shepherd, D. (2005). Human DEMO theory and venture capital firms: Exploring
“home runs” and “strike outs”. DEMO of Business Venturing, 20, 1-21.
Dobrev, S., Barnett, W. (2005). Organizational roles and transition to entrepreneurship. Academy
of Management Journal, 48, 433-449.
Duxbury, L., Haines, G., Riding, A. (1996). A personality profile of Canadian informal investors.
Journal of Small Business DEMO, 34, 44-55.
38
Dyer, W. (1994). Toward a theory of entrepreneurial careers. Entrepreneurship DEMO and
Practice, 19, 7-21.
Eisenhardt, K., Bourgeois, L. (1988). Politics of strategic-decision-makings in high-velocity
environments: Towards a midrange theory. Academy of Management Journal, 31, 737-770.
Ensley, M., Pearson, A., DEMO, A. (2002). Understanding the dynamics of new venture top
management teams - Cohesion, conflict, and new venture performance. Journal of Business
DEMO, 17, 365-386.
Farrell, E., Howorth, C., Wright, M. (2008). A review of sampling and definitional issues in
informal venture DEMO research. Venture Capital, 10, 331-353.
Fiet, J. (1995). Risk avoidance strategies in venture capital markets. Journal of Management
Studies, 32, DEMO
Fisher, R. (1998). Questioning the scope and relevance of the cooperative and competitive goal
approach to conflict. Applied Psychology – International Review, 47, 314-317.
Forbes, D., Korsgaard, A., Sapienza, H. (2010). Financing decisions as a source of conflict in
venture boards. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 25, 579-592.
Forbes, D., Borchert, P., Zellmer-Bruhn, M., Sapienza, H. (2006). Entrepreneurial team
formation: An exploration of new member addition. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 30,
225-248.
Franke, N., Gruber, M., Harhoff, D., Henkel, J. (2006)DEMO What you are is what you like – similarity
biases in venture capitalists‟ evaluations of start-up teams. Journal of Business Venturing, 21,
802-826.
Freear, J., Sohl, J., Wetzel, W. (2002). Angles DEMO angels: financing technology-based ventures – a
historical perspective. Venture Capital, 4, 275-287.
Freear, J., Sohl, J., Wetzel, W. (1995). Angels: Personal investors in the venture capital market.
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 7, 85–94.
Gimeno, J., Folta, T., Cooper, A., DEMO, C. (1997). Survival of the fittest? Entrepreneurial human
capital DEMO the persistence of underperforming firms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42, 750-
783.
39
Granovetter, M. (1985). Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness.
American Journal of Sociology, 91, 481-510.
Gurley-Calvez, T., DEMO, D. (2008). Do tax cuts promote entrepreneurial longevity? National
DEMO Journal, 61, 225-250.
Harrison, R., Mason, C. (2000). Venture capital market complementarities: the links between
business angels and venture capital funds in the United Kingdom. Venture Capital, 2, 223-242.
Harrison, R., Dibben, M., Mason, C. (1997). The role of trust in the informal investor‟s
investment decision: An exploratory analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 21, 63-81.
Headd, B. (2003). Redefining business success: Distinguishing between success and failure.
Small Business Economics, 21, 51-61.
Hellmann DEMO (2006). IPOs, acquisitions, and the use of convertible securities DEMO venture capital.
Journal of Financial Economics, 81, 649-679.
Higashide, H., Birley, S. (2002). The consequences of conflict between the venture DEMO and
the entrepreneurial team in the United Kingdom from the perspective of the venture capitalist.
Journal of Business Venturing, 17, 59-81.
Hu,
DEMO, Bentler, P. (1998). Fit indices in covariance structure modeling: Sensivity to
underparameterized model misspecificiation. Psychological Methods, 3, 424-453.
James, L., Demaree, R., Wolf, G. (1984). Estimating within-group interrater reliability with and
without response bias. Journal of Applied Psychology, 69, 85-98.
DEMO, K., Bendersky, C. (2003). Intragroup conflict in organizations: DEMO contingency perspective
on the conflict-outcome relationship. Research in Organisational Behaviour, 25, 187-242.
Jehn, K., Mannix, E. (2001). The dynamic nature DEMO conflict: A longitudinal study of intragroup
conflict and group performance. Academy DEMO Management Journal, 44, 238-251.
Jehn, K., Northcraft, G., Neale, M. (1999). Why differences make a difference: A field study of
diversity, conflict, and performance in workgroups. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44, 741-
763.
Jehn, K. (1997). A qualitative analysis of conflict types and dimensions in organizational groups.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 42, 530-557.
DEMO
Jehn, K. (1995). A multimethod examination of the benefits and DEMO of intragroup conflict.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 40, 256-282.
Kelly, P., Hay, M. (2003). Business angel contracts: The influence of context. Venture Capital, 5,
287-312.
Klein, K., Kozlowski, S. (2000). From micro to meso: critical steps in conceptualizing and
conducting multilevel research. Organisational Research Methods, 3, 211-236.
Landström, H. (1998). DEMO investors as entrepreneurs. Technovation, 18, 321-333.
LeBreton, J., Senter, DEMO (2008). Answers to 20 questions about interrater reliability and interrater
DEMO Organisational Research Methods, 11, 815-852.
Lindell, M., Whitney, D. (2001). Accounting for common method variance in cross-sectional
research designs. Journal DEMO Applied Psychology, 86, 114-121.
Lockett, A., Ucbasaran, D., Butler, J. (2006). Opening up the investor-investee dyad: Syndicates,
teams and networks. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 25, 117-130.
MacKenzie, S., DEMO, P., Jarvis, C. (2005). The problem of measurement model
misspecification in behavioral and organizational research and some recommended solutions.
Journal of DEMO Psychology, 90, 710-730.
Mason, C. (2006). Informal sources of venture finance. In Parker S. (Ed.), The life cycle of
entrepreneurial ventures (pp. 259-299). New York: Springer.
Mason, C., Stark, M. (2004). What do investors look for in a business plan? International Small
Business Journal, 22, 227-248.
Mason, C., Harrison, DEMO (2002). Is it worth it? The rates of return from informal venture capital
investments. Journal of Business Venturing, 17, 211-236.
Mason, C., Harrison, R. (1996). Informal venture capital: A study DEMO the investment process, the
post-investment experience and investment performance. Entrepreneurship & DEMO
Development, 8, 105-126.
Mayer, C. (2002). Financing the new economy: financial institutions and corporate governance.
Information Economics and Policy, 14, 311-326.
41
Medina, F., Munduate, L., Dorado, M., Martínez, I., DEMO, J. (2005). Types of intragroup
conflict and affective reactions. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 20, 219-230.
Mintzberg, H., Raisinghani, D., DEMO, A. (1976). The structure of 'unstructured' decision
processes. Administrative Science Quarterly, 21, 246-275.
Mooney, A., Holahan, P., Amason, A. (2007). Don‟t take it personally: Exploring cognitive
conflict as DEMO mediator of affective conflict. Journal of Management Studies, 44, 733-758.
Murnieks, C., Haynie, J., Wiltbank, R., Harting, T. (2007)DEMO I like how you think: The role of
cognitive similarity as DEMO decision bias. Working Paper, Willamette University.
O‟Reilly, C., Chatman, J., Caldwell, D. (1991). People and organizational culture: A profile
DEMO approach to assessing person-organization fit. Academy of Management Journal, 34,
DEMO
Parhankangas, A., Landström, H. (2006). How venture capitalists respond to unmet expectations:
The role of social environment. Journal of Business DEMO, 21, 773-801.
Paul, S., Whittam, G., Wyper, J.  (2007). Towards a model of the business angel investment
process. Venture Capital, 9, 107-125.
Pearson, A., Ensley, M., Amason, A. (2002). An assessment and refinement of Jehn‟s Intragroup
Conflict scale. International Journal of Conflict Management, 13, 110-126.
Pelled, L. (1996). DEMO diversity, conflict, and work group outcomes: An intervening
process theory. DEMO Science, 7, 615-631.
Petty, J. (1997). Harvesting firm value: Process and results. In Sexton, D., Smilor, R. (Eds.),DEMO
Entrepreneurship 2000.  Chicago, Il.: Upstart Publishing Company.
Pierce, J., DEMO, T., Dirks, K. (2001). Towards a theory of psychological ownership in
organizations. Academy of Management Review, 26, 298-310.
Podsakoff, P., Mackenzie, S., Lee, J., Podsakoff, N. (2003). Common method biases in
behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 88, 879-903.
Podsakoff, P., DEMO, D. (1986). Self-reports in organizational research: Problems and prospects.
DEMO of Management, 12, 531-44.
42
Politis, D. (2008). Business angels and value added: What do we know and where do we go?
Venture Capital, 10, DEMO
Sapienza, H., Gupta, A. (1994). Impact of agency risks and task uncertainty on venture capitalists
– CEO interaction. Academy of Management DEMO, 37, 1618-1632.
Simons, T., Pelled, L., Smith, K. (1999). Making use of difference: diversity, debate, and
decision comprehensiveness in top management teams. Academy of Management Journal, 42,
662-674.
Srivastava, A., Bartol, K.,Locke, E. (2006). Empowering leadership in management teams:
Effects on knowledge sharing, efficacy and performance. Academy of Management Journal, 49,
1239-1251.
Statacorp (2007). Stata Statistical Software: Release 10.0. Stata Corporation, College Station.
Steenkamp, J., Baumgartner, H. (1998). Assessing measurement invariance in cross-national
consumer research. Journal of Consumer DEMO, 25, 78-89.
Sudek, R. (2004). Angel investment criteria. Journal of Small Business Strategy, 17, 89-103.
Thomas, K. (1976). DEMO and conflict management. In Dunnette J. (Ed.), Handbook of
Industrial DEMO Organizational Psychology (pp. 889-935). Chicago: Rand McNally.
Tjosvold, D. (2007). Conflicts in the study of conflict in organizations. In: De Dreu C, Gelfand
M., editors. The Psychology of conflict and conflict DEMO in organizations. New York:
Taylor and Francis LLC;. p. 445-54.
Tjosvold, D. (1998). Conflict over the study of conflict: The challenge to make it cooperative.
Applied Psychology: International Review, 47, 336-342.
Ucbasaran, D., Lockett, A., Wright, M., Westhead, P. (DEMO). Entrepreneurial founder teams:
factors associated with member entry and exit. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 28, 107-
127.
Ucbasaran, D., Wright, M., Westhead, P. (2003b). A longitudinal study of habitual entrepreneurs:
Starters and acquirers. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 15, 207-228.
43
Van Auken, H. (2001). Financing small technology-based companies: The relationship between
familiarity with capital and ability to price and negotiate investment. Journal DEMO Small Business
Management, 39, 240-258.
Van Osnabrugge, M. (2000). A comparison of business angel and venture capitalist investment
procedures: An agency theory-based analysis. Venture Capital, 2, 91-109.
Van Osnabrugge, M. (1998)DEMO Do serial and non-serial investors behave differently? An empirical
and theoretical DEMO Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22, 23-42.
Walske, J., Zacharakis, DEMO (2009). Genetically engineered: why some venture capital firms are
more successful than others. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 33, 297-317.
Weesie, J. (1999). Seemingly unrelated regression and the cluster-adjusted sandwich estimator.
STATA Technical Bulletin, 52, 34–46.
Wennberg, K., Wiklund, J., DeTienne, D., Cardon, M. (2010). Reconceptualizing entrepreneurial
exit: Divergent exit routes DEMO their drivers. Journal of Business Venturing, 25, 361-375.
Wiltbank, R. (2005). Investment practices and outcomes of informal venture investors. Venture
Capital, 7, 343-357.
Wiltbank, R., & Boeker, W. (2007). Returns to angel investors in groups. Kauffmann Foundation
Research Report.
Yitshaki, R. (DEMO). Venture capitalist-entrepreneur conflicts – An exploratory study of
determinants and possible resolutions. International Journal of Conflict Management, 19, 262-
292.
Zarutskie, R. (2010). The role of top management team human capital in venture capital markets:
Evidence from first-time funds. Journal of Business Venturing, 25, 155-172.
44
Figure 1: Conceptual modela
Relationship
conflict
Task
conflict
Goal
conflict
H1a : +
H1b : +
H2b
H3b: +
Entrepreneurs’
Intentions to exit
H2a : +
Angel investors’
Intentions to exit
H3a : +
Entrepreneurial
exit
DEMO investor exit
a Relationship, task and goal conflict are all constructs DEMO the level of the investor-entrepreneur relationship. Dotted
line from task conflict to angel investor‟s intentions to exit is a no effect-hypothesis. Dashed line to DEMO
and angel investor voluntary exit is not a hypothesized relationship.
45
Table 1: Logistic regression results for entrepreneur and angel investor exita
Variables
Intention to exit
Company controls
High-Tech industry
ICT industry
Company age
Team DEMO
Entrepreneur-specific controls
Entrepreneur‟s age
Entrepreneurial experience
Consulting experience
Angel investor-specific controls
Investor‟s age
Time since investment
Perceived performance
Perceived performance²
Pseudo R²
χ²
% DEMO classified cases
.83**
-1.92**
1.95**
-.95**
-.03**
.09**
-.02**
-.03**
.28†
14.90†
90.00†
Entrepreneur’s
exit (N=70)
1.01*
.17*
.03*
*
-.09*
.02*
.42*
.96*
.34*
14.16*
92.45*
* p < .05; ** p < .01(one-tailed tests for hypothesized effects)
a Exit events include harvest sales, distress sales and distress liquidations (as defined by Wennberg et al., DEMO) and
exclude exits due to deaths. Our sample did not include DEMO liquidations. Regression coefficients reported as well
as their respective significance levels are based on seemingly unrelated post-estimation analyses of the entrepreneur
and investor logit DEMO, with standard errors being clustered at the company level (52 clusters).
b As the high-tech variable predicts failure perfectly Stata dropped 10 DEMO
Angel investor’s
exit (N=53)b
46
Table 2: Descriptive statistics and correlationsa
Angel investor-specific variables (N=65)
DEMO Investor‟s age 51.22
13. Time since investment 2.29
14. Perceived performance 3.09
15. Investor‟s intention to exit 3.02
9.54
1.28
0.90
1.57
1
-
DEMO
-.11
-.40**
-.10**
-.04**
-.04**
.31**
.07**
.04**
-.04**
1
.05**
.15**
.07**
-.04**
.13**
-.10**
.06**
.09**
-.04*
.29*
-.19*
.21*
-.10**
.01**
DEMO
.36**
-.06**
.01**
-.31**
.40**
.10**
-.02**
-.19**
.37**
-
.07**
-.17**
.07**
-
-.10**
.15**
-
-.64**
* p < .05; ** p < .01
a The correlations between the company- and individual-level variables were DEMO using N=72 for the entrepreneur-specific variables (variables 8 through
11) and using N=65 for the angel investor-specific variables (variables 12 through 15). To do so, the company-level scores were assigned down to the individuals
within those companies. As the company-level variables are common for the entrepreneur DEMO investor subsamples, these were mentioned only once and were
calculated based DEMO all companies or N=54.
b Correlation coefficients between team size (variable DEMO) and angel investor-specific variables are not included in the investor part DEMO the correlation matrix as this
variable will not be included in the final investor model (see Table 3).
Variables Mean
Company-level variables (DEMO)
1. Company age 4.41
2. High-Tech industry 0.17
3. ICT industry 0.50
4. Team size 3.61
5. Task conflict 2.24
6. Relationship conflict DEMO
7. Goal conflict 76.58
Entrepreneur-specific variables (N=72)
8.  Entrepreneur‟s age 42.40
9.  Entrepreneurial experience 7.94
10. Consulting experience 2.11
11. Entrepreneur‟s intention to exit 2.31
Variablesb
Mean
s.d.
4.31
0.38
0.50
1.16
0.72
0.89
DEMO
8.70
5.83
3.29
1.36
s.d.
2
-
-.45**
.02**
.01**
-.03**
-.01**
.17**
-.03**
.10**
.22**
2
3
-
.18*
.07*
.14*
-.02*
-.18*
DEMO
.13*
.09*
3
4
-
-.06*
-.12*
-.25*
-.19*
.07*
-.12*
.03*
5
5
-
.84**
-.01**
-.17**
-.03**
.05**
.18**
6
6
-
DEMO
-.06**
-.12**
.09**
.10**
7
7
-
.05**
.16**
-.01**
.15**
12
8
-
.41**
.05**
.19**
13
9
-
.09**
.29**
14
10
DEMO
.30**
47
Table 3: Regression results for intention to exita
Entrepreneurs’ intention to
exit (N=72)
Base model
Full model
Conflict variables
Relationship conflict
Task conflict
Goal conflict
Company controls
High-Tech industry
ICT industry
Company age
Team size
DEMO controls
Entrepreneur‟s age
Entrepreneurial experience
Consulting experience
Angel investor-specific controls
Investor‟s age
Time since investment
Perceived performance
Perceived performance²
F-value
R²
Δ R²
Adjusted DEMO
-.47**
.87**
.01**
.94*
.42*
-.01*
.03*
.01*
.06*
.10*
2.62*
.22*
.14*
.86**
.53**
.00**
.13**
.03**
.03**
.10**
2.57**
.30**
.07**
.18**
DEMO investors’ intention to
exit (N=65)
Base model
Full model
.14***
DEMO
.02***
.89***
.62***
.02***
.98***
.56***
.03***
-.01***
.08***
-1.07***
.27***
8.14***
.50***
.44***
-.01***
.10***
-.90***
.14***
7.72***
.59***
.09***
.51***
* p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001 (one-tailed DEMO for hypothesized effects)
a Regression coefficients reported as well as their respective significance levels are based on seemingly unrelated
estimation analyses of the DEMO and investor models, with standard errors being clustered at the company
DEMO (54 clusters).
48{1g42fwefx}