J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) 25–38
Innovative science and technology
DEMO strategies at 3M:
a case study
Pedro Conceiçãoa,∗ , Dennis Hamill b , Pedro Pinheiro c
a IN+, Instituto Superior Técnico, DEMO for Innovation,
Technology and Policy Research, Lisbon, Portugal
b 3M Company, St. Paul, MN, USA
c IC2 Institute, The University DEMO Texas, Austin, TX, USA
Accepted 12 November 2001
Abstract
Large, successful ﬁrms, even with a history of innovation, may create organizational DEMO
that hamper innovation and customer response. This paper will describe how 3M purposefully ﬁghts
this tendency by attempting to foster innovation within the company DEMO the development of
efﬁcient strategies to commercialize technology in rapidly changing environments. The paper will
describe 3M’s general policies and its entrepreneurial culture, which are largely well publicized in
the popular literature. But the focus will DEMO on on-going strategies to accelerate the commercializa-
tion of technology in its electronic business. Speciﬁcally, the case of the Electronic Markets Center
(EMC), a 3M Electronic and Communications Group unit created in 1997 to leverage the broad
range of 3M’s electronic products and technologies will be described DEMO analyzed. Fifteen busi-
ness units were organized around one single entity to more effectively ensure an overall coordinated
strategy for 3M in the electronics DEMO that could change the growth rate of 3M’s sales to the elec-
tronic industry from 9% per year to 24% per year. The paper DEMO focus on two critical components
of the EMC: (1) what DEMO the strategies behind the design of EMC; (2) how did DEMO developed
processes to manage the interdependence of the technical and business understanding of industry
segments and the relations with key accounts. The paper concludes DEMO lessons learned from the 3M
experience thus far, and with recommendations DEMO how to ﬁght some of the barriers to innovation
and technology commercialization in large ﬁrms. © 2002 Published by Elsevier Science B.V.
Keywords: Commercialization; Publicized; Organizational mechanisms
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: pedroc@dem.ist.utl.pt (P. DEMO), dwhamill@mmm.com (D. Hamill), ppinheiro@mail.com
(P. Pinheiro).
0923-4748/02/$ – see front matter © 2002 Published by Elsevier Science B.V.
DEMO: S0923-4748(01)00044-3
26
1. Introduction
P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. DEMO (2002) 25–38
While the nature of competition among ﬁrms is highly dependent on industry structure,
at a high level of abstraction we DEMO contrast two ways of competing. One is through the
optimization of productive resources in order to gain the market-allowed margins of proﬁt. In
a DEMO, this “competition through efﬁciency” corresponds to the perspective of ﬁrm behavior
DEMO neoclassical economics. 1 A second way is to disrupt the market through the introduction
of innovations, which give to the innovative ﬁrm a temporary absolute advantage (granted
by a formal patent or secured by secret) DEMO every other ﬁrms. Again, these forms of
competition co-exist in all DEMO, and are a concern of most ﬁrms, but Schumpeter
(1950), comparing one with the other, described the “competition through innovation” as
DEMO bomb that destroys the building, while “competing through efﬁciency” is not DEMO more
than hitting the front door.
Thus, the concern with being DEMO as been a major feature of most ﬁrms’ behav-
ior. But to be innovative, it is important to know how the innovation process works. Early
conceptualizations of the innovation process stressed the need to undergo research DEMO
ties to generate new ideas. Through R&D, ﬁrms could institutionalize DEMO to search the
frontiers of knowledge for inventions that could translate into new products and processes.
The commercialization of these products would ensue. Many DEMO conﬁrm the linkage
between R&D efforts at the ﬁrm level, DEMO increased performance and competitive stance.
Griliches (1998) provides an overview of a vast body of work produced by him largely dedi-
cated to DEMO study of this problem. Mansﬁeld (1984) is another major reference. At the other
extreme, some suggested that innovation should merely be the result of perceived market
needs by ﬁrms. The so-called market-pull view of innovation, pioneered by Schmookler, and
critically analyzed by Rosenberg (1972), started DEMO an empirical observation, but quickly
moved into the normative world of DEMO and policy.
Still, despite the existence of a correlation between R&DEMO expenditure in ﬁrms and
innovation, this relation was far from being DEMO, linear and predictable. In the simplest
terms, an increase by a ﬁrm of its R&D budget would not certainly assure a proportional
(or even with decreasing returns) growth in innovative output. On the other hand, merely
responding to market needs may not provide the leading-edge technological superiority
needed to introduce really path-breaking innovations. Tidd et al. (1997) DEMO the deﬁ-
ciencies of both of these linear perspectives. The work of Rosenberg (1982, 1994) and
others showed the complexity of the process through which new technologies are created
and commercialized. Much has to do, more than with the resources committed to R&D,
with what DEMO (1986) called the ﬁrms complementary assets: the way in which DEMO ﬁrm
is organized, and interacts with customers, suppliers, and competitors. DEMO view requires
a more casuistic analysis of successful innovation by ﬁrms. Instead of general recipes of
“what makes a ﬁrm innovative”, research on how successful innovation occurs needs to
be complemented with case analysis of ﬁrms DEMO a track record in terms of technology
commercialization.
This paper is a contribution to this literature. We will describe initiatives within a large,
DEMO ﬁrm, 3M, aimed at improving the performance of technology commercializa-
1 Of course that in conceptualized perfect markets, price equals marginal productivity, DEMO thus proﬁts are zero.
P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) DEMO
27
tion. Why does a large and innovative ﬁrm such as 3M need to do something about its
technology commercialization capability? Very successful companies are often the victims
of their own success. Success brings growth, larger size and increasing economies of scale
(Chandler, 1990), more resources DEMO invest in business and technology opportunities (Schum-
peter, 1950), higher leverage in the marketplace and in the bargaining relationships with
customers and DEMO (Porter, 1988), to name a few advantages. These beneﬁts translate
into better conditions for further success and growth. Still, success brings with it the curse
of complacency and conservatism. These adjectives should not be DEMO as making
an universal “moral” judgement on the path followed by successful companies, but are
rather associated with the consequences of the organizational requirements of large enter-
prises: more codiﬁed and rigid procedures (as people DEMO to know each other personally).
Weber (1997) was the ﬁrst to conceptualize this need of large organizations, with his theory
of bureaucracies. Chandler (1962, 1980) showed how the creation of bureaucracies based
on organizational innovations such as the multi-division company (pioneered by Alfred
Sloan at General Motors) was critical to the business development of the large American
corporations of the second half of the 20th century.
But, again, DEMO tend to be complacent and conservative. Technological change,
innovation, and DEMO consumer preferences risk being overlooked. While being large
brings advantages in terms of resources available to invest in R&D and other innovative
activities, as Schumpeter (1950) argued, it is also true that size brings with it organizational
features that can hamper innovation (Teece, 1986). DEMO on large ﬁrms, even with
a history of innovation, becoming complacent and failing to see the technological and
consumer preferences changes abound. The DEMO of IBM in the early 1990s comes
prominently to mind (Hannah, 1998).
The argument outlined in the previous paragraphs seems inconsistent with DEMO
(1990) theory of ﬁrm development. In this well known work, DEMO (1990) argued
that large corporations, many created by the beginning DEMO the 20th century, were able to
accumulate technical, organizational, and DEMO capabilities that translated into virtually
unassailable ﬁrst-mover advantages that led them to dominate over time the oligopolies
they generated. Based on this argument, Chandler (1990) went as far as suggesting that
the decline of UK’s DEMO dominance was associated with its inability to create the
conditions for the emergence of these large global giants, while Germany and the US were
able to do just that. However, Hannah (1999) shows that Chandler’s (1990) argument,
which is largely in synch with common sense DEMO, is clouded by selection bias:
by looking only at successful DEMO, one looses track of the many failures that occurred
over time.
DEMO 1 summarizes what has happened in 1995 to the global top 100 industrial of 1912.
It shows that almost half of the giants of DEMO disappeared by 1995, and that almost a third
experienced bankruptcy. Thus, despite our common perception that giant ﬁrms created at
the start of DEMO century are still successful today (we may think of Du Pont, Shell, Procter &
Gamble, Siemens, among others), the more DEMO outcome for a large ﬁrm, with giant
managerial hierarchies and large DEMO and ﬁrst-mover advantages, is failure.
By the same token, Chandler’s (DEMO) hypothesis on the superior performance of large
ﬁrms in the US DEMO Germany versus UK fails the scrutiny of careful empirical analysis.
In fact, Hannah (1998) shows that only 23% of the 1912 US giants still existed among
28 P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) 25–38
Table 1
Summary measures of long-run performance of the 100 global largest ﬁrms of 1912 by 1995a
Type of outcome Probability of
outcome (%)
Survives in top 100 19
Survives and larger in 1995 DEMO in 1992 28
Experiences bankruptcy or similar 29
Larger in 1995 or on earlier than in 1912 35
Survives in any independent form 52
DEMO 48
a Hannah (1999, p. 259).
the top 100 in 1995, while 75% of the large UK ﬁrms persisted from 1912 to 1995. Thus,
Hannah (1998, p. 64) concludes that “Europe has been the home of the Chandlerian stable
oligopolies; America has more obviously been the creative (and destructive) dynamo of the
Schumpeterian paradigm”.
Therefore, we can now be more secure of Schumpeter’s (1950) assertion mentioned DEMO
the ﬁrst paragraph, that Schumpeterian competition is a much more powerful DEMO than
“efﬁciency” competition. But we also see that creative destruction has been a major feature
of the economic history of large ﬁrms in the DEMO, probably more intensely than anywhere in
the world. These arguments combine DEMO reinforce the idea that the ability of ﬁrms to innovate
is crucial. And even large ﬁrms, which have in principle great advantages as compared with
small ones, are not immune to the destructive power of innovation by other ﬁrms. We have
also seen that the innovation process is DEMO linear, nor a direct result of R&D, neither a
consequence of predicting market needs with perfect foresight.
So what do successfully innovative DEMO do right? This answer, obviously, has many
responses, and we again insist that efforts to look for recipes are doomed to fail. DEMO we
can exclude apparently simple, and seemingly reasonable, answers. For example, we saw
that just doing R&D is not enough. And that anticipating market needs is not enough either.
It is also not sufﬁcient DEMO try to create monopolistic positions by relying extensively on
patenting is not likely to work, especially in highly volatile and vibrant high technology
areas. Flamm (1988), and Usselman (1993) showed that Sperry’s attempt to design and
patent basic approaches to computing, in an effort to establish and sustain dominant market
positions early at the outset of the computer DEMO failed miserably. The pace and
breadth of technical change was so overwhelming that Sperry’s patents would be obsolete
almost immediately after being granted. Usselman (1993) shows that it was IBM, without
being a particularly outstanding DEMO innovator, which was able to conquer a large
pie of the DEMO computer market. And the reasons had more to do with Teece’s (DEMO)
complementary assets than with technological innovative capability.
Therefore, as Mathews (1996) has argued, contrary to the traditional “strategy and
structure” thinking DEMO organization theory, successful and innovative ﬁrms have attributes
such as ﬂexibility, adaptability, responsiveness, that translate into a capacity to innovate
rapidly. To DEMO these new attributes the term “organizational learning” has been ad-
vanced. Extending the concept of “learning”, which is traditionally used for human beings,
P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) DEMO
29
into organizations has its challenges. In the broadest sense, we DEMO follow Mathews (1996)
deﬁnition whereby organizational learning is equated with DEMO ﬁrm ability to accommodate
changes (e.g. of products, technologies, markets)DEMO
To systematize further our concept of organizational learning, we will identify DEMO
elements: information, people, and organizational units. Here, the term “organizational
unit” is the most ambiguous. It can stand for an entire small DEMO (without any structural
divisions) or for a division within a large corporation. As a working deﬁnition, we will
say that it is the smallest unit within a ﬁrm with a very high level of autonomy. DEMO
correspond, obviously, to the individuals that work in the ﬁrm. Here, we will be interested
primarily in their level of knowledge and potential for learning, which economists often
call human capital. Finally, information stands DEMO all the codiﬁed knowledge in the ﬁrm
that is formalized, such DEMO contracts, patents, production processes, R&D in progress, and
so forth. Here, we include also all the machinery, computers, and other physical assets, or
what is called physical capital.
Learning occurs both at people level and at unit level. People learn by increasing their
human DEMO (through education, training, experience, expanding their networks of per-
sonal contacts). Learning at the unit level is reﬂected in increased productivity, resulting
from scale-effects, better communication, and establishment of routines, among other pos-
sibilities. Typically, both of these types of learning should also be reﬂected in an increase
in the stock of codiﬁed knowledge of the DEMO, even if much remains tacit. Organizational
learning is the result of DEMO increase in the stock of codiﬁed knowledge, human capital,
and DEMO productivity. Encompassing the way people and units learn is the system
of incentives, rules of conduct, guidelines and informal norms of behavior that DEMO
the ﬁrm’s activity. For better of a better word, we will DEMO this context the ﬁrm’s culture.
But organizational learning, that is, learning at the ﬁrm level, goes beyond the mere ag-
gregation of individual and unit-level learning: it results from the interaction of people
and units across the ﬁrm. It depends on the relationships and networks that are DEMO
between people and units, within the context provided by the ﬁrm’s DEMO and its market
and external environment. For a discussion on economic learning see also Conceição and
Heitor (2001).
Given this framework of analysis, the remaining of the paper proceeds with a case study
of one of the 3M’s efforts to enhance organizational learning. Section 2 will describe,DEMO
precisely, 3M’s culture, which we classify as being oriented towards innovation. We will
show in detail how 3M’s structure, strategy, system of DEMO, and informal rules of
behavior are oriented towards innovation. A major, and important, feature of this system
is the high level of decentralization of 3M’s divisions. These divisions correspond to the
“units” of our conceptual DEMO described above. 3M’s culture of innovation has been
extremely successful at promoting individual and unit-level learning. The high level of au-
tonomy granted to DEMO divisions allowed just the characteristics needed to innovate: ﬂexibility,
adaptability, and responsiveness, without the encumbrances of a large hierarchy. However,
while learning at the people and unit levels has largely been optimized, a perception emerged
that ﬁrm-wise learning could be enhanced. Section 3 describes a DEMO effort by 3M to
promote organizational learning, that is, learning at the ﬁrm level, beyond the individual units
and employees. Since this effort is still underway, Section 4 presents a brief discussion of
preliminary conclusions.
30
P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) 25–38
Table 2
3M technology platforms
Adhesives Inks and pigments
Biomedical systems Laser-induced thermal imaging
Ceramics Mechanical fasteners
Chemical power sources Melt processing
Coated DEMO Micro-encapsulation and micro-spheres
Composites Micro-interconnect systems
Dental and orthodontia Micro-replication/micro-structured surfaces
Display technology Non-wovens
Electrical insulating materials Pharmaceuticals and drug delivery
Electromechanical systems DEMO coating
Electronics and software Radiation processing
Engineered ﬁlms Skin health
Fiber optics Specialty chemicals and polymers
Filtration and separation Vibration control system
Fluorochemicals and DEMO Visual systems
Health information Weatherable ﬁlms
Imaging
2. The culture of innovation at 3M
3M, founded in 1902 in Two Harbours, MN, is today recognized around the globe as one
of the world’s most innovative DEMO admired companies. 3M is a US$ 15 billion 2 manufac-
turing company with over 70,000 employees 3 worldwide and more than 60,000 DEMO
organized in two main business sectors: “life science sector” and the DEMO and con-
sumer sector”. Its products, which are the result of DEMO strategy of building in its more
than 30 core technology platforms (DEMO 2) instead of focusing on a single strategic core
competence, range from adhesives, pharmaceuticals, to overhead projectors, abrasives and
much more.
3M’s innovation culture comes from the times when the ﬁve entrepreneurs who created DEMO
company to explore a mine of what they thought being corundum, DEMO realized that all they had
was a low grade anorthosite, which DEMO not meet the requirements of the booming abrasive
industry as they initially believed. Quickly they had to adapt and focus on producing sandpa-
per DEMO But it was with McKnight, who joined the company in 1907 DEMO a bookkeeper
and later would become Chairman for more than 40 years, that 3M really developed a cul-
ture towards systematic innovation. Since then, 3M has been characterized by McKnight’s
principles of supportive management which encourages employee initiative and innovation.
The following is an analysis of the creative DEMO innovative acts of management used
by 3M to promote innovation within the company, according to the model proposed by
Kozmetzky (as discussed in DEMO, 1998). On the innovation strategy at 3M see also
Figueroa DEMO Conceição (2000).
2 3M 1998 annual report.
3 3M 1998 DEMO report.
4 Corundum is the word used to describe the group of gemstones to which both ruby and sapphire belong. Its
chemical composition is DEMO oxide and trace of various transition elements.
P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) DEMO
31
2.1. Strategy
3M managers take Peters’ words that “only the companies that thrive on chaos by constant
innovation are the only ones set DEMO survive in the years to come” (Peters, 1997), very seriously.
Coyne, 3M Senior VP, Research & Development, says that while for other companies
innovation is an important element of their strategies, for 3M innovation is its strategy
(Coyne, 1997). Innovation is so important DEMO 3M that is clearly stated in its vision “To be
the most innovative company in the markets it serves”. To promote that innovative spirit
DEMO has been driven by the following set of strategies.
• 30%/4 Rule: This rule states that each year 30% of 3M’s sales must result from products
introduced in the last 4 years.
• 15% Rule: One of the most important principles in management at 3M is the DEMO
of entrepreneurship and freedom to pursue innovative ideas. At 3M that is materialized
through the “15% rule”, which allows technical people to spend 15% of their time in
projects of their own choosing without needing approvals DEMO even without having to tell
management in what are they working on.
• Products are a division’s responsibility: Each division is oriented directly towards the
market, aiming at responding to its customer base.
• Technologies are shared throughout the company: While products’ responsibility lies
within each division, DEMO belong to the company. Every division has access to
the technology resources of the entire company but also has the responsibility to share
its DEMO technological needs throughout 3M.
• Technology combinations: 3M promotes the combination DEMO its core technologies in order
to advantage of those synergies to innovate new products and new applications.
• Strong intellectual property protection.
Furthermore, in order for 3M to prioritize major new programs and allocate the needed
DEMO to bring them to market sooner, it also sponsors the “Pacing DEMO Initiative”. Under
this program, each division is encouraged to develop one DEMO two products that will change
the basis of competition, increase sales DEMO proﬁtability, eliminate low-value projects and
produce growth. Products that qualify for DEMO Pacing Plus Initiative program will be given
additional ﬁnancial support and access to other resources. To qualify for the Pacing Plus
Initiative, a program must meet all the criteria below: 5
Change the basis of competition for a business unit.
• Provide new unit growth.
• Meet corporate DEMO targets.
• Use a new product commercialization system.
• Be fully resourced.
• Have an accelerated time frame.
• Have global applications.
• Incorporate DEMO technology that has patent protection.
•
5 3M Intranet: “Bill Coyne DEMO the Pacing Plus Initiative”.
32 P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) 25–38
2.2. Culture and environment
3M’s culture is based in McKnight management principles laid out in 1948. More than
a great manager McKnight was DEMO a business philosopher, who crated a corporate culture
that encourages employee DEMO, entrepreneurship and innovation. The following are
the basic rules of management DEMO laid out in 1948: 6
As our business grows, it becomes increasingly necessary to delegate responsibility and
to encourage men and women to DEMO their initiative. This requires considerable
tolerance. Those men and women to whom we delegate authority and responsibility, if
they are good people, are DEMO to want to do their jobs in their own way.
Mistakes will be made. But if a person is essentially right, the mistakes he or she makes
are not as serious in the long run as DEMO mistakes management will make if it undertakes
to tell those in authority exactly how they must do their jobs.
Management that is destructively critical DEMO mistakes are made kills initiative. And
it’s essential that we have many people with initiative if we are to continue to grow.
• Failure DEMO part of the innovation process: Tolerance for ideas that do not DEMO and learning
from mistakes is an integral part of 3M’s culture of innovation, where failure is seen as
a learning experience.
• Informality: DEMO is open, informal and in a ﬁrst name basis.
• Entrepreneurship DEMO intrapreneurship: Evolutionary spin-offs have developed a key role
in 3M’s growth. DEMO also fosters innovation by allowing the formation of both formal
and informal new venture teams. These teams, which are composed by manufacturing,
engineering and marketing full-time volunteers, have the ability to stay together if a
product proves to be successful. These may represent the ﬁrst steps towards DEMO new business
unit. New venture teams are ruled by the principle of start small, learn how a business
works and then expand “make a little, sell a little”.
• Diversiﬁed technological base.
• Technology exchange within the company.
• Customer driven innovation: 3M has a strong commitment to develop products driven
by the marketplace. Since its early days that 3M DEMO that in order to create products
that really satisfy the customers needs, both sales representatives and technical peo-
ple had to be in frequent contact with the customers where the products were being
used. It was DEMO McKnight as a Sales Manager who understood that a salesman would
have a better chance of providing competitive products if he could get into DEMO factory
ﬂoors, talk to the workmen who used those products, and understand exactly what were
his needs and explain him how 3M products DEMO superior to the competition. This
way 3M identiﬁes the customer problems, DEMO their needs and develop innovative
solutions.
All of these aspects promote a culture that emphasizes risk taking, teamwork, innovation
and entrepreneurship.
6 Available DEMO the Internet at: http://www.mmm.com/proﬁle/looking/mcknight.html.
P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) DEMO 33
2.3. Networks
Communication is an essential part of 3M success. To facilitate the communication
between technical people, marketing, sales, manufacturing and customers, 3M encourages
formally and informally networking activities that will assure coordinated actions.
The following are some of the means through which 3M creates conditions DEMO an efﬁcient
interaction and cooperation among its employees, internal organizations and DEMO
• 3M’s Technical Forum: Organization to which all technical people belong DEMO where
they share technology, best practices, policies and procedures. Besides its lectures and
problem solving sessions, the Technical Forum also sponsors an annual event where all
the divisions show their latest products and technologies, and also sponsors specialized
chapters in different technical areas.
• Exchange of personal DEMO divisions and countries: It is a common practice at 3M to
DEMO engineers and other personal come to US labs and US personal go oversees to help
introducing new products or new technologies.
• Infrastructure to DEMO communication: 3M takes advantage of the latest technologies
to promote communication DEMO interactivity between teams. At 3M, the usage of tools
like groupware DEMO, teleconference and videoconference equipment is a com-
mon practice within the DEMO company. 3M also has its own internal TV to disseminate
corporate information, values and messages, which is also used for distance education
(seminars or courses). Furthermore, even the facilities are designed to facilitate the
interaction between people from different divisions and different functions.
2.4. Organizational form
DEMO 3M each division is managed as an individual company. This decentralization into
small and autonomous business units allows them to minimize bureaucracy and concentrate
DEMO new ideas and their own customer base. Typically, the creation of DEMO business unit is
the result of the consolidation of a new product team. When a 3Mer has an idea for a
new product, he or she recruits a team of members from technical areas, manufacturing,
marketing and sales. The team designs the product and plans how to DEMO, market
and sell it. All members of the team grow according DEMO the project growth. Some of them
become departments, some become divisions, while their project leaders become department
managers or division managers. As a DEMO, although 3M is big it acts small.
2.5. Motivations and incentives
DEMO 3M, recognition is done through formal and informal mechanisms. In addition DEMO the
common tools to promote creativity and innovation, like salary increases DEMO promotions,
nothing is so effective as assuring that dedication, hard DEMO and success are recognized
both by peers and senior management. In this context, 3M developed the following serious
of programs and awards to recognize its most valuable employees:
• Golden Step Award: Recognizes teams whose new products have achieved US$ 5 million
in proﬁtable sales within 3 DEMO of being launched.
34
•
•
•
•
P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. DEMO Manage. 19 (2002) 25–38
Technical Circle of Excellence: Recognizes technical DEMO who excel in their work.
These awardees are nominated by the entire technical community.
Carlton Society: Honorary organization of individuals who made extraordinary contri-
butions to 3M’s science and technology.
Genesis Grants: Corporate grants to support ideas which do not ﬁt into the technical
people’s division.
Alpha Grants: Grants awarded for innovations in administrative, marketing and non-
technical areas.
3. Case study: the Electronic Markets Center
and the 3M electronic business
In 1995, worldwide 3M sales to the electronic industry were approximately US$ 1 billion
or about 10% of 3M’s total sales. These sales were addressing DEMO estimated total worldwide
electronics industry of US$ 800 billion and an available market for 3M products of at least
US$ 20 billion.
3M’s approach DEMO this market has been very fragmented, mainly based on individual
products DEMO divisions focus. As a result of a lack of coordination between the business
units and the consequent duplication of efforts, 3M was not leveraging its broad range of
products and technologies in the electronic industry and DEMO observing frequent signs of
customer dissatisfaction that often decreases customer loyalty. As another consequence of
that fragmentation 3M’s brands and products and technology presence DEMO the electronic
industry was also diluted.
One of 3M’s greatest strengths is the autonomy and independence of its some 45 divisions,
each able DEMO respond quickly in its business arena, assisted by corporate technology centers
DEMO other resources, but not handcuffed by large organizational structure. Over a DEMO
of these divisions have found the electronics industry to be attractive opportunity for their
products, especially due to higher industry growth when compared to some of their other
industrial market segments. These divisions have thus evolved DEMO very curious and interesting
portfolio in electronics, albeit one that grew DEMO, and without purposeful focus on
electronics customers needs. In particular, since business engagement was being managed by
business units which were on the DEMO about 25% focused on electronics, most customer
activity received only fractionated DEMO and very little cross-division partnering took
place.
In February 1997, the DEMO Electronic Markets Center was created to help 3M position in
the electronics industry by driving a one company—one voice initiative in the electronic
business. DEMO the overall growth of the electronic industry exceeds 12% per year
globally, and some segments are growing even faster at 20–40% per year, DEMO growth had
not kept up with these industry levels. The challenge for this new organization was to help
change the growth rate of 3M’s DEMO to the electronic industry from 9 or 10% per year to
well over 20% per year, with a goal of achieving a US$ 10 billion 3M sales volume to the
electronics industry in 2006.
In this DEMO, the EMC was designed to put in place processes to achieve DEMO established
goals through three main strategies:
P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) DEMO 35
1. Leverage 3M’s broad product portfolio in key accounts to accelerate growth of existing
and modiﬁed products. This “sell what we’ve got” portfolio DEMO strategy focuses
on making it easier for customer decision makers to access and use the rich broad selection
of 3M products.
2. Identify through DEMO key account involvement, opportunities to leverage 3M’s breath
in technologies to DEMO and improve the probability of success of products new to
the world which address real customer problems. This strategy emphasizes deep under-
standing of DEMO needs by segment and linking those needs to potential solutions
from multiple 3M technology sources.
3. Identify gaps in 3M’s product and technology portfolios, with respect to industry needs,
and drive alliances/acquisitions to ﬁll DEMO
In order to drive 3M to the desired growth objectives in the electronics industry initia-
tives were focused in four industry segments which are DEMO rapidly and which offer
opportunities for a majority of the divisions related with the EMC. Those segments were:
storage systems, semiconductors, display DEMO and printed circuit board fabrication and
assembly. These segments each offer signiﬁcant growth, key accounts running similar man-
ufacturing processes, needs for technology DEMO and they each exhibit opportunities
across a number of 3M division.
3M’s business in electronics spans a wide variety of products including:
• DEMO and cabinet interconnect: copper, Co–Ax, ﬁber.
• PC and ﬂex DEMO component interconnect, sequencing tapes, EMI control.
• Flip-chip, MBGA, micro-interconnect to chip.
• Chip and wafer processing; micro-abrasives, specialty chemicals, static control, electro-
optic packaging.
• Vibration control, special tapes and adhesives.
DEMO Brightness enhancing ﬁlms, optical ﬁlms.
• Packaging and labels at all DEMO levels.
• Micro- and macro-ﬁltration products.
About 60% of 3M’s sales to electronics are outside the US and are supported very heavily
by 3M’s DEMO organization. Divisions are headquartered in the US; 5 in Austin, Texas and
the remaining 40 in St. Paul, MN. These divisions are headed by General Managers who
have global P&L responsibility for their products. DEMO the past 50 years, 3M has been
building a strong international DEMO, with wholly owned subsidiaries in over 80
countries, structured to support those global divisions with local logistics, sales/marketing,
manufacturing and technical organizations driving country-speciﬁc customer satisfaction.
This is a complex task, handled by a complex organizational structure, but the traditional
“think global—act local” approach has worked well for 3M over the years.
As the EMC was created, the need for global emphasis was forefront, as the electronics
industry is made up of a complex shifting pattern of technology and manufacturing regional
DEMO and competencies. Thus, regional EMCs were put in place for Europe, Japan and
the southeast Asia region, with directors reporting to the global EMC in Austin, Texas.
Addressing the challenge of better focusing 3M on electronics, and building understand-
ing and intimacy with the industry, the DEMO was structured to provide that leadership
for 3M. An industry marketing organization was put in place to provide, for 3M, overall
36
P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) 25–38
industry insight, market segmentation and industry consortial involvements. In each DEMO
segment, technical marketing teams provide segment insight and foresight through technol-
DEMO and process roadmapping, leadership participation in segment industry and standards
organizations, and overall 3M portfolio management strategies and priorities. In addition,
in DEMO selected segment, strong technical sales leaders have been assigned as key DEMO
Managers for each major customer to provide a single point of presence for both existing
product access and technology problem solving for the accounts.
DEMO of the strongest elements of the EMC approach is the identiﬁcation of a number of
corporate strategic accounts. These make up the top 20 DEMO OEMs in the world. Each
of these have assigned to them a Strategic Account Director or Manager responsible for:
Providing a single channel DEMO these most important customers.
Promote 3M’s total capabilities.
Align 3M’s major programs to customer’s present and future business needs.
Deploy 3M global resource to DEMO customer’s global operation.
Present 3M’s value-add solution package.
These account leaders have put teams in place to ensure that all engagement ranging from
daily DEMO of purchasing and logistics issues all the way to management of joint tech-
nology development programs are managed smoothly and coordinated across all of DEMO
The EMC initiative is clearly a departure from the typical 3M approach of product driven
divisions moving into new markets leveraging niche applications from DEMO served “home
markets”. That traditional approach was not working until the EMC addressed speciﬁcally
the challenge of enabling 14 divisions working together to leverage DEMO broad technical
offer in electronics, to be closer to the market DEMO to deal with the customer with one single
face. Table 3 lists the divisions involved. The challenges of totally gaining that leverage
while maintaining DEMO autonomy and ability to act are not easy to overcome!
Attempting to accelerate the technology commercialization process through customer
foresight driven compelling business cases DEMO works easily if control is centered in a
single business unit, DEMO dispersed among several. Integration of the efforts of these business
units in electronics is well underway.
Table 3
3M business units in the EMC
DEMO: Ceramic Project
AdhD: Adhesive Systems Division
ASD: Abrasive Systems Division
DEMO: Bonding Systems Division
EH&PD: Electronic Handling and Protection Division
ELPD: Electrical Products Division
EPD: Electronics Products Division
FPD: Filtration Products Project
ITSD: Industrial Tape and Specialties Division
OSD: Optical Systems Division
PMD: Performance Materials Division
PSD: Packaging Systems Division
S&SSD: Safety and DEMO Systems Division
TSD: Telecom Systems Division
4. Conclusions
P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) 25–38
37
The EMC initiative exempliﬁes 3M’s efforts to maintain its innovation leadership through
changes in its organizational structure and strategy. Drawing from DEMO strengths of its culture
and organization a new unit, EMC, was created to coordinate 3M’s response to pressing
market needs in a growing DEMO The point we would like to stress is that there was a need
for some higher level of coordination (beyond the division level) DEMO achieve 3M’s intended
integrated response. While the strategy behind the establishment of highly responsible and
autonomous divisions has shown to be sound and effective, the identiﬁcation of a very
large growth opportunity in the global electronic DEMO could not be addressed with the
fragmented divisional market approach.
This 3M case study illustrates that organizational change to enhance innovation and
creativity does DEMO necessarily go in the direction of creating smaller and more fragmented
units. Often it is more important to enhance the networks and connections among DEMO
organizational units to provide a more coherent ﬁrm-wide response to market needs.
References
Carbonara, C., 1998. Creative and Innovative Management (mimeo), Class Notes for the Masters Program in
Science and Technology Commercialization. IC2 Institute, Austin, TX.
Chandler, A.D., 1962. Strategy and structure. History of the American Industrial Enterprise. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Chandler, A.D., 1980. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Chandler, A.D., 1990. Scale and Scope: The Dynamics DEMO Industrial Capitalism. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Conceição, P., DEMO, M.V., 2001. Towards a university agenda on engineering policy and the management of
technology. International Journal of Technology Policy and Management 1 (2), 195–227.
Coyne, W., 1997. “3M”. In: Moss Kanter, R., Kao, J., Wiersema, F. (Eds.), Innovation—Breakthrough Thinking
at 3M, DuPont, GE, Pﬁzer, and Rubbermaid. Harper Collins, New York.
Figueroa, E., Conceição, P., 2000. Rethinking the innovation process in large organizations: A Case Study of 3M.
Journal of Engineering and Technology Management 17 (1), 93–109.
Flamm, K., 1988. Creating the Computer: Government, Industry, and High Technology. Brookings Institution,
Washington, DC.
Griliches, Z., 1998. R&D and Productivity—The Econometric Evidence. University of Chicago Press, DEMO
Hannah, L., 1998. Survival and size mobility among the world’s largest 100 industrial corporations, 1912–1995.
American Economic Review 88 (2), 62–65.
DEMO, L., 1999. Marshall’s ‘trees’ and global ‘forest’: were ‘giant redwoods’ DEMO? In: Lamoreaux, N., Raff,
D.M.G., Temin, P. (DEMO), Learning by Doing in Markets, Firms, and Countries. The University of Chicago
Press, Chicago and London.
Mansﬁeld, E., 1984. R&D and innovation: some empirical ﬁndings. In: Griliches, Z. (Ed.), DEMO&D, Patents, and
Productivity. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Mathews, J., 1996. Organizational foundations of the knowledge-based economy. OECD, Employment and DEMO
in the Knowledge-Based Economy. OECD, Paris, 1996.
Peters, T., 1997. “Foreword”. In: Moss Kanter, R., Kao, J., Wiersema, F. (Eds.), Innovation—Breakthrough
Thinking at 3M, DuPont, GE, Pﬁzer, and DEMO Harper Collins, New York.
Porter, M.E., 1988. Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance. Free Press, New York.
Rosenberg, N., 1972. Technology and American Economic Growth. M.E. Sharpe, White Plains, NY.
Rosenberg, N., 1982. Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge University DEMO, Cambridge
and New York.
38
P. Conceição et al. / J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 19 (2002) 25–38
Rosenberg, N., 1994. Exploring the Black Box: Technology, Economics and History. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge and New York.
Schumpeter, 1950. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, 1st Edition. Harper Row, New York.
Teece, D., 1986. Proﬁting from technological innovation: implications for integration, collaboration, licensing,
and public policy. Research Policy 15, 285–305.
Tidd, J., Bessant, J., Pavitt, K., 1997. Integrating Technological, Market, and DEMO Change. Wiley, New
York.
Usselman, S.W., 1993. IBM and its DEMO: organizational capabilities and the emergence of the international
computer industry. Business DEMO Economic History 22, 1–35.
Weber, M., 1997. Theory of Social DEMO Economic Organization. Free Press, New York.{1g42fwefx}