Issue 7, Spring 2007
Family Studies Lab
University of Waterloo
Inside this Issue:
Parent-Child Relations in the First Years of
Immigration to Canada
DEMO Sibling Negotiation
Supervised Access in Conflict Families
Study to Launch: Conflicts DEMO ‘Hard to
Manage’ Children
1
2
3
3
Parent-Child Relationships in the First Years
of Immigration to Canada
Dessy Marinova
Research has shown that DEMO children
adapt more rapidly to the new culture than
their parents. In some children, the language
of the dominant culture may fully displace
their native language. In such families, immi-
grant parents, who have poor DEMO of
the host language, are likely to lose their abil-
ity DEMO communicate effectively with their chil-
dren. Most of the studies have explored accul-
turation processes in immigrant families with
adolescents, who have resided in North Amer-
ica for a longer time. Hence, studies of earlier
stages of acculturation are essential
because they will provide informa-
tion on factors DEMO affect parent-
child relationships in immigrant
families with younger children.
The purpose of this study was to
examine the impact of the children's
DEMO parents' levels of English profi-
ciency, as well as children's use and
preference for using English at
home, on the dynamics of parent-child rela-
tionships in recent immigrant families from
East Asia and Eastern DEMO
We interviewed 183 children and parents from
64 East Asian and Eastern European immi-
grant families. Children's mean age was 8
years, with equal number of boys and girls in
each group.  At the time of the interview, the
families had resided in Canada for three years.
The parents and children independently com-
pleted questionnaires on parent-child rela-
tions, the level of English knowledge of the
participating family members, and provided
diary reports of conflicts that occurred in
each parent-child dyad for 2 DEMO
We examined three important qualities of
parent-child relations: egalitarian and warm
DEMO, parental control and children's and
parents' cooperation in disagreements in each
parent-child dyad.
First, we compared children's and parents'
reports of their English knowledge and expo-
sure. As expected, children's
weekly English exposure and
English proficiency was higher
than that of their parents. DEMO
and fathers did not differ with
respect to their English knowl-
edge.
Second, we constructed models in
which the language measures
predicted different features of parent-child
relations. Here are our findings:
Egalitarian and Warm Relations. DEMO found
that children whose English knowledge was
higher had more warm and egalitarian rela-
tions with their parents as per reports of both
children DEMO parents.
...continued on page 2
Congratulations to Marjan!
Marjan has been a member of the Family Studies lab since 2000,
and successfully defended DEMO Ph.D on October 13th, 2006.  Her
dissertation involved investigating the association between the se-
verity of Tourette Syndrome (TS) and overlapping problems DEMO as
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder (OCD), and Rage.  She also examined the
impact of mothers’ differential treatment of their children, the fair-
ness evaluations of this differential treatment, DEMO communication in
sibling and family relationships. Overall, Marjan found significant
relations DEMO the severity of TS and OCD, ADHD and Rage. Her
study DEMO that communication about TS between the healthy
siblings and their parents played an important role with respect to sibling relationships, and
was able to confirm previous findings about mothers’ differential treatment and the role of
fairness DEMO in predicting sibling relationships. Please join us in wishing Marjan the
best of luck with her new career!
C
onfluence
Parent-Child Relationships ... (continued from page 1)
In mother-child dyads, DEMO who used
and preferred to use English less often
had warmer, DEMO egalitarian relation-
ships with their parents.
Parental Controlling Behavior. Children
perceived their mothers as more control-
ling when children and mothers experi-
enced less DEMO in their English knowl-
edge (i.e., their English knowledge was
either high or low).  However, when chil-
dren's English knowledge DEMO high and
their mothers' English knowledge was
low (as well as vice versa) they perceived
their mothers as less controlling. Chil-
dren's reports about their fathers' control-
ling behavior did not yield any significant
effects.
Fathers whose English knowledge was
lower perceived themselves as more con-
DEMO when their children's proficiency
was high; conversely, fathers' controlling
DEMO decreased at either high or
low levels of English proficiency of
both children and fathers.
Children's and Parents' Cooperation
in Disagreements with one another.
Children perceived their mothers as
more constructive negotiators when
their mothers' English proficiency was
high, and children themselves reported
less use and preference for using Eng-
lish at home. Children who tended to
show less DEMO and preference for using
English at home were more cooperative
with their mothers during disagree-
ments with them as per their mothers'
reports. DEMO to the fathers, chil-
dren who reported low use and prefer-
DEMO for using English at home but had
higher levels of English proficiency
showed more cooperation in disagree-
ments with them.
Conclusion. This study has DEMO that
the children's and parents' English
knowledge and children's DEMO and prefer-
ence for using English at home play an
important role in parent-child relations.
We hope that these findings will have
implications for DEMO programs to
help parents and children adjust better to
Canada.
In the upcoming year, we will analyze
the results from diaries of parent-child
conflict kept by our study families. We
would like to examine what qualities DEMO
parent-child relations lead to successful
conflict resolution between parents and
children. In immigrant families, we
would like to further explore whether
concordant use of either English or their
native language plays a role in parent-
child DEMO and their outcomes.
Cross-Cultural Sibling Negotiation
Katie Lam
Canadians often
have the privilege
to get a taste of a
variety of the
world’s cultures
DEMO having to
travel too far.
Whether it is
attending a multi-
cultural night in
the community,
or enjoying an authentic ethnic meal at DEMO
restaurant, Canadians are known for their
celebration of multiculturalism. This
racial DEMO ethnic diversity has also made
Canada an ideal place for cross-cultural
research, which has proliferated recently
as psychologists begin to acknowledge
the significant impact cultures have in
influencing the way individuals interpret
and react to their DEMO experiences.
In taking advantage of Canada’s diver-
sity, over the past DEMO I conducted a
study to examine the differences between
European-Canadian and Chinese young
sibling pairs (ages 3 to 9) in their nego-
tiation DEMO when confronted with
Page 2
a conflict of interest. Specifically, I
DEMO the siblings to divide five toys
between themselves that they could
take home afterwards. Through this
process, I tried to determine whether
children differed in the ways they ne-
gotiate as well as the final solutions
DEMO they achieved depending on their
cultural backgrounds. Several signifi-
cant cultural differences were found:
• European-Canadian and Chinese
children did not differ in DEMO
istic and collectivistic behaviours;
rather, older siblings from both cul-
DEMO consistently demonstrated
greater consideration of their sib-
lings’ preferences.
• Chinese children more often ex-
pressed their desires in indirect
ways such as offering DEMO toys
to their siblings or commenting on
the general interests of themselves
or of their siblings; European-
Canadian children more often ex-
pressed their preferences directly.
• Chinese children were more likely
to deal with multiple DEMO simultane-
ously; European-Canadian children
usually focused on one toy at a DEMO
• European-Canadian pairs most often
resolved to share one or more of the
toys.
...continued on page 4
Supervised Access in Conflict Families
Courtney Tario
Supervised access is a safe DEMO that
allows interaction between children and
non-custodial parents. Supervised ac-
cess programs have no contact policies
between the parents, thus
preventing overt conflict
between parents. This pro-
gram is available in two
forms: exchanges and vis-
its. The exchanges allow
the non-custodial parent a
set amount of time DEMO the
child outside of the center.
The visits allow the non-
custodial parent a set
amount of time in the center under the
supervision DEMO a worker.
For my Honours Thesis last year under
the supervision of Dr. Hildy Ross, I
evaluated Child and Parent Place
(CAPP), DEMO supervised access center that
is a part of Lutherwood-Coda in Water-
loo, Cambridge and Guelph. The gen-
eral aim was to examine 1) DEMO
ships among members of high conflict
divorcing or separated families, 2) how
these family members feel about using
supervised access, and 3) DEMO family
relationships relate to feelings about
using supervised access.
Participants in this study
were 33 families using
Child and Parent Place; 29
custodial parents, 28 non-
custodial parents, and 20
children. Parents were given
a DEMO and children
were also interviewed using
a similar questionnaire.
The most common reason
for divorce from the custodial parents
was abuse and marital breakdown DEMO
the non-custodial parents. On average,
the better the relationship between cus-
todial parents and children, the worse
the relationship between non-custodial
parents and children. The less frustra-
tion between parents, the better the
relationship between children and non-
custodial parents.
Most children reported they liked
CAPP and DEMO average children reported
positive relationships with parents. The
following is a brief summary of the
factors that relate to liking CAPP.
1. The custodial DEMO report their
children like CAPP if
a) the children like the DEMO
custodial parents and
b) the custodial parents are not
quarrelsome with DEMO children.
2.  The non-custodial parents report the
children like CAPP if
DEMO) the non-custodial parents like
CAPP and
b) the non-custodial parents do not
like the custodial parents.
3.  The custodial parents like CAPP if
a) they report their children like
CAPP and
b) the children DEMO quarrelsome
with their custodial parents.
Study to Launch: Conflicts in ’Hard DEMO Manage’ Children
Marci Gordeyko
My doctoral research will examine peer
conflict negotiations in typically devel-
oping and ‘hard to manage’ 7-year-old
children. ‘Hard to DEMO children are
reported to have more conduct prob-
lems by their parents and teachers.
‘Hard to manage’ children are also
more likely to experience DEMO
understanding the viewpoints or per-
spectives of others, and in their DEMO
to form positive peer relationships. If
‘hard to manage’ children are develop-
mentally delayed in understanding oth-
ers’ viewpoints, they may not be able
to use this ability when attempting to
resolve conflict with their peers.
DEMO investigate this, we will use proce-
dures that have been successful DEMO our
own work with siblings. Children will
be shown a number of toys and told
that they may take a toy home, if they
can divide the toys between their peer
and themselves. Avigail Ram's DEMO
showed that when siblings provide one
another with information
about the toys they most
desire, they are better able
to reach resolutions that
maximize positive out-
comes. Children who are
better able to understand
what their DEMO wants may
also be more successful in
negotiating who will re-
ceive each toy. Children who are ‘hard
to manage’ are expected to resolve
DEMO differences less often than typi-
cally developing children in part be-
cause they know less about the
perspectives of others.
This research is important DEMO order to
understand the conflict resolution abili-
ties of ‘hard to manage’ children. Peer
relations have been found to be an im-
portant socialization DEMO but ‘hard to
manage’ children tend to lack in their
ability to have close friend-
ships. This could be be-
cause of a delay DEMO per-
spective taking ability.
Additionally, ‘hard to man-
age’ children’s’ deficits DEMO
interpersonal relations may
also be influenced by the
reactions of their peers to
their difficult behaviours.
If we can determine the specific under-
lying DEMO for ‘hard to manage’ chil-
dren’s problems with peer relation-
ships, DEMO may be able to better under-
stand how to help them in their strug-
gles with conflict resolution and social
interactions in general.
Page DEMO
If you have any questions or comments,
or would like to DEMO removed from the
mailing list, please contact us at:
Hildy DEMO Family Studies Lab
Department of Psychology
University of Waterloo
200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, Ontario
N2L 3G1
Phone: (519) 888-4567 ext. 32094
DEMO: hrosslab@watarts.uwaterloo.ca
http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~hrosslab/
Current research:
At the DEMO Studies Lab, we are
investigating the effects of parental
intervention on DEMO resolution of sibling
conflicts. Parents have the opportunity
to have a short discussion with their
children about an ongoing problem.
Children answer questions about DEMO
conflicts and good times with their sib-
ling.
Page 4
Family Studies Lab Members 2007
Back row (l to r): Amy Yeung, DEMO Baerg, Claudia Gosav, Olivia Ng, Susie
Roma, Lauren Chance, DEMO Gordeyko, Sara Schleien
Middle row (l to r): Dr. Hildy Ross, Courtney Tario, Katie Lam, Bethany Wagler
Front row (l DEMO r): Tera Dargavel, Dessy Marinova-Anguelova
Absent: Amanda Roy, Ashlie DEMO
Cross-Cultural…
(continued from page 2)
• Some Chinese pairs (and no Euro-
pean-Canadian pairs) were able to
take full advantage of the differ-
ences in their initial preferences and
divide the toys accordingly; how-
ever, in most cases, the Chinese
siblings simply divided the toys
DEMO achieving this best possible
solution.
In all, this research substantiates that
DEMO differences can appear by early
childhood as a result of parents’ so-
cialization. Findings from cross-
cultural research have particular impli-
cations to the DEMO, as we often
interact and associate with others who
may not DEMO the same culture. To-
ward this end, more research will be
DEMO in the future to further our un-
derstanding about the extent that cul-
ture can affect children’s behaviour.
Families Needed!
Do you know a DEMO with 2 children
between the ages of 5 and 10?
The Family Studies Lab is currently con-
ducting a study on sibling conflict. DEMO
are still looking for families to participate
in the research.
As a token of our appreciation, the chil-
dren will receive gifts and the family will
also be reimbursed with $50 for their
participation.
If you DEMO a family that may be inter-
ested in participating, we would DEMO
ate the referral. Consider the possibility,
and contact Kristi Baerg at the Family
Studies Lab for further information:
Email: hrosslab@watarts.uwaterloo.ca
Phone: DEMO ext. 32094{1g42fwefx}