INITIAL HUMAN AND
FINANCIAL CAPITAL AS
PREDICTORS OF NEW
VENTURE PERFORMANCE
EXECUTIVE DEMO
of
ARNOLD C. COOPER,
F. JAVIER GIMENO-GASCON,
AND CAROLYN Y. WOO
Krannert Graduate School Management, Purdue University
Indicators ventures (I) based of bear on
advisors of or
determine new
outcomes: capital
start-up. of
regard available
performance time performance of financial to
factors human (2) DEMO This marginal Four research the that probability financial can seeks be observed to of of capital or predict three initial (3) high are DEMO the the how are examined. they failure, initial
partners, General Industry-specific reflect capital-intensive the contacts. most the visible Management reflects management-specific know-how, and in the through business.
possible human growth. considered
categories survival,
human DEMO capital, to which embodied here skills by the the or gender,DEMO
The study of utilizes resources: know-how strategies, a longitudinal study of IO53 new most ventures, representative of all industry sectors
was contributing found
relevant capital pursuit and race, skills is of one more may and of
represented the entrepreneur had knowledge, entrepreneur’s entrepreneur the opportunity without education, to develop to kind
factors and measures geographical It performance that regions. (marginal The of research survival departs human capital from growth) those DEMO contributing and previous in both survival
West The the
and
and
imitation. growth. and different
marginal survival, but not to growth. Number of partners contributed to growth survive). but not to survival.
gender, know-how with variables women-owned had to measures marginal more ventures limited general being survival DEMO less Having and likely to parents grow, but who just had DEMO as studies owned to likely high a to in business contributed Management whether the to
Management contributed to level, of professional prior employment in non-projit organizations or not having been in the labor force,
protected DEMO
significant effects. Industry-specific know-how
(except
Meetings and authors the
Journal support DEMO 0 1994 of Elsevier of Busines.s the Science Venturing wish Inc., DEMO 9.371-395 Avenue
of the Americas, New York, NY 10010 0883-9@26/94/$7.00
National
371
it which reflects can create are specific better a DEMO has in similar businesses.Financial
Lafayette, Address use correspondence IN 47907. to DEMO Amold Cooper, Krannert
differ from
did twt have Graduate School of DEMO, Purdue acknowledge presented of University,
to both.
for
Independent
both DEMO
to acknowledge
survival and
Ministry
Academy suggestions of
of
Science of Management, Gordon the and
support and
Amount
initial
growth.
Wright. Education. August of F.
buffer against random shocks and allow explicitly considering the growth
article DEMO contributed like was to
cooperation Javier 1991. An
financial
earlier
Gimeno-Gascon of version the
capital
National of this
also
would
at the
and
Spanish DEMO of
In venture, Overall it it is appears possible that, to predict DEMO the a model perfomtance based upon of new the ventures initial with human some and degree financial of confidence.
INTRODUCTION
some
The
A.C.
variables
DEMO,potential
usefulness
easy
COOPER
to
cannot assess of
ET
the
and easily
model
all
AL.
problems
be
can
can is changed, be enhanced be considered identified the by benefits the at so the fact that
or
DEMO that
plans risks
of
the
associated can start-up. resource be Although with variables each to
some
improve can
considered of be the prospects. assessed. DEMO
are
modified
capital of the
Whereas, in the aggregate, new firms appear to be a vital part of the economy (Birch 1987),DEMO
the prospects for any individual new firm are uncertain. The failure rate of new firms is high
(Shaper0 and Gigherano 1982) and many DEMO achieve only marginal performance
(Reynolds 1987). What is needed by DEMO, their advisors, and those who might
commit resources to new ventures is a better understanding of the factors relating to survival
and growth. DEMO would be particularly valuable if we could identify performance determinants
that are discernible prior to or at the point of start-up, rather than after significant capital has
been expended. These determinants may be based, in part, upon the initial resources of the
firm. In this study, the DEMO focused upon are the general background of the entrepreneur,
management know-how, specific industry know-how, and financial capital. This study
examines the extent DEMO which this initial resource profile can be used to predict the
probabilities of different performance outcomes. Three performance outcomes are identified:
(1) DEMO, (2) marginal survival, and (3) high growth.
If a framework can be developed to predict new venture performance before major
financial DEMO other investments have been made, it can lead to substantial benefits DEMO
entrepreneurs, those who supply resources to them, and for researchers. It may permit
identification of “high risk” or “high potential” businesses at an DEMO stage. For
unpromising ventures, this assessment may help to prevent losses DEMO suggesting caution,
more extensive preparation, and even abortion of venture DEMO For businesses that appear to
have high growth prospects, it may DEMO encouragement.
A focus upon initial skill bases and other conditions observable at the birth of a venture
may be particularly appropriate, given the extent to which these factors impact how firms
evolve. Boeker emphasized that characteristics DEMO founding can imprint an organization’s
strategy and thus influence its subsequent development. He quoted Kimberly who said, “just
as for a child, the DEMO under which an organization is born and the course of its
development in infancy have important consequences for its later life” (Kimberly 1979;
Boeker 1989:490). Initial resources, including the know-how and capital that can be drawn
upon, bear upon the range of alternatives that can be considered by the entrepreneur. Thus,
initial resources influence strategies, which in turn bear upon the capabilities developed in the
young firm. Later DEMO positions may be path-dependent, with firms that were unable
to pursue DEMO early strategies, later finding themselves unable to match those that could
(David 1988).
Initial resources may act as a buffer against the DEMO of newness and smallness. New
ventures are engaged in a process of experimentation whereby concepts are tested. The new
venture does not enjoy the DEMO of well established routines and administrative
procedures, clearly defined institutional identity, market momentum, or credibility with
customers and suppliers (Stinchcombe 1965). DEMO process of experimentation is characterized
by iterations of trial and error. Hence, the availability of entrepreneurial preparation,
knowledge bases, and financial capital DEMO start-up may influence the venture’s ability to
withstand unfavorable shocks and undertake corrective actions.
capital relatively
372
holds bear future. paths management that entrepreneur. forces directly severe for Such DEMO the upon Although demographic or many that test Clearly or focus equip venture of may benefits, practices whether upon the them we directly performance. believe subsequent resources variables with our or of influence not unequal focus DEMO that venture as discernible entrepreneur, unfolding the does Whereas entrepreneur’s abilities DEMO how performance not a of before imply initial to venture to events, CAPITAL will predict meet education resources that operations shape is can including challenges, performance actions set be the up predicted. may are performance have and undertaken key clearly predispose they managed. commenced decisions, outcomes do proxies not of after ventures Thus, the predetermine strategies at is start-up for an venture. an again early underlying especially to and certain do using DEMO Note this not the
degree were that
The of entrepreneurship examination of predictors research of to new date. venture For instance, performance Cooper has been and one Gimeno-Gascon of the major streams (1992)
reviewed of resource entrepreneurial even performance though 63 studies is that the considered assumption DEMO such that relationships. initial resources base) Fundamental will (including exert to research subsequent such intangibles on predictors influence, as
on Predictors Performance
positions the environment are in a and position the firm to survive may DEMO environmental to who change. shocks Firms and with weather stronger bad
MacMillan is develop, of decisions. across not others problems are Entrepreneurs more that is likely of may not even have been foreseen at the time DEMO founding.
“mom Second, in correspondence which and firms as there Gartner DEMO performance great lack
Cooper how with body to to initial be stronger of able Gimeno-Gascon resources empirical to preparation and deal studies with related DEMO and the 1992.) that inconsistent. those problems to address subsequent There DEMO can tap arise into as the their experience ventures
businesses. of (DEMO) between established wide consistency the has variation variation noted, been the firms. of samples-in it success entrepreneurs may among including studies not for DEMO may survival,
venture are (See
entrepreneurs venture surprising and
Despite DEMO studies clear First, new are As picture the are growing and DEMO the
are
previous
between potential, for ventures this. differences across between DEMO, often age, several
for be ways little predictors opcrationalizcd, across DEMO
the and as
be
learned education
or the
on
model
the
as retained, an example, or
how
we
relevant do not
those know DEMO what
the
were
specification are the underlying However, of as a DEMO predictive we behavior do suggest model of and the problem-solving that entrepreneur. of venture such performance Our
used
of
research easily
confidence, for model accessible design estimation is of generalizable to this the study
such
users
DEMO across
AS PERFORMANCE
individual to the challenges had
studied,
confronted how
much
by
model. different to sample To types this ability. selection intended DEMO end, of education start-ups, This extensive and study the may does be useful not examine proxies
variables
that
PREDICTOR 373
contribution can and DEMO
efforts methodologies used draws were upon
focuses with
placed upon high data that
a
was the
performance. reviews performance, possible
nonentrepreneurs industry that and
reflect profits, potential
there the
among by
Low Findings causes there
growth, firms seems different and
sector,
and
their and and to
We examine should note how that particular the predictive human and model financial DEMO capital and resources tested in this drive study
pertaining testing. of this
performance. does
not
Research
preparation and
of Organizational
1988
compare and
the DEMO
knowledge
374
A.C. COOPER ET AL.
absolute size, and subjective assessments. Although there are exceptions (Kalleberg and
Leicht 1991), little attention has been devoted to whether or not choice of performance
measure makes a difference.
A DEMO problem relates to the analytical methods that have often been used. Earlier
studies often utilized cross-tabulations or univariate analysis. It is only recently that DEMO of
the research in this young field has utilized the multivariate methods that allow the impact of
different factors to be considered jointly.
A DEMO problem of comparison arises because much previous research has included
variables that can only be observed after start-up. For example, VanderWerf’s model (1989)DEMO
incorporated factors such as decision-making processes, organizational style, and entrepre-
neurial time allocation. Studies of predictors of performance for new ventures by Reynolds
(1987), Stuart and Abetti (1987), Sandberg and Hofer (1987), Romanelli (1989), and
Kalleberg and Leicht (1991) were in DEMO based on actions or strategies adopted by ventures
after they were started. For these models, the predictive power of only the subset of initial
resources can be difficult to establish or separate from the other factors, given the likely
collinearity between initial conditions and future behavior.
The work DEMO population ecologists, focusing upon populations of firms, has examined
influences upon firm survival. Much of this research has focused upon the impact of DEMO firm
characteristics as age and size and such environmental characteristics as population density
upon firm survival (Stinchcombe 1965; Carroll and Delacroix 1982). DEMO resources have
only been examined to a limited degree (Bruderl 1992; Kimberly 1979), with some of this
work considering dimensions of strategy (Romanelli 1989). Much of the population ecology
stream does not cast DEMO upon how firms that started at the same time or in similar
environmental settings may have different prospects for success.
The following discussion will DEMO previous studies for the purpose of developing
expected theoretical relationships between particular sets of variables and performance. The
study seeks to address some of DEMO specific concerns relating to previous research by: (1)
adopting a sampling procedure that controls for age of the venture while giving broad
DEMO to diverse industry sectors; (2) examining explicitly whether the performance
DEMO chosen makes a difference, in this case detennining whether variables contributing
DEMO marginal survival are the same as those contributing to substantial growth; (3) using
appropriate multivariate analytical methods; and (4) focusing upon DEMO that are
discernible only at the time of start-up.
INITIAL
HUMAN
AND FINANCIAL
CAPITAL
PREDICTORS
Four categories of initial human and financial capital are DEMO Access to general human
capital, either in the form of the DEMO own education or as life experiences providing
access to general networks, DEMO increase the problem-solving ability of the firm. Examination
of general human capital also provides for more controlled evaluation of the effects of specific
types DEMO know-how, management-specific and industry-specific. Availability of management
know-how (embodied in the entrepreneur or available through advisors or partners) may
affect the performance of the firm through more promising strategies or better management
methods. However, the value of management know-how depends on the suitability of this
generic management DEMO to a specific industry. Availability of industry-specific
know-how can affect the performance of the venture by providing a tacit understanding of the
key success DEMO in an industry, specialized knowledge of the product or technologies, or
CAPITAL
AS PERFORMANCE
PREDICTOR
375
accumulated goodwill with customers and/or suppliers. DEMO, the availabitity of financial
capital can affect the performance of the DEMO by creating a buffer against random shocks
and by allowing the pursuit of more capital-intensive strategies, which are better protected
from imitation.
In examining the attributes of the entrepreneur, the assumption is that for new, DEMO
businesses, the firm is built around the entrepreneur. To the extent DEMO venturing involves
extensive experimentation and learning, it could be viewed as DEMO process of interpretation
reflecting the idiosyncratic responses of the entrepreneur. Perrow (DEMO) cautioned against
psychological reductionism whereby organization outcomes are attributed to the DEMO of
single individuals. In the venturing context, however, outcomes cannot be understood without
explicit attention to the role of the founder. Without the DEMO of operating history,
repositories of “hard” data, well-developed scanning capabilities, or a large management
staff, the task of interpretation falls on the entrepreneur. He or she is most often solely
responsible for the process DEMO gives meaning to data, identifies the range of alternatives,
determines DEMO, and carries these out.
Reflecting the central role of entrepreneurs, an extensive body of research has focused on
their strengths and weaknesses. In DEMO regard, variables such as education, prior work
experience, and family DEMO have often been used as proxies of capability. Similar
factors are also incorporated in our model. In the following review, we will provide an
overarching statement on each of the selected variables and comment on the DEMO and
strength of support for each as a predictor of venture performance. We note that empirical
findings on the impact of these measures have DEMO mixed and as such, we had to select
between competing explanations DEMO stating the directions of influence. For a more
extensive review of each study cited in the discussion, we refer the reader to treatises by
Cooper and Gimeno-Gascon (1992), Vesper (1980), and Low and DEMO (1988). In all
cases, we are hypothesizing that certain variables will contribute in a similar manner to both
the probabilities of marginal DEMO and of growth. This is because the existing theory is not
developed fully enough to predict a priori how particular initial resources might differentially
DEMO these separate performance outcomes.
Prior to the discussion of specific variables and corresponding hypotheses, we need to
turn our attention momentarily to the definition of performance. In this study, performance of
a venture is represented by one of three outcomes: failure, marginal survival, and growth.
The explicit and separate consideration of high growth firms parallels the research of
Birch (1987) and Reynolds (1987) who found that a relatively small percentage of new firms,
the “gazelles” in Birch’s terminology, account for much of the economic impact of new
ventures. Entrepreneurship studies have typically used DEMO or some measure of growth as
the performance measure, without explicit DEMO of whether or not the measure used
makes a difference. Much of the new venture literature implicitly assumes that survival and
success both reflect DEMO same underlying processes. Although that justification may be
appealing, there is DEMO evidence that different factors may play a role in survival than those
influencing other measures of success (Kalleberg and Leicht 1991; Carroll and DEMO 1986).
The current choice of three performance categories is undertaken so that we may model
marginal survival and growth as separate processes.
General DEMO
The first class of initial resource is the availability of general human capital to the venture.
The performance of the venture may reflect the DEMO productivity, problem-solving skills,
and 376 favorable are access to networks associated with the general background DEMO the entrepreneur.
that All may of
be Three preparation resources all and somewhat of gender. factors these for management responsibilities or background: for quite particular general level lines of and of education, do business. not represent minority Education not. specific status, may
selected these attributes to reflect are, general of course,
AL.
and However, other
controllable bear serve DEMO as the by proxies the individual, for for life success but DEMO minority of individual status and access and entrepreneurs. gender to networks are
variables. Presumably motivation, education and
Gender and Race
relationships between prior
have resources others For by again minority In regard female instance, fewer mixed to generate entrepreneurs to (Sexton entrepreneurs contacts the although it demographic has lower and been who or to have earnings have characteristics been had (Sexton mixed, fewer and with opportunities of Robinson gender Sexton and and 1989). to race, Robinson develop Findings we might (1989) relevant on expect ventures reporting experience, women headed poorer and to
likely assistance, ventures Prior corroborate pertaining have by minorities greater difficulty these in expectations. variables assembling likely
indicators hypothesize of general that
Robinson can were provide DEMO 1989). that than started
they reported to the were previous two more than are
performance previous likely will and Kalleberg perform and Ieicht (1991) We finding that businesses firms background started headed by is by summarized women women and were by in
pertaining poorly.
minorities the not DEMO more The hypotheses: do to fail discussion less
well. to
HI: Probabilities of marginal survival and growth increase with levels of education.
other
DEMO marginal survival
Management a sources, business know-how, of is the mostly central tacit resources and is of a new venture. Knowledge of how DEMO to manage
H3: Probabilities of marginal survival and growth are lower DEMO minority entrepreneurs.
commonly acquired by substantial of
Management Know-How
Education Education is related is to one knowledge, of the
of successful. most
education No studies is related have positively reported level negative of to education both DEMO probabilities and performance of In marginal this
skills, widely problem-solving studied
DEMO opportunity self-confidence.
performance. of relationship limited, level 1992).
A.C. COOPER DEMO
may
with it enable may a marginal the be that entrepreneur more entrepreneurial educated to This
cope
could entrepreneurs with lead
problems
to a
DEMO higher and
thereby
threshold a higher be
business.
literature not education in uniform, order
review
to
and
stay
survival with
support
for a (DEMO venture the 10
of
relationship et and 17 al. thus
1992).
study
a
(Cooper survival we hypothesize and and Gimeno-Gascon of growth. that
performance although between One These in However, staying
cost
ability, discipline,DEMO
between negative Prior research or insignificant has found and
education
level
H2: Probabilities
reported that
earlier studies had found positive
can be one
enterprise
prospects
findings not and to
to
embodied in the
and
entrepreneur
are
DEMO
or
lower
available to the venture from
for female
entrepreneurs.
377
time entrepreneur of experience chances know-how in the people in labor DEMO, of success that in force), a may business embody be DEMO, by result obtained and having organization from this from and this DEMO having making management knowledge. had business parents know-how Management decisions. available A know-how new through venture embodied the can involvement increase in the its
DEMO owned a business, from work
AS PERFORMANCE PREDICTOR
partners. may through DEMO (rather use management of than professional a non-profit experience. advisors organization DEMO or addition, from or not management having been of
involvement
Parents DEMO which A number the Who parents of studies Owned have Businesses noted that has entrepreneurs been are more that likely to be from families DEMO
see parents owned as role a business. models and It that entrepreneurship reasoned individuals is perceived growing as a viable up in career. such
DEMO Furthermore, prepared involved and Gartner and in running 1988). less DEMO coming disheartened They a business, from up may in families such DEMO when a valuable be families, where more those aware background problems DEMO a young parents of the arise. person owned challenges for future In develops this a business entrepreneurs study, they knowledge will we should face hypothesize (Duchesneau and do of what is
Non-Pro$t better. be better that
exposure yielded this to anticipate any
opportunity problems
because findings negative solving DEMO 1986)
Organization
force develop In viewed The technical this organization or as setting who experiences to skills. an have “incubator” the In where DEMO terms entrepreneur directly non-profit the of where prior entrepreneur relevant a organizations organization, can to managing entrepreneurs may have a business. had who little They have opportunity would not been have to in observe the had DEMO less or
Level We who should would had of do Management supervised better. expect Their that managers level breadth Experience of prior or of DEMO managed management a would business experience better prior to would launching them be relevant, for the the current wide so
opportunity the other
confronting to
On
education, constituents perceive problems. have of or greater insignificant differences generally no significant been in relationships how mixed.
relationships management Some with
DEMO what the nature are is involved less observations and likely
develop level skills new
management and cultivate to
magnitude in to
contacts hand, costs also associated greater serve with have management survival. to experience with shown
DEMO located contacts experiences just and prior
well. this of a potential business, challenges. thereby we hypothesize making Although it more that
functions experience
performance marginal Prior positive experience was studies businesses. (Sandberg operationalized. relationships are may difficult and
may for
develop
was
of
ventures.
monitoring
Management diverse
running
DEMO
do
on
as
relevant starting place
the
potential a proxy for customers greater and motivation and
learn
to
take
a managerial (Cooper firm
entrepreneurs difficult literature for
interacting may suppliers. also
lead This entrepreneurs could (Teach to Empirical compare lead 1987). et
1985). and be
them DEMO not
that
with aptitude Similar for to
Hofer al.
provide
and
might
has
venture those of
different range
to
the
CAPITAL
background
dimension,
DEMO others,
prepare
Despite 378 experience the COOPER would inconsistency be ET positively AL. prior DEMO findings, to performance. we
of hypothesize that level of management
AC.
DEMO, specific lawyers, information Reliance who data bankers, utilize upon may
DEMO of provides seeking such as
1989). hypothesize also (O’Neill been DEMO and found a devoted Duker
available access to through to information a blind higher professional spots. networks The advisors of
can also comprehensive In DEMO
and advisors has of (Aldrich to professional been non-customer with associated DEMO greater al. 1987; advisors success with external Dollinger better and (Hay performance. contacts performance 1985). and Ross has We
professional the also DEMO encouragement, and start-up reflect accountants. of advisors larger, and also general, may more helps also promising have access ventures to more (Aldrich DEMO et act al. resources. 1987).
different between of performance accountants networks outside sources more of professional assistance has been investigated in several studies. DEMO of
use
planning, identify degree and and
Those
positive to
use
DEMO), to be relationship developing related and
to
Partners
The
number of principals and found evidence
H4: Probabilities of marginal survival and growth are higher for entrepreneurs whose
parents have owned a small business.
H5: Probabilities of marginal survival and growth are lower for entrepreneurs who were
not DEMO the workforce or who left non-profit institutions prior to starting the venture.
H6: Probabilities of marginal survival and growth increase with higher levels of
management experience.
H7: Probabilities of marginal survival and growth are higher for ventures making greater
of professional advisors.
The third class of human capital DEMO here refers to the availability of know-how
use
to the specific industry
costly previous products, goodwill specific to build processes, with from and DEMO customers, technology and cannot be transferred independently of the people in DEMO
H8: of
to suppliers, specific or human stakeholders. capital investment This specific in relationships investment and is
Industry Know-How
Use of Professional
Advisors
DEMO lenders skill bases presence and of of partners leads to a greater can breadth and depth of expertise. Resource-
the presence better or absence DEMO of a team and the number of team members have been examined. Four
to of of Teach add the venture to et the al. DEMO 1986). to potential Both and
out teams of Pertaining five did previous other theory the venture. than constituents management suggests studies those Partners (Cooper that started (Eisenhardt know-how, partners may by and also single DEMO that enhance be larger founders. Schoonhoven viewed the credibility as 1992) DEMO reported that firms
and
the following teams A
hypotheses did number 1990; better.
are stated: started by
studies examined the
experiences in the DEMO same line of the grows out of the of
marginal survival higher for
similar business, knowledge
of
or business
and growth are
venture. This
and ranges from
ventures
know-how tacit
with partners.
Probabilities
Specific
CAPITAL AS PERFORMANCE
PREDICTOR
379
it is embodied.
“liability
customer relationships,
DEMO). Thus, entrepreneurs who come from similar businesses
bring with them DEMO relevant knowledge bases, experiences, and relationships
significantly reduce the liability of newness.
Business Similarity
may
that
resources
(Stinchcombe
Entrepreneurs starting businesses closely related to what they did in the past would
repertoires of pertinent skills DEMO the appropriate “prior mental programming”
such entrepreneurs
relationships
enhance their ability to obtain credit, develop sales, and achieve other forms of cooperation.
research, higher performance
offered (in five of seven studies) and in markets DEMO (in two of four studies) (Cooper and
Gimeno-Gascon
more
from
DEMO
previous
1980). Furthermore,
with suppliers, distributors,
are more DEMO
and customers. These would give them credibility
to have developed
networks
In
(Vesper
of
and
was found when the new venture was related in products
The lack of this industry-specific
know-how
is a major determinant
of DEMO,”
inadequately
developed internal processes, and problems
previous
Probabilities
to
organizations
DEMO). Note that “business
a particular
of
marginal of the
entrepreneur. survival
task
and growth are higher for ventures similar to the
and
market
DEMO:
between similarity
to prior organization
and performance.
similarity”
which presumably
arises because
of a lack of stable supplier
of the
and
in acquiring
DEMO
have
specific
a business
organization,
the previous
environment
variable
implies knowledge and capabilities
than that gained from having come
considered.
We hypothesize
a DEMO
Financial Capital
The amount of capital raised should be positively
a long tradition of studying
that is clearly central to the assembly
the initial DEMO that might be pursued. For instance,
store to carry a broader mix of merchandise
ambitious
overcomes
that examined
capital was associated with better DEMO
Probabilities
of marginal survival and growth increase with the
More
the entrepreneur
capital.
learns or
relationships
between
initial capital and performance,
The hypothesis
DEMO found that more
thus states:
HIO:
associated
the financing
of resources. The amount of initial capital is related to
more initial capital DEMO a retail
firm to undertake
with venture survival.
of new firms, DEMO part of the entrepreneurial
or a high technology
There is
process
more
Control Variable: Industry Sector
In addition
consider
have
discontinuance
retail
labor intensity
retail and personal services to do less well. The final hypothesis
personal
DEMO
Probabilities services
of marginal survival and growth are lower for ventures in the retail and
(Reynolds 1987). Humphreys
sectors may have lower success because of greater competition
characterizing
states:
such businesses.
that
and higher
DEMO such, we would expect new ventures
in
HI 1:
industry
DEMO
substantial
to the initial human and financial
sector to be a control variable. Previous
differences
by industry,
capital variables
studies of new firm DEMO
retail
with
discussed
firms
previously,
we also
having
the highest
and
rates
sectors.
and McClung
(1981) also suggested
capital
Gimeno-Gascon
time, while
(1992) reported that, of eight prior studies
level of initial
projects.
problems.
initial
Cooper and
also buys
380
Sample
A.C. COOPER ET AL.
influence
on performance
are summarized
Definitions
DEMO Table I.’
of the variables and their hypothesized
METHOD
The sample is a study of 2994 entrepreneurs
May 1985, approximately
Federation
business
found to have become owners during the preceding
2994 entrepreneurs and their firms. 3 DEMO the time of the first questionnaire, the average
entrepreneur had been DEMO business for 11 months. The sample represented all industries and
all geographic retail businesses
western United States seem slightly overrepresented, it appears to be broadly representative
of full-time new businesses in the United States.4
The reporting DEMO were sent follow-up
Multiple venues were used
short-response postcards, checks of DEMO membership lists, and post-office return mail
enabled
or survived during
were
DEMO questionnaires were
date young of
January enough
management and pooled made with suggestions), those
1984 not so
completed variables-education, conducted from the 21he survey when was levels initially field-tested
but age start-up of 1 that (I
similar
as
approach discontinued
was
analysis, sensitivity proportion Characteristics in the to alternative cut-off points of 12 months, 17 months, and 22 DEMO Of the
3The decision was made to focus upon businesses
with a range from I to I7 months).
business. I months, Such businesses were sufficiently
4The
eliminated
many
partnerships, of
these tax-paying
entities
except for S corporations.)
these
a of with they Based letter retail The DEMO data 5 upon with Non-response firms. independent detailed from an Dun’s results businesses. Business of these Starts, comparisons 1984, which measures establishment
of
DEMO
or had sold their Overall, enclosed firms. Secondly,
classified A
DEMO, firms it postcard seems
and proprietorships
were this broadly tracked to DEMO sample returned,
representative in three appears indicating ways. to
annually by the Internal Revenue Service and based upon income tax
new whether a DEMO in
who businesses failed western they were to geographic return the still
are reported have of Those in Cooper, Dunkelberg,
United
in
the
second-year bias States. and
were a higher survey out
business,
of
DEMO were business,
sent
Woo, and Dennis
corporations, annually. from filings. the As Sraristics (The 1982 of CBO Income, excluded 1985, corporations published
were
firms.
only of one (industry Sample characteristics variables considered
those with owners who worked in the business part-time grossing 20 hours per DEMO or less and grossed less than $25,000
sample new
of
ventures Business was
compared in Owners. the
sector) services with showed sensitivity
The
a special
tabulation and retailing tabulation included sectors run by only did
DEMO are
to the cut-off the point using were a confidence examined
activities, more
those Bureau significantly firms of
Census as we in
formed
the
The $25,000. sample sample was also compared with data
11
than
DEMO,
the
The data
using 1980 included to determine
regardless sample were
data through older from 1982 the ventures I982
compared was also
of DEMO compared with or not
level of 0.01. in their The this
and
all
remaining postcard
of Independent
owners?
13,000 questionnaires
Businesses
Responses
DEMO of the United States. Although
and their firms tracked over a 3-year period. In
were distributed
(NFIB) who reported that they had recently
DEMO obtained
17 months. The study focuses upon these
and businesses
in the
to track
the
questionnaires
status of non-respondents.5
The
surveys,
study period.
DEMO founding months
level, and with prior members organization-yielded of NFIB. on DEMO Based results. upon All 154 tests responses pertaining
characteristics prior from to the
several well-established this first study. questions
which, would on the average, were nearing completion
questionnaire), be fresh
no significant
were to be in reworded well-represented to provide greater clarity. The data
there the minds DEMO 2994 of
effects.
the
in firms NFIB membership
founders. in
(from DEMO members the following who
the
With sample a
of their cut-off (DEMO lists, first
those (failed). used for whom to the post office was unable to deliver the letter with enclosed
determine Finally,
DEMO
NFIB status membership of these
firms
records as
of
May were 1987. used
(199ti64-67).
the
to members of the National
become
from 4814 entrepreneurs,
of whom 2994 were
in May 1986 and May 1987.
DEMO classify
the
i In cases
to determine
the impact of
for
the
all
independent
one of
but
variables
the
were compressed
2994
ventures
for DEMO,
they had
were
been
sensitivity
tests
failed,
whether
the
of different operationalizations
us
to evaluate
sold,
year
drop
TABLE
ys
1
Definition of
added as a
0 I I
0 DEMO 0 I otherwise. otherwise. if if before entrepreneur’s
0 0 index I I otherwise. if otherwise. if or was highest more use managers”; level of
number index determine = develop 0.8618). of of full-time an DEMO
total amount business of capital activity invested is retail (hundreds or DEMO services,
0 0 1 if
1
0 I otherwise if major
if otherwise. otherwise. less the venture
0 I otherwise. if than venture DEMO
otherwise. if if entrepreneur male
entrepreneur otherwise
not
different; five-point in DEMO of
than
survived,
Hvnothesized Directions
venture
survived in
employees, grew
DEMO relative than 50% in relative employment
but
employment, was not
classified DEMO
50%
similarity
had at least a bachelor’s
was not a federally defined minority,
in starting the
of relative index professional of importance use (3 advisors. = not of used, information Three I2 four-point = very
15
scales
Scores = no to
‘growth less
than
and firm 2 DEMO had added more
employees) (i.e., it
parents had owned a
DEMO
difference); previous were used summed to organization determine to
were (DEMO
develop
similarity in alpha products an index = in services, or DEMO services. similarity in
0.6228).
of thousands)
labor venture, management DEMO, entrepreneur
had grown
degree,
business, worked
going into for venture a non-profit was
sources.
important); scales Scores were
“supervising organization
(Cronbach’s were used
summed to
one or
alpha to
customers, Three (3 DEMO
by the time of first sale.
very
and
Dependent Variables:
Yr=
Ys
EDUCATION GENDER RACE (+) PARENTS (+) (+) NON-PROFIT (+)
=
Independent
=
PROFAD (+) MGMT = =
PARTN DEMO (+)
CAPITAL (-) IND (+)
=
=
Variables:
=
=
(-)
=
= =
=
Nore: ( ): Hypothesized
directions.
=
1
(+)
Variables and
CAPITAL AS PERFORMANCE PREDICTOR
381
For the firms that survived and also returned survey responses DEMO the third year, growth
in the number of employees could be DEMO After elimination of ventures for which
there were missing values pertaining to resource variables, the working sample was reduced
to 1053 for this study (385 failed firms and 668 surviving and reporting firms). Firms were
excluded when there
of surviving because
no two significant groups were compared
DEMO sample differences of 1053 (at firms in the regard was .05 DEMO to the I I independent
firms
were incomplete
could be determined
level) for these variables.
not
data
on the
variables that are the focus of
independent
variables
with the 1941 firms that were excluded for the DEMO reasons research. indicated. Them were The
or the growth rates
was not retumed.6
the third questionnaire
382
A.C. COOPER ET AL.
Variables
In this study, performance
mutually
growth. Firms that were sold (4.5% of the original
Some of the businesses
have been flourishing.
available,
performance
and is usually not regarded as DEMO
owner’s salary (as would be the case for profits), nor DEMO it depend upon the owner’s ability
to estimate full-year
A venture
employment
dimensions
of alternative
not sensitive to initial size of the venture so DEMO growth was not a function
the combination
those new ventures
marginal survival category if it did not discontinue
category.
METHODOLOGY
is operationalized
was placed DEMO achieved at least 50% growth in
as well as added at least two employees. Many combinations of the two
(percentage and absolute growth in employment) were evaluated to test the effect
cut-off values. The chosen combination
of size,7 and (2)
demonstrated
that had achieved
and did not meet the criteria of the growth
performance
met two a priori DEMO:
(1) it was
nominal validity so that the growth category incorporated
substantial
only
in the middle of the year (as would be the case for annual
expansion.
A firm was placed
in the
Given DEMO qualitative nature of the dependent variable, two generic statistical approaches are
DEMO: discriminant analysis and logistic regression. The latter was selected because it DEMO
more robust to the violation
variables (Maddala 1983). Specifically,
DEMO of the
more than two categories.
For each venture
variables that captured the observed outcome of the venture. For each venture, only one of the
three dummy variables
11,
binary logit model when the dependent
(n), performance
(Y,) was represented
can be equal to 1. Y,is defined as follows:
of the normality
we employed the DEMO
variable is represented
by
by a set of three dummy
assumption
relating to categorical explanatory
logit model (MNL), an
toward If the
both was used to minimize this bias.
employees,” biased more likely 7
DEMO,
Y,, = 1 if venture failed,
Y,, = 1 if venture survived but did not grow,
Y,, = DEMO if venture grew,
Corresponding
P”, = P [Y”, =
P,, =
=
to
P
show large
[Y”s = 11.
the measure
DEMO
=
=
0 otherwise;
0 otherwise.
=
0 otherwise;
for each respective outcome can be represented
as:
growth
P
[Y,,
the smaller
measure
firms had
= 11,
the
been
sample,
DEMO
with
and
in
been increases.
biased If
growth toward firms the growth which firms in number initially measure that
of
had
employees,” only
DEMO or the two
model employees
would
being have
much been
were
had
initially been
“growth larger. Hence. in absolute a
combination number
of
as DEMO qualitative
exclusive
sample) were excluded
may have been sold as they DEMO
Because
sold businesses
measure used. It has the advantage of being a measure of economic contribution,
information.
categories:
failure,
marginal
we DEMO unable
were excluded
dependent
survival
from this study,
failure, whereas DEMO may
to draw these distinctions
from the analysis. Growth in employment
It is not sensitive
to decisions
(survived
variable
with low growth),
DEMO
with the data
was the
about
with three
AND FINDINGS
the growth category if it
common
would percentage have
sales).
CAPITAL AS PERFORMANCE PREDICTOR
383
The summation of P,, P,,, and P,, equals 1. The
probabilities as a function of the DEMO independent
coefficients, according to the following equation:
MNL model
variables
DEMO
and their
these
estimated
P”i =
exp (‘,i)
i-f,DEMO
s, g
exp (V,r) + cxp (V,,) DEMO exp (V,,)
where
V,, = a, + b,x,
V “s = as + bsx,,
V,, = 0 (Parameters of V,, (af and b,) are normalized
DEMO zero so that a unique solution exists.)
The x’s represent
the venture.
explanatory
outcome-failure. As such, the coefficients in the MNL should be interpreted as describing
the effect of the explanatory variables on the probability DEMO a particular outcome (marginal
survival or growth) relative to the probability of failure. The coefficients do not represent any
absolute effect on the DEMO of that outcome.8
Table 2 provides means, standard deviations, and correlation coefficients for the
variables used in the models. Correlations between explanatory variables DEMO not exceed an
absolute level of 0.26. Hence, multicollinearity is not DEMO problem
model was estimated by maximum likelihood using LIMDEP; results are DEMO
Two vectors of coefficients (standard errors and corresponding significance)
in DEMO 3. The vector b, represents
prediction of marginal
associated with the DEMO equation.
variables contributes to predicting whether a venture will be in the marginal survival
growth categories. Hypothesis testing was conducted by (1) examining DEMO
individual parameters, and (2) evaluating goodness-of-fit of the full modeL9
DEMO critical assumption
alternatives
the unobserved factors that affect each of the three alternatives)
(Ben-Akiva
IIA property. For this purpose, the McFadden,
DEMO
study.
resource elasticities. value of sThe the absolute
was pooled versus necessary
survival
incremental
over the normalized
Thus, we examine
effects of the explanatory
outcome,
9Because
the vector of explanatory
The vector coefficients of the DEMO model
variable on the logarithm of the odds-ratio
in this study. The MNL
in Table 3.
are reported
variables
failure. The second vector is
DEMO each of the initial
in the
condition
or
of
“non-started” at or Aggregate same below to resource are available elasticities
of the MNL model DEMO the property of independence
(IIA). Stated succinctly,
are mutually
DEMO Lerman 1985). Therefore, it is critical to test for significant
DEMO, and Train (1976) test and the Small and
test were DEMO
effect of a resource variable on a given outcome probability
firms
the
determine the sample
variable.
from
of
a - 0.1
included were whether DEMO
can be
developed Disaggregate of not the pooling only authors. probabilities elasticities of failure, can then marginal be averaged survival, across and
confidence.
DEMO
the IIA property holds that the disturbances
start-ups these. compared; firms
(63%).
together a likelihood but also was
firms
appropriate. ratio that DEMO
had
was
measured
of irrelevant
(representing
independent
violations
not violated
in
DEMO individuals
showed Separate been that purchased models the samples or for inherited, “started” could be it
variables
denoting
represent the marginal effect of an
of that outcome to the normalized
with
of the
into respect aggregate DEMO
all
the initial conditions
of
by to the a change disaggregate in the
this
(1985)
used. Both tests showed that the
elasticity,
variables which represents
the responsiveness
of a particular
individual’s
outcome
probability
h
F
P
Gender Education
TABLE 2
Parents Race Non-profit Mgmt
Fktn DEMO Profad Ind Similar b
CL a < < 0.01 0.05.
Correlation Means 0.79 0.27
0.12 0.92 0.09 0.44
(two-tailed). 0.48 0.64 0.44 7.80 8.85
Coefficients 0.44 0.41 SD
0.29 0.50 0.32 0.27
0.48 0.76 0.83 DEMO 2.65
Education .OP .03
.I26 .I66 .04
-.I66 -.02 -.W .17b .04
Gender
.Ilb
-.08b .OO .w
-.02 .llb .13b .04
-.I56
Race
-.04 DEMO .07”
-.05 -.03 .06 .Ol
Parents
-.06 -.Ol
-.03 -.07” .OO .Ol .OO
Non-profit
-.03
-.02 -.04 -.206 .03 .Oo
Mgmt
-.03 -.02 .206 DEMO .Ol
Profad
.206 .12b .Ilb
-.03
Palm
.18 .03
-.w
Similar
-.26b .Ol
Capital
-.Ol
Ind
$ % g 3
0
TABLE 3
Gender Education
Parents Race Profad Nonprofit Mgmt.
Partn Capital Similar
DEMO (
) asymptotic
standard
0
deviations.
0
Ind
Resource-based
associated (normalized Vector “failure”
of
coefficients with to
Model of
zero)
0
0
DEMO
0
0
0
0
0
0
Resources on To education, assess DEMO the minority that use of
of
0
Examination
(.lO capital, level), and gender and minority status, experience in similar business, partners, capital, and
coefficients assess several (Efkon loThe the subsamples 1979). DEMO use Sixty of
deviations were and in general larger than the
of
PREDICTOR
385
Test t-values of H: bs - bg
-2.0802b 2.8313’ I.1096
-0.9830
-0.4316 -2.4733b -0.4304 0.0961
1.4670
1.4377
“(a
standard were statistically
DEMO);
<0.05);
‘(a
3.9072* 0.8059
for marginal survival (vector b,) included
significant
d(a < .oOl).
<O.Ol);DEMO
Individual
professional status, parents advisors
who had (.I0 started level). ventures, Contributing experience to growth in similar were education business,
observations, their problematic to approximate MLE counterparts. bootstrapping were when the generated. the real
Parameters
sample Although distribution technique size the
Bootstrap
is
was
bootstrap DEMO small. estimates used the
coefficients In that order the
standard draws of
deviations, and r-tests, differences a were not large.
from
asymptotic these DEMO
standard
the
standard
asymptotic original
deviations samples,
deviations of the
sample standard were deviations each
two
associated bs Vector “marginal of
-1 (0.41058) .5788gd
(0.17410) (0.16979) 0.704665d 0.541 0.22150
-0.20856 (0.25680) (DEMO) (0.25484) 0.428887c 0.40603 276b
-0.02802 (0.22637) (0.02739) (0.0923 0.04792“
-0.22478 (0.01655) (0.15845) (0.13243) 0.05131c 0.47652d I)
DEMO Venture coefficients with Survival and Growth
CAPITAL AS
survival”
bg Vector associated “growth” of coefficients with
-3.56544d (0.71360)
(0.24645) (0.32395) 0.88629r 0.459392” I.031336
(0.20988) 0.14026
XI.21398 -0.23805 (0.45781) (0.32588)
(DEMO) 0.06453
(0.02469) 0.06141b
-I
(0.16325) (0.2205 0.377976 1)
(0.49978)
(0.11552) 0.226537b
.ox%V
PERFORMANCE
and
generated vectors
compared with deviations
uses
can
1053
them be to
of
through coefficients
maximum (b,
and
b,),
likelihood we
used
estimation.‘o f-tests based
to
DEMO standard
constant
significance
Significance
levels:
b(a
their
386
A.C. COOPER ET AL.
industry sector. Coefficient directions in both functions DEMO consistent with predictions in
Table 1. The last column of Table 3 examines the differences between b, and b,. Except for
gender, DEMO of partners and industry sector, no significant differences between the two
DEMO were observed for all other variables. Hence, most resource variables appeared DEMO to
demonstrate differential impacts on whether a venture marginally survived or grew.
Goodness-of-Fit
Tests
Significance of the model is usually measured with likelihood ratio DEMO calculated from
comparisons of the proposed model with “naive” models. With MNL, there are two naive
models (Ben-Akiva and Lerman 1985): one DEMO to each venture equal probabilities of
failure, survival, and growth, DEMO the other assigns to each of the three outcomes,
probabilities equal to the actual observed proportions (in our sample, .3656, SOO5, DEMO .I 339,
respectively). Based on the likelihood ratio tests, DEMO x2 values from the comparisons of the
proposed model with the two naive models were 389.1 and 146.8 0, = .OOO). Hence the
current model was significantly more powerful than both naive models.
Having established DEMO statistical significance of the model, the next step is to assess DEMO
model’s predictive power. The evaluation of that predictive power is hindered by two
characteristics of the model. First, the initial probabilities of the outcomes are quite dissimilar,
with low probabilities for some outcomes and higher DEMO for others. Despite the high
rates of failure, sample outcomes are DEMO dominated by businesses that marginally survived.
In this study, the proportions DEMO firms that failed, marginally survived, and grew substantially
were 0.3656, DEMO, and 0.1339 respectively. The challenge for modeling is that a simple
DEMO of assigning all ventures to the dominant category (marginally survived) would lead to
correct classification of 50.05% of the cases and exceed the DEMO of most empirical
models on entrepreneurial outcomes.
The second concern pertains specifically to the stochastic or highly random nature of the
entrepreneurial process. The DEMO and turns taken by organizations are to some degree shaped
by the occurrence of unexpected, nonrecurring or, otherwise termed, random events. The success
and survival of new ventures, relative to established firms, are even DEMO significantly
dominated by these events. The thin resource base of the new venture makes it constrained in its
ability to respond to surprises. This DEMO of flexibility magnifies its vulnerability to events that
diminish market opportunities or increase competitive pressures. In addition, a venture pivots
around the founder as its key provider of skills, capital, interpretation, and direction. As such,
random events that enter into the life of the entrepreneur (such as health and family problems)
are also likely to affect the DEMO Finally, considering that the new venture will operate in
uncharted waters, most of the events, even those indigenous to the structural environment, DEMO
probably new, surprising, and unanticipated for that firm. The impact of these random events
renders it difficult to pinpoint the exact outcome for DEMO individual venture.
These characteristics make our research similar to those studies in epidemiology that
attempt to find characteristics which predict the occurrence of a DEMO In such cases, the
dominant proportion of the population does not DEMO the disease and hence naive
classification rules based on assignment of individuals to the healthy category will
outperform most models. Secondly, even individuals who demonstrate all the characteristics
as specified by the model may or may DEMO have the disease during the period of the study. In
such cases, the practice is not to specify the actual occurrence of an outcome but the
probability associated with the outcome. For example, predictions are made regarding the
probability of survival for such a patient within a certain DEMO of time.
CAPITAL AS PERFORMANCE PREDICTOR
387
We find the study of entrepreneurial ventures DEMO be analogous to the modeling of these
problems in the field of epidemiology. Thus, we turn to the latter for the tests of predictive
power that accommodate
“deciles of risk” (Truett, Cornfield,
estimated
probability
DEMO several advantages:
analysis,
easy to assess the goodness-of-fit
can be put in graphic form, making its interpretation
For example,
ranked
membership. Thus, the first group was made up of those ventures that were least likely to fail,
based upon the model, and the 30th group was made up of those ventures with the highest
predicted probability DEMO failure. For each group, we computed the estimated and actual
number DEMO failures. A x2 test was then used to evaluate the tit between both series (Hosmer
and Lemeshow
associated
through graphs, the actual and DEMO probabilities
the series indicate that equality between predicted probabilities
be rejected
differences
than by real underlying
growth outcomes,
high degree of accuracy, the probabilities
A further assessment
sample. A subsample
the model was with the DEMO 753 observations. From the results of this
reduced model we calculated probabilities of failure, survival, and growth for each holdout
observation. Predictive power DEMO the model as applied to the holdout sample was assessed by
comparing the estimated number of outcomes in each category with the actual outcomes
(Ben-Akiva and Lerman 1985). The estimated number of cases for each DEMO was very
close to the actual number of cases (failure : DEMO versus 111; survived : 156.13 versus 150;
and growth : DEMO versus 39). Hence, we failed to find any significant
the DEMO and observed
(two-sided p-values of .2542, .4778, and .5620, respectively).
DISCUSSION
OF RESULTS
numbers
of cases of failure,
marginal
differences
DEMO,
between
and growth
the special characteristics of our model. One approach, known as
and Kannell 1967), groups observations that have similar
probabilities of a disease. The procedure compares
with the actual proportion
(1) DEMO measures the fit of the model to the data much like in regression
rather than comparing predictions
with the x2 test (Hosmer and Iemeshow
much easier.
to calculate the test measures
by their estimated probabilities of DEMO and placed in 30 groups with equal
of occurrence
of occurrences
within each subgroup.
This approach
the estimated
from two models, as in likelihood
ratios; (2) it is
1989); and (3) it
for the failure outcome, observations
were
1980). A similar procedure was used to evaluate the predictive power
with the other’two outcomes: marginal survival and growth. Table 4 illustrates,
for each outcome. The x2 tests between
DEMO actual proportions cannot
at any common level of significance. The probabilities that the observed
between predicted and actual proportions were caused by random error, rather
differences, were 0.98, 0.99, and 0.99 for failure, survived, and
respectively. This analysis shows that the model is able to predict, with a
of the three outcomes.
of predictive power can be provided DEMO the use of a holdout
of 300 randomly selected observations was extracted from the sample,
Using a model based upon the initial human DEMO financial capital of the venture, it appears
possible to predict the DEMO of new businesses with some degree of confidence.
Moreover, we found DEMO and growth to be governed by similar stochastic processes, with
only DEMO few variables demonstrating a strong differential impact. We believe this is one of the
first studies to examine explicitly whether or not there are DEMO differences.
In terms of factors that contributed to the prediction of venture performance, all variables
that were statistically significant supported the directions of influence as specified in the
hypotheses.
and
estimated
388 Performance
A.C.
TABLE 4
1
1
Comparison COOPER A.
Outcomes E.T
DEMO of
AL.
Estimated Probabilities
and
and Observed
Probabilities Actual
Proportions
for
Failure Related
to the Three
B. Estimated
7
and Observed
13
9
11
DEMO
17
19
for Marginal
23
Groups ranked by estimated probabilities
Survival
27
25
29
C. Estimated and Observed
by estimated
Probabilities for Growth
Groups DEMO
probabilities
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
Groups ranked by estimated probabilities
3
5
15
21
CAPITAL AS PERFORMANCE PREDICTOR
389
General Background
Overall, performance appeared to be enhanced by level of education. A higher level of
education may lead DEMO problem-solving skills and also reflect certain qualities of
“stick-to-it-ness” through a combination of commitment, motivation, and discipline.
Whereas such characteristics may merely lead DEMO entrepreneur to hang on (despite poor
results), this study showed DEMO beyond tenacity, there was a suggestion that education might
contribute. to DEMO marginal survival and achieving high growth performance (significant only
at the DEMO level).
Racial minority was linked to lower probabilities of both marginal survival and growth.
In addition to the factors considered in this study, it has been suggested that poor location and
limited access to the DEMO market contribute to poorer performance for minority-owned
businesses (America 1980). DEMO might also note that minorities may have fewer business
contacts and more difficulty in obtaining insurance, credit from suppliers, and access to
prosperous DEMO
Gender was significant only in the growth equation. High growth is clearly a more
demanding process than marginal survival. The latter is as likely DEMO reflect idiosyncratic
choices (e.g., personal attachment to the venture) as DEMO economic potential. This may be
particularly true when focusing upon the initial 3 years of the venture and not the later years,
when DEMO realities may play a stronger role. In contrast, high growth indicates DEMO certain
ability to withstand the test of the market through effective choices and execution and also
requires the ability to finance that growth. There DEMO some evidence that banks may impose
more stringent requirements on women business owners in regard to collateral for loans
(Riding and Swift 1990). Such requirements could be one factor limiting the growth of these
firms. DEMO has also been reported that women owners are more likely to pursue other goals
beside the economic goals emphasized by many male-owned firms (Brush 1992). Male
entrepreneurs may be better positioned within networks and thus DEMO benefit from improved
access to suppliers and customers. They may also be more likely to start growth-oriented
ventures.
Overall, the variables representing general human capital and background appear to be
significantly related, although in different degrees, to both marginal survival and growth. This
significance reinforces the general character of these variables. It appears that general human
capital is as well DEMO in self-employment in new ventures (through higher rates of
survival and DEMO) as it is rewarded in other alternative uses (such as employment in
established firms). Similar significant findings of the effects of general DEMO capital on new
venture success were reported by Bruderl et al. (DEMO) in their study of German new firms.
Management Know-How
Having parents DEMO had owned a business contributed to marginal survival, but not to DEMO
The dynamics behind this finding are not clear. It could be that such a background prepares
the entrepreneurs to expect difficulties. As such, they may be less disheartened in the face of
unfavorable shocks. They may DEMO more committed to venturing as a career path and may hang
on longer before seeking out other options. They may be satisfied with lifestyle DEMO
that do not experience much growth. Although such role-modeling may instill a certain
perspective and tenacity, it may not provide the industry-specific skills and contacts
contributing to growth. It should be noted that this finding contrasts DEMO the Bruderl et al.
(1990) study, which found that having DEMO self-employed father did not increase survival
prospects.
390
A.C. COOPER ET AL.
The number of partners emerged as a DEMO contributor to achieving high growth.
Reiterating the reason cited earlier, high DEMO would be more difficult to attain and more
dependent on the availability of resources and know-how. Benefits associated with the
presence of partners include DEMO, functional expertise, and a broader range of management
experience. There may also be benefits from the psychological support they can provide each
other DEMO from the lessened reliance upon a single entrepreneur’s drive and judgment. These
ventures are probably more sophisticated and larger in nature (Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg
1989). The formation of such a team may also DEMO the start-up process to more extensive
planning, evaluation, and refinement. Interestingly, the probability of marginal survival was
not increased, possibly reflecting the DEMO of some partnerships because of disagree-
ments. It has been noted that partnership team often do break up and that, when this happens,
the survival of the business may be threatened (Thurston 1986).
Three variables, all under the category of management know-how, did not contribute
DEMO to either marginal survival or growth. They were: management level, prior
employment in non-profit organization/not having been in the labor force, and use of
professional advisors (significant at the .10 level for marginal survival). The findings relating to
previous management level and use of professional DEMO were surprising, although the latter
approached significance for firms achieving marginal DEMO It may be that these variables
have their greatest impact on larger scale ventures than those studied here. The non-profit or
not-in-the-labor-force background variable DEMO not been investigated previously. It may be that
there are few advantages to be gained from simply having been in a business context, without
regard to the position held or the degree of relatedness to the DEMO venture.
Overall, these results point toward the possibility that management know-how DEMO se has
a weak direct effect on the performance of a new venture. Again, this agrees with the Bruderl
et al. (1992) findings that neither self-employment, nor leadership experience, nor a
self-employed father had DEMO significant effect on the odds of survival. Two possible
explanations can be proposed. First, it may be that the only effect of management know-how
on venture performance comes from the enhanced ability of firms rich in DEMO
know-how to raise initial financial capital for the business. Table 2 shows that higher initial
capital is associated with higher management know-how available to DEMO firm (in the form of
management experience, use of professional advisors, and involvement of partners). Second,
management know-how acquired in an industry may not be generally transferable to other
industries or lines of DEMO In any case, the recurrent finding of the insignificant effect
of DEMO know-how on venture performance raises important theoretical questions to
be explored by future research.
Specific Industry Know-How
Business similarity turned out to be a DEMO determinant of both marginal survival and
growth. The experience and contacts developed in a similar business may lessen the liability
of newness of the DEMO venture, leading to less “trial and error” as the venture gets DEMO It
also represents a key resource for enhancing high growth.
These results substantiate the finding by Bruderl et al. (1992) of a strongly DEMO
effect of industry-specific experience on venture survival. When considering these results
with the previous findings about management know-how, both Bruderl et al. (1992) and this
study find that industry-specific human capital is a strong predictor DEMO future success, whereas
general management experience (defined as know-how in the role of managing a business,
independent of the industry of application) is weakly or not related to success.
CAPITAL AS PERFORMANCE PREDICTOR
391
Financial Capital
The level of capitalization also DEMO to marginal survival and growth. Capital may
influence performance through both direct and indirect effects. Direct effects include the
ability to buy time, undertake more ambitious strategies, change courses of actions, and meet
the financing DEMO imposed by growth. In terms of indirect effects, capital accumulation
may DEMO better training and more extensive planning. Such ventures may also be more
promising propositions that passed the screening of lenders and investors.
Control Variable: Industry Sector
Industry sector was only significant in the growth equation. This DEMO is uniquely
important for attaining high growth. In this study, probability DEMO growth tended to be higher
in businesses that were not in the retail and personal services sectors. This finding is
consistent both with our DEMO and findings from earlier studies. Start-up barriers may be
lower in retail and personal services and these sectors may be characterized by more intense
DEMO pressures. Along the same line, such businesses are less likely to DEMO unique
capabilities or contacts that render imitation difficult. In contrast, participation DEMO industrial
businesses or professional services may be highly dependent on very specific sets of
capabilities or requirements developed through prior experience or education.
In DEMO, of the set of hypotheses on venture performance, support is established for
education (H l), gender (H2), not being a DEMO minority (H3), parents who owned a business
(H4), number of partners (H8), experience in a similar field (H9), DEMO (HlO), and industry
sector (Hll).
It appears that groups such as minority entrepreneurs and female entrepreneurs do less
well. However, the use of multivariate methodology allows us to gain insight into the reasons
DEMO these results. First, the weaker performance of these businesses is explained DEMO other
variables incorporated in this study. Note in the correlation matrix (DEMO 2) that women are
more likely to come from non-profit organizations, less likely to start similar ventures, likely
to start with less capital, and more likely to be in retail or personal services. Note also that
minority founders in this sample were less likely to be male DEMO to have had parents who
owned a business. Second, even after DEMO for differences in know-how, capital, and
industry, the multivariate analysis DEMO that businesses headed by minorities and females
were still performing poorly. Although the results would suggest that there exists a direct
effect between gender, race, and performance, there is no established theory or consistent
prior DEMO evidence to suggest that minorities and female entrepreneurs are inherently
less promising. It is possible that other factors not captured in our multivariate model, such as
access to networks or economic activity in the geographic markets DEMO may he behind the
Iower performance outcomes. Much more research is needed in this area to identify the
unobserved factors that contribute to the DEMO successful performance of minority and female
entrepreneurs.
Using the model to group ventures according to their predicted probabilities of failure,
survival, or growth, we found that within each group the actual proportions pertaining to these
outcomes corresponded well to predictions. In general, the model indicated higher
probabilities for failure and marginal survival than for substantial growth. Note that in DEMO
4C, even the most favored category of firms had only a DEMO probability of growth of
36.5%.
392
CONTRIBUTIONS
COOPER ET AL.
LIMITATIONS
There are major practical implications from DEMO study. Accurate identification of the
resources that contribute to survival and growth benefits entrepreneurs, those who assist,
train, and advise them and DEMO who provide capital for their ventures. In no way do we imply
that the variables considered here are the only ones contributing to performance. DEMO,
these resource variables are relatively easy to assess, and all DEMO be considered at the time of
start-up. It is striking that this limited set of variables contributed substantially to the
prediction of new venture DEMO
Some of the entrepreneurial capability variables cannot easily be changed. However, DEMO
benefits or risks associated with them can be assessed, with implications DEMO for individual
entrepreneurs and for public policy. Entrepreneurs whose resource base renders it less likely
for them to succeed should proceed with caution or DEMO their position. Venture size,
financial capital base, or lack of DEMO experience
disadvantage of female and minority
identified and actions to acquire specific know-how or capital can be taken to increase the
chances of success.
DEMO study seeks to make a number of contributions to the growing literature on
predictors of new venture performance. First, the model used in this study achieved a high
level of predictive power based solely on conditions DEMO at the start-up stage. Without
downplaying the significance of subsequent actions and developments, we believe that the
ability to evaluate the prospects of a new venture at an early stage presents a number of
advantages to DEMO entrepreneurs and their supporters.
Second, many studies in the population ecology DEMO have related survival to age and
size of the venture. This study, in contrast, examined a sample of new ventures that were all
DEMO young and small. As such, the analysis focused of other
determinants DEMO performance. Hence, it shed light on factors that
attention in the DEMO ecology studies-factors which help to
performance among firms that are all young and small.
Third, this study explicitly models the effect of considering
performance. It defined three categories of performance and used an
allowed potential differences DEMO predictors among failure, marginal
emerge. This approach enabled us to explicitly DEMO rather than assume homogeneity and
identified the predictors that were particularly important for achieving growth.
Fourth, noting problems in the extant literature with data accuracy on performance
status, we took extreme care to obtain reliable data on this variable. Multiple venues were
used. These venues included the survey, postcards for easy responses, post-office return
information, and cross-checks with the DEMO membership database. As a result, we were able
to determine the DEMO status of each of the 1053 ventures. These efforts also allow us
to include all those ventures in the sample that failed within the DEMO of study. Studies in the
past have been limited by a bias toward successful ventures due to the difficulty of tracking
businesses that have DEMO operations. Performance was also monitored longitudinally over
the first three years after launch, a period which is often characterized by turbulence as
reflected in rather high failure rates.
Fifth, this study also attempted to respond to the methodological shortcomings of prior
studies. Beyond the separate estimation of growth DEMO marginal survival, this study utilized
the multinomial logit model, a more robust methodology for the estimation of qualitative
binary dependent variables. The fit DEMO the model was assessed through multiple tests. These
included comparison with two naive models and use of a holdout sample for testing correct
entrepreneurs;DEMO
in business
however,
organizations
these
problems
work to the
can be
on the identification
had not received much
determine differences in
multiple measures DEMO
estimation approach that
survival, and growth to
AND
A.C.
CAPITAL AS PERFORMANCE PREDICTOR
and growth against
393
the predicted
classifications. In DEMO, we also undertook a comparison of the actual proportions
ventures in DEMO categories of failure, marginal survival,
proportions through the “deciles of DEMO approach.
Finally, the sample itself incorporated a broad array of all DEMO of ventures. These
ventures were drawn from all industry sectors and geographical regions. Except for a larger
percentage of retail ventures, checks of this current sample against other large databases
suggest a high degree of representativeness DEMO the general population of small businesses.
is possible that other cross-sectional databases comprised largely of established
reflect the lower survival rates among retail businesses. DEMO breadth of businesses represented
in this study enable the findings to be generalized to the larger population of new ventures.
The rather narrow boundaries DEMO to geographic and industry settings of prior studies
were often cited as an impediment to integration among studies and systematic advancement
of knowledge in DEMO field of entrepreneurship.
On the other hand, we need to note DEMO number of limitations associated with this study.
Although the variables considered are similar to those utilized in much of the research to date,
DEMO should be recognized that these do not measure the specific skills and behaviors that directly
influence performance. For example, the entrepreneur’s previous level of management
experience is considered, but the specific skills and behavior that may result from that
experience are not. The variables considered here do have DEMO advantage of being visible and
relatively easy to assess by entrepreneurs and their advisors. However, future research can
move beyond these easily accessible variables to examine specific skills, behaviors, and
cognitive processes that theory suggests DEMO be related to entrepreneurial performance. In
addition, it should be recognized DEMO directions of causality may be difficult to untangle. For
instance, greater DEMO capital may reflect more promising ventures, and professional advisor
utilization may DEMO associated with more sophisticated entrepreneurs.
We should also note that this study focuses upon performance during the first three
years. It may be that DEMO kinds of businesses (such as high technology firms) require a
longer period to demonstrate their possibilities. It is also possible that other kinds DEMO
businesses fail very quickly and are not even picked up in a study such as this.
the impact of initial resources on subsequent performance DEMO extremely
strong, we did not observe the process by which initial DEMO shaped the opportunity set
of the venture and its capacity to respond to various challenges. It seems likely that initial
resources serve to imprint DEMO strategies and also influence the paths by which capabilities
evolve. The process through which such strategies and capabilities developed was not
examined in this DEMO
In conclusion, we believe that efforts to understand predictors of new DEMO
performance constitute one of the most important streams of entrepreneurship research. We
REFERENCES
It
ventures
of
hope the success of the models described
here, even with their obvious
limitations,
will
Aldrich, H., Rosen, H., and Woodward, W., 1987. The impact of social networks on business foundings
provide encouragement
for the work yet to be done.
Ben-Akiva, Becker, America,
58(3):116-121. G.S. R.F. M.,
Research.
and DEMO: Wellesley, a longitudinal MA: Babson College:
1985.
1975.
1980. DEMO Lerman, How
minority S.R.
study. business In York: N.C. Churchill 154-168.
National can
build
Bureau on
et al., its eds.,
of
strength. Economic
Frontiers
Cambridge,
Research. MA:
Business Press.
Review
Entrepreneurship
The DEMO
Harvard
Human Capital. New
Discrete Choice Analysis.
of
Although
Birch, Journal organizations. A.C. W. J., COOPER 1989. 32: 489-S Strategic ET AL.
Carroll, Carroll, Brush, and 91(94):838-873. perspective: G.R., G.R., Ireland: and and Delacroix, an Huo, findings ecological Y.P.
Cooper, Cooper, Cooper, Cooper, Cooper,
David, Dollinger, DEMO
Entrepreneurship characteristics D.L. 1989.
Duchesneau, Effron, R.K., Frontiers environment upon DEMO industry. Babson B. and K.E., financial Quarterly Ross, of and and Schoonhoven, growth among C.B. 1990. U.S. Organizational semiconductor
Statistics S. An
Cambridge I.
Journal Firms A.C., A.C.
A.C., A.C., Business
performance. MA: DEMO, PWS
Paper of role of
Proceedings. threshold Woo, Folta, T.,DEMO
Venturing C., and
Eisenhardt, Hay,
Hosmer, Hosmer, D., DEMO M.A., Iemeshow,
M.B., Academy J. 1979. of
Management Society G.S. and Monographs, 1983. MacMillan,
Communications D., and
Kalleberg, Humphreys, DEMO business A.L.,
Kimberly, Maddala, Low,
D.L. New 1987. York: Job The Creation Free Press. in
Boeker,
394
Bruderl,
#533, University. P.A.
M.J.
1979.
1992. Preisendorfer,
of
Dunkelberg, and Their DEMO Gimeno In D. Publishing Owners. Sexton W.C., Gas&, Washington, Woo, Co.
Business 1988. D.A., Stanford, 1985. Path-dependence: Management Environmental expectations. DEMO: Gimeno The Dunkelberg, 4(5):3
directions. C.
Entrepreneurship Research DEMO on
and 1985. Business The
College: In Bootstrap B.A. and
15. DEMO, change: America: How Our Smallest Companies Put the Most People DEMO Work.
role
Iemeshow,
in
survival and and and Leicht, and
DEMO
Issues Management 139-161. in the
Gartner, 372-386. Kirchhoff
and Sociological women DEMO, Science in
Venturing of
Academy Gas&, J. F.J. In C.Y., Kasarda, 1992. Entrepreneurs, eds., The
Institute 17-332.
methods:
S. 1989. 1980. of Applied Logistic Regression. New York: J. Wiley & Sons.
1988.
J. from 1986. 1982. approach. Organizational Administrative
mortality
the
Quarterly newspaper
Theory DEMO
incubator the 1(1):75-86. organizations
Foundation. W.J. State Jr.
23(DEMO
W.B.
A9(
putting for
et al., another contacts 1988. 1):24-30. eds., A
Research. assessment Goodness successful 10):
W! J.L.Wall DEMO F.J., Mathematical 1989. Management. the and past Entrepreneurship and Woo,
DEMO of fit
Academy Gender Women of and
creation Journal
Dependent
571227-242. Survival
business and
Organizational local newspaper task and industry. institutional
Practice owners:
DEMO(4):5-30. past
and chances history.
trends, a new perspective
and future
in the of processes 1990. founding the American Art New Business DEMO America: The
L.R. Jauch, eds., and Entrepreneurs’ the Academy initial DEMO of of firms. Journal
and financial into performance
look
Frontiers profile at the of new of jackknife. Entrepreneurship venture Annals
Management of organizational success DEMO tests for factors Journal the multiple logistic regression
of 22~437-457. organizations:
Wellesley, versus
failed MA:
Entrepreneurship: University and Qualitative Press.
past
DEMO effects Review R., of founding
and DC: Dennis, NFIB
Studies DEMO
of growth oriented
in of Entrepreneurship. founding, exit Management and decisions: new
future in of the economics. Social Sciences, Technical
success
growth: DEMO,
Babson ventures. of non-urban College. In R.
performance: in Oklahoma. DEMO(1):136-161.
and in future Econometrics. challenges.
of Academy newly founded DEMO Management
of in of ecological Argentina Sociology
Boston, firm
Stanford Report
DEMO, research Variables innovation and institutionalization.
business
firms.
Best the
of the DEMO firm. Journal of
linking of
of model.
Econometric Journal
environments 27: DEMO
1978-1988. Research. Statistics founding Brockhaus failure start-up 7(l): Wellesley, DEMO
and
industries 169-198.
determinants Review
an
l-26.
emerging MA:
Administrative team, firms et strategy,
al.,
Regional of small
of
based eds.,
and
35:504-529.
Business McClung, success. K.T. 6(2): 1991. H. 13-20. 1981.
C.Y. 1992.
CAPITAL AS PERFORMANCE
PREDICTOR
Perrow, O’Neill, McFadden,
Management C.B. H.M., 1970. and
Reynolds, Riding, 2(3):231-2&j. the A., DEMO P.
Alternatives Institute D., of
and
Romanelli, Sandberg, Sexton,
DEMO, Small, Shapero,
Teach, Stuart, Frontiers Business R.D., R.,DEMO
and
Truett, Thurston, P. 1986. When partners fall out. Harvard Business Review 86(6):24-26,30,32,34.
‘Qe,
1987.
Administrative E.
employment. industry MA: E.A., W.R.,
26:619-627. Vesper, Organizations. K., A., and Tarpley, Abetti, A.L.
VanderWerf, Vesper, Wall in DEMO, Framingham. Cornfield,
Street
and
K.
Babson and ed.,
1989. DEMO,
Giglierano, Frontiers of J. Entrepreneurship 1982. Exits and entries: Research. a study Wellesley, in yellow MA: pages Babson journalism. College:
DEMO tests. In J.G. International March, Economic Review
MA: the
Hsiao, DEMO Chicago: C. 1985. Multinomial
Venturing of Entrepreneurship F.A., P.A.
2(3):
and
1987.
Practice Journal. 1980. P.A.
New
14(2):45-58. DEMO Venture Journal and Kannel of
1989. J.,
Achieving
Black
empirical 1967. Englewood progress face
Strategies. entrepreneurs
Chronic W
Disease A multivariate 20151 huge DEMO, in an hurdles undefined NJ: Prentice-Hall, in places field.
like
DEMO: Miami. Inc.
May 17:
I-524.
Transportation Property W., and of
Duker, Organizational 24( New 1):30-37. J.
experience. C. 1990. firms:
Train, the
1986.
structure, and and Hofer, and the C.W. Quarterly
Social Schwartz, 2 Rand 15-230.
Studies, Analysis: Survival
Women Journal societal and
34~369-387. strategies
College: In Robinson, R.H.
Brockhaus 28-42. P.B.
DEMO 1987. 1989. et al., The eds., economic Frontiers
Start-up
Environments Science
Multinomial K.
structure Research. McNally R.G. ventures: 1986.
Improving Journal of organization
logit specification
and Publishers: organizations. towards Software
Wellesley,
1976. University Diagnostic Logit of Model. California. Tests Working for the paper Independence No. 76 DEMO
business of contribution Business A and Sociological failure in small View. business. Belmont, Journal CA: Wadsworth. of
new of
owners
Venturing versus and
DEMO venture and of
5(5):327-340. Entrepreneurship demographic of performance: Venturing startups: credit: effects 2( on early survival.
determinants 1):5-28. DEMO Research.
role of Wellesley, strategy, of self-
In
ed., Handbook DEMO
venture prediction Babson teams. of initial In R.
Ronstadt success.
546-562.
113-
analysis of College: risk of coronary heart disease
Theory 1,16.
terms
potential.
Journal
some
of
Berkeley, of
empirical Business
Irrelevant
395
Small findings Venturing Business of
K.H. 141.
et Journal al.,
CA:
eds.,DEMO
of{1g42fwefx}