ENTREPRENEURS'PERCEIVED
CHANCES FOR SUCCESS
ARNOLD C. COOPER,
CAROLYN Y. WOO,DEMO
Purdue University
AND WILLIAM C. DUNKELBERG
Temple University
Entrepreneurs involved in planning or starting firms must engage in a
EXECUTIVE continuing process of appraising DEMO for success. These assessments
SUMMARY presumably bear upon the preparations they make. as well as, at some
later point, whether they decide to DEMO major changes or even to dis-
continue the business. In this study, data from 2994 entrepreneurs who
had recently become business owners were analyzed to determine their
perceived changes of success.
Although previous evidence on business DEMO led to the hypothesis that the entrepreneurs
would only be cautiously optimistic, this was not the case. They perceived their prospects as very
favorable, with 81% seeing odds of7 out of /0 or better and DEMO remarkable 33% seeing odds of success
of /0 out of /0. In considering the prospects for other businesses like their own, they perceived odds
which were significantly lower, but still moderately favorable.
Based upon previous research on factors associated with new business success, it was hypoth-
esized that those who were "more likely to succeed" (based upon their personal backgrounds and the
nature of their new firms) would be more optimistic. However, this was not the case. Those who were
poorly prepared were just as optimistic as those who were well prepared.
At this DEMO, shortly after having become business owners, the assessment by entrepreneurs oftheir
own likelihood of success was dramatically detachedfrom past macro statistics ,from perceivedprospects
for peer businesses, and from characteristics typically associated with higher performing new firms.
The psychological literature on "post-decisional bolstering" suggests that decision makers, in
many settings, tend to bolster or exaggerate the attractiveness of an option after it has been chosen.
This, coupled with the tendency of entrepreneurs to believe that they can control their own destinies,
implies DEMO the extreme optimism observed here is probably a typical occurrence.
Address correspondence to: Arnold C. Cooper, School of Management, Krannert Graduate School of
Management, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation and support of the National Federation of Independent Business.
An DEMO version of this paper was presented at the 1986 Babson Research Conference.
Journal of Business Venturing 3,97-108
© 1988 Elsevier Science Publishing Co DEMO Inc., 52 Vanderbilt Ave., New York, NY 10017
0883-90261881$3.50
97
98
A.C. COOPER ET AL.
For entrepreneurs the findings suggest that it DEMO probably natural to experience feelings of
entrepreneurial euphoria when first becoming a business owner. With the available evidence. it is
difficult to judge whether DEMO leads to inadequate preparations or an inability to diagnose problems
and make adjustments after the business is started. This extreme optimism probably does contribute
DEMO the heavy personal commitments observed here. in which the median entrepreneur devoted more
than 60 hours per week to the business. The entrepreneur would DEMO well advised to form relationships
with outsiders. such as board members and professional advisors, who can be objective and detached
in diagnosing problems and assessing objectively the prospects for the business in its current form.
INTRODUCTION
DEMO an entrepreneur starts or buys a business, many would perceive this DEMO be a risky
undertaking. The entrepreneur appears to have much at stake--capital, long hours invested,
reputation, and foregone opportunities. Yet, despite the combination of having much to lose
and the apparent poor chances for DEMO, more than 50,000 new corporations are established
every month. In DEMO, many other entrepreneurs start unincorporated businesses or pur-
chase existing firms.
DEMO paper examines how entrepreneurs perceive their chances for success shortly after
they have become business owners. Do they see themselves as undertaking risky ventures,DEMO
with marginal prospects, or are they confident that, come what may, they will succeed?
What do they perceive as the chances for success for other businesses like theirs? Does
degree of optimism relate (DEMO a rational manner) to the nature of their businesses or to DEMO
which previous research suggests might be associated with success?
Consideration of these questions should allow us to assess the degree of objectivity
exercised DEMO entrepreneurs in rating their own potential for success. To the degree that
entrepreneurs grossly misjudge their prospects or have evaluations totally unrelated to success
DEMO demonstrated in prior research, they may operate under suboptimal biases. If DEMO
is overoptimism, entrepreneurs may underestimate the difficulties associated with their
businesses, thus failing to make the necessary preparations, e.g., larger capital bases, in-
come from other sources, lines of credit, or adequate marketing DEMO They may
further find it difficult to recognize problem areas, to DEMO major changes, or to appraise
objectively whether to continue to make DEMO If entrepreneurs are unduly pes-
simistic, then short-term problems may dominate DEMO perspectives and reduce inclina-
tions to stay with their firms through the start-up difficulties. Hence, by examining how
entrepreneurs perceive their prospects, we DEMO increase our understanding of entrepre-
neurial thinking and of the processes leading to the formation and development of new
firms. This should alert both DEMO and those who work with them to biases which
may develop. It may enable them to bring more objective thinking to bear about whether
DEMO preparation and early progress are likely to lead to success or whether major changes
are necessary.
PREVIOUS RESEARCH AND HYPOTHESES
To the best of DEMO knowledge, there has been no systematic previous examination of how
entrepreneurs DEMO their chances for success.
However, there has been research on factors DEMO we might expect to influence these
perceptions. This would include research on the historic survival experience and success of
new firms. Presumably, if the actual success rate for new firms is low or high, entrepreneurs
ENTREPRENEURS' PERCEIVED CHANCES FOR SUCCESS 99
might sense this and adjust their assessments for their own businesses accordingly. There
has also been research examining DEMO between characteristics of entrepreneurs and
the later performance of their firms. These relationships, if recognized, might lead entre-
preneurs to take into account DEMO own preparation and characteristics in judging whether
prospects for their firms are favorable or unfavorable.
Past studies of business survival suggest poor prospects for DEMO survival for most
new businesses. (Some specialized groups, such as high-technology firms, appear to have
much higher likelihood of success.) Shapero and DEMO in 1982 reported on 13 previous
studies of discontinuance rates for new firms or the population of existing firms. One of the
largest was DEMO U.S. Department of Commerce study of all operating businesses started or
transferred to new ownership during the eight years ending in 1954 (Churchill 1955). It
reported 46% discontinuing or changing hands within 1.5 years and DEMO within 4.5 years.
The most frequently quoted study is that by Dun and Bradstreet, which reported that 67%
of new businesses discontinue within four years (Dun and Bradstreet 1967). A number of
focused studies, DEMO firms in specific industries and locations, have found discontin-
uance rates DEMO nontechnical firms ranging from 50% after two years to 35% after three years
(Shapero and Giglierano 1982). However, Shapero and Giglierano, tracking firms through
telephone company Yellow Pages, found somewhat lower discontinuance rates-34% after
two years and 50% after five years.
Variations in findings appear to DEMO two factors. One is the sample of firms examined,
whether it is a cross section of all firms or a less diverse group DEMO as manufacturing or
high-technology firms. Of particular importance is whether the sample is of new firms or a
cross section of established, more seasoned companies. A second point of difference relates
to the definition of "discontinued." Many firms are sold, moved, or changed (merged, name
changed, etc.). These changes complicate the question of determining whether "a DEMO"
has survived.
Even while recognizing these problems of sample selection and measurement, it appears
that 34%-50% of businesses discontinue or change hands after two years, with 50%-71 %
meeting similar fates after five years. These numerous studies suggest that, at best, less than
50% of businesses DEMO for more than five years with a given owner/manager. In the light
of such historic experience, we might expect entrepreneurs who think objectively and ra-
tionally about their prospects to be cautiously optimistic and to DEMO at best an average
probability of 0.5 when evaluating their potential for success. This leads to our first
hypothesis.
Hypothesis 1 The entrepreneurs' perceived odds of success will be less than or equal to
0.5.
A DEMO of the above hypothesis is the expectation that entrepreneurs would perceive
their own odds to be about the same as those who are in DEMO businesses. While some
firms are better prepared and others less so, DEMO average, the entrepreneurs should have the
same prospects as those in DEMO businesses. If their perceptions of odds for success are
based primarily on objective considerations, then entrepreneurs' odds of success should not
deviate significantly DEMO those assigned to their peer groups. Thus, the second hypothesis
states:DEMO
Hypothesis 2 The entrepreneurs' perceived odds of success for their own DEMO will
not differ significantly from the odds assigned to businesses similar to their own.
100 A.C. COOPER ET AL.
Research on the relationship between entrepreneurial characteristics DEMO new business
success has been spotty, with relatively few studies that DEMO upon each other. Probably
most relevant have been several longitudinal studies following firms through time, which
identified factors associated with survival and success.
A number of longitudinal studies of manufacturing and high-technology start-ups
suggest that teams DEMO to be more successful than single founders (Hoad and Rosko 1964;DEMO
Roberts 1972; Cooper and Bruno 1977). Multiple founders usually have DEMO broader base of
skills and experience and are also able to give one another psychological support. In regard
to education and industry experience, a study of 95 new manufacturing firms found that the
combination of education (one or more years in college) and prior industry experience was
associated with the greatest success. Education or experience alone was better than the
DEMO of inexperience and little education. Surprisingly, researchers found that the
entrepreneur'DEMO prior experience might be in managerial or nonmanagerial work with equal
benefit to the firm. However, a variety of experience seemed to correlate with greater success
(Hoad and Rosko 1964). A study of the founders of 81 Rhode Island retail and service
establishments revealed similar findings about DEMO role of education, but contrasting findings
about experience. For these entrepreneurs, less than 10% of whom had completed college,
greater education was DEMO with success. Yet, those who had previously worked in
the same DEMO were not more successful. Prior experience as an owner, however, led to
a higher success rate (Mayer and Goldstein 1961). A broad cross-sectional study of 1805
business owners found that those with at least DEMO college as well as those with supervisory
experience had achieved more growth than their counterparts with less education or expe-
rience (Dunkelberg and Cooper 1982).
For high-technology firms, founders who had previously worked in an organization
utilizing similar technology and serving similar markets tended to be more DEMO (Roberts
1972; Cooper and Bruno 1977). In a broad cross section of firms, greater growth was
achieved by those that offered the same products or services as in their previous organizations
(Dunkelberg and Cooper, 1982). Interestingly, entrepreneurs who had spun off from larger
organizations (more than 500 employees) also did better (Cooper and Bruno 1977)DEMO
Success also seems to be related to the amount of initial capital; firms that have more
initial capital tend to be more successful (DEMO and Goldstein 1961; Lamont 1972; Roberts
1972). Presumably, the DEMO capital gives the new firm a longer period in which to work
out its problems and survive. The ability to raise a large amount DEMO initial capital may also
reflect a more impressive strategy and management team.
The overall pattern of relationships is consistent with conventional wisdom. Despite
some DEMO findings, success generally attended those entrepreneurs who were involved in
a DEMO team, who had education and relevant experience, who had owned previous
businesses, who started businesses similar to those they had left, who DEMO from large firms,
and who had more initial capital. These findings suggest that entrepreneurs who have these
characteristics would be better prepared, more likely to succeed, and possibly more opti-
mistic. In view of the above, we hypothesize that:
Hypothesis 3 Entrepreneurs' perceived odds of DEMO would be positively related to the
factors as listed in Table 1.
RESEARCH DESIGN
The hypotheses listed above will be tested using data from DEMO we believe to be the largest
and most diverse sample of small business owners studied to date. A survey was administered
ENTREPRENEURS' PERCEIVED CHANCES FOR SUCCESS
101
TABLE 1
Characteristics Associated with High-Performing New and Small Businesses
Factors
Number of partners (NP)
College education (CE)
Business experience (BE)
Prior ownership (PO)
Prior supervisory
experience (SE)
Same or similar customers
as prior employer (DEMO)
Same or similar products
or services as prior
employer (SP)DEMO
Size of prior employer (S)
Initial capital (lC)
Hypothesized Direction of Influence on
Perceived Odds of Success
+
+
+
+
DEMO
+
+
+
+
Parenthesized abbreviations are used in text.
Measurement
number of partners
high school or less
more than high school
worked for DEMO or not in
labor force
worked for a business
had not owned a business
had previously owned a business
no subordinates previously
had supervised DEMO or
managers
different customers than prior
employer
same or similar customers
as prior employer
o = different products/services
than prior employer
same or DEMO products/services
as prior employer
less than 100 employees
100 or more employees
less than $5000
$5,000-$19,999
$20,000-$99,999
$100,000 DEMO more
n =
=
=
=
o
I
o
I =
=
=
o
I
o =
I =
o =
I =
I DEMO
o =
=
=
=
=
=
I
I
2
3
4
in the spring of 1985 to members of The National Federation ofIndependent DEMO (NFIB)
who reported that they had recently become owners of DEMO I
A total of 2994 entrepreneurs (Table 2) who had become owners (primarily through
start-up or purchase) in 1984 and 1985 were DEMO from an initial sample of 4814 busi-
nesses. With this sample, DEMO median entrepreneur had been in business for 12 months. The
interquartile range was 8-15 months. All of the businesses in the sample were underway
DEMO had experienced some feedback from the marketplace. However, the firms had DEMO really
been tested over time and some may have been surviving on their initial capital. Of course,
perceptions of chances for success may DEMO over time and with experience. With this in
mind, we shall DEMO examine whether entrepreneurs' perceived odds of success vary with
months in DEMO
The sample is described more fully in Table 2. It seems broadly representative of
small business in the United States, with entrepreneurs from virtually all industries and parts
of the country. As noted, about 64% of these entrepreneurs became owners through starting
their firms and about 30% through DEMO
'The NAB has over half a million member firms. Based upon DEMO and other government data, the
membership is reasonably representative of the DEMO of small business in terms of industry, legal forms of
organization, and employment. Average NAB employment does tend to be somewhat larger.
102
A.C. COOPER ET AL.
TABLE 2 Sample Characteristics
Characteristic
Percent
Industry
DEMO
Manufacturing and mining
Transportation and communication
Wholesale
Retail
Agriculture
Financial
Service
Professional
Other or unknown
Number of Employees"
o or no answer
0.1-2.4
DEMO
4.5-9.4
Over 9.4
How Became Owner
Started
Purchased
Inherited
Other
7
8
2
4
46
2
5
19
5
1
3
39
29
19
DEMO
64
30
2
4
All entrepreneurs (n = 2994) became owners in 1984 or 1985. Data were gathered in May 1985.
"Number of full-time + 0.5 x number of part-time employees.
It should be noted DEMO this sample of entrepreneurs had substantial stakes in their
ventures. For the sample, 67% invested $10,000 or more and 51% invested $20,000 or
more. Their investment of time was particularly noteworthy. The median entrepreneur DEMO
ported devoting 60 hours or more per week to the venture and 75% reported a work week
of 50 hours or more. It is DEMO from these profiles of commitment that these entrepreneurs
had major stakes in their ventures. These were not investments "on the side," like lottery
tickets, which, if lost, could be easily absorbed. Thus, there DEMO incentives for the entre-
preneurs to assess with care their chances for success.
Against this backdrop of heavy commitments, the entrepreneurs were asked, "What
are the odds of your business succeeding?" They were given DEMO choices, ranging from 0
chances in 10 to 10 in 10. DEMO, they were asked, "What are the odds of any business
DEMO yours succeeding?" These two measures labeled Oddyours and Oddlike, as DEMO as other
variables measuring the success factors listed in Table I, DEMO used to test the hypotheses.
These are operationalized in the following manner:
Hypothesis 1
Oddyours ~ 5.0,
Hypothesis 2
Oddyours -
Oddlike DEMO 0.0,
Hypothesis 3 a. Oddyours = F (NP, CE, DEMO, PO, SE, SC, SP, S, IC)
b.Oddyours - Oddlike = F (NP, CE, BE, PO, SE, SC, SP, S, IC)
ENTREPRENEURS' PERCEIVED CHANCES FOR SUCCESS
TABLE 3 Odds of Your Business Succeeding
Odds
Percent
o out of 10
lout of 10
2 out of DEMO
3 out of 10
4 out of 10
5 out of 10
6 out of 10
7 out of 10
8 out of 10
DEMO out of 10
10 out of 10
1
1
I
1
10
4
9
19
20
33
Mean = 8.1 out of 10. a DEMO 0.000.
"Less than 0.5%.
103
RESULTS
The results for the entrepreneurs' perceptions of their own odds for success display a
noteworthy degree of DEMO As shown in Table 3, 95% perceived odds of success of DEMO
out of 10 or better, and 81% odds of 7 out DEMO 10 or better. A remarkable 33% perceived
their chances as "dead DEMO," 10 out of 10. The mean value was 8.1. This is substantially
and significantly more than the hypothesized value of 5.0 or less (ex = 0.000). We reject
the first hypothesis that entrepreneurs would DEMO their own odds to be less than or equal
to 5.0 out of 10.0.
The results when entrepreneurs were asked, "What are the DEMO of any business like
yours succeeding?" are shown in Table 4. Of the entrepreneurs, 78% perceived these odds
as 5 out of 10 or better and 39% perceived odds of 7 out of 10 or DEMO The mean value
of 5.9 is substantially and significantly less than the value of 8.1 which the entrepreneurs
saw as their own odds for DEMO (ex = 0.000). We reject the second hypothesis that
entrepreneurs DEMO perceive their own odds as not significantly different from those assigned
to similar businesses.
TABLE 4
The Odds of Any Business Like Yours Succeeding
DEMO
o out of 10
lout of 10
2 out of 10
3 out of 10
4 out of 10
5 out of 10
6 DEMO of 10
7 out of 10
8 out of 10
9 out of 10
10 out of 10
Mean = 5.9 out of 10. DEMO = 0.000.
"Less than 0.5%.
Percent
3
6
7
6
30
DEMO
II
12
5
II
104
A.C. COOPER ET AL.
TABLE 5
Odds of Success for Your DEMO Versus Any Business Like Yours
Your odds poorer than
any business like yours
Your odds the same as
any business like yours
Your odds DEMO than
any business like yours
5%
27%
68%
A comparison of their own prospects for success with those for others in the same
kind DEMO business is revealing (see Table 5). Only 5% perceived their DEMO chances as poorer
than for others in the same business. About 27% saw their chances as exactly the same as
others, and 68% perceived their odds for success as better than others. The cross-tabulations
are shown DEMO Table 6.
We now consider whether entrepreneurs' perceptions of their own DEMO are re-
lelated to objective predictors of success. As noted earlier, DEMO research has identified
a number of factors related to the background of the entrepreneur or the nature of the new
business which seem associated DEMO success.
Two dependent variables were available for analysis: first, the entrepreneur's proba-
bilistic assessment of success on a scale of 0 to DEMO (Oddyours). The second measure compares
perceived chances of success for DEMO entrepreneur's own firm to those of similar businesses.
This measure is constructed by forming a simple difference between the firm's own odds
DEMO success and the odds for similar firms (Difodd). Thus, an objective assessment of 7 (out
TABLE 6
Odds of
success
of any
business
like yours
0
I
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
DEMO
10
Cross-tabulation of Odds of Success for Your Business Versus Any Business Like
Yours
Odds of success for your business"
0
2 3
DEMO
5 6
7
8
9
10
3
2 19 3 4
I
0 5 5 14
2
3
0
0
I
0
I
0 DEMO 0 0 0
2
7
3
I I 2
3 6 5
0
I
I
0 0
I
12 4
I I
2 3
DEMO 0
0
0 0
4
10
4
5 6
2 10
2 5
0 I
I 4
0
12 4 9
20 10
22
DEMO
187
28
5
3
0
I
14
IS
31
I
21
30 36
29 48 22 22
83 202 153 183
23
52
7
DEMO
2 6
0 0 4
9 II 20
25 22 35
29
60 60 58
53 102 97
98 95 129
9 65 73
DEMO 280
44
%
3
6
7
6
30
9
II
12
5
II
Cumulative
percent
10 4 9
19 20 33
Not including 139 DEMO who gave no response to one or both questions. Mean (Oddyours DEMO Oddlike) = 2.20.
a = 0.000.
"Odds of success out of 10 chances, e.g., lout of 10.
bLess than 0.5%.
ENTREPRENEURS' PERCEIVED CHANCES FOR SUCCESS
105
TABLE 7 Odds of Success as a Function of Entrepreneur Background and Nature of Business
Dependent variables
Number DEMO partners (NP)
College education (CE)
Business experience (BE)DEMO
Factor
Prior ownership (PO)
Prior supervisory experience (SE)
Same or similar customers as prior employer (SC)
Same or similar products or services as prior employer (SP)
Size of prior employer (DEMO)
Initial capital (IC)
Oddyours
O.04a
(0.91)b
0.19*
(DEMO)
0.06
(.21)
0.24
(3.70)
-0.01
(0.009)
DEMO
(1.73)
0.12
(1.56)
0.07
(.51)
0.07**
(9.97)
Difodd
0.09
(3.22)
0.36**
(14.62)
0.46**
(8.83)
0.18
(1.68)
0.34**
(9.55)
0.02
(0.04)
0.08
(DEMO)
-0.11
(1.05)
0.03
(1.04)
R2
Significance
aBeta coefficient.
bF-value.
'Significant at a = 0.05; "Significant at a = 0.01.
0.01
0.000
0.02
0.000
of 10) might be optimistic or pessimistic depending on whether the entrepreneur feels that
the odds of success for others DEMO 7 in 10 (a difference of 0) or only 3 in 10 (a difference of
4). Essentially, this is a measure DEMO whether the entrepreneur perceives his or her chances
for success to be substantially better or poorer than those for similar firms.
Regression analyses were DEMO, using the "objective predictors" as independent
variables and using each DEMO the measures of expected success discussed above as dependent
variables. Results are shown in Table 7.
The first analysis, that involving only the entrepreneurs' probabilistic assessments of
success (Oddyours), produced disappointing results. It explained DEMO of the variation in
odds, with a R2 of only 0.01.
DEMO second analysis used the dependent variable derived from the difference between
the entrepreneur's perceived chances of success and the perceived chances of success DEMO
similar businesses (Difodd). The resulting analysis, shown in Table 7, again exhibited a
lack of systematic relationships between objective predictors and this measure of optimism.
Despite the large sample size, most variables were not significant and the R2 was only 0.02.
Those who were poorly prepared DEMO just as optimistic as those who were well prepared.
It is clear that we must reject the hypothesis that perceived odds of success are DEMO to
the "objective predictors" of success listed in Table 1.
Since the sample firms had been in business for varying amounts of time, we examined
whether degree of optimism was related to months in business. DEMO might have expected
that entrepreneurs with older, more "seasoned" businesses DEMO be more optimistic. Pre-
106
A.C. COOPER ET AL.
sumably, their firms had demonstrated the ability to survive over time. However, examination
of odds for success by months in business showed no significant differences. Those who
had just started their DEMO were just as optimistic as those who had been in business 16
months or more.
DISCUSSION
In this, the first systematic examination of how entrepreneurs perceive their chances for
success, several findings seem clear:
1. Entrepreneurs who have already made the commitment to become business owners display
DEMO remarkable degree of optimism. Most see their own odds for success as extremely
high, far higher than would seem justified by the historic experience of new firms.
2. Entrepreneurs perceive their prospects for success as substantially DEMO than those for
similar businesses.
3. Entrepreneurs' perceptions of their own DEMO for success do not seem to be system-
atically related to factors which previous research suggests might be associated with
success.
Clearly, the assessment by entrepreneurs of their own likelihood of success is dra-
matically detached DEMO past macro statistics, perceived likelihood of the peer group, and
characteristics typically associated with higher-performing new businesses. The proposed
model, one based on rational, objective evaluation of relevant factors totally fails to account
for the perceptions of new business owners. To understand the observed extreme bias toward
DEMO, we tum to an alternative perspective outside of the rational framework DEMO possible
explanations. The psychological literature on post-decisional bolstering and on the psycho-
logical characteristics of entrepreneurs offers insights.
The theory of cognitive dissonance leads DEMO the expectation that decision makers will
bolster or exaggerate the attractiveness of an option after it has been chosen (Abelson and
Levi 1985, DEMO 276). In field experiments conducted in real-life settings, a high DEMO of
post-decisional bolstering has been observed as people made choices regarding jobs, can-
didates in a political campaign, or betting in a horse DEMO Thus, entrepreneurs who have
already made the decision to start a DEMO may express optimism as an example of "activity
(that) involves DEMO new defensive attitudes and rationalizations that enable the de-
cision maker to recommit himself" (Janis and Mann 1977, p. 317). These considerations
would account for the high degree of optimism among entrepreneurs who have DEMO sub-
stantial commitments.
The psychological makeup of entrepreneurs may also have played a role. There has
been research on entrepreneurs' propensity to take risks. (External observers might perceive
entrepreneurs to be undertaking ventures in which the probability of success seems low and
might thereby conclude that entrepreneurs have DEMO high propensity to take risks.) McClelland
noted that in a variety DEMO laboratory tests individuals who perform well in an entrepreneurial
role have demonstrated a preference for tasks in which the risks are moderate and their
DEMO or skills can make a difference (McClelland 1961). Furthermore, Brockhaus, re-
viewing the literature on entrepreneurial risk-taking, found that most ofthe DEMO evidence
suggested that entrepreneurs are only moderate risk-takers (Brockhaus 1982). DEMO
have also often been found to have high levels of internallocus-of-control beliefs, meaning
that they believe they can control their own destinies. Brockhaus has commented on this
characteristic as it relates to entrepreneurial expectations, "Entrepreneurs DEMO such a high
ENTREPRENEURS' PERCEIVED CHANCES FOR SUCCESS
107
belief in their ability to influence the achievement of business goals that the perceived
possibility of failure is DEMO low" (Brockhaus 1986, p. 29). The findings presented here
DEMO clearly consistent with the previous research on these entrepreneurial characteristics.
It may seem particularly surprising that those who were well prepared and those who
DEMO poorly prepared seemed equally optimistic. It may be that entrepreneurs, at DEMO at
this stage of their commitment, are unable to assess objectively DEMO own strengths and
weaknesses and the early progress of their firms. If so, this would raise serious questions
about their ability to diagnose problems, make adjustments, and make objective assessments
about whether to continue their DEMO personal commitments. It may also be that the psy-
chological process of postdecisional bolstering has an overwhelming effect as entrepreneurs
make these assessments. All DEMO, whether well prepared or not, may experience
"entrepreneurial euphoria," DEMO which they feel they must succeed and then assess their odds
accordingly.
What are the implications of these findings? For scholars, they add DEMO our understanding
of the processes leading to the formation and development of new firms. Furthermore, the
findings seem consistent with earlier research on "DEMO propensity" and "locus-of-
control" characteristics of entrepreneurs. We should further DEMO that the sample considered
here is a broad cross section of small businesses, with many of the retail and service firms
noted for high rates of discontinuance. These optimistic entrepreneurs were not concentrated
in the segments DEMO the economy noted for long business lives.
For entrepreneurs the findings suggest that it is probably natural to experience feelings
of entrepreneurial euphoria when DEMO becoming a business owner. With the available evi-
dence, it is DEMO to judge whether this leads to making inadequate preparations or over-
looking potential problems. We can note that the median firm started with an DEMO of
slightly more than $20,000. While this is not a trivial investment, it probably provides little
cushion for unexpected problems which might arise. This may mean that the overwhelming
optimism observed here is often associated DEMO thin capitalization and thus an inability to
survive unexpected problems. Extreme optimism may also make it difficult for the entre-
preneur to diagnose problem DEMO, to redirect the venture, or possibly to close it down.
Given the psychological processes at work, the entrepreneur would seem well advised to
form relationships with outsiders who can provide objective assessments. Board members,
DEMO business people, accountants, and attorneys can, if kept informed, provide not only
expertise, but also objective assistance in diagnosing problems and appraising prospects.
However, there may also be benefits associated with extreme optimism. It may thereby
become easier to make the great time commitments observed here. (Recall that the median
entrepreneur was devoting more than 60 hours per DEMO to the business.) Thus, buoyed by
optimism he or she may work to make the entrepreneurial decision tum out right and, in
doing so, may actually increase prospects for success. In addition, optimism may DEMO the
entrepreneur to avoid discouragement and to find ways to overcome the many problems
which often arise.
For those who work with entrepreneurs, the high, possibly unrealistic degrees of
optimism observed here may be what will usually be observed. It may not be desirable to
try to dampen DEMO optimism, but the external advisor is in a position to provide DEMO
and detached advice. Working closely with the entrepreneur, it may be DEMO to make
real contributions in diagnosing strengths and weaknesses and in helping the entrepreneur
to assess objectively prospects for the business in its current DEMO The entrepreneurial
euphoria observed here may make it difficult for the entrepreneur to make these judgments
when working alone.
108
A.C. COOPER ET AL.
This is the first stage of a DEMO study, in which the sample firms and their
performance will be DEMO for two successive years. It should then be possible to relate
subsequent performance to the entrepreneurs' original projections of prospects for success
as well as to variables normally thought to be related to entrepreneurial success.
REFERENCES
DEMO, R.P., and Levi, A. 1985. Decision making and decision theory. DEMO G. Lindzey and E.
Aronson, eds., The Handbook of Social Psychology. 3rd ed. New York: Random House.
Brockhaus, R.H. 1982. The psychology DEMO the entrepreneur. In C.A Kent, D.L. Sexton, and K.G.
Vesper, DEMO, The Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Brockhaus, R.H. 1986. The Psychology of the Entrepreneur. In D.L. Sexton and R.W. Smilor, eds.,
The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger DEMO
Brockner, J., Houser, R., Lloyd, K., Nathanson, S., Birnbaum, G., Deitcher, J., and Rubin, J. March
1986. Escalation of commitment to an ineffective course of action: the effect of feedback having
negative implications for self-identity. Administrative Science Quarterly 31 (1):109-126.
DEMO, B.C. December 1955. Age and life expectancy of business firms. Survey DEMO Current Business
35 (12):15-19.
Cooper, A.C., and Bruno, DEMO April 1977. Success among high-technology firms. Business Horizons
20 (2): DEMO
Dun and Bradstreet. 1967. Patterns of success in managing a business. New York: Dun and Bradstreet.
Dunkelberg, W., and Cooper, A.C. 1982. DEMO of small business growth. Academy of Management
Proceedings 1982: 409-413.
Filley, A.C., and Aldag, R.J. December 1978. Characteristics and measurement of an DEMO
typology. Academy of Management Journal 21 (4):578-591.
Hoad, W.M., and Rosko, P. 1964. Management Factors Contributing to the Success or Failure of
New Small Manufacturers. Ann Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan.
Janis, I.L., and Mann, L. 1977. Decision Making: A Psychological Analysis of Conflict. Choice, and
Commitment. New York: The Free Press.
Lamont, L.M. 1972. The role of marketing in technical entrepreneurship. In A.C. Cooper and DEMO
Komives, eds., Technical Entrepreneurship: A Symposium. Milwaukee, Wise.: Center DEMO Ven-
ture Management.
Mayer, K.B., and Goldstein, S. 1961. The DEMO Two Years: Problems of Small Firm Growth and
Survival. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
McClelland, D.C. 1961. The Achieving Society. Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand Company.
Roberts, E.B. 1972. Influences upon performance DEMO new technical enterprises. In A.C. Cooper and
J. Komives, eds., Technical Entrepreneurship: A Symposium. Milwaukee, Wise.: Center for
Venture Management.
Shapero, DEMO, and Giglierano, J. 1982. Exits and entries: a study in DEMO pages journalism. In K.H.
Vesper, eds., Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1982. Wellesley, Mass.: Babson College.{1g42fwefx}