IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION, VOL. 47, NO. 2, JUNE 2004 95
Building Trust in Virtual Teams
—NANCY W. COPPOLA, SENIOR MEMBER, DEMO, STARR ROXANNE HILTZ, AND NAOMI G. ROTTER
Abstract—This paper presents a study of trust development in online courses. It reviews the concept of DEMO
trust and examines changes in faculty roles as professors go online. An exploratory content analysis looks at
indicators of the development of swift trust DEMO the highest rated of a large number of online courses studied
over a three-year period, and contrasts these results with one of the poorest-rated online courses. Establishing
swift trust at the beginning of an online course DEMO to be related to subsequent course success. Strategies
for trust formation are also suggested.
Index Ter m s—Asynchronous learning networks (ALNs), e-learning, DEMO trust.
An asynchronous lear ning network (ALN) uses the
world wide web and the inter net to deliver courses
anytime rather than “same DEMO,” with an emphasis
on student-student as well as student-teacher
interaction. The most successful courses use
extensive class discussions and group assignments
(in teams varying in size from dyads to the whole
class) to build a lear ning community [1]. This paper
presents an exploratory qualitative study of DEMO
the for mation of SWIFT TRUST in the first few weeks
of an online course can help explain the success
of online courses. Though DEMO is limited primarily
to an intensive study of trust for mation indicators
in one especially successful course, the study has
implications for other types of online work in which
work groups or teams plan to interact DEMO a period
of several months.
Swift trust is a concept developed by Meyerson et al.
for temporary teams who for m a round a DEMO purpose
and common task with a finite life span [2]. Swift
trust was originally developed to describe high-risk
and high-stake temporary groups such as DEMO crews
or cockpit crews. The researchers discovered that
temporary teams are tied together by a for m of trust
with unusual properties. Swift trust DEMO a unique for m
of collective perception, rather than scaled-down
trust, for temporary, but not trivial, situations.
Meyerson et al. frame swift DEMO in temporary systems
in ter ms of the following social characteristics:
• vulnerability—the belief (hope) that others will
care for what is DEMO entrusted with good will.
• uncertainty—a willingness to suspend doubt in
order to execute the task per for mance.
• risk—a willingness to take DEMO
• expectations—A positive expectation of benefits
of temporary group activity.
Manuscript received September 25, 2002; revised November 18,
2003. The authors are DEMO the New Jersey Institute
of Technology, Newark NJ 07102-1982 USA
(email: coppola@admin.njit.edu).
IEEE DOI 10.1109/TPC.2004.828203
0361-1434/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE
Especially for students and faculty who are new to
lear ning online, the above set of characteristics is
important to members of new “temporary teams.”
DEMO with a traditional classroom, the virtual
classroom presents more uncertainty, risk, and
expectations. This is certainly the case for the first
time ALN user who is uncertain about how to proceed
and what to expect. DEMO, this new ALN user may
be concer ned with how to DEMO successfully in an
unfamiliar and ambiguous setting, where many of
the DEMO social cues are missing. Even if a faculty
member or a student has had a prior course using
the ALN approach, they are never sure whether or
how this new set of characters is going to DEMO able to
work together.
While trust in general is an important ingredient
in the functioning of social relationships, swift
trust takes on heightened significance in the ALN
environment because the situation can leave students
vulnerable to DEMO of isolation. This sense of
isolation has been discussed extensively in the
literature on telecommuters (e.g., Kugelmass [3]).
The telelear ner working DEMO is analogous to the
telecommuter. The dynamic of swift trust can alleviate
this potential aspect of the ALN environment.
Because people in temporary groups DEMO a limited
amount of time to become familiar with one another,
they import trust and assign perceptions based on
past personal and professional DEMO Since
these groups come together to get a job done, swift
DEMO is sustained and reinforced by a high level of
activity. According to Meyerson et al., “The more
forceful the action, the greater the DEMO to trust
and the more rapidly does trust develop” [2, p. DEMO
High levels of action are associated with
high-per for ming teams in the Iacona and Weisband
study of temporary electronic teams [4]. These
researchers DEMO to understand what temporary,
distributed teams do to produce and maintain trust.
They studied 14 teams of graduate and undergraduate
business students in DEMO geographically diverse
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Waterloo. Downloaded DEMO June 1, 2009 at 07:59 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
96 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION, VOL. 47, NO. 2, JUNE 2004
universities for instances of active interaction. They
coded email between team DEMO for instances of
initiations and responses to initiations. They found
that high levels of trust were maintained in teams
that engaged in continuous and DEMO interaction,
what they describe as “doing trust work,” [4, DEMO
413]. In summary, while trust, swiftly or slowly
built, combines DEMO feelings and beliefs regarding
the extent of confidence to be placed in another’s
words and actions, it derives from reliable acts and
communications.
Jarvenpaa and Leidner extend the original concept
of swift trust to an examination DEMO global virtual
teams [5]. They define a global virtual team as
a temporary, culturally diverse, geographically
dispersed, electronically communicating work group
(following DEMO et al. [6]).
Jarvenpaa and Leidner’s research analyzes behaviors
and actions both in early and later stages of group
work.
Early behavior and DEMO that facilitate trust
in-group
Communication
• Social communication; social exchanges
• DEMO conveying enthusiasm
Member actions
• Coping with technical and task uncertainty
• Individual initiative; members suggest topics,
volunteer
Later behaviors and actions that facilitate trust
in-group
Communication
• Predictable communication; regular patter n of
communication; war ning of absences
• Substantive and timely responses; explicit and
DEMO responses that the messages were read
and evaluated
Member actions
• Leadership rotated among members
• Transition from procedural to task focus;
movement DEMO rules to emphasis on the task
• Phlegmatic reaction to crisis; DEMO to ride out
turbulence
Jarvenpaa and Leidner’s study suggests that swift
trust for ms in global virtual teams with unique
communication and behaviors. First, communication
via the earliest keystrokes begins to establish
trust. Task communication maintains DEMO while
social communications (and explicit statements of
commitment, excitement, and DEMO) strengthen
trust. Finally, the members’ initial actions as well as
their responses to one another are critical to trust
development.
CONTEXT OF THIS DEMO
For over a decade, a research team at New Jersey
Institute DEMO Technology (NJIT) has been involved in
constructing a specific version of an ALN, called the
Virtual Classroom, and studying its use in DEMO wide
variety of courses [7]. NJIT can be considered a
“strategic research site” for studying deter minants
of the effectiveness of online courses, since it has
one of the largest sets of online undergraduate and
graduate DEMO in the US (according to U.S.
News and World Report), DEMO in infor mation
technology degrees such as the B.A., B.S., and M.S.
in infor mation systems and computer science. As of
the 2001–2002 DEMO year, when this study was
conducted, 136 instructors offered ALN courses, with
approximately 2,800 students enrolled.
We found that students are generally enthusiastic
about the opportunity to lear n online. Our findings
correspond to DEMO for over 30 empirical studies of
the effectiveness of ALNs as compared to traditional
face-to-face courses [8]–[10]. The research literature,
which uses grades DEMO student evaluations about
equally to measure course effectiveness, tends to show
DEMO no significant difference in lear ning outcomes
or significant advantages of ALNs over traditional
face-to-face classrooms in student satisfaction. For
example, Wade and Power found that students in ALN
environments received more in-depth exposure to the
DEMO content area [11]. Bour ne et al. showed that
ALN is more effective than the traditional lecture or
laboratory and that peer-to-peer lear ning DEMO enhanced
through ALN [12]. Other studies evaluated grades
and test per for mances in ALNs. Alavi found that
final grades of students using computer-mediated
DEMO lear ning were significantly higher than
those of students who did not use computer-mediated
lear ning [13].
Relatively little research has been published that
DEMO exactly how the technology changes
the teaching process and the role of the university
faculty member. Among the few studies that do
examine these DEMO are our prior study of role
changes for virtual professors, described DEMO, and
recent content analysis of discussion transcripts by
Heckman and Annabi DEMO They coded the length
and type of “utterances” in a course transcript using
four major categories: social processes, cognitive
processes, teaching, and DEMO They found a
shift in student and faculty roles: the presence DEMO the
teacher was much more pervasive in face-to-face, but
while in DEMO, the student utterances were longer and
teacher utterances were shorter.
Our DEMO path to the investigation of swift
trust began with questions concer ning student
outcomes. If studies describe students gaining
significantly higher grades using computer-mediated
DEMO ning, what factors might explain this? Through
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Waterloo. Downloaded on June 1, 2009 at 07:DEMO from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
97
examination of faculty experiences, we uncovered
shifts in self-described faculty role behavior as they
moved from the traditional setting to the electronic
classroom. DEMO shifts, described below, led us
to look for associated effects in virtual classroom
interactions.
Role Changes for Virtual Professors To understand
how ALN DEMO changes the teaching process
and the role of faculty, the authors DEMO,
conducted, transcribed, and coded 20 semistructured
interviews with faculty who have prepared and
delivered at least one online course [15]. We wanted
DEMO hear from ALN faculty about how they perceive the
teaching and lear ning process to have been altered
by using online communication as the DEMO
mode of communication with their students. The
interviews and their analysis suggested that the roles
enacted by instructors in traditional settings are
also enacted DEMO ALN environments, though each of
these roles is transfor med. The DEMO role, which
relates to mental processes of lear ning, infor mation
storage, and thinking, shifts to one of deeper cognitive
complexity for DEMO professors. The affective role,
which relates to influencing the relationships between
students and the instructor and the classroom
atmosphere, required them to find new tools to
express emotion, yet they found the relationship
with students more intimate. The managerial role,
which deals with class and course DEMO,
requires greater attention to detail, more structure,
and additional DEMO monitoring.
The cumulative roles may be described as a persona.
Overall, DEMO reported a change in their teaching
persona. They noted the need for precision and
a certain for mality in outlining expectations for
students. This DEMO probably because there is little
opportunity for students to raise spontaneous
questions about details of requested activities; unless
they are clearly detailed, they DEMO be misunderstood
and lead to disorganization. However, while in some
ways DEMO online teaching persona is more for mal in
ter ms of precision of instructions given to students,
in other ways it is less DEMO mal, especially in ter ms of
moving toward more “give and DEMO,” a kind of “Digital
Socrates” who shifts from conveying infor mation to
raising questions and engaging in dialogue.
Answers Lead to Questions We DEMO that faculty,
in their own words, found changes in their DEMO
teaching roles and persona. However, we wondered
if there were any DEMO data to support
faculty perceptions. Faculty talked about building
community, relationships, and trust. Could we find
examples of these interactions?
These questions DEMO to the literature of teamwork
in corporations, whereby team members gradually
DEMO interpersonal relationships and trust over
time. Research into building trust among members of
temporary teams has produced the theory called swift
trust. In temporary DEMO, a variant of trust, swift
trust, is necessary to predict DEMO teamwork.
We set out to explore whether the development of
swift trust in the beginning of an online course could
help to explain why DEMO ALN courses are especially
successful, as judged by the students.
RESEARCH DEMO
Our current research thread attempts to
operationalize the concept of swift trust in virtual
lear ning communities. Our research premises are a s
follows.
(1) If faculty are to become successful “Digital
Socrates,” they must overcome the coldness
in the electronic medium with social
communication clues in DEMO conferences.
(2) The most effective online teachers get a good
start in the very first week of online classes,
which is the DEMO of swift trust, with online
conferencing.
(3) Once established, swift trust will carry over in
the remainder of the semester.
Measuring Teaching DEMO For this
exploratory study, our objective was to identify the
“most DEMO teacher in the ALN environment we
had examined, and to develop DEMO apply a coding
scheme to measure the extent of swift trust for mation
in the first few weeks of one of the courses taught
DEMO this instructor. We also decided to contrast this
to a coding of the same period of interaction in a
course in which the teaching DEMO rating was
very low. To deter mine the most effective teacher,
we used data collected from over 1300 postcourse
questionnaires that rated instructor’s DEMO
for ALN and “matching” face-to-face sections of both
undergraduate and graduate NJIT courses over a
period of three years. Sections of the questionnaire
contained DEMO of items designed to measure various
aspects of the process and outcomes of courses:
perceived quality of the instructor’s per for mance,
DEMO outcomes, and overall evaluation of the
“Virtual Classroom” ALN experience (the latter only for
sections using ALN). The unidimensionality of these
sets DEMO items was validated by an item analysis using
Chronbach’s Alpha and exploratory factor analysis,
before being combined into an index.
Two key indexes DEMO measuring the effectiveness of
the instructor in an ALN section are the “instructor
overall” index and the “Virtual Classroom overall”
index. The items in DEMO instructor index are
similar to those used for decades to obtain student
course ratings at many institutions and represent
modifications of the standard teaching DEMO
instruments used by various departments at NJIT;
the modifications were designed to take into account
the delivery medium [16]. From a methodological
Authorized DEMO use limited to: University of Waterloo. Downloaded on June 1, 2009 at 07:59 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
98 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION, VOL. 47, NO. 2, JUNE 2004
point of view, there a re more items than would be
needed to get an overall measure of teaching, and
the positive nature of all of the items can introduce
bias. However, organizational context must also be
taken into account in devising a measure of teaching
effectiveness. DEMO is, for promotion and tenure
purposes, it is important to make the measurements
similar to those already used in traditional classes.
The Virtual DEMO overall index (Tables IV and V)
was designed at NJIT; of the six items, half are stated
positively and half are stated negatively, in order
to minimize response bias. Looking at the Virtual
Classroom overall questions, the results for this study
are very similar to those for the previous project that
involved undergraduate CIS students only. These
results DEMO the ratings to be generally favorable for
the ALN courses, in DEMO ms of the students feeling that
they are a s good or better than traditional courses.
For example, on the question, “Did the DEMO of the
system increase the quality of your education,” a1–7
Likert-type scale, 56% indicated positive agreement,
and 25% saw no difference; DEMO disagreed. With 1.0
the score for the most positive response and 4.0 the
value for a n o difference or “unsure” response, the
mean of 3.3 is on the positive side and compares to
a slightly DEMO positive mean of 3.4 for the previous
study of undergraduates only.
For those instructors with at least eight valid
student questionnaires, an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was per for med to deter mine if there DEMO
significant differences among instructors. A Duncan’s
Multiple Range test showed that the mean ratings
for instructors are significantly different from one
another for both DEMO Since the rank order for
instructors was somewhat different on the two major
measures of instructor effectiveness, we selected the
instructor with the highest average ranking as the
most effective online instructor. We will refer to DEMO
instructor as “Professor T.”
For comparison, we selected Professor X. On DEMO
key indices, Professor X was in a group of the three
DEMO ranking instructors, which were significantly
lower than most other instructors, according to the
Waller-Duncan ratio T-test. For example, on the
instructor overall index, Professor X had a mean of
60, compared to the mean DEMO 70 for Professor T.
Deter mining the Codes To analyze the
communication within the group, we adapted a
classic, well-established system by Bales DEMO
interaction process analysis, which makes a
distinction between task achievement and DEMO
maintenance [17]. This is one of the most widely
used interaction content analysis schemes, even fifty
years after its first introduction, with approximately
DEMO citations in the 2000–2002 social science
literature. Our coding scheme, shown DEMO Table I,
distinguishes seven categories of behavior and
communication in group interaction. To establish a
common understanding in applying the codes, the
three researchers individually coded part of the same
conference transcript and discussed discrepancies.
DEMO discussions set the guidelines for the rest of the
coding of the conference. We then continued coding
independently.
Analysis: The conference transcripts (online
DEMO) were transcribed and coded using
QSR NVivo software (1999), which has been used
TABLE I
Swift trust coding in virtual classrooms
Authorized DEMO use limited to: University of Waterloo. Downloaded on June 1, 2009 at 07:59 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
99
extensively in educational research. This program
assists in qualitative data analysis DEMO the data
are transcribed interviews. The researcher decides
what becomes a meaningful section of text for coding.
In this case, we selected messages, DEMO instructor
and student new posts (that is the initiation of a
DEMO) and replies (responses to posts), as the
text section. Then, each text unit can be coded using
either a researcher-created code or the program to
uncover themes within the interviews. This research
used coding DEMO shown in Table I. In addition,
we counted responses to deter mine the level of
interaction. We realized that we needed to read DEMO
subject lines of the messages in the conferences and
to read the messages carefully for nuance and tenor
of comment. We make no claims DEMO our research
is discourse analysis; although we multiply coded
sections of DEMO rather than using mutually exclusive
categories, our qualitative research is content DEMO
[18].
FINDINGS
Effective Online Instructor For analysis, we
selected Professor T’s DEMO on management
of infor mation systems. Professor T uses a
commercial computer-mediated software system
called WebBoard to organize his online discussion
forums or conferences. DEMO following conferences
were structured to contain a small number of related
topics: Instructor’s Instructions; General Discussion;
Introductions; Questions on Assignments; Questions
DEMO book Chapters; Questions on Lectures; Questions
on Readings (i.e., professional papers assigned);
Management Jokes (related to IS); and Café DEMO
Practice.
The Introduction conference is critical in online
teaching because it establishes the atmosphere,
interaction, and dialogue for the entire course.
Typically, DEMO instructor introduces himself/herself,
providing a model of expected response, DEMO outlining
questions for response. Students then introduce
themselves, perhaps infor ming DEMO class of their
experience in the field, their objective for taking
DEMO course, and their topics of interest in the
course. Professor T DEMO the importance of these
introductions. “The first participatory conference
is important in that it helps create a welcoming
atmosphere, so I make every effort to respond to
most introductions. The students also know there a re
DEMO where they can work as teams so they
realize their introduction is useful for team for mation”
(Explanation by Professor T, 2001).
DEMO Communication: Using the swift trust coding
scheme, we looked for evidence of swift trust in
the Introductions conference, which takes place in
the first two weeks of the course. The conference
was examined for the DEMO of behaviors and
actions that facilitated early trust for mation in
Jarvenpaa and Leidner’s research. Their early
communication activities of social exchanges and
social DEMO correlate with our coding
categories of social emotional positive response to
each other (Code 3) and social emotional negative
response to one another (Code 4). Out of 297 coded
passages in the Introductions conference, we found
35 instances of instructor social emotional positive
(32) or DEMO (3) and 74 instances of student social
emotional positive (73) or negative (1). As one might
expect, the most frequent DEMO communication,
occurring in 18 out of 34 passages, is the DEMO
exchange “hello” or a variation such as “greetings.” An
example of the instructor making a social emotional
positive response to a student, in which he shows
praise, encouragement, or approval, can be found in
the following passage:
You’re doing fine, Jinny. For someone here only a
few weeks, your English is good. I could not resist
using your words to make a point for the benefit
of the class even DEMO I suspected you probably
should not have been taken “literally.”
Even the instructor’s social emotional negative
comments are couched in positive language:
Jia, the colorful screen is very pretty but trying to
read pink on DEMO is very difficult for those my age
who need about twice the contrast level that you
can use when you read. When you get DEMO chance to
take CIS 732, you will learn those things!
Students DEMO social emotional positive responses
both to the instructor and to one another. One
student agreed with the instructor’s observation or
analysis: As you surmised, I d o like being a systems
analyst better than being a manager. They frequently
expressed solidarity with their peers: Nice to meet
you! Like you, I have about 14 years in IS. I also have
children (3) and I live in South Jersey, taking this
course as a distance-learning student. I hope to keep
in touch.
Expectations: Jarvenpaa and Leidner also found
the communication behaviors of communication
conveying enthusiasm to DEMO early trust; these
correlate with our codes of positive expectations
about DEMO course (Code 1) and social emotional
positive reaction to each other (Code 3). Findings
regarding Code 3 a re presented in the previous
section “Early Communication.” We found evidence
of positive expectations about the DEMO (Code 1) in
34 instructor instances and 89 student instances.
The instructor connotes enthusiasm for the course in
the following passage: This is one of the reasons I like
merging the face to face and DEMO distance students in
that we do get this rich mix of backgrounds. Students
express positive course expectations, as exemplified
in this passage: I’m DEMO forward to getting to know
Authorized licensed use limited to: University DEMO Waterloo. Downloaded on June 1, 2009 at 07:59 from IEEE DEMO  Restrictions apply.
100 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION, VOL. 47, NO. 2, JUNE 2004
you. I hope I will have interesting discussions about
diverse issues DEMO the class.
Task-Related Communication: In early trust for mation,
Jarvenpaa DEMO Leidner found member actions of
coping with technical and task uncertainty and of
taking individual initiative to be important. Our
task area codes correlate DEMO these codes: Asks
for help (Code 5), Gives help or infor mation (Code
6), and technical/logistical/procedural (Code 7)DEMO In
the Introductions conference, the task is instructor
and student introduction DEMO personal background
infor mation and course expectations. We found
evidence of coping with task uncertainty most
frequently in Giving infor mation (Code 6), with 15
instructor passages and 53 student passages found.
Typically, students give infor mation in their initial
posting, or new post, in the DEMO In their
replies to the instructor or to one another, students
DEMO suggestions or opinions: If you don’t have project
management experience, then I suggest you take the
course Project Management. The instructor is a DEMO
experienced project manager. The instructor might
give task direction: You can DEMO to the directory and
change your nickname to something more human
that is easier for us all to remember. In Asking for
help or DEMO mation, we found 12 student and 6
instructor instances. The instructor DEMO asks
a student to expand or clarify task infor mation
given: DEMO also interested in SW dev life cycle. Could
you briefly describe “Rapid Application Development
Methodology?” Students ask for confir mation of their
understanding: I don’t think this course will teach
you how to be a DEMO manager. Am I right on this?
In technical issues (Code DEMO), we found only one
instructor instance and none from students.
We believe that this initial analysis shows that
successful “virtual professors” establish community
DEMO their virtual groups by for ming a unique kind
of swift trust in the very first week of online classes.
Would this swift trust DEMO over in the remainder
of the semester? Would weeks one and DEMO predict
weeks nine and ten?
Later Communication: Later trust for DEMO is
characterized by predictable communication,
according to Jarvenpaa and Leidner. We found this
regular patter n of communication by comparing the
instructor’s General DEMO conference over the
course, a conference specified for questions or issues
DEMO do not fit into the other topic-related forums.
The frequency count table in Table II shows a fairly
consistent patter n in General Discussion DEMO weeks
one and two and in weeks nine and ten. Later member
actions that facilitated trust, according to Jarvenpaa
and Leidner, a re DEMO centered. We found significant
evidence of task focus in examining the conference
Development Process discussion. The conference
topic, management of software development process,
TABLE II
Swift trust coding frequency counts for Professor T
relates to DEMO The tabulated new posts and replies
in Table II show a rich patter n of discussion relating
to a case-study assignment.
Ineffective Online Teacher DEMO comparison, we
selected Professor X’s course on Computers and
Society. Similar DEMO Professor T, the instructor
with the highest ranking, Professor X used a
computer-mediated system in a “mixed” medium
course that combined face-to-face and DEMO
interaction. Unlike Professor T, however, Professor
X had only one discussion conference that included
welcome and introduction as well as task instructions.
As DEMO noted earlier, the Introduction conference is
singularly important in establishing the DEMO
for the entire course. Here, the professor establishes
her or his DEMO, sets the tone for the course
discussion, and provides a model for the dialogue that
follows. Professor X began his online discussion with
DEMO introduction: Welcome. Please introduce yourself
to the members of this conference. DEMO us a little about
yourself. (i.e., what’s your major? why DEMO you taking
the class? what do you want to do after DEMO graduate?,
etc.) He did not include any infor mation about himself
TABLE III
Swift trust coding frequency counts
Professor X
Authorized licensed DEMO limited to: University of Waterloo. Downloaded on June 1, 2009 at 07:59 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
101
in this posting or in follow-up messages. Perhaps, it
is not surprising that the first student response to
his introduction was, My name is XXX you don’t
need to know my last name . I DEMO CIS major and I
have no free time to enjoy to myself I work and I got
15 credits to worry about.
...
...
DEMO
Early Communication: Using the swift trust coding
scheme, we examined the conference transcript for
examples of behaviors and actions that facilitate early
trust DEMO mation. These early communication activities
of social exchanges and social communication
correlate to our coding categories of social emotional
positive response to each other (Code 3) and social
emotional negative response to one another (Code
DEMO). Out of 129 coded passages in the conference, we
found DEMO instances of instructor social emotional
positive and two instances of instructor social
emotional negative. For student postings, we found 52
instances of social emotional positive and 6 instances
of social emotional negative.
Professor X’s early communication DEMO difficult
to characterize. In reply to one student who
enthusiastically proclaims that America is a great
place to explore, he genially inquires, So, where have
you explored already? To a student who has lost a
family member, Professor X is sympathetic, I’m very
sorry to hear DEMO your uncle. What a horrible thing
to have happened. However, when DEMO make
mistakes with the conferencing system, he chides
them: You responded to your own comment? or You
didn’t write anything?!? Professor DEMO longest posting
in the conference is a failed attempt at humor: DEMO
of the things we’ll have to work on this semester is
bringing you out of your shell. You have to learn not to
hold DEMO and to say what is on your mind. Yes, I’m
being DEMO I can’t wait to hear your opinions on
the articles. (That DEMO not sarcastic.) This message, less
than a week into the semester, was the professor’s
last response to students’ introductions.
In the instructor’s absence, however, the students
continued to post their introductions, giving the
TABLE IV
Indexes for measuring course effectiveness
All items were reversed in scoring DEMO make the high numbers equal
Croncbach’s Alpha=0
:
95
“best.”
Authorized DEMO use limited to: University of Waterloo. Downloaded on June 1, 2009 at 07:59 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
102 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION, VOL. 47, NO. 2, JUNE 2004
infor mation that was requested and making a social
emotional positive DEMO or welcome. Typical is this
student’s introduction: Hello!!!!! This is XXXX. DEMO am
CIS major at Rutgers. Hope you are having fun in this
class. Bye. Communication that conveys enthusiasm,
which correlates with our code DEMO positive expectations
about the course (Code 1), was found in DEMO student
new posts and replies: I a m looking forward to DEMO
rest of the semester Hope you are having fun in this
class I have a feeling that this class is going to be
interesting DEMO it will be fun to be with everybody in
the class. This is my first semester taking classes here
but I feel good with DEMO class.
...
...
...
Task-Related Communication: In the first two weeks
DEMO the conference, students coped with technical and
task uncertainty by asking DEMO help and giving help to
one another. Our task area codes correlate with these:
Asks for help (Code 5); Gives help or infor mation (Code
6); and Technical/logistical/procedural (Code 7)DEMO
A requirement of this course on computers in society
is to post articles in the conference regarding ethical,
legal, and social issues for computing systems.
Therefore, the most frequently used code is Code
6, DEMO gives infor mation. In addition to students
giving infor mation in their initial posting in the
conference, as well as in giving infor mation to fulfill
an assignment, students also gave help or infor mation
to students who asked. For example, in response to
the question Hey do you know how to find the article
that he gave us today? another student responded:
Just do the same with the previous assignment. DEMO to
ACM and just search it. Other students offered advice
about obtaining the articles from home computers or
from another campus: I just downloaded the article
from ACM and if you login from home through NJIT
DEMO Internet, you are able to download the articles
directly to your DEMO You asked if we can telnet to
Pegasus from NJIT. Yes, DEMO can. You have to telnet at
telnet.pegasus.rutgers.edu.
In analysis of the course, there is little evidence to
suggest that the class ever for med a team, other
than the artificially prescribed gathering of students
posting assignments that also include introductions.
Students seem to sense that the discussion board
DEMO an academic exercise not integral to lear ning, as
suggested by DEMO first student’s response indicating
he had no free time and a later reply from another
student This conference is way too cluttered with
postings. DEMO NASCAR Winston Cup racing; it’sa
good sport. We know that early DEMO is
critical to establishing trust, yet the instructor does
not appear DEMO after the course begins. He exits the
discussion within a week of the initial posting, to
appear again only in week three to post a new task. We
examined the conference transcript in weeks nine and
DEMO for an example of later trust for mation. However,
there were n o postings during that period. There a re
scattered postings during DEMO last weeks of class with
TABLE V
Items included in the virtual classroom overall index
All items were reversed in scoring to make the DEMO numbers equal
Croncbach’s Alpha=0
:
83
“best.”
Authorized licensed use limited DEMO: University of Waterloo. Downloaded on June 1, 2009 at 07:59 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
103
this final conference posting, Just wondering how we
could get our grades. The next semester is just a few
days away, and we still haven’t gotten our grades yet.
CONCLUSION
Our initial analysis shows that DEMO trust can
for m in a successful virtual lear ning community,
but with unique communication and behaviors as
compared to face-to-face groups. If DEMO members
become successful “Digital Socrates,” they overcome
the coldness in the electronic medium with social
communication clues in the conferences. The most
effective DEMO teachers get a good start in the very
first week, which DEMO the essence of swift trust, with
online communication. Once established, swift trust
will carry over into the remainder of the semester if
high DEMO of action are maintained.
These analyses yield strategies that are applicable
to all who are concer ned with building trust and
establishing community in DEMO teams. The
following are four more suggestions.
(1) Establish early communication. Team members
need to perceive the instructor’s presence as
soon as they DEMO the course.
(2) Develop a positive social atmosphere. Team
members respond to perceived caring in
instructional context. Instructors need to model
solidarity, congeniality, and affiliation.
(3) Reinforce predictable patter ns in
communication and action. Students
need carefully structured activities and regular
responses and feedback.
(4) DEMO team members in tasks. To sustain
early trust for mation, group DEMO need to
be involved in meaningful tasks. Instructors
need to motivate, DEMO, and require
participation.
Our research has many limitations. We have analyzed
DEMO conference transcripts of only one professor who
was rated the most effective online instructor and one
who was rated very poorly, at one institution, and
in one field of study (infor mation systems). To DEMO if
our findings are able to be generalized would require
similar content coding of several courses with varying
degrees of measured “success” at different DEMO
and with different fields of study. However, we believe
that based DEMO the evidence of the importance of
community, relationships, and trust evidenced in all
twenty of the faculty we originally interviewed, and
the initial analysis of communication between and
among instructor and students, we can conclude that
swift trust does for m frequently in virtual lear ning
communities DEMO can predict the success of the
remainder of the virtual group work.
REFERENCES
[1] S. R. Hiltz. (1998, Nov.) Collaborative lear ning in asynchronous lear ning networks: Building lear ning
communities. [Online]. Available: http://eies.njit.edu/~hiltz/collaborative_lear ning_in_asynch.htm
[2] D. Meyerson, K. E. Weick, and R. M. Kramer, “Swift trust and temporary groups,” in Trust in Organizations:
Frontiers of Theory and Research, M. Kramer and T. R. Tyler, Eds. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,
1996, pp. DEMO
[3] J. Kugelmass, Telecommuting: A Manager’s Guide to Flexible Work Arrangements. New York: Lexington Books,
1995.
[4] C. S. Iaconna and S. Weisband, “Developing trust in virtual teams,” in Proc. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., vol.
2, 1997, pp. 412–420.
[5] S. L. Jarvenpaa and D. E. Leidner. (1998, June) Communication and trust in global virtual teams. JCMC.
[Online] Available: http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol3/issue4/jarvenpaa.html.
[6] A. L. Kristof, K. G. Brown, H. P. Sims Jr., and K. A. Smith, “The virtual team: A case study and DEMO
model,” in Advances in Interdisciplinary Studies of Work Teams: Knowledge DEMO in Teams, M. M. Beyerlein, D.
A. Johnson, and S. DEMO Beyerlein, Eds. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1995, vol. 2, pp. 229–253.
[7] S. R. Hiltz and M. Turoff, The Network Nation: Human Communication via Computer. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1978/1993.
DEMO D. Spencer and S. R. Hiltz. Studies of ALN: An empirical DEMO presented at Proc. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst.
Sci. 34. [Online] Available: DEMO://www.hicss.hawaii.edu/hicss_34/apahome34.htm.
[9] S. R. Hiltz, M. Turoff, and Y. Zhang, “Studies of effectiveness of lear ning networks,” in Elements of Quality of
Online Education, J . Bour ne and J. C. Moore, Eds. Needham, MA: SCOLE, 2002, pp. 15–41.
[10] Lear ning networks effectiveness research . [Online] Available: http://www.alnresearch.org.
[11] V. P. Wade and C. Power, “Evaluating the design and delivery of www based educational environments and
courseware,” in ACM ITICSE Proc., July 1998, pp. 243–248.
[12] J. R. Bour ne, E. McMaster, J . Rieger, and J. O. Campbell. Paradigms for on-line lear ning: a DEMO study in the
design and implementation of an Asynchronous Lear ning Networks (ALN) course. presented at JALN. [Online]
Available: http://aln.org/publications.
[13] M. Alavi, “Computer-mediated collaborative lear ning: An empirical evaluation,” DEMO Quart., pp. 159–173,
June 1994.
[14] R. Heckman and H. DEMO, “A content-analytic comparison of FtF and ALN case study discussions,” DEMO Proc.
Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., 2003, pp. 3–6.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Waterloo. Downloaded on June 1, 2009 DEMO 07:59 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
104 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION, VOL. 47, NO. 2, JUNE 2004
[15] N. Coppola, S. R. Hiltz, and N. Rotter, “Becoming a virtual professor: Pedagogical roles and asynchronous
lear ning networks,” J. Manag. Inform. Syst., vol. 18, pp. 169–189, 2002.
[16] J. A. Centra, Determining Faculty Effectiveness. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Boss, 1979.
DEMO R. F. Bales, Interaction Process Analysis: A Method for the Study of Small Groups. Cambridge, MA:
Addison-Wesley, 1950.
[18] L. A. DEMO and R. O. Kroger, Doing Discourse Analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: DEMO, 2000.
Nancy W. Coppola (M’98–SM’01) researches the communication of online DEMO and technology transfer. She directs the Master
of Science program in Professional and Technical Communication at New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) where DEMO teaches
all of her undergraduate and graduate technical communication courses online.
Starr Roxanne Hiltz is a Distinguished Professor at NJIT. She has spent most DEMO the last 25 years researching applications and
social impacts of computer-mediated communication. Her latest book on online lear ning (co-edited with Ricki Goldman) DEMO Learning
Together Online: Research on Asynchronous Learning Networks (Erlbaum, expected DEMO 2004).
Naomi G. Rotter is a Professor of Management in NJIT’s School of Management. She received her Ph.D. in Industrial and Organiza-
tional DEMO from New York University. Her interest in asynchronous communication extends from research in the workplace
using telecommuting to education using distance lear ning. In DEMO she has studied what behavioral changes occur as the result
of remote links between manager and employee and between professor and student with the DEMO on the manager and the professor.
Her homepage is http://eies.njit.edu/~rotter.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Waterloo. Downloaded on June 1, 2009 at 07:59 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.{1g42fwefx}