Qualitative Sociology, Vol. 13, No. t, 1990
Grounded Theory Research: DEMO,
Canons, and Evaluative Criteria
Juliet Corbin 1 and Anselm Strauss
DEMO grounded theory as an example, this paper examines three methodologi-
cal DEMO that are generally applicable to all qualitative methods. How
should the usual scientific canons be reinterpreted for qualitative research?
How should researchers report DEMO procedures and canons used in their re-
search? What evaluative criteria DEMO be used in judging the research
products? We propose that the DEMO should be adapted to fit the procedures
of the method. We demonstrate how this can be done for grounded theory and
suggest criteria for DEMO studies following this approach. We argue that
other qualitative researchers might be similarly specific about their procedures
and evaluative criteria.
INTRODUCTION
In this paper DEMO We address three related methodological issues. How
should the usual scientific canons be redefined for qualitative research in social
science? How should qualitative researchers report the procedures and canons
used in their research? What evaluative criteria should be used in judging the
products of particular studies? These products are not all identical in type be-
cause researchers variously aim at DEMO rich descriptions, ethnographic
fact-finding accounts, narratives that yield verstehen, theoretical DEMO of par-
1Address correspondence m: Juliet M. Corbin, R.N., D.N.Sc., Department of Social and Behavioral
Sciences, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.
2We wish to thank Kathy Charmaz, Adele Clarke, Uta Gerhardt, Barney Glaser, David Maines,
Virginia Olesen, DEMO Schatzman, Joseph Schneider, Hans-Georg Soeffner, and Leigh Star,
whose DEMO detailed comments on earlier drafts appreciably aided us in clearing up ambiguities
and inconsistencies, preventing possible misunderstandings. In addition, Adele Clarke did
painstaking DEMO effective editorial work on an earlier version.
© 1990 Human Sciences Press, lnc,
4 Corbin and Strauss
ticular phenomena, systematic theory, or politically intended DEMO
ing documents. Presumably, researchers who aim at such different goals will
DEMO at least somewhat different procedures. If so, we should not judge DEMO results
of their research by the same criteria.
We will try to illuminate these methodological issues by demonstrating
how we have redef'med the DEMO criteria in light of the procedures of
grounded theory methodology. To do this we have first to explicate some of
the procedural steps of DEMO theory. We will conclude by offering a specific
set of criteria for evaluating studies that follow the grounded theory approach.
Our intent is to DEMO how this can be done and to challenge other qualitative
researchers to spell out their own procedures (Cf, Miles and Huberman, 1984;
Manning, 1987) and evaluative criteria.
Grounded Theory: Overview and Brief Description
of Its Canons and Procedures
Qualitative methods, like their quantitative cousins, DEMO be systematically
evaluated only if their canons and procedures are made explicit. In this section,
we describe the unions and procedures of grounded DEMO (For a more detailed
explanation see: Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Glaser, 1978; Strauss, 1987; Strauss
& Corbin, forthcoming 1990). First, however, we shall briefly note an issue
well recognized by DEMO researchers. Qualitative studies (and research
proposals) are often judged by quantitatively-oriented readers; by many, though
not all, the judgment is made in terms of quantitative canons. Some qualitative
researchers maintain that those canons are DEMO to their work (Cf.,
Agar, 1986; Guba, 1981; DEMO and Miller, 1986), and probably most believe
that modifications are DEMO to fit qualitative research. Grounded theorists
share a conviction with many other qualitative researchers that the usual canons
of "good science" should be DEMO, but require redefinition in order to fit
the realities of qualitative DEMO and the complexities of social phenomena.
These scientific canons include significance, DEMO compatibility,
generalizability, consistency, reproducibility, precision, and verification (Cf., the
succinct discussion in Gortner and Schultz, 1988, p. 204). DEMO are so much
taken for granted by physical and biological scientists that even philosophers
of science do not explicitly discuss most of them except DEMO verification, though
canons such as precision, consistency, and relevance are DEMO implicit (Pop-
per, 1959).
When using these terms, qualitative DEMO must guard against the
dangers that lie in their positivistic connotations. There is no reason to define
or use them in accordance with the DEMO of quantitative social researchers,
any more than one would strictly follow the usages of physical scientists. Every
Grounded Theory Research
5
mode of discovery develops its own standards--and canons DEMO procedures for
achieving them. What is important is that all of these are made explicit. Below
we shall explicate how this has been done DEMO grounded theory research.
Overview
While grounded theory has not changed in form since it was first intro-
duced in 1967, the specificity of its procedures has been elaborated in some
detail as the method has evolved DEMO practice. The procedures of grounded theory
are designed to develop a well integrated set of concepts that provide a thorough
theoretical explanation of social DEMO under study. A grounded theory
should explain as well as describe. It may also implicitly give some degree of
predictability, but only with regard to specific conditions.
Grounded theory derives its theoretical underpinnings from Pragmatism
(Dewey, 1925; Mead, 1934) and Symbolic Interactionism (Park and Burgess,
t921; Thomas and Znaniecki, 1918; Hughes, 1971; Blumer, t DEMO). Though one
need not subscribe to these philosophical and sociological orientations to use
the method, two important principles drawn from them are built into it. The
first principle pertains to change. Since phenomena are not DEMO of as
static but as continually changing in response to evolving conditions, an im-
portant component of the method is to build change, DEMO process, into the
method. The second principle pertains to a clear DEMO on the issue of "deter-
minism." Strict determinism is rejected, DEMO is nondeterminism. Actors are seen
as having, though not always utilizing, the means of controlling their destinies
by their responses to conditions. They DEMO able to make choices according to
their perceptions, which are often DEMO, about the options they encounter.
Both Pragmatism and Symbolic Interactionism share DEMO stance. Thus, grounded
theor 3, seeks not only to uncover relevant conditions, but also to determine how
the actors respond to changing conditions and to the consequences of their ac-
tions. It is the researcher'DEMO responsibility to catch this interplay. This interactive
approach is necessary whether the focus of a study is microscopic, say of
workers' interactions in DEMO laboratory, or macroscopic, as in a study of the health
industry or the AIDS policy arena.
As in other qualitative approaches, the data for a grounded theory can
come from various sources. The data collection DEMO involve interviews
and observations as well as such other sources as government documents, video
tapes, newspapers, letters, and books--anything that may shed DEMO on ques-
tions under study. Each of these sources can be coded in the same way as
interviews or observations (Glaser and Strauss, DEMO, pp. 161-184). The inves-
tigator will use the usual methods DEMO in the interview and field work
literature to assure credibility of respondents and to avoid biasing their respon-
6
Corbln and Strauss
ses and observations (Guba, 1981; Hammersley and Atkinson, 1983; Kirk and
Miller, 1986; Johnson, 1975). An investigator will also follow similar protective
procedures for collecting and analyzing documentary DEMO
Canons and Procedures
In writing a detailed account of grounded theory procedures and canons,
we risk being read as unduly formalistic and perhaps DEMO somewhat sectarian.
Yet these procedures and canons must be taken seriously. Otherwise researchers
end up claiming to have used a grounded theory approach when DEMO have
used only some of its procedures or have used them incorrectly. Each researcher
must tread a fine line between satisfying the suggested criteria DEMO allowing
procedural flexibility in the face of the inevitable contingencies of an actual
research project. However, to the extent that circumstances permit, following
DEMO procedures with care gives a project rigor.
Grounded theory has specific procedures for data collection and analysis,
although there is flexibility and latitude DEMO limits. (If one stretches the limits
too far, rigor cannot be maintained.) Just as the grounded theory researcher
must know these procedures and associated canons in order to carry out a study,
so should DEMO who read and evaluate grounded theory studies. The procedures
and canons are as follows:
1. Data Collection and Analysis are Interrelated Processes. In DEMO
theory, the analysis begins as soon as the first bit of DEMO is collected. By con-
trast, many qualitative researchers collect much of DEMO data prior to beginning
systematic analysis. While this may work for other modes of qualitative re-
search, it violates the foundations of this method. Here, analysis is necessary
from the start because it is used to direct the next interview and observations.
This is not to say that DEMO collection is not standardized. Each investigator
enters the field with some questions or areas for observation, or will soon
generate them. Data will be collected on these matters throughout the research
endeavor, unless the questions prove, during analysis, to be irrelevant. In order
not to miss anything DEMO may be salient, however, the investigator must analyze
the first bits of data for cues. All seemingly relevant issues must be incorporated
into DEMO next set of interviews and observations.
The carrying out of procedures of data collection and analysis systemati-
cally and sequentially enables the research process DEMO capture all potentially
relevant aspects of the topic as soon as they are perceived. This process is a
major source of the effectiveness of DEMO grounded theory approach. The research
process itself guides the researcher toward examining all of the possibly reward-
ing avenues to understanding. This is why DEMO research method is one of dis-
covery and one which grounds a theory in reality (Glaser & Strauss, 1967).
Grounded Theory Research
7
Every concept brought into the study or discovered DEMO the research process
is at first considered provisional. Each concept earns its way into the theory
by repeatedly being present in interviews, documents, DEMO observations in one
form or another---or by being significantly absent (i.e., it should be present,
but isn't, so that questions must be asked). Requiring that a concept's relevance
to an evolving DEMO (as a condition, action/interaction, or consequence) be
demonstrated is one way that grounded theory helps to guard against researcher
bias. No DEMO how enamored the investigator may be of a particular concept,
if its relevance to the phenomenon under question is not proven through con-
DEMO scrutiny, it must be discarded. Grounding concepts in the reality of DEMO
thus gives this method theory-observation congruence or compatibility.
2. Concepts Are the Basic Units of Analysis. A theorist works with con-
ceptualizations of data, not the actual data per se. Theories can't be built with
DEMO incidents or activities as observed or reported; that is, from "DEMO data."
The incidents, events, and happenings are taken as, DEMO analyzed as, potential
indicators of phenomena, which are thereby given conceptual labels. If a respon-
dent says to the researcher, "Each day DEMO spread my activities over the morning,
resting between shaving and bathing," then the researcher might label this
phenomenon as "pacing." As DEMO researcher encounters other incidents, and
when after comparison to the first, they appear to resemble the same
phenomena, then these, too, can be labeled as "pacing." Only by comparing
incidents and naming like DEMO with the same term can a theorist ac-
cumulate the basic units for theory. In the grounded theory approach such con-
cepts become more DEMO and more abstract as the analysis continues.
3. Categories Must Be Developed and Related. Concepts that pertain to
the same phenomenon may be grouped DEMO form categories. Not all concepts
become categories. Categories are higher in level and more abstract than the
concepts they represent. They are generated through DEMO same analytic process
of making comparisons to highlight similarities and differences that is used to
produce lower level concepts. Categories are the "cornerstones" DEMO a developing
theory. They provide the means by which a theory can be integrated.
We can show how the grouping of concepts forms categories DEMO continu-
ing with the example presented above. In addition to the concept of "pacing,"
the analyst might generate the concepts of "self-medicating," "resting," and
"watching one's diet." While coding, DEMO analyst may note that, although these
concepts are different in form, they seem to represent activities directed toward
a similar process: keeping an illness under control. They can be grouped under
a more abstract heading, the category: "Self Strategies for Controlling Illness."
Merely grouping concepts DEMO a more abstract heading does not con-
stitute a category, however. DEMO achieve that status (as explained more fully
below) a more abstract concept must be developed in terms of its properties
and dimensions of DEMO phenomenon it represents, conditions which give rise to
8
Corbin and Strauss
it, the action/interaction by which it is expressed, and the consequences it
produces. For example, once the category DEMO identified, one would want to know
some of the characteristics of DEMO for managing illness: are they
employed some of the time or DEMO of the time7 Do they require much knowledge
or can one use them with little knowledge? One would also want to address
such questions as: How do the strategies differ from those carried out by health
practitioners and family members? Under what conditions does someone use
self-strategies and when not? What other strategies for self-management do
people use? What DEMO follow from their usage?
Through such specification, categories are defined DEMO given explanatory
power. Over time, categories can become related to one DEMO to form a
theory.
4. Sampling in Grounded Theory Proceeds on Theoretical Grounds. Sam-
piing in grounded theory proceeds not in terms of drawing DEMO of specific
groups of individuals, units of time, and so on, but in terms of concepts, their
properties, dimensions, and variations. DEMO a project begins, the researcher
brings to it some idea of DEMO phenomenon he or she wants to study. Based on
this knowledge, DEMO of individuals, an organization, or community repre-
sentative of that phenomenon can be selected for study. For example, if a re-
searcher wants to study nurses' work, he or she would go to where DEMO are
working--a hospital, clinic, or home (or all three)--to DEMO what they do.
Once there, the researcher would not be sampling DEMO as such, but
sampling the incidents, events, and happenings that DEMO the work that the
nurses do, the conditions that facilitate, interrupt, or prevent their work, the
action/interaction by which it is DEMO, and the consequences that result.
After analysis of the first observations DEMO term "work" would have more
specific and complex meanings than the general questions or concepts with
which one began the study. The researcher DEMO note that there are different
types of work, that it varies DEMO intensity, and so forth.
At this point, the researcher might want to pick up on differences among
types of work, focusing his or her observations to identify as much variation
in types as possible. At DEMO same time, he or she might also be sampling for
intensity, making note of conditions that create more or less intensity in the
DEMO To maximize the potential for uncovering such conditions the researcher
might also observe places where the work is known to be intense or less DEMO,
such as intensive care units in contrast to home health care. This does not
mean, however, that the researcher might not happen DEMO highly intensive
work by chance, while simply moving among hospital units DEMO a systematic
fashion. The investigator could vary the time of sampling to determine if work
seems more intense during some parts of the day DEMO others. The idea is this:
it is not nurses, units, or time that are the focus of attention, but rather the
intensity of work or types of work. One varies or contrasts the conditions DEMO
Grounded Theory Research
9
methodically as possfble in order to determine what DEMO an impact on the
phenomenon in question.
To maintain consistency in data collection, the investigator should watch
for indications of all important concepts in every observation--ones carried
over from previous analyses as welt as ones that DEMO in the situation. Atl
of the observations would be qualified by noting the conditions under which
the phenomena occur, the action/interactional form they take, the consequences
that result, and so forth. Careful noting of DEMO gives specificity to con-
cepts.
Though one does not normally count the times that one observes or reads
about an event or action as DEMO of a concept, this can be done. Simply
to sit and DEMO may keep the researcher from noticing previously unidentified
events that might prove more important for the evolving theory, However, it
is possible to DEMO specific events later from systematic field notes if it seems
useful for the overall qualitative analysis. (For an example, see Barley, 1986.)
It is by theoretical sampling that representativeness and consistency are
achieved. In DEMO theory, representativeness of concepts, not of persons,
is crucial. The aim is ultimately to build a theoretical explanation by specifying
phenomena in DEMO of conditions that give rise to them, how they are expressed
DEMO action/interaction, the consequences that result from them, and varia-
tions of these qualifiers. The aim is not to generalize findings to a DEMO
population per se. For instance, one might want to know how DEMO
"comfort work" is of the total amount of work that nurses do (Strauss, et al.,
1985, pp. 99-128). Do nurses engage in it all of the time or some of the time?DEMO
What are the conditions that enable them to do it or prevent their doing it? It
is also necessary to situate one type of work in relationship to other types. If
comfort work is a predominant DEMO of work among nurses, it will emerge as
such. If rarely DEMO, this fact will be noted along with the conditions describing
why DEMO work is not. Consistency is achieved because, once a concept has
"earned" its way into a study through demonstrations of its relationship to the
phenomenon under investigation, then its indicators should be sought in all sub-
sequent interviews and observations. How consistently is it found? Under what
conditions is it found?
5. Analysis Makes Use of Constant Comparisons. DEMO an incident is noted,
it should be compared against other incidents for similarities and differences.
The resulting concepts are labeled as such, and over time, they are compared
and grouped as previously described. Making comparisons assists the researcher
in guarding against bias, for he or she is then challenging concepts with fresh
data. Such comparisons also help to achieve DEMO precision (the grouping of
like and only like phenomena) and consistency (always grouping like with like).
Precision is increased when comparison leads to sub-division of an original
concept, resulting in two different concepts or variations on the first.
10
Corbin and Strauss
6. Patterns and Variations Must Be Accounted For. DEMO data must be
examined for regularity and for an understanding of where that regularity is
not apparent. Suppose an investigator notices that nurses regularly DEMO in
sentimental work (Strauss, et al., 1985) when pediatric patients undergo physi-
cally traumatic experiences. If, however, the researcher also notes DEMO when
nurses are especially busy, they delegate the sentimental work to DEMO mem-
ber of the health team or a family member, a DEMO of the original pattern
emerges. Finding patterns or regularities helps to give order to the dater and
assist with integration.
7. Process Must Be DEMO Into the Theory. In grounded theory, process
has several meanings. Process DEMO can mean breaking a phenomenon down
into stages, phases, or steps. Process may also denote purposeful action/inter-
action that is not necessarily DEMO, but changes in response to prevailing
conditions. One may speak of DEMO division of labor among factory workers as a
flexible process depending upon the situation. Each worker is assigned certain
duties and responsibilities, but they may be temporarily set aside or altered if
another worker is injured DEMO needs assistance with priority work. "Being
flexible" offers one explanation of how work gets done despite daily fluctua-
tions in staffing and work DEMO Noting how the division of labor shifts and
changes in response to prevailing conditions over the course of a day, week,
or year is another way of bringing process into the analysis.
8. Writing Theoretical DEMO Is an Integral Part of Doing Grounded
Theory. Since the analyst cannot readily keep track of all the categories, proper-
ties, hypotheses, and generative questions that evolve from the analytical
process, there must be a system for doing so. The use of memos constitutes
such a system. DEMO are not simply about "ideas." They are involved in the
formulation and revision of theory during the research process. Writing memos
should begin DEMO the first coding sessions and continues to the end of the
research. It should incorporate and elaborate on the coding sessions themselves
as well DEMO on the "code notes." (See Strauss, 1987, pp. 59-69 DEMO illustrations
of code notes.)
Memos vary in form and length according to the stage of the research
project and the type of coding DEMO is performing. As a theory becomes better
elaborated and integrated, so DEMO the memos. Memo writing should continue
until the very end of the project, often including the writing itself. Sorted and
resorted during the writing process, theoretical memos provide a firm base for
reporting on the research and its implications. If a researcher omits the memoing
and moves directly DEMO coding to writing, a great deal of conceptual detail is
lost DEMO left undeveloped. A less well elaborated and satisfying integration of
the analysis will result. (For other functions and features of memos, including
illustrations DEMO comments about different types, see Glaser, t978, pp. 82-91,
DEMO Strauss, 1987, pp. 109-129.) Though theoretical memo- and code note-writ-
Grounded Theory Research
11
ing procedures are specific to grounded theory, the recording of fieldnote and
interview data is not appreciably different from the DEMO used by other
qualitative researchers.
9. Hypotheses About Relationships among Categories Should Be
Developed and Verified as Much as Possible during the Research Process. DEMO
hypotheses about relationships among categories are developed, they should be
taken DEMO into the field for checking out and revision as needed. (This DEMO
is explained more fully under "axial coding.") A key feature DEMO grounded theory
is not that hypotheses remain unverified, but that hypotheses (whether involving
qualitative or quantitative data) are constantly revised during the research until
they hold true for all of the evidence concerning the phenomena DEMO study,
as gathered in repeated interviews, observations or documents.
Embedded DEMO the verification procedures is a search for negative and
qualifying evidence. Because it entails constant revisions, this process results
in quite robust analyses (DEMO, 1981). In The Discovery of Grounded Theory,
emphasis on "verification" was perhaps too much identified with kinds of re-
search that we opposed. Many readers of that early book have apparently
formed an DEMO of grounded theory" research as not at all concerned with
verification.
DEMO A Grounded Theorist Need Not Work Alone. For many who use the
grounded theory approach, an important part of research is testing concepts and
their relationships with colleagues who have experience in the same substantive
area. DEMO up one's analysis to the scrutiny of others helps guard against
bias. Discussions with other researchers often lead to new insights and increased
DEMO sensitivity as well. Research projects carried out by teams also offer
opportunities for increasing the probability of collaborative analysis (Strauss,
1987, pp. DEMO). Where several researchers live or work in proximity, oc-
casional DEMO on-going discussion groups provide an excellent supportive resource.
11. Broader Structural Conditions Must Be Analyzed, However Micro-
scopic the Research. The analysis of a setting must not be restricted to the
conditions that bear immediately on DEMO phenomenon of central interest. Broader
conditions affecting the phenomenon may include economic conditions, cultural
values, political trends, social movements, and so on. DEMO have suggested else-
where (Corbin & Strauss, 1988, pp. 135-138; Strauss & Corbin, 1989) that it
is useful to think of DEMO conditions in terms of a "Conditional Matrix."
With this image, we suggest the worth of attending to a set of decreasingly
inclusive DEMO embracing different conditions, beginning with the broad ones
just noted and DEMO inward to conditions progressively narrower in scope.
Bringing broader conditions into the analysis requires integrating them
into the theory. It is not appropriate simply DEMO list them or refer to them as a
background for "better DEMO" of what one is studying. It is the re-
searcher's DEMO to show specific linkages between conditions, actions,
12
Corbin and Strauss
and consequences. We should not simply note, for example, that the increased
specialization among physicians, nurses, and technicians has affected the or-
ganization and performance of work in intensive care nurseries. DEMO, we
must specify how particular features of increased specialization link with DEMO
organization and performance of work to produce the resulting consequences
(Strauss & Corbin, forthcoming 1990).
Coding
Coding is the fundamental analytic process DEMO by the researcher. In
grounded theory research, there are three basic DEMO of coding: open, axial,
and selective.
1. Open Coding. Open coding is the interpretive process by which data
are broken down analytically. DEMO purpose is to give the analyst new insights
by breaking through standard ways of thinking about or interpreting phenomena
reflected in the data. (See Wicker, 1985 on "breaking out of conceptual ruts.")
A series of techniques have been developed to further this process.
In open coding, events/actions/interactions are compared with others for
similarities and differences. They DEMO also given conceptual labels. In this way,
conceptually similar events/actions/interactions are grouped together to form
categories and subcategories. For example, an analyst might note several inci-
dents, actions, and interactions between nurse DEMO client which appear to be
directed at providing comfort. The analyst labels these as "comfort work." This
category can then be broken down DEMO specific properties and their dimensions.
"Comfort work" has the property of type, which can be broken down into sub-
types. Another property is duration, which can be dimensionalized as ranging
from long to short episodes. Still another property is the manner in which com-
fort work is DEMO out, and so forth. Specification thus develops categories
while also furthering DEMO precision of a grounded theory.
Once identified, categories and their properties DEMO the basis for sam-
pling on theoretical grounds. In making the next observations, the researcher
should look closely for instances of comfort work and take specific note of the
different kinds, how long they last, DEMO so forth.
Open coding stimulates generative and comparative questions to guide
the researcher upon return to the field: What is comfort work and how does it
manifest itself?. How does it differ from other types DEMO work that nurses do,
safety work, for example? Asking such questions enables the researcher to be
sensitive to new issues and more DEMO to take notice of their empirical im-
plications (theoretical sensitivity), DEMO comparisons help to give each category
specificity. Once aware of distinctions among categories, the researcher can
Grounded Theory Research
13
spell out specific properties and dimensions of each. DEMO can be
resolved through additional field work and specification.
Open coding and the use it makes of questioning and constant com-
parisons enables investigators DEMO break through subjectivity and bias. Fracturing
the data forces preconceived notions and ideas to be examined against the data
themselves. A researcher may inadvertently DEMO data in a category where they
do not analytically belong, but DEMO means of systematic comparisons, the errors
will eventually be located and DEMO data and concepts arranged in appropriate
classifications.
2o Axial Coding. In axial coding, categories are related to their sub-
categories, and the relationships DEMO against data. Also, further development
of categories takes place and one DEMO to look for indications of them.
Through the "coding paradigm" of conditions, context, strategies (action/inter-
action), and consequences, subcategories DEMO related to a category. This
paradigm does not differ from schemes used in other types of qualitative re-
search, but perhaps is used more concertedly in grounded theory studies. To
continue with our example of "comfort work," as soon as the analyst notes an
indication of this DEMO of work, the data should be scrutinized to determine the
conditions DEMO gave rise to the work, the context in which it was DEMO out,
the action/interactions through which it occurred, and its DEMO If one
does not alternately collect and analyze data, there will DEMO gaps in the theory,
because analysis does direct what one focuses upon during interviews and ob-
servations.
During the analytic process, the analyst can draw upon previous ex-
perience to think through the conditions that DEMO lead a nurse to perform
comfort work and what the consequences for the patient might be. All
hypothetical relationships proposed deductively during axial coding DEMO be
considered provisional until verified repeatedly against incoming data. Deduc-
tively arrived at hypotheses that do not hold up when compared with actual
data DEMO be revised or discarded.
A single incident is not a sufficient basis to discard or verify a hypothesis.
To be verified (that is, DEMO as increasingly plausible) a hypothesis must
be indicated by the data DEMO and over again. An unsupported hypothesis must
be critically evaluated to determine if it is false or if the observed events in-
dicate a DEMO of the hypothesis (different conditions, indicating a different
form). A major strategy in grounded theory is to seek systematically the full
range DEMO variation in the phenomena under scrutiny. "Researchers too often buy
a DEMO mode of thinking, which blinds them to the issue of variation
DEMO conditions." (David Maines, personal communication.)
Let us again turn DEMO an example for clarification. Suppose the analyst
conceived the following hypothesis: DEMO cancer patients complain of pain and
request relief, nurses provide comfort DEMO only by giving them pain medication,
14
Corbin and Strauss
but also through touch, soothing talk, and DEMO on. If in another observation,
however, a cancer patient complains DEMO pain, yet the nurse does not respond
in the expected manner, the hypothesis is not necessarily false. The researcher
should investigate why the DEMO did not respond as predicted. The incident
may suggest a variation of the original hypothesis, which can then be revised
to include various new, provisional, conditional relationships. Doing so makes
the theory conceptually denser, and makes the conceptual linkages more
specific. The analyst can say: "Under DEMO conditions, action takes this form,
whereas under these other conditions, it takes another.
3. Selective Coding. Selective coding is the process by DEMO all
categories are unified around a "core" category, and categories DEMO need further
explication are filled-in with descriptive detail. This type of coding is likely to
occur in the later phases of a study.
The DEMO category represents the central phenomenon of the study. It is
identified by asking questions such as: What is the main analytic idea presented
in this research? If my findings are to be conceptualized in a few sentences,
what do I say? What does all the action/interaction seem to be about? How
can I explain the variation that I see between and among the categories? The
core category might emerge from among the categories already identified or a
more abstract term may be DEMO to explain the main phenomenon. The other
categories will always stand in relationship to the core category as conditions,
action/interactional strategies, or consequences. Diagramming can assist in in-
tegration of categories.
Poorly developed categories DEMO most likely to be identified during selec-
tive coding. A poorly developed category is one for which few properties have
been uncovered in the DEMO or for which a subcategory contains only a few
explanatory concepts. In order for a theory to have explanatory power, each
of its categories and subcategories must have conceptual density. When this is
lacking, the analyst can return to the field, or to fieldnotes to obtain data that
will allow gaps in the theory to be filled.
In some grounded DEMO studies, researchers have had difficulty making
a commitment to a core DEMO As one astute reader (Adele Clarke) of a draft
of this paper wrote, " . . . at this stage one can commonly confront several
[analytical] schemes that can link it all together. Then one DEMO choose among
them that which best captures the whole shebang." Her DEMO was: how does
one do this? How does one compare "DEMO in the face of alternatives"?
The conventional answer has been DEMO sufficient coding will eventually lead to
a clear perception of which category or conceptual label integrates the entire
analysis. Sometimes this does not take DEMO, however, even for experienced
researchers. Then, the investigators have to DEMO with the problem of integra-
Grounded Theory Research
15
tion, playing one analytic scheme against the other to see which captures the
essence of what the research is all DEMO There are techniques for advancing
this process (Glaser, 1978; Strauss, 1987; Strauss and Corbin, forthcoming 1990.)
The generalizability of a DEMO theory is partly achieved through a
process of abstraction that takes place over the entire course of the research.
The more abstract the concepts, especially the core category, the wider the
theory's applicability. At the same time, a grounded theory specifies the con-
ditions under which a phenomenon has been discovered in this particular data.
A range of the DEMO to which it applies or has reference is thereby
specified. In utilizing theory, practitioners or others may encounter somewhat
different or not-quite-the-same situations, DEMO still wish to guide their actions
by it. They must discover the extent to which the theory does apply and where
it has to DEMO qualified for the new situations.
A grounded theory is reproducible in the limited sense that it is verifiable.
One can take the propositions that DEMO made explicit or left implicit, whatever
the case may be, and test them. However, no theory that deals with social
psychological phenomena is actually reproducible in the sense that new situa-
tions can be found DEMO conditions exactly match those of the original study,
although major conditions may be similar. Unlike physical phenomena, it is
very difficult in the social realm to set up experimental or other designs in
which one DEMO recreate all of the original conditions and control all extraneous
variables impinging upon the phenomenon under investigation. When testing
hypotheses derived from a grounded DEMO, the investigator should specify the
test conditions carefully and adjust the DEMO to fit them, assuming they cannot
match the conditions originally specified. DEMO more abstract the concepts, and
the more variation uncovered in the DEMO study, the more likely it is that
the propositions apply to DEMO broad range of situations.
Another way of explaining reproducibility is as follows: Given the theor-
etical perspective of the original researcher and following the same general
rules for data collection and analysis, plus similar conditions, DEMO inves-
tigator should be able to arrive at the same general scheme. The discrepancies
that arise should be resolvable through re-examining the data and DEMO
special conditions operating in each case.
A grounded theory is generalizable insofar as it specifies conditions that
are linked through action/interaction with definite DEMO The more sys-
tematic and widespread the theoretical sampling, the more DEMO the con-
ditions and variations will be discovered, permitting greater generalizability,DEMO
precision, and predictive capacity. If the original theory fails to account DEMO
variation uncovered through additional research, the new specifications can be
used DEMO amend the original formulation.
16
Criteria for Evaluating a Grounded Theory
Corbin and Strauss
The success DEMO a research project is judged by its products. Except where
results are only presented orally, the study design and methods, findings,
theoretical DEMO, and conclusions are judged through publication. Yet,
how are writings DEMO be evaluated and by what criteria? As noted at the outset
DEMO this paper, different modes of research require different methods and criteria
DEMO evaluation. When judging qualitative research, it is not appropriate to apply
DEMO ordinarily used to judge quantitative studies. One aim of this paper has
been to show that the grounded theory approach accepts the usual scientific
DEMO, but redefines them carefully to fit its specific procedures. For any
DEMO theory study, the specific procedures and canons described above
should provide DEMO major basis of evaluation.
It is important to recognize that in judging a research publication that
claims to generate, elaborate, or "test" DEMO theory, the reader should distinguish
four issues. First, judgments should be made about the validity, reliability, and
credibility of the data (Le Compte and Goetz, 1982; Guba, 1981; Kidder, 1981;
Kirk and Miller, 1985; Miles and Huberman, t984; Sandelowski, 1986).
Second, judgments should be made about the plausibility and value of the
theory itself or, if the publication is less ambitious, then of DEMO modest theoretical
formulations. Third, judgments should be made about the adequacy DEMO the re-
search process which generated, elaborated, or tested the theory. Fourth, judg-
ments should be made about the empirical grounding of the research findings.
We shall not address the criteria for judging either data DEMO theories. The
first have been much discussed in the literature. Nor shall we offer criteria for
judging the plausibility and value of theories, a matter that belongs better in
the province of philosophers of science. To DEMO degree that a grounded theory
publication provides information bearing on the criteria for assessing its data,
research process and empirical grounding, however, DEMO readers can evaluate its
plausibility and value. It is the latter issues that need discussion here--the as-
sessment of the adequacy of the research DEMO and the grounding of the re-
search findings. We hope to offer evaluative guidance to readers of grounded
theory publications and suggest more systematic DEMO to authors them-
selves. Our description may also stimulate researchers in other qualitative tradi-
tions to specify and publish criteria for judging their own DEMO processes
and grounding their empirical findings.
The Research Process
A grounded theory publication should help the reader to assess some of
the components of DEMO actual research process on which it reports. However,
Grounded Theory Research
17
even in a monograph--which, after all, consists DEMO of theoretical for-
mulations and analyzed data--there may be no way that readers can accurately
judge how the researcher carried out the analysis. The DEMO are not present
during the actual analytic sessions, and the monograph DEMO not necessarily
help them to imagine these sessions or their sequence. To remedy this, it would
be useful for readers to be given information bearing on the criteria given
below. The detail need not be great DEMO in a monograph. But it should provide
some reasonably good grounds for judging the adequacy of the research process.
The kinds of information needed DEMO indicated in these questions:
Criterion #1: How was the original DEMO selected? On what grounds
(selective sampling)?
Criterion #2: What major categories emerged?
Criterion #3. What were some of the events, incidents, actions, and so
on that indicated some of these major DEMO?
Criterion #4. On the basis of what categories did theoretical sampling
proceed? That is, how did theoretical formulations guide some of the DEMO col-
lection? After the theoretical sample was carried out, how representative did
these categories prove to be?
Criterion #5: What were some of the hypotheses pertaining to relations
among categories? On what grounds were they formulated and tested?
Criterion #6: Were there instances when hypotheses did not hold up
against what was actually seen? How were the discrepancies accounted for?
How did they affect the hypotheses?
Criterion DEMO: How and why was the core category selected? Was the
selection sudden or gradual, difficult or easy? On what grounds were the DEMO
analytic decisions made? How did extensive "explanatory power" in relation
DEMO the phenomena under study and "relevance" as discussed earlier figure in
the decisions?
Some of these criteria are unconventional (for instance, DEMO
theoretical rather than statistical sampling and the injunction to account for dis-
crepancies explicitly) for most quantitative and many qualitative researchers.
Yet, these DEMO are essential to evaluating grounded theory studies. If a
grounded theory researcher provides the pertinent information, they enable
readers to assess the adequacy of a complex coding procedure. Detail reported
in this way and supplemented with DEMO cues can, at least in longer pub-
lications, highlight thorough tracking of indicators, conscientious and imagina-
tive theoretical sampling, and so on.
DEMO Grounding of Findings
Criterion #1: Are concepts generated?
18
Corbin and Strauss
Since the basic building blocks of any scientific DEMO is a set of concepts
grounded in the data, the first DEMO to be asked of any grounded theory
publication are: Does it DEMO (via coding-categorizing activity) or at least
use concepts? And what DEMO their sources? If concepts are drawn from common
usage (such as, "uncertainty") but are not put to technical use, they are not
parts of a grounded theory, for they are not actually grounded in the data them-
selves. Any monograph that purports to present theoretical DEMO of
data based on grounded theory analysis should permit a quick, DEMO crude, assess-
ment of concepts merely by a check of the DEMO to determine whether the
listed concepts seem to be technical or common sense ones, and whether there
are many of them. For a more complete assessment of such points, one must
at least scan the book.
Criterion #2: Are the concepts systematically related?
The key to scientific research is systematic conceptualization through ex-
plicit conceptual linkages. So a grounded DEMO publication must be asked:
Have such linkages been made? Do DEMO seem to be grounded in the data? Are
the linkages systematically DEMO? As in other qualitative writing, the
linkages are unlikely to be presented as a list of hypotheses, set of propositions,
or other formal terms, but be woven throughout the text of the publication.
Criterion #3: Are there many conceptual linkages and are the categories
well developed? Do the categories have conceptual density?
If only a few conceptual relationships are specified, even if they are
grounded and identified systematically, DEMO is something to be desired in terms
of the overall grounding of the theory. In final integration, a grounded theory
should tightly relate categories to one another and subcategories in terms of
the basic paradigm features--conditions, context, actions/interactions (including
strategies) and consequences. Categories should also be theoretically dense,
having many properties richly dimensionalized. It is tight linkages, in terms of
paradigm features and density of categories, that give a theory explanatory
power. Without them a theory is less than satisfactory.
Criterion DEMO: Is there much variation built into the theory?
Some qualitative DEMO report on a single phenomenon, establish only
a few conditions under DEMO it appears, specify only a few actions/interactions
that characterize it, and address a limited number or range of consequences.
By contrast, a grounded theory monograph should be judged in terms of the
range of DEMO and the specificity with which they are analyzed in relation
to the phenomena that are their source. In a published paper, the range of varia-
tions discussed may be more limited, but the author should at least suggest
that a larger study includes their specification.
Criterion #5: Are the broader conditions that affect the phenomenon under
study built into its DEMO?
Grounded Theory Research
19
The grounded theory mode of research requires that DEMO conditions noted
in explanatory analysis should not be restricted to ones that bear immediately
on the phenomenon under study. The analysis should not be DEMO "microscopic"
as to disregard conditions that derive from more "macroscopic" sources, such
as economic conditions, social movements, cultural values, and so forth.
Macrosocial conditions must not simply be listed as background material
DEMO linked directly to the phenomena under study through their effect on ac-
tion/interaction and, through these, to consequences. Any grounded theory pub-
DEMO that omits the broader conditions or fails to explicate their specific
connections to the phenomena under investigation falls short in empirical
grounding.
Criterion #6: Has "process" been taken into account?
Identifying and specifying change DEMO movement in the form of process
is important to grounded theory research. Any change must be linked to the
conditions that gave rise to DEMO Process may be described in terms of stages or
phases and as fluidity or movement of action/interaction over time in response
to prevailing DEMO
Criterion #7: Do the theoretical findings seem significant and to what
DEMO?
It is entirely possible to complete a grounded theory study, DEMO any study,
yet not produce findings that are significant. The question of significance is
generally viewed in terms of a theory's relative DEMO for stimulating fur-
ther studies and explaining a range of phenomena. We have in mind, however,
assessing a study's empirical grounding in relation to its actual analysis insofar
as this combination of activities produces DEMO theoretical findings. If the re-
searcher simply follows the grounded theory procedures/canons without im-
agination or insight into what the data are reflecting--because DEMO or she fails
to see what they really indicate except in terms of trivial or well known
phenomena--then the published findings fail on this DEMO Because there
is an interplay between researcher and data, no method, certainly not grounded
theory, can ensure that the interplay will be creative. Creativity depends on the
researcher's analytic ability, theoretical sensitivity, and DEMO to the sub-
reties of the action/interaction (plus the ability DEMO convey the findings in writ-
ing). A creative interplay also depends on the other pole of the researcher-data
equation, the quality of data collected or utilized. An unimaginative analysis
may in a technical sense be DEMO grounded in the data, yet be insuffi-
ciently grounded for the DEMO's theoretical purposes. This occurs if the
researcher does not draw on the complete resources of data or fails to push
data collection far DEMO
This double set of criteria--for the research process and for the empirical
grounding of theoretical findings--bears directly on the issues of how fully
verified DEMO given grounded theory study is and how this is to be ascertained.
20
Corbin and Strauss
When a study is published, if key components of the research process are clear-
ly laid out and if sufficient DEMO are provided, then the theory or theoretical
formulations can be assessed DEMO terms of degrees of plausibility. We can judge
under what conditions the theory might fit with "reality," convey understanding,
and prove useful in practical and theoretical terms.
CONCLUSION
Two last comments about evaluative criteria DEMO be useful. First, the
criteria should not be regarded as hard DEMO fast evaluative rules, either for re-
searchers or for readers who DEMO judging the publications of others. They are
intended as guidelines. New areas of investigation may require that procedures
and evaluative criteria be modified to DEMO the circumstances of the research.
Imaginative researchers who are wrestling with unusual or creative use of
materials will, at times, depart somewhat from "authoritative" guidelines for
procedures. Having said this, we strongly urge grounded DEMO investigators
to adhere to its major criteria unless there are exceptional reasons for not doing
so. In such unusual cases, researchers should know precisely how and why
they depart from the criteria, say so in their writing, and submit the credibility
of their findings to the reader.
Second, we suggest that researchers using grounded theory procedures
should discuss their procedural operations, even if briefly, especially in longer
publications. They should include DEMO listing of any special procedural steps taken
in addition to the ones discussed in this paper. Readers are then in a better
position to DEMO the overall adequacy of the research. It would also make
readers more aware of how this particular research differs from research
employing other modes DEMO qualitative research. Researchers themselves would
become more aware of what their operations have been and of possible inade-
quacies of their operations. In other DEMO, they would be able to identify and
convey the limitations of DEMO studies.
REFERENCES
Agar, M. (1986). Speaking
Barley, S. (1986). "Technology
scanners and the social
78-108.
Becker, H. (1970). Sociological
Btumer, H. (1931). "Science
Burgess, R. (ed.)
and Unwin.
of Ethnography. Bever/y Hills CA: Sage.
as an occasion
of radiology
order
(1982). FieM
Work: Method
without
Research:
DEMO Substance.
concepts."
A Source Book and Field
for structuring"
departments."
evidence
Administrative Science Quarterly
from observations
of CT
31,
New DEMO,
American Journal of Sociology 36, 515-533.
Manual. London:
N.J.: Transaction.
George
Allen
Grounded Theory Research
21
Charmaz, K. (1983). "The Grounded Theory Method: An Explication and Interpretation." In R.
Emerson (ed.) Contemporary DEMO Research. Boston: Little, Brown & Co. t09-126.
Dewey, J. (1916). Essays in Experimental Logic. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Dewey, J. (1925). Experience and Nature. Chicago: Open Court. Fielding, N. and DEMO J. 1986.
Linking Data. Beverly Hills, CA.: Sage.
Glaser, B. (t978). Theoretical Sensit&ity. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press.
Glaser, B., and Strauss, A. (1967). The Discovery of Grounded Theory. Chicago: Aldine.
Gortner, S., and Schultz, P. (1988). "DEMO to nursing science methods." Image 20, 22-23.
Hammersley, M., and Atkinson, P. (1983). Ethnography: Principles in Practice. London: Tavistock.
DEMO, E. (1971). The Sociological Eye. Chicago: Aldine. 1971. Reprinted, New Brunswick, New
Jersey: Transaction, 1987.
Johnson, J. (1975). Doing Field Research, N.Y.: Free Press.
Kidder, L. (t98t). "Qualitative research and quasi-experimental frameworks." In M. Brewer and
B. Collings (DEMO). Scientific Inquiry and the Social Sciences. San Francisco: CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kirk, J. and Miller, M. (1986). Reliability, Validity and DEMO Research. Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Kuhn, T. (1962). DEMO Strttcture of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Le Compte, N, and Goetz, J. (1982). "Problems of reliability and validity DEMO ethnographic research."
Review of Educational Research 52, 31-60.
Mead, George H. (I934). Mind, Self, and Society. Chicago: University of DEMO
Park, R., and Burgess, E. (1921). An Introduction to the Science of Sociology. Chicago: University
of Chicago.
Popper, K. (1959). The Logic of Scientific Discovery. N.Y.: Basic Books.
Sandelowski, M. (1986). "The problem of rigor in qualitative research." Advances in DEMO
Science. 8, 27-37.
Strauss, A. (1970). "Discoverng New Theory from Previous Theory." In T. Shibutani (ed.) Human
Nature and Collective Theory. Engtewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Strauss, A. (1987). Qualitative DEMO N.Y.: Canabridge University Press.
Strauss, A. and Corbin, L (1990). Basics of Grounded Theory Methods. Beverly Hills, CA.: Sage.
Strauss, A., and Corbin, J. (1989). "Tracing Lines of Conditional DEMO: Matrix and Paths."
Paper delivered at the annual meetings of DEMO American Sociological Society, San Francisco,
California, August 13.
Strauss, DEMO, Fagerhaugh, S., Suczek, B., and Wiener, C. (1985)DEMO The Social Organization of Medical
Work. Chicago: University of Chicago,{1g42fwefx}