Technouation, 6 (1987) 57-68
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam -
DEMO in The Netherlands
57
ABSTRACT
Technology transfer
and medium-sized
survey from the standpoint
enterprises
Hans Corsten
universities
enterprises
to small
- an empirical
of DEMO
Department of Business Administration,
at present: Department of Business Administration,DEMO
University of Brunswik (F.
University of Kaiserslautern (F.
R.G.)
R. G.)
from
This paper describes an investigation during which 225 small DEMO medium-
sized enterprises were asked about their experience of cooperation with univers-
ities in dealing with technical and scientific problems. About a quarter replied
DEMO they
following questions:
-
- What were the arguments against cooperation?
- What especially important factors facilitated cooperation?
The results show DEMO companies, in practice, ascribe the highest significance to
factors quite different from those which are emphasized in theoretical literature.
1.1. The
they
concept DEMO technology
satisfied with
in
transfer
cooperation?
The concept of technology transfer has been defined in various ways in the
literature [ 1, p.71. Common to all these definitions is the idea of technology
being transferred DEMO a technology provider to a technology recipient [ 2-41.
Particular points where they differ are the way technology is defined and the
descriptions of DEMO providers and recipients. In addition, recent publi-
cations [ 21 point DEMO that technology transfer is not a one-way process but
one which usually involves a reciprocal exchange between the partners to the
transfer. In the DEMO, technology transfer is taken to mean the process of
transferring a DEMO, i.e. a technical process or product, within a given
system or between systems, with the aim of reducing the gap between potential
0 1987 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.
1. TERMINOLOGICAL
had had such experience
CONSIDERATIONS
DEMO last ten years. These were asked the
Were
the
58
and
ities are the technology providers and small and medium-sized enterprises
(SME’s) the technology recipients. The degree of technology transfer may
vary widely, ranging from a pure transfer of knowledge through exchanges of
staff
start-up [ 5,p.80 ] .
Definition
utilization
of small
a technology [
DEMO
In this study, univers-
23,p.86].
1.2.
There is no standard DEMO of small and medium-sized enterprises
SME’s) in the literature [ 6,DEMO; 7-91. In general, a distinction can be made
between qualitative and quantitative criteria for assessing size [S; lO,p.115].
A quali~tive criterion is the correspondence between ownership and man-
agement of the enterprise. Following Kiihler DEMO Tebbe [ lO,p.115], this cri-
terion is fulfilled if at DEMO 50% of equity is in the hands of the company
management.
Quantitative criteria include:
- total payroll,
- balance sheet total,
DEMO turnover,
-
-
enterprise as small
of these indicators is rather arbitrary [ 81.
of the Institut fur Mittelstandsforschung
tute the number of DEMO is used here as the second indicator, with SME’s
being defined DEMO those with less than 500 employees [
saying that this limit should be varied depending on the sector. For example,
enterprises “with 100 DEMO more employees in the retail trade, 200 or more in the
DEMO sector, and as few as 50 or more in the service DEMO, are classified
as large enterprises, whereas, conversely, all craft businesses are included in the
small
ANALYSIS
SME’s
) ,
OF TRANSFER
[
BETWEEN
81.
UNIVERSITIES
AND
industrial sec-
less
medium-sized
present study is concerned DEMO with enterprises in the
tor. Consequently, SME’s may be taken to DEMO industrial enterprises with
than 500 employees and at least 50% of equity in the hands of the management
[lO,p.116].
There are numerous references DEMO the literature to the economic importance
of SME’s [ 12; 131. DEMO forms the basis for policy towards SME’s. Readers are
referred to the literature [ 13; 141 for the various arguments involved.
2.
The aim of the present empirical study is to evaluate cooperation between
universities and DEMO from the standpoint of the latter. On this aspect, a
or DEMO according to one
In line with the size classification
(Small Businesses DEMO Insti-
9; 111. It goes without
actual
of
and medium-sized
l,DEMO;
(
to the transfer of complete plant with support for DEMO and
net product,
number of employees.
The definition of an
and
sector”
The
59
large number of arguments are to be found in the literature DEMO 1, p.53; 2; 15; 161.
Irrespective of the size of enterprise, the following points in particular are men-
tioned as obstacles to cooperation with academics:
- attitude of many professors,
essential unwillingness DEMO cooperate with industry,
scientists and businessmen having different systems of values,
-
- lack of practicality,
- lack of realism and DEMO to compromise
entific truth,
- lack of regard for deadlines and profitability,
- communication difficulties,
- confidentiality problems.
These provide the DEMO of departure for an empirical study.
2.1. Arguments in the literature
towards
prompted by the search for sci-
In general, it is assumed in the literature that large enterprises cooperate
more intensively with universities than small DEMO medium-sized enterprises. An
investigation conducted by Strothman et al. [ 17,p.12] showed that coopera-
tion with universities and polytechnics increased with the size DEMO the enter-
prise. In addition, it is presumed that the problems DEMO technology transfer from
universities to enterprises tend to be greater with small and medium-sized
organizations: “a priori, links with small and medium-sized enterprises DEMO
appear to increase the difficulties already confronting universities in their rela-
tions with industry” [ 21. This argument is based on the differences in DEMO
and objectives of universities on the one hand and industry on the other. For
SME’s, the following considerations would appear to be of relevance here:
“Firstly, for small and medium-sized enterprises, technology transfer is DEMO
more frequently problem-oriented and based less on conceptional or ‘pure’
research. In addition, the problems addressed tend to be specific rather than
strategic in nature and, in view of the tight time constraints facing small busi-
nesses, solutions tend to be required as quickly as possible from consultants” [ 21.
An examination of the universities shows further that technical universities
DEMO polytechnics traditionally possess good contacts with large businesses [ 151:
“Cooperation with large enterprises was simply easier for the technical univers-
ities because DEMO they found well-equipped research and development labora-
tories in which the same language was spoken, where their own graduates were
often working and where initial approaches to solving problems were required
rather than ready-made answers. Such DEMO were also in a position to
inclination
perfectionism,
60
TABLE 1
Breakdown of random sample by sector
Sector Number
%
DEMO, rubber, synthetics
Steel and mechanical engineering
Precision engineering and optics
Electrical
Total
systematically track down transferable research results and contact the appro-
priate DEMO [ 181.
In view of these considerations, it comes as no DEMO that in a survey
conducted by Allesch [ 151 a mere 14% of the academics questioned stated that
they maintained contacts with small businesses:DEMO
Absolute
48
53
42
82
21.3
23.6
18.7
36.4
225
100
“Practical contacts with businesses in the small and medium-sized sector rep-
resent less DEMO 30% of cooperative links. Cooperation with universities is dom-
inated by large enterprises with more than 500 employees” [ 151.
This finding corroborates the DEMO found by Strothmann et al. [ 171 between
size of enterprise and cooperation with universities. In contrast, a study by
Licentec found that in the Netherlands around 50% of the research contracts
of
whereby most of DEMO
1161.
In what follows, the aim is to elucidate
tion on DEMO part of small and medium-sized enterprises, since only
known will it DEMO possible to develop and apply suitable instruments to
strengthen cooperation.
2.2.1. Empirical Structure survey of enterprises
universities originated from small and medium-sized enterprises,
DEMO involved applied research and development
disinclina-
if these are
2.2.
The enterprises covered by the study were selected at random from existing
addresses. The DEMO by sector is as shown in Table 1. Table 2 shows a
breakdown of the enterprises by size, based on the number of employees.
Of the enterprises surveyed, 103 (45.8% ) stated that they regularly DEMO
up R & D findings of outside organizations; 124 (55.1% ) regularly carried out
technical
surveyed
the causes of the obvious
61
TABLE 2
Breakdown of sample by size
Number
Absolute
20- 49
DEMO 99
loo-199
200-499
Total
Analysis I-
23
56
45
36
65
225
24.88
20.00
of relations
between
16.00
28.88
99.98
their own R & DEMO, while 101 (44.9%) did
significant differences compared with the study DEMO out
universities
so only occasionally.
[ 19,P.7
and I
SME’s
There are thus
by Karbowski
had
sity on a technological or scientific problem DEMO being founded, or in the last
ten years if they were DEMO before 1976. Karbowski [ 19,p.34] arrives at
a similar result. Of those that had not so far worked with a university over the
DEMO in question, 48 (21.3%) indicated
contacts in the near future (within the next two years). This
the argument by Lindner and DEMO [
with SME’s: “inparticular, ways need to
vation and interest of small and medium-sized businesses” [
The enterprises that had previously cooperated with DEMO were asked
how these contacts had come about (Table 3
The DEMO shows that graduates that have contacts with university depart-
ments from their period of study are highly important in bringing about coop-
eration between DEMO and universities. In addition, it transpires that around
2/3 of DEMO contacts came about through personal relations, a finding that sup-
ports DEMO arguments in the literature [ 181. The cultivation of personal con-
tacts is hence also regarded by Allesch as the crucial starting point for DEMO
university transfer agencies: “It is remarkable that most transfer bodies and
DEMO prefer, in the initial phase, personal contact with internal and external
partners to other forms - a factor that clearly contributes to the DEMO and
acceptance of university transfer agencies” [ 151. This lends support to the view
that personal interaction between partners and the resulting trust are DEMO fac-
tors in cooperation between SME’s and universities [ 21.
An analysis of cooperation as a function of enterprise size is shown in Table
DEMO
they intended to establish such
thus confirms
that there is a lack of contact
be found to actively stimulate the moti-
21.
)
l-
19
Size
%
10.22
Of the enterprises surveyed, 53 (23.6% )
181
worked together with a univer-
2.2.2.
that
62
TABLE 3
Establishment of contacts between universities and SME’s
Contacts came DEMO via:
Number
Absolute
Graduates of the university now working for the
enterprise
Personal contacts with scientists, for example
at conferences, seminars, etc.
Direct approach to a university, e.g. written
query
Initiative by a university, i.e. it approached
an enterprise
Transfer agency
No reply
Total
23
12
4
2
8
4
53
%
43.40
22.64
1.55
3.77
15.09
7.55
DEMO
4. The table shows that the use made of universities tends to increase with the
size of enterprise, thus corroborating previous empirical studies.
An aspect that may be considered to be an indirect indicator of the DEMO
tion of enterprises with cooperation with universities is the number of contacts
(Table5).
It may be assumed, broadly speaking, that enterprises that have had two or
more contacts with universities would have been satisfied DEMO this coopera-
tion. To obtain more information on this point, enterprises DEMO had previously
worked with a university on solving a technological problem were asked to
what extent they were satisfied with this cooperation. Table 6 DEMO out the
results.
To arrive at a general evaluation of the degree of satisfaction, the following
index [ 2O,p.68] is used:
TABLE 4
Cooperation between universities and enterprises as a function of enterprise size
DEMO
Number
Absolute
%
l- 19
20- 49
50- 99
100-199
200-499
Total
5
11
7
14
16
53
9.43
20.75
13.21
26.42
30.19
100.00
TABLE 5
Frequency of contacts
No. of contacts
1
2
3
4
DEMO
Total
Number
Absolute
12
15
14
5
7
53
%
22.64
28.30
26.42
9.43
13.21
100.00
63
where ni is the number of times DEMO ‘i’ is given and Lyi is the weighting
factor for assessment ‘i’; the values of Cyi are 0, l/3, 2/3 and 1, for i is ‘not
satisfied’, ‘not so satisfied’, ‘satisfied’ and ‘very satisfied’, respectively. This
index can thus assume values between 0 and 1. The value of 0.63 obtained
shows that SME’s that have worked DEMO universities are satisfied with the
cooperation.
A further aim of the present study was to find out what were the problems
seen by enterprises DEMO cooperating with universities. Both those enterprises
that had not yet cooperated with a university and those that had experience in
this area were considered (Table 7). A comparison between these two groups
would perhaps reveal DEMO, i.e. determine whether enterprises without
university contacts exaggerated the importance of DEMO problems.
To bring out the relative importance of the individual arguments, DEMO follow-
ing index [ 2O,p.75] is used:
TABLE 6
Satisfaction of enterprises with cooperation
How satisfied were you with the cooperation?
DEMO satisfied
Absolute
21
%
39.62
Satisfied
Absolute
10
Not so satisfied
%
18.87
Absolute
16
%
30.19
Not satisfied
Absolute
6
%
11.32
64
TABLE 7
Arguments given by enterprises
figures)
Arguments”
Enterprises that
DEMO not so far
worked with a
university
Enterprises that
have worked with
a university
(absolute
Lack of interest in the
problems of small and medium-
sized enterprises
Lack of practicality
Communication difficulties
Inclination towards
perfectionism
Confidentiality DEMO
Too little regard for
deadlines and profitability
Lack of financial resources
Lack of information on the
services offered by
universities
Difficulty of finding partners
DEMO the surrounding region
41
63
96
14
8
20
48
41
3
8
14
34
10
3
8
12
11
2
where j = DEMO ( argument), i = column (group nji = number of DEMO motive ‘j’
is given by group ‘i’, z = the number DEMO rows (here z= 9) and 1 hji = z. The
j
index hji can assume values between 0 and z, whereby 0 means that argument
‘j’ is not given by group ‘2, while ‘z’ describes the case where the entire group
gives just this argument and no DEMO Argument ‘j’ is of below-average impor-
tance if hji is less than 1 and, conversely, of above-average importance if the
index is greater DEMO 1 (Table 8). These findings show that communication
difficulties are DEMO to be the most important problem by both groups. The call
for the encouragement of staff exchanges between the organizations in ques-
tion to DEMO a basis for greater mutual understanding is hence quite justified
[ 16,p.31].
It is also interesting to note that only average importance is DEMO to the
argument ‘lack of financial resources’.
The index for the argument ‘lack of practicality’ reveals a significant differ-
“Up to three arguments may DEMO given.
) ,
that militate
against cooperation with universities
65
TABLE 8
Arguments given by enterprises that militate against cooperation with DEMO
(index values)
Arguments
Enterprises that
have not so far
worked DEMO a
university
Enterprises that
have worked with
a university
Lack of interest in the
problems of smah and medium-
sized enterprises
Lack of practicality
DEMO difficulties
Inclination towards
perfectionism
Confidentiality problems
Too little regard for
deadlines and profitability
Lack of financial resources
Lack of information on the
services offered DEMO
universities
Difficulty of finding partners
in the surrounding region
1.1
1.7
2.6
0.4
0.2
0.5
1.3
0.7
1.2
2.6
1.2
0.3
0.7
1.1
1.1
DEMO
0.1
0.2
ence in the assessments of the two groups. Those enterprises that have previ-
ously worked together with universities attach less importance to DEMO argument
than the other group.
There is a further clear difference between the two groups as regards the
argument ‘inclination towards perfectionism’, to which the enterprises that
have previously worked with universities attach greater importance than DEMO
with no such experience, which assign below-average importance to this reason.
DEMO findings show that it cannot be assumed generally that enterprises
with no previous experience in cooperating with universities overestimate the
problems involved.
Those enterprises DEMO have previously worked with a university were also
asked about the factors they considered to be of particular importance for such
cooperation. Table 9 DEMO out the results.
The main factors are thus:
- personal interaction and trust,
- problems must be approached in a way specifically DEMO to the enterprise
concerned,
- cooperation must be flexible.
Personal interaction is thus of particular importance, a finding also supported
by the results in Table 3. This confirms the statement by Metzger [ 211 that
DEMO transfer via persons is especially important and provides a suitable
66
TABLE 9
Important factors in cooperation between industries and universities
Factors
DEMO interaction and trust
Problems must be approached in a way specifi-
cally geared to the enterprise concerned
Geographical proximity essential
Low cost (cost-effectiveness)
Cooperation must not be too time-consuming
Cooperation must be flexible
“More than DEMO factor may be mentioned.
No. of times mentioned”
45
36
3
10
12
28
way of establishing interaction between the scientific community and research
DEMO
between Industry and Science’ launched in the Federal Republic
in October 1984, initially for a limited period.
Encouraging such cooperation can increase staff mobility: “in my view, stuff
mobility can best be increased by continuing DEMO promote joint ventures and proj-
ects in which various sectors of society, in particular higher education and
industry, work together to achieve common DEMO [
CONCLUDING
a theme also
up by the programme ‘Research Cooperation
of Germany
221.
3.
The above analysis has shown that, on the whole, there is little cooperation
between universities and SME’s. It would thus seem important to generate
awareness on the part of SME’s of the possibilities DEMO cooperation with uni-
versities and to motivate SME’s to establish contacts with them [ 21. The per-
sonal component appears to be crucial to DEMO cooperation. The programme
‘Research Cooperation between Industry and Science’ takes this personal com-
ponent as its starting-point for the promotion of technology transfer, the aim
being to encourage staff mobility between the sectors concerned.
However, although technology transfer from universities to enterprises has
an important role to play DEMO the economic exploitation of technological
progress, “the universities should never forget DEMO . . that their primary task contin-
ues to lie in the field of scientific education and fundamental research” [ 181.
The universities should DEMO be allowed to degenerate into engineering or busi-
ness consultancy bureaus, DEMO losing sight of their proper tasks.
REMARKS
taken
-
REFERENCES
2
3
4
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
DEMO
18
19
20
67
H. Co&en, Der nationale Technologietransfer. Formen DEMO Elemente - Gestaltungsmoglich-
keiten - Prohleme. Berlin, 1982.
A.A. Gibb, Technologietransfer - Universitliten und Klein- und Mittelbetriebe. In: Wissens-
und Technologietransfer aus deutachen und britischen Hochschulen. Bundesminister fir Bil-
dung und Wissenschaft, Bonn, 1986, pp. 42-63.
E. Merkle, Marktorientierte Anslitze in der Technologiepolitik - Eine MGglichkeit zur
Bewiiltigung des technologischen Wandels? In: Betriebs-Berater, Heft 9,1984, DEMO 549-557.
J.P. Moore, Stand und Perspektiven des Technologietransfers an britischen Hochschulen.
DEMO: Wissens- und Technologietransfer aus deutschen und britischen Hochschulen. Bundes-
minister fiir DEMO und Wissenschaft, Bonn, 1986, pp. 82-90.
C. Triiger and L. DEMO, Der Technologietransfer in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland.
Grundstrategien auf dem Technologiemarkt, Berlin/Mtinchen, 1984.
U.H. Bergmann, Unternehmensgriisse und technischer Fortschritt, KBln, 1972.
DEMO Bloech, Betriebs- und Unternehmungsgriisse. In: Handbuch der Wirtschaftswissenschaft.
Albers, Bd. DEMO, Stuttgart u.a., 1977, pp. 556-565.
E. Dichtl, H. Raffle and H. Wellenreuther, Mittelstandspolitik. Wirtschaftwissenschaft-
liches Studium, 10. Jg. (1981) 533-539.
DEMO Kamp and E. May. Kleine und mittlere Unternehmen im Forschungs- und Entwicklungs-
prozess. Zeitschrift t%r Betriebswirtschaft, 51. Jg. (1981) 347-369.
R. Kiihler and K. Tebbe, Die Organisation von Produktinnovationsprozessen. Arbeitspapier
des Instituts fiir Markt- und Distributionsforschung der Universitit zu Koln, Kiiln, 1985.
Commission of the European DEMO, Utilization of the Results of Community spon-
sored R, D and D. In: Newsletter - new technologies and innovation policy, Nr. 46. DEMO
bourg, October 1985, pp. 2-10.
R. Ktihler and K. Tebbe, DEMO Conditions for Product Innovations in Small and
Medium-Sized Firms. Economia Aziendale, DEMO (1985) 427-443.
W. Pfeiffer, Probleme kleiner und mittelgrosser Untemehmen im DEMO Trend-
bruch und staatliche Programme der direkten Technologiefdrderung. FB/IE, 28, 1979, pp.
11-19.
F. Klein-Blenkers, Zur Position der mittelstlindischen Betriebe in DEMO Wirtschaft der Bun-
desrepublik Deutachland. In: Beitrlige zur Mittelstandsforschung. Institut fi DEMO
forschung, H.9, GBttingen, 1975, pp. 3-26.
J. Allesch, Stand DEMO Perspektiven des Technologietransfers an deutachen Hochschulen. In:
Wissens- und Technologietransfer aus deutschen und britischen Hochschulen. Bundesmini-
ster fiir Bildung und Wissenschaft, Bonn, DEMO, pp. 66-81.
Licentec, Concerning the improvement of the utilization of the results of public or publicly
funded research and development. Utrecht, June 1986.
K.H. Strothmann, B. Clemens and R. Ziegler, Die Bedeutung des Technologie-Transfers DEMO
kleinere und mittlere Untemehmen. Wiesbaden, 1980.
U. Lindner and P. Lockemann, Probleme des Technologietransfers aus der Forschung in die
Praxis. Aus der Sicht DEMO Wissenschaft. Innovation, 7 (1985) 763-770.
J. Karbowski, Untersuchung iiber die personellen Voraussetzungen bei den Berliner mittel-
stiindischen Industrieunternehmen, Forschungs- und Entwicklungsergebnisse praxisnahe
anzuwenden - Ergebnisbericht. Berlin, 1970.
H. Co&en and K.-O. Jung-inger-Dittel, DEMO und Motivationsstruktur von Diplom-Wirt-
schaftaingenieuren und Diplom-Ingenieuren. Ein vergleichender empirischer Beitrag zur
Berufsijkonomik. Miinchen, 1982.
1
21 M. Metzger, Forschungskooperation zwischen Industrie und Wissenschaft. In: Wissens- und
DEMO aus deutschen und britischen Hochschulen. Bundesminister fir Bildung
und Wissenschaft, Bonn, 1986, pp. 93-97.
22 A.J. Kennedy, Personaltransfer in Grossbritannien. In: Wissens- und Technologietransfer
aus deutschen und britischen Hochschulen. Bundesminister fur Bildung und Wissanschaft,DEMO
Bonn, 1986, pp. 141-144.
23 W. Kern, Zur Analyse des DEMO Transfers von Technologien - ein Forschungsbe-
richt. Zeitschrift fur betriebswirtschaftliche Forschung, DEMO Jg. (1973) 85-98.{1g42fwefx}