JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN PERSONALITY 31, 319–336 (1997)
ARTICLE NO. DEMO
Measuring Levels of Trust
Laurie L. Couch
Fort Hays State University
and
Warren H. Jones
University of Tennessee
College student respondents involved in romantic DEMO (N 5 445) com-
pleted questionnaires containing measures of trust and related constructs. Analyses
focused on two sets of issues. The ﬁrst concerned DEMO validity of the Trust Inventory,
an innovative self-report measure that partitions trust into separate domains includ-
ing (a) speciﬁc relationship partners, called Partner Trust; (b) family and friends,
termed Network Trust; DEMO (c) people-in-general, called Generalized Trust. The
second set of issues DEMO several previously unanswered questions derived from
the trust literature, speciﬁcally: (DEMO) the comparability of competing measures of trust,
(b) the DEMO between trust in speciﬁc people vs trust in human nature, and
(c) whether trust is more closely related to one’s personality or emotions or to the
quality of one’s relationships. Results generally supported the validity DEMO the Trust
Inventory and its tripartite division of types of trust including the new concept of
Network Trust. In addition, various measures of trust were moderately to strongly
interrelated. However, results also supported the distinction between relational trust
(trust in relationship partners) and global trust (trust in human nature). Measures
of relational trust were signiﬁcantly more strongly related DEMO relationship quality
and commitment, whereas measures of global trust were slightly DEMO strongly re-
lated to indices of personality and emotion. This latter difference was not signiﬁ-
cant.  1997 Academic Press
Trust has long been DEMO important construct in personality and in under-
standing development, communication, personal relationships, and organiza-
tional behavior. However, the literature on trust contains DEMO diversity of deﬁ-
nitions and conceptualizations, some anomalous ﬁndings, and several
unresolved theoretical problems. For example, trust has been deﬁned in di-
verse ways: as a generalized expectancy (Rotter, 1967), as an enduring atti-
Address reprint requests to Dr. Laurie L. Couch, Department of Psychology, Fort Hays
State University, Hays, KS 67601.
319
0092-6566/97 $25.00
Copyright  1997 by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any DEMO reserved.
320
COUCH AND JONES
tude or trait (Deutsch, 1958; Gifﬁn, DEMO), and as a transitory situational
variable (Driscoll, 1978; Kee & Knox, 1970). Some global measures of trust
are not reliably DEMO with the trust experienced in speciﬁc relationships
(e.g., Holmes, 1991; Tardy, 1988).
Earlier treatments (e.g., Deutsch, 1958; Rotter 1967) often deﬁned trust
broadly as trust in human nature or people-in-general (DEMO, termed global
trust), whereas more recent approaches focus on trust DEMO a speciﬁc rela-
tional—often romantic—partner (termed relational trust; Lazelere & Hus-
ton, 1980; Rempel, Holmes, & Zanna, 1985). We believe this distinction is
an important conceptual innovation and a potential point of DEMO for
some of the theoretical issues involving the concept of trust. A further re-
ﬁnement in this line of reasoning is implicit in the DEMO Inventory (Couch,
1994; Couch, Adams, & Jones, 1996) which is the ﬁrst instrument that mea-
sures both global and relational DEMO simultaneously. In fact, this inventory
divides the construct into three levels: Generalized Trust (i.e., global trust
in human nature), Partner Trust (i.e., trust in speciﬁc relationship partners),
and an intermediate level DEMO Network Trust deﬁned as trust in one’s social
network of family and friends. The purpose of the current investigation was
to clarify further the DEMO of trust by exploring the validity of the tripar-
tite conceptualization contained in the Trust Inventory and by assessing the
convergence among differing deﬁnitions DEMO measures of trust (e.g., global
vs relational trust, etc.).
DEMO TRUST
Most of the initial theoretical descriptions of trust tended to be broadly
conceived in the sense of seeking to account for an individual’s DEMO
toward human nature or people-in-general, referred to as global trust (Rotter,
1967; Wrightsman, 1974). For example, according to Erikson (DEMO) the
initial task of human development involves learning to trust the DEMO care-
giver. The infant is deeply inﬂuenced by the caregiver’s responsiveness and
sensitivity to the expression of its needs and thus, a strong impression of the
predictability and dependability of the caregiver is formed. The resultant
DEMO in the caregiver is essential not only for a formation of secure attachment
but also for progression to subsequent tasks of development and the DEMO
ization of trust to other people. The concept of a global trust is also illustrated
by the work of Rotter (1967, 1971, 1980), who focused on what he called
‘‘interpersonal trust.’’ Rotter deﬁned interpersonal DEMO as a generalized ex-
pectancy that the promise of an individual or a group can be relied upon.
According to Rotter, trust is not related to any speciﬁc experience but derives
from generalizations across experiences that DEMO individual perceives as simi-
lar. Rotter argued that because trusting individuals work on the assumption
that people will respond to them and make their DEMO known, a sense of
personal control may develop. For example, internal locus of control, or the
LEVELS OF TRUST
321
feeling that one has some control over the DEMO of situations one is in,
has consistently been found to be related to global trust (Rotter, 1980). Fi-
nally, several scholars including Erikson (1950), Wrightsman (1974), and
Rotter (1967) DEMO that global trust, conceived in this way, is the essen-
tial and necessary interpersonal component for developing relationships.
RELATIONAL TRUST
By contrast, relatively little attention has been paid to assessing trust in
close relationships directly. DEMO is surprising considering the amount of re-
search recently directed toward the study of personal relationships, and con-
sidering that trust is often seen as a major factor in relationship development
(Hendrick & Hendrick, 1983; Lazelere & Huston, 1980; Rempel, Holmes, &
Zanna, 1985)DEMO Relational trust differs from the traditional ideal of global trust
in that it is focused on a speciﬁc partner with whom a person has DEMO important
relationship (Holmes, 1991; Holmes & Rempel, 1989). It refers to a person’s
level of conﬁdence in the strength of the DEMO and his/her partner’s
positive feelings (caring) toward the person (DEMO et al., 1985). Theoreti-
cal work on the construct of DEMO trust has generated three main ap-
proaches: (a) developmental theories DEMO are concerned with how trust
emerges and changes in a developing relationship (e.g., Holmes & Rempel,
1989; Lazelere & Huston, 1980); (b) the component model (Rempel et al.,
1985) which focuses on the evolution of trust through speciﬁc stages such
as predictability, dependability, and faith; and (c) the appraisal process model
that DEMO the perceptual and cognitive consequences of one’s level of
trust (Holmes, 1991). Also, with few exceptions the concept of relational
trust has been almost exclusively used to refer to trust in romantic partners.
As DEMO implied by the term relational trust, each of these approaches assumes
DEMO trust is a critical element in any close or important relationship.
RESEARCH ISSUES
The development of the concept of relational trust as a theoretical DEMO
ion to global trust is, we believe, an advancement in understanding the nature
of trust in experience and most especially the role of DEMO in close relation-
ships. Even so, several important issues remain unresolved DEMO recent research
and theory. First, deﬁning trust exclusively in either relational (i.e., speciﬁc
romantic partners) or global (i.e., people-in-general) terms would appear to
omit a portion of the potential range of the trust DEMO; namely, one’s will-
ingness to trust the members of one’s social network (i.e., family and
friends). In contrast to ephemeral human DEMO, one has numerous speciﬁc
interactions with the members of one’s social DEMO, and yet those experi-
ences may lack the immediacy, intimacy, DEMO in some cases the importance
of exchanges with one’s romantic partner. Whether trust in family members
322
COUCH AND JONES
and friends functions as it appears to in DEMO relationships is not yet
clear and is one of the general questions that initiated the present research.
Second, the statistical relationship between global trust and relational trust
remains unclear. It seems reasonable to expect, and Rotter (1967) speciﬁcally
proposed that global trust and trust for relational partners DEMO be corre-
lated. However, it is also reasonable to suppose that DEMO some cases a discrep-
ancy between global and relational trust could occur in which one is sanguine
regarding people-in-general but suspicious of one’s partner. DEMO the reverse
may hold true; one may be generally mistrusting but DEMO faith in one particu-
lar person or a small group of people. Also, research to date has often failed
to demonstrate a reliable relationship between measures of the two constructs
(Holmes, 1991; Tardy, 1988)DEMO
Third, is trust best conceived as a characteristic of a person DEMO a judg-
ment arising from interactions with a speciﬁc other person or people-in-gen-
eral? The former might be termed the personality trait approach and assumes
that individuals vary in trust more-or-less independent of their contemporary
interpersonal DEMO One can easily imagine people who might trust
others excessively even when they are in danger and thus at a disadvantage
to do so. DEMO, one can imagine others who exhibit extreme distrust
despite the reliability DEMO their relational partners. Presumably, one’s current
level of trust for speciﬁc DEMO generalized others could derive from past rela-
tionship experiences or other mechanisms of personality development. By
contrast, trust may reﬂect the status or quality of one’s current relationships.
Although difﬁcult to disentangle, these competing characterizations suggest
incompatible origins and consequences of trust. Alternatively, each approach
may reﬂect differing levels of trust. For example, global trust is likely to be
more closely linked to personality processes whereas, by deﬁnition, rela-
tional trust DEMO reﬂect actual and current relationships and interpersonal
experiences.
Fourth, an important DEMO for any literature for which a variety of
deﬁnitions and potentially dissimilar measures have been used concerns the
extent to which established results reﬂect DEMO constructs underlying theoreti-
cal models or simply the idiosyncrasies of the instruments and deﬁnitions
involved. This issue is related to most of the points DEMO above in that, at
present, the generalizability from studies involving global trust to those fo-
cused on relational trust remain largely unexplored.
The DEMO Inventory (Couch, 1994; Couch, et al., 1996) emerged from a
program of research stimulated, in part, by these conceptual and DEMO
ment issues. Of special note, in addition to yielding scores for DEMO and
relational trust, this instrument includes a measure of network trust, designed
to assess the conﬁdence, dependence, and trust, in one’s network of friends
and family members. Although it is new, existing research suggests that the
Trust Inventory is internally consistent, reliable over time, and DEMO
LEVELS OF TRUST
323
evidence supports the validity of scale interpretations. Consequently, one
purpose of the present research was to examine further the validity DEMO the
three conceptualizations of trust as deﬁned by the Trust Inventory scales
using comparisons with both (a) extant measures of global and relational
DEMO and (b) measures of selected personality traits versus interpersonal and
relational constructs of relevance. In addition, the present research sought
to explore further the distinctions outlined by the tripartite theory of trust
(e.g., among DEMO, network, and relational trust) at the level of the construct
(c) by examining comparisons among extant measures of both global and
relational trust, including the Trust Inventory and by (d) comparing these
measures to the personality and relational constructs used to validate the
Trust Inventory.
DEMO
METHOD
Originally, respondents were 552 undergraduate college students. Of this group, 445
(80.6%) reported being involved in a romantic relationship, the mean length of which was
22.9 months. In order to eliminate potential variability DEMO Partner Trust scores deriving from
respondents not involved in a romantic relationship, analyses were conducted on these latter
participants only. The mean age of the participants was 20.2 years, and 89.8% were Caucasian.
These participants completed the Trust Inventory along with one or more additional measures.
All participants DEMO recruited from undergraduate psychology classes at a large public Univer-
sity.
Procedure
Participants completed questionnaires in out-of-class sessions in exchange for nominal
course credit. DEMO participant completed questionnaires containing: (a) biographical questions
(e.g., age, romantic involvement, etc.), (b) the revised Trust Inventory, (c) alternative measures
of global and relational trust, and (d) measures DEMO various personality, emotional, and relation-
ship constructs included for the purpose of comparisons with the measures of trust.
Measures
The trust inventory. The DEMO Inventory (Couch, 1994; Couch, Adams, & Jones, 1996)
yields three scores reﬂecting a priori deﬁnitions of trust as follows: Partner Trust, deﬁned as
trust or conﬁdence in a romantic partner or in one’s romantic relationship; Network Trust
deﬁned as feelings of conﬁdence and security one has in one’s network of relationships with
family and friends; and, Generalized Trust, deﬁned as the tendency to entertain positive
assumptions about DEMO, or to attribute positive characteristics to ‘‘human na-
ture.’’
Initial estimates DEMO internal reliability for the current version of the Trust Inventory have
met or exceeded conventional standards of measurements (Couch, 1994; Couch et al., 1996):
Coefﬁcient αs ranged from .87 to .92, and the mean interitem correlations for the scales ranged
from .33 to .40. The DEMO Trust scale consists of 20 items such as ‘‘I am sure about how
my partner feels about me,’’ whereas Network Trust (e.g., DEMO often worry about the motives
of others in my life’’) and DEMO Trust (e.g., ‘‘Basically I am a trusting person’’) consist
of DEMO and 20 items, respectively. An examination of test–retest reliability over a DEMO period
324
COUCH AND JONES
indicated sufﬁcient temporal stability for Partner (r 5 .82), Network (r 5 .74), and Generalized
Trust (r DEMO .80). Preliminary validity evidence regarding the Trust Inventory involving compar-
isons with extant measures of trust and relationship status indicated moderate to strong DEMO
The three scales showed moderate intercorrelations (Couch et al., 1996).
The Partner Trust scale, which measures the faith one has in a romantic partner or in a
speciﬁc romantic relationship, has been found to be related to commitment to one’s partner,
relational satisfaction, and passionate love. The Network Trust scale was designed to assess
one’s trust for DEMO of his/her social network (e.g., friends and family). The Network
Trust scale has been found to be positively correlated with friendship DEMO, a global rating
of friendship satisfaction, and family satisfaction. The Generalized Trust scale was designed
to measure one’s belief that human nature is DEMO good, and validation studies have indi-
cated that its scores are DEMO to social support, liking others, and trust in human nature
(DEMO et al., 1996).
Measures of relational trust. Participants also completed DEMO additional measures of rela-
tional trust. These included the Faith subscale of the Trust Scale (Rempel, Holmes, & Zanna,
1985), 7 items from the Emotional Trust subscale of the Speciﬁc Interpersonal Trust Scale
(Johnson-George & Swap, 1982), and the Dyadic Trust Scale (Lazelere & Huston, 1980). The
Trust Scale is a 26-item measure of DEMO in romantic relationships. Its Faith subscale is a 10-
item measure of the feelings of conﬁdence in a romantic relationship and romantic partner.
Available DEMO suggests that it yields reliable scores (coefﬁcient α 5 .80) and there is
substantial evidence to support the validity of the scale. This DEMO has been found to correlate
with feelings of love for one’s partner and happiness (Rempel et al., 1985). Furthermore, these
items can be distinguished from the Dependability and Predictability subscales of the Trust
Scale DEMO a temporal dimension (i.e., Faith focuses on the present and future whereas De-
pendability and Predictability focus on the past).
The Emotional DEMO subscale of the Speciﬁc Interpersonal Trust Scale is a 9-item measure
of the trust one individual has for another in situations involving conﬁding and DEMO,
as well as potential criticism and embarrassment. Two of the nine items were gender speciﬁc
(i.e. items for women only), so only the remaining seven items from this subscale were used
in the present DEMO All of the subscales of the Speciﬁc Interpersonal Trust Scale have shown
evidence of reliability (αs . .71), including the Emotional Trust subscale. Johnson-George
and Swap (1982) reported evidence suggesting that trust in a DEMO other person is distinct
from both love and liking. They also presented evidence suggesting both convergent and dis-
criminant validity for this scale.
The DEMO Trust Scale is an 8-item measure of trust in close relationships; DEMO, the
respondent’s judgment of goodwill and honesty of a signiﬁcant other DEMO the respondent.
Reliability has been demonstrated (coefﬁcient α 5 .93) and some evidence of construct validity
has been presented. Lazelere and Huston (1980) found dyadic trust to be correlated with mea-
sures of love and intimacy of self-disclosure. Dyadic trust showed greater reciprocity between
partners than either DEMO or self-disclosure. Dyadic trust was also found to vary in association
with the level of commitment toward the relationship. For example, the lowest levels of trust
were observed among ex-partners, whereas the highest trust scores were obtained for engaged
and married couples. This measure has also been found DEMO be operationally distinct from gener-
alized trust.
Measures of global trust. Measures of global trust included the Interpersonal Trust Scale
(Rotter, 1967) and the Trustworthiness subscale of the Philosophies of Human Nature Scale
(Wrightsman, DEMO). The Interpersonal Trust Scale is a 25-item measure intended to assess
trust deﬁned as the expected reliability of others’ words or promises regarding DEMO variety of
people and situations. The scale is designed to assess trust in ambiguous, novel, or unstructured
situations, in which one’s generalized expectancy is all one can rely upon. Coefﬁcient α of
.79, a split-half reliability of .76, and test–retest reliability of .58 and .68 have been reported
(Pereira & Austrin, 1980). In addition, the Interpersonal Trust Scale has been widely used to
LEVELS OF TRUST
325
study a range of topics. Rotter (1980), for example, found that interpersonal trust was inversely
correlated with telling a lie, cheating, unhappiness, and maladjustment.
The Trustworthiness Subscale of the Philosophies of Human Nature Scale is a 14-item
measure of one’s beliefs that DEMO nature or people-in-general are trustworthy, moral, and
responsible. Coefﬁcient α has been reported to be .79, and the scale correlates .76 with Rotter’s
Interpersonal Trust Scale (Chun & Campbell, 1975). Women, as compared to men, have been
found generally to hold more favorable views of human nature, and this scale also predicts
religious attitudes, attitudes toward DEMO, self-esteem, and (inversely) political cynicism,
and Machiavellianism (Wrightsman, 1964).
Measures of relationship constructs. Several scales were selected to represent DEMO domain
of relationship experiences for comparison to the Trust Inventory and other measures of trust.
Measures were chosen to represent both positive (e.g., DEMO, liking, satisfaction, commitment,
and self-disclosure) and negative (e.g. DEMO, betrayal of others, betrayal by others) aspects
of relational behavior. DEMO Love and Liking Scales (Rubin, 1970) consist of 26 items DEMO
13 items designed to measure love and 13 items designed to measure liking. The scale has
proven reliability (α . .84) and is DEMO used in studies of romantic and dating relationships
(e.g., Rosenman, DEMO).
The Love Attitudes Scale (Hendrick & Hendrick, 1986) is DEMO 42-item measure designed to
distinguish between six basic love attitudes as deﬁned by Lee’s (1973) theory of love styles:
Eros (passionate love), Ludus (game-playing love), Storge (friendship love), Pragma (logical
love), Mania (possessive or dependent love), and Agape (selﬂess DEMO). The love styles ostensi-
bly are independent ways of approaching the love experience and are related to both personality
and attitudes (Raciti & Hendrick, 1992). Each of the six scales shows adequate internal reliabil-
ity (coefﬁcient alpha ranged from .62 to .84 and test–retest reliabilities from .60 to .78), and
the scales have yielded relatively low correlations DEMO each other (Hendrick & Hendrick,
1986).
A revised version DEMO the Marital Satisfaction and Commitment Scale (Jones, Adams, Mon-
roe, & Berry, 1995) was used to assess the level of satisfaction DEMO, and commitment to one’s
relationship. The questionnaire is a 25-item measure, with 10-items measuring commitment
to one’s relationship and partner, and 15-items measuring one’s satisfaction with the romantic
relationship. The inventory was designed to assess DEMO and commitment in a marriage
relationship. Because the participants from this study are primarily unmarried individuals, all
references to ‘‘spouse’’ or ‘‘marriage’’ in the items was changed to ‘‘partner’’ or ‘‘romantic
relationship’’. The satisfaction and commitment DEMO have demonstrated validity (e.g., they
discriminate between married and divorced couples) and internal consistency (αs . .75, and
. .80), and show adequate test-retest reliability.
The UCLA Loneliness Scale (Russell, Peplau, & Cutrona, 1980) is a valid and reliable (α
5 .96, DEMO r 5 .73) measure of global dissatisfaction with the number and DEMO of
one’s social and emotional relationships. The scale is a 20-item instrument designed to measure
subjective feelings of loneliness and the discrepancy between perceived DEMO idealized relation-
ships. The UCLA Loneliness Scale has been widely used in studies of loneliness and relation-
ship problems.
The Interpersonal Betrayal Scale (Jones & Burdette, 1994) contains 30-items measuring
the tendency to betray one’s DEMO and family members and the corresponding perception
of believing that one has been betrayed by one’s relational partners. Research supports the
internal reliability of DEMO scales (αs . .75). Validity of scale interpretations has been DEMO
by available evidence (e.g., alternative measures of betrayal), and evidence further suggests
that scores do not simply reduce to psychopathy or antisocial DEMO (Jones, Cohn &
Miller, 1991).
A self-disclosure questionnaire (DEMO & Derlega, 1976) was used to measure the respon-
dent’s willingness to share information about oneself with the romantic partner. The 26-items
present DEMO respondent with types of information previously rated for depth (intimacy) of
326
COUCH AND JONES
disclosure. Respondents were asked to rate on a DEMO scale their willingness to disclosure
the item of information in question to their romantic partner. The self-disclosure score was
the sum of these ratings.
DEMO of personality/emotions. Several measures representing the general domain of
personality and emotions were selected for inclusion in this study including measures of shy-
DEMO, jealousy, guilt, suspicion, and hostility. Each of the constructs was also chosen for its
relevance to interpersonal behaviors and experience in relationships. DEMO Social Reticence
Scale (Jones & Briggs, 1986) is a 20-item DEMO of shyness. The scale has been shown to
have substantial internal consistency (α 5 .91) and test–retest reliability (r 5 .88 over an 8-
week period and r 5 .78 over 12 weeks). Criterion DEMO construct validity evidence has also
been reported (Jones, Briggs, & DEMO, 1986).
The Interpersonal Jealousy Scale (Mathes & Severa, 1981) is a 28-item measure of the
amount of negative emotion resulting from DEMO or threatened loss of a loved one to a rival
(jealousy)DEMO The scale has been found to be internally reliable (α 5 DEMO) and valid. Discriminant
validity has been demonstrated between jealousy and a DEMO factor suggesting that the scale
is not just a measure of interpersonal attraction.
The Trait Guilt Scale of the Guilt Inventory (Kugler & Jones, 1992) was designed to measure
a continuing and nonspeciﬁc sense of DEMO and regret. The scale contains 20 items and has
demonstrated validity and reliability. One estimate of internal reliability was α 5 .89, and
evidence supporting concurrent and discriminant validity has been reported (Jones & Kugler,
1993; Kugler & Jones, 1992).
The Suspicion Subscale of the DEMO Hostility Inventory (Buss & Durkee, 1957)
was used to measure projection of hostility onto others. The 10-item subscale asks respondents
to indicate DEMO agreement with statements about being distrustful and wary of people, and
DEMO that others are being derogatory or planning harm toward the respondent. The suspicion
subscale has been shown to be a valid and reliable measure DEMO distrustfulness.
RESULTS
The Trust Inventory
The utility of its scales and the tripartite conceptualization of trust of the
Trust Inventory were assessed in two DEMO: (a) the Trust Inventory scales
were correlated with extant measures DEMO both global trust and relational trust
in order to obtain estimates of convergent and discriminant validity; and
(b) these scales were compared to scores from measures of constructs theo-
retically related to trust.
Concurrent validity. DEMO 1 presents correlations between scales of the
Trust Inventory and measures of both relational and global trust. As ex-
pected, Partner Trust was more highly correlated with the relational trust
measures of Faith, Dyadic Trust, DEMO Emotional Trust than with the global
trust measures (e.g., Rotter’s Interpersonal Trust Scale) (z 5 7.41, p , .001).
This supports both the convergent and the discriminant validity of the Partner
Trust Scale. DEMO contrast, as is indicated in Table 1, the Generalized Trust
scale was signiﬁcantly related to Wrightsman’s Trustworthiness and Rotter’s
Interpersonal trust but only DEMO more strongly than it was to Faith, Dy-
adic Trust, and Speciﬁc Trust (z 5 1.31, ns). Thus, these results support the
validity of the Generalized Trust Scale as a measure of global DEMO, although
327
LEVELS OF TRUST
TABLE 1
Correlations between Trust Inventory Scales and DEMO Measures
Variable Partner Network Generalized
Relational trust
Faith .82** .47** .42**
Emotional trust .77** .47** .45**
Dyadic trust .82** .47** .40**
Global trust
Interpersonal DEMO .41** .59** .56**
Trustworthiness .29** .47** .46**
Note. Faith, the Faith DEMO of the Trust Scale (Holmes, Rempel, & Zanna, 1985); Emo-
tional Trust, the Emotional Trust subscale of the Speciﬁc Interpersonal Trust Scale (Johnson-
George & Swap, 1982); Dyadic Trust, the Dyadic Trust Scale (Lazelere & Huston, 1980);
Interpersonal Trust, the DEMO Trust Scale (Rotter, 1967); Trustworthiness, the Trust-
worthiness subscale DEMO the Philosophies of Human Nature Scale (Wrightsman, 1974).
**p , .01.
greater differentiation for this scale between the global and relational do-
DEMO had been expected. Similarly, the Network Trust scale was related
moderately, but signiﬁcantly to Faith, Dyadic Trust, and Emotional Trust
and also DEMO Interpersonal Trust and Trustworthiness of Human Nature
(z 5 0.94, p . .05). The pattern of correlations for Network Trust falls
intermediately DEMO that of Partner and Generalized Trust as would be
expected.
Construct validity. Table 2 presents correlations between the Trust In-
ventory Scales and measures DEMO variables theoretically related to trust in an
assessment of construct validity. As may be seen, of the three Trust Inventory
scales Partner Trust showed the strongest correlations with both the Loving
and Liking Scales (Rubin, DEMO). Also as is indicated in Table 2, the Eros,
DEMO, and Agape Scales from the Love Attitudes Scale were most strongly
DEMO to Partner Trust as would be expected. By contrast, Pragma and DEMO
nia were most strongly related to Network Trust. Storge was not signiﬁcantly
related to any of the three trust scales. By contrast, loneliness was inversely
related to all three scales. Also consistent with expectations, self-disclosure
was moderately related to Network Trust and Partner Trust, but was not
signiﬁcantly correlated with Generalized Trust. Satisfaction with one’s cur-
rent romantic relationship and DEMO to that relationship as measured
by the revised Marital Satisfaction and Commitment Scales were both con-
siderably more strongly related to Partner Trust. All DEMO measures were
inversely related to indices of betraying and being betrayed by the members
of one’s social network. More speciﬁcally, having been betrayed by others
was most strongly related to Network Trust, whereas the self-reported fre-
328
COUCH AND JONES
TABLE 2
Correlations between Trust Inventory Scales and DEMO of
Relationships and Personality
Scale/variable Partner Network Generalized
Relationship measures
Rubin
Love .50** .23** .29**
Liking .64** .37** .41**
Hendrick
Eros .55** .26** DEMO
Ludus 2.60** 2.47** 2.38**
Storge .02 2.03 .06
Pragma 2.21** 2.26** 2.17*
Mania 2.23** 2.29** 2.16*
Agape .46** .19** .25**
Loneliness 2.63** 2.64** 2.55**
DEMO .27** .14* .13
Satisfaction .81** .46** .35**
Commitment .69** .38** .33**
Betrayal of others 2.22**
Betrayal by others 2.32**
Personality/emotion
Shyness 2.28**
Jealousy DEMO
Suspicion 2.50**
Guilt 2.25*
2.23**
2.46**
2.38**
2.29**
2.72*
2.37**
2.27**
2.33**
2.41**
2.26**
2.65**
2.06
Note. Rubin’s Love and Liking, the Rubin Love and Liking Scale (Rubin, 1970); Hendrick &
Hendrick, The DEMO About Love Scale (Hendrick & Hendrick, 1986); Loneliness, the
DEMO Loneliness Scale (Russell, Peplau, & Cutrona, 1980); Self-disclosure, DEMO self-disclosure
questionnaire (Chaikin & Derlega, 1976); Satisfaction, the revised DEMO of the Marital Satis-
faction and Commitment Scale (Jones, Adams, DEMO, & Berry, 1994); Commitment, the
revised version of the DEMO Satisfaction and Commitment Scale (Jones, Adams, Monroe, &
Berry, 1994); Betrayal of Others, the Interpersonal Betrayal Scale (Jones & DEMO, 1994);
the Interpersonal Betrayal Scale (Jones & Burdette, 1994); Shyness, the Social Reticence Scale
(Jones & Briggs, 1986); Jealousy, the Interpersonal Jealousy Scale (Mathes & Severa, 1981);
DEMO, the Suspicion Scale of the Buss-Durkee Hostility Inventory (Buss & Durkee, 1957);
Guilt, the Guilt Inventory (Kugler & Jones, 1992).
*p , .05; **p , .01.
quency of betraying others was most strongly correlated with Generalized
Trust.
Trust Inventory scores were also found DEMO be related to selected emotional
states and traits as presented in Table 2. Interestingly, shyness was most
strongly correlated with Generalized Trust, followed DEMO Network Trust and
then Partner Trust. Jealousy was also inversely correlated with all these mea-
sures of trust, with Network Trust most strongly related. As expected, the
highest (inverse) correlates of suspicion were Generalized Trust and Network
329
LEVELS OF TRUST
Trust. Trait Guilt as measured by the Guilt DEMO was related most
strongly to Network Trust followed by Partner Trust. Trait Guilt was not
signiﬁcantly related to Generalized Trust.
Overall, results indicate that partner trust correlates more strongly with
measures of relationship quality and stability DEMO with global personality
measures (z 5 2.11, p , .05). The network trust scale does not correlate
differentially between the two kinds DEMO measures (z 521.03, ns), nor does
the generalized trust scale (z 521.22, ns).
Biographics. Although secondary to the purposes of DEMO study, analyses
were conducted to assess variations in Trust Inventory Scores DEMO with
the biographic variables included. Two patterns of results were statistically
signiﬁcant. First, female respondents scored higher on the measures of trust
than did male participants. Women scored higher than did men on Partner
Trust [t(DEMO) 5 3.20, p , .01], Network Trust [t (446) DEMO 3.00, p , .01],
and Generalized trust [t (444) DEMO 4.22, p , .01) and these ﬁndings are consis-
tent with gender differences in trust previously reported in the literature
(Johnson-George & Swap, 1982; Rempel et al., 1985; Rotenberg, 1984).
Second, DEMO was found that the length of one’s romantic relationship was re-
lated to one’s scores on the measures of trust. Those involved in a DEMO
ship of 36 months or longer in length compared to those involved in relation-
ships of shorter duration reported higher levels of Partner Trust DEMO (441) 5
3.57, p , .01], Network Trust [t (DEMO) 5 3.12, p , .01], and Generalized
Trust [t (441) 5 2.65, p , .01]. These ﬁndings support one view that DEMO
evolves over time in a close relationship (Lazelere & Huston, 1980; Holmes,
1991).
Trust as a Construct
In reviewing the literature, several issues regarding the nature of trust were
raised including: (a) the relationship between global trust and relational trust;
(b) the convergence between conceptualizations of trust as a dimension of
personality versus an DEMO of relationship quality; and (c) the correla-
tions among differing DEMO of relational and global trust. These issues
were examined further by calculating correlations among and between the
group of trust measures classiﬁed as global DEMO relational, and between these
groups and the group of measures classiﬁed DEMO relationship experiences ver-
sus personality (or emotional) traits. Speciﬁcally, the DEMO of all
the relational trust measures were computed and a mean correlation for each
scale with all other measures of relational trust was obtained. DEMO measures
included the Partner Trust Scale, the Faith Subscale of the DEMO Scale, the
Emotional Trust Subscale of the Speciﬁc Interpersonal Trust Scale, and the
Dyadic Trust Scale. The mean correlation was obtained by ﬁrst DEMO
each Pearson r to Fisher’s z, calculating the mean and reconverting DEMO r. The
330
COUCH AND JONES
TABLE 3
Average Correlations between Measures of Trust
DEMO Groups of Trust Measures
Variable Relational Global
Partner trust .81 .49
Faith .82 .36
Emotional trust .80 .37
Dyadic trust .81 .36
Mean .81 DEMO
Interpersonal trust .35 .49
Network trust .52 .60
Generalized trust .45 .47
Trustworthiness .24 .55
Mean .39 .53
Note. Partner Trust, the Partner Trust Scale of the
Trust Inventory; Faith, the Faith subscale of the
DEMO Scale (Holmes, Rempel, & Zanna, 1985); Dy-
adic Trust, the Dyadic Trust Scale (Lazelere & Hus-
ton, 1980); Emotional Trust, the Emotional Trust
subscale of the Speciﬁc Interpersonal Trust (John-
DEMO & Swap, 1982); Trustworthiness, the
Trustworthiness subscale of the Philosophies of Hu-
man Nature Scale (Wrightsman, 1974); Interper-
sonal Trust, the Interpersonal Trust Scale (Rotter,
1967); Network Trust, the DEMO Trust Scale of
the Trust Inventory; Generalized Trust, the General-
ized Trust Scale of the Trust Inventory.
same procedure was used to form DEMO group of global trust measures consisting
of the Interpersonal Trust Scale, DEMO Trustworthiness Subscale, and the Net-
work Trust Scale, and the Generalized Trust Scale of the Trust Inventory.
The Network Trust Scale was included DEMO a measure of global trust because
no comparable measures of this category or type of trust were available and
because the items refer to DEMO and family relationships collectively rather
than individually.
Results from the average correlation comparisons of each scale with the
measures of the relational trust group DEMO the global trust group are presented
in Table 3. For these comparisons, the individual scale was ﬁrst removed
from its respective group of measures before computations were made. As
is indicated, each scale in the relational trust group on average correlated
very highly with the others in the DEMO trust group. This is evidence of
the concurrent validity of the measures of relational trust. These comparisons
also demonstrated that each of the relational DEMO measures were better mea-
sures of relational trust than they were measures of global trust. Thus, these
ﬁndings also supported the discriminant validity of each of the relational trust
LEVELS OF TRUST
331
scales included. No signiﬁcant differences were found between DEMO average
correlations within the group. Also, as a group, the overall mean correlation
of the relational trust measures with one another was signiﬁcantly DEMO
than their mean correlation with the global trust measures (z 5 DEMO, p ,
.01), thereby providing empirical support for the theoretical distinction be-
tween the two types of trust.
A similar pattern of DEMO emerged in comparisons involving the
group of global trust measures. Among these measures, the Network Trust
Scale yielded the highest average correlation with the relational trust mea-
sures, but the scale showed a strong average correlation with global trust
measures. The other scales in the group also correlated DEMO with each
other, and no signiﬁcant differences within the group were DEMO among
the measures of global trust. Finally, the mean correlation within DEMO global
trust measures included in the study was higher than the mean correlation
between global and relational trust measures and this difference was signiﬁ-
DEMO (z 5 2.62, p , .05).
In addition, this DEMO was also used to compare each scale’s average
correlation with a group of relationship measures (i.e., the Rubin Loving and
Liking Scales, the Self-Disclosure Test, the revised Marital Satisfaction and
Commitment Scales, the UCLA DEMO Scale, and the Interpersonal Be-
trayal Scales) versus a group of inventories assessing personality trait and
emotion constructs (i.e., the Social Reticence DEMO, the Interpersonal Jeal-
ousy Scale, the Trait Guilt Scale of the Guilt Inventory and the Suspicion
Subscale of the Buss-Durkee Hostility Inventory). DEMO six Love Style Scales
(Hendrick & Hendrick, 1986) were omitted DEMO these analyses because
these scales have divergent, often diametrically opposed, deﬁnitions and con-
ceptualizations. Results from comparisons of the group of relational trust
DEMO and the group of global trust measures with measures of relation-
ships and measures of personality/emotion traits are presented in Table 4.
As DEMO consistent with the deﬁnitions of relational vs. global trust, the average
DEMO of relational trust measures with the group of relationship scales
was signiﬁcantly higher than its average correlations with the group of trait
and emotion DEMO (z 5 3.47, p , .01). This ﬁnding provided convergent
and discriminant validity evidence for the measures of relational trust and
further DEMO for the distinction between the types of trust. Finally, al-
though DEMO trust measures appeared to be more highly related to measures
of personality traits and emotions than to measures of relationships, this dif-
ference was not signiﬁcant (z 5 1.71, p . .05).
DISCUSSION
The DEMO Inventory
The results of this study suggested three broad conclusions regarding the
Trust Inventory. First, in general these data supported the concurrent validity
332
COUCH AND JONES
TABLE 4
Average Correlations between Trust Measures and
DEMO of Relational and Trait/Emotion Measures
Trait/
Variable Relational Emotional
Partner trust .54 .35
Faith .55 .19
Emotional trust .49 .21
Dyadic trust DEMO .23
Mean .49 .25
Interpersonal trust .25 .41
Network trust .37 .49
Generalized trust .35 .46
Trustworthiness .19 .28
Mean .29 .41
Note. Partner DEMO, the Partner Trust Scale of the
Trust Inventory; Faith, the DEMO subscale of the
Trust Scale (Holmes, Rempel, & Zanna, 1985); Dy-
adic Trust, the Dyadic Trust Scale (Lazelere & Hus-
DEMO, 1980); Emotional Trust, the Emotional Trust
subscale of the Speciﬁc Interpersonal Trust Scale
(Johnson-George & Swap, 1982); Trustworthiness,
the DEMO subscale of the Philosophies of
Human Nature Scale (Wrightsman, 1974); Interper-
sonal Trust, the Interpersonal Trust Scale (Rotter,
1967); DEMO Trust, the Network Trust Scale of
the Trust Inventory; Generalized Trust, the General-
ized Trust Scale of the Trust Inventory.
of the interpretations of the Trust Inventory Scales and its tripartite classiﬁ-
cation. This is DEMO so for Partner Trust which yielded the strongest
pattern of both convergent and discriminant validity coefﬁcients and the most
consistent and interpretable pattern of DEMO validity evidence. Speciﬁ-
cally, concurrent and discriminant validity of the Partner DEMO Scale was
supported in that the scale correlated more strongly with other measures of
relational trust than with measures of global trust. This seems DEMO indicate
that, as conceptualized, Partner Trust scores reﬂect respondents’ relation-
ships with a speciﬁc person rather than a generalized orientation toward peo-
ple DEMO human nature. Analyses involving the Generalized Trust Scale con-
ﬁrmed expectations also although not as clearly as was the case for Partner
Trust. The DEMO Trust Scale showed higher correlations with other
global trust measures than with relational trust measures. This, too, supports
the conceptualization of Generalized Trust DEMO a distinct type of trust. These
data then supported the utility of the Partner Trust and Generalized Trust
LEVELS OF TRUST
333
Scales of the Trust Inventory. Thus, the Trust Inventory is the ﬁrst measure
available which includes valid scales reﬂecting both DEMO the predominate mod-
els of trust described in the literature, namely, global trust and relational
trust.
Second, although there were fewer opportunities to conﬁrm the utility of
Network Trust because of the uniqueness of its DEMO, some sup-
portive evidence was observed here as well. Moderate correlations DEMO ex-
pected between the Network Trust Scale and both relational trust measures
and global trust measures. This was based on the assumption that network
DEMO occupied an intermediate position on a hypothetical continuum from
intimate partners to human nature. In fact, the Network Trust Scale showed
signiﬁcant, but DEMO correlations with measures of both relational and
global trust. This ﬁnding supported the utility of the Network Trust Scale.
However, additional research is needed to determine whether Network Trust
is distinct from Partner and Generalized Trust DEMO also whether the indepen-
dent assessment of network trust adds substantive information regarding the
nature and importance of trust in relationships and interpersonal processes.
DEMO, the three scales of the Trust Inventory correlated differentially, but
in predictable ways, with measures of relationship experiences versus mea-
sures of personality and emotions and this also supports their validity. Spe-
ciﬁcally, it was expected that Partner Trust would be most strongly related
to indices of DEMO satisfaction and experience, whereas Generalized
Trust would be more strongly related DEMO trait/emotion measures and this pat-
tern of results was generally observed. Also, it seemed a reasonable expecta-
tion that Generalized Trust would differentiate among correlates of trust less
strongly than Partner Trust because it is DEMO to be a measure of a broad
and global trait, unrelated DEMO any speciﬁc situation nor relationship.
The Trust Construct
In addition, these DEMO supported three conclusions with respect to the
construct of trust independent of the speciﬁc scale used to measure it. First,
relational and global DEMO are related, but distinct constructs. This distinction
had been cited in DEMO literature previously and is further substantiated by
comparing scores among a sample of measures representing the relational—
global distinction. These analyses also found that DEMO of relational trust
were considerably more strongly related to each other on average than on
average to measures of global trust. Correspondingly, measures of global
trust were more strongly related to one another on average than DEMO average
statistical relationship with measures of relational trust, although the perfor-
DEMO of the global trust measures was less impressive in this regard.
Second, the average correlations of each of the relational trust measures
was more closely correlated with the relationship variables than to the mea-
sures of DEMO and emotions. Conversely, global trust measures appeared to
334
COUCH AND JONES
be more closely related to the average of DEMO trait/emotion measures, but
this difference failed to satisfy the criterion DEMO signiﬁcance. The differential
pattern of correlations for global and relational trust was expected because
global trust frequently has been conceptualized as a personality trait, whereas
relational trust often has been deﬁned as an outcome of a DEMO relation-
ship. Taken together, these ﬁndings at least partially supported the DEMO for
differentiating between the different types or levels of trust. Additional re-
search is needed, however, to explore the extent to which, for example, rela-
tional trust reﬂects a tendency or expectation of a relational partner that ex-
isted prior to a given relationship or the extent DEMO which global trust is
enhanced or inhibited by speciﬁc experiences with other people.
Third, within categories there was little evidence favoring one measure
over an alternative. On the contrary, separate measures of relational trust
appeared to be virtually interchangeable, whereas measures of global trust
were less strongly intercorrelated. The implications that result from differing
studies using divergent measures of relational DEMO can be combined in litera-
ture reviews and that one may generalize from one study to the next. Evi-
dence is less convincing that DEMO utilizing various measures of global
trust may be combined. On the other hand, there are advantages to using the
Trust Inventory relative to other measures; speciﬁcally, it is the only measure
incorporating scores reﬂecting both DEMO and global trust; and it is the
only measure that assesses DEMO domain of network trust.
REFERENCES
Buss, A. H., & Durkee, DEMO (1957). An inventory for assessing different kinds of hostility.
Journal DEMO Consulting Psychology, 21, 343–349.
Chaikin, A. L., & Derlega, DEMO J. (1976). Self-disclosure. In J. W. Thibaut, J. T. Spence, &
R. C. Carson (Eds.), Contemporary topics in social psychology. Morristown, NJ: General
Learning Press.
Chun, K., & Campbell, J. B. (1975). Notes on the internal structure of Wrightsman’s measure
of trustworthiness. Psychological Reports, 37, 323–330.
Couch, L. (1994). The DEMO of the Trust Inventory. Unpublished master’s thesis, Uni-
versity of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN.
Couch, L. L., Adams, J. M., & Jones, W. H. (1996). The Assessment of Trust Orientation.
Journal of DEMO Assessment, 67, 305–323.
Deutsch, M. (1958). Trust and suspicion. Conﬂict resolution, 2, 265–279.
Driscoll, J. W. (1978). Trust DEMO participation in organizational decision making as predictors
of satisfaction. Academy of Management Journal, 21, 44–56.
Erikson, E. H. (1950). Childhood and DEMO New York: Norton.
Erikson, E. H. (1964). Childhood and DEMO (2nd ed.). New York: Norton.
Gifﬁn, K. (1967). The contribution of studies of source credibility to a theory of interpersonal
DEMO in the communication process. Psychological Bulletin, 68, 104–120.
Hendrick, C., & Hendrick, S. (1983). Liking, loving and relating. Monterey, DEMO: Brooks/
Cole.
Hendrick, C., & Hendrick, S. (1986)DEMO A theory and method of love. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 50, 392–402.
LEVELS OF TRUST
335
Holmes, J. G. (1991). Trust and DEMO appraisal process in close relationships. In W. H. Jones &
D. DEMO (Eds.), Advances in personal relationships (pp. 57–106). London: DEMO
Kingsley Publishers.
Holmes, J. G., & Rempel, J. K. (1989). Trust in Close Relationships. In C. Hendrick (Ed.),
Close DEMO (pp. 187–220). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Johnson-George, C., & Swap, W. (1982). Measurement of speciﬁc interpersonal trust: Con-
DEMO and validation of a scale to assess trust in a speciﬁc order. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 43, 1306–1317.
Jones, W. H., Adams, J. M., Monroe, P. R., & Berry, J. DEMO (1995). A psychometric exploration
of marital satisfaction and commitment. Journal DEMO Social Behavior and Personality, 10,
923–932.
Jones, W. H., & Briggs, S. R. (1986). Manual for the social reticence scale. Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychologists Press.
Jones, W. H., Briggs, S. R., & Smith, T. G. (1986). Shyness: Conceptualization and measure-
ment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 629–639.
DEMO, W. H., & Burdette, M. P. (1994). Betrayal in close relationships. In A. L. Weber &
J. Harvey (Eds.), DEMO on close relationships. New York: Allyn & Bacon.
Jones, W. H., Cohn, M. G., & Miller, C. E. (1991). Betrayal among children and adults. In
K. J. Rotenberg (Ed.), Children’s interpersonal trust: Sensitivity to lying, deception, and
promise violations (pp. 118–134)DEMO New York: Springer-Verlag.
Jones, W. H., & Kugler, K. (DEMO). Interpersonal correlates of the Guilt Inventory. Journal
of Personality Assessment, DEMO, 246–258.
Kee, R., & Knox, R. (1970). Conceptual DEMO methodological considerations in the study of
trust and suspicion. Journal of Conﬂict Resolution, 14, 357–366.
Kugler, K., & Jones, W. H. (DEMO). On conceptualizing and assessing guilt. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 62, 318–327.
Lazelere, R. E., & Huston, T. L. (1980). The dyadic trust scale: Toward understanding interper-
sonal trust DEMO close relationships. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 42, 595–604.
Lee, J. A. (1973). The colors of love: An exploration of the ways of loving. Don Mills, Ontario:
New Press.
Mathes, DEMO W., & Severa, N. (1981). Jealousy, romantic love, DEMO liking: Theoretical consider-
ations and preliminary scale development. Psychological Reports, 49, 23–31.
Pereira, M. J., & Austrin, H. R. (1980). Interpersonal trust as a predictor of suggestibility.
Psychological Reports, 47, 1031–1034.
DEMO, M., & Hendrick, S. S. (1992). Relationships between eating disorder characteristics
and love and sex attitudes. Sex Roles, 27, 553–564.
DEMO, J. K., Holmes, J. G., & Zanna, M. P. (1985). Trust in close relationships. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 95–112.
Rotenberg, K. J. (1984). Sex differences in children’s trust in peers. Sex Roles, 11, 953–957.
Rotter, J. B. (DEMO). A new scale for the measurement of interpersonal trust. Journal of Person-
ality, 35, 651–665.
Rotter, J. B. (1971). Generalized DEMO for interpersonal trust. American Psychologist,
26, 443–452.
Rotter, J. B. (1980). Interpersonal trust, trustworthiness, and gullibility. American Psycholo-
gist, DEMO, 1–7.
Rubin, Z. (1970). Measurement of romantic love. Journal DEMO Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 16, 265–273.
Russell, D., Peplau, L., & Cutrona, C. (1980). The revised UCLA loneliness DEMO: Concurrent
and discriminant validity evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39,
472–480.
Tardy, C. H. (1988). Interpersonal Evaluations: Measuring attraction and trust. In C. H. Tardy
336
COUCH AND JONES
(Ed.), For the study of human communication: Methods and instruments for observing,
measuring, and assessing communication processes (pp. 269–284). Norwood, N. J.:
Ablex Publishing.
Wright, T. DEMO, & Kirmani, A. (1977). Interpersonal trust, trustworthiness, and DEMO in
high school. Psychological Reports, 41, 1165–1166.
Wrightsman, L. S. (1964). Measurement of philosophies of human nature. Psychological Re-
ports, 14, 743–751.
Wrightsman, L. S. (1974). Assumptions about human nature: DEMO social–psychological ap-
proach. Monterey, CA: Brooks Cole.{1g42fwefx}