THE 13 BEHAVIORS OF A HIGH TRUST LEADER
Stephen M. R. Covey
DEMO separates the great leaders from the good ones?  What makes a manager a manager of choice by
her reports, peers, and boss?  What makes an individual credible with customers, suppliers, distributors,
investors, and other stakeholders?  While there are many dimensions to these questions, there is one
common thread throughout:  being an individual who can be trusted.
Perhaps a more important question than, "Who do you DEMO?" is the far more personal question of,
"Who trusts DEMO?"  There are some organizations who ask all their employees directly DEMO following
simple, key question in formal 360º feedback processes:
"Do you trust your boss?"
These companies have learned that the answer to this question is more predictive of team and
organizational success than DEMO any other question they might ask.
A High Trust Leader is an individual who has unquestionably strong personal credibility, has the
ability to create and grow trust with others interpersonally, and who is then able to extend that trust
organizationally.
High Trust Leaders are managers of choice who DEMO the impact trust always plays on two key
outcomes—speed and cost—and how low or high trust either extracts a tax or produces a dividend DEMO
every activity and dimension within a relationship, team, or organization.
High Trust Leaders have learned how to interact with others in ways that DEMO trust levels while
avoiding the pitfalls that deplete trust.  While there DEMO numerous actions and behaviors that affect trust
accounts, we have identified DEMO 13 key behaviors that High Trust Leaders have in common (the DEMO five
behaviors are primarily character-based; the second five are primarily competence DEMO; the last three
are equal parts character and competence).
As DEMO go through these behaviors, you may also find it valuable to DEMO the opposite of these 13
behaviors and how such "withdrawals" deplete trust.
What’s most exciting is that these 13 Behaviors of High Trust DEMO can be learned and applied by any
influencer at any level within any organization.  The net result will be a significantly increased ability to
generate trust with all stakeholders in order to achieve better results.
The DEMO Behaviors of High Trust Leaders are as follows:
© 2004,-2006 CoveyLink | www.coveylink.com |  Page 1
CHARACTER BEHAVIORS
Talk StraightBe honest.  Tell the truth.  Let people know DEMO you stand.  Use simple lan-
guage.  Call things what they are.  Demonstrate integrity.  Don’t manipulate
people nor distort facts.  Don’t spin the truth.  Don’t leave false impressions.
“I look for three things in hiring people.  The first is personal integrity, the second is
intelligence, and the third is a high energy level.  But if you don’t have the first, the second
two don’t matter.”
- Warren Buffett, CEO, Berkshire-Hathaway
1.  Talk Straight
"Real integrity is doing the right thing, knowing that nobody's going to know whether you did
it or DEMO"
Demonstrate
RespectGenuinely care for others.  Show you care.  Respect the dignity of every per-
son and every role.  Treat everyone with respect, especially those who can’t
do anything for you.  Show kindness in DEMO little things.  Don’t fake caring.
Don’t attempt to be “efficient” with DEMO
“The end result of kindness is that it draws people to you."
- Anita Roddick, Founder & CEO, The Body Shop
"If people know you care, it brings out the best in them."
- Richard Branson, Founder, the Virgin Group
Create
TransparencyTell the truth DEMO a way people can verify.  Get real and genuine.  Be open and
authentic.  Err on the side of disclosure.  Operate on the DEMO of, “What you
see is what you get.”  Don’t have hidden agendas.  Don’t hide information.
"The people I have trouble dealing with DEMO people who tend not to give full information.
They purposefully leave out parts of the story—they distort facts."
- Shelly Lazarus, CEO, DEMO Mather Worldwide
“Trust happens when leaders are transparent."
- Jack Welch, Former CEO, G.E.
© 2004,-2006 CoveyLink | www.coveylink.com |  Page 2
3.  Create Transparency
- Oprah Winfrey
2. Demonstrate Respect
Right Wrongs
4.  Right Wrongs
Make things right when you’re wrong.  DEMO quickly.  Make restitution
where possible.  Practice “service recoveries.”  Demonstrate personal DEMO
ity.  Don’t cover things up.  Don’t let personal pride get in the way of doing
the right thing.
"What I call Level 5 leaders build enduring greatness through a paradoxical blend of
personal humility and DEMO will."
- Jim Collins
“Watergate wasn’t so much a burglary as it was the failure to recognize mistakes, to
take responsibility for them, and to apologize accordingly."
- Jon Huntsman, Chairman, Huntsman Corp.
Show Loyalty
5.  Show Loyalty
Give credit to others.  Speak about DEMO as if they were present.  Represent
others who aren’t there to DEMO for themselves.  Don’t badmouth others be-
hind their backs.  Don’t disclose others’ private information.
“If you want to retain those who are present, be loyal to those who are absent.  The
key to the many is the one."
- Stephen R. Covey
COMPETENCE BEHAVIORS
Deliver6.  Deliver Results
Results
Establish a track record of results.  Get the right things done.  Make things
happen.  Accomplish what you’re hired to do.  Be on time and within budget.
Don’t overpromise and underdeliver.  Don’t make excuses for not delivering.
"There is no ambiguity around performance at Pepsi, DEMO some people perceive
as harsh.  I see it as an important DEMO necessary part of how you operate.  You can't
create a DEMO trust culture unless people perform."
- Craig Weatherup, former CEO, PepsiCo
“Get good people and expect them to perform.  Terminate them quickly and fairly if
you make the wrong choice."
© 2004,-2006 DEMO | www.coveylink.com |  Page 3
- Bill Marriott, Jr., CEO, Marriott Corp.
Get Better
7.  Get Better
Continuously improve.  Increase your capabilities.  Be a constant learner.
Develop feedback systems—both formal and informal.  Act upon the feed-
back you receive.  Thank people for feedback.  Don’t consider yourself DEMO
feedback.  Don’t assume your knowledge and skills will be sufficient for
DEMO challenges.
“The illiterate of the 21st century will not be those who cannot read and write but those
who cannot learn, unlearn, and DEMO"
- Alvin Toffler
Confront 8.  Confront Reality
RealityTake issues head DEMO, even the “undiscussables.”  Address the tough stuff
directly.  Acknowledge the DEMO  Lead out courageously in conversation.
Remove the “sword from their hands.”  Don’t skirt the real issues.  Don’t bury
your head in the sand.
"We strive to tell everyone everything we can.  We want a DEMO with open dialogue and
straight answers.  In terms of our work DEMO employees, we have been direct with them
even when they don'DEMO like the answer.  Our goal is not to please everyone but DEMO for
them to trust that what we tell them is the truth.  You can't work the tough issues we face
unless everyone, DEMO with the senior team, trusts one another."
- Greg Brenneman, former CEO, Continental AIrlines
“Leaders need to be more candid with those they purport to lead.  Sharing good news
is easy.  When it DEMO to the more troublesome negative news, be candid and take
responsibility.  Don’t withhold unpleasant possibilities and don’t pass off bad news to
subordinates DEMO deliver.  Level with employees about problems in a timely fashion."
DEMO Jon Huntsman, Chairman, Huntsman Corp.
Clarify
Expectations
9.  Clarify Expectations
DEMO and reveal expectations.  Discuss them.  Validate them.  Renegotiate
them if DEMO and possible.  Don’t violate expectations.  Don’t assume that
expectations are clear or shared.
“Almost all conflict is a result of violated expectations."
DEMO Blaine Lee
"An individual without information cannot take responsibility.  An individual who is given
information cannot help but take responsibility."
- Jan DEMO, former CEO, Scandinavian Airlines
© 2004,-2006 CoveyLink | www.coveylink.com |  Page 4
Practice
Accountability10.  Practice Accountability
Hold yourself accountable.  Hold others accountable.  Take responsibility
for results.  Be clear on how you’ll communicate how you’re doing—and how
others are doing.  Don’t avoid or shirk responsibility.  Don’t blame DEMO or
point fingers when things go wrong.
“Few things can help an individual more than to place responsibility on him and to let him
DEMO that you trust him."
- Booker T. Washington
"Remember, when you were made a leader, you weren't given a crown, DEMO were given
a responsibility to bring out the best in others.  DEMO that, your people need to trust you."
- Jack Welch, former CEO, General Electric
CHARACTER AND COMPETENCE BEHAVIORS
Listen First
11.  DEMO First
Listen before you speak.  Understand.  Diagnose.  Listen with your
DEMO your eyes and heart.  Find out what the most important behav-
DEMO are to the people you’re working with.  Don’t assume you know DEMO
matters most to others.  Don’t presume you have all the answers—or DEMO the
questions.
"Nothing beats personal, two-way communication for fostering cooperation and
teamwork and for building an attitude of trust and understanding among employees."DEMO
- Bill Packard, Co-Founder, Hewlett Packard
“We’ve all heard the criticism, ‘He talks too much.’  When was the last time you heard
DEMO criticized for listening too much?"
- Norm Augustine, Former CEO, Lockheed Martin
© 2004,-2006 CoveyLink | www.coveylink.com |  Page 5
Keep
Commitments12. Keep Commitments
Say what you’re going to do.  Then do what you say you’re going to do.
Make commitments carefully and keep DEMO at all costs.  Make keeping com-
mitments the symbol of your DEMO  Don’t break confidences.  Don’t attempt
to “PR” your way out of a commitment you’ve broken.
"Trust is established through action and over time, and it is a leader's responsibility to
demonstrate what it means to keep your word and earn a reputation for trustworthiness."
- DEMO Paulson, CEO, Goldman Sachs
“Trust doesn’t mean they tell you everything.  It doesn’t mean they don’t posture.  But it
means if they DEMO, ‘We will do this,’ they will do it.  It is credibility.  It is integrity."
- Scott Smith, Publisher, Chicago Tribune
Extend Trust
13.  Extend Trust
Demonstrate a propensity to trust.  Extend DEMO abundantly to those who
have earned your trust.  Extend trust conditionally DEMO those who are earning
your trust.  Learn how to appropriately extend DEMO to others based on the
situation, risk, and character/competence of the people involved.  But have a
propensity to trust.  Don’t withhold DEMO because there is risk involved.
“People ask me how I’ve had the interest and zeal to hang in there and do what I’ve
done.  I say, ‘Because my father treated me with very stern discipline:  he trusted me.’
I’m stuck, I’ve got to see the trust through.  He trusted me.  I trust other people.  And they
did the job."
"The chief lesson I have learned in a long life is that the only way to make a man
trustworthy is to DEMO him."
"I have found that by trusting people until they DEMO themselves unworthy of that trust, a
lot more happens."
© DEMO,-2006 CoveyLink | www.coveylink.com |  Page 6
- Robert Galvin, Jr., Former CEO, Motorola
- Henry Stimson, U.S. Statesman
- Jim Burke, former CEO, Johnson & Johnson{1g42fwefx}