Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
www.elsevier.com/locate/geb
How DEMO identify trust and reciprocity
JamesC.Cox
Department of Economics, 401 McClelland Hall, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0108, USA
Received 12 April 2001
Abstract
This paper uses a three-games (or triadic) design to identify DEMO and reciprocating behavior.
A large literature on single-game trust and reciprocity experiments is based on the implicit
assumption that subjects do not have altruistic DEMO inequality-averse other-regarding preferences. Such
experimental designs test compound hypotheses that include the hypothesis that other-regarding
preferences do not affect behavior. In contrast, experiments with the triadic design do discriminate
between transfers resulting from trust or reciprocity DEMO transfers resulting from other-regarding
preferences that are not conditional on the behavior of others. Decomposing trust from altruism and
reciprocity from altruism or inequality DEMO is critical to obtaining empirical information that can
guide the process of constructing models that can increase the empirical validity of game theory.
 DEMO Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
JEL classiﬁcation: C70; C91; D63; D64
Keywords: Experimental economics; Game theory; Trust; Reciprocity; Altruism
1. Introduction
In their seminal work on game theory, von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944, 1947)
thought it necessary to simultaneously develop a theory DEMO utility and a theory of play for
strategic games. In contrast, DEMO subsequent development of game theory has focused on
analyzing the play of games to the exclusion of utility theory. In the absence of a DEMO
by game theorists on utility theory, it is understandable that experimentalists DEMO the
theory’s predictions have typically assumed that agents’ utilities are afﬁne transformations
of (only) their own monetary payoffs in the games. This interpretation DEMO game theory
incorporates the assumptions that agents do not care about others’ (relative or absolute)
E-mail address: jcox@eller.arizona.edu.
0899-8256/$ – see DEMO matter  2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0899-8256(03)00119-2
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281 261
DEMO payoffs or about their intentions. There is a large experimental literature based
on this special-case interpretation of the theory, which I shall subsequently refer to as the
model of “self-regarding preferences.” The part of the literature DEMO with public
goods experiments and trust and reciprocity experiments has produced replicable patterns
of inconsistency with predictions of the model of self-regarding preferences. For DEMO,
the patterns of behavior that have been observed in one-shot trust and reciprocity games
are inconsistent with the subgame perfect equilibria of that DEMO But this does not imply
that the observed behavior is inconsistent with game theory, which is a point that has not
generally been recognized in the literature.
In one prominent research program, the central empirical question has been posed
as a contest between game theory and alternative theories DEMO on ideas of cultural or
biological evolution.1 For example, McCabe et DEMO (1998) pose the question as follows:
Our objective is to examine game theoretic hypotheses of decision making based on
dominance and backward DEMO in comparison with the culturally or biologically
derived hypothesis that reciprocity supports more cooperation than predicted by game
theory (p. 10)...
and state their conclusion as
Contrary to noncooperative game theory, but consistent with the reciprocity hypothesis,
many subjects achieve the symmetric joint maximum under the DEMO play anonymous
interaction conditions that are expected to give game theory its best shot (p. 22).
Another distinguished research program has focused on inconsistencies between the
predictions of principal-agent theory and behavior in experimental labor DEMO For
example, Fehr et al. (1997, p. 856) conclude that
Our results indicate, however, that the neglect of reciprocity may render DEMO agent
models seriously incomplete. As a consequence it may limit their predictive power.
Moreover, the normative conclusions that follow from models that neglect reciprocity
may not be correct.
Widely-disseminated conclusions about robust observations of trust and DEMO
have motivated developments of utility theory intended to improve the empirical validity
of game theory. For example, Rabin (1993) and Dufwenberg and Kirchsteiger (2001)
have developed models that incorporate perceptions of others’ intentions into the utilities
of game players. In contrast, Levine (1998), Fehr DEMO Schmidt (1999), and Bolton and
Ockenfels (2000) have developed DEMO that incorporate other-regarding preferences (or
fairness) into game players’ utilities. Models that incorporate both intentions and fairness
1 The research program includes the DEMO papers: Berg et al. (1995), Hoffman et al. (1994, 1996, 1998),
McCabe et al. (1996, 1998), and DEMO (1998).
2 The research program includes the following papers: Fehr and Falk (1999), Fehr and Gächter (2000a, 2000b),
DEMO et al. (1993, 1996, 1997).
262 J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
DEMO been developed by Falk and Fischbacher (1999), Charness and Rabin (forthcoming),
and Cox and Friedman (2002). But there is DEMO problem with the widely-disseminated
conclusions about behavior that are motivating these theory developments: the conclusions
are not all supported by the experimental designs that generated the data.
The present paper re-examines some central questions in the DEMO on trust and
reciprocity. It speciﬁcally questions the widely-accepted conclusion stated in a recent
survey article by Fehr and Gächter (2000b, p. 162):
Positive reciprocity has been documented in many trust or gift exchange DEMO (for
example, Fehr et al., 1993; Berg et al., DEMO; McCabe et al., 1996).
The conclusion that positive reciprocity is “documented” by data showing that many
proposers send, and responders give back money in trust and gift exchange games is not
supported by the DEMO designs in the cited papers. The source of the difﬁculty is
that the single-game experimental designs used to generate the data in these experiments
DEMO not discriminate between actions motivated by trust or reciprocity and actions motivated
by other-regarding preferences characterized by altruism or inequality aversion that is not
DEMO on the behavior of others. In the present paper, a triadic DEMO design
is used to discriminate between transfers resulting from trust or reciprocity and transfers
resulting from other-regarding preferences that are not conditional on the DEMO of
another. This discrimination is based on dictator games that give a ﬁrst or “second mover”
the same feasible choices as in the original DEMO but eliminate the possible effects of the
(observed or anticipated) actions of the other agent. Being able to discriminate between
the implications of DEMO other-regarding preferences and trust or reciprocity is
important to obtaining the empirical information that can guide the process of formulating
a theory of utility DEMO can increase the empirical validity of game theory.
2. Deﬁnitions
Interpretations of data in this paper will be based on the following deﬁnitions.
Preferences DEMO one’s own and others’ material payoffs will be referred to as “other-
regarding preferences.” Such preferences can be altruistic (Andreoni and Miller, 2002; Cox
et al., 2002), inequality-averse (Bolton and Ockenfels, 2000; DEMO and Schmidt, 1999),
quasi-maximin (Charness and Rabin, forthcoming), or possibly even malevolent. They
involve ideas of the fairness of outcomes. DEMO yk and yj denote the money payoffs of
agents k and j . Assume that agent k ’s preferences can be represented by a DEMO function.
Then agent k has other-regarding preferences for the income of agent j if his or her utility
function, uk (yk ,yj ) is not a constant function of yj .
It is important to DEMO between actions motivated by reciprocity and actions
motivated by conventional other-regarding preferences that are not conditional on the
actions or intentions of others because DEMO have different implications for game-theoretic
modeling. The concept of positive reciprocity used in this paper is deﬁned as follows.
“Positive reciprocity” is a motivation DEMO repay generous or helpful actions of another
by adopting actions that are generous or helpful to the other person. An action that is
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
263
DEMO reciprocal is a generous action that is adopted in response to a generous action
by another. Thus, positively reciprocal behavior is conditional kindness that is distinct
from the unconditional kindness motivated by altruism. An individual who DEMO in a
reciprocal way makes decisions that can be modeled with other-regarding preferences that
are conditional on the perceived intentions behind the actions of DEMO, as in Section 4 and
Appendix A.
Suppose that the ﬁrst DEMO in an extensive form game chooses an action that beneﬁts
the second mover. Further suppose that, subsequently, the second mover adopts an action
DEMO beneﬁts the ﬁrst mover. Is the second mover’s action motivated by reciprocity
or unconditional other-regarding preferences characterized by altruism or inequality
aversion? Section 5 explains how the triadic experimental design discriminates between
reciprocity and unconditional other-regarding DEMO as explanations for generous
second-mover actions.
“Trust” is inherently a matter of the beliefs that one agent has about the behavior of
another. An DEMO that is trusting of another is one that creates the possibility of mutual
beneﬁt, if the other person is cooperative, and the risk DEMO loss to oneself if the other person
defects. If the ﬁrst mover in an extensive form game believes that the second mover may
have DEMO preferences, or be motivated by positive reciprocity, then the ﬁrst
mover may make an efﬁciency-increasing transfer to the second mover. The ﬁrst mover
DEMO do this, even if he himself has self-regarding preferences, when he believes that the
second mover is unlikely to defect, that is, DEMO he trusts the second mover.
Suppose that the ﬁrst mover in an extensive form game chooses an action that beneﬁts
the second mover. Does DEMO ﬁrst mover do this because she trusts that the second mover
will not defect? Or would she do it anyway because she has other-regarding preferences in
which the pair of payoffs created by her action is DEMO to the pair of payoffs determined
by the two players’ endowments? DEMO 5 explains how the triadic experimental design
discriminates between trust and other-regarding preferences as explanations for generous
ﬁrst-mover actions.
The experimental design described in DEMO 4 involves game triads that include the
investment game introduced by Berg et al. (1995) and later used by several other authors.
3. DEMO investment game
The Berg, Dickhaut, and McCabe experimental design for the investment game is as
follows. Subjects are divided into two groups, the room A group and the room B group.
Each individual subject in DEMO group is given ten $1 bills. Each subject in room B is
instructed to keep his or her $10. The subjects in room A DEMO informed that each of them,
individually, can transfer to an DEMO paired person in room B any integer number of
their own ten $1 bills, from 0 to all 10, and keep the remainder. DEMO amount transferred by
a room A subject is multiplied by 3 by the experimenter before being delivered to a room
B subject. Then each DEMO B subject is given the opportunity to return part, all, or none of
the tripled amount of the transfer he or she received DEMO the anonymous paired person in
room A.
264 J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
DEMO one assumes that subjects have self-regarding preferences, then game theory predicts
DEMO:
(i) room B subjects will keep all of any tripled amounts transferred by room A subjects
because room B subjects prefer more DEMO to less; and
(ii) knowing this, room A subjects will not transfer any positive amount.
This subgame perfect equilibrium allocation of the DEMO of self-regarding preferences
is Pareto-inferior to some alternative feasible allocations because it leaves each pair of
subjects with $20 when it could have ended DEMO with as much as $40.
Results from investment-game experiments reported by Berg, Dickhaut, and McCabe
were that the average amount transferred by room DEMO subjects was $5.16 and the average
amount returned by room B subjects was $4.66. When data from this experiment were
provided to subjects in DEMO subsequent experiment (the “social history” treatment), the
average amount transferred DEMO room A subjects was $5.36 and the average amount returned
was $6.46. There was large variability across subjects in the amounts transferred and
returned. DEMO experiments reported by Berg, Dickhaut, and McCabe used a “double
blind” protocol in which subjects’ responses were anonymous to other subjects and the
DEMO
Note what is measured by these experiments. A room A subject may be willing to
transfer money to a room B person if he DEMO that some of the tripled amount transferred
will be returned. Further, DEMO room B subject may be willing to return part of the tripled
amount transferred if she is motivated by positive reciprocity. But a room DEMO subject may
be willing to make a transfer to a paired subject in room B even if there is no opportunity for
the latter DEMO return anything. The Berg, Dickhaut, and McCabe experimental design does
not allow one to distinguish between transfers resulting from trust and transfers resulting
DEMO altruistic other-regarding preferences. Similarly, their design does not provide data
that DEMO between second-mover return transfers motivated by reciprocity and
returns resulting from unconditional other-regarding preferences. The experimental design
used in the present paper makes it DEMO to discriminate among transfers motivated by
trust, reciprocity, and unconditional other-regarding preferences.
4. Experimental design and procedures
The experiment involves three treatments implemented DEMO an across-subjects design.
Treatment A is the investment game. Each individual in the second-mover group is credited
with a $10 endowment. Each individual in DEMO ﬁrst-mover group is credited with a $10
endowment and given the task of deciding whether she wants to transfer to a paired
individual in DEMO other group none, some, or all of her $10. Any amounts transferred are
tripled by the experimenter. Then each individual in the second-mover DEMO is given the
task of deciding whether he wants to return some, all, or none of the tripled number of
certiﬁcates he received DEMO the paired individual in the other group.
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281 265
DEMO B is a dictator game that differs from treatment A only in that the individuals
in the “second-mover” group do not have a decision DEMO make; thus they do not have an
opportunity to return any DEMO that they receive.
Treatment C involves a decision task that differs from treatment A as follows. First,
the “ﬁrst movers” do not have DEMO decision to make. Each “second mover” is given a $10
endowment. “First movers” are given endowments in amounts equal to the amounts kept
(i.e., not sent) by the ﬁrst movers in treatment A. Furthermore, the “second movers” in
treatment C are given additional dollar amounts equal to DEMO amounts received by second
movers in treatment A from the tripled amounts sent by the ﬁrst movers in treatment A.
The subjects are informed DEMO a table of the exact inverse relation between the number of
additional dollars received by a “second mover” and the endowment of the anonymously-
DEMO “ﬁrst mover.”
The experiment sessions are run manually (i.e., not with computers). The payoff
procedure is double blind:
(i) subject DEMO are identiﬁed only by letters that are private information of the
subjects; and
(ii) monetary payoffs are collected in private from sealed envelopes contained in lettered
mailboxes.
Double blind payoffs are implemented by having each DEMO draw a sealed envelope
containing a lettered key from a box containing many envelopes. At the end of the
experiment, the subjects use their keys to open lettered mailboxes that contain their
monetary payoffs in sealed DEMO The experimenter is not present in the mailbox
room when the subjects collect their payoff envelopes. There is no interaction between
the experimenter and DEMO subjects during decision-making parts of an experiment session.
All distribution and collection of envelopes containing subject response forms is done by
a “monitor” who DEMO randomly selected from the subject pool in the presence of all of the
subjects.
All of the above design features are common information given DEMO the subjects except for
one item. The subjects in treatment C are not informed that the inversely-related amounts
of the endowment of the “ﬁrst DEMO and additional certiﬁcates of the “second mover” are
determined by subjects’ decisions in treatment A.3 The subject instructions and response
forms do not use DEMO terms “ﬁrst mover” and “second mover” to refer to the two groups of
subjects; instead, the terms “group X” and “group Y” are DEMO The subjects are assigned
randomly to group X and group Y. There were six experiment sessions, two per treatment.
No subject participated in more than one experiment session. There were 30 pairs of
subjects in treatment DEMO and 32 pairs of subjects in each of treatments A and C.
All of the experiment sessions end with each subject being paid an DEMO $5 for
ﬁlling out a questionnaire. First movers and second movers have distinct questionnaires.
The questions asked have three functions:
3 This procedure DEMO followed in order to avoid any possible suggestion of indirect reciprocity (DEMO
et al., 2001) to the second movers, which would consist DEMO repaying “ﬁrst mover” Cj , in treatment C, for the
friendly DEMO of ﬁrst mover Aj , in treatment A.
266 J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
(i) to provide additional data;
(ii) to provide a check for possible subject confusion about the decision tasks; and
(iii) to provide checks for possible recording errors by the experimenters and counting
errors DEMO the subjects.
Subjects do not write their names on the questionnaires. The additional data provided
by the questionnaires include the subjects’ reports of their DEMO key letters. Data error
checks provided by the questionnaires come from asking the subjects to report the numbers
of dollar certiﬁcates transferred, received, DEMO returned. These reports, together with two
distinct records kept by the DEMO, provide accuracy checks on data recording.
Subjects were recruited with a DEMO e-mail message from a computerized data-
base of students that had volunteered to participate in experiments by registering on the web
site of the DEMO Science Laboratory at the University of Arizona. Some of the subjects
had participated in previous economics experiments. The computerized database records
the types of DEMO that subjects participate in. This information was used to ﬁlter sub-
jects that had previously participated in experiments similar to ones reported here from DEMO
recruitment e-mail list. Except for this ﬁlter, subjects were randomly selected DEMO the data-
base. At the beginning of an experiment session, the DEMO were required to show student
photo identiﬁcation cards, print their names DEMO a sign-in form, and write their signatures
on the form. Inspection DEMO the sign-in forms veriﬁes that there was no repeat participation.
5. Discriminating between other-regarding preferences and trust or reciprocity
Treatment B differs from treatment DEMO only in that the “second movers” do not have a
decision to make; thus they do not have an opportunity to return any part of the tripled
amounts sent to them. Since “second movers” cannot return DEMO in treatment B,
ﬁrst movers cannot be motivated by trust that they will do so. In contrast, in treatment
A the ﬁrst movers may be motivated to send positive amounts by both trust and altruistic
DEMO preferences. Thus conclusions about whether ﬁrst-mover transfers in the
investment game (DEMO A) are partially motivated by trust are based on the difference
DEMO treatments A and B in the amounts of money sent by ﬁrst movers to second
movers.
Since “ﬁrst movers” cannot send anything in treatment DEMO, “second movers” cannot
be motivated by positive reciprocity, that is, DEMO need to repay a friendly action by a ﬁrst
mover. In contrast, in treatment A, second movers can be motivated to return positive
DEMO by reciprocity or by unconditional other-regarding preferences. Thus conclusions
about whether second-mover transfers in the investment game are partially motivated by
reciprocity are based DEMO the difference between treatments A and C in the amounts of
money returned by second movers to ﬁrst movers.
As with any data, one needs a maintained theoretical model to interpret the data from the
investment DEMO triadic experiment. I begin by discussing the implications of a model of
preferences over outcomes that can be conditional on the behavior of another. DEMO model
provides clear testable hypotheses about trust and reciprocity. Subsequently, I DEMO some
questions that have been raised about this approach.
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281 267
DEMO Implications of a model of preferences over outcomes
Note that the deﬁnition of reciprocity in Section 2 incorporates a possible dependence
of preferences over DEMO upon the process that generated those outcomes and beliefs
about the behavior of others. Such dependence can provide an explanation of why rational
agents DEMO actions involving trust and reciprocity. Thus, a ﬁrst mover can rationally
DEMO a trusting action if she believes that this choice may trigger a social norm in
the second mover that causes him not to defect. DEMO, a ﬁrst mover can rationally
undertake a trusting action if he DEMO that the second mover has altruistic or inequality-
averse unconditional other-regarding preferences. The experimental design for game triads
explained in Section 4 makes it DEMO to discriminate between the implications of
unconditional other-regarding preferences and trust or reciprocity.
I will use the following speciﬁc criteria for deciding whether a DEMO mover’s behavior
is trusting. A ﬁrst mover will be said to undertake an action in the investment game that
exhibits trust if the chosen DEMO:
(i) gives a positive amount of the ﬁrst mover’s money endowment to the second mover;
and
(ii) is risky for DEMO ﬁrst mover, in the sense that the amount of money that DEMO sent is larger
than the amount that would maximize the ﬁrst mover’s utility if none were to be
returned by the second mover.
Thus DEMO trusting action requires a belief by the ﬁrst mover that the second mover will not
defect and keep too much of the proﬁt generated DEMO the ﬁrst mover’s decision to send a
positive amount. If a ﬁrst mover has self-regarding preferences then the act of sending
any positive amount DEMO trust because such a ﬁrst mover will lose utility if the second
mover does not return at least as much money as the ﬁrst DEMO gave up. But a ﬁrst mover
may have other-regarding preferences. Since, DEMO the investment game any amount sent by
the ﬁrst mover is tripled, a ﬁrst mover with altruistic preferences might prefer to give
the second mover some money even if she knew that she would get nothing DEMO Thus
the mere act of sending a positive amount of money is not evidence of trusting behavior
unless it is known that ﬁrst movers DEMO self-regarding preferences. But the treatment
B dictator game, together with the DEMO A investment game, permit one to identify
trusting actions, as follows.
Assume that each subject in every pair has preferences over her own DEMO the paired
subject’s money payoffs that can be represented by a utility function. These preferences can
be other-regarding or self-regarding. If the preferences are DEMO then the utility
function is a constant function of the other’s money payoff. If the preferences are other-
regarding then they can be altruistic DEMO inequality-averse. In treatment B, a ﬁrst mover
chooses an amount to DEMO from the set, S of integers weakly between 0 and 10. DEMO
choice in treatment B, sb implies
u1(10 −sb, 10 +3sb) u1(10 − s, 10 +3s), for all s ∈ DEMO
(1)
Now assume that the amount of money that the DEMO mover gives to the second mover in
treatment A, sa is DEMO than the amount given in treatment B. Then we can conclude
268 J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
DEMO the ﬁrst mover has exhibited trust because the amount sent in treatment A is too large
to be fully explained by other-regarding preferences. Thus, if sa >sb then we know that
the ﬁrst mover is exposed to risk from the possibility that the second mover will defect
and DEMO too much of the money transfer. Speciﬁcally, if the second mover DEMO
to return nothing in the event that sa >sb , then DEMO (1) and strict quasi-concavity
of u1 imply that the ﬁrst mover will have lower utility than he could have attained if he had
DEMO that the second mover would return nothing:
u1(10 −sa, DEMO +3sa )<u1(10 −sb, 10 +3sb)
because sa ∈ DEMO
(2)
Next consider the question of identifying reciprocal behavior. The DEMO over pay-
off (ordered) pairs can be conditioned on a social norm for reciprocity. For example, if the
ﬁrst mover in the investment game sends the second mover some of her money, the second
mover may be motivated by a social norm for reciprocity to repay this DEMO action with
a generous response. Within the context of a model of preferences over material payoffs,
a social norm for reciprocity can be DEMO with a state variable. Thus, the preferences
over payoffs can be DEMO on a state variable for reciprocity. This is an appropriate
representation because, if there is reciprocal behavior, then individuals behave as if they
DEMO more altruistic towards another person after that person has been kind, DEMO, or
trusting. The empirical question is whether or not second movers DEMO the investment game
choose more generous actions, after the ﬁrst mover DEMO intentionally sent them money, than
they would in the absence of DEMO ﬁrst mover’s action but the presence of the same money
allocation.
When analyzing data from this experiment, I will use the following speciﬁc criteria
for deciding whether a subjects’ behavior is reciprocal. A second mover will DEMO said to
undertake an action that exhibits positive reciprocity if the chosen action:
(i) returns to a generous ﬁrst mover a positive DEMO of money; and
(ii) is costly to the second mover, in the sense that the amount returned is larger than the
amount DEMO would maximize the second mover’s utility in the absence of the generous
action by the ﬁrst mover.
A second mover with self-regarding preferences will DEMO return any money to the ﬁrst
mover. But a second mover with either altruistic or inequality-averse other-regarding
preferences may return money to the ﬁrst DEMO who, after making a positive transfer
to the second mover, now has a lower money endowment than the second mover. Thus the
mere DEMO that the second mover returns money to the ﬁrst mover is not evidence of positive
reciprocity. But the treatment C dictator game, together with the treatment A investment
game, permits one to identify reciprocal actions, DEMO follows.
A “second mover” in treatment C is given an endowment that is inversely related to
the endowment of the paired subject. The endowments DEMO a pair of subjects in treatment C
are determined by a (DEMO) ﬁrst mover’s decision in treatment A (but the subjects do
not know this). Thus, the endowments of a pair of treatment C subjects are given by
(10−sa, 10+3sa) . In treatment C, DEMO “second mover” chooses an amount to return from the
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
269
DEMO, R(sa) that contains the integers weakly between 0 and 3sa . The choice in treatment C,
rc implies
u2(10 +3sa DEMO, 10 −sa +rc)
u2(10 +3sa − r, 10 −sa + r), for all r ∈ R(sa ).
(3)DEMO
Suppose that the second mover returns to the ﬁrst mover in the investment game a positive
amount of money or, perhaps, even a DEMO amount than the ﬁrst mover sent: ra sa .This,
in DEMO, does not support a conclusion that the second mover was motivated DEMO positive
reciprocity because the assumed choice could have been motivated by maximization of
unconditional altruistic or inequality-averse other-regarding preferences. However, if one
observes that ra >rc then he can conclude that the second mover was motivated by reci-
procity because the amount of money returned is too large DEMO be fully accounted for by
unconditional other-regarding preferences. This follows from noting that ra >rc , state-
ment (3), and strict quasi-concavity DEMO u2 imply
u2(10 +3sa −ra, 10 −sa +ra )<u2(DEMO +3sa −rc, 10 −sa +rc)
(4)
because ra ∈ R(sa).
It might, at ﬁrst, seem inconsistent with utility DEMO for a subject to return an
amount of money, ra that DEMO inequality (4). But a social norm for reciprocity can
change DEMO agent’s preferences over material payoffs. Such a norm can be incorporated into
a theory of utility by introducing the possibility that an agent’s preferences DEMO outcomes
can depend on the observed behavior of another. Speciﬁcally, with DEMO to reciprocity,
an agent’s preferences over his own and another person’s material payoffs can depend on
whether the other person intentionally helped him DEMO intentionally hurt him or did neither.
Thus, let λa be a DEMO variable that depends on the amount of money sent by the ﬁrst mover
to the second mover in treatment A:
λa = f(DEMO ).
(5)
The utility to the second mover of the monetary payoffs in the investment game can be
conditional on the reciprocity DEMO variable. Thus there need be no inconsistency between
inequality (4) and the norm-conditional-preference inequality,
2
uλ
a (10 +3sa −ra, 10 DEMO +ra)
a (10 +3sa − r, 10 −sa +
2
uλ
r), for all r ∈ R(sa ).
(6)DEMO
Furthermore, experiments on reciprocal behavior can be characterized as research on DEMO
comparative properties of norm-unconditional (u2) , and norm-conditional
maximizing behavior.
A complete model for interpreting data from the triadic investment game experiment is
DEMO in the appendix. Theoretical models that incorporate other-regarding preferences
over outcomes that can be conditional on the perceived intentions of others are reported in
DEMO and Fischbacher (1999), Charness and Rabin (forthcoming), and Cox and Friedman
(2002).
In order to incorporate into game theory the possibility that agents can be motivated by
reciprocity, one needs to include the possibility that agents’ preferences over outcomes may
2 ) utility-
(uλ2
270 J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
DEMO conditional on the observed behavior of others. But if agents’ outcome preferences can
be conditional on observations of behavior, can they also be conditional on anticipations
of behavior?
5.2. What if outcome preferences can be DEMO on anticipated behavior or are not a
characteristic of an agent?
It is conceivable that subjects’ outcome preferences could be conditional on anticipa-
DEMO of behavior of others, as illustrated by the following example constructed DEMO a referee.
Suppose that the ﬁrst mover in treatment B gives the paired subject $5, knowing that there
is no opportunity for the paired subject to return anything. Also suppose that the ﬁrst mover
in treatment DEMO gives the second mover $5, knowing that the second mover will DEMO an op-
portunity to share the proﬁt, from the tripling of DEMO sent, by returning some money.
The zero return in treatment B DEMO determined by the structure of the game. In contrast, if the
DEMO mover in the investment game returns zero then the ﬁrst mover may feel angry and
betrayed in addition to not realizing his intended distribution DEMO payoffs. Anticipation of
this bad emotional outcome could cause a ﬁrst mover in the investment game to send less
than in the dictator game. DEMO subjects’ behavior were consistent with this example, then the
test for DEMO behavior with data from the triadic design would be a conservative test be-
cause a ﬁrst mover would require an even stronger belief that DEMO second mover would not
defect in order to overcome the risks of both sub-optimal money payoffs and bad emotional
outcomes. As it turned out, the tests reported in Section 6 do reveal signiﬁcant trusting be-
havior. DEMO it would not be a problem if the tests were to be conservative, as implied by
the preceding example of anticipation-dependent utility of outcomes.
Another referee questioned the central assumption that underlies the triadic experimen-
tal DEMO, which is the assumption that preferences are characteristics of agents. The DEMO
ment was that, while the games in the three treatments may DEMO similar using the author’s
theoretical framework, we do not know how DEMO think about them. It was argued that
treatments A, B, and C may elicit different fairness norms, leading to the use of different
rules of thumb. The alternative approach advocated by the referee was to DEMO data from
experiments with games like treatments A, B, and C to construct a portfolio of rules of
thumb that are shortcuts for DEMO decisions in families of situations.
In the following section, I will DEMO data from the three treatments using the theoret-
ical framework developed in Section 5.1 and Appendix A. Authors of subsequent papers
may want to DEMO whether preferences are characteristics of agents in fairness games.
6. Subjects’ behavior in the three games
The experiment sessions were conducted in the Economic DEMO Laboratory at the
University of Arizona in November 2000. Similar experiments comparing group and
individual behavior in the investment game were conducted in the DEMO of 1999 and
reported in Cox (2002).4 Subjects’ behavior in DEMO investment game will ﬁrst be discussed.
Subsequently, data from all three DEMO will be used to ascertain whether there is
4 Individual subject data from the triadic designs used in both experiments are compared in Cox (2000).
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
271
DEMO support for the conclusion that the subjects’ behavior is characterized by trust
and/or reciprocity.
6.1. First- and second-mover decisions in the investment game
DEMO 1 shows amounts sent and returned by subjects in treatment A, DEMO investment
game. There are 32 pairs of subjects. The solid black bar for each numbered subject
pair shows the amount sent by the ﬁrst DEMO, which will be multiplied by three by
the experimenter. The patterned DEMO for a subject pair shows the amount returned by the
second mover. There are six subject pairs, numbered 1–6, for which the ﬁrst DEMO sent
zero and the second mover returned zero. The behavior of these six pairs is consistent
with the subgame perfect equilibrium of the traditional DEMO preferences model,
whereas the behavior of the other 26 subject pairs is inconsistent with that equilibrium.
But the consistency of behavior of these DEMO subject pairs must be related to the features of
the investment game, as it was implemented by Berg et al. (1995) and in the experiment
reported here. If a ﬁrst mover sends zero then the DEMO mover must return zero. Hence,
in this game, subject-pair consistency DEMO the above subgame equilibrium prediction is
equivalent to consistency of data for only the ﬁrst-mover. There are nine second movers
who received positive transfers DEMO returned zero. The behavior of these nine second
movers is consistent with the self-regarding preferences model and it is not constrained
to be consistent DEMO the structure of the game.
The ﬁrst movers in the seven subject pairs numbered 11 to 17 sent exactly one-half of
their $10 endowments DEMO the paired second mover. Two of the second movers who received
$15, from the $5 amounts sent, kept all of the money. Four DEMO the second movers who were
sent $5 returned more than they were sent. And the remaining subject returned $3 to the
ﬁrst mover who DEMO her or him $5.
Fig. 1.
272
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
DEMO ﬁrst movers in subject pairs 18 and 19 sent amounts greater than $5 and less than
$10. One of the paired second movers returned DEMO than was sent and the other second
mover returned nothing.
The ﬁrst movers in the 13 subject pairs numbered 20–32 sent all $10 of DEMO
endowments. The paired second movers exhibited considerable variability in their
responses. One of these second movers returned exactly $10, thus keeping all of the proﬁt
from the tripling of the amount sent. Four of the second DEMO returned nothing, thus
ending up with $40 and leaving their paired DEMO movers with $0. At the opposite extreme
of the data, three DEMO the second movers who received $30 transfers returned $20, thus
choosing DEMO implement the equal-split fairness focal point payoffs of $20 for each member
of the subject pair. One of the other second movers who was DEMO $10 shared the proﬁt
by returning $17. Three other second movers did not share the proﬁt but returned positive
amounts of $1, $6, DEMO $9.
As shown in Fig. 1, 26 out of 32 ﬁrst DEMO sent positive amounts. Is this trusting
behavior? Comparison of behavior in DEMO A and B will make it possible to answer
this question. Figure 1 also shows that 17 of the second movers returned positive amounts
DEMO there appears to be an overall increasing relationship between amounts returned and
amounts sent. Is this reciprocal behavior? Comparison of behavior in treatments A and C
will make it possible to answer this question.
6.2. Identifying DEMO, reciprocity, and altruism
Figure 2 shows the numbers of ﬁrst movers in treatments A and B that sent amounts
varying from $0 to DEMO The patterned bars represent treatment A (investment game)
data and DEMO solid black bars represent treatment B (trust-control dictator game) data.
The ﬁrst thing to note in Fig. 2 is that 19 out of DEMO 30 ﬁrst movers in treatment B sent
positive amounts of money to the paired subjects. Thus, there is substantial evidence of
Fig. 2.
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
273
DEMO 1
Decomposition tests for trust and reciprocity
Parametric and nonparametric tests of ﬁrst- and second-mover data
Data Send mean Return mean Means tests Epps–Singleton DEMO
tests tests
5.97 4.94
Tr. A [3.87] [6.63] ... ...
{32} {32}
3.63
Tr. B [3.86]
{30}
Tr. C ...
Tr. A send 2.34 DEMO
vs. Tr. B send ... ... (0.010)a
Tr. A return DEMO 6.94
vs. Tr. C Return ... (0.018)a
Tobit analysis of DEMO data
αˆ βˆ
4.20 0.680
−1.55
a
(0.219) (0.061)
(0.060) (0.034)a
a Denotes a one-tailed test. p -values in DEMO Standard deviations in brackets. Number of observations
ˆ θˆ LR test
−(0.124) (0.008) (0.759 0.158 5.98<0.025)
γ
in braces.
DEMO ... ...
2.06
[3.69]
{32}
... ...
−2.35
a
(0.010) (DEMO)
unconditional other-regarding preferences in these data: when the cost of DEMO dollar sent
to the paired subject was only $0.33, 63% of DEMO subjects behaved as altruists.
Figure 2 shows that six subjects sent $0 in treatment A whereas 11 subjects made this
choice in treatment B. DEMO the other extreme, 13 subjects sent all $10 in treatment A DEMO
four subjects made this decision in treatment B. This pronounced difference suggests that
the ﬁrst movers’ behavior in treatment A partly resulted from trust. DEMO notable differ-
ence in Fig. 2 is at $5: seven ﬁrst DEMO sent that amount in treatment A but only three did
so in treatment B. Finally, note that there is more variability of behavior in treatment B data,
with six subjects sending amounts of $1, $8, or $9 that are not observed in treatment A.
Is there statistically-signiﬁcant support for the existence of trust in the data? The
second column of Table 1 reports that the mean amount sent by ﬁrst movers DEMO $5.97 in
treatment A and $3.63 in treatment B. The mean amount sent in treatment A is signiﬁcantly
greater than that in treatment B DEMO the one-tailed two-sample t -test (p =0.010) reported in
the fourth column of Table 1. Hence the means test supports the conclusion that DEMO subjects
exhibited trust in the investment game. As reported in Table 1, the one-tailed Mann–
Whitney test also detects that the treatment A amounts sent are signiﬁcantly greater than
the treatment B amounts sent (p = 0.010) . The Epps–Singleton test detects a signiﬁcant
difference between the cumulative distributions of amounts sent in treatments A and B
(p =0.010) DEMO Hence all of these tests support the conclusion that there is signiﬁcant trusting
behavior in the investment game.
274
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
DEMO 3.
In Fig. 3, the patterned bars show the amounts returned DEMO treatment A (the investment
game) and the solid black bars show the amounts returned in treatment C (the reciprocity-
control dictator game). The ﬁrst thing to note in Fig. 3 is that 13 out DEMO the 32 “second
movers” in treatment C “returned” positive amounts of money to the paired subjects. Thus,
there is substantial evidence of unconditional DEMO preferences in these data:
when the cost of each dollar sent to the paired subject was as high as $1, 41% of the subjects
behaved as though they had altruistic or inequality-averse other-regarding preferences.
The DEMO axis in Fig. 3 records the amounts sent by ﬁrst movers. The ﬂoor axis is
labeled with number/letter combinations. The number is the DEMO sent and the letter
designates a ﬁrst mover who sent that amount in treatment A. Some notable differences
between treatments A and C show DEMO in Fig. 3. First consider the 13 observations for
which the amount sent was $10. For this category, ﬁve out of the 13 second movers in
treatment A returned amounts greater than or equal to $10. DEMO contrast, only one out of
the 13 “second movers” in treatment DEMO that were “sent” $10 returned an amount greater
than or equal to $10. Another notable difference appears with the nine observations for
which the DEMO sent varied from $5 to $7. For this category, ﬁve out DEMO the nine second
movers in treatment A returned more than was sent. In contrast, only one out of the nine
“second movers” in treatment C that were “sent” amounts between $5 and $7 “returned” an
amount DEMO than or equal to the amount “sent.” There are three observations for which
the amounts “returned” in treatment C exceed the amounts returned in DEMO A when
the amounts sent are low, varying from $0 to DEMO
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281 275
DEMO there statistically-signiﬁcant support for the existence of reciprocity in the data? DEMO
third column of Table 1 reports that the mean amount returned by second movers was $4.94
in treatment A and $2.06 in treatment C. DEMO mean amount returned in treatment A is sig-
niﬁcantly greater than that in treatment C by the one-tailed two-sample t -test (p =0.018)
reported in the fourth column of Table 1. The one-tailed Mann–Whitney test DEMO de-
tects that the treatment A amounts returned are signiﬁcantly greater than the treatment B
amounts returned (p = 0.061) . The Epps–Singleton DEMO does not detect a signiﬁcant dif-
ference between the cumulative distributions of amounts returned in treatments A and C
(p =0.219).
The last row of Table 1 reports tobit estimates of the parameters of the DEMO relation
between amounts sent, St and amounts returned, Rt in treatments A and C:
Rt =α + βDt St + γSt +εt ,
(7)
where
 1 for treatment A data, (8)
Dt = 0 for treatment C data.
The bounds for the DEMO estimation are the bounds imposed by the experimental design:
Rt ∈[0, 3St ].
(9)
One would expect that the cone created DEMO these bounds might produce heteroskedastic
errors. In order to allow for the possibility of heteroskedastic errors, the tobit estimation
procedure incorporates estimation of the θ parameter in the following model of multiplica-
tive heteroskedasticity:
σt DEMO . (10)
Note that βˆ is the estimate of the DEMO of reciprocity on amounts returned by second
the tobit estimation supports the conclusion that the subjects exhibited positive reciprocitymovers. We observe that βˆ is DEMO and signiﬁcantly greater than 0 (p =0.034); hence
in the DEMO game. As noted above, the means test and Mann–Whitney test support
DEMO same conclusion.
7. Concluding remarks
This paper reports experiments with a triadic design that can identify trusting and
reciprocating behavior. Several researchers had previously DEMO the replicable result
that the majority of ﬁrst movers send positive amounts and the majority of second movers
return positive amounts in investment game DEMO This pattern of results, and
results from many other fairness experiments, are inconsistent with the subgame perfect
equilibria of the special case of DEMO theory in which players are assumed to have self-
regarding preferences. This leaves the profession with the task of constructing a less
restrictive model DEMO can maintain consistency with the empirical evidence. But this
task cannot be undertaken successfully unless we can discriminate among the observable
implications of alternative DEMO of the deviations from behavior predicted by the self-
regarding preferences model. The game triad experiments reported here make it possible to
276 J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
DEMO among the observable implications for subjects’ choices of trust, reciprocity,
DEMO unconditional other-regarding preferences. This discrimination is possible because:
(i) treatments A and B jointly identify the trusting behavior that results from beliefs DEMO
others; and
(ii) treatments A and C jointly identify the DEMO behavior that results from
imputations of the intentions of others.
There are a few other studies that have used control treatments for intentions. Blount
(1995) compared second mover rejections in a standard ultimatum game with second
mover rejections in games in which the ﬁrst move was selected randomly DEMO by an out-
side party rather than by the subject that would receive the ﬁrst mover’s monetary payoff.
She found lower rejection rates in DEMO random treatment than in the standard ultimatum
game and lower or similar rejection rates in the third party and standard games, depend-
ing upon the choice of elicitation mode for subjects’ decisions. Charness (forthcoming)
used Blount’s control treatments in experiments with the gift exchange game. He found
DEMO higher average second mover contributions in the outside party and random
treatments than in the standard gift exchange game. The average ﬁgures reported by DEMO
ness reﬂect lower second mover contributions in the gift exchange game than in the control
treatments at low wage rates, a result that is consistent with negative reciprocity. Bolton
et al. (1998) experimented with an DEMO treatment in the context of simple
dilemma games. In the control treatment, the row player “chooses” between two identical
rows of monetary payoffs. They found no signiﬁcant differences between the column play-
ers’ responses in the DEMO treatments and the positive and negative reciprocity treatments.
Our experiment provides evidence of altruistic other-regarding preferences, trust, and
reciprocity. These results have the DEMO implications for constructing a model that
will be consistent with the observed behavior. First, utility should not be assumed to be a
constant function of others’ money payoffs, as in the self-regarding preferences model.
This is required in order to maintain consistency with the treatment B and C DEMO
games in which the majority of subjects give money to the paired subjects knowing that
the paired subjects have no decision to make. Second, beliefs about others’ altruistic and
reciprocating behavior should be incorporated in the DEMO This is required in order to
maintain consistency with the trusting behavior that is jointly identiﬁed by the investment
game (treatment A) and DEMO beliefs-control dictator game (treatment B). Third, the other-
regarding preferences should be conditional on the perceived intentions behind others’
actions. This is DEMO in order to maintain consistency with the reciprocating behavior
that is jointly identiﬁed by the investment game (treatment A) and the intentions-control
dictator DEMO (treatment C).
Acknowledgments
Financial support was provided by the Decision DEMO and Management Science
Program, National Science Foundation (grant number SES-9818561). I am grateful to a
journal referee for helpful comments and suggestions.
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
277
DEMO A. Testable hypotheses derived from the triadic experimental design
I shall explain the structure of the three games and model the players’ (utility) DEMO
in a general way. Each player’s utility function will explicitly incorporate the monetary
income of the paired player. It is important to understand that DEMO am not assuming that
the game players necessarily have other-regarding preferences; DEMO, I am allowing for
that possibility. The subjects’ behavior in the DEMO with the three games informs
us as to whether they do or do not have other-regarding preferences. The second mover’s
utility function will explicitly DEMO a state variable that introduces the possibility
that a trusting action by the paired ﬁrst mover could trigger an internalized social norm
that affects DEMO second mover’s utility of the two players’ money payoffs from the game.
It is also important to understand that I am not assuming that DEMO game players necessarily
are affected by social norms for reciprocity but am, rather, including that as a possibility.
Once again, it is the subjects’ behavior in the experiment that informs us on this question.
A.1. DEMO A
Treatment A is the investment game, which can be modeled DEMO follows. The ﬁrst mover
chooses sa ∈ S ,where
S ={0, 1, 2,..., 10}.
(A.1)
At the time the ﬁrst mover makes her choice of sa , she may not know what DEMO
the second mover will subsequently make. Let the random variable ˜ with probability
the amount of money that will be returned by the second DEMO in subgamedistribution function Ω(˜|sa) ,deﬁned on R(sa) , DEMO the ﬁrst mover’s beliefs aboutΓ(sa).
The ﬁrst mover’s expected payoff from choosing sa in game A is
The choice of sa by DEMO ﬁrst mover selects the Γ(sa) subgame, in which the second mover
chooses ra ∈ R(sa),where
R(sa) ={0, 1, 2,..., 3sa}.
r
(A.2)
r
EP1 = E )DEMO(10 −sa +˜ 10 +3sa −˜ .
Ω(˜|sa
A
r
r,
r)
(A.3)
In the special case where the ﬁrst mover has self-regarding preferences, u1 is a constant
function of the second mover’s income.
A.2. Treatment B
Treatment B is a dictator game with DEMO same strategy set for the ﬁrst mover as in the
investment game. Thus the ﬁrst mover chooses sb ∈ S ,where S is deﬁned in statement
(A.1). The “second mover” does not have a decision to make. The (utility) payoff to the
ﬁrst mover is
P1 DEMO(10 −sb, 10 +3sb ).
B
(A.4)
278 J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
DEMO Treatment C
Treatment C involves a game C(n) , that DEMO selected by the choice made by a ﬁrst mover
in treatment A. It is a dictator game with the same strategy set for the DEMO mover”
that a second mover has in treatment A. Thus the “second mover” chooses rc ∈ R(sa).The
(utility) payoff to the DEMO mover” in game C(n) will not be dependent on the DEMO
operation of a social norm for reciprocity because the ﬁrst mover has no decision to make
in this game.
A.4. Payoffs dependent on social DEMO
The utility to the second mover of the monetary payoffs from a game can be made
conditional on the possible operation of a social DEMO for reciprocity. Thus, the payoff to
the second mover from the DEMO of sa and ra in game A will be written as
2 (10
=uλa
PA2 +3sa −ra, 10 −sa +ra) (A.5)
DEMO the second mover knows that the ﬁrst mover has chosen the action sa and may feel
obliged to reciprocate. The notation
with a state DEMO λa that depends on the amount of money sent by the ﬁrst mover to the
second mover in treatment A:
2
uλa
permits DEMO utility of monetary payoffs to vary
λa = f(sa ). (A.6)
In contrast, in game C(n) the “second mover” DEMO that the “ﬁrst mover” has no decision
to make. Since there is no opportunity for trusting actions by the “ﬁrst mover” in game
C(DEMO) , there is no reason for a social norm for reciprocating DEMO be triggered. Thus the payoff
to the “second mover” from the choice of rc in game C(n) will be written as
PC(n)2 =u2(10 +3sa −rc, 10 −sa +rc ). (A.7)
In the special case where a social norm for reciprocity does not DEMO utility of monetary
2
uλa is identical to u2 for all sa ∈ S.
payoffs,
A.5. Testing for the presence of trust
In DEMO validly to conclude that a ﬁrst mover has demonstrated trust, the DEMO
must have knowledge that she has borne a risk of loss from her choice in game A. Thus it
must be known that there DEMO rz ∈ R(sa) and sτ ∈ S such that
u1(DEMO −sa +rz, 10 +3sa −rz )<u1(10 −sτ , 10 DEMO ). (A.8)
Assuming that u1 is strictly quasi-concave (and DEMO that the variables are discrete),
the choices by the ﬁrst DEMO allow the researcher to conclude that (A.8) is satisﬁed by
rz = 0and sτ =sb if
sa >sb +1. (A.9)
This DEMO be seen by noting that the choice by the ﬁrst mover in game B and strict quasi-
concavity of u1 imply
u1(10 −sb, 10 +3sb )>u1(10 − s, 10 +3s), ∀s ∈ S, s>sb +1.
(A.10)
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
279
DEMO null hypothesis is that the self-regarding preferences model makes empirically-correct
predictions. In the present context, this means that the ﬁrst mover has not exhibited trust:
T:
H0 sa sb +1,
with alternative
(A.11)
T:
HA sa >sb +1.
(A.12)
It may DEMO unlikely that the ﬁrst mover will be indifferent between sb and sb + 1;
hence the null hypothesis in statement (A.11) may DEMO to bias the tests against ﬁnding
that the data contain evidence of trust. Furthermore, across-subjects comparisons between
treatments involve means and other aggregations of data for which the $1 unit of
discreteness does not apply. Therefore, the tests reported are for the null hypothesis,
T :
H00 sa sb,
with alternative given by
(A.13)
T :
DEMO sa >sb.
Of course, the hypotheses that are tested statistically will be stochastic versions of
(A.14)
T .
H00
A.6. Testing for the presence of reciprocity
In order validly to conclude that a second DEMO has demonstrated positive reciprocity,
the researcher must have knowledge that the second mover has incurred a cost to repay
a social debt to DEMO ﬁrst mover. This can be manifested by the second mover choosing to
return an amount of money in game A that is larger than DEMO amount that would maximize
his utility in the absence of a social norm for reciprocating. Thus, the second mover has
exhibited positive reciprocity in game A if there exists ry ∈ R(sa) such that
u2(10 +3sa −ry, 10 −sa +ry )>u2(10 +3sa −ra, DEMO −sa +ra ). (A.15)
Assuming that u2 is strictly quasi-concave (and recalling that the variables are discrete),
the choices by DEMO second mover allow the researcher to conclude that (A.15) is satisﬁed if
ra >rc +1.
(A.16)
This can be seen by DEMO that the choice by the “second mover” in game C(n) DEMO strict
quasi-concavity of u2 imply
u2(10 +3sa −rc, 10 −sa DEMO )>u2(10 +3sa − r, 10 −sa + r),
∀r ∈ R(sa ), r>rc +1
(A.17)
.
DEMO null hypothesis is that the self-regarding preferences model makes empirically-correct
predictions. In the present context, this means that the second mover has not exhibited
reciprocity:
R:
H0 ra rc +1,
with alternative
R:DEMO
HA ra >rc +1.
(A.18)
(A.19)
280
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
DEMO the reasons explained above in the context of testing for trust, DEMO reported tests for
reciprocity are based on stochastic versions of
R :DEMO
H00 ra rc,
with alternative given by
(A.20)
R :
HAA ra >rc.
(A.21)
References
Andreoni, J., Miller, J., 2002. Giving according to GARP: An experimental test of the DEMO of preferences
for altruism. Econometrica 70, 737–753.
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J., McCabe, K., 1995. Trust, reciprocity, and social history. Games Econ. Behav. 10, 122–142.
Blount, S., 1995. When social outcomes aren’t fair: the effect of causal attributions on preferences. Organ. Behav.
Human Dec. Processes 63, 131–144.
Bolton, G., Brandts, J., Ockenfels, A., 1998. Measuring motivations for the reciprocal responses observed in
simple dilemma games. DEMO Econ. 1, 207–219.
Bolton, G., Ockenfels, A., 2000. ERC: a theory of equity, reciprocity and competition. Amer. Econ. Rev. 90,
166–193.
Charness, G., forthcoming. Attribution and reciprocity in an experimental labor DEMO J. Lab. Econ.
Charness, G., Rabin, M., forthcoming. Understanding social preferences with simple tests. Quart. J. Econ.
Cox, J., 2000. Trust DEMO reciprocity: implications of game triads and social contexts. Univ. of Arizona DEMO
paper.
Cox, J., 2002. Trust, reciprocity, and other-regarding preferences: DEMO vs. individuals and males vs. females.
In: Zwick, R., Rapoport, A. (Eds.), Advances in Experimental Business Research. Kluwer.
Cox, J., Friedman, D., 2002. A tractable model of reciprocity and fairness. Univ. DEMO Arizona working paper.
Cox, J., Sadiraj, K., Sadiraj, V., 2002. A theory of competition and fairness for egocentric altruists. Univ. of
DEMO working paper.
Dufwenberg, M., Kirchsteiger, G., 2001. A theory of sequential reciprocity. Discussion paper. University of
Vienna.
Dufwenberg, M., Gneezy, U., Güth, W., van Damme, E., 2001. Direct versus indirect reciprocity: an experiment.
Homo Oeconom. 18, 19–30.
Falk, A., Fischbacher, U., 1999. A theory of reciprocity. Working paper No. 6. Institute for Empirical Research
in Economics, University of Zurich.
Fehr, E., Falk, A., 1999. Wage rigidity in a competitive incomplete contract market. J. Polit. Econ. DEMO, 106–134.
Fehr, E., Gächter, S., 2000a. Do incentive contracts DEMO out voluntary cooperation? Univ. of Zurich working
paper.
Fehr, E., DEMO, S., 2000b. Fairness and retaliation: the economics of reciprocity. J. DEMO Perspect. 14, 159–
181.
Fehr, E., Gächter, S., Kirchsteiger, G., 1996. Reciprocal fairness and noncompensating wage differentials. J. Inst.
Theoret. Econ. 152, 608–640.
Fehr, E., Gächter, S., Kirchsteiger, G., 1997. Reciprocity as a contract enforcement device: experimental evidence.
Econometrica 65, 833–860.
DEMO, E., Kirchsteiger, G., Riedl, A., 1993. Does fairness prevent market clearing? An experimental investigation.
Quart. J. Econ. 108, 437–460.
Fehr, E., Schmidt, K., 1999. A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. Quart. J. Econ. 114, 817–868.
Hoffman, E., McCabe, K., Shachat, K., Smith, V., 1994. Preferences, property rights, and DEMO in bargaining
games. Games Econ. Behav. 7, 346–380.
Hoffman, E., DEMO, K., Smith, V., 1996. Social distance and other-regarding behavior in dictator games. Amer.
Econ. Rev. 86, 653–660.
Hoffman, E., McCabe, DEMO, Smith, V., 1998. Behavioral foundations of reciprocity: experimental economics and
evolutionary psychology. Econ. Inquiry 36, 335–352.
J.C. Cox / Games and Economic Behavior 46 (2004) 260–281
281
DEMO, D., 1998. Modeling altruism and spitefulness in experiments. Rev. Econ. Dynam. 1, 593–622.
McCabe, K., Rassenti, S., Smith, V., 1996. Game theory and reciprocity in some extensive form bargaining games.
Proc. Nat. DEMO Sci. 93, 13421–13428.
McCabe, K., Rassenti, S., Smith, V., 1998. Reciprocity, trust, and payoff privacy in extensive form bargaining
games. Games Econ. Behav. 24, 10–24.
Rabin, M., 1993. Incorporating fairness into game theory and economics. Amer. Econ. Rev. 83, 1281–1302.
Smith, V., 1998. Distinguished guest lecture: the two faces of Adam Smith. Southern Econ. J. 65, 1–19.
von Neumann, J., Morgenstern, O., 1944. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, 1st edition. Princeton Univ.
Press, 2nd DEMO, 1947.{1g42fwefx}