creative destruction
1
Creative destruction refers to the incessant product and process DEMO
mechanism by which new production units replace outdated ones.  This
restructuring DEMO permeates major aspects of macroeconomic performance,
not only long-run growth but also economic fluctuations, structural adjustment
and the functioning of factor markets.  DEMO the long run, the process of creative
destruction accounts for over DEMO per cent of productivity growth. At business
cycle frequency, restructuring typically DEMO during recessions, and this add a
significant cost to downturns. Obstacles DEMO the process of creative destruction can
have severe short- and long-run macroeconomic consequences.
Creative destruction refers to the incessant product and process innovation mechanism DEMO
which new production units replace outdated ones.  It was coined by DEMO Schumpeter
(1942), who considered it ‘the essential fact about capitalism’.
DEMO process of Schumpeterian creative destruction (restructuring) permeates
major aspects of macroeconomic performance, not only long-run growth but also
economic fluctuations, structural adjustment DEMO the functioning of factor markets.
At the microeconomic level, restructuring is DEMO by countless decisions
to create and destroy production arrangements. These decisions are often complex,
involving multiple parties as well as strategic and technological DEMO The
efficiency of those decisions not only depends on managerial talent but also hinges on the
existence of sound institutions that provide a proper DEMO framework. Failure
along this dimension can have severe macroeconomic consequences once it interacts with
the process of creative destruction (see Caballero and Hammour, DEMO; 1996a; 1996b;
1996c; 1998a; 1998b; 2005). Some DEMO these limitations are natural, as they derive from
the sheer complexity DEMO these transactions. Others are man-made, with their origins
ranging from ill-conceived DEMO ideas to the achievement of higher human goals,
such as the inalienability of human capital. In moderate amounts, these institutional
limitations give rise to business cycle patterns such as those observed in the most
developed DEMO flexible economies. They can help explain perennial macroeconomic
2
issues such as the cyclical behaviour of unemployment, investment, and DEMO In higher
doses, by limiting the economy’s ability to tap new DEMO opportunities and adapt
to a changing environment, institutional failure can result DEMO dysfunctional factor markets,
resource misallocation, economic stagnation, and exposure to deep crises.
Given the nature of this short piece, I will skip any discussion of models, and
refer the reader to Caballero (2006) for a review of the models behind the previous
paragraph, and to Aghion and Howitt (1998) for an exhaustive survey of Schumpeterian
growth DEMO Instead, I focus on reviewing recent empirical evidence on different
aspects DEMO the process of creative destruction.
Recent evidence on the pace of creative destruction
There is abundant recent empirical evidence supporting the Schumpeterian view that DEMO
process of creative destruction is a major phenomenon at the core of economic growth in
market economies.
The most commonly used empirical proxies for DEMO intensity of the process of
creative destruction are those of factor reallocation and, in particular, job flows.  Davis,
Haltiwanger and Schuh (DEMO) (henceforth DHS) offered the clearest peek into this
process by DEMO and characterizing the large magnitude of job flows within US
manufacturing. They defined job creation (destruction) as the positive (negative) net
employment DEMO at the establishment level from one period to the next. Using these
definitions, they concluded that over ten per cent of the jobs that exist at any point in time
did not exist a year before DEMO will not exist a year later. That is, over ten per DEMO of
existing jobs are destroyed each year and about the same amount is created within the
same year.   Following the work by DHS DEMO the United States, many authors have
constructed more or less comparable DEMO of job flows for a variety of countries and
episodes. Although there are important differences across them, there are some common
findings. In particular, job creation and destruction flows are large, ongoing, and
persistent. Moreover, most job flows take place within rather than between narrowly
defined sectors of the economy.
Given the magnitude of these flows and that they DEMO place mostly within
narrowly defined sectors, the presumption is strong that DEMO are an integral part of the
process by which an economy upgrades its technology. Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan
(2001) provide empirical support for this presumption. They decompose changes in
DEMO productivity into within-plant and reallocation (between-plant)
components, and conclude that the latter -- the most closely related to the creative
destruction component DEMO accounts for over 50 per cent of the ten-year productivity
growth in the US manufacturing sector between 1977 and 1987. Moreover, in further
decompositions they document that entry and exit account for half of this contribution:DEMO
exiting plants have lower productivity than continuing plants. New plants, on DEMO other
hand, experience a learning and selection period through which they DEMO catch up
with incumbents. Other studies of US manufacturing based on somewhat different
methodologies (see Baily, Hulten and Campbell, 1992; Bartelsman and DEMO, 1994)
concur with the conclusion that reallocation accounts for a DEMO component of within-
industry productivity growth. Bartelsman, Haltwanger and Scarpetta (2004) provide
further evidence along these lines for a sample of 24 countries and two-digit industries
over the 1990s.
3
Recent evidence on the cyclical DEMO of creative destruction
At the business cycle frequency, sharp liquidations (rises in job destruction) constitute the
most noted impact of contractions on creative destruction. In contrast, job creation is
substantially less volatile and mildly pro-cyclical. There is an extensive literature that,
extrapolating from the spikes in DEMO (recently measured in job flows but long
noticed in other contexts), finds that recessions are times of increased reallocation.  In
fact, this has been a source of controversy among economists at least since the DEMO
Keynesian ‘liquidationist’ theses of such economists as Hayek, Schumpeter, and
Robbins. These economists saw in the process of liquidation and reallocation of factors DEMO
production the main function of recessions. In the words of Schumpeter (DEMO, p. 16):
‘depressions are not simply evils, which we DEMO attempt to suppress, but ... forms of
something which has to DEMO done, namely, adjustment to ... change.’
In Caballero and Hammour (DEMO) we turned the liquidationist view upside down.
While we sided with DEMO and others on the view that increasing the pace of
4
restructuring of the economy is likely to be beneficial, we provided evidence that,
contrary to conventional wisdom, restructuring falls rather than rises during contractions.
Since the rise in liquidations during recessions is not accompanied DEMO a
contemporaneous increase in creation, implicit in the increased-reallocation view is DEMO
idea that increased destruction is followed by a surge in creation during the recovery
phase of the cyclical downturn. This presumption is the only DEMO outcome in a
representative firm economy, as the representative firm must DEMO each job it destroys
during a recession by creating a new job during the ensuing recovery. However, once one
considers a heterogeneous productive structure that experiences ongoing creative
destruction, other scenarios are possible. The cumulative effect of a recession on overall
restructuring may be positive, zero, or DEMO negative, depending not only on how the
economy contracts but also DEMO how it recovers. Thus, the relation between recessions and
economic restructuring DEMO one to examine the effect of a recession on aggregate
separations not only at impact, but cumulatively throughout the recession-recovery
episode. We explored this issue using quarterly US manufacturing gross job flows and
employment data for DEMO 1972-93 period, and found that, along the recovery path, job
DEMO declines and falls below average for a significant amount of time, DEMO than
offsetting its initial peak. On the other hand, job creation DEMO, but it does not exceed
its average level by any significant DEMO to offset its initial decline. As a result, our
evidence indicates DEMO, on average, recessions depress restructuring.
Similarly, in Caballero and Hammour (2001) we approached the question of the
pace of restructuring over the cycle from the perspective of corporate assets. Studying the
aggregate patterns of DEMO and acquisition (M&A) activity and its institutional
underpinnings, we DEMO a conclusion that also amounts to a rejection of the
liquidationist perspective. Essentially, a liquidationist perspective in this context would
consider fire sales during sharp liquidity contractions as the occasion for intense
restructuring of corporate assets. DEMO evidence points, on the contrary, to briskly
expansionary periods characterized by high stock market valuations and abundant
liquidity as the occasion for intense DEMO&A activity.
Recent evidence on institutional impediments to creative destruction and their cost
5
For all practical purposes, some product or process innovation is taking place at every
instant in time. Absent obstacles to adjustment, continuous innovation would entail
infinite rates of restructuring. What are these obstacles to adjustment? The bulk of it is
technological -- adjustment consumes resources -- but (over-?) regulation and other man-
made institutional impediments are also a DEMO of depressed restructuring.
While few economists would object to the hypothesis that labour market
regulation hinders the process of creative destruction, its empirical support is limited. In
Caballero et al. (2004) we revisited this hypothesis DEMO a sectoral panel for 60
countries.  We found that job security DEMO -- measured by variables such as
grounds for dismissal protection, protection DEMO dismissal procedures, notice and
severance payments, and protection of employment in the constitution -- hamper the
creative destruction process, especially in countries where regulations are likely to be
enforced. Moving from the 20th to the DEMO percentile in job security cuts the annual
speed of adjustment to shocks by a third. By impairing worker movements from less to
more productive DEMO, effective labour protection reduces aggregate output and slows
down economic growth. DEMO estimated that moving from the 20th to the 80th percentile of
job security lowers annual productivity growth by as much as 1.7 per cent.
DEMO, the idea that well-functioning financial institutions and markets are
important factors DEMO economic growth is an old one.  The process of creative
destruction DEMO likely to be a chief factor behind this link.  In Caballero, Hoshi and
Kashyap (2006) we analysed the decade-long Japanese slowdown of DEMO 1990s and early
2000s. The starting point of our analysis is the well-known observation that many large
Japanese banks would have been out of DEMO had regulators forced them to recognize
all their loan losses. Because of this, the banks kept many zombie firms alive by rolling
over loans that they knew would not be collected (evergreening). Thus, the DEMO
competitive outcome whereby the zombies would shed workers and lose market share
was thwarted. Using an extensive data set, we documented that roughly 30 per cent of
firms were on life support from the banks in DEMO and about 15 per cent of assets resided
in these firms. The main idea in our article is that the counterpart to the congestion
DEMO by the zombies is a reduction in profits for potential and more productive
6
entrants, which discourages their entry. We found clear evidence of such a pattern in
firm-level data and of the corresponding reduced restructuring in DEMO data.
Bertrand, Schoar and Thesmar (2004) further drive home the DEMO that problems
in the banking sector can have grave consequences for the health of the restructuring
process. They use a differences-in-differences approach on firm-level DEMO for the period
1977-99 to analyse the impact of the banking reforms of the mid-1980s on firm and bank
behaviour. These reforms eliminated government DEMO in bank lending decisions,
eliminated subsidized bank loans, and allowed DEMO banks to compete more freely in
the credit market. They find that, after the reforms, firms’ exit rates and asset reallocation
rise, and are more correlated with performances.
International competition is an important source of DEMO destruction.  Trefler
(2004) concludes that there are significant productivity and DEMO effects from
trade openness, even in industrialized economies. To reach this DEMO, Trefler takes
advantage of the Canada-US. Free Trade Agreement (FTA) DEMO study the effects of a
reciprocal trade agreement on Canada. He finds that, for industries that experienced the
deepest Canadian tariff reductions, the DEMO of low-productivity plants reduced
employment by 12 per cent while raising industry-level labour productivity by 15 per
cent. Moreover, he finds that at least half of this increase is related to exit and/or
contraction of DEMO plants. Finally, for industries that experienced the largest
US tariff reductions, plant-level labour productivity soared by 14 per cent.  Consistent
with this evidence, Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2006) find that in the United DEMO
productivity growth is fastest in industries where trade costs (barriers) have declined the
most.
Domestic deregulation of goods markets can have similar effects. DEMO example,
Olley and Pakes (1996) find that deregulation in the US telecommunications industry
increased productivity predominantly through factor reallocation toward more productive
DEMO rather than through intra-plant productivity gains.   More broadly, Klapper, Laeven
and Rajan (2004) study the effect of entry regulation on firm DEMO in a sample
including firm-level data from countries of western and eastern Europe. Their findings
support the notion that regulation affects entry: ‘naturally high-entry’ industries have
relatively lower entry in countries that have higher entry regulations. DEMO, both the
7
growth rate and share of high-entry industries are depressed in countries DEMO more
stringent barriers to entry.     Finally, Fishman and Sarria-Allende (2004) extend the
Klapper, Laeven and Rajan study to countries outside DEMO and include both industry-
and firm-level data from the UNIDO and WorldScope databases, and reach similar
conclusions.
Final remarks
Evidence and models coincide in their conclusion that the process of creative destruction
is an integral part DEMO economic growth and fluctuations. Obstacles to this process can
have severe short- and long-run macroeconomic consequences.
Ricardo J. Caballero
Bibliography
Aghion, P. and Howitt, P. 1998. Endogenous Growth Theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Baily, DEMO, Hulten, C. and Campbell, D. 1992. Productivity dynamics in manufacturing
DEMO In Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, ed.
M. Baily and C. Winston. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Bartelsman, E. and Dhrymes, DEMO 1994. Productivity dynamics: U.S. manufacturing plants,
1972–1986. Finance and Economics DEMO Series No. 94-1. Washington,
DC: Board of Governors,  Federal DEMO System.
Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger, J. and Scarpetta, S. 2004. Microeconomic evidence of
creative destruction in industrial and developing countries. Mimeo, University of
Maryland.
Bernard, A., Jensen, J. and Schott, P. 2004. Survival DEMO the best fit: exposure to low-wage
countries and the (uneven) DEMO of U.S. manufacturing plants. Journal of
International Economics 68, 219–37.
Bertrand, M., Schoar, A. and Thesmar, D. 2004. Banking deregulation and industry
structure: evidence from the French banking reforms of 1985. Discussion Paper
No. 4488. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.
8
Caballero, R. 2006. The Macroeconomics of Specificity and Restructuring. Yrjo Jahnsson
Lectures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Caballero, R. and Hammour, M. DEMO The cleansing effect of recessions. American
Economic Review 84, 1350-68.
Caballero, R. and Hammour, M. 1996a. The fundamental transformation in
macroeconomics. American Economic Review 86(2), 181–6.
Caballero, R. and Hammour, M. 1996b. DEMO the timing and efficiency of creative
destruction. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 805–52.
Caballero, R. and Hammour, M. 1996c. On the ills of adjustment. Journal of
Development. Economics 51, 161–92.
Caballero, R. and Hammour, M. 1998a. The macroeconomics of specificity. Journal of
Political Economy 106, 724–67.
Caballero, R. and Hammour, M. 1998b. Jobless growth: appropriability, factor
DEMO and unemployment. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 48, 51–94.
Caballero, R. and Hammour, M. 2001. Institutions, restructuring, and macroeconomic
performance. In Advances in Macroeconomic Theory, ed. J. Dreze. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Caballero, R. and Hammour, M. 2005. The cost of recessions revisited: a reverse-
liquidationist view.  Review of Economic Studies 72, 313–41.
Caballero, R., Hoshi, T. and Kashyap, A. 2006. Zombie lending and depressed
restructuring in Japan. Working Paper No. 12129. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Caballero, R., Cowan, K., Engel, E. and Micco, A. 2004. Effective labor regulation and
microeconomic flexibility. Mimeo, MIT.
Davis, S., Haltiwanger, DEMO and Schuh, S. 1996. Job Creation and Destruction. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Fishman, R. and Sarria-Allende, V. 2004. Regulation of entry DEMO the distortion of
industrial organization. Working Paper No. 10929. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J. and Krizan, C. 2001. Aggregate DEMO growth: lessons
from microeconomic evidence. In New Developments in Productivity Analysis,DEMO
ed. E. Dean, M. Harper and C. Hulten. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
9
Klapper, L., Laeven, L. and Rajan, R. 2004. Business DEMO and firm entry:
evidence from international data.  Working Paper No. DEMO Cambridge, MA:
NBER.
Olley, S. and Pakes, A. 1996. DEMO dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications
equipment industry. Econometrica 64, 1263–98.
DEMO, J. 1934. Depressions. In Economics of the Recovery Program, ed. D. Brown
et al. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Schumpeter, J. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York: Harper & Bros.
Trefler, D. 2004. The long and short of the Canada–U.S. Free Trade Agreement.
American Economic Review DEMO, 870–95.{1g42fwefx}