SPRU Electronic Working Paper Series
Paper No. 154
University IPRs and Knowledge DEMO Is the IPR ownership
model more efficient?
G.A. Crespi*, A. DEMO and B. Verspagen***
(*SPRU & University of Chile, **SPRU, ***Eindhoven DEMO of Technology & TIK)
December 2006
The Freeman Centre, University DEMO Sussex,
Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QE, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 1273 877139
E-mail: g.a.crespi@sussex.ac.uk
http://www.sussex.ac.uk/spru/
University IPRs and Knowledge Transfer. Is the IPR
ownership model more efficient?DEMO
Gustavo A. Crespi+
SPRU – University of Sussex & Department of Economics - University of Chile
Aldo Geuna*
SPRU – University of Sussex
Bart DEMO
Eindhoven University of Technology & TIK, University of Oslo
V23: December, 2006
Acknowledgment
The authors are grateful to Ed Steinmueller for his comments and suggestions. Earlier versions of this paper
were presented at the workshop DEMO Knowledge as Property Workshop”, European University Institute,
Florence (I), the DRUID 11th Conference, Copenhagen (Dk), The European Science Open DEMO, Munich (D),
the workshop “IPR for Business and Society”, Birkbeck College, London (UK), SPRU 4th anniversary
conference, University of Sussex, Brighton (UK), European Patent Office seminar, Den Hague (DEMO) and the
Roundtable for Engineering Entrepreneurship Research, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta (US).
Comments and suggestions of participants at these meetings DEMO much appreciated. The creation of the PatVal
database used in this analysis was supported by the European Commission PatVal project. Aldo Geuna
acknowledges the DEMO of the International Centre for Economic Research (ICER), Torino (I) the final draft
of this paper was written during his appointment as Senior Research Fellow at the centre.
+: SPRU, University of Sussex DEMO Centre, Brighton, BN1 9QE, UK. Tel. +44 1273 873592, Fax. +44
1273 685865, e-mail: g.a.crespi@sussex.ac.uk
*: SPRU, University of Sussex DEMO Centre, Brighton, BN1 9QE, UK. Tel. +44 1273 877139, Fax. +44
1273 685865, e-mail: a.geuna@sussex.ac.uk
# : Eindhoven University of Technology, PO Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, NL. Tel: +31 40 247 5938, Fax:
+31 40 247 2607, e.mail: b.verspagen@tm.tue.nl
Abstract
This paper contributes to the current debate on university patents and DEMO transfer at
two levels. First we present the results of the comparison of European and US academic
patenting systems, and show that the common perception that Europe is lagging behind the
US in terms of university DEMO is far from being correct. Second, we develop an
assessment of DEMO efficiency of the academic IPR ownership model. Specifically, we assess
whether DEMO patents in Europe are more often applied, and/or more
economically DEMO, than patents that result from university research but are not owned DEMO
universities (university-invented). Our analysis starts from the observation that in DEMO sample
of six major European countries, about two-thirds of the patents DEMO result (at least partly)
from university research, are not owned by universities (but instead are owned in large
measure by private firms). Given the different importance of Public Research Organisations
(PRO) in DEMO 6 EU countries considered, we have done the same analysis also DEMO the case of
PRO-owned and PRO-invented patents. A review of the theory of research joint ventures
suggests that ownership is the result of a DEMO game, in which the relative bargaining
positions depend, among other things, on characteristics of the inventive process. This is the
starting point for applying two separate statistical treatment models. Our results indicate that,
after DEMO for observable patent characteristics, there are no significant differences
between university-owned DEMO university-invented patents.
JEL Subject Classification: O3, I28
Keywords: University patenting, public-private technology transfer, European universities
1
1. Introduction
The role of universities in the production of economically useful DEMO has received
much recent attention in the policy debate. Policy initiatives leading to major institutional
changes have been carried out in many countries following DEMO idea that the university has to
be more proactive in transferring knowledge to industry. It seems to us that in most policy
circles, a vision of the American model based on the research university that owns DEMO
property rights on its inventions and actively seeks to exploit them, DEMO been taken as the new
way forward in Europe. Specifically, most DEMO the policy attention has focused on the need for
European countries to enact a ‘Bayh-Dole Act’-like legislation, which is expected to raise the
number of patents owned by European universities.
The focus on the role of DEMO in knowledge transfer from universities to the private
sector seems to largely ignore the empirical evidence that public-private knowledge transfer
is a multi-faceted phenomenon DEMO occurs through a number of channels of great variety
(e.g., Cohen et al., 1998). These channels include scholarly publications such as journal
articles, conferences and workshops where researchers from universities and the private
sector meet, employment of graduates in private firms, research joint ventures, consultancy
by university faculty, etc. In the setting of such a variegated set of relations and interactions,
the model of a university taking out DEMO patent on an invention resulting from one of its basic
research projects, and then actively seeking a firm to license the patent to, DEMO to be only
one of the many possible ways of transferring knowledge.
In particular, in the next section, we present evidence that in DEMO, even in the context of
patented research results, such a characterization of the knowledge transfer process is far
from the dominant way found DEMO practice. Our evidence suggests that the largest part of
(European) patents in which university researchers are involved as inventors, is owned by
private firms, rather than universities. This suggests that the firm is involved in the university
research as early as the pre-patent phase, and that who owns the patent (the firm, the
university, or, in the DEMO of some European countries, the researcher) is the result of a
bargaining process. Our data confirm earlier impressions of the empirical relevance, in
Europe, of this type of involvement of university researchers in patenting by firms (e.g.,
Geuna and Nesta, 2006).
This paper asks DEMO question whether private ownership of patents on university research (or a
DEMO of private and university research) has any effect on the probability DEMO
commercialization of the patent, or on the economic value of the DEMO We focus on
patenting as one channel of knowledge transfer without studying its relative
efficiency/effectiveness compared to other channels. Specifically, we compare, DEMO a European
context, university-owned patents (those patents that have a university assignee) with
university-invented patents (those patents that have at least one DEMO inventor, but are
not owned by the university).  We employ data from a large scale survey among inventors of
European patents (PatVal database1) to assess whether university-owned patents in Europe
are more often applied, and/or more economically valuable, than university-invented.
The issue that emerges DEMO the literature review that we provide below, and which forms the
DEMO of our research question, is whether university ownership of patents on DEMO research
that is carried out by its researchers will enhance the efficiency of the knowledge transfer
1 For more information on the PatVal Project, see Giuri, Mariani et al. (2005).
2
process. The answer to this question obviously has large policy implications, because, as we
show below in Section 3, many European universities tend DEMO leave their patents to be owned
by private parties (mostly firms)DEMO
The literature review suggests that there may indeed be effects of patent ownership on the
economic efficiency of patenting as a channel of university-to-private DEMO transfer. In
particular, it is suggested (Agion and Tirole, 1994) that private ownership of patents in which
university researchers cooperate may lower DEMO incentive to provide a high-quality
contribution, and (Hellman, 2005) that private ownership may be associated to less-efficient
searching for commercial partners from DEMO side of the university of the individual researcher.
Our theoretical review also briefly covers the issue of what influences the decision of
university researchers DEMO yield the patent to the university or a private firm (Jensen, Thursby
and Thursby, 2006).
The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we review the relevant theoretical
contributions of IPR ownership in DEMO context of public-private research joint ventures and
present our hypotheses. The data sources and descriptive statistics on university patent
ownership are presented in the DEMO 3. Section 4 introduces further explanatory variables
that we will use in the statistical analysis, and presents descriptive statistics of these. Section
5 introduces the methodology and presents estimation results. Finally, the main result
pointing to a lack of significant differences in the use and value of university-owned DEMO
university-invented patents discovered is discussed in relation to current policy actions in the
conclusions.
2. University IPR Ownership and Technology Transfer
Much of the DEMO debates on the technological competitiveness of Europe centres,
correctly or not, around what is known as the ‘European paradox’: Europe performs well DEMO
scientific research, but is bad in commercializing it (European Commission, DEMO).2
Naturally, as an outcome of the central role of this DEMO, policy emphasis has been put
on the working of industry – DEMO relations in Europe. The suggestion is that these
relations leave much to be desired, and that policies are needed to make them more efficient.
From an economic point of view, what could be the reasons for such underutilization of
academic research in private businesses? Quite a few academic and policy works have
suggested that European academic IPR institutions, or the lack of a strong enforcement of it,
can be considered one DEMO the major causes of the supposed low contribution of science to
innovation. However, only very few theoretical works (and even less empirical validations)DEMO
have addressed this issue using an analytical framework to assess if and when the lack of
(strong) IPR, or the inappropriate assignment of it, can be considered as the cause of
underutilisation of academic science.
To the best of our knowledge, only the papers of Aghion and Tirole (1994), Hellman (2005)
and Mazzoleni (2005) have DEMO full economic models to assess the impact of academic
IPR on the efficiency of the development process. Mazzoleni (2005) analyses the social
2 DEMO concept of an existence of a European paradox has been challenged by scholarly work in recent years. See
for example Tijssen and Van Wijk (1999), Brusoni and Geuna (2003) and Dosi, Llerena and Sylos-Labini
(2005).
3
welfare implications of academic patenting focusing on the appropriability conditions of
downstream DEMO&D.  It compares the two scenarios of ‘open access’ and ‘licensing’. DEMO first
is characterised by diffusion of knowledge through traditional open science channels while
the second relies on academic patents. The paper is very much DEMO by the American
context and does not take into account the issue of ownership of the property right, it is less
relevant for the focus of our research, below we briefly discuss the predictions of the Hellman
and Agion and Tirole models.
The Hellman model is primarily aimed DEMO the questions whether patents are an efficient form
of knowledge transfer, DEMO hence does not primarily focus on the issue of patent ownership.
However, we feel that this model still has strong implications for our research question. It
considers a two-stage research process, in which a university researcher  (the ‘scientist’) first
develops an ‘idea’, and then seeks a DEMO to develop this idea into a commercial project. The
main question that the model addresses is whether it makes any difference for the search
DEMO whether or not the idea is patented. Hellman shows that patents increase the incentive
of the scientist to invest in search, but that the incentive of the firm to search for scientists is
lowered by the DEMO (because the patent strengthens the bargaining power of the
university/researcher)DEMO
In an elaborate version of the model, there are three parties DEMO in the matching process:
the scientist, the university (represented by a Technology Transfer Office, TTO), and the
firm. In this model setup, the assumption is that the TTO has lower search costs, DEMO to
the scientist, when looking for interested firms. For a given DEMO expenditure, the TTO
realizes a higher probability for a match than DEMO scientist on her own does. Hence the
involvement of the TTO increases the efficiency of the commercialization process, and also
the expected rate of commercialization of university research projects. Hellman assumes that
if the idea is DEMO, the patent is owned by the university, and the TTO is involved. This
implies that once the idea is patented, the scientist looses control over it: negotiations on
licensing etc. take place between the TTO and the firm. The scientist does have a choice,
however, of whether or not disclosing the invention (to the TTO). The advantage of
disclosure is that it raises the search efficiency, and hence the probability of commercial
application. In return for this probability, the scientist can negotiate an up-front fee, or a share
of the licensing income, DEMO the TTO.
The disadvantage of disclosure is that the scientist is no longer in a position to negotiate
directly to the firm, because the TTO owns the patent. The firm, the TTO and the scientist are
involved in a three-party bargaining game, and the relative share that the scientist gets from
this game is lower than in the case of DEMO direct bargaining process with the firm, in the version
of the DEMO where the TTO does not exist. Thus, the scientist faces a DEMO between
disclosing, which raises the probability of commercialization, but lowers the pay-off of it, and
non-disclosure, which lowers the probability of commercialization DEMO raises the pay-off of it.
Hellman shows that there are (plausible) parameter values where the negative effects of
disclosure outweigh the positive effects, as seen from the scientist’s perspective. In this case,
which is DEMO likely when the search costs advantage of the TTO is not particularly
strong (e.g., when the scientist is strongly embedded in a network DEMO private firms), the
scientist may choose not to disclose the idea to the TTO, but instead to search herself for an
interested firm and ‘sell’ the idea directly to this firm. Note, however, that DEMO Hellman’s
model, “the major drawback is that without disclosure, the scientist never wants to file a
patent, since the university would simply lay a claim on it” (Hellman, 2005, p. 26). It seems
4
consistent to assume that in such cases, the firm would still patent the idea, and hence the
firm patent would turn up with a university inventor.
Although Hellman (2005) does not undertake a detailed welfare DEMO of the case, it is
clear that there may be a DEMO impact on social value of the university research if the
scientist decides to not disclose the invention. This results, for example, because the
DEMO of the TTO, through its lower search costs, will increase the probability of
commercialization. Thus, we conclude that in the setting of the Hellman model, private
ownership of patents based (partly) on university research, may be an indication of a less
efficient matching process, and DEMO may lower the probability of commercial application of
the patent.
The paper by Aghion and Tirole (1994) analyzes the issue of the ownership DEMO the patent in a
different setting, which is the case of DEMO research projects between universities and private
firms. They conclude that the assignment of property rights (patents) to the firm rather than
the university DEMO lead to market failure, i.e., the innovation resulting from the collaboration
will have a lower value than could have been the case if DEMO university had owned the patent.
In this model, a university undertakes DEMO research project for a private firm. Both parties need
to invest in the project. Due to uncertainty, the actual content of the innovation is non-
negotiable ex ante. Therefore, the contract specified for the research project is incomplete: it
specifies only the attribution of the property right (DEMO owns the patent, the university of the
firm?), the license fee that the university obtains in case the patent is assigned to DEMO firm, and
the amount of investment of the firm. As an DEMO, only one of the two parties involved
may own the patent DEMO from the project.
In this setting, the pay-offs of the invention DEMO the two parties are related to ownership. If the
firm owns the invention, the university does not share in the profits from the invention.
Instead, it is paid a pre-bargained fee that covers its research efforts. On the other hand, if the
university owns the invention, both DEMO share the pay-off by means of a licensing fee
levied by the university. The university and the firm bargain ex ante over ownership of DEMO
expected invention, taking into account these (expected) benefits. Then, the answer to the
question of who will own the patent depends on DEMO factors: the relative marginal impacts of
the research efforts of both DEMO, and the ex ante bargaining power of both parties. We
discuss DEMO factors in turn.
The relative marginal impacts of the two parties are important because the university only has
an incentive to make the maximum DEMO in case it owns the patent. Due to the
incompleteness of the research contract, the firm does not have the means to control whether
or not the university makes the maximum effort. Thus, if the university does not own the
invention, it’s best strategy is to ‘shirk’, DEMO, provide a minimal research effort. Such a
shirking university is obviously DEMO problem for the firm, because it will lead to a less DEMO
invention. If the relative marginal impact of the university's research effort is large, this
becomes a serious problem, and the firm is DEMO likely to leave ownership to the
university.
In the formal model, DEMO and Tirole compare the pay-offs to the firm under both modes of
ownership. If the firm owns the patent, it gets the full amount of pay-offs (net of the lump
sum payment to the university). If the university owns the invention, the firm gets only part
of the total payoff. Thus, the firm compares a shared pay-off under maximum effort by the
university to the full pay-off with a 'shirking' DEMO Obviously, the higher the marginal
5
impact of the university effort, the more likely it is that the first of these situations will lead to
a higher pay-off for the DEMO Thus, the higher the marginal impact of the university effort, the
higher the willingness of the firm to leave ownership of the invention DEMO the university.
Bargaining power for the university also influences the assignment of the patent. For
example, if the university has specific knowledge that makes it a research monopolist, the
firm may have to choose between no project at all (and hence no pay-offs) and sharing pay-
offs DEMO the university. As long as the shared pay-offs are positive, the DEMO will then still
undertake the research project and leave the patent to the university (which would be socially
optimal).
A case of market failure may emerge when the university does not have strong bargaining
power DEMO the relative marginal impacts of the two parties are such that the firm is unwilling
to leave the patent to the university. To see DEMO this emerges, let us call the value of the
innovation under DEMO ownership of the patent (i.e., minimum effort by the university) DEMO
Now assume that the extra effort that the university would be willing to make in exchange for
ownership leads to an increase in the DEMO value equal to ∆ > 0. Obviously, as long as ∆
> 0, the social value of the innovation goes up with a DEMO of the patent to the university.
But, because in this case DEMO firm only gets a share of the invention value, its private DEMO
may be lower. Assume the firm gets a share σ (Aghion DEMO Tirole assume σ = ½). Then, σ(V0
+ ∆) < V0, or ∆ < V0(1 − σ)/σ would DEMO sufficient to prevent the firm from making the
socially efficient decision to leave the patent to the university.
The extra effort of the university DEMO not always lead to a larger value of the invention (∆ >
0) because the effort of the firm is endogenous. The optimal firm effort may go down as a
result of increased university effort. DEMO such a case, market failure does not take place, and the
allocation of the patent to the firm is optimal.
Note that market DEMO only results if the university is cash constrained, which is an
DEMO of the model, and the firm has a large degree of DEMO power. If the
university is not cash-constrained, it would be able DEMO pay the firm the difference V0 – σ(V0 +
∆) DEMO still have positive pay-offs itself. Because the firm is not assumed to be cash
constrained, market failure is not a possibility in case in which the university owns the patent
(i.e., when it has high DEMO ante bargaining power).
Whether the strong assumption on pay-off maximizing and cash constrained universities is
realistic, can be debated. As long as the firm behaves in a strictly profit-maximizing way,
market failure due to DEMO lack of university ownership of patents is a possibility. Arguably, in
DEMO framework of the Aghion and Tirole model, universities not being interested DEMO monetary
pay-offs only reinforce the possibility of market failure.
In the context of our empirical analysis below, the question what determines whether a patent
on university research is owned by the university, plays an essential role. Obviously, both the
Hellman (2005) and Aghion and Tirole (1994) models address this issue. In Hellman (2005),
it is the DEMO efficiency of the university researcher in searching for interested commercial
parties, DEMO well as the value of involving the university researcher in the development process
(this increases the bargaining power of the scientist) that are DEMO main input into the decision
on disclosure of the patent. In Aghion and Tirole (1994), it is primarily the relative (marginal)
DEMO of the university researcher to the research outcome that influences ownership.
6
Finally, the recent paper by Jensen, Thursby and Thursby (2006) DEMO the issue of patent
ownership in a more direct way. Their model is a 2-stage game, in which a research project is
first applied for funding with public funding agencies, and in a final stage may be
commercialized by consulting of the university scientist to a firm. Their DEMO focuses on the
impact of differences in the quality of the university researcher, and differences in the
difficulty of the research project. With higher quality researchers, the model predicts that
university ownership of the resulting patents is more likely (ceteris paribus). Project difficulty
mainly works indirectly through research agency funding, and the effect of more funding is
argued to increase the likelihood of university ownership.
What can be done about the DEMO failure due to a ‘wrong’ assignment of patents resulting
from university – private research collaboration? The fact that the market failure is
asymmetric (DEMO firms owning patents can be inefficient) makes it possible to eliminate DEMO
sources of it by giving universities more bargaining power, for example DEMO a piece of
legislation like the Bayh-Dole Act that was introduced in the U.S. in 1980 (Eisenberg, 1996,
provides an overview of DEMO debates surrounding the introduction of the Bayh-Dole Act). This
law provides universities in the USA with the right to own patents on research DEMO was
sponsored from federal sources such as the National Science Foundation (DEMO).
The usual economic logic behind the Bayh-Dole Act (for an DEMO, see, e.g., Mowery et
al., 2001) is that these DEMO will facilitate technology transfer from universities to private
firms (see also DEMO above discussion of Hellman, 2005). When university research generates
knowledge DEMO may be applied in commercial products or processes, private firms may DEMO
interested in this knowledge. But when it comes to making additional investments in order to
transform the university-generated knowledge into a commercial application, an additional
incentive problem may pose itself. A firm that endeavours to undertake DEMO additional R&D
that is necessary to develop the commercial application will only consider this a useful
undertaking when it has a prospect of DEMO imitation by competitors. This is only
possible if the firm that develops the applied knowledge to turn the university discovery into
a commercial application DEMO an exclusive right to do so. Otherwise competitors may move
in, DEMO use the freely available university knowledge to develop a competing application, DEMO
this prospect is enough to discourage private investment following up university research.
The only way in which the firm that wants to develop the DEMO discovery may obtain
exclusivity, is when the university patents its discovery, and grants an exclusive license to the
firm.
Note that this argument DEMO somewhat more extensive than the setting of the Aghion and Tirole
model discussed above. It sketches a two-stage research process, with the university
undertaking the basic research, and the firm the applied (or experimental) research, whereas
the Aghion and Tirole model considers a research joint venture. The ‘common logic’ also
does not pose the question of ownership of the DEMO (either the firm interested in the
research, or the university itself). Since we are primarily interested in the issue of ownership
(for the empirical reasons discussed below), we prefer to use the Aghion DEMO Tirole line of
argument, but we notice that this leads to DEMO same conclusion, i.e., that universities should be
stimulated legally to patent their inventions, as the common argument in the Bayh-Dole
debate.
Note also that there is a subtle difference between the US context of the DEMO Act and
the situation in European nations. In the US, because DEMO its federal structure, a specific
question with regard to ownership of DEMO sponsored research had emerged (Mowery and
7
Sampat, 2001). Funding bodies such as the NIH and NSF could claim rights because they co-
financed research, and universities could equally do so because they financed part of the
research themselves, and because they employed the researchers and owned the labs in which
the research was DEMO U.S. law did not provide an immediate and clear answer as to who
held the rights to patent federally funded research. Hence the funding DEMO and the
universities usually engaged in complicated negotiations over these rights. First, these
negotiations were taking place on a case-by-case basis, but later DEMO so-called Institutional
Patent Agreements (IPAs) were introduced by the larger funding agencies. The Bayh-Dole
act was introduced in order to streamline the multiple DEMO in this field.
A phenomenon like the IPAs found in the US is (still) largely unknown in Europe because the
share of research DEMO funded by large independent funding organizations is still relatively
small (possibly DEMO the exception of the UK). Instead, a different issue seems DEMO emerge with
regard to the patenting of European university research. In some European countries Bayh-
Dole act like regulation giving the ownership of IPR DEMO the university instead of the professor
(professorial rights) has been in force for many years (though possibly not enforced), while in
other countries it has been introduced only recently in an emulation of the DEMO act.
Across European countries (except Italy) there is now strong support for the assignation of
IPR ownership to the university based on the DEMO that this policy can help to solve the
“European paradox”. The evidence usually put forward is that European universities have
many fewer patents than DEMO universities and there is therefore a need of new regulation to
create incentives for them to be more active. In this paper we endeavour DEMO examine the
validity of this rational using the Aghion and Tirole framework to study new original data on
university patenting in Europe gathered in DEMO Patval survey.
3. A First Assessment of European Academic Patenting
For our empirical analysis we rely on the Patval survey. For a full description DEMO the survey
sample, methodology, and a preliminary analysis of the response see Giuri, Mariani et al.
2005. The survey was addressed at inventors listed on (granted) European patents with a
priority date in the DEMO 1993 – 1997, in six European countries: Germany, France, Italy,
The Netherlands, Spain and the UK. These six countries accounted for about 88% of granted
EPO patents whose first inventor has an address DEMO of the EU-15 countries (about 42% of the
total EPO). DEMO survey was carried out in the period July 2003 - April 2004. We obtained
responses relating to 9,017 patents representing 18% of all DEMO EPO patents with a
priority date in the considered period.
On the basis of a question that asked where the inventor was employed at DEMO time of the
invention, we were able identify 433 patents in DEMO at least one of the inventors was
employed by a university (DEMO will label these 'university patents' from now on). They
represent 4.8% of our sample. Gambardella, Harhoff and Verspagen (2005) have constructed
sampling weights for the 9,017 observations, defined as the inverse probability of a patent
being in the set of 9,017 observations. These DEMO are based on a comparison of the
responses with all granted patents with a similar priority date in the six countries, on the basis
of observable characteristics in the patent document (such as inventor country, DEMO date,
technology class), as well as citations received. These weights enable us to assess the
representativeness of the 433 university patents relative DEMO the total sample, i.e., to determine
whether or not the inventors of university patents are more or less likely to respond.
8
Spain
17
9
53%
8
47%
7
4
57%
3
43%
Although DEMO paper focuses mainly on academic patents, the intricacies of the university
DEMO in certain EU countries such as France and Italy, for example, in which Public
Research Organisations (PROs) overlap at least in part DEMO universities, requires us also to
consider PRO-patents (those patents that have at least one PRO inventor). The second part of
Table 1 DEMO this information. As expected, countries with important PRO infrastructure
such as DEMO and the Netherlands have a significant number of number of PRO patents, less
so the UK where most of the research is carried out in universities. France is the only country
where the number of PRO DEMO in the sample is larger than the number of university
patents.
Interestingly, compared to the situation in universities, the case of PRO patents DEMO less clear-
cut in terms of ownership. Although in the data for all countries the number of invented PRO
patents is still the majority, this is the result of opposite situations in the various countries
(probably dependent on different institutional and legal configuration). In the cases of
DEMO results of this calculation show that we have a very small overrepresentation of
university patents: the share of our 433 cases in the sum of the sampling weights over the
complete (n = 9,017) DEMO is 4.93%, while in terms of the number of observations, their
share is 4.80% (433/9,017).3 In the remainder of this paper, we ignore this, and proceed as if
our university patents DEMO is representative of the larger universe in the six countries.
Table 1 presents, for each country in the sample, the total number of DEMO and it breaks
down ownership of the patent into university or non-university. University-owned patents are
those patents that have a university assignee, while university-invented patents are those
patents that have at least one university inventor but DEMO are not owned by a university. What
the table brings out very clearly is that the large majority of patents in which university
inventors DEMO involved is not owned by universities.4  In all countries except Spain, the
fraction of university-owned patents in university patents is far below half.
DEMO 1. Ownership of European University/PRO Patents
Germany Italy France
Number of University patents 108 50 60
University-owned patents 4  2  7
4% DEMO 12%
University-invented patents 104 48 53
96% 96% 88%
Number of PRO patents 62 13 77
PRO-owned patents 45 4 24
73% 31% 31%
DEMO patents 17 9 53
17% 69% 69%
UK
139
45
32%
94
68%
37
0
37
100%
Nether-
lands
59
12
20%
47
80%
DEMO
23
57.5%
17
42.5%
Total
433
79
18%
354
82%
236
100
42%
136
58%
3 These results differ between countries. The shares of DEMO patents in the samples per country are as
follows (the results DEMO presented as share in number of cases/share in weights): UK 9.01%/9.22%, DE
3.23%/3.62%, FR 4.04%/3.95, IT 4.00%/3.94%, NL 5.25%/5.18%, ES 6.32%/6.07%. The deviation between the
two DEMO is most serious in Germany (DE), where we seem to DEMO some overrepresentation of university
inventions.
4 See Geuna and Nesta, 2006 DEMO references cited in their paper for preliminary evidence of this phenomenon in
a few European countries.
9
Germany, the Netherlands and Spain PRO-owned patents are more frequent than PRO-
invented patents, the contrary applies to the cases of France, Italy DEMO the UK.5
Table 2 analyses in more detail the ownership structure of invented patents. About 4/5th of
the university-invented patents are owned by DEMO, 10% are assigned to governmental
offices of various kinds, PROs and other Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) and 9% to
individuals (mostly in the case of Germany and Italy).6 Companies play a (slightly) DEMO
dominant role in the case of PRO-invented patents, accounting for about DEMO of them.
Apparently, PROs being more often more directly linked to DEMO results in a higher
share of ownership by governmental offices (about DEMO). A particular case is military
research, 17% of the PRO-invented DEMO where assigned to the UK Secretary of State for
Defence (UK), underlying the important role of military research in the UK. Finally,
individuals account for 9% as in the case of university patents.
Table DEMO Ownership of European University/PRO Invented  Patents
Ownership Total Sample
Companies DEMO (81%)
University-invented patents Government, PRO, PPP 36 (10%)
Individuals 31 (9%)
Companies 81 (60%)
PRO-invented patents Government, Univ., PPP 43(31%)
Individuals 12 (9%)
The first DEMO this paper wants to make is to compare the US university technology
transfer system with our own data on Europe to assess if there DEMO indeed a major difference
between the patent output of US universities and European universities (here represented by
our sample), as often claimed by most policy literature. Some commentators have argued that
Europe is 20 years DEMO the US, referring to the Bayh-Dole Act as the departure point DEMO a
new technology transfer model that Europe needs to follow to support a more significant
contribution of European universities to the innovative process of DEMO In other words,
European universities do not produce a sufficient number of patents (based on national and
OECD statistics of university-owned patents) DEMO therefore they are not efficient in
technology transfer.
If we look at US data for the period 1993-1997 we discover that academic patents accounted
DEMO between 1.9% and 4.3% of USPTO patents depending if we considered all USPTO
patents or only the one assigned to US organisations (private and non-profit) (NSF, 2004).
Given the absence of a response bias for university patents, it is clear that European
universities have a (DEMO) similar share as compared to US universities. Why do our
results DEMO in such a dramatic way compared to the commonly accepted policy view of a
technologically low-performing higher education system in Europe? The most important
5 The case of the UK can be explained by the fact DEMO the only two major PROs were active in the period
considered. These were DERA (now privatised as QuinetiQ) and the Medical Research Centre, both owned by
the respective ministry and therefore the ownership of patents DEMO assigned to the ministries.
6 In the period considered in our analysis, the British Technology Group (BTG) was created from the
privatisation of the National Research Development Corporation (merged with the National Enterprise Board),DEMO
the public organisation created in the late 1940s to commercialise innovations resulting from publicly funded
research. Following the tradition, until the mid 1990s, DEMO was chosen by a large number of universities to be
the assignee of academic patents. Our sample includes 14 patents assigned to BTG, they were classified in the
companies class.
10
reason is that official data take only into account university-owned patents, and therefore
underestimate in a macroscopic way the activity of European universities. Thursby, Thursby
and Fuller (2006) show that this phenomenon (firms owning patents to university research)
also occurs in the (post Bayh-Dole) US, although at a relatively lower frequency than in the
European sample we DEMO
Table 3. Ownership of US University Patents
Share of total academic patents
Total number of University patents 5772
# University-owned patents 66%
# University-invented DEMO 32%
US federal government as one of the assignees 2%
Author elaboration of data from Thursby et al. (2006).
Can we find a way to adjust the US data to take into account of the DEMO issue? The US
NSF data take into account only university-owned patents, however, Thursby, Thursby and
Fuller (2006)7 have put together information at the inventor level controlling for ownership
for 87 research intensive universities DEMO for about 5,800 patents in the middle 1990s.
Table 3 presents an elaboration of their data.
Although we acknowledge that the two samples DEMO be not perfectly comparable, the first
striking observation that can be DEMO that while in the US about 2/3rd of university patents are
owned by the university that employed one of the inventors, in Europe university ownerships
accounts for less than 1/5th. These data seems to DEMO to the existence of two different
models of university technology transfer. The American model is mainly based on the
university owning the rights to DEMO discovery made by one of its academic employees; on the
basis DEMO this right, the university commercialises the discovery via the technology transfer
DEMO (TTO). Instead, the European model of academic technology transfer is mainly based
on a direct transfer of property rights from the academic DEMO (or university) to the private
sector (usually a large firm), with only a minor role for university ownership and TTOs
activity in licensing or spin-offs.
One may argue that the figures presented here clearly DEMO the incentive creation effect that
the Bayh-Dole Act had in the US system. But does this lead to a much higher academic
patents production DEMO the US system as compared to Europe? If we adjust the DEMO for the US
taking into account that the official statistics underestimate of about 1/3rd the number of
university patents (generalising the result of Table 3 that about 1/3rd of patents had an
academic inventor DEMO were not owned by the university), and we recalculate the two shares
of academic patents on US-PTO patents present above, we would end up with a bracket 2.5%
- 5.7% (depending on whether US university patents are expressed as a share of total
USPTO-issued patents, or only those assigned to US residents). Anecdotal evidence suggests
that the share DEMO foreign-residents in holding domestic patents is higher in the US than in
Europe, and hence the upper end of the bracket (5.7%) is probably a better benchmark than
the lower bracket. Comparing the upper bracket DEMO with the 4.8% from our sample, we
conclude that US academic DEMO output as a fraction of total patents is at most about 15%
higher in the US than in Europe.
7 We want to thank DEMO Thursby for having allowed us to access their data on the US system before
publication.
11
To understand the relative importance of this difference it is worth remembering (Table 2
above) that a significant part of the European science system is institutionally organised in
the various national public research organisations (such as the Max Plank Institute, CNRS,
CNR, etc..) while public research organisations in the US tend to be more specialised and
have a DEMO lower size. Thus, a sizable portion of European scientific activity that
DEMO patents is situated outside the university system in the public research organisations
(Cesaroni and Piccaluga, 2005), therefore some of the difference between DEMO and European
academic patent output should be attributed to the different institutional set up.
These back-of-the-envelop calculations aim to make the point that once DEMO available data is
adjusted for the ownership structure, thus taking into DEMO the different university
technology transfer models, and for the different institutional DEMO up of science, it is not so
clear that the US DEMO is outperforming the European system. US universities may have
had more patents than European universities in absolute terms, however they did not have a
much higher share of national patents.
These results shed some doubts on DEMO impact that the Bayh-Dole Act has had on the US
academic system and on the value of its applicability to the European context. Our DEMO seems
to be consistent with the evidence put forward by a series of papers of Mowery, Nelson,
Sampat and Ziedonis8 that argued that the increased number of university patents is mainly
due to the emergence DEMO the new technological opportunities offered by biomedical and ICT
research as well as the changes in IPR regulation carried out in the US during DEMO eighties and
nineties to increase appropriability and patentability. Preliminary evidence put forward for
Germany and Italy (Geuna and Nesta, 2006) seems to indicate that also European universities
have responded to increased technological opportunities as shown DEMO the increased number of
university patents in the 1980s’ and 1990s’.
3.1 Technology transfer and market failure
Apparently, although European universities are involved in research with commercial value
(i.e., leading to patentable inventions), they DEMO not particularly care to exploit the results of
this research by means of owning the associated patent. As the review of the Aghion and
DEMO model above suggests, either a lack of university bargaining power or DEMO relatively low
marginal contribution of university efforts to the outcome of the research projects may be
responsible for this. We may take the distribution DEMO inventors over the two parties as an
indication of the relative marginal impact of research efforts. Table 4 provides information on
this variable for DEMO sample of 384 patents for which we have this information. In this sample,
slightly less than half (45%) of all patents has DEMO university inventors. 55 % of all patents
has university inventors and non-university inventors.
Table 4. Ownership and inventorship of university patents
Only university University DEMO(s) and Total
inventor(s) other type inventor(s)
University-owned patents 53 (31% of column) 11 (5% of column) 64
DEMO patents 119 (69% of column) 201 (95% of column) 320
Total 172 (45% of row) 212 (55% of row) 384
DEMO the group of patents that has non-university inventors, only 5% are DEMO
Within the group of patents with only university inventors, this percentage DEMO larger (31%),
although still clearly less than half. Thus, DEMO we take the distribution of inventors over the
8 See Mowery et al (2004) for a summary for their results.
12
research partners as a (broad) indication of relative marginal research impact, the data seem
to support the idea (in Aghion and Tirole) DEMO this variable has an impact on the distribution
of ownership of the invention.
This preliminary result suggests that ‘the market’ indeed deals with the DEMO of ownership
of intellectual property rights in case of public-private research joint ventures. However, as
the Aghion and Tirole model shows, such market DEMO of patent ownership may still be
prone to market failures. Since we also have data on the (perceived) value of inventions,9 we
DEMO in a position to test for the existence of such market failure.
In doing so, we make use of the outcome of the Aghion and Tirole model that market failure
occurs in an asymmetric way: if the market fails to provide the optimal innovation size, it is
because the firm takes ownership where this should have been assigned to the DEMO
Thus, if market failure plays a significant role, we would expect that, ceteris paribus, the
value of patents would be lower for DEMO sample where firms own the patent than for the
sample where universities own the patent (in this case, the model predicts that the DEMO
produces the optimal innovation value). Thus, we formulate our research DEMO as follows:
can we find, ceteris paribus, the factors that impact on ownership of patents resulting from
public – private research joint DEMO, a positive effect of university ownership on the
economic value, and/or the rate of commercial application of patented inventions? If the
answer to this research question is positive, this amounts to support for a “European Bayh-
Dole Act”.
4. Explanatory variables and descriptive statistics
There are DEMO university related inventions in the PatVal dataset, 79 (18%) of DEMO owned by
the university and 354 (82%) owned by a firm or another non-university entity. We start by
studying the characteristics of the DEMO and non-university-owned sub samples
along a list of variables capturing both invention and inventor’s backgrounds. Table 5
presents the variable definitions.
We have constructed DEMO variables to try to capture the economic value and the rate of
commercial application of patented inventions.10 Three of these capture the
commercialization of DEMO patent: commercial use by the applicant itself, licensing11 and
creation of a start up. These three variables are dummy variables with value 1 DEMO the
respondent indicated patent use. We also construct a summary variable Patent Used with
value 1 if at least one of the three forms DEMO use had value 1. The PatVal Questionnaire also
asked the respondent to provide a (subjective) evaluation of the value of the patent. The
DEMO were structured in 10 asymmetric intervals ranging from less than €30,000 to more
than €300 million.12 Finally we used the number of forward DEMO as a proxy for the use of
the patent in subsequent inventive processes. Finally, we include the number of citations
9 For discussion on the robustness and use of the information on the (perceived) value DEMO invention see
Gambardella et al. (2005).
10 See Appendix 1 DEMO a selection of questions used in the PatVal questionnaire regarding this category of
variables.
11 We assume that if a patent is licensed, the licensee commercializes the patent.
12 Although this is a subjective variable that DEMO be severely contaminated by measurement errors, it has been
extensively validated DEMO the PatVal team and the results of this validation process seemed highly consistent (see
Gambardella, et. al, 2005, Giuri, Mariani, et DEMO, 2005).
13
received by a patent (forward citations), which has been proposed by, among others,
Trajtenberg (1990) as an indirect indicator of economic value of the patent.
Table 5. Variable definitions
Variable Definition
Patent used DEMO, 1 if the patent was used commercially
in any way (maximum of three dummies below)
Commercial used Dummy, 1 if the applicant/owner has used the
patent commercially
Dummy, 1 if applicant/owner has licensed out
Licensed the patent
Dummy 1 if the patent was used DEMO start a new
Start up Firm
No of Forward citations Number of citations received by the patent
Value of invention as estimated ex post DEMO inventor, based on interval
Expected Value responses. We took the natural DEMO of the mean value of each interval
plus the right border of the lowest interval and the left border of the
top interval.
Inventor DEMO Age of the inventor at time of survey
Background Graduation Graduation year of latest degree obtained
Experience Number of years between year of graduation DEMO
entering the job in which the patent was
invented
Tenure  Number DEMO years in the job when the patent
was invented
Male Dummy variable for sex
Postdoc degree Dummy, 1 if inventor has a postdoc degree
EPO patent applications Total number of patent applications at EPO by
The DEMO (ln)
Invention Inventor estimate of total R&D costs leading DEMO
Backgroun patent (1000 euro, ln)
Number of man-months for research leading to
patent, based on interval responses, using mean
of intervals
DEMO, whether patent is part of a family (a
family is a set of technically interrelated patents)
Number of words in the claims (ln)
Number of 4 digit IPC classes (ln)
Number of inventors listed
Dummy, whether there is more than 1 applicant
Dummy, DEMO non-university inventor(s) were present
Dummy, whether there was a formal collaboration agreeme
Dummy, 1 for electrical engineering
Dummy, 1 for instruments
DEMO, 1 for chemicals / pharmaceuticals
Dummy, 1 for precision engineering
Dummy, 1 for mechanical engineering
Country dummy United Kingdom
Country dummy Germany
Country dummy Italy
Country dummy Spain
Country dummy Netherlands
Country dummy France
Block
DEMO
R&D total costs
d
Man Months
nt
Family
No words claim
No IPC 4 digit
No inventors
Multiple applicants
Cooperation
FormCol
Technology ISI-EIEng
DEMO ISI_Instr
ISI_ChePha
ISI_PrEng
ISI_MechEng
Country UK
Effects DE
IT
ES
NL
FR
14
To control for heterogeneity between patents, we built 16 control variables capturing inventor
background –a set of variables with background information of the inventor DEMO the
questionnaire13– and invention background –a set of variables with information about
characteristics of the invention process leading to the patent. Finally, to control for
institutional characteristics such as differences in the legal system and technological
DEMO, we created country –according to where the research leading to the DEMO
was located– and technology dummy variables –according to the patent’s main IPC at 4
digits. Table 6 presents a comparison of these variables according DEMO the ownership of the
patent (university-owned versus university-invented).
Table 6. DEMO characteristics in each sub-sample
Sign
University University ifica
Block Variable Owned Invented Std T P-value OBS nce
Impact Patent used (0/1) 0.709 DEMO 0.061 -2.632 0.009 433 ***
Commercial used (0/1) 0.494 0.468 0.062 -0.421 0.674 433
Licensed (0/1) 0.557 0.150 0.048 -8.456 DEMO 433 ***
Start up (0/1) 0.228 0.082 0.038 -3.825 0.000 433 ***
No of Forward citations 0.114 0.500 0.138 2.792 0.006 433 DEMO
Value (ln) 6.226 5.962 0.218 -1.212 0.226 433
Inventor Age 45.6 46.5 1.361 0.691 0.490 433
Background Graduation 1978.9 1977.7 1.366 -0.936 0.350 DEMO
Experience 5.722 5.394 0.828 -0.395 0.693 433
Tenure 12.418 15.093 1.275 2.099 0.036 433 **
Male 0.937 0.952 0.027 0.558 0.577 433
Postdoc degree DEMO 0.808 0.047 -1.923 0.055 433 *
EPO patent applications 0.290 0.646 0.076 4.709 0.000 433 ***
Invention R&D total costs 11.181 10.961 0.216 DEMO 0.310 433
Background Man Months 5.411 4.569 0.219 -3.847 0.000 433 ***
Family 0.468 0.503 0.062 0.560 0.576 433
No words claim (ln) DEMO 4.758 0.087 0.873 0.383 433
No IPC 4 digit (ln) 0.419 0.343 0.056 -1.353 0.177 433
No inventors 0.869 1.094 0.066 3.436 0.001 DEMO ***
Multiple applicants (0/1) 0.152 0.085 0.037 -1.826 0.069 433 *
Cooperation (0/1) 0.152 0.565 0.059 6.991 0.000 433 ***
DEMO (0/1) 0.380 0.723 0.057 6.057 0.000 433 ***
Technology ISI-EIEng (0/1) 0.165 0.138 0.044 -0.599 0.550 433
Effects ISI_Instr (0/1) 0.291 0.192 0.051 -1.958 0.051 433 *
ISI_ChePha (0/1) 0.304 0.367 0.596 1.064 0.288 433
ISI_PrEng (0/1) 0.177 0.195 DEMO 0.361 0.718 433
ISI_MechEng (0/1) 0.063 0.107 0.037 1.183 0.238 433
Country UK (0/1) 0.570 0.266 0.056 -5.396 0.000 433 DEMO
Effects DE (0/1) 0.051 0.294 0.053 4.612 0.000 433 ***
IT (0/1) 0.025 0.136 0.040 2.792 0.006 433 ***
ES (0/1) 0.114 0.023 0.024 -3.834 0.000 433 ***
NL (0/DEMO) 0.152 0.133 0.043 -0.447 0.655 433
FR (0/1) 0.089 DEMO 0.043 1.422 0.156 433
(***) denotes 1% significance level, (**) denotes 5% significance level and (*) denotes 10% significance level.
13 Note that the inventor who answered the questionnaire is not necessarily always (one of) the university
inventors of the patent.
15
The country effects show that there are major differences between both sub DEMO in the
distribution of patents across the different countries, in line DEMO the results presented above
in Table 1. The UK and Spain account for a significantly higher fraction of patents in the
university-owned group than DEMO the university-invented group, while in Italy and Germany,
the situation DEMO reverse. For France and the Netherlands, we do not reject the DEMO hypothesis
of a balanced proportion of both types of patents.
In comparison to the major differences in the distribution of the rates of university-owned
DEMO across countries, the results regarding the technology effects are more balanced.
DEMO, the only technology class where we are able to reject the DEMO hypothesis of equal
shares in both groups is Instruments, with 29% DEMO university owned patents but only 19% of
patents in the other group. But this difference is only significant at the 10% level.
Regarding the DEMO in the distribution of inventor’s characteristics across both sub
samples of patents, we also observe a fairly balanced pattern. The only exceptions are the
variables Tenure and the number of EPO patent applications by the inventor, where the mean
is higher in the non-university owned group, and whether or not the inventor holds a postdoc
(PhD) degree. Non-university owned DEMO have a (much) higher fraction of inventors with
a postdoc degree.
There are more statistically significant differences regarding to some of the characteristics DEMO
the invention process. Here we find that the mean number of man months invested in the
invention process is higher in the case of DEMO owned patents (although we do not find a
significant variable for DEMO financial investment, i.e., R&D costs). The proportion of patents
with multiple applicants is also higher in the university owned patents. On DEMO other hand, the
number of inventors per patent is higher in DEMO non-university owned group of patents.
Finally, we find that the proportion DEMO patents in which there was cooperation (meaning that
both university- and DEMO were present) is higher for the non-university-
owned group, and the same holds for patents wre the respondent reported a formal
collaboration.
Finally, and most directly related to our research question, for the variables on
commercialization and value, we do not find any difference between the two groups with
regard to the inventor’s perceived value of the patent. On DEMO other hand, we do find that the
number of forward citations DEMO higher in the non-university owned group. However, the
probability of that DEMO patent was actually used is higher in the group of university owned
patents. Investigating further the reasons for this higher rate of used by DEMO owned we
find that this is related to two effects: licensing (56% of university owned patents were
licensed with only 15% in the DEMO group) and launching start up firms (23% of university
owned patents were also used as a basis for starting-up a new firm versus DEMO only in the
other group). Perhaps surprisingly, we find no DEMO difference between the two groups
with regard to commercial application by the applicant itself. Since universities are normally
not in the habit of undertaking DEMO activity other than education and research, we
would expect that this DEMO would be rather low for the university category. However, we
find DEMO roughly half of the university owned patents are reported to have been used for
commercial purposes by the applicant/owner. Our suspicion, based on inspection of the data,
is that (university) respondents have taken DEMO as one form of commercial application,
and hence this variable overlaps partly with the licensing variable. This implies that we
should not put DEMO much emphasis on the results for this particular variable, and instead DEMO
16
mainly on the other use variables, including (especially) the one that summarizes the various
categories (Patent Used).
5. Statistical Results
Taking these differences (or the absence of them) in the rate of commercialization DEMO the
value variables at face value, we cannot determine whether they DEMO related to the ownership
effect, or to some other underlying differences DEMO the patents in each of the two
samples. In other words, DEMO the findings for commercialization and value due to university
ownership, or DEMO other heterogeneity between the two samples? Possibly, the observed
heterogeneity between the two samples might even be causally related to the ownership value
(this is what, e.g., the Aghion and Tirole model assumes), DEMO further complicates drawing
inference on the effects of university ownership.
We approach this problem by two separate statistical techniques, both explained in more
detail in Appendix 2. The first of these estimates a regression explaining in DEMO each of the
commercialization and value variables. The explanatory variables include a wide range of
possible factors influencing the commercialization or value, and this list includes the
university ownership value. In this way, we hope to disentangle the various influences on
commercialization and value, so that we can identify the university ownership effect
separately.
The second technique that we apply DEMO from identifying the university owned patents as a
sample of so-called ‘treated’ patents (the ‘treatment’ is university ownership). It then
proceeds by constructing a control sample of ‘non-treated’ (university invented) patents. The
point is DEMO the control group should be as similar as possible to the treated sample in all
ways, except, of course, the treatment (university DEMO). Given the adequacy of such a
control group, we can DEMO a t-test for differences in the means of the commercialization and
value variables to test our research hypotheses.
The way in which we construct DEMO control group is a two-stage process (Rosenbaum and
Rubin, 1983). This starts by estimating a (logit) regression for the treatment (ownership)
variable. This regression is aimed at explaining which patents are university DEMO, and
hence the predicted values from this provide an estimated probability DEMO a particular patent
will be university owned. We then, in the DEMO stage, construct the control sample by
drawing for each treated patent DEMO control that has a probability score that is as close as
possible to the treated patent.
5.1. Control function regressions
The results from estimating DEMO control function using are summarised in Table 7. In all the
regressions we also add as control a time variable capturing the time elapsed DEMO the
patent application and the survey. In this way we can control for the fact that patents have
been exposed to diffusion processes for DEMO times. Given the different scaling of the
variables, we apply a DEMO of regression models. In the first four columns, which are all
DEMO with binary dummy variables, we use a probit model. In the DEMO for value, we
apply a simple OLS model, and in the model for citations, we use a negative binomial model.
Obviously, the DEMO of the estimated coefficients varies between those models.
17
Table 7. Regression results
ES
DE
NL
FR
IT
ISI_ElEng
ISI_Instr
ISI_ChePha
DEMO
Age
Graduation
Experience
Tenure
Postdoc degree
EPO patent appl.
R&D total costs
Man Months
Family
No words claim (ln)
No IPC 4 digit (ln)
No inventors
Multiple applicants
Cooperation (0/1)
DEMO (0/1)
Time 0.029 -0.123 0.23
(1.93*) (1.95*) (2.38**)
Constant 5.411 29.701
(7.75***) (1.43)
Observations 433 433 433 433 433 433
(Pseudo) R2 0.14 0.14
Robust t-test in DEMO (***) denotes 1% significance level, (**) denotes 5% significance DEMO and (*) denotes 10% significance level.
The first 4 columns show the marginal effects of probit model evaluate at sample means. The fifth DEMO shows OLS results and the sixth
column shows the negative binomial results.
In all cases, we started by estimating a ‘full model’ that includes all variables on inventor
background, invention background, and technology and country DEMO, as the explanatory
variables. We reduced this model to a more DEMO model by excluding, one-by-one all
18
-0.299
(2.13**)
-0.154
(DEMO)
-0.211
(2.48**)
0.416
(4.48***)
-0.259
(2.24**)
DEMO
(2.23**)
-0.117
(1.11)
-0.397
(4.05***)
-0.176
(1.62)
0.019
(3.04***)
0.018
(2.41**)
0.016
(2.70***)
-0.192
(2.19**)
0.112
(2.26**)
0.124
(2.27**)
0.146
(2.39**)DEMO
-0.125
(2.14**)
-0.156
(1.10)
-0.103
(1.30)
-0.079
(0.92)
0.564
(5.80***)
-0.076
(0.79)
-0.204
(1.83*)
-0.165
(1.57)
-0.381
(3.89***)
-0.214
(2.01**)
-0.012
(DEMO)
0.015
(2.33**)
0.019
(2.21**)
0.02
(2.96***)
DEMO
(3.15***)
0.129
(2.23**)
0.108
(1.69*)
-0.193
(1.89*)
-0.117
(1.87*)
Licensed
0.353
(5.44***)
-0.126
(1.85*)
-0.100
(2.10**)
-0.141
(3.04***)
-0.204
(4.60***)
-0.14
(DEMO)
0.078
(0.82)
0.121
(1.35)
0.085
(1.05)
DEMO
(1.68*)
0.006
(3.28***)
-0.032
(2.81***)
0.076
(1.75*)
-0.122
(2.78***)
-0.042
(1.21)
-0.096
(3.10***)
-0.013
(0.54)
-0.029
(1.11)
0.059
(1.16)
0.023
(0.55)DEMO
-0.012
(0.32)
-0.018
(0.46)
0.043
(2.13**)
0.050
(2.33**)
-0.048
(2.47**)
-0.051
(1.83*)
-0.064
(2.65***)
0.161
(0.37)
-1.274
(5.62***)
-0.819
(3.16***)
-0.99
(DEMO)
-0.432
(1.52)
0.175
(0.53)
0.098
(0.32)
DEMO
(0.72)
-0.252
(0.81)
0.191
(4.08***)
University owned
DEMO
(2.16**)
2.607
(6.41***)
0.583
(1.02)
1.252
(2.66***)
1.979
(4.42***)
0.443
(0.98)
0.21
(0.54)
0.226
(0.57)
0.074
(0.18)
-0.018
(1.73*)
0.367
(2.11**)DEMO
Patent used
0.146
(1.99**)
Commercial used
0.063
(0.78)
Start up
0.034
(1.28)
Value (ln)
-0.21
(0.95)
Forward citations
-0.389
(0.91)
variables that were not significant at the 10% level or better. Country DEMO, technology
dummies and the commercialization and value variables were never removed DEMO the
regression, independent of their significance level.
With regard to the DEMO variable (university ownership), we observe that this is
significant for DEMO Used (overall rate of commercialization) and licensing. It is not
significant for the other variables, including both measures of value.14 Thus, our DEMO here
indicates that, overall, university-owned patents tend to be 15% more often used than non-
university owned patents. Of the individual categories that DEMO up overall
commercialization, only the effect of licensing is significant (35% more often). For value and
citations, the treatment effect is in fact negative, but not significantly so (last two columns).
The DEMO for the remaining control variables are also interesting to briefly inspect. First, the
country effects tend to be highly significant across all columns and they seem to be more
important than the technology effects. This is DEMO with the results of a previous study
showing an higher relevance of country effects compare to technology effects on the mobility
of academic inventors (Crespi, Geuna and Nesta; 2005). The UK, where technology transfer
offices and their associations (UNICO/AURIL) have existed longer, is the reference country
(its dummy has been excluded from the estimations), and the generally negative signs for the
other countries in the first four DEMO indicate that commercialization is relatively high in
the UK.
Country-level institutional factors play a more important role than technological specificities.
Of the technology effects, only few are significant, and these seem to point out that in
electrical engineering and chemicals and pharmaceuticals, commercialization is less frequent.
Regarding inventors’ background, we find that experience (in general terms) contributes
positively to the rate of commercialization. The variables Graduation, Experience, Tenure,
and DEMO number of EPO patent applications all show up with positive and significant
coefficients in at least two equations. Age and having a postdoc degree, on the other hand,
have a significant negative impact in one DEMO None of the variables in the inventors
characteristics block, however, has a very robust influence on the two value indicators.
This is similar DEMO the project characteristics block. Here, we find that economic value, in our
approach is only explained by the R&D budget (and country effects).15 The number of words
in the claims of the patent DEMO the number of forward citations. The other variables have
an influence on the commercialization indicators. Interestingly, larger projects (in terms of
man months) show a lower rate of licensing. Whether or not a patent is DEMO of a larger set of
interrelated patents (family) affects commercialization positively, and so does the number of
IPC classes that apply to the patent. The number of inventors, the number of applicants, and
the DEMO collaboration variables affect commercialization negatively.
5.2. Treatment effects and matching
The first stage of the treatment effect method is the estimation of the probit DEMO that
predicts university ownership. We use the familiar set of regressors in this equation. The
14 The signs and significance levels of the university DEMO variable is always identical between the full
model and the parsimonious model, and hence our conclusions are not affected by including or excluding
explanatory variables.
15 Gambardella, Harhoff and Verspagen (21005) provide a more elaborate approach to explaining patent value
than we can offer here, and provide more enlightening insights for the total PatVal sample.
19
inventor-related variables are assumed to be a good proxy of the variables DEMO Jensen,
Thursby and Thursby (2006) rank under “researcher quality”, DEMO note that our inventors are
not necessarily always the university inventors. Still, we can take the observed inventor
characteristics as representative of the set of all inventors of the patent. We would expect that
an increase DEMO the quality of the inventor raises the probability that the patent is assigned to
the university. We do not have the same variables on DEMO funding as Jensen, Thursby and
Thursby (2006) apply, but the variables in our project characteristics block do give us an
indication of DEMO complexity of the project, and this captures the same tendency that DEMO,
Thursby and Thursby capture through their funding variable. We would expect that in
general, for “more difficult” projects, the likelihood of university DEMO increases. This is
also in line with Aghion and Tirole, since DEMO this case the marginal university contribution
should assumed to be higher.
We also apply the same process of eliminating insignificant variables from the equation. DEMO
only change we make in this respect is that we only accept final specifications that satisfy the
balancing restriction (this is a test of whether for a given propensity score, treated and control
observations are on average observationally identical, see the Appendix 2 for technical
details).16 The results of these p-score regressions are documented in Table 8. 17
We DEMO three different samples, corresponding to the three columns in the table. DEMO first
columns gives estimations for the complete sample (433 cases). DEMO, we find that inventors
with recent diplomas (negative sign on Graduation), less time in the current job (negative
sign on Tenure), with less experience in previous patenting (negative sign on number of EPO
patents), or of a higher age (positive sign on Age) DEMO to have a higher probability of
assigning the patent to the university. This is somewhat contrary to the findings in Jensen,
Thursby and DEMO (2006), who argue that higher quality inventors are more likely DEMO
assign to universities. To the extent that experience is an indicator of quality, our results at
least partially contradict this expectation, suggesting that DEMO theoretical work on this
issue for Europe might provide valuable insights.
16 If the balancing property is not satisfied, we include the last insignificant variable that we excluded, until the
restriction is satisfied.
17 We verify the balancing property using the procedure by Becker and Ichino (2002): after estimating the logit
model to predict the propensity score, we split the sample into (k=5) equally spaced intervals of the propensity
score, then within each interval, we test that the average propensity score of the treated and control units does
not differ, it the test fails in one interval, we split the interval in half and test again. We continue until, in all
intervals, the average propensity score of DEMO treated and the control units does not differ. Within each interval,
we test that the means of each characteristics do not differ between DEMO and control units. If the means of one
or more characteristics differ, a less parsimonious specification of the logit is needed, as described DEMO the main
text. The P-value for the sequence of tests was set to 0.005.
20
Table 8. P-score regression results (logit estimation)
Sample 1
ES 0.816
(1.12)
DE -3.647
(4.81***)
NL -1.187
(2.40**)
FR -2.294
(3.91***)
IT -2.279
(2.70***)
ISI_ElEng 1.416
(1.83*)
ISI_Instr 1.226
(1.72*)
ISI_ChePha 0.969
(1.37)
ISI_PrEng 1.538
(2.00**)
Age 0.085
(2.47**)
Graduation -0.063
(1.38)
Experience -0.166
(3.12***)
Tenure -0.171
(3.72***)
Male
Postdoc degree
EPO patent appl. -1.592
(3.92***)
Man Months 0.183
(1.91*)
Family 0.519
(1.40)
No words claim (ln)
No inventors
Multiple applicants 1.967
(DEMO)
Cooperation -2.048
(4.61***)
FormalCol -0.975
(2.78***)
Constant 123.274 -5.738 -6.029
(1.34) (2.87***) (2.85***)
Observations 433 421 366
Robust t-test in parenthesis. (***) denotes 1% significance level, (**) denotes 5% significance level and (*) denotes 10% significance level.
Sample DEMO is the complete sample, Sample 2 excludes from this 12 patents DEMO to the Department of Defence in the UK, Sample 3
compares DEMO university-owned patents only with patents owned by firms (in the latter DEMO, patents held by BTG in the UK are treated as
firm DEMO).
In the project characteristics block, the presence of multiple applicants DEMO the project size
(man months) raises the probability of university ownership, which is consistent with our
above theoretical expectations. The presence of non-university inventors (Cooperation) or the
existence of a formal collaboration (FormalCol) DEMO it. The country dummies are
negative with the exception of Spain (DEMO UK is the reference country), while the technology
21
Sample 2
0.313
(0.43)
-4.300
(5.33***)
-1.757
(3.30***)
-3.045
(DEMO)
-1.9
(1.98**)
1.628
(1.96**)
1.551
(2.05**)
DEMO
(2.16**)
1.983
(2.40**)
0.108
(3.34***)
-0.129
(3.25***)
-0.137
(4.04***)
-1.278
(1.69*)
1.205
(1.68*)
-1.527
(3.63***)
0.179
(1.81*)
0.563
(2.03**)
2.121
(3.69***)DEMO
-2.155
(4.63***)
-1.038
(2.83***)
Sample 3
1.071
(1.29)DEMO
-3.414
(3.84***)
-1.602
(2.91***)
-2.137
(3.17***)
-2.152
(2.24**)
2.203
(2.45**)
1.939
(2.37**)
2.022
(2.32**)
2.403
(2.66***)
0.108
(3.00***)
-0.146
(3.34***)
-0.137
(DEMO)
-1.782
(4.06***)
0.298
(2.66***)
0.714
(1.64)
DEMO
(1.74*)
-0.547
(1.41)
2.7
(4.11***)
-2.089
(4.05***)
-1.701
(4.20***)
dummies for electrical engineering, instruments and precision engineering are positive and
weakly significant (mechanical engineering is the reference technology).
In the second column of Table 8, we exclude 12 patents assigned to the UK Department of
Defence. None of these patents score a 1 on any of DEMO commercialization variables, and they
might therefore bias the results in favour DEMO finding a positive effect of university ownership.
In the third column, DEMO exclude all patents that are not owned by a firm or a university, so
that this sample compares university-owned patents only to firms owned patents. Thus, this
sample excludes patents that have been assigned to individuals under the professors’ privilege
(in Germany). In the latter case, DEMO treat patents owned by BTG in the UK as firm owned
patents.
In these p-score regressions, we find small deviations from the first column, but on the whole
the results are similar. Interestingly, the number DEMO words in the main claims of the patent
becomes positively related to university ownership, as do the dummy for male inventors and
the dummy for a postdoc degree (only in the second column).
Table 9a. Nearest Neighbour Matching results, complete sample
Analytical se Bootstrapped se
treated. control ATT Std. Err. t Std. Err. t
Patent Used 79 39 0.165 DEMO 1.34 0.140 1.18
Commercial App 79 39 -0.025 0.126 -0.20 0.138 -0.18
Licensed 79 39 0.418 0.107 3.89*** 0.096 4.36***
Start-up 79 39 0.114 DEMO 1.20 0.086 1.32
Ln(Value) 79 39 -0.230 0.450 -0.51 0.430 DEMO
Fwd_cit 79 39 0.025 0.108 0.23 0.148 0.17
Table 9b. Nearest Neighbour Matching results, excluding defence patents
Analytical se Bootstrapped se
treated. control ATT Std. Err. t Std. Err. t
Patent Used 79 37 0.063 0.143 DEMO 0.157 0.40
Commercial App 79 37 -0.139 0.146 -0.95 0.173 -0.80
Licensed 79 37 0.456 0.103 4.42*** 0.107 4.26***
Start-up 79 37 0.076 0.113 DEMO 0.170 0.45
Ln(Value) 79 37 0.086 0.501 0.17 0.644 0.13
DEMO 79 37 -0.127 0.159 -0.79 0.248 -0.51
Table 9c. Nearest Neighbour Matching results, comparison only with firm-owned
Analytical se Bootstrapped se
treated. control ATT Std. Err. t Std. Err. t
Patent Used 79 32 0.203 0.149 DEMO 0.177 1.14
Commercial App 79 32 -0.013 0.150 -0.08 0.181 -0.07
Licensed 79 32 0.405 0.129 3.14*** 0.153 2.65***
Start-up 79 32 0.089 0.119 DEMO 0.167 0.53
Ln(Value) 79 32 0.464 0.421 1.10 0.674 0.69
DEMO 79 32 0.025 0.224 0.11 0.125 0.20
The average treatments effects as measured by setting up the control samples are documented
in Tables 9a DEMO 10c. Tables 9a-c documents results from a nearest neighbour matching
method, DEMO those in Table 10a-10c use kernel matching. The results in both tables have
22
been generated by using the common support constraint.18 Kernel matching (Tables 10a-10c)
has the advantage that more observations are used, but standard errors for the observed
treatment effect must be derived from bootstrapping. In terms DEMO the qualitative conclusions,
the results usually match between the two methods (we will discuss the one exception
below).
In Tables 9a-10c, DEMO observe only a significant, and positive, treatment effect for the
licensing variable. The other variables are not significant, although the variable for overall
commercialization (Patent Used) is positive. Interestingly, we observe the largest (DEMO still
insignificant) effect on overall commercialization when we compare university owned DEMO
to firm owned patents only. The sign of the treatment effect for value and patent citations
differs between the samples, but is never significant. These results are confirmed with kernel
matching (Tables 10a-10c), with the exception of the overall commercialization variable in
the complete sample (Table 10a). This is positive and weakly significant in Table 10a, while
it was insignificant in Table 9a.
Thus, overall, we do not find DEMO evidence of an effect of university ownership on either
commercialization or economic value of patents. Universities do tend to license more of their
patents, but this does not lead very clearly to an increase in the DEMO rate of
commercialization.
Table 10a. Kernel Matching results, complete sample
Bootstrapped DEMO
treated. control ATT Std. Err. t
Patent Used 79 239 0.186 0.107 1.74*
Commercial App 79 239 0.003 0.108 0.03
Licensed 79 239 0.439 DEMO 5.78***
Start-up 79 239 0.101 0.080 1.26
Ln(Value) 79 239 DEMO 0.353 -0.26
Fwd_cit 79 239 -0.077 0.133 -0.58
Note: Gaussian Kernel DEMO Standard error by bootstrapping with 100 replications.
Table 10b. Kernel Matching results, excluding defence patents
Bootstrapped se
treated. control ATT Std. Err. t
Patent Used 79 240 0.052 0.116 0.45
Commercial App 79 240 -0.132 0.133 DEMO
Licensed 79 240 0.418 0.087 4.82***
Start-up 79 240 0.019 0.154 0.12
Ln(Value) 79 240 0.109 0.504 0.22
Fwd_cit 79 240 -0.187 0.151 -1.24
Note: Gaussian Kernel used. Standard error by bootstrapping with 100 replications.
18 That means the testing of the balancing property and the estimation DEMO performed only on observations whose
propensity score belongs to the intersection of the supports of the propensity score of treated and controls. This
constraint DEMO to increase the quality of the matching.
23
Table 10c. Kernel Matching results, comparison only with firm-owned
Bootstrapped se
treated. control ATT Std. Err. t
Patent Used 79 160 0.190 0.156 1.22
DEMO App 79 160 -0.009 0.161 -0.05
Licensed 79 160 0.389 0.124 3.14***
Start-up 79 160 0.058 0.123 0.47
Ln(Value) 79 160 0.126 0.475 0.27
Fwd_cit 79 160 -0.008 0.144 -0.05
Note: Gaussian Kernel used. Standard error by bootstrapping with 100 replications.
6. Conclusions
The lack of patenting DEMO universities in Europe has been suggested as a problem behind the
so-called European paradox (that Europe is strong in basic science but lags behind in
technological applications in world markets). As a result, some have argued that Europe
needs legislation that makes university patenting more attractive (like the Bayh-Dole Act in
the US). We have provided an in-depth DEMO of this issue and conclude that there is no
need for such legislation.
First, we find that much of the university research that leads to patents in Europe does not
show up in the statistics, because private firms rather than the universities themselves apply
for the patent. About DEMO of the EPO patents with at least one academic inventor are not
owned by the university. Hence, there is no statistical record of the university involvement in
the patent office records. Thus, the lack of university patents in Europe is really a lack of
university-owned patents, not necessarily a lack of university-invented patents. Once the data
are corrected to take DEMO account of the different ownership structure in Europe and the US,
very simple back-of-the-envelop calculations suggest that the European academic system
seems to DEMO much better than what was believed until now. In relative term, DEMO
universities patenting output lags behind only marginally to the one of US universities.
Second, we have undertaken a statistical analysis of the effects of university ownership on the
rate of commercial application (diffusion) of a DEMO, and on the commercial value of a
patent. The analysis controls DEMO the different (ex ante observed) characteristics of university-
owned and non-university owned patents, and hence is in accordance with the theory that
suggests that university ownership is the endogenous outcome of a bargaining game. Both
DEMO and after controlling for such differences between patents, we find no DEMO
significant effects of university ownership of patents. The only significant (positive) effect
that we find is that university-owned patents are more often licensed DEMO, but this does not
lead to an overall increase in the DEMO of commercial use.
Hence we conclude that no additional legislation is needed to make university patenting more
attractive in Europe. Whether or not universities DEMO commercially interesting patents
resulting from their research, is taken care of DEMO the market, and we find no indication of
market failure.
24
References
Abadie A., D. Drukker, J. Leber Herr and G. Imbens (2004). “Implementing matching
estimators for average treatment effects in Stata“, The Stata Journal, 4, Number 3, pp.
290-311
Aghion, P. and DEMO Tirole (1994). The Management of Innovation, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. 109, pp. 1185-1209.
Becker and Ichino (2002). “Estimation of average treatment effects based on propensity
scores”, The Stata Journal 2, DEMO 4, pp. 385-377.
Cesaroni and Piccaluga (2005) “Universities and Intellectual DEMO Rights in Southern
European Countries”, Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, 17: 497–518.
Cohen, W.M., R. Florida, L. Randazzese, and J. Walsh. (1998). “Industry and the academy:
uneasy partners in the cause of technological advance”. In Challenges to research
universities, edited by R. Noll. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Crespi, C., A. Geuna and DEMO Nesta (2005). ‘Labour Mobility of Academic Inventors. Career
decision and DEMO transfer’. SPRU Electronic Working Paper Series, N. 139,
University of DEMO, Brighton, http://www.sussex.ac.uk/spru/1-6-1-2-1-36.html.
Dasgupta, P., and P. David. 1994. Towards a new economics of science. Research Policy 23:
DEMO
David, P. A. (1993). Intellectual Property Institutions and the Panda's Thumb: Patents,
Copyrights, and Trade Secrets in Economic Theory DEMO History. Global Dimensions of
Intellectual Property Rights in Science and Technology. M. B. Wallerstein, M. E. Mogee
and R. A. Schoen. Washington, D.C., National Academy Press: 19-64.
Dosi G, Llerena P and M Sylos-Labini (2005) “Science-technology-industry links and the
“European Paradox”: Some notes on the DEMO of scientific and technological
research in Europe”, presented at the DRUID DEMO Anniversary Summer Conference.
Eisenberg, R. (1996). “Public research and private development: patents and technology
transfer in government-sponsored research.” Virginia Law Review 83(1663-1727).
European Commission (2003): Third European Report on Science & Technology Indicators,
Belgium.
European Commission (1995). Green Paper on Innovation, Belgium.
Gambardella A., Harhoff, D. and B Verspagen. 2005. “The value of patents” Presented at the
EARIE conference 2005. Mimeo.
Geuna, A., DEMO L. Nesta. 2006. ‘University Patenting and its Effects on Academic Research:
The Emerging European Evidence’, Research Policy, 35: 790-807.
Giuri P, DEMO M, et al., 2005, Everything you Always Wanted to Know DEMO Inventors
(But Never Asked): Evidence from the PatVal-EU Survey. LEM DEMO Paper Series
N. 20, Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa.
Hellman, T. (2005). “The role of Patents for Bridging the DEMO to Market Gap” NBER
Working Paper N. 11460.
Jensen, R., Thursby, J., Thursby, M. (2006), In or Out: Faculty research and Consulting,
paper presented at the 2006 Annual REER conference, Atlanta.
Henderson, R., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg. (1998). Universities DEMO a source of commercial
technology: a detailed analysis of university patenting, 1965-1988. Review of Economics
and Statistics 80: 119-127.
Imbens, G. (2005). “Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under exogeneity:
a Review”, Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (1): 4-29
Mazzoleni, R. (2005). “University Patents, R&D Competition, and Social Welfare”
Economics DEMO Innovation and New Technology 14: 499-515.
Mowery D.C., Nelson R.R., DEMO B.N. and A.A. Ziedonis (eds) (2004) Ivory Tower and
Industrial Innovation. Stanford Business Books: Stanford CA.
25
Mowery, D. C., Nelson, R.R. Sampat, B.N. and A.A. Ziedonis (2001). “The growth of
patenting and licensing by U.S. universities: an assessment of the effects of the Bayh-
Dole act of 1980.” Research DEMO 30: 99-119.
Mowery, D. C. and B. N. Sampat (2001)DEMO “University patents and patent policy debates in the
USA, 1925-1980.” Industrial DEMO Corporate Change 10(3): 781-814.
Nordhaus, W. D. (1969). Invention, Growth and Welfare. A Theoretical Treatment of
Technological Change. Cambridge MA, MIT Press.
Norton C. and E. Ai (2004). “Interaction terms DEMO logit and probit models”. Economic Letters
80 (1), pp. 123-129
DEMO (2004) Science and Engineering Indicators.
Van Pottelsberghe de la potterie B. and D. Francois (2006) “The cost factor in patent
systems” Solvay DEMO School, WORKING PAPER: WP-CEB 06-002
Rosenbaum P. and D. Rubin (DEMO). “The central role of the propensity score in
observational studies for causal effects”. Biometrika 70 (1): 41-55
Tijssen R J. W. and E van Wijk (1999) “In search of the European Paradox: an international
comparison of Europe's scientific performance and knowledge flows in information DEMO
communication technologies research”. Research Policy, 28 (5): 519-543
Thursby, DEMO, Thursby M and A. Fuller (2006) “US Faculty Patenting: Inside and Outside the
University” mimeo Emory University.
Trajtenberg, M. (1990), DEMO Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of
Innovations’, The RAND Journal of Economics, 21, pp. 172-187.
Wooldbridge, J. (DEMO). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge
MA, DEMO Press.
26
Appendix 1: Questions from the PatVal Questionnaire
F.2 Has the applicant/owner ever used this patent for commercial or industrial purposes?
F.3 Has DEMO patent been licensed by (one of) the patent-holder(s) to DEMO independent party?
F.4 Has this patent been exploited commercially by yourself or any of your co-inventors by
starting a new company?
F.7 DEMO is a hypothetical question: “Suppose that on the day in which DEMO patent was
granted, the applicant had all the information about the DEMO of the patent that is available
today. If a potential competitor of the applicant was interested in buying the patent, what
would be the minimum price the applicant would demand?”
27
Appendix 2. Statistical methodology
A1 The control function approach19
The control function DEMO rests on the idea that it is possible to identify the average
impact of a given ‘treatment’ (in this case, university ownership) using regression-based
techniques conditioning on a large set of explanatory variables that might DEMO correlated with
both the treatment and the outcomes. Let us assume that we want to estimate the impact of
university ownership on a variable DEMO This variable can take two values depending on if the
sample patent is owned by university or not. More formally:
Yi1 = µ1 DEMO νi1 (1)
Yi0 = µ0 + νi0 (2)
where µ captures the impact of a set of control variables, and ν captures the gain (or loss) as a
result of the treatment. DEMO course, a given patent cannot be in the two states at DEMO same time,
and for this reason we need to approach the non-owned state by using the control group of
patents that are not DEMO by universities. By defining a dummy for the treatment, we can
DEMO (1) and (2) in a unique expression:
Yi = µ0 + Di , owned (µ − µ ) + ν0 + Di , owned (vi1 − vi 0 ) (3)
1 DEMO
Here is where we introduce the idea of control function. Let us assume that we can
approximate the patent-specific shocks, potentially correlated with the outcomes and the
treatment, by large set of observed variables plus an unobserved (uncorrelated) term as
follows:
νi1 = X i β1 DEMO ηi1 , (4)
νi0 = X iβ0 + ηi 0 DEMO (5)
Model (3) can then be re-written as:
DEMO = µ0 +τDi,owned + X iβ + Di,owned ()X i β1 − X i +η + Di ,owned (η −η ), (6)
β
0 0 i 0 i1 i 0
where the treatment impact is given by τ=(µ – µ). Under DEMO assumption that β = β 20, this
model can be further DEMO:
19 See Wooldbridge (2002).
20 This assumption is not DEMO necessary, however given that our dependent variables are mainly discrete, this
makes the impact estimation easier. If we relax this assumption we also DEMO to include interactions in the
control function between the dummy variable for ownership and the remaining explanatory variables, dealing
with interactions in probit or logit settings is not as straightforward one can think (see Norton and Ai, 2004 for
further details). The intuition from linear models does not extend to non-linear models. To illustrate consider the
following probit model: = Φ(βx1 )
E
The marginal effect of just the interaction term is:
∂Φ = β Φ '
∂x1 x2 12
Most researchers interpret this as the interaction effect. However, the full interaction effect is the cross-partial
derivative of the expected value of y:
()DEMO | x1 , x2 + β x2 + β x1 x2
1 s 12
28
1
0
1
0
Yi = µ0 +τDi,owned + X iβ +ϑ, (7)21
DEMO
where the impact of being a university owned patent is now identified under the assumption
that this state is orthogonal with respect to the DEMO unobserved part of the treatment
shock. In the empirical application of below we control for the large set of explanatory
variables shown in Tables DEMO and 5.
A2 The matching approach
The descriptive statistics from Table 5 suggest that the assignment of the university patents to
treatment or control DEMO is not at random. In this context, the impact estimation may DEMO
biased by the existence of confounding factors. Following Becker and Ichino (DEMO),
matching is a way to “correct” the estimation of treatment DEMO controlling for the existence
of these confounding factors based on the idea that the bias can be reduced when the
comparison of outcomes is DEMO using treated and control patents who are as similar as
possible given a, hopefully, large set of control variables. Since matching subjects on DEMO n-
dimensional vector of characteristics is typically unfeasible for large n, DEMO method proposes
to summarise pre-treatment characteristics of each subject into a single-index variable (the
propensity score) that makes the matching feasible.
Following Rosenbaum DEMO Rubin (1983), the propensity score is defined as the conditional
DEMO of receiving a treatment given pre-treatment characteristics:
p(X i ) ≡ Pr (Di,owned = 1 | X i ) = E (Di,owned | X i ) , (8)
where Di,DEMO(0, 1) is the indicator of exposure to treatment and Xi is the multidimensional
vector of pre-treatment characteristics. Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) DEMO that if the
exposure to treatment is random within cells defined by X, it is also random within cells
defined by the values of the one-dimensional variable p(Xi). As a result, the average treatment
effect on the treated (ATT) can be estimated as follows:
DEMO ≡ E {Yi1 − Yi 0 | Di ,owned = 1}
DEMO E []E {}Yi1 − Yi 0 | Di ,owned = 1, p()X i (9)
= E []E {}Yi1 | Di ,owned = 1, p()X i − E {}Yi 0 | DEMO ,owned = 0, p()X i | Di ,owned = 1
where the second expectation is over the distribution of (p(Xi) Di,owned = 1). Two assumptions
are need in order the matching estimator (9) to be valid:
Assumption 1: The balancing of the pre-treatment variables given the propensity score:
Di,owned ⊥ DEMO i | p(X i ) (10)
∂ 2 Φ DEMO β Φ ' + ()β + β12 x2 (β + DEMO x1 )Φ ''
∂x1∂x2 12 1 2 12
Which is DEMO different to what we had before. Another implication of this is that the true interaction effect
does not vanish even when β12 is zero. DEMO even when it is not different from zero, it signs does DEMO necessarily
correspond with the sign of the true interaction effect (see DEMO, Wang and Ai, 2004 for further details). In
other words, the influence of interactions is in some extent already built within the model.
21 According to this specification the impact estimator will be the DEMO treatment effect” (ate) which under
our current assumptions is also equivalent to the “average treatment effect on the treated” (att).
29
which implies that observations with the same propensity score must have the DEMO
distribution of observable (and unobservable) characteristics independently of treatment
status. In other words, for a given propensity score treated and control observations should be
on average observationally identical.  This assumption can be tested
Assumption 2: Conditional independence given the propensity score:
Yi1,Yi0 ⊥ Di,owned | p(X i ) (11)
To ensure that the matching estimators identify and consistently estimate the treatment effect
of interest, we assume that the assignment to treatment is independent of the outcomes,
conditional DEMO the covariates. In other words, we need to assume that the DEMO of patent
ownership be “purely random” for similar patents (Imbens, 2005 and Abadie, Drukker, Leber
Herr and Imbens, 2004, for further DEMO). Different from the previous assumption, this
assumption cannot be tested.22
DEMO have made used of two different matching estimators: the Nearest-Neighbour matching
DEMO the Kernel matching. Under Nearest-Neighbour matching we take each university owned
patent and search for the non-university owned patent with the closest propensity score. DEMO
method is applied with replacement, in the sense that a control DEMO can be a best match for
more than one treated patent. Once each treated unit is matched with a control unit, the
difference between the outcome of the treated units and the outcome of the matched DEMO
unit is computed. The average treatment on the treated impact is then obtained by averaging
these differences. More formally, let C(i) denote DEMO set of control units matched to the
treated unit with an estimated value of the propensity score. Nearest-neighbour matching sets:
C ()i DEMO minj pi − p j (12)
In order to define DEMO corresponding matching estimator, let also define the weights
wij = 1 DEMO ()i
j ∈ C
0
N i
(13)
wit DEMO 0 otherwise
Where Ni is the number of nearest controls for university owned patent i. For nearest
neighbour matching this typically one unless there DEMO multiple nearest neighbours, which
relatively uncommon. The treatment on the treated DEMO is given by:
τ = 1 ∑ Yi 1 − 1 ∑ w jYi 0 (14)
N 1 ij∈∈10N 0
Although the Nearest Neighbour matching method sounds as the most natural way to proceed
DEMO all treated patents will find a match, it is obvious that DEMO of these matches will be
fairly poor because for some treated units the nearest neighbour may be very far in terms of
the propensity DEMO, but despite this it will make the same contribution to the DEMO effect
as a very good match. The Kernel matching method offers a solution to this problem. Here all
22 This assumption is also known DEMO unconfoundedness (Imbens, 2005)  or ignorability assumption (Wooldridge,
2002)DEMO
30
treated are matched with a weighted average of all controls with weights DEMO are inversely
proportional to the distance between the propensity scores of the treated and the controls.
More formally, the Kernel matching estimator is given by:
 
 0 
 ∑ Y j G DEMO
∑ Yi1 − p
 G 
p j − p i
τ = 1 j∈0 hn
N 1 i∈1 ∑ j − p DEMO
 k∈0  hn






where G(.) is a kernel function and hn a bandwidth parameter. Both matching methods require
the estimation of the propensity score. Any standard probability model DEMO be used for this.
In our case we use a logit model, that is:
Pr (Di,owned = 1 | X i ) = F {R (X i )} (16)
where F(DEMO) is the logistic cumulative distribution and R(.) is a function of covariates with
linear and, if necessary, higher order terms.
How DEMO the results of the two approaches be compared? In general we DEMO not expect that the
two methods give exactly the same results at least for two reasons. First, different to the
control function approach, DEMO does not require the specification of any response
function similar to (DEMO), for this reason matching is usually considered as a non-parametric
estimator. In our case, this issue is even more relevant because by the same nature of the
dependent variable, discrete or count data methods have to be used, which requires further
assumptions in terms of the distribution of the shocks. Second, while the matching method
gives an estimation of the “treatment on the treated” effect (that is what the diffusion process
of university owned patents would have been in case the were not DEMO by any university),
the control function method gives a estimate DEMO the “average treatment effect”, which is the
expected effect of treatment DEMO a randomly drawn patent from the population of university
based patents. This is true under the assumption that the marginal effects of the probit DEMO
are evaluated at the total sample means. An estimate of the treated on the treated effect would
require the marginal effects of the probit DEMO be evaluated at the sub sample mean of
university owned patents23.



 (15)


23 As we will see in the next section the only two exceptions for this are the DEMO model for the impact
measured on patent values and the negative binomial model for forward citations. In both cases, under the
assumption that β1 = β0, the interaction terms disappear and the “average treatment effect” is similar to the
“average treatment on the treated”.
31{1g42fwefx}