Small Business Economics (2006) 26: 103–116
DOI 10.1007/s11187-004-7813-9
Why do Most Firms Die
Young?
ABSTRACT. A model is developed to explain DEMO most
ﬁrms die in the ﬁrst few years of trading. A risk averse
entrepreneur with initial capital endowment faces a
Brownian motion in net DEMO over time. To balance
return (proﬁts growth) and risk (variance DEMO proﬁts) she
adopts a portfolio strategy, choosing market positioning
to achieve an optimal combination of risk and return at
each instant, given her ﬁnancial and human capital
endowments and attitude towards risk. Failure occurs
when DEMO ﬁrm’s value falls below the opportunity cost of
staying in business. The resulting distribution of failure is
Inverse Gaussian, implying, for speciﬁc parameter DEMO,
a positively skewed failure curve of the type observed in
practice. In addition the model presents a novel-measure
of management human capital (MHC) which implies that
high MHC entrepreneurs will have higher absolute and
marginal proﬁts growth than low MHC entrepreneurs at
given levels of risk.
KEY DEMO: entrepreneur, failure curve, human capi-
tal, risk-aversion, inverse Gaussian, port folio
1. Introduction
It is a well-established empirical fact that (at least
in Manufacturing industry) young ﬁrms tend to
be more failure prone than older ones (see e.g.,
Hall, 1987, Evans, 1987a, b, Dunne et al., 1989).
Less well-studied is how the DEMO rate of ﬁrms
varies with time trading within the ﬁrst year or
so of life. Whilst in the small business economics
literature several recent DEMO suggest that
around half of a randomly selected cohort of
startups die in the ﬁrst two and a half years of
trading, a less known but equally remarkable fact
is that the ﬁrm failure distribution over DEMO
Final version accepted on December 17, 2004
CASS Business School
London
DEMO
E-mail: r.c.cressy@city.ac.uk

Springer 2006
Robert Cressy
trading is positively skewed DEMO a mean that
appears relatively constant in calendar time
(Ganguly, 1985; Bruderl et al, 1992; Cressy,
1996);1 see Figure DEMO To the layperson in this
area the explanation for the shape of the curve is
not immediately obvious: Why should the failure
rate of ﬁrms should ﬁrst rise steeply to apeakat
18–24 months of age and DEMO fall gradually to
converge on a low long run value?2
Recent studies have examined ﬁrm-level deter-
minants of failure. For example, early innovation
might enhance a startup’s survival chances in an
industry dominated by large DEMO, or diﬀerences
in human and ﬁnancial capital at start-up (or
prior to closure) and the availability of outside
opportunities to entrepreneurship may be instru-
mental in the survival of small business (Evans
and Jovanovic, DEMO; Bates, 1989; Holtz-Eakin
et al., 1994a, b; Mata, DEMO; Cressy, 1996). For
example, human capital in the form DEMO team
starts run by more experienced owners with voca-
tional qualiﬁcations and less outside options
seem to survive longer. Finally, theoretical litera-
ture suggests that entrepreneurs may be more
risk-tolerant than wage workers and so choose
DEMO riskier income stream associated with entre-
preneurship (Kihlstrom and Laﬀont, 1979). It is
a short argument from there to conclude that
small DEMO owners may diﬀer in their attitudes
to risk, and that this DEMO may impact their fail-
ure rate, particularly at the startup stage.3 DEMO
sistently with the failure curve described above,
some studies have found the determinants of sur-
vival to vary with the time the ﬁrm DEMO been
trading for ﬁrm- or industry-level reasons
(Audretsch, 1991; Bruderl DEMO al., 1992; Argarwal
and Audretsch, 2001). However, none of these
studies provide a formal optimising model gener-
ating the observed failure DEMO
By contrast the work of Jovanovic (1982) and
Ericson and Pakes (1995) generates dynamic
104
Robert Cressy
Figure 1. Business closure rates by time trading.
optimising DEMO of the ﬁrm and in principle
failure rates that vary along its lifecyle. Jovanovic
assumes that human capital (eﬃciency) is un-
known but DEMO be learnt about by entering busi-
ness. Ericson and Pakes allow for the role of
learning by doing in addition to learning pure
and DEMO What none of these models do is to
take into account the role of human capital evo-
lution in conjunction with risk and risk DEMO,
letting the entrepreneur to adjust his portfolio
over time. Little attention has been paid in par-
ticular to attitudes to and the management DEMO
uncertainty.4 This is contrary to much observed
reality, and, whilst empirical work in other disci-
plines than economics allows for the role of
DEMO, a.perusal of that literature reveals no
formal optimising model of the DEMO as the basis
for proper testing (see e.g., Gimeno et al., 1997
and references therein).
The ﬁnance literature has however long recog-
nised that by portfolio rebalancing an individual
can optimise exposure to risk. DEMO fact con-
forms well with results from recent empirical
studies of successful entrepreneurs who typically
aim to reduce the amount of market uncertainty
they DEMO in engaging in business (e.g., Knight,
1965; Prais, 1983; Delmar, 1995). Risk reduction
for the ﬁrm is achieved by DEMO across
products and services produced, across clients
supplied and across input DEMO This prac-
tice clearly pays dividends by reducing ﬂuctua-
tion in the ﬁrm’s revenue so that the chances of
it falling below the entrepreneur’s DEMO threshold
(minimum equity) are thereby lowered. But
‘there is no such thing as a free lunch’ and we
would expect for given levels DEMO entrepreneurial
ability that this lower risk would be purchased
at the expense of a lower return. Likewise,
higher risk is associated with higher DEMO: for
example, if a niche marketing strategy allows the
business to grow faster than the market average,
we should expect this to DEMO associated with
higher variability of proﬁts. A specialist product
or bespoke service will more often than not be
one for which the demand is DEMO variable as
tastes switch capriciously to other product niches
or a larger ﬁrm uses economies of scale to force
down price.
Thus the external DEMO must be man-
aged eﬀectively for the business to optimise its
response to risk. The ability to do this will be
determined in part DEMO factors internal to the ﬁrm,
including the entrepreneur’s own managerial abil-
ity and her attitudes to risk. In economic terms,
entrepreneurial ability DEMO be understood in terms
of the eﬀect of inherent traits or attributes on the
cost, measured by the extra risk involved, of
achieving DEMO given increment to the ﬁrm’s growth
rate. We identify management human capital
(MHC) as the ability to achieve growth at lower
cost in DEMO of ﬁrm-speciﬁc risk.6 Higher MHC
individuals should have lower costs of growth in
this sense. Attitudes towards risk can also be
expected to play DEMO role in determining the entre-
preneur’s selection of projects (see Kihlstrom DEMO
Laﬀont, 1979) with less cautious entrepreneurs
likely to risk exposure to projects with more vari-
able returns. This choice in turn has implications
DEMO failure rates. Firms run by headstrong entre-
preneurs whose growth aspirations outstrip their
capacity to manage them–are likely to fail early
as they ‘grow DEMO fast too soon’. In general, risk
Why do Most Firms Die Young?
105
aversion should be associated DEMO lower failure
rates but also with slower growth.
The present paper provides a theoretical
model to explain how in an uncertain environ-
ment human DEMO ﬁnancial capital together with
entrepreneurial risk aversion and human capital
interact with endogenous market positioning to
aﬀect the risk-return distribution faced by an
entrepreneur. DEMO pulls together three strands of
the literature, namely, portfolio theory as a
strategy for balancing risk and return; a variant
on Gibrat’s law as a description of the growth
process; and human capital and market position-
ing as a determinant of entrepreneurial produc-
tivity which is allowed DEMO vary (exogenously)
with the lifecycle of the entrepreneurial team.
The DEMO is a model consistent with the
observed ﬁrm failure distribution, with DEMO fail-
ure rate ﬁrst rising steeply and then tailing oﬀ
to a low long run value, predicting that indeed
‘most ﬁrms die young’.
The optimal growth-risk model resulting from
this process determines the systematic part of DEMO
ﬁrm’s growth. However, it allows that part of a
ﬁrm’s growth DEMO determined outside the entrepre-
neur’s control by random proportional shocks to
the ﬁrm’s startup equity value. Finally, we let the
entrepreneur make an optimal decision as to
when, if at all, to quit business. This DEMO involve
the comparison of the likely returns to contin-
uing as compared with the value of an outside
alternative (Jovanovic, 1982; Evans and Jovanov-
ic, 1989). The entrepreneur’s value function will
accordingly contain a stopping rule allowing the
‘switching’ decision to be made optimally. Recent
developments DEMO the theory of investment under
uncertainty (Dixit and Pindyck, 1994) DEMO
on the early work of Merton (1969)7 provide the
tools DEMO which this phenomenon can be treated
analytically. In this framework market research is
a control variable of the entrepreneur.8
2. The model
More formally, suppose, then, that an entrepre-
neur’s proﬁts are aﬀected in two DEMO by a
choice (market positioning) parameter h a higher
value of which raises the ﬁrm’s growth rate and
simultaneously its variance. A risk-averse DEMO
preneur will therefore ﬁnd that there is a utility
cost to higher growth in the form of higher risk
and will therefore wish to DEMO the two. In
the following model we allow both eﬀects to
operate.
Proﬁts, x(t), in any period, starting from some
initial DEMO x(0), are assumed to be subject to
random proportional shocks, i.e. we assume Gi-
brat’s law holds for the ﬁrm conditional on entre-
preneurial human capital.9 In continuous time this
implies that the proﬁt DEMO x follows a Geo-
metric Brownian motion (GBM):
dx
¼
lx xdt
þ
rx xdz
ð1Þ
where lx and rx are known DEMO func-
tions that represent the expected growth of prof-
its and the variance of proﬁts over a small time
interval.10 These functions are assumed DEMO take
the form:
lx
¼
Hlhb;
rx
¼
rha;
H; r; a; b; h > 0
ð2Þ
Note that DEMO ¼ 1 ¼ B implies that ﬁrm and mar-
ket parameters are identical so the ﬁrm is ‘cen-
trally positioned’ in the market measured DEMO risk
and return i.e. lx ¼ l and rx ¼ r.
We shall assume in this model that the system-
atic component of the DEMO growth rate is
non-negative, which implies that the systematic
component of DEMO ﬁrm’s growth, lx, is also non-
negative. This does not of course imply that the
realised growth rate of both market and ﬁrm DEMO
negative.11
From equation (2) a higher h is associated
with a higher expected return and a higher vari-
ance of return. With an DEMO assumption
we can show that this will generate the familiar
positively sloped mean-variance Eﬃcient Frontier
of portfolio analysis. Solving (2) for lx as DEMO func-
tion of rx we get:
lx
¼
lH
x
r
k
;
k
¼
b=a > 0
ð3Þ
If h is chosen optimally (i.e. to maximise
expected utility) we can identify this expression
DEMO the Eﬃcient Frontier which shows how
ﬁrm-speciﬁc risk is associated with growth when
the entrepreneur chooses diﬀerent market posi-
tioning strategies h. Before we DEMO this we state
r
106
Robert Cressy
Deﬁnition 1: The Eﬃcient Frontier (or EF) is
the curve of equation (3) for diﬀerent h plotted in
(lx, rx) space.
Now, using Assumption 1 above and making
Assumption 2: b < a or equivalently k<1
we will ﬁnd that the EF is upward-sloping and
concave in positioning space:
dlx
drx
¼
DEMO > 0;
x
K
¼
lH=rk
ð4Þ
and
d2lx
drx2
¼
kðk

1ÞKrk2 < 0 for k < 1
x
ð5Þ
See DEMO 2.
In Figure 2 we have two EFs parameterised
by diﬀerent levels of human capital, H. Each is
upward sloping reﬂecting the essential cost of
growth as additional risk. The entrepreneur’s
expected utility indiﬀerence curves are DEMO plot-
ted showing the optimal combination of risk and
return given her preferences, human capital
endowment etc. Tangency points as usual pick
out the optima as H varies. We emphasise here
that l is to be DEMO as market return and r
market risk. The entrepreneur’s choice of theta
determines both his ﬁrm-speciﬁc risk and ﬁrm-
speciﬁc return (lx and rx)12 and thus ‘positions’
her in the market. Whilst l and r DEMO parameters
from the point of view of the entrepreneur, the
actual DEMO of return and risk she faces (lx and
rx) will vary across ﬁrms via h and its determin-
ing parameters. The optimal value DEMO h, h*, in
Figure 2 maximises the entrepreneur’s discounted
expected utility over time, VfxðtÞj lxðhÞ; rxðhÞg –
see below.
2.1. Role of DEMO human capital
Management capital plays a natural role here by
raising the entrepreneur’s marginal return for
given level of risk or, equivalently, by DEMO
the marginal cost of growth. Thus any changes
in a parameter that increase the height and slope
of the eﬃcient frontier can be identiﬁed DEMO eco-
nomically eﬃcient. Management human capital
(i.e. managerial ability, particularly in the man-
agement of risk), henceforth MHC, is an obvious
candidate for this role.
Deﬁnition 2: Management Human capital is
any parameter more of which reduces the marginal
cost of growth measured along the EF, i.e. reduces
the value of drx
dlx
Figure 2. Eﬃcient frontier for DEMO risk and return and the entrepreneur’s optimum market positioning.
Why do Most Firms Die Young?
107
Remark: An example of such a parameter is H
in equation (3) above.
Proposition 1: Management human capital
(MHC) measured by the parameter H of equation
DEMO increases the height and slope of the Eﬃcient
Frontier in (lx, rx)-space.
Proof. Diﬀerentiating the level of the EF of
equation 3 DEMO its slope of equation 4 respectively
w.r.t. H we get
l
dlx r
dH ¼
K
H
k
k x
rx
¼ ð6Þ
> DEMO
r
k l x k1 > 0
r r
@2lx k K rk1
@H@rx ¼ H x
r
¼ ð7Þ
This proposition is illustrated DEMO Figure 1 above.
As H increases EF pivots upward from EF(H1)
to EF(H2). Thus the slope of EF has increased DEMO
rx1 implying more growth for a given level of
risk. The new equilibrium (tangency point)
occurs to the left of the old implying a higher
equilibrium growth rate and a higher level of
equilibrium risk.
DEMO The entrepreneur’s optimisation strategy
The entrepreneur’s optimisation strategy has
several components:
1. Choose the market positioning parameter
r, c) to maximise
lx (h), rx (h)} from
following an optimal policy i.e. to optimally
continue or close the business at any point in
time t.
DEMO This results in a choice of the expected growth
rate and risk of the ﬁrm relative to the market
{lx (h), rx (DEMO)} and places the entrepreneur at
a position on the EF, DEMO the parameter set
(a, k, H, l, r, c ). This position may change
through time as e.g. H evolves.13
3. Note that the all-important management capi-
tal of the entrepreneur (H) DEMO a part in
determining determine the slope and position
of the EF at this initial stage. Attitudes to risk
h ¼ h *(a, k, H, l,
expected utility V{x(t)|
will determine DEMO curvature of the utility func-
tion and the tangency optimum.
4. We can think of H (among other things) as
also inﬂuencing initial DEMO of the entre-
preneur (x0). Initial resources combined with a
DEMO on market positioning will determine
the expected growth rate of the ﬁrm through
time. Growth is measured alternatively by
proﬁts, equity value or utility as we shall see
later.
5. The entrepreneur also chooses at startup DEMO ex
post exit rule which allows her to compare at
each point in time the value of continuing in
business, V(x(t)|.), with the value of switching
to an alternative activity worth W. DEMO
enables her to decide optimally when to ‘fail’
i.e. to close the business solvently.l4
6. After these decisions have been made, chance
factors then take over to alter the actual tra-
jectory experienced, and the actual decision, if
any, to exit the business at some point in
DEMO
2.3. Entrepreneur’s optimisation problem
The entrepreneur is an expected utility maximiser
and chooses a function V(x(t)| h) to solve the fol-
lowing optimisation problem given his MHC:
VðxjhÞ¼ maxuðxÞþ 1
1
þ
DEMO E½Vðx
þ
dxjhÞ; W
ð8Þ15
where r is the appropriate risk-adjusted DEMO
rate, u(x) is the utility of current (known) proﬁts
x, the expectation is taken over the random incre-
ment dx given by equation (1), and W is the
present discounted value (DEMO) of the alterna-
tive activity open to the individual. The left DEMO
part of the term in curly brackets in (8) is the
value of continuing in business, given that mar-
ket positioning is optimal; and the right hand
part (W) is the value of ceasing to trade.
Equation (8) says simply that if, once x is
realised in any period, the value of the return to
the alternative activity exceeds that to the current
business, the entrepreneur closes her business, i.e.
the business ‘fails’.16 Otherwise she continues
with the current activity.
108
The entrepreneur’s utility function u(x)is
assumed to satisfy the DEMO for constant
relative risk aversion (CRRA):
uðxÞ¼ x1c=ð1  cÞ) xu00 ¼
c 2ð0; 1Þð9Þ
u0
We thus deﬁne failure as DEMO situation where the
entrepreneur’s equity (or equivalently, discounted
entrepreneurial utility) DEMO to the opportunity
cost of staying in business.The relevant form of
the discounted utility of an owner of an existing
ﬁrm and whose value DEMO(x) exceeds W,is
obtained by a straightforward application of Ito’s
DEMO (se Dixit and Pindyck, 1994) to (8) as:
DEMO maxhfð1=2Þr x2V00ðxÞþ lxxV0ðxÞþuðxÞg=r
¼ maxhfð1=2Þr2h2ax2V00ðxÞþ lhbxV0ðxÞ
þuðxÞg=r ð10Þ
2
x
using (DEMO). This maximisation process yields the
ﬁrst order condition
bHlhb1V0
avh2a1xV00 þ ¼ ¼ ð11Þ
0; v r2
an expression for optimal eﬀort h*:

1
bHlV0ðxÞ
2ab
h
¼ ð12Þ
a 00
vV ðxÞx
DEMO second order condition for a maximum
requires that
að2a 1Þh2a2 vxV00ðxÞþHbðb 1Þhb2lV0
v ¼ r2
< 0;
ð13Þ
It is straightforward to show DEMO, under the
assumption that V¢ > 0, this reduces to the sim-
pler condition
b < 2a or a > b=2
ð14Þ
and DEMO Assumptions 1 and 2 guarantee the
second order condition (13) is fulﬁlled.17 As the
basis for our ﬁrst proposition we now make
Assumption DEMO:18 lx c v2  cÞ > 0
Where lx ¼ Hlhb, vx r r2hb . Inserting ð1 h* back
in to the optimal value function (10), we can
x
¼
demonstrate
Robert Cressy
Proposition 2: The optimal value function V(x)
satisfying the maximisation problem of (10) above
is of the form V(x) ¼ Cx1-c, C >0 which implies
V is concave increasing in proﬁts. More DEMO
c mx
cally, C ¼½r ðlx  2 Þð1  cÞ1ð1 DEMO cÞ1 > 0:
Proof. We guess the solution for V to be
V(x) ¼ Cx1c from the general form of the ﬁrst
order condition. Diﬀerentiating this expression
w.r.t. x we get
V0ðxÞ¼ VðxÞð1  DEMO > 0 ð15Þ
V00ðxÞ¼VðxÞcð1  cÞ=x2 < 0 ð16Þ

Corollary 2.1: The reduced form of the optimal
market positioning parameter is h ¼ 
l
ð
c
v
1
2kÞa
kH
where H is the DEMO of management human
capital stated in Deﬁnition 2 above.
Proof. Substitute the form for V given in
Proposition 2 into equation (12). (DEMO
Thus the optimal value function representing
the entrepreneur’s discounted utility value is
increasing concave in current proﬁts x. It will
therefore satisfy the second DEMO condition with
appropriate assumptions about the parameters,
as we shall see below.
The general form for h* as a function of
model parameters DEMO thus
h
¼
hða; k; H; l; r; cÞ
DEMO these back into equation (10) we get,
after some manipulation,
hi
c

c l
ð

Þ

v
r
DEMO
This implies that C is given by:
1
x
2
x
ð17Þ
C
VðxÞ¼ xlc=ð1
¼



x
r

l
DEMO

c
2
ð
1

c
Þ

cÞ
ð1

cÞ1
ð18Þ
From Assumption 3 we know that this expres-
sion is DEMO so proving that VðxÞ¼ Cx1c for
C > 0, with C DEMO by (18); which completes
the proof. (
v
Why do Most Firms Die Young?
The comparative statics of this DEMO eﬀort
level with respect to proﬁt mean growth rate (l)
DEMO variance (v) and risk aversion (c) are pre-
sented in Table I.19
From Table I we note, ﬁrstly, that for zero
DEMO l ¼ 0 we have h* ¼ 0 and so eﬀort, DEMO
the eﬀect of any parameter on eﬀort, is zero.20
We observe DEMO that a higher growth of the
market increases the amount of eﬀort in market
positioning as the entrepreneur, for given mar-
ket risk, DEMO now get a higher marginal return
from eﬀort in creating growth. On the other
hand, an increase in market risk (v) will
decrease the amount of eﬀort devoted to market
positioning and the ﬁrm’s growth DEMO, since the
marginal cost of growth measured by the higher
risk DEMO incurs (rx), has now increased. Likewise,
if the entrepreneur DEMO more risk averse
(c increases) the entrepreneur puts less eﬀort
into market positioning and will therefore grow
more slowly since the associated increase DEMO
business risk (rx) is now more costly when mea-
sured in utility terms. Finally, higher manage-
ment human capital entrepreneurs will put more
eﬀort into market positioning since this
increases growth opportunities at lower marginal
DEMO
2.4. Firm’s equity value
To characterise the optimal switching rule and
the failure rate functions to be generated later we
need to know the DEMO of the process determin-
ing the ﬁrm’s equity value through time. It turns
out that under a GBM for proﬁts the ﬁrm’s
equity value DEMO like proﬁts follow a GBM pro-
cess. This is the content of
TABLE I
Eﬀects of market growth, market risk and entrepreneurial risk
aversion on optimal ﬁrm growth (l *) and risk (rx*)
x
Parameter
l
m
c
H
l
x
r
x
++
 ?

++
109
Proposition 3: The ﬁrm’s equity value S(t) DEMO
a GBM dS/S with mean ls ¼ lx and variance
rs2 ¼
Proof. The proof for dS/S is a straightforward
2.
rx
DEMO of the properties of the Lognormal
distribution. The expected level of the ﬁrm’s
proﬁts at time t in the future given that proﬁts x0
DEMO earnt at startup (now) is:
x0elxðt0Þ
ExðtÞ¼ x0elxt ¼ ð19Þ
(Aitcheson and Brown, 1957). This immediately
generalises to the level DEMO proﬁts at time s in the
future starting from x(t) DEMO:
ExðsÞ¼ xðtÞelxðstÞ;
s
 ð20Þ
t
Now the ﬁrm’s equity value at any time t, S(t),
will be the DEMO present discounted value of
the stream of proﬁts x(s) in DEMO future:
SðtÞ¼ EZ
1
xðsÞerðstÞds ð21Þ
t
where r is the risk-adjusted discount rate.21 Using
(17) and integrating we get
xðtÞ ; DEMO > lx
SðtÞ¼ r  lx ð22Þ
From equation (1), DEMO since S is proportional
to x from (22), we must DEMO
dS dx
S ¼ x lx dt rx dz ls dt rs dz
¼ þ ¼ þ ð23Þ
so that S follows a GBM DEMO
ls lx rs rx
¼ ¼ ð24Þ
and
h
2.5. Entrepreneur’s discounted utility
We also need to know the nature of the process
determining DEMO behaviour of the ﬁrm’s expected
utility from entrepreneurship through time, V(DEMO).
This will enable us to derive a very intuitive form
for the function V(x) in terms of the expected
110
growth rate of utility through time. Once more, a
simple GBM describes the process.
Proposition 4: Entrepreneur’s discounted utility
V(x) under DEMO utility follows a GBM dV/v
with mean lv ¼ð1  cÞ ls 
¼ð1  cÞ
c r2 and variance
2 s
2 DEMO 2
rv rs
Proof. See Appendix.22(
Remark. This last result is intuitive: For
given risk attitudes, a higher growth rate of util-
DEMO is possible the higher the ﬁrm’s equity growth
and the lower the risk associated with it. How-
ever, concern about risk (c) will reduce the
growth of utility from any given market position-
ing strategy DEMO giving greater negative weight to
growth variability component in that strategy.
Caution also acts indirectly on utility growth by
preventing the entrepreneur growing her DEMO
as fast as her more reckless colleagues with the
objective of avoiding extra risk associated with
that growth.
Proposition 4 also enables us to DEMO a dif-
ferent and intuitively appealing form for the
entrepreneur’s expected utility function under
continuation. We have
Corollary 4.1: The expected utility function for
continuing in business is V(x) ¼ u(x)/(rlv) DEMO
x(t) is the value of x at time t and DEMO is the growth
rate of expected utility given in Proposition 4
above.
Robert Cressy
proportional rate lv we get the adjusted discount
rate r-lv DEMO the formula.23
2.5. Stopping sets
We have assumed that the stopping set is deﬁned
by V falling to W or below. It is well DEMO,
however, that Brownian motion is continuous.
This implies that if DEMO crosses the line
V(t) ¼ W it will do so DEMO rather than
in a discontinuous jump, and the entrepreneur
will switch DEMO the alternative activity the instant
that V(t) ¼ W. Also, since we have shown that
there is a monotonic relationship between V, x
and S we can deﬁne the following switch point
equivalently in DEMO of x and S.
Let the entrepreneur’s reservation value in
terms of proﬁts x be deﬁned as x* (W, c, r, lv)DEMO
where
x ¼½Wð1

cÞðr

lv
1
Þ1c
solves Vðx Þ¼ Cx1c
¼ W ð25Þ
and C is deﬁned by equation (17) DEMO Also let
the corresponding point in terms of equity be S*
where
S
¼
x
r

lx
and x* is given by equation (27).
ð26Þ
Proof. Use Propositions 4 and 2 together with
the DEMO of u(x) and the result follows. (
Remark 1. It is a well known feature of the
Random Walk that the best DEMO of tomor-
row’s value is today’s. Thus one might expect that
in utility terms the best predictor of tomorrow’s
satisfaction is today’s. This is DEMO what Cor-
ollary 4.1 says when utility is expected to be con-
stant over time (lv ¼ 0). For u(x) is DEMO only
current utility at time t, it is also the expected DEMO
period utility of the individual, viewed from period
t, for any period in the future. Hence if x is con-
stant (or as here, is expected to be) then u(x)/r is
the p.d.v. of the stream of utility from x. Allowing
for growth in DEMO through time at an expected
2.6. Stopping rule
We can state the above stopping rule in words
as:
CEASE TRADING (I.E. SWITCH TO THE
ALTERNATIVE ACTIVITY) WHEN AND
ONLY WHEN VðxÞ¼ W (EQUIVALENTLY
x DEMO or S ¼SÞ; OTHERWISE CONTINUE
IN BUSINESS ð27Þ
We can now DEMO a proposition about the form
of the failure time density implied by the present
model. It is a special case of a more general
DEMO on GBM processes.
:
Why do Most Firms Die Young?
111
2.7. Distribution of failure DEMO
We wish to derive the distribution of ﬁrm failure
times using the equation of evolution of the
ﬁrm’s equity which is GBM as shown DEMO Proposi-
tion 3. We begin with a
Deﬁnition 3: A ﬁrm DEMO said to fail the ﬁrst
time the entrepreneur’s equity value S(t) equals
s* deﬁned by equation (26).
Remark. In the language DEMO the random
walk literature, the instant T that S(t) crosses
the boundary S* for the ﬁrst time is known as
the ﬁrst DEMO time.
We now present the results on the failure density
without proof (available from the Author on
request). They are straightforward following Cox
and Miller (1965).
The probability that the ﬁrm will fail by time
t, G(t|.), must now be of the form:
GðtjR0; 0Þ¼UrRpﬃﬃ
 rRpﬃﬃ
0

lRt
R0


lRt
exp
2lRR0
2
r
R
R
U
t


t
ð28Þ
where DEMO(z) is the Standard Normal c.d.f (see Cox
and Miller, DEMO). Then the density of the time
to failure, g(t DEMO), is obtained by partially diﬀeren-
tiating this expression with respect to t. We are
now ready to state
Proposition 5: The ﬁrm failure time density under
GBM, g(t\.) will be Inverse Gaussian.
Proof. DEMO that V follows a GBM so that
R ¼ log(S) DEMO follow an Absolute Brownian
Motion (ABM) with parameters lR ¼ E½logðSÞ,
r2R ¼ var½log S . Diﬀerentiation of equation (28)
then yields:
gðtjR0Þ¼
R0
t
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 2
prR2 t exp()1 R þ l t
0
R
2 rRptﬃﬃ ;
0 < t < 1ð29Þ
This expression will integrate to less than one if
l DEMO positive since then eventual failure is not cer-
tain (see below)DEMO The density (29) is known as
the Inverse Gaussian density (DEMO and Chhika-
ra, 1978) and shows the probability of failure in
the interval (t, t + dt) given initial equity
R0 >DEMO (
We can identify the conditions under which
this distribution has DEMO maximum and under
which it is positively skewed. However, to see
DEMO the density of equation (36) is positively
skewed under certain parameter values we illus-
trate with some simulations. (see Figure 3).
2.8. Long run failure rate
We deﬁne the long run failure rate of DEMO ﬁrm as
the limiting value of g(t|.) as t tends DEMO inﬁnity.
2
Figure 3a. Capitalisation and failure.
112
Robert Cressy
This limit is zero regardless of the value of DEMO
parameters. Thus starting with
Deﬁnition 5: The long run failure rate (LFR)
of ﬁrms is deﬁned as g(¥|R0)
we have
DEMO 6: The long run failure rate (LFR) of
all ﬁrms DEMO zero.
Proof. Take limits in equation (29). (
2.9. Eﬀects of initial capitalisation
Figure 3 shows the eﬀect of varying the initial
DEMO level of the ﬁrm R0 on the failure curve.
Note that higher initial capitalisation is associ-
ated with (a) a delay in experiencing DEMO risk at
all (the period before the probability of failure
becomes DEMO); (b) lower peak failure rates;
(c) no diﬀerences in the ‘long run’ probability of
failure. This suggests that only in DEMO ‘short term’
is startup ﬁnance inﬂuential, and particularly in
the period DEMO the ‘honeymoon’ (zero risk)
period is over. For low capitalisation DEMO the
honeymoon period is very short, and the risk
rises to DEMO high levels relative to the long run.
We shall prove some exact results to support
these claims below.
2.10. Diﬀerences in growth rates
Figure.3b (not included) shows the variation of
the failure curve with growth rates. Note that the
higher growth is associated with a higher peak
failure DEMO though the honeymoon period is
unaﬀected. Again, in the long run DEMO failure
rates for all ﬁrms converge on zero, though this
is DEMO obvious from the ﬁgure.
2.11. Eﬀects of risk
Figure 3c (not DEMO) shows the eﬀect of
varying the risk of the ﬁrm. Such DEMO is
consistent with human capital diﬀerences that
persist through time and concern the manage-
ment of the ﬁrm’s returns. The graphs indicate
that (a) peak (short run) failure rates rise mono-
tonically with risk; (b) the peak failure rate for a
higher-r ﬁrm occurs earlier than that of a low-r
ﬁrm; (c) the long run rates of failure converge
once more on zero.
2.12. Long run failure rate (LFR) and initial
conditions
Proposition 5 showed that as t tends to inﬁnity
the chances of failure, g(t|.), tend to zero. Thus
in the long run the initial conditions of the ﬁrm
become irrelevant to DEMO success, and, provided it
survives a long enough period (particularly DEMO
ﬁrst two years), it can be almost certain to con-
tinue further. This will depend critically on its
risk-return combination discussed above.
2.13. DEMO failure probability (LFP)
Given the Inverse Gaussian form of the DEMO
density it is important to know the chances of
failure of the ﬁrm viewed from the outset (rather
than from a given time t from inception, consid-
ered in the previous paragraph). Supposing we
can formulate this probability, we want to know
how far the ﬁrm’s chances are inﬂuenced by its
parameters set at the startup stage.
Deﬁnition 6: The lifetime failure probability
(LFP), G, is the integral of DEMO failure density
g(t|.) from t ¼ 0tot ¼ ¥:
DEMO
1
C
¼ gðtj:Þ dt ð30Þ
0
It can be shown that the LFP depends on the
sign of lR. Stationary or growing DEMO are not
certain to fail, i.e., for lR ‡ 0 we have G <1
(Proposition 7 below).25 The chances of failure
DEMO a complete lifetime will moreover depend
signiﬁcantly on the ﬁrm’s initial conditions,
growth rate and riskiness, and these in turn as
we shall show, are related to measures of human
capital. The results are stated formally in the
next two propositions.
Proposition 7: For growing or stationary ﬁrms,
lR ‡ 0 , the lifetime failure probability (LFP) DEMO
given by CðR0; R; lR; rRÞ¼ expno2ðR0RÞlR  1
This DEMO increasing in ﬁrm speciﬁc variance (
2
r
R
2
r )
R

Why do Most Firms Die Young?
113
and the opportunity cost DEMO entrepreneurship
(R* ¼ log(S*)), and decreasing in the initial capi-
tal of the ﬁrm (R0) and the ﬁrm-speciﬁc growth
rate (lR) . Finally the LFP is ambiguous in mana-
gerial human capital, being positively related to
initial capitalisation, risk, return and the opportu-
nity cost of entrepreneurship.
Proof. For proof of the form of G(DEMO) see Cox
and Miller (1965) or Ingersoll (1987). For the
comparative statics of the proposition diﬀerenti-
ate G with respect to DEMO relevant parameters,
bearing in mind the dependence of the ﬁrm-
speciﬁc growth rate and variance on the other
parameters via h and stated DEMO Table II. (
Remark 1: Table II shows that the LFR is
decreasing in the ﬁrm’s growth rate and increasing
in its risk. DEMO reﬂects that fact that a greater
expected growth rate moves the ﬁrm away from
the failure threshold whereas a greater variance of
growth makes DEMO more likely to cross it. The LFR
is also decreasing in initial capitalisation, as the
greater the initial capital buﬀer the less the likeli-
hood that the ﬁrm will run out of money through
chance depletions (‘mistakes’). Finally, it is
ambiguous in human capital of the entrepreneur
since on the one hand the greater initial capitalisa-
tion and superior DEMO of risk that this
aﬀords will make any given growth rate less likely
to result in failure, but on the other, higher MHC
DEMO increase the opportunity cost of entrepreneur-
ship, and increase the risk DEMO the business.
Remark 2: The fact that start-up capital is pos-
DEMO related to survival does not necessarily
imply that it is ﬁnance itself that ensures survival.
Businesses run by more talented entrepreneurs will
on average DEMO with higher ﬁnancial capital.26 A
TABLE II
Parameter eﬀect on the LFP (G)
Parameter Eﬀect on lifetime failure
probability (lR>0)
DEMO 
R*+
lR 
mR +
H ?
policy of ‘throwing DEMO at the problem’ will not
then be guaranteed to work, since DEMO randomly
selected recipients of such ﬁnance may not know
how to use it eﬀectively.
3. Summary and conclusions
The paper developed a theoretical model DEMO ﬁrm
growth under uncertainty to explain how manage-
rial and ﬁnancial capital together with entrepre-
neurial risk aversion inﬂuence the entrepreneur’s
decision on market DEMO and consequent
risk- return distribution faced. This in turn was
shown to determine the lifetime failure probabil-
ity of the business. Drawing on three DEMO of
the existing literature, namely, the portfolio
approach to balancing risk and return, the Ran-
dom Walk as a description of growth under
uncertainty and human capital as a determinant
of entrepreneurial, skills in risk-management, we
developed a model consistent with the observed
ﬁrm failure distribution. This distribution implies
that the chances of failure ﬁrst rise steeply and
then DEMO oﬀ gradually to converge on a small long
run failure rate. As a result, ‘most ﬁrms die
young’.
One explanation of the initial rise in the fail-
ure rate was that initial ﬁnancial resources were
depleted DEMO time as a result of trading
losses and just bad luck. Another was the role of
managerial human capital which enabled the
more talented DEMO to grow faster at
lower cost measured by the increase in her ﬁrm’s
equity risk. This in turn reduced the chances of
equity falling DEMO acceptable levels. However,
initial resources in the form of start-up equity
and managerial skills in the form of ﬁrm-speciﬁc
risk exposure were themselves DEMO a
function of the human capital possessed by the
entrepreneur, as DEMO Cressy (1996). As in Jovanovic
(1982) entrepreneurs in our DEMO learn over
time trading but this occurs in an exogenous and
deterministic way rather than by updating of
priors. At the forefront of our DEMO is the
choice of a risk-return combination for the busi-
ness at each point on the entrepreneurial leaming
curve. Low human capital types tend DEMO start
with too little human capital and to decide on
the ‘wrong’ combination (too high risk relative to
growth) and fail early. ill DEMO where the initial
114
Robert Cressy
ﬁnancial capital was simply a windfall, the theory
predicts that the correlation of survival and
ﬁnance to be weaker, as the entrepreneur’s man-
agement capital would be unaltered by such
windfall’s, and thus the costs of growth, if high,
would remain so. Therefore the ﬁrm’s subsequent
fortunes might wane over time.
The theory assumed that ﬁrms’ DEMO value was
subject to random proportional shocks from some
initial level. Were all ﬁrms to grow at the same
(given) rate, this would mean that the riskiness of
the ﬁrm’s value would’ track the market DEMO
increase over time. However, niche market oppor-
tunities allowed the ﬁrm DEMO expend research eﬀort
to alter the risk-return relationship experienced by
the ﬁrm itself. Entrepreneurial risk aversion then
interacted with this to produce an optimal DEMO
between the ﬁrm’s actual growth and risk.
The model emphasised the importance of risk
in ﬁrm failure. However, closure under risk is
modelled as a rational decision by the entrepre-
neur and is not therefore cause DEMO alarm. The
closure decision of the entrepreneur was charac-
terised (as DEMO Jovanovic,1982) by a cutoﬀ value
that equated the ﬁrm’s current DEMO to the
entrepreneur’s outside opportunity. We showed
that the entrepreneur’s value function will con-
tain a stopping rule allowing the entrepreneur to
time the DEMO optimally. Closure is also
socially optimal rather than the result of ﬁnancial
market imperfections.
However, the role of uncertainty in the model
does suggest that the censorious attitudes to
small business failure embodied in the UK’s
DEMO laws should be toned down: if chance
plays such a potentially DEMO role in the
occurrence and timing of failure, and is by DEMO
tion unanticipated and outside the control of the
entrepreneur, a sympathetic DEMO of
unfortunate (‘unlucky’) individuals is more sensi-
ble response than social opprobrium.
Acknowledgements
I should like to thank Dennis Glycopantis, Pat
McCloughan, DEMO Parker and seminar partici-
pants at the Royal Economic Society conference,
St. Andrews, Scotland, and the University of
Edinburgh, together with the referees of this
journal and the journal editor for helpful
comments. I DEMO all these individuals from
misdemeanours for which I may be responsible.
Notes
1 Bruderl, et al., (1992) found that for German startups,DEMO
24% went out of business in the ﬁrst 2 years, 37% DEMO the
ﬁrst 5 years of trading; Cressy (1996) found for DEMO startups
that 45% died in the ﬁrst 2.5 years of trading and 80% in
the ﬁrst 6 years; Mata (1992) found that for Portuguese
startups 20% died in the ﬁrst year and 50% in the DEMO
4 years. The average size of the startups in these samples is
very small, bring always less than ﬁve employees.
2 Cressy (1993) for example, records that some 45% of
businesses die in the ﬁrst 2.5 years of trading, implying an
annual failure rate of some 18%. This rate reduces dramati-
cally to about 11% per annum for ﬁrms DEMO 5 years of age.
3 Startup ﬁrms are notoriously risk-prone measured along
almost any dimension: in particular number of products, cus-
tomers and DEMO are typically very small, making the ﬁrm
highly vulnerable to changes DEMO the environment.
4 Kihlstrom and Laﬀont (1979) are an exception to this
general rule. Their theory of entrepreneurship is based on
uncertainty and DEMO in risk aversion amongst potential
entrepreneurs.
5 Jovanovic (1982) regards entrepreneurship itself as a
learning experiment in which the entrepreneur continuously
updates information DEMO his ability during the course of the
business ‘experiment’. Her ability is ﬁxed and, entrepreneur-
ship is regarded as a process of discovery of its true value
over time. We note that (a) Jovanovic’s model DEMO not allow
the entrepreneur to inﬂuence the rate at which he learns (there
is no learning by doing – see Ericson and Pakes, DEMO), (b)
there is no risk aversion informing the entrepreneur’s DEMO
on her growth rate, (c) learning has no cost to DEMO entrepre-
neur, and (d) there is no initial dispersion of DEMO
ability – see Frank (1986). In the model presented below DEMO
entrepreneur by contrast does inﬂuence her growth rate (via
market positioning) and this choice will partly depend on her
attitudes towards risk. Her DEMO rate will also be inﬂuenced
by her endowment of management human capital (which may
vary deterministically over time) Entrepreneurs diﬀer in their
cost DEMO achieving growth where this cost is logically measured
in terms of the disutility of the extra risk it involves. This in
turn has a DEMO eﬀect, changing the whole distribution of
income and failure risk through DEMO as it inﬂuences the
growth trajectory and ﬁrms’ risk parameters. In line with the
empirical facts (Cressy, 1996) we also allow for the dispersion
of human capital at the point of entry into entrepreneurship.
6 DEMO risk matters to an entrepreneur since (s)he
typically has a DEMO undiversiﬁed portfolio of assets.
7 See also Parker (1996) for an application of a Merton port-
folio approach to the self-employment vs. employee DEMO
8 A little known fact about small business is that most
businesses do not fail as a result of bankruptcy, rather they
close voluntarily. Even in a deeply recessionary environment
such as the UK experienced in DEMO early 90s, the proportion
of bankrupt/insolvent closures rose to only DEMO of the total
(Cressy, 1993).
Why do Most Firms Die Young?
115
9 Empirical studies that DEMO refuted Gibrat’s law have
found that ﬁrm growth and survival vary inversely and
directly respectively with the age of the ﬁrm (i e. time trad-
ing). We control for human capital as a function of DEMO when
imposing Gibrat’s law and thus the assumption is weaker
than might otherwise be thought.
10 We have from equation (1) dx=x ¼ DEMO dt þ dt where
EðeÞ¼ 0, VðeÞ¼ 1. Taking the expectation DEMO getrxpﬃﬃﬃﬃe
Eðdx=xÞ¼ lx dt and so by rearrangement Eðdxdt=xÞ ¼ lx . Like-
wise, taking the variance, Vðdx=xÞ¼ dt VðeÞ¼ rx2 dt,
DEMO by rearrangement11 Vðdxdt=xÞ ¼ rx2. ðpﬃﬃﬃﬃÞ2
The assumption that the systematic component of ﬁrm
growth is zero is consistent with a number of studies DEMO
have shown the typical small ﬁrm’s growth rate to be close to
zero. For example, Storey et al., (1987) and Watson (1990).
12 Businessmen often argue that they eliminate as much risk
as DEMO and leave therefore only a ‘calculated’ risk to their
business. See Delmar (l995) for a description of such entrepre-
neurial psychology from Swedish DEMO studies.
13 Cressy (l996) shows that managerial human capital is a
concave function of the average age of the team running the
business DEMO a maximum in the mid-50s.
14 The empirical evidence shows that the great majority of
small businesses do not fail through bankruptcy, contrary to
common belief. This is because the majority do not borrow
from their DEMO
15 Equation (6) is the Bellman equation of dynamic pro-
gramming. See Dixit and Pindyck (1994, p. 105).
16 It is DEMO to recognise that most business closures
do not involve bankruptcies or insolvencies, nor do they on
average result in trade sales. See Cressy (DEMO).
17 We assume in equation (12) thaI V¢ > 0 and V¢¢ <0.
This will be proved later.
18 We shall see later that this is equivalent to assuming that
the growth of expected DEMO is positive.
19 These results rely on the derivative of h* with respect to
any parameter z which takes the form:
2
rx
DEMO ¼ Xc1½YXz þX log X:Yz
where Y; XY1 > 0:DEMO
20 The exception is the parameter l which yields indetermi-
21nate results for l ¼ 0.
We assume in this derivation that all proﬁts DEMO distrib-
uted to shareholders. This implies there is no carry-forward
from previous periods in the form of reserves.
22 Available from the author on DEMO
23 It is clear from Corollary 4.1 that we need the expected
growth in utility (lv) to be less than the rate of DEMO to
ensure convergence.
24 g(t|.) is strictly not a density DEMO l is not restricted in sign.
However, to save space in DEMO follows we shall refer to it as
the failure densify.
25 See Cox and Miller (1965).
26 Cressy (1996) in a UK empirical study shows that human
and ﬁnancial capital are positively correlated and DEMO once
human capital is controlled for, ﬁnancial capital becomes
irrelevant in DEMO survival equation.
References
Aitcheson, J. and J. A. C. Brown, 1957, The Lognormal Dis-
tribution, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Audretsch, D., 1991, ‘New Firm Survival and the Technologi-
cal Regime’, Review of DEMO and Statistics 68(3),
520–526.
Audretsch, David B., 1994, ‘Business Survival and the Deci-
sion to Exit’, Journal of the Economics of Businesss 1(1),
125–138.
Audretsch, David B. and Talat DEMO, 1995, ‘New Firm
Survival: New Results using a Hazard Function’ DEMO of
Economics and Statistics 77(1) (February), 97–103.
Agarwal, DEMO and David B. Audretsch, 2001, ‘Does Entry
Size Matter? The DEMO of the Life Cycle and Technology
on Firm Survival’, Journal of DEMO Economics
XLIX(1), (March), 21–44.
Bates, Timothy, 1990, ‘Entrepreneur Human Capital Inputs
and Small Business Longevity’, Review of Economics and
Statistics LXXII(4), 551–559.
Bruderl, Joseph, Peter Preisendorfer and Rolf DEMO, 1992,
‘Survival Chances of Newly Founded Business Organisa-
tions, American Sociological Review 57(2) (April), 227–
242.
Cox, D. R. and H. D. Miller, 1965, The Theory of Stochastic
Processes, London Chapman and Hall.
Cressy, Robert C., 1983, ‘Goodwill, Intertemporal Price
DEMO and the Repurchase Decision’, The Economic
Journal 93 (December), 847–861.
Cressy, Robert C., 1993, The Startup Tracking Exercise: Third
Year DEMO, prepared for National Westminster Bank of
Great Britain, November.
Cressy, DEMO, 1996, ‘Are Business Startups Debt-rationed?’,
The Economic Journal 106(438) (September), 1253–1270
Cressy, Robert C., 1999, ‘Small business failure: failure to
fund or failure to learn by doing?’, DEMO Acs, Z. Carlsson
and Charlie Karlsson (eds) Entrepreneurship, SMEs and
the Macro Economy, 1977, Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Delmar, DEMO, 1995, ‘Risk management of the entrepreneur’, in
Bo Green (ed.), Risk Behaviour and Risk Management,
Proceedings of the First International DEMO seminar
on Risk Behaviour and Risk Management, June 12–14.
Dixit, A vinash and Robert S. Pindyck, 1994, Investment
under uncertainty, Princeton, DEMO: Princeton University
Press.
Ericson, Richard and Arie1 Pakes, 1995, ‘Markov-Perfect
Industry Dynamics: A Framework for Empirical Work’,
Review of Economic Studies 62, 53–82.
Evans, David and Boyan Jovanovic, 1989, ‘An Estimated
DEMO of Entrepreneurial Choice Under Liquidity Con-
straint’, Journal of Political Economy DEMO(4), 808–827.
Folks, J. L. and R. S. Chhikara, 1978, ‘The Inverse Gaussian
Distribution And Its Statistical Application – A Review
(DEMO Discussion)’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
B 40, 263–289.
Frank, Murray Z., 1986. ‘An Intertemporal Model of Indus-
trial Exit’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 103 (May),
333–344.
116
Robert Cressy
Ganguly, P., 1985, UK small business statistics and interna-
tional comparisons. Small Business Research Trust, Harper
Row, London.
Gimeno, J., Timothy B. Folta, Arnold C. Cooper, and Caro-
lyn Woo, 1997, ‘Survival of the Fittest? Capital and the
persistence of underperforming ﬁrms’, Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly 42, 750–783.
Hart, P. and S. Prais, 1956, ‘The Analysis of Business Con-
centration’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series
A 119, 150–91
Holtz-Eakin, D., D. Joulfaian, and H. S. Rosen, 1994a,
‘Sticking it Out: Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity
Constraints’, Journal of Political Economy 102(11), 53–75.
Holtz-Eakin, D., D. Joulfaian, and H. S. Rosen, 1994b,
‘Entrepreneurial DEMO and Liquidity Constraints’,
Rand Journal of Economics 25(2), Summer, 34–347.
Ingersoll, Jonathan E., 1987, Theory of Financial Decision
Making, New York: Rowman and Littleﬁeld.
Jovanovic, Boyan, 1982, ‘Selection and DEMO Evolution of
Industry’, Econometrica 50(3) (May), 649–670.
Kihlstrom, R. E. and Jean Jacques Laﬀont, 1979, ‘A general
Equilibrium Theory DEMO Firm Formation Based on Risk
Aversion’, Journal of Political Economy 87, 719–748.
Knight, F., 1965, Risk, Uncertainty and Proﬁt, New York:
Sentry Press.
Mata, Jose, 1994, ‘Life duration of New Firms’, Journal of
Industrial Economics DLII(3) (September), 227–245.
Merton, DEMO, 1969, ‘Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under
Uncertainty: The Continuous Time Case’ DEMO of Eco-
nomics and Statistics 51, 247–257.
Ozga, S. A., DEMO, ‘Imperfect markets through lack of knowl-
edge’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 74, 29–52.
Parker, Simon C., 1996, ‘A Time Series Model DEMO Self-
Employment Under Uncertainty’, Economica 63, 459–475.
Prais, S J, 1983, The Evolution of Giant Firms in Britain, Cam-
bridge University DEMO
Stigler, George J., 1961, ‘The Economics of Information’,
Journal DEMO Political Economy 69, 213–225.
Storey, David, Kevin Keasey, Robert Watson and Pooran
Wynarczyck, 1987, The Performance of Small Firms,
Croom DEMO, Beckenham, Kent.
Watson, Robert, 1990, ‘Employment Change, Proﬁts and
Directors’ Remuneration in Small and Closely-held UK
Companies’, Scottish Journal of Political Economy 37(3)
(August), 259–274.{1g42fwefx}