Psychological Commitment and Its Effects on Post-Decision Evaluation and
Preference Stability among DEMO
Lawrence A. Crosby; James R. Taylor
The Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 9, No. 4. (Mar., 1983), pp. 413-431.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0093-5301%28198303%299%3A4%3C413%3APCAIEO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
The Journal of Consumer Research is DEMO published by The University of Chicago Press.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions DEMO Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
DEMO://www.jstor.org/journals/ucpress.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen DEMO printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and DEMO literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, DEMO societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
DEMO of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact DEMO
http://www.jstor.org
Thu Jan 10 22:52:49 2008
Psychological Commitment and Its
Effects on Post-Decision Evaluation
and Preference Stability Among DEMO
LAWRENCE A. CROSBY
JAMES R. TAYLOR*
High psychological commitment to a vote decision produces halo effects in the
subsequent evaluation of election outcomes and DEMO associated with greater pref-
erence stability. Among low commitment voters, preferences DEMO more unstable
and subject to less cognitive mediation. Social motivation moderatesthe influence
of social versus personal outcomes in post-decision evaluation for high but not
DEMO low commitment voters.
t appears that researchers no longer draw a major dis-
(e.g., I tinction Nakanishi, between Cooper, voting and behavior DEMO and consumer 1974; Palda behavior 1975;
Rothschild 1978; Swinyard and Coney 1978). Various ex-
planations have been given for this trend, including the
increased expenditures for advertising in political cam-
paigns (Rothschild and Houston 1980). A more important
factor for those doing research on DEMO behavior is the
widely accepted but untested assumption that voting and
buying are governed by similar behavioral principles.
A reasonable starting point for broadening DEMO application
of consumer behavior concepts is to find areas where buying
overlaps with voting. For example, mass communication
effects are common to both. It is reasonable to expect that
models of advertising response would generalize to DEMO
Not surprisingly, previous studies dealing with political
candidates have been concerned DEMO the manner in and
degree to which voters' decisions are influenced DEMO political
advertising and other promotional stimuli. What occurs
after the election, DEMO the candidate is in office or the law
is on the books, has generally been ignored. The staying
power of a politician or law seems to depend on voters'
post-decision evaluations (e.g., voters in DEMO State of Mich-
igan recently reversed an earlier referendum decision and
*Lawrence A. Crosby is Visiting Assistant Professor of Marketing and
James R. Taylor DEMO the S.S. Kresge Professor of Marketing, both at the
Graduate School DEMO Business, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109. The authors DEMO acknowledge financial support provided by
S.S. Kresge Research Funds and field services provided by Nordhaus
Research, Inc., of Farmington, Michigan. The authors also wish to thank
Michael Ryan, Claes Fornell, and the reviewers for DEMO on an earlier
draft of the manuscript.
413
raised the legal drinking age from 18 to 21, in response to
evidence of increased traffic accidents among teenagers due
to alcohol). As Rothschild (1979) notes, advertising can
lead to short-run behavior, but reinforcement is necessary
for long-run behavior. Presumably, supporters of a suc-
cessful candidate or proposal will develop less favorable
views if their subsequent evaluation indicates more negative
than positive DEMO Opponents' views, on the other
hand, should become more favorable DEMO positive outcomes
are perceived to outweigh negative ones.
We would amend this formulation by stating that post-
decision evaluation is markedly affected by the DEMO's ini-
tial beliefs and attitudes. We contend that these beliefs and
attitudes affect not only the content but also the nature of
evaluation. DEMO effects of prior beliefs on the content of
evaluation are well documented in the expectation confir-
mation/disconfirmation literature (e.g., Oliver and Linda
DEMO). In this study, we employ a theoretical notion of
commitment DEMO explain how prior attitudes simultaneously
affect the content and nature of post-decision evaluation.
To test our model and hypotheses, we employed two
waves of survey data dealing with the issue of the Michigan
"bottle ban," which was passed by voters in 1976 and
implemented in 1978. The DEMO are longitudinal, containing
opinion measures on the same individuals at two DEMO in
time. Previous works have discussed the pre-election survey
results (Crosby DEMO Gill 1981; Crosby, Gill, and Taylor
1981; Crosby, Taylor, and Kinnear 1980) and post-imple-
mentation findings (Crosby and Taylor 1982)DEMO This article
represents the first attempt to statistically relate both waves
of data at the individual level. A dynamic view of con-
sumerlvoter behavior DEMO this longitudinal focus
(Engel, Blackwell, and Kollat 1978, p. 577; Ferber 1976;
Jacoby 1976; Olson and Dover 1978).
0 DEMO OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
Vol. 9
March 1983
CONCEPTS OF COMMITMENT
The thrust of our argument is that the stability DEMO a voter's
preference with respect to a political decision is a positive
function of the voter's level of commitment to that deci-
DEMO' Contributing to this stability are mediating responses
that vary according to DEMO level of commitment. A concept
of commitment is distilled from similar constructs appear-
ing in the public opinion, psychology, sociology, and con-
sumer behavior literatures. An attempt is made to avoid a
tautological enor by DEMO the nature of commitment
and why it produces consistent preferences (e.g., Becker
1960).
In attempting to explain the stability (or instability) DEMO
individuals' opinions on public issues over time, opinion
researchers have employed a variety of related concepts.
Stability, they claim, is positively associated DEMO opinion
intensity or strength and is greater for opinions that are
consonant with related attitudes, based on knowledge or
experience, important to the DEMO of the holder, and
that have been publicly expressed (Hennessey 1975; Lane
and Sears 1964).
Social psychologists have invoked similar notions to ex-
plain why attitudes may be resistant to change. Resistance,
they DEMO, is positively associated with attitude centrality
(Rokeach 1960) and increases DEMO the level of position
involvement (Freedman 1964), ego involvement (Ostrom
and Brock 1968), conviction (Gerard 1968), and commit-
ment (DEMO 1968; Kiesler 1968). Commitment is de-
fined in terms of DEMO that serve to fix or freeze be-
havior (Gerard 1965), DEMO that pledge or bind the individual
to a behavior, and the DEMO that represent those be-
haviors (Kiesler 1971). The various consistency DEMO
also predict that under conditions of balance (Hieder 1946),
congruity (Osgood and Tannenbaum 1955), and
affective-cognitive consistency (Rosenberg 1960), DEMO is
less attitude change.
The fact that three types of commitment have been cited
in the literature (Lee and Zeiss 1980) is relevant DEMO this
discussion: a cognitive form emphasizes the knowledge as-
pect, attitudinal commitment refers to the person's dispo-
sitions, and a behavioral form emphasizes commitment by
doing. Sociologists are particularly interested in the behav-
ioral DEMO of commitment. They are concerned with the
process by which behavioral acts commit the individual to
a consistent line of action. In sociology, for example, com-
mitment may refer to the societal and social factors that
constrain one to continue a line of action, or to the actor's
perception that the costs of discontinuation are too high
(Johnson 1973).
In consumer behavior, the issues of preference stability
'Stability implies DEMO comparison of measures at two or more points in
time. The comparison in this study is between pre-election (campaign
phase) and post-election (implementation phase) preferences. This pro-
vides the opportunity for a relatively long period of evaluation, with many
intervening events, and gives the election outcomes DEMO chance to unfold.
Still, many of the concepts discussed should generalize DEMO both shorter
and longer periods.
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
and commitment have been discussed in connection with
brand loyalty and consumers' resistance to persuasive com-
munication. Concepts used to explain these phenomena are
taken from DEMO psychology. 1t is argued that true loyalty,
as opposed to repeat purchasing, exists only when there is
involvement with the purchase and commitment to the
brand (Day 1969). Under these conditions, behavior reflects
DEMO positive attitude toward the brand that is relatively stable
across purchase situations (Jacoby and Kyner 1973). Rob-
ertson (1976) offers a definition of commitment in the con-
sumer behavior context as "the strength of the individual's
belief system with regard to a product or a DEMO" The
larger the number of distinguishing attributes and the higher
their DEMO, the greater the commitment.
In an attempt to tie together this DEMO from several
disciplines and theoretical perspectives, we offer the fol-
lowing DEMO of commitment:
Psychological commitment refers to a tendency to resist
change in preference in response to conflicting information
or experience. Psychological commitment is DEMO
when (1) the individual is motivated by 8 need to maintain
consistent relationships between preference and salient as-
pects of cognitive structure, and (2) important values and
self-images are linked to the preference, leading to a state of
position involvement.
Thus, commitment is defined as a hypothetical construct
that exists only by inference. This definition attributes re-
sistance DEMO internal states of the individual, whereas the
sociological view of commitment DEMO stability to ex-
ternally imposed constraints that make a behavior irrever-
sible.
Our concept of commitment is related to, but somewhat
different than commitment as defined by Robertson. First,
he employs a static definition of DEMO (i.e., strength
of individual's belief system), while ours is dynamic (i.e.,
tendency to resist change). Second, Robertson's DEMO of
commitment is primarily concerned with the belief elements
of cognitive structure and is oriented to a multiattribute
model of brand choice. His concept DEMO commitment appears
restrictive in specifying that only beliefs can commit the
individual to a preference. Other psychological variables
would seem to have that capacity DEMO well.
One implication of our definition is that commitment var-
ies directly with the amount of cognitive-affective-behavioral
support that exists for the preference. Here "support"
means "psycho-logically" (Abelson and Rosenberg 1958)
consistent relationships with salient aspects of cognitive
structure. To the extent that such consistency DEMO, the
consumer/voter has more "reasons" for taking and main-
DEMO a particular stand. Conversely, we assume that in-
dividuals wish to DEMO inconsistency because it produces
psychological tension and that they will, therefore, resist
change in already balanced structures. Conceptual confu-
sion and problems of DEMO arise from trying to spec-
ify what aspects of cognitive structure are linked to pref-
erence. These might include values (centrality?), cognitive
DEMO (conviction?), beliefs (rootedness?), self-images
EFFECTS OF COMMITMENT
(involvement?), related attitudes (consonance?), and DEMO
ories of past behaviors (behavioral commitment?).
It is our argument that all such relationships serve to
commit the voter or consumer to DEMO preference, although the
potency of such linkages will probably vary. when DEMO
linkage is to the person's values and self-images, position
involvement DEMO that provides an added incentive (i.e.,
ego defense) to maintain consistency. However, separating
the influence of involvement from other commitment-pro-
ducing factors is problematic because of a tendency for
these phenomena to coexist in DEMO consumer's psyche (e.g.,
more involvement, more belief support). In fact, thereis
evidence that high involvement consumers tend to have
more complex cognitive structures (Lastovicka and Gardner
1978; Rothschild and Houston 1980)DEMO
In Robertson's work and in more recent discussions
(e.g., Fennel1 1978; Kassarjian and Kassarjian 1979), com-
mitment has been treated as equivalent to involvement or
as a component of involvement (Lastovicka and Gardner
1978). We feel these conceptualizations are somewhat im-
precise. Arguments put DEMO by Freedman (1964) help to
clarify the relationship between commitment and involve-
ment. He notes that one usage of the term "involvement"
implies a commitment to a particular position on an issue,
while DEMO usage refers to the general level of interest
or concern about an issue without reference to a specific
position. Thus, a person may be involved with an issue
without yet having taken a stand. This might DEMO that
involvement often precedes commitment. Involvement re-
sults from the fact that important values or the person's
self-image are engaged or made salient DEMO a decision situ-
ation. This would lead to the arousal or drive activation that
Mitchell (1979) has suggested. Commitment (= position
involvement) DEMO when these values, self-images, im-
portant attitudes, and so on DEMO cognitively linked to
a particular stand or choice alternative.
In summary, DEMO feel the voter is committed to a political
decision when the psychological costs of deviating from
that decision are too high. The voter is DEMO to a
decision if change would challenge hislher values or self-
concept, necessitate a modification of many important be-
liefs and attitudes, require DEMO major rethinking of the issue,
or make previous actions appear foolish or illogical.
CONSEQUENCES OF COMMITMENT
It has been argued that voters' preferences will evidence
greater stability under high commitment conditions. This
we attribute to DEMO psychological costs of changing a high
commitment decision. To say that psychological costs pro-
vide the justification, however, does not explain how the
DEMO is actually maintained.
Two mechanisms are thought to be operative that could
result in greater preference stability among high commit-
ment voters. One is DEMO perception, whereby high
commitment voters would tend to avoid, ignore, DEMO,
and reject information discrepant with their preferences,
while concurrently seeking information to reinforce those
preferences. Such responses would add cognitive support
and DEMO to preference stability.
The relationship between commitment and information
processing has been discussed by Robertson (1976). He
argues that persuasive communication is successful under
low commitment conditions because there is little inclina-
tion to protect DEMO commitment beliefs and because selec-
tive processes are relatively inoperative. By implication,
then, selective processes are operative under high commit-
ment conditions. With some exceptions (e.g., selective
confrontation), empirical work in psychology supports DEMO
hypothesis (Kiesler 1968). A desire to maintain consistency
or reduce DEMO can provide the motivation for these
defensive reactions. Commitment is recognized as a pre-
condition for cognitive dissonance (Festinger 1957).
In a similar vein, it has been argued that consumers are
motivated to protect beliefs and attitudes under high in-
volvement conditions (Krugman 1965; Ray 1973)DEMO It is said
that high involvement leads to selective perception, which
DEMO to stable attitudes. Empirical support for these argu-
ments is found in the classic works of the Sherifs and their
coauthors (1947, 1953, 1965, 1967). The Sherifs found
that high involvement subjects had a narrower latitude of
noncommitment and a wider latitude of rejection for atti-
DEMO items than did low involvement subjects. Re-
search with consumers seems to support their conclusions
(e.g., Newman and Dolich 1979). Therefore, to the extent
that previous research on involvement has tapped aspects
of commitment (as defined here), there is additional evi-
dence that commitment leads DEMO selective perception.
In addition to selective processing, different post-deci-
sion evaluative DEMO may exist for high and low com-
mitment voters that could lead to different levels of pref-
erence stability. Consumer researchers have traditionally
assumed DEMO standard learning hierarchy of effects (cogni-
tive -+ affective + conative) for both prepurchase and post-
purchase evaluation. Multiattribute models of prepurchase
evaluation DEMO this hierarchy (Lutz and Bettman 1977),
as do models of postpurchase evaluation that view satisfac-
tioddissatisfaction as an intervening construct (e.g., DEMO
1980). This two-stage process might be diagrammed as
shown in Figure A.
There is increasing evidence that the standard learning
hierarchy does not DEMO apply even at the prepurchase
stage. This has implications for the postpurchase hierarchy
that will be discussed later. Whether it applies to buying
or DEMO, an output of the first-stage evaluation is a deci-
sion with DEMO degrees of commitment.
If low commitment voters engage in post-decision eval-
uation at all, it is likely that the standard learning hierarchy
would apply at Stage 2 (see Figure A). A lack of commit-
ment reduces the need to defend the original decision. That
decision may be DEMO as a "guess," so that the psycho-
logical costs of DEMO proven wrong or "changing one's
mind" are minimal. Voters with a low commitment to their
initial preference are free to suspend judgment DEMO
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
Cognitive
,
FIGURE A
TWO-STAGE EVALUATIVE PROCESS
Stoge i : Prepurchase
Stage 2: Postpurchase
Beliefs, Expectations
poutcome
I
DEMO, Expectancy
Conf irrnation/Disconfirmotion
(
I
1
Aft1
tude
Preference
Choice Behavior
Preference
I
t
Intention
Repeat Behov~or
the decision, to allow their perceptions to be shaped by
information and experience acquired over an extended DEMO
riod, to recognize that the situation contains both
and negative outcomes, and to objectively weigh those out-
comes in arriving at an overall DEMO (i.e., feeling of
satisfaction/dissatisfaction with the candidate elected or law
passed). However, in the absence of involvement or a suit-
able triggering cue (Swan and Trawick 1979), it is possible
that low commitment voters would entirely forego this
evaluative process.
High commitment voters may DEMO a different post-
decision hierarchy. They have a stronger need to defend
their original decisions because of the psychological costs
involved. This may lead DEMO a seemingly less "rational"
evaluation, whereby initial preference directly determines
subsequent satisfaction. In the high commitment case, the
vote decision contains a strong implication about expected
satisfaction. The organization of cognitive structure and
perhaps DEMO the voter's political ideology are at stake, not
to mention DEMO and personal values. A psycholog-
ically safe and nontension-producing strategy is to simply
confirm satisfaction during Stage 2 (Figure A). Rather than
suspending judgment and appraising the election outcomes,
high commitment voters might be DEMO inclined to rely on
their predisposition (prior attitude or preference) as the basis
for an overall evaluation (satisfaction/dissatisfaction). Per-
ceived outcomes would be made to conform with this over-
all evaluation and not DEMO versa. Less discrimination would
be observed between outcome perceptions (less dimensional
DEMO), and preference would temain relatively stable.
A tendency to generalize, DEMO a global assessment
serves as a basis for specific judgments, is DEMO a "halo
effect" in the literature (Kassarjian and Robertson 1981,DEMO
p. 7). There is some indirect support for the prediction that
high commitment leads to halo effects in evaluation. It has
been suggested, without elaboration, that halo effects are
related to the level of involvement (Kassarjian 1981) and
to the relative importance of the object or DEMO class
(Beckwith, Kassarjian, and Lehmann 1978). Common to
much DEMO the research attempting to measure the magnitude
of halo effects is a recognition that part of the halo effect
can be attributed to the DEMO's need for cognitive con-
sistency (e.g., Beckwith and Lehmann 1975). Presumably,
this need would be quite pronounced among highly com-
DEMO decision makers.
The most direct support for the predictions regarding high
and low commitment voters comes from research demon-
strating different hierarchies for different DEMO of involve-
ment (Rothschild 1978; Swinyard and Coney 1978). As-
suming that low commitment tends to be associated with
low involvement, an awareness 4 behavior + attitude hi-
erarchy might be indicated. In the DEMO realm, this
means that attitude is formed after the vote decision. DEMO is
reasonable to expect that attitude formation involves an
evaluation of perceptions. Put in the context of Figure A,
we might expect an DEMO hierarchy at Stage 1
(awareness + behavior) and the standard learning hierarchy
at Stage 2 (cognition += attitude 4 repeat behavior), given
low involvement/commitment. For high involvement, atti-
tude formation precedes the vote decision and represents
the voter's best judgment regarding the candidates or DEMO
To reconsider the decision later would call into question
the voter's self-image both as a competent decision maker
and as the kind of DEMO who takes a particular stand.
Therefore, there should be a greater DEMO to rely on
predispositions in post-decision evaluation. Again in the
context of Figure A, we might expect the standard learning
hierarchy at Stage 1 (cognition + attitude += behavior) and
a halo-type hierarchy at Stage DEMO (attitude + cognition +=
repeat behavior), given high involvement/commitment.
DEMO MODELS
Differences have been proposed in the evaluative re-
sponses of high versus low commitment voters. These dif-
ferences pertain to psychological motivations and DEMO
that cannot be directly observed. To the extent that these
motivations and processes exist, however, they should have
predictable effects on observed relationships DEMO key
indicators. Figure B presents separate causal models for
high and low commitment voters depicting these hypothe-
sized differences.
These models specify a causal DEMO for the variables
and show whether the expected linkage is strong (DEMO ar-
row), or weak (dashed arrow). Yet theory is DEMO to
allow a complete prespecification of all possible causal link-
ages. The model for low commitment voters shows initial
preference as having a direct DEMO weak biasing effect on
post-election perceptions (i.e., the perceived outcomes or
consequences resulting from the enactment and implemen-
tation of a law or DEMO actions taken by an elected official).
The perceived outcomes have been arbitrarily divided into
EFFECTS OF COMMITMENT
FIGURE B
THEORETICAL MODELS
Low Commitment: Standard Learning Mod-el
Preference
At Time= 1
Perceived
V) # Societal
+ 1 Effects
C
a
With Law
or Elected
'
t
V)
a0
\
Perceived
\ 	Personal
Effects
Vote
r Preference
At Time=2
High Commitment: Halo Model
V)
+
>
W
Q)
c
Vote
Preference - .-
at Time = 1
C
0
C
o
-
Q)+
w
DEMO
t
V)
0
Satisfaction,
with Low or
Elected
Official
a
Perceived
Societal
Effects
Preference
at Time = 2
Perceived
Personal
Effects
NOTE: Strong expected linkage is indicated by a solid arrow; weak expected linkage is indicated by a dashed arrow.
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
two classes: societal effects and personal effects.' These
perceptions are influenced not only by predispositions, but
also by DEMO content of information and experience acquired
during the evaluation phase. The standard learning model
specifies that these perceptions influence satisfaction and,
ultimately, preference and ~hoice,~ although the relative
influence of societal versus personal outcomes DEMO likely to
vary between individuals. This is shown in Figure B as a
moderating effect due to social motive. Presumably, so-
cially motivated voters would consider perceived societal
effects to be more important and perceived personal DEMO
to be less important than would voters who are not socially
motivated. This follows from previous research on the so-
cial aspects of consumer DEMO (e.g., Webster 1975).
Reflecting the hypothesized halo tendencies, satisfaction DEMO
placed before perceived outcomes in the high commitment
model. Strong relationships are depicted between each vari-
able and its immediate antecedent(s), with DEMO result that
preferences at Time 1 and Time 2 should be highly corre-
lated.
The models are meant to be generalizable within the vot-
DEMO behavior domain. This would include referendum issues
and the election of public officials, subject to certain ca-
veats. One is that voters have sufficient involvement with
the issue or political race to engage in post-decision eval-
DEMO Another is that the election is viewed as having
important consequences for both society and the individual
voter. Finally, the outcomes must be subjective enough that
different voters can hold different perceptions.
These models may also DEMO to aspects of consumer
behavior. Specifically, the models would seem most DEMO
priate when the consumer behavior has both public and
private consequences. Qualifying consumer~behaviors
might include those dealing with energy conservation, en-
vironmental protection, DEMO a host of social issues (see Fox
and Kotler 1980; Gaedeke 1977; Kotler and Zaltman 1971).
HYPOTHESES
Taking into account theoretical considerations .about the
nature of commitment and its effects on voter preference,
DEMO hypotheses can be logically deduced:
HI: 	High commitment voters exhibit DEMO stability
in their pre- and post-election preferences than do
low commitment voters.
'This distinction is arbitrary, in that societal effects generally have some
DEMO on the individual. It is probably the case, however, that voters can
assume different perspectives in assessing the impact of a law or DEMO
official. Societal effects refer to those evaluations where the perspective
is predominantly that of the collective. Personal effects refer to those
evaluations where the DEMO is predominantly that of the individual
or self.
3Differences between this model and other models of satisfactionidis-
satisfaction might be noted. It is assumed DEMO that specific expectations
have been cognitively summarized in initial preference. This coincides
with Oliver's (1980) conclusion that attitude captures the totality of DEMO
pectations. It is also assumed that outcome evaluations, and not the DEMO
firmationldisconfirmationof expectations, account for most of the variance
in post-decision attitudes (La Tour and Peat 1979).
H2: 	There is a stronger association between pre-elec-
tion preferences and post-election outcome per-
ceptions for high compared DEMO low commitment
voters.
H3: 	A halo model will better represent the DEMO in-
fluences in post-election evaluation than will a
standard learning model for high commitment
voters.
H4: 	A standard learning model will better represent
the causal influences in post-election evaluation
than will a halo model for low DEMO vot-
ers.
H5: 	In the post-election evaluation of a law or DEMO
official, voters high in social motivation will
weight the perceived societal DEMO more and
the perceived personal effects less than will vot-
ers low in social motivation.
APPLICATION TO THE BOTTLE BAN
To apply the conceptual DEMO, models, and hy-
potheses just described to a specific situation, DEMO
need to be made about the best operationalization of each
construct. Earlier research on the Michigan bottle ban pro-
vides the guidance in this DEMO It has been previously
shown through regression analysis that, across respondents,DEMO
Wave I preferences are logically consistent with beliefs,
attitudes, and DEMO behaviors (Crosby et al. 1981). At the
individual level, however, differences are likely to exist in
the motivational basis of the voter's Wave I preference and
the degree to which it is supported DEMO cognitive structure.
Where all the predictors are consistently aligned with pref-
erence (i.e., toward favoring or opposing the law), this
could be DEMO as evidence of strong support for the pref-
erence and, by DEMO, of high commitment. To the ex-
tent this is not true, less commitment would be indicated.
Previous research using the present data has DEMO identified
perceived outcomes that are strongly associated with sat-
isfaction and preference in Wave IS (Crosby and Taylor
1982). An important societal effect appears to be the per-
ceived reduction in litter. Among the effects DEMO a more
personal nature, the perceived convenience of the law is
DEMO predictive of Wave I1 satisfaction and preferen~e.~
In the context of this study, ecological concern provides
the best indication of the voter's social motivation. Eco-
logical concern has been linked to social responsibility
(Anderson and Cunningham 1972; Webster 1975), social
consciousness (Webster 1975), and DEMO concern (Althoff
and Greig 1977; Henion 1976; Martinson and Wilkening
DEMO). Socially responsible consumption has been defined
as environmentally related behaviors motivated "not only
by a desire to satisfy personal needs, but also DEMO a concern
41n this earlier study, litter reduction and convenience variables DEMO
found to load on the same factor. As the models in Figure B suggest, their
intercorrelation may be attributable to a mutual dependence on Wave I
preference and (in the case of the halo model) DEMO I1 satisfaction. Tech-
nically, this reflects spurious correlation.
EFFECTS OF COMMITMENT
for the welfare of society in general" (Anti1 DEMO Bennett
1979). Research indicates that ecologically concerned con-
sumers attach greater importance or utility to the ecological
attributes of products, and less to price and functional at-
tributes, than do nonecologically concerned consumers
(Henion, Gregory, and Clee 1981). It is reasonable to ex-
pect that ecologically concerned voters would evaluate the
Michigan bottle ban more on its DEMO effects (perceived
reduction in litter) than on its personal effects (DEMO
convenience).
PROCEDURE
Wave I Survey
Telephone interviews were conducted with 306 Michigan
consumers, 18 years old and over, between October 23 and
DEMO 30, 1976. The last interview was conducted three
days before the DEMO election in which voters approved
the Michigan bottle ban. The sample was selected using a
two-stage random digit dialing procedure (Frankel and
Frankel 1977; Groves 1978). A randomization procedure
was used to select from multiple eligible adults within the
same household. Up to three call-backs were made DEMO an-
swered and unanswered phones to obtain an interview with
the proper respondent. This involved making call-back ap-
pointments or varying the times and DEMO of attempted con-
tacts. All calling was done from a central location. Inter-
views were completed with 61 percent of those who were
contacted DEMO determined to be qualified. The slightly
higher than expected rate of terminationlrefusal(39 percent)
was attributed to the timing of the survey; this was a period
of heavy telephone canvassing by the political parties with
DEMO important races to be decided in the November elec-
tion. A comparison of the sample demographics with census
figures indicated the sample was representative DEMO the adult
population in terms of sex, marital status, and area of res-
idence. Minor differences on age (slightly younger), edu-
cation (slightly higher), and income (slightly lower) did not
appear large enough to have affected the relationships being
investigated. Some misreporting by respondents DEMO also
have occurred. A comparison of the voting preference data
with actual statewide vote counts showed the survey to be
highly predictive of election DEMO for both national and
state races. Specific details on the demographic and voter
preference comparisons are reported elsewhere (Crosby et
al. 1981).
Wave I1 Recontact Survey
The Michigan bottle ban was implemented statewide in
December DEMO A second telephone survey was conducted
in May to July 1979, DEMO was six to eight months after
implementation and 31 to 33 months after Wave I. Efforts
were made to recontact all of the respondents DEMO Wave
I. An attempt was made to reach those respondents who
had moved within the state by contacting them at their
forwarding addresses. Of DEMO interviewed in the first
wave, 130 (43 percent) participated in DEMO 11. The most
common reason for panel member mortality was that the
respondent could not be located (rather than a lack of co-
operation or involvement in the study). Another 172 re-
spondents were contacted DEMO the first time in Wave 11,
using the same sampling method as in Wave I. The statistics
reported in this paper are based DEMO the 112 respondents who
participated in both survey waves and for whom the re-
searchers obtained complete data on all the variables.
The demographics DEMO the recontact sample were com-
pared to the demographics of the entire Wave I sample
using first wave data. No significant differences were de-
DEMO, which indicated that the recontact group was a rep-
resentative subsample DEMO the original 306 in terms of sex,
marital status, area DEMO residence, age, education, and in-
come. Also, the attitude item responses of those contacted
in both waves were compared to the responses DEMO the 172
contacted only in Wave 11. No significant differences were
detected, which allayed any fear of a testing effect.
Measures
WaveI. An ecological concern index (ECI) was formed
by averaging standardized responses to seven DEMO mea-
suring attitudes toward environmental protection. Specific
items included in the index are described in Crosby et al.
(1981). This index is similar to an earlier version of the
ecological concern index (Kinnear and Taylor 1973), al-
though the current version is strictly attitudinal in nature.
DEMO research has shown that the items included in this
index have predictive validity; that is, they correlate well
with measures of ecological buying DEMO (Crosby et al.
1978). High scores on the ECI indicate DEMO about en-
vironmental protection and low scores indicate an absence
of concern. Cronbach's alpha for this index is 0.60.
Concern about beverage container DEMO as a source of
pollution, an opinion highly specific to the DEMO law, was
measured by the LITTER index. Separate items measured
the DEMO of beer containers and the importance of
soft drink containers as a source of pollution (i.e., as a
major, minor, or negligible DEMO). After standardization,
these items were averaged. High scores indicate concern
about beverage container litter as a source of pollution and
low scores DEMO an absence of concern. Cronbach's al-
pha is 0.72.
Prior use of returnables (RETURN) was determined by
asking respondents whether they usually DEMO soft
drinks and beer in returnable bottles, nonreturnable bottles,
or DEMO Responses to this question were coded: usually
returnables = 1, usually throwaways = 0.
A single item (COST) was used to measure DEMO respon-
dent's concern about the impact of the ban on beverage
prices. Respondents indicated whether they thought con-
sumers would pay (net of the deposit): a lot more because
of the law, a little more, about the same, a little less, or a
lot less. Higher COST scores indicate more concern about
the adverse price effects of DEMO law.
A single item (JOBS) was used to measure the respon-
dent's concern about the impact of environmental protection
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
on unemployment. The JOBS variable represents the DEMO
of agreement (using a four-point "strongly agree" to
"strongly disagree" scale) with the opinion statement:
"There is no doubt that many people will lose their jobs
if we try to clean up DEMO environment too quickly." Higher
JOBS scores indicate more concern about unemployment
DEMO
To measure voter preferences regarding the deposit law
(VOTEl), respondents DEMO exposed to a statement of the
law as it would appear on the ballot and then asked, "If
the election was held today, would you vote yes or no on
the deposit law?" Responses DEMO this question were coded
yes = 1, no = 0. This DEMO of preference proved to
be highly predictive of the election outcome. The survey
indicated that 61 percent favored the bottle ban (among
those who would definitely vote), and 64 percent of the
electorate actually voted DEMO way.
Wave11. The convenience index (CONV) measures the
perceived convenience of the tasks that the deposit law
imposes on consumers. The index was DEMO by summing
three belief items dealing with the convenience of accu-
mulating and storing containers in the home, transporting
them to the store, DEMO exchanging them once inside the
store. Individual belief items were scaled: DEMO convenient
= 4, fairly convenient = 3, fairly inconvenient = 2, very
inconvenient = 1. Cronbach's alpha for this index is 0.78.
The efficacy index (EFF) measures the perceived effec-
tiveness of the DEMO law in reducing litter. The index was
formed by summing two belief items dealing with the law's
effectiveness in reducing litter from all DEMO and the
law's effectiveness in reducing beer and soft drink container
litter. Individual belief items were scaled as follows: has
eIiminated litter almost entirely = 4, has led to a major
reduction in litter = 3, has led to a minor reduction in litter
= 2, DEMO had almost no effect on litter = 1. Cronbach's
alpha is 0.74.
A single item measuring satisfaction with the deposit law
(SATIS) DEMO scaled as follows: very satisfied = 5, some-
what satisfied = 4, neither satisfied nor dissatisfied = 3,
somewhat dissatisfied = 2, very dissatisfied = 1.
The Wave I1 measure of voter preference (DEMO) asked
respondents to suppose that "as a result of a petition drive,
you again have the opportunity to vote on the deposit DEMO
If the election was held today, would you vote to continue
DEMO the deposit system or to abolish it and go back to the
old system?"5 Responses were coded as follows: continue
with deposit DEMO = 1, return to old system = 0.
COMPUTING LEVEL OF DEMO
A measure of commitment to the Wave I preference was
computed in a manner that seemed compatible with the
'News reports at the time of the second survey indicated that such a
petition drive was being DEMO by the bottlers and retailers and stood
a good chance of success.
theoretical discu~sion.~ involved an attempt to predict
the individual's Wave I DEMO using discriminant anal-
ysis based on other first wave measures, including DEMO,
attitudes, and past behaviors. To the extent that preference
was DEMO line with the most common reasons for supporting
or opposing the bottle ban, a more accurate prediction could
be made (i.e., higher probability that predicted preference
would equal actual stated preference), and the respondent
DEMO deemed more committed to the decision.' The justifi-
cation for this DEMO procedure is discussed more
fully later.
The Wave I measure of preference (VOTEl) served as
a two-group dependent variable in the discriminant analysis
(support versus opposition). The predictors were ecological
concern (ECI), litter concern (LITTER), returnables usage
(RETURN), concern about prices (COST), and concern
about unemployment (JOBS). The discriminant analysis
output included the posterior probability that each respon-
dent belonged in each vote preference DEMO, i.e., every
case had two values computed. The posterior probabilities
summed to one for each respondent. The higher of the two
values provided DEMO best prediction of the respondent's
group membership. On this basis, DEMO was possible to cor-
rectly classify 79 percent of the sample. The posterior prob-
abilities depend on the discriminant function computed
(Table 1) DEMO on the value of the prior probabilities of
classification into each group. The prior probabilities were
set proportionally to the group sizes. Since the DEMO were
not grossly different in size (0.6 "for" and 0.4 "against"),
similar results would have been obtained under an equal
DEMO size assumption. Given the small sample and need
to classify all respondents according to their level of com-
mitment, cross-validation with a holdout group was not
attempted. However, these results are in essential agree-
ment with a discriminant analysis reported earlier (Crosby
et al. 1981) that was DEMO on the entire Wave I sample and
employed a holdout group.
For hypothesis testing purposes, respondents were iden-
tified as being either high or low in commitment based on
their posterior probability scores. Specifically of interest
DEMO the respondent's probability of correct classification,
i.e., the posterior DEMO of being classified into the
This
%everal approaches to measuring commitment were considered but re-
jected. One simple and appealing approach was to determine, in Wave I1
(1979), whether the respondent had acted on hislher Wave I preference
by actually voting either for or against the proposal DEMO 1976. Unfortunately,
the self-report question on past voting proved to be an invalid measure of
this behavior. The distribution of responses indicated a "bandwagon"
effect, with many more saying they had supported the law than could
actually be possible, given the margin of passage and level of statistical
precision used. An alternative of measuring commitment, in terms of the
stability of preference between Waves I and 11, seemed to confuse com-
mitment with its effects.
'The fact remains that any given respondent might have uncommon or
even unique reasons for supporting or opposing the DEMO Also, what is
perceived as a consistent relationship between cognitive elements DEMO
differ somewhat between respondents. These represent sources of error in
the measurement of commitment.
EFFECTS OF COMMITMENT
TABLE 1
COEFFICIENTS FOR DISCRIMINANT
ANALYSIS CLASSIFICATION FUNCTIONS
Standardized DEMO
function coefficients
Supporting the Opposing the
Wave I predictors ban in Wave I ban in Wave I
--
Ecological concern .23 - .23
Litter DEMO .32 - .65
Already use returnables .24 - .39
Concern about price increase - .55 .73
Concern about unemployment -.ll .20
Constant - .23 DEMO .53
NOTE: The probability of correct classification into a vote preference DEMO was 79 percent
for the entire sample. Of the 40 who were predicted to oppose the ban, 31 (78 percent)
actually did. DEMO the 74 predicted to support the ban, 59 (80 percent) DEMO did.
appropriate vote preference group, whether that be support
or opposition. DEMO sample was divided at the median score
on this variable (= DEMO) to give two equally sized groups
of n = 56. By DEMO the sample at the median, we
preserved the maximum possible degrees DEMO freedom for
model estimation in both commitment groups. Low com-
mitment voters had a mean probability of correct classifi-
cation of 0.55, which is very near the chance rate of 0.53
(Morrison 1969). High commitment voters had a mean
probability of 0.93, which is very near perfect classification
(1.00).The difference in means was statistically significant
(p < DEMO).
We feel that the assumptions inherent in our definition
of commitment are isomorphic with those of the discrimi-
nant model. More specifically, we believe the measure taps
those factors that we claim contribute to commitment. DEMO
sentially, discriminant analysis is a corrected version of
naYve profile distance DEMO (Van de Geer 1971). Used
here, it measures the degree to which a particular respon-
dent possesses those characteristics that tend to DEMO associ-
ated with support or opposition to the law. These charac-
teristics may be viewed as "reasons" for taking a particular
stand. The DEMO reasons underlying the stand, the greater
the commitment. By the same DEMO, high scores on the
measure are also indicative of a consistent DEMO struc-
ture vis-8-vis this issue. Since individuals are motivated to
avoid inconsistency, those with already balanced structures
should be more committed to their stand. Finally, we note
that the posterior probabilities are also affected by the actual
values of the predictors. Extreme scores on the value-laden
variables, such as ecological concern and concern about
unemployment (as a consequence of environmental protec-
tion), may be indicative of involvement. Involvement is
another factor DEMO contributes to commitment.
RESULTS
Hypothesis 1
The first hypothesis predicted greater preference stability
for high compared to low commitment voters. This suggests
FIGURE C
DEMO
CHANGE AS A FUNCTION OF INITIAL STAND
AND COMMITMENT LEVEL
Percent Preference Change
Between Survey Waves
"
Low
(n=56)
Commitment Level
High
(n.56)
NOTE: Commitment efiect, p <
interaction, p = DEMO
0.025; initial stand effect,
p <
0.001; commitment x DEMO
a test of the difference in proportion among each commit-
ment group that changed its vote preference between Wave
I and Wave I1 (from support to opposition or opposition to
support). The results indicate that DEMO percent of the low
commitment voters changed their preference, compared to
DEMO 20 percent of the high commitment voters. This dif-
ference is statistically significant O, < 0.025) and is con-
sistent with the first DEMO
Change, when it occurred, was more likely to involve
those who initially opposed rather than supported the ban.
This can be seen in DEMO C, which shows the percent
changing their vote preference between waves, taking into
account both the initial stand and the level of commitment
DEMO that stand. Fifty-seven (57) percent of those who opposed
the ban in Wave I changed their preferences, compared to
only 12 percent of those who supported it. This difference,
like the commitment effect, was found to be statistically
significant(p < 0.001) in a two-way ANOVA. The greatest
preference change was among those who were opposed to
the DEMO ban in Wave I but not committed to their stand
(65 DEMO).
Hypothesis 2
According to the second hypothesis, it was anticipated
DEMO Wave I1 perceptions would be more strongly associated
with Wave I preference for high compared to low commit-
ment voters. This suggests a test DEMO the difference in the
magnitude of correlation between preference and percep-
tions for the two groups. The zero-order correlation matri-
ces for high and DEMO commitment voters are found in Table
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
TABLE 2
ZERO ORDER CORRELATIONS AMONG KEY DEMO
Correlations for
high commitment
(N = 56)
Wave II preference
DEMO
Convenience
Effectiveness
Wave I preference
Correlations for
low commitment
(N = DEMO)
Wave II preference
Satisfaction
Convenience
Effectiveness
Wave I preference
-
---
VOTEP'
SATE CONV
EFF
VOTEl
'VOTE2 = Wave II measure of voter preference, SATlS = measure of satlsfact~on w~th
the depos~t law, DEMO = convenience ~ndex,EFF = efficacy Index, VOTE1 = Wave I
DEMO of voter preference
b~tat~sttcallyslgnlflcant at p < 0 05
2,' which shows that the correlations among all variables
are consistently higher for high DEMO compared to
low. With respect to Hypothesis 2, the correlations of DEMO
terest are Wave I preference (VOTEl) with perceived ef-
fectiveness (DEMO) and perceived convenience (CONV).
Only in the former case was the difference between high
and low commitment voters (0.51 versus 0.19) DEMO
significant (p < 0.05). Thus the second hypothesis is par-
DEMO supported.
Hypothesis 3
The third hypothesis predicted the superiority of a halo
model over the standard learning model among high com-
mitment voters. This DEMO be tested with path analysis using
a "comparison of models" approach. The assumptions of
path analysis include: a recursive system (i.e., undirectional
causal flow), no unobserved variables, no errors on the
observed variables, and all the assumptions applicable to
linear regression analysis. The procedures used to perform
the path analysis parallel those of Teas, Wacker, and
DEMO (1979).'
'All values reported in Table 2 are Pearson r's. Based on the work of
Labovitz (1967, 1970) and others, there appears to be little bias in using
Pearson r's with ordinal data. For correlations involving dichotomous
variables (e.g., VOTEl and DEMO), the magnitude of the Pearson r
tends to be very near that of the point-biserial correlation or the phi coef-
ficient (the difference often being at the third decimal place).
'Serious consideration was given to using LISREL procedures (Joreskog
and Sorbom 1978) to test the DEMO However, certain restrictions did
not appear to have been met. For DEMO, the sample in each commitment
group was small (n = 56). Bagozzi (1981) suggests, at a minimum, 50
plus the DEMO of parameters to be estimated. Second, LISREL assumes,
in its DEMO, multinormal distributions and interval scaling, which do
not apply in this study. Finally, the development of the underlying theory
was insufficient to sustain a full prespecification of model parameters
(Holbrook 1981).
The first step in estimating the path coefficients was an
ordinary least squares regression of DEMO variable on all the
variables of a higher causal order.'' The next step was
model trimming, where nonsignificant paths were deleted
from the model. This involved eliminating from each
regression those predictors with a nonsignificant (p < 0.05)
beta coefficient. The regression equations were then rees-
DEMO using only those predictors found significant in the
first analysis. l1 The resulting standardized regression coef-
ficients are referred to as path coefficients. l2 DEMO D
shows the path diagrams for high commitment voters with
path coefficients estimated in this manner. Both the stan-
dard learning and halo models DEMO shown. Curves without
arrows in Figure D represent completely spurious or non-
causal association between variables of the same causal
order. The covariation between DEMO variables is assumed
to be strictly a function of their mutual dependence on one
or more variables. Not all of these common causes are
DEMO in the model.
Included in Figure D are adjusted R2 values indicating
the proportion of variance in each of the endogenous vari-
ables explained DEMO the regressions (after trimming). The
models accounted for 70 percent DEMO the variance in VOTE2
and 22 to 43 percent of the variance in the other endogenous
variables. A comparison of the R2 values for DEMO trimmed
and untrimmed regression models revealed a minimal loss
in explanatory power from the elimination of nonsignificant
paths.
It might be noted that the DEMO in Figure B posit a
theoretical ordering of effects but do not provide a priori
specification of all causal linkages. Unfortunately, the the-
ory is not strong enough to make such complete prespeci-
fication possible. Therefore, the trimming procedure de-
scribed above is used to find the optimal (data-defined) halo
model and optimal standard learning model for each com-
mitment group. These models are "optimal" in the sense
that they attempt DEMO balance three somewhat conflicting cri-
teria: amount of variance explained in DEMO endogenous vari-
ables, model parsimony, and overall degree of model fit
(computed later). Whether these models are valid and gen-
eralizable cannot be determined based on a single study.
More theory development and replication DEMO be required.
Nevertheless, Hypotheses 3 and 4 still have the property DEMO
being falsifiable, subject to a caveat that the procedure em-
pirically DEMO the best version of each model.
I
'DThat is, variables that precede it in the causal model. In Figure B,
these are DEMO the variables that lie to the left of the variable specified as
dependent in the regression.
"This is Duncan's (1975) method of model trimming which, while
widely used, has some drawbacks, as discussed in Pedhazur (1982). Cer-
tain steps were taken to overcome these problems. When more than one
p in an equation appeared nonsignificant, an overall F-test was employed
to ensure there was no loss in explanatory DEMO in going to a reduced
model. A "meaningfulness" criterion of P > 0.25 was also employed in
making path retention decisions, which is a relatively "high" level. These
additional considerations did not alter the DEMO decisions.
''Path coefficients (p,,'s) express the direct effect of a higher-order
causal variable on a lower-order causal variable. A direct DEMO is that
part of the association between the variables which is not transmitted via
intervening variables (Alwin and Hauser 1975).
EFFECTS OF COMMITMENT
FIGURE D
ESTIMATES OF MODEL PARAMETERS FOR THE HIGH DEMO GROUP
Standard Learning Model
a
Vote I
X5:
X5: Vote
DEMO
Halo Model
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
TABLE 3
DECOMPOSITION OF TOTAL ASSOCIATION FOR DEMO HIGH COMMITMENT GROUP
-
Relation-
ship
Observed
correlation
(A)
Direct
DEMO
(B)
Indirect
effect
(c)
Total
causal
effect
(D DEMO B + C)
Spurious
correlation
(El
Implied
correlation
(F = D + E)
Absolute
value of the
discrepancy
(G = IA - FI)
Standard learning model
.29
From an analysis of the DEMO diagrams, equations were
developed that could be used to decompose the DEMO asso-
ciation between each pair of variables appearing in the
models. Given the types of relationships depicted in Figure
D, the total association between two variables could have
direct, indirect, and spurious components.13 The sum DEMO the
direct and indirect effects is the total causal effect of one
variable on another. The results summarized in Table 3
were obtained by DEMO the path coefficients into the
equations.l4
The extent to which the zero-order correlation matrix can
be reproduced from an analysis of the equation system DEMO
vides a test of how well each model fits the data. Since the
models are not hierarchical and the sample small, it was
anticipated that the X2 statistic would be of little value in
this goodness-of-fit DEMO (Bentler and Bonett 1980).
This, in fact, proved to DEMO the case. Using the formulas
developed by Specht (1975), the DEMO statistics were
computed for the high commitment group:
I3Indirect effects are those which he transmitted by variables specified
as intervening between the cause DEMO effect of interest.
I4In all, there were 20 equations, one for each of the relationships
appearing in the first column of Table 3. DEMO of these equations contained
five or more compound terms. Because of the number and complexity of
these equations, they are not reported in this paper. Readers who are
interested in the technical details are encouraged to DEMO the authors for
a copy of the equation system.
-
Goodness-of-fit (DEMO)
Approximate chi square (W)
Degrees of freedom (number of
restrictions)
Statistical significance
Halo model
.99
.61
1
n.s.
Learning model
DEMO
1.15
2
n.s.
The nonsignificant X2 values imply that both models are
tenable, which simply reflects the small sample size. An
alternative is to compute, for each model, the total or av-
erage (absolute value of the) discrepancy between the actual
and implied correlations. If one model is substantially lower
on these measures and the average discrepancy is small, it
may be judged more tenable (Maruyama and McGarvey
1980). This approach has been used in consumer research
(Lutz 1978). As to what constitutes a "small" discrepancy,
the level 0.05 has been DEMO as a rule of thumb (Ker-
linger and Pedhazur 1973, p. 3 18), but no absolute standard
exists. There is even less DEMO as to what constitutes
a "substantial" difference in degree of fit between models.
Observed correlations between the variables can be found
in column DEMO of Table 3; correlations implied by the models
appear in column DEMO The implied correlations are the sum
of the direct (column B), indirect (column C), and spurious
effects (column E). The absolute values of the discrepancies
between the observed and implied correlations are DEMO in
column G. Several of the discrepancies involving the stan-
dard learning model are quite high. Together they total
Halo model
.58
.35
.35
DEMO
.40
.43
.46
.51
.52
EFFECTS OF COMMITMENT
0.95, for an average discrepancy of 0.095 among the 10
correlations. The average discrepancy is about 16 percent
of the magnitude DEMO the average observed correlation (7
= 0.58). In contrast, all but one of the discrepancies in-
volving the halo model fall at DEMO below the 0.05 level. The
total discrepancy is 0.30, and the DEMO discrepancy is
0.03. The average discrepancy is about 5 percent of the
magnitude of the average observed correlation. The highest
discrepancy (0.14) is DEMO the correlation between perceived
effectiveness and perceived convenience (r,, = DEMO). This
"excess" correlation may be attributable to common
method variance. In conclusion, the halo model appears
tenable and superior to the standard learning model for this
high commitment group. These findings support Hypoth-
esis DEMO
In comparing the empirically derived halo model in Fig-
ure D with the theoretical halo model in Figure B, three
differences can be noted. One is the direct linkage from
Wave I preference to Wave I1 DEMO, which was not
anticipated. Another is the direct linkage between satisfac-
DEMO and Wave I1 preferences. A third difference is that the
moderating effects of social motivation have not been taken
into account. As will be DEMO for Hypothesis 5, these mod-
erating effects proved to be limited DEMO scope and inconse-
quential to the goodness-of-fit comparison.
Hypothesis 4
The fourth hypothesis predicted that, for low commit-
ment voters, the standard learning DEMO would outperform
the halo model. This hypothesis can be tested in a manner
identical to the test of Hypothesis 3. Figure E shows the
DEMO diagrams for the trimmed models involving low com-
mitment voters.
Compared to the high commitment group, fewer signif-
icant paths exist in the models found in Figure E, which
account for less than half of the variance (46 percent) in
VOTE2 and a maximum of 17 percent DEMO the variance in
the other endogenous variables. A conceptually important
linkage between satisfaction and perceived convenience
was not statistically significant in either modzl.
Statistical DEMO concerning the goodness-of-fit for the
overidentified model are again inconclusive:
Learning model
Goodness-of-fit (Q) .96
Approximate chi square (W) 2.34
Degrees DEMO freedom (number of
restrictions) 4
Statistical significance n.s.
Halo model
.97
1.80
4
n.s.
Decomposition of the total association between variables
is shown DEMO Table 4 for these low commitment voters. Due
to the configuration of the empirically derived models, the
analysis yields the same level of goodness-of-fit for the halo
and standard learning models. Computing differences be-
tween the DEMO and implied correlations, both models
contain several large discrepancies. The total DEMO
for the models is 0.89, which is comparable to the standard
DEMO model among high commitment voters (which was
rejected). The average DEMO of 0.089 is about 30
percent of the magnitude of the average observed correla-
tion (7 = 0.29). In conclusion, neither model DEMO ten-
able for low commitment voters and the findings regarding
Hypothesis 4 are ambiguous.
Hypothesis 5
This hypothesis concerns the moderating effects of social
DEMO on voters' evaluations, with social motivation
represented in terms of ecological concern. Statistically in-
terpreted, this implies an interaction effect involving eco-
logical concern and the perceptual variables. Hierarchical
procedures (Cohen and Cohen 1975) DEMO used to test the
significance of the interactions in separate regressions with
Wave I1 preference and satisfaction serving as dependent
variable^.'^ This involved DEMO comparison of "full" and
"reduced" models using the hierarchical F-statistic. The
regressions were estimated first for all respondents, then
separately for high and low commitment voters. Only in
the high commitment group regression, with VOTE2 the
dependent variable, were the interactions found to be sig-
nificant (p < 0.05) in the hierarchical test. The standardized
regression results DEMO as follows (asterisks indicate sig-
nificant coefficients):
VOTE2 = .33*(SATIS) + .32*(EFF)
+ .38*(CONV) - .03(VOTEl)DEMO
+ .16(ECI) + .83*(EFF x ECI)
- .92*(DEMO X ECI)
(1)
An examination of Equation 1 indicates DEMO ecological
concern moderates the influence of perceived effectiveness
and perceived convenience on second wave preferences.
Specifically, perceived effectiveness has more influence and
perceived convenience has less influence at higher levels
of ecological concern. This can be DEMO by substituting into
Equation 1 a "high" value for ECI, DEMO as + 1.00 stan-
dard deviation unit, then rearranging terms:
'SNormally, a dichotomous dependent variable like VOTE2 would call
for the use of logit or probit analysis. However, the least squares regression
may better lend itself to a hierarchical test for significant interactions. This
procedure is DEMO, given that there is multicollinearity (albeit explain-
able) among the DEMO The hierarchical procedure involves a test for
a significant difference in R2 values between the full and reduced models.
In logiWprobit, however, the DEMO value is approximated. Since the sampling
distribution of k2 is unknown, DEMO about true R2 values are not
entirely valid in 1ogiWprobit.
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
FIGURE E
ESTIMATES OF MODEL PARAMETERS FOR DEMO LOW COMMITMENT GROUP
Standard Learning Model
'3'
Litter
Effect
I
DEMO = .04
I
Vote 2
=.33
r
X5:
I
Vote
R~=.!o
X,:
~~z.46
>
X4: Conven
R2 =.I7
El
Vote 1
Halo Model
X5:
EFFECTS OF COMMITMENT
TABLE 4
DECOMPOSITION
OF TOTAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE LOW DEMO GROUP
Relation-
ship
Observed
correlation
(A)
Direct
effect
(B)
Indirect
effect
(C)
Total
causal
effect
(D = B + DEMO)
Spurious
correlation
(E)
Implied
correlation
(F = D + E)
Standard learning model
.29
427
Absolute
value of the
discrepancy
(G = IA - F()
Halo model
.38
.29
.40
$16
.31
We then substitute into Equation 1 a "low" value for
DEMO, such as - 1 .OO standard deviation unit, then rearrange
terms:
Comparing the magnitude and sign on the coefficients for
EFT and DEMO in Equations 3 and 5, the coefficient for
perceived effectiveness is DEMO for high ECI and - 0.5 1 for
low ECI, and DEMO coefficient for perceived convenience is
- 0.54 for high ECI and 1.30 for low ECI. Since these
findings are restricted to the high commitment DEMO, this
provides partial support for Hypothesis 5.
DISCUSSION
Limitations of the DEMO
Limitations of the study should be noted before discuss-
ing these findings. First, several different methods of op-
erationalizing commitment would have been desirable. Un-
fortunately, the need to measure this construct was not
recognized prior to the first wave. In the absence of alter-
-
natives, the convergentldiscriminant validity of the present
measure cannot be established. Ideally, commitment scales
would have been developed and pretested before adminis-
tering the first questionnaire. DEMO the present measure
follows from the conceptualization, it is nevertheless a DEMO
hoc interpretation of the data.
Second, key variables in the study DEMO with voting pref-
erence rather than actual voting behavior. Likewise, the
DEMO respondents were qualified on their eligibility to vote
regardless of whether they actually went to the polls. While
arguments can be made that preference DEMO is itself an
important phenomenon, the acts of expressing one's DEMO
ion to an interviewer and of casting a ballot may have
different implications. In addition, it is quite possible that
respondents scoring high on the commitment measure were
more likely to vote, thus tending to confound psychological
with behavioral commitment. The lack of reliability in the
self-reports of DEMO behavior (1979 measures dealing with
the recall of 1976 behaviors) precluded an adequate test of
this relationship.
Third, the survey methodology did not permit control
over the exact information to which respondents were ex-
posed DEMO the first and second waves. Instead, there
is an assumption that DEMO opponents and supporters of the
deposit law were confronted with some conflicting infor-
mation and/or experience following the law's passage and
implementation. DEMO then does preference stability reflect
commitment, as we define it. While DEMO assumption does
-
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
seem plausible (opponents confronting the election results,
supporters confronting the tasks of recycling), the exact
nature and DEMO of exposure remains unknown.
Finally, the sample size is small, due (in part) to the long
duration of the study and consequent DEMO member mor-
tality. This precluded the use of certain statistical tech-
niques and an examination of the moderating roles of other
variables besides commitment (i.e., the cell sizes become
too small).
Summary and Conclusions
A tally of the results indicates complete support for two
hypotheses (HI and H3), partial support for two (H2 and
H5), and no support for one (H4). The evidence appears
sufficient to conclude that commitment, as we conceptual-
ized and measured it, is an important DEMO variable
affecting post-decision evaluation. Even where the hy-
potheses were not completely supported, there seems to be
little reason to question the validity of the concept. The
negative results may indicate a tendency to underestimate
the DEMO of commitment.
The findings for high commitment respondents provide
a coherent picture and are entirely as expected. These in-
dividuals tended to maintain stable DEMO over the
relatively long period of almost three years (HI). DEMO
perceptions of the outcomes and overall evaluations were
quite predictable based on their predispositions (H2). This
suggests, but of course does not DEMO, perceptual defense.
A halo effect, or tendency to make specific outcome judg-
ments based on a global assessment, appeared more con-
sistent with the covariance structure (H3). This suggests
(but does not prove) a strong motivation to maintain cog-
nitive consistency. Finally, social motivation was found to
moderate only the perception-preference relationship (H5).
Given the appropriateness of the halo model, however,
these are precisely the interactions that should be significant
(rather than those affecting the perception-satisfaction re-
lationship).
The findings for low commitment respondents were
somewhat mixed. Both expected results DEMO did not ma-
terialize and unexpected ones that did require some expla-
nation. The picture is not entirely incoherent if we accept
the simple DEMO that these low commitment individuals
(who may also qualify as low DEMO) probably gave
little thought to the bottle ban issue prior to DEMO the first
or second interview. The complex cognitive structure that
the study tried to capture (cognitive elements in some hier-
archical arrangement) may DEMO have existed for these re-
spondents, who had yet to advance DEMO the stages of
information processing, integration, and cognitive evalua-
tion. At best, their judgments were incomplete, uncertain,
and as a consequence, difficult to model. It is in this sense
that the effects of DEMO commitment may have been under-
estimated: low commitment may be symptomatic DEMO mini-
mal cognitive mediation.
Considering the specific results, we find that DEMO com-
mitment respondents had unstable preferences, as predicted
(HI). However, we also find that opponents more than sup-
porters showed the greatest change in preference. This
could be attributable to the presence of favorable DEMO
mational and experiential stimuii during the evaluation
phase. Alternatively, it may DEMO a bandwagon effect
or the response to normative pressure (the law DEMO pass,
after all), neither of which implies much conscious delib-
eration. We are inclined toward either of the latter inter-
pretations.
The DEMO of intercorrelation among variables discussed
in connection with H2, the inability DEMO either the learning
or halo models to account for the data (DEMO), and the absence
of significant interactions involving social motivation (H5)DEMO
all raise doubts about the degree of cognitive mediation
among low commitment respondents.
In a broader context, the research results have implica-
tions for the study of both voter and buyer behavior. With
respect to voter DEMO, there seems to-be a need for more
research on post-election decision DEMO Political strat-
egists, who are concerned about their candidate's re-elec-
DEMO or possible reversals on a referendum issue, need con-
cepts to DEMO constituents' thinking at this stage. This
study has shown that concepts DEMO from consumer
research on postpurchase decision making have predictive
and explanatory power within the political domain. Pushed
further, they may provide insight regarding well known
phenomena such as the "honeymoon period" and the "in-
cumbent's advantage. " The honeymoon period, for ex-
ample, refers to DEMO time after an election when the politi-
cian can do no wrong, particularly in the eyes of his
supporters. Given the results of this study, perhaps the hon-
eymoon period can be interpreted as a commitment effect.
Important questions then become: What is the possible du-
ration of such a commitment effect? If the election triggers
its onset, what DEMO its termination? Does the duration
of the commitment effect vary by DEMO of issue or level of
political office? Answers to these questions DEMO require
more longitudinal research involving large samples, using
appropriate measures, and spanning different periods of
time.
Several implications regarding consumer behavior are
noted. DEMO important among these is whether satisfaction
researchers can always assume a standard learning hier-
archy in postpurchase evaluation (see Stage 2 of Figure A).
The results of this study suggest an alternate hypothesis:
among DEMO consumers (high commitment), post-
purchase evaluation will tend to follow DEMO halo effects
model. Among nonloyal consumers, the process will tend
to DEMO the standard learning hierarchy, provided it is a
high involvement item. DEMO low involvement products, a
nonmediated type of behavioral learning model is DEMO
likely to apply (Rothschild 1979). Preliminary tests of this
hypothesis DEMO be made using data from already com-
pleted satisfaction studies. An aggregated analysis will not
reveal whether halo effects exist for brand-loval consumers.
Instead, the sample needs to be divided a priori, based on
.
-
EFFECTS OF COMMITMENT
loyalty or level of commitment. Since repeat purchasing
sometimes DEMO as brand loyalty, separate measures
of loyalty and commitment might be DEMO and correlated.
Commitment could be measured more globally, as in this
DEMO, or using the belief-specific measure specified by
Robertson (1976). Given a large enough sample, models
might be compared using LISREL, in DEMO both of the
hierarchical sequence and of the level of cognitive media-
tion.
Another research implication has to do with those prod-
ucts the DEMO of which involves both personal and social
outcomes. This study is, DEMO part, an extension of previous
research that has shown a differential DEMO of evalu-
ative criteria depending on the level of social/ecological
concern. Here we find evidence that a differential weighting
also exists in the DEMO domain and at the stage of post-
decision evaluation. An interesting rc:plication would use
a product category containing both ecologically safe and
harmful DEMO versions (e.g., roll-on versus aerosol deo-
dorant). Prepurchase and postpurchase measures would be
taken. Two sets of questions might then be considered DEMO
garding the ecologically concerned consumer: (1) What in-
formation do DEMO consumers use to determine whether
their private consumption actually benefits the environment
(that is, what sustains their behavior)? (2) Is their DEMO
chase evaluation basically governed by halo effects, given
that they are DEMO more committed to the purchase de-
cision? Does this imply more DEMO loyalty among ecolog-
ically concerned consumers? Answers to these questions
could DEMO in the formulation of more effective marketing
strategies for environmentally safe products.
[Received June 1981. Revised October 1982
.]
REFERENCES
Abelson, Robert P. and Milton J. Rosenberg (1958), "Symbolic
Psychologic: A Model of Attitudinal Cognition," Behavioral
Science, 3, 1-13.
Althoff, Phillip and William H. Greig (1977), "Environmental
Pollution Control: Two Views from the General Population,"
Environment and Behavior, 9, 441-456.
Alwin, Duane F. DEMO Robert M. Hauser (1975), "The Decom-
position of Effects in Path Analysis," American Sociological
Review, 40 (February), 37-47.
Anderson, W. Thomas Jr. and William H. Cunningham (1972),
"The Socially Conscious Consumer," Journal of Marketing,
36 (July), 23-3 1.
Antil, John H. and Peter D. Bennett (1979), "Construction and
Validation of a Scale to Measure Socially Responsible Con-
sumption Behavior," DEMO The Conserver Society, eds. Karl E.
Henion and Thomas C. Kinnear, Chicago: American Mar-
keting Association, 51-68.
Aronson, Elliot (1968), "Discussion: Commitments about Com-
mitment," in Theories of Cognitive Consistency: DEMO Source-
book, eds. Robert P. Abelson et al., Chicago: Rand DEMO,
464-466.
Bagozzi, Richard P. (1981), "Evaluating Structural Equation
DEMO With Unobservable Variables and Measurement Er-
ror: A Comment," Journal DEMO Marketing Research, 18 (Au-
gust), 375-38 1.
Becker, Howard DEMO (1960), "Notes on the Concept of Commit-
ment," American Journal of Sociology, 66(1), 32-40.
Beckwith, Neil E. and DEMO R. Lehmann (1975), "The Im-
portance of Halo Effects in Multi-Attribute Attitude
Models," Journal of Marketing Research, 12 (August),
265-275.
, Harold H. Kassarjian, and Donald R. Lehmann (1978),
"Halo Effects in Marketing Research: Review and Prog-
nosis," in DEMO in Consumer Research, Vol. 5, ed. H.
Keith Hunt, Ann DEMO, MI: Association for Consumer Re-
search, 465-467.
Bentler, P. M, and Douglas G. Bonett (1980), "Significance Tests
and Goodness of Fit in the Analysis of Covariance Struc-
tures," Psychological Bulletin, 88(3), 588-606.
Cohen, Jacob and Patricia Cohen (1975), Applied DEMO
Regression/Correlation Analyses for the Behavioral Sci-
ences, Hillsdale, NJ: DEMO Erlbaum Associates.
Crosby, Lawrence A. and James D. Gill (1981), "A Causal Path
Analysis of Ecological Behavior Relating to Marketing," in
Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 8, ed. Kent B. Mon-
roe, Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research,
630-636.
,James D. Gill, and James R. Taylor (1981), "Consumer/
Voter Behavior in the Passage of the Michigan Container
Law," Journal of Marketing, 45 (Spring), 19-32.
and James R. Taylor (1982), "Consumer Satisfaction with
Michigan's Container Deposit Law-An Ecological Perspec-
tive," Journal DEMO Marketing, 46 (Winter), 47-60.
, James R. Taylor, and DEMO C. Kinnear (1980), "The
Role of Ecological Concern in the Passage of the Michigan
Container Law," in 1980 Educators' Conference Proceed-
ings, ed~. Richard P. Bagozzi et al., Chicago: American
Marketing Association, 448-451.
Day, George S. (1969), "A Two-Dimensional Concept of DEMO
Loyalty," Journal of Advertising Research, 9 (September),
29-36.
DEMO, Otis D. (1975), Introduction to Structural Equation
Models, New DEMO: Academic Press.
Engel, James F., Roger D. Blackwell, and David T. Kollat
(1978), Consumer Behavior, 3rd edition, Hinsdale, IL: The
Dryden Press.
Fennell, Geraldine (1978), "Consumers' Perceptions of DEMO Prod-
uct-Use Situation," Journal of Marketing, 42 (April), 38-47.
Ferber, Robert (1976), ''Where Do We Go From Here?" in Se-
lected Aspects of Consumer Behavior, National Science
Foundation, Directorate for Research Applications, RANN-
Research Applied to National Needs, ed. Robert DEMO,
Washington, D.C. : U.S. Government Printing Office,
541-548.
Festinger, Leon (1957), A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance, Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Fox, Karen F. A. and Philip Kotler (1980), "The Marketing of
Social Causes: The First 10 Years," DEMO of Marketing,
44 (Fall), 24-33.
Frankel, Martin R. and Lester R. Frankel (1977), "Some Recent
Developments in Sampling Design," Journal of Marketing
Research, 24 (August), 280-293.
Freedman, Jonathan DEMO (1964), "Involvement, Discrepancy, and
Change," Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
69(3), 290-295.
Gaedeke, Ralph M. (DEMO), Marketing in Private and Public Non-
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
projt Organizations, Santa Monica, CA: Goodyear Publish-
ing Co.
Gerard, Harold B. (1965), "Deviation, Conformity, and Com-
mitment," in Current Studies in Social Psychology, eds.
I. D. Steiner and M. Fishbein, New York: Holt, Rinehart
& Winston, 263-277.
(1968), "Basic Features of Commitment," in Theories
of Cognitive Consistency: A Sourcebook, eds. Robert P.
Abelson et al., Chicago: Rand McNally, 456-463.
Groves, Robert M. (1978), "An Empirical Comparison of Two
Telephone Sample Designs," Journal of Marketing Re-
search, 15 (November), 622-63 1.
Heider, Fritz (1946), "Attitudes DEMO Cognitive Organization,"
Journal of Psychology, 21, 107-1 12.
Henion, Karl E. (1976), Ecological Marketing, Columbus, OH:
Grid Publishing.
, Russell Gregory, and Mona A. Clee (1981), "Trade-offs
in Attribute Levels Made by Ecologically Concerned and
Unconcerned Consumers When Buying Detergents," in Ad-
vances in Consumer Research, Vol. 8, ed. Kent B. Monroe,
Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research,
624-629.
DEMO, Bernard C. (1975), Public Opinion, 3rd edition, Bel-
mont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing.
Holbrook, Morris B. (198 I), "Integrating Compositional and
Decompositional Analyses to Represent the Intervening Role
of Perceptions in DEMO Judgments," Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 18 (February), 13-28.
Jacoby, Jacob (1976), "Consumer Research: Telling It Like It
DEMO," in Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 3, ed. Bev-
erlee B. Anderson, Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Con-
sumer Research, DEMO 1.
and David B. Kyner (1973), "Brand Loyalty Versus Re-
peat Purchasing Behavior," Journal of Marketing Research,
10 (February), 1-9.
Joreskog, Karl G. and Dag Sorbom (1978), LISREL: Analysis of
Linear Structural Relationship by the Method of Maximum
Likelihood, Version N,Release 2, Chicago: National Edu-
cational Resources, Inc.
Johnson, Michael DEMO (1973), "Commitment: A Conceptual Struc-
ture and Empirical Application," Sociological Quarterly, 14
(Summer), 395-406.
Kassarjian, Harold H. (1981), "Low 	Involvement: A Second
Look" in Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 8, ed. Kent
B. Monroe, Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Re-
search, 31-34.
and Waltraud M. Kassarjian (1979), "Attitudes Under
Low Commitment Conditions," in Attitudes Research Plays
for High DEMO, eds. John C. Maloney and Bernard Silver-
man, Chicago: American DEMO Association, 3-15.
and Thomas S. Robertson (1981), Perspectives in Con-
sumer Behavior, 3rd edition, Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman.
Kerlinger, DEMO N. and Elazar J. Pedhazur (1973), Multiple
Regression in Behavioral DEMO, New York: Holt, Rine-
hart & Winston.
Kiesler, Charles A. (1968), "Cornmitment," in Theories of Cog-
nitive Consistency: A Sourcebook, eds. Robert P. Abelson
et a]., Chicago: Rand McNally, DEMO
(1971), The Psychology of Commitment, New York: Ac-
ademic DEMO
Kinnear, Thomas C. and James R. Taylor (1973), "The DEMO
of Ecological Concern on Brand Perceptions," Journal of
Marketing Research, DEMO (May), 191-197.
Kotler, Philip and Gerald Zaltman (1971), "Social Marketing: An
Approach to Planned Social Change," Journal of Marketing,
35 (July), 3-12.
Krugman, Herbert E. (1965), "DEMO Impact of Television Adver-
tising: Learning Without Involvement," Public Opinion
DEMO, 29 (Fall), 349-356.
Labovitz, Sanford (1967), "Some DEMO on Measurement
and Statistics," Social Forces, 46, 151-160.
(1970), "The Assignment of Numbers to Rank Order
Categories, American Sociological Review, 35, 515-525.
Lane, Robert E. and David 0. Sears (1964), Public Opinion,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Lastovicka, John L. DEMO David M. Gardner (1978), "Components
of Involvement," in Attitude Research Plays for High Stakes,
eds. John C. Maloney and Bernard DEMO, Chicago:
American Marketing Association.
La Tour, Stephen A. and Nancy C. Peat (1979), "Conceptual and
Methodological Issues in Satisfaction Research," in Ad-
vances in Consumer Research, Vol. 6, ed. William L.
Wilkie, Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research,
431-437.
Lee, Barrett A. and Carol A. Zeiss (1980), "Behavioral Com-
mitment to the Role of Sport Consumer: An Exploratory
Analysis," Sociology and Social Research, 64(3), 405-41 5.
Lutz, Richard J. (1978), "Rejoinder," Journal of Consumer Re-
search, 4 (March), 266-271.
and James R. Bettman (1977), "Multiattribute Models in
Marketing: A Bicentennial Review," in Consumer and In-
dustrial Buyer Behavior, eds. Arch G. Woodside, Jagdish
Sheth, and Peter D. Bennett, New York: Elsevier-North
Holland, 137-149.
Martinson, 0. B. and E. A. Wilkening (DEMO), "A Scale to Mea-
sure Awareness of Environmental Problems: Structure and
Correlates," paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the
Midwest DEMO Society, Chicago.
Maruyama, Geoffrey and Bill McGarvey (1980), "Evaluating
Causal Models: An Application of Maximum-Likelihood
Analyses of Structural Equations," Psychological Bulletin,
87, 502-512.
Mitchell, Andrew A. (1979), "Involvement: A Potentially Im-
portant Mediator of Consumer Behavior," in Advances in
DEMO Research, Vol. 6, ed. William L. Wilkie, Ann
Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research, 191-196.
Momson, Donald G. (1969), "On the Interpretation of Discrim-
inant Analysis," Journal of Marketing Research, 6,
156-163.
Nakanishi, Masao, Lee G. Cooper, and Harold H. Kassarjian
(1974), "Voting for a Political Candidate Under Conditions
of DEMO Information," Journal of Consumer Research,
1 (September), 36-43.
DEMO, Larry M. and Ira J. Dolich (1979), "An Examination
DEMO Ego-Involvement as a Modifier of Attitude Changes
Caused From Product Testing," in Advances in Consumer
Research, Vol. 6, ed. William L. Wilkie, Ann Arbor, MI:
Association for Consumer Research, 180-183.
Oliver, Richard L. (1980), "A Cognitive Model of the Anteced-
ents and DEMO of Satisfaction Decisions," Journal
of Marketing Research, 17 (November), 460469.
and Gerald Linda (1981), "Effect of Satisfaction and Its
DEMO on Consumer Preference and Intention," in Ad-
vances in Consumer Research, Vol. 8, ed. Kent B. Monroe,
Ann Arbor, MI: DEMO for Consumer Research, 88-93.
Olson, Jerry C. and Philip A. Dover (1978), "Attitude Matura-
EFFECTS OF COMMITMENT
tion: Changes in Related Belief Structures Over Time," in
Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 5, ed. H. Keith Hunt,DEMO
Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research,
333-342.
Osgood, DEMO E. and Percy H. Tannenbaum (1955), "The
Principles of Congruity in the Prediction of Attitude
Change," Psychological Review, 62, 42-55.
DEMO, Thomas M. and Timothy C. Brock (1968), "A Cognitive
DEMO of Attitude Involvement," in Theories of Cognitive
Consistency: A Sourcebook, eds. Robert P. Abelson et al.,
Chicago: Rand McNally, 378-383.
DEMO, Kristian S. (1975), "The Effect of Expenditure on Political
DEMO," Journal of Law and Economics, 18 (December),
745-77 DEMO
Pedhazur, Elazar J. (1982), Multiple Regression in Behavioral
Research, DEMO York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Petty, Richard E, and John T. Cacioppo (1981), "Issue Involve-
ment as a Moderator of DEMO Effects on Attitude of Advertising
Content and Context," in Advances in Consumer Research,
Vol. 8, ed. Kent B. Monroe, Ann Arbor, MI: Association
for Consumer Research, 20-24.
Ray, Michael L. (1973), "Marketing Communication and the
Hierarchy-of-Effects," in New Models for Mass DEMO
cation Research, ed. P. Clarke, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage,
147-176.
Robertson, Thomas S. (1976), "Low-Commitment Consumer
Behavior," Journal of Advertising Research, 16(2), 19-24.
Rokeach, Milton (1960), The Open and Closed Mind: Investiga-
tions into the Nature of Belief Systems and Personality Sys-
tems, New York: Basic Books.
Rosenberg, Milton J. (1960), "An Analysis of Affective-Cogni-
tive Consistency," in DEMO Organization and Change,
eds. C. I. Hovland and M. J. Rosenberg, New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, 15-64.
Rothschild, Michael DEMO (1978), "Political Advertising: A Ne-
glected Policy Issue in DEMO," Journal of Marketing
Research, 15 (February), 58-71.
(1979), "Marketing Communications in Nonbusiness Sit-
uations or Why It's So DEMO to Sell Brotherhood Like Soap,"
Journal of Marketing, 43 (DEMO), 11-20.
and Michael J. Houston (1980), "Individual Differences
in Voting Behavior: Further Investigations of Involvement,"
in Advances in Consumer DEMO, Vol. 7, ed. Jerry C.
Olson, Ann Arbor, MI: DEMO for Consumer Research,
655-658.
Sherif, Carolyn W., Muzafer Sherif, DEMO Roger E. Nebergall
(1965), Attitude and Attitude Change: The Social Judgment
Involvement Approach, New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Sherif, DEMO and Hadley Cantril (1947), The Psychology of
Ego Involvement, New York: John Wiley.
and Carl I. Hovland (1953), Social Judgments: Assimi-
lation and Contrast Effects in Communication and Attitude
Change, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
and Carolyn W. Sherif (1967), "DEMO Own Categories
Procedures in Attitude Research," in Readings in Attitude
Theory and Measurement, ed. Martin Fishbein, New York:
John Wiley.
Specht, David A. (1975), "On the Evaluation of Causal Models,"
Social Science Research, 4, 1 13-133.
Swan, John E. and Frederick I. Trawick (1979) "Triggering Cues
and the Evaluation of Products as Satisfactory or Dissatis-
factory," in 1979 Educators' Conference proceedings, eds.
DEMO Beckwith et al., Chicago: American Marketing Asso-
ciation, 231-244.
Swinyard, William R. and Kenneth A. Coney (1978), "Promo-
tional Effects DEMO a High- Versus Low-Involvement Electo-
rate," Journal of Consumer Research, DEMO (June), 41-48.
Teas, Kenneth R., John G. Wacker, and R. Eugene Hughes
(1979), "A Path Analysis of Causes and DEMO of
Salespeople's Perceptions of Role Clarity," Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 16 (August), 355-369.
Tyebjee, Tyzoon T. (1979), "Response Time, Conflict, and In-
volvement in Brand Choice," Journal DEMO Consumer Research
6 (December), 295-304.
Van de Geer, John P. (1971), Introduction to Multivariate Anal-
ysis for the Social Sciences, DEMO Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Webster, Frederick E., Jr. (1975), "Determining the Character-
istics of the Socially Conscious Consumer," Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 2 (December), 188-196.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 6 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Psychological Commitment and Its Effects on Post-Decision Evaluation and Preference
Stability among Voters
Lawrence A. Crosby; James R. Taylor
The Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 9, No. 4. (Mar., DEMO), pp. 413-431.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0093-5301%28198303%299%3A4%3C413%3APCAIEO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access DEMO from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon DEMO your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access DEMO JSTOR.
[Footnotes]
3 A Cognitive Model of the Antecedents and Consequences of Satisfaction Decisions
Richard L. Oliver
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 17, DEMO 4. (Nov., 1980), pp. 460-469.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28198011%2917%3A4%3C460%3AACMOTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-G
8 Some Observations on Measurement and Statistics
Sanford Labovitz
DEMO Forces, Vol. 46, No. 2. (Dec., 1967), pp. 151-160.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0037-7732%28196712%2946%3A2%3C151%3ASOOMAS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R
8 The Assignment of DEMO to Rank Order Categories
Sanford Labovitz
American Sociological Review, Vol. 35, No. 3. (Jun., 1970), pp. 515-524.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28197006%2935%3A3%3C515%3ATAONTR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has DEMO maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 6 -
9 DEMO Structural Equation Models with Unobservable Variables and Measurement
Error: A Comment
DEMO P. Bagozzi
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 18, No. 3. (DEMO, 1981), pp. 375-381.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?DEMO
9 Integrating Compositional and Decompositional Analyses to Represent the Intervening Role
of Perceptions in Evaluative Judgments
Morris B. Holbrook
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 18, No. 1. (Feb., 1981), pp. 13-28.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28198102%2918%3A1%3C13%3AICADAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
12 The Decomposition of Effects in Path DEMO
Duane F. Alwin; Robert M. Hauser
American Sociological Review, Vol. 40, No. 1. (Feb., 1975), pp. 37-47.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28197502%2940%3A1%3C37%3ATDOEIP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-9
References
The Decomposition of Effects in Path Analysis
DEMO F. Alwin; Robert M. Hauser
American Sociological Review, Vol. 40, DEMO 1. (Feb., 1975), pp. 37-47.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28197502%2940%3A1%3C37%3ATDOEIP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-9
Evaluating Structural Equation Models with Unobservable Variables and Measurement
DEMO: A Comment
Richard P. Bagozzi
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 18, No. 3. (Aug., 1981), pp. 375-381.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28198108%2918%3A3%3C375%3AESEMWU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-X
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 6 -
Notes DEMO the Concept of Commitment
Howard S. Becker
The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 66, No. 1. (Jul., 1960), pp. 32-40.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-9602%28196007%2966%3A1%3C32%3ANOTCOC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U
The Importance of Halo Effects in Multi-Attribute Attitude Models
Neil E. Beckwith; Donald R. Lehmann
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 12, No. 3. (Aug., 1975), pp. 265-275.
DEMO URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28197508%2912%3A3%3C265%3ATIOHEI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-W
Some Recent Developments in Sample Survey Design
Martin R. Frankel; Lester R. Frankel
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 14, No. 3, Special Issue: Recent Developments in Survey
DEMO (Aug., 1977), pp. 280-293.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28197708%2914%3A3%3C280%3ASRDISS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z
An Empirical Comparison of Two Telephone Sample Designs
Robert M. DEMO
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 15, No. 4. (Nov., 1978), pp. 622-631.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28197811%2915%3A4%3C622%3AAECOTT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-O
Integrating DEMO and Decompositional Analyses to Represent the Intervening Role of
Perceptions in Evaluative Judgments
Morris B. Holbrook
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 18, No. DEMO (Feb., 1981), pp. 13-28.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28198102%2918%3A1%3C13%3AICADAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
Brand Loyalty vs. Repeat Purchasing Behavior
Jacob Jacoby; David B. Kyner
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 10, No. 1. (Feb., DEMO), pp. 1-9.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28197302%2910%3A1%3C1%3ABLVRPB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-T
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 4 of 6 -
The DEMO of Ecological Concern on Brand Perceptions
Thomas C. Kinnear; James R. DEMO
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 10, No. 2. (May, 1973), pp. 191-197.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28197305%2910%3A2%3C191%3ATEOECO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-E
The DEMO of Television Advertising: Learning Without Involvement
Herbert E. Krugman
The Public DEMO Quarterly, Vol. 29, No. 3. (Autumn, 1965), pp. 349-356.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0033-362X%28196523%2929%3A3%3C349%3ATIOTAL%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1
Some Observations on Measurement DEMO Statistics
Sanford Labovitz
Social Forces, Vol. 46, No. 2. (Dec., 1967), pp. 151-160.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0037-7732%28196712%2946%3A2%3C151%3ASOOMAS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R
DEMO Assignment of Numbers to Rank Order Categories
Sanford Labovitz
American Sociological Review, Vol. 35, No. 3. (Jun., 1970), pp. 515-524.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28197006%2935%3A3%3C515%3ATAONTR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U
A Further Examination of Two Laboratory Tests of the Extended Fishbein Attitude Model:
Rejoinder
Richard J. Lutz
DEMO Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 4, No. 4. (Mar., 1978), pp. 266-271.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0093-5301%28197803%294%3A4%3C266%3AAFEOTL%3E2.0.CO%3B2-6
On DEMO Interpretation of Discriminant Analysis
Donald G. Morrison
Journal of Marketing Research, DEMO 6, No. 2. (May, 1969), pp. 156-163.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28196905%296%3A2%3C156%3AOTIODA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0
NOTE: The reference numbering from the DEMO has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 5 of 6 -
Voting DEMO a Political Candidate Under Conditions of Minimal Information
Masao Nakanishi; Lee DEMO Cooper; Harold H. Kassarjian
The Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 1, No. 2. (Sep., 1974), pp. 36-43.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0093-5301%28197409%291%3A2%3C36%3AVFAPCU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Y
A Cognitive Model of the Antecedents and Consequences DEMO Satisfaction Decisions
Richard L. Oliver
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 17, No. 4. (Nov., 1980), pp. 460-469.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28198011%2917%3A4%3C460%3AACMOTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-G
The Effect of Expenditure on Political Success
Kristian S. Palda
Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 18, No. 3, Economic Analysis of Political Behavior:
Universities-National Bureau Conference Series Number 29. (Dec., 1975), pp. 745-771.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2186%28197512%2918%3A3%3C745%3ATEOEOP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-N
Political Advertising: A Neglected Policy Issue in Marketing
Michael L. Rothschild
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 15, No. 1. (Feb., 1978), DEMO 58-71.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28197802%2915%3A1%3C58%3APAANPI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-G
Promotional Effects on a High-versus Low-Involvement Electorate
William R. Swinyard; Kenneth A. Coney
The Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 5, No. 1. (Jun., 1978), DEMO 41-48.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0093-5301%28197806%295%3A1%3C41%3APEOAHL%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
A Path Analysis of Causes and Consequences of Salespeople's Perceptions of Role Clarity
R. DEMO Teas; John G. Wacker; R. Eugene Hughes
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 16, No. 3. (Aug., 1979), pp. 355-369.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28197908%2916%3A3%3C355%3AAPAOCA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z
NOTE: The reference numbering from DEMO original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 6 of 6 -
Response DEMO, Conflict, and Involvement in Brand Choice
Tyzoon T. Tyebjee
The Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 6, No. 3. (Dec., 1979), DEMO 295-304.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0093-5301%28197912%296%3A3%3C295%3ARTCAII%3E2.0.CO%3B2-%23
Determining the Characteristics of the Socially Conscious Consumer
Frederick E. Webster, Jr.
The Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 2, No. 3. (Dec., 1975), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0093-5301%28197512%292%3A3%3C188%3ADTCOTS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-D
NOTE: The reference DEMO from the original has been maintained in this citation list.{1g42fwefx}