ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR AND HUMAN DECISION PROCESSES
Vol. 69, No. 2, February, pp. 117–132, 1997
ARTICLE NO. OB962675
Regulatory Focus and Strategic Inclinations:
Promotion and Prevention in Decision-Making
ELLEN CROWE AND E. TORY HIGGINS
Columbia DEMO
A promotion focus is concerned with advancement,
growth, and accomplishment, whereas a prevention
focus is concerned with security, safety, and responsi-
DEMO We hypothesized that the promotion focus incli-
nation is to insure hits and insure against errors of
omission, whereas the prevention focus inclination is
to insure correct rejections and insure against errors of
commission. This hypothesis DEMO three predictions:
(a) when individuals work on a difficult task or have
just experienced failure, those in a promotion focus
should perform better, and those in a prevention focus
should quit more readily; (b) when individuals work
on a task where generating any number of alternatives
is correct, those in a promotion focus should generate
more distinct alternatives, and those in a prevention
focus should be more repetitive; DEMO (c) when individu-
als work on a signal detection task that requires them
to decide whether they did or did not detect a DEMO,
those in a promotion focus should have a “risky”
response bias, and those in a prevention focus should
have a “conservative” response bias and take more
time to respond. These predictions were supported in
two DEMO studies in which regulatory focus was
experimentally manipulated independent of va-
lence. q 1997 Academic Press
A strategy refers to a pattern of decisions DEMO the acquisition,
retention, and utilization of information that serves to DEMO cer-
tain objectives, i.e., to insure certain forms of outcome and to
insure against certain others.
Bruner, Goodnow, & Austin (1956, DEMO 54)
Probably no motivational principle has received more
attention than the hedonic principle that people ap-
proach pleasure and avoid pain. Biological models DEMO
This article is based on Ellen Crowe’s doctoral dissertation at Co-
lumbia University and was supported by National Institute of Mental
Health Grant MH39429 DEMO E. Tory Higgins. We are grateful to James
Bradley for his help on Study 2.
Address reprint requests to E. Tory Higgins, Department of
Psychology, Schermerhorn Hall, Columbia University, New York,
NY 10027.
distinguished between the appetitive system involving
approach and the defensive or aversive system DEMO
ing avoidance (e.g., Gray, 1982; Konorski, 1967; Lang,
1995). Models in personality and social psychology have
distinguished between the DEMO to move toward de-
sired end-states and the motive to move away from
undesired end-states (e.g., Atkinson, 1964; Bandura,
1986; Carver & Scheier, 1981, 1990; Lewin, 1935, 1951;
McClelland, DEMO, Clark, & Lowell, 1953; Roseman,
1984; Roseman, Spindel, & Jose, 1990). But it is not
only hedonism that DEMO approach and avoidance
strategies. The present paper considers the approach
and avoidance strategies that derive from an indepen-
dent principle of motivation, “regulatory focus,” and
examines their implications for decision-making while
problem-solving.
A self-regulatory system DEMO have either a desired
or an undesired end-state functioning as the reference
value. The system attempts to move the current actual-
self state as DEMO as possible to a desired end-state and
as far away as possible from an undesired reference
point. Carver and Scheier (1981, 1990) refer to the for-
mer discrepancy-reducing system as an approach sys-
tem and DEMO latter discrepancy-amplifying system as
an avoidance system. They also suggest that the dis-
crepancy-reducing system is more common than the
discrepancy-amplifying system. Higgins, Roney, Crowe,
and Hymes (1994) proposed that there are two alterna-
tive means or strategies for accomplishing discrepancy
reduction—approach actual self states that DEMO the
desired end-state or avoid actual self states that mis-
match the desired end-state. A person who wants to
get a good grade on DEMO quiz (a desired end-state), for
example, could either study hard at the library the day
before the quiz (approaching a match to the desired
end-state) or turn down an invitation to go out drinking
with friends the night before the quiz (avoiding a mis-
match to the desired end-state). Thus, different ap-
proach and avoidance strategies can be used in the
service of the same general approach system. Higgins
DEMO
0749-5978/97 $25.00
Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
118
CROWE AND HIGGINS
et al. (1994) proposed that individuals’ chronic DEMO at school for the beginning of my 8:30 psychology class
ulation in relation to different types of desired selves
exemplifies this strategic distinction.
DEMO theory (Higgins, 1987) distinguishes
between two types of desired end-states: (a) ideal self-
guides, which are individuals’ representations of some-
one’s (self or other) hopes, wishes, or aspirations for
them; and (b) ought self-guides, which are individuals’
representations of someone’s beliefs about their duties,
obligations, and responsibilities. Self-regulation in rela-
tion to either ideal or ought self-guides is discrepancy-
reducing and involves approach at the DEMO system
level. Higgins et al. (1994) proposed, however, that ideal
and ought self-regulation differ in their strategic incli-
nation.
Actual self congruencies DEMO hopes, wishes, or aspira-
tions represent the presence of positive outcomes
whereas discrepancies represent the absence of positive
outcomes. Thus, the psychological situations involved
in ideal self-regulation are the presence and absence of
positive outcomes (see Higgins, 1989). Unlike hopes,
wishes, and aspirations that DEMO like maximal
goals, duties, obligations, and responsibilities function
more like DEMO goals (see Brendl & Higgins, 1996).
These are goals that a person must attain or standards
that must be met. When strong DEMO, such as biblical
commandments, oughts can even function like necessi-
ties. Discrepancies to such minimal goals represent the
presence of negative outcomes whereas DEMO
represent the absence of negative outcomes (see Gould,
1939; Rotter, 1982). Thus, the psychological situations
involved in ought self-regulation are DEMO absence and
presence of negative outcomes.
Higgins et al. (1994) proposed that the concern of
ideal self-regulation with positive outcomes (their pres-
ence and absence) should engender an inclination to
approach matches to hopes and aspirations as a strat-
egy for ideal self-regulation. In contrast, the concern
of ought self-regulation with negative outcomes (their
absence and presence) should DEMO an inclination
to avoid mismatches to duties and obligations as a strat-
egy for ought self-regulation. In one of their studies,
Higgins et DEMO (1994) tested these predictions by first
asking undergraduates to report either on how their
hopes and aspirations have changed over time (to prime
or activate ideal self-guides) or on how their duties and
obligations have changed over time (to prime ought
self-guides). Next, the participants DEMO about several
episodes that occurred over a few days in the life of
another student, completed a filler task, and then tried
to DEMO the episodes in a free recall task. The
episodes all described the target as trying to experience
a desired end-state but varied in the DEMO used, as
in the following examples: (a) “Because I wanted to be ideally like you to do”. The regulatory focus is one DEMO
which is usually excellent, I woke up early this morn-
ing.” DEMO a match to a desired end-state]; and
(b) “I wanted DEMO take a class in photography at the
community center, so I DEMO register for a class in
Spanish that was scheduled at the same time.”
[avoiding a mismatch to a desired end-state]
As predicted, the participants remembered episodes
that exemplified approaching matches to desired end-
states significantly better DEMO ideal versus ought self-
regulation was activated, whereas they remembered
episodes DEMO exemplified avoiding mismatches to de-
sired end-states significantly better when ought versus
ideal self-regulation was activated. A second study
found that individuals with strong DEMO self-regulation
versus strong ought self-regulation selected different
tactics when asked about their strategies for friendship,
with the former selecting tactics that involved ap-
DEMO matches (e.g., “Be supportive to your friends.
Be emotionally supportive”) DEMO the latter selecting tac-
tics that involved avoiding mismatches (e.g., “Stay in
touch. Don’t lose contact with friends”).
The results of this DEMO other studies (see Higgins et
al., 1994; Higgins & Tykocinski, 1992) supported the
proposal that ideal self-regulation involved a concern
with positive outcomes (presence and absence) and a
predilection for approach means to DEMO desired end-
states, whereas ought self-regulation involved a con-
cern with DEMO outcomes (absence and presence)
and a predilection for avoidance means DEMO obtain desired
end-states. But more generally, ideal and ought self-
regulation DEMO be considered as involving two types of
regulatory focus (see Higgins, 1996a). Ideal self-regula-
tion has a promotion focus whereas ought self-regula-
DEMO has a prevention focus. To appreciate better the
nature of these two types of regulatory focus, their hy-
pothesized involvement in self-guide acquisition will be
described briefly (for a fuller discussion of socialization
processes, see DEMO, 1996a).
The child experiences the presence of positive out-
comes DEMO caretakers, for example, encourage the
child to overcome difficulties or set up opportunities for
the child to engage in rewarding activities, and the
child experiences the absence of positive outcomes when
caretakers, for example, DEMO away a toy when the child
refuses to share it or stop a story when the child is not
paying attention. The caretaker ’s DEMO to the child
in both cases is that what matters is attaining accom-
plishments or fulfilling hopes and aspirations, but it is
communicated in reference to either a desired or an
undesired state of the child—either DEMO is what I
would ideally like you to do” or “This is not what I would
REGULATORY FOCUS AND STRATEGIC INCLINATIONS
119
promotion, i.e., a concern with DEMO, growth, of negative) when they did not solve an anagram DEMO
accomplishment.
In contrast, the child experiences the absence of nega-
tive DEMO when caretakers, for example, train the
child to be alert to potential dangers or teach the child
to “mind your manners,” and DEMO child experiences the
presence of negative outcomes when caretakers, for ex-
DEMO, yell at the child when he or she does not listen
DEMO criticize the child when he or she makes a mistake.
The caretaker ’s message to the child in both cases is
that what matters DEMO insuring safety, being responsible,
and meeting obligations, but it is communicated in ref-
erence to either a desired or an undesired state DEMO the
child—either “This is what I believe you ought to do”
or “This is not what I believe you ought to do.” The
regulatory DEMO is one of prevention, i.e., a concern with
protection, safety, responsibility.
These caretaker–child interactions occur over long
periods and consist of a DEMO significant other commu-
nicating about the child’s contingencies in the world.
The different messages engender ideal self-regulation
involving a promotion focus concerned with advance-
DEMO, growth, accomplishment or ought self-regulation
involving a prevention focus concerned with protection,
safety, responsibility. But regulatory focus should not
be limited to such chronic individual differences. After
all, momentary situations should also be capable of tem-
porarily inducing either a promotion focus or a preven-
tion DEMO Just as the responses of caretakers to their
children’s actions provide feedback to the children
about how to attain desired (rather than undesired)
end-states, feedback from a boss or a teacher communi-
cates to an employee or a student, respectively, how to
attain desired end-states. And DEMO feedback can occur
in a momentary situation without there being a long
history or strong relationship between the interactants.
Thus, promotion or prevention feedback, whether it con-
cerns a desired state (positive feedback) or an undesired
state (negative feedback), should be capable of inducing
a temporary state of regulatory focus that influences
motivation.
This possibility was tested in DEMO recent study by Roney,
Higgins, and Shah (1995). Undergraduate participants
worked on a set of anagrams that included both solvable
anagrams DEMO unsolvable anagrams. The participants
were given 45 s to solve each anagram but they could
quit before the time was up. Success or failure DEMO
was given after each problem. Half of the participants
received promotion focus feedback, such as “Right, you
got that one” (presence of positive) when they solved
an anagram or “You didn’t get that one right” (absence
of positive) when they did not solve an anagram. The
DEMO half of the participants received prevention focus
feedback, such as “No, you missed that one” (presence The results of these two recent studies suggest that
“You didn’t miss that one” (absence of negative) when
DEMO solved an anagram. After the first trial in which
feedback was given, the participants immediately per-
formed a second trial without feedback. The results for
this trial are of special interest because there was no
longer DEMO but a regulatory focus had been induced
from the first trial. For the unsolvable anagrams, the
study found that participants with a prevention focus
quit before the time was up on 19% of the problems,
DEMO participants with a promotion focus quit on
only 4% of the problems.
The results of this study suggest that feedback is
capable of inducing DEMO either a promotion fo-
cus or a prevention focus, and this DEMO turn can influence
motivation to persist on a task. But feedback is not
the only situational variable that should be capable of
inducing different DEMO of regulatory focus. To use
again the analogy of caretaker–child interactions, DEMO
should be possible to induce a regulatory focus with
instructions that present a task contingency concerning
which actions produce which consequences, i.e., how
DEMO attain desired (versus undesired) end-states. This
possibility was tested in a second study by Roney et al.
(1995) on motivational persistence.
Undergraduate DEMO were told that they
would perform two tasks. For everyone the first task
was an anagrams task that included both easy ana-
grams pretested DEMO be solvable by everyone and unsolv-
able anagrams. All of the participants were told that
the second task would be either a computer simulation
DEMO the popular “Wheel of Fortune” game or a task called
“unvaried repetition” described in such a way as to
appear very boring. Although the DEMO contin-
gency for playing the fun game rather than the boring
game as the second task was the same for everyone, the
framing of the contingency was experimentally varied.
Half of the participants were given a DEMO focus
in which they were told that if they solved 22 (DEMO more)
out of the 25 anagrams they would get to play the
“Wheel of Fortune” game, otherwise they would do the
“unvaried repetition” task. The other half of the partici-
pants were given a prevention DEMO in which they were
told that if they got four (or DEMO) out of the 25 ana-
grams wrong, they would do the “unvaried repetition”
task, otherwise they would play the “Wheel of Fortune”
game. The time participants spent working on the un-
solvable anagrams was recorded. DEMO with the
results of the first study described earlier, this study
DEMO that participants with a promotion focus per-
sisted over one-third longer on the unsolvable ana-
grams than participants with a prevention focus.
120
CROWE AND HIGGINS
regulatory focus can be induced situationally and influ- DEMO experienced, this orientation might motivate quitting
ence motivation. Thus, regulatory focus is not just an to avoid explicitly committing an error.
individual difference DEMO relevant to chronic per- The findings of Roney et al. (1995) need to be reconsid-
sonal predilections. Rather, it concerns different self- ered in light of this analysis. The unsolvable anagrams
regulatory states. Individuals can DEMO chronically predis- in their studies appeared among the first few problems,
posed to experience a particular state or it can be in- and DEMO the participants experienced failure early on
duced in them temporarily by properties of the current in the tasks. This early failure experience might have
DEMO In either case, individuals in a promotion been necessary to produce DEMO regulatory focus differ-
focus state versus a prevention focus state will have ence that was found. One of the aims of our first study
DEMO strategic inclinations. Let us reconsider, then, was to examine directly for the first time whether ana-
the nature of this difference in strategic DEMO gram performance on solvable anagrams is better with
A promotion focus is concerned with advancement, a promotion focus than a prevention focus only when
growth, accomplishment. Goals are hopes and aspira- participants are experiencing difficulty. A new “embed-
tions. The strategic inclination is to make progress by ded DEMO task was also included in our first study
approaching matches to the desired end-state. In con- in order to consider this possibility more generally. DEMO
trast, a prevention focus is concerned with security, was expected that individuals in a prevention focus
safety, responsibility. Goals are duties and obligations would quit an especially difficult hidden figure before
or even necessities. The DEMO inclination is to be the time limit was up in order to avoid committing a
prudent and precautionary and avoid mismatches to mistake, whereas individuals in a promotion focus
the desired end-state. Given these differences, one would persist longer to prolong the opportunity for a
would expect that DEMO self-regulatory states would “hit.” To broaden our examination of this issue still
be different when their focus is promotion versus pre- further, an additional counting backward task was also
vention. With a promotion focus, the state should be included that had an easy sequence followed by a diffi-
DEMO to attain advancement and gains. With a pre- cult sequence. It was expected that a performance ad-
vention focus, the state should be vigilance to assure vantage of the promotion focus would emerge only dur-
safety DEMO nonlosses. ing the difficult sequence.
How might a state of eagerness versus a state of A more central purpose of our first study (as well as
vigilance impact strategic inclinations? In signal detec- the second study) was to address a limitation of the
tion terms (e.g., Tanner & Swets, 1954; see also Trope & Roney et al. (1995) studies that is evident in the general
Liberman, 1996), individuals DEMO a state of eagerness literature as well. In manipulating regulatory focus,
from a promotion focus should want, especially, to ac- the first DEMO study controlled for valence by in-
complish “hits” and to avoid errors of omission (i.e., a cluding both positive and negative feedback within DEMO
loss of accomplishment). In contrast, individuals in a regulatory focus DEMO The second “task contin-
state of vigilance from a prevention focus should want, gency” study confounded regulatory focus and valence
especially, to attain DEMO rejections and avoid errors by framing the contingency positively for the promotion
of commission (i.e., making a mistake). Thus, to use focus and negatively for the prevention focus. To ad-
Bruner et al.’s (1956) classic terminology cited earlier, dress this limitation, the present studies used the “task
the promotion focus inclination is to insure hits and contingency” DEMO and independently manipu-
insure against errors of omission, whereas the preven- DEMO both the regulatory focus and the valence of the
tion focus inclination is to insure correct rejections and contingency framing. Thus in the context DEMO contingency
insure against errors of commission. framing, the present studies examine DEMO the first time
How might these different strategic inclination im- how regulatory focus as one motivational principle and
pact behavior on an anagram task DEMO used by Roney et valence or hedonic value as a separate motivational
al. (1995)? An anagram task requires participants to find principal influence strategic inclinations, both indepen-
one or more words hidden in a letter string. Success at dently and in combination.
finding a word would be DEMO correct acceptance or “hit” The other major aim of the present studies was to in-
whereas failure to find a word would be an DEMO of omis- vestigate an additional implication of the hypothesized
sion. On this task, then, the promotion focus individuals strategic inclinations that has not DEMO been exam-
should be eager to find words (“hits”) and to avoid omit- ined. Specifically, one would expect differences in the
ting any possible words. This should yield high persis- strategic motivation to generate alternatives. DEMO
tence and a strong desire to find words following a failure tasks allow people to produce few or many alternatives
to find any. In DEMO, the prevention focus individuals without penalty. On a sorting task, for example, individ-
should be vigilant against nonwords and want to avoid uals could use the same criterion, such as color, to sort a
DEMO the error of producing them. When difficulty set of fruits and to sort a set of vegetables or they could
REGULATORY FOCUS AND STRATEGIC INCLINATIONS
121
use different criteria, such as color for the fruits and the study, 138 were randomly selected and scheduled
shape for the vegetables. Either strategy is considered
correct. The requirement is DEMO that the sorting crite- took place approximately two months after the battery.
rion be consistent across all members of a category. Thus,
individuals DEMO reduce the likelihood of making a mis-
take and still be correct by simplifying the task, such as
sticking to one criterion for both categories. Individuals
in a vigilant state from a prevention focus want to DEMO
errors of commission and thus should be inclined to be
repetitive. In contrast, individuals in an eager state from
a promotion focus want to accomplish “hits” and thus
should be inclined against a strategy that omits DEMO
tives. Thus, when the task permits, one would expect
such individuals to use different criteria.
This hypothesized difference in strategic inclinations
for considering DEMO was tested in our first study
by including two additional tasks among the initial set
of tasks. One of these tasks was a sorting DEMO like the
one just described. A second task was a characteristic
listing task that permitted generating many different
alternatives. Participants are presented with the
DEMO of furniture objects, such as desk, couch, or bed,
DEMO are asked to write down all of the characteristics
they can think of for each object. It was hypothesized
that individuals with a promotion DEMO, compared to
individuals with a prevention focus, would be more flu-
ent in listing unique characteristics for the different
members of a category DEMO of their stronger strate-
gic inclination to generate many different alternatives
when possible. In contrast, individuals with a preven-
tion focus, who are DEMO to avoid errors of commis-
sion, should be more repetitive than DEMO with
a promotion focus (controlling for fluency).
The first study DEMO performance when experi-
encing difficulty and generating alternatives. Each of
these measures permits a test of the proposal that indi-
viduals in an eager DEMO from a promotion focus are in-
clined to insure hits and insure against errors of omis-
sion, whereas individuals in a vigilant state from a
prevention focus are inclined to insure correct rejections
and insure against DEMO of commission. Given that this
proposal was inspired by a signal detection analysis, it
would be reasonable to test it as well with a signal detec-
tion task. This was the aim of our second study DEMO
examined decisions on a recognition memory task.
Mood questionnaire. During the experimental ses-
STUDY 1 sion, measures of participants’ mood were taken to
check on whether the experimental framing manipula-
Method tion itself or the tasks DEMO had emotional effects.
Participants We did not expect to produce changes in emotions be-
cause the participants were given no feedback about
Columbia University DEMO were paid to their level of performance and, indeed, there was no
complete a battery of questionnaires. Of those who had right or DEMO answer on two of the five tasks used.
appropriately filled out the critical questionnaires for Still, we were concerned about this possibility because
to participate as paid subjects in the experiment that
Materials
As part of DEMO battery completed weeks before the
experiment, all participants filled out the DEMO Rating
Questionnaire and the Selves Questionnaire.
Task rating questionnaire. This questionnaire asks
respondents to rate 16 tasks or activities on a
7-point Likert scale, from 23 (Dislike Very Much) to
13 (Like Very Much). The tasks included such activities
as solitaire, alphabetizing, playing a video DEMO, proof-
reading, transcribing audiotapes, and playing blackjack
(“21”). Each participant’s most liked task and least liked
task were selected from their DEMO to be used as part
of the experimental framing to be described later.
Selves questionnaire. This questionnaire asks re-
spondents to list up to DEMO or 10 attributes for each of
three different self-states: (a) DEMO actual self, the kind
of person they believe they actually are; (b) their ideal
self, the kind of person that someone (DEMO or other)
would ideally like them to be, someone’s hopes, wishes,
and aspirations for them; and (c) their ought self, the
kind of person that someone (self or other) believes
they ought to be, someone’s beliefs about their duties,
obligations and responsibilities. The questionnaire is
administered in two sections, the first involving the
respondent’s own standpoint and the second involving
the standpoints of the respondent’s significant DEMO
(i.e., mother and father). The magnitude of the self-
discrepancy between the actual self and each of the
ideal and ought self-states DEMO calculated by summing
the total number of mismatches with the actual self,
then subtracting the total number of matches with the
actual self (see Higgins, Bond, Klein, & Strauman,
1986). Because the present studies were concerned with
how situationally-induced regulatory focus influences
strategic inclinations, we wanted to control for the ef-
fects of chronic strategic predispositions. DEMO, the dif-
ferent self-discrepancies were included as covariates in
the multiple DEMO analyses.
122
CROWE AND HIGGINS
any change in the participants’ mood might itself DEMO the second trial involved decrements of 9, which is rela-
ence DEMO strategic inclinations. The mood measures tively difficult.
permitted us both to check on and to control for this
possibility. Mood was assessed three times—once DEMO the Sorting. This task was based on a sorting task em-
very beginning of the experimental session, once about ployed by Mikulincer, Kedem, and Paz (1990). Partici-
halfway through the study (i.e., after the sorting task), pants were given a set of 12 members DEMO a given cate-
and again at the very end of the session. gory, and were instructed to sort or separate this set of
The Mood Questionnaire contained 16 different mood items into subgroups according to a DEMO criterion or
terms. Because ideal self-regulation produces dimension which made sense to them. They first sorted
cheerfulness/dejection-related emotions whereas ought a list of DEMO and then sorted a list of vegetables. Only
self-regulation produces quiescence/agitation-related the names of the items appeared on each page—no pic-
emotions (see Higgins, 1996b), the mood questionnaire tures were included. The fruits and vegetables listed
was constructed to include positive and negative items were all DEMO of the semantic categories as deter-
from each of these two emotional dimensions: (a) cheer- mined by Rosch (1975). The twelve DEMO were [listed
fulness-related feelings (happy, upbeat and satisfied); in order]: orange, strawberry, banana, pear, lime, pine-
(b) dejection-related DEMO (discouraged, sad, and dis- apple, apple, grapes, blueberry, DEMO, watermelon,
appointed); (c) agitation-related feelings (uneasy, tense, plum. The twelve vegetables were [listed in order]: peas,
and worried); and (d) quiescence-related feelings (calm, cucumbers, green beans, DEMO, eggplant, corn, let-
secure, and relaxed). The remaining four mood terms tuce, beets, celery, carrots, green peppers, broccoli.
were general feelings unrelated to these two emotional There was no time limit, and there were no restrictions
dimensions. Most of the mood terms were DEMO from on the number of subgroups or the number of items per
two mood factors in the Semantic Differential Mood subgroup. The only stipulation DEMO that the subgroups
Scale (Lorr and Wunderlich, 1988)—Cheerful– represent different values on the same dimension (e.g.,
Depressed, and Relaxed–Anxious. Some DEMO extreme fruits of different colors). After completing the second
items (DEMO, gloomy) were changed to less extreme items page in which they sorted vegetables, the participants
(e.g., discouraged). For each mood term, the respon- were asked on the third page to write down as many
dents were asked to indicate which extent rating “best different criteria DEMO they could think of, as many dimen-
describes HOW YOU FEEL DEMO NOW” on a 5-point sions as possible, for separating the same DEMO of 12
Likert scale that ranged from 0 (Not at all) to 4 (Very). vegetables into subgroups, excluding the dimension
All DEMO the participants worked on the following five they had used to sort the vegetables on the previous
tasks in the order listed: page. They were allowed as much time as they needed
to complete this exercise.
DEMO figures. This task was developed by Wit-
kin, Oltman, Raskin, DEMO Karp (1971; see also Ruebush,
1960). As described by them, the participant’s “task on
each trial is to locate a previously seen simple figure
within a larger complex figure which has been so DEMO
nized as to obscure or embed the sought-after simple
figure (p. DEMO).” The simple and complex figures were
geometric shapes that fit on 39 3 59 cards. The simple
design was always present in the DEMO one. Addi-
tionally, the simple figure was always right side up
DEMO had the same size inside the complex figure. Three
minutes (180 DEMO) was allotted for each figure. Given that
the norms for college DEMO fall in the range of 46
Counting backwards. Participants in this task ver- to 70 s per figure for this test (Witkin et al., 1971),
bally counted backwards from a given number by an DEMO was considered to be an ample amount of time for
assigned decrement. They were given 1 min in which participants to work on each DEMO The participants
to do so, and were told that the purpose DEMO the task was were given seven embedded figures. Six of the figures
to see how many numbers they could get in a minute. were DEMO color and one was in black and white. Pretesting
They performed this task two times. The first trial in- of the figures had indicated DEMO the black and white
volved decrements of 6, which is relatively DEMO, and figure was clearly the most difficult. This difficult figure
Characteristic DEMO This task was based on an
attribute listing task employed by Mikulincer, Kedem,
and Paz (1990). Participants were presented with the
DEMO of eight objects, each on a separate sheet of pa-
per, and were told to write down all of the characteris-
tics they DEMO think of for each object. Participants
were given 1 1/2 min per object. They completed the
pages in the order presented, and could not look forward
or backward at pages other than the one they DEMO
working on. The eight objects, on eight different pages,
were (in order of appearance): desk, couch, bookcase,
table, cabinet, bed, chair, mirror. All objects were mem-
bers of the superordinate semantic category of furniture
as determined by Rosch (1975).
REGULATORY FOCUS AND STRATEGIC INCLINATIONS
123
permitted a test of persistence by DEMO the per- complete a series of different attention and problem-
centage of participants in each condition who quit work- solving measures. Your performance on DEMO tasks will
ing on the figure. determine what your final task will be, and it will be
Anagrams. The participants were asked to com- one of 2 things, either [participant’s liked task] or [parti-
plete four anagrams, one per page. The instructions cipant’s disliked task].” The instructions then varied
were to complete the pages in order, and the partici- across conditions, as follows:
pants were not allowed to return to a page once they (a) Promotion Working—“If you do well on the DEMO
had completed it. There was no time limit per page. cises I’m about to give you, you will get to do the [partici-
The four anagrams, in order, were: “cleets”, “tisrnp”, pant’s liked task] instead of the other task.”
“tohcass” and “wderra”. The first two had DEMO solutions (b) Promotion Not Working—“If you don’t do well
each, DEMO the last had four solutions. The third ana- on the exercises I’m about to give you, you won’t get to
gram was unsolvable. Participants were told that each do the [participant’s liked task] but will do DEMO other
anagram could have multiple solutions or no solution. task instead.”
Before beginning, the participants were given a practice (c) Prevention Working—“As long as you don’t do
anagram that was easier than the task anagrams. DEMO on the exercises I’m about to give you, you won’t
have DEMO do the [participant’s disliked task] but will do
the other task instead.”
Procedure (d) Prevention Not Working—“If you do poorly on
Upon arriving DEMO the experimental session, the parti- the exercises I’m about to give DEMO, you will have to do
cipants were asked to complete the DEMO Question- the [participant’s disliked task] instead of the other
naire. They were told that studies have shown that task.”
mood can influence performance and DEMO effects would In addition to these four contingent framing condi-
interfere with the aims of our research. Thus, we would tions, there was DEMO one experimental noncontingent
like to determine whether mood is influencing perfor- framing condition. Here the relation between the initial
mance on our study so DEMO we can correct for it if it is. set of exercises and the final task was described as
Using the participants’ earlier idiographic responses DEMO The two alternative final tasks were
to the Task Rating Questionnaire, DEMO activity was se- described and the participants were told that one of
lected for the experiment that a participant clearly liked these tasks would DEMO randomly assigned to them, as
and another was selected that the DEMO clearly follows: “We’re now going to have you complete a series
DEMO After completing the Mood Questionnaire, the of different attention and problem-solving DEMO
participants were told that they would first perform After you have completed these tasks, your final task
an initial set of five exercises [the experimental tasks will be randomly assigned to you, and it will be one of
described above] and then they would be assigned a two DEMO, either [participant’s liked task] or [partici-
final task. The liked activity (e.g., playing a video game) pant’s disliked task].” By including a DEMO
and the disliked activity (e.g., proofreading) were each framing condition, it was possible to examine how the
fully described as an alternative DEMO task that a partic- variable of contingency per se influenced strategic incli-
ipant might perform. Props related to a participant’s nations.
alternative final task DEMO also included (e.g., a deck The participants were randomly assigned to one of
of cards for solitaire) to convince participants that ei- the above five framing conditions upon arrival at the
ther of these tasks DEMO be their final task. The de- experiment. There were 28 participants in the “Promo-
briefing at the end of the experimental session indicated tion DEMO Working” condition and 29 in the “Prevention
that the participants believed that they would perform Working” condition. There were 27 participants in each
one DEMO these tasks during the session. of the remaining three conditions. Each participant re-
Four of the experimental framing conditions were mained in one of DEMO five conditions while working
contingency conditions in which participants were told on all of the initial set of exercises. The participants
that which of DEMO alternative final tasks they would were reminded of their specific contingency or noncon-
work on at the end of the session depended on their DEMO condition halfway through the initial set of
performance on an initial set of five exercises [the five tasks (i.e., after the sorting task), and they filled out the
experimental tasks providing the dependent mea- Mood Questionnaire for the second time at this point.
sures]. The relation between DEMO initial set of exercises After finishing the Anagrams task, the participants
DEMO the final task was described as contingent for every- filled out the Mood Questionnaire for a third time. At
one, but the framing varied in different conditions as this point, the experiment was over. All participants
a function of both regulatory focus and valence. All were told that DEMO had done well on the exercises. They
instructions began with, “We’re DEMO going to have you were then thanked and fully debriefed.
124
CROWE AND HIGGINS
Results and Discussion effects (all F’s , 1). In contrast, a regression analysis on
Methods of Analysis the number of solutions found for the solvable anagram
that followed the unsolvable anagram (controlling for
Multiple regression analyses were performed on the solutions to the DEMO preceding the unsolvable
dependent variables to assess the independent effects anagram and time spent on the unsolvable anagram)
of each framing variable while DEMO for all the revealed a significant effect of regulatory focus, F(DEMO,115)
other variables. Differences among the four contingency 5 4.6, DEMO , .05. As predicted, participants in the promo-
framing conditions were DEMO by including two tion focus condition found more solutions (M 5 DEMO; with
different framing variables in the analysis. The first a maximum DEMO 4) than participants in the prevention
framing variable was Regulatory Focus, distinguishing focus condition (M 5 1.0). There were no other signifi-
between promotion focus conditions (Promotion Work- cant effects.
ing; Promotion Not DEMO) and prevention focus con-
ditions (Prevention Working; Prevention Not Working)DEMO Embedded figures. As discussed earlier, the embed-
The second framing variable DEMO Valence, distinguish- ded figures task permitted an additional test of the
DEMO between pleasant or positive valence conditions effects of task difficulty on persistence because it in-
(Promotion Working; Prevention Working) and painful cluded one especially difficult problem. The partici-
or negative valence conditions (Promotion Not Working; pants were given the option of quitting any embedded
Prevention Not Working). figure and moving on to the next one if they wanted;DEMO
Differences between the four contingency framing that is, they were told DEMO at any time they could stop
conditions combined and the noncontingency framing searching for any simple figure they had not yet found.
condition were DEMO analysed as a Contingency variable The participants rarely quit searching for more than
(Contingency Framing; Noncontingency Framing). one of the embedded figures DEMO, as expected, the figure
Two- and three-way interaction terms were also in- that they typically quit was the most difficult one. (It
cluded in the multiple regression to determine whether was the fifth problem in DEMO sequence of seven prob-
any interaction effects occurred among Regulatory lems.) DEMO logistic regression analysis on quitting this
Focus, Valence, and Contingency. Finally, each regres- difficult figure revealed a borderline significant effect
sion analysis included participants’ideal and ought dis- of regulatory focus, Wald 5 3.37, p , .07. As expected,
crepancy scores as covariates. (Possible interactions be- DEMO participants in the prevention focus condition were
tween self-discrepancies and the other variables were more likely to quit this difficult figure (54%) than DEMO
also investigated but none were significant.) participants in the promotion focus DEMO (35%).
Motivational Response to Difficulty
Counting backwards.
This task included DEMO rela-
It was proposed earlier that the promotion focus incli-
nation is to insure hits and insure against errors of
omission, whereas the prevention focus inclination is
to insure correct rejections and insure against errors
of DEMO When a task becomes difficult, or just
following failure, promotion focus individuals should be
eager to find “hits” and insure against omitting any
DEMO “hits,” whereas prevention focus individuals
should be vigilant against mistakes and insure against
committing the error of producing them. When a task
becomes DEMO, then, one would expect promotion
focus individuals to perform better and prevention focus
individuals to quit more readily. The results on three
of DEMO tasks are relevant to this hypothesis.
Anagrams. The participants completed two solv- counted more quickly (M 5 22.4 numbers/min) than
able anagrams DEMO encountering the unsolvable ana- participants in the noncontingency condition (M 5 DEMO
gram. They were given as much time as they wanted
to work on each of the anagrams and time spent work- the second trial DEMO it was nonsignificant. There were
ing on the anagrams was included as a covariate. A no other main effects but there was a significant DEMO
regression analysis on the number of solutions found for latory Focus 3 Trial Order interaction, F(1,117) 5 3.9,
the first DEMO solvable anagrams revealed no significant p 5 .05. Consistent with our prediction, on the easier
tively easy and relatively difficult trials of counting
backwards. It was hypothesized that higher motivation
and performance with a promotion than DEMO prevention
focus would appear when the task became difficult. The
participants were given two trials of counting back-
wards, counting first by an interval of 6 and then by a
interval of 9. As expected, the participants found the
first trial easier as reflected in their counting markedly
DEMO on the first trial (M 5 21.7 numbers/min) than
on the second trial (M 5 14.8 numbers/min), F(1,117)
5 10.9, p , .0001.
A regression analysis first revealed a significant ef-
fect of contingency on counting speed during the first
trial, F(1,118) 5 7.9, p , .01, reflecting the fact that on
the first trial participants in the contingency condition
numbers/min)DEMO The effect was in the same direction on
REGULATORY FOCUS AND STRATEGIC INCLINATIONS
125
first trial the participants in the DEMO focus condi- a borderline significant effect of regulatory focus,
tion were somewhat faster (M 5 22.9 numbers/min) F(1,116) 5 3.7, p , .06. As predicted, participants in
than participants in DEMO promotion focus condition (M the prevention focus condition had higher repetition
DEMO 21.9 numbers/min), whereas on the more difficult scores (M DEMO 2.8) than participants in promotion focus
second trial the prevention focus DEMO were condition (M 5 2.5). There were no other significant DEMO
somewhat slower (M 5 14.7 numbers/min) than the fects.
promotion focus participants (M 5 15.3 numbers/min).
It should be noted, moreover, that the slower speed of Sorting. The first measure was DEMO total number of
the prevention focus participants on the second trial subgroups that participants generated in both the fruit
was not in the service DEMO reducing errors because, if and vegetable sortings together. There was no DEMO
anything, they also had more errors on the second trial limit DEMO the sorting task and participants varied in
(M 5 1.3) than the promotion focus participants how much time they spent. Although the conditions
(M 5 0.9). themselves did not differ in time spent sorting, time
spent was included as a covariate in the analysis. Multi-
Generating DEMO ple regression on this measure of total number of sub-
It was proposed earlier that, given a task where gen- groups generated revealed both a borderline significant
erating any number of alternatives is correct, individu- effect of regulatory focus, F(1,117) 5 3.2, p , .07, and
als in a prevention focus state would tend to be rela- a significant effect of valence, F(1,117) 5 4.4, p , .05. As
tively repetitive and generate less alternatives than predicted, participants in the promotion focus condition
individuals in a promotion focus state. We DEMO sorted the items into more subgroups (M 5 6.3) than
that individuals in a vigilant state from a prevention participants in the prevention DEMO condition (M 5
focus want to avoid errors of commission and DEMO 5.7). In addition, participants in the positive valence
should be DEMO to use the strategy of sticking to as condition produced more subgroups (M 5 6.4) than par-
few alternatives as possible and repeating DEMO already ticipants in the negative valence condition (M 5 5.7).
DEMO On the other hand, sticking to as few alternatives There were DEMO other significant effects.
as possible means that some possibilities will be omitted The two main effects meant that participants in the
during the task. DEMO proposed that individuals in an Prevention Not Working condition produced an espe-
eager state from a promotion focus want to accomplish cially low number DEMO subgroups (M 5 5.5), whereas
“hits” and thus should not DEMO inclined to use this strat- participants in the Promotion Working condition pro-
egy. Indeed, in a task where many different alternatives duced an especially high number of subgroups (M 5
could be produced, we proposed DEMO these individuals 6.7). One possible explanation for this difference is that
would be inclined to generate many different alterna- participants in these conditions DEMO different cate-
tives. Both the characteristic listing task and the sort- gories that naturally varied in their subgrouping poten-
ing task directly tested this DEMO tial, such as the category “Has seeds [Yes; No]” versus
“color” [green, red, yellow, etc.]. A review of the catego-
Characteristic listing. When counting the number ries selected in the different conditions indicated that
DEMO characteristics listed for each item, all repetitions, this was not the case. Instead, the difference was due
including synonyms, were excluded. The DEMO num- more to participants in the Prevention Not Working
ber of characteristics that participants listed per item condition employing the strategy of choosing one DEMO
on this task is a measure of their fluency in generating group, “X,” as a reference point and creating the two
unique aspects of these different members of the furni- subgroups, “X” and “not X.” For example, a participant
ture category. The multiple regression analysis on this might choose to sort vegetables into “green” and “not
fluency measure revealed DEMO borderline significant effect green”.
of regulatory focus, F(1,117) 5 3.7, p , .06. As predicted, To eliminate any possibility that DEMO in sub-
participants in the promotion focus condition displayed group production was due to choice of category for
more fluency (M 5 10.0) DEMO participants in the pre- grouping, an analysis was performed on just DEMO num-
vention focus condition (M 5 9.0). No other effects DEMO ber of subgroups used when sorting vegetables by
significant. As another indicator of characteristic list- “color.” The category of “color” was selected because it
DEMO style, the average number of times a subject re- was the DEMO frequently employed category for sorting
peated terms or words when describing more than one both fruits and vegetables, and the analysis was per-
item was calculated. The number of possible repetitions formed on vegetables because color DEMO more frequently
for any specific term varied from 2 to 8. A multiple used in sorting vegetables than in sorting fruit. The
regression analysis DEMO the mean number of term repeti- framing conditions did not differ in how often partici-
tions across all items (controlling for fluency) revealed DEMO used color as their sorting category. The logistic
126
CROWE AND HIGGINS
regression analysis revealed a significant effect of regu- DEMO scale. At each of the three measurement times, both
latory focus, Wald 5 5.2, p 5 .02. As expected, partici- the dejection-related DEMO agitation-related emotions
pants in the prevention focus condition were more likely had scores below 3.5, i.e., slightly dejected and slightly
to use an DEMO/not “X” color sorting strategy (58%) than agitated. At each of the three measurement times, both
participants in the promotion focus condition (DEMO). the cheerfulness-related and the quiescence-related
There were no other significant effects. emotions had scores above 5.5, i.e., moderately cheerful
Most of the DEMO that were employed by partici- and moderately quiescent.
pants in the sorting task, such as “color,” “size,” or A repeated measures analysis by framing condition
“taste,” could have been used to sort both DEMO fruits and was conducted for each mood type across the three mea-
the vegetables listed. Some criteria, such as “citrus/ surement times. There DEMO no significant mood effects
noncitrus” for fruits, could be applied to DEMO one list. as a function of framing condition. Equally important,
The participants were given no instructions regarding each of the significant findings reported DEMO on the
whether or not they could repeat the criterion employed different task measures remained significant when the
for sorting the fruits when sorting DEMO vegetables, and four types of emotions at the different measurement
it DEMO certainly correct to do so. A logistic regression times, and the DEMO in emotions between measure-
analysis on repeating the sorting category with vegeta- ment times, were included in the regression analyses.
bles that had been previously used with fruits (control- The results of Study 1 provide support for the hypoth-
ling for the number of subgroups produced) revealed esized difference in strategic inclinations between indi-
a significant effect of regulatory focus, Wald 5 5.8, viduals in a promotion focus and individuals in a pre-
p , .02. As expected, the participants in the prevention vention focus. We had proposed earlier that the
focus condition were more likely DEMO repeat their sorting promotion focus inclination is to insure hits and insure
criteria with both fruits and vegetables (28%) than par- against errors DEMO omission, whereas the prevention fo-
ticipants in the promotion focus condition (14%). There cus inclination is to insure correct rejections and insure
DEMO no other significant effects. against errors of commission. One implication of this
After the participants had sorted both the set of fruits difference was DEMO promotion focus individuals should
and then the set of vegetables, they DEMO asked to list be eager to find “hits” and insure against omitting any
as many additional criteria or dimensions as they could possible “hits”, whereas prevention focus individuals
think of for sorting the same set of DEMO (i.e., ex- should be vigilant against mistakes and insure against
cluding the criteria they had just employed when sorting committing the error of DEMO them. Thus, when a
the vegetables.) A regression analysis of the number of task becomes difficult, individuals in a promotion focus
different sorting criteria participants produced (control- should perform better than individuals in a prevention
ling for time spent) revealed a borderline significant ef- focus, and DEMO latter should quit more readily. This
fect of regulatory focus, F(DEMO,116) 5 3.0, p , .09. As ex- implication was supported by the results on the ana-
pected, the participants in the promotion focus condition gram task (participants in the promotion focus condi-
produced more different sorting criteria (M 5 8.7) than tion found more solutions DEMO the solvable anagrams
participants in the prevention focus condition (M 5 DEMO). than participants in the prevention focus condition fol-
There were no other significant effects. lowing the difficult, unsolvable anagram), the results
on the embedded figures task (more participants in the
Mood prevention focus condition than in the promotion focus
condition quit the difficult figure), and DEMO results on the
One possible way that the different framing condi- counting backwards task (participants in the promotion
tions might influence performance was that they could focus condition were faster than participants in the
influence the DEMO mood and their mood could prevention focus condition on the more difficult second
influence their performance. Although this might be trial but not on DEMO easier first trial). We believe that
interesting in its own right, we were more interested these results for the three tasks taken together provide
in the strategic effects of our framing variables, inde- strong support for the first implication.
pendent of any mood effects. Thus, we needed both to Another implication of the proposed difference in
check for and DEMO for mood effects. strategic inclinations was that, given a task where DEMO
There were three emotions each for cheerfulness, de- erating any number DEMO alternative categories is accept-
jection, quiescence, and agitation as the four general able, individuals in a vigilant state from a prevention
types of emotion. Thus, because each scale measuring focus should tend to be relatively repetitive and gener-
current feelings was from 0 (Not at all) DEMO 4 (Very), each ate few alternatives in order to avoid DEMO of commis-
of these four general types of emotion had a total score sion, whereas individuals in an eager state from a pro-
that ranged from 0 to 12, with 6 being the midpoint of motion focus want to accomplish “hits” and thus should
REGULATORY FOCUS AND STRATEGIC INCLINATIONS
127
be inclined to generate more alternatives. DEMO implica- signal; and (d) a “Correct Rejection”—saying “no” when
tion DEMO supported by the results on the character list- there was no signal. The decisional criterion employed
ing task (participants in the promotion focus condition by a person is assumed to depend upon the weights
were more DEMO in generating alternatives than parti- or payoffs that the person assigns to these possible
cipants in the prevention focus condition, and, indepen- outcomes. DEMO the gain for getting a Hit is greater than the
dent of this effect, participants in the prevention focus gain for a Correct Rejection and the cost for “Missing” a
condition repeated terms or words more DEMO items signal is greater than the cost of getting a False Alarm,
than participants in the promotion focus condition), and then the DEMO will be inclined (or have a bias) to
the results on the sorting task (participants in the pro- say “yes.” In contrast, DEMO the gain for getting a Correct
motion focus condition generated more subgroups than Rejection is greater than the gain for a Hit and the DEMO
participants in the prevention focus condition, with the for getting a DEMO Alarm is greater than the cost of
latter being much more likely to use a simple “X”/not Missing a signal, then the person will be inclined (or
“X” sorting strategy, and, independent of the number have a bias) to say “no.”
of subgroups generated, participants DEMO the prevention Signal detection theory per se is silent on motiva-
focus condition were more likely than participants in tional determinants of a person’s DEMO matrix. The
the promotion focus condition to repeat their sorting principle of regulatory focus, however, does make a pre-
strategy across object categories)DEMO We believe that these diction. Participants with a promotion focus are in a
results taken together provide strong support for the state of eagerness. DEMO state should induce advance-
second implication. ment tactics, an inclination to DEMO accomplish-
In sum, the results of Study 1 support our proposal DEMO They want to insure hits and insure against
that individuals in an eager state from a promotion errors of omission. These participants, then, DEMO
focus are inclined to insure hits and insure against want to insure Hits (successfully recognizing a true
errors of omission, whereas individuals in DEMO vigilant target) and insure against Misses (omitting a true tar-
state from a prevention focus are inclined to insure get). That is, these participants should try to recognize
correct rejections and insure against errors DEMO commis- as many items as possible, producing an inclination to
sion. DEMO proposed difference in strategic inclinations say “yes” (i.e., a risky bias).
was inspired by a signal detection analysis (e.g., Tan- In DEMO, participants with a prevention focus are
ner & Swets, 1954; DEMO also Trope & Liberman, 1996). in a state of vigilance. DEMO state should induce precau-
It would be useful, then, to use a signal detection task tionary tactics, an inclination to avoid mistakes. They
to test more directly the hypothesized differences in want to insure correct DEMO and insure against
strategic inclinations or response biases. A recognition errors of commission. These participants, then, should
memory task was selected for our DEMO study to ac- want to insure Correct Rejections (i.e., successfully
complish this aim. avoiding a false distractor) and insure against False
Study 2 used the same basic paradigm as Study 1. Alarms (failing to avoid a false distractor). That is,
Undergraduate participants filled out a DEMO these participants should try not to commit mistakes,
where they expressed their liking for different kinds of producing an inclination to say “no” (i.e., a conservative
activities during a large survey held weeks before the bias). In addition, because of their vigilance against
experiment. Each participant’s responses were used id- errors of commission, these individuals should take
iographically to select one activity that the participant more time to respond. Thus, we also predicted that the
clearly liked and another he or she DEMO disliked. response latencies would be longer for participants in
When the participants arrived for the study, they were the prevention focus condition than those in the promo-
told that they would first perform a recognition memory DEMO focus condition.
task and then would be assigned a second task. The
liked and the disliked activity previously selected were STUDY 2
each described DEMO an alternative second task.
The recognition memory task is a signal detection Method
task that requires participants to make decisions. In Participants
signal detection DEMO, a signal is either presented or
not presented, and a respondent says either “yes” (they Columbia University undergraduates were paid to
detected a signal) or “no” (no signal was detected). There complete a DEMO of questionnaires. Of those who had
are four possible outcomes for a signal detection trial: appropriately filled out the critical questionnaires for
(a) a “Hit”—saying “yes” when a signal was presented; the study, 65 DEMO randomly selected and scheduled to
(b) a “Miss”—saying “no” when a signal was presented; participate as paid subjects in the experiment that took
(c) a “False Alarm”—saying “yes” when there was no place approximately DEMO month after the battery. There
128
CROWE AND HIGGINS
were 13 participants randomly assigned to each of DEMO on the word recognition memory task, you won’t get to
five DEMO conditions. do the [participant’s liked task] but will have to do the
other task instead.”
Materials (c) Prevention Working—“As long as you don’t DEMO
The Task Rating Questionnaire, Selves Question- poorly on the word recognition DEMO task, you won’t
naire, and Mood Questionnaire were the same as those have to do the [participant’s disliked task] and will do
used DEMO Study 1. The recognition memory task that was the other task instead.”
used was part of a software system developed by Eugene (d) DEMO Not Working—“If you do poorly on
Galanter at Columbia University. It was developed for the word recognition memory task, you will have to do
the Macintosh computer and was designed to allow un- the [participant’s disliked DEMO instead of the other
dergraduate psychology students to run their own ex- task.”
periments. No modifications of the software were neces- In addition to DEMO four contingent framing condi-
sary in order to use it in this experiment. The program tions, there was also the experimental noncontingent
itself randomly generated the nonsense words used to framing condition. As in Study 1, the relation between
assess subjects’ recognition memory. the initial recognition memory task DEMO the second,
final task was described as noncontingent. The two al-
Procedure ternative final tasks were described and the partici-
pants were told DEMO one of these tasks would be ran-
The initial procedure when participants arrived at domly assigned to them after they had completed the
the DEMO session was basically the same as in recognition memory task.
Study 1. The participants were told that their mood For the recognition memory task, the participants
would be measured during the session to correct for any DEMO three trials. (The computer program auto-
possible influence it might have DEMO their performance. matically combined the results for the three trials.) In
DEMO completing the first Mood Questionnaire, the par- the first part of DEMO trial, they were shown 20 nonsense
ticipants were told that they DEMO first perform an words, one at a time for 2 s. DEMO nonsense word con-
initial recognition memory task [the experimental tasks sisted of five letters in which the first, third, and fifth
described above] DEMO then they would be assigned a letters were consonants and the second and fourth let-
second, final task. The participants’ earlier idiographic ters were vowels. The participants then performed a
responses to the Task Rating Questionnaire DEMO used vowel–consonant filler task in which they identified
to select one liked activity and one disliked activity. letters as either vowels or consonants for DEMO s. Next,
The liked activity (e.g., playing a video game) and the they were shown another set of 40 nonsense words and
disliked activity (e.g., proofreading) were each fully de- asked whether or not they had seen them before. Of
scribed as an alternative second DEMO that a participant these 40 nonsense words, 20 were nonsense words DEMO
might perform. Props related to a participant’s alterna- they had seen before in the trial, and the other 20 were
tive second task were again included, and the debriefing new nonsense words that they had not seen in the trial
at the end of the experimental session indicated DEMO (or in any earlier trial). Participants first ran through
the DEMO believed that they would perform one a practice trial. After the practice trial, they performed
of these tasks during the session. the three consecutive experimental trials, with a pause
As in Study 1, four of DEMO experimental framing condi- of 30 s between each. There was no time limit for the
tions were contingency conditions in which participants last recognition DEMO of the trial. The experimenter
were told that which of the alternative final tasks they recorded the duration of this recognition phase for each
DEMO work on at the end of the session depended on trial. After all the trials were completed, the partici-
their performance on the initial recognition memory pants filled out the Mood Questionnaire for a second
task. DEMO relation between the initial memory task and and final time.
the second, final task was described as contingent for
everyone, but the framing DEMO in different conditions
as a function of both regulatory focus and valence. All Results and Discussion
the participants were told that they would first DEMO given
a word recognition memory task. The instructions then Methods of Analysis
varied across conditions, as follows:
(a) Promotion Working—“If you do well on the word As in Study 1, multiple regression analyses were per-
recognition memory task, you will get to do the [partici- formed on the dependent variables to assess the inde-
pant’s liked task] instead DEMO the other task.” pendent effects of each framing variable while control-
(DEMO) Promotion Not Working—“If you don’t do well ling for all the DEMO variables.
REGULATORY FOCUS AND STRATEGIC INCLINATIONS
129
Response Bias
between the two distributions, and is calculated using
the formula, d8 5 Z(FA) 2 DEMO(H) (i.e., the z-score for
False Alarms minus the z-score DEMO Hits) (Galanter,
1994, pg. 141). A larger d8 DEMO indicates greater sensi-
tivity to the signals, or a greater ability DEMO distinguish
between noise alone and signal plus noise.
A regression analysis on the accuracy scores revealed
a significant effect of valence, F(1,60) 5 4.6, p , .04,
reflecting the fact that participants DEMO the negative va-
lence condition had a higher recognition accuracy score
(DEMO 5 1.58) than participants in the positive valence
condition (M 5 1.40). This effect was due mostly to the
very high recognition DEMO scores of participants in
the Prevention Not Working condition (M 5 DEMO). This
condition differed significantly from all other conditions
combined (M DEMO 1.40), F(1,60) 5 4.4, p , .05), whereas
the other conditions did not differ significantly from
each other. The DEMO recognition accuracy
scores were not correlated with either their beta values
or their response times in this study, but to make certain
the accuracy scores were independent the multiple re-
gression was repeated with beta and DEMO time in-
cluded as covariates. The effect of valence and the differ-
ence between Prevention Not Working and all the other
conditions combined remained DEMO There were
no other significant effects.
The statistics for signal detection parameters are
based on the standardized frequency distributions of
the “noise” alone distribution DEMO the “signal plus noise”
distribution, plus the location of a person’s DEMO cri-
terion in relation to these two distributions. This crite-
rion line, which is also in standard scores, is referenced
with respect to DEMO noise distribution (Galanter, 1994,
p. 142). For this study, the response bias statistic beta
(b), which is based on DEMO criterion statistic, was used
to represent each participants’s decision criterion point
DEMO giving a “yes” or “no” answer. Beta is calculated
by taking the ordinate value of the signal plus noise
distribution at the criterion line (indicating the propor-
tion of Hits) and dividing it by the ordinate value of
the noise distribution at the criterion line (indicating
the proportion of False Alarms) [b 5 f(H)/f(FA), where
DEMO is the height of the ordinate, also known as the density
DEMO A beta value of 1 indicates no bias, whereas
beta . DEMO indicates a bias toward saying “no” and beta
, 1 indicates a bias toward saying “yes”.
A regression analysis on the beta values revealed DEMO
significant effect of regulatory focus, F(1,60) 5 6.9,
p 5 .01. As predicted, participants in the promotion
focus condition had a risky bias to say “yes” as indicated
in scores lower than DEMO (M 5 0.92), and participants
in the prevention focus condition DEMO a conservative
bias to say “no” as indicated by scores greater than one Mood
(M 5 1.13). There were no other significant effects.
Response Latency As in Study 1, we were interested in the strategic
effects of our framing variables, independent of any
The response latency of each participant was the mood effects. Thus, we needed both to check for and
number of seconds waited on average before saying control for DEMO effects. Again, the four general types of
“yes” or “no” to DEMO presented nonsense word. A regression emotion were cheerfulness, dejection, quiescence, DEMO
analysis on the response latencies revealed a significant agitation, and each DEMO these four general types of emo-
effect of regulatory focus, F(DEMO,60) 5 6.2, p , .02, re- tion had a DEMO score that ranged from 0 to 12, with 6
flecting the DEMO that, as predicted, participants in the being the midpoint of the scale. At each of the two
prevention focus condition waited longer on DEMO to measurement times, both the dejection-related and agi-
respond (M 5 1.40 s) than participants in the promotion tation-related emotions had scores below 4.0 and mostly
focus condition (M 5 1.23 s). Response latency was below 3.0, i.e., slightly dejected and slightly agitated.
uncorrelated with DEMO in this study, but to make certain At each of the DEMO measurement times, both the cheer-
the two were independent the multiple DEMO was fulness-related and the quiescence-related emotions
repeated with beta included as a covariate. The effect had scores above 5.0 and mostly above 6.0, i.e., moder-
of regulatory focus remained significant. There were no ately cheerful and moderately quiescent.
other significant effects. A repeated measures analysis by framing condition
DEMO Accuracy was conducted for each mood type across the two mea-
surement times. There were no significant mood effects
The participants’ recognition memory accuracy DEMO as a function of framing condition. Equally important,
their accuracy rate in detecting the presence and ab- each of the significant findings reported DEMO re-
sence of signals, a standardized score known as d8 mained DEMO when the four types of emotions at
(“d prime”). This DEMO was calculated with reference the different measurement times, and the changes DEMO
to the two distributions of noise alone and signal plus emotions between measurement times, were included
noise. The d8 measure is the distance in standard scores in the regression analyses.
130
CROWE AND HIGGINS
GENERAL SUMMAR Y AND CONCLUSIONS
A promotion focus DEMO concerned with advancement,
growth, and accomplishment and the strategic inclina-
DEMO is to make progress by approaching matches to the
desired end-state. In contrast, a prevention focus is
concerned with security, safety, responsibility and the
strategic inclination is to be prudent and precautionary
and avoid mismatches DEMO the desired end-state. A pro-
motion focus, then, would involve a state of eagerness
to attain advancement and gains whereas a prevention
focus DEMO involve a state of vigilance to assure safety
and non-losses. Given these differences, we hypothe-
sized that the promotion focus inclination is to insure
hits and insure against errors of omission, whereas the
prevention focus inclination is to insure correct rejec-
tions and insure against errors of commission.
DEMO general hypothesis yielded three basic predic-
tions. One prediction was that when individuals work
on a difficult task or have just experienced failure, those
in a promotion focus should be eager to find hits and
insure DEMO omitting any possible hits, whereas
those in a prevention focus should DEMO vigilant against
mistakes and insure against committing the error of
producing them. Under these circumstances, then, indi-
viduals in a promotion focus should DEMO better than
individuals in a prevention focus and the latter should
quit more readily.
Taken together, the results of Study 1 on the ana-
grams task, the embedded figures task, and the count-
ing backwards DEMO strongly support this prediction.
Participants in the promotion focus condition, com-
DEMO to those in the prevention focus condition, found
more solutions on DEMO anagram following their failure
on the unsolvable anagram, and counted backwards
DEMO quickly on the difficult sequence. Participants in
the prevention focus, compared DEMO those in the promo-
tion focus, were more likely to quit DEMO difficult embed-
ded figure.
The second prediction was that when individuals
work on a task where generating any number of alter-
natives is correct, those in a prevention focus should
want to avoid errors of commission DEMO sticking to as
few alternatives as possible and repeating ones already
used, and those in a promotion focus should want to
accomplish hits and insure against omitting possible
alternatives. Under these circumstances, then, individ-
uals DEMO a prevention focus should be more repetitive
than individuals in a promotion focus and the latter
should generate more distinct alternatives.
Taken together, the results of Study 1 on the charac-
teristic listing task and the DEMO task strongly sup-
port this prediction. Participants in the promotion con-
dition, compared to those in the prevention focus pants in the contingency condition counted more
condition, were more fluent in generating unique char-
acteristics of different members of a category, sorted
different members of a category into more subgroups,
and used a greater number of different sorting criteria
DEMO categories. Participants in the prevention condi-
tion, compared to those in DEMO promotion condition, re-
peated more characteristics across category members
(controlling for fluency) and repeated the same sorting
criteria more across categories (controlling DEMO the num-
ber of subgroups produced in each category).
The third prediction was that when individuals work
on a signal detection task that DEMO them to decide
whether they did or did not detect a signal, those in a
promotion focus should want to insure hits and insure
against errors of omission by deciding that a signal was
presented, whereas those in a prevention focus should
want to insure correct rejections and DEMO against
errors of commission by deciding that a signal was not
presented. In a recognition memory task, then, individ-
uals in a promotion DEMO should be inclined to recognize
as many items as possible and thus to respond “yes”
(a risky response bias), whereas individuals in a preven-
tion focus should be inclined to try not to commit mis-
DEMO and thus to respond “no” (a conservative response
bias). Moreover, individuals in a prevention focus vigi-
lant against errors of commission should DEMO more
time to respond than individuals in a promotion focus
eager for hits. The results of Study 2 for response bias
and for response DEMO (controlling for response bias)
supported these predictions.
Another major objective DEMO the present studies was
to examine for the first time how regulatory focus as
one motivational principle and valence or hedonic value
as a DEMO motivational principal influence strategic
inclinations, both independently and in combination.
Our DEMO considered this issue in the context of fram-
ing manipulations that created contingencies between
performance on the target tasks and assignment of a
final DEMO There were two alternative final tasks, one
liked and one disliked DEMO each participant. The same
objective contingency was framed in relation to a posi-
tive or a negative outcome (valence) and, orthogonally,
in relation to a promotion or a prevention focus (regula-
tory focus). In addition, these contingent conditions
were compared to a noncontingent condition in which
the final task was randomly assigned, unrelated to pre-
vious performance.
As summarized earlier, regulatory focus framing had
many significant effects. In contrast, contingency had
only one significant effect and valence framing had just
two effects. The contingency effect was simply that on
the first trial of DEMO counting backwards task, partici-
REGULATORY FOCUS AND STRATEGIC INCLINATIONS
131
quickly than participants in the noncontingency DEMO
tion. This might have reflected greater motivation in
the contingency than the noncontingency condition, but
there was little evidence for this conclusion on the other
tasks. It should also be noted that the effects of valence
DEMO seemed to be driven by specific conditions that
involved regulatory focus as well. Specifically, the va-
lence difference in producing subgroups on the sorting
task reflected mostly the fact that participants in the
Prevention Not Working DEMO produced an espe-
cially low number of subgroups whereas participants
in the Promotion Working condition produced an espe-
cially high number of subgroups. And DEMO valence differ-
ence in recognition accuracy reflected mostly the fact
that participants in the Prevention Not Working condi-
tion had very high recognition accuracy DEMO This
suggests that individuals focusing on prevention not
working might be especially vigilant under certain cir-
cumstances, and vigilance might be an advantage in
certain tasks such as recognition memory.
Overall, the present studies clearly indicate that reg-
ulatory focus, independent of valence, can influence
strategies or DEMO patterns in task performance and
problem-solving. The results support the general hy-
pothesis that the promotion focus inclination is to in-
sure hits and DEMO against errors of omission, whereas
the prevention focus inclination is to DEMO correct re-
jections and insure against errors of commission. Our
studies found that regulatory focus can be induced us-
ing a contingency framing manipulation. DEMO manipu-
lation was inspired by regulatory focus differences in
the messages that caretakers give to their children
when they respond to them contingently. But DEMO con-
tingency messages are not restricted to caretaker–child
interactions. As noted earlier, teacher–pupil and em-
ployer–employee interactions also communicate contin-
gencies. More generally, DEMO and institutions
communicate contingencies through the kinds of formal
incentives and feedback that they use. An interesting
question for future research is how different DEMO of
formal incentives and feedback relate to regulatory fo-
cus and thereby influence motivation and performance.
REFERENCES
Atkinson, J. W. (1964). An DEMO to motivation. Princeton, NJ:
Van Nostrand.
Bandura, A. (1986)DEMO Social foundations of thought and action: A social
cognitive theory. Englewood DEMO, NJ: Prentice–Hall.
Brendl, C. M., & Higgins, E. T. (1996). Principles of judging valence:
What makes events positive or DEMO? In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social DEMO (Vol. 28, pp. 95–160).
New York: Academic Press.
Bruner, J. S., Goodnow, J. J., & Austin, G. A. (1956). A study of
thinking. New York: Wiley.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1981). Attention and self- regulation:
DEMO control-theory approach to human behavior. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Carver, C. DEMO, & Scheier, M. F. (1990). Principles of self- regulation:DEMO
Action and emotion. In E. T. Higgins and R. M. Sorrentino (DEMO),
Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations of social behav-
ior. (Vol. 2, pp. 3–52). New York: Guilford.
Galanter, E. (1994). Psych Tech Notes. Version 2.1. New York: Adams,
Bannister, Cox.
Gray, J. A. (1982). The neuropsychology of anxiety: DEMO enquiry into
the functions of the septohippocampal system. New York: Oxford
DEMO Press.
Higgins, E. T. (1987). Self-discrepancy: A theory relating DEMO and
affect. Psychological Review. 94, 319–340.
Higgins, E. T. (1989)DEMO Continuities and discontinuities in self-regula-
tory and self-evaluative processes: A developmental DEMO relating
self and affect. Journal of Personality, 57, 407–444.
Higgins, DEMO T. (1996a). The “self digest”: Self-knowledge serving self-
regulatory functions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
71, 1062–1083.
Higgins, E. DEMO (1996b). Emotional experiences: The pains and plea-
sures of distinct regulatory systems. In R. D. Kavanaugh, B. Zim-
merberg, and S. DEMO (Eds.), Emotion:Interdisciplinary perspectives
(pp. 203–241). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Higgins, E. T., Bond, R. N., Klein, R., & Strauman, T. (1986). Self-
discrepancies and emotional vulnerability: How DEMO, acces-
sibility, and type of discrepancy influence affect. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 51, 5–15.
Higgins, E. T., Roney, C., Crowe, E., & Hymes, C. (1994). Ideal versus
ought predilections for approach and avoidance: Distinct self-regu-
latory systems. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66,
276–286.
Higgins, E. T., & Tykocinski, O. (1992). Self-discrepancies and bio-
graphical memory: Personality and cognition at the level of psycho-
logical situation. Personality and Social Psychology DEMO, 18,
527–535.
Konorski, J. (1967). Integrative activity of DEMO brain: An interdisciplin-
ary approach. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Lang, P. J. (1995). The emotion probe: Studies of motivation and
attention. American Psychologist, 50, 372–385.
Lewin, K. (1935). A DEMO theory of personality. New York:
McGraw–Hill.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science. New York: Harper.
Lewin, K., Dembo, T., Festinger, L., & Sears, P. S. (1944). DEMO
of aspiration. In J. McHunt (Ed.), Personality and the behavior
DEMO (Vol. 1, pp. 333–378). New York: Ronald Press.
Lorr, M., & Wunderlich, R. A. (1988). A semantic differential mood
scale. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 44, 33–36.
McClelland, D. C., DEMO, J. W., Clark, R. A., & Lowell, E. L.
(1953). The achievement motive. New York: Appleton–Century–
Crofts.
Mikulincer, M., Kedem, P., & Paz, D. (1990). The impact of DEMO
anxiety and situational stress on the categorization of natural ob-
jects. Anxiety Research, 2, 85–101.
Roney, C. J. R., Higgins, E. T., & Shah, J. (1995). Goals and framing:
How outcome focus influences motivation and emotion. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, DEMO
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive representations of semantic categories.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 104, 192–233.
Roseman, I. J. (1984). Cognitive determinants of emotion: A struc-
tural theory. Review of Personality and Social Psychology, 5, 11–36.
132
CROWE AND HIGGINS
Roseman, I. J., Spindel, M. S., & Jose, P. E. (1990). Appraisals of Tanner, W. P. DEMO, & Swets, J. A. (1954). A decision-making theory of
DEMO events: Testing a theory of discrete emotions. visual detection. Psychological Review, 61, 401–409.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 899–915. Trope, Y., & Liberman, A. (1996). Social hypothesis testing: Cognitive
Rotter, J. B. (1982). Some implications of a social learning DEMO for and motivational mechanisms. In E. T. Higgins and A. W. Kruglan-
the practice of psychotherapy. In J. B. Rotter (Ed.), The development ski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp.
and applications of social learning theory (pp. 237–262). New York: 239–270)DEMO New York: Guilford.
CBS Educational and Professional Publishing. Witkin, H. A., Oltman, P. K., Raskin, E., & Karp, S. A. (1971). A
Ruebush, B. K. (1960). Interfering and facilitating DEMO of test manual for the embedded figures test. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
anxiety. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 60, 205–212. Psychologists DEMO
Received: August 7, 1996{1g42fwefx}