OUTSOURCING INNOWnON
Comparison of external technology providers to
Siemens uncovers five drivers DEMO innovation success.
Zhijian Cui, Christoph H. Loch, Bernd Grossmann, and DEMO He
OVERVIEW: Although innovation outsourcing has be-
come a widespread practice DEMO R&D management, man-
agers on the ground wonder which project DEMO
practices are required for technology development with
external providers. An examination of 24 outsourced de-
velopment projects at Siemens identified five common
drivers of DEMO Among these, project-specific partner
competence as well as maintaining in-house competence
DEMO successes from failures. In addition, each in-
novation source has specific DEMO drivers. These in-
clude managing expectations (customers tend to get
carried DEMO thinking they can sell the technology next
month) and protecting one'DEMO intellectual property in col-
laborations with competitors and start-ups. When a
mature rather than novel technology is outsourced, the
success drivers shift from project issues to producibility
and system compatibility.
KEY CONCEPTS: innovation outsourcing, partner-
DEMO, project management, Siemens.
There is a continuing trend toward shifting product
and service innovation activities outside the firm, a trend
that is driven by a combination of more complex tech-
nologies (and greater technology risk), global markets,
more dispersed expertise, and faster emergence of dis-
Zhijian Cui is a Ph.D. candidate in technology manage-
ment at INSEAD, Fontainebleau, France. His research
interest is in R&D management. Before joining INSEAD,
he worked as plant manager in the City of Industry, Cal-
ifornia. He holds an M.B.A.from Pepperdine University
and an engineering degree DEMO Tsinghua University.
Zhijian.CUI@insead.edu
Christoph Loch is the GlaxoSmithKline Chaired Professor
of Corporate Innovation at INSEAD. His research concerns
innovation processes, strategy cascading, and DEMO motiva-
tion of professionals. A member of the Board of Editors of
Research-Technology Management, he holds a Ph.D. from
the Stanford Graduate School of Business, an M.B.A.from
the University of Tennessee Knoxville and an engineering
degree fi'om the Darmstadt Institute of Technology.
Christoph.LOCH@insead.edu
ruptive technologies (1,2). One survey of the world's
largest R&D spenders reveals DEMO increasing reliance
upon extemal sources of technology over the last ten
years (5); another recent survey estimates that 45 per-
cent of innovations stem from external sources, with this
figure as high as 90 percent in service industries (4).
Despite this, managers still struggle with DEMO the
best innovation providers and with managing collabora-
tions. Indeed, many DEMO projects eventually
unravel (4). This article presents a study of DEMO detailed
innovation outsourcing case studies at Siemens, a global
electronics company DEMO one of the world's largest and
most international R&D operations. This study makes
two contributions:
1. We compare five different types DEMO external providers
of novel technologies with respect not only to their
general strengths and weaknesses but also to their oper-
ational management challenges: research institutes (in-
cluding universities), suppliers, competitors, customers,
and technology start-up companies. This offers lessons
for R&D managers on how to DEMO among the various
provider types and where to focus attention in managing
collaboration projects.
Bernd Grossmann is program manager for innova-
tion management at DEMO Corporate Technology,
Munich, Germany. He has had experience as systems
DEMO, portfolio manager and innovation manager
His current activities involve innovation strategies,DEMO
open innovation, and foresight. He received his doctor-
ate in physics DEMO the University of Heidelberg.
Bernd.grossmann@siemens.com
Ru He is a senior consultant at Siemens Corporate Tech-
nology, working in the area of innovation. Before join-
ing Siemens she worked in IT consulting, healthcare and
technology management in the United States. She re-
ceived her Master of Science degree from DEMO MIT Sloan
School of Management and Ph.D. from the Graduate
School and University Center of CUNY.
Ru.he@siemens.com
Research • Technology Management
0895-6308/09/$5.00 DEMO 2009 Industrial Research Institute, Inc.
2. We compare the outsourcing of novel versus mature
technologies for one DEMO of provider (suppliers) and dem-
onstrate how, in the latter DEMO, management challenges are
less concerned with competence and more with the DEMO
patibility of a sourced new component within the broader
system of which the component will become a part.
How the Study Was Conducted
Siemens DEMO is Germany's largest manufacturer and
R&D organization. In fiscal 2007, its gross revenue was
about €72.4 billion and total R&D expenditures were
€3.4 billion. The company had 32,500 A&D employees
globally, filed 5,060 patent applications and registered
8,267 internal inventions. Its DEMO&D themes are highly di-
versified, ranging from environmental technology, new
energy sources, artificial intelligence, new light sources,
and new materials DEMO such applications as transporta-
tion systems, factory design and logistics.
Siemens DEMO its vast in-house R&D efforts by
collaborating with hundreds of external innovation part-
ners. For this study, 24 innovation outsourcing cases
were systematically selected along two dimensions (see
Table 1): 1) comparing innovation DEMO for the em-
bryonic technology phase, and 2) comparing the man-
agement challenges across technology maturity stages
for one source (5,6).
The unit of analysis is a single collaborative project of
outsourced innovation DEMO The Siemens collabora-
tors were willing to share with us their experiences on
"successful" and "less successful" projects. The compari-
son between DEMO and less successfial efforts makes
the study more reliable by decreasing the likelihood of
idiosyncratic findings (7). Each case is based on a two-
hour interview using structured questions plus supporting
materials; the interviewees were project managers, senior
engineers, or innovation portfolio managers. A few cases
DEMO reported together, two per interviewee, and a num-
ber of cases involved several interviewees.
The case examples come from nine different European
entities DEMO Siemens. Because of limited access to some of
the Siemens units, DEMO are cells in the matrix of Table 1
for which data were unavailable. The cross-source com-
parison is therefore focused on the embryonic phase DEMO
the comparison across the life-cycle phase is focused on
the supplier source. Note that suppliers are involved in
the entire technology life cycle, whereas other sources
(e.g., universities) are clustered in the embryonic stage.
Table 2 summarizes the success drivers for embryonic
technologies across innovation sources. Important DEMO
monalities and differences suggest where innovation
managers need to focus attention. We shall discuss each
factor in turn.
Common Success Drivers for
Outsourcing Embryonic DEMO
Trust and communication
Working with a partner requires a high degree of mutual
understanding and trust (8,9). Trust builds on existing
relationships from previous collaboration and also re-
quires an investment in communication and DEMO
cy. In our sample cases, this investment took the form of
DEMO meetings and visits with all partners, and an
open atmosphere for DEMO
For example, Siemens staff spent a lot of time commu-
nicating DEMO faculty of university partners: "Many in-
formal meetings were organized as things came up, and
formal meetings were organized once per month," one
staff member told us. "Do not collaborate with organiza-
tions that you do not know very well and where there is
no mutual DEMO in continuing to collaborate for a long
time," said another.
Communication and trust are more easily built when
the partner is geographically close. DEMO, in the one
less-successful customer collaboration, the partner was
Table 1.—Comparison Dimensions ofthe Study: Degree of Success Across Providers and Maturity Phase.
Innovation Source
University
Suppliers
Customers
Start-ups
Competitors
Embryonic Technology Phase
• 4 successful DEMO
• 3 less successful cases
'2 successful cases
' 1 less DEMO case
'4 successful cases
• 1 less successful case
' 1 DEMO case
• I less successful case
• 1 successful case
• 1 less successful case
Mature Technology Phase
'3 successful cases
• 2 less successful cases
November—December 2009
located far away and had no previous collaboration with
the Siemens unit. DEMO distance always repre-
sents a complication for a project team, but DEMO can be
addressed by using a cross-firm, co-located team and by
DEMO relationships and frequent communication.
One successful customer innovation project had a his-
tory of collaboration since the 1960s even though the
customer was in DEMO Asia. The Siemens unit sent a
team of engineers to support installation of the part-
ner's facility, and senior managers on both sides be-
came friends.
Actions speak louder than words when building trust. In DEMO
nutshell, keep your word! There were several situations in
which Siemens DEMO to make additional investments
to support next-generation equipment but then canceled
because of corporate pressure fi'om outside the project
(e.g., because "the business unit canceled the offer" or
"the plan finally wasn't DEMO by the investment com-
mittee"). Such reneging on promises made DEMO trust
unlikely and consequently reduced the partner's commit-
ment and willingness to take fiirther steps.
Strong project-related partner competence
Competence is a common DEMO for all innovation
outsourcing, but the nature of the key competence DEMO
fers by source. For universities and start-ups, the key
competences are DEMO technology, breakthrough ideas,
and general theory frameworks. However, the compe-
tence must be related to the project at hand. For example,
DEMO one project, the university's equipment could not pro-
duce the DEMO material-grade prototypes as Siemens's
in-house models: "One of the key disagreements be-
tween us is that what she delivered can't be DEMO
in our lab," an interviewee told us. "We need a DEMO
setting, but she has only a three-inch setting in her lab."DEMO
In contrast, the lab environment in another project was
1 '
' '
t.- '
: {'•
¡"'
: I i"
• J ": . ' i î ,
compatible DEMO Siemens's, and the Ph.D. students at the
partner university received DEMO training before the
collaboration started.
With suppliers, Siemens usually cares about DEMO
technology expertise in the relevant field. This helps to
reduce technical uncertainty and shorten development
time.
With customers, the key project-related competence is
their market knowledge. For example, one partnering
customer owned large-scale production facilities in which
Siemens's technology would be applied. In contrast, an-
other customer partner in the same industry did not have
a large-scale plant; this caused the collaboration to lose
direction and cease after six years.
Verifying DEMO competence of a prospective outsourcing
partner is an essential initial step in an outsourcing proj-
ect. The checklist should include not only past evidence
DEMO competence but also organizational stability (to be
discussed shortly) and culture match.
Table 2.—Common and Provider-Specific Success Drivers for Outsourcing Embryonic Technologies.
Success DEMO Across Sources
• Trust and communication
• Strong partner competence
• Strong in-house competence (all but start-ups)
' Clear problem definition (all DEMO start-ups)
' Incentive alignment (all but suppliers)
Sources
Source-specific DEMO Drivers
Universities • Detailed process control
• Actively ensuring knowledge transfer (DEMO to university)
Customers • Expectation management
• Organizational stability
Suppliers • Detailed process control
• Clear milestones
• Actively ensuring knowledge transfer (from supplier to company)
• IP protection
Competitors • IP protection
• DEMO alignment (all but suppliers)
Start-ups • Flexible decision making
• DEMO participation in management
• Organizational stability, dependence on key individuals
Research DEMO Technology Management
In-house competence
Maintaining a minimal level of in-house competence
is necessary if DEMO organization is to effectively apply
the ideas that come from the partner (this ability is
sometimes called "absorptive capacity"). In-house,
competence also helps to define questions in a fuzzy
and uncertain context, and it helps to solve unexpected
technical problems that inevitably emerge under con-
DEMO of uncertainty.
In all successful university collaborations, Siemens ex-
plicitly retained DEMO knowledge and activities in-
house. In one less successful project, the DEMO did
Insights from Previous Work
Previous studies of innovation outsourcing have identified six key motivations for obtaining new technologies from
the outside {¡,11); 1) to lower R&D costs; 2) to access a DEMO that the firm does not understand well; 3) to obtain
technology knowledge that does not exist within the firm; 4) to obtain DEMO component technologies with lower
manufacturing cost or higher quality; 5) to focus for strategic purposes on core competence and 6) to avoid internal
bureaucracy and politics {12) or to upgrade the firm's internal R&D processes.
Technology is known to evolve from an embryonic or novel DEMO to a mature phase (75). In this framework,
novel DEMO tends to offer product innovation and novel markets, and it is DEMO by high technical and
market uncertainties. Mature technology, on the other DEMO, tends to offer additional features of existing products
and process innovation DEMO established products {14,15).
The six innovation outsourcing motivations apply differendy to the five most widely discussed innovation sources:
universities and R&DEMO institutes, customers, suppliers, competitors, and start-up companies. Additional external
innovation providers are emerging, such as idea brokers (e.g., the Internet marketplace Innocentive), "developers
for hire" (e.g., "rent-a-coder"), and DEMO design firms (e.g., IDEO). We focus on the five established provid-
ers because they are still the most relevant for our host DEMO
Previous studies have examined general strengths and weaknesses of the five types of innovation providers, relating
these characteristics to the outsourcing motive and technology maturity stage for which they are best suited. For ex-
ample, university outsourcing is observed mainly at the embryonic stage of innovation. Its role DEMO to generate novel
ideas and to offer theory and general-purpose equipment; DEMO strength lies in its diversified knowledge and potentially
low R&D cost. Provider strengths and weaknesses, as identified in previous work, are summarized DEMO Table 3. Cost
continues to be important for all sources, although DEMO is a less dominant concern than it was ten years ago.
Tabte 3.—Strengths and Weaknesses of Innovation Providers by Type.
Type
Key Areas of
DEMO
Innovation Stage
Main Outsourcing
Motivation
Technology
knowledge,
cost
Market access,
strategic, cost
Production or
technology
knowledge,
cost
Strategic,
market
access, cost
Technology
knowledge,
organizational
leaming, cost
Strengths
Access to novel
DEMO and
features, low cost
Knowledge
of market
requirements,
new product DEMO
Familiarity with
firm's systems,
expertise in related
problems, efficient
DEMO of
current market
and technologies
Source of creativity
and disruptive
innovations
Universities General theory Raw ideas, early
framework, product
prototyping development
Customers Related DEMO, Typically usability
extended usage adaptations
of existing of mature
products technologies
DEMO Components, Usually mature
process technologies
innovation or novel
components
Competitors Product DEMO precompetitive
benchmarking and mature
technologies
Start-ups New product Emphasis on
concepts, DEMO
patented technologies
technologies
Weaknesses
Often little knowledge
of market
Not for new categories,
short-term orientation
(want to use now)
Lack of novel
ideas, might
incur dependence
Competitive threat,
ownership conflicts
High market risk,
commercialization
gap, potential
competitor
These strengths and weaknesses are useful guidelines for the manager initiating a collaboration with an external
innovation provider. However, the observations summarized here are at a high level of aggregation, and it is not the
purpose of our study to re-examine them. Instead, this paper sheds light on the execution challenges of actually
managing an DEMO outsourcing partner.—Ttie Autiiors
November—^December 2009
not have sufficient in-house competence, failed to iden-
tify emerging problems, DEMO lost control of both budget
and progress. One manager commented: "Who knows
when this project will end? Five years ago, we needed
DEMO years and today we still need five years."
In supplier collaborations, strong in-house R&D compe-
tence is useful in identifying and overcoming potential
technical barriers. For example, when the first prototype
did not work in one electronic hardware project, Sie-
mens's in-house R&D engineering team quickly diag-
nosed the problem and, ultimately, the product was
DEMO on time.
A paradox is inherent in these observations: We argue
DEMO in-house competence when the company is out-
sourcing a new technology or intellectual property
(IP) precisely because the company does not have
sufficient DEMO in this technology. However,
our interviews suggest that it is helpful to have some
knowledge that is at least related. An absence of DEMO
pertise makes it difficult for the innovation buyer to
absorb and apply the knowledge acquired. Outsourc-
ing projects in which the company has no DEMO,
not even in related fields, is "extremely risky," as one
interviewee put it.
The in-house competence may be based on preliminary
DEMO, knowledge in related fields, or knowledge
about the system into which the new technology will be
integrated. Having at least related knowledge gives DEMO
mens the ability to absorb, test and apply the purchased
IP, and this puts it in the position of an "essential" part-
DEMO in the collaboration.
The only kind of source for which in-house competence
did not appear as a requirement was start-ups that offered
radically new DEMO outside Siemens's normal
range. Because no in-house competence existed for those
cases we had access to, competence could not appear as
a differentiator. The absence of in-house competence cer-
tainly made these projects risky for DEMO {10).
Clear problem definition
In an environment characterized by high uncertainty, it
is difficult to anticipate which problems the project
team will need to solve. Nevertheless, targets for deliv-
ery time (and cost) must be set in collaboration with
the external partner. Clearly defined targets—such as
"decrease energy consumption by 30 percent" or "in-
crease storage capacity DEMO 70 percent"—reduce the
potential for disagreement, bundle responses to unex-
DEMO events, focus problem solving, and facilitate
termination decisions. However, targets DEMO need ad-
justment in response to such unforeseeable events as
unexpected system interactions or the emerging of
competing technologies.
M ','•' • DEMO • ^ • ' M J • ' '
;-i;ni|!ii| '
'r:''M
In order to better set targets and DEMO, an organiza-
tion must devote considerable time to negotiating the
contract, which requires thinking through and planning
the project and its benefits in DEMO detail. With one proj-
ect, for example, senior management spent two months
discussing the contract details before the project started.
The contract defined DEMO project goal: "reduce the energy
consumption by 'x' [percent] compared with the tradi-
tional equipment." This helped in setting performance
hurdles and benchmarking progress.
Moreover, understanding the main source of any uncer-
tainty helps Siemens to assign a project team that mesh-
es with the partner'DEMO strengths and weaknesses and also
to set an appropriate target. For example, the principal
uncertainty in one university project stemmed from am-
biguous market requirements. Universities were invited
to participate mainly to help obtain financial government
DEMO and to change the project's image in the minds
of customers.
In collaborations with customers, project targets are co-
decided and shared between Siemens and the partner.
For example, all technical targets must be discussed in
great detail with all the partners and then spelled out
clearly DEMO a project handbook. In one successful project,
the goal was clearly defined as "to develop a facility that
can utilize broader energy sources and decrease energy
consumption compared with a conventional facility."
The benchmark DEMO Siemens's eurrent technology, and
progress was reviewed regularly.
As for DEMO R&D activities to a competitor, one
of the interviewees remarked: "It is very hard to build
trust with competitors, and there DEMO always confiicting
interests in the team." This makes it even more DEMO
to make the strategic goal of the innovation outsourcing
explicit and well understood. In this project, Siemens's
goal was to obtain aecess to the competitor's know-how,
while the competitor's goal was to DEMO access to
Siemens's market volume. Because this eompetitor was
small, DEMO strategic importance of learning state-of-the-
art technology outweighed the risk of market loss.
Research • Technology Management
Collaborations with start-ups are, once again, the excep-
tion because in DEMO sample they were used mainly to ex-
plore radically novel opportunities. In such cases, precise
outcomes could not be defined at the outset and had yet
to emerge.
Aligning incentives and mitigating confiicts of interest
Misaligned DEMO are always a threat when out-
sourcing innovation. In particular, any DEMO col-
laboration faced three conflicts of interest:
t. A university partner tends to have strong demands for
intellectual property rights. One collaboration collapsed
DEMO because of ÍP conflicts, not because of incompe-
tence or technology DEMO
2. The requirements of publication and production are
very different. Researchers like to change parameters
and tests for the purpose of publication, and they tend to
shun tedious replication. Production, however, requires
reproducibility. Consequently, the commercial project
manager cares only about a small range of feasible pa-
DEMO but demands utter reliability in the results.
3. There is tension between the university culture of rela-
tively free exploration and the highly structured DEMO
es and systems within a large firm such as Siemens.
Such conflicts were handled at Siemens by mediators
who understood both sides. In one DEMO, for example,
the Siemens project manager had a Ph.D. from DEMO part-
nering university. As a result, he understood how the uni-
DEMO lab and its doctoral students were managed, which
helped to mitigate DEMO and enabled project success.
The alignment of incentives requires patience and mana-
gerial skills. The mediators must first understand the
partners' real differences and then keep their egos under
control; when a difference arises, it DEMO easily spiral into
an issue of "who wins?" As one DEMO explained:
"1 and my partner always have different opinions .. DEMO but
we still need to figure out a common way to proceed. All
conflicts between us and the partner must be solved in a
DEMO business manner."
Solving conflicts constructively in this way contributes
to building relationships as a collaboration is repeated
over time. This is illustrated by DEMO supplier sample, the
only category of outsourcing providers in which con-
DEMO of interest did not emerge as a differentiator be-
tween successful and less successful projects. Because
all suppliers had previously collaborated with their as-
DEMO units at Siemens, the parties had learned to
work through and DEMO conflicts.
Innovation Source-Specific Success
Drivers for Embryonic Technologies
The management lessons described above applied to all
embryonic innovation sourcing projects and across all
November—December DEMO
•/••':
innovation providers. However, outsourcing partners are
not all alike; there are important differences in the suc-
cess drivers for each type of provider that require spe-
cific management attention (see column 3 of Table 2). In
this section we explain these factors in DEMO detail.
Universities and R&D institutes
Our interviewees initially confirmed the strength of
universities as innovation sources: strong technology
know-how (albeit often at DEMO general level and not appli-
cation-specific) and relatively low cost. Two DEMO
success drivers emerged that should be addressed
by management: control of DEMO and transfer of
knowledge.
Close control of progress.—University partners are high-
ly innovative and generally possess strong expertise.
However, the university management system and "mind-
set" is quite different from those of the firm. As DEMO result,
the university may work in directions and toward ends
with which the company disagrees. Avoiding such con-
flicts requires well-defined progress and DEMO milestones.
In one project, the university partner actually showed a
new DEMO to Siemens customers before it was launched
in the market, which DEMO put Siemens in an awk-
ward position. Losing control of progress might also lead
to cost overruns. As one interviewee commented: "Be-
cause DEMO didn't know what she was doing, we couldn't
stop DEMO work; . . . , it is quite normal to see DEMO the ac-
tual expense is 50 percent higher than intended."
Progress toward each milestone should be reviewed in
weekly or monthly project meetings DEMO include all team
members. Geographically distant partners need at least
some regular face-to-face contact, complemented by
frequent teleconferences.
Transfer of in-house knowledge to the university.—The
expertise of universities and R&D institutes is usually
quite general ("the partner knew a lot about this catalyst
in many circumstances, DEMO not in this environment
and this performance challenge"). Universities need DEMO
acquire substantial "local knowledge" in order to under-
stand what has DEMO been done on a specific project
and what still needs to be accomplished; otherwise, un-
necessary replication will occur. In one project, a Ph.D.
student worked for three years merely to duplicate knowl-
edge that DEMO already possessed in-house.
Clearly, the university partner must not only understand
DEMO to achieve but also what to leave aside. One way to
facilitate knowledge transfer is to organize in-house
training with an "apprenticeship" program. DEMO successful
projects, Ph.D. students were usually given two to three
months DEMO in-house training before the projects formally
began. This ensured an effective knowledge transfer
from the company to the university.
Customers
Customers were found to DEMO useful in providing ideas
and in carrying out development activities. They under-
stand market needs very well from the user side, and
sophisticated customers also understand trends and fu-
ture needs. We identified two specific success DEMO for
customer collaboration: well-managed customer expec-
tations, and the partner's management stability.
Management of customer expectations.—Although cus-
tomer satisfaction is of the DEMO importance, overly
optimistic customers are a source of risk in radical DEMO
novation projects with high uncertainty. The project
manager needs to understand how the customer may in-
terpret signals about the project's potential. As DEMO inter-
viewee stated: "Once your customers are aware of your
new product, there is no way you can stop it." The man-
DEMO needs to find a balance between informing cus-
tomers of the risks and convincing customers of the
continuing potential. In one project, for example, the
business unit was very frank in informing the customer
what could and could not be achieved. This helped the
Siemens unit to ensure DEMO its own component supplier
and the partner customer worked at the same speed.
It is important to build customer confidence in order to
maintain DEMO momentum. In the face of significant
risks, the project manager needs DEMO send positive sig-
nals about project progress, market demand, and new
knowledge learned from the project. This is especially
important for projects initiated DEMO customers. For ex-
ample, after a customer innovation partner on one DEMO
ect changed its top manager, Siemens was unable to
convince the DEMO manager of this technology's prom-
ise from either a market or technical perspective. The
customer reduced the budget as a result, and the project
was delayed and ultimately reduced in scope.
Stable customer organization and DEMO
ofthe five customer collaboration projects were initiated
by the customers. However, DEMO change of top manage-
ment or project management can inñuence both the
financial commitment and the expectations of collabora-
tion. For example, after the customer CEO changed dur-
ing a project to develop a new industrial DEMO
technology, "the atmosphere of the steering committee
completely changed." This DEMO's new managers
didn't like the project and were more concerned ahout
short-run payoffs than a long-run technology break-
through. In contrast, when top management of another
industrial equipment customer had remained stable for a
DEMO time, the Siemens manager saw this as a key reason
for DEMO continuing financial and technical support from
this client over a span of 20 years.
Suppliers
Years of competitive selection have turned suppliers into
strong DEMO specialists, with effective develop-
ment processes of their own and who DEMO contribute use-
ful (though rarely breakthrough) ideas and activities.
Three success drivers were especially important for this
innovation source: detailed monitoring, well-defined
DEMO, and knowledge transfer.
Detailed process control and monitoring.—Although
suppliers are typically DEMO with Siemens's needs
and systems, the uncertainty inherent in new DEMO
gies and emerging market needs usually precludes effec-
tive delegation of risk management to the supplier. In
one project, Siemens let the supplier run industrial test-
ing after the prototype was frozen and before mass pro-
DEMO started. This should have been a low-risk stage
as compared with prototype development, but because
the technology was embryonic, operating parameter
variations remained DEMO enough to disrupt indus-
trial functionality. Siemens's oversight was insufficient;
the supplier did not fiiUy report adverse data, and then
the Siemens employee responsible for the oversight quit
just after testing was completed. Thus, the problem re-
mained undetected until the market launch was immi-
nent. DEMO and retesting took 18 months,
which ultimately led to project failure.
Clearly defined contract milestones.—All three supplier
collaboration projects involved formal contracts that
DEMO such complex issues as problem definition,
targets, milestones, and IP policy. Siemens's investment
and order-quantity commitment was contingent upon
project progress. DEMO contingent contracts allow the
firm to hedge against technology uncertainties and give
the partner incentives to "invest" in the project. Clear
milestones must DEMO defined to enable contingent con-
tracts. For example, clearly described target DEMO
specifications for one project allowed problems to be
diagnosed immediately and then addressed and solved.
Less successful projects had a common feature: the
team would not give up on the technology even after
Research • Technology DEMO |
missing several milestones. The decision to terminate a
project should be based DEMO only on its financial status
but also on changes in the competitive environment, the
project's strategic importance, and its position in the
DEMO R&D portfolio.
Knowledge transfer from R&D to manufacturing.—
Supplier collaboration is tightly interwoven with Sie-
mens's in-house production. In-house manufacturing
engineers DEMO not familiar with the producibiiity of com-
ponents that incorporate novel technologies. This makes
knowledge transfer between R&D and manufacturing
crucial. The knowledge DEMO include novel design
attributes, potential production pitfalls, and the ideal
assembly sequence. In the case of the less successful
supplier outsourcing, manufacturing engineers joined
the development team too late, and the internal produc-
tion group was unable to resolve production prototype
problems. As a result, the production costs were too high
and the volume sold was too low.
Competitors
DEMO competitors had valuable expertise to offer—but
at the risk of weakening Siemens's own competitive po-
sition. This made one success driver critical: IP protec-
tion.
Protection of IP.—Competition for intellectual property
is inherent in outsourcing DEMO to competitors. If
the IP retained is not sufficiently strong, the DEMO
can possibly block the firm's product and future devel-
opment. In one project, for example, the competitor had
complete IP ownership of DEMO innovation output. Sie-
mens was free to apply the innovation in-house but could
neither sell nor license it. Thus, the business unit con-
cluded that the benefit from this collaboration was too
small to compensate for DEMO risk of technology leakage
and the collaboration was terminated.
One systematic way of protecting IP in a competitor col-
laboration project is a "collaborative platform" in which
all joint projects are organized around identified themes
and products/technologies within this platform, keeping
other technologies out.
Start-up companies
Siemens outsourced innovation activities to start-ups
mainly for seizing "promising and potentially disruptive
technologies." Start-ups used fast and fiexible processes
to work on novel ideas that were too risky for the large
organization to pursue. Four different DEMO drivers
emerged for working with such organizations, as fol-
lows:
DEMO Protection of IP and core technologies.—Start-ups
can become competitors themselves; consequently, if the
November—December 2009
intellectual property is lost the collaboration becomes
meaningless. DEMO the past, several start-ups had evolved
into competitors of Siemens, as did the start-up in the
less successful collaboration. One interviewee remarked:
"A start-up can sell the IP to competitors or produce it
itself; either [action] blocks us." Thus, IP protection is as
important with DEMO as with competitor sourcing.
Firms can protect their intellectual property by clearly de-
fining their IP-sharing policy in the contract. Technolo-
gies of great DEMO for firms need to be exclusively
owned, and any resale should DEMO the firm's permis-
sion. For example, Siemens financed (with 100 percent
funding) a start-up to develop a new material that was to
be owned entirely by Siemens. This arrangement de-
creased potential IP ownership DEMO and protected
Siemens's strategic advantage.
2. Flexible decision making and management systems.—
Start-up companies normally have faster and less formal
decision-making processes than DEMO companies. This is
an advantage, and some projects are outsourced to DEMO
ups precisely because "this project looks promising in a
start-up but DEMO be killed internally by politics. . . .
Therefore, we'd DEMO let it be outside." However, reap-
ing the benefits of such an arrangement requires the large
company to adjust. In this case, Siemens's investment
decision processes had longer cycles, which required
special arrangements to make the collaboration succeed:
"We have a special budget and a different mindset from
other divisions. We respond to their requests very fast."DEMO
3. Active, not passive, participation.—In its relationships
with some start-up companies, Siemens focused on its
role as an investor without taking an active management
role. This policy is beneficial because it diversifies tech-
nology risks, alerts the company to new technologies,
and earns a financial return. DEMO diversification benefits
are limited when the interests of the start-up confiict
with those of Siemens. For example, a Siemens employ-
ee was on the board of a start-up that undertook a project
relevant to Siemens. When DEMO firm offered a better
buy-in price than Siemens, this employee was legally
unable to vote for Siemens. As the technology success-
fully evolved toward competing with Siemens's DEMO
product, Siemens sold its shares because "we couldn't
control it and the shares fetched a good price." Of course,
you do not always have the privilege of sitting on the
board of your DEMO partner (although you should try!).
However, this example holds a more general lesson:
Fully benefiting from start-up collaboration may require
some DEMO on steering its R&D activities. Therefore,
use whatever leverage you have in a partner's decision-
making; do not squander it because of unrelated or "gen-
eral policy" reasons.
4. Dependence on individuals,DEMO most difficult chal-
lenge in working with start-ups is dependence on indi-
vidual employees. "Start-ups don't have a credible track
record," said one interviewee. The start-up's technolo-
gies or patents are "frozen in individual employees"; if
something happens to this small group or if DEMO leaves, the
whole company may die or lose its value to DEMO
Therefore, stability of the start-up's organization is ex-
tremely important DEMO the success of innovation outsourc-
ing, and it needs to be DEMO and supported. In one
successful project, the head of the start-up DEMO both gen-
eral manager and chief engineer. The contract contained
the provision that, in the event something happened to
him, Siemens could take DEMO of all design blue-
prints. This approach is attractive for the firm but unde-
sirable for the start-up, so it is not commonly used.
Outsourcing Mature Technologies to Suppliers
This section summarizes observations about outsourc-
ing DEMO development of a mature (as opposed to embry-
onic) technology to a supplier. There are, of course,
several commonalities (e.g., supplier competence), and
communication and trust remain as important as ever.
However, an outsourced mature technology is usually
not managed as a "stand-alone" DEMO but rather is em-
bedded in an existing, larger system. This DEMO a dif-
ferent emphasis on knowledge transfer and puts two
additional demands on the supplier: compatibility of
components with the existing system architecture; DEMO
flexibility, or a willingness to adjust components to ac-
commodate broader DEMO requirements.
Knowledge transfer andproducibility
As with the case of embryonic technologies, DEMO transfer
of knowledge from R&D to manufacturing is important.
Note that the less uncertainty involved with a mature
technology makes it easy to DEMO the difficulty
of transferring R&D knowledge into manufacturing. In
one case, components developed by one supplier could
not initially be produced at the Siemens plant and re-
quired unforeseen extra process development and train-
l DEMO
yJL
ing. This delayed the project and increased costs by
50 percent.
Component compatibility with system architecture
A component might work very well in DEMO but fail
when working within a large system. For instance, one
DEMO partner was a leading manufacturer of electronic
processors, but problems emerged DEMO the processor
was embedded in the Siemens system. In the end, DEMO
mens had to find a different provider and the project was
delayed by three months. Compatibility must be verified
at the outset.
Supplier flexibility DEMO component adjustments
Siemens's motivation for outsourcing a mature tech-
nology is to find market-ready components that can be
quickly and inexpensively embedded in DEMO system (ex-
isting or under development). All the suppliers in DEMO
sample had strong relevant expertise, but not all were
willing to DEMO their components (some renowned
suppliers tended to be "stubborn"). DEMO example, one
supplier, a leading sensor manufacturer, was willing to
DEMO the additional cost of adjusting its components to
the Siemens system. In contrast, another well-known
supplier was over-confident about its product and re-
fused to adjust even when a third-party report had doc-
umented problems stemming DEMO this component. In
the end, the product's market launch was DEMO by
half a year.
Lessons and Conciusion
Previous studies of innovation outsourcing have identi-
fied strengths and weaknesses but at a relatively abstract
level. DEMO study, in contrast, has focused on operational
managerial challenges for each source of innovation:
our comparison of successful and less successful out-
DEMO projects allows us to identify speciflc success
drivers that managers should utilize or monitor (see
Table 2).
Researcri • Tecrinorogy Management
The success drivers allow managers to configure an out-
sourcing collaboration, choosing the right partners (e.g.,
the source type with the appropriate strengths, and the
specific partner with the right competence and stability)
and putting the right incentives and milestones in place
(e.g., goal definition DEMO IP ownership) while focusing
attention on the most critieal issues in DEMO the col-
laboration (setting control procedures, knowledge trans-
fer activities, DEMO decision procedures).
The insights from this study also help to define roles in
complex projects with multiple outsoureing partners.
For example, one project manager eommented: "We let
the partner customer give us guidance on DEMO to do, and
the partner university gives us general knowledge and
DEMO the testing." In another project, a multi-party out-
sourcing team was formed that included a eompetitor, a
start-up and suppliers. Consequently, management DEMO
lenges include ensuring tight IP protection, allowing
"start-up cowboys" to DEMO closely with corporate R&D
staff, and facilitating cooperation between in-house DEMO
gineers and suppliers so that knowledge is transferred
effeetively. The relative strengths and contributions of
the partners must be defined, and the challenges and
risks for each partner should be managed during the ex-
eeution of DEMO collaborative project.
Because Siemens is a global and diverse R&D company,
our lessons may (with appropriate cautions) be applica-
ble to DEMO organizations as well. The common Siemens
R&D decision process across our sample should reduce
"noise" in the observations. However, this commonality
also limits applicability of our results to other organiza-
tions. For instance, Siemens's highly developed mana-
gerial accounting methods may make "project control" DEMO
given in our sample, preventing it from appearing as a
success DEMO; in other organizations with less devel-
oped accounting methods, "projeet DEMO" may well be
a distinct success driver.
Some of our results DEMO carry over to other industries,
such as the pharmaeeutical industry, DEMO also out-
sources large chunks of technology and innovation work
to external providers. For this purpose, however, our
results should be viewed as "starting hypotheses" from
which a company can build its own specific experiences.
For example: some providers are biotech companies but
not start-ups; and DEMO project governance and manage-
ment methods that distinguish success from failure may
be affected by such industry-specific effects as regula-
tory influences, the availability of predietive models,
and/or three-way communication among the provider,
DEMO company and opinion leaders. Our study offers hy-
potheses and a way of thinking about the problem, but
the specific operational success drivers discussed here
are not necessarily transferable.
This caution is related to a general DEMO of beneh-
marking efforts: Always take what others do with a DEMO
of salt, and always adapt what they do to your own DEMO
cific organizational characteristics and needs. The same
holds true here. ®
References and Notes
1. Dyer, J. H. 2000. Collaborative Advantage-Winning through E.x-
tended Enterprise Supplier Networks. Oxford University Press.
2. Chesbrough, H. 2006. Open Business Model: How to thrive in the
new innovation landscape. Harvard Business School Press.
3. Mclvor, R. 2009. How the transaction cost and resource-based
theories of the firm inform outsourcing evaluation. Journal of
Operations Management 27, pp. 45-63.
4. Linder J. C , Jarvenpaa, S., and Davenport, T. H. 2003. Toward an
innovation sourcing strategy. MIT Sloan Management Review.
Summer, pp. 43-49.
5. Yin, R. K. 2003. Case Study Research: Design DEMO methods. 3rd
ed. Sage.
6. Eisenhardt, K. M., and Graebner, DEMO E. 2007. Theory building
from cases: Opportunities and challenges. Academy of DEMO
Journal 50, no. 1, pp. 25-32.
7. Kortelainen, S. 2005. DEMO at the interface. Working paper,
Helsinki School of Economics.
8. Doz, Y. L. 1996. The evolution of cooperation in strategic alliance:
Initial conditions or learning processes? Strategic Management
Journal 17, pp. 55-83.
9. DEMO, C. H., de Meyer, A., and Pich, M. T. DEMO Managing the
Unknown—A new approach to managing novel projects. Wiley.
10. We did not evaluate variations in the project management
competence that was brought DEMO bear on the Siemens side, as the
authors did not have DEMO access to independent interviewees to
perform such an evaluation. However, all DEMO project managers
were senior managers with previous experience in managing out-
sourcing partners.
11. Terwiesch, C , and Ulrich, K. 2009. Outside Sources: Sensing
Opportunities Externally. Chapter 3 in Innovation Tournaments.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
12. Christensen, C. M., and Overdorf, M. 2000. Meeting the
challenges of disruptive change. Harvard Business Review, March/
April, pp. DEMO
13. Utterback, J. M., and Abemathy, W. J. 1975. A DEMO model
of process and product innovation. OMEGA, The International
Journal of DEMO Science 3, no. 6, pp. 639-656.
14. Roberts, E. B. DEMO Liu, W. K. 2004. Ally or acquire?—How
technology leaders decide, in The Human Side of Managing
Technological Innovation. R. Katz (ed.). Oxford University Press.
15. De Meyer, A., and Loch, C. H. 2007. Technology strategy, in
C. H. Locfi and S. Kavadias (eds.)DEMO Handbook of New Product
Development, Butterworth/Heinemann/Elsevier.
Subscribers Read RTM DEMO .. .
... as soon as the issue is printed, at DEMO://www.iriinc.org/rtm. Full text, electronic version is searchable
within text DEMO across other journals.
November—December 2009
Copyright of Research Technology Management is the property of Industrial Research Institute, Inc. and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple DEMO or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.{1g42fwefx}