4th Pillar Organizations
in Canada
A Report Prepared for the
Prime Minister’s DEMO Council on Science and Technology
Government of Canada
Margaret Dalziel
School of Management
University of Ottawa
136, rue Jean-Jacques Lussier
Ottawa ON K1N 6N5
Telephone:  (613) 562-5800 ext. 4917
Fax:  (613) 562-5164
DEMO:  dalziel@management.uottawa.ca
Website:  www.management.uottawa.ca/dalziel
September 15th, 2005
Preface
This preliminary investigation into 4th pillar organizations in Canada was commissioned
DEMO the Prime Minister’s Advisory Council on Science and Technology in July 2005.  It
represents a first effort to characterize 4th pillar organizations on a conceptual level and to
estimate the nature and size of the population DEMO 4th pillar organizations in Canada.  The
objective of the report is DEMO lay the groundwork for a consideration of how the
government can leverage 4th pillar organizations as vehicles of increased innovation and
productivity, particularly among small and medium sized enterprises.
I would like to thank Brian Barge DEMO Ian Wong for reading drafts of this report and
providing helpful suggestions for improving it.  I would also like to thank Ian Wong for
his invaluable contribution in preparing Appendix A.  The tables from Statistics Canada
were graciously provided by Frances Anderson and Charlene Lonmo of the Science,DEMO
Innovation and Electronic Information Division of Statistics Canada.
ii
Table of Contents
Preface ................................................................................................................................ ii
Table of Contents............................................................................................................... iii
Executive Summary DEMO iv
1. Introduction.................................................................................................................1
2.
3.
An Overview of 4th Pillar Organizations in Canada ................................................... 4
The Challenges and Opportunities Facing 4th Pillar Organizations.......................... 12
DEMO
The Need for Scholarly Attention............................................................................. 18
5.
Recommendations for Government Action .............................................................. 24
6. Conclusion ................................................................................................................ 30
References......................................................................................................................... 32
Appendix A:  100 Active DEMO Potential 4th Pillar Organizations in Canada..................... 34
Appendix B:  Six Case Studies of 4th Pillar Organizations in Canada ............................. 61
iii
Executive Summary
Four sectors contribute to Canada’s national system of innovation:  DEMO, government,
universities, and nonprofit organizations.  4th pillar organizations are DEMO from
other nonprofit organizations by the fact that they work to increase the innovativeness
and competitiveness of Canadian firms by engaging all three of DEMO other pillars of
innovation.  4th pillar organizations are defined as innovation DEMO and multipliers that
work to promote, support, or conduct science, DEMO, or business-practice based
innovation that results in new products, services, DEMO processes deployed by companies.
4th pillar organizations such as R&D institutes, industry associations, economic
development organizations and other nonprofit organizations work closely DEMO private
sector firms, facilitating innovation in a number of ways.  First, they provide a forum in
which related firms can learn from one another.  Second, they connect firms to
knowledge resources and opportunities outside DEMO immediate purview, for example
knowledge in universities and opportunities in foreign DEMO  Third, they facilitate the
collaborative development of new products, services, and processes involving
universities and governments in addition to private sector firms.  And finally, in some
cases, nonprofit organizations have sufficient expertise to DEMO innovative projects
on behalf of their private sector stakeholders.
As illustrated in Figure 1, below, this report distinguishes between active 4th pillar
organizations DEMO are industry-led, supported by government, and that engage with
university researchers, and potential 4th pillar organizations which do not engage with all
three of the other pillars of innovation as described, or which are not structured as
nonprofit organizations.  Hospitals, universities, colleges, and other educational DEMO
training institutions are excluded from consideration as 4th pillar organizations,
notwithstanding their critical role in innovation.
Figure 1:  Active and Potential 4th DEMO Organizations
iv
The diversity of active and potential 4th pillar organizations is commensurate with DEMO
diversity of the for-profit firms that they serve and the ways in which they serve them.
There are 4th pillar organizations for every region DEMO industry in the country, and they
range from those that work DEMO build connections between sophisticated firms and
university researchers, to those that DEMO to help struggling small firms cope with the
adoption of new technology and business practices.  The diversity of nonprofits is a
requirement of their effectiveness.  Their for-profit constituents demand relevancy and
specific knowledge in their discretionary institutional partners and innovative firms cite
nonprofit organizations as important sources of DEMO and as collaborators in innovation
(Statistics Canada, 2003).  Government DEMO be unable to match this diversity without
an unreasonable increase in its size and complexity.  Of the approximately 161,000
nonprofits in Canada (DEMO Canada, 2005a), I estimate that 10,500 of these are DEMO
or potential 4th pillar organizations.
In many cases an industry association or economic development organization may be the
only non-transactional organization with which a DEMO small firm engages, and so such
organizations represent the best opportunity DEMO government to reach small firms.  But
like their small firm constituents, many 4th pillar organizations face resource shortages,
and the more transformative DEMO activities in which they engage, the more acutely the
resource shortages DEMO felt.  Activities that are non-customized, near term, local, and not
knowledge intensive (e.g. networking events) can be undertaken with relatively modest
DEMO  But activities that are one-on-one, intended to make a difference over the long
term, international, or science or technology-based require government support.  4th pillar
organizations can sustain their existence with the former type of DEMO but their ability
to contribute fully to the innovativeness of Canadian firms is linked to their ability to
provide high value added assistance of DEMO type that relies upon the support of
government.
The federal government presently accommodates the diversity of 4th pillar organizations
by providing them with multiple DEMO points to its resources and expertise.  Almost every
government department and DEMO provides funding for nonprofits, the notable funders
of 4th pillar organizations DEMO Industry Canada and its multiple affiliated agencies,
Natural Resources Canada, DEMO International Trade Canada.  While this approach may
yield certain benefits in DEMO of building connections between nonprofits and
government, these benefits are offset DEMO the downsides.  Most importantly, the current
approach fails to recognize 4th pillar organizations as an important class of contributors to
innovation and prosperity.  Dispersed funding may be awarded inconsistently, may be
perceived as arbitrary, DEMO is not transparent.  It creates problems for the nonprofit
organizations insofar DEMO funding opportunities are unpredictable, and their pursuit
consumes significant organizational resources DEMO would be better spent serving
innovation and commercial objectives.  Finally the DEMO approach minimizes
opportunities for learning about what types of approaches to industry assistance work
best and what types of impacts they achieve.  Imagine how burdensome and unproductive
it would be if university researchers appealed to multiple DEMO departments for
funding instead of being dealt with collectively through the granting councils.
v
This report suggests consolidated and increased funding for 4th pillar organizations, both
active and potential.  Specifically, the four recommendations are:
1. Provide DEMO and sustained federal government support for active 4th
pillar organizations.  Create DEMO agency or foundation to integrate funding for
active 4th pillar organizations and implement a national, competitive, peer-
reviewed process to provide funding on DEMO basis of excellence and fit with
national priorities.
2. Provide consolidated funding for potential 4th pillar organizations to involve them
as full participants in DEMO national system of innovation.
3. Provide increased funding for all 4th pillar organizations.
4. Investigate the possibility of spinning-off certain government institutions into
nonprofit DEMO
As shown in Figure 2, below, it is recommended that annual funding for 4th pillar
organizations grow over three years to a total DEMO $550 per year, $450 million of which is
reallocated funding and DEMO million of which is new funding.
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Figure 2:  Recommended Funding Levels by Year
The primary benefit DEMO working through 4th pillar organizations is that is it leverages the
knowledge and capabilities of Canadians.  It distributes the problem of how to make
Canadian firms more innovative and productive across groups of business people and
DEMO that can design targeted programs that address important needs and
opportunities.  DEMO comprehensive federal program will spur the development of many
worthwhile initiatives.  DEMO that don’t receive federal government funding may be able
to proceed in reduced form without funding or with alternative funding.
Another benefit is that DEMO funding for 4th pillar organizations will create
legitimacy and visibility for the class of organizations.  This will lead to a number of
second order benefits such as an improved ability on the part of such organizations DEMO
attract, retain, and develop the careers of their employees.  The DEMO risks to government
of centralized funding for 4th pillar organizations are those commonly associated with
interventionism.  By centralizing and thereby increasing the visibility of its funding for
vi
Increased funding for 4th
pillar organizations
Consolidated funding DEMO
potential 4th pillar
organizations
Consolidated funding for
active 4th pillar
orgnizations
2006-2007
2007-2008
2008-2009
4th pillar organizations, the federal government risks attracting criticism for
overspending, DEMO on industry subsidies, and spending on organizations viewed by
some as DEMO to the conduct of business.  These risks are contained as this DEMO
recommends new funding of only $100 million, with a three year DEMO up.  The risk of
criticism can be further mitigated by ensuring DEMO the criteria for funding are appropriate
and sufficiently challenging as to ensure that only the most important and best-managed
organizations are funded.
4th pillar DEMO are a means by which the Canadian government can promote the
innovativeness and productivity of a broad range of geographically distributed
companies.  In particular, 4th pillar organizations are well equipped to help small and
medium sized firms adopt advanced technologies and business practices.  No amount of
reduced taxes or tax credits can help an organization that is unsure of what DEMO should do or
one that has insufficient resources to meaningfully invest in prototype development or
global marketing.  4th pillar organizations are distinguished from monetary incentives by
the fact that they are composed of knowledgeable people who DEMO with firms to
motivate them to adapt and innovate and give them the tools to do so.  They are the
government’s best channel to the small and medium sized firms upon which our nation’s
prosperity depends.
DEMO
1. Introduction
Private sector for-profit firms are the most significant and most DEMO contributors to
wealth creation in Canada.  A single large or growing DEMO makes a more significant
contribution than does a single small or declining firm and the challenge for Canada is to
ensure that all firms DEMO the tools they need to achieve growth-enabling sustained
competitive advantage. In Canada this challenge is made more complex by the diversity
of firms which DEMO from large and sophisticated multinationals, to small firms that rely
primarily DEMO local customers for their revenues; from firms that operate in asset-intensive
DEMO such as mining, to firms that operate in knowledge-intensive industries such DEMO
software; and from firms that operate in large urban centres, to firms that operate in small
towns and rural areas.  What can the federal government do to ensure that all Canadian
firms, whatever their attributes and circumstances, are well equipped to innovate and
compete in today’s global markets?
A key to the answer is provided by Canadian firms DEMO  In 2003, Statistics
Canada surveyed firms in a number of information technology, professional service,
natural resource, and transportation industries to better DEMO how they innovate.  To
innovate firms need access to new knowledge DEMO ideas, and to partners that have
resources and capabilities that are DEMO to their own.  Innovative Canadian
firms1 cite customers, suppliers, competitors, and their industry associations as important
sources of ideas for innovation2.  Innovative firms also cite industry associations and
private non-profit research institutes in addition DEMO customers, suppliers, competitors,
universities, and federal and provincial laboratories DEMO collaborators in innovation.
According to Canadian firms, nonprofit organizations play an DEMO role in their
efforts to innovate (Statistics Canada, 2003).
This is not surprising as industry associations, research institutes, and other nonprofit
DEMO work closely with private sector firms, facilitating innovation in a number
DEMO ways.  First, they provide a forum in which related firms can learn from one another.
Second, they connect firms to knowledge resources and opportunities outside their
immediate purview, for example knowledge in universities and opportunities in foreign
markets.  Third, they facilitate the collaborative development of new DEMO, services,
processes, and capabilities involving universities and governments in addition to private
sector firms.  And finally, in some cases, nonprofit organizations have sufficient expertise
to undertake innovative projects on behalf of their private DEMO stakeholders.
This report explores the diversity of innovation-enabling nonprofit organizations and
makes recommendations designed to improve the ability of such organizations to
contribute to DEMO national system of innovation and prosperity.  Throughout the
report I refer DEMO innovation-enabling nonprofit organizations as 4th pillar organizations,
recognizing the fact that they complement the three pillars of industry, government, and
1 According DEMO the Statistics Canada definition, innovative firms are firms that have introduced DEMO new or
significantly improved product or processes during the last three years (Statistics Canada, 2003).
2 The most innovative Canadian firms, the ‘world first’ innovators, also cite universities as important
sources of ideas (DEMO Canada, 2003).
1
universities by bringing together diverse stakeholders to address important challenges and
opportunities (Barge, 2002).
As a subset of nonprofit organizations, 4th pillar DEMO share the attributes of
nonprofits identified by the National Survey of Nonprofit and Voluntary Organizations
(Statistics Canada, 2005a) as they are:
• Non-governmental – institutionally separate from government
• Non-profit distributing – do not DEMO surpluses to their owners or directors
• Self-governing – independent and able to regulate their own activities
• Voluntary – benefit to some degree DEMO voluntary contributions of time or money
• Incorporated – formerly incorporated or registered under provincial or federal
legislation.
4th pillar organizations are distinguished from DEMO nonprofit organizations by the fact
that they work to increase the innovativeness and competitiveness of Canadian firms by
engaging all three of the other DEMO of innovation.  This report distinguishes between
active 4th pillar organizations that DEMO industry-led, supported by government, and that
engage with university researchers, DEMO potential 4th pillar organizations which do not
engage with all three of the other pillars of innovation as described, or which are not
structured as nonprofit organizations.  Hospitals, universities, colleges, and other
educational and DEMO institutions are excluded from consideration as 4th pillar
organizations, notwithstanding their DEMO role in innovation.
The diversity of active and potential 4th pillar organizations is commensurate with the
diversity of the for-profit firms that they serve DEMO the ways in which they serve them.
There are 4th pillar organizations for every region and industry in the country, and they
range from those that work to build connections between sophisticated firms and
university researchers, to those that work to help struggling small firms cope with the
DEMO of new technology and business practices.  The diversity of nonprofits is DEMO
requirement of their effectiveness.  Their for-profit constituents demand relevancy and
specific DEMO in their discretionary institutional partners.  Government would be
unable to match DEMO diversity without an unreasonable increase in its size and
complexity.
The federal government presently accommodates the diversity of 4th pillar organizations
by providing them DEMO multiple entry points to its resources and expertise.  Almost every
government DEMO and agency provides funding for nonprofits, the notable funders
of 4th DEMO organizations being Industry Canada and its multiple affiliated agencies,
Natural Resources Canada, and International Trade Canada.  While this approach may
yield certain DEMO in terms of building connections between nonprofits and
government, these benefits DEMO offset by the downsides.  The current approach is
inconsistent, may be perceived as arbitrary, and is not transparent.  It creates problems for
DEMO nonprofit organizations insofar as funding opportunities are unpredictable, and their
pursuit DEMO significant organizational resources that would be better spent serving
innovation and commercial objectives.  Finally the dispersed approach minimizes
2
opportunities for learning about what types of approaches to industry assistance work
DEMO and what types of impacts they achieve.  Imagine how burdensome and DEMO
it would be if university researchers appealed to multiple government departments for
funding instead of being dealt with collectively through the granting councils.  Note also
that the existence of the granting councils does not prevent university DEMO from
building connections with specific departments as appropriate.  This report advocates DEMO
improved understanding of the important role of 4th pillar organizations in our national
system of innovation and a more rational approach to their funding DEMO will allow them
to better serve their private sector members.
The remainder of this report is structured as follows.  Section 2 provides a typology of
active and potential 4th pillar organizations that shows how the 4th DEMO concept can be
used to better understand the actual and potential contributions to innovation of a variety
of nonprofit, government, and university organizations DEMO Canada.  Section 2 is supported
by Appendix A that lists 100 DEMO and potential 4th pillar organizations in Canada.
Section 3 presents the highlights of six case studies of 4th pillar organizations and on the
basis DEMO these describes the challenges that 4th pillar organizations face and the
opportunity for a substantial increase in their effectiveness.  The case studies themselves
are found in Appendix B.  Section 4 is more theoretical and builds on recent
examinations of nonprofit organizations and national systems of innovation to examine
DEMO we have been so slow to acknowledge and leverage the contributions of 4th pillar
organizations, and Section 5 presents recommendations for government action.  DEMO
conclusion identifies the contributions and limitations of the report and makes
suggestions for further study.
3
2. An Overview of 4th Pillar Organizations in Canada
Four sectors contribute DEMO Canada’s national system of innovation:  industry, government,
universities, and nonprofit organizations.  4th pillar organizations are a subset of nonprofit
participants in the innovation system.  4th pillar organizations are nonprofit innovation
enablers and multipliers that work to promote, support, or conduct science, technology, or
DEMO based innovation that results in new products, services, or processes
deployed by companies.
Figure 1, below, shows four types of active 4th DEMO organizations and eight types of
potential 4th pillar organizations.  Active 4th DEMO organizations exhibit all the attributes
of 4th pillar organizations while potential 4th organizations display a subset of the
attributes.   Active 4th pillar organizations DEMO nonprofits that are industry-led, supported
by government, and that engage with university researchers, while potential 4th pillar
organizations are nonprofits that do not engage with all three of the other pillars of
innovation as described, or are university- or government-owned initiatives.  Proximity to
or distance from the ideal type of 4th pillar organization is not an indication of an
DEMO merit.  While this report argues for the importance of the contributions DEMO
4th pillar organizations it recognizes that excellence and mediocrity is exhibited by all
types of organizations.  Each of the 12 types of 4th pillar organizations is described
below.
Active 4th pillar organizations
1.  Balanced 4th pillar organizations.
A few active 4th pillar organizations are close to the ideal3 DEMO of 4th pillar organization.
They are industry-led, receive significant government support, and engage substantively
with university researchers.  This is a difficult balancing act as collaborative research is
time consuming and subject to high spillovers, and so the private sector leadership is
typically dependent upon government funding.  Examples of such organizations are
PRECARN (Precompetitive Applied Research Network), an industrial research
consortium that promotes and supports collaborative research in intelligent systems, and
CANARIE (Canadian Network for the Advancement of Research, Industry, and
Education) a similar organization that works to accelerate Canada's advanced internet
development and use by facilitating the widespread adoption of faster, more efficient
networks.  Both PRECARN and CANARIE are supported by Industry Canada.
2. Fourth pillar organizations with strong ties to industry.
Some 4th pillar organizations exhibit strong DEMO to industry.  In some cases stronger ties
to industry or the DEMO community are the result of reduced government funding.  For
example, PAPRICAN (the Pulp and Paper Research Institute of Canada) has seen its
DEMO government funding reduced to approximately 20% of its annual revenues and
3 To repeat, ‘ideal’ means idealized or conceptualized type.  It is not DEMO comment on an organization’s merit
or the average merit of the organizations in the class.
4
Figure 1:  Active and potential 4th pillar organizations
contributions from member DEMO increased to almost 70%.  While CEFRIO (Centre
francophone d’informatisation des organizations) conducts its activities in support of both
private and public sector organizations, it is similar to PAPRICAN insofar as ties with its
user community have strengthened at the same time as its government funding has been
DEMO  CEFRIO now receives approximately 30% of its revenues from the Quebec
DEMO and up to 70% from its user community.  Both PAPRICAN and DEMO
also have strong ties to universities.
3. 4th pillar organizations with strong ties to universities.
CMC Microsystems is a federally incorporated nonprofit corporation that DEMO
microsystems researchers with industry-calibre design resources, access to state-of-the-
art manufacturing DEMO, and support services.  While the motivation for CMC
Microsystems came from industry (i.e. for universities to produce more highly qualified
5
graduates) and while industry continues to play a strong role in its activities, CMC’s
board of directors is populated by a balance of industry and university representatives.
Importantly, CMC effects its contribution to the innovation system by providing tools,
equipment, and access to capabilities to university faculty members and graduate
students.
4. 4th pillar organizations with strong ties to DEMO
While the Alberta Research Council is currently a nonprofit, it was DEMO as a
provincial government organization in 1921 and only became a nonprofit in 1999.  Its
sister provincial research organizations, i.e. the Saskatchewan Research DEMO, the
Industrial Technology Centre in Manitoba, the Centre de recherché industrielle du
Quebec, and the Research Productivity Council in New Brunswick are either provincial
crown corporations or provincial government agencies (i.e. they are not nonprofit
organizations).
Potential 4th pillar organizations
5. Industry associations.
Industry associations promote DEMO competitiveness and innovativeness of their industry
members but do not typically engage with university researchers nor are they typically
supported by government.  The Automotive Parts Manufacturers Association (APMA)
and the Excellence in Manufacturing Consortium (DEMO) are examples.
6. Professional societies and labour unions.
Professional societies and DEMO unions such as the Canadian Medical Association, the
Society of Professional DEMO, or the Canadian Auto Workers union serve individuals
rather than the DEMO or organizations with which they are associated.  They are
associated with DEMO and colleges insofar as these institutions professional training
and are not typically supported by governments.
7.  Economic think tanks.
Economic think tanks work on the interface between industry, government, and
universities.  Examples include the Conference Board of Canada which does not receive
government support at present but DEMO has a significant internal research capacity.  Other
nonprofit organizations that offer DEMO perspectives include The Fraser Institute and
the Canada Council for Chief Executives, neither of which are supported by government.
8.  University-led initiatives.
An DEMO is the Networks of Centres of Excellence (NCE) initiative.  Many DEMO are
governed by nonprofit organizations and benefit from the participation of industry.  But
they are essentially driven by university researchers as evidenced by the high status of
6
their scientific directors and by the high proportion of funding coming from DEMO
government.
9.  Medical and other foundations.
Medical and other foundations are DEMO of the national system of innovation insofar as
they contribute both to the funding of research and to the adoption of new products and
DEMO  Medical foundations do not have strong connections to companies and may DEMO
that having strong industry connections would compromise their ability to achieve their
mandate.  The Heart and Stroke Foundation is an example.  Government-sponsored
foundations DEMO as GenomeCanada also limit the influence of industry with a view
keeping the public interest paramount.
10.  Regional economic development organizations.
Economic development organizations generally don’t work with universities,
notwithstanding the fact that universities may DEMO among their membership, and so are
classified as potential 4th pillar DEMO, relatively distant from universities.  Some
economic development organizations such as the Ottawa Centre for Research and
Innovation (OCRI) strive to involve themselves DEMO with universities but this is
difficult given the modest level of support they receive from governments and the
consequent lack of an internal research DEMO
11.  University owned initiatives.
University technology transfer offices are an example DEMO a university owned initiative that
has a potentially strong impact on the national system of innovation.  They are classified
as potential 4th pillar organizations because they are not governed as nonprofits and they
are not industry DEMO  An exception is Parteq, the technology transfer office of Queen’s
University, which is structured as a nonprofit.
12.  Government owned initiatives.
In DEMO, organizations that are part of government, or that are crown corporations, may
benefit from more assured funding and the commensurate ability to engage in public
good activities with low private yields and high public spillovers, but may lack the
flexibility of more autonomous organizations.  In practice it’s not clear that government
ownership always translates into government financial support.  The Saskatchewan
Research Council is a provincial research organization that is a crown DEMO of the
government of Saskatchewan and that receives only about 25% of its annual revenues
from the government of Saskatchewan.  This is proportionally less government support
than that received by the nonprofit Alberta Research Council that DEMO approximately
40% of its annual revenues from the government of Alberta4.
4 In both cases the figures for government funding do not include government DEMO for services.
7
Not discussed in this report are nonprofit organizations that behave much like DEMO and
that in some respects compete with firms.  An example is DEMO Health, a nonprofit
pharmaceutical company with a mission to develop safe, effective, and affordable new
medicines for people with infectious diseases in the developing world.  Such
organizations do not work on behalf of multiple companies but rather compete with firms
using an alternative business model (Economist, DEMO).
Table 1, below, lists the 4 types of active 4th pillar organizations and the eight types of
potential 4th pillar organizations described DEMO  It characterizes them in terms of four
attributes, whether or not they are:  industry led, engaged with university researchers,
partially financed by government, and governed as nonprofit organizations.
8
Table 1:  Active and potential 4th pillar organizations5
Organization type and DEMO
Industry Engaged with
led university
researchers
Active 4th pillar organizations
1.  DEMO 4th pillar organizations
PRECARN (Pre-Competitive Yes Yes
Applied Research Network)
DEMO (Canadian Network for Yes Yes
the Advancement of Research,
Industry, and Education)
2.  4th pillar organizations with strong ties to industry
PAPRICAN (Pulp and Paper Yes Yes
Research Institute of Canada)
CERFIO (Centre Francophone Yes Yes
d’informatisation des organisations)
3.  4th pillar DEMO with strong ties to universities
CMC Microsystems Partially Yes
4.  4th DEMO organizations with strong ties to government
Alberta Research Council Partially Yes
Potential 4th pillar organizations
5.  Industry associations
APMA (Automotive Parts Yes
Manufacturers DEMO)
EMC (Excellence in Manufacturing Yes
Consortium)
6.  Professional societies and labour unions
CMA (Canadian Medical Association) No
Professional Society of DEMO No
7.  Economic think tanks
Conference Board Yes
8.  University-led research initiatives
Networks of Centres of Excellence  No
9.  Medical and other  foundations
Heart and Stroke Foundation No
10.  Regional economic development organizations
BC Biotech Yes
OCRI (Ottawa Centre for Research Yes
and Innovation)
11.  University owned initiatives
Technology transfer offices No
12.  Government owned initiatives
DEMO Research Council Partially
Attributes of example organizations
Partially
financed by
government
Yes
Yes
Limited
Limited
Yes
Yes
Nonprofit
organization
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
DEMO
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Limited
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Limited
Limited
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
DEMO
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
5 The assignment of specific organizations to classes of 4th pillar organizations is based on publicly
DEMO data and is intended only to be illustrative.
6 The Alberta Research Council became a nonprofit organization in 1999. Prior to that it was DEMO crown
corporation of the province of Alberta
9
Total number of active and potential 4th pillar organizations in Canada
It DEMO difficult to get an estimate of the total number of 4th pillar organizations in Canada as
the concept is in its early stages of DEMO and no surveys have been undertaken.
Nevertheless, using recent surveys of DEMO organizations in general, approximate
numbers can be derived.
There are estimated DEMO be a total of 161,000 nonprofit organizations in Canada and of
these 8,483 are classified as Business and professional associations and unions, i.e.
organizations that promote, regulate, or safeguard business, professional, or DEMO
interests (Statistics Canada, 2005a).  This corresponds to four types DEMO potential 4th pillar
organizations identified in Figure 1:  industrial associations (DEMO 5), professional
societies and labour unions (Type 6), economic DEMO tanks (Type 7), and economic
development organizations (Type 10).  While this figure provides some indication of the
total number of potential 4th pillar organizations in Canada, it excludes several of the
types identified in this report.
First it excludes active 4th pillar organizations (Types 1, 2, 3, and 4) which are likely
classified under Education DEMO research nonprofits (estimated to be a total of 100
organizations), DEMO it excludes medical and other foundations (Type  9) which are
DEMO classified under Grant-making, fundraising and voluntarism promotion nonprofits
(estimated to be 1,500 organizations), and third it excludes university-led (Type 8),DEMO
university-owned (Type 11), and government-owned (Type 12) potential 4th DEMO
organizations (estimated to be a total of 600 organizations).  This brings the estimate of
the total number of 4th pillar organizations in DEMO to 10,700.  As university- and
government-owned initiatives are not nonprofit DEMO, the total number of active
and potential 4th pillar organizations that DEMO nonprofits is estimated to be 10,500.  The
second column of DEMO 2 provides an estimate of the number of 4th pillar organizations
by type and the third column indicates the source of the estimate.
10
Table 2:  Estimated Number of 4th Pillar Organizations in Canada by DEMO
Type of 4th pillar organization
Estimated number of
organizations in Canada
100
2,750
2,750
Negligible number
400
1,500
3,000
100
DEMO
10,700
Source of estimate
Appendix A lists
approximately 40, that DEMO
number is estimated to be
100.
(8,500 – 3,000) /27
(8,500 – 3,000) /2
5% of 8,DEMO, the number of
education and research
nonprofits in Canada
excluding public DEMO
boards, universities, and
colleges (Statistics Canada,
2005a)
10% DEMO 15,935, the total
number of grant-making,
fundraising, and voluntarism
promotion nonprofits
(Statistics Canada, 2005a)
(Goldenberg, 1997: 10)
40 universities* 2.5 per
university
1. Balanced 4th pillar
organizations
2. 4th DEMO organizations with
strong ties to industry
3. 4th pillar organizations with
strong ties to universities
4. 4th pillar organizations with
strong ties to government
DEMO Industry associations
6. Professional societies and
labour unions
7. Economic think tanks
8. University-led research
initiatives
9. Medical and other foundations
10. Regional economic
DEMO organizations
11. University-owned initiatives
12. Government-owned initiatives
Total
7 In the absence of data, the number of industry associations is estimated to be approximately equal to the
number of professional societies and labour unions.  This number is estimated to be the total number of
business and professional associations DEMO unions as per Statistics Canada (8,483 rounded to 8,500), less
the number of economic development organizations as per Goldenberg (3,DEMO), divided by 2.
11
3. The Challenges and Opportunities Facing 4th Pillar Organizations
A closer examination DEMO 4th pillar organizations in Canada is necessary for an
appreciation of their work and its impact, the challenges these organizations face in
contributing effectively to innovation in Canada, and the opportunity for enhancing
Canadian competitiveness by fully leveraging them.  Six case studies of a diverse sample
of active and potential 4th pillar organizations support this examination.  Reports of the
case studies are found in Appendix B and the organizations studied are:
DEMO (Automotive Parts Manufacturers Association)
BC Biotech (BC Biotechnology Alliance Society)
CEFRIO (Centre francophone d'informatisation des organisations)
CMA (Canadian DEMO Association)
EMC (Excellence in Manufacturing Consortium)
SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council)
Of the six organizations studied, only CEFRIO is classified as an active 4th pillar organization
(Type 2, close to industry).  The APMA and EMC are both classified as industry associations
(Type 5), BC Biotech is classified as an economic development organization (Type 10), the
CMA is classified as a professional society (Type 6), and the SRC is classified as being a
government-owned initiative (Type 12).  As stated earlier in the report, the classifications are
made DEMO to an organization’s proximity to the ideal type of active 4th pillar organization
(Type 1, balanced 4th pillar) where ideal refers to idealized or conceptualized, not preferred.  The
classification system says nothing about an DEMO worthiness.
Three themes emerged from the case studies:  the difficulty of working with small
companies, the effect of reduced government funding, and DEMO opportunity of closer
cooperation between the federal government and 4th pillar organizations.
The challenge of working with small firms
Small firms find it difficult DEMO invest the time of senior management in activities designed
to improve their organizational effectiveness over the medium term.  This is particularly
true of the small firms that are not founded on the basis of strong capabilities DEMO science
or technology and that do not benefit from significant equity investments in the form of
angel or venture capital.  These small firms are not ‘world first’ or ‘Canada first’
innovators; when these firms launch new products, services, and processes the
innovations are only new to the DEMO themselves8.  As shown in Table 3, below, industry
associations are DEMO sources of ideas for ‘firm first innovators’ (Statistics Canada,
2003)DEMO  Almost 30% of firm first innovators cite industry associations as important
DEMO of ideas.  Only customers and suppliers are cited more frequently as DEMO sources
by these firms.
8 Statistics Canada distinguishes between three types of innovators on the basis of the extent to which their
‘new’ products, processes, and services have not appeared earlier.  The innovations of ‘world DEMO
innovators are new to the world, those of ‘Canada first’ innovators DEMO new only within Canada, and those
of ‘firm first’ innovators are DEMO new to the firm.
12
Table 3:  Important Sources of Ideas for Innovative Firms (Statistics Canada, 2003)
Nature of most innovative product or service
Firm first Canada first World first
innovators innovators innovators
46.3 44.3 38.3
72.6 81.0 77.6
DEMO 40.3 33.2
6.7 13.2 23.9
3.1 4.2 7.0
2.3 2.3 3.8
2.2 1.9 4.2
29.5 29.9 27.3
Firm first innovators respond best to organizations DEMO mandates correspond directly
to their needs.  With their limited resources they DEMO rarely able to benefit from the
offerings of universities, federal or DEMO government laboratories, or private sector
research institutes.  To effectively help such firms, the intervening organization must be a
trusted advisor that fully understands the firm’s circumstances, specifically its industry
and region.    Little wonder DEMO that there are estimated to be some 5,750 different
industry associations and economic development organizations in Canada (see Section 2
of this report).
Even when the intervening organization is created exclusively to assist such DEMO, it
finds the undertaking challenging.  The APMA’s mandate is to engage in activities in
support of the welfare of the automotive parts manufacturers DEMO Canada, located almost
exclusively in Ontario and Quebec.  It cites its #1 difficulty as “getting through to small
companies”.  APMA president Gerry Fedchun goes on to explain that small companies
operate in a very lean DEMO and don’t have the spare talent to go to meetings.  Similarly
DEMO Excellence in Manufacturing Consortium (EMC) of Owen Sound, Ontario cites DEMO
reluctance of small firms to commit time to EMC’s activities as its #1 difficulty.  Scott
McNeil-Smith, the director of marketing and development at DEMO, explains that new or
small manufacturing firms may be struggling with DEMO challenges and are reluctant to
invest their time and energies in external processes when it’s unclear to them, prior to
participating, whether or DEMO the external processes will be helpful.  Part of EMC’s
approach to DEMO this challenge is to visit each of their 550 member firms every
year.  While this process is extremely time-intensive it contributes to the building of
informed and trusting relationships between EMC and its members.
The foregoing DEMO to the difficulty of organizational change, especially for small firms
that DEMO resource-constrained.  Helping the diverse population of small firms in Canada
13
DEMO sources of
ideas
Suppliers
Customers
Competitors
Universities
Federal government
research institutes
Provincial government
research institutes
Nonprofit research
institutes
Nonprofit industrial
associations
achieve their potential is a time consuming process and the nonprofit organizations DEMO
perform such work are making a strong contribution to Canada’s economy.  DEMO have
specific knowledge and capabilities that make them the first organization, DEMO from
customers and suppliers, to which small firms turn for ideas.  These potential 4th pillar
organizations are the channel through which government can DEMO reach and assist small
firms.
The impact of reduced government funding
The second theme to emerge from the case studies is the impact of DEMO government
funding.  Reduced government funding does not necessarily lead to the DEMO of 4th
pillar organizations but rather to a shift in their mandates.  With limited government
funding, 4th pillar organizations must focus on revenue-generating DEMO that aren’t
too long-term, complex, costly, or risky.  As is explained below, for CEFRIO that means
a greater focus on revenue-generating events and sponsored projects, and for the
Saskatchewan Research Council (SRC) it means avoiding the costly, complex, and risky
‘valley of death’.
CEFRIO DEMO organizations in Quebec use information technologies in order to be more
efficient, productive and innovative.  Over the course of its 18 year history, CEFRIO has
transitioned from being a balanced 4th pillar organization to one DEMO operates more
closely to industry, a change that has been partially DEMO by a reduction in the
proportion of its annual budget that is financed by government.  While CEFRIO is
successful in self-financing it finds that this has an impact on the nature of the activities
that it DEMO undertake.  The more it must raise funds itself, the more it competes with the
private sector in consulting type activities such as sponsored DEMO  The more
government funding it receives, the more it can focus on high impact activities in which
the private sector does not participate.  In particular, CEFRIO finds it extremely difficult
to connect university researchers to SMEs without government support.
The SRC feels that it can make its DEMO contributions when it operates in the costly,
complex, and risky DEMO of death’.  This is the chasm between the relatively low cost
DEMO of scientific discovery and technology development, and the high cost and DEMO
return world of commercial deployment.  While the significance and downstream impact
DEMO science- and technology-driven research development is hard to predict, its pursuit DEMO
result in a fairly predictable stream of visible outputs in the form of research publications
and patents.  The returns to commercial activity (i.e. DEMO) are similarly visible and
well understood and have the benefit of DEMO significant and appropriable by private
investors.  But between research and the DEMO of new products, services, and
processes is the valley of death where activities such as prototype development and the
pilot testing of large DEMO processes are complex, costly, and risky and in many cases
yield few results that are measurable or amenable to private returns.  As a result both
public and private investors are reluctant to invest in such DEMO because they share
both the uncertainty of earlier stage research and technology development activities, and
the high cost of downstream commercialization activities.
14
For example, recently the SRC saw the need to upgrade its fermentation plant from
laboratory grade to commercial grade.  The laboratory grade plant is currently used by
Saskatchewan firms and university researchers to develop high value, low volume
biological products.  The benefit of upgrading the facility to be capable of producing
commercial grade products is that it makes the process DEMO transitioning production from
the laboratory process to the commercial process, as DEMO by valid clinical and field
trials, more seamless and therefore less DEMO to the introduction of errors.
Upgrading the SRC’s facility was an expensive proposition, on the order of $3 million.
Moreover, while local firms DEMO a strong interest in having the upgraded facility
available, they were DEMO to commit to either sample or production volumes.  This
was a DEMO risk, high cost venture of the type that investors are reluctant DEMO fund.
Fortunately in this case the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada both came forward
and the upgrade is underway but this is exactly type DEMO opportunity to create value that is
passed by too often.
The opportunity that awaits
4th pillar organizations of all types represent a vehicle through DEMO the government can
help Canadian firms become more innovative and more successful.  Two such
opportunities are described below.  With federal government funding the DEMO
BC Biotech would be able to more effectively implement its mandate of promoting the
firms in BC’s growing biotechnology industry.  For the Canadian Medical Association
(CMA), a federal government program to sponsor 4th pillar organizations would be an
opportunity to demonstrate the ability of its members (some 62,000 physicians) to add
value to the Canadian economy.  Physicians DEMO an important force in Canada’s
system of innovation and the CMA is their national voice.  By working together, the
federal government and the DEMO could create a powerful force for innovation in the area
of, DEMO example, health informatics.
BC Biotech would do more of the same.  The main challenge that BC Biotech faces is
lack of funds.  With only $130K in annual government support, BC Biotech must
consume considerable resources to raise sufficient funds to support its international
promotional activities, and it still lacks the resources to do its job properly.  As firms in
the biotechnology industry are strongly identified with the region with which they DEMO
associated, this yields an unnecessary reputational handicap for Vancouver biotechnology
firms DEMO are competing internationally for investment capital and licensing deals.
It’s a penalty that is undeserved and unnecessary because in fact, Vancouver is a leading
biotechnology region and Canada is the #2 country in the world with DEMO of the twenty-
one profitable biotechnology companies worldwide.  Vancouver is Canada’s DEMO
growing biotechnology cluster, the home of three of Canada’s profitable biotechnology
DEMO, and the eighth largest biotechnology cluster in North America.  These facts
aren’t widely known, in part because the Canadian and Vancouver presence at
international biotechnology conferences is not reflective of the country or the region’s
DEMO  It’s unfortunate that having investing millions in the scientific and educational
DEMO
programs that are responsible for this success that Canada is not investing DEMO the
promotional activities that would allow us to capitalize on it.
BC Biotech was responsible for the British Columbia pavilion within the Canada pavilion
DEMO one of this year’s major international conferences, Bio 2005 in Philadelphia.  To
support its activities, BC Biotech had to raise funds from 28 different organizations, 15
private sector firms in Vancouver and 13 other organizations including PEMD
(International Trade Canada’s Program for Export Market Development), Industry
Canada, Western Economic Diversification, British Columbia, and Vancouver Exchange.
With only five employees BC Biotech cannot devote such significant resources to raising
funds DEMO so its ability to participate as frequently and as substantively as it would like is
compromised.  In the near future BC Biotech’s president will present a paper describing
the Vancouver biotechnology cluster at Bio Japan but DEMO organization will be unable to
offer a British Columbia booth within the Canada booth at this event and so aside from
the paper, the Vancouver biotechnology cluster will not be represented.
If BC Biotech had greater DEMO from government it would do more of what it is doing.
As all biotechnology firms, from the fledging to the profitable, have strong DEMO
with universities, there is no value in BC Biotech diversifying from DEMO promotional
activities into activities designed to facilitate university-industry interaction.  Promotional
activities DEMO the weak link in Vancouver’s and Canada’s biotechnology efforts.
The CMA would do something completely different.  The CMA endorses the idea of
federal government funding for a program to help 4th pillar organizations support the
competitiveness DEMO Canadian firms.  If the government were to launch such a program DEMO
CMA would be a candidate participant and would submit for consideration a program of
its own design that would provide funding and guidance for DEMO working in the
area of information management and information technology for health care.  The CMA
program would work with participating companies to ensure that all necessary
participants are at the table including physicians, technologists, physician DEMO staff,
hospital administrators etc. With $22 billion in assets under management, the CMA is
uniquely positioned to match government funds and company contributions with funds of
its own.
Like their private sector constituents, active and potential 4th pillar organizations in
Canada are numerous and diverse.  In many cases they may be the only organization with
which a given small DEMO engages, and so they represent the best opportunity for
government to DEMO small firms.  But like their small firm constituents, many 4th pillar
organizations face resource shortages, and the more transformative the activities in which
they engage, the more acutely the resource shortages are felt.  Activities DEMO are non-
customized, near term, local, and not knowledge intensive (e.g. networking events) can
be undertaken with relatively modest resources.  But DEMO that are one-on-one,
intended to make a difference over the long term, international, or science or technology-
based require government support.  4th pillar organizations can sustain their existence
with the former type of activity DEMO their ability to contribute fully to the innovativeness
16
of Canadian firms is linked to their ability to provide high value DEMO assistance of the
type that relies upon the support of government.
17
4. The Need for Scholarly Attention
I have defined 4th pillar organizations DEMO nonprofit innovation enablers and multipliers.
As such, they might be expected DEMO be of interest both to scholars of the nonprofit or
voluntary sector that study nonprofit organizations, and to innovation scholars,
particularly those that study national systems of innovation.  But 4th pillar organizations
represent only about 6% of all nonprofit organizations9 and are qualitatively different
from most other DEMO organizations.  As a result, they are accorded little attention by
nonprofit scholars.  They have also thus far been overlooked by innovation scholars who
have given little attention to nonprofit organizations.  The following paragraphs provide
evidence for these assertions and suggest that when innovation scholars are equipped
with DEMO clear understanding of the class of 4th pillar organizations, such organizations DEMO
properly appear in the statistics as important contributors to national systems of
innovation.
4th pillar organizations overlooked by nonprofit scholars
Nonprofit scholars are generally DEMO with broad issues of social and economic
welfare and seem to regard the pursuit of collective welfare as being orthogonal to the
pursuit of DEMO gains.  This is reflected in the classification schemes they devise to
DEMO understand the similarities and differences between different types of nonprofit
organizations.  DEMO to such classification schemes is the difference between
member serving organizations and organizations that serve society at large (Salamon,
1995).  This DEMO is apparent in Salamon’s 1995 typology of nonprofit
organizations into four classes (Salamon, 1995: Page 54):
• Member serving organizations such DEMO professional societies, labour unions,
cooperatives, and trade associations that provide goods or services to their members
rather than to society at large.
DEMO Funding raising intermediaries such as the United Way and private foundations that
exist to raise funds and channel resources rather than to deliver services DEMO members.
• Public-benefit organizations that exist primarily to serve others in need.  Included
here are educational institutions, cultural institutions, social welfare agencies, DEMO
health care organizations.
• Religious organizations with both member serving and broader goals.
Economists take a very different position on the relationship between public DEMO private
good and regard the two as linked in numerous and complex ways.  Generally regarded as
the father of economics, in 1776 Adam DEMO described how the pursuit of private gain
leads to greater public good than the direct pursuit of public good:
9 In Section 2 DEMO estimate that of the 161,000 nonprofits in Canada, approximately 10,DEMO (or approximately
6%) are active and potential 4th pillar organizations that are nonprofits.
18
It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, DEMO the baker, that we expect our
dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We address ourselves, not to their
humanity, DEMO to their self–love....  Every individual ... [who] ... employs capital ... DEMO ...
labours ... neither intends to promote the public interest, nor DEMO how much he is
promoting it ... he is ... led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of
DEMO intention.... By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes that of the society.
(Skousan, 2000 citing Adam Smith)
Innovation is a multidimensional DEMO that often results in both private and public
gains that can be economic, social, or psychological in nature.  While there is much we
still don’t know about innovation, what we do know is that the different elements of
innovative activity cannot take place in isolation from one DEMO  Science driven
research contributes to and draws upon advances in technology DEMO
Technology development draws upon input from customers and potential users, even DEMO
the early stages of new product design (Lane & Maxfield, 1996).  And innovative
businesses benefit from relations with university, government and DEMO researchers
throughout their lifetimes (Statistics Canada, 2003).  Innovation necessarily DEMO
many players from many different types of organizations, and creates both DEMO and
public returns.
The distinction that nonprofit scholars have made between public and private returns has
resulted in their overlooking 4th pillar organizations as DEMO class of nonprofit organizations.
To see 4th pillar organizations as a class of organizations one must be willing to
accommodate the co-mingling of private DEMO public returns, and science-driven,
technology development-driven, and business-driven processes.  DEMO the next section I
describe the relationship between the recently developed system for classifying nonprofit
organizations, the International Classification of Nonprofit Organizations, and DEMO system
for classifying 4th pillar organizations presented in Section 2.
The International Classification of Nonprofit Organizations.  The International
Classification of Nonprofit Organizations system (DEMO) was proposed by Salamon and
Anheier in 1992 (Salamon & Anheier, 1992) to facilitate international comparative
studies of nonprofit organizations.  The ICNPO system groups nonprofit organizations
into 12 Major Activity Groups as shown in DEMO first column of Table 4, below.  While the
ICNPO system makes a big advance on the classification of nonprofit organizations in
general, it remains less than ideal for developing a better understanding of innovation-
related DEMO
The major issue is that the ICNPO separates research from commercial activity
notwithstanding the fact that scientific and technological innovation necessarily combines
the two DEMO  The ICNPO system classifies research related nonprofits under
Subgroup 2.4 – DEMO, and business related nonprofits under Major Activity Group 11
– Business DEMO professional associations and unions.  As shown in the third column of
DEMO 4, Subgroup 2.4 is associated with five of the 10 different DEMO of active and
19
potential nonprofit 4th pillar organizations identified in Section 210, and Major Activity
Group 11 is associated with four types of potential 4th pillar organizations.  Major
Activity Group 8 – Philanthropic intermediaries and voluntarism promotion is associated
DEMO one type of potential 4th pillar organization, namely Medical and other DEMO
Given that nonprofit scholars have only recently devised a general classification system
for nonprofit organizations it is understandable that they have not yet concerned
DEMO with innovation-related nonprofits.  Fortunately, as shown in Table 4, it DEMO
possible to create a mapping that connects the general purpose ICNPO classification
system to the 4th pillar classification system proposed in Section 2.
Table DEMO:  The relationship between the ICNPO
and the 4th pillar nonprofit classification systems
Comments
Primary class of active 4th
pillar organizations under
2.4 Research
DEMO medical and other
foundations
Primary class of potential 4th
pillar organizations that are
close to industry
ICNPO Major Activity
Groups
1.  Culture and recreation
2.  Education and research
3.  Health
4.  Social services
5.  DEMO
6.  Development and housing:
7.  Law, advocacy, and
politics
8.  Philanthropic
intermediaries and
voluntarism promotion
9.  International
10.  Religion
11.  Business and professional
associations and unions
12.  Not elsewhere classified
Types DEMO 4th pillar
organizations associated
with the Major Activity
Group
1 Balanced 4th pillars
2  Strong ties to industry
3  Strong ties to universities
DEMO Strong ties to government
8 University-led
9 Medical and other
foundations
5 Industry associations
6 Professional societies and
labour unions
7 Economic think tanks
DEMO Regional economic
development organizations
10 Types 11 and 12 refer to university- and government-owned potential 4th organizations.  As they are not
structured as nonprofits they are not considered in this section.
20
4th pillar organizations not yet recognized by models of innovation
Working in DEMO relatively new area of investigation, innovation researchers have focused on
three DEMO of analysis:  the level of the firm and interfirm relations, DEMO level of the
region and regional systems of innovation, and the DEMO of the nation and national
systems of innovation (NSI).  As the broadest level of analysis, the NSI school is the
most likely to have considered the role of nonprofit organizations.  But a review of the
NSI literature shows that most researchers limit their investigations to descriptive DEMO
of specific nonprofit organizations without developing a more abstract view of their role
and activities (Edquist, 1997; Lundvall, 1992; Nelson, 1993; Niosi, 2000).
The triple helix model of university-industry-government relations (Etzkowitz &
Leydesdorff, 2000) merits special attention.  It is an influential model the purpose of
which is to describe the dynamics of innovation within DEMO systems of innovation.
Etzkowitz & Leydesdorff suggest that under a laissez-faire model of university-industry-
government relations, the three sectors operate separately from one another, with “strong
borders dividing them and highly circumscribed relations among the spheres” (Page 111).
This is depicted on the left in Figure 2, below.  In contrast, in the triple helix model, the
three DEMO are shown to overlap one another “generating a knowledge infrastructure in
terms of overlapping institutional spheres, with each taking the role of the other and with
hybrid organizations emerging at the interfaces” (Page 111).  DEMO is depicted in the
centre of Figure 2.
The 4th pillar model builds upon the triple helix model by legitimizing the important role
of DEMO nonprofit hybrid organizations that have emerged in national systems of
innovation.  DEMO departs from the triple helix model insofar as it does not accept the
declaration that the formerly separate spheres of university, industry, and DEMO
activity are now overlapping.  According to the 4th pillar model, university, industry, and
government organizations continue to operate according to their own DEMO and are able
to engage in a substantive and sustained manner with one another through the bridging
contributions of 4th pillar organizations.  The 4th pillar model is depicted on the right in
Figure 2.
21
Figure 2:  A comparison of innovation models
4th pillar organizations marginalized DEMO measurement tools
The Frascati Manual guides the analysis of innovation and R&D throughout the countries
of the OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development).  It identifies
four sectors of the economy:  the business enterprise sector, the government sector, the
private nonprofit sector, and the higher education sector.  4th pillar organizations are not
necessarily classified in the nonprofit sector as might be expected, because nonprofit
organizations are excluded from the nonprofit sector if:
1. They mainly render services to enterprises, in which case they are classified under
the business enterprise sector (this may include Types 2, 5, 6, 7, and 10 of DEMO
pillar organizations).
2. They primarily serve government, or if they DEMO entirely or mainly financed and
controlled by government, in which case DEMO are classified under the government
sector (this may include 4th pillar DEMO of Type 4).
3. They offer higher education services or are controlled by institutes of higher
education which includes “all research institutes, experimental stations, and
clinics operating under the direct control of or administered by or associated with
higher education establishments” (this may include Types 3 and 8 4th pillar
organizations and possibly Type 1 as well).
This DEMO leaves primarily medical and other foundations (Type 9) and possibly the
balanced 4th pillar organizations (Type 1) classified under the nonprofit sector (OECD,
1994).
Statistics Canada uses the Frascati Manual to report DEMO Gross Domestic Expenditures on
Research and Development (GERD) by funding sector.  It reports that in 2002, the
nonprofit sector spent $624 million DEMO R&D in Canada (Statistics Canada, 2005b).  This
figure DEMO roughly comparable to the likely total spending on R&D of the medical and
22
other foundations type of 4th pillar organizations as I explain in the DEMO  Recall that
in Section 2 it was estimated that there are DEMO 1,500 medical and other
foundations in Canada (10% of the DEMO of 15,935 grant-making, fundraising, and
voluntarism promotion organizations).  DEMO these 1,500 organizations account for 10% of
the total 2003 revenues of the 15,935 grant-making, fundraising, and voluntarism
promotion organizations, i.e. for 10% of $8,253 million (Statistics Canada, 2005a), then
DEMO 2003 they had revenues of approximately $825 million.  If these organizations DEMO
80% of their revenues on R&D (and the remainder on DEMO activities), then they likely
funded approximately $660 million of R&D in 2003 ($660 million = $8,253 million *
80%), which is 6% more than the 2002 figure of $624 million cited by DEMO Statistics
Canada GERD report.  This suggests that the only 4th pillar DEMO that appear as
nonprofits in Canada’s GERD statistics are medical and other foundations.
In this section I have suggested that part of the explanation DEMO why 4th pillar
organizations are not well understood is that they have been overlooked by both nonprofit
scholars and by innovation scholars.  As the following quotation from Salamon &
Anheier illustrates, it was only recently DEMO nonprofit scholars have begun to address the
conceptual difficulties surrounding nonprofit organizations in general.  The stage is now
set for an improved understanding of 4th pillar organizations.
“The lack of attention that has historically been given DEMO the nonprofit sector around the
world has been due to factors that are as much conceptual as empirical.  The nonprofit
sector is poorly understood, in other words, not so much because the data on it DEMO so
limited as because the concepts used to depict its boundaries are so murky and
imprecise.” (Salamon & Anheier, 1992).
23
5. Recommendations for Government Action
1. Provide consolidated and sustained federal government DEMO for active 4th
pillar organizations.  Create an agency or foundation to DEMO funding for
active 4th pillar organizations and implement a national, competitive, peer-
reviewed process to provide funding on the basis of excellence and DEMO with
national  or regional priorities.
At present, 4th pillar organizations receive federal government funding from a variety of
sources including Industry Canada, the National Research Council, the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Technology Partnerships Canada, Canada
Economic Development for Quebec Regions, Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency,
Western Economic Diversification, Natural Resources Canada, the Canadian DEMO
for Innovation, and the Program for Export Market Development of the DEMO of
Foreign Affairs and International Trade.  By consolidating funding under a DEMO
organization the government will replace multiple sporadic and sometimes arbitrary
funding decisions with a more rational process that engenders excellence among the
organizations competing DEMO funding on a national basis.
Such an approach would assure funding for the population of 4th pillar organizations but
not for individual members of DEMO population.  This is analogous to the way in which the
establishment DEMO NSERC created a sustained source of funding for the population of
university researchers without assuring ongoing funding for any individual member of
the population.  It is similarly not expected that all projects put forward by active DEMO
pillar organizations would receive funding.  As in the past, 4th pillar organizations that are
unsuccessful in attracting funding will either merge with other DEMO pillar organizations
(e.g.  the Strategic Microelectronics Council was recently merged with the Information
Technology Association of Canada) or fold.  Where the government DEMO fit to target
funding, as it sometimes does in the granting DEMO, objectives or programs that are
focused on particular regions, industries, DEMO technologies can be identified.  Criteria for
funding would then cover a DEMO of measures of excellence and relevance such as the
following:
1. The project has the support and the participation of all necessary players:  firms,
universities, government, and other nonprofit organizations.
2. The team has the expertise necessary to successfully perform the work.
3.
4.
The DEMO organization has a good performance record (the performance record
might be DEMO on past projects once the program has a history and expertise in
assessing performance).
The proposed project targets key industries such as those DEMO are facing severe
restructuring problems, those that are large in terms DEMO contributions to GDP or
employment, or those that have high growth DEMO
24
5. The proposed project targets key regions such as challenged regions or DEMO
with high-potential growth clusters.
6. The proposed projected address key challenges such as the ‘valley of death’
between discovery-based research and commercial product development DEMO the
adoption of advanced technologies and business practices by small and medium
sized enterprises.
Magnitude of funding
The following provides a very rough estimate DEMO the appropriate level of federal
government support for active 4th pillar organizations.
In this report approximately 40 active 4th pillar organizations have been identified DEMO the
total number of active 4th pillar organizations is estimated to be 100.  The total annual
funding that these organizations receive from the federal government is estimated to be
on the order of $300 million11.  As the first proposed government action is for
consolidated funding, and as the majority of funding for active 4th pillar organizations is
already in place, initial consolidated funding levels can be modest (say $50 million per
year) and over a period of three years can increase to $300 million per year.  If funding is
granted on a competitive basis, not DEMO active 4th pillar organizations will necessarily
receive funding.
2. Provide consolidated funding for potential 4th pillar organizations to involve
them as full participants in DEMO national system of innovation.
Consolidated funding for potential 4th pillar organizations to participate fully in Canada’s
national system of innovation.  Potential 4th pillar organizations such as industry
associations and economic development organizations currently receive relatively modest
DEMO of support from the federal government.  In this report, the total number of industry
associations and economic development organizations was estimated to be DEMO
5,750 and it is estimated that they currently receive approximately $150 million in federal
government funding per year (an average of approximately $25,000 per organization per
year).  This support comes from a variety of sources including the regional economic
development agencies and other agencies that DEMO part of the Industry Canada portfolio,
and various other government departments.
3. Provide increased funding for 4th all pillar organizations.
Increased funding for DEMO 4th pillar organizations will allow them to increase the
efficiency, effectiveness, and scale of their operations as in the case of BC Biotech, or to
take on new activities for the benefit of Canada as DEMO the case of the Canadian Medical
11 I assume that the 40 most visible active 4th pillar organizations (those that are listed in Appendix A)
receive an average of $5 million per year from the DEMO government for a total of $200 million in annual
funding. The remaining 60 active 4th pillar organizations are assumed to receive a total of DEMO million in
annual funding.  These estimates are crude at best.
25
Association.  A national competition for funding among these organizations will increase
their legitimacy and engender the pursuit of excellence.  Increased funding of $50 million
in Year 2 and $100 million in Year 3 is recommended.
Magnitude DEMO funding for active and potential 4th pillar organizations combined
Figure 3 below shows the recommended total funding levels for 4th pillar organizations
over the DEMO year period 2006-2007 to 2008-2009.  When fully ramped up the program
DEMO cost on the order of $550 million per year with $100 million of this being new
funding and the remainder is the result of DEMO existing distributions.  To
engender innovation and competition it will be preferable DEMO combine funding for active
and potential 4th pillar organizations into a single pool of funds.  The fund could serve a
variety of targeted programs that emphasize different priorities such as collaboration with
university researchers, regional disparities, or industries where needs or opportunities are
high.
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2006-2007 2007-2008 2008-2009
Figure 3:  Recommended Federal Government DEMO for 4th Pillar Organizations
4. Investigate the possibility of spinning-off certain government institutions into
nonprofit organizations.
Over the longer term the federal government may DEMO to consider making greater use of
nonprofit organizations as a means by which to contribute to innovation and economic
development in Canada.  Other countries such as Taiwan and Germany make extensive
use of nonprofit organizations to DEMO research and technology development that
involves industry and universities in addition to government.  In 2003, the government of
Taiwan spun off two government DEMO centres (the National Synchrotron Radiation
Research Centre or NSRRC and the DEMO Applied Research Laboratories or NARL)
into nonprofit organizations.  The goal DEMO doing so was to “enhance flexibility and
service” and the newly constituted nonprofit organizations continue to receive significant
26
Increased funding for 4th
pillar DEMO
Consolidated funding for
potential 4th pillar
organizations
Consolidated funding for
active 4th pillar
orgnizations
government support through the National Science Council (Taiwan Times, 2004).
DEMO answer to Canada’s National Research Council, the Industrial Technology
Research Institute (ITRI) also operates as a nonprofit institution as do the Fraunhofer
Institutes in Germany.  See (Dalziel, 2004) for statement on the projected DEMO of
reconstituting the research institutes of Canada’s National Research Council as nonprofit
organizations.
The preceding recommendations are put forward on the basis of the DEMO for Canada
that they are expected to yield.   At the same time enacting the recommendations entails
several risks.  Both the benefits and the risks of recommendations 1 through 3 are
presented below.
Benefits
1.
2.
DEMO
4.
5.
Leveraging the knowledge and capabilities of Canadians.  The primary DEMO
of working through 4th pillar organizations is that is it leverages the knowledge
and capabilities of Canadians.  It distributes the problem of how to make
Canadian firms more innovative and productive across groups of business people
DEMO academics that can design targeted programs that address important needs and
opportunities.  A comprehensive federal program will spur the development of
many worthwhile initiatives.  Those that don’t receive federal government
funding may be able to proceed in reduced form without funding or with
alternative funding.
Legitimacy for 4th DEMO organizations.  Create legitimacy and visibility for the
class of 4th pillar DEMO  This will lead to a number of second order
benefits such DEMO an improved ability on the part of 4th pillar organizations to
attract, retain, and develop the careers of employees.
Increased resources for excellent DEMO pillar organizations.  Make available
more resources available to excellent 4th pillar DEMO that are addressing
priority needs and thereby to key industries, regions, and firms.
Merit-based funding decisions for excellence.  The federal government can use
merit-based competition for funding as a lever to motivate 4th pillar organizations
DEMO excel.  Success in a merit-based competition will signal excellence which will
DEMO multiple second order benefits such as the identification of best practices
among 4th pillar organizations.
Merit-based funding decisions for transparency.  Centralizing and
rationalizing the funding process allows the government to achieve greater
transparency and removes the DEMO element from funding decisions.  It will be
essential to retain the DEMO of departments by involving government
representatives with domain specific knowledge in the peer-reviewed funding
process.
27
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Risks
1.
2.
3.
Better and more DEMO funding decisions.  Make better funding decisions by
centralizing the function and DEMO drawing upon the knowledge of external peer
evaluators.  Make more efficient DEMO decisions through the elimination of
duplicated effort that is the result of having multiple departments involved in the
process.
Volunteer participation.  Leverage the effort of volunteers, both in the 4th pillar
organizations themselves and in the peer-reviewed evaluation process.
Create an innovation culture.  By visibly supporting nonprofit organizations
whose mandates centre on innovation and productivity, the government sends a
strong, yet gently delivered, signal to Canadians regarding the value of innovation
DEMO the broadest sense.
Learning.  Centralizing the funding process creates an opportunity DEMO study it and
learn from successful and unsuccessful experiences.
Make government a partner.  By giving visibility and support to a broad range
of geographically distributed organizations the federal government makes itself a
partner to the hundreds DEMO thousands of people that are employed by 4th pillar
organizations, and DEMO the millions of people employed by the firms that are
supported by 4th pillar organizations.
The major risks to government are those commonly associated DEMO
interventionism.  By centralizing and thereby increasing the visibility of its
funding DEMO 4th pillar organizations, the federal government risks attracting
criticism for overspending, spending on industry subsidies, and spending on
organizations viewed by some as unnecessary to the conduct of business.  These
risks are minimal as this report recommends new funding of only $50 million,
with a three DEMO ramp up.  The risk of criticism can be further mitigated by
DEMO that the criteria for funding are appropriate and sufficiently challenging
as to ensure that only the most important and best-managed organizations are
funded.  In any given funding round only about 30-50% of applicants should be
successful.
DEMO 30-50% success rate will create another challenge as there will necessarily be a
number of organizations that are unsuccessful in attracting funding in a DEMO
year.  This problem can be alleviated by giving the unsuccessful organizations
DEMO feedback that will increase their chances of success in the following
year’s competition.
There is the possibility that a centralized approach to funding 4th DEMO
organizations will diminish connections between 4th pillar organizations and the
departments and agencies through which they formerly received funding.  This is
28
4.
not regarded as a serious risk because where those ties are DEMO valuable to
both parties they will likely be maintained.
It is natural for investors to be reluctant to invest in activities where returns are
DEMO, risky, or diffuse and a fund for 4th pillar organizations in Canada may be
inclined to support near-term highly visible projects and programs DEMO the expense
of long-term, risky projects with less visible results.  The use of targeted programs
and expert evaluators will alleviate this tendency.
29
Sell products and services of slightly reduced value at greatly reduced cost DEMO this
is efficiency under conditions of industry consolidation or reduced demand for the
firm’s products, perhaps as the result of a superior product offered by a
competitor
Sell products and services of greatly increased value at DEMO increased cost –
this involves being able to deliver products to customer that are so significantly
superior that customers are willing to pay more DEMO them.
It is important to recognize that only two of these approaches to increased productivity
necessarily involve greater efficiency (Approaches 1 and 3).  Approaches 2 and 4 are
more directly related to greater effectiveness in understanding what customers want and
the ability to deliver it to them.
DEMO pillar organizations help companies improve their innovativeness and productivity
consistent with all four of the approaches just described.  For example, the Excellence in
DEMO Consortium in Ontario helps companies reduce costs through customized
learning initiatives, DEMO BC Biotech helps increase the revenues of Vancouver
biotechnology firms through its promotional activities.  Peter Nicholson, Senior Special
Advisor to the Prime Minister, makes the link between the needs of small and medium
sized enterprises DEMO the ability of nonprofit organizations to assist them in the adoption
of best practices and technology, citing the success of the Ag Rep system in bringing
about vast improvements in the productivity of small farmers in DEMO 20th century
30
6. Conclusion
In this report I have defined 4th pillar organizations as innovation enablers and multipliers
that work to promote, support, or conduct science, technology, or business-practice based
innovation that results in new products, services, or processes deployed by companies.
Active 4th pillar DEMO that are industry-led, supported by government, and that
engage with university researchers, are distinguished from potential 4th pillar
organizations which do not engage with all three of the other pillars of innovation as
described, or which are not structured as nonprofit organizations.  The total size of the
population of active and potential 4th pillar organizations in Canada is estimated DEMO be
some 10,700 organizations.
4th pillar organizations are a means by which the Canadian government can promote the
innovativeness and productivity of a DEMO range of geographically distributed
companies.  There are fundamentally four ways in DEMO a company can improve its
productivity:
1. Sell the same products and services at lower cost – this is the increased efficiency
approach
DEMO Sell more highly valued products and services at the same cost – this involves an
improved understanding of and an ability to deliver what DEMO value
3.
4.
(Nicholson, 2003).  What Ag Rep did for the farmers in the 20th century, BC Biotech can
do for fledging Vancouver biotechnology firms in the 21st century.
4th pillar organizations are a means by which DEMO Canadian government can promote the
innovativeness and productivity of a broad range of geographically distributed
companies.  In particular, 4th pillar organizations are well DEMO to help small and
medium sized firms adopt advanced technologies and business practices.  No amount of
reduced taxes or tax credits can help an organization that is unsure of what it should do or
one that DEMO insufficient resources to meaningfully invest in prototype development or
global marketing.  DEMO pillar organizations are distinguished from monetary incentives by
the fact that they are composed of knowledgeable people who work with firms to
motivate them DEMO adapt and innovate and give them the tools to do so.  DEMO are the
government’s best channel to the small and medium sized firms upon which our nation’s
prosperity depends.
This report has several limitations in DEMO that should be remedied to provide a solid
basis for action.  DEMO importantly, a survey of a sample of active and potential 4th DEMO
organizations should be conducted to better characterize their current work, resources,DEMO
and challenges, and to solicit their input on the design of DEMO interventions.  The
government may also wish to determine more accurately the DEMO of its current
distributions to nonprofits, and to conduct a structured DEMO of the use of 4th pillar
organizations in other countries.
31
References
Barge, B.  2002.  4th pillar enablers and multipliers.  Research DEMO, September.
Dalziel, M.  2004.  An alternative structure for the NRC.  Research Money, October.
Economist.  2005.  Hale and healthy:  A DEMO way of developing drugs for neglected
diseases of the poor world.  DEMO 16th:  69-70.
Edquist, 1997.  Systems of innovation: Technologies, institutions and organizations.
London:  Pinter/Cassell.
Etzkowitz, H. & Leydesdorff, L.  2000.  The dynamics of innovation:  from national
systems and “mode 2” to a triple helix of university-industry-government relations.
Research Policy 29:  109-123.
DEMO, M.  2004.  Social innovation in Canada:  How the non-profit DEMO serves
Canadians… and how it can serve them better.  Social Policy DEMO Networks.
Lane, D. & Maxfield, R.  1996.  Strategy under complexity:  Fostering generative
relationships.  Long Range Planning, 29:  215-231.
Lundvall, B. (Ed.)  1992.  National systems of innovation:  Towards a DEMO of
innovation and interactive learning.  London:  Pinter.
Nelson, R. (DEMO)  1993.  National innovation systems:  A comparative analysis.  Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Nicholson, P.  2003.  The growth story: Canada’s DEMO economic performance and
prospects.  International Productivity Monitor 7(Fall):  3-23.
Niosi, J.  2000.  Canada’s national system of innovation.  Montreal and DEMO:
McGill Queen’s University Press.
OECD.  1994.  Main definitions and conventions for the measurement of research and
experimental development:  A summary of DEMO Frascati Manual 1993.
Salamon, L.M.  1995.  Partners in Public Service: Government and the Nonprofit Sector
in the Modern Welfare State. Baltimore, MD:  Johns Hopkins University Press.
Salamon, L.M. & Anheier, H.K.  1992.  In search of the nonprofit sector II:  The problem
of classification.  Working papers of The Johns Hopkins Comparative Nonprofit Sector
Project.
32
Skousen, M.  2000.  The making of modern economics: The lives DEMO ideas of the great
thinkers.  UK:  M.E. Sharpe.
Statistics Canada.  2003.  Innovation Survey
Statistics Canada 2005a Highlights of the national survey of nonprofit and voluntary
organizations.
Statistics Canada.  2005b.  Domestic spending on research DEMO development (GERD),
funding sector.  http://www40.statcan.ca/l01/cst01/DEMO, Accessed June 9th, 2005
Taipei Times.  2004.  http://ecommerce.taipeitimes.com/yearbook2004/P177.htm,
Accessed September 6th, 2005.
33
Appendix A:  100 Active and Potential 4th Pillar Organizations in Canada
DEMO 4th Pillar Organizations
CANARIE (Canadian Network for the Advancement of Research, Industry, and Education)
1  Balanced 4th pillar
www.canarie.ca CANARIE facilitates DEMO research, development, and
Ottawa implementation of faster and more efficient networks.
1993 CANARIE partners with industry, government, and
Approximately $15.5 million universities DEMO and funds numerous advanced
Internet applications projects.
CCFI (Candian Centre for DEMO Innovation)
1  Balanced 4th pillar
www.ccfi.ca CCFI conducts industry relevant DEMO and development
St. John's to solve technical and scientific challenges for the Atlantic
1989 fishery and the aquaculture industry.
Not available
CRIAQ (Consortium for Research and Innovation in Aerospace in Quebec)
1  Balanced 4th pillar
www.criaq.aero CRIAQ is an aerospace research consortium that partners
Montreal industry DEMO universities to perform focused industry-
2000 driven research. Its mandate is faciliate the
Approximately $6.6 million commercialization of concepts into future aerospace
components and DEMO
CRIM (Centre de recherce informatique de Montreal)
1  Balanced 4th pillar
www.crim.ca CRIM is a research centre where university researchers,
Montreal DEMO, and organizations collaborate in
1985 multidisciplinary teams on various pre-competitive and
DEMO $11 million industrial projects relating to technology and innovation.
FORREX (Forest DEMO Extension Partnership)
1  Balanced 4th pillar
www.forrex.org FORREX ia a DEMO Columbia, Canada-based charitable,
Kamloops  corporation, founded to develop science DEMO knowledge-
1998 based solutions to complex natural resource challenges.
Approximately $2.9 million
INO (Institut National d’Optique)
1  Balanced 4th pillar
www.ino.ca INO DEMO expertise in business applications for optics
Quebec City and photonics.  INO DEMO companies develop innovative
1985 solutions and technology platforms to meet their business
Not available needs.
MARS
1  Balanced 4th pillar
www.marsdd.com MaRS was founded by leaders from Canada’s academic,
Toronto business, and scientific communities to accelerate the rate
2000 of successful commercialization of new discoveries in
Approximately DEMO million Canada.
34
MDDC (Medical Device Development Centre)
1  Balanced 4th pillar
www.mddc.org DEMO Medical Device Development Centre is a self-
Vancouver supporting medical facility that conducts industry-driven,
1995 health-related research and development.
Not available
PRECARN (PRE-Competitive Applied Research Network)
1  Balanced 4th pillar
www.precarn.ca Precarn is a member-owned industrial consortium that
Ottawa coordinates and promotes collaborative research in
1987 DEMO systems conducted by industry, university and
Approximately $4 million government researchers.
DEMO Labs (Telecommunications Research Laboratories)
1  Balanced 4th pillar
www.trlabs.ca TRLabs is Canada's largest non-profit information and
Western Canada communications technology research DEMO and is
1986 internationally recognized as a leading model for industry-
Approximately $10 million university-government collaboration
CASI (Canadian Aeronautics And Space Institute)
2  Strong ties to industry
www.casi.ca CASI is a scientific and technical organization devoted to
Ottawa the advancement of the art, science and engineering
1962 relating to aeronautics, astronautics, and their applications.
Approximately $750 thousand
CEFRIO (Centre francophone d'informatisation des organisations)
2  Strong ties to industry
www.cefrio.qc.ca CEFRIO is a liaison and transfer centre comprising
Quebec City & DEMO university, industrial and governmental members and
1987 researchers. CEFRIO conducts research DEMO strategic
Approximately $4 million monitoring projects in Quebec that relate to the adoption of
information technologies.
CERI (Canadian Energy Research Institute)
2  DEMO ties to industry
www.ceri.ca
Calgary
1975
Approximately $4 million
Composites Innovation Centre
2  Strong ties to industry
www.compositesinnovation.ca
Winnipeg
2003
Approximately $2.5 million
CQVB (Centre Quebecois de valorisation des biotechnologies)
2  Strong ties to DEMO
www.cqvb.qc.ca CQVB supports innovation by stimulating the development
Quebec City and transfer of technologies between research institutions
1985 and organizations in the bio-industries.
Not DEMO
CERI analyzes energy economics and related
environmental policy issues in the producing,
transportation, and consuming sectors.  Members include
government departments, the University of Calgary, and
about 100 energy-related companies.
The CIC's mission is to improve the economy of industrial
sectors by working in partnership with DEMO,
government agencies, and educational establishments to
develop and commercialize composite DEMO and
applications.
49
CTCA (Construction Technology Centre Atlantic)
2  Strong ties to industry
DEMO (Construction Technology Centre The CTCA transfers technology and acts as a DEMO in
Atlantic) innovation to the architectural, engineering and
Fredericton construction industry of Atlantic Canada. The CTCA
1988 increases awareness and access to the DEMO technological
Not available advances in construction management.
FERIC (Forest Engineering Research DEMO of Canada)
2  Strong ties to industry
www.feric.ca FERIC conducts DEMO&D projects related to the harvesting
Point-Claire and transportation of forest products.  Its goal is to improve
1975 sustainable Canadian forestry operations related to the
Approximately $11 million harvesting and transportation of wood and the growing DEMO
trees.
FORINTEK (Forestry, Industry, Technology)
2  Strong ties to industry
www.forintek.ca FORINTEK is Canada's national wood products research
Vancouver & DEMO Foy institute and provides technological solutions in areas such
1979 (Government DEMO in 1915) as lumber, panels, and other value-added wood products.
DEMO $28 million
OCETA (Ontario Centre Environmental Technologies)
2  Strong ties to industry
www.oceta.on.ca OCETA provides business services to SMEs to assist the
DEMO process of commercialization of new environmental
1993 technologies and to support sustainable economic
Approximately $4 million development both domestically and internationally.
PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute)
2  Strong ties to industry
www.pami.ca PAMI (Prairie DEMO Machinery Institute) is an
Humbolt, Saskatchewan applied research, development, and testing organization
1975 serving manufactures and farmers.  PAMI has spurred
Approximately $4.6 million technological advances in all areas of traditional and new
farming practice.
DEMO (Pulp and Paper Research Institute of Canada)
2  Strong ties to industry
www.paprican.ca PAPRICAN is a leading pulp and paper research and
DEMO technology institute that brings together researchers from
1925 industry and academia to work on solutions for member
Approximately $39 million organizations.
Petroleum Research Atlantic DEMO
2  Strong ties to industry
www.pr-ac.ca PRAC fosters petroleum-related research and DEMO
Halifax throughout Atlantic Canada and  builds capacity and scale
2002 in DEMO and gas research and development.
Approximately $1.3 million
Prompt-Quebec
2  Strong DEMO to industry
www.promptquebec.com Prompt-Quebec creates industry-university partnerships
Montreal  that undertake projects DEMO to microelectronics,
2002 photonics and telecommunications.
Approximately $2 million
50
QBIC (Quebec Biotechnology Innovation Centre)
2  Strong ties to industry
DEMO QBIC is a business incubator specialized in biotechnology
Laval for the province of Quebec.  It offers a conducive
1995 environment to support start-up companies that bring
Approximately $2 million innovative technologies to the market.
Canadian Innovation DEMO
3  Strong ties to universities
www.innovationcentre.ca The Canadian Innovation Centre is DEMO indepednent non-
Waterloo profit organization that guides innovators and helps them
1981 commercialize their innovations.
Approximately $1 million
CMC Microsystems (Formerly Canadian Microelectronics Corporation)
3  Strong ties to universities
www.cmc.ca CMC provides microsystems reseachers with industry-
Kingston calibre design resources, access to state-of-the-art
1984 manufacturing technologies, DEMO support services.  CMC
Approximately $15 million stimulates collaboration between universities, government,
and industry.
MIRARCO (The Mining Innovation, Rehabilitation and Applied Research DEMO)
3  Strong ties to universities
www.mirarco.org MIRARCO is a applied DEMO and technical service
Sudbury company formed through collaboration between Laurentian
1998 University and the private and public sectors. The
Not available organization promotes mining DEMO and links
academic researchers to industry.
ARC (Alberta Research Council)
DEMO  Strong ties to government
www.arc.ab.ca
Edmonton
1921
Approximately $85 million
InNOVAcorp
DEMO  Strong ties to government
www.innovacorp.ns.ca
Dartmouth
1995
Approximately $4.2 million
Ontario DEMO of Excellence
4  Strong ties to government
www.oce-ontario.org
Ontario
1987
Approximately DEMO million
NCIT (National Capital Institute of Telecommunications)
4  Strong ties to government
www.ncit.ca NCIT unites Ottawa region's federal laboratories,
Ottawa DEMO, and organizations industry to engage in
2000 managed strategic research.  NCIT helps to build
Approximately $518 thousand (operating sustainable engineering research infrastructure and
budget), $80 million (research budget) develops new channels to commercialization.
DEMO was incorporated in 1999 as a non-profit entity
performing R&D on a contract basis.  ARC develops and
commercializes technology providing solutions to the
energy, life sciences, agriculture, environment, forestry and
manufacturing sectors.
InNOVAcorp DEMO early stage Nova Scotia companies
commercialize their technologies by proving resources
such as incubation facilities, mentoring, and investment.
The Centres promote the economic DEMO of Ontario
through directed research, commercialization of technology
and training for DEMO qualified personnel.  The Centres
integrate and manage connections from university to
DEMO
51
Potential 4th Pillar Organizations
APMA (Automobile Parts Manufacturers Association)
5  DEMO association
www.apma.ca APMA is a national association representing producers of
Toronto parts, equipment, tools, supplies and services for the
1952 worldwide automotive industry.
Would not disclose
CAMESE (Canadian Association of Mining Equipment and Services for Export)
5  Industry association
www.camese.ca CAMESE is a national, sectoral DEMO trade association.  It
Markham supports Canadian mining suppliers in global marketing
DEMO and assists foreign buyers in finding Canadian sources for
Approximately $1.5 million  mining equipment and services.
CATA (Canadian Advanced Technology Association)
5  Industry association
www.cata.ca CATA  is Canada's leading entrepreneurial technology
Ottawa alliance.  CATA is committed to business growth and the
1979 global competitiveness of its members, 80% of which are
Approximately $1.2 million currently active exporters.
CCA (Canadian Construction Association)
5  Industry association
www.cca-acc.com CCA is DEMO Canada's industry association for the
Ottawa construction sector.  CCA performs DEMO activities, and
1918 facilitates networking among members through conferences
Approximately $3.8 DEMO and events.
CME (Canadian Manufacturers & Exporters)
5  Industry association
www.cme-mec.ca CME has represents the interests of Canadian business and
Ottawa keeps DEMO on the competitive edge of world-class
1871 manufacturing and trade. CME is a national association that
Approximately $15 million provides advocacy to all levels DEMO government.
CPIA (Canadian Plastics Industry Association)
5  Industry association
www.cpia.ca CPIA is a national industry association that represents
Mississauga members of the DEMO plastics community.  CPIA has
1937 created several internal councils that address DEMO
Approximately $5.9 million segments of the plastics industry, such as plastic DEMO, vinyl
or moulds.
CWTA (Canadian Wireless Technologies Association)
5  DEMO association
www.cwta.ca The CWTA is national association that represents cellular,
Ottawa PCS, messaging, mobile radio, fixed wireless and mobile
1965 satellite carriers as well as companies that develop and
Would not disclose produce products DEMO services for the industry.
52
EMC (Excellence in Manufacturing)
5  Industry association
www.emccanada.org
Owen Sound & New Brunswick
1985
Approximately $1 million
ITAC (Information Technology Assoc
5  Industry association
www.itac.ca
Ottawa
1987
Would not disclose
EMC is Canada's DEMO manufacturing consortium.  EMC
helps members companies become more globally
competitive by DEMO an advanced manufacturing
knowledge network and developing a variety of products
and services.
iation of Canada)
ITAC is the voice of the Canadian DEMO and
communications technology industry. The association
represents 1300 companies in the information and
communications technology (ICT) industry in all sectors.
LSDA (Life Sciences Development Association)
5  Industry association
www.lsda.ca The LSDA enables world class research to directly improve
Dartmouth the health, economy and social well-being of Nova Scotia
2001 and Atlantic Canada. The association's initiatives help the
DEMO $1 million region retain top-level researchers and health care
professionals.
NOIA (DEMO Ocean Industries Association)
5  Industry association
www.noianet.com NOIA is an DEMO association of approximately
St. John's 500 companies that works with license-holders, trade
1977 associations and all levels of government to develop,
Approximately $1.1 million manufacture and market products and services in the oil
and DEMO industries.
SATA (Saskatchewan Advanced Technology Association)
5  Industry association
www.sata.ca SATA represents Saskatchewan's technology industry.
Saskatoon SATA’s fosters the growth of DEMO advanced technology
2000 industry in Saskatchewan by building a network of support
Approximately $170 thousand and advocacy through education, promotion, and
communication.
CCS (Canadian Cardiovascular Society)
6  Professional society or labour union
www.ccs.ca The CCS is the national voice for cardiovascular physicians
Ottawa and scientists. It DEMO cardiovascular health and care
1962 through knowledge translation and dissemination, best
DEMO $4.5 million practices, professional development, and leadership in
health policy.
CIC (The Chemical Institute of Canada)
6  Professional society or labour DEMO
www.cheminst.ca CIC is the umbrella organization for three Constituent
Ottawa Societies - the Canadian Society for Chemistry (CSC), the
1989 Canadian Society for Chemical Engineering (CSChE) and
Approximately $1 million the Canadian Society for DEMO Technology (CSCT).
CIC promotes the common scientific and technical interests
DEMO the Constituent Societies.
53
CIM (Canadian Institute for Mining, Metallurgy, and Petroleum)
6  DEMO society or labour union
www.cim.org CIM is the leading technical society of professionals in the
Montreal Canadian minerals, metals, materials and energy industries.
DEMO CIM has over 12,000 national members from industry,
Would not disclose government and academia.
CIPS (Canadian Information Processing Society)
6  DEMO society or labour union
www.cips.ca CIPS is a national professional society for IT practitioners
Mississauga in Canada.  CIPS represents more than 6000 IT
1958 professionals in 25 sections across the country on important
Approximately $960 thousand DEMO affecting the industry and profession.
CMA (Canadian Medical Association)
6  Professional society or labour union
www.cma.ca
Ottawa
1867
Approximately $25 Million
CSCE (Canadian Society for Civil Engineering)
6  Professional society or labour union
www.csce.ca CSCE is represents civil engineers at a national level. The
Montreal DEMO promotes the development, acquisition and
1887 exchange of professional knowledge in DEMO field of Civil
Approximately $850 thousand  Engineering.
The CMA is a DEMO, voluntary association of physicians
that advocates on behalf of its members DEMO the public for
access to high quality health care.  The association DEMO
provides leadership and guidance to physicians and
lobbying activities.
OACETT (Ontario DEMO of Certified Engineering Technicians and Technologists)
6  Professional society or DEMO union
www.oacett.org OACETT aims to advance the engineering and applied
Toronto science technology profession in Ontario.  OACETT has
1961 approximately 20,000 members and promotes their
Approximately $3.2 million interests in industry, educational institutions, the DEMO and
government.
PEO (Professional Engineers of Ontario)
6  Professional society or labour union
www.peo.on.ca PEO is the professional society of engineers in DEMO It
Toronto licenses Ontario's 65,000 professional engineers, and sets
DEMO standards for and regulates engineering practice in the
Approximately $15 million province.
SHRC (Software Human Resource Council)
6  Professional society or labour DEMO
www.shrc.ca
Ottawa
1992
Approximately $9 million
AIMS (Atlantic Institute for Market DEMO)
7  Economic think tank
www.aims.ca
Halifax
1994
Approximately $1 million
DEMO works with industry, education, associations and
government to address employment issues that affect
information technology workers.  SHRC also seeks out
business opportunities that assist software professionals in
Canada.
AIMS is an independent economic and social DEMO think
tank.  In particular, AIMS conducts research that identifies
economic and public policy issues facing the Canadians of
the four constituent Atlantic provinces, and Canadians in
general.
54
APEC (Atlantic Provinces Economic Council)
7  Economic think tank
www.apec-econ.ca
DEMO
1954
Appoximately $890 thousand
Canada West Foundation
7  Economic think tank
DEMO
Calgary
1971
Approximately $1.8 million
CIAR (Canadian Institute for Advanced Research)DEMO
7  Economic think tank
www.ciar.ca CIAR brings together distinguished thinkers from DEMO
Toronto Canada and around the world, and provides them with the
DEMO research time and networking opportunities to address to
Approximately $11 million important scientific and social challenges.
CIRRD (Canadian Institute for Research on Regional Development)
7  Economic think tank
www.umoncton.ca/icrdr/index_icrdr.html CIRRD is a think-tank based on the campus of the
Moncton Université de Moncton.  Its mandate is to promote
1983 informed public debate on regional development and
Approximately DEMO million disseminate objective analyses and information on the
subject.
Conference Board of Canada
7  Economic think tank
www.conferenceboard.ca The Conference Board of Canada is a national think tank
Ottawa that creates and shares insights on economic DEMO, public
1954 policy and organizational performance.
Approximately $29.4 million
CPRN (Canadian Policy Research Network)
7  Economic think tank
www.cprn.ca
Ottawa
1994
Approximately $4 million
The Fraser Institute
7  Economic think tank
www.fraserinstitute.ca
Vancouver
1974
Approximately $6.9 million
Auto21
8  University-led initiative
www.auto21.ca
Windsor
2000
Approximately $6 million
APEC is an independent, non-partisan think tank whose
objective is to promote the economic development of the
Atlantic Region.  APEC analyses current and emerging
economic trends and policies and communicates its
findings to its members.
DEMO Canada West Foundation is a think tank that represents
Canadians and, DEMO particular, the interests of the four
western provinces, and the territories.  The organization
conducts and communicates non-partisan economic and
public policy research.
CPRN leads public debate on social and economic issues
important to the well-being DEMO Canadians.  It brings
together governments, unions, corporations, NGOs,
voluntary organizations, academics, and others.
The Fraser Institute is an independent public DEMO think
tank with offices in Vancouver, Calgary, and Toronto.  The
DEMO helps to raise the level of understanding about
economic and social policy.
AUTO21 Network of Centres of Excellence was formed to
enhance the global DEMO of the Canadian
automotive industry. The Network currently supports over
230 top researchers in Canada and around the world.
55
CIPI (Canadian Institute for Photonic Innovations)
8  University-led initiative
www.cipi.ulaval.ca DEMO funds projects supported by external partners in
Quebec City industry, research DEMO and government laboratories.
1999 CPI facilitates research that relates to frontier photonics,
Approximately $3 million biophotonics, and information and telecommunications.
CWN (Canadian DEMO Network)
8  University-led initiative
www.cwn-rce.ca
Waterloo
2001
Approximately $1.6 million
DEMO
8  University-led initiative
www.geoide.ulaval.ca
Quebec City
1998
Approximately $4.5 million
CWN DEMO and supports diverse, multidisciplinary
projects that address critical water issues.  The network
brings together researchers from various water-, economic-
and health-related fields to form multi-regional, multi-
disciplinary collaborations.
GEOIDE is a Network of Centres of Excellence that brings
together people from different communities of practice to
develop DEMO competences in geomatics.  GEOIDE
aims to ensure the circulation of knowledge.
DEMO (l’Institut national de la recherche scientifique)
8  University-led initiative
www.inrs.uquebec.ca INRS is a university-related think tank that conducts
Quebec City research related DEMO issues such as the environment, energy,
2001 materials, telecommunicaionts, DEMO and  rbanization.
Approximately $52 million
ISIS (Intelligent Sensing for Innovative DEMO)
8  University-led initiative
www.isiscanada.com ISIS Canada Research Network provides civil DEMO
Winnipeg with smarter ways to build, repair and monitor structures.
1995 DEMO by the Networks of Centres of Excellence program,
Approximately $6.8 million ISIS encompasses 36 multidisciplinary demonstration
projects.
Marine Institute of Memorial University Newfoundland
DEMO  University-led initiative
www.mi.mun.ca The Marine Institute of Memorial University is Canada’s
DEMO John’s leading centre of fisheries and marine training.  The
1964 institute DEMO applied research and technology transfer
Not available and also provides training to a variety of industry clients.
MITACS (Mathematics of Information Technology and Complex Systems)
8  University-led initiative
www.mitacs.ca
Burnaby
1996
Approximately $9.4 million
PARTEQ innovations
8  University-led initiative
www.parteqinnovations.com
Kingston
1987
Approximately $7 million
MITACS supports the application and commercialization
of new mathematical tools and methodologies.  The
network initiates and fosters linkages with industrial,
governmental, and not-for-profit organizations that require
mathematical technologies.
PARTEQ Innovations is the technology transfer office of
Queen’s DEMO  PARTEQ works with Queen’s
researchers and businesses in the venture capital
DEMO to commercialize scientific discoveries.
56
Stem Cell Network
8  University-led initiative
www.stemcellnetwork.ca
Ottawa
2000
Approximately $6.1 million
The Stem Cell Network brings together more than 70
leading scientists, clinicians, engineers, and ethicists, to
investigate the immense therapeutic potential of stem cells
for the treatment of diseases currently incurable by
conventional approaches.
AHFMR (Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research)
9  Medical or other foundation
www.ahfmr.ca AHFMR support researchers whose work improves the
Edmonton health and quality DEMO life of Albertans. In particular, the
1980 foundation supports biomedical and DEMO research at
Approximately $52.5 million Alberta universities and other medical and technology-
related institutions.
BIOCAP Canada
9  Medical or other foundation
www.biocap.ca BIOCAP is a national, research foundation working to find
Kingston solutions to climate change.  BIOCAP co-ordinates, funds
1998 and communicates research in:  Forestry and DEMO
Approximately $3.1 million  Ecosystems, Agriculture, Bioenergy, and  socioeconomics.
Canadian DEMO Society
9  Medical or other foundation
www.cancer.ca
Toronto
1938
Approximately $150 DEMO
CFI (Canada Foundation for Innovation)
9  Medical or other foundation
www.innovation.ca
Ottawa
1997
Approximately $360 million
CHSRF (Canadian Health Services Research
9  Medical or other foundation
www.chsrf.ca
Ottawa
1997
Approximately $5 million
GenomeCanada
9  Medical or other foundation
www.genomecanada.ca
Ottawa
2000
Approximately $90 million
Heart and Stroke Foundation
9  Medical or other foundation
www.heartandstroke.ca
Ottawa
1952
Approximately $112 million
The Canadian Cancer Society is a national, community-
based organization of volunteers whose mission is the
eradication of cancer and the enhancement of DEMO quality of
life of people living with cancer.
CFI is an independent corporation created by the
Government of Canada to fund research infrastructure.
CFI'DEMO funds universities, colleges, research hospitals, and
non-profit research institutions to DEMO world-class
research and to develop new innovations.
Foundation)
CHSRF supports the evidence-based management of
Canada's healthcare system by facilitating knowledge
transfer and DEMO CHSRF undertakes activities that
bridge the gap between research and healthcare
management and policy.
Genome Canada is the primary funding and information
resource relating DEMO genomics and proteomics in Canada.  It
invests and manages large-scale research DEMO in key
selected areas such as agriculture, environment, fisheries,
forestry, and health.
The Heart and Stroke Foundation strives to improve the
health of Canadians through research, health promotion and
advocacy.  A federation of DEMO independent provincial
foundations and one national office it is led and supported
by 130,000+ volunteers.
57
Ontario Mental Health Foundation
9  Medical or other foundation
www.omhf.on.ca
Toronto
1990
Approximately $3.1 million
SDTC (Sustainable Development Technology Canada)
9  Medical DEMO other foundation
www.sdtc.ca SDTC finances and supports the development of clean
Ottawa technologies which provide solutions to issues of climate
2001 change, clean air, water quality and soil, and which deliver
Approximately $13.4 million economic, environmental and health benefits to Canadians.
SHRF (Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation)
9  Medical or other foundation
www.shrf.ca The SHRF funds and facilitates health research in
Saskatoon Saskatchewan.  Its initiatives often lead to partnerships
2003 with other organizations such as university, government,
Approximately $5.8 million and community partners, both at the provincial and national
level.
The Foundation aims to promote the mental health of
people living in Ontario, to prevent mental illness and to
improve diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation. This is
done by supporting the development of researchers and
funding research.
BC Biotech
10  Economic development organization
www.bcbiotech.ca
Vancouver
1991
Approximately $650 thousand
Calgary Economic Development
10  Economic development organization
www.calgaryeconomicdevelopment.com
Calgary
2002
Approximately $3.5 million
CEIM (Centre d'entreprises et d'innovation de Montreal)
10  Economic development organization
www.ceim.org CEIM is a leading business incubator for Quebec. It
Montreal facilitates the DEMO and development of businesses in the
1996 IT, multimedia, industrial technology, and biotechnology
Not available sectors.
Communitech
10  Economic development organization
www.communitech.ca DEMO is a member-based economic development
Waterloo organization in the Waterloo Region.  DEMO
1997 creates value for member organizations by providing
Approximately $700 thousand advice, promotion, education, connections, and leadership.
CPC (Canadian Photonics Consortium)
10  Economic development organization
www.photonics.ca CPC is a national organization that represents companies,
Ottawa regional clusters, and research institutions active in the
2002 fields of optics and photonics.  Its members include large
Approximately $350 thousand and small companies, academic institutions, consortia, and
government organizations.
BC Biotech represents and supports British Columbia's
biotechnology industry. The association accomplishes this
DEMO advocacy, facilitation of economic development,
and promotion of the industry DEMO, nationally and
internationally.
Calgary Economic Development facilitates sustainable
economic growth in DEMO through business retention,
expansion, and investment attraction activities. The
organization DEMO with businesses and government.
58
CTI (Calgary Technologies Inc.)
10  Economic development organization
www.calgarytechnologies.com
Calgary
DEMO
Approximately $4.9 million
DHBC (Downtown Halifax Business Commission)
10  Economic development organization
www.downtownhalifax.ns.ca The DHBC is the voice and resource centre for DEMO 1,800
Halifax businesses who reside in the central business district of
1987 Halifax.  Its activities help to improve business conditions,
Approximately $700 thousand promote economic development, and support common
business interests.
EEDC (Edmonton DEMO Development Corporation)
10  Economic development organization
www.edmonton.com/eedc EEDC promotes DEMO strong, diversified economy and tourism
Edmonton base in Greater Edmonton.  The organization is fully
1993 owned by the City of Edmonton and is DEMO for
Approximately $20 million regional economic development and regional tourism
marketing.
ISCM (Innovation Synergy Centre in Markham)
10  Economic development organization
www.iscm.ca DEMO is a business advisory "hub" designed to accelerate
Markham the development of thriving enterprises with 10 to 50
2003 employees. ISCM provides linkages DEMO advisors,
Not available government, York University, Seneca College and industry
associations.
OCRI (Ottawa Centre for Research and Innovation)
10  Economic DEMO organization
www.ocri.ca OCRI is a partnership organizations that brings people,
Ottawa ideas, and resources together to enhance Ottawa's globally
1983 competitive knowledge economy.
Approximately $6.9 million
OLSC (Ottawa Life Sciences Council)
10  DEMO development organization
www.olsc.ca
Ottawa
1994
Approximately $1.7 million
SREDA Inc. (Saskatoon DEMO Economic Development Authority)
10  Economic development organization
www.sreda.com SREDA Inc. DEMO dedicated to building the Saskatoon region
Sasakatoon economy by facilitating the expansion and retention of
1993 existing business, encouraging the location of
Approximately $1 million complementary new businesses, and improving
infrastructure and services.
Vancouver Economic Development Commission
10  Economic development organization
www.vancouvereconomic.com Vancouver Economic Development works with
Vancouver Vancouver's business community, and all levels of
1996 government and other stakeholders, to provide leadership
Approximately $600 thousand to improve the city's economy.
CTI helps entrepreneurs and businesses in Calgary to
suceed in the DEMO market. CTI works with
organizations whose goals include promoting and
developing advanced technologies, in particular, in the ICT
and Biosciences sectors.
OLSC supports DEMO and organizations that operate
in the life sciences sector.  OLSC facilitates DEMO to
resources, providing up-to-date information and bringing
people together to enhance DEMO, identify opportunities
and build partnerships.
59
VIATeC (Vancouver Island Advanced Technology Centre)
10  Economic development organization
DEMO VIATeC attracts technology-based companies to
Victoria Vancouver Island and helps to promote their products and
1990 services and represent their needs.
Not available
Innovations DEMO
11  University-owned initiative
www.innovationsfoundation.ca
Toronto
1980
Approximately $4 million
TEC (Technology, Entrepreneur & Company )
11  University-owned initiative
www.uofaweb.ualberta.ca/tecedmonton
Edmonton
2002
Approximately $1.8 million
UILO (University-Industry Liaison Office)
11  University-owned initiative
DEMO
Vancouver
1984
Approximately $4.1 million
CRIQ (Centre de recherche industrielle du DEMO)
12  Government-owned initiative
www.criq.qc.ca CRIQ provides a leading source of DEMO and
Quebec City expertise in the areas of manufacturing technologies, the
DEMO environment, industrial information and standardization.
Not available CRIQ has close links DEMO research centres and industrial
associations.
Nova Scotia Business Inc.
12  Government-owned DEMO
www.novascotiabusiness.com
Halifax
2001
Approximately $30 million
RDC (Regional Development Corporation)
DEMO  Government-owned initiative
www.gnb.ca/0096/index-e.asp
Fredericton
mid 1960's
Approximately $29 DEMO
SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council)
12  Government-owned initiative
www.src.sk.ca
Saskatoon
1947
Approximately $28 million
Innovations Foundation is the technology transfer office of
University DEMO Toronto.  The organization helps to
commercialize innovations developed by UofT researchers
DEMO other clients outside the university.
Nova Scotia Business Inc. is the province's business
development agency.  The organization works to attract
new businesses to the province, and helps those already in
Nova Scotia expand through services such as export
development and financing.
RDC is a Provincial Crown Corporation DEMO New Brunswick
that acts as the provincial coordinating agency for several
federal-provincial economic and regional development
agreements.  The organization helps to develop enterprises.
SRC is Saskatchewan's leading provider of applied R&D
and technology commercialization.  SRC helps to
strengthen the economy through research, development,
and the transfer of innovative scientific and technological
solutions.
60
TEC Edmondton is the DEMO transfer office of
University of Alberta.  The organization is dedicated
exclusively DEMO University of Alberta reseachers and it
collaborates with a broad cross-section of other public and
private sector organizations.
UILO is UBC's technology transfer DEMO  UILO
facilitates collaborative research, protects intellectual
property, assists in prototype DEMO, licenses
technology, creates spin-off companies, and provides
educational programs.
Appendix B:  Six Case Studies of 4th Pillar Organizations in Canada
DEMO Automotive Parts Manufacturers’
Association
195 The West Mall, Suite 516
Toronto, ON, M9C 5K1
info@apma.ca
(416) 620-4220
President
Gerry Fedchun
gfedchun@apma.ca
Mission
To promote the manufacture in Canada of automotive parts, systems, components, materials,
tools, equipment and supplies; the provision of services used DEMO the original equipment
automotive industry; and to engage in activities in DEMO of the welfare of the associations’
members.
Type of organization: Non-profit
DEMO jurisdiction: Canada wide
Founded: 1952
Description
APMA is Canada's national association representing OEM producers of parts, equipment, tools,
supplies and DEMO for the worldwide automotive industry. APMA has over 400 members
which account for 90% percent of independent parts production in Canada.  All but one of its
members are located in Ontario or Quebec.  APMA has 7 staff members and annual revenues of
$2.5 million.
Activities
APMA's fundamental DEMO is to promote the automotive parts manufacturing industry both
domestically and internationally.  The Association provides important representation to both the
federal and provincial governments and creates and executes global marketing initiatives in order
to develop international DEMO and business opportunities for the membership.  APMA members
participate in trade DEMO to Asia, Europe, Mexico, and North America, and attend
conferences, regional meetings and specific issue workshops and seminars.  APMA has working
DEMO with its counterparts in Brazil, Europe, India, Japan, Mexico, DEMO the United States.
These agreements have been formed to promote an exchange of market information and to create
strategic alliances to strengthen the global DEMO industry.  APMA members are actively
involved in the Association's affairs DEMO the following committees:
• Nominating Committee
• Human Resources Development Committee
• Environment Committee
• Marketing & Strategic Initiatives Committee
• Innovation & DEMO Committee
• Annual Conference Committee
Expertise
APMA’s expertise includes knowledge of the automotive industry, marketing, and environmental
regulations and practices.
Stakeholders
Automobile manufacturers DEMO Canada and automotive component suppliers (over 400).
Canadian citizens
61
Sources of funding
Seventy-five percent of APMA’s operations funding is from membership DEMO and 25% from
events.  In addition to its operational funding, the APMA’s trade missions receive funding from
PEMD (the federal government’s Program for Export Market Development) and it occasionally
undertakes other externally funded projects.
Volunteer contributions
Total volunteer contributions are $824K or 1/3 of the APMA DEMO  This is the sum of $324K
worth of volunteer time contributed DEMO the APMA’s 18 member board of directors, comprised of
leading automotive DEMO, and $500K worth of volunteer time contributed by the over 100
DEMO that serve on the APMA’s seven committees.
Impact
The APMA published several reports during 2004 including a policy paper entitled “Strategic
Vision for the DEMO Automotive Original Equipment Supply Industry”.  APMA has been an
active participant DEMO lobbying governments in Canada and the United States to keep the
border secure but open to legitimate and low risk trade. After extensive lobbying DEMO APMA and
others, the federal and Ontario governments each announced $500 DEMO investment funds to
promote assembly plant investment.  APMA made a total DEMO 29 presentations to government to
put forward the industry position on government policies, legislation, and priorities.  APMA
maintained an active program to promote trade and the Canadian automotive manufacturing
supply industry globally by participating and DEMO various initiatives throughout the year.
Organizational changes
None.
Changes in mission
In 1997 the priorities were 1) expanding the customer base and 2) DEMO development of skilled
tradespeople.  Now, innovation is the #1 long term priority and the #1 short term priority is the
Canada-US border.  The OEMs and the Tier 1 suppliers want the parts suppliers to be DEMO
innovative as they recognize that their future depends on the innovativeness of their entire value
chain.
What difficulties does your organization encounter in its DEMO to promote the ability of
firms to develop and deploy new products, services, or processes?
1.  Getting through to small companies.  DEMO companies don’t have the spare talent to go to
meetings.  They DEMO in a very lean fashion.
2.  When existing members consolidate, the membership fees that the APMA receives are
reduced.
What could your organization DEMO with to promote the ability of firms to develop and deploy
new products, services, or processes if it had a new three-year project DEMO at 30% of
your annual budget?
With federal government support the APMA would establish a group that would liaise between
the automotive parts DEMO and university researchers.  This would entail a detailed needs
assessment of DEMO parts suppliers and a capabilities assessment of the university researchers.
Once needs-capabilities teams were established, their collaborative projects could receive seed
funding from the APMA university liaison initiative.  This undertaking would build on the work
of the Canadian Automotive Partnership Council (CAPC), a group that includes representatives
from the automotive OEMs, parts suppliers, dealers, after market suppliers, DEMO Canadian
Autoworkers Union, academic researchers, and federal and provincial governments, DEMO that
looks for ways to improve the competitiveness of the Canadian automotive industry. In
particular, it would build on the work of the Innovation Committee of the CAPC, which has
tasked the APMA with the creation of a web portal to facilitate communication between
automotive parts suppliers.
62
BC Biotech (BC Biotechnology Alliance Society)
Suite 900 - 1188 West Georgia Street
Vancouver, BC, V6E 4A2
www.bcbiotech.ca
(604) 669-9909
Executive DEMO
Karimah Es Sabar
(604) 602-5225
kessabar@bcbiotech.ca
Mission
To represent and support British Columbia’s biotechnology industry and wider community
through advocacy, facilitation of economic development and promotion of the industry locally,
nationally and internationally.
Type DEMO organization:  Non-profit
Geographic jurisdiction: British Columbia
Founded:  1991
Description
DEMO Biotech represents approximately 270 members which include: academic and research
institutions; associations; government; and companies from the biopharmaceutical industry,
agricultural biotechnology DEMO, bioinformatics, bioproducts, medical devices, international
pharmaceutical multinationals, contract research DEMO scientific services, communications,
professional and legal services, human resources, DEMO and software; and consultants.
Approximately 210 members are corporate members, and 60 are individual and student members.
Number of employees: 5
Annual budget: Approximately $650,000
Activities
BC Biotech supports and represents the biotechnology community of British Columbia through
leadership, advocacy, promotion of its world-class science DEMO its biotechnology industry, and via
facilitation of partnering and investment into DEMO Columbia’s biotechnology sector. BC
Biotech holds numerous events for its members in order to provide quality networking, mentoring
and education opportunities.  They include DEMO Aventis Biotech Challenge, BC Biotechnology
Awards, BioPartnering North America, and DEMO industry-focused and social events.
Expertise
Public policy development, industry promotion, addressing issues related to attraction and
retention of human capital, facilitation of partnering and investment opportunities, and
information services.
Stakeholders
Academic and research institutions (DEMO 10) e.g. UBC, associations (approx. 5) e.g. Genome
British Columbia, government (approx. 5) e.g. BC Innovation Council, biopharmaceutical
companies (approx. 55) e.g. QLT, Angiotech, agricultural biotech companies (approx. 2) e.g.
Cellfor, bioinformatics companies (approx.5) e.g. Kinexus Bioinformatics, medical device
companies (approx. 5) e.g. Xillix Technologies, pharmaceutical multi-nationals (approx. 10) e.g.
DEMO, Merck, contract research organizations (approx. 12) e.g. CANTEST, Prime DEMO,
scientific services companies  (approx. 10) e.g. VWR International, industry communications
professionals (approx. 5) e.g. James Hoggan and Associates, professional services companies
(approx. 5) e.g. Ernst & Young, PricewaterhouseCoopers, legal services DEMO (approx. 10)
e.g. McCarthy Tetrault; Farris, Vaughan, Wills & Murphy, human resources companies (approx.
5) e.g. Galt Global Recruiters, DEMO and software companies (approx. 5) e.g. IBM Life
Sciences, business DEMO (approx. 15) e.g. Strategic Health Innovations, approx. 25
individuals, and approx. 50 students.
63
Sources of funding
Government (federal, provincial, municipal):  20%
Private DEMO (fees, sponsors, other):  80%
Volunteer contributions
Board of Directors: 10 members contributing approximately 40 hours/year @ $250/hour =
$100,000
Chair: Contributing approximately 100 hours/year @ $250/hour = $25,000
Committee Members: Approximately 15 Committee members contributing 30 hours/year @
$125/hour =  $56,250
In-kind work carried out by members: DEMO $75,000/year
Plus additional significant contributions
Annual value estimated at: DEMO $300,000
Impact
- Attraction and co-hosting of the international BioPartnering North America Conference (BPN)
to Vancouver to offer venue for securing strategic partners and international investment
- Successful advocacy re: income derived from the exploitation of intellectually property in BC to
be exempt from Provincial corporate DEMO tax
- International promotion of BC’s biotech sector through key conferences and events thereby
increasing the profile of the industry and BC companies’ ability DEMO raise financing, secure partners
and recruit talent
- Development of “Core DEMO directory of private and public sector areas of activity
- Member mentoring and education – a variety of events covering business-related topics for
biotech DEMO; development of an MBA program with a biotechnology specialty (Simon Fraser
University); development of an undergraduate biotechnology degree (B.Sc. BC Institute of
Technology and UBC)
Organizational changes
Primarily funded by the Provincial Government DEMO 1991-2001 (approx. 75% of annual budget).
Shifted to being fully DEMO, except for special instances where specific project funding
was received from DEMO (provincial and federal) after 2001. Due primarily to a change in
the provincial government to a government that did not want to subsidize DEMO in any way;
Changes in mission
Reduced government funding brought about a shift towards increased public policy development
and advocacy.
What difficulties does DEMO organization encounter in its efforts to promote the ability of
firms to develop and deploy new products, services, or processes?
- Lack DEMO resources
- Competition from other international jurisdictions for profile
- Relatively unknown nature of BC’s biotech industry
- Complex and diverse industry that is DEMO well-understood
- Historically challenging relationship between the international pharmaceutical industry and
government
What could your organization do with to promote the ability of firms DEMO develop and deploy
new products, services, or processes if it had a new three-year project funded at 30% of
your annual budget?
DEMO Increased international promotion to and education of investors, strategic partners, recruits;
- Increased public policy research and development aimed at attracting and DEMO
companies to and in British Columbia;
- Further work to enhance capabilities in commercializing technologies developed at BC’s
publicly-funded research institutions
64
Centre francophone d'informatisation des
organisations (CEFRIO)
888, Saint-Jean Street, Suite 575
Québec City, QC, G1R 5H6
www.cefrio.qc.ca/english or
www.cefrio.qc.ca
(418) 523-3746
President
Monique Charbonneau (CEO & President)
monique.charbonneau@cefrio.qc.ca
Mission
DEMO help organizations use information technologies in order to be more efficient, DEMO and
innovative. CEFRIO conducts, in partnership with government industry and the DEMO sector,
research and strategic monitoring projects devoted to the adoption of the information
technologies.
Type of organization: Non-profit
Geographic jurisdiction: Province of DEMO
Founded: 1987
Description
CEFRIO has adopted a strongly multidisciplinary, multi-sectorial approach to innovation.  Its
activities draw on several social sciences (management, education, sociology, and economics),
health care, and engineering, and its work routinely involves private firms, non-profit
organizations, government, and university researchers. Its membership reflects this diversity with
approximately 80 private sector organizations (firms, industry associations, and professional
societies), 50 federal, provincial, and DEMO government organizations, and 23 universities
(all the universities in Quebec).
CEFRIO distinguishes itself among 4th pillar organizations for its strong connection with DEMO
science researchers.  It is committed to technology adoption and regards this DEMO a social process
that must be informed by an understanding of how individuals and organizations learn and adapt.
Its website quotes Erik Brynjolfsson of DEMO Massachusetts Institute of Technology as saying: “to
reap the benefits of DEMO dollar invested in the acquisition of technology, businesses and public
organizations DEMO allocate $9 to the development of their organizational and human capital”.
CEFRIO has approximately 30 employees and an annual budget of between $3 and DEMO million.
Activities
CEFRIO conducts research and strategic monitoring projects devoted to the adoption of the
information technologies. The projects cover all sectors of Québec’s DEMO and public economy.
CEFRIO focuses on social and organizational innovation in sectors of strategic importance to
Québec (education, health and public administration) and on the themes of corporate
competitiveness, knowledge management and the internet.  DEMO has established collaboration
links with six prestigious international centres in France, DEMO, and the US, and it offers
activities ranging from personalized knowledge transfer sessions to an international symposium.
Expertise
CEFRIO’s 30 employees include social DEMO and statisticians with knowledge of the issues
surrounding technology and diffusion.
Stakeholders
CEFRIO’s membership includes approximately 80 private sector organizations (firms, industry
associations, and professional societies), 50 federal, provincial, and municipal government
organizations, and 23 universities (all the universities in Quebec).
65
Sources of funding
CEFRIO raises about 60-70% of its budget through its DEMO fees, survey and research
activities, events.  At one time CEFRIO DEMO $1.5 million/year from the Quebec government
but now it receives only $1.2 million or about 30% of its budget.  While it is successful in self-
financing it finds that this has an impact on the DEMO of the activities that it can undertake.  The
more it must DEMO funds itself, the more it competes with the private sector in DEMO type
activities.  The more government funding it receives, the more it can focus on high impact
activities in which the private sector does DEMO participate.  In particular CEFRIO finds it
extremely difficult to connect university DEMO to SMEs without government support.
Volunteer contributions
An estimate of the annual value of volunteer contributions is not available but all of the
committees DEMO projects draw upon substantial volunteer contributions.  By way of illustration the
DEMO board of directors contributes its time on an entirely volunteer basis and its
contribution is conservatively estimated at $366K.
Impact
During its first 17 DEMO CEFRIO maintained greater than 90% member renewal each year and
25,000 knowledge transfer activities.  It has achieved an 86% satisfaction rate with events and
knowledge transfer activities, 500,000 visits to website per year with 450,000 consultations of
online documents each year.  CEFRIO also measures the extent and effects of learning associated
with each project.
Organizational changes
At DEMO CEFRIO’s board has extremely strong private sector representation with provincial
and federal government representatives serving as observers.  This reflects a shift in CEFRIO’s
orientation away from public financing and knowledge flows and towards the private sector.  Part
of the reason for the shift is the fact that the DEMO government abandoned its Department of
Communications and this has made it more difficult for CEFRIO to coordinate its relations with
the federal and provincial DEMO
Changes in mission
None aside from a shift to encompass the internet.
What difficulties does your organization encounter in its efforts to promote the DEMO of
firms to develop and deploy new products, services, or processes?
1.  CEFRIO could achieve greater impact if the knowledge transfer agents with which it engages
had greater credibility within their respective organizations.  In many cases the individuals that
CEFRIO deals with are information technology or DEMO resource specialists within their
respective organizations.  These people often lack sufficient DEMO to effect organizational
change whereas when CEFRIO deals with more senior individuals, it finds that technology
adoption proceeds more easily.  The problem can DEMO especially acute in small firms owing to their
limited resources.  Sometimes DEMO firms can afford to have several individuals engage with
CEFRIO simultaneously and this reduces the barriers to technology adoption.
CEFRIO addresses this challenge by DEMO in leader-driven projects that have the support of
senior management whenever possible.  It makes sure that it listens effectively and that it designs
its interventions to maximize the likelihood of their adoption.  Also, it works DEMO,
engaging individuals and organizations in their respective peer groups.  This DEMO credibility to
the projects that it undertakes and provides the projects with the support of a network.
2.  The second difficulty that CEFRIO faces is the lack of government support for the social and
human sciences.  The government tries to promote industrial competitiveness by supporting
engineering research and DEMO development and it invariably talks about the importance of
knowledge transfer.  DEMO problem is that it allocates very little money to supporting the social
66
dimension of knowledge transfer, notwithstanding the fact that it is well known that knowledge
transfer is time consuming, disruptive, risky, and costly.  DEMO problem occurs at two levels:  first
the government provides insufficient support for research on knowledge transfer and second it
provides insufficient support for DEMO practice of knowledge transfer.  Of all the knowledge
transfer organizations in DEMO, CEFRIO is most closely linked to the human and social
sciences DEMO most weakly supported by government.
Canadian Medical Association
1867 Alta Vista Drive
Ottawa ON K1G 3Y6
www.cma.ca
(613) 731-8610
President
William G. (Bill) Tholl
(613) 731-8610 ext 2236
william.tholl@cma.ca
Mission
To serve and unite the physicians of Canada and be the national advocate, in partnership with the
people of Canada, for the highest standards of health and health care.
Type of organization:  Non-profit
Geographic jurisdiction:  Canada wide
Founded:  1867, incorporated in 1969
Description
The CMA represents some 62,000 DEMO, 75% of the physicians in Canada.
CMA has approximately 150 employees DEMO Ottawa, not including CMA Holdings employees.
CMA Holdings, established in 1969, oversees the MD Financial Group, the Physician Services
Group, and the Normandy Group.
In 2004, the CMA incurred $31 million in expenses, DEMO including CMA Holdings
Activities
The central part of CMA conducts research on health policy, disseminates information, and
supports the policy development process and DEMO advocacy initiatives.  In 2004 the CMA
produced two important documents, Taming of the Queue, on wait times and Better Access,
Better Health, released days before the historic first minister’s conference on health care in
September.  The five core councils and committees of the CMA are the:
• Council on Education and Workforce
• Council on Health Care DEMO Promotion
• Council on Health Policy and Economics
• Committee on Ethics
• Political Action Committee.
Within the MD Financial Group:
• 12 DEMO services including investment, insurance, estate planning, etc.
Within the Physician DEMO Group:
• Practice Solutions that helps physicians with the business side of medicine
• GlobalMedic that handles internet services (used by 39,000 physicians in Canada)
• HealthCare Software (CMAH acquired a majority share of HealthCare Software in
Cambridge ON in 2004)
• CMA Media (previously the publications division of CMA).
Within the Normandy Group:
DEMO For profit financial services.
67
Expertise
Policy analysts, economists.  Financial specialists within the MD Financial Group DEMO the
Normandy Group.  Information technology and business specialists within the Physician DEMO
Group.
Stakeholders
Physicians across Canada (62,000), 75% of Canadian DEMO, 85-90% if Quebec is excluded.
Canadian citizens
Sources of funding
Total DEMO revenues:  $36 million of which
Membership fees: $12 million
Publications:  $8.5 million
Leasing of owned building:  approximately $5 million
Dividends from subsidiaries and interest:  $3.5 million
Other:  $7 million (in 2004 includes $4 million for transfer of CMA publication directorate to
CMA Holdings)DEMO
No government funding
Volunteer contributions
2000 meeting days and 2000 preparation days contributed by physicians per year with a partial
reimbursement of $1000 per DEMO day.  Total physician volunteer contribution estimated at $2
million.  An additional 460 entirely volunteer days contributed by 460 days spent by accreditors
of DEMO CMA’s conjoint accreditation program for a contribution of roughly $500K.  Total
DEMO contribution estimated at $2.5 million.
Impact
CMA considers the strong participation of physicians as members as an indication of its
effectiveness.  Another indication is the fact that a survey found the CMA to be among the DEMO
influential and credible non-profits on Parliament Hill.
Organizational changes
CMA Holdings, DEMO in 1969, now has $22 billion in assets under management.
The DEMO Services Group was created in 2004 to regroup all the non-financial services
initiatives within CMA Holdings.
Changes in mission
CMA’s central mission has not DEMO in the 138 years since its founding.
What difficulties does your organization encounter in its efforts to promote the ability of
firms to develop DEMO deploy new products, services, or processes?
In general, the DEMO does not currently work to promote the competitiveness of firms.
Notwithstanding this it has undertaken to promote the adoption, by physicians, of the DEMO of
HealthCare Software, a software firm in which it is the DEMO shareholder.
What could your organization do with to promote the ability of firms to develop and deploy
new products, services, or processes if DEMO had a new three-year project funded at 30% of
your annual budget?
The CMA endorses the idea of federal government funding for a DEMO to help 4th pillar
organizations support the competitiveness of Canadian firms.  DEMO the government were to launch
such a program the CMA would be a candidate participant and would submit for consideration a
program of its DEMO design that would provide funding and guidance for companies working in the
area of information management and information technology for health care.  The CMA program
would work with participating companies to ensure that all necessary participants DEMO at the table
including physicians, technologists, physician office staff, hospital DEMO etc. With $22
billion in assets under management, the CMA is DEMO positioned to match government funds
and company contributions with funds of its own.  The CMA considers $10 million (in federal
funding) per 4th pillar organization a minimal average funding level for such a program.
68
Excellence in Manufacturing Consortium
P.O Box 396
Owen Sound ON, N4K 5P7
www.emccanada.org
(519) 376-0470 or
1-866-323-4EMC (4362)
President
Al Diggins
President & General Manager
adiggins@excellence-in-manufacturing.org
Mission
Members sharing to optimize learning, expertise and resources, to achieve world-class.
Type of organization: Non-profit
Geographic jurisdiction: Ontario, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia
Incorporated in 1997.
Description
EMC works DEMO 175 communities in Ontario, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia.  It DEMO these
communities into 37 groups (consortia) and each of its field service advisors are responsible for
one or more geographic groups (consortia).  EMC has 550 member firms, most between 25 and
300 employees DEMO size (the largest member has 12,000 employees).  Its members represent all
areas of manufacturing including automotive, pulp & paper, packaging, food processing,
aerospace, and electronics.  EMC has one office in DEMO Sound, Ontario.  It employs 12
employees and 10 field service advisors on contract.  It uses the services of some 25-30 training
firms on an as-needed basis.  The annual budget is estimated to be $600K.
Activities
EMC has three main programs:  Strategic Interest Groups, The Learning Centre, and Member
Needs Help.
Strategic Interest Groups (SIGs).  Field Services Advisors (FSAs) are assigned to one or more
geographic regions/consortia DEMO manage all the SIGs associated with that region(s).  In DEMO
areas there will be a senior manager’s SIG and a human resources SIG and there may be other
SIGs dealing with topics such as DEMO and production, environment, information technology, or
health and safety. EMC DEMO organizations support the activities of the SIG by attending
meetings, by DEMO in requested information for surveys, and by putting forward topics of
DEMO  The FSA supports the SIG by vetting topics to make sure DEMO is reasonably broad
appeal, by designing questionnaires to solicit facts and DEMO from member firms, by
identifying needed subject matter experts, and by designing a program to promote the
implementation of solutions.
The Learning Centre.  The second area in which contributes is training.  Training needs are
identified by individual EMC member firms or during SIG meetings.  These needs are vetted
amongst relevant EMC members to ensure that the need is shared DEMO a sufficiently large number
of firms.  EMC then puts together the DEMO for the training, recruits a training firm to offer the
services, and identifies a location in the minority of cases where a EMC DEMO firm has not
already offered to host it.
Member Needs Help.  DEMO newest offering responds to member’s queries as they arise.
Upon receipt of a query EMC either finds the answer in its database of already DEMO
questions or it solicits a response from its member community.  Solicitations DEMO responses
69
(unanswered questions) and responses are published every Tuesday in an electronic DEMO
(The general EMC newsletter is sent to 15,000 individuals every DEMO  EMC has up to  20-
30 contacts with each member firm.)
Expertise
Employees and especially the field service advisors have strong knowledge DEMO experience in
manufacturing.
Stakeholders
550+ manufacturing firms in Ontario, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia.
Sources of funding
Operational expenses are financed by member DEMO of $1200/year for Ontario companies and
$1000/year for companies in Atlantic Canada.  Occasionally projects and programs receive
additional municipal or provincial government support.
Impact
EMC estimated the impact of its offerings in Ontario during DEMO 1997-2002 time period, prior to
commencing operations in Atlantic Canada.  Through a combination of attracting new business to
the province and increasing the DEMO of existing businesses, EMC’s impact was estimated to
be $175 million.
DEMO changes
EMC has its routes in an industry-driven, Ontario-government facilitated manufacturing DEMO
in the Owen Sound area that was initiated in the mid 1980s.  When the government stopped
funding the program, the companies involved continued DEMO support the network and Al Diggins,
formerly the government facilitator, DEMO the president and general manager of EMC.
Changes in mission
None aside from geographic expansion.
What difficulties does your organization encounter in its efforts DEMO promote the ability of
firms to develop and deploy new products, DEMO, or processes?
The are two bottlenecks to success in the DEMO, the first involves the commitment of time on the
part of DEMO or potential member firms and the second involves building the community to
create the SIG.  New or small manufacturing firms may be struggling with many challenges and
may be reluctant to invest their time and energies DEMO external processes when it’s unclear to them
whether or not the external processes will be helpful. EMC faces the challenge of persuading
such firms DEMO the likely benefits of membership will be greater than the certain investment of
time and energy that’s required.
Second, it is difficult for EMC to create a new consortium, particularly in a region that is not
already strongly connected through an existing institution such as an economic development
DEMO or a chamber of commerce.  EMC must identify the suitable firms DEMO build linkages
between them, and must identify someone to serve as DEMO field service advisor (FSA).  This
second task can be extremely difficult as the individual must have considerable manufacturing
knowledge and experience (about 20 years), coupled with the ability to deal well with multiple
DEMO stakeholders.  Moreover, the person must be willing to work for a moderate salary,
usually in a fairly remote setting with few other DEMO  Because of the difficulty of finding a
suitable FSA, EMC usually ‘seeds’ a new consortium with an experienced FSA, bringing in the
new individual once the consortium is established and the right individual is found.  This problem
limits EMC’s ability to grow because it is reluctant to DEMO its experienced FSAs over old and
new territories and thereby compromise its ability to serve existing members in the interest of
serving new members.  EMC currently has five communities in Ontario that are ‘screaming’ for
its DEMO
70
Saskatchewan Research Council
125 - 15 Innovation Blvd.
Saskatoon, SK, S7N DEMO
info@src.sk.ca
(306) 933-5400
President
Dr. Laurier L. Schramm
(306) 933-5402
schramm@src.sk.ca
Mission
SRC's mission is to help the people of Saskatchewan DEMO the economy with quality jobs
and a secure environment. SRC does this through research, development, and the transfer of
innovative scientific and technological DEMO, applications and services.
Geographic jurisdiction: Saskatchewan
Founded:  1947
Description
SRC is Saskatchewan's leading provider of applied R&D and technology commercialization. DEMO
council takes the leading-edge knowledge developed in Saskatchewan and sells it to the world
and, at the same time, brings the best knowledge DEMO work has to offer and applies it to the unique
Saskatchewan situations.  The SRC has more than 265 employees.
Activities
The SRC undertakes R&D in five of the economic sectors that have been identified as DEMO to
the province of Saskatchewan:  agriculture and biotechnology, environment, mining and minerals,
energy, and manufacturing and value-added processing.
Expertise
Scientists, DEMO, and technologists in a variety of disciplines.  Eighteen of the staff are adjust
professors in Saskatchewan universities.  The particular strength of the SRC is pilot scale process
development, and technology and prototype development.
Stakeholders
Roughly 80% of the SRCs clients are large organizations from the public and DEMO sector.
Twenty five clients are responsible for 75-80% of  the 1,DEMO projects undertaken during 2004-
2005.
Sources of funding
The annual budget is approximately $28 million.  Contracts account for approximately 75% of
SRC’s revenues and government investment for the remaining 25%.  Of the contracts, 60% are
DEMO by industry and 40% from various levels of government.
Volunteer contributions
The value of volunteer contributions is not assessed but is estimated to be DEMO than $400K per
year.  400K is the sum of the volunteer DEMO of the 9 member board of directors which is
estimated at $100K, and the contributions of the members of the five 15 member industry
advisory committees, estimated at $300K.
Impact
The SRC strives to provide quality of life and environmental benefits to the citizens of
Saskatchewan in addition DEMO economic benefits.  A conservative estimate of the 2004-2005
economic benefits is DEMO million.  In addition, the SRC estimates that during 2004-2005
approximately 2000 jobs were created or saved as a result of its work.  The SRC served 1,800
clients during 2004-2005.
71
Occasionally the SRC’s research projects led to very significant economic benefits for DEMO
province.  For example, the SRC developed a process for using carbon dioxide(CO2) injections to
facilitate the recovery of oil.  Besides being DEMO efficient method for recovering the remaining oil
from depleted reservoirs, the DEMO has the added benefit of sequestering excess CO2
underground where it doesn’t create environmental problems.  EnCana Resources has used the
process to generate an additional 120 million barrels of oil generating some $6 billion in
revenues.
DEMO changes
In 1996 the SRC created a for-profit subsidiary called TecMark International which assists
entrepreneurs with technology assessment and commercialization.  In 2000 the act governing the
SRC was amended to allow it to take equity stakes DEMO companies in exchange for the provision of
R&D services.
Changes in mission
Since 2001 SRC has shifted towards a greater focus on work DEMO by industry.  This shift has
been accompanied by a shift in DEMO sources to the point where approximately 75% of SRC’s
resources come from contracts and 25% from government.  Of the contracts, 60% are awarded DEMO
industry and 40% from various levels of government.   As a public agency the SRC can undertake
more public-good projects than could a more DEMO industry–driven organization.
What difficulties does your organization encounter in its efforts to promote the ability of
firms to develop and deploy new products, services, or processes?
The SRC has two major obstacles to increased value creation.  The first is financial, with a great
financial commitment from DEMO province the Council could undertake work of greater depth and
breadth.  DEMO second problem is related and concerns insufficient support for organizations
operating in the space between publicly supported technology development and privately
supported business activities.  The activities in this space, which is sometimes referred to as the
‘valley of death’, include pilot testing of large scale processes and prototype development. Both
public and private investors are reluctant to invest in such DEMO because they share both the
high risk profile of earlier stage research and technology development and the high cost profile of
downstream commercialization activities.
DEMO example, recently the SRC saw the need to upgrade its fermentation DEMO from laboratory
grade to commercial grade.  The laboratory grade plant is DEMO used by Saskatchewan firms
and university researchers to develop high-value, low DEMO biological products.  The benefit of
upgrading the facility to be capable DEMO producing commercial grade products is that it makes the
process of transitioning production from the laboratory process to the commercial process, as
required for clinical and field trials, more seamless and therefore less susceptible to the
introduction of errors.  Upgrading the SRC’s facility was an expensive proposition, DEMO the order
of $3 million.  Moreover, while local firms declared a strong interest in having the upgraded
facility available, they were unwilling to commit to sample or production volumes.  This was a
high risk, DEMO cost venture of the type that investors are reluctant to fund.  DEMO in this
case the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada both came forward and the upgrade is
underway but this is exactly type of opportunity DEMO create value that is passed by too often.
What could your organization do with to promote the ability of firms to develop and deploy
DEMO products, services, or processes if it had a new three-year project funded at 30% of
your annual budget?
With increased funding on DEMO order of $9 million SRC would create a kind of business incubator
for the process industry.  Such a capability would allow SRC to take technology from the pilot
stage to the commercial stage.  The facility would be complemented by a fund to do
demonstration projects.
72
73{1g42fwefx}