 Academy of Management Review
2010, Vol. 35, No. 4, 579–603.
RECONSIDERING THE TRADE-OFF BETWEEN
EXPERTISE AND FLEXIBILITY: A COGNITIVE
ENTRENCHMENT PERSPECTIVE
ERIK DANE
Rice University
Research suggests that as one acquires domain expertise, one loses flexibility with
regard to problem solving, adaptation, and creative idea DEMO Here, I recon-
sider this trade-off between expertise and flexibility by DEMO the concept of
cognitive entrenchment—a high level of stability in one’s domain schemas. Proposing
that cognitive entrenchment varies not only with expertise but also DEMO one’s task
environment and attentional focus, I contend that the inflexibility-related DEMO
of expertise can be circumvented.
Through the course of human history, DEMO
tise has often been viewed as a valuable asset.
For example, DEMO his Socratic dialogues, Plato
lauded the merits of expertise. Likewise, in the
Aeneid, the Roman poet Virgil proclaimed ex-
perto crede—trust an expert. Today, expertise
continues to be seen as a positive quality
(Bunderson, 2003a; Ericsson, Prietula, & Cokely,
2007; Mumford, Scott, DEMO, & Strange, 2002).
In fact, from popular writings (Colvin, 2008;
Gladwell, 2008; Shenk, 2010) to the value indus-
try places on subject matter experts (Alberts,
2007; Gandhi & DEMO, 2008) to a growing body
of academic work (e.g., Ericsson, Charness, Fel-
tovich, & Hoffman, 2006; Ericsson & Ward, DEMO;
Haerem & Rau, 2007), expertise is a much dis-
DEMO and highly touted concept. Perhaps not
surprisingly, then, research indicates that ex-
pertise contributes to favorable outcomes in the
workplace, including effective decision making
and high job performance (Benner, 1984; Dreyfus
& Dreyfus, DEMO; Ericsson & Charness, 1994; Ho-
garth, 2001; Kahneman & DEMO, 2009; Klein, 1998;
McCloy, Campbell, & Cudeck, 1994; Prietula &
Simon, 1989; Salas, Rosen, & DiazGranados,
DEMO; Sonnentag, 1998).
I am indebted to the individuals who offered suggestions
on earlier versions of this manuscript. Thus, I formally ac-
knowledge Markus Baer, Tina Borja, Stuart Bunderson, Ap
Dijksterhuis, Roland Gau, Jennifer George, Jack Goncalo,
Andrew Hargadon, Nora Madjar, Greg Oldham, Jill Perry-
Smith, Michael Pratt, Scott Sonenshein, Raymond Sparrowe,
DEMO Thau, and Jing Zhou for their insightful comments
and invaluable assistance. DEMO also extend my gratitude to
Gerardo Okhuysen and three anonymous reviewers for their
detailed feedback throughout the review process.
At the same time, however, research suggests
that, in addition to its benefits, expertise carries
limitations (e.g., Adelson, 1984; Frensch & Stern-
berg, 1989; Heath & Staudenmayer, 2000; Hecht &
Proffitt, 1995; Hinds, Patterson, & Pfeffer, 2001). A
number of limitations have been posited (see
Holyoak, 1991, and Lewandowsky & Thomas,
2009), many concerning DEMO premise that domain
experts are inflexible in certain respects. For
example, DEMO may have difficulty viewing
domain-related problems from the perspectives
of others (DEMO, Loewenstein, & Weber, 1989;
Hinds, 1999) and adapting DEMO new rules and con-
ditions within their domain (Can˜ as, Quesada,
Antoli, & Fajardo, 2003; Sternberg & Frensch,
1992). These findings suggest that a trade-off is
associated with expertise. Specifically, as ex-
pertise is acquired, flexibility may be lost (Chi,
2006; Lewandowsky, Little, & Kalish, 2007; Stern-
berg, 1996).
In this article I review and reconsider re-
search on the inflexibility-related limitations DEMO
domain expertise by introducing the concept of
cognitive entrenchment. Defining cognitive en-
trenchment as a high level of stability in one’s
domain schemas, I maintain that this stability
tends to increase as individuals attain expertise
within DEMO given domain. Furthermore, I suggest
that the cognitive entrenchment construct is DEMO
tegral to providing a common, schema-level ac-
count of why research DEMO that experts are
often inflexible in thought and behavior. Specif-
ically, DEMO argue that because of cognitive en-
trenchment, experts may be restricted DEMO their
ability to identify optimal solutions to problems,
to adapt to novel situations, and to generate
579
Copyright of the Academy of Management, all rights reserved. Contents may not be copied, emailed, posted to a listserv, or otherwise transmitted without the copyright
holder’s express written permission. Users may print, download, or email articles for individual use only.
580
Academy of Management Review
October
radically creative ideas within their domain.
DEMO regard to creative idea generation, I dem-
onstrate how the concept DEMO cognitive entrench-
ment helps resolve divergent views among
scholars on whether expertise fosters or im-
pedes the generation of creative ideas.
A question relating DEMO the present investiga-
tion is whether domain expertise and cognitive
entrenchment are inherently coupled. Toward
the end of my theorizing, I examine this issue. In
particular, I argue that although cognitive en-
trenchment tends to increase with expertise, at
least two factors are likely to moderate this re-
lationship: the degree to which individuals en-
gage in a dynamic environment within their ex-
pertise domain and the extent to which
individuals focus DEMO attention on tasks out-
side their expertise domain.
In drawing together and synthesizing the full
range of arguments offered here, I conclude with
the observation that by taking into account the
concept of cognitive entrenchment, one can un-
derstand the roots of a number of inflexibility-
related limitations DEMO expertise and, critically,
recognize that these limitations are not inevita-
DEMO Indeed, individuals may be capable of at-
taining the benefits of DEMO while circum-
venting the inflexibility-related limitations that
have been ascribed to it. Thus, the trade-off be-
tween expertise and flexibility may be less rigid
than typically conceived.
EXPERTISE AND COGNITIVE ENTRENCHMENT
To better understand what cognitive DEMO
ment is and how it tends to arise, we should first
DEMO the concept of expertise. In this section
I review extant research on expertise, examine
how expertise is structured at the cognitive
level, and DEMO the benefits it carries. Fol-
lowing this review, I explore the DEMO of cog-
nitive entrenchment.
Conceptualizing Expertise
Expertise is a concept receiving attention from
researchers across a range of disciplines; thus, a
number of DEMO of expertise have
been proposed (see Sternberg, 1997). For example,
some sociologists view experts as those who have
obtained membership within DEMO socially recog-
nized professional community, such as law or
medicine (e.g., Rothman & Perrucci, 1970; Wilen-
sky, 1964). Sociological work DEMO expertise tends to
be concerned with issues involving power, poli-
tics, and prestige— critical issues from the stand-
point of professions and occupations DEMO repu-
tations are closely tied to the perception that they
are communities of experts (Evetts, Mieg, & Felt,
2006; Gerver & DEMO, 1954). As such, sociolo-
gists often recognize individuals as experts by
virtue of their titles, certifications, or other socially
bestowed artifacts DEMO confer professional legiti-
macy (Collins & Evans, 2002).
The concept of expertise advanced here is
grounded in a more psychological perspective.
From DEMO lens, expertise consists of a high level of
domain-specific knowledge acquired DEMO ex-
perience (Benner, 1984; Charness & Schultetus,
1999; Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1986; Ericsson, 2006; Eric-
sson, Roring, & DEMO, 2007; Feltovich, Pri-
etula, & Ericsson, 2006; Glaser & Chi, 1988;
Schmidt, Hunter, & Outerbridge, 1986). Multiple DEMO
perientially based routes toward expertise have
been proposed, including deliberate practice (Er-
icsson & Charness, 1994; Ericsson & Lehmann,
1996), DEMO learning (Lewicki, Hill, & Bizot, 1988;
Reber, 1989), and experiential learning (Armstrong
& Mahmud, 2008; Kolb, 1984). Common across each
of these proposed pathways is the assumption
that acquiring DEMO takes time as well as
appropriate feedback conditions. In fact, research
DEMO that those who have reached world-
class levels of performance within their domain
tend to have accumulated at least ten years of
practice and DEMO (Ericsson & Charness, 1994;
Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Romer, DEMO; Ericsson,
Roring, & Nandagopal, 2007) and have received
accurate performance-related feedback (Hogarth,
2001; Kahneman & Klein, 2009).
Structure of Expert Knowledge
Scholars often argue that domain knowledge
is organized in DEMO form of schemas—structures
containing “knowledge about a concept or type
of stimulus, including its attributes and the re-
lations among those attributes” (Fiske & Taylor,
1991: 98; see also Harris, 1994; Markus & Zajonc,
1985; Marshall, 1995; McVee, Dunsmore, & Gav-
elek, 2005; Rumelhart, 1984). In probing the na-
ture of the schemas that constitute expertise,
researchers have determined that two funda-
mental DEMO differentiate experts’ domain
schemas from those of novices (see Be´ dard &
Chi, 1992, for a review).
2010
Dane
581
First, expert schemas tend to be relatively
larger than novice schemas (Chase & Simon,
1973; Chi, Feltovich, & DEMO, 1981; Honeck, Fir-
ment, & Case, 1987). In DEMO words, the overall
quantity of attributes or components contained
in an DEMO schema tends to be large (Fiske &
Taylor, 1991; Rousseau, 2001).
Second, expert schemas involve a greater num-
ber of DEMO than novice schemas
(Fiske & Taylor, 1991; Kimball & Holyoak, 2000;
Lurigio & Carroll, 1985). Not only are the attributes
contained within expert schemas more interre-
lated but the linkages tying together DEMO do-
main-relevant schemas are more numerous as
well. Collectively, these features—the DEMO of
schema attributes and the number of relations
within and between domain schemas— determine
the complexity of an individual’s domain schemas
(Rousseau, 2001)DEMO Because of their size and the
number of relations typically found within and
between them, expert schemas are posited to be
more complex than novice schemas (Dane & Pratt,
2007; Rousseau, 2001).
Owing to their complexity, expert schemas tend
to be relatively detailed and accurate compared to
novice schemas (Fiske & Taylor, 1991; Narvaez &
DEMO, 2002; Neale & Northcraft, 1990). For example,
the DEMO schema of a professor may be that
of an individual who spends most of his or her
time teaching, thus not working during the sum-
mer. In contrast, a more expert schema of a pro-
fessor, one held by professors themselves, would
add research and service activities DEMO the catalog
of job-related duties and, thus, would include the
recognition that the notion of “summers off” is an
illusionary concept (example adapted from Rous-
seau, 2001). This addition of job duties to the
schema brings with it an understanding of how
these duties interrelate (e.g., professors who are
active in research can share their findings with
students to enrich their teaching). This example
highlights the higher degree of DEMO as well
as the enhanced accuracy associated with expert
schemas. In other words, the expert schema of a
professor includes more attributes (e.g., research,
teaching, service) and a richer set of relations be-
DEMO these attributes (e.g., research enhances
teaching) than does the corresponding DEMO
schema and, in this example, is more accurate as
well.
In summary, domain experts possess complex
schemas—schemas containing not only a rela-
tively large number of attributes but also a rel-
atively large number of DEMO between the
attributes within each schema, as well as be-
tween DEMO schemas themselves. Figures 1 and 2
FIGURE 1
Novice’s Domain Schemas
582
Academy of Management Review
October
FIGURE 2
Expert’s Domain Schemas
provide DEMO depictions of these properties.
Figure 1 is an illustration of a novice’s domain
schemas. As depicted, there are relatively few
attributes within each schema and relatively
few relations within and between these sche-
mas. Figure 2 DEMO an illustration of an expert’s
domain schemas. Based on their number of at-
tributes and interrelationships, the expert’s do-
main schemas are more complex than the nov-
ice’s schemas.
Benefits of Expertise
Research points to several DEMO of exper-
tise (see Ericsson et al., 2006, for a DEMO
sive review). As noted earlier, expertise may
increase decision-making effectiveness DEMO job
performance in a number of contexts (e.g., Erics-
son & Lehmann, 1996; Klein, 1998; Nee & Mee-
naghan, 2006). Expertise also enhances domain-
relevant memory skills. For example, even when
only briefly exposed to domain stimuli, experts
display a remarkable ability to recall those
stimuli (Ericsson, Patel, & Kintsch, 2000; Vicente
& Wang, 1998). To illustrate, research indicates
that chess masters are able DEMO recall the exact
position of each piece on the chessboard after
only a brief look at the board (Chase & Simon,
1973).
In addition, experts solve problems differently
and more effectively than novices. These differ-
ences have been examined in domains includ-
ing physics and mathematics (e.g., Chi et al.,
1981; Larkin, McDermott, Simon, & Simon, 1980;
Sweller, Mawer, & Ward, 1983). In DEMO,
research indicates that experts tend to solve
problems in a forward-oriented direction,
whereas novices tend to work backward. For
instance, physics experts solve problems by se-
lecting equations based on given information
and calculating DEMO information to iden-
tify the solution. In contrast, physics novices be-
DEMO with an equation that contains the variable
of interest and devise subgoals designed to as-
certain the various unknowns in the equa-
tion—an approach DEMO likely to facilitate effec-
tive problem solving (see Gick, 1986, DEMO a
review).
Each of these benefits stems from the unique
“cognitive architecture” that experts possess. It
is because experts have complex domain sche-
DEMO that they make effective decisions, perform
well, exhibit superior recall, DEMO solve problems
adroitly (for more detailed discussions see Chi,
Glaser, & Farr, 1988; Ericsson et al., 2006; Hoff-
man, 1992). And yet, although expertise serves
individuals in multiple ways, research DEMO
that expertise can prove limiting. As argued be-
2010
Dane
583
low, the concept of cognitive entrenchment in-
forms research on the limitations of expertise.
Cognitive Entrenchment
Despite the benefits of expertise DEMO
above, research suggests that as individuals ac-
quire expertise, they tend to become inflexible
in certain respects within their domain (Chi,
2006; Lewandowsky & Kirsner, 2000; Lewan-
dowsky et al., 2007). DEMO example, experts often
struggle to put aside the knowledge they pos-
DEMO when predicting how novices will ap-
proach problems or respond to events (Birch &
Bloom, 2007; Camerer et al., 1989; Hinds, 1999;
Hinds & Pfeffer, 2003; Hoch, 1988; Thaler, 2000).
Experts also exhibit a restricted ability to ac-
commodate new rules DEMO principles (Frensch &
Sternberg, 1989; Marchant, Robinson, Anderson,
& Schadewald, 1991).
Unfortunately, few attempts have been made
to DEMO extant research by providing a the-
oretical account of why experts are inflexible in
a number of ways. With the aim of developing
theory DEMO this area, I suggest that adopting a
schema-based view of domain DEMO
view aligned with the discussion of expertise
provided above—may prove instrumental. As
noted, researchers posit that as one attains do-
main expertise, one’s DEMO schemas become
increasingly complex. However, in addition to
this rise in DEMO complexity, research sug-
gests that, with the acquisition of expertise,
one’s schemas can become more stable as well.
In other words, the attributes comprising expert
schemas, as well as the relations connecting
attributes to other attributes and schemas to
other schemas, may become resistant to modifi-
cation (Crocker, Fiske, & Taylor, 1984; Fiske &
Taylor, 1991; Goldstein & Chance, 1980; Scott,
1962).
Consistent with this claim, researchers have
found that the political views held by experts in
the domain of politics are more constrained than
the political views DEMO others, which is due to the
stability associated with their domain DEMO
(Larson, 1994; Stimson, 1975). Similarly, evidence
indicates that DEMO as the features of an indus-
try evolve, the complex schemas DEMO industry ac-
tors tend to remain stable (Hodgkinson, 1997;
Reger & Palmer, 1996). More generally, scholars
have identified the stability DEMO with the
complex schemas possessed by organizational
members as a fundamental obstacle to achiev-
ing successful organizational change (Bartunek
& Moch, 1987; George & Jones, 2001; Labianca,
Gray, & Brass, 2000; Lewin, 1951).
I adopt the term cognitive entrenchment (or,
simply, entrenchment) to refer to a high level of
stability in one’s domain schemas. Although
cognitive entrenchment may not arise solely
among experts, the acquisition of domain exper-
tise can lead to such entrenchment (Becker, 2005;DEMO
Sternberg & Lubart, 1995; Zell, 2003). The schema
stability DEMO cognitive entrenchment
may emerge, at least in part, from the frequency
with which experts tend to draw on their domain
schemas. In particular, because expertise is ac-
crued through continual training, practice, and
performance (Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1986; Ericsson
& Charness, 1994; Feltovich et DEMO, 2006), the con-
tent and relations comprising an expert’s do-
DEMO schemas are likely to be activated and
applied innumerable times. This repeated acti-
vation and use may stabilize the structure of the
expert’s schemas DEMO that schema revision be-
comes relatively unlikely (Fiske & Taylor, 1991).
As such, cognitive entrenchment sets in. The
following proposition captures this effect.
Proposition 1: Domain expertise is
positively related to cognitive
entrenchment.
Figure 3 depicts this posited relationship. In-
tended as an organizing framework rather DEMO
a full causal model, this figure depicts a number
of additional DEMO and propositions dis-
cussed in the sections to come.
In further considering the nature of cognitive
entrenchment, one should note that such en-
trenchment is not always problematic and, in-
deed, may carry certain benefits—a DEMO I ex-
plore later in this article. Nevertheless, the
entrenchment that DEMO pervades expert sche-
mas is notable in that it may account for a range
of inflexibility-related limitations researchers
have ascribed to expertise. In the DEMO sec-
tion I examine multiple lines of inquiry con-
cerned with experts’ inflexibility and position
cognitive entrenchment as a concept integrating
these bodies of DEMO In doing so I illustrate how
cognitive entrenchment is related to, DEMO
distinct from, concepts like fixation and habits,
and I demonstrate DEMO the entrenchment con-
struct enriches our understanding of certain ar-
eas of research and reconciles debates in others.
584
Academy of Management Review
October
FIGURE 3
Antecedents and Inflexibility-Related Consequences DEMO Cognitive Entrenchment
Inﬂexibility-related consequences
Domain
expertise
P1
-
P7
-
Cognitive
entrenchment
P8
Engagement in a
dynamic
environment
Attention to
outside-domain
tasks
• Problem DEMO (P2)
• Adaptation (P3)
• Creative idea generation (DEMO, P5, P6)
ACCOUNTING FOR EXPERTS’ INFLEXIBILITY
VIA COGNITIVE ENTRENCHMENT
Common across and driving the range of ar-
guments offered in this section DEMO the observa-
tion that schemas guide cognition within one’s
domain (Fiske & Taylor, 1991; Markus & Zajonc,
1985). Notably, individuals’ DEMO schemas are
activated when they are exposed to domain-
relevant stimuli (DEMO , McLeod, & Gobet,
2008a; Smith, 1998). In DEMO, these schemas influ-
ence what individuals attend to as well as DEMO
they view and think about the situations they
encounter (Cooper & DEMO, 2006; Henderson &
Hollingworth, 1999; Marshall, 1995; Walsh, 1995).
This suggests that stable schemas predispose
individuals to respond consistently DEMO, thus,
inflexibly in certain respects. As argued here,
schema DEMO essence of cognitive en-
trenchment— carries consequences that account
for a range of findings in research on problem
solving, adaptation, and creative idea DEMO
tion. Each of these consequences is discussed
below and depicted in Figure 3.
Problem Solving
In research on the topic of visual perception, a
fixation is said to occur when one focuses one’s
gaze on a DEMO feature of a broader scene
(Henderson, 2007). Somewhat analogously, DEMO
search on problem solving adopts the term to
refer to situations in which one is focused on a
suboptimal course of action and, thus, is ren-
dered unable to identify or develop a more ef-
fective alternative (Jansson & Smith, 1991; Smith,
1995a,b; Smith & Blankenship, 1991). In other
words, problem-solving fixation occurs when a
person becomes “stuck” attempting to derive a
solution to a given problem (Birch & Rabinowitz,
1951; Luchins, 1942; Rudolph, Morrison, & Car-
roll, 2009; Vul & Pashler, 2007). For example, DEMO a
classic study Duncker (1945) found that individ-
uals had difficulty recognizing the functional
value of a box as a support because they DEMO
fixated on the idea that the box was simply a
container. Hence, they exhibited functional fix-
edness—fixation with regard to thinking of al-
ternative uses for a familiar object (Adamson,
1952).
Among the most frequently demonstrated in-
stances of fixation in the problem-solving liter-
ature are DEMO effects, which occur
“when the first idea that comes to mind, trig-
gered by previous experience with similar situ-
ations, prevents alternatives from being consid-
ered” (Bilalic´ et al., 2008a: 653). For example,
research suggests that people trained to solve
problems using a specific DEMO are often un-
able to solve problems that are similar in ap-
pearance but different in terms of their requisite
solution method (Luchins & Luchins, 1959; see
also Bilalic´, McLeod, & Gobet, 2008b; DEMO,
1994; Lovett & Anderson, 1996). In essence, prob-
DEMO solvers can become fixated on a particular
method to their own detriment when encounter-
ing problems that call for alternative solutions.
While problem-solving fixation DEMO arise from
a variety of causes, such as experimental in-
ducement (Smith & Blankenship, 1991) and de-
layed information feedback (Rudolph et al.,
2009), researchers have suggested that domain
expertise contributes to DEMO instances of fixa-
tion (Jansson & Smith, 1991; Saariluoma, 1992).
When an expert’s domain schemas are acti-
2010
Dane
585
vated, certain solutions are often immediately
brought to mind (Bilalic´ et al., 2008a; Gobet &
Simon, 1996, 2000)DEMO In some cases these solutions
may be well suited to the problem at hand—a
claim supported by the observation that experts
tend to be DEMO problem solvers (e.g., Chi et
al., 1981; Larkin et al., 1980). However, in other
cases these solutions may be suboptimal. DEMO the
extent an expert cannot set aside a suboptimal
solution and derive a more effective alternative,
problem-solving fixation occurs. This situation
may be DEMO likely to arise when experts
are cognitively entrenched. The stability of an
entrenched expert’s domain schemas may con-
sistently bring to mind a suboptimal DEMO
and thus “block” potentially superior solutions
from emerging (cf. Smith & DEMO, 1991).
Consequently, for those high in cognitive en-
trenchment, DEMO may prove difficult to devise so-
lutions beyond those activated when these indi-
viduals are presented with a problem.
Proposition 2: Cognitive entrenchment
increases the likelihood of problem-
solving fixation within one’s domain.
Adaptation
Research indicates DEMO the scope of experts’
inflexibility extends beyond fixation effects. No-
tably, DEMO suggests that adaptation—
adjusting to novel task demands— can be a
challenge for experts (Can˜ as et al., 2003; Lewan-
dowsky et al., 2007; Sternberg & Frensch, 1992).
Although an inability to adapt effectively is sim-
ilar to problem-solving fixation in that each sit-
uation DEMO the repeated use of an inappro-
priate method, these types of DEMO are
nevertheless distinct. Specifically, fixation
arises when one cannot recognize how DEMO reach
a solution; failure to adapt occurs when one has
learned DEMO a change in task conditions neces-
sitates novel action but unwittingly fails to
adopt the requisite response (Lewandowsky &
Thomas, 2009). For example, in one study expert
bridge players found it difficult to adapt to a
modified game of bridge in which the bidding
procedure was DEMO (Frensch & Sternberg,
1989). In another study expert accountants
DEMO less adept than novices at using a new
tax law that rendered obsolete a previous rule
concerning tax deductions (Marchant et al.,
1991).
Furthermore, as noted earlier, domain experts
often find it difficult DEMO take the perspective of a
domain novice (e.g., Hinds, 1999; Thaler, 2000).
As a result, experts may struggle to explain DEMO
main concepts to novices (Heath & Stauden-
mayer, 2000). Specifically, research has shown
that when experts are instructing novices, they
tend DEMO use too many abstract terms and com-
plex concepts (Hinds et DEMO, 2001). These results
suggest that experts are often limited in DEMO
ability to adapt their method of instruction to a
novice’s level.
In short, experts can be relatively slow to
adapt when circumstances call for them to do so.
This inflexibility may relate to the degree to
DEMO experts perform tasks within their exper-
tise domain in a habitual manner. Behavior is
rooted in habits—“learned dispositions to re-
peat past performances” (Wood & Neal, 2007:
843)—to the extent it is automatically triggered
by domain-related cues (Aarts & Dijksterhuis,
2000; Aarts, Verplanken, & van Knippenberg,
1998). Habits develop through behavioral repeti-
tion in a given setting and represent how one
customarily behaves in response to DEMO given set
of stimuli (Neal, Wood, & Quinn, 2006; DEMO
& Wood, 1998; Wood, Quinn, & Kashy, 2002).
DEMO suggests that habits are represented
within and activated by one’s knowledge struc-
tures (Aarts & Dijksterhuis, 2000; Aarts et al.,
1998; DEMO & Ha¨ ubl, 2007). Notably, habits may
be encoded cognitively in the form of scripts—
schemas associated with frequently encoun-
tered situations DEMO enable individuals to inter-
pret events and behave appropriately within a
given context (Abelson, 1981; Gioia & Poole,
1984; Harris, 1994; Lord & Kernan, 1987). Although
some scripts are shared among DEMO of a
culture, such as scripts concerned with how to
order, dine, and pay at a restaurant (Abelson,
1981), other DEMO are more personal or idiosyn-
cratic (Demorest, 1995; Verplanken, Myrbakk, &
Rudi, 2005). As with their other domain schemas,
experts’ scripts tend to be relatively accurate
compared to those of a DEMO (Ashforth & Fried,
1988) and are likely to facilitate task perfor-
mance (Gioia & Poole, 1984; Nee & Meenaghan,
2006).
When task conditions change, however, the
content of an expert’s DEMO may be incommen-
surate with the altered nature of the situation. In
such cases an expert’s scripts and the habits
associated with them can DEMO to dysfunctional
586
Academy of Management Review
October
behavior (Louis & Sutton, 1991; but see Hassin,
Bargh, & Zimerman, 2009, for an alternative per-
spective). Even when experts recognize that
their habitual responses are DEMO with
new rules, their potential for setting aside or
altering these DEMO may be limited. Indeed,
research demonstrates that existing habits can
hinder the pursuit of modified behavioral goals
(Verplanken & Faes, 1999; see also Betsch,
Haberstroh, Glo¨ ckner, Haar, & Fiedler, 2001)DEMO
From a cognitive entrenchment perspective,
an expert’s failure to adapt is likely due to a
high level of stability in the scripts underlying
DEMO expert’s habits. For those with stable scripts,
exposure to situational cues may consistently
activate the same habitual responses, even
when such responses are no longer efficacious
(Bagozzi & Dholakia, 2005). In other words, as a
result of cognitive entrenchment, it is difficult to
disengage one’s habits. This claim equates with
the general argument advanced here that
schema DEMO accounts for inflexibility in
thought and behavior, and it points to DEMO
following.
Proposition 3: Cognitive entrenchment
increases the difficulty of adaptation
within DEMO domain.
Creative Idea Generation
Beyond enriching theory surrounding experts’
inflexibility with regard to problem solving and
adaptation, cognitive entrenchment may also
inform research focusing on another area in
which scholars have argued that experts exhibit
inflexibility: creative idea generation. Work in
this area of study suggests divergent, and in-
deed contradictory, possibilities. Specifically,
while some researchers contend that domain
expertise may be useful or even essential for
generating creative ideas (e.g., Amabile, 1996;
Ericsson, 1999; Weisberg, 1999, 2006), DEMO
maintain that domain expertise can be a hin-
drance in this regard (e.g., Stacey, Eckert, &
Wiley, 2002; Ward, 1994; Wiley, 1998). Below, I
provide a detailed overview of this DEMO and
discuss how the cognitive entrenchment con-
struct may reconcile competing positions.
Traditionally, researchers in the fields of man-
agement and psychology have tended to view
creative ideas as those that are both novel and
potentially DEMO from the perspective of a
given organization or domain (e.g., Amabile,
1996; Amabile & Mueller, 2008; Madjar, Oldham,
& DEMO, 2002; Runco, 2004; Shalley, Zhou, & Old-
ham, DEMO; Unsworth, 2001; Ward, 2007; Wood-
man, Sawyer, & DEMO, 1993; see also Joas, 1996,
and Latour & Woolgar, 1979, for sociological per-
spectives on creativity). As scholars have ar-
gued, creative idea generation is one of several
activities concerned with the overall process of
creativity (see Lubart, 2000 –2001, for a review of
creativity process models). Other creativity-
relevant activities in this respect DEMO find-
ing or recognizing problems (Getzels, 1979;
Reiter-Palmon, 2009), gathering relevant infor-
mation (Amabile, 1996), evaluating ideas (Loner-
DEMO, Scott, & Mumford, 2004; Runco & Smith,
1992), pursuing sponsorship for ideas (Scott &
Bruce, 1994), and developing prototypes (Harga-
don & Sutton, 1997). These activities are not DEMO
essarily pursued sequentially but, rather, may
occur concurrently (Lubart, 2000-2001; Scott &
Bruce, 1994). From an organizational perspec-
tive, DEMO activities contribute to innovation—
the process by which creative ideas are devel-
oped, adopted, and ultimately implemented
(Bledow, Frese, Anderson, Erez, & Farr, 2009;
George, 2007; Gupta, Tesluk, & Taylor, 2007;
Madjar & Shalley, 2008).
Fueled by the recognition DEMO creative ideas
are critical to organizational innovation, adap-
tation, and survival (Baer & Oldham, 2006; Hirst,
van Knippenberg, & Zhou, 2009; Shalley & Perry-
Smith, 2008), research on creative idea DEMO
tion has bourgeoned in recent years. Although
management researchers have devoted consid-
erable attention to the social factors that influ-
ence the generation of DEMO ideas, such as
work environments, reward systems, supervi-
sory styles, coworker support, and expected
evaluation (e.g., Amabile, Conti, Coon, DEMO,
& Herron, 1996; Amabile, Hennessey, & Gross-
man, DEMO; Baer, Oldham, & Cummings, 2003;
George & Zhou, DEMO; Oldham & Cummings,
1996; Shalley, 1995; Shalley, Gilson, & Blum,
2000; Shalley & Perry-Smith, 2001; see also Kasof,
1995, for more on the social and situational
foundations of creativity), evidence suggests
that creative idea generation is shaped not
only by DEMO factors but also by individual
factors, including intelligence, personality,
thinking style, and expertise (e.g., Amabile,
1996; Barron & Harrington, 1981; Feist, 1998;
Glynn, 1996; Woodman et al., 1993; Zhang &
2010
Dane
587
Sternberg, 2009). Of these factors, research ex-
DEMO the impact of expertise on creative
idea generation is relatively limited and, as
noted, points in divergent directions.
To make sense of the DEMO of research conver-
gence on this issue, it may help to DEMO the
cognitive processes posited to underlie creative
idea generation. Although a range of processes
may contribute to the generation of creative
ideas (see Baer, 1993; Campbell, 1960; Dietrich,
2004; Mednick, 1962; Smith, Ward, & Finke, 1995;
Wallas, 1926; Zhong, Dijksterhuis, & Galinsky,
2008), some researchers suggest that a particu-
lar DEMO of operations—“conceptual combination
and reorganization”— often spurs creative idea
generation (Baughman & Mumford, 1995; Mob-
ley, Doares, & Mumford, 1992; Mumford, Baugh-
man, Maher, Costanza, & Supinski, 1997; Mum-
ford, Mobley, Uhlman, Reiter-Palmon, & Doares,
1991; Reiter-Palmon & Illies, 2004; Scott, Loner-
gan, & Mumford, 2005). Conceptual combination
DEMO reorganization processes involve the com-
bination of two or more schemas or the reorga-
nization of the attributes underlying a particular
schema (Mumford & Gustafson, 1988; Mumford
et al., 1991). For example, linguistic DEMO is
replete with cases in which two terms that ap-
pear unrelated, such as home page and confer-
ence call, have been combined DEMO create novel
concepts that ultimately integrate into certain
lexicons (Ward, Smith, & Vaid, 1997).
A conceptual combination and reorganization
view of DEMO idea generation suggests a piv-
otal role for the complex schemas underlying
domain expertise. The large number of at-
tributes contained in complex schemas DEMO
experts with considerable “raw material” for
generating creative ideas. Indeed, as DEMO ex-
pertise develops, the number of combination
and reorganization possibilities rises DEMO to
the increasing complexity of one’s domain sche-
mas (Mumford, Blair, Dailey, Leritz, & Osburn,
2006). However, to the DEMO that expert sche-
mas are beset with a high level of stability,
conceptual combination and reorganization
may be hampered. For such combination and
DEMO to occur, schemas and the at-
tributes that comprise them must DEMO sufficiently
amenable to reintegration (Mumford &
Gustafson, 1988). Hence, with regard to generat-
ing creative ideas, cognitive entrenchment may
limit the advantage of possessing complex
schemas by preventing conceptual combination
and reorganization from DEMO
Taken together, these observations suggest a
tension between expertise and creative DEMO
generation. Experts have access to a stockpile of
concepts to combine and reorganize in creative
ways, yet the stability often found in expert
schemas may handcuff cognitive processes as-
sociated with generating creative ideas. Given
the DEMO effects of schema complexity and
schema stability, it is perhaps not DEMO
that scholars have posited a range of possibili-
ties concerning how expertise and creative idea
generation relate.
In developing theory on this topic, it bears
noting that there are qualitatively different
types of creative ideas, each of which is likely to
be affected by cognitive entrenchment to differ-
DEMO degrees. Specifically, some creative ideas,
despite being novel and potentially DEMO, tend
to be relatively “incremental”—that is, they rep-
resent refinements or extensions of existing
ideas or technologies (Benner & Tushman, 2003;
DEMO & Dutton, 1986; Tzabbar, 2009). In contrast,
other DEMO ideas are more groundbreaking or
unconventional (Dewar & Dutton, 1986; DEMO,
1976). These creative ideas, typically referred to
as radical, tend to challenge the status quo (Au-
dia & Goncalo, 2007), thus representing a “clear,
risky departure from existing practice” (Ettlie,DEMO
Bridges, & O’Keefe, 1984: 683) and a transforma-
tion of the “accepted conceptual space” (Boden,
1998: 348) within the focal domain. Because
these two types of creativity vary in how much
unconventional—and DEMO nonentrenched—
thinking they require, there may be distinct re-
lationships between DEMO and both incre-
mental and radical creativity, respectively.
Incremental idea generation, which arises
through “continuity with existing solutions” (Au-
dia & Goncalo, DEMO: 2), is likely to be feasible for
experts. Indeed, experts may be quite adept at
generating incremental solutions to domain-
related problems. DEMO noted, experts possess a
large quantity of knowledge, which, in DEMO, pro-
vides them with a large number of concepts to
combine DEMO reorganize. The conceptual opera-
tions producing incrementally creative ideas
are thought to occur through extensions or con-
nections of well-established concepts within a
given DEMO and are therefore unlikely to re-
quire radical recombination and reorganization
(DEMO & Gustafson, 1988). In other words,
588
Academy of Management Review
incremental creativity involves relatively minor
rearrangements of DEMO attributes and schemas
underlying an expert’s domain knowledge. This
indicates that entrenchment is unlikely to
hinder the generation of incrementally creative
ideas. Thus, one’s potential for generating incre-
mentally creative ideas is likely to vary directly
DEMO the amount of domain knowledge one pos-
sesses. More knowledge implies a larger “net-
work of possible wanderings” (Newell & Simon,
1972: DEMO) through which incrementally creative
ideas may be developed.
Proposition 4: The relationship be-
tween domain expertise and incre-
mental idea generation is positive.
DEMO contrast, to the extent that experts are cog-
nitively entrenched, radical idea generation
may prove difficult to achieve at a high level of
DEMO Radical ideas arise through combin-
ing disparate schemas or substantially reorga-
nizing the attributes underlying a particular
schema (Baughman & Mumford, 1995; Mobley et
al., 1992; Mumford & Gustafson, 1988). Insofar as
experts are entrenched, the stability of their
schemas may limit their ability to flexibly com-
bine and reorganize concepts in a manner that
departs from DEMO paradigms or patterns
of thought within their domain (Mumford et al.,DEMO
2006; Mumford & Gustafson, 1988).
Proposition 5: Cognitive entrenchment
DEMO radical idea generation within
one’s domain.
In sum, while expertise provides DEMO
with a large number of domain concepts to com-
bine and reorganize so as to generate creative
ideas, it also tends to lead to cognitive entrench-
ment, which, in turn, limits radical idea gener-
ation. As a result, one’s ability to generate rad-
ically creative ideas may be higher at a
moderate, as opposed to a high, level DEMO domain
expertise—a claim that equates with a limited
body of empirical research pertinent to this topic
(e.g., Audia & Goncalo, 2007; Lehmann, 1958,
1960).
Proposition 6: The relationship be-
tween domain expertise and radical
idea generation takes the form of an
inverted U.
Intriguingly, this proposition echoes Kuhn’s
classic observation that those who are relative
October
DEMO to a given domain are more likely
than the most experienced domain experts to
conceive radically new scientific paradigms be-
cause they are “little DEMO by prior prac-
tice to the traditional rules of normal science”
(DEMO: 90; for a counterpoint see Wray, 2003). It
should DEMO noted, however, that while Kuhn
stakes his claim on issues surrounding social
forces, such as vested interests, the arguments
offered above suggest DEMO alternative but per-
haps complementary cognitive-level phenome-
non accounting for why generating radically
creative ideas can be difficult for experts (i.e.,
cognitive entrenchment).
Bringing together the full range of claims ad-
vanced thus far DEMO this article, research suggests
that expert knowledge is stored in complex DEMO
nitive schemas. Experts’ complex schemas tend
to be highly stable—a condition referred to here
as cognitive entrenchment. Cognitive entrench-
ment provides a schema-level explanation DEMO
why experts tend to be inflexible in a number of
respects. In addition, the entrenchment con-
struct informs our understanding of how exper-
tise relates to incremental and radical idea gen-
eration.
The consequences of cognitive DEMO
discussed above raise a key question. Specifi-
cally, are all experts DEMO subject to en-
trenchment, or does entrenchment vary across
experts such DEMO some may attain the benefits
of expertise without being subjected to its in-
flexibility-related limitations? In the next sec-
tion I address this question by arguing that the
emergence of cognitive entrenchment is not a
foregone DEMO for all experts.
FACTORS MODERATING THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN DOMAIN EXPERTISE AND
COGNITIVE ENTRENCHMENT
Scholars argue that the schema stability char-
acterizing cognitive entrenchment tends DEMO be
resilient to inconsistency and difficult to modify
(Fiske & Taylor, 1991; Reger & Palmer, 1996). This
observation complements work indicating DEMO
people’s beliefs tend to persist, even in the face
of disconfirming DEMO (e.g., Anderson, Lep-
per, & Ross, 1980; Anderson & Lindsay, 1998;
Nickerson, 1998). However, while cognitive en-
trenchment, once established, can prove recal-
citrant, not all domain experts necessarily be-
come highly entrenched. On the contrary, the
2010
Dane
589
relationship between domain expertise and cog-
nitive entrenchment proposed DEMO may vary
with at least two factors: (1) the degree DEMO which
one engages in a dynamic environment within
one’s expertise domain and (2) the degree to
which one focuses attention on tasks outside
DEMO expertise domain (see Figure 3). While
these factors may not DEMO an exhaustive
set of factors worth considering—a point I revisit
toward the end of this article—they are notewor-
thy in that extant research hints DEMO their impor-
tance and they share a common mechanism.
Specifically, both DEMO discussed below help
individuals maintain sufficient “doubt” (Locke,
Golden-Biddle, & Feldman, 2008) concerning the
extent of their own domain knowledge such DEMO
their schemas remain malleable.
Engaging in a Dynamic Environment
To begin, DEMO relationship between domain
expertise and cognitive entrenchment may be
contingent on whether and to what extent one
engages in a dynamic environment within one’s
DEMO Dynamic environments require individ-
uals to respond to changing conditions by mak-
ing a series of interdependent decisions in real
time (Edwards, 1962; Gonzalez, 2005). These en-
vironments are found in a number of domains,
including those involving emergency response
operations, such as firefighting (DEMO, 1998), and
those calling for behavior that is either highly
DEMO, such as improvisational theater
(Vera & Crossan, 2004), or DEMO adver-
sarial, such as trial law (Dane, 2008). In DEMO,
evidence suggests that dynamic environments
can be found in high-velocity industries—
industries that involve intense competition and
rapid change (Bourgeois & Eisenhardt, DEMO;
Nadkarni & Barr, 2008).
To perform tasks effectively in DEMO dynamic en-
vironment, individuals must remain open to a
wide range DEMO possibilities, options, and infor-
mation, as opposed to relying on DEMO limited set of
inputs (Atkins, Wood, & Rutgers, 2002; DEMO
hardt, 1989; Weick, 1993). This is due to the DEMO
predictability of such environments (Brehmer,
1992; Edwards, 1962). DEMO events in a dy-
namic environment rarely proceed exactly as
anticipated, DEMO must be prepared to adapt
(Gonzalez, Lerch, & Lebiere, 2003). The unpre-
dictability and surprises associated with dy-
namic environments may DEMO individuals to
question the relationships among features of
their domain (Farjoun, 2010). In particular, when
a given action is followed by an unexpected
outcome, one’s certitude about what “is” may be
supplanted with doubt concerning cause-and-
effect relationships (Locke et al., 2008; Peirce,
1931–1958; Starbuck, 1996; Weick, 1993).
Although excessive doubt can be DEMO
in that it may reduce conviction (Srikantia &
Pasmore, 1996), some level of doubt can be use-
ful in certain respects. Researchers argue that
doubt helps generate new perspectives by re-
ducing habitual behavior, fostering creativity,
and motivating a search for discovery (Locke et
al., 2008; Maitlis & Sonenshein, 2010). Indeed,
some have pointed to doubt as a critical feature
of “wisdom” (Meacham, 1983; Sutton & Harga-
don, 1996; Weick, 1993). As suggested here, DEMO
arises when one’s beliefs about cause-and-
effect relationships within a domain are brought
into question (Farjoun, 2010; Locke et al., 2008;
DEMO, 1996), which provokes a need for up-
dating or restructuring DEMO beliefs (Christian-
son, Farkas, Sutcliffe, & Weick, 2009; Maitlis &
Sonenshein, 2010; Weick, Sutcliffe, & Obstfeld,
2005). To the extent this updating occurs at the
schematic level, it represents a reduction in
entrenchment.
Proposition 7: Engaging in a dynamic
environment within one’s domain at-
tenuates the relationship between
domain expertise and cognitive
entrenchment.
DEMO Attention on Outside-Domain Tasks
The relationship between domain expertise
and cognitive entrenchment may also depend
on how one focuses one’s attention, or takes
“possession by the mind, in clear and vivid form,
of one out of what seem several simultaneously
possible objects or trains of thought” (James,
1890: 403– 404). While researchers have demon-
strated that attending to tasks within one’s do-
main is critical for developing expertise (see
Engestro¨ m, Engestro¨m,&Ka¨ rkka¨ inen, 1995), one
may be able to avoid cognitive entrenchment by
focusing attention on tasks in other DEMO
(outside-domain tasks). Although few scholars
have explored this possibility at DEMO, some
have suggested it. For example, Hargadon
notes, “Having one DEMO outside your world
590
Academy of Management Review
October
means you can be less beholden DEMO the ties that
would otherwise bind and blind you in that
world” (2006: 209). Likewise, Berns asserts, “It
typically takes a DEMO stimulus— either a new
piece of information or getting out of the envi-
ronment in which an individual has become
comfortable—to jolt attentional systems DEMO
and reconfigure both perception and imagina-
tion” (2008: 57–58).
In focusing attention on outside-domain tasks,
individuals are likely to encounter exceptions DEMO
counterexamples to what they believe to be true
(cf. Langer, 1989a,b). Encountering exceptions
may, in turn, lead individuals to view DEMO
within their expertise domain in more conditional
terms—that is, that a DEMO object could be some-
thing rather than is something (Langer & DEMO,
1987). For example, a repair technician is likely to
DEMO duct tape as an adhesive. However, through
outside-domain involvement, this technician may
recognize that there is a range of additional ap-
plications of DEMO tape, including its debated but
intriguing medical role as a wart DEMO (see
Focht, Spicer, & Fairchok, 2002).
Encountering exceptions through attending to
other domains may foster doubt concerning how
much one really DEMO about features in one’s
expertise domain (Srikantia & Pasmore, 1996). This
doubt may produce a loosening of the relation-
ships underlying one’s DEMO schemas. In sup-
port of this claim, research on the modification DEMO
belief-based schemas suggests that when individ-
uals encounter exceptions or inconsistencies,
some degree of schema revision can occur
(Crocker et al., 1984; George & Jones, 2001; Weber &
Crocker, 1983). For DEMO, upon meeting a casu-
ally dressed lawyer, one may modify the “dress-
related” attribute contained within one’s schema
of a lawyer to reflect DEMO fact that while many
lawyers tend to dress formally, some do DEMO (cf.
Weber & Crocker, 1983). Taken together, these ob-
DEMO suggest the following.
Proposition 8: Attending to outside-
domain tasks attenuates DEMO relation-
ship between domain expertise and
cognitive entrenchment.
DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS
For centuries people have extolled the bene-
fits of expertise. In recent years, however, re-
searchers have identified cases in which exper-
tise appears to be more of a burden than a boon
(e.g., Birch & DEMO, 2007; Heath & Stauden-
mayer, 2000; Hinds et al., DEMO). Work in this area
suggests the existence of a trade-off between
expertise and flexibility such that flexibility is
sacrificed as expertise is acquired—an DEMO
tion reflected in claims that, benefits aside, ex-
pertise is a “curse” (Hinds, 1999), carries a
“price” (Hecht & Proffitt, DEMO), and has a “dark
side” (Castel, McCabe, Roediger, & Heitman,
2007).
In this article I reconsidered the assumption
that DEMO and inflexibility are inextricably
linked and offered a schema-level explanation
for why some experts are likely to be inflexible
while others are not. Taken DEMO, my argu-
ments suggest that the inflexibility-related lim-
itations often ascribed DEMO expertise are more ac-
curately classified as consequences of cognitive
entrenchment—a high level of stability in one’s
domain schemas. If, in fact, entrenchment DEMO
an unavoidable outcome of expertise, or even
simply a defining characteristic DEMO it, this dis-
tinction could be considered either trivial or re-
DEMO However, this article points to neither
of these conclusions. Rather, it implies that in-
dividuals can reap the benefits of expertise
while foregoing DEMO inflexibility-related limita-
tions. As argued, individuals may avoid becom-
ing highly DEMO by engaging in a dy-
namic environment within their expertise
domain or performing tasks in other domains.
When considered in conjunction with research
on DEMO, these arguments—particularly
those concerned with outside-domain tasks—
carry novel implications.
To DEMO, research has shown expertise to be
domain specific. In other words, attaining exper-
tise in one domain does not typically enhance
one’s expertise DEMO other domains (Chi, 2006; Fel-
tovich et al., 2006; DEMO et al., 2007; but
see Barnett & Koslowski, 2002, for a counter-
point). Additionally, to acquire expertise in a
given domain, one must engage in a significant
amount of domain-related practice and training
(Ericsson, 1996, 2006; Ericsson & Charness, 1994;
Ericsson et al., 1993; Ericsson & Lehmann, 1996).
From an attentional focus standpoint, this sug-
gests that individuals pursuing expertise within
a particular domain should focus their attention
predominantly on tasks within that domain.
However, as noted earlier, expertise acquisition
can lead to cognitive entrenchment. To avoid
2010
such entrenchment, I suggested that experts
should focus their attention more widely—
toward tasks and activities not only within but
also outside their DEMO Therefore, while ex-
pertise may not be readily transferable across
domains, there is merit to outside-domain par-
ticipation precisely because of the domain DEMO
ificity of expertise. By performing tasks in other
domains, individuals are DEMO to encounter
doubt-inducing exceptions to what they believe
to be true about their domain of expertise, thus
preserving their potential for flexible thinking
within their expertise domain. This implies that
individuals will benefit from a gradual DEMO
ening of their attentional focus toward outside-
domain tasks as they pursue and achieve do-
main expertise.
Through achieving a wider breadth of attention
DEMO participating in outside domains, experts may
not only avoid cognitive entrenchment DEMO may
also sidestep the inflexibility-related conse-
quences of entrenchment discussed in this arti-
cle. For example, in performing outside-domain
tasks, experts may retain DEMO potential for gen-
erating radically creative ideas. This suggests a
caveat to the inverted-U-shaped relationship be-
tween domain expertise and radical idea gen-
eration DEMO in Proposition 6. Namely, the
slope of the drop-off in radical DEMO generation
associated with a high level of expertise de-
pends on the degree to which experts focus their
attention outside their domain. This prospect
DEMO with Simonton’s claim that the domain
experts who are most likely to develop radically
creative ideas are not “narrow-minded persons
who concentrate all their DEMO hours on a
highly specialized endeavor” but, rather, those
who have wide interests across different do-
mains (2009: 449). Moreover, and as depicted in
Figure 3, focusing attention on outside-domain
tasks may permit individuals to at least par-
tially avoid the other inflexibility-related conse-
quences DEMO entrenchment discussed in this arti-
cle: problem-solving fixation and adaptation
difficulty.
DEMO on this line of reasoning, focusing
attention on outside-domain tasks may DEMO espe-
cially critical for those who do not typically en-
gage in a dynamic environment within their ex-
pertise domain—the other factor posited to
DEMO the relationship between domain ex-
pertise and cognitive entrenchment. Indeed,
performing tasks in outside domains may be
Dane
591
viewed as a surrogate DEMO for attaining
the benefits associated with engaging in a dy-
namic environment that some individuals are
denied. In other words, for those operating in a
nondynamic or static environment, outside-
domain involvement represents an alternative
route to circumventing entrenchment and main-
taining flexibility.
Of course, it bears noting that an expert’s
breadth of attention may conceivably become
too wide. After DEMO, if experts spend very little
time participating in their expertise domain DEMO
instead direct most of their attention to other
domains, their domain DEMO may gradually
diminish or become obsolete. In support of this
point, DEMO indicates that in order to main-
tain their expertise, individuals must DEMO
to devote attention to tasks associated with their
domain (Krampe & DEMO, 1996; Sonnentag &
Kleine, 2000). Perhaps for this reason, some pro-
fessional groups require members to participate
routinely in education programs that promote
knowledge acquisition and retention (e.g., con-
tinuing legal education DEMO attorneys). In short,
while experts can avoid entrenchment by focus-
ing attention on outside-domain tasks, those
adopting this approach should strive to allocate
enough attention to their expertise domain to
maintain their expert knowledge.
DEMO versus Benefits of
Cognitive Entrenchment
In this article I explored the inflexibility-
related consequences of cognitive entrench-
ment. As suggested here, inflexibility can be
problematic for experts in a variety of ways. At
the same time, it is important to note that the
consequences of entrenchment may not DEMO neg-
ative in all circumstances. Indeed, in some sit-
uations inflexibility DEMO prove benign or even
useful. It is therefore worth considering the con-
ditions under which the consequences of en-
trenchment are most costly and DEMO conditions
under which these consequences are potentially
beneficial.
The arguments I presented in this article sug-
gest that entrenchment is particularly costly
when circumstances DEMO such that greater
flexibility is needed. This point was made di-
rectly with regard to adaptation but may hold in
other respects as well. DEMO instance, although
inflexibility in the area of problem solving may,
592
Academy of Management Review
October
in some cases, serve experts well by consis-
tently bringing effective solutions to mind,
changes within a DEMO may engender fixa-
tion effects as experts attempt to solve emergent
problems using outdated solutions. In fact, this
situation is analogous to the classic research
design used to evoke problem-solving fixation
in which the nature of DEMO problem is altered
such that previously efficacious solutions are no
longer optimal (see Luchins, 1942). In addition,
as domains change because DEMO internal or exter-
nal pressures, the importance of radical creativ-
ity DEMO rise (Benner & Tushman, 2003; Hill &
Rothaermel, 2003)DEMO As such, the negative impact
of cognitive entrenchment on radical creativity
DEMO be especially costly during periods of
change and uncertainty (Nystrom & DEMO,
1984). In contrast, entrenchment may be rela-
tively unproblematic, or even beneficial, in do-
mains characterized by a relatively high degree
of stability (Feltovich, Spiro, & Coulson, 1997). In
such DEMO entrenchment may produce func-
tional and reliable responses to commonly en-
countered problems.
The costs versus benefits of cognitive en-
trenchment may also relate DEMO the values and
norms associated with one’s domain. For exam-
ple, DEMO an innovative culture, radical idea gen-
eration tends to be embraced (Sutton, 2001; West
& Richter, 2008). In such a culture cognitive en-
trenchment is likely to be considered a signifi-
cant hindrance DEMO as it constrains the cog-
nitive processes that lead to radical idea
generation. In contrast, cognitive entrenchment
may be less costly and more beneficial in orga-
nizations seeking to protect culturally normative
patterns of thinking. In DEMO organizations cog-
nitive entrenchment may be valued to the extent
it benefits the organization by aligning behavior
with what constitutes “appropriate” thought and
action (cf. March, 1994). A variety of contexts may
fit this mold, including network marketing orga-
nizations (Pratt, 2000) and military units
(Karsten, 1998).
Taken together, these observations suggest
that the degree DEMO which cognitive entrenchment
is costly varies with certain features of the focal
domain (e.g., rate of change, cultural values),
and they DEMO the possibility that, in some set-
tings, cognitive entrenchment is beneficial. Fur-
ther developing this idea, it may be the case that
some degree of entrenchment is beneficial in
professionalized occupations such as law and
DEMO By their nature, professions possess a
large and somewhat esoteric body DEMO knowledge
that makes their professional services valuable
and, in some cases, inimitable (Elliot, 1972; Le-
vay & Waks, 2009; Pratt, DEMO, & Kauf-
mann, 2006; von Nordenflycht, 2010). While the
knowledge associated with many professions
is continually evolving (e.g., new drugs DEMO
frequently introduced in the field of medicine;
see Norman, Eva, Brooks, & Hamstra, 2006), the
evolution of knowledge within a DEMO
may be gradual (Robertson, Scarbrough, &
Swan, 2003)—an DEMO integral to the
lengthy duration of education and training as-
sociated with several professions. For exam-
ple, in spending many years training to be-
come physicians, individuals assume that the
body of knowledge they accrue will remain
relevant in the future. Therefore, because of
the relative stability of the knowledge base
underlying many professions, there may be
certain advantages to cognitive entrenchment
in professional communities.
Additionally, except when pressures for
change are immediate and substantial, ideas
that challenge traditional practices valued
within a profession often receive little traction
(Greenwood, Suddaby, & Hinings, 2002). DEMO ex-
ample, only as a result of an extreme shortage of
DEMO did law firms consider and ultimately
adopt new employment arrangements that de-
parted from the traditional “up-or-out” system
inherent to the legal profession (Sherer & Lee,
2002). Thus, among professional groups, radi-
cally DEMO ideas tend to be critiqued on nor-
mative grounds to the extent they undermine
practices that are integral to the profession’s
identity (Ferlie, DEMO, Wood, & Hawkins,
2005). These claims suggest another reason that
cognitive entrenchment may be perceived as
functional within professions—namely, that as
an inhibitor of radical idea generation, en-
trenchment may prevent the emergence of radi-
cal ideas that could threaten venerated tradi-
tions. Moreover, because entrenchment is
unlikely to hinder the generation of incremen-
tally creative ideas, professions may continue to
evolve through incremental advances that keep
valued practices DEMO
In all, these observations point to potential
benefits of cognitive entrenchment DEMO profes-
sional groups. However, it should be acknowl-
edged that the DEMO benefit of entrenchment may
2010
Dane
593
differ across professions to the extent that they
vary DEMO the stability of their knowledge bases.
More broadly, it can be DEMO that cognitive
entrenchment is likely to carry benefits that
should be leveraged and costs that should be
considered as a function of the occupation DEMO
profession in which one is employed.
Practical Implications
Turning to practical implications, perhaps the
most direct extension of the arguments offered
here is that individuals seeking to avoid en-
trenchment—particularly those who do not tend
to DEMO in a dynamic environment—should
participate in activities beyond their domain of
expertise. This prescription dovetails with a lim-
ited body of research pointing to DEMO importance
of multidomain engagement. For example, re-
search indicates that many DEMO scientists
tend to be polymaths—that is, in addition to
their scientific DEMO, they have artistic, lit-
erary, or musical avocations (Root-Bernstein et
al., 2008; Root-Bernstein, Bernstein, & Garnier,
1995). In DEMO, evidence suggests that partic-
ipating in non-work-related hobbies increases
creative problem-solving DEMO at work
(Jaussi, Randel, & Dionne, 2007).
Although some individuals participate in mul-
tiple domains on their own initiative, managers
can play a role in helping to ensure that orga-
nizational members, particularly experts, focus
their attention in diverse ways. One approach
would be to offer paid time off to organizational
members who wish to engage in DEMO ser-
vice work. This may provide individuals with
the financial freedom and time necessary to par-
ticipate in tasks in a different domain. Manag-
DEMO could also adopt practices akin to Google’s
20 percent rule, which DEMO and encourages
employees to work on projects outside their job
description, DEMO potentially outside their do-
main of expertise, for one day each DEMO While
Google may have implemented the 20 percent
rule as a motivational tool, the company may
garner additional benefits from it to the extent
this practice helps employees avoid cognitive
entrenchment as they acquire job expertise.
DEMO additional approach relevant to multina-
tional corporations would be to leverage expa-
triate assignments. Such assignments often dif-
fer significantly from standard job duties
DEMO of sociocultural factors (Mendenhall &
Oddou, 1985). Thus, expatriates must focus their
attention not only on business issues within
their domain DEMO expertise but also on cultural
matters. Doing so is likely to provide access to a
wealth of outside-domain inputs that may de-
stabilize one’s DEMO schemas (see Leung,
Maddux, Galinsky, & Chiu, 2008, DEMO Maddux &
Galinsky, 2009).
Finally, among individuals for whom DEMO
tive entrenchment is an asset, engaging in a
dynamic environment and DEMO attention on
outside-domain tasks may compromise the
schema stability that typically serves them well.
These individuals may benefit from seeking out
a static environment DEMO limiting the extent to
which they direct their attention to domains be-
yond their area of expertise. More generally, all
individuals should consider whether and how
cognitive entrenchment either aids or inhibits
them within their domain DEMO, insofar as possi-
ble, should strive to “manage” their level of en-
trenchment accordingly, given the avenues dis-
cussed in this article.
Future Research Directions
The arguments presented in this article sug-
gest directions for DEMO research. First, al-
though cognitive entrenchment tends to in-
crease with DEMO expertise, I maintained that
these concepts are not inherently coupled. In-
DEMO, not only might some experts be low in
their level of DEMO, but it is also possi-
ble that a moderately high degree DEMO entrench-
ment could be found among individuals with
relatively little domain expertise. While the con-
cept of an “entrenched novice” may seem coun-
terintuitive, research suggests that novices can
be inflexible in certain respects. For example,DEMO
one need not be a domain expert to develop
habits (Ouellette & Wood, 1998; Wood et al.,
2002), which I argued here are outgrowths of
stable schemas. In addition, under high-stress
conditions, DEMO and novices alike often ex-
hibit rigid responses (Chajut & Algom, 2003;
Easterbook, 1959; Staw, Sandelands, & Dutton,
1981)DEMO These observations suggest a need to ex-
amine if and how entrenchment can arise
among domain novices.
Next, I suggested in this article that attending
to tasks in outside domains limits cognitive en-
trenchment. However, I said little concerning the
degree to which one domain must differ from
594
Academy of Management Review
October
another to prompt this effect. Although DEMO re-
search is needed to determine the most relevant
dimensions on which to compare domains (cf.
Barnett & Ceci, 2002; Kaufman, 2007), domains
can be differentiated based on the knowledge,
skills, and DEMO (KSAs; Motowidlo, Borman,
& Schmit, 1997; Motowidlo & DEMO Scotter, 1994)
they require. For example, a physics expert
working on a mechanical engineering task is
focusing attention on a different domain, but the
KSAs associated with these two domains are
likely to be DEMO closely related than the KSAs
associated with performing a physics task ver-
sus a visual arts task. Researchers could exam-
ine whether the moderating DEMO of outside-
domain participation on the relationship
between expertise and entrenchment is more
pronounced when an expert attends to another
domain that is highly DEMO from his or her
expertise domain versus highly similar to it in
terms of the KSAs each domain requires.
In line with the former DEMO, as the sub-
stantive difference between domains increases,
individuals may DEMO more likely to encounter ex-
ceptions that engender doubt. For example, DEMO
the extent that domains in the hard sciences
differ markedly from those in the arts (see Sim-
onton, 2009), an expert scientist DEMO perhaps
circumvent entrenchment by encountering a
number of concepts and phenomena being used
in different ways through participation in an
artistic domain. This possibility DEMO with
the research on polymaths noted earlier.
Alternatively, it is possible DEMO a large sub-
stantive difference between domains renders it
less likely that individuals will encounter doubt-
inducing exceptions. Simply put, if two domains
are completely distinct, the core concepts, re-
sources, or technologies associated with each
domain may be nonoverlapping. For example,
there may be very DEMO conceptual overlap be-
tween the domains of nuclear physics and retail
sales. As such, it is not immediately clear how
working as a retail salesperson would lead an
expert nuclear physicist to question or doubt
features DEMO his or her base of knowledge con-
cerning nuclear physics. Given these divergent
possibilities, research is needed to determine
just how different or how similar domains must
be to fully activate the moderation effect asso-
ciated DEMO outside-domain participation pos-
ited in this article and depicted in Figure 3.
Finally, it bears considering what avenues be-
yond engaging in a dynamic environment and
participating in outside domains could attenu-
ate the relationship between DEMO expertise
and cognitive entrenchment. In addressing this
issue, scholars could explore DEMO personal-
ity traits like openness to experience (McCrae,
1987) and cognitive styles like open-minded
thinking (Stanovich & West, 1997) might play
such a role. In addition, certain social context
factors are worth examining. For example, indi-
viduals working in teams that are high in func-
tional background diversity (Bunderson, 2003b;
Hambrick, Cho, & Chen, 1996) may be exposed to
a wide range of knowledge held by other mem-
bers of the team (Kurtzberg & Amabile, 2000 –
DEMO; Taylor & Greve, 2006). In interpreting this
diverse body of knowledge, team members may
be likely to encounter schema-destabilizing con-
cepts—particularly to the extent their team en-
gages in questioning and other practices that
DEMO knowledge integration (see Okhuysen
& Eisenhardt, 2002, for a discussion DEMO such
practices).
Similarly, individuals who have a large num-
ber DEMO weak ties in their social networks—ties
that “involve relatively infrequent interactions,
comparatively low emotional closeness, and
one-way exchanges” (Perry-Smith & Shalley,
DEMO: 92–93)—may have access to a wide range
of concepts and DEMO (Perry-Smith, 2006;
Perry-Smith & Shalley, 2003). This exposure DEMO a
variety of viewpoints may help limit cognitive
entrenchment insofar as it raises doubt in the
manner described earlier. In short, research is
needed to further investigate both individual
and social factors as possible moderators of DEMO
relationship between domain expertise and cog-
nitive entrenchment.
Conclusion
While research suggests a trade-off between
expertise and flexibility, the arguments ad-
vanced in this article call this trade-off into
question. Specifically, I posited that inflexibility
arises most directly not from expertise but, in-
stead, from the high DEMO of cognitive en-
trenchment that often pervades experts’ domain
schemas. Arguing that entrenchment is not an
inevitable by-product of expertise, I contended
that experts can eclipse entrenchment through
engaging in a dynamic environment and attend-
2010
Dane
595
ing to outside-domain tasks. The implications of
the arguments DEMO here underscore the
importance of continuing to investigate the ori-
gins, DEMO, and impact of cognitive entrench-
ment across a variety of domains.
DEMO
Aarts, H., & Dijksterhuis, A. 2000. Habits as knowledge struc-
DEMO: Automaticity in goal-directed behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 78: 53– 63.
Aarts, H., Verplanken, B., & van Knippenberg, DEMO 1998. Pre-
dicting behavior from actions in the past: Repeated de-
DEMO making or a matter of habit? Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 28: 1355–1374.
Abelson, R. P. 1981. Psychological status of the script DEMO
cept. American Psychologist, 36: 715–729.
Adamson, R. E. 1952. Functional DEMO as related to prob-
lem solving: A repetition of three experiments. DEMO of
Experimental Psychology, 44: 288 –291.
Adelson, B. 1984. When DEMO surpass experts: The diffi-
culty of a task may increase with DEMO Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cogni-
tion, 10: 483– 495.
Alberts, D. J. 2007. Stakeholders or subject matter experts,DEMO
who should be consulted? Energy Policy, 35: 2336 –2346.
Amabile, T. M. 1996. Creativity in context. Boulder, CO: West-
view Press.
DEMO, T. M., Conti, R., Coon, H., Lazenby, J., & Herron, M.
1996. Assessing the work environment for creativity.
Academy of Management Journal, 39: 1154 –1184.
Amabile, T. M., Hennessey, B. A., & Grossman, B. S. 1986.
Social influences on creativity: The effects of contracted-
for reward. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
DEMO: 14 –23.
Amabile, T. M., & Mueller, J. S. 2008. Studying creativity, its
processes, and its antecedents: An exploration of the
componential theory of creativity. In J. Zhou & C. E.
Shalley (Eds.), Handbook of organizational creativity:
33– 64. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Anderson, C. A., Lepper. M. R., & Ross, L. DEMO Perseverance
of social theories: The role of explanation in the persis-
DEMO of discredited information. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 39: 1037–1049.
Anderson, C. A., & Lindsay, J. J. 1998. The development, DEMO
severance, and change of naive theories. Social Cogni-
tion, 16: DEMO –30.
Armstrong, S. J., & Mahmud, A. 2008. Experiential learning
DEMO the acquisition of managerial tacit knowledge.
Academy of Management Learning & Education, 7: 189 –
208.
Ashforth, B. E., & Fried, Y. 1988. The mindlessness of orga-
nizational behaviors. Human Relations, 41: 305–329.
DEMO, P. W. B., Wood, R. E., & Rutgers, P. DEMO 2002. The effects
of feedback format on dynamic decision making. Orga-
nizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 88:
587– 604.
Audia, P. DEMO, & Goncalo, J. A. 2007. Past success and creativ-
ity over time: A study of inventors in the hard disk drive
industry. Management Science, 53: 1–15.
Baer, J. 1993. Creativity and divergent thinking: DEMO task-
specific approach. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum As-
sociates.
Baer, DEMO, & Oldham, G. R. 2006. The curvilinear relation
between experienced creative time pressure and cre-
ativity: Moderating effects of openness to experience
and support for creativity. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 91: 963–970.
Baer, M., Oldham, G. R., & Cummings, A. 2003. Rewarding
creativity: When does it really matter? Leadership Quar-
terly: 14: 569 –586.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Dholakia, U. M. 2005. Three roles of past
experience in goal setting and goal striving. In T. Betsch
& DEMO Haberstroh (Eds.), The routines of decision making:
21–38. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Barnett, S. M., & Ceci, S. DEMO 2002. When and where do we apply
what we learn? A DEMO for far transfer. Psycholog-
ical Bulletin, 128: 612– 637.
Barnett, DEMO M., & Koslowski, B. 2002. Adaptive expertise: Ef-
fects of DEMO of experience and the level of theoretical
understanding it generates. Thinking and Reasoning, 8:
237–267.
Barron, F. B., & Harrington, D. DEMO 1981. Creativity, intelli-
gence, and personality. Annual Review of Psychology,
32: 439 – 476.
Bartunek, J. M., & Moch, M. DEMO 1987. First-order, second-order,
and third-order change and organizational development
interventions: A cognitive approach. Journal of Applied
Behavioral Science, 23: 483–500.
Baughman, W. A., & Mumford, M. D. 1995. Process-analytic
models of creative DEMO: Operations influencing
the combination-and-reorganization process. Creativity
Research Journal, 8: 37– DEMO
Becker, K. 2005. Individual and organizational unlearning:
Directions for future DEMO International Journal of
Organisational Behaviour, 9: 659 – 670.
Be´ dard, J., & Chi, M. T. H. 1992. Expertise. Current Directions
in Psychological Science: 1(4): 135–139.
Benner, M. J., & Tushman, M. L. 2003. Exploitation, explora-
tion, and process management: The DEMO di-
lemma revisited. Academy of Management Review, 28:
238 –256.
DEMO, P. 1984. From novice to expert: Excellence and power
in clinical practice. New York: Addison-Wesley.
Berns, G. 2008. Iconoclast: A neuroscientist reveals how to
think differently. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Betsch, T., Haberstroh, S., Glo¨ ckner, A., Haar, T., & Fiedler, K.
2001. The effects of routine strength on adaptation and
information search DEMO recurrent decision making. Orga-
nizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 84:DEMO
25–53.
596
Academy of Management Review
October
Bilalic´, M., McLeod, P., & Gobet, F. 2008a. Why good thoughts
block better ones: The mechanism of the pernicious Ein-
stellung (set) effect. Cognition, 108: 652– DEMO
Bilalic´, M., McLeod, P., & Gobet, F. 2008b. Inflexibility DEMO
experts—Reality or myth? Quantifying the Einstellung
effect in chess masters. Cognitive DEMO, 56: 73–102.
Birch, H. G., & Rabinowitz, H. S. DEMO The negative effect of
previous experience on productive thinking. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 41: 121–125.
Birch, S. A. J., & Bloom, P. 2007. The curse of knowledge in
reasoning about false beliefs. Psychological Science, 18:
382–386.
Bledow, R., Frese, M., Anderson, N., DEMO, M., & Farr, J. 2009. A
dialectic perspective on innovation: Conflicting de-
mands, multiple pathways, and ambidexterity. Indus-
trial and Organizational DEMO, 2: 305–337.
Boden, M. A. 1998. Creativity and artificial intelligence. DEMO
tificial Intelligence, 103: 347–356.
Bourgeois, L. J., & Eisenhardt, DEMO M. 1988. Strategic decision
processes in high velocity environments: Four cases DEMO
the microcomputer industry. Management Science, 34:
816 – 835.
Brehmer, B. 1992. Dynamic decision making: Human control
of complex systems. Acta Psychologica, 81: 211–241.
Bunderson, J. S. 2003a. Recognizing and utilizing expertise in
work groups: A status characteristics perspective. Ad-
ministrative Science Quarterly, 48: 557–591.
Bunderson, J. S. 2003b. Team member functional background
and involvement in management teams: Direct effects
and the moderating role of power centralization. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 46: 458 – 474.
Camerer, C., DEMO, G., & Weber, M. 1989. The curse of
knowledge in DEMO settings: An experimental anal-
ysis. Journal of Political Economy, 97: DEMO
Campbell, D. T. 1960. Blind variation and selective retention
in creative DEMO as in other knowledge processes.
Psychological Review, 67: 380 – 400.
Can˜ as, J. J., Quesada, J. F., Antoli, A., & Fajardo, I. 2003.
Cognitive flexibility and adaptability to environmental
changes in DEMO complex problem-solving tasks. Er-
gonomics, 46: 482–501.
Castel, A. D., McCabe, D. P., Roediger, H. L., & Heitman, J. L.
2007. The dark side of expertise. Psychological Science,
18: 3–5.
Chajut, E., & Algom, D. 2003. Selective attention improves
under stress: DEMO for theories of social cogni-
tion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85:
231–248.
Charness, N., & Schultetus, R. S. 1999. DEMO and exper-
tise. In F. T. Durso (Ed.), Handbook of DEMO cognition:
57– 81. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. 1973. Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4: 55– 81.
Chi, M. T. H. 2006. Two approaches to the study of experts’
characteristics. In K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P. Felto-
DEMO, & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of
expertise and expert performance: 21–30. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Chi, M. DEMO H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. 1981. Categorization
and representation of physics problems by experts and
novices. Cognitive Science, 5: DEMO
Chi, M. T. H., Glaser, R., & Farr, M. DEMO The nature of
expertise. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Christianson, DEMO K., Farkas, M. T., Sutcliffe, K. M., & Weick,DEMO
K. E. 2009. Learning through rare events: Significant
interruptions at the DEMO & Ohio Railroad Museum.
Organization Science, 20: 846 – 860.
Collins, H. M., & Evans. R. 2002. The Third Wave of Science
DEMO: Studies of expertise and experience. Social
Studies of Science, 32: DEMO
Colvin, G. 2008. Talent is overrated: What really separates
world-class performers from everybody else. New York:
Portfolio.
Cooper, R. P., & DEMO, T. 2006. Hierarchical schemas and
goals in the control of sequential DEMO Psychologi-
cal Review, 113: 887–916.
Crocker, J., Fiske, S. DEMO, & Taylor, S. E. 1984. Schematic bases
of belief change. In J. R. Eiser (Ed.), Attitudinal judgment:
197–226. New York: DEMO
Dane, E. 2008. Examining experience and its role in dynamic
versus DEMO decision-making effectiveness. Paper pre-
sented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Man-
agement, Anaheim, CA.
Dane, E., & Pratt, M. G. 2007. Exploring intuition and its role
in managerial decision making. Academy DEMO Manage-
ment Review, 32: 33–54.
Demorest, A. P. 1995. The DEMO script as a unit of analysis
for the study of personality. Journal of Personality, 63:
569 –592.
Dewar, R. D., & Dutton, J. E. 1986. The adoption of radical and
incremental innovations: An DEMO analysis. Man-
agement Science, 32: 1422–1433.
Dietrich, A. 2004. The DEMO neuroscience of creativity.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 11: 1011–1026.
Dreyfus, DEMO L., & Dreyfus, S. E. 1986. Mind over machine: The
DEMO of human intuition and expertise in the era of the
computer. New York: Free Press.
Dreyfus, H. L., & Dreyfus, S. E. DEMO Expertise in real world
contexts. Organization Studies, 26: 779 –792.
Duncker, K. 1945. On problem solving. Psychological Mono-
graphs, 58: 270.
Easterbrook, J. A. 1959. The effect of emotion on cue utiliza-
tion and the organization of behavior. Psychological Re-
view, 66: 183–201.
Edwards, W. 1962. Dynamic decision theory and probabilis-
tic information processing. Human Factors, 4: 59 –73.
Eisenhardt, K. M. 1989. Making fast strategic decisions in
DEMO environments. Academy of Management
Journal, 32: 543–576.
Elliot, P. 1972. DEMO sociology of the professions. New York:
Herder and Herder.
2010
Dane
597
Engestro¨ m, Y., Engestro¨m,R.,&Ka¨ rkka¨ inen, M. 1995. Poly-
contextuality and boundary crossing in expert cogni-
tion: DEMO and problem solving in complex work
activities. Learning and Instruction, 5: 319 –336.
Ericsson, K. A. 1996. The acquisition of expert performance:
An introduction to some of the issues. In K. A. Ericsson
(Ed.), The road to excellence: 1–50. Mahwah, NJ: Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates.
Ericsson, K. A. 1999. Creative expertise as superior reproduc-
ible performance: Innovative and flexible aspects of ex-
pert performance. Psychological Inquiry, 10: 329 –333.
Ericsson, K. A. 2006. The influence of experience and delib-
erate practice on the development of superior expert
performance. In K. A. DEMO, N. Charness, P. Feltovich,
& R. R. Hoffman (Eds), The Cambridge handbook of ex-
pertise and expert performance: 685–706. Cambridge:DEMO
Cambridge University Press.
Ericsson, K. A., & Charness, N. 1994. DEMO performance: Its
structure and acquisition. American Psychologist, 49:
725–747.
Ericsson, K. A., Charness, N., Feltovich, P., & Hoffman, R. R.
2006. The Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert
performance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Romer, C. 1993. The
role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert
DEMO Psychological Review, 100: 363– 406.
Ericsson, K. A., & Lehmann, A. C. 1996. Experts and excep-
tional performance: Evidence of maximal DEMO to
task constraints. Annual Review of Psychology, 47: 273–
305.
Ericsson, K. A., Patel, V., & Kintsch, W. 2000. How experts’
adaptations to representative task demands account for
the expertise effect in memory DEMO: Comment on Vi-
cente and Wang (1998). Psychological Review, DEMO: 578 –
592.
Ericsson, K. A., Prietula, M. J., & Cokely, E. T. 2007. The
making of an expert. Harvard Business DEMO, 85(7/8):
114 –121.
Ericsson, K. A., Roring, R. W., & Nandagopal, K. 2007. Gifted-
ness and evidence for reproducibly superior perfor-
mance: An account based on the expert-performance
framework. High Ability Studies, 18: 3–56.
Ericsson, K. A., & Ward, P. 2007. Capturing the naturally
occurring superior performance of experts in the labo-
DEMO: Toward a science of expert and exceptional per-
formance. Current Directions DEMO Psychological Science,
16: 346 –350.
Ettlie, J. E., Bridges, W. P., & O’Keefe, R. D. 1984. Organization
strategy and structural DEMO for radical versus
incremental innovation. Management Science, 30: 682–
695.
Evetts, J., Mieg, H. A., & Felt, U. 2006. Professionalization,
scientific expertise, and elitism: A sociological perspec-
tive. In K. A. DEMO, N. Charness, P. Feltovich, & R. R.
Hoffman (Eds), The Cambridge handbook of expertise
and expert performance: 105–123. Cambridge: Cam-
DEMO University Press.
Farjoun, M. 2010. Beyond dualism: Stability and change as a
duality. Academy of Management Review, 35: 202–225.
Feist, G. J. 1998. A meta-analysis of personality in scientific
and artistic creativity. Personality and DEMO Psychol-
ogy Review, 2: 290 –309.
Feltovich, P. J., Prietula, M. J., & Ericsson, K. A. 2006. Studies
of expertise from psychological perspectives. In K. A.
Ericsson, N. Charness, P. Feltovich, & R. R. Hoffman
(Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert
performance: 41– 67. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Feltovich, P. J., DEMO, R. J., & Coulson, R. L. 1997. Issues of
expert DEMO in contexts characterized by complex-
ity and change. In P. J. Feltovich, K. M. Ford, & R. R.
Hoffman (Eds.), Expertise in context: Human and ma-
chine: 125–146. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
DEMO, E., Fitzgerald, L., Wood, M., & Hawkins, C. DEMO The
nonspread of innovations: The mediating role of profes-
sionals. Academy DEMO Management Journal, 48: 117–134.
Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, DEMO E. 1991. Social cognition (2nd ed.).
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Focht, D. R., Spicer, C., & Fairchok, M. P. 2002. The efficacy of
duct tape vs. cryotherapy in the treatment of verruca
vulgaris (the common wart). Archives of Pediatric and
Adolescent Medicine, 156: DEMO
Frensch, P. A., & Sternberg, R. J. 1989. Expertise and DEMO
gent thinking: When is it worse to know better? In R. J.
Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the psychology of human
intelligence: DEMO Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Gandhi, J., & Sauser, DEMO 2008. Knowledge networks: How inde-
pendence and subject matter experts can DEMO project
reviews. Engineering Management Journal, 20: 19 –28.
George, J. DEMO 2007. Creativity in organizations. Academy of
Management Annals, 1: 439 – 477.
George, J. M., & Jones, G. R. 2001. Towards a process model of
individual change in organizations. Human Relations,
54: 419 – 444.
George, J. M., & Zhou, J. 2001. When openness to experience
and conscientiousness are related to creative behavior:
An interactional DEMO Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 86: 513–524.
Gerver, I., & Bensman, J. 1954. Towards a sociology of expert-
ness. Social Forces, DEMO: 226 –235.
Getzels, J. W. 1979. Problem finding: A theoretical DEMO Cog-
nitive Science, 3: 167–172.
Gick, M. L. 1986. Problem-solving DEMO Educational
Psychologist, 21: 99 –120.
Gioia, D. A., & Poole, P. P. 1984. Scripts in organizational
behavior. Academy of Management Review, DEMO: 449 – 459.
Gladwell, M. 2008. Outliers: The story of DEMO New York:
Little, Brown and Company.
Glaser, R., & DEMO, M. T. H. 1988. Overview. In M. T. H. Chi,
DEMO Glaser, & M. J. Farr (Eds.), The nature of expertise:
xv–xxviii. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Glynn, M. A. 1996. Innovative genius: A framework for relat-
598
Academy of Management Review
October
ing individual and organizational intelligences to DEMO
vation. Academy of Management Review, 21: 1081–1111.
Gobet, F., & Simon, H. A. 1996. Templates in chess memory: A
mechanism for DEMO several boards. Cognitive Psy-
chology, 31: 1– 40.
Gobet, F., & Simon, H. A. 2000. Five seconds or sixty? Presen-
tation DEMO in expert memory. Cognitive Science, 24:
651– 682.
Goldstein, A. G., & Chance, J. E. 1980. Memory for faces and
schema DEMO Journal of Psychology, 105: 47–59.
Gonzalez, C. 2005. Decision support DEMO real-time, dynamic
decision-making tasks. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 96: 142–154.
Gonzalez, C., Lerch, J. F., & Lebiere, C. DEMO Instance-based
learning in dynamic decision making. Cognitive Sci-
ence, 27: 591– 635.
Greenwood, R., Suddaby, R., & Hinings, C. R. 2002. Theorizing
change: The role of professional associations in the
transformation of institutionalized fields. Academy of
Management Journal, 45: 58 – 80.
Gupta, A. K., Tesluk, P. E., & Taylor, M. S. 2007. Innovation DEMO
and across multiple levels of analysis. Organization
Science, 18: 885– 897.
Haerem, T., & Rau, D. 2007. The influence of degree of exper-
tise and objective task complexity on perceived task
complexity and performance. DEMO of Applied Psy-
chology, 92: 1320 –1331.
Hambrick, D. C., Cho, T., & Chen, M. 1996. The influence of
top management team heterogeneity on firms’ compet-
itive moves. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41: DEMO –
684.
Hargadon, A. 2006. Bridging old worlds and building new DEMO:
Toward a microsociology of creativity. In L. Thompson &
H.-S. DEMO (Eds.), Creativity and innovation in organiza-
tional teams: 199 –216. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Hargadon, A., & Sutton, R. I. 1997. Technology brokering and
innovation in a product development firm. Administra-
DEMO Science Quarterly, 42: 716 –749.
Harris, S. G. 1994. Organizational DEMO and individual
sensemaking: A schema-based perspective. Organiza-
tion Science, 5: DEMO –321.
Hassin, R. R., Bargh, J. A., & Zimerman, DEMO 2009. Automatic
and flexible: The case of nonconscious goal pursuit.
Social DEMO, 27: 20 –36.
Heath, C., & Staudenmayer, N. 2000. DEMO neglect:
How lay theories of organizing complicate coordination
in organizations. Research in Organizational Behavior,
22: 155–193.
Hecht, H., & Proffitt, DEMO R. 1995. The price of expertise: Effects
of experience on the DEMO task. Psychological Sci-
ence, 6: 90 –95.
Henderson, J. M. DEMO Regarding scenes. Current Directions
in Psychological Science, 16: 219 –222.
Henderson, J. M., & Hollingworth, A. 1999. High-level scene
perception. Annual Review of Psychology, 50: 243–271.
Hill, C. W. L., & Rothaermel, F. T. 2003. The performance of
incumbent firms in the face of DEMO technological
innovation. Academy of Management Review, 28: 257–
274.
Hinds, DEMO J. 1999. The curse of expertise: The effects of exper-
tise DEMO de-biasing methods on predictions of novice
performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: DEMO
plied, 5: 205–221.
Hinds, P. J., Patterson, M., & Pfeffer, J. 2001. Bothered by
abstraction: The effect of expertise on DEMO trans-
fer and subsequent novice performance. Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, DEMO: 1232–1243.
Hinds, P. J., & Pfeffer, J. 2003. Why organizations don’t “know
what they know”: Cognitive and motivational factors
affecting the transfer of expertise. In M. S. Ackerman,
V. Pipek, & V. Wulf (Eds.), Sharing expertise: Beyond
knowledge management: 3–26. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Hirst, G., van Knippenberg, D., & Zhou, J. 2009. A cross-level
perspective on employee creativity: Goal orientation,
team learning behavior, and individual creativity.
Academy of Management Journal, 52: 280 –293.
Hoch, S. J. 1988. Who do we know: Predicting the interests
DEMO opinions of the American consumer. Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 15: 315–324.
Hodgkinson, G. P. 1997. Cognitive inertia in a turbulent mar-
ket: The case of UK residential estate agents. Journal of
Management Studies, DEMO: 921–945.
Hoffman, R. R. 1992. The psychology of expertise: Cognitive
DEMO and empirical AI. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Hogarth, R. M. 2001. Educating intuition. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Holyoak, K. J. 1991. Symbolic DEMO: Toward third-
generation theories of expertise. In K. A. Ericsson &
J. Smith (Eds.), Toward a general theory of expertise:
301–335. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Honeck, R. P., Firment, M., & Case, T. J. S. 1987. Expertise and
categorization. Bulletin of DEMO Psychonomic Society, 25:
431– 434.
James, W. 1890. The principles of psychology. New York: Holt.
Jansson, D. G., & Smith, DEMO M. 1991. Design fixation. Design
Studies, 12: 3–11.
Jaussi, K. DEMO, Randel, A. E., & Dionne, S. D. 2007. I am, I think
I can, and I do: The role of personal identity, self-
efficacy, and cross-application of experiences in cre-
ativity at DEMO Creativity Research Journal, 19: 247–258.
Joas, H. 1996. The creativity DEMO action. (Translated by J. Gaines
& P. Keast.) Chicago: University DEMO Chicago Press.
Kahneman, D., & Klein, G. 2009. Conditions for DEMO ex-
pertise: A failure to disagree. American Psychologist, 64:
515–526.
Karsten, P. 1998. The training and socializing of military
personnel. New York: Garland.
Kasof, J. 1995. Explaining creativity: The attributional per-
spective. Creativity Research Journal, 8: 311–366.
Kaufman, S. B. 2007. Investigating the role of domain general
2010
Dane
599
mechanisms in the acquisition of domain specific exper-
tise. DEMO Ability Studies, 18: 71–73.
Kimball, D. R., & Holyoak, DEMO J. 2000. Transfer and expertise.
In E. Tulving & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), The Oxford handbook
of memory: 109 –122. New DEMO: Oxford University Press.
Kirton, M. 1976. Adopters and innovators: A DEMO and
measure. Journal of Applied Psychology, 6: 622– 629.
Klein, DEMO 1998. Sources of power: How people make decisions.
Cambridge, MA: DEMO Press.
Kolb, D. A. 1984. Experiential learning: Experience as the
source of learning and development. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Krampe, R. DEMO, & Ericsson, K. A. 1996. Maintaining excellence:
Deliberate practice and elite performance in young and
older pianists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
eral, 125: 331–359.
Kuhn, T. S. 1962. The structure of scientific revolutions. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
Kurtzberg, T. R., & Amabile, T. M. 2000 –2001. From Guilford to
creative synergy: Opening DEMO black box of team-level
creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 13: 285–294.
Labianca, G., Gray, B., & Brass, D. J. 2000. A grounded model
of organizational schema change during empowerment.
Organization Science, 11: 235–257.
DEMO, E. J. 1989a. Mindfulness. Cambridge, MA: De Capo.
Langer, E. J. 1989b. Minding matters: The consequences of
mindlessness-mindfulness. Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, 22: 137–173.
Langer, E. J., & Piper, A. I. 1987. The prevention of mindless-
ness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53:
280 –287.
Larkin, J. H., McDermott, J., Simon, H. A., & Simon, D. P. 1980.
Expert and novice performances DEMO solving physics
problems. Science, 208: 1335–1342.
Larson, D. W. 1994. DEMO role of belief systems and schemas in
foreign policy decision-making. Political Psychology, 15:
17–33.
Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. 1979. Laboratory DEMO: The construc-
tion of social facts. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
DEMO, H. C. 1958. The chemist’s most creative years. Sci-
ence, 127: 1213–1222.
Lehman, H. C. 1960. The age decrement in outstanding sci-
DEMO creativity, American Psychologist, 15: 128 –134.
Leung, A. K.-Y., DEMO, W. W., Galinsky, A. D., & Chiu, C.-Y.
2008. DEMO experience enhances creativity.
American Psychologist, 63: 169 –181.
Levay, C., & Waks, C. 2009. Professions and the pursuit of
transparency in healthcare: Two cases of soft autonomy.
Organization Studies, 30: 509 –527.
Lewandowsky, S., & Kirsner, K. 2000. Knowledge partition-
ing: Context-dependent use DEMO expertise. Memory and
Cognition, 28: 295–305.
Lewandowsky, S., Little, DEMO, & Kalish, M. L. 2007. Knowledge
and expertise. In F. T. Durso (Ed.), Handbook of applied
cognition (2nd ed.): 83–109. DEMO, UK: Wiley.
Lewandowsky, S., & Thomas, J. L. 2009. DEMO: Acquisi-
tion, limitations, and control. In F. T. Durso (Ed.), Reviews
of human factors and ergonomics, vol. 5: 140 –165. DEMO
Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
Lewicki, P., Hill, T., & Bizot, E. 1988. Acquisition of procedural
knowledge about a pattern of stimuli that cannot be
articulated. Cognitive Psychology, 20: 24 DEMO
Lewin, K. 1951. Field theory in social science. New York:
DEMO & Row.
Lippman, L. G. 1994. Rule-governed performance and sensi-
tivity DEMO contingencies: What’s new? Journal of General
Psychology, 121: 353–360.
Locke, K., Golden-Biddle, K., & Feldman, M. S. 2008. Making
doubt generative: Rethinking the role of doubt in the
research process. Organization Science, 19: 907–918.
Lonergan, D. C., Scott, G. M., & DEMO, M. D. 2004. Evalu-
ative aspects of creative thought: Effects of appraisal
and revision standards. Creativity Research Journal, 16:
231–246.
Lord, DEMO G., & Kernan, M. C. 1987. Scripts as determinants of
purposeful behavior in organizations. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 12: 265–277.
Louis, M. R., & Sutton, R. I. 1991. Switching cognitive gears:
DEMO habits of mind to active thinking. Human Rela-
tions, 44: 55–76.
Lovett, M. C., & Anderson, J. R. 1996. History of success and
current context in problem solving. Cognitive Psychol-
ogy, 31: 168 DEMO
Lubart, T. I. 2000 –2001. Models of the creative process: Past,
present and future. Creativity Research Journal, 13: 295–
308.
Luchins, A. S. 1942. Mechanization in problem solving—The
effect of Einstellung. Psychological Monographs, 52(6):
95.
Luchins, A. S., & Luchins, E. DEMO 1959. Rigidity of behavior.
Eugene: University of Oregon Press.
Lurigio, A. J., & Carroll, J. S. 1985. Probation officers’ sche-
mata of DEMO: Content, development, and impact on
treatment decisions. Journal of Personality DEMO Social
Psychology, 48: 1112–1126.
Maddux, W. W., & Galinsky, DEMO D. 2009. Cultural borders and
mental barriers: The relationship between living DEMO
and creativity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 96: 1047–1061.
Madjar, N., Oldham, G. R., & Pratt, M. G. 2002. There’s no
place like home? The contributions of work and nonwork
creativity support to employees’ creative performance.
Academy of Management Journal, 45: 757–767.
DEMO, N., & Shalley, C. E. 2008. Multiple tasks’ and multiple
DEMO effect on creativity: Forced incubation or just a
distraction? Journal of Management, 34: 786 – 805.
Maitlis, S., & Sonenshein, S. 2010. Sensemaking in crisis and
change: Inspiration and insights from Weick (DEMO). Jour-
nal of Management Studies, 47: 551–580.
March, J. DEMO A primer on decision making: How decisions
happen. New York: Free Press.
600
Academy of Management Review
October
Marchant, G., Robinson, J., DEMO, U., & Schadewald, M.
1991. Analogical transfer and expertise in DEMO reason-
ing. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro-
cesses, 48: 272–290.
Markus, H., & Zajonc, R. B. 1985. The cognitive perspective in
social psychology. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), The
handbook of social psychology, vol. 1: 137–230. New York:
Random House.
DEMO, S. P. 1995. Schemas in problem solving. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
McCloy, R. A., Campbell, J. P., & Cudeck, R. 1994. A confir-
matory test of a model of performance determinants.
Journal DEMO Applied Psychology, 79: 493–516.
McCrae, R. R. 1987. Creativity, divergent thinking, and open-
ness to experience. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 52: 1258 –1265.
McVee, M. B., Dunsmore, K., & DEMO, J. R. 2005. Schema
theory revisited. Review of Educational Research, 75:
531–566.
Meacham, J. A. 1983. Wisdom and the context of knowledge:
Knowing that one doesn’t know. In D. Kuhn & J. A.
DEMO (Eds.), Contributions to human development,
vol. 8: 111–134. Basel, Switzerland: Karger.
Mednick, S. A. 1962. The associative basis of the creative
process. Psychological Review, 69: 220 –232.
Mendenhall, M., & DEMO, G. 1985. The dimensions of expa-
triate acculturation: A review. Academy of Management
Review, 10: 39 – 47.
Mobley, M. I., DEMO, L. M., & Mumford, M. D. 1992. Process
analytic models DEMO creative capacities: Evidence for the
combination and reorganization process. Creativity Re-
DEMO Journal, 5: 125–155.
Motowidlo, S. J., Borman, W. C., & Schmit, M. J. 1997. A theory
of individual differences in task and contextual perfor-
mance. Human Performance, 10: 71– 83.
Motowidlo, S. J., & Van Scotter, J. R. 1994. Evidence that task
performance DEMO be distinguished from contextual
performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79: 475– 480.
Mumford, M. D., Baughman, W. A., Maher, M. A., Costanza,
D. P., & Supinski, E. P. 1997. Process-based measures of
creative problem-solving skills. IV: Category combina-
tion. Creativity Research Journal, DEMO: 59 –71.
Mumford, M. D., Blair, C., Dailey, L., Leritz, L. E., & Osburn,
H. K. 2006. Errors in creative thought? Cognitive biases
in a complex processing activity. Journal of Creative
Behavior, 40: 75–109.
Mumford, M. D., & Gustafson, S. B. 1988. Creativity syndrome:
Integration, application, and innovation. Psychological
Bulletin, 103: 27– 43.
Mumford, M. D., Mobley, M. I., Uhlman, DEMO E., Reiter-Palmon, R.,
& Doares, L. M. 1991. Process DEMO models of creative
capacities. Creativity Research Journal, 4: 91–122.
Mumford, DEMO D., Scott, G. M., Gaddis, B., & Strange, J. M. 2002.
Leading creative people: Orchestrating expertise and
relationships. Leadership Quarterly, DEMO: 705–750.
Murray, K. B., & Ha¨ ubl, G. 2007. Explaining cognitive lock-in:
The role of skill-based habits of use in consumer DEMO
Journal of Consumer Research, 34: 77– 88.
Nadkarni, S., & Barr, P. S. 2008. Environmental context, man-
agerial cognition, and strategic action: An integrated
view. Strategic Management Journal, 29: 1395–1427.
Narvaez, DEMO, & Bock, T. 2002. Moral schemas and tacit judge-
ment or how the defining issues test is supported by
cognitive science. Journal of DEMO Education, 31: 297–
314.
Neal, D. T., Wood, W., & Quinn, J. M. 2006. Habits—A repeat
performance. Current Directions in Psychological Sci-
ence, 15: 198 –202.
Neale, M. A., & Northcraft, G. B. 1990. Experience, expertise,
and decision bias in negotiation: DEMO role of strategic
conceptualization. Research on Negotiation in Organi-
zations, 2: 55–75.
Nee, C., & Meenaghan, A. 2006. Expert decision making in
burglars. British Journal of Criminology, 46: 935–949.
Newell, A., & DEMO, H. A. 1972. Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
DEMO, R. S. 1998. Confirmation bias: A ubiquitous phe-
nomenon in many guises. Review of General Psychol-
ogy, 2: 175–220.
Norman, G., DEMO, K., Brooks, L, & Hamstra, S. 2006. Expertise
in DEMO and surgery. In K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness,
P. Feltovich, & R. R. Hoffman (Eds), The Cambridge hand-
book of expertise and expert performance: 339 –353.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nystrom, P. C., & Starbuck, W. H. 1984. To avoid organiza-
tional crises, unlearn. Organizational Dynamics, 12(4):
53– 65.
Okhuysen, G. A., & Eisenhardt, K. M. 2002. Integrating knowl-
edge in groups: How formal interventions enable flexi-
bility. Organization Science, 13: 370 –386.
Oldham, G. R., & Cummings, A. C. 1996. Employee creativity:
Personal DEMO contextual factors at work. Academy of
Management Journal, 39: 607– 634.
Ouellette, J. A., & Wood, W. 1998. Habit and intention in
everyday life: The multiple processes by which past
behavior predicts future behavior. Psychological Bulle-
tin, 124: 54 –74.
Peirce, C. S. 1931–1958. Collected papers of Charles Sanders
Peirce, vols. 1– 8. (Edited by C. DEMO, P. Weiss, &
A. Burks.). Harvard, MA: Cambridge DEMO Press.
Perry-Smith, J. E. 2006. Social yet creative: The role of social
relationships in facilitating individual creativity. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 49: 85–101.
Perry-Smith, J. E., & Shalley, C. E. 2003. The DEMO side of
creativity: A static and dynamic social network perspec-
tive. DEMO of Management Review, 28: 89 –106.
Pratt, M. G. 2000. DEMO good, the bad, and the ambivalent:
Managing identification among Amway distributors.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 45: 456 – 493.
Pratt, M. G., Rockmann, K. W., & Kaufmann, J. B. 2006. Con-
structing DEMO identity: The role of work and
identity learning cycles in the DEMO of identity
2010
Dane
601
among medical residents. Academy of Management
Journal, 49: DEMO
Prietula, M. J., & Simon, H. A. 1989. The experts DEMO your midst.
Harvard Business Review, 67(1): 120 –124.
Reber, A. S. 1989. Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118: 219 –
235.
Reger, R. K., & Palmer, T. B. 1996. Managerial categorization
of competitors: Using old maps to navigate new envi-
ronments. Organization Science, 7: 22–39.
Reiter-Palmon, R. 2009. A dialectic perspective on problem
identification and construction. Industrial and Organi-
zational Psychology, 2: 349 –352.
Reiter-Palmon, R., & Illies, J. J. 2004. DEMO and creativ-
ity: Understanding leadership from a creative problem-
solving perspective. DEMO Quarterly, 15: 55–77.
Robertson, M., Scarbrough, H., & Swan, J. 2003. Knowledge
creation in professional service firms: Institutional ef-
fects. DEMO Studies, 24: 831– 857.
Root-Bernstein, R., Allen, L., Beach, L., Bhadula, R., Fast, J.,
Hosey, C., Kremkow, B., Lapp, J., Lonc, K., Pawelec, K.,
Podufaly, A., Russ, C., Tennant, L., Vrtis, E., & DEMO
lander, S. 2008. Arts foster scientific success: Avocations
of Nobel, DEMO Academy, Royal Society, and Sigma
Xi members. Journal of Psychology of Science and Tech-
nology, 1(2): 51– 63.
Root-Bernstein, R. DEMO, Bernstein, M., & Garnier, H. 1995. Cor-
relations between avocations, scientific style, work hab-
its, and professional impact of scientists. Creativity Re-
search Journal, 8: 115–137.
Rothman, R, A., & Perrucci, R. 1970. Organizational careers
and professional expertise. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 15: 282–293.
Rousseau, D. M. 2001. Schema, promise and mutuality: The
building blocks of the psychological contract. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 74: 511–
541.
Rudolph, J. W., Morrison, J. B., & Carroll, J. S. 2009. The
dynamics of action-oriented problem solving: Linking
interpretation DEMO choice. Academy of Management Re-
view, 34: 733–756.
Rumelhart, D. DEMO 1984. Schemata and the cognitive system. In
R. S. Wyer & T. K. Srull (Eds.), Handbook of social cogni-
tion, vol. 1: 161–188. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Runco, M. A. 2004. Creativity. Annual Review of Psychology,
55: 657– 687.
Runco, M. A., & Smith, W. R. 1992. Interpersonal and intra-
personal evaluations of creative ideas. Personality and
Individual Differences, 13: 295–302.
Saariluoma, P. 1992. Error in chess: The apperception-
restructuring view. Psychological Research, 54: 17–26.
Salas, E., Rosen, M. A., & DiazGranados, D. 2010. Expertise-
based intuition and decision making in organizations.
Journal of Management, 36: 941–973.
DEMO, F. L., Hunter, J. E., & Outerbridge, A. N. DEMO Impact
of job experience and ability on job knowledge, work
sample DEMO, and supervisory ratings of job per-
formance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71: 432– 439.
Scott, G. M., Lonergan, D. C., & Mumford, M. D. 2005. Concep-
tual combination: Alternative knowledge structures, al-
ternative heuristics. Creativity Research Journal, 17: 79 –
98.
Scott, S. G., & Bruce, R. A. 1994. Determinants of innovative
behavior: A path model of individual innovation in the
workplace. Academy of Management Journal, 37: 580 –
607.
Scott, W. A. 1962. Cognitive complexity and DEMO flexi-
bility. Sociometry, 25: 405– 414.
Shalley, C. E. 1995. DEMO of coaction, expected evaluation,
and goal setting on creativity and DEMO Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 38: 483–503.
Shalley, C. E., Gilson, L. L., & Blum, T. C. 2000. Matching
creativity requirements and the work environment: Ef-
fects on satisfaction and intentions to leave. Academy of
Management Journal, 43: 215–223.
Shalley, C. E., & DEMO, J. E. 2001. Effects of social-
psychological factors on creative performance: The role
of informational and controlling expected evaluation
and modeling experience. Organizational DEMO and
Human Decision Processes, 84: 1–22.
Shalley, C. E., & Perry-Smith. 2008. The emergence of team
creative cognition: The role of diverse outside ties, so-
ciocognitive network centrality, and team evolution.
Strategic Entrepreneurship DEMO, 2: 23– 41.
Shalley, C. E., Zhou, J., & Oldham, G. R. 2004. The effects of
personal and contextual characteristics on creativity:
Where should we go from here? Journal of Management,
30: 933–958.
Shenk, D. 2010. The genius in all of us. DEMO York: Doubleday.
Sherer, P. D., & Lee, K. 2002. Institutional change in large law
firms: A resource dependency and institutional perspec-
tive. Academy of Management Journal, 45: 102–119.
Simonton, D. K. 2009. Varieties of (scientific) creativity: A
hierarchical model of domain-specific disposition, de-
DEMO, and achievement. Perspectives on Psycho-
logical Science, 4: 441– 452.
DEMO, E. R. 1998. Mental representation and memory. In D. T.
Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of
DEMO psychology, vol. 1 (4th ed.): 391– 445. Boston:
McGraw-Hill.
Smith, S. M. 1995a. Fixation, incubation, and insight in mem-
ory and creative thinking. In S. M. Smith, T. B. Ward, &
R. A. Finke (Eds.), The creative cognition approach: 135–
156. DEMO, MA: MIT Press.
Smith, S. M. 1995b. Getting into and DEMO of mental ruts: A
theory of fixation, incubation, and insight. DEMO R. J. Stern-
berg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The DEMO of insight: 229 –
251. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Smith, S. M., & Blankenship, S. E. 1991. Incubation and the
persistence DEMO fixation in problem solving. American
Journal of Psychology, 104: 61– 87.
602
Academy of Management Review
October
Smith, S. M., Ward, T. B., & Finke, R. A. 1995. The creative
cognition approach. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sonnentag, S. 1998. Expertise in professional software de-
DEMO: A process study. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83:
703–715.
Sonnentag, S., & Kleine, B. M. 2000. Deliberate practice at
work: DEMO study with insurance agents. Journal of Occu-
pational and Organizational Psychology, DEMO: 87–102.
Srikantia, P., & Pasmore, W. 1996. Conviction and doubt in
organizational learning. Journal of Organizational
Change Management, 9: 42–53.
Stacey, M., Eckert, C., & Wiley, J. 2002. Expertise and creativ-
DEMO in knitwear design. International Journal of New
Product Development and Innovation Management, 4:
49 – 64.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, DEMO F. 1997. Reasoning independently
of prior belief and individual differences in actively
open-minded thinking. Journal of Educational Psychol-
ogy, 89: 342–357.
Starbuck, W. H. 1996. Unlearning ineffective or obsolete tech-
nologies. International Journal of Technology DEMO
ment, 11: 725–737.
Staw, B. M., Sandelands, L. E., & Dutton, J. E. 1981. Threat-
rigidity effects in organizational behavior: DEMO multilevel
analysis. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26: 501–524.
Sternberg, R. J. DEMO Costs of expertise. In K. A. Ericsson (Ed.),
The road to excellence: 347–354. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Sternberg, R. DEMO 1997. Cognitive conceptions of expertise. In
P. J. Feltovich, K. M. DEMO, & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), Exper-
tise in context: DEMO and machine: 149 –162. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sternberg, R. J., & Frensch, P. A. 1992. On being an expert: A
cost-benefit analysis. In R. Hoffman (Ed.), The psychol-
ogy of expertise: Cognitive research and empirical AI:
191–203. New York: Springer-Verlag.
DEMO, R. J., & Lubart, T. I. 1995. Defying the crowd. DEMO
York: Free Press.
Stimson, J. 1975. Belief systems: Constraint, complexity and
the 1972 election. American Journal of Political Science,
19: 393– 417.
Sutton, R. I. 2001. The weird rules of creativity. Harvard
Business Review, 79(8): 94 –103.
Sutton, R. I., & Hargadon, A. 1996. Brainstorming groups in
context: Effectiveness in a product design DEMO Admin-
istrative Science Quarterly, 41: 685–719.
Sweller, J., Mawer, DEMO F., & Ward, M. R. 1983. Development of
expertise in mathematical problem solving. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 112: 639 – 661.
Taylor, A., & Greve, H. R. 2006. Superman or the Fantastic
Four? Knowledge combination and experience in inno-
vative teams. Academy of Management Journal, 49: 723–
740.
Thaler, R. H. 2000. From Homo Economicus to Homo Sapiens.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14: 133–141.
Tzabbar, D. 2009. When does scientist recruitment affect
technological repositioning? Academy of Management
Journal, 52: 873– 896.
Unsworth, K. 2001. Unpacking creativity. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 26: 289 –297.
Vera, D., & Crossan, M. 2004. Theatrical improvisation: Lessons
for organizations. Organization Studies, 25: 727–749.
Verplanken, B., & Faes, S. 1999. Good intentions, bad habits,
DEMO effects of forming implementation intentions on
health eating. European Journal of Social Psychology,
29: 591– 604.
Verplanken, B., Myrbakk, V., & Rudi, E. 2005. The measure-
ment of habit. In T. Betsch & S. Haberstroh (Eds.), The
routines of decision making: 231–247. Mahwah, NJ: Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates.
Vicente, K. J., & Wang, DEMO H. 1998. An ecological theory of
expertise effects in memory recall. Psychological Re-
view, 105: 33–57.
von Nordenflycht, A. 2010. What is a professional service firm?
Toward a theory and taxonomy of knowledge-intensive
firms. DEMO of Management Review, 35: 155–174.
Vul, E., & Pashler, DEMO 2007. Incubation benefits only after
people have been misdirected. Memory and Cognition,
35: 701–710.
Wallas, G. 1926. The art of thought. New DEMO: Holt.
Walsh, J. P. 1995. Managerial and organizational cognition:
Notes from a trip down memory lane. Organization Sci-
ence, 6: 280 DEMO
Ward, T. B. 1994. Structured imagination: The role of category
structure in exemplar generation. Cognitive Psychology,
27: 1– 40.
Ward, T. DEMO 2007. Creative cognition as a window on creativ-
ity. Methods, 42: 28 –37.
Ward, T. B., Smith, S. M., & Vaid, J. 1997. Conceptual struc-
tures and processes in creative thought. In T. DEMO Ward,
S. M. Smith, & J. Vaid (Eds.), Creative thought: An inves-
tigation of conceptual structures and processes: 1–27.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Weber, R., & Crocker, J. 1983. DEMO processes in the
revision of stereotypic beliefs. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 45: 961–977.
Weick, K. E. 1993. The collapse of sensemaking in organiza-
tions: The Mann Gulch disaster. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 38: 628 – 652.
Weick, K. E., Sutcliffe, K. M., & DEMO, D. 2005. Organizing
and the process of sensemaking. Organization Science,
DEMO: 409 – 421.
Weisberg, R. W. 1999. Creativity and knowledge: DEMO challenge
to theories. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook of DEMO
ity: 226 –250. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weisberg, R. W. DEMO Modes of expertise in creative thinking:
Evidence from case studies. In K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness,
P. Feltovich, & R. R. DEMO (Eds), The Cambridge hand-
book of expertise and expert performance: 761–787. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
West, M. A., & Richter, A. W. 2008. Climates and cultures for
innovation and creativity at work. In J. Zhou & C. E.
2010
Dane
603
Shalley (Eds.), Handbook of organizational creativity:
211–236. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wilensky, H. L. 1964. The professionalization DEMO everyone?
American Journal of Sociology, 70: 137–158.
Wiley, J. DEMO Expertise as mental set: The effects of domain
knowledge in creative DEMO solving. Memory and
Cognition, 26: 716 –730.
Wood, W., & Neal, D. T. 2007. A new look at habits and the
habit-goal interface. Psychological Review, 114: 843– 863.
Wood, W., Quinn, J. M., & Kashy, D. A. 2002. Habits in every-
day life: Thought, emotion, and action. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 83: 1281–1297.
Woodman, R. W., Sawyer, J. E., & Griffin, R. W. 1993. Toward
a theory of organizational creativity. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 18: 292–321.
Wray, K. B. 2003. Is science really a young man’s game?
Social Studies of Science, 33: 137–149.
DEMO, D. 2003. Organizational change as a process of death,
dying, and rebirth. Journal of Applied Behavioral Sci-
ence, 39: 73–96.
Zhang, L. F., & Sternberg, R. J. 2009. Intellectual styles and
creativity. DEMO T. Rickards, M. A. Runco, & S. Moger (Eds.),
The Routledge companion to creativity: 256 –266. London:
Routledge.
Zhong, DEMO B., Dijksterhuis, A., & Galinsky, A. D. 2008. The
merits of unconscious thought in creativity. Psychologi-
cal Science, 19: 912–918.
Erik DEMO (erikdane@rice.edu) is an assistant professor of management at the
Jesse H. Jones Graduate School of Business, Rice University. He received his Ph.D.
from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. His current research explores
the effects DEMO domain expertise on cognitive flexibility, intuition, and mindfulness
in the workplace.{1g42fwefx}