Journal ofManagement Shcdies 33:6 November 1996
0022-2380
RISK TYPES AND INTER-FIRM DEMO STRUCTURES*
T. K. DAS
BING-SHENG TENC
Baruch College, Cip Unwmsip OfNm DEMO
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the choice between equity and non-equity forms of inter-
firm alliances from an ‘integrated risk’ perspective, which combines relational risk
and performance risk in inter-firm alliances. Relational risk relates to co-
operation DEMO alliance partners, while performance risk has to do with the
hazards DEMO not achieving the performance objectives of an alliance, given co-
operation. DEMO suggest that equity alliance is adopted to control relational risk,
while non-equity alliance is aimed at minimizing performance risk. Existing
studies on the DEMO of alliance configurations are examined from the proposed
risk perspective, and DEMO number of key propositions are advanced for empirical
testing and further development of the perspective.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years we have witnessed a remarkable DEMO in the competitive envir-
onment of business, characterized by increasing intensity DEMO a more integrated
global market (Rmg and Van de Ven, 1992; Yoshino and Rangan, 1995). In
dealing with this challenge as DEMO as opportunity, many firms are finding
themselves unable to cope with DEMO traditional arsenal of competitive strategies,
which emphasize maximum exploitation of an individual firm’s competitive
advantage. More than ever, the rapidly changing and expanding market makes it
difficult either to dominate or to focus. D’Aveni (1994) has coined the term
‘hypercompetition’ to describe such unprecedented pressure on firms to shift
their strategic positions constantly. One way to survive this mounting DEMO
tion, as many firms are discovering, is to co-operate with other firms and create
‘collaborative advantage’ (Bleeke and Ernst, 1995; Huxham and Macdonald,
1992). Inter-firm alliances have emerged as a response to DEMO new competitive
environment, and it appears that they are gaining momentum (Badaracco, 199 1 ;
Murray and Mahon, 1993; Yoshino and DEMO, 1995).
Inter-firm alliances can have a variety of co-operative arrangements, including
direct investment, joint ventures, supplier relationships, technology licensing,
technology exchange, research and development agreements, and so on. Various
typologies have DEMO proposed to classifir these structures (Alter and Hage, 1993).
Addnssfw rCprntC: T. K. Das, Department of Management, School of Business, DEMO College, City
University of New York, 17 Lexington Avenue, New DEMO, NY 10010, USA.
0 Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996. Published by Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 lJF, UK
and 238 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
828
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG
Some theorists have differentiated the DEMO structures into two categories:
equity alliances and non-equity alliances (Hennart, 1988; Pisano, 199 1 ; Rugman,
1982; Teece, 1992)DEMO Equity alliances involve the transfer or creation of equity
ownership, and DEMO take two primary forms: direct investment and joint
ventures. Direct investment DEMO when one of the partners acquires partial
ownership of the other partner or partners. In joint ventures, partners invest in a
new, jointly DEMO entity. Non-equity alliances, on the other hand, do not
involve any equity transfer, so that they include all kinds of contractual arrange-
ments.
A fair number of studies have sought to reveal the underlying rationale DEMO
determining the choice between equity and non-equity alliances (Gulati, 1995;
Hagedoorn, 1993; Hennart, 1988; Osborn and Baughn, 1990; Pisano, 1991).
Most of them have approached the issue from a transaction DEMO economics
standpoint (e.g. Williamson, 1975, 1985). Transaction cost theorists DEMO inter-
firm alliances as an intermediate or hybrid form between two polar forms:
markets and hierarchies (Williamson, 1991). When transaction costs DEMO by
using the market mechanism are deemed to exceed governance costs from inter-
nalized exchanges, hierarchical organizations will be created. Conversely, low
transaction DEMO will justiq the choice of market exchanges. Inter-firm alliances
serve as an eclectic choice, when the transaction costs involved in an exchange
are too high for using market mechanism but not high enough to form a
DEMO (Ring and Van de Ven, 1992; Williamson, 1985).
Applying this logic, transaction cost theorists posit that the governance
structure of an inter-firm alliance is also determined by the transaction costs of
the deal (Pisano and Teece, 1989). Adopting the neoclassical economics of
oligopoly, DEMO theorists have assumed that the partners of an inter-firm alliance
tend to behave opportunistically, maximizing their own benefits while plunging
the collective efforts into difficulties. Clearly, the opportunistic behaviour of
partners, or ‘self-interest seeking with DEMO (Williamson, 1975, p. 26), is a major
source of DEMO costs in inter-firm alliances. Opportunism results in
expensive negotiating costs ex ante and monitoring costs ex post (Hennart, 1988).
However, if partners share ownership of an entity, or are ‘mutual hostages’, their
incentive DEMO behave opportunistically is likely to decrease (Pisano and Teece,
1989)DEMO To Parkhe (1993), such ‘non-recoverable investment’ serves as ex ante
DEMO for opportunism. Thus, equity alliances are used to control opportu-
nistic DEMO, and therefore the transaction costs of inter-firm alliances. Non-
equity alliances, by contrast, lack such a mechanism for curbing opportunistic
behaviour. The general finding in the existing literature is that when the
available chances and DEMO of opportunistic behaviour are high, equity alliances
will be the preferred DEMO (Gulati, 1995).
Nevertheless, the foregoing explanation does not provide DEMO with a complete
picture of the issues involved in equity and non-equity alliances, even from a
transaction cost standpoint. According to Demsetz (1 DEMO I), governance costs of
running a hierarchy must be taken into account as well. To be comprehensive,
transaction cost economics should examine DEMO the sum of governance costs
and transaction costs of internal organization exceeds that of market transaction,
‘since either option entails expenditures on both DEMO categories’ (Demsetz, 199 1,
p. 162). Along similar lines, Zajac and Olsen (1993) observed that, as compared
0
Blackwell DEMO Ltd 1996
RISK TYPES AND INTER-FIRM ALLIANCE STRUCTURES
829
to market transactions, inter-firm alliances may well incur higher transaction
costs; thus, complete reliance on transaction DEMO provides an inadequate expla-
nation of alliances.
Indeed, since economizing on DEMO costs is just one component of the
decision picture, one must DEMO at incurred governance costs also. With regard to
the choice between equity and non-equity alliances, it may be argued that equity
alliances decrease transaction costs by controlling opportunistic behaviour, but
does so at the expense of increasing governance cost (through non-recoverable
investment and sharing decision making). If equity alliances have a mixed impact
on governance costs and transaction costs, the overall impact is unknown. Thus,
transaction cost economics does not DEMO a clear-cut rationale for a choice
between the two types of governance structures of alliances.
The purpose of this paper is to develop an DEMO perspective of inter-firm
alliances: an ‘integrated risk‘ perspective. Risk is recognized DEMO a key factor in
strategic decision making. However, an objective and DEMO definition of risk
has proven difficult (March and Shapira, 1987; DEMO and Stone, 1992). Clearly,
both the probability of the DEMO outcome from a risk-inherent decision and
the value of that outcome are relevant, but the circumstances under which and
the way in which they interact with each other are far from clear (Kahneman
and Tversky, DEMO). Different people may have different risk perceptions of the
same situation, and thus objective risk and perceived risk can be quite different.
Though the subjective view of risk seems to be more relevant to decision
DEMO, we maintain that certain conditions are riskier than others, even from
an objective viewpoint. Such conditions may include those with high outcome
uncertainty DEMO possible extreme consequences (Sitkin and Pablo, 1992). Thus,
one needs to keep in mind both the objective risk and its subjective DEMO
tion. For our purpose, we assume that the risk inherent in DEMO situation and the
attendant risk perception are related: risky situations generally DEMO to a percep-
tion of risk. In this paper, we investigate DEMO impact of risk perceptions on inter-
firm alliances, as well as DEMO situational antecedents of risk perceptions. Since it
has been reported that managers usually relate risk to the possibility of unfavour-
able outcomes (March and Shapira, 1987), or downside risk (Miller and Leiblein,
1996), we also define risk as negative outcome variance.
In line with our argument, Brouthers (1995, p. 10) has suggested that firms
face DEMO ‘totality of risks’ and that ‘management must be cognizant of the overall
risk management package’. We suggest that this total, integrated risk perspective
covers the major issues involved in inter-firm alliances, and that it also provides
us with a straightforward accounting for the choice between equity and non-
DEMO alliances. Ring and Van de Ven (1 992) observed that the type of contracts
selected reflects the risks the partners perceive. Our integrated DEMO perspective
develops this idea further and articulates the choice criteria on the basis of risk
perception. Since this perspective focuses on an individual partner’s DEMO percep-
tion, it is not limited to two-partner alliances. In other DEMO, partners’ risk
perceptions do not necessarily change just because more than DEMO firms are
involved in the alliance.
In the next section, we DEMO between relational risk and performance
risk involved in building inter-firm alliances, DEMO develop several propositions
regarding the antecedents to the perception of relational and performance risks.
0
Blackwell Publishen Ltd 1996
830
T. K. DAS AND
BINGSHENG TENG
However, the identification of these antecedents is not intended to be compre-
hensive, since there are simply too many factors that are related to these percep-
tions. In the DEMO following that, we set out the conditions under which equity
alliances DEMO non-equity alliances will be preferred.
RELATIONAL RISK AND
PERF’ORMANCE RISK IN INTER-FIRM ALLIANCES
The fundamental attribute that distinguishes inter-firm alliances from all other
strategic DEMO is the reliance on co-operation among the partners. Since
the partners usually have only partially overlapping goals, their co-operation
cannot be taken for granted. Ouchi (1980) has called this uncertainty the ‘funda-
mental problem of DEMO @. 130). While the success of other strategies
completely depends on how well the firm itself deals with the environment, the
success of inter-firm alliances demands an additional premise: a good working
relationship among the partners. As noted by Parkhe (1993, p. 794), inter-firm
alliances DEMO ‘often characterized by inherent instability arising from uncertainty
regarding a partner’s future behavior’. Accordingly, a model of inter-firm
alliances must establish this characteristic as its core.
There are two independent and yet equally important considerations for
DEMO into an alliance: relationship and performance. Relational risk is
concerned with DEMO the co-operation among partners will go smoothly.
Performance risk involves the prospect of achieving the strategic goals of the
alliance, given full compliance by all partners. These two types of risk are
conceptually independent to each DEMO because they are rooted in two different
domains: one in inter-firm DEMO and the other in the competitive environ-
ment. Miller (1992) noted that oftentimes we name risk by their sources, e.g.
political risk, DEMO&D risk. In this sense, our definitions of the two risk DEMO are
also differentiated in terms of their respective sources. If a hazard is attributable
to market factors, we call it performance risk. Similarly, DEMO negative outcomes
arise from co-operative relationships, we designate it as relational DEMO Since
inter-firm co-operation and the competitive environment represent two mutually
exclusive domains, the differentiation permits a meaningful dichotomy of risks in
strategic alliances.
Nevertheless, some may argue that inter-firm co-operation and the competitive
environment themselves are related, so that relational and performance risks are
really interdependent. A seemingly relevant example would be R&D alliances, in
which both relational risk and performance risk tend to be high. In our view,
however, R&D activities are just common factors that contribute simultaneously
to both DEMO of risk. It does not follow that this commonality can be used to
argue that relational risk and performance risk are thereby overlapping
constructs. DEMO need, in fact, to go further and iden* the sources of hazards. In
R&D related alliances, for instance, factors of the DEMO prospects of a new
product are related to performance risk, while DEMO like shirking or stealing
firm-specific know-how are clearly relational risk. Thus, DEMO suggest that the two
types of risk are indeed independent. Later sections will examine some of these
antecedent factors in greater detail.
Since these DEMO types of risk give a complete picture of the situation, firms
DEMO
Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996
RISK TYPES AND INTER-FIRM ALLIANCE STRUCTURES 83 1
intending to form an DEMO with others will need to evaluate them carefully.
We may observe here that the two types of risk seem to go in tandem with DEMO
sets of uncertainties in inter-firm alliances that Ring and Van de Ven (1994, pp.
92-3) have noted: ‘uncertainty regarding future states of DEMO (performance
risk) and ‘uncertainty whether the parties will be able to rely on trust’ (relational
risk).
The distinction between relational risk and performance risk highlights the
characteristics of inter-firm alliances as compared with other DEMO All
other types of strategic manoeuvres, with no inter-firm co-operation involved,DEMO
invite only performance risk. Inter-firm alliances, in contrast, concurrently
involve relational risk also. The distinction, therefore, provides us with a useful
and DEMO way of understanding inter-firm alliances. We will show how
various aspects of inter-firm alliances identified in previous studies may fruitfully
be subsumed under the DEMO integrated perspective comprised of relational
risk and performance risk.
Relational Rkk
The term ‘relational risk‘ addresses the possibility and the consequence that the
partners DEMO inter-firm alliances do not fully commit themselves to joint efforts. In
other words, it refers to the concern that firms may not work toward the mutual
interests of the partners, and that they may not co-operate in a manner specified
in the alliance arrangement or as expected by DEMO partners. The motives of
such discordant behaviour can be either rational or irrational. Rational motives
refer to the self-interest seeking by economic actors, or opportunistic behaviour
(Williamson, 1981, 1993). Such actions could be ‘individually rational yet
produce a collectively suboptimal outcome’ (Parkhe, 1993, p. 794). It is believed
that all partners in inter-firm alliances, given a chance, would tend to maximize
their own interests at the cost of the other partners (Joskow, 1985). In an effort
to control DEMO self-interest seeking behaviour, the partners are compelled to
negotiate and write DEMO and contingent contracts, which generally involve
high costs. In the absence DEMO opportunism, each party can expect others to
‘honor the spirit as DEMO as the letter of an agreement’ (Williamson and Ouchi,
1981, p. 352), and contingencies allowed to unfold.
One form of relational DEMO may be referred to as ‘dissipation of the firm-
specific advantage’ (DEMO, 1982, p. lo), or ‘dissemination risk’) (Brouthers,
1995, p. 12). Some partners of inter-firm alliances may unintendedly lose control
of their technology through poorly conceived contractual arrangements.
Hagedoorn (1993) pointed DEMO that one of the motives in entering an inter-firm
alliance is to capture other partners’ superior knowledge and technology. Besides
a technology transfer agreement, firms may use joint activities as a cover for
secretly capturing other DEMO technology. According to Pisano and Teece
(1989, p. 235), ‘the biggest transactional risks for the seller are associated with
the buyer’s using DEMO technology in ways not anticipated by the contract, or
which while DEMO cannot be easily prevented‘. As a result, it has been
observed DEMO many alliances eventually lead to an unplanned transfer of
ownership, a DEMO in which one or more partners take advantage of the other
partner or partners (Bleeke and Ernst, 1995). In this case, having a co-operative
relationship with others imposes additional relational risk for the firm DEMO,
0
Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996
832 T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG
which then impacts on the DEMO of relational risk. If one partner suspects
the real intentions of other partners, the level of confidence on a good working
relationship will go down. Consequently, the perception of high relational risk
becomes more acute. However, for those partners who have access to other
firms’ proprietary know-how in alliances, a high level of relational risk is unlikely
to be perceived. Clearly, there could be asymmetric perceptions as between
partners. Thus:
Proposition 1: The more difficult it is to protect one’s proprietary know-how, DEMO
higher will be the relational risk perceived by the partners of inter-firm
alliances.
On the other hand, an irrational motive for being uncommitted does not
necessarily involve self-interestedness. It may include a host of psychological
reasons DEMO not liking the potential co-operative relationship. For example, Ouchi
(1 980) stressed that the condition for co-operation is a distribution mechanism
that is perceived to be equitable. Ring and Van de Ven (1994, p. DEMO) also
suggested that partners of inter-firm alliances may ‘rely more heavily DEMO equity
than efficiency in assessing their relationship’. Therefore, if partners of DEMO inter-
firm alliance foresee unfair pay-offs in the future, their confidence DEMO co-
operation may be undermined. Thus, their relational risk perception will DEMO
more prominent.
According to the equity theory of motivation (Adams, ‘1963), there exists a
sense of inequity whenever people believe that their DEMO of outcome to inputs is
different from those of others. Perceiving themselves to be either under-rewarded
or over-rewarded, people are motivated to restore a sense of equity through
altering their gains and/or their inputs. In DEMO alliances, an expected altera-
tion of initial arrangements and/or commitment DEMO concerns about a sitis-
factory partnership. Therefore, we may expect a DEMO of inequity to engender
the perception of relational risk. When one party of the alliance expects the pay-
offs to be unfair, no matter the party itself is over-paid or under-paid, it may
start to worry about the future working relationship. The mncern is that sooner
or later DEMO partner will be motivated to behave discordantly, notwithstanding its
own possible DEMO Therefore, high relational risk may be perceived by both
partners, not just the one expecting underpayment. Hence:
Proflosition 2: The higher the pay-off inequity expected by the partners in an
inter-firm alliance, the higher will be the relational risk perceived by the
partners.
The degree of DEMO relational risk, or concern with co-operation, is
believed to be mitigated by trust among the partners (Gambetta, 1988; Maitland
et al., DEMO). Relational risk and trust are closely related, because the decision DEMO
accept the risk implies trust (Williamson, 1993). Conversely, Coleman (1990)
wrote that ‘[situations involving trust] are situations in which the DEMO one takes
depends on the performance of another actor’ (p. 91)DEMO In this sense, relational
risk can be viewed as the opposite DEMO of inter-firm trust.
Two dimensions of trust have been identified in the literature: affect-based
trust and cognition-based trust (McAllister, 1995). Cognition-based trust derives
0 Blackwd Publishers Ltd 1996
RISK TYPES AND INTER-FIRM ALLIANCE STRUCTURES 833
confidence from others’ competence, dependability and other characteristics.
Mect-based trust, on the other hand, depends on DEMO of closeness and
goodwill. Ring and Van de Ven (1994, p. 93) named the first dimension as ‘risk-
based view of trust’, DEMO that this view treats trust as something like risk,
inviting careful calculation of probabilities. Using the same language, our
relational risk can be termed as a ‘trust-based view of risk’, which suggests that
partners calculate the risks involved in the co-operative relationship by evaluating
how much they DEMO each other. Such evaluation should include both cognition-
based and affect-based trust.
When the partners of an inter-firm alliance develop a sense of trust DEMO each
other, the scope for and the concern over opportunistic behaviour DEMO to ebb
quickly (Axelrod, 1984), and the partners ‘can act as if the future were more
certain’ (Zajac and Olsen, 1993, p. 140). Gulati (1995) has also noted that
detailed contracts DEMO strategic trust are two ways to make the behaviour of the
partners predictable. It has also been argued that repeated alliances among the
same DEMO breed inter-firm trust (Gulati, 1995; Parkhe, 1993). One reason, as
related to affect-based trust, is that a history of alliances DEMO a long-term relation-
ship lead firms to believe in their partners’ goodwill. Another reason seems more
related to cognition-based trust. When the partners have DEMO number of on-going
alliances, each alliance serves as ‘mutual hostage’ for DEMO so that ‘mutual
forbearance’ is enhanced. As a result, partners become DEMO concerned with the
possibility of opportunistic behaviour. Supporting this view, Kogut (1 989) found
that the likelihood of alliance termination is decreased when the partners have
other on-going agreements among them. Thus, a broad perspective which allows
the examination of multiple alliances is adopted in our model:DEMO
RopoSition 3: The greater the number of previous alliances between the
DEMO, the lower will be the relational risk as perceived by the DEMO
Pdonnance Rirk
Ring and Van de Ven (1 992, pp. 487-8) have summarized various terms used to
describe risks involved in a strategic choice, such as commercial and technolo-
gical risks, corporate risk, and corporate strategic risk. Despite the variety of
terms, the essence of risk inherent in strategies is that the achievement of
strategic objectives does not DEMO depend on the efforts of a firm. Thus, we
use the DEMO ‘performance risk‘ to account for the possibility and the conse-
quences that the objectives of inter-firm alliances are not successfully achieved,
although all DEMO co-operate fully. In other words, performance risk embraces
all kinds of DEMO, except those related to co-operation, that can either lead to
the failure of an inter-firm alliance, or to an increase in the magnitude of loss
from the alliance.
Many researchers have identified risk-sharing as an DEMO motive for
entering into inter-firm alliances (Alter and Hage, 1993; DEMO, 1991; Das
and Teng, in press a; Kogut, 1991; Murray and Mahon, 1993; Oliver, 1990;
Powell, 1987). DEMO risk of an otherwise attractive strategy is too high for a
single firm, inter-firm alliances appear to be a natural alternative. Brouthers
(1995) found that the perception of high risks leads to strategies that shift DEMO
and control to other firms. It seems clear that these ‘risks’ refer to risks inherent
0
Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996
834 T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG
in pursuing strategic objectives, and they have nothing to do with relational risk
of the alliances. Therefore, these risks are shared by the partners of an inter-firm
alliance and DEMO into our category of performance risk. The important finding is
that while relational risk is created when forging inter-firm alliances, some perfor-
mance risk can be shared and mitigated through inter-firm alliances.
There are numerous factors DEMO may contribute to a high level of perfor-
mance risk. For our purpose, though, it would suffice to discuss only a few of
DEMO The need for sharing performance risk becomes more sigmficant when it
comes to R&D activities (Hagedoorn, 1993; Pisano, 1991) and international
business (Hennart, 1988; Kogut and Singh, 1988; Shan, 1991)DEMO This is under-
standable since performance risk inherent in these alliances is higher than those
not dealing with R&D. Teece (1992, p. DEMO) has stated that ‘there is no arena in
which uncertainty is DEMO and the need to co-ordinate greater than in the
development and commercialization of new technology’. Besides the unpredict-
able nature of R&D activities, the development and commercialization of new
products are often very costly and DEMO (Plsano, 1990). Similarly,
cross-border alliances are exposed to so-called ‘international risk‘ (Miller, 1992),
which includes a host of environmental, industry, and firm-specific risks. When a
firm does business in a DEMO country, it has to deal with a new competitive
environment characterized DEMO a different legal system, market structure,
consumer behaviour and customs. DEMO a result, the firm feels less able to rely on
its DEMO or experience accumulated in its domestic market, and thus
perceives a DEMO level of performance risk. Therefore, we propose:
Roposition 4 Performance DEMO will be perceived as higher in inter-firm alliances
with a shared R&D component, as compared to other kinds of alliances.
Proposition 5 Performance risk will be perceived as higher in cross-border inter-
firm alliances as DEMO to domestic alliances.
One important source of performance risk in inter-firm alliances appears to be
the non-recoverable investments made in a particular alliance (Parkhe, 1993).
Non-recoverable investments are analogous to Williamson’s (1 985) concept of
asset specificity, and include physical, human, and other assets that are dedicated
to the specific alliance. The value of these assets will DEMO sigdicantly discounted if
employed for purposes other than the initial alliance. Clearly, the more their
values need to be discounted in other possible uses, the more non-recoverable
they are. When a firm has to invest specifically for a strategic objective, perfor-
mance risk goes up because the potential loss from failing the course becomes
higher. Since previous studies (e.g. Shapira, 1995) found that decision makers use
potential gains and losses to DEMO risk, a high non-recoverable investment will
lead to the perception of DEMO performance risk. Thus:
Roposicion 6 The more non-recoverable the investment is in an inter-firm
alliance, the higher the performance risk will be as perceived by the partners.
As we noted before, the choice between equity alliance and non-equity alliance
will have a sigmficantly different impact on the DEMO of non-recoverable
investments, as well as on other aspects of relational DEMO and performance risk.
0 Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996
RISK TYPES AND INTER-FIRM ALLIANCE STRUCTURES 835
The next section will discuss DEMO integrated risk perspective with respect to the
equity/non-equity choice.
EQW ALLIANCES AND NON-EQUITY ALLIANCES
The choice between equity and non-equity alliances is one DEMO the most important
decisions that prospective partners are required to make (DEMO, 1988; Teece,
1992). The decision has crucial implications on virtually every aspect of the
alliance: organization structure, operational process, control mechanism, and so
on. The advantages and disadvantages of the choice on these aspects of an
alliance could be multifarious, so that it is quite difficult to capture the essence of
this structural choice. We thus DEMO a framework that would assist us in assessing
the considerations involved in the decision in a meaningful and parsimonious
way. The perceptions of relational DEMO performance risk provide us with such a
framework. According to Thompson (DEMO 967), organizations endeavour to control
uncertainties and risks in their task environment. An integrated risk perspective is
especially relevant in alliances because the DEMO tend to be aware of the two
types of risk. Thus, DEMO control the total risk in the alliance, which means the sum
DEMO relational and performance risk, is a key objective in the partners’ DEMO
When they face the choice of the governance structure, in our DEMO equity versus
non-equity alliance, they would naturally prefer the structure that DEMO the
sum of relational risk and performance risk.
Equip Alliances
Since equity alliances involve the creation of new entities, or ownership transfer
of existing entities, they are more like hierarchies (Gulati, 1995). The incidence
of opportunistic behaviour is usually less within hierarchies, primarily because
transactions tend to take place in formalized ways. Hierarchies may not eliminate
all opportunistic DEMO, as factors such as organizational politics and shirking
on the job DEMO obstruct effective co-ordination. Nevertheless, it is reasonable to
expect smoother co-operation DEMO internal units, as compared with that
among independent firms. In the DEMO way, equity alliances do not foster oppor-
tunistic behaviour either, and consequently relational risk of alliances can be
better controlled (Plsano et al., 1988; Stuckey, 1983). Some characteristics that
equity alliances share with hierarchies appear to deter opportunistic behaviour:
aligned interests, monolithic control, DEMO diminished performance ambiguity.
First of all, shared equity ownership aligns the DEMO and incentives of parent
firms. On the one hand, since each DEMO firm has its own stake in the entity,
there is no point in behaving opportunistically. On the other hand, the shared
equity ownership serves as a ‘mutual hostage’ for each partner, so that the
incentive for opportunistic behaviour will be restrained.
The second factor that allows equity DEMO to deal with opportunistic
behaviour is monolithic control in shared entities. A shared ownership often
means a separate administrative hierarchy, such as in the case of joint ventures.
Based on resources from all parent firms, a new entity is created to pursue its
strategic goal. Within this new DEMO, it is difficult for one or more partners
to manipulate its DEMO and exploit the other parties (Gulati, 1995). It is in
0
Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996
836
T. K.
DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG
this sense that Beamish and DEMO (1987) argued that transaction cost problems
associated with opportunism and uncertainty can be better handled in a joint
venture. On the other hand, it has also been suggested that even equity alliances
may not be DEMO to deal with opportunism effectively, especially if the firms are
looking DEMO appropriate such intangible assets as tacit knowledge and know-how of
their partners (Kay, 1992; Reich and Mankin, 1986). In our view, however, even
if one partner attempts to steal technology or to shirk from its various responsi-
bilities, a separate entity as a control mechanism will be effective for detecting
these behaviours. In equity alliances, joint decision making as well as reward and
control systems serve to restrain the DEMO By comparison, non-equity
alliances such as research consortium and other R&DEMO arrangements have to
contend with the same problem of hidden agendas, DEMO lack strong control
systems. Thus, as equity alliances are more hierarchical DEMO non-equity alliances
in terms of control, relational risk is less likely DEMO be a problem. Clearly, these
two arguments are not different from DEMO traditional standpoint of transaction
cost economics.
In a somewhat different vein, DEMO third characteristic is concerned with
Ouchi’s (1 980) notion that opportunistic behaviour mainly stems from perfor-
mance ambiguity, i.e. ‘the difficulty of identifying h,e contributions made by the
parties to a transaction’ (Maitland et al., 1985, p. 61). To that end, equity
alliances seem to ‘provide a mechanism for distributing residuals when ex ante
contractual agreements DEMO be written to specify or enforce a division of
returns’ (Teece, 1992, p. 20). At least the partners would agree on using the
proportion of equity ownership as the measure for relative contribution. Relating
DEMO the first point, the partners would be more willing to retain DEMO residuals
that are really hard to distribute, if they share the DEMO There will be no rush
for immediate gain-sharing. Because of these three characteristics of equity
alliances, opportunistic behaviour is expected to be discouraged. Thus, equity
alliances are more effective in controlling relational risk inherent in an alliance,
and should therefore be preferred when the perceived relational risk DEMO high.
However, when it comes to controlling performance risk, equity alliances are
not the answer. Indeed, as compared to non-equity alliances, a DEMO degree
of performance risk can be ascribed to equity-based alliances. First, DEMO
alliances require a special investment in the joint task, so that DEMO price of
failure in the deal becomes greater. Also, plainly, this type of investment
cannot easily be recovered for other uses. In that DEMO, forging equity alliances
may involve incurring more costs than forming hierarchies. DEMO reason is that
equity alliances do not simply mean internalizing transactions by eliminating
market transactions, but rather creating new entities for these would-be interna-
lized transactions. Therefore, some additional initial expenditures are necessary
to get the alliance-entity started. These costs may not be needed if internaliza-
tion of DEMO is achieved through a merger or an acquisition. Neither are
they necessary if the transactions are carried out through non-equity alliances,
in which DEMO each party is free to utilize what they already have to the
maximum extent. In other words, in order to get the partner’s complementary
skills or assets, partners in equity alliances have to carry a heavier equity
burden. Given these additional investments that are needed to create the DEMO
entity, an equity alliance involves ‘very high exit costs’ (Gulati, DEMO, p. 89),
0
Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996
RISK TYPES AND
INTER-FIRM ALLIANCE STRUCTURES
837
and is thus exposed to DEMO higher level of performance risk than a non-equity
alliance.
Secondly, a DEMO performance risk for equity alliances also emanates from its
high governance cost. It has been observed that governance costs incurred by
joint ventures are DEMO than those of regular enterprises (Osborn and Baughn,
1990). DEMO, since equity alliances often stand as separate entities, substantial
extra governance costs have to be incurred. By comparison, the operation of
non-equity alliances largely remains within parent firms, so that less extra govern-
ance costs are involved. Second, shared ownership implies shared decision
making, which complicates DEMO process and reduces strategic flexibility of the
firm. Organizational culture differences make joint decision making and imple-
mentation even more difficult. In non-equity alliances, by comparison, less joint
decision making is mandated because the only obligation of the partners is to
abide by the terms of explicit contractual DEMO However, this does not
mean that non-equity alliances cannot benefit from DEMO decision making that is
necessary for their operation. The key difference here is that while in equity
alliances an unnecessary degree of joint decision DEMO may be forced by joint
equity ownership, in non-equity alliances the DEMO usually have more leeway.
In sum, equity alliances allow the effective DEMO of relational risk in a deal,
while being exposed to high performance risk. As a result, it is expected that
equity alliances will be adopted when relational risk is perceived as more signifi-
cant than DEMO risk. Parkhe (1 993) found some support for the hypothesis
that perception of opportunistic behaviour leads to more non-recoverable, or
equity, investments. DEMO:
Proposition 7 Inter-firm alliances are more likely to be equity based when
relational risk, rather than performance risk, is perceived as the DEMO
threat to the alliances.
Previous studies provided some indirect support for this proposition. For
example, Gulati (1995) reported that the number of previous alliances is
negatively related to the choice of equity alliances. Since proposition DEMO predicts
that previous alliances would breed trust and thus lead to the perception of less
relational risk, performance risk is likely to be the dominant threat. In addition,
it has been found that alliances were DEMO likely to be equity based if they were
to conduct joint R&D activities (Gulati, 1995; Osborn and Baughn, 1990). The
DEMO provided by transaction cost theorists is that transaction costs of joint
R&D are too high for non-equity agreements, due to difficulties and opportu-
nistic behaviour in sharing, exchanging and developing knowledge. However, we
argue DEMO that equity R&D alliances call for additional investments and high
governance costs, which may actually increase total transaction costs. If that is
so, the transaction cost explanation is not very convincing.
Our integrated risk perspective, by comparison, provides a more plausible
explanation. While proposition 4 suggests DEMO high level of performance risk in
R&D alliances, it needs DEMO be noted that joint R&D also invites serious relational
risk for the partners. Ultimately, it is the contrast between the two that would
determine the preferred structure. Because of the ambiguities inherent in R&D
DEMO, it is hard accurately to assess the contribution of each party. DEMO,
joint R&D could be a fertile area for opportunistic behaviour, which leads to the
0
Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996
838 T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG
perception of high relational risk. DEMO, previous studies have reported that
inter-firm alliances are often used to DEMO risk, or more specifically performance
risk, of R&D activity (DEMO Hagedoorn, 1993). Thus, it is expected that relatively
high performance risk in R&D could be mitigated by entering into inter-firm
alliances. DEMO concern with relational risk is so serious in nature that it likely
overwhelms the concern with performance risk in R&D, which is shared. Thus,
equity alliances are normally formed in such cases.
Our position DEMO further supported by the finding that inter-firm alliances in
industries with high R&D intensity are less likely to be equity based (Osborn and
Baughn, 1990). Apparently, high-tech industries implies the incidence of higher
DEMO risk for firms. Uncertainties and risks in the newer industries such
as telecommunications and biotechnology are likely to be greater than those
industries with DEMO mature technology. Thus, we may plausibly argue that
perceptions of high DEMO risk should result in a preference for non-equity
alliances, assuming relational DEMO is constant.
Non-equip Alliances
Non-equity alliances do not involve the creation of new entities or of equity
transfers. In terms of the exchange continuum DEMO by transaction cost
theorists, non-equity alliances are more like market-based contracts DEMO than
hierarchies. Thus, in contrast to equity alliances, the key characteristic of non-
equity alliances is a lack of control and strategic flexibility. DEMO the same
logic .as in our discussion on equity alliances, we DEMO that a lack of shared
ownership makes it difficult to align the interests of the partners, to control their
behaviour, and to distribute DEMO outcomes. Consequently, opportunistic
behaviour will be hard to curb. Beyond the DEMO identified by the contract ex
ante, non-equity contractual agreements rely heavily DEMO the goodwill and voluntary
co-operation from independent firms. As the partners realize that they lack the
means to deal with opportunism, relational risk will be perceived to be high.
On the other hand, we suggest that non-equity alliances are better able to
protect the partners from high performance DEMO Compared to equity alliances,
non-equity alliances are much more flexible. Since there is no transfer of equity,
the level of commitment tends DEMO be comparatively limited. Thus, the partners of
an alliance can quite DEMO decide to get out of the alliance. This option would
be more problematic in equity alliances - for example, joint ventures would have
to be sold to a partner or to an outsider, and minority equity positions would
need to be reconiigured.
In sum, non-equity alliances are able to mitigate performance risk, but not
relational risk. Thus, when performance DEMO is perceived as more serious than
relational risk, non-equity alliances will DEMO selected. It has been found that
foreign companies are less willing to invest equity when country-specific risk is
perceived as high (Shan, 1991)DEMO This means that firms facing high performance
risk, yet needing to DEMO equity, would make as little investment as possible.
Such a phenomenon DEMO supported by our framework. As a result:
Aoposition 8: Inter-firm DEMO are less likely to be equity based when perfor-
mance risk, DEMO than relational risk, is perceived as the dominant threat to
the DEMO
0 Blackwell Publishen Ltd 1996
RISK TYPES AND INTER-FIRM ALLIANCE STRUCTURES
839
In essence, we suggest that it is the relative levels of relational risk and perfor-
mance risk DEMO determine the choice between equity and non-equity alliance
structures. In other words, the actual levels of the two types of risk are not the
relevant criterion. In fact, an alliance may be forged even though there are high
levels of relational risk and performance risk. The reason, as suggested by Zajac
and Olsen (1993), is that the joint values created by pooling the partners may
well outweigh the costs and possible DEMO The governance structure of the
alliance, or the choice between equity DEMO non-equity alliance in our case,
should be used to control the level of total risks. Our earlier discussion demon-
strates that either choice DEMO be effective in dealing with only one type of risk.
The dilemma inherent in the choice is that it is not possible to curb DEMO types
of risk simultaneously. It is expected that partners would choose the governance
structure that can better cope with the primary risk of the DEMO, i.e. the risk
type of higher degree. Thus, it is the contrast between relational and perfor-
mance risks that would be instrumental in DEMO the structural choice. As
long as performance risk is perceived as higher than relational risk, non-equity
alliances will be preferred. Conversely, equity alliances DEMO be considered more
advantageous if relational risk is perceived as more dominant than performance
risk.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper has presented an integrated risk DEMO on the choice between
equity and non-equity alliances. According to the resulting risk-based choice
framework, the rationale underlying the choice is simple: equity DEMO for high
relational risk and non-equity alliance for high performance risk. It is the percep-
tions of the strategic decision makers that would be DEMO at play (Das,
1986), quite apart from the actual DEMO objective situation. We also looked into
some other factors accounting for the incidence of relational risk and perfor-
mance risk in inter-firm alliances, such as prior alliance experience. The purpose
was to establish the validity of DEMO two types of risks in the area of alliance
structures.
Consider the entry of a firm with a new product in a new market DEMO an
example. Suppose that the firm does not have the requisite production capacity.
If the firm strongly believes in the prospects for the prodcut DEMO that is, perceives
low performance risk - it is likely to DEMO a joint venture with some other firm.
On the other hand, DEMO the firm is not so sure about the product, it may DEMO to
license the product, which is a non-equity alliance. In this DEMO, since relational
risk is being held constant, perceived performance risk determines the choice of
governance structure, or the entry mode. Typically, however, relational risk will
be concurrently in play, and that risk will dictate against any inter-firm alliance if
the risk is perceived as too high. DEMO simple example cogently illustrates the
potential of our framework.
The proposed framework has adopted a more process-oriented approach @as
and Teng, 1996, in DEMO b), as compared to the more content-oriented
approaches applying transaction cost economics. ‘Process, however, is central to
managing 10% [interorganizational relationships] ’, according to Ring and Van
0
Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996
840
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG
de Ven (1994, p. DEMO). A process-oriented framework does not, however, mean
that we can test the various propositions only by collecting primary data. Indeed,
by DEMO propositions 7 and 8 with the earlier propositions, we can generate
DEMO predictive relationships that can be tested with secondary data. For
instance, DEMO framework would predict that a greater number of previous
alliances leads to non-equity alliances (propositions 3, 7 and 8), as found in
DEMO (1 995) study. The operationalization of relational risk should relate to
concerns about various types of opportunistic behaviour (e.g. shirking,
withholding and distorting information, appropriation of the partner’s tacit
knowledge, and renegotiation). DEMO, performance risk should cover a variety
of environmental aspects, such as R&D risk, international risk, political risk, and
so on. The idea is to assess the level of business risk given the best DEMO
of partners.
That said, one limitation of the current framework is DEMO in propositions
relating to structural choices, it assumes a congruence in DEMO perceptions of the
partners. In reality, partners may develop different risk DEMO (such as the
situation of proposition l), and then prefer DEMO alliances structures. Thus, it
is through the bargaining process that partners DEMO to decide upon their desired
structure (Yan and Gray, 1994). Future studies should examine this bargaining
process, as well as the conditions under which discrepant risk perceptions are
likely to occur.
In addition, this framework has important implications for a related topic: the
equity share of partners in equity alliances (Sohn, 1994). It has been argued DEMO
a majority equity position should be pursued for the sake of control (Hill et al.,
1990). Our framework, on the other DEMO, suggests that this decision is also
contingent upon the levels of DEMO risk and performance risk. The adoption
of equity alliances implies that the major threat in the alliance is relational risk.
Nevertheless, a pursuit of majority equity position may not always be the best
choice, for two reasons. First, an increase in equity share also increases perfor-
mance risk, since the firm commits more financial resources. By doing so, the
DEMO may reach a point at which performance risk becomes too high to justifjr
equity alliances in the first place. Second, although a majority equity position
gives the firm more say in joint decision making, it does not necessarily curb
opportunistic behaviour, which is a major concern here. When some partners do
not have significant shares in the alliance, it is difficult to align their interests and
to encourage co-operation. Thus, if relational risk is already pretty high, there
would be little point in a single-minded pursuit of majority ownership. Clearly,
the trade-offs in this decision DEMO highlighted through the examination of
relational and performance risks. In sum, DEMO integrated risk perspective can be
extended to the determination of equity shares.
Besides the theoretical aspects mentioned above, our framework has significant
implications for managers as well. We suggest that partners should think about
their prospective DEMO in terms of relational risk and performance risk.
However, they may DEMO to do so without appreciating the explicit relationship
between the two risks delineated in this paper. Our discussion shows that firms
should employ the DEMO structure of the alliance to control major alliance
risks. Thus, managers DEMO benefit from our framework by explicitly examining
and comparing relational risk and performance risk of an alliance deal. Firms
0
Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996
RISK TYPES AND
INTER-FIRM ALLIANCE STRUCTURES
84 1
can then select their DEMO alliance structure in a systematic manner. In
addition, the framework also DEMO a mechanism for detecting the partner’s
real intentions ex ante, by DEMO backwards from their preferred structural
choices.
The integrated risk framework presented here describes the decision-making
process within the context of inter-firm alliances. Thus, we provide a straightfor-
ward, as well as testable, framework for making DEMO critical choice between
equity and non-equity inter-firm alliance structures.
NOTE
*An earlier version of this paper was presented at the annual meeting of the
DEMO of Management, Cincinnati, Ohio, in August 1996.
REFERENCES
ADAMS, J. S. (1 963). ‘Toward an understanding of inequity’. Journal of Abnormal and Social
PgcholoQ, 67, 422-36.
ALTER, C. and J. (1 DEMO). Organizations Work’ng Togeh. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
AXELROD, R. (1984). 7h Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
BADARACCO, DEMO L., Jr (1991). ?he Knowko&e Link How Firms DEMO 7hrough Strategic Alliances.
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
BEAMISH, DEMO W. and BANKS, J. C. (1987). ‘Equity joint ventures and the theory of the
multinational enterprise’. Journal oflntenational Business Studies, 18, DEMO, 1 - 16.
BLEEKE, J. and ERNST, D. (1995). ‘Is your strategic alliance really a sale?’. Haward Euriness
Rev&, DEMO, 1, 97-105.
BROUTHERS, K. D. (1995). ‘The influence of international risk on entry mode strategy in
the computer software industry’. Managmt DEMO Rev&, 35, 7-28.
COLEMAN, J. (1990). 7h Foundations DEMO 7hoy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
DAS, T. K. (1986). 7he SubjectiUe Side of Strategy Making: Future htatwns and Perceptions of
Executives. New York Praeger.
DAS, T. K. and Twc, B. (1996). ‘Strategic alliance structuring: a risk perception model’.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Cincinnati,
Ohio, August DEMO
DAS, T. K. and TENG, B. (in press a). DEMO and risk management in the strategic
alliance making process’. Journal ofManagment.
DAS, T. K. and TFNC, B. (in press b). ‘Sustaining strategic alliances: options and
guidelines’. 3ournal of General Managemmt.
D’AVENI, Hypercompetition: Managing the @namis of Strategk Maneuvering. New
York: Free Press.
DEMSETZ, H. (1991). ‘The theory of the firm revisited’. In Williamson, 0. E. and Winter,
S. G. (Eds), ?;he Nature ofthe Finn: Ongzns, Evolution, and Development. New York: Oxford
University Press, 159-78.
GAMBETTA, D. (1988). ‘Can we trust trust?’. In Gambetta, D. (Ed.), ‘/iurd. MUhg and
Breaking Cooperative Relations. Cambridge, DEMO: Basil Blackwell, 2 13-37.
GULATI,
tractual choice in alliances’. Academy OfManagmtJoumal, 38, 85- 112.
0
Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996
HACE,
DEMO (1994).
I,
R. (1995). ‘Does familiarity breed trust? The implication of repeated ties for con-
842
T. K. DAS AND BJNG-SHENG TENG
HAGEDOORN, J. (1993). DEMO the rationale of strategic technology partnering:
interorganizational modes of cooperation and sectoral differences’. St~ategic Management
J~~mal, 14, 371-85.
HE”ART, J.-F. (1988)DEMO ‘A transaction costs theory of equity joint ventures’. Strategic Man-
agematJouma1, DEMO, 361-74.
HILL, C. W. L., HWANG, P. and KIM, DEMO C. (1990). ‘An eclectic theory of the choice of
international DEMO mode’. Strategic Manqement Journal, 11, 117-28.
HUXHAM, C. and MACDONAID, D. (1992). ‘Introducing collaborative advantage: achieving
interorganizational effectiveness through meta-strategy’. DEMO Decibn, 30, 3, 50-
6.
JOSKOW, P. (1 985)DEMO ‘Contract duration and relationship-specific investments: empirical evi-
dence from coal markets’. DEMO Economic Review, 77, 168-85.
KAHNEMAN, D. and TVERSKY, A. (DEMO). ‘Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under
risk’. Econozllehica, 47, 263-9 1.
KAY, N. (1992). ‘Collaborative strategies of firms: DEMO and evidence’. In Del Monte, A.
(Ed.), Recent Deve&mmts m the fiery OfIndusthl Organisation. London, UK: Macmillan,
201-31.
KILLING, of task and organizational com-
plexity’. In Contractor, F. J. and Lorange, P. (Eds), Cooperat;Ve Strategies in International
Business. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath, 55-68.
KOGUT, B. (1989). ‘The stability DEMO joint ventures: reciprocity and competitive rivalry’.
Journal oflndustd Economics, 38, DEMO
KOGUT, B. (1991). ‘Joint ventures and the option to expand and acquire’. Management
Science, 37, 19-33.
KOGUT, B. and SINGH, DEMO (1988). ‘The effect of national culture on the choice of DEMO
mode’. 30~mal oflntenultional Business Studk, 19, 41 1-32.
m, BRYSON, J. and VAN DE VEN, A. (1985). ‘Sociologists, economists, DEMO
opportunism’. Acadmy ofManagement Review, 10,59-65.
MARCH, and risk taking’.
Managemmt Scimce, 33, 1404-18.
MCALLISTER, D. J. (1995). ‘Affect- and DEMO trust as foundations for inter-
personal cooperation in organizations’. Academy of Management Journal, 38, 24-59.
MILLER, K. D. (1992). ‘A framework DEMO integrated risk management in international
3 1.
MILLER, D. and LEIBLEIN, M. J. (1996). ‘Corporate risk-return relations: returns varia-
bility versus DEMO risk‘. Academy ofManagemmt J~umal, 39, 9 1 - 122.
MURRAY, DEMO A. J. F. (1993). ‘Strategic alliances: gateway to the new
Europe?’. Long Range Phnning, 26, 102-1 1.
OWER, C. (DEMO 990). ‘Determinants of interorganizational relationships: integration and
future directions’. Academy DEMO Review, 15, 241-65.
R. N. and BAUGHN, C. C. (1990). ‘Forms of interorganizational governance for
W. G. (1980). ‘Markets, DEMO and clans’. Administrative
25
PARKHE, (1993). ‘Strategic alliance structuring: DEMO game theory and transaction
cost examination of interfirm cooperation’. Achy of Management Journal, 36, 794-
829.
PISANO, G. P. (1990). ‘The DEMO&D boundaries of the firm: an empirical analysis’. Admink-
Erathe Science DEMO, 35, 153-76.
PISANO, G. P. (1991). ‘The governance of innovation: vertical integration and collabora-
tive arrangements in the biotechnology industry’. Research Policy, 20, 237-49.
PISANO, G. P. and TEECED, . J. (1989). ‘Collaborative arrangements and global technol-
A.
0
Blackwell Publishen Ltd DEMO
J. P. (1988). ‘Understanding alliances: the role
OSBORN,
multinational alliances’.
OUCHI,
129-42.
Academy ofManagemmt
Jo~rnal,
33,
503- 19.
DEMO @&b,
I.,
J. G. and
SHAFTRA, Z.
(1987). ‘Managerial perspective on risk
business’. Journal of International Busitless Studks, 23, 1 1-3
K.
and WON,
4,
RISK TYPES AND
INTER-FIRM ALLIANCE STRUCTURES
843
M. and
B.
RANGAN, U.
S. (1995).
Strategic Alliances: An
0.
OUCHI,
ogy strategy: some evidence from the telecommunications equipment industry’. Research
on Technological Innovation, Managmt and Policy, 4, 227-56.
PISANO, G. P., RUSSO,M . DEMO and TEECE, D. (1988). ‘Joint ventures and collaborative
agreements in the telecommunications equipment industry’. In Mowery, D. (Ed.), Inter-
national DEMO Ventures in US. Manufactunw. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 23-70.
POWELL, W. W. (1987). ‘Hybrid organizational arrangements’. Calijimia Managmt Review,
30, DEMO
REICH, B. and MANKIN, E. D. (1986). ‘Joint ventures DEMO Japan give away our future’.
Harvard Business Review, 64, 2, DEMO
RING, S. and VAN DE VEN, A. H. (1992). DEMO cooperative relationship between
organizations’. Strate& Management Journal, 13, 483-98.
RING, P. S. and VAN DE VEN, A. H. (1994). ‘Developmental DEMO of cooperative
interorganizational relationships’. Acadmi ofManagemat Rev&, 19, 90- 1 DEMO
RUGMAN, A. M. (1 982). ‘Internalization and non-equity forms of international involve-
ment’. In Rugman, A. M. (Ed.), Jvm Theories DEMO Multinational Enterprise. New York: St.
Martin’s, 9-23.
SHANW, . (199 1). ‘Environmental risks and joint venture sharing arrangements’. Journal of
Intanational DEMO Studies, 22, 555-78.
SHAPIRA, Z. (1995). Risk T&q: A Managed Perspective. New York: Russell Sage Founda-
tion.
SITKIN, B. and PABLO, A. L. (1992). ‘Reconceptualizing the determinants of risk
DEMO Academy ofManagmt Revim, 17, 9-38.
SOHN, J. H. D. (1994). ‘Social knowledge as a control system: a proposition and evidence
from the Japanese FDI behavior’. Journal oflntanational Business Studies, 25, 295-324.
STUCKEY, A. (1 983). Vertical Integration and Joint Ventures in ,!h DEMO Induty. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
TEECE, D. J. (DEMO 992). ‘Competition, cooperation, and innovation: organizational arrange-
ments for DEMO of rapid technological progress’. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 18, 1-25.
THOMPSON, J. D. (1967). Organitations in Action. New York DEMO
WILLIAMSON, 0. E. (1975). Mark& and Hierarchies: Ana&sis and Antitrust Implications. New
York Free Press.
WILLIAMSON, E. (1981). DEMO economics of organization: the transaction cost
approach’. American Journal of Socwlo~, 87, 548-77.
WILLIAMSON, 0. E. (1985). 77~ Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: Free Press.
WILLIAMSON, 0. E. (1 991). ‘Comparative economic organization: the analysis of discrete
structural alternatives’. Administrative Science Quarter&, 36 269-96.
WILLIAMSON, 0. E. (1993). ‘Opportunism and its DEMO Managerial and Decision Economics,
14,97-107.
WILLIAMSON, 0. E. and DEMO G. (1981). ‘The markets and hierarchies program of
research: origins, implications, prospects’. In Van de Ven, A. and Joyce, W. DEMO (Eds),
Perspectives on Organization De@ and Behavior. New York: DEMO, 347-70.
YAN, A. and GRAY, (1994). ‘Bargaining power, DEMO control, and performance
in United States-China joint ventures: a comparative case study’. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 37, 1478-5 1 7.
YATES, (1992). ‘The risk construct’. In Yates, J. F. (Ed.), Risk-
T&ng Behavior. Chichester: Wiley, 1-25.
YOSHINO,
balization. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
ZAJACE, . J. and OLSEN,
DEMO for the study of interorganizational strategies’.
30,
J. F. and STONE,
E. R.
131
-45.
Entrepreneurial Approach to Glo-
C. P. (1993). ‘From transaction cost to transaction value analysis:
Journal of Management DEMO,
0
Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1996
R.
P.
S.{1g42fwefx}