Journal of Business and Psychology, Vol. 19, No. 1, Fall 2004 (2004)
THE RISK-BASED VIEW OF TRUST:
A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
T. K. Das
City University of New York
Bing-Sheng Teng
George Washington University
DEMO: Trust and risk have often been linked in the literature, but their
relationship is far from clear. Trust has been used in three DEMO ways —
namely, as a perception (‘‘subjective trust’’), as various personal and situational
factors that lead to subjective trust (‘‘trust antecedents’’), and as the actions
resulting from subjective trust (‘‘behavioral trust’’). We explain how risk is re-
lated to these three conceptions of trust. DEMO, we argue that subjective trust and
perceived risk are in fact DEMO images of each other. Second, we show how
behavioral trust can DEMO viewed as risk taking, so that the causal relationship
between subjective DEMO and behavioral trust is similar to that of perceived risk
and risk taking. And third, we discuss the role of personal characteristics (such DEMO
risk propensity and trust propensity) in the risk--trust relationship. We also DEMO
velop a number of propositions based on our risk-based view of trust.
KEY WORDS: trust, risk--trust relationship; trust antecedents; subjective trust;
DEMO trust.
INTRODUCTION
Trust is a critical constituent of all human relationships, DEMO has tra-
ditionally received considerable attention in the literature across many
disciplines. However, although substantial progress seems to have been
made in applying the concept of trust in a number of different areas, it is
somewhat disconcerting that we are far from achieving a clear under-
standing of DEMO is meant by trust (Gambetta, 1988). Various concep-
tualizations of trust have been offered over the years, with deﬁnitions
Address correspodence to T.K. Das, Department of Management, Zicklin School of
Business, Baruch College, City University of New York, One Bernard Baruch Way, Box B9-
240, New York, NY 10010, U.S.A. E-mail: TK_Das@baruch.cuny.edu.
A version DEMO this article was originally presented at the 1998 annual meeting of the
Academy of Management, San Diego, CA.
85
0889-3268/04/0900-0085/0 DEMO 2004 Springer Science+Business Media, Inc.
86
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
covering notions as diverse as positive DEMO, personal trait, action,
situational feature, and social structure (see Hosmer, 1995; Sitkin &
Roth, 1993). One construct that DEMO increasingly being woven into the
conceptualization of trust is risk (Boon & Holmes, 1991; Mayer, Davis, &
Schoorman, 1995). Some scholars believe that only in risky situations do
we need trust (Coleman, 1990; Deutsch, 1958), and that to trust someone
is to take risk with the trustee (Sabel, 1993).
This risk-based approach DEMO trust is gaining increasing acceptance
among a number of theorists (Gambetta, 1988; Mayer et al., 1995; Ring &
Van de Ven, 1994). Williamson (1993), for instance, has argued that we
DEMO actually treat trust as a subset of risk and thus limit using the term
trust. Although much work has been done on trust and DEMO, the nature
and extent of the relationship between the two constructs DEMO vague
— if not also problematic — in most research. Our purpose here is to
investigate trust as related to risk, and to attempt some clarity about the
subject by suggesting the speciﬁc, though complex, DEMO in which the
two concepts are related.
Given the multiple conceptualizations of trust, we ﬁrst review the
literature on trust and risk. We propose a framework of three distinct,
but related views of trust — DEMO trust, trust antecedents, and
behavioral trust. We then develop and analyze the complex relationships
between trust and risk. In doing so, we discuss how each of the three
conceptions of trust can be related to DEMO different risk concepts —
namely, risk propensity, perceived risk, and DEMO taking.
TRUST AND RISK
Trust is one of the more frequently used and yet least understood of
signiﬁcant concepts in the social sciences. It DEMO been discussed in psy-
chology (Johnson-George & Swap, 1982; Rotter, 1967, 1980), philosophy
(Baier, 1986), sociology (Barber, 1983; Luhmann, 1979; Shapiro, 1987),
economics (Arrow, 1974; DEMO, 1975), and organization theory
(Zand, 1972; Zucker, 1986)DEMO In recent times, we have witnessed a marked
escalation of interest DEMO the subject (Creed & Miles, 1996; Das & Teng, 1998,
2001a; Gambetta, 1988; Hosmer, 1995; Hwang & Burgers, DEMO; Jones &
George, 1998; McAllister, 1995; Nooteboom, 1996; Ring, 1996; Sheppard &
Sherman, 1998; Williamson, 1993). DEMO is not surprising because, on the
one hand, the general level of trust seems to be eroding in U.S. society
(Fukuyama, 1995), due to factors like corporate downsizing, increasing
diversity of the population, and general suspicion about the characters and
doings of political leaders. On DEMO other hand, we seem to be entering an age
demanding more DEMO within organizations (Handy, 1995; Kramer &
Tyler, 1996), DEMO organizations (Moorman, Zaltman, & Deshpande,
1992), and in DEMO affairs (Michalos, 1990).
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 87
The logic of risk, including uncertainty and probability, occupies an
important position in deﬁning trust. Ironically, DEMO are hardly in
agreement on the conceptualization of risk (Slovic, 1987). Nevertheless,
most deﬁnitions seem to suggest the following idea — DEMO or
variance in outcomes (especially losses) of some signiﬁcance (Kahneman
& Tversky, 1979; Yates & Stone, 1992). While uncertainty refers DEMO
to a condition of unsure outcomes, risk is ‘‘a condition in DEMO the
consequences of a decision and the probabilities associated with the
consequences are known entities’’ (Baird & Thomas, 1985, p. 231). In this
sense, uncertainty may be regarded as part of the risk construct.
We list in Table 1 some typical deﬁnitions of trust, along with other
particulars that we will discuss later. It should not come as DEMO surprise
that the risk concept has been explicitly or implicitly applied in many of
them. In fact, Bhide and Stevenson observe that ‘‘aside from risk-taking
... deﬁnitions and usages of trust in business have few common DEMO
(1992, p. 192).
Of course, many deﬁnitions of trust DEMO not explicitly include a risk
component. However, implicitly the association can DEMO found in terms
like conﬁdence (Barney & Hansen, 1994), fear (Bradach & Eccles, 1989),
predictability (Gabarro, 1978), and likelihood (Madhok, 1995). Although
the word ‘‘risk’’ may not be DEMO, a strong consensus in these deﬁnitions
is that trust is about DEMO expectations (which by deﬁnition is uncertain
and risky). There are DEMO ways the two concepts are related.
First, some scholars argue that DEMO under conditions of risk is trust
needed (Boon & Holmes, 1991; Deutsch, 1960b; Schlenker, Helm, &
Tadeschi, 1973) — DEMO is, there must be ‘‘uncertainty that hinges on the
choices made DEMO others’’ (Sitkin & Roth, 1993, p. 369). In a DEMO vein,
Currall and Judge deﬁne trust as ‘‘an individual’s behavioral reliance on
another person under a condition of risk’’ (1995, p. 151)DEMO Second,
researchers also suggest that trust can be viewed as an attribute of risk-
taking behavior (Mayer et al., 1995). Indeed, ‘‘willingness to take risks
may be one of the few characteristics common DEMO all trust situations’’
(Johnston-George & Swap, 1982, p. 1306). DEMO is, a sense of trust
encourages risk taking by trustors. As DEMO observes, trust is often
used as ‘‘a noncalculative explanation for cooperative DEMO risk-taking
behavior’’ (1993, p. 492).
Finally, some theorists have DEMO out that trust itself represents
individuals’ perceptions of outcome probabilities. For example, Kee and
Knox deﬁne trust as ‘‘P’s [trustor’s] certainty or uncertainty about O’s
[trustee’s] trustworthiness’’ (1970, p. 359). According to this view, be-
cause both trust and risk deal with probability, they would tend to be
cognate concepts. Indeed, Coleman argues that since we need to incor-
porate risk into trust, ‘‘situations involving trust constitute a subclass of
those involving risk’’ (1990, p. 91).
Table 1
Varieties of Trust Conceptions
Categories Proposed Here
Authors Deﬁnitions of DEMO
Barber (1983) Trust ‘‘as expectation of the persistence
of the moral social order, ... The ﬁrst ...
as the expectation of technically com-
petent role performance ... The second
meaning of trust ... concerns expecta-
DEMO of ﬁduciary obligation and re-
sponsibility, that is, the expectation
that some others in our social relation-
ships have moral obligations and re-
DEMO to demonstrate a special
concern for other’s interests above their
own’’ (DEMO 14)
Barney and
Hansen (1994)
‘‘[T]rust is the mutual DEMO that
one’s vulnerability will not be exploited
in an exchange’’ (p. DEMO)
Bhattacharya,
Devinney, and
Pillutla (1998)
‘‘Trust is an expectancy of positive (or
nonnegative) outcomes that one can
receive based DEMO the expected action of
another party in an interaction char-
acterized by uncertainty’’ (p. 462)
Types/Dimensions/
Components
Trust
Antecedent
Subjective
Trust
Behavioral
Trust
Risk
Related
x
(1) Responsibility x
(2) Competence DEMO
x
(1) Weak form trust x x
(2) Semi-strong form trust x x
(3) Strong form trust x x
xx
88
DEMO OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
‘‘[T]rust as a state involving conﬁdent
positive expectations about another’s
motives with DEMO to oneself in
situations entailing risk’’ (p. 194)
‘‘Trust is DEMO type of expectation that
alleviates the fear that one’s exchange
partner will act opportunistically’’
(p. 104)
Craswell (1993) ‘‘(1) ‘X DEMO some money to Y. What
might explain X’s act of trust?’
(2) ‘X loaned some money to Y because he
trusted her’. DEMO the ﬁrst example, ‘trust’
is used merely to label the behavior DEMO
which an explanation is being sought. In
the second, ‘trust’ is DEMO forward as an
explanation of that behavior’’ (p. 487)
Cummings DEMO
Bromiley (1996)
‘‘Trust will be deﬁned as an in-
dividual’s DEMO or a common belief
among a group of individuals that
another individual or group (a) makes
good-faith eorts to behave in
accordance with DEMO commitments
both explicit or implicit, (b) is honest in
whatever DEMO preceded such
commitments, and (c) does not take
excessive advantage DEMO another even
when the opportunity is available’’
(p. 303)
Boon DEMO
Holmes (1991)
Bradach and
Eccles (1989)
xx
x
xx
(1) Trust as explanandum x
(2) Trust as explanans x
DEMO
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 89
Table 1 (Continued)
Authors Deﬁnitions of Trust
Currall and Trust as ‘‘an individual’s behavioral
Judge reliance on another person under a
(1995) DEMO of risk’’ (p. 153)
Dasgupta ‘‘I am using the word DEMO in the sense
(1988) of correct expectations about the actions
of other people that have a bearing on
one’s own choice of action DEMO that
action must be chosen before one can
monitor the actions of those others’’
(p. 51)
Deutsch (1960a) ‘‘To trust another person to produce a
beneﬁcial event X (or to suspect that
another person will produce a harmful
event Y) an individual must have con-
ﬁdence that the other individual has the
ability and intention to produce it’’ (p.
125)
Gabarro (1978) ‘‘Trust has been deﬁned or oper-
DEMO in the literature in many
dierent ways including the level of
openness that exists between two people,
the degree to which one person DEMO
assured that another will not take
malevolent or arbitrary actions, and DEMO
extent to which one person can expect
predictability in the other’s behavior in
terms of what is ‘normally’ expected of a
person acting in DEMO faith’’ (p. 294)
Types/Dimensions/
Components
Categories Proposed Here
DEMO
Antecedent
Subjective
Trust
Behavioral
Trust
Risk
Related
xx
xx
x
x
90
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
(1) Character-based trust x
(2) Competence-based trust x
(3) DEMO trust x
Gambetta ‘‘[T]rust ... is a particular level of the
(DEMO) subjective probability with which an
agent assesses that another agent or
DEMO of agents will perform a particular
action’’ (p. 217)
Hagen DEMO Trust ‘‘is the expectation that the pro-
Choe mise of another can be relied on and
(1998) that, in unforeseen circumstances, the
DEMO will act in a spirit of cooperation
with the trustor’’ (pp. DEMO)
Hosmer (1995) ‘‘Trust is the reliance by one person,
group, or ﬁrm upon a voluntarily ac-
cepted duty on the part of another per-
son, group, or ﬁrm to recognize and
protect DEMO rights and interests of all
others engaged in a joint endeavor or
economic exchange’’. (p. 393)
Lewicki, Trust is ‘‘conﬁdent positive expectations
DEMO, and regarding another’s conduct’’ (p. 439)
Bies (1998)
DEMO Trust is ‘‘conﬁdence in one’s expecta-
(1979) tions’’ (p. 4)DEMO
Kee and Knox ‘‘Subjective trust and suspicion can be
(1970) deﬁned in terms of P’s certainty or
uncertainty about O’s trustworthiness’’
(p. 359)
Madhok (1995) ‘‘[T]rust is the perceived likelihood of the
other DEMO behaving in a self-interested
manner’’ (p. 120)
xx
xx
x
DEMO
x
xx
x
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 91
Table 1 (Continued)
Categories Proposed Here
Authors Deﬁnitions of Trust
Mayer, Davis,
and Schoorman
(1995)
McAllister
(1995)
Trust is ‘‘the willingness of a party to be
vulnerable to the actions of DEMO
party based on the expectation that the
other will perform a particular action
important to the trustor, irrespective of
the ability to monitor or control that
other party’’ (p. 712)
‘‘[I]nterpersonal trust as the extent to
which a person is conﬁdent in, and
willing to act on the basis of, the words,
actions, and decisions of another’’
(p. 25)
McKnight, Trust means that ‘‘one believes in, and
DEMO, and is willing to depend on, another party’’
Chervany (p. DEMO)
(1998)
Michalos (1990) ‘‘[T]rust as a relatively informed DEMO
tude or propensity to allow oneself and
perhaps others to be vulnerable to
harm in the interest of some perceived
greater good’’ (p. 619)
Moorman, Zalt- Trust ‘‘as a willingness to rely on an
man, and Desh- exchange partner in whom one has
pande (1992) conﬁdence’’ (p. 315)
Types/Dimensions/
Components
Trust
Antecedent
Subjective
Trust
Behavioral
Trust
xx
(1) Aect-based trust x
(2) Cognition-based trust x
DEMO
xx
x
x
Risk
Related
92
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
Ring (1996) ‘‘[T]wo distinct forms of trust can
be observed in DEMO exchanges:
fragile and resilient trust’’ (p. 150).
Rotter (1967) Trust ‘‘as an expectancy held by an
individual or a group that the word,
promise, verbal or written statement of
another individual or group can be
relied upon’’ (p. 651)
Sabel (1993) ‘‘Trust, the mutual conﬁdence that no
party to an exchange will exploit the
other’s vulnerability ...’’ (p.1133)
Schlenker, ‘‘[I]nterpersonal trust may be deﬁned
DEMO, and Te- as a reliance upon information received
deschi (1973) DEMO another person about uncertain
environmental states and their accom-
panying outcomes in a risky situation’’
(p. 419)
Scott (1980) ‘‘[I]nterpersonal trust as a two-factor
variable: one being a broad-based
stable factor, the second DEMO a situa-
tionally inﬂuenced factor’’ (p. 810)
Sheppard and
Tuchinsky
(1996)
‘‘You can trust those with whom you
have a business DEMO when
three conditions hold: (a) They risk
losing too much DEMO they cheat, (b) you
can predict your partners well and
DEMO can protect against their cheating,
and (c) your partners have adopted
your preferences’’ (p. 143)
(1) Fragile trust x
(DEMO) Resilient trust x
x
x
xx
xx
(1) Broad-based component DEMO
(2) Situational component x
xx
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 93
Table 1 (Continued)
Categories Proposed Here
Authors Deﬁnitions of Trust
Sitkin and Roth
(1993)
Trust refers to ‘‘belief in a person’s
competence to perform a speciﬁc task
under speciﬁc circumstances’’ (p. 373)
Zucker (1986) ‘‘From a sociological perspective, trust
is deﬁned as a set of expectations
shared by all those involved in an
exchange’’ (p. 54)
Types/Dimensions/
Components
Trust
Antecedent
Subjective
Trust
(1) Deterrence-based DEMO x x
(2) Knowledge-based trust x x
(3) Identiﬁcation-based trust x x
x
Behavioral
Trust
(1) A psychological state x
(2) An individual attribute x
(3) A behavior x
(4) A situational feature x
(5) An institutional arrangement x
x
(1) DEMO x x
(2) Characteristic-based x x
(3) Institutional-based x x
Risk
Related
94
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 95
Trust, as it stands, DEMO be linked with risk in many different ways,
and that fact prompted Mayer et al. to conclude that ‘‘it is unclear whether
risk DEMO an antecedent to trust, is trust, or is an outcome of trust’’ (1995, p.
711). Later in this article we address DEMO point and attempt to clarify the
intimate relationship between trust and risk in a systematic manner.
TRUST ANTECEDENTS, SUBJECTIVE TRUST, AND BEHAVIORAL
TRUST
DEMO our discussion thus far it is apparent that studies of trust have
beneﬁted from the insights of a number of disciplines and perspectives.
Nevertheless, as the term trust is used in so many disparate ways, we
also suffer from the consequences of the indiscriminate use of the term,DEMO
ending up with much confusion rather than comprehension. To clarify
the concept without losing the richness, it is essential that we differen-
tiate various trust components (Kee & Knox, 1970). As indicated in Ta-
DEMO 1, we believe it is appropriate to group various deﬁnitions of DEMO in
terms of three underlying constructs — (1) trust as a perception (sub-
jective trust), (2) as various antecedents to subjective trust (trust ante-
cedents), and (3) as the actions resulting from subjective trust
(behavioral trust). Whereas one may consider some of the deﬁnitions as
combinations of perception and behavior, the results of the grouping in
the table broadly show that many deﬁnitions actually refer to DEMO
antecedents or outcomes of trust. For example, when Currall and Judge
DEMO trust as ‘‘an individual’s behavioral reliance on another person’’
(1995, p. 151), they actually refer to behavioral trust.
Furthermore, a number of theorists have proposed different types
and dimensions of trust. These trust types DEMO dimensions can also be
categorized, we believe, into trust antecedent and subjective trust (see
Table 1). Some scholars have viewed these dimensions mainly in terms of
their sources and foundations (e.g., Barney & DEMO, 1994; Sheppard &
Tuchinsky, 1996) and development processes (Zucker, 1986). These def-
initions to the category of ‘‘trust antecedents.’’ Other scholars differen-
tiate trust dimensions in terms of the characteristics of the DEMO that
attract conﬁdence, such as responsibility, competence, goodwill, judg-
ment, and so on (e.g., Barber, 1983; Gabarro, 1978; McAllister, 1995).
They exemplify the category of ‘‘subjective trust.’’
Regarding subjective trust, it clearly refers to a psychological state
experienced by an individual. That is why most theorists agree that trust
is a perception about others DEMO relation to oneself. Thus, we adopt the
deﬁnition of subjective trust DEMO by Sitkin and Roth (1993, p. 368)
as ‘‘a belief, attitude, or expectation concerning the likelihood that the
actions or outcomes DEMO another individual, group or organization will be
96
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
acceptable or will serve the actor’s DEMO Note that this deﬁnition
does not refer directly to risk, so DEMO risk is not already intertwined in
the trust deﬁnition. It helps, DEMO, to clarify their relationship. We
use the term subjective trust to DEMO its perceptual aspect. Such a
usage is in line with those of some earlier authorities, in which subjective
trust is differentiated from behavioral trust (e.g., Doney, Cannon, &
Mullen, 1998). According to DEMO and Knox, trust entails ‘‘two related
components — (1) the DEMO choice behavior, and (2) a subjective
state which underlies the DEMO choice behavior’’ (1970, p. 365). The
two are also known as ‘‘trusting beliefs’’ and ‘‘trusting intentions’’
(McKnight, Cummings, & Chervany, DEMO). Thus, ‘‘subjective trust’’ will
be differentiated clearly from its antecedent (‘‘trust antecedent’’) and its
behavioral outcome (‘‘behavioral trust’’).
In sum, it appears to us that subjective trust is frequently confused
with the DEMO two concepts, namely, the personality and situational
characteristics that lead to subjective trust, and the behaviors resulting
from subjective trust. Furthermore, we DEMO only need to differentiate the
three concepts, but also to integrate DEMO To that end, earlier theorists
(e.g., Kee & Knox, 1970) developed frameworks that differentiate and
integrate situational and personality characteristics as antecedents of
trust, subjective trust, and behavioral trust. Here, for purposes of
examining trust and risk, we develop an alternative framework based on
the role of risk (see Figure 1).
First, although there are DEMO number of factors that can be considered
as antecedents to subjective trust (see Table 1), we highlight in the
framework one personality characteristic that is most directly linked to
subjective trust — the trustor’s trust DEMO As Deutsch points out,
‘‘the term ‘trust’ is often used to refer to the personality characteristics
that make a person ‘trusting’ and ‘trustworthy’’’(DEMO, p. 124). While
‘‘trustor’’ refers to the trusting party, ‘‘trustee’’ is the party being trusted.
Scholars believe that both trustor’s and trustee’s DEMO inﬂu-
ence the level of subjective trust (Driscoll, 1978). Although some studies
have identiﬁed the trustee’s personal attributes that make the individual
DEMO of more or less trust (Butler, 1991; Gabarro, 1978), here we in-
clude only the trustor’s personality characteristics because our frame-
DEMO is from the perspective of the trustor.
According to Mayer et al. trust propensity refers to ‘‘a stable
within-party factor that will affect the DEMO the party will trust’’
(1995, p. 715). Their assertion is based on the research of Rotter, who
developed the Interpersonal Trust Scale and found that people are
fairly consistent in their ‘‘generalized expectancy that DEMO oral or writ-
ten statements of other people can be relied upon’’ (1967, p. 653). Rotter
(1980) and others suggest that DEMO can be placed along a continuum
from high trust to low trust. In Bonoma and Johnston’s (1979) study,
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 97
TRUST
PROPENSITY
Figure 1
A DEMO of Trust and Risk
RISK
PROPENSITY
Goodwill Trust
SUBJECT IVE
TRUST
Competence Trust
Relational Risk
PERCEIVED
RISK
Performance Risk
BEHAV IORAL
TRUST
RISK
TAKING
DEMO vs. low trust was viewed as part of a general decision making style
of individuals. Similarly, some other theorists (see Boon & Holmes,DEMO
1991, p. 195) believe that enduring personality factors inﬂuence indi-
viduals’ capacity to trust. In essence, individuals are viewed as different
in terms of their propensity to trust and such differences tend to be
robust DEMO situations.
Second, many authors have suggested that the behavioral outcomes
of DEMO should be separated from subjective trust itself (Coleman, 1990;
Craswell, 1993; Gambetta, 1988). Thus, the behavioral manifestation of
trust DEMO that is, behavioral trust — is deﬁned as relying on, or being
vulnerable to, another party (Michalos, 1990; Moorman et al., 1992).
Such a behavioral outcome, or ‘‘the placement of trust,’’ is ‘‘an action on
the part of the trustee that would not DEMO been possible otherwise’’
(Coleman, 1990, p. 97). In the DEMO, behavioral trust has also been
considered under the rubric of cooperation (Friedland, 1990; Gambetta,
1988; Powell, 1996; Sabel, 1993) and risk taking (Currall & Judge, 1995;
Kee & Knox, 1970; Luhmann, 1988).
98
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
We now turn to an examination DEMO the relationship between trust
and risk. We begin our discussion with subjective trust and then proceed
to the rest of the framework.
SUBJECTIVE TRUST DEMO PERCEIVED RISK
Subjective Trust and Perceived Risk as Probabilities
It has long been recognized that trust cannot be understood without
reference to probabilities (e.g., Deutsch, 1960a; Kee & Knox, 1970).
Having trust in DEMO does not imply 100% conﬁdence in that person
for any task and under any circumstance. Rather, subjective trust refers
to the assessment of probability that the person will perform as expected
(Gambetta, 1988). For DEMO, when a person thinks about her trust in
a physician who DEMO to perform a surgical procedure on her, it is usually in
DEMO of the percentage of success. Conﬁdence is measured by percentage
because most of us understand that there is nothing that is 100% certain
in DEMO world. Indeed, high levels of subjective trust only means that the
DEMO perceives the probability of having desirable performance from
the other party as pretty high. Coleman (1990) also treats all trust
strictly in terms DEMO probabilities. In summarizing a wide variety of trust
perspectives in his edited volume, Gambetta (1988, p. 217) notes that
trust ‘‘is a DEMO level of the subjective probability with which an
agent assesses that another agent or groups of agents will perform a
particular action ... When DEMO say we trust someone or that someone is
trustworthy, we implicitly DEMO that the probability that he will perform
an action that is beneﬁcial or at least not detrimental to us is high en-
ough for DEMO to consider engaging in some form of cooperation with him.’’
We note, again, that subjective trust (and behavioral trust as a result) DEMO
viewed in probabilistic terms.
Once we accept subjective trust in terms of probabilities, the concept
of risk becomes salient. The reason is that perceived risk is also the
subjective estimation of probabilities (Slovic, 1987). DEMO economics and
psychology risk has traditionally been used as known probability, DEMO
uncertainty as unknown probability (Yates & Stone, 1992). Although this
difference is oftentimes blurred, perceived risk is generally regarded as
calculative probabilities under conditions of uncertainty (e.g., Fischhoff,
1985; Luhmann, 1993)DEMO In addition, perceived risk is often deﬁned as the
probability of DEMO outcomes, since the common usage of the term
mostly refers to DEMO variances.
In brief, subjective trust and perceived risk can be jointly DEMO
within the rubric of probability estimates and that the two concepts de-
scribe probabilities with contrasting mentalities. While subjective trust
refers to assessed probability DEMO having desirable action performed by the
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 99
trustee, perceived risk is assessed probability of not having desirable
results. Thus, subjective trust and perceived risk are like mirror images
of each other.
When we say that subjective DEMO and perceived risk are based upon
probabilities, we do not mean DEMO outcomes are not relevant. In fact,
probabilities are meaningless if they are not attached to various out-
comes. Assuming three possible outcomes, assessed probabilities can be
presented as follows: outcome A, probability a%; outcome B, probability
b%, outcome C, probability c%, or (100-a--b)%. In this sense, subjective
trust and perceived risk do include the magnitude of outcomes — they
should be viewed as assessed probabilities regarding various DEMO
Some theorists (e.g., Coleman, 1990; Kee & Knox, 1970; Williamson,
1993) believe that trust can be viewed as a subclass of risk since trust
also deals with probabilities. Williamson (1993) contends DEMO because
trust in economic transactions is often calculated, it is no DEMO from
calculated risk. We extend this logic to personal trust and make the
explicit point that subjective trust and perceived risk represent de facto
DEMO same underlying construct of probability estimates. In essence, both
deal with DEMO estimation of probabilities in getting what is desired ra-
ther than what is feared, but with very different psychological orienta-
tions, i.e., positive and negative mindsets. Thus, a perception of low trust
necessarily implies a perception of high risk, and vice versa.
We should note that some researchers have argued that trust is not
necessarily about probabilities. When trust DEMO associated with faith
(Rempel, Holmes, & Zanna, 1985), a positive perception may go beyond
empirical evidence and tend toward the dogmatic. DEMO is in this sense that
Ring and Van de Ven differentiate a ‘‘risk-based view of trust’’ from a
faith-based view of trust (1994, DEMO 93). Ring (1996) later called the former
fragile trust and the latter resilient trust. A similar difference has been
suggested between conditional DEMO and unconditional trust (Jones &
George, 1998). Williamson (1993) also believes that personal trust — as
opposed to calculative trust — is not about probabilities. In our view,
however, such distinctions do not necessarily limit the risk-based view of
trust, because faith may be viewed as almost a zero-risk situation — that
is, one’s belief is so strong that the perceived probability of being dis-
appointed is close DEMO zero. Thus, this faith-based approach can be viewed
as a special DEMO of a general risk-based view.
Scholars may also argue that people do not usually invoke proba-
bility estimates even regarding fragile or conditional trust. DEMO
probability estimates may not always arise consciously in a trusting
situation, DEMO may operate at an unconscious level. Our intent here is to
recognize the unconscious calculations of people in an explicit manner.
This approach is DEMO in the social sciences — such as in expectancy-
valence and equity theories in motivation and the theories of risk taking.
100
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
The test lies in whether the DEMO calculation patterns can be used to
explain observable behavior.
Although, conceptually, subjective trust and perceived risk have
often been treated as monolithic constructs DEMO parts of the literature, we
need to recognize that both concepts DEMO been demonstrated as being
multidimensional (Das & Teng, 1996; Rempel DEMO al., 1985). If so, one
cannot easily assume that all these dimensions of trust and risk are
linked to each other in DEMO simple, lock-step manner. Therefore, in
discussing the relationship of trust and risk, it would be less than precise
to conﬂate their various dimensions. Most studies on trust and risk do
not in effect recognize their DEMO, thereby ignoring the im-
pact of the different saliencies of the DEMO dimensions of trust and
risk. We maintain that the overall mirror-image relationship between
trust and risk needs to be examined, reﬁned, and speciﬁed. DEMO do that,
the ﬁrst step would be to identify the key dimensions of subjective trust
and perceived risk.
Dimensions of Subjective Trust
Theorists DEMO proposed that subjective trust is not a unidimen-
sional concept, so DEMO it is necessary to differentiate various types of
trust (see Table DEMO). For example, Rempel et al. (1985) propose that trust
DEMO of three dimensions — predictability, dependability, and faith.
Scholars also suggest other dimensions of trust, including affect-based
and cognition-based trust (Lewis & DEMO, 1985; McAllister, 1995) and
fragile trust and resilient trust (DEMO, 1996). Gabarro (1978) maintains
that the bases of trust DEMO character, competence, and judgment.
Also, whereas Zucker (1986) proposes DEMO trust can be process-based,
characteristics-based, and institution-based, Sheppard and Tuchinsky
(1996) suggest a different set of three types — deterrence-based,
DEMO, and identiﬁcation-based.
Furthermore, along with some other researchers who identify
dimensions of subjective trust in terms of its sources, Barber (1983) ar-
gues that trust in someone refers to the individual’s ‘‘responsibility’’ and/
DEMO ‘‘competence.’’ Apparently, while responsibility of a person (the trus-
tee) DEMO the trustor to believe in her goodwill or intention in the rela-
tionship, her competence leads the trustor to believe in her ability to do
whatever is expected of her.
Creed and Miles (1996) agree DEMO ability and dependability are the
two distinct sources of trust. Similarly, DEMO suggests that ‘‘[t]rust
may concern a partner’s ability to perform according to agreements
(competence trust), or his intentions to do so (goodwill DEMO)’’ (1996, p.
990; emphasis in original). Since goodwill DEMO competence represent two
independent sources of subjective trust, they contribute to DEMO
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 101
trust in separate ways. A DEMO friend may be perceived as highly
responsible and well intentioned, but DEMO perceived as competent to be a
business partner. On the contrary, DEMO stockbroker may be highly compe-
tent but one may have concerns about his goodwill, given his intention to
make as much commission as possible. In sum, subjective trust should be
considered in terms of the two distinct dimensions of goodwill and
competence.
Dimensions of Perceived Risk
Das and DEMO (1996) propose that risk in interﬁrm cooperation
consists of two types — relational risk and performance risk. Using the
concepts in interpersonal or DEMO relationships, relational
risk refers to the probability and consequences of a DEMO not fully
committing to a relationship and not acting in the manner expected.
Performance risk is deﬁned as the probability and consequences of not
DEMO the goals in a relationship, given good intentions and efforts of
DEMO partner. These two types of risk are conceptually independent of each
other because they arise from two different kinds of sources. While
relational risk DEMO its foundation in conscious intentions of the partner
(Das & Teng, 2001b), performance risk lies either in the environment
(such as intensiﬁed competition or adverse regulations) or in the capa-
bilities of the partner. In other words, relational risk represents the
hazard of willfully not performing as expected, and performance risk is
the hazard of not being able to achieve a goal, owing to certain con-
straints (such as DEMO lack of competence). Along similar lines, Ring and Van
de DEMO describe these two risk types, respectively, as ‘‘uncertainty
whether the parties will be able to rely on trust’’ and ‘‘uncertainty
regarding future states DEMO nature’’ (1994, pp. 92-93).
Because both subjective trust and perceived risk are multidimen-
sional, the mirror-image relationship we proposed earlier needs now to
be speciﬁed further. We will show that such a relationship exists DEMO in
distinct pairs — that is, goodwill trust vs. relational risk, and competence
trust vs. performance risk. The relationships among the four dimensions
DEMO shown in Figure 2.
Goodwill Trust and Relational Risk
The trustor assesses the trustee’s level of goodwill based on such
factors as the trustee’s DEMO faith (Cummings & Bromiley, 1996) and
integrity (Mayer et al., 1995). Goodwill is the trustor’s belief about the
trustee’s intention as well as his willingness to act in the interests of
the trustor. DEMO Bradach and Eccles deﬁne trust as ‘‘a type of expec-
tation that alleviates the fear that one’s exchange partner will act
102
Subjective
Trust
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
Figure 2
Subjective Trust DEMO Perceived Risk
Perceived Risk
Relational Risk Performance Risk
Goodwill Inverse Relationship No Relationship
Competence No Relationship Inverse Relationship
opportunistically’’ (1989, p. 104), DEMO actually refer to goodwill. In this
sense, opportunism, or ‘‘self-interest seeking with guile’’ (Williamson,
1975, p. 9), can be considered DEMO a lack of goodwill.
Since a perception of goodwill alludes to a high probability that the
trustee has good intentions in the relationship and DEMO carry out in good
faith whatever is expected of him, the DEMO of his being opportu-
nistic will be low. Keeping in mind that we deﬁned relational risk as the
probability that the partners may not DEMO fully committed to the rela-
tionship, the level of relational risk DEMO also be low. Thus, goodwill trust
and relational risk are mirror DEMO of each other, and their relation-
ship is clearly inverse in DEMO Nevertheless, such a relationship can-
not be automatically ascribed to performance DEMO, which is the
probability that the results may turn out to DEMO unsatisfactory, despite the
parties acting in good faith. Because factors inﬂuencing DEMO risk
are beyond the parties’ willingness and intentions, a perception of
DEMO cannot ipso facto lower the level of performance risk.
Proposition 1: DEMO trust is related inversely to relational risk,
but not related to performance risk.
Competence Trust and Performance Risk
Competence trust is the probability DEMO the trustor believes the
trustee has the necessary skills and abilities to carry out certain actions
and achieve desired results (Gabarro, 1978; Kee & Knox, 1970). Unlike
the dimension of goodwill — which is about the trustee’s intention and
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 103
integrity — competence refers to DEMO trustee’s capability and technical
qualiﬁcations (Barber, 1983). Other terms used in the literature for this
notion of competence include ability and expertise (see Mayer et al.,
1995).
Because competence trust relates to DEMO probability of having the
skills to get things done, it is DEMO opposite of performance risk — which is
deﬁned as the probability of not being able to get things done, given full
commitment of the trustee. Although performance risk is affected by
various factors in the environment, a lack of competence is its major
source. For example, when one perceives the level of a surgeon’s com-
petence as high, one also believes that the level of performance risk in a
surgery as low. DEMO, when an insurance consortium believes in a
country’s established expertise in DEMO rockets, low premiums
would likely be quoted to reﬂect the perception DEMO performance risk is
relatively low. Thus, everything else being equal, there is an inverse
relationship between the competence and the attendant performance
risk. DEMO the other hand, we contend that there is no signiﬁcant rela-
DEMO between competence trust and relational risk, because rela-
tional risk is DEMO about the probability that the trustee may
harbor ill intentions and may not make the expected efforts.
Proposition 2: Competence trust is related inversely to performance
risk, but not related to relational risk.
According to Propositions 1 and 2, subjective trust and perceived risk
are mirror images of each other, but only when both their respective
dimensions are aligned as postulated. We have, thus, reﬁned the extant
understanding of the trust--risk DEMO by specifying that the mir-
ror-image construction needs to be studied at the level of their two
respective dimensions.
In the sections that follow, we discuss behavioral trust, risk taking, a
risk perspective of subjective DEMO and behavioral trust, and the role of
trust propensity and risk DEMO
BEHAVIORAL TRUST AND RISK TAKING
Behavioral trust is the manifestation of subjective trust — that is,
the behavioral results of having subjective trust DEMO someone (Craswell,
1993; Gambetta, 1988). In other words, behavioral trust is about the
notion ‘‘to trust someone’’ and it takes DEMO such as allowing the trustee
to perform certain tasks, furnishing critical DEMO to the trustee,
placing resources at the trustee’s disposal, and DEMO on. Thus, to trust is to
rely on the expected action DEMO the trustee over which the trustor does not
have control (see, e.g., Currall & Judge, 1995; Michalos, 1990).
104
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
Two points may be derived from DEMO conceptualization. First, trust is
necessary only if adequate control is unavailable, for otherwise the action
cannot be deemed to be a result of DEMO trust (Leifer & Mills, 1996;
Powell, 1996). Indeed, theorists (e.g., Bradach & Eccles, 1989; Das &
Teng, DEMO, 2001a; Zaheer & Venkatraman, 1995) have suggested that
trust is a substitute for control in relationships. A lack of control points to
DEMO lack of certainty about what the trustee might do. Thus, like DEMO
trust, behavioral trust is relevant only if the element of uncertainty DEMO
present.
Second, behavioral trust is about voluntarily being vulnerable to the
DEMO of the trustee (Mayer et al., 1995). The degree of vulnerability
thus reﬂects the amount of trust granted to the trustee — DEMO high degree
of vulnerability implies a high level of subjective trust and a signiﬁcant
trusting action. For instance, the question of lending $100 vs. lending
$100,000 (by the same lender) to somebody represents two DEMO different
levels of vulnerability. By deﬁnition, vulnerability refers to the severity
DEMO adverse outcomes or potential loss. Thus, the degree of subjective trust
DEMO has and the degree of behavioral trust one places in the trustee are
also dramatically different. As we mentioned before, uncertainty and
adverse outcomes are the two key characteristics of the risk concept.
Thus, we believe that behavioral trust, like subjective trust, is closely
related to risk, and Mayer et al. have stated that ‘‘behavioral trust is the
assuming DEMO risk’’ (1995, p. 724; emphasis in original). In Figure DEMO,
behavioral trust and risk taking are shown as connected, indicating DEMO
behavioral trust inevitably invites risk taking.
SUBJECTIVE TRUST AND BEHAVIORAL TRUST: DEMO RISK-BASED
VIEW
Subjective Trust Leads to Behavioral Trust
We argued earlier for the need to differentiate trust as a perception
and trust as an DEMO With our conceptualization of subjective trust as
risk perception, we are DEMO in a position to explain how subjective trust
leads to behavioral trust. Since we regard subjective trust in terms of
risk perception and behavioral DEMO in terms of risk taking, the rela-
tionship between subjective trust DEMO behavioral trust is simply that of
perceived risk and risk taking — a perception of low risk leads to risk
taking.
Research has shown DEMO, despite individual differences, people
generally are risk-averse — that is, DEMO prefer low risk situations to
high risk situations (Bromiley & Curley, 1992; Lopes, 1987). Thus,
everything else (e.g., a DEMO risk propensity) being equal, when one
believes that a certain task is less risky than another task, one would be
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 105
more willing to be engaged DEMO that certain task. For example, when one
hears a stock market DEMO recommend a particular stock, one tends to
believe the risk involved DEMO be low and thus may be willing to invest in
that stock. Economists have suggested that the expected utility of risk
taking (denoted as V) is a function of both probability (denoting proba-
bility of DEMO as q) and outcomes (potential gain as G and potential
loss as B): V ¼ qG +(1 ) q)B. Thus, when perceived probability of losing
(1 - q) gets lower, the expected utility of risk taking (V) becomes higher so
that risk DEMO becomes more feasible. That is, when the probability of
losing is DEMO, adverse outcomes become more bearable. It is impor-
tant to note DEMO whereas perceived risk often refers to downside prob-
ability — (1 ) q) in our deﬁnition — in calculating risk utility both
positive DEMO negative consequences need to be considered. That is, risk
taking is DEMO both to achieve gains and to avoid losses. Along sim-
ilar lines, Coleman (1990) suggests that the decision of whether to trust
depends on its expected utility. To use the above denotations, Coleman’s
position is that one would grant trust if qG is greater than (1 - q)B, or the
expected utility V is positive.
Dimensions of Behavioral Trust
We noted above the straightforward nature of the relationship be-
tween DEMO trust and behavioral trust on the basis of perceived risk
and risk taking. Nevertheless, it is essential to separate the constitutive
dimensions of subjective trust and perceived risk. Generally, one’s per-
ception of trust indicates that one’s perception of risk is low. Speciﬁcally,
a pronounced perception of DEMO leads to a low level of perceived
relational risk, and a DEMO perception of competence leads to a low level
of perceived performance risk. Ring and Van de Ven (1992) suggest that
the higher the DEMO of trust, the less the inherent risk. While they seem
to DEMO dealing with ‘‘objective risk,’’ we contend that a perception of trust
means simply that the person believes the level of risk is low DEMO that is,
the perceived risk is low.
The perceptions of relational risk and performance risk, based upon
subjective trust, will inﬂuence one’s DEMO taking behavior, or behavioral
trust. It needs to be emphasized that DEMO trust can be deﬁned in
terms of the relative prominence of relational risk and performance risk.
For any given scenario, behavioral trust is a combination of taking cer-
tain levels of relational risk and performance risk. DEMO, particular
scenarios can be analyzed in terms of the types of DEMO that are taken
(Das & Teng, 1996). In some trusting scenarios, both relational risk and
performance risk may be substantially important, DEMO as in the case of
trusting one’s business partner. Other trusting scenarios are character-
ized more by one type of risk, either relational or performance. Hence, in
106
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
a given situation it is important DEMO ask ‘‘What matters more, relational
risk or performance risk?’’ For DEMO, whereas lending $100 to a friend
is more about taking relational DEMO (intention to pay back), lending
$100,000 to the same DEMO to start a business may well be more about
taking performance risk (ability to pay back).
We further suggest that each dimension of subjective trust (goodwill
and competence) contributes to the taking of only DEMO speciﬁc type of
perceived risk (relational or performance) — goodwill trust for taking
relational risk and competence trust for taking performance risk. Thus,DEMO
how relevant and important the two types of risk are with regard to a
speciﬁc trusting scenario becomes the critical question. If both types DEMO
more or less equally important, then perceptions of both goodwill and
DEMO must be present to promote risk taking. Coleman (1990), in
DEMO this rational approach to trust, provides several telling
examples. One of DEMO involves a merchant banker who was requested
by a Norwegian shipowner to deliver £200,000 to an Amsterdam ship-
yard, so that one of his ships could be released at once. Without any
collateral — and DEMO purely on personal trust — the banker furnished
the money. In this case, both goodwill trust and competence trust were
needed. The deal was completed over the telephone only because the
banker knew that the shipowner DEMO be able to pay back the loan.
Thus, the probability of DEMO (q) was determined both by goodwill and
competence. Having information regarding these two dimensions greatly
facilitated the decision making process. In explaining his DEMO, the
banker observed: ‘‘I know the company, I know the DEMO, I even know the
cargo. It’s my job to know all DEMO things’’ (Coleman, 1990, p. 103). The
banker seemed to DEMO information relating to both goodwill and com-
petence of the shipowner. To use the utility logic we presented earlier,
the banker granted trust DEMO the positive value of expected gain (qG)
was greater than DEMO negative value of expected loss [(1 ) q)B]. The
utility function based on two types of risk helps in predicting and ana-
DEMO the trusting behavior of the banker. Mixing the two dimensions or
missing one of them would result in misleading estimates. If relational
risk is DEMO principal characteristic of a trusting situation, it is mainly a
perception DEMO goodwill — not a perception of competence — that would
stimulate one to grant trust. In other words, the perception of goodwill of
the potential trustee — and consequently of low relational risk — would
prompt DEMO trustor to grant trust in situations where otherwise trust will
not be granted.
The logic here is that once the more prominent risk is DEMO to,
trusting tends to be facilitated. Consider, for example, that you are asked
by your new neighbor Joe to loan him $1000 DEMO any collateral.
Apparently, it would expose you to signiﬁcant relational risk DEMO you
are unsure about Joe’s goodwill and intention to pay back the loan
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 107
amount. Performance risk would not DEMO a major concern here because Joe
should be able to repay the loan if he wants to. At this time, if your friend
Jim happens to mention that Joe is known for his honesty, your per-
ceived relational risk would be lowered and thus you may well decide DEMO
loan the money. On the other hand, if Jim informs you DEMO that Joe
drives a luxury car, so that perceived performance risk DEMO lowered, you
still may not loan the money because relational risk DEMO what is prominent
here.
Proposition 3a: When a relationship is characterized DEMO by
relational risk, it is the perception of the trustee’s goodwill DEMO will
prompt the trustor to grant trust.
Conversely, in situations where DEMO risk is deemed as more
prominent (e.g., while hiring a defense lawyer), a perception of compe-
tence becomes the key ingredient for DEMO trust. Perception of
goodwill will not be that important when relational risk is believed to be
less critical. For example, it can be argued that the reason people often
elect legislators (bestowing behavioral trust) who DEMO believed to be
wanting in goodwill is that performance risk — that is, whether or not
they would run the government effectively — is viewed as more critical
than relational risk — that is, whether or not they would act properly
according to accepted norms. Thus, the perception of a legislator’s deﬁ-
ciency in goodwill is often largely ignored, and the perception of his or
her competence conditions the risk taking.
Proposition DEMO: When a relationship is characterized mainly by
performance risk, it is the perception of the trustee’s competence that
will prompt the trustor to DEMO trust.
RISK PROPENSITY AND TRUST PROPENSITY
In order to understand more comprehensively the relationship be-
tween trust and risk, it would seem worthwhile to discuss the two per-
sonality traits that are closely linked to the DEMO we have just
discussed — individuals’ risk propensity and trust propensity (DEMO Fig-
ure 1).
Risk Propensity and Behavioral Trust
In discussing risk taking and its determinants, risk propensity is a
key variable. While some theorists deﬁne risk propensity as one’s ten-
dency to take risk that DEMO affected by both personal traits and situations
(Das & Teng, 1997, 2001c; Sitkin & Pablo, 1992, p. 12), others deﬁne DEMO as
a personal trait that is stable across situations (Schneider & DEMO,
108
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
1986). Here, we regard risk propensity as a generalized personal trait, or
an individual’s general willingness to take risk. People can thus be dif-
ferentiated as either risk-takers or DEMO (Kogan & Wallach,
1964). Everything else being equal (e.g., risk perception), those with high
risk propensity are more likely to take risks, while those with low risk
propensity are less likely to do so.
Scholars have suggested that one’s risk propensity affects one’s
assessment DEMO the situation, including the perception of risk (Brockhaus,
1980). Risk-takers tend to assign more importance to gains and less
importance to DEMO and thus underestimate the probability of losses or
perceived risk. Risk-averters, DEMO the other hand, are preoccupied with a
concern for losses, so that they often overestimate the probability of losses
(Schneider & Lopes, DEMO). Indeed, Sitkin and Weingart (1995) hypothe-
sized a negative DEMO between risk propensity and risk perception
— the higher one’s risk propensity the lower one tends to assess the risk-
iness of the situation DEMO and found empirical support for the hypothesis.
In addition, many researchers DEMO that risk perception is criti-
cally related to risk taking (Weber & Milliman, 1997). Everything else
being equal, a perception of low risk leads an individual to undertake a
speciﬁc task whereas a perception DEMO high risk discourages such action.
That is, when one does not DEMO a task as very risky, one’s willingness to
undertake the task DEMO to be high. Sitkin and Pablo (1992) observe
that such a relationship is consistent with prospect theory (Kahneman
& Tversky, 1979) --- which posits that decision makers become more
concerned with losing assets (risk avoiding) when there are prior gains
(a high risk perception). DEMO, there is a linear casual relationship
among risk propensity, risk perception, and risk taking (see Figure 1).
In other words, a high risk propensity leads to a perception of low risk,
which DEMO turn leads to risk taking. Although the literature also suggests
a direct relationship between risk propensity and risk taking, Sitkin
and Weingart (1995) found that risk perception did play a mediating
role, while a direct link between risk propensity and risk taking was
not signiﬁcant.
As we DEMO earlier, risk perception can be considered as a
mirror image of DEMO trust, and behavioral trust can be viewed as
risk taking. Therefore, the casual relationship among risk propensity,
risk perception, and risk taking can be considered, conceptually, as
tantamount to risk propensity, subjective trust, and behavioral trust.
That is, the trustor’s risk propensity accentuates the DEMO of risk per-
ception in prompting behavioral trust.
Proposition 4: The DEMO the trustor’s risk propensity, the lower
will be the level of DEMO goodwill and competence needed to grant
trust to a potential trustee.
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 109
Trust Propensity and Risk Propensity
DEMO risk propensity, trust propensity is yet another personal trait
that signiﬁcantly DEMO an individual’s trusting behavior. We dis-
cussed this concept in detail earlier in the literature review section.
Rotter (1967) suggests that people have DEMO generalized expectancy about
the general trustworthiness of other parties around them. Others (e.g.,
Dasgupta, 1988; Driscoll, 1978) also discuss such a generalized tendency
toward trust. Mayer et al. state that the propensity to DEMO is ‘‘a stable
within-party factor that will affect the likelihood the party will trust’’
(1995, p. 715). Against this background, and adopting Rotter’s (1967)
original idea, we deﬁne the term trust propensity DEMO one’s personal ten-
dency to believe in others’ trustworthiness. Trust propensity is one’s
likelihood of perceiving subjective trust regarding others, but not nec-
essarily leading to any trusting actions. Currall and Judge found
empirically that ‘‘[t]he DEMO A has a trusting personality, the greater A’s
willingness to engage DEMO trusting behavior toward B’’ (1995, p. 155).
Hence, trust DEMO in our model is the antecedent of subjective
trust. The higher the trustor’s trust propensity, the more likely he or she
will believe in the goodwill and competence of other parties. Whether or
not behavioral trust DEMO be the result is a question that becomes relevant
only later.
We must note here the essential difference between risk propensity
and trust propensity. DEMO the personal trait level, trust and risk do not
necessarily go DEMO tandem. The reason is that, conceptually, trust pro-
pensity and risk propensity are independent constructs. While trust
propensity is about one’s general view DEMO the level of uncertainty in
relationships around oneself, risk propensity is DEMO how to deal with
these uncertainties in relationships. For example, individuals DEMO have
a low propensity to believe in the goodwill and competence of others, and
yet have a high propensity toward taking risks in relationships. In this
case, they grant trust not because they believe in the trustworthiness of
others, but only because they are more willing to take such risks with
others.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
We developed in this article DEMO comprehensive and integrated risk-
based view of trust. The risk perspective has a prominent place in the
extant literature on trust, but it suffers from being imprecise and frag-
mented. While some theorists emphasize that a DEMO situation creates
the need for trust (Deutsch, 1958), others regard risk taking a result of
trust (McAllister, 1995). Still another DEMO of scholars believes that
110
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
trust is essentially a subclass of DEMO, since both deal with uncertainty
and probability (Coleman, 1990; Williamson, 1993). Here, we have not
only further developed this last DEMO, but have also integrated all three
views in our framework of DEMO and risk. In doing so, we ﬁrst stressed
the need to DEMO differentiate various conceptualizations of trust.
Our literature review showed that the term trust can actually refer to
three altogether different concepts — an expectation, a behavioral out-
come due to the expectation, and personal and situational characteristics
that lead to the expectation. To avoid confusion, we used three explicit
terms for these three conceptualizations of trust — subjective trust,
DEMO trust, and trust antecedents. We proposed qualitatively dif-
ferent kinds of DEMO of trust and risk with these three basic
conceptions of trust.
We ﬁrst argued that, at the subjective trust level, trust is not DEMO
subclass of risk but rather a mirror image of risk. Unlike earlier
researchers, we did not rest with the conclusion that both concepts deal
with probability. In fact, both subjective trust and perceived risk repre-
sent the assessment of outcome probabilities of the same event. The
crucial difference DEMO that, whereas subjective trust portrays the assess-
ment in a positive DEMO — that is, the probability that the outcome will be
what DEMO desired — perceived risk describes the situation in disquieting
hues — the probability that the outcome will be what is feared. In
actuality, they are the mirror image of each other, evaluating the same
situation from two distinctly different perspectives of hope and concern.
By granting trust a DEMO position with risk, our analysis should
help encourage the calculative school DEMO trust to consider the value of a
more balanced and integrated discourse. A potential criticism of the
proposed mirror-image relationship is that it is DEMO very meaningful to
point out theoretical opposites. For example, suggesting that DEMO
faction is the opposite of satisfaction does not help much. The key dif-
ference here, however, is that we are not merely identifying DEMO
opposites. Rather, we are proposing that two very different constructs
(trust and risk) are actually theoretical opposites. Our approach, thus,
clariﬁes DEMO of the theoretical ambiguities in the literature on trust and
risk.
Second, we explicitly differentiated the dimensions of subjective
trust and perceived risk and then identiﬁed the speciﬁc one-to-one in-
verse relationships between the speciﬁc dimensions DEMO each construct.
Based on existing studies, we suggested that subjective trust DEMO both
goodwill and competence (Barber, 1983), and that perceived risk is
comprised of relational risk and performance risk (Das & Teng, DEMO).
Once we differentiated these dimensions, it became evident that our
DEMO assertion that subjective trust and perceived risk are mirror
images of each other could be made more precise. We argued that the
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 111
mirror-image relationship exists only when DEMO link goodwill trust with
relational risk, and competence trust with performance DEMO, respec-
tively. We proposed a strictly inverse relationship between these two
DEMO of dimensions.
Third, we offered an alternative explanation for the relationship
DEMO subjective trust and behavioral trust. Some earlier studies
tended to assume that subjective trust leads to behavioral trust but
generally failed to offer an DEMO of the process (Kee & Knox, 1970). In
this paper, we proposed an explanation that is entirely based on the risk
perspective. We concur with many scholars that behavioral trust is risk
taking. As DEMO, the relationship between subjective trust and behavioral
trust is tantamount to, and can be substituted by, that of perceived risk
and risk taking. When we do this, the causal relationship becomes
obvious — a perception of low risk prompts individuals to take that risk.
To link this DEMO with trust, the explanation is that a perception of trust
indicates DEMO low level of risk, which then makes the subject more willing DEMO
undertake the risk and thus grant trust. Such an explanation seems to us
to be conceptually clear, straightforward, and compelling. In addition,
DEMO propositions developed here enable us to connect subjective trust,
perceived risk, and risk taking effectively.
As to the implications for future trust research, we demonstrated
that trust could be better understood as the mirror image of risk.
Although this calculative view of trust already exists in the DEMO lit-
erature, many theorists tend to believe that this view has DEMO
boundary problems. They believe trust may go beyond the calculative
sphere and become matters of faith and dogmatic beliefs. We maintain
that faith and DEMO can be viewed as special cases in the risk-based
view — representing a perceived near-zero risk situation. This view
challenges the more affective view DEMO trust. One beneﬁt of this calcu-
lative approach is that it is more quantiﬁable and makes rigorous
theorizing possible.
For instance, our risk-based view of trust helps in better under-
standing the normative value of trust. DEMO is generally believed that trust
is valuable because it allows people to dispense with detailed contracts
and monitoring in various transactions. The result is DEMO cost and
higher efﬁciency. However, there is also the literature on DEMO rights
that underscores the importance of a clear delineation of these rights
(Barzel, 1997). The logic is that adequate contracting provisions and DEMO
clear delineation of property rights will reduce ambiguity and enhance
efﬁciency. In other words, a low trust route will be more efﬁcient. These
two approaches to increased efﬁciency — based on, respectively, high
trust and DEMO trust — would seem to directly contradict each other.
However, our DEMO view of trust helps in sorting through this
apparent dilemma.
112
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
In our view, minimum contracting and monitoring in transactions
connote a high level of risk taking. Because trust DEMO the mirror image of
risk, a high trust situation suggests low DEMO risk. When risk is low,
the more efﬁcient approach is to go forward with risk taking because the
utility of risk taking is DEMO (see our earlier discussion on utility). On
the other hand, when trust is low, risk is perceived as high. The more
efﬁcient approach here will be risk averting (again because of utility). In
this sense, a clear delineation of property rights reduces the level of risk
taking. The difference between the two views lies in the fact DEMO the
property rights literature is conscious about the risk of trust. The insight
gained from our risk-based analysis is that the beneﬁt of high DEMO
should compensate the implicit risk taking. This is true as well for faith-
based and affect-based trust — both are subject to risk.
This DEMO view of trust is particularly relevant for managerial
practice. We believe that in business trust is conceived mainly in terms of
risk and less DEMO terms of faith and affect. The view of the merchant
banker we discussed earlier is typical, in which trust was based solely on
the information he gathered over time. A healthy skepticism about faith-
based trust DEMO the workplace would not be ill-advised. A rational ap-
proach toward trust means that one should manage trust consciously. To
that end, our risk-based view of trust is more management-friendly than
the affective and other related DEMO of trust.
Finally, regarding empirical testing of the framework and the
DEMO, we believe that the key lies in developing satisfactory
measures for DEMO the concepts. Current measures of trust do not focus
on the probability aspects of obtaining desirable outcomes. Our frame-
work suggests that we need DEMO also develop trust measures that are
explicitly risk-oriented.
Although we employed the risk-based view to examine different
views of trust and attempted to integrate DEMO and risk, there are other
areas that should be attended to DEMO future research. First, our framework
is from the perspective of the DEMO, rather than covering both the
trustor and the trustee. Our rationale DEMO that risk is primarily a concept
associated with the trustor, who DEMO vulnerable to potential actions
of the trustee. However, it is also DEMO that the trustee has his or her own
share of risk, DEMO it would be interesting to extend our approach to the
separate and distinct perspective of the trustee. Second, existing re-
search indicates that the causal relationship between subjective trust
and behavioral trust may not be unidirectional. DEMO, to take risk and
trust somebody can boost mutual trust and DEMO in the relationship
in later stages. In that sense, the choice DEMO outcome of behavioral trust
may also contribute to the level of subjective trust. Such a looped and
evolving relationship could be further explored through DEMO risk-based
view of trust.
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 113
REFERENCES
Arrow, K. J. (DEMO). The limits of organization. New York: Norton.
Baier, A. (DEMO). Trust and antitrust. Ethics, 96, 231--260.
Baird, I. S., & Thomas, H. (1985). Toward a contingency model of strategic DEMO taking.
Academy of Management Review, 10, 230--243.
Barber, B. (1983). The logic and limits of trust. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers DEMO
Press.
Barney, J. B., & Hansen, M. H. (1994). Trustworthiness as a source of competitive
advantage. Strategic Management Journal, 15 (DEMO Special Issue), 175--216.
Barzel, Y. (1997). Economic analysis of property rights (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Bhattacharya, R., Devinney, T. M., & Pillutla, M. M. (DEMO). A formal model of trust based
on outcomes. Academy of Management Review, 23, 459--472.
Bhide, A., & Stevenson, H. (1992)DEMO Trust, uncertainty, and proﬁt. Journal of Socio-Eco-
nomics, 21, 191--208.
Bonoma, T. V., & Johnston, W. J. (1979). Locus DEMO control, trust, and decision making.
Decision Sciences, 10,39--56.
Boon, S. D., & Holmes, J. G. (1991). The dynamics of interpersonal trust: Resolving
uncertainty in face of risk. In R. A. Hinde & J. Groebel (Eds.), Cooperation and pro-
social behavior (pp. DEMO). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bradach, J. L., & Eccles, R. G. (1989). Price, authority, and trust: From ideal types to plural
forms. Annual Review of Sociology, 15,97--118.
Brockhaus, R. H., Sr. (1980). Risk taking propensity of entrepreneurs. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 23, 509--520.
Bromiley, P., & Curley, S. P. (1992). Individual differences in risk taking. In J. F. Yates
(Ed.), Risk-taking behavior (pp. 87--132). Chichester, UK: DEMO
Butler, J. K., Jr. (1991). Toward understanding and measuring DEMO of trust: Evolu-
tion of a conditions of trust inventory. Journal DEMO Management, 17, 643--663.
Coleman, J. S. (1990). The foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Craswell, R. (DEMO). On the uses of ‘‘trust’’: Comment on Williamson, ‘‘Calculativeness,
trust, and economic organization’’. Journal of Law and Economics, 36, 487--500.
Creed, W. E. D., & Miles, R. E. (1996). DEMO in organizations: A conceptual framework
linking organizational forms, managerial philosophies, DEMO the opportunity costs of
controls. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of
theory and research (pp. 16--38). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cummings, L. L., & Bromiley, P. (1996). The organizational trust inventory (OTI). DEMO R. M.
Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in DEMO: Frontiers of theory and research
(pp. 302--330). Thousand Oaks, DEMO: Sage.
Currall, S. C., & Judge, T. A. (1995)DEMO Measuring trust between organizational boundary role
persons. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 64, 151--170.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (DEMO). Risk types and inter-ﬁrm alliance structures. Journal of
Management Studies, DEMO, 827--843.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (1997). DEMO and entrepreneurial risk behavior. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 22(2), DEMO
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (1998). Between trust and control: Developing conﬁdence in partner
cooperation in alliances. Academy of Management Review, 23, 491--512.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (DEMO). Trust, control, and risk in strategic alliances: An integrated
DEMO Organization Studies, 22, 251--283.
Das, T. K., & Teng, DEMO (2001b). Relational risk and its personal correlates in strategic
alliances. DEMO of Business and Psychology, 15, 445--461.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (2001c). Strategic risk behavior and its temporalities: Between risk
propensity and decision context. Journal of Management Studies, 38, 515--534.
DEMO, P. (1988). Trust as a commodity. In D. Gambetta (DEMO), Trust: Making and
breaking cooperative relations (pp. 49--72). New York: Basil Blackwell.
Deutsch, M. (1958). Trust and suspicion. Journal of Conﬂict Resolution, 2(4), 265--279.
114
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
Deutsch, M. (1960a). The DEMO of motivational orientation upon trust and suspicion. Hu-
man Relations, 13, 123--139.
Deutsch, M. (1960b). Trust, trustworthiness, and the F DEMO Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 61, 138--140.
Doney, P. DEMO, Cannon, J. P., & Mullen, M. R. (1998). DEMO the inﬂuence of na-
tional culture on the development of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23,
601--620.
Driscoll, J. W. (1978). Trust and participation in organizational decision making as pre-
dictors of satisfaction. DEMO of Management Journal, 21,44--56.
Fischhoff, B. (1985). Managing DEMO perceptions. Issues in Science and Technology, 2(1),
83--96.
Friedland, N. (1990). Attribution of control as a determinant of cooperation DEMO exchange
interactions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 20, 303--320.
Fukuyama, DEMO (1995). Trust: The social virtues and the creation of prosperity. New York:
Free Press.
Gabarro, J. J. (1978). The DEMO of trust, inﬂuence, and expectations. In A. Athos &
J. DEMO Gabarro (Eds.), Interpersonal behavior: Communication and understanding in
relationships (DEMO 290--303). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Gambetta, D. (1988). Can we trust trust? In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking
cooperative relations (pp. 213--237). New York: Basil Blackwell.
DEMO, J. M., & Choe, S. (1998). Trust in Japanese interﬁrm relations: Institutional
sanctions matter. Academy of Management Review, 23, 589--600.
Handy, C. (1995). Trust and the virtual organization. Harvard Business DEMO, 73(3),
40--50.
Hosmer, L. T. (1995). Trust: The connecting link between organizational theory and
philosophical ethics. Academy of Management Review, 20, 379--403.
Hwang, P., & Burgers, W. P. (DEMO). Properties of trust: An analytical view. Organizational
Behavior and Human DEMO Processes, 69,67--73.
Johnston-George, C., & Swap, W. C. (DEMO). Measurement of speciﬁc interpersonal trust:
Construction and validation of a scale to assess trust in a speciﬁc other. Journal of
Personality and DEMO Psychology, 43, 1306--1317.
Jones, G. R., & George, J. DEMO (1998). The experience and evolution of trust: Implications for
cooperation and teamwork. Academy of Management Review, 23, 531--546.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision DEMO risk.
Econometrica, 47, 262--291.
Kee, H. W., & Knox, DEMO E. (1970). Conceptual and methodological considerations in the
study of DEMO and suspicion. Journal of Conﬂict Resolution, 14, 357--366.
Kogan, N., & Wallach, M. A. (1964). Risk Taking: A study in cognition and personality. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Kramer, R. M., & Tyler, T. R. (1996). Trust in organizations: DEMO of theory and
research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Leifer, R., & Mills, P. K. (1996). An information processing approach for DEMO upon
control strategies and reducing control loss in emerging organizations. Journal of
Management, 22, 113--137.
Lewicki, R. J., McAllister, D. J., & Bies, R. J. (1998). Trust and distrust: New relationships
DEMO realities. Academy of Management Review, 23, 438--458.
Lewis, J. D., & Weigert, A. (1995). Trust as a social reality. Social DEMO, 63, 967--985.
Lopes, L. L. (1987). Between hope and fear: The psychology of risk. Advances in Experi-
mental Social Psychology, DEMO, 255--295.
Luhmann, N. (1979). Trust and power. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Luhmann, N. (1988). Familiarity, conﬁdence, trust: Problems DEMO alternatives. In D.
Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations (pp. 94--107). New
York: Basil Blackwell.
Luhmann, N. (DEMO). Risk: A sociological theory. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Madhok, A. (1995). Revisiting multinational ﬁrms’ tolerance for joint ventures: A trust-
based approach. Journal of International Business Studies, 26(1), 117--137.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative model of organiza-
tional trust. Academy of Management Review, 20, 709--734.
T. K. DAS AND BING-SHENG TENG 115
McAllister, D. J. (1995)DEMO Affect- and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal
cooperation in organizations. Academy of Management Journal, 38,24--59.
McKnight, D. H., Cummings, L. DEMO, & Chervany, N. L. (1998). Initial trust formation in
DEMO organizational relationships. Academy of Management Review, 23, 473--
490.
Michalos, DEMO C. (1990). The impact of trust on business, international security and the
quality of life. Journal of Business Ethics, 9, 619--638.
DEMO, C., Zaltman, G., & Deshpande, R. (1992). Relationships between providers and
users of market research: The dynamics of trust within and between organizations.
Journal of Marketing Research, 29, 314--328.
Nooteboom, B. (1996). Trust, opportunism and governance: A process and control model.
Organization Studies, 17, 985--1010.
Powell, W. W. (1996). Trust-based DEMO of governance. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler
(Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 51--67). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Rempel, J. K., Holmes, J. G., & Zanna, M. P. (1985). Trust in close relationships. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 49(1), 95--112.
Ring, P. DEMO (1996). Fragile and resilient trust and their roles in economic DEMO Business
& Society, 35, 148--175.
Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. (1992). Structuring cooperative relationship between
organizations. DEMO Management Journal, 13, 483--498.
Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. (1994). Developmental processes of cooperative interor-
ganizational DEMO Academy of Management Review, 19,90--118.
Rotter, J. B. (1967)DEMO A new scale for the measurement of interpersonal trust. Journal of
Personality, 35, 651--665.
Rotter, J. B. (1980). Interpersonal trust, trustworthiness, and gullibility. American Psy-
chologist, 35,1--7.
Sabel, C. F. (DEMO). Studied trust: Building new forms of cooperation in a volatile DEMO
Human Relations, 46, 1133--1170.
Schlenker, B. R., Helm, B., & Tedeschi, J. T. (1973). The effects of personality and DEMO
tional variables on behavioral trust. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO,
419-427.
Schneider, S. L., & Lopes, L. L. (1986). Reﬂection in preferences under risk: Who and when
may suggest why. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Per-
formance, 12, 535--548.
Scott, C. L., III. (1980). Interpersonal trust: A comparison DEMO attitudinal and situational
factors. Human Relations, 33, 805--812.
Shapiro, S. DEMO (1987). The social control of impersonal trust. American Journal of DEMO,
93, 623--658.
Sheppard, B. H., & Sherman, D. M. (1998). The grammars of trust: A model and general
implications. DEMO of Management Review, 23, 422--437.
Sheppard, B. H., & Tuchinsky, M. (1996). Micro-OB and the network organization. In R. M.
DEMO & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research
(pp. 140--165). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Sitkin, S. B., & Pablo, A. L. (1992). Reconceptualizing the DEMO of risk behavior.
Academy of Management Review, 17,9--38.
Sitkin, S. B., & Roth, N. L. (1993). Explaining the limited effectiveness of legalistic ‘‘rem-
edies’’ for trust/distrust. Organization Science, 4, 367--392.
DEMO, S. B., & Weingart, L. R. (1995). Determinants of risky decision-making behavior: A
test of the mediating role of risk perceptions and propensity. Academy of Management
Journal, 38, 1573--1592.
Slovic, P. (DEMO). Perception of risk. Science, 236, 280--285.
Weber, E. U., & Milliman, R. A. (1997). Perceived risk attitudes: Relating risk perception to
risky choice. Management Science, 43, 123--144.
Williamson, O. E. (1975). Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and antitrust implications.
New York: Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. (1993). Calculativeness, trust, and DEMO organization. Journal of Law
and Economics, 36, 453--486.
116
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY
Yates, J. F., & Stone, E. R. (1992). The risk construct. In J. F. Yates (DEMO), Risk-taking
behavior (pp. 1--25). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Zaheer, A., & Venkatraman, N. (1995). Relational governance as an interorganizational
strategy: An empirical test of the role of trust in economic exchange. Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 16, 373--392.
Zand, D. E. (1972)DEMO Trust and managerial problem solving. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 17, 229--239.
Zucker, L. G. (1986). Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure,
1840--1920. Research in Organizational Behavior, 8,53--111.{1g42fwefx}