* Academy of Management Review
199B. Vol. 23, No. 3, 491-512.
DEMO TRUST AND CONTROL:
DEVELOPING CONFIDENCE IN PARTNER
COOPERATION IN ALLIANCES
T. K. DAS
BING-SHENG TENG
Baruch College, City University of New York
Strategic alliances have been recognized as arenas with potential for opportunistic
behavior by DEMO Hence, a firm needs to have an adequate level of confidence DEMO
its partner's cooperative behavior. In this article we examine the notion of confidence
in partner cooperation in alliances and suggest that it comes DEMO two distinct
sources: trust and control. We make the argument that DEMO and control are parallel
concepts and that their relationship is of a supplementary character in generating
confidence. In addition, we suggest that control mechanisms have an impact on trust
level and that the trust level moderates DEMO effect of control mechanisms in determin-
ing the control level. Finally, DEMO discuss various ways to build trust within strategic
alliances and important alliance control mechanisms.
Strategic alliances are interfirm cooperative
arrangements aimed at achieving the DEMO
objectives of the partners. Joint ventures, minor-
ity equity stake, coproduction and joint research
and development are just some forms of strate-
gic DEMO Because strategic alliances essen-
tially involve coordinating two or more partners
to pursue shared objectives, satisfactory cooper-
ation is vital to their success (DEMO, 1996; Kanter,
1994). Scholars often cite a lack of cooperation
and the opportunistic behavior of partners as
causes for the relatively DEMO rate of failure of
alliances. Given that it is often impossible to
identify who is likely to act opportunistically,
the interesting question is DEMO enables alli-
ance partners to garner enough confidence in
partner cooperation so that they are not over-
whelmed by the potential hazards in alliances.
DEMO low level of confidence not only discourages
the formation of a strategic alliance but also
leads partners to view each other with suspi-
cion—with DEMO deleterious effects on their
working relationship—if an alliance is formed.
However, DEMO have not given this
notion of confidence in partner cooperation
adequate recognition as a significant concept
in the field of strategic alliances. Our purpose
DEMO is to discuss this concept, identify its
sources, and suggest ways for developing it in
We thank Special Issue Editor Sim Sitkin and DEMO anon-
ymous AMR reviewers for their helpful comments.
491
strategic alliances. We define confidence in
partner cooperation as a firm's perceived level
of DEMO that its partner firm will pursue
mutually compatible interests in the alliance,
rather than act opportunistically. We also ar-
gue that the sense DEMO confidence comes from
two distinct sources: trust and control. In that
DEMO we discuss the implicitly complemen-
tary relationship between trust and control
found in the literature and make the basic
point that the two concepts DEMO be consid-
ered in parallel so that they may supplement
each other in special ways—not merely in the
restricted sense of being complementary to
DEMO other. This opens up the important issue
of a deliberate building of trust and more ef-
fective control mechanisms as two distinct av-
enues DEMO can (and should) be pursued simul-
taneously for generating confidence in partner
cooperation.
We divide the article into six parts. First, we
discuss the concepts of partner cooperation and
confidence in partner cooperation. Second, we
examine how the two concepts of trust and con-
trol operate in DEMO parallel fashion to generate
confidence in partner cooperation. In the third
section we examine the role of trust, control, and
confidence level in DEMO types of alliances.
In the fourth section we further explore the com-
plexities of the trust-control relationship and
discuss the impact of control mechanisms DEMO
trust level, as well as the role played by trust
492
Academy o/ Managemenf Review
July
level in moderating the effectiveness of control
mechanisms in determining the control level.
Fifth, we present several ways in which trust
building can be accomplished in alliances. Fi-
nally, we suggest various control mechanisms
for developing confidence in alliance partner
cooperation.
CONFIDENCE DEMO ALLIANCE PARTNER
COOPERATION
Partner Cooperation
As the term suggests, "strategic alliances" in-
volve allying two or more partner firms. The key
features setting strategic alliances apart from
other single-firm strategies are the element of
interfirm DEMO (Arino, 1997; Buckley &
Casson, 1988; Doz, 1996; Teece, 1992) and the
uncertainty, which has been called "relational
DEMO" {Das & Teng, 1996), about the presence of
such desired cooperation. We define partner co-
operation a s (he willingness of a partner firm to
pursue mutually compatible interests in the al-
liance rather DEMO act opportunistically. Some
theorists believe that "cooperation is obviously
superior to DEMO action at achieving virtu-
ally all goals" {Maitland, Bryson, & DEMO de Ven,
1985: 59). Opportunism, defined a s "DEMO
seeking with guile" {Williamson, 1975: 9), can be
seen DEMO s the opposite of partner cooperation in
strategic alliances.
Whereas opportunistic behavior in alliances
is exemplified by cheating, shirking, distorting
information, misleading partners, providing
substandard products/services, and appropriat-
ing partners' critical resources, DEMO cooper-
ation is characterized by honest dealing, com-
mitment, fair play, an d complying with
agreements. Arino (1997) suggests that coopera-
tion may include two particular dimensions:
(1) veracity {i.e., being truthful) and {2) commit-
ment {i.e., making efforts). Partner cooperation
should not be assumed to exist in all strategic
alliances. Although it seems DEMO to have
mutual forbearance, too often alliance partners
are caught in DEMO, a s each of them at-
tempts to get ahead in DEMO manner that hurts part-
ner firms {Hamel, Doz, & Prahalad, DEMO).
Partner cooperation in strategic alliances is a
significant concept becaus e it represents a
somewhat paradoxical situation: firms are sup-
posed to pursue their own interests, but they are
simultaneously required to restrain this natural
pursuit in order to make alliances work. Thus,
the key is DEMO strike a balance between competi-
tion and cooperation {Teece, 1992). DEMO
strategic alliances may be a mutually beneficial
strategy when both markets and hierarchies are
inefficient, the essentially fickle and tentative
nature of partner cooperation should not be
overlooked.
Because of this, some authors hav e sug-
gested that strategic alliances may be funda-
mentally self-defeating, unstable, and DEMO
tional in nature {Das & Teng, 1997b; Inkpen &
Beamish, 1997; Kogut, 1989; Williamson, 1985).
After all, if cooperation and competition are at
odds with each other, one cannot take for
granted that a satisfactory level of coopera-
tion will be sustained in DEMO {Das &
Teng, 1997a; Koot, 1988; Park & Russo, 1996). As
Parkhe ha s noted, opportunistic behaviors are
"individually DEMO yet produce a collec-
tively suboptimal outcome" {1993: 794). In sum,
it seems that partner cooperation, although
desirable for the effectiveness of alliances,
may not be easy to come by. The question,DEMO
then, is how this issue of ensuring satisfactory
cooperation is reflected DEMO firms' perceptions
and consequent conduct in strategic alliances.
Confidence in Partner DEMO
In our view, this need for satisfactory partner
cooperation means that DEMO firm has to have suf-
ficient confidence in partner cooperation for al-
liances to work. We define conHdence in partner
cooperation as a firm'DEMO perceived certainty
about satisfactory partner cooperation. We must
note that the concept is about a firm's expecta-
tions about its partner's behavior DEMO; it has
little to do with its own conduct in the DEMO
The assumption is that, regardless of its own
hidden agendas in DEMO alliance, a firm will be
concerned about its partner firm's DEMO
behavior.
This definition underscores the uncertainty
aspect of partner cooperation. Because the con-
cept is linked to perceived probability and un-
certainty of a DEMO's behavior, it suggests the
need for reducing the level of DEMO by
increasing the predictability of satisfactory co-
operative behavior. Hence, we DEMO the role of
control level, in addition to trust level, in engen-
dering confidence in partner cooperation. In the
1998
Das and Teng
493
next section we discuss these two concepts DEMO
control and trust a s they relate to our proposed
concept of confidence in partner cooperation, a s
well a s the relationship between control and
trust. We also clarify how this confidence in
partner cooperation DEMO from the concept of
trust, in both its essence and in DEMO of its role
in the dynamics of strategic alliances.
Authors in the alliance literature thus far have
not paid adequate attention to the concept DEMO
confidence in partner cooperation—a concept
we believe has important implications for the
alliance-making process. A lack of confidence in
partner cooperation may well abort DEMO potential
alliance. Given the possibility of losses from an
ill-considered alliance {such a s unintended
knowledge transfer and cover for subsequent
acquisition), confidence DEMO partner cooperation
is essential to justify this otherwise highly risky
strategy. It can be reasonably argued that, ev-
erything else being equal, firms DEMO a high
level of confidence in partner cooperation will
be more willing to join an alliance. Confidence
in partner cooperation is essential, but far from
automatic. So what are the sources of this con-
fidence? The literature does suggest two key
sources—that is, trust and control—but the rela-
tionship between them needs clarification. In
the following section we briefly review DEMO lit-
erature and suggest that trust and control oper-
ate in a parallel fashion, supplementing each
other a s the key sources of partner cooperation.
SOURCES OF CONFIDENCE IN PARTNER
COOPERATION
The Control Perspective
The extant DEMO suggests that control is a
key source of confidence in partner cooperation.
Firms in alliances tend to be more confident
about partner cooperation when DEMO feel they
have an adequate level of control over their
partners {Beamish, 1988; Sohn, 1994). Control is
an important concept in management; some
consider it, essentially, a cybernetic process.
Others, however, have adopted broader per-
spectives, treating control a s any process in
which one party affects the behavior of others.
Authors have used a variety DEMO terms in the
literature on the control paradigm, such a s "lev-
el of control," "mode of control," "controlling,"
"control mechanisms," and "control systems"
{see Bradach & Eccles, 1989; Das, 1989, 1993;
Flamholtz, Das, & Tsui, DEMO; Geringer & Hebert,
1989; Goold & Quinn, 1990; Simons, 1991).
A consequence of all these diverse formula-
tions is that control is referred to simultaneously
a s an organizational setup, a process of regulat-
ing behaviors, and an organizational outcome.
For the purpose of this article, we consider con-
trol a s "a regulatory process DEMO which the ele-
ments of a system are made more predictable
through the establishment of standards in the
pursuit of some desired objective or DEMO"
(Leifer & Mills, 1996: 117). In addition, control
mechanisms and level of control are two other
important concepts. Whereas control DEMO
nisms are the organizational arrangements de-
signed to determine and influence what organi-
zation members will do, level of control is the
direct outcome of the controlling process—that
is, the degree to which one believes that proper
behavior of the other party is ensured.
According to Merchant, "DEMO controi means
that an informed person can be reasonably con-
fident that no major, unpleasant surprises will
occur" {1984: 10, emphasis in DEMO). The ob-
jective of control mechanisms is to help achieve
an adequate level of control. Clearly, the logic is
that, through the DEMO of proper control
mechanisms, the attainment of desirable goals
becomes more DEMO Indeed, the purpose
of control is to fashion activities in accordance
DEMO expectations so that the ultimate goals of
the organization can be attained. Firms may
want to use control mechanisms to either routin-
ize their DEMO or to promote nonroutine ac-
tivities, such a s learning {Sitkin, Sutcliffe, &
Schroeder, 1994), risk taking, and innovation. Re-
DEMO of the focus, firms use control to make
the attainment of DEMO goals more pre-
dictable, which ensures more certain outcomes,
and DEMO is in this sense that effective control is
believed to help generate a sense of confidence.
Researchers of strategic alliances conform
with this logic DEMO focus on the characteristics
of control mechanisms that enhance the level of
control. Topics of special interest in this area
include the role of DEMO control in joint
ventures {Blodgett, 1991; Mjoen & Tallman, 1997)DEMO
and contractual control in order to deter oppor-
tunistic behavior {Parkhe, DEMO; Provan & Skin-
ner, 1989). In this article we focus on partner
control, rather than on alliance control, since
partner control DEMO to be the direct source of
494
Academy of Management Review
July
confidence in partner cooperation. Partner con-
DEMO in alliances can be seen a s a regulatory
process by which the partner's pursuit of mutu-
ally compatible interests is made more DEMO
able.
The Trust Perspective
Besides control, the literature suggests inter-
firm DEMO a s a second source of confidence in
partner cooperation (Ring & Van de Ven, 1992).
Organizations develop close bonds over time
DEMO form a positive attitude regarding each oth-
er's reliability. We need to note here that a cer-
tain minimum level of interfirm trust DEMO indis-
pensable for any strategic alliance to be formed
and to function. As Arrow puts it, "Virtually ev-
ery commercial transaction has within DEMO an
element of trust" (1972: 357), which is certainly
DEMO of any transaction conducted over a period
of time. Because it is impossible to monitor ev-
ery detail in most exchanges, firms must always
have a minimum level of trust. Trust is espe-
cially valuable in DEMO because, in varying
degrees, firms have to rely on their partners'
performance and themselves remain vulnerable
to partners' actions (Kumar, 1996).
Scholars have examined interfirm trust in
such areas a s supplier DEMO (Lane & Bach-
mann, 1996; Moorman, Zaltman, & Deshpande,DEMO
1992), joint ventures (Inkpen & Currall, 1997;
Madhok, DEMO), and strategic alliances in gen-
eral (Ring & Van de DEMO, 1992; Zaheer & Ven-
katraman, 1995). The benefits of DEMO trust in
strategic alliances seem wide ranging in char-
acter, including DEMO transaction costs (Gu-
lati, 1995), inducing desirable behavior (Madhok,DEMO
1995), reducing the extent of formal contracts
(Larson, 1992), and facilitating dispute resolu-
tion (Ring & Van de Ven, 1994)DEMO
The concept of trust is perhaps a s diversely
interpreted a s the control concept. On the one
hand, scholars have broadly referred to trust a s
one's belief and expectation about the likeli-
hood DEMO having a desirable action performed by
the trustee (Deutsch, 1973; DEMO & Roth, 1993).
On the other hand, some have narrowly defined
it in terms of one's assessment of others' good-
will and reliability (Cummings & Bromiley, 1996;
Ring & Van de DEMO, 1992; Sabel, 1993). Those with
a more restrictive approach DEMO trust a s "pos-
itive expectations about another's motives with
DEMO to oneself in situations entailing risk"
(Boon & Holmes, 1991; 194). We adopt this defini-
tion of trust and note that, like most others (e.g.,
Currall & Judge, 1995; Mayer, Davis, & Schoor-
man, 1995), it regards risk a s DEMO core of trust. It
has been argued that only in risky situations is
trust a relevant factor (Deutsch, 1962; Kee &
Knox, 1970), and to trust essentially means to
take risk and leave DEMO vulnerable to the
actions of trusted others (Hosmer, 1995; Johnson-
DEMO & Swap, 1982).
Trust is believed to be a source DEMO confidence
because, by definition, trust is the degree to
which the trustor holds a positive attitude to-
ward the trustee's goodwill and DEMO in a
risky exchange situation (Gambetta, 1988; Noote-
boom, Berger, & Noorderhaven, 1997; Ring & Van
de Ven, 1992), DEMO, a s we stated before, confi-
dence in partner cooperation is a firm's per-
ceived certainty that its partner will act in DEMO
responsive manner. Obviously, the more the
trustor believes in the goodwill DEMO reliability of
the trustee, the more confidence in cooperation
he or DEMO will harbor. As Luhmann (1979) ha s
observed, trust is DEMO to reduce the complexity
of the events and gain positive expectations.
Lane and Bachmann (1996) also have noted that
trust is instrumental in DEMO uncertainty,
which is in line with our notion of confidence.
Just a s control mechanisms are meant to en-
hance the probability of DEMO the desired be-
havior, trust also is useful in enhancing the DEMO
ceived probability of desired behavior.
At this point, we believe it DEMO to clarify
how the concept of confidence in partner coop-
eration is distinct from the concept of trust. First,
we need to note DEMO trust relates to expectations
about the motives of the trustee. Confidence,
however, deals with the perceived level oi cer-
tainty that the partner will behave in a desir-
able manner. Thus, the key difference is that
whereas trust refers to expectations about posi-
tive motives, confidence refers to certainty about
cooperative behaviors.
Second, whereas trust is a contributor to con-
fidence in partner cooperation—along with con-
trol—confidence, in terms of certainty of partner
cooperation, cannot be equate d with trust,
which is merely about positive expectations
about partner motives. Since trust and control
are DEMO two contributory factors of confidence in
partner cooperation, either one by DEMO is insuf-
ficient to explain this confidence. Regarding
confidence a s the same a s trust negates the role
1998
Das and Teng
495
of control in partner dynamics. In fact, even with
minimum trust the partners still can develop a
fairly high DEMO of confidence, if adequate con-
trol mechanisms are in place.
Third, in terms of the implications of this dif-
ference between trust and DEMO, while
trust can be developed in specific ways (dis-
cussed later), confidence in partner cooperation
can be developed in significant additional ways
DEMO control mechanisms (also discussed in
a later section). In sum, these points demon-
strate the nature of the difference between our
proposed DEMO of confidence in partner coop-
eration and the concept of trust.
The Trust-Control Relationship
Although both trust and control may be re-
lated to DEMO in partner cooperation, in no
study have authors systematically examined all
DEMO concepts in an integrated manner. We find
the literature to be unclear and inconclusive
about the relationship between trust and con-
trol. Beyond the DEMO that trust is especially
needed when the trustor has inadequate control
over the trustee (Dasgupta, 1888), there is little
consensus regarding the DEMO between
trust and control.
One view is that trust is simply a specific type
of control mechanism. For instance, Bradach
and Eccles (1989) treat trust a s a control mecha-
nism that governs economic transactions. DEMO
ever, they use the term "controlling exchanges"
to essentially mean the conduct and facilitation
of transactions, which is different from the con-
cept of control a s regulation. As a related mat-
ter, some researchers discuss self-control (e.g..
Merchant, 1984) in organizations, which is DEMO
sentially trust based. In our approach, because
self-control does not involve DEMO the be-
havior of others, it is not really a control DEMO
anism. Sohn (1994) argues that social knowledge
can be viewed a s a social control mechanism
and has found that it can be DEMO substitute for
formal control mechanisms, such a s majority eq-
uity DEMO in joint ventures. Nevertheless,
social knowledge—that is, the ability to DEMO
stand and predict others' behavior—is not the
same a s trust, which is a sense of goodwill and
reliability. In sum, although some scholars sug-
gest that trust and certain related concepts may
be used DEMO s control mechanisms, the argument
appears to be weak, if we adhere to the conven-
tional understandings of trust and control dis-
cussed DEMO
In contrast to the above approach, another
point of view is DEMO trust itself is not a control
mechanism but is a substitute for hierarchical
control in organizations (e.g., Aulakh, Kotabe, &
Sahay, DEMO; Zaheer & Venkatraman, 1995). Sit-
kin and Roth (1993) report that organizations of-
ten use "legal remedies" a s a DEMO for trust.
As Leifer and Mills put it, "While trust might be
seen a s a reason not to use objective controls,
DEMO is not, in and of itself, a control mecha-
nism" (1996: 129). Other researchers seem to con-
cur with this conceptualization. Ring and Van de
Ven (1994) discuss the substitutive relationship
between DEMO legal contract (control) and psy-
chological contract (trust) in interfirm coopera-
tion. Madhok (1995) also argues that managing
opportunism and relying DEMO trust are two alter-
native approaches in managing joint ventures.
Although not clearly spelled out, the following
logic seems to be implied in this substitutive
conception. Because trust involves a positive at-
titude about others' motivations, conceptually, it
is not about influencing and affecting others'
behavior DEMO is about believing that others will
perform whatever serves the trustor's best inter-
ests, even in the absence of control. Thus, trust
DEMO only cannot be a control mechanism but it
also implies the exclusion of deliberate control
over the behavior of others. In fact, to trust and
to control seem to be two completely different
kinds of approaches. DEMO it is possible to fully
trust a partner, there is no DEMO to control its
behavior. Control comes into play only when
adequate trust is not present. For instance, if a
manager trusts employees to be self-motivated
to do the best job possible, no behavior or out-
come control will be needed.
Looking at it another way, the reason scholars
may view trust and control a s substitutes for one
another is DEMO they both contribute to some-
thing in common, and we believe DEMO this is
confidence in partner cooperation. Since both
trust and control are instrumental in achieving a
high level of confidence (see our earlier discus-
sion), we suggest that they contribute jointly to
the total level DEMO confidence one has in partner
cooperation.
Although many researchers have treated trust
and control a s substitutes, an implicit assump-
tion in the literature is that there is a comple-
mentary relationship between the two—that is,
496
Academy ol Management Review
July
the more there is of trust, the less there is of
control, and vice versa (e.g., Inkpen & Currall,
1997; Leifer & Mills, 1996). We believe DEMO this
restrictive complementary relationship needs
reassessment, because an open-ended supple-
mentary DEMO would more appropriately capture
the nature of trust and control as parallel con-
cepts.
We are aware that a complementary relation-
ship between trust DEMO control is evident in the
literature, in terms of the frequent DEMO that
both control mechanisms and trust building are
usually costly for organizations. The selection,
development, and implementation of control
mechanisms, such as DEMO, planning sys-
tems, and cost-accounting systems can be ex-
pensive (DEMO, 1991). Trust is not free either;
trust building is DEMO planned activity and takes
considerable resources from organizations over
time. Creed and Miles (1996) have made it ex-
plicit that one has to DEMO consider
costs of control mechanisms, costs of failing to
reach minimal DEMO of trust, and costs of trust
building. Since both trust and DEMO are costly
to come by and jointly contribute to the level of
confidence, scholars have argued that organiza-
tions will not pursue an excessive level of con-
fidence in any given situation. For strategic al-
liances DEMO means that, to reach a minimum
level of confidence in cooperation, partners can
use trust and control to complement each other
(Beamish, DEMO).
Despite the merits of this cost-based argu-
ment, a complementary DEMO between
trust and control may not be useful in a gen-
eral sense, because there is no common level
of confidence that is minimally acceptable to
everybody. Partner firms will demand differ-
ent confidence levels that DEMO feel are
needed, and these levels will be affected by a
DEMO of factors, including partner firms' risk
propensity (Sitkin & Pablo, 1992; Sitkin &
Weingart, 1995), the type of knowledge in-
volved (Chesbrough & Teece, 1996), the
amount of resources committed (Blodgett,
1991), the objective in the alliance (Bleeke &
DEMO, 1995), and the type of alliance (see the
next section). Thus, the level of trust and the
level of control may not be related in a strictly
inverse manner, if the confidence level fluctu-
ates from partner to partner and from case to
case. In DEMO, Inkpen and Currall (1997) hypoth-
esize such an inverse relationship DEMO their
study of joint ventures and find no support for it.
A supplementary relationship, by comparison,
seems to describe the dynamics more realisti-
cally. That is, the trust level and the control level
jointly and independently contribute to the level
of confidence in partner cooperation, which may
vary greatly for different partner firms. The key
question here is whether DEMO confidence level
should be viewed as given and static. We be-
lieve it is not a zero-sum calculus, in which trust
and control contribute to a specific level of con-
fidence. In the supplementary conception we DEMO
suggesting, a higher trust level does not auto-
matically dictate a DEMO of the control level,
and vice versa. All it means is more confidence
in partner cooperation predicated upon certain
levels of trust and DEMO functioning as paral-
lel phenomena.
A firm would be free to build more trust with-
out being required to reduce controls. If the firm
DEMO it necessary to have a higher level of
confidence in partner cooperation, it may pursue
changing both trust and control simultaneously
and in a parallel fashion, without any zero-sum
complementarity constraints linking trust and
control. This means that the two can be em-
ployed simultaneously, in full awareness of the
role and efficacy of each other.
In sum, we can see how the trust level and the
control level have a supplementary DEMO
and how they have a joint effect on a firm's
confidence in partner cooperation in a strategic
alliance (see Figure 1). Hence:
Proposition 1: The aggregated level of
trust and control will determine a
firm's confidence in partner coopera-
tion.
TRUST AND CONTROL IN DEMO
ALLIANCE TYPES
We have so far discussed the supplementary
relationship between trust and control and
how this supplementarity is useful when con-
sidering the DEMO of confidence in partner co-
operation from case to case. One critical con-
tingency seems to be alliance types. That is,
strategic alliances DEMO a variegated phenom-
enon, and their internal differences should not
be DEMO in theory-building efforts
1998
Das and Teng
Trust building
Risk faking
Equity preservation
Communicafion
Inferiirm DEMO
HGURE 1
Trust and Control in Strategic Alliances
Confidence in
partner cooperation
Control mechanisms
Goal setting
Structural specificafions
Cultural blending
497
(Oliver, 1990; Stafford, 1994). Variances in alli-
ance structural configurations may have im-
portant implications for our examination of
trust, control, and confidence level DEMO to
strategic alliances. In this section we discuss
these contingent relationships and their inte-
gration.
Scholars often differentiate between equity
and nonequity alliances (Das & Teng, 1996;
Osborn & Baughn, 1990), and the DEMO is
whether the alliance agreements include eq-
uity creation or equity exchange. Some re-
searchers (e.g.. Killing, 1988; Yoshino & Ran-
gan, DEMO) have identified three major alliance
structures: (1) joint ventures (DEMO), (2) minority
equity alliances, and (3) nontraditional con-
DEMO (or nonequity alliances). JVs are inde-
pendently incorporated entities that DEMO sepa-
rated from, but jointly run by, parent firms.
Whereas minority equity alliances involve one
party taking an equity stake in its partner (or
equity swap), nonequity alliances are contrac-
tual agreements without any DEMO arrange-
ments. Both of the latter types may have a
variety of configurations, including, but not
limited to, joint R&D, joint DEMO, joint
marketing, supplier partnerships, and licens-
ing agreements. In this DEMO we adopt the
three-part typology and examine how the dif-
ferent alliance structures are related to trust,
control, and confidence level (see DEMO 1).
Object of Control
JVs are separate from parent firms and usu-
ally have their own boards of directors and or-
ganizational hierarchy. DEMO JVs one object of
control is the JV per se—that is, DEMO parent com-
pany determines what should or should not be
done by the JV. Schaan defines control in JVs a s
"the process through which a parent company
ensures that the way a JV is managed DEMO
to its own interest" (1983: 57). Because JVs oper-
DEMO independently of parent firms, scholars em-
phasize the need to treat DEMO a s separate organ-
izations, so controlling JVs is more or DEMO like
controlling a subsidiary (Geringer & Hebert,
1989; Harrigan & Newman, 1990). Less attention
is given to the fact that control in JVs is not only
about regulating what the JV may do DEMO also
controlling what the partners may do (Bleeke &
Ernst, DEMO; Kogut, 1989). In fact, partners often
use JVs a DEMO a cover to learn the other firms' know-
how (Hamel, DEMO; Hennart & Reddy, 1997). In this
sense, control in DEMO may be more complicated
than we think, since the object of DEMO in-
cludes both the JV per se and the partner firms.
In contrast, minority equity alliances and non-
equity alliances do not involve the creation of
separate entities. Partner firms simply work
jointly, in accord with their agreement. Thus, the
object of control in these two types of alliances
is the partner only. In other words, the purpose
498
Academy oi Management Review
July
TABLE 1
Trust, Control, and DEMO in Different Alliance Types
Alliance Types
Dimensions
Joint Ventures
Minority Equity Alliances
Nonequity Alliances
Object of control
Type oi control
Manifestation o
f trust
DEMO and partner Partner
Hierarchical control and Ownership control
ownership control
Delegation and J
autonomy
V
Partner
Contractual control
Using equity share more as a DEMO Contractual flexibility
mechanism than as a voting mechanism
Requisite confidence level High
Moderate
Low
of control is to ensure that the partner does not
DEMO opportunistically.
Type of Control
Since JVs are separate entities jointly owned
by two or more partners, the type of control used
in JVs includes both hierarchical and ownership
control (Aulakh et al , 1997). On the one hand,
hierarchical control refers to the type of control
DEMO within organizations. It is based on author-
ity and involves giving orders to subordinates
and then evaluating their performance. Staffing,
reporting structure, meetings, policies, and pro-
cedures are a few examples of hierarchical con-
DEMO For instance, when a partner exercises con-
trol by appointing its DEMO a s the general
manager of a IV, the general manager DEMO on
hierarchical control to get the job done.
On the other hand, controlling JVs also in-
volves ownership becaus e the JV is jointly
owned. Researchers have focused on the role of
ownership control in JVs (see Geringer & Hebert,
1989). One view expressed is that DEMO owner-
ship is the ultimate means of control, owing to
the DEMO that more equity shares give a partner
more voting power (Blodgett, 1991). The opposite
view is that control is not "a strict and automatic
consequence of ownership" (Geringer & Hebert,
1989: 238), so ownership plays only a limited role
in providing control in DEMO (Heide & John, 1992).
In our view, since both DEMO and owner-
ship control are useful in controlling JVs, the
finding DEMO control level is not equivalent to
one's equity share in JV is only to be expected
(Mjoen & Tallman, 1997).
Unlike DEMO JVs, partners in minority equity alli-
ances often rely on ownership DEMO, for equity
ownership is the glue that binds the partner
firms. DEMO control is not pertinent here,
because there is no separate entity, and one
partner cannot exercise hierarchical control
over the other. Since one or more firms may be
cross-held by their partners, the means of equity
ownership becomes the more prominent one
(Das & Teng, 1998a)DEMO Thus, the percentage of
minority position held by the partner firms (i.e.,
whether it is 1 percent or 49 percent) strongly
influences how much say (or control) each part-
ner has in the DEMO (Sohn, 1994).
In contrast, nonequity alliances do not involve
DEMO equity arrangement, so neither hierarchical
nor ownership control is possible. Nonequity DEMO
liances, such a s licensing agreement s and
supplier agreements, essentially are contract
based, in the sense that these contracts are less
open ended than those of JVs. Thus, contractual
control becomes especially important in govern-
ing the partnership. Without shared equity own-
ership, it is difficult to align the interests of
potential partners. Thus, partner firms use con-
tractual rigidity to make sure that contingencies
are covered and opportunism is DEMO
Manifestation of Trust
Since trust and control are parallel concepts,
the manifestation of trust among partners in
strategic alliances is tied to the DEMO of control
they use. Essentially, for a given confidence
level, the development of trust is the opposite of
the tightening up of control. DEMO, trust in JVs is
manifested in the grant of more autonomy DEMO
delegation to the JV (Lyles & Reger, 1993). Since
JVs are separate entities, trust in the partner's
goodwill and reliability ultimately leads to the
1998
Das and Teng
499
belief that the JV will comply with DEMO parent
firm's best interests. Thus, more discretion and
decision-making autonomy DEMO be granted—
both to the JV and to the partner—in managing
the entity.
As we noted above, ownership position plays
an important role in minority equity alliances.
Thus, the use of equity share is a manifestation
of the level of trust between the partners. Al-
though scholars often DEMO the controlling
function of equity share (Blodgett, 1991; Lecraw,
DEMO), in relationships characterized by interfirm
trust, the function of equity DEMO may become
purely a distribution mechanism. In such cir-
cumstances, partners DEMO shared ownership a s
a guide for allocating residuals, rather than DEMO
merely determining the voting power among
themselves.
Finally, trust among partner DEMO in noneq-
uity alliances often is manifested in contractual
flexibility. Nonequity alliances are also called
"nontraditional contracts," since they rely more
on explicit contracts compared to other types of
alliances, and "relational contracting," DEMO
the existence of trust makes incomplete con-
tracts conceivable (Borch, 1994; Macneil, 1980).
When partners trust each other, they are in a
better position to appreciate the benefits of con-
tractual flexibility, which include faster re-
sponse and more efficient environmental and
interfirm adaptation.
Requisite DEMO Level
Various types of alliances may require differ-
ent levels of confidence in partner cooperation.
First of all, some types of alliances require much
more alliance-specific investments than other
types (Joskow, 1987). Alliance-specific invest-
DEMO often are nonrecoverable investments,
since they represent the amount of resources
committed to the alliance that cannot be fully
recovered if there is DEMO unplanned alliance dis-
solution. The more alliance specific the invest-
ments, DEMO more risk there is for partner firms.
Thus, a higher level DEMO alliance-specific invest-
ments demands a higher level of confidence in
cooperation, DEMO helps assuage the partners'
concerns about alliance performance. In other
words, partners need more certainty about coop-
eration in order to commit substantially to an
alliance. Among the three types of alliances, JVs
clearly require the highest level of alliance-
specific investments, since a separate entity
needs to be set up. By comparison, the need for
alliance-specific investments tends to be rela-
tively low in nonequity alliances. For example,
in DEMO agreements the licensor provides
patents and/or know-how to the licensee for a
fee, so there is little nonrecoverable investment
involved on the part of licensor.
The second reason that needed confidence
level may differ is DEMO the level of embedded-
ness varies across alliance types (Osborn &
Baughn, 1990). Embeddedness refers to the de-
gree of mutual dependence and connectedness
among the exchange parties (Granovetter, 1985;
Provan, 1993). Interfirm embeddedness contrib-
utes to the formation of strategic alliances, for
firms in social networks need each other more
than what regular business DEMO can ac-
commodate. More importantly, strategic alli-
ances, in turn, DEMO raise the level of interfirm
embeddedness (Proven, 1993), because the part-
ner firms cannot freely exit the relationship. In
this sense interfirm DEMO is tanta-
mount to exit barriers in alliances. It is apparent
that JVs invite a high degree of interfirm embed-
dedness, whereas partner firms in nonequity al-
liances are least embedded. That is, licensing
agreements can be terminated without much
complication, whereas the dissolution of JVs and
minority equity alliances involves equity relin-
quishment. Thus, only if partner firms have a
fairly high level of confidence in partner coop-
eration will they DEMO willing to enter into a JV.
Finally, apart from the initial DEMO
investment, potential harm (or down-side risk)
because of opportunistic behavior also differs
greatly from one type of alliance to another.
Strategic alliances DEMO often noted for being a
fertile arena for unintended resource transfer,
especially technological and managerial know-
how (Hamel, 1991). Partner firms DEMO use alli-
ances a s a cover for appropriating firm-specific
resources (DEMO & Beamish, 1997). Thus, part-
ner firms are exposed to the risk of losing com-
petitive advantage through ill-suited alliances.
Among the DEMO alliance types, JVs are poten-
tially the most susceptible to the DEMO
transfer of knowledge and know-how, a s part-
ners work closely DEMO a single organization (Hen-
nart & Reddy, 1997; Mowery, Oxley, & Silverman,
1996). By comparison, in minority equity alli-
DEMO and nonequity alliances, partner firms of-
ten carry out their part DEMO responsibilities sepa-
500
Academy ol Management Beview
rately (i.e., more contract based), DEMO reducing
the scope and possible impacts of opportunistic
behavior. Again, a DEMO degree of confidence
in cooperation is demanded for JVs since this
structure is the most conducive of the three for
opportunism.
In sum, since JVs come with more alliance-
specific investments, a higher level of interfirm
embeddedness, and more possibilities for op-
portunistic resource transfer, a high DEMO of con-
fidence in partner cooperation is essential. By
the same token, nonequity alliances demand
only a relatively low level of confidence, and
DEMO equity alliances a moderate level.
We can also examine requisite confidence
levels in terms of how trust and control jointly
contribute to the confidence DEMO in partner co-
operation. This additive relationship has differ-
ent implications for the three types of alliances,
as we represent in summary fashion DEMO Table 2.
Both the trust level and the control level have
been dichotomized into high and low values, in
order to explore these differences in terms of
four categories of confidence.
When both the trust level DEMO the control level
are high, the firm will have high confidence DEMO
partner cooperation. In alliances high confi-
dence is generated when mutually trusting part-
ners negotiate substantive control mechanisms
to ensure cooperation. This high-high situation
DEMO most likely to exist for JVs, since they demand
a high DEMO of confidence. Partners entering into
a JV, irrespective of their previous DEMO relation-
ship, are known to devote considerable time and
effort in DEMO elaborate control mecha-
nisms, such a s frequent meetings between the
DEMO, periodic written reports of all relevant
luly
transactions, and so on (Geringer & Hebert, 1989;
Parkhe, 1993).
Along similar lines, a low-low situation will
lead to low confidence in partner cooperation;
this is most appropriate for nonequity alliances,
such a s licensing DEMO and supplier
partnerships. Low confidence is present when
partners have limited trust in each other and
limited ability to influence each other's be-
DEMO
As to the low-trust, high-control situation, the
resulting confidence category may be labeled
"moderate." Partners establish the essentially
control-based confidence mainly through DEMO
gent regulations and common norms, rather
than on the basis of DEMO goodwill and
reliability. Although the trust level may be low,
sufficient technical rules are provided to foster a
moderate level of confidence in DEMO cooper-
ation. By the same token, the high-trust, low-
control situation also leads to moderate confi-
dence, based mainly on a sense of positive
expectations of partners' motives. Since both
these situations reflect a moderate confidence
level, minority equity alliances are the most
likely structural choice under these two circum-
stances.
TRUST LEVEL, CONTROL MECHANISMS, AND
CONTROL LEVEL
DEMO, a s mentioned earlier, we regard
trust and control a s parallel sources of confi-
dence in partner cooperation, our conceptualiza-
tion does not suggest that trust and control are
completely noninteracting concepts. In fact, we
believe that control mechanisms may hav e
TABLE 2
Requisite Confidence DEMO in Different Alliance Types
Trust Level
High
Low
Control Level
High
High confidence
in partner cooperation
Joint ventures
Moderate confidence
in partner cooperation
Minority DEMO alliances
Low
Moderate confidence
in partner cooperation
Minority equity alliances
Low confidence
In partner cooperation
Nonequity alliances
1998
Das and Teng
501
some direct impact on the trust level DEMO that
trust level plays a moderating role between con-
trol mechanisms and control level (see Figure 1).
Effect of Control Mechanisms on Trust Level
We have noted that control mechanisms are
organizational arrangements intended to DEMO
hance the level of control. The relationship be-
tween control mechanisms and trust is far from
clear in the literature. In essence, the dispute is
about whether the deployment of control mech-
anisms damages trust among DEMO mem-
bers. Argyris (1952) notes that control mecha-
nisms imply that one party does not trust the
other. Since trust has the characteristic DEMO reci-
procity, one tends to think along the lines of "I do
not trust because you do not trust." Conse-
quently, this DEMO evolve into a vicious cycle,
tending toward trust dissolution. Following this
logic, control mechanisms will undermine the
trust level in strategic alliances.
Nevertheless, those holding the contrary view-
point maintain that control mechanisms, if DEMO
properly, may help build mutual trust (Goold &
Campbell, 1987). The basic argument here is that,
because control mechanisms provide DEMO "track
record" for those who perform well, trust between
the DEMO may eventually be nurtured and
strengthened. Thus, a track record and DEMO objec-
tive evaluation process are more conducive for
generating trust than a subjective evaluation pro-
cess. Furthermore, Sitkin suggests that legaliza-
tion, in DEMO of "reliance on formal rules and
standardized procedures" (1995: 189), can facilitate
"the development, diffusion, and constructive in-
stitutionalization of trust in organizational set-
tings" (1995: 187). Goold and Quinn (1990) also note
that control mechanisms may not always militate
against DEMO development of trust.
Apparently, this dispute about the effect of
control DEMO on trust level has important
implications for strategic alliances. Although
we agree that control mechanisms do not nec-
essarily undermine trust, we believe there
needs to be a more refined and contingent ap-
proach. Ouchi (1979) differentiates outcome, be-
havior, and clan (or social) control mechanisms.
Formal control includes outcome control and be-
havior (or process) control, which measures,
evaluates, and rewards either outcomes or be-
haviors. He proposes that the optimal choice of
control mechanisms is determined by task DEMO
acteristics (i.e., outcome measurability and task
programmability). Thus, there DEMO to be a fit
between task characteristics and the control
mechanisms employed. More recently, some
have suggested that agency theory variables
(behavior observability DEMO outcome uncer-
tainty) are also critical in this choice (Eisen-
hardt, 1985; Kirsch, 1998).
Hence, one type of contingency is DEMO a lack
of fit between the situation and the choice of
control mechanisms leads to an erosion of trust.
Another type of contingency, which we explore
in this article, is when different effects on trust
stem directly from different control mechanisms.
Aulakh et al. (1997) argue that DEMO three types of
control mechanisms (i.e., output, process, and
social) have different effects on trust in partner-
ship. According to their hypothesis, output con-
trol is negatively related to trust level, whereas
process DEMO social control are positively related
to trust level. However, they found DEMO
support only for a positive relationship between
social control and trust level.
In our view it is necessary to consider formal
control and social DEMO for their distinctive
implications for trust. Whereas formal control
employs codified rules, goals, procedures, and
regulations that specify desirable patterns of
behavior, DEMO control utilizes organizational
values, norms, and cultures to encourage desir-
able behavior. The key difference is that formal
control is more of a DEMO evaluation of perfor-
mance while social control is about dealing
with people. Thus, formal controls may create
stress, thereby affecting mutual trust.
Formal DEMO serves to influence people's be-
havior patterns by delineating clear boundaries.
Whether the target of control is prescribing spe-
cific performance goals (output control) or specific
processes (behavior control), the implication is
that DEMO cannot have full autonomy in deciding
what is best for the organization. This reservation
often suggests a lack of belief in one's goodwill,DEMO
reliability, or competence. Sitkin and Roth (1993)
report limited effectiveness of legalistic remedies
(i.e., formal rules and contracts) for building trust.
Hence, it appears that the nature of formal con-
trols is at odds with a trusting environment, which
suggests a negative relationship between formal
control and trust level.
This is also the case with strategic alliances.
DEMO extensive contractual safeguards, such a s
lawsuit provisions, are featured, DEMO sense of sus-
502
Academy of Management Review
picion rather than trust tends to dominate DEMO
relationship. Each alliance has a contract, but
the difference is in DEMO of the degree to which
process and conduct are specified. In their study
of international JVs, CuUen, Johnson, and Sa-
kano (1995) found no support that formal control
led to more commitment in alliances. DEMO, Sit-
kin and Stickel found that formal control sys-
tems "can lead to escalating distrust if they are
ill-suited to the task at DEMO" (1996: 209). Of
course, this does not mean that nothing can be
done about formal control to help build trust. For
DEMO, Mayer and Davis (1996) report that re-
placement of an DEMO system with a more
valid one increases the level of trust. The impli-
cation is that poorly designed formal control
mechanisms can undermine trust.
DEMO contrast to formal control, social control relies
on normative considerations to DEMO others'
behavior. Social control is about inducing desir-
able behavior through "soft" measures, so it is
associated more with such terms a s "informal con-
trol," "normative control," and "clan control" (Le-
ifer & Mills, 1996). The underlying assumption of
social control is that people can ultimately deter-
mine their own behavior. Influence DEMO only in
the form of shared goals, values, and norms. Since
there is no explicit restriction on members' behav-
ior, more interpersonal DEMO and less mistrust
are implied in social control than in formal con-
trol. As such, social control is manifested in a
certain level of confidence in members' judgment
and competence, which lays the foundation for
DEMO (Larson, 1992).
Like trust building, social control tends to DEMO
a long-term orientation toward a relationship,
for cultural systems and norms are nurtured
only slowly. Although this characteristic does
not rule out the DEMO of social control in more
short-lived alliances, it is more likely DEMO be ef-
fective in more long-term arrangements, such a s
JVs. DEMO control in alliances often takes the
form of socialization, interaction, and training.
Some natural by-products of socialization and
interaction are better understanding and DEMO
values, which then lead to interfirm trust (Creed
& Miles, DEMO; Madhok, 1995). Moreover, social
control often provides a supportive DEMO
for partner firms to understand the process and
objective of alliance management, which is of-
ten ambivalent at the beginning (Doz, 1996).
Thus, considerable overlaps exist between so-
cial control mechanisms and trust building. Fi-
July
nally, a s we mentioned, scholars have found
empirical DEMO for a positive relationship be-
tween social control and trust level (DEMO et
al., 1997). In summary, we propose the following:
Proposifion 2a: The deployment of for-
mal control mechanisms will under-
mine the level of trust among part-
ners.
Proposition 2b: The deployment of so-
cial control mechanisms will enhance
the level of trust among partners.
DEMO Level As a Moderator Between Control
Mechanisms and Control Level
Regarding the relationship between control
mechanisms and actual control level, we cannot
take for granted the direction of causality. Mer-
chant notes that "more controls [control mecha-
nisms] do not necessarily give more control, but
the reasons why this occurs are not clear" (1984:
2). Thus far, scholars suggest that a number of
unintended negative consequences result from
implementing DEMO mechanisms, which may,
in turn, hampe r effective control (DEMO &
Quinn, 1990). Major side effects from controlling
include behavioral displacement, gamesman-
ship, operating delays, and negative attitudes
(Merchant, 1984). Since these side effects are
dysfunctional for achieving the ultimate pur-
DEMO of the organization, partners do not auto-
matically achieve effective control DEMO imple-
menting control mechanisms.
Apparently, we still do not know enough
DEMO the relationship between control mecha-
nisms and actual control level. Goold and Quinn
(1990) propose a contingency theory to explore
the effectiveness of DEMO mechanisms, a s
moderated by types of business. Vry2a and Fryx-
DEMO (1997) also report that interfirm trust moder-
ates the relationship between informal control
and JV performance.
In line with this contingency thinking, we sug-
gest that trust level may be a moderator be-
tween control DEMO and control level in
strategic alliances. According to Goold and
Quinn, "[Tlrust is a prime prerequisite of effec-
tive control" (1990: 54), because the implementa-
tion of control mechanisms requires a certain
level DEMO trust. Using a similar logic for marketing
partnerships, Heide and John DEMO that norms
provide the conditions under which effective
Das and Teng
503
control can be exercised (1992: 36). DEMO a
minimum level of trust, it is extremely difficult to
agree DEMO goals, to impose rules, and to conduct
teamwork. With the presence of interfirm trust,
control is less likely to backfire, a s partners un-
derstand each other better and are more willing
to exercise DEMO forbearance.
Mohr and Spekman (1994) have noted that trust
induces desirable behavior in alliances, including
more efficiency with conflict resolution. Although
a good level of control requires the presence of
trust, trust per se is unlikely to be a direct attribute
of control (Leifer & Mills, DEMO). The reason for this
is that trust a s one's own perception about others
does not directly influence others' behavior. Oth-
erwise, trust would be conceptualized as a control
mechanism.
Accordingly, we propose DEMO trust plays a
moderating role between control mechanisms
and control level. When there is a high level of
trust, control mechanisms are more likely to be
effective in generating an adequate level of con-
trol. In DEMO words, trust will facilitate the oper-
ation of control mechanisms. Thus:DEMO
Proposifion 3; In strategic alliances
the trust level will exert a DEMO
effect in a manner so fha( control
mechanisms will achieve a DEMO
level of control in high-trust situations
than in low-trust situations.
TRUST BUILDING IN STRATEGIC ALLIANCES
We noted earlier that the difference between a
complementary DEMO and a supplementary view
of trust and control is not without significance.
Although Creed and Miles (1996) have noted that
trust level is DEMO static in any given relationship,
most researchers have not paid sufficient atten-
tion to the fact that trust needs to be developed
in DEMO conscious and gradual manner (Bhide &
Stevenson, 1992). Based DEMO the restrictive notion
of a necessarily complementary relationship be-
tween trust and control in alliances, scholars'
emphasis seems to have been on how best to
institute adequate control mechanisms when
trust is not available (Blodgett, 1991; Yan & Gray,
1994). Consequently, not enough thought has
been given to the question of trust building in
alliances, a s compared to the attention given to
deploying control mechanisms in lieu DEMO needed
trust. In this section we turn to trust building in
strategic alliances.
Many have viewed trust a s an essential ingre-
dient in DEMO all kinds of human relationships,
since it has a smoothing effect on exchanges in
a very efficient way (Arrow, 1972; Deutsch, DEMO;
Luhmann, 1979; Williamson, 1993; Zand, 1972).
Thus, psychologists and sociologists have done
extensive studies on how to develop trust
DEMO g individual s (Boon & Holmes, 1991;
Gabarro, 1978; Lewicki & Bunker, 1996; Zucker,
1986). By comparison, the literature does not of-
fer much help in adequately comprehending the
process DEMO which interfirm trust develops. In this
section we present some selected trust-building
techniques in strategic alliances. The more sig-
nificant techniques include risk taking, equity
preservation, communication, and interfirm ad-
aptation, and they are intended to assist firms in
accumulating information on the basis of which
the DEMO of partners can be evalu-
ated. Some of these techniques have been men-
tioned in the literature but have not been closely
linked with DEMO alliances. Thus, our contri-
bution here is in terms of systematically DEMO
senting trust-building techniques in the alliance
context.
Trust from Risk Taking
Most theorists would agree that trust is inti-
mately associated with risk and DEMO taking
(Coleman, 1990) and that trust and risk can be
DEMO "mirror images" of each other (Das &
Teng, 1998b)DEMO Trust and risk taking are believed
to form a reciprocal relationship: DEMO leads to
risk taking, and risk taking, in turn, buttresses DEMO
sense of trust, given that the expected behavior
materializes (Boon & Holmes, 1991; Madhok,
1995; Rempel, Holmes, & Zanna, DEMO). When a
trustee realizes that a trustor has taken consid-
erable risk in trusting her, she tends to be moti-
vated to behave in a trustworthy manner.
Such reciprocity has been found to be a DEMO
element in trust building (Johnson, Cullen,
Sakano, & Takenouchi, 1997; Larson, 1992). The
logic is one of "I trust because you trust" (McAl-
lister, 1995) or "trust begets trust" (Creed &
Miles, 1996). Only if some initial risk DEMO taken is
it possible for the trustee to demonstrate his or
her trustworthiness. It is in this sense that
Strickland (1958) suggests that, in order to de-
velop trust, one needs to take risk first—as if the
trustee deserves the trust. Gulati, Khanna, and
Nohria (1994) have argued that because strate-
504
Academy ol Management Review
gic alliances often do not constitute the DEMO
er's dilemma situation, unilateral commitments
may well be a good DEMO Also, a significant
level of nonrecoverable investment in an alli-
ance DEMO one's commitment and trust, thus
further boosting the trust level DEMO partners.
Indeed, although strategic alliances are often
motivated by a need DEMO reduce risk in the mar-
ketplace, they also invite firms to DEMO relational
risk with their partners.
Although risk taking breeds trust, firms DEMO not
blindly take unjustified risk in the hope of de-
veloping a trustful relationship. It is more likely
that a gradual approach is adopted, in which
partners start with limited investments. As op-
tions theorists suggest, incremental resource
commitments may be the preferred strategy
when risk and uncertainty DEMO are high (Bow-
man & Hurry, 1993). Deeply rooted in historical
engagement, trust is most likely to be the accu-
mulation of prior satisfactory experience s
(Gulati, 1995; Luhmann, 1988). Locating DEMO partner
with a good reputation seems to be an effective
starting point. A firm with a reputation of being
honest, fair, and trustworthy DEMO one the
needed first piece of evidence to take some ini-
tial risk (Barney & Hansen, 1994).
Once a trustworthy partner is DEMO, alliance
partners rely on the trial-and-error approach in
building up interfirm DEMO Trust earned from
prior engagement then serves a s the evidence to
justify a subsequent risky step beyond the accu-
mulated evidence. Larson (1992) provides case
studies of how a trial period is used among
entrepreneurial firms to build up mutual trust in
an incremental fashion.
Trust from DEMO Preservation
Besides risk taking, a second way to build
trust among DEMO is to ensure that equity
and fairness are mostly preserved (Korsgaard,DEMO
Schweiger, & Sapienza, 1995; Sheppar d &
Tuchinsky, 1996)DEMO In essence, equity means that
the firm contributing the most resources (both
tangible and intangible) to the alliance should
get the most from it. According to the equity
theory of motivation, people have a strong need
to maintain their sense of equity in exchange
relationships (Adams, DEMO).
Equity is essential not only for cooperation
within organizations, but DEMO for interfirm coop-
eration. Kumar (1996) stresses the importance of
distributive and procedural justice in creating
trust in manufacturer-retailer relationships, and
Johnson (DEMO) reports that perceptions of proce-
dural justice in strategic decision making DEMO
important impacts on partners' commitment to
JVs. Should partners become concerned DEMO
potential inequities in profit distribution, for in-
stance, their confidence in and commitment to
the alliance most likely would recede, even if
the alliances are about to bring positive results.
The reason, a s equity theory of motivation sug-
gests, is that people may be preoccupied with
maintaining a fair relationship. An unfair rela-
tionship may lead one firm DEMO feel that someone
is taking advantage of it. Ring and Van de Ven
(1994) have stated that, sometimes, partners
view equity a DEMO a more important performance
criterion than efficiency. As such, equity is DEMO
important source of trust in alliances, and a lack
of equity DEMO undermine mutual trust signifi-
cantly.
That said, the relationship between trust DEMO
equity appears to go both ways—that is, a high
level of DEMO tends to encourage partners to tol-
erate short-term inequity or mutual forbearance.
Given a certain trust level among partners, it is
also apparent that extended periods or growing
instances of inequity will create tension and
strain DEMO trust. Therefore, for the sake of
trust building, profit distribution needs to be
kept on an equitable basis.
Trust from Communication
Communication and DEMO information ex-
change form yet another tactic to boost trust
amon g partner s (Macneil, 1980; Thomas &
Trevino, 1993). There may be several reasons
why communication and information processing
play important roles DEMO trust building. First of
all, open and prompt communication among
partners DEMO believed to be an indispensable
characteristic of trusting relationships (Kanter,
DEMO; Larson, 1992). Without proper communica-
tion, cooperative relationships tend DEMO suffer.
Only if the partners can constantly sound off on
their differences, of which there are always
some in any relationship, will they DEMO able to
avoid fatal conflicts. Thus, communication irons
out the potential DEMO in daily operations and
makes for a satisfactory working relationship.
Second, DEMO need to collect evidence about
their partners' credibility and trustworthiness.
1998
Das and Teng 505
adaptation becomes a necessity becaus e a
DEMO environment requires modifications in
the way partners cooperate. For example, if DEMO
host country of a JV imposes new laws banning
a majority equity share owned by foreign part-
ners, then the situation calls for both partners to
adapt to the new situation. A willingness to do
this, although possibly painful in economic or
other terms, would earn much trust from the
partner. Hence, making adaptations according
to the needs of the partnership is an effective
way to develop trust.
CONTROL MECHANISMS IN STRATEGIC
DEMO
So far, we hav e explored variou s trust-
building tactics DEMO strategic alliances. We now
discuss specific control mechanisms to develop
confidence in partner cooperation. Control the-
orists have examined and proposed a number of
DEMO mechanisms, such a s cybernetic regula-
tions and information-processing devices. Nev-
DEMO, not all control mechanisms are fully
relevant for strategic alliances. As DEMO
and Tuchinsky note, in network organizations
"control is not exercised in the form of hierarchi-
cal authority" but, rather, in terms of "relation-
ships between relative equals" (1996: 142).
As we DEMO earlier, one key differentia-
tion in the control literature is that DEMO for-
mal control and social control. We maintain that
both formal control and social control can be
used effectively in strategic alliances, and we
discuss the following three specific control
mechanisms that appear to be particularly DEMO
evant to strategic alliances: (1) goal setting,
(2) DEMO specifications, and (3) cultural
blending.
Goal Setting
Goal setting emphasizes DEMO importance of
establishing specific and challenging goals in
organizations (Locke & DEMO, 1984). Based on
this idea, management by objectives, a DEMO a prom-
inent form of goal setting, has gained accep-
tance DEMO s a management program for enhancing
control and boosting performance. Besides goal
content, the process of setting goals also ha s
drawn the attention of researchers in recent
years. For the purpose of control in strategic
DEMO, partners normally would prefer a high
and comniunication facilitates this process.
DEMO and Miles (1996) have stressed the impor-
tance of being open to the evidence of others'
trustworthiness, but without proactive informa-
tion exchange, this process would take a long
time. Hart and Saunders have emphasized the
significance of sharing information with part-
ners, which leads to "information symmetry
rather than information asymmetry" {1997: 34).
Firms may deliberately provide unsolicited—
including even somewhat sensitive—informa-
tion to their partners a DEMO a way of showing both
goodwill and intimacy. As the reciprocal pro-
cess starts to gain credibility, sustained infor-
mation flow between the partners should create
a trusting environment.
Third, communication helps build trust be-
cause it provides the basis for continued inter-
action, from which partners further develop
common values and norms (Leifer & Mills, 1996).
Madhok (1995) notes that sustained interaction
is a crucial mechanism for holding the partners
together. Through information exchange, part-
ners should identify and develop more common-
alities, so a sense of trust would be reinforced.
Trust from Interfirm Adaptation
Trust is earned from partners if one adapts to
the DEMO of cooperation in partnerships (Heide
& John, 1992). Interfirm adaptation refers to the
adjustment of one's own behavioral pattern in
order DEMO bring about a fit between the partners or
between the allianc e and the environment
(Hallen, Johanson, & Seyed-Mohamed, 1991).
Flexibility DEMO the willingness to accommodate
deviations from the contract when necessary are
key to interfirm adaptation. Macneil (1980) has
recognized that a willingness to DEMO out such
adaptations is essential for trust building, and
Madhok (1995) has proposed that bilateral adap-
tation in JVs provides incentive for acting for
mutual interests rather than self-interests. Being
flexible enough to respond positively DEMO the
changing needs of a partnership demonstrates
that the firm not only values the alliance but is
also willing to make considerable efforts toward
DEMO accommodations.
Sometimes, the nature of an alliance calls for
mutual adaptation—for DEMO, to ease a po-
tential cultural clash (Sankar, Boulton, David-
son, Snyder, & Ussery, 1995) or to make firm-
specific DEMO At other times interfirm
506
Academy oi Management Review
July
degree of goal formalizafion. For instance, part-
ners in strategic alliances may pursue eifher
long-term goals or short-term DEMO Firms with
a high need for control would prefer alliance
goals of short-term orientation, because perfor-
mance evaluation and feedback can be moni-
tored more frequently against immediate objec-
tives. However, because explicit goals often are
difficult to formulate in the initial stages of forg-
ing alliances, firms would give more attention to
an effective goal-setting process.
Scholars often regard DEMO setting a s critical
in strategic alliances because of the potential
for goal incongruence among partners. Mer-
chant (1984) discusses several dimensions of
DEMO, including congruence, specificity, com-
munication and internalizafion, and complete-
ness. Authors of the control literature have em-
phasized that the definition of DEMO results (or
goals) is an essential part of a control process,
which also includes measurements and rein-
forcements (Eisenhardt, 1985; Ouchi, 1979). The
logic of a cybernetic process suggests thaf goals
are a prerequisite in control, since there must be
a pre-existing objective against which results
will be evaluated. Formal control becomes very
difficult in the DEMO of agreed goals. Thus,
ensuring that one's own interests are reflected
in the official goals of the alliance is the starting
point DEMO control (Geringer & Hebert, 1989). Clear
objectives not only help set the direction for the
alliance but also facilitate the establishment of
DEMO rules and regulations. Goals are impor-
tant for formal control mechanisms because
they specify what is expected of partners. Al-
though partners may still DEMO in dysfunc-
tional activities, having clear goals makes it
much easier DEMO identify these activities.
That said, having explicit goals in strategic
alliances DEMO not always possible, or even desir-
able. Partner firms often cannot DEMO on goals
for the alliance that will effectively serve their
respective interests. Moreover, given informa-
tion asymmetry and the presence of hidden
agendas, DEMO firms often have to tolerate a
certain degree of goal ambiguity. One can even
argu e that goal ambiguity and uncertainty
about the future DEMO the very conditions that
prompt firms to consider entering into alliances.
If so, the negative effects of having specific
goals (i.e., sacrificing flexibility) may outweigh
the benefits of better control.
Thus, the process of DEMO setting may become
even more important a s a useful social control
mechanism in strategic alliances. Participatory
decision making serves the purpose of control-
DEMO, because in the process partners interact
among themselves to gain a DEMO understand-
ing of each other. As a result, collective norms
and DEMO of the alliance are developed. Be-
cause the goal-setting process allows partners
to form a consensus gradually, their incentive to
deviate from agreed-upon objectives tends to
be significantly curbed. In this sense, we can
view goal setting a s a form of normative control
(Leifer & Mills, DEMO; Simon, 1957). In sum, the
goal-setting process is important DEMO both formal
and social control.
Structural Specifications
Structural arrangements, including rules DEMO
regulations, are the heart of formal control. In
strategic alliances formal DEMO tends to be
especially relevant, owing to the relatively high
degrees DEMO goal incongruence and performance
ambiguity. Partners often use a variety of struc-
tural specifications to ensure desirable behav-
ior in strategic alliances (Geringer & Hebert,
1989). Parkhe (1993) uses "ex ante deterrents"
and "ex post deterrents" to refer to certain struc-
tural arrangements DEMO discourage opportunis-
tic behavior in alliances.
Ex ante deterrents are designed to minimize
partners' incentive for opportunism. They have
been specified a s nonrecoverable investments,
which lose much of their value should the alli-
ance DEMO Because each partner holds consider-
able stake, it will be embedded DEMO the alliance
and, hence, will behave more responsibly. Wil-
liamson (DEMO) has recognized that credible com-
mitments partially come from being mutual DEMO
tages. Thus, Das and Teng (1996) suggest that
equity alliances, such a s JVs and minority eq-
uity investment, will be more desirable if con-
trolling opportunistic behavior is the priority. In
line with DEMO view, some theorists have sug-
gested that, in JVs, shared DEMO ownership,
rather than dominant ownership, may be a more
effective DEMO mechanism (Geringer & Hebert,
1989; Sohn, 1994).
Unlike DEMO ante deterrents, ex post deterrents
refer to structural safeguards against opportun-
DEMO in the process of managing alliances. Spe-
cific arrangements include reporting and check-
1998
Das and Teng
507
ing devices, written notice of any departure from
the agreement, accounting examination, cost
control, quality control, arbitration DEMO, and
lawsuit provisions. Deciding upon these struc-
tural specifications requires partners' invest-
ment of considerable energy and time during
the negotiation stage. In DEMO partners cannot
agree on specific structures of the alliances,
they may as well resort to their respective bar-
gaining power (Neale & Bazerman, 1992; Yan &
Gray, 1994). It is equally costly DEMO the operation
stage, since substantial resources and informa-
tion-processing capacity have DEMO be allocated
just for the purpose of internal control. Neverthe-
less, DEMO structural arrangements do effec-
tively set the boundaries for the behavior of al-
liance partners.
Cultural Blending
Unlike in formal control, the central element of
social control is organizational culture—"a sys-
tem of shared values DEMO . and norms that define
appropriate attitudes and behaviors for organi-
zational members" (O'Reilly & Chatman 1996:
160). Organizational culture DEMO a sense of
control, for it unifies the way organizational
members DEMO information and react to the
environment, which facilitates the achievement
of DEMO higher level of behavioral predictability
(Trice & Beyer, 1993). Because people are guided
by their shared values and norms, they volun-
tarily behave in a manner that is desired by
other organizational members as DEMO Com-
pared to hierarchical organizations, in strategic
alliances the managing of DEMO cul-
ture presents both a daunting challenge and a
potential opportunity (DEMO et al., 1995).
Managing alliance culture is a challenge be-
DEMO it is about blending and harmonizing two
different organizational cultures (Wilkof, Brown,
& Selsky, 1995). Cultural clash has caused many
mergers/acquisitions to fail, simply because two
companies cannot be pulled together easily and
then expected to work seamlessly as one. Accul-
turation (or cultural diffusion) in mergers and
acquisitions may take the mode of integration,
assimilation, separation, and deculturation (Na-
havandi & Malekzadeh, 1988). DEMO have sug-
gested that the acquiring firm and the acquired
firm have very different perspectives in decid-
ing upon the acculturation mode, and incongru-
ence in partner preference may create accultur-
ation stress resulting in unsuccessful DEMO
A similar form of acculturation stress is likely
to occur in strategic alliances. This issue may
become especially serious for alliances in
which one DEMO plays a dominant role.
Whereas in a merger/acquisition it is accept-
able for one organizational culture to prevail, in
alliances this is rarely so, for partners in alli-
ances are still independent firms so that both
are concerned about losing their own organiza-
tional identity in a DEMO alliance. Thus, the
challenge is to make cultural blending work,
DEMO largely preserving the separate cultures.
Furthermore, there are certain organizational
cultures DEMO are inherently discordant, such as
the rigid form of large organizations DEMO the
flexible one of small firms.
Despite the difficulties, managing culture DEMO
critical, particularly owing to a lack of alterna-
tive effective control DEMO in alliances.
As we mentioned earlier, goal setting and struc-
tural DEMO are useful, but the degree of
goal incongruence and task complexity DEMO
well require a higher level of control in alli-
ances. Therefore, DEMO a certain extent, blending
organizational cultures offers an attractive al-
ternative. DEMO key seems to be in the socializa-
tion and training of alliance managers. Social-
ization provides much-needed interaction
among managers from both sides, thus enabling
managers to familiarize themselves with their
partner's organizational culture. Such DEMO
interaction helps develop common values and
norms for the alliance.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
One of the key questions for partners in stra-
tegic alliances is DEMO to trust or to control.
The major theme here is that trust and control
are two alternative sources in developing confi-
dence in partner DEMO, although the two
are not linked by a simple complementary rela-
DEMO In this article we have proposed an
integrated framework of trust and control for
developing a firm's confidence in partner coop-
eration in DEMO alliances.
We first examined, at some length, the notion
of confidence in partner cooperation in a strate-
gic alliance, defined as a firm's perceived cer-
tainty about satisfactory partner cooperation.
We also discussed how DEMO notion of confidence
508
Academy of Management Review
in partner cooperation is conceptually different
from DEMO, which relates to the trustor's positive
expectations about the motives DEMO the trustee.
One distinction, among others, between trust
and confidence is that of expectations of mo-
tives as against perceptions of certainty about
DEMO behavior. Since partners recognize
strategic alliances as potential arenas for op-
portunistic behavior, the significance of confi-
dence in partner cooperation seems clear for the
formation and management of alliances.
Second, we discussed how trust and control
are two distinct sources of confidence in partner
cooperation. After conceptually DEMO
trust and control as two parallel concepts, we
examined them in DEMO integrated manner. Al-
though some theorists have suggested that trust
is itself a control mechanism, we have found the
existing literature to be unclear on this point
and have argued that trust cannot be a control
DEMO, if both trust and control are defined
restrictively for increased clarity. DEMO have de-
fined trust here as a positive expectation about
others' DEMO, and control as the process of
regulating others' behavior to make it more pre-
dictable. The confusion in the literature stems
from authors DEMO the terms, perhaps unwit-
tingly, as if they were causally linked within an
implied complementary straightjacket.
A more appropriate construction of the rela-
DEMO, we have contended, would be of a sup-
plementary character—flexible and open end-
ed—which would disentangle the tightly
coupled conception of the trust-control DEMO
ship evident in the literature, thereby facilitat-
ing the consideration of DEMO two concepts on
their own terms. This, of course, recognizes the
possibility of substituting one concept for the
other (given a specific desired level of confi-
dence), but without the obvious limitations of a
DEMO complementary relationship between
the two. Such an uncoupled conception of trust
and control in the development of confidence in
partner cooperation enables us to DEMO the
significant issue of the two concepts interacting
to supplement each other in special ways. That
is, in a particular alliance situation, the DEMO
concepts can be developed in parallel, but with
due regard to DEMO interactive effects should the
need arise for increased confidence in partner
cooperation.
Third, by uncoupling the implied complemen-
tary linkage between trust and control that per-
vades the literature, we were able to explore the
relationship between trust level and control
mechanisms, as well as the moderating role of
trust level in control. We suggested that al-
though trust and DEMO are parallel concepts,
they are not completely independent in the
sense of being isolated from each other. In fact,
the deployment of DEMO mechanisms may ei-
ther enhance or undermine the trust level, de-
DEMO on the specific type of control mecha-
nisms partners use. Furthermore, DEMO suggested
that trust level plays a moderating role between
control mechanisms and control level. In other
words, we proposed that trust level will facili-
tate the deployment of control mechanisms,
even though some of these DEMO mechanisms
may be suggestive of a lack of trust.
Fourth, in DEMO these relationships, we
discussed some of the complexities introduced
by the DEMO of alliance types. Adopting a con-
tingent approach, we examined three DEMO
types of alliances in terms oi the roles of trust,
control, and confidence level. It appears that,
whereas the basic roles of these constructs we
delineate in this article can be generalized
across alliance DEMO, the specifics of each con-
struct can differ fairly widely because DEMO the
structural differences among strategic alliance
types. For instance, the requisite DEMO oi confi-
dence in partner cooperation appears to be high
in JVs, compared to only a relatively low level
for nonequity alliances.
Fifth, DEMO systematically addressed the issues
of trust building and control mechanisms in
strategic alliances. For trust building in alli-
ances, we discussed four key techniques; (1) risk
taking, (2) equity preservation, (3) communica-
tion, and (4) interfirm adaptation. We also dis-
cussed three key control mechanisms in strate-
gic alliances: (1) goal setting, (2) structural
specifications, and (3) organizational culture
blending. This discussion should DEMO us to bet-
ter understand the various alternatives for de-
veloping confidence in partner cooperation.
Finally, regarding future research based on
this integrative examination of trust and control
in developing confidence in partner cooperation
in strategic DEMO, we see one area that
seems particularly promising (but that we have
not addressed here). Some scholars have sug-
gested that the DEMO combination of trust
building and control mechanisms depends on
their respective costs. The conventional wisdom
1998
Das and Teng
509
is that one should employ control mechanisms
DEMO adequate trust is wanting. The assump-
tion underlying this argument is that trust is
ostensibly something of a static phenomenon. In
fact, as we have tried to show, trust can (and
should) be developed whenever it is deemed
appropriate. However, trust building can be
costly, for DEMO organizational re-
sources are necessary, in some form or other.
Thus, we believe it would be of interest to ex-
plore the calculus DEMO optimal combinations of
trust and control in developing confidence
through a detailed analysis of the relative costs
oi trust building and control mechanisms. To
DEMO end, our discussion on specific trust-
building techniques and control mechanisms
DEMO provide a useful starting point.
Borch, O. J. 1994. The process DEMO relational contracting: De-
veloping trust-based strategic alliances among small
business enterprises. DEMO in Strategic Manage-
ment lOB: 113-135,
Bowman, E, H., & Hurry, D, 1993, Strategy through the option
lens: An DEMO view of resource investments and
the incremental-choice process. Academy of Manage-
ment fieview, 18: 760-782.
Bradach, J. L, & Eccles, R. G. 1989, Price, authority, and trust:
From ideal types to plural forms. Annual Review of
Sociology. 15:97-118.
Buckley, P. J,, & Casson, M. 1988. A theory of cooperation in
international business. In F. I- Contractor & P. Lorange
(Eds.). Cooperative strategies in internationai business:
31-53. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Chesbrough, H, R., & Teece, D. J. 1996. Organizing for inno-
vation. Harvard Business Review. 74(1): 65-73.
Coleman, J. S. 1990, Foundations of social theory. DEMO,
MA: Harvard University Press,
Creed, W, E. D., & Miles, R. E, 1996, Trust in organizations: A
conceptual DEMO linking organizational forms,
managerial philosophies, and the opportunity costs of
DEMO In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust DEMO
organizations; Fronfiers of theory and research: 16-38.
Thousand Oaks. CA: DEMO,
Cullen. J, B., Johnson, J. L,, & Sakano, T, 1995. Japanese and
local partner commitment to IJVs: Psychological conse-
DEMO of outcomes and investments in the IJV rela-
tionship. Journal of International Business Studies. 26:
91-115.
Cummings, L. L., & Bromiley, P. 1996. The organizational trust
inventory (OTI). In R. M, Kramer DEMO T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust
in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research: 302-
330. Thousand Oaks. CA: Sage,
Currall, S. C . 8f Judge. T, A, 1995, Measuring trust between
organizational boundary role persons. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 64: 151-170,
Das, T, K. 1989. Organizational control: An evolutionary per-
spective. Journal oi Management Studies, 26: 459-475.
Das, T, K, 1993, DEMO multiple paradigm approach to organiza-
tional control. /nternotionaJ /ournai oi Organizational
Analysis. 1: 385-403.
Das, T, K,, & Teng, B. DEMO Risk types and inter-firm alliance
structures. Journal oi Management Studies, 33: 827-843.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. 1997a. Sustaining strategic alliances:
Options and guidelines. Journal oi General Manage-
ment. 22(4): DEMO,
Das, T. K., & Teng. B. 1997b. The dialectics oi strategic alli-
ances. Paper presented at the annual meeting ol the
Academy DEMO Management, Boston, MA.
Das, T. K.. & Teng. B, 1998a. Resource and risk monagement
in the strategic alliance making process. Journal oi DEMO
agement, 24: 21-42.
Das. T. K,, 8f Teng. B. 1998b, The risk oi trust: A conceptual
analysis. Paper to be presented DEMO the annual meeting oi
the Academy ol Management, San Diego, CA.
REFERENCES
Adams, J. S. 1963. Toward an understanding of inequity.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67: 422-436.
Argyris. C. 1952. The impact DEMO budgets on people. New York:
ControUership Foundation.
Arino, A. 1997. DEMO and commitment: Cooperative be-
havior in first-time collaborative ventures. In P. DEMO
Beamish 8f J. P. Killing (Eds.), Cooperafive strategies: Vol.
2. European perspectives: 215-241. San Francisco: New
Lexington Press.
Arrow, K. J. 1972. Gifts and exchanges. Philosophy and Public
Aliairs. I: 343-362.
Aulakh, DEMO S.. Kotabe, M., & Sahay, A. 1997. Trust and perfor-
DEMO in cross-border marketing partnerships. In P. W.
Beamish & J. P. Killing (Eds.), Cooperative strategies: Vol.
1, North American perspectives: 163-196. DEMO Francisco:
New Lexington Press.
Barney, J. B., & Hansen, DEMO, H. 1994, Trustworthiness as a
source ol competitive advantage. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 15(Winter Special Issue): 175-216.
Beamish, P, 1988. Multinational joint ventures in developing
countries. London: Routledge.
Bhide. A., & DEMO, H. 1992. Trust, uncertainty, and profit,
/ournai of Socio-Economics, 21: 191-208.
Bleeke, ]., & Ernst. D. 1991. The way DEMO win cross-border
alliances, Harvard Business Review. 69(6): 127-135.
Bleeke, J., & Ernst, D. t995. Is your strategic alliance really a
DEMO? Harvard Business Review. 73(1): 97-105.
Blodgett. L. L. 1991, Partner contributions as predictors of
equity share in international joint ventures. Journal DEMO
/nfernah'onai Business Studies, 22: 63-78.
Boon, S, D,, & Holmes, J. G. 1991. The dynamics of interper-
sonal trust: Resolving uncertainty in the face of risk. In
R. A, Hinde & J, Groebel (Eds.). Cooperation and proso-
cial behavior: 190-211. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
510
Academy of Management Review
July
Dasgupta, P. 1988. Trust as a commodity. In D. Gambetta
(Ed,), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations:
49-72, New York: Basil Blackwell.
Deutsch, M. 1962. Trust, trustworthiness, and the F Scale.
Journal o/ Abnormal and Social Psychology' 61: 138-140.
Deutsch, M. 1973. The resolution of contlict: Constructive DEMO
destructive processes. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Doz, Y. DEMO 1996. The evolution oi cooperation in strategic
alliances: Initial conditions or DEMO processes? Stra-
tegic Management Journal, 17(Summei Special Issue):
DEMO
Eisenhardt, K. M. 1985. Control: Organizational and eco-
nomic approaches. Management Science, 31: 134-149.
Flamholtz, E. G., Das, T. K., & Tsui, A. S. 1985. Toward an
integrative Iramework of organizational control. DEMO
counting, Organizations and Society, 10: 35-50.
Gabarro, J. J. 1978. The development of trust, iniluence, and
expectations. In A. Athos & DEMO J. Gabarro (Eds.), Interper-
sonal behavior: Communication and understanding in
relationships: 290-303. Englewood Clifis, NI: Prentice-
Hall.
Gambetta, D. 1988. DEMO we trust trust? In D. Gambetta (Ed.),
Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations: 213-
237. New York: Basil Blackweil.
Geringer, J. M., & Hebert, L 1989. Control and performance of
international DEMO ventures. Journal ol International
Business Studies. 20: 235-254.
Goold, M., & Campbell, A. 1987. Strategies and styles: The
role ot the centre in managing diversified corporations.
Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell.
Goold, M,. & Quinn, ]. J. 1990. The paradox ol strategic con-
trols. Strategic Management /ournai, 11: 43-57.
Granovetter, M. 1985. Economic action and DEMO structure:
The problem oi embeddedness. American Journal ol So-
ciology. 91: 481-510.
Gulati, R. 1995. Does familiarity breed trust? The implication
of repeated ties for contractual choice in alliances.
Academy of Management Journal. 38: 85-112.
Gulati, R., Khanna. T., & Nohria. N. 1994. Unilateral commit-
ments and the importance ot process in alliances. Sloan
Management Review. 35(DEMO): 61-70.
Hallen. L.. Johanson, J., & Seyed-Mohamed. N. 1991. Interiirm
adaptation in business relationships. Journal of Market-
ing. 55(2): 29-37.
DEMO, G. 1991. Competition for competence and inter-
partner learning within international DEMO alli-
ances. Strategic Management Journal, I2(Summei Spe-
cial Issue): DEMO
Hamel, G.. Doz, Y. L., & Prahalad, C. K. 1989. Collaborate with
your competitors—and win. Harvard Business Review,
67(1): DEMO,
Harrigan, K. R., & Newman, W. H. 1990. Bases DEMO interorgani-
zation co-operation: Propensity, power, persistence.
Journal ot Management Studies. DEMO: 417-434.
Hart. P., & Saunders. C. 1997. Power and trust: DEMO factors
in the adoption and use of electronic data interchange.
Organizafion Science, 8: 23-42.
Heide, ]. B., & John. G. 1992. Do DEMO matter in marketing
relationships? Journal ot Marketing, 56(2): 32-44.
Hennart. J,-F.. & Reddy. S. 1997. The choice between mergers/
DEMO and joint ventures: The case oi Japanese
investors in the United DEMO Strategic Management
Journal. 18: 1-12.
Hosmer, L. T. 1995. Trust: DEMO connecting link between or-
ganizational theory and philosophical ethics. Academy
of Management Review, 20: 379-403.
Inkpen, A. C , & Beamish. P. W. 1997. Knowledge, bargaining
power, and the instability of international joint ven-
DEMO Academy ot Management Review. 22: 177-202.
Inkpen. A. C , St DEMO, S. C. 1997. International joint venture
trust: An empirical examination. In P. W. Beamish & J. P.
Killing (Eds.). Cooperative strategies; DEMO 1. North Amer-
ican perspectives: 308-334. San Francisco: New Lexing-
ton Press.
Johnson, J. L., Cullen, J. B., Sakano, T., & Takenouchi, H. 1997.
Setting the stage for trust and strategic integration DEMO
Iapanese-U,S, cooperative alliances. In P. W. Beamish &
J, DEMO Kiiling (Eds.), Cooperative strategies: Vol. 1. North
American perspectives; DEMO San Francisco: New
Lexington Press.
Johnson, J. P, 1997, Procedural justice perceptions among
international joint venture managers. In P, W. Beamish
& I, P. Killing (Eds.), Cooperative strategies: Vol. 1. North
American perspectives: 197-226, San Francisco: New
Lexington Press.
Johnson-George, C . & Sv/ap, W, C. 1982, Measurement of
specific interpersonal trust: Construction and validation
of a scale to assess trust in a specific DEMO Journal of
Personaiitjr and SociaJ Psychology. 43: 1306-1317,
Joskow, P, L. 1987. Contract duration and relationship-
specific investments: Empirical evidence from DEMO mar-
kets. American Economic Review, 77: 168-185,
Kanter. R. M. 1994. Collaborative advantage: The art oi alli-
ances. Harvard Business Review, DEMO(4): 96-108,
Kee. H. W.. & Knox, R. E. DEMO Conceptual and methodolog-
ical considerations in the study oi trust and suspicion.
Journal ol Conflict Resolution. 14: 357-366.
Killing, J. P. 1988. Understanding DEMO: The role of task
and organizational complexity. In F, J, DEMO & P.
Lorange (Eds.). Cooperative strategies in international
business: 55-68. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books,
Kirsch. L. J. 1996. The management DEMO complex tasks in or-
ganizations: Controlling the systems development pro-
cess. DEMO Science, 7: 1-21.
Kogut, B, 1989. The stability of joint ventures: Reciprocity and
competitive rivalry. Journal ot Industrial Economics,
38(2): 183-198.
Koot, W. T. M. 1988. Underlying dilemmas in the manage-
ment of international joint ventures. In F, J. Contractor &
P, Lorange (Eds,). Cooperative strafegries in international
business: 347-368. Lexington, DEMO: Lexington Books,
Korsgaard, M. A., Schweiger, D. M.. & Sapienza, H, J. 1995.
1998
Das and Teng
Building commitment, attachment, and trust in strategic
DEMO teams: The role of procedural justice.
Academy of Management Journal. 38: 60-84.
Kumar. N. 1996. The power of trust in manufacturer-retailer
relationships. Harvard DEMO Beview, 74(6): 92-iOS,
Lane, C , & Bachmann. R, 1996, The social constitution oi
trust: Supplier relations in Britain and Germany. Or-
ganizafion Studies. 17: 385-395,
Larson, A, 1992. Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: A
study oi the governance of exchange relationships. Ad-
ministrative Science Quarterly. 37: 76-104,
Lecraw, D. J. DEMO, Bargaining power, ownership, and profit-
ability of transnational corporations in DEMO
countries. Journal of International Business Studies. 15:
27-43,
Leifer, DEMO, & Mills, P, K. 1996, An information processing
approach for deciding upon control strategies and re-
ducing control loss in emerging organizations. DEMO
of Management, 22: 113-137.
Lewicki. R. J,, & Bunker, DEMO B. 1996. Developing and maintain-
ing trust in work relationships. In R, M. Kramer & T, R.
Tyler (Eds), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory
and research: 114-139. Thousand Oaks. CA: Sage.
Locke, E, A., & Latham. G. P. 1984, Goal-setting: A motiva-
tional technique that works. Englewood Cliffs. NJ: Pren-
tice-HaU.
Luhmann, N. DEMO Trust and power. Chichester, England:
Wiley.
Luhmann. N. 1988, Familiarity, confidence, trust: Problems
and alternatives. In D. Gambetta (Ed.), DEMO: Making
and breaking cooperative relations: 94-107. New York:
Basil Blackweil.
Lyles, M. A., & Reger, R. K. 1993. Managing for autonomy in
joint ventures: A longitudinal study of upward influence.
Journal of Management Studies, 30: 383-404.
Macneil, 1. R. 1980. The new social contract. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press,
Madhok, A. 1995, Revisiting multinational firms' tolerance
for joint ventures: A trust-based approach. Journal DEMO
International Business Studies, 26: 117-137,
Maitland, I., Bryson. J.. & Van de Ven, A. 1985, Sociologists,
economists, and opportunism. Academy of Management
Review. 10: 59-65,
Mayer, R, C . & Davis. J. H, 1996, Opening the black box ot
trust DEMO management: Can trust levels be managed?
Paper presented at the DEMO meeting of the Academy
of Management. Cincinnati, OH.
Mayer. R. C , Davis, J, H., & Schoorman. F, D. 1995, An DEMO
grative model of organizational trust. Academy ot Man-
agement Review, 20: 709-734,
McAllister. D, J, 1995. Affect- and cognition-based trust as
DEMO for interpersonal cooperation in organiza-
tions. Academy of Management Journal, 38: 24-59.
Merchant, K. A. 1984. ControJ in business organizations.
Marshfield. MA: DEMO Publishing,
Mjoen. H.. & Tallman. S. 1997. Control and performance in
511
international joint ventures. Organization Science, 8:
257-274.
Mohr. J., & Spekman. R. 1994. Characteristics of partnership
success: Partnership attributes, communication behav-
ior, and conflict resolution techniques. Strategic Man-
agement Journal. 15: 135-152.
DEMO C . Zaltman. G., & Deshpande. R, 1992. Relation-
ships between providers and users of market research:
The dynamics of trust within DEMO between organiza-
tions. Journal ot Marketing Research, 29: 314-328.
Mowery, DEMO C , Oxley. J. E., & Silverman, B. S, 1996. DEMO
alliances and interfirm knowledge transfer. Strategic
Management/ournai, 17(Winter Special DEMO: 77-91,
Nahavandi, A., & Malekzadeh. A. R. 1988. Acculturation DEMO
mergers and acquisitions. Academy ot Management Re-
view. 13: 79-90.
Neale, M. A., 8E Bazerman, M. H. 1992. Negotiator cognition
and rationality: A behavioral decision theory perspec-
tive. Organizationai Behavior and Human Decision Pro-
DEMO 51: 157-175.
Nooteboom, B,, Berger, H., & Noorderhaven. N. 1997. Effects of
trust and governance on relational risk. Academy of
Management DEMO 40: 308-338.
Oliver, C. 1990. Determinants of interorganizational relation-
ships: DEMO and future directions. Academy ot
Management Review. 15: 241-265.
O'Reilly, C. A., & Chatman, J. A. 1996, Culture a s social
control: Corporations, cults, and commitment. Research
in Organizational Behavior, 18: 157-200.
Osbom. R. N.. & Baughn, C, C, 1990, Forms DEMO interorganiza-
tional governance for multinational alliances. Academy
ot Management Journal. 33: DEMO
Ouchi, W, G. 1979. A conceptual framework for the design of
organizational control mechanisms. Management Sci-
ence. 25: 833-848.
Park, S. H.. & Husso. M. V. 1996. When competition eclipses
cooperation: An event history DEMO of joint venture
failure. Management Science, 42: 875-890,
Parkhe, DEMO, 1993. Strategic alliance structuring: A game the-
ory and transaction cost examination of interiirm coop-
eration. Academy of Management Journal. 36: 794-829.
Provan, K. G. 1993, Embeddedness, Interdependence, and
opportunism in organizational supplier-buyer DEMO
Journal ot Management. 19: 841-858.
Provan, K, G.. & Skinner, S. J. 1989. Interorganizational de-
pendence and control a s predictors of DEMO in
dealer-supplier relations. Academy of Management
Journal. 32: 202-212.
Rempel, ], K., Holmes, J, G., & Zanna. M. P. 1985. Trust in close
relationships, /ournai ot Personality and SociaJ Psychol-
ogy, 49:95-112.
Ring, P. S.. & Van de Ven. A. H. 1992. Structuring cooperative
relationships between organizations. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 13: 483-498.
Ring, DEMO, S,, & Van de Ven. A. H. 1994. Developmental pro-
512
Academy of Management Review
luly
cesses of cooperative interorganizational relationships.
Academy DEMO Management Review, 19: 90-118.
Sabel, C. F, 1993, Studied DEMO: Building new iorms of coop-
eration in a volatile economy. Human DEMO 46:
1133-1170.
Sankar. C, S,, Boulton, W. R.. Davidson, N. W., Snyder, C. A.,
& Ussery. R. W. 1995. Building a world-class alliance:
The Universal Card^TSYS case. Academy ot Manage-
DEMO Executive. 9(2): 20-29.
Schaan. J. L, 1983. Parent control DEMO joint venture success:
The case ot Mexico. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
University of Western Ontario, Canada.
Sheppard. B. H.. & Tuchinsky, M. 1996. DEMO and the
network organization. In R. M. Kramer & T, R. DEMO (Eds.),
Trust in organizations: Frontiers ot theory and research:DEMO
140-165. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Simon, H. 1957, Administrative behavior (2nd ed.). New York:
Free Press.
Simons, R, 1991. Strategic orientation and top management
attention to control systems. Strategic Management
Journal, 12: 49-62.
Sitkin, S. B, 1995, On the positive effect DEMO legalization on
trust. Research on Negotiation in Organizafions, 5 185-
217.
DEMO S. B., & Pablo, A. L. 1992. Reconceptualizing the deter-
minants of risk behavior. Academy ot Management Re-
view. 17: 9-38.
Sitkin, DEMO B.. & Roth, N. L, 1993. Explaining the limited effec-
tiveness oi legalistic "remedies" ior trust/distrust. Or-
ganization Science. 4: 367-392.
Sitkin. S. B,, & Stickel, D. 1996. The road to hell: The dynamics
of distrust in an era of quality. In R, DEMO Kramer & T. R,
Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers ot theory
and research: 196-215. Thousand Oaks. CA: Sage.
Sitkin, S. B.. Sutcliffe, K. M,, & Schroeder, R. G. 1994. DEMO
guishing control Jrom learning in total quality manage-
ment: A contingency DEMO Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 19: 537-564.
Sitkin, S. B,, 8E Weingart, L. R, 1995, Determinants of risky
decision-making behavior: A test oi the mediating role
of risk perceptions and propensity. Academy DEMO Manage-
ment Journal, 38: 1573-1592,
Sohn, J. H. D. DEMO, Social knowledge as a control system: A
proposition and evidence irom the Japanese FDI behav-
ior. Journal oi International Business Studies. 25: 295-324.
Stafford. E. R, 1994, Using co-operative strategies to make
alliances work. DEMO Range Planning. 27(3): 64-74.
Strickland. L. H, 1958. Surveillance DEMO trust. 7ouma/ of Per-
sonality, 26: 200-215.
Teece. D, J. 1992, Competition, cooperation, and innovation:
Organizational arrangements ior regimes of rapid tech-
nological progress. Journal ot Economic Behavior and
Organization. 18: 1-25.
Thomas. J, B., & Trevino. L. K. 1993. Information processing in
DEMO alliance building: A multiple-case approach,
/ournai of Management Studies. 30: 779-814,
Trice, H., & Beyer, J. 1993. The cultures DEMO work organizations.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Vryza, M.. & Fryxell. DEMO E, 1997. The interaction of trust and
control mechanisms in the DEMO ot successtul
international joint ventures. Paper presented at the an-
nual meeting of the Academy of Management, Boston,
MA.
Wilkoi, M. V., Brown. D. W., & Seisky. J. W. 1995. When stories
are different: The influence of corporate culture mis-
matches on interorganizational relations. Journal ot Ap-
plied Behavioral Science, 31: 373-388.
Williamson, O, E. 1975. DEMO and hierarchies: Analysis
and antitrust implications. New York: Free Press,
Williamson, O. E. 1983. Credible commitments: Using hos-
tages to support DEMO, American Economic Review,
73: 519-540,
Williamson, O. E. DEMO The economic institutions of capital-
ism. New York: Free Press.
Williamson. DEMO E. 1993. Calculativeness, trust, and economic
organization. Journal ot Law & Economics. 36: 453-486.
Yan, A.. & Gray, B. 1994. Bargaining power, management
control, and performance in United States-China joint
ventures: A comparative case study. Academy ot Man-
agement Journal 37: 1478-1517.
Yoshino, M, Y.. & Rangan, U, S. 1995, Strategic alliances: An
entrepreneurial DEMO to globalization. Boston: Har-
vard Business School Press.
Zaheer. A., & Venkatraman, N. 1995. Relational governance
a s an interorganizational strategy: An DEMO test of
the role oi trust in economic exchange. Strategic Man-
agement Journal 18: 373-392.
Zand, D, E, 1972. Trust and managerial DEMO solving.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 17: 229-239.
Zucker. L. G. 1986, DEMO of trust: Institutional sources of
economic structure, 1840-1920. Research in Organiza-
tional Behavior, 8: 53-111.
T. K. Das is professor of strategic DEMO and area coordinator (strategic man-
agement and business & society) at the Zicklin School oi Business, Baruch College.
City University oi New York. He received his Ph.D. in management from the University
of California at DEMO Angeles. His current research interests include strategic alliances,
strategy making, DEMO temporal studies in management and organization.
Bing-Sheng Teng is a doctoral candidate in strategic management at the City Uni-
versity of New York. His DEMO interests include strategic alliances and risk be-
havior.
{1g42fwefx}