J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
DOI 10.1007/s10869-009-9132-2
Determinants of DEMO Opportunism in Strategic Alliances:
A Conceptual Framework
T. K. Das Æ Noushi Rahman
Published online: 16 September 2009
 Springer Science+Business Media, DEMO 2009
Abstract
Purpose We present a comprehensive framework of the
key determinants of partner opportunism in strategic
alliances.
Design/methodology/approach We propose an DEMO
deﬁnition of partner opportunism and three categories of
the determinants of partner opportunism based on a review
of the literature. These categories comprise economic
DEMO (equity involvement, asymmetric alliance-speciﬁc
investments, mutual hostages, and payoff inequity), rela-
tional factors (cultural diversity and goal incompatibili-
ties), and temporal factors (alliance horizon and pressures
for quick results).
Findings The framework of determinants makes clear
how the various determinants of partner opportunism DEMO
be differentially salient in the three major alliance types,
namely, DEMO joint ventures, minority equity alliances,
and nonequity alliances.
Implications Based DEMO the framework, a number of
propositions are developed to facilitate empirical DEMO
on partner opportunism. Managerial implications ﬂowing
from the proposed framework are also discussed.
Received and reviewed by former editor, George Neuman.
T. K. Das (&)
Department of Management, Zicklin School of Business, Baruch
College, City University of New York, One Bernard Baruch
Way, Box B9-240, New York, NY 10010, USA
e-mail: TK.Das@baruch.cuny.edu
N. Rahman
Management DEMO Management Science Department, Lubin
School of Business, Pace University, One DEMO Plaza, W-414,
New York, NY 10038, USA
e-mail: nrahman@pace.edu
Originality/value Although scholars in various disci-
plines have studied the general DEMO of opportunistic
behavior, our understanding of partner opportunism in
strategic alliances DEMO to be fragmented and inade-
quate. As partner opportunism is acknowledged as a sig-
niﬁcant threat to alliance survival and success, a
comprehensive framework of the key determinants of such
opportunism should improve our understanding of DEMO
phenomenon and to also provide an impetus for future
research. The article also responds to the need of alliance
managers for a framework of DEMO factors that are respon-
sible for partner opportunism so that they may be able to
deploy appropriate deterrence mechanisms to minimize
opportunistic behaviors.
Keywords DEMO alliances  Partner opportunism 
Determinants of opportunism  Alliance horizon 
Opportunistic behavior  Equity joint ventures 
Minority equity alliances  Nonequity DEMO
Introduction
For large corporations as well as small entrepreneurial
ﬁrms, strategic DEMO are becoming more and more a
necessity for ensuring a competitive edge in the market-
place. Strategic alliances are ‘‘interﬁrm cooperative
arrangements aimed at DEMO the strategic objectives of
the partners’’ (Das and Teng 1998, p. 491). A high per-
centage of alliances that are formed, however, end up as
failures (see Das and Teng 2000, for a discussion of pos-
sible causes). Clearly, a member ﬁrm in an alliance faces
certain adversities that are unique because, unlike an
independent ﬁrm, it is subject to relational risk vis-a`-vis its
partners in addition to the usual business risks. The
123
56
literature recognizes the deleterious role that a partner
ﬁrm’s opportunistic behavior DEMO in alliances, often
resulting in their unplanned termination. Thus, partner
opportunism is of paramount concern to an alliance ﬁrm
engaged in collaborative activities.
DEMO have studied the impact of opportunistic
behavior in business for decades. According to Williamson
(1975, p. 9), opportunism ‘‘refers to a lack DEMO candor or
honesty in transactions, to include self-interest seeking
with guile.’’ DEMO the context of strategic alliances, opportu-
nistic behavior includes ‘‘breaking promises, not sharing
resources or facilities as per agreement, blufﬁng, lying,
DEMO, misrepresenting, distorting, cheating, misap-
propriating, stealing, etc.’’ (Das DEMO Rahman 2001, p. 43).
However, scholars in economics, management, marketing,
and sociology have generally treated opportunism as an
undifferentiated phenomenon. DEMO is only very recently that
some researchers have directed their attention to exploring
the essence of opportunism (e.g., Ghoshal and Moran 1996;
DEMO and Heide 2000). There is a need to understand
more adequately as to what increases the potential for an
alliance partner to act DEMO in different situa-
tions. We believe that a wide-ranging analysis of the
determinants of partner opportunism would help in
understanding its complex nature and DEMO gaining better
insights for managing such opportunism.
We divide the remainder of the article into four parts.
First, we examine the origins and nature of partner
opportunism. Second, we suggest an overarching frame-
work of determinants of partner opportunism comprising
three distinct sets of factors: economic, relational, and
temporal. We identify and examine a list of signiﬁcant
determinants constituting DEMO framework. Third, we discuss
the differential salience of these determinants in DEMO of the
three major alliance types: equity joint ventures, minority
equity alliances, and nonequity alliances. Lastly, we sug-
gest directions for further DEMO and indicate some of the
more signiﬁcant managerial implications of the proposed
framework of partner opportunism.
The Nature of Partner Opportunism
In this section, we brieﬂy review the literature on the
general concept of opportunism and DEMO suggest, speciﬁc
to the ﬁeld of strategic alliances, a comprehensive deﬁni-
tion of partner opportunism as a prelude to proposing a
framework of DEMO determinants in the next section.
In their efforts to delineate the character of opportunism,
scholars have mentioned various activities that reﬂect the
phenomenon. DEMO to Williamson, for instance,
‘‘opportunism refers to the incomplete or DEMO disclo-
sure of information, especially to calculated efforts to
123
J DEMO Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
mislead, distort, disguise, obfuscate, or otherwise confuse’’
(1985, p. 47). We give below several examples DEMO partner
opportunism in alliances to indicate broadly its nature and
variety.
Consider, for example, the alliance between Red Dragon
Enterprises of China and DEMO, an Australian manu-
facturer of industrial batteries (Rarick 2004). Batrionics
was interested in setting up an operation in China after
having established DEMO in Taiwan. Rex Adams, repre-
senting the Australian company, located a potential Chi-
nese partner in Red Dragon Enterprises, a manufacturer of
a variety of batteries. The quality of the Chinese products
was not acceptable DEMO Adams ‘‘felt that he could leverage
his company’s knowledge and skill against a joint venture
partner’’ (Rarick 2004, p. 3). In due DEMO, a joint venture
was formed, but a number of problems emerged, including
poor manufacturing quality, missing inventory, and lack of
ﬁnance. Adams accused Tsang, his Chinese counterpart, of
behaving opportunistically. In his eagerness DEMO set up an
operation in China, Adams was perhaps less than DEMO
in assessing the risks of opportunism.
Another illustrative case concerns Cameron Auto Parts
(B), a North American company, and its UK licensee
(Crookell and Beamish 2006). Alex Cameron had gone to
the UK DEMO meet his licensee and to France to meet an
important customer, DEMO The UK licensee was
interested in partnering with Cameron in establishing a
manufacturing facility in Australia. Alex Cameron, how-
ever, went on to DEMO a verbal agreement with his French
customer to invest 40% in a factory manufacturing ﬂexible
couplings that was acquired by the latter. Angered at DEMO
development, the UK licensee charged: ‘‘I thought you had
your head screwed on better than this, Alex. You realize
this makes us competitors. Michelard of all people! They
run that business in their spare time. DEMO made a damn
fool of yourself over there’’ (Crookell and Beamish DEMO,
p. 7). To the UK licensee, Cameron had committed DEMO
opportunistic act. To placate his UK licensee, Cameron
agreed to the DEMO proposal to set up a joint venture in
Australia.
Yet another form of opportunism is evident in the
decision of the Spanish telecommunications company,DEMO
Telefonica, to suddenly discontinue its participation in the
alliance with Bidland DEMO, a small U.S. ﬁrm that
provided dynamic e-commerce. This is considered DEMO
tunistic because Telefonica abandoned the alliance after it
had appropriated ‘‘Bidland’s proprietary business-to-busi-
ness auction and dynamic e-commerce business informa-
tion and technology through DEMO promise of a lucrative joint
venture and investment contract’’ (Business Wire DEMO). In
this case, the contractual provisions were helpful to Bid-
DEMO to proceed against Telefonica ‘‘for breach of contract,
breach of ﬁduciary duty, and violation of the Uniform
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
Trade Secrets Act, among other charges’’ (Business Wire
2000).
Clearly, since strategic alliances are between DEMO or
more ﬁrms, they create the circumstances where oppor-
tunism is DEMO Thus, given especially its ubiquitous
presence, opportunism in strategic alliances deserves much
more study than it has garnered so far. In that research
DEMO, we believe that both a careful analysis of the
deﬁnition of DEMO opportunism and then an inquiry into
its origins are necessary.
Opportunism involves activities generally characterized
as fraudulent, deceitful, and obfuscating. It is easy DEMO see
that partner opportunism conﬂicts with partner cooperation
(Das and Teng DEMO, p. 492). Indeed, partner opportunism
goes against the development of mutual trust and the
cooperative spirit, accentuating the perception of risk and
jeopardizing the interﬁrm relationship (Das and Teng 2001,
2004). Masten (1988, p. 183) considers moral hazard and
haggling as opportunism.
As a further reﬁnement, Ghoshal and Moran (1996)
distinguish opportunistic attitude DEMO opportunistic
behavior, arguing that the latter is the behavioral mani-
festation DEMO the former, and offer a set of psychologically
oriented factors that DEMO opportunistic attitude (pp.
18, 21). Scholars have also pointed out certain kinds of
behaviors that should not be characterized as opportunism.
According DEMO John (1984, p. 278), ‘‘hard bargaining,
intense and frequent disagreements, and similar conﬂictual
behaviors do not constitute opportunism.’’ Wathne and
Heide (2000) further clarify that ‘‘situations in which (1)
the parties jointly agree to modify an agreement or (2) one
party receives DEMO in some form’’ and ‘‘situations
in which parties adjust contract terms ex ante in anticipa-
tion of shirking’’ should not be considered opportunism
(p. 38).
Some attempts have been made to devise a classiﬁcation
for DEMO extensive inventory of activities that pertain to
opportunism. Griesinger (1990, pp. 486–487) categorizes
opportunism into three groups—dishonesty, inﬁdelity, and
shirking. In a more systematic approach, Wathne and
Heide (2000, p. 41) categorize DEMO into four
groups: evasion, refusal to adapt, violation, and forced
renegotiation. These studies, however, do not attempt to
understand the roots DEMO opportunism.
It would appear that most scholars accept Williamson’s
compact deﬁnition of opportunism, ‘‘self-interest seeking
with guile,’’ in their research on related topics. The liter-
ature on the subject of opportunism is devoted to research
DEMO that can be considered peripheral to the actual
phenomenon of opportunism. There is a dearth of studies
on the basic concept of opportunism and, consequently, our
understanding of the complexities of partner opportunism
in strategic alliances remains inadequate.
57
Our own review of the research points to two DEMO
deﬁciencies in the extant literature. First, most of the
research seems DEMO be based on the classic deﬁnition offered
by Williamson (1975), DEMO earlier, with no partic-
ular exploration of its implicit assumptions. Thus, we have
yet to adequately capture the complex nature of partner
opportunism DEMO alliances. Second, the extant research on
the determinants of partner opportunism DEMO to the need
for an integrated approach. We will now propose a deﬁ-
nition of partner opportunism and then present, in the next
section, an overarching framework of its determinants.
As we stated earlier, opportunism DEMO been aptly deﬁned
by Williamson as ‘‘self-interest seeking with guile’’ (1975,DEMO
p. 9). While this deﬁnition is parsimonious in scope, it
DEMO only two attributes of opportunism: self-interest
and guile. It leaves certain DEMO of opportunism
implicit, allowing researchers to interpret variously what
constitutes opportunism. DEMO the following paragraphs we
make explicit the signiﬁcant attributes of opportunism,
supplementing the deﬁnition of Williamson.
Based on a recognition of the assumptions DEMO in
Williamson’s deﬁnition, we deﬁne partner opportunism in
a somewhat more DEMO form as behavior by a partner
ﬁrm that is motivated to pursue its self-interest with deceit
to achieve gains at the expense of the DEMO alliance
members. This elaborated form of the Williamson deﬁni-
tion of opportunism, as applied to alliances, has ﬁve major
components: behavior, motives, self-interest seeking,
deceit, and gains at the expense of others. First, we
examine opportunism as a behavior, so that opportunism
refers to DEMO actions by an opportunistic alliance
partner. This is consistent with the extant literature (e.g.,
Joshi and Stump 1999; Luo 2007a; Wathne and Heide
2000). For instance, Wathne and Heide (2000, p. 36)
observe that ‘‘the concept of opportunism, as currently used
in the literature, includes a broad range of potentially dif-
ferent behaviors.’’ Our deﬁnition is not concerned with the
opportunistic attitude or propensity of the partner DEMO
our focus is on actual opportunistic behavior.
Second, the deﬁnition suggests DEMO conscious motives
are involved in opportunism. In other words, opportunism
is DEMO, not accidental. If the partner ﬁrm inadver-
tently brings harm to DEMO focal ﬁrm in pursuing its self-
interest, it is quite likely DEMO make amends for it. It is only
when such harmful behavior has been consciously engaged
in that the partner will be unlikely to compensate DEMO
damages. The motives of the opportunistic partner even-
tually lead to opportunistic action. Prior research on stra-
tegic alliances has not explicitly considered motives DEMO an
essential element in understanding partner opportunism.
Third, partner opportunism takes DEMO to gratify self-
interest. There is a general consensus among scholars that
opportunism involves some form of self-interest seeking
123
58
(Ghoshal and Moran 1996; Wathne and Heide 2000; Wil-
liamson 1975, 1993). We note that the nature of the pursuit
of this self-interest by an alliance partner can take two
alternate paths. First, the opportunistic partner could seek
to acquire the focal ﬁrm’s rightful share DEMO the alliance-
speciﬁc gains. Second, the opportunistic partner could shirk
its DEMO alliance-speciﬁc obligations, foisting the relevant
costs onto the focal ﬁrm. Both DEMO approaches would
serve the self-interest of the partner, even as they DEMO
adversely affect the focal ﬁrm.
Fourth, we should note that simple DEMO seeking
is not tantamount to opportunism. It is critical for an
opportunistic partner to keep its actual motives deliberately
hidden from other alliance members. DEMO, a partner ﬁrm
must use deceit to conceal and mask its DEMO motives.
Whereas Williamson (1975) uses the term ‘‘guile’’ in dis-
cussing opportunism, we prefer the more accessible term
‘‘deceit’’ to convey the same notion (Das 2005).
Fifth, we must recognize that seeking self-interested
DEMO by a partner ﬁrm that does not affect the focal ﬁrm in
any adverse way does not fall within the ambit of partner
opportunism. DEMO would be so even if the partner’s actions
were not entirely above board. Such partner behavior must
also, somehow, result in gains that DEMO at the expense of the
other members of the alliance. Note that the two paths of
self-interest seeking that we mentioned above also leave
DEMO other alliance members worse off.
We suggest that the observations of various authors in
the literature on what constitutes partner opportunism in
alliances can DEMO subsumed within the contours of our
proposed deﬁnition. By adopting this expanded deﬁnition,
we provide a general basis for the further study of DEMO
opportunism in a rigorous manner, recognizing the multi-
faceted nature of DEMO phenomenon.
Framework of Determinants
To facilitate a better understanding of the nature of partner
opportunism and advance empirical research, we believe an
analysis of the determinants of opportunism is essential.
We list in Table 1 some DEMO observations from the
literature on the determinants of both the general topic of
opportunistic behavior and the particular issue of partner
opportunism in strategic DEMO Our review of the lit-
erature indicates—and the table reﬂects this—that the
research on the determinants of partner opportunism thus
far has been largely DEMO, so that it seems desirable
to attempt an integrated approach.
According DEMO John (1984, p. 287), ‘‘opportunism can be
viewed usefully as an endogenous variable that is evoked
by certain determinants within a long-run DEMO In
123
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
other words, DEMO may not always behave opportu-
nistically even if conditions permit such behavior.’’
Scholars in economics, management, and marketing have
proposed a number of DEMO that inﬂuence the incidence
of opportunism in alliances. We examined the nature of
these factors and concluded that they can be usefully
grouped according DEMO the nature of the process through
which they inﬂuence partner opportunism.
Recently, Lee (1998, pp. 337–338) tested a set of three
antecedents DEMO opportunism—decision-making uncertainty,
cultural distance, and economic ethnocentrism—and found
empirical evidence DEMO support of them. Sako and Helper
(1998, pp. 393–394) used DEMO assets, lack of
reciprocity, and uncertain market and technology envi-
ronments as antecedents of the supplier’s perception of
customer opportunism, while Joshi and Stump (1999,
p. 346) used only technological unpredictability as a
DEMO of opportunism.
Provan and Skinner (1989, p. 205) ﬁnd dependence DEMO
control of decision making to be predictors of opportunism.
Nooteboom (1996, p. 999) lists different external events that
may trigger opportunistic behavior. Also, Wathne and Heide
(2000, p. 42) note that the focal DEMO would be vulnerable to
opportunism under conditions of information asymmetry
and lock-ins. Finally, according to John (1984, p. 281), an
alliance member would be more likely to act opportunisti-
cally if it felt coerced DEMO another alliance member.
We may note here that explicit cooperation-building
mechanisms are likely to impact upon the determinants
of opportunism. For example, Gulati (DEMO) shows that
familiarity breeds trust, a fundamental requirement for
cooperation. Hence, familiarity between alliance members
may temper opportunistic tendencies.
Clearly, not all DEMO behave opportunistically all the
time. Following Williamson’s reasoning, ﬁrms refrain from
DEMO when the resultant losses (i.e., loss of image,
goodwill, DEMO retribution, etc.) are expected to be greater
than the potential economic gains. The problematic feature
of this conceptualization is that it renders opportunism DEMO
be a monolithic phenomenon. Because a partner may act
opportunistically for a variety of reasons, the focal ﬁrm
needs to be wary of all such possibilities. It would thus
seem useful to formulate an appropriately sophisticated
DEMO of the concept of partner opportunism.
Our analysis yielded three distinct groups of determi-
nants, each group inﬂuencing the potential for partner
opportunism in its distinctive way. Accordingly, we pro-
pose in this section three sets of key determinants that
signiﬁcantly impact upon the potential for partner oppor-
DEMO: economic, relational, and temporal. We should
note that most of DEMO determinants have been empirically
supported (see Table 2).
Table 1 Types of determinants of opportunism
Authors Conceptual/empirical Illustrative observations
DEMO et al.
(1998)
Ghoshal and
Moran (1996)
Griesinger
(DEMO)
Heide and
Miner (1992)
Empirical (155 purchasing
agents; DEMO suppliers)
John (1984) Empirical (147 dealers of major
oil DEMO; dealer–company
relationships)
Johnson et al.
(1996)
Joshi and Stump
(1999)
Conceptual ‘‘Norms supporting power differentials also provide evidence that targets will act for personal gain. … To the
extent that such self-serving DEMO are sanctioned, one might infer that targets in high power distance
DEMO will act opportunistically and fail to associate high costs with opportunistic behavior.’’ (p. 613)
‘‘Targets in low uncertainty avoidance cultures may engage in opportunistic behavior, even if doing so risks
damaging the relationship. This follows from the fact that people in low uncertainty avoidance cultures do not
DEMO the future and tolerate risk easily …’’ (p. 614)
Conceptual DEMO is inﬂuenced by three factors. The ﬁrst is ‘‘prior conditioning’’ (relationship DEMO) that includes all
the attitudes and values formed through exposure to DEMO as well as subliminal stimuli … Second,
opportunism is inﬂuenced by what we describe as the ‘‘feeling for the entity,’’ which represents DEMO
individuals’ favorable or unfavorable assessment of the speciﬁc transaction partner, the DEMO or the
organization… The third inﬂuencer of opportunism is opportunistic behavior.’’ (DEMO 2)
Conceptual ‘‘The extent of the risk [of dishonesty] depends on the magnitude of the possible deception, the norms of
disclosure surrounding the transaction, the possibility of detection, and the conscience of the potential
DEMO If the transaction is nonrecurrent, the information inherently asymmetric, and the parties strangers to
each other (i.e., the moral character is not DEMO), then the risk will be high and safeguards are warranted.’’ (DEMO
486)
‘‘Parties who make idiosyncratic contributions to an exchange are particularly vulnerable to the termination of
the relationship because their investments have substantially DEMO value apart from it.’’ (p. 486)
‘‘The analysis of games DEMO that although anticipated open-ended interaction does not require cooperation, it
does DEMO it possible – even when neither party has altruism or concern about the other party’s well-being.’’
(p. 269)
‘‘Players may cooperate in the present because they anticipate possible reciprocal future responses. Or they may
cooperate DEMO the present because they know that they can retaliate for a defection by defecting later
themselves.’’ (p. 269)
‘‘Bureaucratic structuring is related positively to opportunism and negatively to the attitudinal orientation of
involvement with another DEMO member’’ (p. 280). ‘‘When perceptions of increased formalization,
centralization, and controls (rule enforcement and surveillance) are present they lead to DEMO erosion of positive
attitudes and consequently more opportunism.’’ (p. 287)
DEMO of coercive power attribution lead to a less favorable attitudinal orientation and a greater degree of
opportunism. Reward power usage leads to similar effects, but to a much lesser degree’’ (p. 281). ‘‘When
attributions of inﬂuence are made to rewards and coercion, more opportunistic behavior is induced. The
coercive attributions also have a deleterious effect on attitudinal orientation which DEMO turn leads to more
opportunism.’’ (p. 287)
Empirical (155 IJVs) ‘‘In general, cross-cultural interaction, often replete with misunderstandings and miscommunication, DEMO foster
opportunistic tendencies.’’ (p. 83)
Empirical (168 purchasing managers; DEMO manufacturer’s investment of speciﬁc assets in a supplier is positively related to the manufacturer’s
buyer–supplier relationships) dependence on the supplier’’ [and] ‘‘A manufacturer’s dependence on a supplier is negatively related to that
manufacturer’s opportunism against the DEMO (pp. 338, 340)
‘‘Technological unpredictability is negatively related to a manufacturer’s dependence on a supplier’’ [and] ‘‘A
manufacturer’s dependence on a supplier DEMO negatively related to that manufacturer’s opportunism against the
supplier.’’ (pp. 338, 340)
Type of
determinant
Relational
Relational
Relational
Relational
Economic
Temporal
Temporal
DEMO
Relational
Relational
Economic
Economic
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
59
123
Table 1 continued
Authors Conceptual/empirical Illustrative observations
Type of
determinant
Kanter (1994) Conceptual ‘‘Many relationships die an early death when they are scrutinized for quick returns. COMCO’s alliance with Temporal
Martech for environmental cleanup services DEMO Eastern Europe dissolved in less than two years because of
disputes over slower-than-expected results and the need for new investment, even though the market potential
was still great.’’ (p. 102)
Lee (1998) Empirical (DEMO Australian exporters; ‘‘Exporters’ perceptions of decision making uncertainty will be positive DEMO to their degree of opportunism.’’ Economic
alliances with Korean importers) (p. 337)
‘‘Exporters’ cultural distance towards the importing country will be positively DEMO to their degree of Relational
opportunism.’’ (p. 337)
‘‘Exporters’ economic DEMO will be positively related to their degree of opportunism.’’ (p. 338) Relational
Provan and Empirical (226 farm and power ‘‘A low level of dependence on a supplier may well lead to high levels of opportunism DEMO dealers; if caught, Economic
Skinner equipment dealers) these dealers can DEMO easily shift to other suppliers or provide critical services on their own than can their
(1989) highly dependent counterparts.’’ (p. 205)
‘‘Opportunistic behavior by dealers in relations with their primary supplier will be positively DEMO to supplier Economic
control over dealer decisions.’’ (p. 205)
Sako DEMO Helper Empirical (675 U.S. and 472 ‘‘The more a supplier is DEMO to provide information to its customer without the customer reciprocating by Economic
(1998) Japanese ﬁrst-tier automotive giving information to the supplier, the greater the supplier’s perception of customer opportunism.’’ (p. 393)
suppliers) ‘‘The DEMO uncertain the market and technology environments, and the higher the degree DEMO asset speciﬁcity, the Economic
greater the level of customer opportunism.’’ (p. 394)
Wathne and Conceptual ‘‘In general, information asymmetry means that one party’s ability to detect opportunism is limited … [which] Economic
Heide (2000) gives the exchange partner the opportunity to pursue opportunistic actions without being caught.’’ (p. 42)
‘‘Lock-in, in contrast, represents vulnerability because a party cannot leave a given relationship without Economic
incurring economic losses. As DEMO consequence, a lock-in situation may require a party to tolerate opportunistic
DEMO (p. 42)
Williamson Conceptual ‘‘Opportunism refers to a lack of DEMO or honesty in transactions, to include self-interest seeking with guile.’’ Economic
(1975) (p. 9)
‘‘Responsible parties who would otherwise be prepared DEMO self-enforce promises to take efﬁcient loss-mitigating Economic
actions may ﬁnd that such behavior is not competitively viable and will consequently be induced to imitate
DEMO types by underinvesting in loss mitigation.’’ (p. 15)
60
123
DEMO Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
Table 2 Selected studies of the determinants of opportunism
Authors Hypotheses Study DEMO Findings Remarks
Equity involvement
Deeds ‘‘An equity investment by the partner ﬁrm will
and decrease perceived opportunism.’’ (p. 145)
Hill
(1999)
DEMO ‘‘Alliances are more likely to be equity based
(1995) if they have a shared R&D component.’’ (p. 91)
Asymmetric alliance-speciﬁc investments
Brown
et al.
(2000)
‘‘The hotel’s opportunism will be reduced
the more the hotel has invested in TSAs
of its own.’’ (p. 53)
Joshi and
Stump
(1999)
Ross
et al.
(1997)
DEMO manufacturer’s investment of speciﬁc assets in a
supplier is positively related to the manufacturer’s
dependence on the supplier.’’ (p. 338)
‘‘A manufacturer’s dependence on a supplier is
negatively related to that manufacturer’s
opportunism against the DEMO (p. 340)
‘‘Perceived asymmetry of commitment rises as
actual asymmetry DEMO commitment rises.’’ (p. 683)
‘‘The greater the commitment a focal DEMO attributes
to its counterpart, relative to its own, P1a: The DEMO
conﬂict the focal party will perceive in the relationship
[and] P1b: DEMO more proﬁt (current and expected) the
focal party will derive from the relationship.’’ (p. 684)
Mutual hostages
Dyer and
Singh
(1998)DEMO
Luo
(2007b)
‘‘hostages may be ﬁnancial (e.g., equity) or symmetric
investments in specialized or cospecialized assets,
which constitute a visible DEMO bond that aligns
the economic incentives of exchange partners.’’ (p. 669)DEMO
‘‘A minority party’s opportunism is negatively
associated with equity captiveness, ceteris
DEMO (p. 861)
52 biotechnology
ﬁrms
2,417 alliances
395 general
DEMO
of hotels
168 purchasing
managers
510 focal actors
from 255 dyads
(DEMO and agent)
b = -0.126 While partner’s equity involvement leads to focal ﬁrm perceiving
(ns) less partner opportunism, the effect is not substantial. Nevertheless,
it is possible that equity involvement has a substantial DEMO
on decreasing the likelihood of actual partner opportunism.
b = 0.90 It is assumed that alliances with a shared R&D component will
(p \ .01) have a higher likelihood of partner opportunism. Findings
suggest that a ﬁrm apprehending partner opportunism will
prefer equity structure for its alliance.
DEMO = 2.29 Results are signiﬁcant in the opposite direction from the hypothesized
p \ .05) relationship. The ﬁndings suggest that more alliance-speciﬁc
investments can lead to higher potential for opportunism as well.
This supports the notion DEMO paranoid concerns about making asymmetric
resource commitments, which increases the potential DEMO opportunism.
= 12.16 Alliance-speciﬁc investments directly affect asymmetry in resource
p \ .001) commitment. It increases dependence, which in effect reduces the
dependent DEMO potential for opportunism. Conversely, the less
= -2.10 dependent partner has DEMO higher potential for opportunism.
(
t
(
t
(p \ DEMO)
b
(p
b
(p
= 0.116 Resource commitment is the most objective form of commitment.
\ .01) Actual asymmetry in resource commitment will increase the
= 0.279 perceived asymmetry in resource commitment.
\ .01) Perceived asymmetry in commitment increases perceived conﬂict.
It is argued that perceived DEMO leads to fears of opportunism.
– – Mutual hostages pave the way for credible commitments, strengthening
interﬁrm relational bonds. Also, by acting opportunistically DEMO partner
would lose the assets that are held hostage by the focal ﬁrm. Hence,
mutual hostages decrease the potential for partner opportunism.
192 DEMO b = -0.29 Equity captiveness in this paper is akin to a mutual hostage situation.
joint ventures (p \ 0.001 when Whereas a local party is more opportunistic when equity captiveness
(163 IJVs used minority party is less, a foreign party is consistently less opportunistic regardless
to test this is local; not of its equity captiveness.
hypothesis) signiﬁcant
when
DEMO party
is foreign)
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
61
123
Table 2 continued
Authors Hypotheses Study sample Findings Remarks
Payoff inequity
Ring DEMO
Van de
Ven
(1994)
‘‘We assume that an equally important DEMO for
assessing a cooperative IOR is equity, deﬁned as
‘fair dealing’ (which does not require that inputs
or outcomes always be divided equally DEMO
the parties).’’ (p. 93; emphasis in original)
‘‘We also assume that the parties to a cooperative
IOR are motivated to seek DEMO equity and efﬁciency
outcomes because of a desire to preserve a reputation
for fair dealing that will enable them to continue to
exchange transaction-speciﬁc DEMO under
conditions of high uncertainty (Helper and Levine
1992).’’ (p. 94; emphasis in original)
Cultural diversity
Barkema ‘‘Differences in uncertainty avoidance between home
and and host country – rather than differences in power
DEMO distance, individualism and masculinity – have a
(1997) negative impact DEMO IJV survival.’’ (p. 849)
‘‘Differences in long-term orientation between home
DEMO host country – rather differences in power distance,
individualism and masculinity – have a negative
impact on IJV survival.’’ (p. 850)
Goal incompatibilities
Anderson ‘‘A channel member’s trust in a manufacturer increases
and Weitz DEMO the more congruent the manufacturer’s and channel
(1989) member’s goals.’’ (DEMO 315)
Ross et al. A focal ﬁrm’s ‘‘belief that the counterpart shares the
(1997) focal party’s objectives’’ refers to goal congruence,
DEMO is negatively associated with the conﬂict the
focal ﬁrm experiences in the relationship. (p. 691)
Alliance horizon
Heide and
Miner
(1992)
DEMO and
Stump
(1999)
‘‘Extendedness in a relationship will have a DEMO
effect on the level of cooperation between two interacting
ﬁrms in a Prisoner’s Dilemma context.’’ (p. 269) (Note:
Four measures of cooperation for both purchasers and
suppliers, creating eight regression coefﬁcients)
‘‘A manufacturer’s long-term orientation toward a
supplier is negatively related to that manufacturer’s
opportunism DEMO the supplier.’’ (p. 340)
– – Ensuring equitable outcomes in DEMO is considered just as important
as attaining economic efﬁciency. Since alliance members are keen on
preserving equity, partners perceiving payoff inequity will strive to
bring back equity to the alliance. Subtle forms of opportunistic behavior
(e.g., shirking) offers a quick way to resolve perceived inequity in the
DEMO
228 international
joint ventures
690 dyadic
relationships
510 focal actors
from 255 dyads
(insurer and
agent)
155 purchasing
agents
and 60 suppliers
168 purchasing
managers
t = 2.01 Differences in cultures, in general, are DEMO related to alliance
p \ .05) performance. More speciﬁcally, however, DEMO select dimensions
of uncertainty avoidance and long-term orientation negatively
inﬂuences alliance outcome. It is implied by the authors that
= 2.61 alliance survival is DEMO due to relational difﬁculties
(one speciﬁc form of which is partner DEMO).
(
t
(p \ .01)
t = 14.46 If goal congruence increases interﬁrm trust, then goal incompatibility
(p \ .01) will increase the potential for partner opportunism in alliances
(assuming trust and opportunism are inversely related).
b = 0.156 Reversing the logic, goal incompatibility will be positively associated
(p \ 0.05) with perceived conﬂicts DEMO an alliance relationship, which undermines
relational bonds and increases the potential DEMO opportunism.
p \ .01 for 7
coefﬁcients;
p \ .10 for
the
other
coefﬁcient
t = -2.47 Long-term orientation of a manufacturer will DEMO reﬂected in its
(p \ .01) preference for a long alliance horizon. Evidently, this condition is
negatively related to the potential for a manufacturer’s opportunism.
Evidently, ﬁrms expecting to continue in an alliance are likely to be
more cooperative. In alliances with long horizons, ﬁrms will
not only expect to continue in their alliances, but will also be
less likely to act opportunistically.
62
123
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:DEMO
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
63
We take the focal DEMO perspective and analyze the
potential for opportunistic behavior by its partner, DEMO that
an increase in the level of a particular determinant (as DEMO
relates to the partner ﬁrm) would be likely to increase/
DEMO partner opportunism. In Fig. 1 we present our
framework of determinants of partner opportunism.
Economic Determinants
The economic determinants of opportunism are the most
DEMO acknowledged in the literature, but especially so in
transaction cost economics (Klein et al. 1978; Masten
1988; Williamson 1975, 1979, 1993)DEMO Scholars maintain
that an alliance partner’s opportunism is shaped by eco-
nomic considerations (e.g., Klein 1996). An alliance part-
ner is driven DEMO the need to procure economic beneﬁts or to
avert economic losses. When such needs are acute, an
alliance partner may harm other alliance members in fur-
therance of its own economic self-interest. The larger the
potential DEMO gains to be made, the more an alliance
partner would be DEMO toward opportunism. Thus, ‘‘even
among the less opportunistic, most have their price’’ to
give in to opportunism (Williamson 1979, p. 234). DEMO
presence or absence of these factors can restrict or facilitate
a partner in opportunistically pursuing its economic self-
interest. As a group, we call these factors the economic
determinants of partner opportunism. The set of economic
DEMO comprise equity involvement, alliance-spe-
ciﬁc investments, mutual hostages, and payoff DEMO
Equity Involvement
Broadly, alliance structural arrangements can be either
equity-based or DEMO Equity alliances are con-
sidered more effective than nonequity alliances in curbing
opportunistic behavior (Das and Teng 1996; Gulati 1995)
because equity DEMO member ﬁrms to the alliance, making
it difﬁcult for them to DEMO easily. A partner ﬁrm will
not jeopardize its alliance relationship by exploiting the
focal ﬁrm’s alliance-speciﬁc investments if it has an equity
stake in DEMO alliance. Similarly, if both ﬁrms contribute
known shares of equity in DEMO alliance, they would be more
accepting of asymmetric resource commitments.
Equity DEMO generally expressed in monetary terms. The
equity invested in the alliance would get tied up with
ongoing operations for an indeﬁnite period of time DEMO,
thus, cannot be readily retrievable. In fact, a partner would
have to depend on the focal ﬁrm’s cooperation to withdraw
its equity DEMO from the alliance. Plainly, a partner
behaving opportunistically with the focal DEMO cannot
expect cooperation from the focal ﬁrm in the withdrawal
process. Thus, opportunism creates problems for the partner
in recovering its equity stake in the alliance. The value of
123
Table 2 continued
Authors Hypotheses Study DEMO Findings Remarks
Pressures for quick results
Das and ‘‘Partners demand quick results in the short run and tend
Teng to be less patient with DEMO investment and
(1999) commitment. Consequently, alliance performance
evaluation will rely DEMO on ﬁnancial and market-
based indicators.’’ (p. 59)
Kanter ‘‘Many DEMO die an early death when they are
(1994) scrutinized for quick returns.’’ (p. 102)
– – Pressures for quick results are very real in most alliances. Many ﬁrms
are unable to cope with such DEMO for various reasons. Since oppor-
tunism offers a clear-cut and quick way to reap substantial beneﬁts
(albeit through unfair means), these ﬁrms have a higher potential to act
opportunistically to respond to the pressures for DEMO results.
– – An alliance partner that evaluates alliance performance without
allowing sufﬁcient time is not going to be satisﬁed with the results.
A DEMO partner will be disinclined to continue in the joint
project, perhaps DEMO premature termination of the alliance.
64
Fig. 1 Framework of
determinants of partner
opportunism. Note:(?) DEMO (-)
indicate that an increase in the
level of the DEMO
determinant (as it relates to the
partner ﬁrm) would be likely to
increase/decrease potential
partner opportunism
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:DEMO
ECONOMIC
Equity Involvement (–)
Asymmetric Alliance-specific Investments (+)
Mutual Hostages (–)
Payoff Inequity (+)
RELATIONAL
PARTNER
OPPORTUNISM
Cultural DEMO (+)
Goal Incompatibilities (+)
TEMPORAL
Alliance Horizon (–)DEMO
Pressures for Quick Results (+)
the tied-up equity that an DEMO partner risks losing
would raise the required threshold of economic gains from
opportunism.
Proposition 1 The extent of equity involvement will
be negatively associated DEMO potential for partner
opportunism.
Asymmetric Alliance-Speciﬁc Investments
In alliances, members often DEMO to develop facilities or
acquire assets that are useful and valuable only within the
speciﬁc alliance context. The rationale for investing in
alliance-speciﬁc assets DEMO to achieve higher efﬁciency in
alliance operations. However, as an unintended DEMO
quence, a focal ﬁrm investing in these alliance-speciﬁc
assets becomes dependent DEMO its partner’s cooperation in
the alliance. If there is a low level of dependence on the
focal ﬁrm, the partner will be more likely to behave
opportunistically, since it ‘‘can more easily shift to other
suppliers or provide critical services on their own than can
their highly dependent DEMO (Provan and Skinner
1989, p. 205). Asymmetry in actual resource commitments
may affect the perceived asymmetry in commitment.
Indeed, as Ross et al. (1997) observe, ‘‘in the principal-
agent context it may be discomﬁting or disadvantageous
for the perceiver to believe that it is overcommitted DEMO
to its counterpart because this belief may create fear of
opportunism’’ (DEMO 683; emphasis in original).
123
Generally speaking, a focal ﬁrm becomes vulnerable to
partner opportunism when it invests in alliance-speciﬁc
assets. This DEMO because there would be sufﬁcient scope for
the opportunist to misappropriate the quasi-rents generated
from such investments. As Klein et al. (1978, p. DEMO)
emphasize: ‘‘After a speciﬁc investment is made and such
quasi DEMO are created, the possibility of opportunistic
behavior is very real.’’ If DEMO opportunistic partner were to
leave the alliance, the focal ﬁrm would DEMO lose the
alliance-speciﬁc value of its assets. Hence, as long as DEMO
loss of abandoning the alliance is greater than the loss
incurred due to partner opportunism, the focal ﬁrm will
have to continue to be a part of the alliance. The oppor-
tunistic partner, in turn, DEMO try to ensure just enough
reward for the focal ﬁrm to dissuade it from severing ties.
If a focal ﬁrm believes its commitment to DEMO alliance to
be greater than that of the partner ﬁrm, it DEMO perceive a
higher potential for partner opportunism, but especially so if
DEMO focal ﬁrm happens to be a small ﬁrm or an entrepre-
neurial ﬁrm (Das and He 2006). A ﬁrm’s apprehension of
opportunistic behavior by the partner may be exacerbated
when it has ‘‘paranoid concerns and DEMO about the
long-term lack of equity in the transfer of knowledge and
capability’’ (Gould et al. 1999, p. 697). By a similar DEMO, a
partner ﬁrm will also be apprehensive about possible
opportunistic behavior DEMO the focal ﬁrm if it believes that its
own resource commitments are greater than that of the
focal ﬁrm. This heightened apprehension will, in turn, lead
to an increase in the partner’s potential for opportunistic
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
behavior. In other words, the fear of the focal ﬁrm’s
opportunism may increase the partner’s own potential DEMO
opportunistic behavior. The focal ﬁrm should understand
this logic, and realize DEMO just as it apprehends opportunistic
behavior by the partner, the partner DEMO in turn also fear
opportunism from the focal ﬁrm in situations of asymmetric
investments. Accordingly, the asymmetry intrinsically adds
to the potential for partner opportunism.
Proposition 2 Asymmetric alliance-speciﬁc investments
will be positively associated with potential DEMO partner
opportunism.
Mutual Hostages
The idea of using mutual hostages by alliance members is
not new as a means of expressing credible commitment and
DEMO partner opportunism. Mutual hostages serve as a
guarantee against defection (Williamson DEMO). Alliance
ﬁrms can hold mutual hostages by exchanging their
respective critical resources with counterparts. The type,
amount, or value of resources to be used as hostages (e.g.,
equity, know how, personnel) DEMO be explicitly stated as
contractual provisions. In this context, Hwang and DEMO
(1997, p. 105) assert that ‘‘mutual commitment offers a
way DEMO enhancing the robustness of cooperation and
diminishing the attractiveness of defection.’’
Clearly, mutual hostages would thwart partner oppor-
tunism even when the focal ﬁrm makes alliance-speciﬁc
investments. Such hostages would also reduce the per-
ceived asymmetry DEMO resource commitments, since credible
commitments are established by both alliance members.
DEMO, mutual hostages would artiﬁcially reduce the level
of private beneﬁts for DEMO opportunist, since it would have
to forgo its own hostage investment. DEMO would yield a
low private to common beneﬁts ratio, effectively decreas-
DEMO the potential for partner opportunism.
Proposition 3 Mutual hostages will be negatively asso-
ciated with potential for partner opportunism.
Payoff Inequity
Partners often perceive DEMO gains from the alliance to be
inequitable compared to those of the focal ﬁrm. Following
equity theory (Adams 1963), the partner that perceives its
rewards as inequitable would be driven to assure a sense of
DEMO Often, this may be accomplished by resorting to
opportunistic behavior. We DEMO, of course, concerned here
only with under-compensation as a form of inequity. An
over-compensated partner ﬁrm will have no motivation for
behaving opportunistically. DEMO is only when the partner feels
under-compensated that it will seek to even out the payoff
arrangements through non-cooperative means.
65
The partner ﬁrm DEMO react opportunistically to restore
equity when it perceives inequitable allocation of alliance
gains. Alliance ﬁrms tend to work in an intertwined fash-
ion, often to such an extent that it becomes impossible to
objectively account for DEMO partner’s contribution toward
the alliance’s performance. Ambiguity in measuring each
member’s performance would complicate the problem of
payoff inequity. The greater the perceived inequity, the
higher will be the potential for opportunistic behavior by
the partner.
DEMO 4 Payoff inequity will be positively associ-
ated with potential for partner opportunism.
Relational Determinants
The second set of determinants of opportunism is rela-
DEMO Ghoshal and Moran (1996) note that a partner’s
feeling for other alliance members would affect that part-
ner’s opportunistic attitude, which would lead to opportu-
nistic behavior. The relational determinants inﬂuence
partner opportunism in three DEMO ways. First, a rela-
tionship that lacks interpartner legitimacy (Kumar and Das
2007) can act as a sanction for a partner to be less sensitive
to the well-being of other members. Therefore, an oppor-
tunistic partner would not feel guilty or even be concerned
about the focal DEMO being adversely affected by its
opportunism. Second, when an alliance partner DEMO
coerced by the focal ﬁrm in some way, it would be DEMO to
consider a response to the coercion. An atmosphere of
interpartner harmony (Das and Kumar 2009a) is breached,
thereby making way for DEMO opportunism. Third, the
lack of an intimate relationship could easily give DEMO to
misunderstandings, thereby provoking partner opportun-
ism. The relational determinants of DEMO discussed
here are cultural diversity and goal incompatibilities.
Cultural Diversity
Cultural diversity among alliance members is a common
phenomenon. Although most research on cultural DEMO
in alliances has been in the context of cross-national alliances
(e.g., Johnson et al. 1996; Kumar and Das 2009; Meschi and
Roger DEMO), alliance ﬁrms from the same country may also
have very distinct organizational cultures (Harrigan 1988).
However, regardless of the source—be it DEMO or orga-
nizational—cultural diversity creates relational issues in
alliances. Firms from different cultures see the strategic
behavior of their partners through different lenses, since
‘‘different cultures are likely to interpret and respond to the
same strategic DEMO in different ways’’ (Schneider and De
Meyer 1991, p. 307). Thus, the chances of misinterpreting
the partner’s actions are high. Contrasting national cultures,
123
66
Brown et al. (1989, pp. 237–238) observe: ‘‘The Japanese
DEMO the straightforwardness of Westerners is rude and
probably masks deceit. Westerners believe the Japanese
inability to come to the point quickly denotes trickery, and
ﬁnd their negotiating tactics underhanded.’’ In their study of
IJVs, Johnson et al. (1996, p. 83) argue that, in general,
‘‘cross-cultural DEMO, often replete with misunder-
standings and miscommunication, can foster opportunistic
tendencies.’’
From the focal ﬁrm’s perspective, cultural diversity
would be cause for increased partner opportunism for a
couple of reasons. First, the partner ﬁrm may react
opportunistically based on a misinterpretation of the focal
ﬁrm’s behavior as DEMO According to Brouthers
et al. (1995, p. 23), ‘‘Different cultures have unique time
frames, alternative priorities, and distinctive methods of
saying DEMO Those managers cognizant of these cultural
differences will not misread partner signals and will
therefore be more successful in their alliances.’’ Misun-
derstandings due DEMO different cultural values and interpre-
tation mechanisms would hinder communication and lead
to poor interﬁrm relationship, perhaps provoking the part-
ner into behaving opportunistically.
Second, cultural distance may result in a self-centered,
ethnocentric approach in dealings with alliance members.
Firms would be more likely to hold a DEMO feeling for a
potential alliance partner with a similar cultural back-
ground, whereas they would be more apprehensive about
one with a different cultural background. As Ghoshal and
Moran (1996, p. 21) also observe: DEMO shown by Ajzen and
Fishbein (1977) and Eagly and Chaiken (DEMO), a positive
feeling for the entity would reduce opportunism whereas a
negative feeling would enhance it.’’ Over all, increased
cultural diversity leads to greater potential for partner
opportunism.
Proposition 5 The cultural diversity among alliance
DEMO will be positively associated with potential for
partner opportunism.
Goal Incompatibilities
Goals are incompatible when the pursuit of one hinders the
pursuit of the DEMO This is different from goal dissimi-
larity, whereby alliance members have DEMO goals, but
without any problem, because these goals are not in conﬂict
with each other. Although mutual strategic interests often
bring prospective alliance DEMO together, their goals can
sometimes be incompatible. According to Hill and DEMO
riegel (1994, p. 594), ‘‘joint ventures are particularly likely
to be subject to goal conﬂicts since they are formed by two
or DEMO ﬁrms, each with its own set of goals. Ultimately, a
joint venture is measured by the extent to which the venture
123
J DEMO Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
meets the goals and expectations of the individual part-
ners.’’ In time, alliance relationships may become sour,
ﬁlled with bickering and the blaming of each other. When
the attractions of DEMO in cooperative arrangements fade
away and the potential for disputes becomes apparent,
alliance members ‘‘may feel compelled to retreat from
interactions, withhold information, and safeguard personal
interests’’ (Gassenheimer et al. 1996,p.77).
Self-interest DEMO may encourage deceit when goals
are not aligned. When goals are compatible, each member
can pursue its own interests without harming those of the
others. In that case, mutual self-interest seeking becomes
possible. However, when DEMO members’ goals are
incompatible, a partner ﬁrm trying to accomplish its DEMO
goals may seem to behave in an uncooperative manner.
‘‘Firms involved in alliances must have goals that support
each other, not compete with each other. Competitive
goals, such as ‘get all you can,’ are counterproductive
and result in alliance failure’’ (Brouthers et al. 1995,
pp. 21–22). Thus, the focal ﬁrm is likely to perceive its
partner’s actions as opportunistic when goals are incom-
patible. An alliance partner would harm DEMO focal ﬁrm if it
pursues self-interest when the focal ﬁrm’s goals are
incompatible. Opportunism yields no risk of loss for the
partner, for the focal ﬁrm’s goals would not beneﬁt
the partner anyway. Thus, the relational tension would
increase—and the relational bond would weaken. A partner
would feel DEMO restraint against opportunism. Thus, conﬂict
is very likely when alliance ﬁrms DEMO incompatible goals.
As a consequence, as Cullen et al. (1995, DEMO 95) observe,
‘‘Conﬂict erodes trust, increases the potential for opportu-
nistic behavior, and reduces the likelihood of partners
dedicating necessary idiosyncratic assets to the relation-
ship.’’ Disagreement over goals may also lead to dissatis-
DEMO with the relationship, to the detriment of the
cooperative spirit. Dissatisﬁed DEMO members will be
less likely to feel committed to each other or to the alli-
ance, thereby increasing the likelihood of opportunism.
Proposition 6 Goal incompatibilities among alliance
members will be positively associated with potential for
DEMO opportunism.
Temporal Determinants
The third set of factors determining partner opportunism is
concerned with the time dimension. Alliances differ in
their intended duration of DEMO A short duration
would elicit a different partner behavior, with scope DEMO
easy exit after opportunistic gains, compared to a long
duration, in which the partner has to continue dealing with
the focal ﬁrm for DEMO period of time. Also, temporal
pressures can motivate a partner to DEMO in ways that it
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
would not do under ordinary DEMO For instance, the
sense that operating results need to be achieved DEMO an
accelerated manner can cause a partner to worry exces-
sively and to resort to desperate measures (i.e., opportu-
nistic actions) to meet deadlines. The notion that partner
opportunism may arise from temporal determinants has
DEMO proposed recently by Das (2006). We need to be
careful DEMO to exclude factors that merely evolve over
time, and may superﬁcially DEMO to be temporal in nature
(such as learning races) but are intrinsically economic in
motivation. The temporal determinants of opportunism are
comprised of DEMO horizon and pressures for quick
results.
Alliance Horizon
Strategic alliances are inherently temporary. Although
some joint ventures have lasted for multiple decades, the
underlying intention of alliance members during the for-
mation of the alliance is DEMO have an arrangement that would
exist for a ﬁnite time period, DEMO a permanent arrangement.
While explicit dates of dissolution are generally agreed on
during alliance formation, some alliances have an inde-
terminate termination date. Alliance horizon is the duration
an alliance is expected to be in existence, or the intended
time span between the formation of an alliance and DEMO
dissolution.
Alliance horizons can vary in time span from short to
long to open-ended. A short alliance horizon would foster
opportunism, whereas a long alliance horizon would deter
such deceitful behavior. Alliance horizons affect partner
opportunism DEMO several ways (Das 2004, 2006). First, alli-
ance horizons DEMO impact the length of ‘‘the shadow
of the future.’’ Research suggests that a long shadow of the
future compels a partner to seriously assess DEMO prudence of
engaging in opportunism, for it has to be concerned DEMO
possible repercussions it might have to face in the
upcoming future (DEMO 1984; Heide and Miner 1992).
Second, during the course of alliance operations, not all
gains can be split equitably between alliancing ﬁrms. When
the alliance horizon is long, sufﬁcient time is usually
available for evening out temporary inequities between
alliance members. Therefore, a long alliance horizon would
give a partner conﬁdence that apparent inequities will not
persist in DEMO long run. In such a circumstance, a partner
will not have DEMO resort to opportunism to restore its sense of
equity. Third, having DEMO up a long alliance horizon, a
partner would be more inclined DEMO preserving the
relationship. According to Ring and Van de Ven, ‘‘in DEMO
temporal development of a cooperative IOR [interorgani-
zational relationship], social psychological DEMO
will create a separate set of pressures to preserve the
relationship’’ (DEMO, p. 95). Moreover, continued and
67
supplementary commitments are likely to be high in an
alliance with a long horizon, which would also serve to
constrain partner opportunism.
Proposition 7 The length of alliance DEMO will be neg-
atively associated with potential for partner opportunism.
Pressures for Quick Results
It usually takes some considerable time before alliances
start producing DEMO Das and Teng (1999, p. 59) explain
that ‘‘alliances are DEMO projects because partner
ﬁrms have to learn to work together smoothly and efﬁ-
ciently,’’ so that pressures for quick results during the initial
DEMO of the alliance may in fact jeopardize the possibilities
of that alliance becoming a proﬁtable venture. However,
ﬁrms differ in their preferences: ‘‘One partner may have a
sense of urgency and favor quick results, while the other has
a long-term view and is more oriented towards investments
DEMO ﬁnancial assets and in building up a relationship with the
partner’’ (DEMO and Vermeulen 1997, p. 849). Also,
ﬁrms may have DEMO host of reasons for seeking quick results
from their alliance projects. First, ﬁrms often lack the
patience to allow the interﬁrm relationships to develop, so
that they tend to treat the alliance merely as a one-off
business transaction. Second, a ﬁrm may be unwilling to
wait sufﬁciently long to see the performance results develop
because it does not have the DEMO faith in its partner or
in the alliance. Third, a ﬁrm DEMO simply not be able to
afford to wait long enough for optimum alliance outcomes,
because substantial resources would remain tied up in the
DEMO during such an extended period.
A partner experiencing pressures for quick results may
resort to desperate means to acquire gains from the alliance.
One DEMO the signiﬁcant advantages of opportunistic behavior
is that it provides immediate results, although it comes at
the expense of potentially greater long-term beneﬁts. Brown
et al. (2000, p. 51) observe: ‘‘A ﬁrm behaves opportunisti-
DEMO to increase its short-term, unilateral gains. As a result,
opportunism DEMO one party can erode the long-term gains
potentially accruing to both parties in a dyadic channel
relationship.’’ Because a partner under pressure for quick
DEMO would discount future outcomes at a much higher
rate, the opportunity DEMO of opportunistic behavior would
appear negligible to such ﬁrms and the potential for
opportunistic behavior would be high.
Proposition 8 Pressures for quick results DEMO be posi-
tively associated with potential for partner opportunism.
Our discussion of the broad framework of determinants
should, we hope, help in appreciating DEMO multiplicity of
inﬂuences that are simultaneously at play in constituting
123
68
partner opportunism in alliances. In particular, the wide
variety evident in the list of determinants attests to the
inherent complexities of partner opportunism. DEMO would be
useful now to explore the differential saliencies of the
various determinants in the three principal forms of
alliances.
Determinants in Different Types DEMO Alliances
The basic distinction among the myriad forms of strategic
alliances is in terms of equity and nonequity alliances. This
simple dichotomy is widely DEMO in the empirical liter-
ature for eminently practical reasons (e.g., Gulati 1995). Of
course, more complex classiﬁcations have also been pro-
posed (e.g., Lorange and Roos 1993). However, for our
purposes here, we follow a somewhat parsimonious cate-
gorization of the rich variety of alliances, and use the three
types followed by Das and Teng (DEMO)—equity joint
ventures, minority equity alliances, and nonequity alli-
ances. Equity joint ventures are the only form of alliances
involving the creation of DEMO third entity. Alliance members
are usually referred to as parents of the joint venture
organization. The parents share the ownership of the joint
venture DEMO inﬂuence its strategic direction. Minority
equity alliances are interﬁrm relationships where a member
holds an equity stake in the partner, or cross-hold equity in
each other. Sharing of ownership reﬂects a high level of
commitment to DEMO alliance on the part of the alliance
members. Nonequity alliances, as DEMO name suggests, do
not involve any equity or the transfer of DEMO They
are contract-based and contingency provisions in the con-
tract can usually make them quite ﬂexible. Nonequity
alliances do not ordinarily bring alliance members DEMO
close proximity and do not usually foster an intimate
business relationship.
The characteristics of each type of alliance allow certain
determinants of opportunism to DEMO more salient than
others. For an understanding of the dynamics of the various
factors at play, we select and discuss brieﬂy, for each
DEMO type, the most salient factor in each of the three
sets DEMO determinants. In Table 3, we indicate these signif-
icant determinants of DEMO opportunism in the three
types of alliances.
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
Equity Joint Ventures
Among the economic determinants of partner opportunism,DEMO
equity involvement appears to be the most prominent in
equity joint ventures. A joint venture requires the parent
ﬁrms to invest substantial equity to DEMO up the commonly
owned, independent organization. Therefore, equity
involvement is likely to be an active determinant of
opportunism in a joint venture. Scholars DEMO argued, both
conceptually and empirically, that the more equity an alli-
ance member invests in a joint venture, the less likely it is to
resort to opportunism (Beamish and Banks 1987; Buckley
and Casson DEMO; Das and Teng 1996; Gulati 1995). This is
because of the possibility of losing the equity investments
tied up in the joint DEMO if the partner ﬁrm were to get
caught in an opportunistic act and had to face legal or social
consequences. There is added complication DEMO we try to
distinguish between equal and unequal splits in equity
involvement by the members. However, the speciﬁc kind of
arrangement that would most enhance the effects of equity
involvement, as a determinant of opportunism, DEMO unclear
from existing empirical ﬁndings. Whereas some scholars
have found equal equity involvement to be more conducive
to joint venture success (Bleeke and Ernst 1991; Blodgett
1991), others have found unequal equity involvement by the
parents to be positively associated with joint venture suc-
cess (Killing 1982).
Of the relational determinants, cultural diversity has the
more important role in equity joint ventures. First, joint
venture parents have to work very closely with each other.
This closeness would reveal the various critical cultural
DEMO of each parent. Hence, also, the cultural
differences are more likely to surface in equity joint ven-
tures than in other forms of DEMO These differences
could be a serious problem, because they could hinder DEMO
tightly integrated work process through poor communica-
tion, misunderstanding, and unnecessary provocations
(Glaister and Buckley 1999, p. 127). Research also suggests
DEMO organizational culture differences are more detrimen-
tal to interﬁrm relationships than are national cultural
differences of the joint venture ﬁrms (Harrigan 1988).
We observed from our analysis that the temporal
determinants of opportunism would be DEMO in
inﬂuencing potential partner opportunism in equity joint
Table 3 Signiﬁcant determinants of partner opportunism in different alliance types
Determinants Alliance types
Equity joint DEMO Minority equity alliances Nonequity alliances
Economic Equity involvement Asymmetric alliance-speciﬁc investments Payoff inequity
Relational Cultural diversity Goal incompatibilities Goal incompatibilities
Temporal Alliance horizon Pressures DEMO quick results Pressures for quick results
123
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
ventures. As the parent ﬁrms DEMO create a new ﬁrm, it is
usually the case that operations DEMO have to continue for
a long period of time to realize net gains. Given the rela-
tively long-term nature of equity joint ventures, alliance
members realize that they would have to work together for
a relatively DEMO period of time. Therefore, ﬁrms planning
to form an equity joint DEMO would generally prefer a
long alliance horizon. Based on our rationale regarding
temporal determinants, a long alliance horizon would have
a signiﬁcant impact on decreasing the potential for partner
opportunism.
Minority Equity Alliances
Among the economic DEMO, asymmetric resource
commitments in the form of alliance-speciﬁc investments
would have DEMO strong inﬂuence on partner opportunism in
minority equity alliances. When an alliance ﬁrm commits
alliance-speciﬁc resources, it becomes very vulnerable to its
partner’s potential exploitative intentions. In such asym-
metric contributions, one ﬁrm is bound to become more or
less dependent vis-a`-vis the other ﬁrm. A partner that DEMO less
dependent may behave opportunistically because of the
excessive dependence of its counterpart. It should be noted
that the impact of alliance-speciﬁc resource commitments
DEMO be strong when such commitments are made dis-
proportionately or one-sidedly, DEMO, only by the focal ﬁrm.
The problem is more acute in DEMO minority equity alliance than
in an equity joint venture. This is because a partner with less
alliance-speciﬁc resource commitments may take advan-
tage of DEMO focal ﬁrm’s vulnerability arising from more
resources committed.
Of the relational determinants, goal incompatibilities
appear to be the important inﬂuence on partner opportun-
ism in minority equity alliances. Incompatible goals
between alliance members of a minority DEMO alliance
would be likely to erode relational harmony over time. The
effect of goal incompatibilities is further complicated by
the fact that alliance ﬁrms DEMO just disband the alliance
on account of the equity stakes they hold in each other. As
dissolving the alliance is not a ready option, a partner ﬁrm
would seek self-interest through every way possible,
including DEMO A partner would resort to shirking,
withholding of critical information, DEMO various acts of
inﬁdelity under such circumstances.
Of the temporal determinants, DEMO for quick results
affect opportunism in minority equity alliances. Such
pressures might arise if a partner overlooks the time it
would take to resolve DEMO unforeseen problems
within the alliance, before getting into actual performance-
related DEMO (Das and Teng 1999). Because of the
idiosyncratic nature of DEMO equity tie-up, where a partner
69
cannot just hold back and DEMO the alliance, a partner
feeling put upon by pressures for quick DEMO would dis-
count long-term results and would be drawn toward short-
term gains. Since opportunism offers the perfect method
for ensuring short-term gains, a partner feeling pressures
for quick results would be inclined toward opportunism.
Nonequity DEMO
A partner is most likely to perceive payoff inequity in a
nonequity alliance. Given the lack of an objective and
tangible basis for distributing DEMO generated from alli-
ance activities (there being no relative equity contribution
DEMO alliance members in a nonequity alliance that can serve
as a basis for distributing residuals), perceptions of payoff
inequity can exist. Reacting to DEMO perceptions, a partner ﬁrm
may resort to opportunistic behavior to regain DEMO sense of
equity.
Of the relational determinants, goal incompatibilities
could be DEMO in breeding opportunism in nonequity
alliances. In this type of alliance, DEMO ﬁrms usually do
not have to interact closely in carrying out alliance tasks.
Thus, they are not exposed to each other’s organizational
culture, DEMO the saliency of cultural diversity as a
relational determinant of opportunism. However, an alli-
ance partner might ﬁnd it convenient to breach the prin-
ciple of exclusivity that forms part of the contracts of
nonequity alliances. DEMO (1990) characterizes this
form of opportunism as inﬁdelity.
Of the temporal determinants, pressures for quick results
are common in nonequity alliances. Firms start off with
this type of alliance to test the waters before engaging DEMO
more deeply involved business relationships. An alliance
partner feels the pressures for quick results because real-
izing alliance outcomes quickly lets it decide on DEMO
extension of the existing alliance. Unfortunately, a lack of
time often DEMO less than satisfactory results, prompting
the alliance partner to behave opportunistically DEMO secure
self-interests.
Discussion and Conclusion
Theoretical Contribution
We noted from a review of the literature that our under-
standing of partner opportunism in strategic DEMO has
generally been inadequate. In this article we attempted to
contribute to the literature by proposing an overarching
framework of determinants of potential partner DEMO
ism. We began by suggesting an encompassing deﬁnition of
partner opportunism as a basis for better understanding and
123
70
study of the phenomenon. We then identiﬁed a compre-
hensive set DEMO determinants comprising three categories of
factors: economic, relational, and temporal. DEMO deter-
minants were discussed individually to better understand
the rationale for a partner ﬁrm to behave opportunistically.
We followed this up with a brief DEMO of the
differential saliencies of these determinants in three major
types of alliance settings, namely, equity joint ventures,
minority equity alliances, and nonequity alliances. This
kind of analysis should eventually assist mid-range theo-
rizing DEMO with our contingency approach.
A striking—and unexpected—insight that emerged from
this exercise is that minority equity and nonequity alliances
seem to be prominently inﬂuenced DEMO very similar kinds of
determinants of partner opportunism (see Table 3)DEMO
Although these two types of alliances have different eco-
nomic determinants, DEMO have the same relational and
temporal determinants. The overall array of the determi-
nants in minority equity and nonequity alliances are in
clear contrast DEMO the list of determinants in equity joint
ventures. We believe this difference maybe due to the
fundamental distinction between an equity joint venture,
DEMO involves the creation of a third entity by the member
ﬁrms, DEMO the other two forms of alliances, which involve
no such third DEMO Thus, the mostly similar sets of critical
determinants in minority equity DEMO nonequity alliances,
and a quite different set of determinants in equity joint
ventures, suggest that perhaps we should adopt a new
perspective in research concerning partner opportunism in
alliances. Whereas extant empirical studies have routinely
DEMO equity and nonequity alliances (i.e., treating
equity joint ventures and minority equity alliances together
as one cluster), such categories may not be DEMO most con-
ceptually sound way of grouping alliances for purposes of
testing hypotheses relating to partner opportunism.
Accordingly, we suggest that it would probably be useful to
distinguish joint ventures from all other forms of alliances,DEMO
minority equity and nonequity. This would facilitate more
focused research on partner opportunism, especially in
light of the speciﬁc sets of salient determinants in the three
different alliance forms discussed here.
As an extension, we would speculate that there might
indeed be reason for entertaining the notion that DEMO
relevant constructs in alliance research—such as conﬁ-
dence in partner cooperation, DEMO risk, interﬁrm trust,
and partner control—might also be better examined
DEMO the dichotomy based on creation or otherwise of a
third entity rather than on the basis of equity versus non-
equity. Our discussion also, of course, suggests a fortiori
that a three-part categorization, giving minority DEMO
alliances a distinctive status along with the other two,
would be warranted in all research where alliance variety is
of interest and focus.
DEMO
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
Limitations and Future Research
The framework of determinants of opportunism proposed
here may be augmented with other DEMO We mention
brieﬂy a few other candidates for determinants, each of
DEMO can be included in one of our three categories. For
example, DEMO partner ﬁrm’s embeddedness in a dense network
ensures good behavior (Hill DEMO), since opportunistic
behavior with the focal ﬁrm will become known to all
networked members, who are in a position to collectively
impose social sanctions on the opportunistic ﬁrm. Rela-
tional embeddedness (i.e., the extent DEMO direct relationship
between two ﬁrms) and structural embeddedness (i.e., the
DEMO position of the ﬁrm in the network) reduce the
potential for DEMO opportunism within the context of
sparse and dense networks respectively (Rowley DEMO al.
2000). Relational embeddedness reduces the potential for
opportunism that can occur due to a lack of relational
harmony. Hence, we would include this factor in the cat-
egory of relational determinants. In contrast, structural
embeddedness reduces the potential for opportunism by the
threat of sanctions that DEMO result in substantial economic
losses for the opportunistic partner. Thus, this DEMO can be
placed in the category of economic determinants.
Furthermore, John (1984) found that coercion is related
to the perception of partner opportunism. Thus, a focal ﬁrm
that feels coerced by the partner would perceive its partner
to be opportunistic. This type of opportunism arises from a
DEMO of relational understanding and feeling of antipathy
toward the supposedly coercive partner. Thus, we would
categorize this factor under relational determinants.
While there may be other factors that can be thought of
as determinants of opportunism, we believe that all these
will consistently ﬁt into the three-category framework DEMO
have proposed here. Doz et al. (2000) reviewed nine latent
constructs that play signiﬁcant roles in making up the ini-
tial conditions of DEMO formation. Some of the latent
constructs they review may inﬂuence the incidence of
opportunism once the alliance gets underway, e.g., similar
interests, domain consensus, escalation of commitment,
continuity of expectation, and learning. Similar DEMO
allude to less goal conﬂicts (Doz 1996; Larson 1992),
DEMO reducing the potential for opportunistic behavior.
Seeking domain consensus implies ‘‘efforts to produce
consensus by sense making and understanding processes
undertaken during negotiation processes. DEMO Potential col-
laborators need to reach meetings of the mind not only
intellectually and strategically, but also culturally and
ethically’’ (Doz et al. DEMO, p. 241). Thus, domain con-
sensus can foster cultural blending as well as common
alliance objectives for member ﬁrms, which effectively
would reduce the probability of partner opportunism, and
can thus be included among relational determinants. This is
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
also true of the construct DEMO escalation of commitment,
which would tend to reduce the likelihood of the alliance
partner behaving opportunistically, as relational bonds
between alliance ﬁrms grow stronger over time.
The construct of continuity of expectation has time at DEMO
core (Telser 1980). A partner’s expectation of continuing
the alliance DEMO is subsumed in the notion of alli-
ance horizon, which is DEMO of the temporal drivers of
opportunism that we have introduced in this paper (see also
Das 2004, 2005, 2006). While Doz et al. (2000, p. 242)
argue that difﬁculties in learning and DEMO initial con-
ditions invite spiraling conﬂicts between alliance members,
that issue is more about adaptation than learning. Partner
opportunism can also be associated DEMO the learning race
in alliances (Hamel 1991). Learning races conjure DEMO the
probability of a partner outlearning a focal ﬁrm (Das and
DEMO 2007). In such circumstances, the faster-learning
partner would be in DEMO position to ﬁnd ways to advanta-
geously back out of the alliance, violating the spirit of the
alliance contract. This kind of partner opportunism, stem-
ming from learning races, would belong in the economic
determinants DEMO
An interesting question is whether partner opportunism
may be associated with exogenous factors, such as demand
uncertainty and technological uncertainty. Clearly, these
factors DEMO the probability of accomplishing alliance-
speciﬁc goals, thereby increasing the performance DEMO of
alliances. However, such conditions have no direct effect in
triggering DEMO behavior (i.e., partner oppor-
tunism). Nevertheless, economic hardship, arising from
exogenous factors, can make economic drivers of oppor-
tunism more salient. That is, a partner’s desire to acquire
economic beneﬁts through opportunistic behavior may
increase when the general economic conditions are not
favorable (i.e., DEMO conditions of high demand and
technological uncertainty). Therefore, these exogenous
DEMO may positively moderate the relationship between
economic determinants and the potential for partner
opportunism.
Future research would also need to explore the role,
DEMO, of various moderators that could affect the
potency of the three DEMO of determinants of partner
opportunism. For instance, the ﬁnancial standing of DEMO
partner ﬁrm may have a moderating effect on the impact
that some of the economic determinants may have on
opportunism. A partner with a DEMO ﬁnancial standing
would have a dire need for economic gains from the alli-
ance and would accentuate the inﬂuence of the economic
determinants. In DEMO of the relational determinants,
industry similarity between alliance members may have a
moderating role. Alliance members from similar industries
would more likely understand DEMO managerial styles of their
counterparts. Thus, even if conﬂicts or misunderstandings
DEMO
occur, the impact on partner opportunism would be much
less when DEMO members come from the same or similar
industries. In the case of the temporal determinants, the
preferred planning horizon of a partner ﬁrm may have a
moderating effect. A partner’s long-term goal (e.g., build-
ing DEMO share) would be in alignment with a long alli-
ance horizon DEMO at odds with a short alliance horizon (Das
2006). Similarly, a short-term primary goal (boosting the
stock price) would probably enhance DEMO function of
pressures for quick results in partner opportunism. Fur-
thermore, DEMO would be useful to study how particular
determinants of potential partner opportunism may have
selectively conspicuous roles in speciﬁc alliance develop-
mental stages (Das and Teng 2002a). The temporal aspects
of alliances and their intersection DEMO potential partner
opportunism may also have critical signiﬁcance in alliance
development.
As academic inquiry of the role of partner opportunism
extends into the emerging DEMO of alliance research, it
would be fruitful to explore how the DEMO determinants
discussed here would be modiﬁed in the case, for example,DEMO
of multi-partner alliances. Having much more complex
internal dynamics because of indirect reciprocity among
the members (Das and Teng 2002b), it would be reasonable
to expect that the relational determinants, in particular, in
this DEMO of alliance will have the more prominent part.
Renewed attention is needed for examining the changing
functional impact of partner opportunism in the increas-
DEMO micro-behavioral approaches that are being adopted
for studying alliance functioning, such DEMO interpartner
legitimacy (Kumar and Das 2007), interpartner sense-
making (Das and Kumar 2009b), interpretive schemes (Das
and Kumar 2009c), and the socio-cognitive motivational
principle of regulatory focus (Das and Kumar 2009d). For
instance, it seems that alliance ﬁrms with a promotion
regulatory focus will be more tolerant of their partners’
opportunistic behavior than alliance ﬁrms DEMO a preven-
tion regulatory focus. When this contingent view of the
sensitivity to partner opportunism is considered in con-
junction with the different stages DEMO alliance development,
an obvious research task would be to seek a ﬁne-grained
appreciation of the comparative inﬂuences of the different
categories of determinants DEMO partner opportunism across
all developmental stages and alliance types.
Managerial Implications
Our discussion here has important managerial implications.
The comprehensive approach to the determinants DEMO partner
opportunism should help the manager of the focal ﬁrm to
evaluate systematically the circumstances that may
increase or decrease the probability of the DEMO ﬁrm
acting opportunistically. Thus, managers of the focal ﬁrm
123
72
would be in a better position to assess the risk of DEMO alli-
ance engagement with a particular partner.
Alliance managers have at their disposal a set of tools to
ensure the smooth functioning of the DEMO These tools
are related to the functions of alliance managers and to
ongoing operations. The unique feature of these managerial
tools is that they DEMO all geared toward restricting the scope
of partner opportunism. The key tools to deter and control
potential partner opportunism comprise monitoring, bud-
geting, DEMO participatory decision making (Das 2005; Das
and Rahman 2001, 2002)DEMO
Monitoring is useful in detecting signs of the partner’s
opportunistic behavior by closely observing the activities
of the partner within the alliance context. At DEMO conceptual
level, we would argue that the probability of being exposed
DEMO an opportunist would sometimes be sufﬁcient in dis-
suading the partner from misbehavior. Close monitoring
can identify shirking even when performance measurement
is ambiguous. DEMO focal ﬁrm can also use this mechanism
when the partner has a reputation for defecting. In the
alliance context, budgeting covers the allocation of
resources to alliance members to enable them to perform
designated tasks. Budgets DEMO restrict wasteful
behavior by the partner. Since a minimum level of per-
formance is expected within speciﬁc budget constraints,
misrepresentations or delivery of DEMO goods
would very likely get detected. Therefore, budgets can
effectively put DEMO leash on an ill-reputed partner’s conduct
within the alliance. As a managerial tool, participatory
decision making involves bringing in representatives of all
member ﬁrms to make decisions regarding alliance goals,
maintenance, operations, performance, and the like. It also
bridges the gap in values, understanding, and DEMO
cation between partners. Furthermore, when alliance
members share in decision making, the inequity perceived
by each member can be readily addressed. For these DEMO
sons, participatory decision making will decrease the
potential for partner opportunism.
DEMO on the potential for partner opportunism, the
focal ﬁrm would be DEMO to use the optimally efﬁcient
combination of deterrence mechanisms to curb the inci-
dence of opportunism (Das 2005). In particular, managers
may DEMO able to select speciﬁc mechanisms that would be
appropriate for controlling partner opportunism generated
primarily by each of the three types of determinants. For
DEMO, if the focal ﬁrm is apprehensive of partner
opportunism that is DEMO predominantly by cultural
diversity (a relational determinant), it might well DEMO
size employee training designed speciﬁcally to foster sen-
sitivity to cultural differences and institute trust-building
processes.
In summary, we hope this article contributes toward
a better appreciation of the factors that account for
123
J Bus DEMO (2010) 25:55–74
opportunistic behavior of partner ﬁrms. The framework of
determinants proposed here should facilitate the rigorous
study of partner opportunism, thus far inadequately
examined as a problematic and complex phenomenon in
the ﬁeld DEMO strategic alliances.
References
Adams, J. S. (1963). Toward an understanding of inequity. Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67, 422–436.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1977). Attitude-behavior relations: A
theoretical DEMO and review of empirical research. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 84, 888–918.
Anderson, E., & Weitz, B. (1989). Determinants of continuity in
DEMO industrial channel dyads. Marketing Science, 8,
310–323.
Axelrod, R. (DEMO). The evolution of cooperation. New York: Basic
Books.
Barkema, H. G., & Vermeulen, F. (1997). What differences in the
cultural backgrounds of partners are detrimental for international
joint ventures? Journal of International Business Studies, 28,
845–864.
Beamish, P. W., & Banks, DEMO C. (1987). Equity joint ventures and the
theory of the DEMO enterprise. Journal of International
Business Studies, 18(2), 1–16.
Bleeke, J., & Ernst, D. (1991). The way to win cross-border alliances.
Harvard Business Review, 69(6), 127–135.
Blodgett, L. L. (1991). Partner contributions as predictors of equity
share in international joint DEMO Journal of International
Business Studies, 22, 63–78.
Brouthers, K. D., Brouthers, L. E., & Wilkinson, T. J. (1995).
Strategic DEMO: Choose your partners. Long Range Planning,
28(3), 18–25.
DEMO, J. R., Dev, C. S., & Lee, D.-J. (2000). Managing marketing
channel opportunism: The efﬁcacy of alternative governance
mechanisms. Journal of Marketing, 64(2), 51–65.
Brown, L. T., Rugman, DEMO M., & Verbeke, A. (1989). Japanese joint
ventures with DEMO multinationals: Synthesising the economic
and cultural explanations of failure. Asia Paciﬁc DEMO of
Management, 6, 225–242.
Buckley, P. J., & Casson, DEMO (1988). A theory of cooperation in
international business. In F. DEMO Contractor & P. Lorange (Eds.),
Cooperative strategies in international business (pp. 31–53).
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Business Wire. (2000)DEMO Bidland Systems sues Telefonica for breach of
contract; Multimillion dollar lawsuit DEMO against telecommuni-
cations giant. http://nrstg2s.djnr.com/cgi-bin/DJInter… Retrieved
12 Dec 2000.
Crookell, H., & Beamish, P. (2006). Cameron Auto DEMO (B)—
Revised (Case # 906M16). ON, Canada: Richard Ivey School of
Business, University of Western Ontario.
Cullen, J. B., Johnson, J. J., & Sakano, T. (1995). Japanese and DEMO
partner commitment to IJVs: Psychological consequences of
outcomes and investments in DEMO IJV relationship. Journal of
International Business Studies, 26, 91–115.
Das, DEMO K. (2004). Time-span and risk of partner opportunism in
strategic DEMO Journal of Managerial Psychology, 19, 744–
759.
Das, T. K. (2005). Deceitful behaviors of alliance partners: Potential
and prevention. Management Decision, 43, 706–719.
Das, T. K. (2006). Strategic alliance temporalities DEMO partner
opportunism. British Journal of Management, 17, 1–21.
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
Das, T. K., & DEMO, I. Y. (2006). Entrepreneurial ﬁrms in search of
established partners: Review and recommendations. Interna-
tional Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour & Research, DEMO,
114–143.
Das, T. K., & Kumar, R. (2007). Learning dynamics in the alliance
development process. Management Decision, 45, 684–707.
DEMO, T. K., & Kumar, R. (2009a). Interpartner harmony in strategic
alliances: Managing commitment and forbearance. International
Journal of Strategic Business Alliances, 1, 24–52.
Das, T. K., & Kumar, R. (2009b)DEMO Interpartner sensemaking in
strategic alliances: Managing cultural differences and internal
tensions. DEMO Decision, 47.
Das, T. K., & Kumar, R. (2009c)DEMO Interpretive schemes in cross-
national alliances: Managing conﬂicts and discrepancies. Man-
DEMO submitted for publication.
Das, T. K., & Kumar, R. (2009d). Regulatory focus and opportunism
in the alliance development process. Manuscript submitted DEMO
publication.
Das, T. K., & Rahman, N. (2001). Partner misbehavior in strategic
alliances: Guidelines for effective deterrence. Journal of General
Management, 27(1), 43–70.
Das, T. K., & Rahman, N. (2002). Opportunism dynamics in strategic
alliances. In F. J. Contractor & DEMO Lorange (Eds.), Cooperative
strategies and alliances (pp. 89–118). Oxford: Elsevier Science.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (1996). Risk types and inter-ﬁrm alliance
structures. Journal of Management Studies, 33, DEMO
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (1998). Between trust and control: Developing
conﬁdence in partner cooperation in alliances. Academy of
Management Review, 23, 491–512.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (DEMO). Managing risks in strategic alliances.
Academy of Management Executive, 13(DEMO), 50–62.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (2000). Instabilities of strategic alliances: An
internal tensions perspective. Organization Science, 11, 77–101.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (2001). Relational DEMO and its personal
correlates in strategic alliances. Journal of Business and
Psychology, 15, 445–461.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (2002a)DEMO The dynamics of alliance conditions
in the alliance development process. Journal of Management
Studies, 39, 725–746.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (2002b). Alliance constellations: A social
exchange perspective. Academy of Management DEMO, 27,
445–456.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (DEMO). The risk-based view of trust: A
conceptual framework. Journal of DEMO and Psychology, 19,
85–116.
Deeds, D. L., & Hill, C. W. L. (1999). An examination of opportunistic
action within research alliances: Evidence from the biotechnology
industry. Journal of Business Venturing, 14, 141–163.
Doney, P. M., Cannon, J. P., & Mullen, M. R. (1998). Understanding
the inﬂuence of national culture on the development of trust.
Academy of Management Review, 23, 601–620.
Doz, Y. L. (1996). The evolution of cooperation in strategic alliances:
Initial conditions or learning processes? Strategic Management
Journal, 17(Summer Special Issue), DEMO
Doz, Y. L., Olk, P. M., & Ring, P. DEMO (2000). Formation processes of
R&D consortia: Which path to take? Where does it lead?
Strategic Management Journal, 21, 239–266.
Dyer, J. H., & Singh, H. (1998). The relational DEMO: Cooperative
strategy and sources of interorganizational competitive advan-
tage. Academy of DEMO Review, 23, 660–679.
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1992). The psychology of attitudes. San
Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace DEMO
Gassenheimer, J. B., Baucus, D. B., & Baucus, M. DEMO (1996). Cooperative
arrangements among entrepreneurs: An analysis of opportunism
and communication in franchise structures. Journal of Business
Research, 36(1), 67–79.
73
Ghoshal, S., & Moran, P. (1996). Bad for DEMO: A critique of the
transaction cost theory. Academy of Management Review, 21,
13–47.
Glaister, K. W., & Buckley, P. J. (DEMO). Performance relationships in
UK international alliances. Management International Review,
39, 123–147.
Gould, L. J., Ebers, R., & Clinchy, R. DEMO (1999). The systems
psychodynamics of a joint venture: Anxiety, DEMO defenses, and
the management of mutual dependence. Human Relations, 52,
697–722.
Griesinger, D. W. (1990). The human side of economic DEMO
Academy of Management Review, 15, 478–499.
Gulati, R. (1995). Does familiarity breed trust? The implication of
repeated ties for contractual choice in alliances. Academy of
Management Journal, 38, 85–112.
Hamel, G. (DEMO). Competition for competence and inter-partner
learning within international strategic alliances. Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 12(Summer Special Issue), 83–103.
Harrigan, K. DEMO (1988). Strategic alliances and partner asymmetries.
In F. J. Contractor & P. Lorange (Eds.), Cooperative strategies
in international business (pp. 205–226). Lexington, MA: Lex-
ington Books.
Heide, J. B., & DEMO, A. S. (1992). The shadow of the future:
Effects of anticipated interaction and frequency of contact and
buyer-seller cooperation. Academy of DEMO Journal, 35,
265–291.
Helper, S., & Levine, D. I. (1992). Long-term supplier relations and
product-market structure. Journal of Law, DEMO & Orga-
nization, 8, 561–582.
Hill, C. W. L. (1990). Cooperation, opportunism, and the invisible
hand: Implications for transaction cost theory. Academy of
Management Review, 15, 500–513.
Hill, R. C., & Hellriegel, D. (1994). Critical contingencies in joint
venture management: DEMO lessons from managers. Organiza-
tion Science, 5, 594–607.
Hwang, P., & Burgers, W. P. (1997). The many faces of multi-ﬁrm
DEMO: Lessons for managers. California Management Review,
39(3), 101–117.
DEMO, G. (1984). An empirical investigation of some antecedents of
opportunism in a marketing channel. Journal of Marketing
Research, 21, 278–289.
Johnson, J. L., Cullen, J. B., & Sakano, T. (1996). Opportunistic
tendencies in IJVs with the Japanese: The effects of culture,
shared decision making, and relationship age. International
Executive, 38(1), DEMO
Joshi, A. W., & Stump, R. L. (1999). Determinants of commitment
and opportunism: Integrating and extending insights from
transaction cost analysis and relational exchange theory. Cana-
dian Journal of Administrative Sciences, 16, DEMO
Kanter, R. M. (1994). Collaborative advantage: The art of DEMO
Harvard Business Review, 72(4), 96–108.
Killing, J. P. (DEMO). How to make global joint venture work:
Learning to live with two parents is harder than managers think.
Harvard Business Review, 60(3), 120–127.
Klein, B. (1996). Why hold-ups occur: The self-enforcing range of
contractual relationships. Economic Inquiry, 34, 444–463.
Klein, B., Crawford, R. G., & Alchian, A. A. (1978). Vertical
integration, appropriable rents, and the competitive contracting
process. Journal of Law DEMO Economics, 21, 297–326.
Kumar, R., & Das, T. K. (2007). Interpartner legitimacy in the
alliance development process. Journal of Management DEMO,
44, 1425–1453.
Kumar, R., & Das, T. K. (DEMO). Strategic alliances and culture in a
globalizing world. In J. Ulijn, G. Duysters, & E. Meijer (Eds.),
Strategic alliances, mergers and acquisitions: The inﬂuence of
culture on successful cooperation. Cheltenham: Edward DEMO
123
74
Larson, A. (1992). Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: A study
of the governance of exchange relationships. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 37, DEMO
Lee, D.-J. (1998). Developing international strategic alliances between
exporters and importers: The case of Australian exporters.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 15, 335–348.
Lorange, P., & Roos, J. (1993). DEMO alliances: Formation,
implementation and evolution. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Luo, Y. (2007a). Are joint ventures more opportunistic in a more
volatile environment? Strategic Management Journal, 28, 39–60.
Luo, Y. (2007b). An integrated anti-opportunism system in interna-
tional exchange. Journal of International Business DEMO, 38,
855–877.
Masten, S. E. (1988). Equity, opportunism, and the design of contractual
relations. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 144,
180–195.
Meschi, P.-X., & Roger, A. (1994). Cultural context and social
effectiveness in international joint ventures. Management Inter-
national DEMO, 34, 197–215.
Nooteboom, B. (1996). Trust, opportunism and DEMO: A
process and control model. Organization Studies, 17, 985–1010.
Provan, K. G., & Skinner, S. J. (1989). Interorganizational depen-
dence and control as predictors of opportunism in dealer-supplier
relations. Academy of Management DEMO, 32, 202–212.
Rarick, C. A. (2004). Red Dragon Enterprises: A failing Chinese joint
venture (Case # 304-462-1). Miami, FL: Barry University.
Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. DEMO (1994). Developmental processes of
cooperative interorganizational relationships. Academy of Man-
DEMO Review, 19, 90–118.
Ross, W. T., Jr., Anderson, E., & Weitz, B. (1997). Performance
in principal-agent dyads: The DEMO and consequences of
123
J Bus Psychol (2010) 25:55–74
perceived asymmetry of commitment to the relationship. Man-
agement Science, 43, 680–704.
DEMO, T., Behrens, D., & Krackhardt, D. (2000). Redundant
governance structures: An analysis of structural and relational
embeddedness in the steel and semiconductor industries. Strategic
Management Journal, 21, 369–386.
Sako, M., & Helper, S. (1998). Determinants of trust in supplier
relations: DEMO from the automotive industry in Japan and
the United States. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organiza-
tion, 34, 387–417.
Schneider, S. C., & De Meyer, A. (1991). Interpreting and responding
to strategic issues: The impact of national culture. Strategic
Management Journal, 12, 307–320.
Telser, L. G. (1980). A theory of self-enforcing agreements. Journal
of DEMO, 53(1), 27–41.
Wathne, K. H., & Heide, J. B. (2000). Opportunism in interﬁrm
relationships: Forms, outcomes, and DEMO Journal of Mar-
keting, 64(4), 36–51.
Williamson, O. E. (1975). Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and
antitrust implications. New York: Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. (1979). Transaction-cost economics: The gover-
nance of contractual relations. Journal of Law and Economics, 22,
233–261.
Williamson, O. E. (1983). Credible commitments: Using hostages to
support exchange. American Economic Review, 73, 519–540.
Williamson, O. E. (1985)DEMO The economic institutions of capitalism.
New York: Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. (1993). Opportunism and its critics. Managerial
and Decision Economics, DEMO(2), 97–107.{1g42fwefx}