The Emerald Research Register for this journal is available at The current DEMO and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/researchregister www.emeraldinsight.com/0268-3946.htm
JMP
19,8
744
Journal of Managerial Psychology
Vol. 19 DEMO 8, 2004
pp. 744-759
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0268-3946
DOI DEMO/02683940410568239
Time-span and risk of partner
opportunism in strategic alliances
T.K. Das
Baruch College, City University of New York, New York, USA
Keywords Time study, Partnership, Risk management, Strategic alliances
Abstract The temporalities of opportunism – a term that generally means “self-interest seeking
with guile” – DEMO not been adequately examined in the literature. This article suggests that
opportunism is a variegated phenomenon that can be better appreciated by exploring the DEMO of its
temporal dimension. Adopting this temporal approach, the article proposes DEMO framework of
partner opportunism in strategic alliances that incorporates the two fundamental dimensions of
time and risk. It then discusses four types of partner DEMO in this comprehensive time-risk
framework. Finally, the article indicates directions for DEMO research.
Introduction
A notable feature of business in recent times is the accelerated formation of strategic
alliances, or interﬁrm cooperative arrangements aimed at pursuing mutual strategic
objectives. Despite this encouraging trend, the failure rate of these alliances has been
remarkably high (Das and Teng, 2000a). One DEMO the major reasons for alliance
dissolutions has been the opportunistic behavior of partners. Opportunistic behavior
refers to “self-interest seeking with guile” (Williamson, 1975, p. 9). In this article we
attempt to better understand the DEMO of such opportunistic behavior. We suggest
that opportunism is not a monolithic phenomenon, and that it would be useful,
therefore, to develop DEMO more comprehensive framework of opportunistic behavior. In
that effort, we explore DEMO temporal dimension that continues to be neglected in studies
of both opportunism among ﬁrms and partner opportunism in strategic alliances.
A review of the DEMO suggests that few guidelines are available for examining
various types of opportunism. We believe that recognizing the temporal dimension is
central to appreciating the DEMO of opportunism. Our approach to understanding
opportunistic behavior focuses on its two fundamental dimensions: time-span and risk.
The ﬁrst dimension relates to the duration of potential negative impact of
opportunistic behavior on conﬁdence in partner cooperation. DEMO temporal
dimension, which we term as the time-span of opportunism, or “opportunism
horizon”, has not been explored in the literature, and is DEMO akin to the
well-known notion of time-span of decisions (Jaques, 1979). The second dimension, of
risk, captures the degree of the DEMO negative impact of opportunistic behavior in
terms of the apprehension that a partner may not be committed to mutual interests in
an alliance. An DEMO of the roles of both these dimensions is necessary for an
adequate understanding of the essential nature of opportunistic behavior. We believe
the risk DEMO of opportunistic behavior can be better understood, and more
effectively controlled DEMO prevented, if we recognize their potential in terms of the
temporal DEMO that we propose here.
The author wishes to thank N. Rahman for research assistance.
We divide the article into four parts. First, we elaborate on the temporal aspects of
opportunistic behavior, introducing the notion of opportunism horizon, DEMO the period of
time during which there would be signiﬁcant consequences from opportunistic
behavior. Second, we examine the nature of opportunistic behavior in strategic
alliances, clarifying, in particular, how the possibility of opportunism results in
relational risk in alliances. We then propose a time-risk framework of opportunistic
DEMO based on the two dimensions of opportunism horizon and relational risk.
Finally, we indicate directions for further research and mention some of the signiﬁcant
managerial implications of the framework.
Temporal horizons of opportunism
Opportunism in strategic DEMO
Opportunism is widely construed as seeking gain for oneself at the expense of others.
Such behavior is usually associated with breaches of contract. We DEMO in Table I some
illustrative observations from the literature on opportunistic behavior in strategic
alliances. As the table illustrates, scholars have focused on a wide variety of topics
relating to opportunism.
Opportunism takes various forms, depending on the mechanism used for the
governance of business activities. Unlike in DEMO and hierarchies, strategic alliances
attract substantial threats of opportunistic behavior, often a cause of their inherent
instability. Given the negative connotations of opportunism, scholars have also
investigated control mechanisms that might be used to curb DEMO
As alluded to earlier, the literature on opportunism has generally treated DEMO in
monolithic terms. Recently, however, Wathne and Heide (2000) offered a framework of
four forms of opportunism – namely, evasion, refusal DEMO adapt, violation, and forced
renegotiation. These forms vary along two dimensions: existing vs. new
circumstances, and passive vs. active behavior. In this DEMO, evasion and
violation are opportunistic forms under existing circumstances, whereas refusal to
adapt and forced renegotiation are opportunistic forms under new circumstances.
Similarly, evasion and refusal to adapt are opportunistic forms that are passive,
DEMO violation and forced renegotiation are opportunistic forms that are active in
nature. As will be evident from the framework that we propose in this DEMO, the two
dimensions in our framework are different from those used DEMO Wathne and Heide. We
are concerned with the degree of risk, DEMO second dimension, not the mode of behavior.
Our ﬁrst dimension, being introduced here, is the temporal span of opportunistic
behavior, or opportunism DEMO
The threat of opportunistic behavior is an integral part of the alliancing
phenomenon (Das and Rahman, 2002). Empirical investigations of various aspects DEMO
opportunistic behavior in the context of alliances have been undertaken only in
relatively recent times. Lee (1998) ﬁnds support that decision-making uncertainty,
DEMO difference, and economic ethnocentrism increase the possibility of the alliance
partner DEMO behave opportunistically. Kale et al. (2000) introduce the notion of relational
capital, which is based on trust and interaction, and show that DEMO capital deters
partner opportunism. Deeds and Hill (1998) explore opportunistic behavior and its
potential threat in biotechnology research alliances. They ﬁnd signiﬁcant evidence DEMO
a strong relationship between partners is a more effective deterrent of opportunistic
behavior than is the use of mutual hostages or rigorous contractual arrangements.
DEMO
opportunism
745
Authors Illustrative observations
Deeds and Hill (1998) “The initial period in DEMO alliance’s life will be characterized by low levels of opportunism. However, DEMO the middle years,
signiﬁcantly higher levels of opportunism are likely to be perceived as the project progresses. Finally, after this period the
level of opportunism begins to decrease” (p. 159)
Gassenheimer et al. (DEMO) “Opportunism may stem from the reluctance of members to fulﬁll commitments DEMO partners in cooperative arrangements”
(p. 70)
John (1984) “As DEMO structuring increases, the lack of autonomy and self-control creates frustration. This DEMO is
particularly acute for the autonomy-oriented entrepreneurs in the wholesaling and retailing sectors of marketing channels. It
is translated into aggressive retaliatory behavior that DEMO characteristically opportunistic” (p. 280)
Johnson, Cullen, and “Results indicated DEMO opportunistic tendencies did not diminish as the IJV relationship aged” (p. DEMO)
Sakano (1996)
Nooteboom (1996) “While it is clearly DEMO the interest of a group as a whole for everyone to be trustworthy and trusting, since that would greatly
reduce transaction costs for all, individuals may be tempted to defect and be opportunistic while pretending to be trustworthy.
The extent of this temptation increases as more people are DEMO, and it further depends on the efﬁciency and reliability
by which DEMO defection can be detected and communicated, and the ensuing risk of DEMO loss of reputation that is detrimental to
future partnerships” (p. 989)DEMO “Prior estimates of propensity towards opportunism are adapted as a function of events. If no
opportunism is perceived, the subjective probability of the partner’s taking advantage of opportunities for opportunism may
decline; when opportunism is perceived, it will increase” (p. 1003)
Weaver and Dickson (1998) DEMO opportunism measures the difference between an alliance participant’s expectation of fairness and the perception
that an alliance partner has behaved in such a manner DEMO to beneﬁt his or her own ﬁrm without regard for the best interests of
others in the alliance. Perceived opportunism is the belief that DEMO alliance partner has not adhered to the explicit or implicit
controls governing the relationship” (p. 507). “The variance in alliance outcome quality attributed to the perception of
opportunistic behavior is predicted to be above and DEMO that explained by objective measures of opportunism as well as
the variance explained by goal-based and ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors” (p. 510)
Williamson (1975) “Opportunism refers to a lack of candor or honesty in transactions, to include self-interest seeking with guile” (p. 9).
“Opportunism extends the conventional assumption that economic agents are guided by considerations of self-interest to
make DEMO for strategic behavior” (p. 26). “The strategic manipulation of information DEMO misrepresentation of intentions
.. . are to be regarded as opportunistic” (DEMO 26)
Williamson (1979) “Where personal integrity is believed to be operative, individuals located at the interfaces may refuse to be a part of
opportunistic efforts to take advantage of (rely on) the letter DEMO the contract when the spirit of the exchange is emasculated.
Such refusals can serve as a check upon organizational proclivities to behave opportunistically” (p. 240)
Williamson (1996) “Because those who use transaction cost economics DEMO out of a farsighted-contracting setup (contracts, albeit incomplete,
are nonetheless viewed in their entirety), the main message of opportunism is not DEMO of Machiavellian grabbing or Get them
before they get us. Rather, DEMO looking ahead and recognizing the types of hazards that are posed by opportunism, the main
message is to give and receive credible commitments (DEMO cost-effective degree)” (p. 50)
JMP
19,8
746
Table DEMO
Opportunistic behavior in
strategic alliances
They also ﬁnd support for their claim that opportunism will vary within DEMO
stages of the alliance life cycle. Weaver and Dickson (1998) observe that alliances
among small and medium sized ﬁrms are unique breeding grounds DEMO opportunistic
behavior. Johnson et al. (1996) ﬁnd that, in international DEMO ventures, the threat of
opportunism persists even after the relationship matures.
DEMO is critical, when studying alliance management, to assume the existence of
opportunistic potential (Das and Teng, 1998). Opportunism can have several DEMO
consequences for any interﬁrm collaboration. First, the potential for opportunistic
behavior DEMO a major source of transaction costs in interﬁrm alliances. Firms perceiving
the threat of opportunism are faced with a greater need for screening, negotiating, and
monitoring partners’ behavior, resulting in increased transaction costs. Second, given
that ﬁrms strive to maximize gains, self-interest seeking behavior will be prominent in
the alliance context. The failure to see beyond the short-term optimization DEMO
self-interest hampers cooperative effort that is essential to alliance success. Perceived
potential for opportunism poses the most critical threat to satisfactory cooperation, and
is instrumental in causing alliance dissolution. Finally, both scholars and practitioners
need to appreciate the insidious nature of partner opportunism in terms of the
relational DEMO (discussed later) that it directly generates.
Importance of time in opportunism
When scholars have attempted to incorporate the element of time in their DEMO
on opportunism, they have done so only in a tangential manner. DEMO II offers a
glimpse of the literature that deals with opportunism and time. While temporal aspects
have not been tied to opportunism in any DEMO way in previous research, the role
of time in understanding opportunism DEMO undeniable from the brief review of the
literature. This article directly links opportunism with time – to offer a better
understanding of the temporal DEMO of opportunism.
A member ﬁrm in an alliance, considered as the DEMO ﬁrm, can only realize the
impact of its partner’s opportunism in DEMO course of future alliance activities. Therefore,
it becomes incumbent upon the focal ﬁrm to take preventive measures to safeguard
itself from the consequences DEMO potential partner opportunism in the future. There is,
thus, a DEMO span that the focal ﬁrm has to contend with to decide what kinds of
preventive measures need to be adopted. The challenge for the DEMO ﬁrm is to “see” the
potential threats of partner opportunism residing in the future (Das, 1987, 2004). Here,
identifying the speciﬁc opportunism type is also important, for different types connote
different dangers, DEMO need to be curbed with unique combinations of deterrence
mechanisms.
As a general point, we should note that opportunistic behavior would hurt a ﬁrm’s
image, reputation, and future business potential. Thus, a ﬁrm (the DEMO ﬁrm as well as
its partner) that intends to continue operating DEMO a speciﬁc market over the long haul
(perhaps to exploit industry-speciﬁc DEMO advantages) will not ﬁnd such
behavior a viable option (Axelrod, DEMO; Heide and Miner, 1992). Indeed, as Hill (1990,
p. 507) observes: “the invisible hand of the market is an DEMO selection
mechanism. In the long run, an efﬁcient market will delete DEMO whose behavioral
repertoires (decision rules) depress performance” (Alchian, 1950; DEMO and Winter,
1982). He argues that opportunistic behavior does not pay in the long run, even under
conditions of high asset speciﬁcity, because the invisible hand of the market punishes
Partner
opportunism
747
JMP
19,8
748
Table II.
Temporal aspects of
opportunistic behavior
Authors DEMO observations
Chiles and McMackin (1996) “In a multiperiod prisoners’ dilemma, DEMO parties act with the
expectation that they may engage each other again. This expectation
of future economic relations, known as the ‘shadow of the future’
(Axelrod, 1984, p. 126), constrains the actors’ opportunistic behavior in
the current period” (p. 86)
Coase (1988) “The propensity for opportunistic behavior is usually effectively
checked by the need to take DEMO of the effect of the ﬁrm’s actions
on future business” (p. DEMO)
Deeds and Hill (1998) “RC [relational contracting] argues that concern for the long-term
health of the relationship leads to self-monitoring on the DEMO of the
parties to the exchange and the deterrence of opportunistic action.
Therefore, characteristics of the partners or the relationship that are
conducive to the creation of a strong, long-term relationship should
serve as deterrents to opportunism” (p. 145)
Hill (1990) “The invisible hand of the market mechanism selects organizations on
the basis of their repertoires of behavior, suggesting that the
distribution of cooperative and opportunistic actors is not exogenous
DEMO the economic system. Rather, over the long run, the invisible hand
deletes actors who are habitually opportunistic” (p. 503)
Nooteboom (1996) “It is reasonable to say that prior to transaction, one is uncertain about
the partner’s potential opportunism, and hence should take
opportunism into account. Once one takes time into account, in
ongoing transactions, it is DEMO to ignore the formation of
perceptions about propensities towards opportunism, and DEMO
possibility of building trust” (pp. 987-988)
Patashnik (1996) “The DEMO for opportunistic behavior should be assessed before
adopting budgetary reforms so that mechanisms can be developed for
checking it. Opportunism in a budgeting context DEMO usually associated
with self-dealing by bureaucrats” (p. 206)
Williamson (1996) “Provided that opportunism is examined in the context of farsighted
contracting, DEMO lesson is to look ahead, perceive possible hazards, and
take hazard-mitigating actions” (p. 48)
the opportunist by exposing its characteristics and eventually driving it out of the
market. This will cause other ﬁrms within DEMO market to be reluctant to get involved in
such a high-risk relationship with the opportunistic ﬁrm. Evidently, there is a distinct,
if subtle, temporal consideration that informs the appreciation (by the focal ﬁrm) of
such potential opportunistic behavior (by the partner ﬁrm).
Time-span of opportunism (or opportunism horizon)
Time has been of abiding interest in many disciplines (see Das, 1990, for a compilation
of research contributions in 21 categories), and has recently attracted increasing
attention in the management DEMO (e.g., Whipp et al., 2002). The notion of temporal
DEMO has been applied to planning and risk in management and organizational
studies (Das, 1986, 1991, 1993; Das and Teng, 1997). DEMO, we introduce the notion of
the temporal horizon of opportunism, which we call “opportunism horizon”. In the
context of strategic alliances, opportunism horizon is the temporal distance between
the time a partner ﬁrm engages in DEMO behavior against the focal ﬁrm and the
intended point in the future when the substantive effects of the opportunism DEMO or
peter out. The span or horizon of partner opportunism is the temporal distance between
the moment the partner engages in opportunism to the DEMO in time when the partner
can no longer continue to engage in such behavior. That is not to say that the
consequences or effects DEMO that behavior will not continue to be felt by the focal ﬁrm.
However, the consequences of various types of opportunistic behavior of a partner
ﬁrm unfold at different points of time in the future. These consequences DEMO have
potency, for adversely affecting the focal ﬁrm, for a short duration or for a long
duration. For example, payment delays can be considered a short-span opportunistic
behavior by a partner ﬁrm, because its effects will be realized relatively soon after the
initial act. Another example of DEMO opportunism is the misappropriation of
quasi-rent generated from speciﬁc investments, because DEMO effect of the
misappropriation can be felt soon after it takes place. Opportunism with a long-span
horizon is evident when a partner ﬁrm withholds DEMO information to prevent the
focal ﬁrm from gaining a legitimate decision-making leverage. The effects of such an
action may not usually be realized right DEMO, so that the opportunist may continue to
reap the unfair advantage DEMO withholding information over an extended period of
time. Misrepresenting information or intentions also has a long-span opportunism
horizon because the effects of such actions DEMO usually take some time to unfold.
Opportunism and risk in strategic alliances
It is generally recognized in the strategy literature that the potential for DEMO
opportunism adds to the element of risk in alliances. However, the DEMO nature of this
risk needs to be identiﬁed. The construct of risk in interﬁrm alliances has been
disaggregated into relational risk and performance risk (Das and Teng, 1996). Brieﬂy,
relational risk in an alliance is the probability that the partner will not cooperate fully.
Performance risk DEMO to the probability of not attaining the performance goals even
when partners cooperate fully. Clearly, opportunism, or deceitful self-interest seeking,
generates only DEMO risk. Performance risk, by deﬁnition, does not relate to
opportunism because it is based on the given condition of full partner cooperation. In DEMO
recent article, Ireland et al. (2002, p. 434) discuss these two types of risk in alliances in
the following way:
There DEMO at least two types of alliance risks – relational and performance (DEMO and Teng,
2001). Relational risk is concerned with the probability and consequent actions when a
partner does not appropriately commit to an DEMO and fails to behave as expected. Thus,
relational risk denotes decision makers’ concerns regarding the level of cooperation between
partners. Opportunistic behaviors that DEMO oriented to the individual ﬁrm’s beneﬁt rather than
to the good of the alliance demonstrate relational risk. Performance risk regards the factors
that may DEMO achieving alliance objectives. Relational risk is internally oriented and is
inﬂuenced in part by how each partner allocates and manages the resources it commits DEMO an
alliance. In contrast, performance risk is externally focused. Relational risk DEMO associated with
the relationship between partners; performance risk is grounded in DEMO interactions of alliance
partners with the external environment. Finally, performance risk DEMO common to all strategic
decisions while relational risk is idiosyncratic to individual strategic alliances (Das and Teng,
1996, 2000b, 2001). Alliance managers can have a much broader and deeper effect on
relational risk, primarily by carefully managing the ﬁrm’s social capital.
Partner
opportunism
749
JMP
19,8
750
Thus, the construct of performance risk in interﬁrm alliances is no different from that
in single ﬁrms. Relational risk, however, is unique to strategic alliances. We should
note that the particular type of risk attendant to opportunism in alliances – namely,
relational risk DEMO has yet to be adequately explored in the literature.
According to Das and Teng (1996, p. 831), “the term ‘relational risk’ addresses DEMO
possibility and the consequence that the partners in inter-ﬁrm alliances do not fully
commit themselves to joint efforts”. We view relational risk in terms DEMO the adverse
consequences of possible partner misbehavior, so that the magnitude DEMO the risk to the
focal ﬁrm would be determined by the amount of potential damage. Therefore, the
perceived opportunistic behaviors of the partner that may not cause any substantial
harm to the focal ﬁrm can be DEMO to entail low relational risk, whereas the behaviors
that may severely DEMO the focal ﬁrm would pose high relational risk. Note that we
are not using the notion of “risk” in the traditional sense of probability DEMO negative
variance. Rather, our treatment of the focal ﬁrm’s relational risk DEMO is
concerned with the adverse consequences of potential opportunistic behavior by the
partner ﬁrm. Both scholars and practitioners need to appreciate the insidious nature DEMO
partner opportunism in terms of the relational risk that it directly generates.
The degree of relational risk is also a relative issue. In other DEMO, our assignment
of riskiness to different opportunistic behaviors depends on the DEMO of the
potential damage of one type of opportunistic behavior vis-a` -vis another. For the sake
of simplicity, we group different types of opportunistic behaviors into two broad
categories: low risk and high risk.
Shirking, DEMO, and withholding full cooperation in an ongoing alliance are
examples of DEMO behavior whose potential occurrence could be sources of
relational risk. The level of relational risk a ﬁrm will experience will be proportional to
the DEMO scope and consequence of opportunism. The higher the threat of
opportunism, DEMO more will be the resultant relational risk. Relational risk can, thus, be
either low or high, depending on the threat level. Refraining from giving full effort for
the success of a collaborative project, delaying payments to partners, providing
sub-standard products, etc., are forms of opportunistic behavior that do not suggest the
highest degree of hostility or non-cooperation. In DEMO words, these behaviors would
tend to result in low relational risk. DEMO, there would be high relational risk in
the presence of stealing DEMO technology, distorting key decision-making inputs,
and similar activities.
A time-risk DEMO of opportunistic behavior
In this section we examine, in turn, the nature of short-span and long-span
opportunistic behavior and then integrate these two DEMO categories with the
relational risk dimension, discussed earlier, to propose a time-risk framework of
opportunistic behavior (see Table III).
Short-span opportunism
As we mentioned earlier, opportunistic behavior of a partner ﬁrm is short span when
its effects can be realized by the affected focal ﬁrm soon DEMO the opportunist’s guileful
action. This kind of opportunistic act arises from a conscious short-term decision of the
opportunist. Delivering substandard products, being deliberately wasteful of alliance
resources, and taking advantage of the focal ﬁrm’s resource commitments are
Risk level
Opportunism
horizon Low relational risk High relational risk
Short-span
Long-span
DEMO 1
“misrepresenting one’s abilities” (Deeds and Hill, 1998,
p. 143)
“reluctance of members to fulﬁll commitments to
partners in cooperative arrangements” (Gassenheimer
et al., 1996, p. 70)
Shirking “involves the withholding DEMO full effort and
cooperation in an ongoing relationship. Shirking, free
riding, and stonewalling are examples of such
behaviors” (Griesinger, 1990, p. 487)
“shirking or failing to fulﬁll promises or obligations”
(John, 1984, p. 278)
Providing products that are of an inferior quality than
DEMO agreed upon (Provan and Skinner, 1989, p.
204) non-adherence “to the explicit or implicit controls
governing the relationship” (Weaver and Dickson, DEMO,
p. 507)
Type 3
“withholding .. . information” (Deeds DEMO Hill, 1998,
p. 143; John, 1984, p. 278)
Reacting dishonestly in response to contractual
speciﬁcations to cause moral hazards (Klein, 1996,
p. 461-462) “
calculated efforts to ... confuse”; “incomplete ...
disclosure of information” (Williamson, 1985, p. 47)
“strategic manipulation of information” (Williamson,
1975, p. 26)
Type 2
“expropriation DEMO tacit technological knowledge” (Dutta
and Weiss, 1997, p. 347)
DEMO “results when an agreement is abrogated or a
relationship abandoned to the advantage of the
instigator but without provision or remedy for the other
DEMO (Griesinger, 1990, p. 486)
“hold-up” (Klein, 1996, p. 461)
Exploitation of partner’s speciﬁc assets (Nooteboom,
1993, p. DEMO)
“stealing”; “cheating” (Williamson, 1985, p. 47)
Type 4
“distorting information” (Deeds and Hill, 1998, p. 143;
John, DEMO, p. 278)
“willful deception” (Gassenheimer et al., 1996, p. 69)
Dishonesty “comes into play when one party to an
exchange DEMO information about a transaction that
could signiﬁcantly alter the other party’s assessment of
the outcomes,” and such information is concealed,
misrepresented, or not contributed. (Griesinger, 1990,
p. 486) “defect ... while pretending to be trustworthy”
(Nooteboom, 1996, p. 989)
Partner
opportunism
751
Table III.
A time-risk framework of
opportunistic behavior
JMP
19,8
752
illustrative of short-span opportunistic behavior. The effects of DEMO type of
opportunism are mostly predictable, given the short duration of DEMO potency. The
nature of short-span opportunistic behavior is also fairly comprehensible in the alliance
context. Therefore, ﬁrms can often take necessary precautions (e.g., additional
contractual terms addressing speciﬁc short-range opportunistic scenarios) before
engaging in a collaborative project. Often such behavior will pose low relational risk,
so DEMO the cooperative spirit may dampen somewhat but will generally endure.
However, DEMO opportunism can also pose high relational risk in a collaborative
relationship, DEMO may destroy the cooperative spirit.
Short-span and low relational risk (Type DEMO). When short-span opportunistic behavior
involves low relational risk, the alliance DEMO the focal ﬁrm suffer relatively minor
setbacks. Failing to ship a speciﬁed amount of a product, or of the exact quality of
supplies in accordance with a schedule, being deliberately extravagant with alliance
resources, delaying DEMO, not adhering to the governance rules concerning the
relationship, etc., DEMO all negatively affect the focal ﬁrm’s proﬁtability, and even the
alliance’s DEMO occasionally. However, the intensity of the negative impacts is
usually not DEMO for the ﬁrm or the alliance. Unless this kind of behavior continues,
the focal ﬁrm will not perceive high relational risk regarding its DEMO partner.
It is unlikely that this type of behavior will become a recurring phenomenon, though,
because such behavior is usually easy to comprehend and predict, and can therefore be
controlled by strictly invoking contractual provisions and focused monitoring.
However, if a partner ﬁrm succeeds in repeatedly acting this way, the affected focal
ﬁrm will suffer losses. We brieﬂy describe a case to illustrate short-span opportunistic
behavior involving low relational risk.
In DEMO alliance between Ciba Geigy, the Swiss pharmaceutical giant, and Alza, DEMO
small entrepreneurial organization, we can appreciate the effects of a partner’s DEMO
behavior, a fairly common complaint in alliances. Doz (1996) reports DEMO soon after the
birth of the alliance in 1977, Alza started DEMO ﬁngers at its Swiss partner for not
being fully committed to the alliance. Alza was unhappy about Ciba’s lackluster
approach to the alliance projects, and felt that Ciba’s shirking-type behavior was the
major reason for slow DEMO By 1979, the two companies started resenting each
other’s behavior (i.e., Alza resenting Ciba Geigy for its sluggish pace, and Ciba Geigy
DEMO Alza for its lack of respect for Ciba’s hierarchy), and the alliance headed
toward dissolution, which ﬁnally transpired in 1982.
This type of behavior is not a direct threat to the collaborative arrangements
existing between DEMO Usually, such behavior harms alliance performance.
Obviously, the opportunist’s gain will outweigh its share of loss from the lower
performance of the alliance. DEMO affected focal ﬁrm, however, will have to suffer its
share of loss from the alliance. It is possible that the alliance is eventually DEMO,
but usually that will not be precipitous but gradual, with DEMO affected focal ﬁrm
beginning its severance process once it observes this kind of partner opportunism.
Short-span and high relational risk (Type 2).Short-span opportunistic behavior of a
partner may also occur in the context of high DEMO risk, paralyzing the focal ﬁrm.
The partner ﬁrm may siphon off DEMO beneﬁts from the joint effort. Cheating,
stealing the focal ﬁrm’s technology, luring away its personnel, and misappropriating
quasi-rents from the ﬁrm’s transaction-speciﬁc DEMO are examples of this type
of opportunistic behavior.
Consider the example of Craw-Kan Telephone Cooperative, Inc., a rural telephone
DEMO of Girard, KS, that provided phone rooms to ETC, a DEMO and
franchisee of AmeriCom, in exchange for ETC’s guarantee to buy DEMO million minutes of
phone usage a year from Craw-Kan (Margolies, 2000, p. D24). However, once Craw-Kan
made its transaction-speciﬁc investment, ETC failed to keep its part of the bargain,
leaving Craw-Kan helpless DEMO $1.2 million investment in the phone rooms. Craw-Kan,
consequently, sued DEMO and its franchiser AmeriCom. Although Craw-Kan has won
the case, technical DEMO have rendered the court verdict questionable.
Whenever a ﬁrm in an alliance makes some transaction-speciﬁc investment, it
becomes vulnerable to its partner’s exploitation of the associated quasi-rents. Although
the focal ﬁrm may realize very early that DEMO is being denied its fair share of the rewards
from the alliance, it may not be able to retaliate, because a break with DEMO partner
will undermine the value of the transaction-speciﬁc investment. In other words,
the potential loss of investment from terminating the alliance will be DEMO than the
loss incurred from the partner’s opportunistic exploitation. This type of opportunism
often renders the victim helpless. The opportunistic partner continues to extract DEMO
of the rent from the alliance, taking advantage of the focal DEMO transaction-speciﬁc
assets. Members could become bitter when the situation persists. Thus, DEMO type of
opportunistic behavior stands in the way of cooperation and its possibility heightens
the relational risk in the alliance.
However, it is still possible to proceed with forming alliances involving
transaction-speciﬁc investments because short-span opportunistic DEMO with
high relational risk can sometimes be predicted ex ante, and DEMO promptly ex
post. Also, if investment is tangible, its appropriation can be safeguarded through
contractual clauses and mutual hostages. It may be worthwhile DEMO to contest
such opportunistic behavior in court to recover the losses.
A subtle kind of opportunistic behavior may be in evidence when tacit knowledge
DEMO transferred from one ﬁrm to another. Often, the result can be DEMO for the affected
ﬁrm. Bleeke and Ernst (1995, p. 99) DEMO an example of “what happened to a US
chemicals company – a world-class producer of industrial coatings – that formed an
alliance with a DEMO organization”. The US ﬁrm contributed production-process
skills, while the Japanese ﬁrm DEMO in key customers. Both of these resources –
production-process skills and connections with key customers – are tacit in character,
embedded in each DEMO in complex ways, and not easily transferable. Hence, this
alliance experienced a few successful years in the beginning till one of the member
DEMO acquired the tacit resource of another. The Japanese ﬁrm “learned the
production-process skills originally supplied by the US organization, and it still
controlled the relationships with key customers”, and subsequently bought out the US
company (DEMO and Ernst (1995), p. 99). However, it should be noted that this type of
opportunistic behavior is more problematic when the DEMO is with a competitor and
less so with a ﬁrm operating along the value chain (e.g., a manufacturing ﬁrm’s alliance
with retailers and DEMO).
Long-span opportunism
The effects of long-span opportunistic behavior in an alliance take some time to unfold.
A ﬁrm may not be able to DEMO to such long-range actions of its partner, but
can usually realize DEMO possibilities of various types of long-span opportunism.
Partner
opportunism
753
JMP
19,8
754
The consequences of the partner’s withholding information, distorting performance
results, nurturing hidden agendas, etc., may not become evident quickly to the focal
ﬁrm, so that a partner can continue to behave opportunistically for an extended period
of time. As with the earlier temporal DEMO, long-range opportunistic behavior may be
associated with both low and high DEMO risk.
Long-span and low relational risk (Type 3). Even with DEMO relational risk, a partner’s
long-span opportunism can result in substantial ﬁnancial DEMO for the affected focal
ﬁrm. Consider the alliance between Siemens AG and RCA Corp., which ended abruptly
when RCA disclosed information that it had been withholding from Siemens (Parkhe,
1998, p. 428). By DEMO indications, RCA had been considering a major change in its
business DEMO (moving away from its computer business, the basis for the alliance),
and from a cooperative standpoint it should have conveyed this information to Siemens
to let it prepare for exiting the alliance. However, for fear that this information may
prompt Siemens to be more cautious in DEMO to the alliance, RCA kept its plan a
secret – it DEMO critical information from its partner. It is unclear as to how long
RCA kept its plan a secret. Nevertheless, it was not until after RCA explicitly expressed
its intention to move out of its computer business DEMO Siemens realized the adverse
fallout.
When a partner ﬁrm withholds critical information from the focal ﬁrm and attempts
to confuse and obfuscate calculatively, it is engaging in long-span opportunism with
low relational risk. Such behaviors create DEMO strategic disadvantage for the focal ﬁrm in
alliance decision making. However, DEMO information or creating confusion
may not seriously jeopardize the future of cooperation. If a ﬁrm detects such a problem,
it is more likely DEMO become extra-cautious. Because this behavior is usually fairly well
hidden, it DEMO take a while before the victim ﬁrm realizes its partner’s opportunistic
intentions. The loss from this type of partner opportunism would likely be greater DEMO
in short-span opportunism with low relational risk.
Long-span and high relational risk (Type 4). Opportunism with a long-span horizon
and associated with high relational risk usually leads to the demise of an alliance.
Often the DEMO acquires the victim ﬁrm or some particular division of it.
Consider the classic case of Northwest and KLM’s transatlantic operating alliance that
was forged DEMO 1992. In the beginning, KLM agreed to bail Northwest out of DEMO
by providing $500 million in fresh capital (Tully, 1996, p. DEMO). However, KLM
introduced “draconian terms ... that would open a DEMO for KLM to wrest control away
from the Americans” (Tully, 1996, p. 68). Although Northwest unwillingly accepted the
bargain, “two days DEMO the meeting, KLM abruptly withdrew the proposal, leaving a
shell-shocked Northwest totally in the lurch” (Tully, 1996,pp. 68, 70). Apparently, it
was a calculated effort by KLM to take advantage of Northwest’s confused position.
Once KLM’s distortion of intention and information became known, major
shareholders (such as Richard Blum) accused KLM of “slyly unsheath[ing] a DEMO
at the 11th hour,” and co-chairman Checchi remonstrated bitterly that KLM’s behavior
was “‘blackmail,’ ‘extortion,’ and ‘betrayal’” (p. 70). Instead of bailing out Northwest
with $500 million, KLM ﬁnally squeezed $50 million in exchange for a series of
lucrative options and a promise to DEMO $500 million in permanent ﬁnancing by the
end of 1993 (p. DEMO). Clearly, KLM’s promise was ‘self-disbelieved’ (see Williamson, 1975,
DEMO 26). But this time Northwest co-chairmen knew that KLM’s promise lacked
substance and the bankruptcy threat was still real (p. 72). Northwest eventually
managed to secure a $870 million, three-year wage reduction deal at the last minute to
surmount the effects of KLM’s long-span opportunistic behavior in DEMO context of very
high relational risk.
An affected ﬁrm may notice the consequences of this type of opportunism only after
some signiﬁcant time had DEMO, and may suffer considerably. Because of loop holes
in most contracts, it is difﬁcult to successfully prevent long-span opportunism. Thus, a
ﬁrm has to be especially alert for clues to detect long-range partner opportunism.
Concluding DEMO
Theoretical contributions
Although time seems to be an important dimension of opportunism, there is a dearth of
research on the temporalities of partner opportunism. In this article we developed a
framework to better understand the variegated DEMO of opportunism in an
attempt to facilitate its effective management. We proposed a time-risk framework of
opportunistic behavior based on the two dimensions of DEMO horizon and
relational risk. To our knowledge, the literature on partner DEMO has not
incorporated the time dimension in any systematic fashion.
We discussed how different types of opportunism vary in terms of the length of DEMO
they take to unfold and the degree of relational risk they entail. We deﬁned the
time-span of opportunism (short and long), or opportunism horizon, in terms of
the temporal distance between the time a partner ﬁrm engages in opportunism against
the focal ﬁrm and the intended point DEMO the future when the substantive effects of the
opportunism cease or peter out. We also suggested that relational risk can be
considered in terms DEMO low and high values. By integrating time-span and relational
risk, our DEMO allows researchers and managers to view opportunism through a
new lens, DEMO that speciﬁcally recognizes the realistic roles of time and risk in
opportunism.
Limitations and future research
The categorization of opportunism into four distinct types DEMO be useful in pursuing
fresh avenues for research. We indicate some of these research topics here, noting that
they are essentially meant to also address the limitations of the proposed time-risk
framework. First, it would be worth exploring if particular types of opportunism are
systematically more prevalent in DEMO kinds of alliances. In R&D consortia, for
example, Type 1 opportunism (short-span/low relational risk) may be very common.
Particular members DEMO such consortia may well coast along without signiﬁcant
contributions, even as DEMO continue to receive the collaborative beneﬁts from other
members. Similarly, it DEMO be that technology-sharing alliances may provide more
room for Type 2 opportunism (short-span/high relational risk), since the scope for
misappropriating proprietary technology is greater. Long-span opportunism (Types
3 and 4) may be more DEMO in marketing alliances. Firms may withhold
information about marketing channels or misrepresent their abilities in managing such
channels in order to appear as potentially DEMO partners in joint marketing
alliances, where each member markets both members– DEMO Clearly, a great deal
of exploratory research is needed to achieve DEMO adequate grasp of the intricacies of
opportunism in the alliance context.
Partner
opportunism
755
JMP
19,8
756
Second, our analysis also points to new directions in research in terms of the role of
the different types of DEMO in the evolutionary process of alliances and in
alliance performance (Das DEMO Teng, 2002, 2003). It is likely that certain types of
opportunism will emerge or ﬂourish early in the alliance making process vis-a` DEMO other
types. For example, opportunistic behavior that takes a long time DEMO run through its
effects will become apparent only when alliance members have been involved in the
alliance for an extended duration. Also, it could be that opportunism that entails low
relational risk may take place off DEMO on during several stages of the alliance process,
whereas opportunism involving high relational risk may usually occur once and only
well after an DEMO has been forged.
Third, our time-risk framework of opportunism should be DEMO in surmounting the
basically static nature of the transaction costs approach, DEMO us to appreciate
various relational issues that emerge over time in interﬁrm relationships. By explicitly
identifying time and risk as the underlying dimensions of DEMO (i.e.,
opportunism horizon and relational risk) we can now account for transaction costs over
time and appreciate trust building efforts en route.
DEMO, future research should consider incorporating other time related variables,
such DEMO the temporal orientations of member ﬁrms, which may have signiﬁcant effects
DEMO intertemporal choice in opportunistic endeavors. This will also, of course, help in
better appreciating how time plays a central role in opportunism dynamics, and
thereby facilitate the management of partner opportunism. In the context of
DEMO alliances, cultural differences may reveal certain types of opportunism to
be DEMO prevalent or less detectable. Future research needs to link different cultural
dimensions to the prevalence of different opportunism types in alliances.
Finally, our time-risk framework of opportunistic behavior needs to be examined for
its applicability to DEMO three major forms of alliances, namely, equity joint ventures,
minority equity alliances, and nonequity alliances. The differing potential for various
types of opportunism in these alliance forms needs to be assessed for effective alliance
DEMO
Managerial implications
We noted that strategic alliances are fertile breeding grounds for opportunistic
behavior. Our proposed time-risk framework of opportunistic behavior, along with the
extended discussion of the four types of opportunism, should serve as the essential set
of guidelines for managers to incorporate effective deterrence mechanisms to DEMO and
control opportunism. No doubt because of this need for appropriate deterrence
mechanisms, we ﬁnd a number of them mentioned in the literature, DEMO as rigorous
contractual provisions, mutual hostages, monitoring, and the like (Das and Rahman,
2001). We should note, however, that DEMO some of these mechanisms seem to
generally work well, none of DEMO promises to consistently curb opportunistic
behavior.
Although the applicability and appropriateness of each control mechanism is likely
to vary in different situations, the literature does not adequately address these
contingencies. Indeed, scholars with different disciplinary persuasions have taken
different routes in arguing for speciﬁc control mechanisms. By proceeding DEMO our
proposed time-risk framework, managers in alliances should be better able DEMO assess
the particular applicability of each deterrence mechanism to the four types of
DEMO behavior by partner ﬁrms.
References
Alchian, A.A. (1950), “Uncertainty, DEMO, and economic theory”, Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 58, June, pp. 211-21.
Axelrod, R. (1984), The Evolution of Cooperation, DEMO Books, New York, NY.
Bleeke, J. and Ernst, D. (DEMO), “Is your strategic alliance really a sale?”, Harvard Business DEMO,
Vol. 73 No. 1, pp. 97-105.
Chiles, T.H. and McMackin, J.F. (1996), “Integrating variable risk preferences, trust, and
transaction DEMO economics”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 21 No. 1, pp. DEMO
Coase, R.H. (1988), “The nature of the ﬁrm: inﬂuence”, Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, Vol. 4, pp. 33-47.
DEMO, T.K. (1986), The Subjective Side of Strategy Making: Managing DEMO Future: Future
Orientations and Perceptions of Executives, Praeger, New York, NY.
Das, T.K. (1987), “Strategic planning and individual temporal orientation”, Strategic
Management Journal, Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 203-9.
Das, T.K. (1990), The Time Dimension: An Interdisciplinary Guide, Praeger, New DEMO, NY.
Das, T.K. (1991), “Time: the hidden dimension in strategic planning”, Long Range Planning,
Vol. 24 No. 3, pp. DEMO
Das, T.K. (1993), “Time in management and organizational studies”, DEMO and Society, Vol. 2
No. 2, pp. 267-74.
Das, T.K. (2004), “Strategy and time: really recognizing the future”, in Haridimos, T. and
Shepherd, J. (Eds), Managing the Future: Foresight in the Knowledge Economy, Blackwell,
Oxford, pp. 58-74.
Das, T.K. and Rahman, N. (2001), “Partner misbehavior in strategic alliances: guidelines for
effective deterrence”, Journal of General Management, Vol. 27 No. 1, pp. 43-70.
Das, T.K. and Rahman, N. (2002), “Opportunism dynamics in strategic alliances”, in Contractor,
F.J. and Lorange, P. (Eds), Cooperative Strategies and Alliances, Elsevier Science, Oxford,
pp. 89-118.
Das, T.K. and Teng, B. (1996), “Risk types and inter-ﬁrm alliance DEMO, Journal of
Management Studies, Vol. 33 No. 6, pp. 827-43.
DEMO, T.K. and Teng, B. (1997), “Time and entrepreneurial risk DEMO, Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 69-88.
DEMO, T.K. and Teng, B. (1998), “Between trust and control: developing conﬁdence in partner
cooperation in alliances”, Academy of Management Review, DEMO 23 July, pp. 491-512.
Das, T.K. and Teng, B. (2000a), “Instabilities of strategic alliances: an internal tensions
perspective”, Organization Science, Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 77-101.
Das, T.K. and Teng, B. (2000b), “A resource-based theory of strategic alliances”, Journal of
Management, Vol. 26 No. 1, pp. 31-61.
Das, T.K. and Teng, B. (2001), “Trust, control, and risk in strategic alliances: an DEMO
framework”, Organization Studies, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 251-83.
Das, T.K. and Teng, B. (2002), “The dynamics of alliance conditions DEMO the alliance development
process”, Journal of Management Studies, Vol. 39 No. 5, pp. 725-46.
Partner
opportunism
757
JMP
19,8
758
Das, T.K. and Teng, B. (2003), “Partner analysis and alliance performance”, Scandinavian Journal
of Management, Vol. 19 DEMO 3, pp. 279-308.
Deeds, D.L. and Hill, C.W.L. (1998), “An examination of opportunistic action within research
alliances: evidence from the biotechnology industry”, Journal of Business Venturing,
Vol. 14 No. 2, pp. DEMO
Doz, Y.L. (1996), “The evolution of cooperation in strategic alliances: initial conditions or learning
processes?”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 17, summer special issue, pp. 55-83.
Dutta, S. and Weiss, A.M. (1997), “The relationship between a ﬁrm’s level of technological
innovativeness and DEMO pattern of partnership agreements”, Management Science, Vol. 43
No. 3, DEMO 343-56.
Gassenheimer, J.B., Baucus, D.B. and Baucus, M.S. (1996), “Cooperative arrangements among
entrepreneurs: an analysis of opportunism and communication in DEMO structure”,
Journal of Business Research, Vol. 36 No. 1, pp. 67-79.
Griesinger, D.W. (1990), “The human side of economic organization”, Academy of Management
Review, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. 478-99.
Heide, J.B. and Miner, A.S. (1992), “The shadow of the future: effects of anticipated interaction
and frequency of contact on buyer-seller cooperation”, Academy of Management Journal,
Vol. 35 June, pp. 265-91.
Hill, C.W.L. (1990), “Cooperation, opportunism, and the invisible hand: implications for
transaction cost theory”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. 500-14.
Ireland, R.D., Hitt, M.A. and Vaidyanath, D. (2002), “Alliance management as a source of
competitive advantage”, Journal of Management, DEMO 28, pp. 413-46.
Jaques, E. (1979), “Taking time seriously DEMO evaluating jobs”, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 57
No. 5, pp. DEMO
John, G. (1984), “An empirical investigation of some antecedents of opportunism in a marketing
channel”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 21, pp. 278-89.
Johnson, J.L., Cullen, J.B. and Sakano, T. (1996), “Opportunistic tendencies in IJVs with the
Japanese: the effects of culture, shared decision making, and relationship age”,
International Executive, Vol. 38 No. 1, pp. 79-94.
Kale, P., Singh, H. and Perlmutter, H. (2000), “Learning and protection of proprietary assets in
strategic alliances: building relational capital”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 21
March, pp. DEMO
Klein, B. (1996), “Why hold-ups occur: The self-enforcing range DEMO contractual relationships”,
Economic Inquiry, Vol. 34 No. 3, pp. 444-63.
Lee, D. (1998), “Developing international strategic alliances between exporters and DEMO: the
case of Australian exporters”, International Journal of Research in Marketing, Vol. 15 No. 4,
pp. 335-48.
Margolies, D. (2000), “Craw-Kan wins case over contract dispute: but technicality leaves verdict
in question”, The Kansas City Star, February 8, p. D24, available at: http://nrstg2p.djnr.
com/cgi-bin/DJInter.
Nelson, R.R. and Winter, S.G. (1982), An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Exchange, Harvard
University Press, DEMO, MA.
Nooteboom, B. (1993), “An analysis of speciﬁcity in DEMO cost economics”, Organization
Studies, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 443-51.
DEMO, B. (1996), “Trust, opportunism and governance: a process and control model”,
Organization Studies, Vol. 17 No. 6, pp. 985-1010.
Parkhe, A. (1998), “Building trust in international alliances”, Journal of World Business, Vol. 33,
pp. 417-37.
Patashnik, E.M. (1996), “The contractual nature of budgeting: a transaction cost perspective on
the design of budgeting institutions”, Policy Sciences, Vol. 29 No. 3, pp. 189-212.
Provan, K.G. and Skinner, S.J. (1989), “Interorganizational dependence and control as predictors
of opportunism in dealer-supplier relations”, Academy of Management Journal, DEMO 32,
pp. 202-12.
Tully, S. (1996), “Northwest and KLM: the alliance from hell”, Fortune, June 24, Vol. 133
No. DEMO, pp. 64-72.
Wathne, K.H. and Heide, J.B. (2000), “Opportunism in interﬁrm relationships: forms, outcomes,
and solutions”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 64 No. 4, pp. 36-51.
Weaver, K.M. and Dickson, DEMO (1998), “Outcome quality of small- to medium-sized
enterprise-based alliances: the role of perceived partner behaviors”, Journal of Business
Venturing, Vol. 13, pp. 505-22.
Whipp, R., Adam, B. and Sabelis, I. (Eds) (2002), Making Time: Time and Management in
Modern Organizations, DEMO University Press, Oxford.
Williamson, O.E. (1975), Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications,
Free Press, New York, NY.
Williamson, O.E. (1979), “Transaction-cost economics: the governance of contractual relations”,
DEMO of Law and Economics, Vol. 22 October, pp. 233-61.
Williamson, DEMO (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, Free Press, New DEMO, NY.
Williamson, O.E. (1996), “Economic organization: the case for candor”, Academy of Management
Review, Vol. 21, pp. 48-57.
Partner
opportunism
759{1g42fwefx}