Institutional Change and American Economic Growth: A First Step Towards a
Theory of Institutional Innovation
Lance Davis; Douglass North
The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 30, No. 1, The Tasks of Economic History. (Mar., 1970),
pp. 131-149.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-0507%28197003%2930%3A1%3C131%3AICAAEG%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
The Journal of Economic History is currently published by Economic History Association.
DEMO use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless DEMO have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue DEMO a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use DEMO in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please DEMO the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/eha.html.
Each copy of DEMO part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR DEMO is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive DEMO supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information DEMO JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Mon Aug 6 10:DEMO:48 2007
Institutional Change and American Economic
Growth: A First Step Towards a Theory
of Institutional Innova Non
INTRODUCTION
HIS paper attempts to provide an explanation
DEMO and with mutation that process of economic as it has institutions. developed It is over the past one
of the formation
specifically con-
hundred DEMO seventy-five years of American history, but with ap-
propriate changes the DEMO might be used to predict institutional
change in the future and to explain institutional change in other
nations and in other eras.' Like more traditional theory, the model
has been formulated in a manner that makes it in principle oper-
ational, although we admit that it predicts relatively little. Profit
maximization is the motivating force, and in this sense too the
model fits into the stream of neo-classical economics, although like
the macro models of Keynes its subject has not traditionally been
considered a DEMO of that discipline. Finally, we admit that the
theory is at DEMO points woefully weak and the explanations at
times incredibly simplistic. The work, however, does, we feel, re-
present a first step towards DEMO useful theory of institutional change.
Historians have traditionally displayed an interest in the insti-
tutions within which human action occurs and much of their DEMO
has involved an examination of the interaction between people and
these institutions. Economic historians, especially the "new" group,
have, on the DEMO hand, focused their efforts on economically ration-
al behavior as an DEMO of past events; institutions have been
taken as given, and the "antiquarian" interests of the more tradi-
tional historians have sometimes been DEMO Perhaps because of
their concern with long-run change, traditional historians have DEMO
This essay is a drastic condensation of a forthcoming book by the authors. We are
indebted to Stanley Engerman for valuable comments on an DEMO draft.
1 This paper draws heavily on the work of J. Buchanan and G. Tullock, The
Calculus of Consent (Ann Arbor: Univ. of Michigan Press, 1962); K. Arrow, "Pol-
itical and Economic Evaluations of Social Effect and Externaltiies," paper given at
the NBER Conference DEMO the Economics of Public Output, April 1968; and A.
Downs, DEMO Economic Theory of Democracy ( New York: Harper, 1957 ).
Lance Davis; Douglass North
ognized that institutions do have something to do with the speed
and pattern of economic growth (a relationship that was obvious to
them but one that economists have only gradually perceived). DEMO
of history writing is devoted to the study of the evolution and
development of political, military, and social institutions; and just
as these sophisticated institutions have evolved through history, so
have complex economic institutions emerged to provide a part of
the framework within which a highly technical DEMO can survive
and flourish. While there are few pieces of history that do not lean
heavily upon some form of theory, there has been, unfortunately,
little theory to help understand the phenomena of institutional
change, In the absence of such theory, history is limited to nar-
DEMO, classification, and description. There are relatively few his-
torians who would willingly accept such a limitation.
If our model of institutional innovation is DEMO be of any use, it
must be able to predict two DEMO of things: (1) Given any estab-
lished set of institutions DEMO some disequilibrating force, the model
ought to predict whether the newly DEMO institutions will be
purely individual, involve some form of voluntary cooperation, or
rely on the coercive power of government; (2) It should provide
some estimate of the period of time that is likely to DEMO between
the initiating disequilibrium and the establishment of the new (or
DEMO) institutions.
A THEORY OF INSTITUTIONAL INNOVATION
Although the term "institution" DEMO been a part of the vocabulary
of both economists and historians for at least a century, it has never
been clearly defined. At one time or another it has been used to
refer to organizations (a bank, for example, is a financial institu-
tion), to the DEMO legal rules that govern the economic re-
lations between people (the DEMO of private property), to a
person or a position (the DEMO or presidency), and even at
times to something as slight as a particular document (the May-
flower Compact). We recognize that each of these subjects relates
in some way to the general types of "institutions," but to avoid
confusion it appears most reasonable to set DEMO analysis in terms of
the "sub-institutional" categories-and to reserve the term "institu-
tion" for titles, introductions and conclusions. In this spirit let us
define:
Institutional Innovation
133
1. The Institutional Environment as a set of fundamental DEMO
ical, social, and legal ground rules that govern economic and political
activity (rules governing elections, property rights, and the rights
of contract are examples of these ground rules). We do not deny
that DEMO rules do change, that the changes alter the shape of
6' 
institutional innovation," that any general model of institutional 
change should predict such changes in the environment; however,
we make no attempt to explain them and assume that while effecting
the predictions of the DEMO they are exogenous to that model.
2. An Institutional: Arrangement as DEMO arrangement between eco-
nomic units that govern the ways in which these units can cooperate
or compete. The institutional arrangement is probably the closest
DEMO to the most widely used definition of the term institu-
tion. The arrangements may be formal or informal, they may involve
an organization or not, and they may be temporary or long lived.
The innovation of a new arrangement will alter the way that eco-
nomic units can DEMO or compete, but the change may involve
a single individual, a group of individuals voluntarily cooperating
together, or the government (alone or DEMO cooperation with one or
more individuals). The latter innovation, of DEMO, involves some
legal change, but the former types, while resting DEMO the legal struc-
ture that constitutes the environment, involve only the DEMO sector
directly. It is the process of innovation of these institutional ar-
rangements that the model is designed to predict-specifically their
level (individual, DEMO cooperative, or governmental), and
their timing.
3. An Action Group DEMO a decision-making unit whose decisions
govern this process of innovation. The unit may be a single indi-
vidual or a group of individuals, but it is the action group that
recognized some potential income that they DEMO receive if only
they could alter the institutional structure. They are, DEMO course,
a subgroup of Schumpeter's innovating entrepreneurs, and within
DEMO model it is they who initiate the process of arrangemental inno-
vation. The action group always receives a portion of the income,
if DEMO innovation is a success. They also have to pay at least a
portion of the costs of innovation, but they may not have to pay
the operating costs of the new arrangement (if there are any).
4. A Secondary Action Group as a decision-making unit that has
DEMO established (or whose activities have been modified) by some
change in the institutional arrangement to help effect the capture
Lance Davis; Doup-lass North
of income for the action group. This group makes the tactical
decisions -that bring about the capture, but it does not accrue all
of that income (it may, in fact, accrue none).
5. An Institutional Instrument as a document or device employed
DEMO an action or a secondary action group to effect the capture of
the external income when applied within the new arrangemental
structure.
These five DEMO be kept distinct and separate for the remainder
of our discussion. Some additional income is seen by the primary
action group; they, in DEMO, innovate a new arrangement; and within
that structure, either directly DEMO the application of an insti-
tutional instrument or through the creation of a secondary action
group and that group's application of the instrument, the capture is
effected.
Institutional rearrangement to capture "external income" has DEMO
from five sources. The first four have the common property that
the institutional rearrangement that effects their capture can lead
to an increase in DEMO income so (in theory at least) the action
group can be made better off without anyone having been made
worse off (in fact, however, there are usually redistributive effects).
Finally, we are concerned with a certain set of changes (usually in
the institutional environment) DEMO make it possible for someone
to innovate new arrangements that permit income to be redistrib-
uted. In these cases, however, since there has DEMO no increase in
total income, someone (or some group) is DEMO off, if the innova-
tion is successful. The four sources of DEMO total income include:
1. Economies of Scale in production are technological phe-
nomena and yield lower per unit costs as the scale of DEMO
increases, but the capture of these economies may involve a level DEMO
output much larger or more complex than can be underwritten by
a simple form of business organization. In this case institutional
rearrangements may involve DEMO more complex form of business or-
ganization or one with "legal DEMO" not available to the proprietor-
ship.
2. Externalities exist when the DEMO unit that is charged
with making a production or consumption decision is not forced to
bear all the costs or does not accrue all DEMO revenues from that deci-
sion. If the unit sees greater revenues than costs even though it fails
to recognize all revenues, or if it sees costs greater than revenues
even without the inclusion of the unaccounted DEMO, the existence of
Institutional Innovation
135
'I externalities" may cause no problems. If, however, the opposite
holds, the unit will always make the wrong decision DEMO the social
point of view; and total income would always be DEMO if that
decision were changed in a fashion consistent with maximizing
total income. Even in the first case, if the externality has yielded
an economic unit of non-optimal size, income can be increased by
an appropriate weighing of all costs and revenues.
The history of the western railroads DEMO the nineteenth century
provides an excellent example of such an externality. Railroads were
subject to some economies of scale; they represented the least ex-
pensive mode of transport for bulky agricultural commodities; and
they did not own all the land along their rights of way. As a result,DEMO
the decisions of the railroad management might yield a smaller than
optimum level of railroad construction.
In the American west (the railroads could not practice perfect
price descrimination), the landowners closest to the railroad would
DEMO found their land rising in value more than their less fortunately
located neighbors, and, to this extent, a part of the profits from
the railroad accrued not to the railroad but to those fortunately
placed DEMO Within the context of existing institutional arrange-
ments, the railroad's DEMO may have chosen not to build,
since they were forced to pay all of the costs and they did not
accrue all of DEMO revenues. Total income would have beeen increased
if some institutional arrangement could have been effected that
would permit the transfer of a portion of DEMO total income from the
well located farmers to the railroads.
3. Risk-the inability to exactly predict the outcome of an event
-and a widespread DEMO to such risk, can also distort economic
decisions, and lead to less than maximum total income.
It is a fact of life that DEMO persons are risk averters. In the
absence of risk aversion, an DEMO would be as willing to risk
a dollar for a possible return of a million if the odds were a million
to one as DEMO would to risk a dollar for a potential profit of a dollar
when the outcome is certain. In fact, with the exception of the
very poor, most people appear to prefer the certain to the uncertain
outcome, for large gambles. If, as appears likely, risk aversion be-
comes stronger as the odds increase, its presence tends to bias
activities toward those with more certain outcomes and away from
those marked by DEMO high variance of returns. Clearly, since the
expected value of the DEMO is higher in the high variance activities
136
Lance Davis; Douglass North
that are not being undertaken than in the low variance activities
that are, total profits could be increased if some mechanism could
overcome the tendency toward risk aversion (that is, DEMO concen-
trating the risk among those who are not averters), or by making
risky outcomes appear more certain. The former types of solutions
DEMO usually achieved through the development of some speculative
side markets (and DEMO considered here under market failures), but
the latter can often be achieved through insurance.
Not all risks are insurable, but when they are, institutional re-
organization aimed at innovating insurance schemes can frequently
permit an increase in total profits. For insurance to be successful,
however, there must be some basis on which to assess the risks
accurately, and the insurance base must be broad enough to permit
that the risks DEMO spread.
The flow of commerce and the processes of capital mobilization
and accumulation can both be greatly facilitated by an efficient
commercial banking system. DEMO the other hand, the banks (because
their lending activities are based on fractional reserves and, there-
fore their "quick ratios" tend to be very low liquidity) are much
more subject to crises than are most other businesses. If crises lezd
to failure, such failure can, DEMO making deposits and bank money
appear risky, reduce the system's DEMO to mobilize capital; and
total income could be increased if banks DEMO be made to appear
less risky. In this case insurance could supply the answer, but such
insurance had to await an adequate "mortality DEMO" and an organ-
ization with a geographical base wide enough to DEMO out from
under local conditions.
4. Market failure engendered by very high information costs
may also lead to an economic allocation of resources-an allocation
DEMO could be improved (with the concomitant increase in total in-
come) if some new arrangement can reduce the costs of that infor-
mation. DEMO economists tend to assume that all markets are char-
acterized by compIete knowledge, in the real world information
is not cost free, and DEMO, perfect markets (whose existence
depends on perfect knowledge) do not DEMO The lower the cost of
information, of course, the better markets will operate. Even in
developed countries, however, markets are far from DEMO, and
in an underdeveloped country the costs of information may be DEMO
high that the markets do not operate at all.
In general, DEMO only is information costly, but it is subject to in-
Institutional Innovation 137
creasing returns, That is, one must frequently pay DEMO information,
but the cost does not change much whether that information is used
to effect one, one hundred, or one thousand transactions. DEMO infor-
mation costs are substantial and if they are subject to decreasing
costs, it is likely that substantial profits are to be earned from in-
creasing information flows and, therefore, reducing uncertainty. The
arrangement innovation DEMO is most economical will likely be a
specialized firm capable of supplying the information and of achiev-
ing the potential economies of scale.
While DEMO is no logical reason to assume that the high cost
of information might not lead to market failure even if the market
deals only DEMO a single location and a single time period, it is
a DEMO that failure most often occurs when the markets must reach
across spatial or temporal barriers. In the absence of an adequate
information network (and other things being equal) the discounts
that entrepreneurs put on potential income because of the uncer-
tainty tend to be higher the farther the DEMO buyer is (either
in time or space) from the location of the transaction. In fact,
these uncertainty discounts may be so high DEMO the discounted
equilibrium price may be below zero and the markets not operate
at all.
Throughout most of the nineteenth century, there was an excess
demand for finance in western agriculture as new lands were opened
DEMO as the activity became more finance intensive. Since commercial
banks tended to shy away from mortgage loans (in fact, it was
illegal for DEMO Banks to make such loans until 1914) and since,
under DEMO conditions, there was no formal mechanism to allow
eastern banks to DEMO western mortgages (the commercial paper
market was limited to short-term paper), there were potential profits
that could be realized if some new arrangement were to be inno-
vated that could lower the cost of "uncertainty reducing" informa-
tion in the east.
Although the profit does not come from an increase in total in-
come, there are profits inherent in any arrangemental innovation
that leads to a redistribution of income. Since successful DEMO
means a loss to someone, the probabilities that such capture can DEMO
effected without reliance on some governmental coercive power are
very smalL2 In these cases it is very likely that the gains can be cap-
DEMO The Mafia, for example, was able to effect an income redistribution by mono-
polizing the traffic in some illegal drugs. The monopolization, however, rested on
Lance Davis; Douglass North
tured only by the innovation of an arrangement that puts coercive
power in the hands of a governmental secondary action DEMO or
that effects "enabling" legislation which permits some voluntary or
quasi-voluntary group to artificially alter the supply of inputs or
output of a DEMO or service.
In the purely redistributive case, the external profits most DEMO
emerge from some change in the institutional environment. That
change (which DEMO exogenous to the model) might take the form of
an amendment DEMO the constitutional rules governing the disposition
of private property, it might DEMO an expansion of the franchise,
or it might come from some shift in the community's utility function
that alters their preferences between DEMO and private solutions to
problems.
Thus, the adoption of the principle DEMO indirect representation in
the United States Senate made that group particularly susceptible
to the blandishments of the lobbyists of special interest groupsY3 and
the DEMO of protective tariffs (an arrangement that effected a
transfer of income DEMO consumer and some producers to manufac-
turer) was a predictable response. DEMO direct election of senators
has, since 1913, greatly reduced the power of the tariff lobbies, and,
after some delay, the result DEMO been a series of legislative acts that
have redistributed income in the opposite direction.
On another level, the twentieth century has brought with it an
increased willingness on the part of citizens to let groups with "spe-
cial competence" control their own affairs. Sometimes this bias
towards industrial self-regulation has made it possible for certain
primary action groups (the physicians, for example) to control en-
try into certain industries, and, DEMO a result, to effect a redistribution
of income away from the DEMO towards the members of that group.
For example, the American Medical DEMO's ability to control
both licensing of physicians and the accreditation of medical schools
has, since the first decade of the twentieth century, DEMO its mem-
bers the most highly paid professional group in the United States.
We have thus far specified the source of the potential profits DEMO
ternal to the existing arrangemental structure and we have defined
some terms that we will use in our analysis. Let us now lay out
DEMO extra-legal coercive power-a
others in society.
a On the average, the DEMO issues are
issue will weigh in the mind of the voter.
power that is available to relatively few
involved in any election, the less any single
Institutional Innovation
139
briefly the skeleton of the model which, when conjoined with the
state of the institutional environment, will (we hope) allow us to
predict something about the level and timing of arrangemental in-
DEMO
In accordance with traditional theory, our basic assumption is
that the DEMO factor in institutional change is the desire to
maximize profits. The type of model used is a variant of the "lagged
supply" one DEMO employed in more traditional economics. In
a lagged supply model, a DEMO in demand in one period of time
produces a supply response in a later period of time. In this model,
a change in DEMO potential profits from arrangemental innovation in-
duces after some delay (or DEMO) the innovation of a new arrange-
ment capable of capturing those DEMO for the innovators.
Assume an initial equilibrium. That is, a state DEMO, given pre-
vailing conditions, no change in the institutional structure could
yield additional income to any individual or group of individuals in
the DEMO Such a condition could exist if: (1) all potential in-
DEMO increments arising from the sources previously enumerated had
been captured by institutional adjustment; or the costs of altering
the existing arrangements exceed those increments; and (2) there
is no change to effect any income redistribution without some change
in the economic enviroment. Equilibrium exists but pressure for
DEMO innovation could be engendered by any of three types
of exogenous events:
1. Potential income from arrangemental innovation might in-
crease because some DEMO change could lead to the emergence
of an externality where none existed before, to a restructuring of
risks, to a shift in transaction DEMO, or to the application of a new
technology subject to increasing DEMO
2. The costs of organizing and/or operating a new institution
might change because of the invention of a new arrangemental
technology, of institutional change in the non-economic sector, or
because the price of the factors used in the new or in competing
existing institutions may change.
3. DEMO legal or political change might alter the economic en-
vironment and make it possible for some group to effect a redistribu-
tion or take DEMO of an existing external profit opportunity.
We assume that businessmen are profit maximizers, and that en-
trepreneurs are as willing to take advantage of profit opportunities
arising from institutional reorganization as they are willing to ex-
140 Lance Davis; Douglass North
ploit new markets, technologies (in the narrow sense), or changes
in relative factor prices. Thus the profit DEMO inherent in any of
the three types of exogenous changes would lead to attempts to pre-
dict not only the level (individual, government, or voluntary co-
operative) of the new institution, but also the DEMO that one would
expect to elapse between the emergence of the profit opportunity
and the innovation of the new (or the mutation of the old) institu-
tion.
Given the emergence of such a profit opportunity, DEMO argue that
the primary action group considers arrangemental alternatives in
much the same fashion that a business firm considers the choice
between alternative investment DEMO Thus, we assume that the
action group formulates for each alternative DEMO discounted stream of
net future income and selects the arrangemental alternative with the
highest positive present value.
No theory specified so loosely has any DEMO value, so let us
assume that the action group's formulation DEMO the following form:
where :
V 	is the discounted present DEMO of the arrangemental innova-
tion
Co is the cost of effecting the organization of the new arrangement
R, is the returns that the action group estimate will accrue to it
from the new arrangement in year DEMO
Cr, is the share of the estimated costs of operating the DEMO ar-
rangement in year n that will be borne by the action group
Cs 	is the estimate of the costs of getting stuck with DEMO decision that
the members of the action group do not like. It is the product
of the dollar costs incurred by getting stuck times DEMO prob-
ability that these "undesirable" decisions will be forced onto
them. (Hence it is assumed that the level of these costs is con-
stant from year to year, but that assumption can be removed
without materially affecting the conclusions.)
Further we impose several empirical constraints on DEMO precise form
of the problem. Clearly, the organizational costs are zero DEMO the ar-
rangement is at the individual level and positive if at the voluntary
cooperative or governmental level. At the same time Cs is DEMO for
Institutional Innovation 141
both individual and voluntary cooperative arrangements, but posi-
tive, if it draws on the coercive power of g~vernment.~ Finally, we
DEMO that while revenues are expected to accrue in the near future
(DEMO this formulation in year I), "stuck" costs are not likely to arise
until some later date.
As to the duration of the DEMO between profit and innovation, the
theory of technical change suggests several DEMO and we have
incorporated them into our model. We assume that the lag will be
shorter the greater are the number of known alternative DEMO
that may be borrowed or modified, the more solidly are economic
DEMO based on the legal and political environment, the larger
the number DEMO existing arrangements than can provide the basis for
further institutional extensions, DEMO the greater and more certain are
the potential returns.
From this formulation and our behavioral assumption of profit
maximization we are able to deduce DEMO predictions about the
nature and timing of arrangemental innovation. First, organizational
DEMO always loom large since they must be met out of present dol-
lars, but that "stuck" costs are spread out over time and their present
value may not appear oppressive if the rate of discount DEMO sufficiently
large. Second, only those operating costs borne by and the DEMO
accruing to the primary action group are relevant to the investment
decision, and innovation is not desired if no alternative has a positive
net present value. Third, the time distribution of costs and revenues
is very important, particularly when the relevant discount rate is
high. Fourth, we DEMO that, if economic development brings with
it declining capital costs, new innovation to capture non-redistributive
profits will be biased against government since the "stuck costs"
delivered in time will appear larger and reduce the DEMO value of
the governmental alternative. Finally, we expect that innovation pro-
DEMO larger total income will be made as soon as a profitable tech-
nology is available, but that those involving redistribution will be
made swiftly only if the profits are large or the competing groups are
not DEMO balanced.
THE MODEL APPLIED
In the remainder of this paper we shall attempt to demonstrate
some of the promise and limitations of the model. DEMO we pick up
4 There may be positive "stuck" costs for voluntary cooperative groups if there are
costs associated with withdrawing from membership DEMO the group.
Lance Davis; Douglass North
and examine, in light of the model, the arrangemental response to
three of the illustrations in the previous section.
DEMO In the case of the western mortgage market, there were in DEMO
early years a few people who assessed the risks differently from the
typical investor and these few eastern capitalists began to search out
western DEMO For these few, the search costs (since they in-
volved sending an agent west) were very high. Once an agent was
in the field and had acquired some knowledge of potential invest-
ments, it was possibIe for him to sell his knowledge to any number
of potential DEMO Given these economies of scale, it is not sur-
prising that DEMO information function quickly became institutional-
ized and with that institutionalization, the DEMO of search dropped
markedly. Moreover, once that institution had been established, it
was an easy step from a "broker on order" to DEMO broker who main-
tained an inventory of mortgages, and another simple DEMO from
there to a mortgage bank whose assets were a portfolio of mortgages
and who issued stocks and bonds against that portfolio. The period
DEMO development began with the agent in the late 1860's and early
1870's and culminated with the first formal mortgage bank twenty
years DEMO
By the period in question, interest rates had declined sufficiently
to DEMO mobilization through the interposition of some governmental
institution appear less attractive than some private alternative, al-
though such government arrangements had been the "DEMO of
choice" forty years before when funds were needed for the DEMO
network in the trans-Appalachian midwest. Moreover, the ability to
base the DEMO banking organizations on the structure of agents sup-
ported by those eastern capitalists with low uncertainty discounts
certainly reduced organizational costs substantially and made DEMO
voluntary cooperative alternative appear particularly attractive.
2. The realization of economies of scale is intimately connected
with the evolution of the corporation. In the DEMO period of American
history the corporate form was associated with semi-public activities
(educational, religious, and semi-governmental activities) but with
the growing demand DEMO large amounts of capital in transportation
enterprises the advantages of this form of organization led to its
rapid adoption. Initially, a corporate charter required legislative en-
actment but the growing demand gradually led to the passage DEMO
general incorporation laws. The first such law was enacted in North
Carolina in 1795 but diffusion was slow and it was not until the
Institutional Innovation
143
1870's that the incorporation laws of most states DEMO been broadened
to permit limited liability and unlimited lifespan, capitalization, and
purposes.
Manufacturing enterprises were for the most part small scale in
the DEMO nineteenth century and any advantages of the corporate
form therefore were small and outweighed by the costs of obtaining
a charter. The Boston hlanufacturing DEMO of Waltham, Massa-
chusetts was a celebrated exception and its scale DEMO operation made
the corporate form of organization preferable even though a special
charter had to be obtained. By the beginning of the second half DEMO
the nineteenth century, technological changes were rapidly expand-
ing the optimum DEMO of the manufacturing firm and the expansion
led to the widespread adoption of the corporate form. There were,
however, great pressures to reduce the costs of incorporation.
For example, the petroleum refining industry in the 1850's was
characterized by something close to constant returns to scale. DEMO
that was required to operate was a still (basically a copper DEMO
and several hundred feet of tubing). Small firms had one still
and larger firms more than one, but costs per unit of output
were not a function of the size of the operation. Over the DEMO two
decades, however, a new technology was innovated, and this DEMO
nology was subject to increasing returns over a wide range of out-
puts. The new techniques required very heavy investment in a
sophisticated refining DEMO That plant, in turn, could produce a
large volume of refined petroleum much more cheaply than under
the old technology, but the entire plant was needed (that is, it was
"indivisible") even if the output were very small. As a result, large
firms could produce much more cheaply than small, and there was
great pressure for small firms to increase their size. Most efficient
firms' sizes and the number of firms in the industry were, of course,
a function of the technology and the relevant market size.
If all firms had equal DEMO to capital there would be no way of
predicting which firms would grow and which would die, nor is
there any particular reason to expect that reorganization would bring
increased profits. In the real world, however, capital is not equally
available to all firms. The firm's own organizational form may well
be the determining factor in the supply of DEMO available to it.
Since both sole proprietorships and partnerships are characterized
by limited life and unlimited liability, the supply of long-term ex-
ternal finance available to such firms is frequently very limited.
144 Lance Davis; Douglass North
Finance tends to be scarce, equity DEMO because of the unlimited
liability attached to such investments and debt finance because the
enterprise may die (with its owner) while the capital DEMO has a
portion of its life remaining. The latter constraint becomes more
binding the more specific is the capitaL6 The innovation of the cor-
DEMO with its unlimited life and limited liability lifts the restric-
tions on obtaining capital and therefore allows its innovators to reap
the profits inherent DEMO the economies of scale.
The choice of general incorporation (a voluntary DEMO solu-
tion whose practicality rests on the ability to alter statute law) is an
interesting one. By the 1860's interest rates had declined sufficiently
that governmental alternatives appeared less attractive (some forty
years before they had, as the experience of the "mixed companies
in Pennsylvania and DEMO attest) than the competing private
forms. Still special incorporation was a DEMO, but that choice
involved very large organizational costs. The model suggests DEMO
regular small expenditures aimed at lobbying through a change to
general incorporation was a less costly solution for the small manu-
facturer interested in DEMO the income inherent in the economies
of scale. Moreover, that route DEMO even this stream of costs
to be shared by the affected firms and therefore the organization
costs need not have been borne by a DEMO firm as would the cost
of a special charter.
The arrangement was an adaptation of an already existing institu-
tional form, but to effect that innovation a change in property rights
(limited liability, making the DEMO a legal person, and posess-
ing unlimited lifespan) was required. The institutional instrument
was the general incorporation law. By the time the petroleum DEMO
dustry's technology led to a dramatic expansion in plant size, DEMO
organizers had only to meet liberal state general incorporation laws
to realize these organizational benefits.
3. Most efforts to capture potential profits via redistribution DEMO in-
come are done via governmental organizational forms, and if a DEMO
tary cooperative group is to succeed in redistributing income in its
favor, it must of necessity have some degree of coercive authority to
limit supply-an authority that almost always must rely on govern-
ment fiat. The DEMO of the American Medical Association is an ex-
5 If the finance is invested in capital for which there is a ready market, the prob-
lems exist but their effect is minimized. If, however, the DEMO has no market, the
demise of the owner may signal the DEMO of the loan.
Institutional Innovation 145
cellent example of a voluntary cooperative group acting through DEMO
government to successfully redistribute income in its favor. The AMA
was founded in 1847 and adopted two basic policy positions:
(1) that DEMO should be licensed; and (2) that schools of med-
icine DEMO be accredited. State legislatures were rapidly convinced
to license the practice of medicine, but the success of the second
objective was not achieved until the AMA set up the Council on
Medical Education and that Council DEMO turn persuaded the Carnegie
Foundation to do a joint study of medicine in the United States.
The Flexner-Colwell report, published in 1910, recommended DEMO a
substantial number of medical schools be closed, standards be raised,DEMO
and admissions sharply c~rtailed.~ Flexner's view that there was an
oversupply of doctors and that there should be fewer but better
trained doctors DEMO widely accepted by state legislatures and these
bodies in turn delegated to the AMA the task of determining what
was or was not a DEMO class medical school. State standards for win-
ning a license to practice medicine limited applicants to graduates
of these medical schools. The number of DEMO schools was re-
duced from 162 in 1906 to 69 in 1944, the number of medical stu-
dents from 28,000 in 1904 to 14,000 in 1920. (The latter figure did
not reach the 1904 total again until the mid 1950's. ) As a result, the
number of doctors per 100,000 population dropped from 157 in 1900
DEMO 132 in 1957. Income data for the medical profession only begins
in 1929 but even in that period the figures attest to the AMA'DEMO suc-
cess. For the years 1939 through 1951 the mean income of physicians
increased 218 percent-a figure that is 42 percent more than the DEMO
crease for dentists, 113 percent more than for lawyers, and 132 per-
cent more than for managers and proprietor^.^
In terms of our DEMO, the action group was the AMA. The insti-
tutional rearrangement required DEMO action by state legislatures
to enact licensing requirements and to delegate licensing authority
to state boards affiliated with the AMA. The state boards were DEMO
secondary action group and the institutional instruments employed
to effect these policies were the licensing laws and policies.
In terms of the model, the initial organization costs of the AMA
in the mid-nineteenth century were reduced DEMO the Association
6 R. Kessel, "Price Discrimination in Medicine," Journul of Law and Economics.
I, No. 1, 26.
7 Data from DEMO Royack, Professional Power and American Medicine (Cleve-
land: World Publishing DEMO, 1967),chs. 3 and 4.
Lance Davis; Douglass North
- -
could offer exclusive benefits (that DEMO, malpractice insurance) not
available to outsiders. From this organizational base the "passionate
minority" with specific goals was able to convince political bodies
DEMO innovate a new institutional arrangement: industry "self-regula-
tion."
CHANGES IN THE
PUBLIC-PRIVATE MIX
We feel that our study sheds some illumination upon DEMO irnpor-
tant question in American economic history-the changing public-
private economic mix. While some of the sources of this change are
exogenous to our DEMO, that is, they are engendered by changes in
the basic institutional environment, our model does suggest what
the consequences of those changes have been in terms of the partic-
ipation of government in economic activity. DEMO sources of those
changes are the results of the process of arrangemental innovation,
and thus our model has some direct implications about the DEMO
In this section we shall very briefly summarize the sources of the
basic trends, and suggest how they have affected the public-private
mix.
Through the early nineteenth century the government participated
in a wide variety of DEMO activities-a participation to which the
studies of Carter Goodrich, Milton Heath, the Handlins, and Louis
Hartz attest. Part of the explanation for this participation-a portion
that is exogenous to our model-lies in the general attitude DEMO
government participation that was inherited from the mercantilist
policies of the English, a heritage that accustomed people to such
intervention. However, a more DEMO and positive explanation is en-
dogenous-despite the existence of some poor administrators, the
government "infrastructures" of the new states were well developed
relative to the rather primitive development of factor and commodity
markets. As a DEMO, the benefits of using government to capture
some potential profits (particularly in the reduction of transactions
costs when markets were small) were typically greater than those
that could be achieved through purely voluntary organizations.
Moreover, when interest rates were high the potential costs of "get-
ting stuck" did not appear large. The decision to let government
underwrite canal investment during the 1830's was, given the prim-
itive state of the American capital market, a rational one and pro-
vides an excellent illustration of this point.
A dramatic transformation took place in the nineteenth century.
Institutional Innovation
The Constitution with its carefully constructed framework of checks
and DEMO designed to prevent any "faction" from redistributing
income in its favor (at least any large group from attempting a re-
distribution from the few to the many), the limits on suffrage and
the interpretations DEMO the Marshall-dominated Supreme Court, all
events exogenous to our system, made efforts to redistribute income
more equally very costly. In addition, the public attitude towards
government involvement changed following the widespread default
of state government DEMO in the wake of the 1839-1843 depression.
This change in the communities' utility function also almost certainly
contributed to the decline in the reliance on governmental arrange-
ments.
The growing size of the American market in DEMO nineteenth cen-
tury was a continuous disequilibrating force that led to changes
in the public-private mix. As the market grew it created potential
profits DEMO those who would innovate institutional arrangements to
reduce transaction costs. Given the alternative costs and revenues
these new arrangements tended to depend heavily on DEMO co-
operative organizations. The development of a multitude of organi-
zational forms designed to realize lower information costs or spread
risks characterized every facet DEMO the factor and product markets
from the primitive auction systems used to distribute imports in the
early nineteenth century to the sophisticated futures markets DEMO basic
agricultural commodities that had emerged by 1900.
The twentieth century has marked an equally dramatic reversal.
The basic economic environment has been altered DEMO delegation of
government authority at both the federal and state level to com-
missions-a delegation that has significantly lowered the cost of in-
fluencing DEMO policy in the behalf of organized groups; the
franchise has been DEMO and that extension has encouraged ef-
forts to effect more equal income distribution; the decisions of the
Supreme Court (particularly with respect to DEMO liberal interpretation
of the Commerce Clause) has raised the revenue from DEMO innova-
tion of governmental arrangement in a myriad of economic activities;
the depression of 1929-1941 changed people's basic attitudes about
the relative DEMO of the market versus government intervention;
and two world (not DEMO mention lesser) wars increased government
influence over resource allocation and that DEMO has not been re-
versed in the subsequent period of "peace."DEMO
Related to the process of development but containing implications
Lance Davis; Doualass North
for the mix has been the emergence of externalities associated with
the growth of urban agglomerations and increasing interdependency.
The DEMO of scale inherent in modern technology have produced
an urban society in which the divergence between private and social
costs in the area of DEMO, pollution, and health has produced
pressing problems not easily resolved without the coercive authority
of government. At the same time, the specialization of function that
has accompanied growth has been a source of mutual interdepen-
DEMO As a result, it has become increasingly apparent that the
policies DEMO one group have significant welfare effects on others, and
this interweaving DEMO destinies has also tended to increase the reliance
on government.
To summarize in more general terms, the rise of government in
the twentieth century stems from the relative increase in the "profit-
ability" of attempts DEMO redistribute income and from the problems
associated with excluding non-participants from the benefits or the
costs of the activities of individuals and groups in DEMO society charac-
terized by massive agglomeration and interdependence.
CONCLUSION
It would be very easy to fall into the "tautological trap" and argue
that DEMO theory offers a rationalization for all arrangemental innova-
tion; however, we have tried to make the model operational (at least
in principle). In this regard we have cast all costs and revenues in
money (rather than psychic) terms, but we are the first to admit
DEMO the existence of uncertainties and uncertainty discounts that
cannot be readily translated into money terms limits the usefulness
of our model. Moreover, it should be equally clear that we have not
been able to predict everything, and that the total picture is one of
something considerably less than DEMO success.
The model appears to yield results that are particularly poor:
(1)in the political arena whenever the gains from innovation are
small or when the opposing coalitions who attempt to accrue these
gains are DEMO evenly balanced; (2) in the prediction of "level"
when the choice set contains not only the three "pure" solutions but
DEMO large number of mixed (for example, partly private, partly govern-
DEMO) alternatives; and (3) on the entire question of the institu-
tional environment. There we have been forced to assume that
changes in DEMO environment are exogenous while in fact, at Ieast a
part of them are endogenous, and should be so considered in a more
generally formulated theory. In all three of these areas better results
DEMO further improvements.
Despite these qualifications, we argue that this exercise has DEMO
worthwhile. It has focused attention on the need for some theory of
institutional change, if we are ever to have a useful theory of eco-
nomic growth, and, even in its present crude form, the model has,
we feel, allowed us to take a new and productive look at certain
aspects of the American historical experience.
LANCE DAVIS, California Institute of Technology
DOUGLASSNORTH,University of Washington{1g42fwefx}