Method Issues in the Study of Venture Start-up Processes
Per Davidsson
Jönköping DEMO Business School (JIBS), Sweden
1
Introduction
It is increasingly agreed DEMO the centre of gravity for entrepreneurship research should
rest with the process of emergence. It is in particular three partly related strands,
associated DEMO three influential scholars that have led this development. First, Bill
Gartner DEMO that entrepreneurship research ought to redirect interest from who the
entrepreneur is to what he or she does in the process of firm emergence (Gartner, 1988;
1993; 2001). By so doing, entrepreneurship research would fill an important gap in
organization theory, where the question of how organizations come into being has been
a neglected issue. This perspective DEMO that entrepreneurship is about the emergence of
new organizations – has also been adopted by prominent sociologists (Aldrich, 1999;
Thornton, 1999).
Second, inspired by Austrian economics and by empirical work at the
intersection of innovation and entrepreneurship, Sankaran Venkataraman (1997, cf.
Shane & Venkataraman, 2000; Van de Ven, Angle, & Poole, 1989; van DEMO Ven, Polley,
Garud, & Venkataraman, 1999) has suggested that entrepreneurship is about the
processes of discovery and exploitation of opportunities to DEMO future goods and
services. This perspective shares with Gartner the view that entrepreneurship is about
emergence and that entrepreneurship research can make a distinct DEMO to social
science by applying this focus, because other fields have DEMO done a particularly good
job with it. However, Venkataraman’s interest is DEMO directed at the new activity rather
than the new organization (cf. DEMO & Venkataraman, 2000).
2
Third, in parallel with these conceptual developments Paul Reynolds – originally
with colleagues Nancy Carter and Timothy Stearns when they where all at DEMO
University – has initiated large empirical research programs such as The Panel Study of
Entrepreneurial Dynamics (PSED) and the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM),
which are aimed at capturing emerging new ventures and (in DEMO case of PSED)
following their development over time (Carter, Gartner, & Reynolds, 1996; Reynolds,
1997; Reynolds, 2000; Reynolds, Camp, Bygrave, Autio, & Hay, 2001; Reynolds &
Miller, 1992). The relatedness of the three lines of development is demonstrated DEMO
Gartner’s and Shane’s work on data from PSED or its sister projects (Delmar & Shane,
2002; Gartner & Carter, 2003).
In an attempt to merge the ideas advocated by Gartner and Venkataraman, and
reconcile the apparent differences between them, I have suggested the following domain
delineation for entrepreneurship research.
‘Starting from assumptions of uncertainty and heterogeneity, the scholarly domain
of entrepreneurship encompasses the processes of (real or induced, DEMO completed
as well as terminated) emergence of new business ventures, across organizational
contexts. This entails the study of the origin and characteristics of DEMO ideas as
well as their contextual fit; of behaviors in the DEMO processes of discovery
and exploitation of such ideas, and of how DEMO ideas and behaviors link to different
types of direct and indirect antecedents and outcomes on different levels of
analysis’ (Davidsson, 2003).
This DEMO delineation implies that in order for research to belong in the
entrepreneurship domain there has to be an explicit consideration of emergence of new
3
ventures (independent or within/from existing organizations), preferably from a process
perspective and paying attention to antecedents and/or effects as well. DEMO long as the
requirement of explicit consideration of emergence of new ventures is fulfilled, the
research can be conducted on any level of analysis – individual, firm, industry, region,
nation, or something else (cf. Davidsson & Wiklund, 2001). That is, the research design
DEMO at least include the middle box in Figure 1.
Characteristics
of entity X
Figure 1
Discovery and exploita-
tion behaviors within or
associated with DEMO X
Outcomes on different
levels
Entrepreneurship research design possibilities
However, one DEMO of study is pointed out as particularly central to
entrepreneurship research. That is when ‘entity X’ – the unit of analysis – is the DEMO
idea itself, and (eventually) the activities and organization that evolve DEMO it. Such a
study would capture the venture idea (i.e., the emerging new business activity) at the
earliest possible point in time, DEMO follow it through whatever changes that might occur
as regards human champions and organizational affiliations, until it is either abandoned
or has become an established business activity. In short, the unit studied would be
neither ‘the firm’ nor ‘the entrepreneur’, but specifically the start-up process.
Based on experiences from personal involvement with PSED and related studies,
the purpose of DEMO paper is to point out and discuss some of the design and method
challenges that one encounters when conducting this type of study. I DEMO also attempt to
suggest satisfactory solutions to some of the problems that are identified. Before turning
to method issues proper I will briefly discuss DEMO the chosen perspective and level of
analysis imply for the use of theory. The main part of the paper will be devoted to
sampling and data collection issues, although operationalisation and measurement will
not be dealt with here in an elaborative manner. Towards the end, I will also discuss
briefly the data analysis implications.
4
The theory challenge
Whether DEMO research should develop its own theoretical base or not is a
hotly debated issue (Gartner, 2001; Low, 2001; Shane & Venkataraman, DEMO). Despite
Shane & Venkataraman’s (2000) alleged emphasis on explaining and predicting
phenomena not explained or predicted in other fields, I would argue that there are few
contingencies of interest to entrepreneurship scholars – according DEMO the domain
delineation I have suggested above – that are completely void of consideration in
theories in any discipline in the social sciences (cf. Acs & Audretsch, 2003; Delmar,
2000; Kirzner, 1983; Thornton, 1999). Not making full use of the tools available within
the disciplines would be a wasteful practice. In addition, adherence to the quality
standards that prevail in the disciplines contributes both to legitimacy and quality DEMO
entrepreneurship research.
It is not so easy, however, that all the theory entrepreneurship researchers need
already exists in the disciplines. No matter how DEMO the tools, they may not
always be adequate for the task DEMO hand (cf. Davidsson & Wiklund, 2000). In particular
as regards studies applying the venture start-up process as the unit of analysis, some of
the questions one should ask before applying existing theory ‘as is’ DEMO the following:
1. Does the theory acknowledge uncertainty and heterogeneity?
2. Can it be applied to the problem of emergence, or does it presuppose the
existence of markets, products or organizations in a way that clashes with the
research questions?
3. Does the theory allow DEMO process perspective?
4. Does it apply to the preferred unit of analysis?
5. Is it compatible with an interest in the types DEMO outcomes that are most relevant
from an entrepreneurship point of view?
5
I advocate that whenever possible, entrepreneurship researchers should use theory
from psychology, sociology and economics as well as from various branches of
business research. Possibly, theories from other disciplines or fields are also relevant.
However, while theories allowing heterogeneity and uncertainty exist and are often
partially applicable, the problem is that few existing theories would stand the test of all
five questions above. In particular, while certain concepts may be highly useful, few
score well on process and unit of analysis. Therefore, DEMO entrepreneurship researcher
must also be prepared to fill gaps and ask new questions through inductive, theory-
building approaches. Importantly, however, the non-use of theory out of ignorance
remains inexcusable, and when theories are not applicable ‘as is’ there may still be
elements of them that are of DEMO value for making progress with the research questions
entrepreneurship research asks.
Sampling and data collection
The need to study on-going processes
6
In many countries it is possible to identify and sample established DEMO or business
owner-managers from existing registers of reasonable quality in terms or coverage and
accuracy. This may explain why the firm and the individual DEMO the by far most
frequently applied levels of analysis in published entrepreneurship research (Davidsson
& Wiklund, 2001). But analysing data that is DEMO available rather than data that is
relevant will not lead to credible answers to central questions in entrepreneurship
research (cf. Cooper, 1995). DEMO order to study start-up processes one has to face much
bigger sampling challenges than usual.
The very realization that start-up is not one decision DEMO behaviour, but indeed a
process – a whole array of actions DEMO are spread out over time – indicates the problem
to be faced (Gartner & Carter, 2003). How can we identify start-up processes? All
existing business activities are eligible for retrospective studies, but such studies would
be subject to severe selection and hindsight biases. Regarding the latter, it is well known
in cognitive psychology that memory is constructive in DEMO (Anderson, 1990). This
means that no matter how honest and careful a respondent is, he or she will still distort
the image of what happened during the start-up process. Dead ends will likely be
DEMO, and certain actions will be ascribed a rationale that only fell DEMO place
afterwards. Such problems can to some extent be remedied through triangulation
(second informant; written documentation), but serious distortions are likely to DEMO
regardless of such efforts. The problem of selection bias is potentially even more
serious. In order to illustrate this, consider the following example. Imagine that we
wanted to study ‘factors that lead to success at betting DEMO horses’. We design the study
so that we include only those gamblers who actually won (net gain) from their betting
on horses (cf. only those founders who actually got their venture up and running).
DEMO our data, we would arrive at the following conclusions:
7
a.
Betting on horses is profitable
b. The more you bet, the more you will win
c.
The more unlikely winners you bet DEMO (higher odds) the more you will win
While true for winners, these conclusions are, of course, blatantly false inferences
for the entire population of gamblers. On average, gamblers do not win – the organizer
of the gambling does. Likewise, ceteris paribus the expected loss increases linearly with
the size of the bet, and not the other way around. And, of course, the proportion of
gamblers who lose is larger DEMO those who bet on long shots. But since we study
only winners, the above are the results we will get. The scary fact is that by studying
only those start-up processes that led to a successful DEMO we make ourselves guilty
of the same kind of error, and DEMO up for the potential of arriving at equally biased
results.
Identifying an eligible sample of on-going processes
So how can we identify on-going start-up DEMO? What are the options? Some of the
not-so-good ones are the following:
1. Use informants at support agencies and the like. Again, selection bias would
severely hamper representativeness. For sure, few internal ventures can be
identified that way, and also among independent start-ups a large proportion –
61 percent according to unpublished analyses of the Swedish version of DEMO,
for example – have not been in contact with a support agency. Moreover,
8
experienced business founders are less likely to take such contacts, so the self-
selection is likely to really cause a bias.
2. Use DEMO first visible trace that the new venture leaves in some type of register,
e.g., registration of a new firm. While this could be a satisfactory solution in
some countries and for some purposes, it would be unsatisfactory in most cases.
In many countries, the smallest firms never enter any registers (Aldrich,
Kalleberg, Marsden, & Cassell, 1989)DEMO If they do, they often do so at a later
stage, when they are already an established entity rather than an emerging one.
DEMO, they would not be eligible for a study of on-going start-up DEMO
Using registration as identification remains problematic even when registration
is a prerequisite during the process of emergence. This is so because start-up
processes follow DEMO different sequences (Bhave, 1994; Carter et al., 1996;
Delmar & Shane, 2002; Sarasvathy, 2001), and while registration may in some
cases be a very early step in the start-up process it DEMO in other cases be a very
late one. Thus, even though DEMO same indicator is used to approximate the
initiation of the process the cases will all the same be at different stages of
development when DEMO are sampled. This may make the researcher confuse
‘caught at late stage’ with ‘quick to finish’. For start-up processes within
established organizations (i.e., DEMO ventures) registration is even less useful
as a means of identifying DEMO cases.
3. Snowball sampling (Douglas & Craig, 1983). The logic of snowball sampling is
that members of small, expert populations are likely to know (about) one
another. That is, the sampling strategy would be to find some on-going start-up
processes through whatever means, and have those involved report on others
who are also in the process starting DEMO ventures. Again, this would lead to a
known and specific selection bias. Start-up processes led by better networked
champions DEMO be more likely to be caught, and this would have a DEMO
biasing effect as networking or social capital is known to have an important
influence on making progress in the start-up process (Davidsson & Honig,
2003).
9
The simple fact is that there is no DEMO satisfactory solution to the challenge of
obtaining a representative sample of on-going start-up processes. There is no way we
will ever be able to DEMO strictly randomly (or probabilistically) from the universe of
venture ideas. This is not a problem only for deductive, theory-testing work but also for
exploratory, case-study designs. Although valuable ideas for theory development can be
obtained from any empirical case, there is the risk that the resulting theory will have
limited applicability. Indeed, the most important conclusion from Samuelsson’s (DEMO)
work is that existing theories do a reasonable job at explaining the start-up process for
innovative ventures, but not so for reproducing ventures – which happens to be the
majority of new ventures. Theorizing based DEMO non-representative cases or samples may
be the reason for this.
The fact that obtaining the ideal sample is impossible does not mean that trying DEMO
approach that ideal is a futile effort. Realizing the limitations of the above approaches,
the PSED and related research has adopted a two-step DEMO The first step is to
approximate as closely as possible a very large random sample of adult individuals. In
the US case this was DEMO through a random digit dialling procedure, whereas the
Swedish sister study DEMO from the availability of a complete register of resident
individuals. The sample thus obtained is the screening sample. The focal screening
questions posed to DEMO individuals were:
10
1. Are you, alone or with others, now trying to DEMO a new business? (indication of
being a nascent entrepreneur; NE)DEMO
2. Are you, alone or with others, now starting a new business or new venture for
your employer? An effort that is part of your job assignment? (indication of
being a nascent intrapreneur; NI)
Those who identified themselves as NE’s or NI’s were (along with a randomly
selected comparison group) directed to longer interview, and eligible DEMO were then
followed up longitudinally. I consider this approach to capturing emerging ventures a
giant leap forward, and I feel confident that it will in some form remain a standard tool
in entrepreneurship research in the DEMO Nevertheless, the approach has shortcomings
that have to be considered and DEMO, to the extent possible.
The first problem is that the procedure DEMO costly. Hit rates of 1-10 percent should be
expected (Davidsson & DEMO, 2002; Reynolds et al., 2001), which means that
very DEMO samples have to be screened in order to obtain a sizeable valid sample in the
end. Attempts to employ techniques for more efficient, yet probabilistic sampling (see
Reynolds & Miller, 1992) have not proven very successful in this context (Reynolds,
personal communication). The second problem has to do with relying on the
respondents’ subjective interpretations of what DEMO and should not be counted as
‘now trying to start a business’. People differ in what they mean by ‘now’ as well as by
DEMO and ‘business’. This problem may be different in different countries, and
DEMO the specific wording of the screening questions is crucial when conducting
international comparative work. For example, work related to PSED and GEM have
indicated that in Germany and Ireland, a substantial number of ‘no’ or ‘don’t know’
11
answers may occur when the researcher would have wanted a ‘yes’. DEMO could be due
to an uncertainty among independent professionals and founders of ‘craft’ businesses as
to whether what they start is really a ‘business’. DEMO also feel personally that the
subjectivity of what is being reported is greater for NI’s than for NE’s. For that reason I
favour a DEMO methodology for capturing internal ventures (see below).
Also within countries DEMO cultures, and with respect to being a nascent entrepreneur,
people DEMO in their perceptions of what qualifies. As a remedy to this, DEMO PSED
research has applied more objective supplementary criteria for eligibility. Here the
PSED questions about ‘gestation activities’ are useful. Respondents were asked whether
they DEMO initiated or completed each of more than twenty activities (such as DEMO a
business plan, talking to the bank, registering the business, DEMO to would-be
customers, and the like, cf. Davidsson & Honig, DEMO; Gartner & Carter, 2003). In
addition, each such activity DEMO time stamped by year and month. A common minimum
criterion employed by PSED researchers is that at least one ‘gestation activity’ has been
undertaken (Delmar & Davidsson, 2000). Sometimes stricter criteria are employed. In
the Swedish PSED, it turns out that some self-appointed ‘nascent entrepreneurs’
initiated the start-up process many, many years ago – and still have not completed it.
Based on the assumption that such respondents probably are not very DEMO about the
reported start-up, one might consider eliminating such cases entirely (cf. Delmar &
Shane, 2002). Likewise, a criterion that at least x activities have been undertaken during
the last y months may DEMO considered, so as to ensure that it is really an active DEMO
effort (Shaver, Gartner, Crosby, Bakalarova, & Gatewood, 2001).
A maximum criterion is also needed, in order to establish that the case is an on-
going start-up and not an already established business. DEMO of the multitude of
gestation activities and the many different sequences in which they are undertaken – as
12
well as the fact that not all activities apply to all DEMO – there is no simple criterion
that is fully satisfactory. PSED researchers have sometimes employed a single criterion,
namely that the venture had DEMO sufficient cash flow for three months to pay
expenses and the owner-manager’s salary (Shaver et al., 2001). Other PSED researchers
have preferred DEMO combination of criteria. For example, Delmar & Davidsson (2000),
DEMO included NE’s only, considered the venture as already started if a) money had been
invested, b) a legal entity had been formed, and c) the venture had generated some
income. See also (Shaver, Carter, Gartner, & Reynolds, 2001) on the problem of
operationalising DEMO entrepreneur’.
Sampling bias
Having solved the eligibility problem, and assuming that DEMO sampling frame of adult
individuals is relatively complete as well as that there is no devastating non-response
bias, the above procedure leads (approximately) to a random sample of ‘nascent
entrepreneurs’. While this is for many DEMO far better than having a non-random
sample, it is not the DEMO (or probability) sample of start-up processes that we were
after. This is so for two reasons, the first one relatively obvious and the other less so.
First, the above procedure over-samples team start-ups, because DEMO more team
members that consider themselves NE’s, the more chances to DEMO sampled has the
venture. If information on the number of team members is available – as is the case with
PSED, albeit truncated at five – this should be relatively easy to correct for, if deemed
important. As will be explained below, I do for most purposes not find this type of
statistical non-representativeness to be much of a problem DEMO all.
13
A much more problematic and intriguing source of bias is that DEMO processes
have different duration. Assuming that the team vs. solo effect has been accounted for,
the resulting sample is, in a sense, DEMO for the population of business start-ups
at the time of the empirical investigation. It is not, however, a representative sample of
all start-up DEMO that were undertaken during that year. In order to see this, DEMO
the following example. Assume that the entire population of start-up processes in a
given year is 40. They consist of ten ‘slow’ start-ups, which are initiated on January 1
and completed on December 31. The other DEMO are ‘quick’ start-ups, which take four
months from initiation to completion. DEMO each are initiated on January 1, May 1, and
September 1, and consequently ten ‘quick’ start-ups are completed on April 30, August
DEMO, and December 31.
Now, although the proportion of ‘quick’ to ‘slow’ start-ups is three to one on a
yearly basis, we will sample from a population with a 50/50 distribution no matter what
date DEMO select for our sampling. That is, the procedure over-samples ‘slow’ start-up
DEMO This is a serious bias by the logic of statistical inference theory, because it is
likely to distort results. On the one hand, DEMO is the risk that the over-sampling
represents less serious and/or less successful start-up efforts. On the other hand,
technology-based, high-potential start-ups are also likely to require longer time. Rather
than hoping that these effects DEMO out the analyst should be aware of this problem,
and try different strategies for solving it. This might include elimination of cases that
DEMO to be ‘eternal start-ups’; weighing; sub-sample analysis by length of process, and
the use of process length as control variable.
Yet another source of bias makes it uncertain whether even ‘snapshot’
representativeness for ‘nascent entrepreneurs’ DEMO fully achieved with the suggested
procedure. Bhave (1994) identified two main processes leading to independent start-
14
ups. The first, which he labels ‘externally stimulated’ starts with a wish to strike out on
one’s own, followed by search, screening DEMO selection of business ideas
(‘opportunities’). The second, labelled ‘internally stimulated’, starts with identification
of a personal need; continues with need fulfilment, and only then does the individual
realize that this problem is general DEMO that the solution has commercial potential. In
this latter case, the DEMO involved may get much further into the process before
they start consider – and report – themselves as ‘nascent entrepreneurs’. If so, the
researcher should be aware that this type of start-up process will be under-sampled, and
try to find remedy as fit for the research problem at DEMO As will be explained below I
do not think deviations from proportionate representation of the empirical population
are necessarily a huge problem, as long as theoretically important categories have
satisfactory representation in the sample. A much DEMO problem may result not from
under-sampling of ‘internally stimulated’ processes but from the fact that they are
further into the process when first caught. DEMO this is not carefully controlled for in the
analysis there is a risk that differences in performance be attributed to process type
when differences DEMO starting point is the real cause.
Sampling on-going internal venture start-ups
As briefly mentioned above, I am less convinced that starting from a sample of
individuals, and the PSED screening questions, are the ideal tools DEMO sampling of
internal ventures. We have therefore employed a slightly different strategy in our study
of on-going new internal venture start-ups (Chandler, Dahlqvist, & Davidsson, 2003).
Instead of screening individuals, we choose to DEMO firms for new initiatives. One
advantage of this is that it eliminates the over-sampling of team efforts. Arguably, it
15
should also reduce the problems of over- and under-reporting relative to DEMO NI item in
the PSED research (cf. above). We were DEMO enough to have an on-going study of
a very large sample of firms from the 1994 cohort of  ‘genuine start-ups’ (Dahlqvist &
Davidsson, 2000a; 2000b), so we used the surviving firms (in year 2000) in this study as
the sampling frame. Because these firms had previously been approached with mail
questionnaires (where the first few question were mandatory data collection for a
government agency, thus yielding high response rates) we choose a mail questionnaire
directed at the CEO for the screening. Under other circumstances phone interviewing
would probably yield a higher response rate. DEMO focal screening questions were the
following:
1. Have you after the start of this company in 1994, started any new venture within
the company, which during some period has provided income to the company?
We are interested in new business initiatives in your company, which have lead
or could lead to new income-generating activities. NB! Not mergers or
DEMO
2. Do you have a business initiative in progress now, which DEMO yourself or others
in the company have devoted time and possibly other resources to develop, but
where the new activity does not yet yield a steady income?
Additional questions asked when the new initiative in (2) was initiated, and whether
the respondent had started any additional DEMO (separate form the sampled one) since
1994. The first question above is intended to define ‘new initiative’ and to separate up-
and-running initiatives DEMO on-going ones. The critical screening question is (2). Those
who DEMO this question affirmatively were later contacted for a phone interview. In
16
the phone interview the eligibility of the initiative was double-checked. It DEMO also
classified in terms of what type of novelty it represented (DEMO Bhave, 1994; Schumpeter,
1934). If the firm had several eligible, on-going initiatives to choose from, the one
deemed by the DEMO to be ‘most important for the company right now’ was
chosen.
So far, this strategy for sampling on-going internal ventures seems to be working
satisfactorily. However, it shares some of the problems with the PSED approach. First,
the screening is costly. In our case, 4950 firms were contacted for a yield of only 250
eligible cases; a sample size which is further reduced through attrition in the
longitudinal follow-ups (Chandler et al., 2003). The yield would almost certainly be
much higher if somewhat older and (in particular) larger firms were sampled – the DEMO
in our sample were predominantly micro-businesses – but increasing firm size also
introduces new complications to which we shall return below. The eligibility problem DEMO
similar to the PSED and soluble through criteria for being over- or under-qualified. The
problem of sampling bias because of variations in process length DEMO the same.
There is also a parallel to the concern discussed above that externally and internally
stimulated independent start-ups may be caught, on average, at different stages in the
process. Chandler et al. (2003) discuss three search processes behind ideas for new
internal ventures: pro-active search, DEMO search, and fortuitous discovery. It may be
suspected that the latter DEMO is less likely to be reported as a new initiative at very
early stages of the process. This would lead to the same problem DEMO under-sampling
and possible confounding of effects as discussed above for internally stimulated
processes in the context of independent start-ups.
Letting the respondent choose ‘the DEMO important’ initiative when several
eligible initiatives existed is, of course, a threat to representativeness. From a statistical
17
point of view a more defensible procedure would be to check DEMO number of eligible
processes in a firm, pick one randomly, and adjust in the analysis for the resulting
under-sampling of new ventures within DEMO firms. However, in our study
this problem was of little practical DEMO, as very few firms had more than one
new initiative under DEMO With larger firms in the sampling frame it would be more of a
problem. Indeed, above a certain firm size almost every sampled firm would likely have
more than one new internal venture under way. This DEMO for a more sophisticated
procedure for choosing among them and – if several ventures per firm are included in
the sample – techniques for DEMO for statistical dependence between cases with the
same origin.
Before selecting what ventures to include, however, one should ascertain that all
relevant new DEMO have been identified. In our cohort of young and mostly very
small firms, it was reasonable to assume that the CEO/respondent be aware of all new
initiatives going on in the firm. A study starting DEMO a sample of large firms would
either have to give up ambitions towards statistical representativeness, or develop a
procedure for first locating a sufficient number of relevant informants representing
different roles in the company. All of DEMO informants would then have to be screened
for information on the existence and nature of on-going internal venture initiatives.
What is probably more of DEMO issue with small (and independently owned) firms
than with large ones is whether the new venture is going to form part of the DEMO
firm, or become a legally separate business? These two possibilities should be
acknowledged in the design of the study and considered in the DEMO I personally see
no reason to decide a priori to include only one type or only the other. On the contrary,
this choice DEMO ‘mode of exploitation’ (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000) can be an
DEMO research question in itself. Moreover, it would be impractical to introduce
such a limitation, as the respondent has not necessarily taken this decision when the
start-up process is first capture.
18
Heterogeneity and representativeness
In DEMO discussions of representativeness above I have implicitly referred to statistical
representativeness. That is, the sample should reflect the composition of the underlying
population in a probabilistically known manner. This is required for statistical inference
theory (significance testing; estimation of confidence intervals) to be applicable – at
least DEMO the strict sense. Representative sampling and significance testing are important
safeguards against ignoring important parts of empirical populations; giving undue
weight to atypical cases, and ascribing substantive meaning to results that can easily
have been generated by chance factors.
The problem is that statistical inference theory is a DEMO that is tailor made for
opinion polls and industrial quality control rather than for social science research (cf.
Cohen, 1994; Oakes, 1986)DEMO Consider opinion polls. Here we have a clearly defined
population, which DEMO most countries is also reasonably reachable: all eligible voters.
What we DEMO to know is their political preferences on the day of investigation. Hence
we can draw a random sample and ask them about their preferences. DEMO statistical
inference theory, we can with high accuracy estimate with what DEMO our sample
results are associated, and determine whether the difference between DEMO political
parties, or the change for one party over time, deserves a substantial interpretation.
Alternatively, we may conclude that these differences are likely to be the result of
random sampling error. Clearly, probability sampling and significance testing are useful
19
tools in this situation – we can say much more on DEMO basis of this probability sample
than on the basis of just any equally sized voter sample of unknown origin.
Social science research, however, DEMO not the same as opinion polls, and theories
are not built DEMO democratic vote. That is, it is not a given that every DEMO case
should be deemed equally important for our theory building and theory testing. What
we are really after in social science research is theoretical DEMO – that the
studied cases are relevant for the theory we try to test or develop. There is no way we
can draw a DEMO sample from the theoretically relevant empirical population, because
that population does DEMO exist in one place at one time. This problem is aggravated by
the fact that start-up processes are very heterogeneous. Some are solo efforts DEMO
others are team based. Some are championed by experienced, habitual entrepreneurs
(Ucbasaran, Westhead, & Wright, 2001). Some are actively searched for whereas others
are stumbled over (Bhave, 1994; Chandler et al., DEMO). Many are part-time endeavours
at least initially while others may involve full time efforts by several individuals. They
also differ in terms of DEMO affiliations, start-up motives, growth potential, and a
range of other DEMO The questions are: what is the theory about and hence, what
should be represented in the sample?
An empirical population of independent DEMO processes is at the present time
likely to be dominated by efforts that are necessity-based and non-innovative (Reynolds
et al., 2001; Samuelsson, DEMO), and championed by first-time, male founders with
limited growth aspirations (Davidsson & Honig, 2003; Delmar & Davidsson, 1999).
Does this make these categories theoretically more interesting or important, so that we
should let them dominate in our efforts to develop and test theory? I would emphatically
say no. First, those who are smaller in numbers may still be more important to the
economy from which the sample is DEMO Second, that particular country in that
20
particular year is but one of an endless pool of empirical DEMO for which the theory
should have some relevance.
To illustrate the limitations of simple random sampling, consider first a firm
level example. If a simple random sample of small firms, here meaning firms with less
than 50 employees, were drawn in Sweden it would have the following composition of
firm sizes: 62 percent self-employed without employees; just short of DEMO percent micro-
firms with 1-9 employees, and a remainder less than DEMO percent firms with 10-49
employees (NUTEK, 2002). I dare ask, are the solo self-employed economically and
theoretically sixteen times more important just because they are sixteen times as many
as the ‘large’ small firms? I dare answer no, for most conceivable research questions
they are not! The same goes for start-up processes. Such processes are a heterogeneous
mix DEMO different ‘types’ (Bhave, 1994; Carter et al., 1996; Samuelsson, 2001;
Sarasvathy, 2001), some of which may be larger in numbers whereas others may be
economically more significant on a per capita DEMO Mixing them all in one sample and
giving little weight to those that are small in numbers in the specific empirical
population from which DEMO sample was drawn is likely to lead us to forego important
findings about significant economic phenomena.
We have noted that the population of ‘start-up DEMO is not well defined;
that the theoretically valid population is not existent in one place at one point in time,
and that DEMO processes are heterogeneous along several dimension. There are several
implications emanating from these lines of reasoning. The first is that simple random
sampling is DEMO necessarily the ideal. Stratified and deliberately ‘narrow’ statistical
samples, and even DEMO samples, may be preferable. However, it should be noted
that the possibility of pre-stratification is much more restricted for emerging ventures
than for DEMO or individuals, which are often classified by age, size, industry, location,
21
legal form and possibly other characteristics in the sampling frame already. DEMO
homogenisation of emerging ventures can be achieved through pre-stratification of the
firms or individuals in the screening sample (e.g., by education level or DEMO).
This first implication relates to the second, that the more DEMO issue about
sampling is not statistical but theoretical representativeness. That is, DEMO should be
carefully ascertained – and communicated – that the elements in the sample represent
the type of phenomenon that the theory makes statements DEMO This is equally relevant
for case study research. The third implication, DEMO related to the previous ones, is that
replication – not statistical DEMO testing – is the crucial theory test. The
development and testing of sound theory requires replication in several sub-groups of
analysable size within the DEMO study, as well as across several studies that investigate
theoretically relevant DEMO from different empirical populations. Achieving
theoretical relevance involves, for example, the above-mentioned criteria for
ascertaining that cases are neither under- nor over-qualified, and that those ‘types’ of
processes that are deemed theoretically relevant have adequate DEMO in the
sample. It is when findings hold up for several theoretically valid samples across time
and space – i.e., when findings are proven replicable – that we can make strong
inferences to the theoretical population.
DEMO rates and attrition
Another problem with the application of statistical inference is that typical response
rates are way below 50 percent (Chandler & Lyon, 2001), which makes inference
dubious also with respect to the empirical population actually used for sampling. When
the research is longitudinal the problem DEMO aggravated by attrition over time. Because
22
some start-up efforts are given up and in other cases the DEMO refuses to continue
to participate in the study, the worst-case scenario DEMO ending up with a sample too small
for statistical analysis may be realized.
In these matters it is a blessing to conduct research in DEMO, where we for
some peculiar cultural reason have been able to DEMO close to 85 percent response rate
in telephone screening for ‘nascent entrepreneurs’, and figures in the 90s (of the still
eligible sample) for continued participation over time (Davidsson & Honig, 2003;
Delmar & DEMO, 2002). Mail surveys rarely achieve much more than 50 percent DEMO
Sweden, but this is already a figure researchers in other countries DEMO only dream about.
Regardless of the maximum attainable level in a specific country, however, there is little
doubt that proper attention to and DEMO of the ‘craft’ of survey research – cover
letter, timing, layout, reminders, call-back schemes, etc. – will help the situation (Fink,DEMO
1995). Likewise, there are well-developed ways to deal with partially DEMO data
(Hair, Anderson, Tatham, & Black, 1998; Little & Rubin, 1987) – a problem that is
more pronounced with multi-wave DEMO opposed to cross-sectional data. These are general
issues that are relevant to any longitudinal survey research. A valid generalization
specifically for new venture start-up DEMO seems to be that initial non-response
actually is a worse problem than is non-cooperation in subsequent waves of data
collection. Just like in Sweden, the experience with the American PSED is that once
captured, those involved in venture start-ups often enjoy talking to interviewers about
their efforts (Reynolds, personal communication).
The occurrence of substantial non-response is additional reason to give
statistical testing a somewhat lesser role than it is often given. DEMO would suggest that the
defensible use of statistical testing is not to answer questions about non-investigated
populations, but to answer the following question: DEMO a sample of this size, could
the effect or difference we have estimated have been generated by some DEMO or
stochastic process, or can we with little risk ascribe it DEMO meaning’?  That is,
the function of statistical testing is limited, but it is still valuable for within-sample
safeguarding against unwarranted interpretations. Statisticians debate whether such
within-sample interpretation of the test is permissible (Oakes, DEMO). If this is not a
valid use one might justifiably question whether there exists any valid use at all of
statistical testing for DEMO research questions in the social sciences.
23
Data analysis
In our reasoning above we have already drifted into several issues of data analysis. For
DEMO, we have noted that the heterogeneity of venture start-up processes call DEMO sub-
sample analysis. We have observed that because of non-response and the impossibility
of drawing a representative sample directly from the theoretically relevant population,DEMO
statistical significance should be given a somewhat smaller role, and replication DEMO bigger
role, than what is conventional in social science practice. We DEMO also noted that unless
carefully considered in the analysis there is risk of confounding ‘caught late in the
process’ with ‘fast completion of the DEMO, and that the problem of catching cases at
different stages of DEMO process is particularly problematic when time of catching is
correlated with a potential explanatory variable, such as type of process. In short, when
DEMO from existing to emerging phenomena and from cross-sectional to longitudinal
data, DEMO analyst has to be aware that familiar problems may be even more pronounced
in this context, and also that a new set of challenges must be dealt with in a satisfactory
manner.
24
As regards analysis techniques it is possible to attain new insights DEMO the
process data based on application of the usual collection of analysis techniques (Carter
et al., 1996; Davidsson & Honig, 2003). DEMO, in order to better deal with the
specific data challenges, and to make full use of the longitudinal aspects of the data,
DEMO techniques may have to be learned and applied. This is a development that has
only just begun. I will here just mention briefly a DEMO examples that probably point out
the right direction.  First, we have Gimeno, Folta, Cooper, & Woo's (1997) careful
adaptation of analysis tools to the analysis problem. In particular, this study is
exceptional in its attention to heterogeneity regarding what is deemed an acceptable
level DEMO success. This mirrors Venkataraman’s (1997) argument that performance
relative to other ventures may not b the most relevant outcome variable for
entrepreneurship research (cf. (Davidsson, 2003).
As regards making use of the longitudinal DEMO of the data there are two (sets
of) techniques that appear especially promising, namely Event History Analysis
(Blossfeld & Rohwer, 2002) DEMO Longitudinal Growth Modelling (Muthén, 1997). In
event history analysis the problem that cases are caught at different stages of the process
can DEMO dealt with. This is achieved through converting the data set to monthly (or
weekly, bi-monthly, etc.) spells, using the time stamped first or nth gestation behaviour,
or a specific event like registration, as marker for the initiation of the process. This way,
the initiation DEMO the process is synchronized despite the calendar time differences among
the studied cases. The technique further makes use of the longitudinal aspect of the
DEMO as well as independent variables. Independent variables can be entered as
time invariant or time variant. In the latter case the value of the DEMO variable is
allowed to change over time. The dependent variable changes its value in the month
when the event to be predicted has occurred. DEMO where the event has still not
25
occurred when the last data collection is made are treated as DEMO censored – a problem
the technique is designed to deal with. The logic of the technique makes it especially
suited for predicting abandonment (vs. continuation) of the start-up processes, but can
also be applied for DEMO, e.g., ‘up and running’ vs. ‘still trying’. See Delmar &
DEMO, 2002; forthcoming) for relevant applications.
Although independent variables in event DEMO analysis can be either
quantitative or qualitative (dichotomous), the dependent DEMO is always qualitative.
Thus, the technique is a longitudinal equivalent to DEMO regression. Although other,
regression techniques for longitudinal analysis with a quantitative dependent variable
also exist, longitudinal growth modelling (LGM) is a particularly interesting alternative
for this situation. In the context of new venture emergence DEMO dependent variable might
be, for example, the accumulation of gestation activities in PSED (cf. Davidsson &
Honig, 2003; Gartner & Carter, 2003); the gradual attainment of the cornerstones of
Klofsten’s Business Platform DEMO (cf. Davidsson & Klofsten, 2003), or any other
variable that is analogous to growth. Being a longitudinal cousin to structural equation
modelling DEMO like LISREL, LGM has the advantages of being applicable to
models DEMO latent variables and indirect as well as direct relationships. The problem of
different starting points is at least partly solved by simultaneously predicting initial
DEMO and development over time. A shortcoming of LGM is that cases that dissolve
during the studied period cannot be included in the analysis. In DEMO to avoid erroneous
conclusions based on success bias the LGM analysis should therefore be supplemented
with other types of analyses of the discontinued cases, so as to make sure that these do
not share the characteristics DEMO appear as success factors in LGM. For a relevant
application see (DEMO, 2001).
Conclusion
26
In this manuscript I have propagated for longitudinal study of DEMO venture start-up
processes, using the evolving venture itself as the unit DEMO analysis. I argue that this type
of study holds great promise of yielding new insights for entrepreneurship both as a
field of research and DEMO business practice. However, it is clearly the case that conducting
this DEMO of research is not easy. On the contrary, it involves an DEMO of tricky
challenges like assessing the applicability of existing theory (and DEMO necessary
adaptations of the same); identifying a relevant sample; balancing DEMO acknowledgement
of heterogeneity as a fundamental characteristic of economic agents and entities with
the wish to delimit heterogeneity in order to achieve clear results, as well ass the need to
identify, learn and apply analysis techniques that make full use of the longitudinal data.
The problems may seem DEMO, but the reason for this is not so much that the
DEMO is much worse for this type of study that for more conventional research; it is
just that we have developed a habit of neglecting some of the fundamental problems
inherent to the type of studies we DEMO more familiar with. For every type of research an
equally long list of inherent method issues could be discussed, and many of the
challenges I have discussed here, such as the problems of theoretical relevance and non-
applicability of statistical inference theory, are in fact much more general than the
specific type of research discussed in this manuscript.
It is DEMO hope that fellow researchers will view the method issues discussed in
this manuscript as interesting and inspiring challenges. If the challenges feel like just DEMO
little bit too much I offer as consolation that for those who take them on the potential
reward is great. Here we have a DEMO field where there is real chance to make
important scholarly contributions regarding issues that are of utmost societal
importance. A DEMO can be worse of than that.
27
References
Acs, Z. J., & Audretsch, D. B. (Eds.). (2003), Handbook of entrepreneurship research:
An interdisciplinary survey and introduction, Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer.
Aldrich, H. (1999), Organizations evolving, Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Aldrich, H., Kalleberg, A. L., Marsden, P. V., & DEMO, J. (1989), 'In pursuit of
evidence: strategies for locating new businesses',. Journal of Business
Venturing, 4, 367-386.
Anderson, DEMO R. (1990), Cognitive psychology and its implications, New York:
W.H.Freeman and Company.
Bhave, M. P. (1994), 'A process model of entrepreneurial venture creation', Journal of
Business Venturing, 9, 223-242.
DEMO, H.-P., & Rohwer, G. (2002), Techniques of event history modeling: new
approaches to causal analysis, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum DEMO
Carter, N. M., Gartner, W. B., & Reynolds, P. DEMO (1996), 'Exploring start-up event
sequences' Journal of Business Venturing, 11, 151-166.
Chandler, G. N., Dahlqvist, J., & Davidsson, DEMO (2003), 'Opportunity recognition
processes: A taxonomic classification and outcome DEMO', paper
presented at the Academy of Management Meeting, Seattle.
Chandler, G. N., & Lyon, D. W. (2001), 'Methodological issues DEMO entrepreneurship
research: the past decade', Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25(4, Summer),
101-113.
Cohen, J. (1994), 'The earth is round (p<.05)', American Psychologist, 47, 997-1003.
28
Cooper, A. C. (1995), 'Challenges in predicting new venture performance', In I. Bull, H.
Thomas, & G. Willard (Eds.), Entrepreneurship: Perspectives on theory
building, London: Elsevier Science Ltd, DEMO 109-124.
Dahlqvist, J., & Davidsson, P. (2000a), 'Business DEMO reasons and firm
performance', In P. Reynolds, E. Autio, C. Brush, W. Bygrave, S. Manigart, H.
Sapienza, & K. Shaver (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2000,
Wellesley, MA: Babson DEMO, pp. 46-54.
Dahlqvist, J., & Davidsson, P. (2000b), DEMO conditions as predictors of new venture
performance: A replication and extension DEMO the Cooper et al. study. Enterprise
and Innovation Management Studies, 1, 1-17.
Davidsson, P. (2003), 'The domain of entrepreneurship research: DEMO suggestions', In
J. Katz & D. Shepherd (Eds.), Advances DEMO Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence
and Growth (Vol. 6), Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Davidsson, P., & Henreksson, M. (2002), 'Institutional determinants of the prevalence
of start-ups and high-growth firms: Evidence from Sweden', Small Business
Economics, 19(2), 81-104.
Davidsson, P., & Honig, B. (2003), 'The role of social and human capital among nascent
entrepreneurs', Journal of Business Venturing, 18, 301-331.
Davidsson, P., & Klofsten, M. (2003), 'The business platform: Developing an
instrument to gauge and assist the development of young firms', DEMO of
Small Business Management, 41(1), 1-26.
Davidsson, P., & Wiklund, J. (2000), 'Conceptual and empirical challenges in the DEMO
of firm growth', In D. Sexton & H. Landström (Eds.), The Blackwell handbook
of entrepreneurship, Oxford, MA: Blackwell Business.
29
Davidsson, P., & Wiklund, J. (2001), 'Levels of analysis in entrepreneurship research:
current practice and suggestions for the future', Entrepreneurship Theory &
Practice, 25(4, Summer), 81-99.
Delmar, F. (2000), 'The psychology of the entrepreneur', In S. DEMO & D. Jones-Evans
(Eds.), Enterprise & small business: Principles, DEMO and policy, Harlow:
Financial Times, pp. 132-154.
Delmar, F., & Davidsson, P. (1999), 'Firm size expectations of nascent entrepreneurs',
In P. Reynolds, W. Bygrave, S. Manigart, C. Mason, G.D. Meyer, H. Sapienza
& K. Shaver (Eds.), Frontiers of DEMO Research 1999, Wellesley,
MA: Babson College, pp. 90-104.
Delmar, F., & Davidsson, P. (2000), 'Where do they come DEMO?  Prevalence and
characteristics of nascent entrepreneurs', Entrepreneurship & Regional
Development, 12, 1-23.
Delmar, F., & Shane, S. (2002), 'What founders do: A longitudinal study of the start-up
process', paper presented at the Babson College / Kauffman Foundation
Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Wellesley, MA.
Delmar, F., & Shane, S. (forthcoming), 'Legitimating DEMO: Organizing activities and the
survival of new ventures', Journal of DEMO Venturing.
Douglas, S.R & C.S. Craig (1983), International marketing research, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Fink, A. (Ed.). (1995), The survey kit, Thousands Oaks, CA.: Sage Publications.
Gartner, DEMO B. (1988), ‘"Who is an entrepreneur" is the wrong question', American
Small Business Journal, 13(Spring), 11-31.
Gartner, DEMO B. (1993), 'Words lead to deeds: Towards an organizational DEMO
vocabulary', Journal of Business Venturing, 8, 231-239.
30
Gartner, W. B. (2001), 'Is there an elephant in entrepreneurship research? Blind
assumptions in theory development', Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25(4,
Summer), 27-39.
Gartner, W.B. & Carter, N. (2003), 'Entrepreneurial behavior and firm organizing
processes', In A. DEMO & D. B. Audretsch (Eds.), Handbook of entrepreneurship
research, Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer.
Gimeno, J., Folta, T. B., Cooper, A. C., & Woo, C. Y. (1997), 'Survival of the DEMO?
Entrepreneurial human capital and the persistence of underperforming firms',
DEMO Science Quarterly, 42, 750-783.
Hair, J. F., Anderson, R. DEMO, Tatham, R. L., & Black, W. C. (1998), DEMO data
analysis, (5 ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kirzner, I. M. (1983), 'Entrepreneurs and the entrepreneurial function: a commentary',
In J. Ronen (Ed.), Entrepreneurship, Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Little, R. J. A., & Rubin, D. DEMO (1987), Statistical analysis with missing data, New York
John Wiley.
Low, M. (2001), 'The adolescence of entrepreneurship research: specification DEMO
purpose', Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25(4, Summer), 17-25.
Muthén, B. O. (1997), 'Latent variable modeling of longitudinal and multilevel data', In
A. Raftery (Ed.), Sociological methodology, Boston; MA: Blackwell Publishers.
NUTEK (2002), 'Företagens villkor och verklighet 2002. Dokumentation och
svarsöversikt' (Conditions and reality of small firms 2002. Documentation DEMO
overview of responses), Stockholm: NUTEK.
Oakes, M. (1986), DEMO inference: A commentary for the social and behavioural
Sciences, Chichester: DEMO
31
Reynolds, P. D. (1997), 'Who starts new firms? DEMO explorations of firms-in-
gestation', Small Business Economics, 9, 449-462.
Reynolds, P. D. (2000), 'National panel study of US business start-ups. Background and
methodology', In J. A. Katz (Ed.), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm
Emergence and Growth (Vol. 4), Stamford, CT: DEMO Press.
Reynolds, P. D., Camp, S. M., Bygrave, W. DEMO, Autio, E., & Hay, M. (2001), Global
entrepreneurship DEMO: 2001 Executive report, Kansas, MO.: Kauffman
Foundation.
Reynolds, P. DEMO, & Miller, B. (1992), 'New firm gestation: conception, birth and
implications for research', Journal of Business Venturing, 7, DEMO
Samuelsson, M. (2001), 'Modeling the nascent venture opportunity exploitation DEMO
across time', In W. D. Bygrave, E. Autio, C. G. Brush, P. Davidsson, P. G.
Green, P. D. Reynolds, & DEMO J. Sapienza (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research 2001, Wellesley, DEMO: Babson College, pp. 66-79.
Sarasvathy, S. (2001), 'Causation DEMO effectuation: towards a theoretical shift from
economic inevitability to entrepreneurial contingency', Academy of Management
Review, 26, 243-288.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934), The theory of economic development, Cambridge: MA:
Harvard University DEMO
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000), 'The promise DEMO entrepreneurship as a field of
research', Academy of Management Review, DEMO, 217-226.
Shaver, K. G., Carter, N. M., Gartner, W. B., & Reynolds, P. D. (2001), 'Who is a
DEMO entrepreneur? Decision rules for identifying and selecting entrepreneurs
in the panel DEMO of entrepreneurial dynamics (PSED)' (summary), In W. D.
Bygrave, E. Autio, C. G. Brush, P. Davidsson, P. G. Green, P. D. Reynolds, &
32
H. J. Sapienza (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2001, DEMO,
MA: Babson College, p. 122.
Shaver, K. G., Gartner, W. B., Crosby, E., Bakalarova, K., & Gatewood, E. J. (2001),
'Attributions about entrepreneurship: A framework for analyzing DEMO for
starting a business', Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 26(2, Winter), 5-32.
Thornton, P. H. (1999), 'The sociology of entrepreneurship', Annual Review of
Sociology, 25, 19-46.
Ucbasaran, D., DEMO, P., & Wright, M. (2001), 'The focus of DEMO
research: Contextual and process issues', Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice,
DEMO(4, Summer), 57-80.
Van de Ven, A. H., Angle, H. L., & Poole, M. S. (1989), Research on the management
of innovation: the Minnesota studies, New York: Harper & Row.
van de Ven, A. H., Polley, D., Garud, R., & Venkataraman, S. (1999), The innovation
journey, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Venkataraman, S. (1997), 'The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: An
editor's perspective', In J. Katz & J. Brockhaus (DEMO), Advances in
Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and Growth, Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.{1g42fwefx}