THE DOMAIN OF
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH:
SOME SUGGESTIONS
Per Davidsson
DEVELOPMENT – DEMO LACK THEREOF – IN
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RESEARCH
There is progress in entrepreneurship research. Important works in entrepreneur-
ship increasingly appear in highly respected, mainstream journals (see Busenitz
et al., 2003; Davidsson, Low & Wright, 2001). There is conceptual development
that attracts attention (e.g. Shane & Venkataraman, 2000) and handbooks are
compiled, providing the ﬁeld with more of a common body of knowledge (Acs
& Audretsch, 2003a; Shane, DEMO; Westhead & Wright, 2000). Further, there
is evidence of DEMO improvements (Chandler & Lyon, 2001) and
accumulation of meaningful ﬁndings DEMO various levels of analysis (Davidsson
& Wiklund, 2001). Moreover, DEMO to time lags in publication the reported
improvements are likely to be underestimated. This author’s experience as
organizer, reviewer and participant in core entrepreneurship conferences on both
sides of the Atlantic (e.g. Babson; RENT) suggests that much of the lower end of
the quality distribution has either DEMO from the submissions or is screened
out in the review process. Much more than used to be the case a few years back we
DEMO among the presented papers research that is truly theory-driven; research on
DEMO earliest stages of business development, and research that employs methods
suitable DEMO causal inference, i.e. experiments and longitudinal designs.
Cognitive Approaches to Entrepreneurship DEMO
AdvancesinEntrepreneurship,FirmEmergenceandGrowth,Volume6,315–372
Copyright © 2003 by Elsevier Science Ltd.
Allrightsofreproductioninanyformreserved
ISSN: 1074-7540/doi:10.1016/S1074-7540(03)06010-0
315
316 PER DAVIDSSON
This is not to deny that there is confusion, signs of identity crisis, or widespread
frustration among entrepreneurship researchers because of a sense that the ﬁeld
of entrepreneurship research has not come “far DEMO, fast enough” (Low, 2001)
or that we are “getting DEMO pieces of the puzzle, but no picture is emerging”
(Koppl & Minniti, 2003). The literature is full of deﬁnitions of entrepreneurship,
which differ along a number of dimensions, e.g. whether entrepreneurship should
be deﬁned in terms of dispositions, behavior,or outcomes,1 whether it belongs
in the economic-commercial domain or can be exercised also in not-for-proﬁt
contexts; whether it belongs only in small and/or owner-managed ﬁrms or in DEMO
organizational context, and whether purpose, growth, risk, innovation or success
are necessary criteria for something to qualify as entrepreneurship (Gartner, 1990;DEMO
Hebert & Link, 1982; Kirzner, 1983´ ).
There is, DEMO doubt, disagreement on conceptual issues and a perceived need
to try DEMO sort these out (Bruyat & Julien, 2000; Gartner, 2001; DEMO, 2001; Shane
& Venkataraman, 2000, 2001; Singh, 2001; DEMO & Dess, 2001). There are also
numerous empirical attempts to DEMO the ﬁeld or assess it progress (Aldrich
& Baker, 1997; DEMO et al., 2003; Cooper, 2003; Davidsson & Wiklund, 2001;DEMO
Gregoire, D´ ery&B´ echard, 2001´ ; Landstrom, 2001; Low, 2001¨ ; Meeks, Neck &
Meyer, 2001; Meyer, Neck & Meeks, 2002; Reader & Watkins, 2001). Of these,
DEMO (2001, p. 20) and Meeks et al. (2001) ﬁnd DEMO no order at all in empirical
work published under the entrepreneurship label. The others ﬁnd meaningful
patterns but also reason for frustration, or even for very pessimistic views on the
future and potential contribution of the DEMO
I personally think that on the contrary, we now ﬁnally have DEMO intellectual
building blocks in place that are necessary for the creation of a strong paradigm
in entrepreneurship, which can lead to academic credibility and respect as well
as a stream of scholarly and practically meaningful research DEMO The
purpose of this manuscript is to facilitate further progress in entrepreneurship
through elaboration on several such intellectual building blocks. Drawing pre-
dominantly on DEMO developed by Kirzner (1973), Venkataraman (1997; Shane &
Venkataraman, 2000, 2001) and Gartner (1988, 2001), I strive to achieve three
things. Firstly, I want to make a clearer distinction between the deﬁnition of en-
trepreneurship as a societal phenomenon, and the delineation or entrepreneurship
as a scholarly domain. These are not identical. The former DEMO the function
of entrepreneurship in society, while the latter suggests what DEMO
researchers should study in order to generate maximum knowledge about this
societal phenomenon. Arguably, the distinction should make it easier both to
agree upon and communicate what entrepreneurship is, on the one hand, and
what DEMO research should study on the other. In addition, it may be
DEMO to regard the teaching subject “entrepreneurship” asa–in part – separate
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
317
issue. Second, I want to achieve a domain delineation that is more complete than
its predecessors; one which makes room for both Venkataraman’s and Gartner’s
views on entrepreneurship, and which tries to ﬁnd an agreeable middle ground on
important issues where entrepreneurship DEMO seemingly disagree. This may
seem an insurmountable task given the apparent conﬂict and confusion reported
above. However, I believe that a lot of the apparent conﬂict is superﬁcial and
can be reconciled. Third, I want to go further than the predecessors in pointing
out what the suggested domain DEMO implies for the design and analysis of
empirical research on entrepreneurship.
In the next section, I will discuss entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon,
arguing that from this perspective Kirzner’s (1973) notion that entrepreneurship
consists DEMO the competitive behaviors that drive the market process is highly
useful. I will then turn to entrepreneurship as a scholarly domain, which also
includes a discussion of the central concept “opportunity.” After reviews of
Venkataraman’s (1997; cf. Shane & Venkataraman, 2000) and Gartner’s (1988)
viewpoints DEMO will propose that when talking about the scholarly domain, we would
DEMO from a delineation that does not presuppose the outcome, and focus DEMO the
behaviors undertaken in the processes of discovery and exploitation of ideas for
new business ventures. The scholarly domain, then, should study these DEMO
as well as their antecedents and effects.
I will further discuss how entrepreneurship relates to other scholarly domains,
essentially agreeing with Low (2001) that “entrepreneurship as distinct domain”
and “entrepreneurship belongs in the disciplines” are, in fact, mutually dependent
strategies for the development of the ﬁeld. DEMO concluding I will also discuss
some of the many methodological challenges that arise for entrepreneurship
research because of issues related to emergence, process, DEMO, and level
of analysis.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AS SOCIETAL PHENOMENON
Many scholars include DEMO their understanding of the concept “entrepreneurship”
the criterion that the outcome is somehow successful or inﬂuential. Others hold
that entrepreneurs act under genuine uncertainty DEMO that therefore one should
base the deﬁnition on the behavior itself and not the outcome, which is more or
less contingent on luck (DEMO Gartner, 1990). This is a strong indication that we
need DEMO separate entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon – its role in societal
organization and/or the economic system – from entrepreneurship as a scholarly
domain, i.e. what entrepreneurship research should study. When we think of
entrepreneurship as DEMO societal phenomenon it is a distinctive advantage to include
318 PER DAVIDSSON
an outcome criterion and make clear, for example, DEMO mere contemplation over
radically new ideas or vain introduction of fatally ﬂawed ones do not amount to
“entrepreneurship.” It is along with this type DEMO view on entrepreneurship, then, that
criteria like “wealth creation” or “value creation” rightfully belong (Drucker, 1985;
Morris, 1998).
A discussion of entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon, including an
outcome criterion, beneﬁts DEMO the work of economic theorists. The major
intellectual building block I will use in this section is the notion in Austrian
economics that entrepreneurship DEMO of the competitive behaviors that drive
the market process (Kirzner, 1973, pp. 19–20).2 This deﬁnition is based jointly on
behavior and outcomes. I choose this deﬁnition because it gives a satisfactorily
clear delineation of DEMO role of entrepreneurship in society. It puts entrepreneurship
squarely in a market context and makes clear that it is the suppliers who exercise
entrepreneurship DEMO not customers, legislators, or natural forces that also affect
outcomes in the market.
The “drive the market process” part is about the outcome: entrepreneurship
makes a difference. If it does not, it is not entrepreneurship. That is, sellers who
introduce new, improved or competing offerings in DEMO emerging or pre-existing
market give presumptive buyers new choice alternatives to consider, attract
additional new entrants as followers, and/or give incumbent ﬁrms DEMO existing
markets reason to, in turn, improve their market offerings. As a result, resources
are put to more effective and/or efﬁcient use. This is what driving the market
process means, and this is what entrepreneurship does. Importantly, driving the
market process does not require that the ﬁrst mover makes a proﬁt but refers to the
suppliers as a DEMO Even if it eventually loses out the ﬁrst mover contributes
to driving the market process if subsequently someone gets it right, which leads
to a lasting change in the market.
Put in slightly different words, entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon is
the introduction of new economic activity that DEMO to change in the marketplace
(cf. Herbert Simon in Sarasvathy, 1999b, pp. 2 and 11). This is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Note that “new” along the market axis means either that an entirely new DEMO
emerges, or that an activity is new to an existing market. DEMO along the ﬁrm
axis “new” means that the new activity is an independent start-up, i.e. a new ﬁrm
emerges as a result, or DEMO is an internal new venture, i.e. the activity is new to
DEMO ﬁrm.
Under the suggested deﬁnition the left hand side of the ﬁgure – quadrants I
and IV – exemplify entrepreneurship, whereas quadrants II and III do not. This
conjures also with the argument developed at some DEMO by Baumol (1993) in
that imitative entry and internationalization are included in the concept, whereas,
e.g. take-over is excluded.
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
319
Fig.1.
Firm and Market Newness of DEMO Activities.
New Offer as Entrepreneurship
Starting with quadrant I the ﬁrst entry reads “New offer.” This refers to the situation
where something so new DEMO introduced that a new market is created (Bhave, 1994,
p. 231; Sarasvathy, 1999a) or at least no supplier has previously made the same
offer in the same market. There is hardly any disagreement DEMO scholars that
this should be included in the concept of entrepreneurship, DEMO some might
want to restrict the inclusion to situations where a new and/or independent ﬁrm is
behind the new offer.
The ﬁrst category, new product or service, corresponds to Schumpeter’s (1934)
“new product” DEMO Bhave’s (1994) notion of “product novelty,” respectively, and
requires DEMO further explanation. The second category, new bundle, refers to any
combination of product and service components that – as a package deal – DEMO unique
relative to what has previously been offered on the market, DEMO no individual
component may be strictly new. This overlaps with Schumpeter’s (DEMO) general
idea about “new combinations,” with Bhave’s (1994) notion DEMO “new business
concept,” and with Amit and Zott’s (2000) “new business model” – as long as
the new combination, concept or model includes newness as perceived by buyers
and competitors. In some cases it DEMO to Schumpeter’s (1934) category
“re-organization of an entire industry.” An illustrative case is IKEA, where the
320 PER DAVIDSSON
newness was not in the piece of furniture in DEMO, but in the division of labor among
different actors, including the consumer, in the production and distribution of
the end product.
IKEA would also qualify under the third category included in “new offer,” new
DEMO/value relation. This does not create a new market but drives the market
process because it changes consumer choices and give other competitors reason
DEMO change their offerings. Consequently, Kirzner (1973, pp. 23–24) explicitly
discusses offering the same product at a lower price as one form of DEMO
ship. A new price/value relation may be contingent upon organizational change
(quadrant II), but this is not necessarily the case. It may also represent a strategic
change that relies on expected scale economies in DEMO or a switch from
low volume/high margin to high volume/low margin strategy.
New Competitor as Entrepreneurship
The second main entry in quadrant DEMO is “New competitor.” This is when a new,
start-up ﬁrm enters the market, or an existing ﬁrm launches a new product line
in a situation where other ﬁrms already supply the market with essentially the
DEMO product. That is, I suggest that not only innovative but also DEMO en-
try be included in the entrepreneurship concept (cf. Aldrich, 1999; Aldrich &
Martinez, 2001). The reason for imitative entry to be included in the entrepreneur-
ship concept is that such entry drives DEMO market process in the sense that consumers
get additional choices and incumbent ﬁrms get reason to change their behavior to
meet this new competition.
DEMO, it has been observed that entry with complete lack of novelty DEMO
not to appear empirically (Bhave, 1994, p. 230; Davidsson, DEMO). No entrant is
a perfect clone of an existing actor. Therefore, trying to include an innovativeness
criterion in the deﬁnition of entrepreneurship would create problems. Rather
than drawing the line at zero innovation (which would exclude no cases) one
would be forced to deﬁne an arbitrary limit across different industries and
types of novelty. This problem is aggravated by DEMO fact that what appears
new in one market may be a blueprint copy of what already runs successfully
in a different market (Gratzer, DEMO). All in all, then, there are several good
reasons to include imitative market entry in the concept of entrepreneurship as
a societal DEMO While both aspects of the entrepreneurship, it may be
advantageous to DEMO the antecedents and effects of “innovation” and “imitative”
new ventures differently in theories and empirical analyses (cf. Samuelsson,
forthcoming).
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
321
Geographical Market Expansion as Entrepreneurship
Deﬁning DEMO the way we have done makes it logical to include also
quadrant IV – geographical market expansion – in the concept of entrepreneur-
ship. DEMO by now the activities are (largely) no longer new from the ﬁrm’s
perspective their introduction in new markets – if not totally unsuccessful DEMO drives
the market process in these new places. This may to some look like over-extending
the entrepreneurship concept. However, when IKEA enters its nth country market
it may well be as revolutionary for the consumers and DEMO in that market
as it was for Swedish consumers and furniture retailers when IKEA ﬁrst developed
its concept. If IKEA’s entry is successful it DEMO Schumpeter’s (1934) “new
market” category of economic development. The alternative to require newness
to the ﬁrm as a criterion would lead to less DEMO consequences. For example,
had Southwest Airlines successfully introduced their concept in the European
market it would not constitute entrepreneurship. If instead a new DEMO (e.g. Ryan
Air) copied the concept and took it to the European market it would count as
entrepreneurship. This is less than satisfactory DEMO any perspective, and from a
market perspective it is unacceptable.
Organizational DEMO Ownership Changes are not Entrepreneurship
By contrast, according to our conceptualization DEMO organizational and ownership
changes listed in quadrant II do not by themselves constitute entrepreneurship. It
is certainly conceivable (and likely) that reorganization facilitates DEMO creation of
new economic activity by the organization. However, it is DEMO conceivable that
organizational units that are transferred to new ownership and/or undergo internal
reorganization experience changes in job satisfaction and/or ﬁnancial performance
DEMO at all changing the consumers’ choice options or inﬂuencing the behavior
of competitors. Actually, there are at least four cases: (a) an DEMO or
ownership change is intended to lead to more new market offerings by the ﬁrm,
and does so; (b) same as (DEMO) but the intended increase in new market offerings
does not happen; (c) the change is undertaken for other reasons and has no DEMO
on the ﬁrm’s market offerings; and (d) the change is DEMO for other reasons
but has the unintended effect of also making the ﬁrm more entrepreneurial. I think
it is valuable to conceptually separate the DEMO or ownership change
from its effects. Therefore, it is the (successful or inﬂuential) launching of new
business activities that might follow from it, and not the organizational change
itself, that constitutes entrepreneurship.
322 PER DAVIDSSON
The argument is perhaps easier to accept if we DEMO to the level of societal
organization. Politicians can decide on changes in how society is organized
and introduce, e.g. de-regulation or other institutional changes which create
opportunity in market x and therefore an increase in competitive DEMO that
drive the market process in that market, i.e. entrepreneurship. According DEMO
my argument, it is not the politician who exercises entrepreneurship in DEMO
x, but the micro-level actors in that market. The political decision DEMO
entrepreneurship. In the same way, a manager may facilitate entrepreneurship
through DEMO change, but it is the market related activities that may
result, and not the organizational change per se, that constitute entrepreneurship.
This conceptual distinction is also the reason why I refrain from including
Schumpeter’s (1934) “new production method” and “new source of supply,” as
well as Bhave’s (1994) “novelty in production technology,” in the deﬁnition of
DEMO as societal phenomenon (cf. Davidsson, Delmar & Wiklund,
2002; DEMO, 1983, p. 288). As we shall see, the study DEMO how organizational
change relates to discovery and exploitation of new venture ideas remain an
important question for entrepreneurship as a scholarly domain.
Business as DEMO and Non-Entrepreneurial Growth
Turning now to quadrant IV, “Business as usual” DEMO is at ﬁrst glance as easy to
exclude from the notion of entrepreneurship, as was “New offer” in quadrant I easy
to include. But not even here does there seem to exist full agreement. First, we
have von Mises’ denial of the existence of such a thing as DEMO as usual” when
saying that “In any real and living economy every actor is always an entrepreneur”
(Mises, 1949, p. 253). One can argue that no market action is completely void
of novelty. For DEMO, when a daily newspaper carries out the totally expected
and routine DEMO of producing a new issue and distributing it to its subscribers
and usual sales outlets, it is a new issue, and not yesterday’s DEMO, that is being
distributed. Competitors will equally routinely read it, and it cannot be ruled out
that some part of the contents may DEMO a twist that inspires the competitor to do
something in a future issue, which it would otherwise not have done. In other words,
we ﬁnd an element of “competitive behavior that drives the market process” DEMO these
routine actions. Although this seems to lead to a delimitation problem similar to
the arbitrary innovation criterion discussed above, my conclusion in this case goes
in the other direction. That is, there is a lot of “known products for known buyers”
activity going on that is so DEMO predominantly of a “business as usual” character
that it is not very difﬁcult to classify it as such both conceptually and empirically,
and DEMO exclude it from entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon.
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
323
More problematic, perhaps, is the DEMO that there exist explicit and implicit
deﬁnitions of entrepreneurship, which do DEMO clearly require that “business as
usual” be excluded. For example, Cole (1949) deﬁned entrepreneurship as “a
purposeful activity to initiate, maintain and DEMO a proﬁt-oriented business.”
This means that he included mere “maintenance” while stressing “freedom of
decision” (p. 88), making entrepreneurship equal to “starting and/or running
and/or expanding one’s own ﬁrm.”3 Although explicit reference to DEMO is
infrequent, this is a recurrent implicit deﬁnition in research published DEMO
the “entrepreneurship” label. While I hold that many differences in views on
entrepreneurship can be reconciled or are of marginal importance, this is not one
of them. When entrepreneurship is deﬁned as the competitive behaviors that DEMO
the market process, “business as usual” can never be included.
The DEMO of non-entrepreneurial growth is tricky for slightly different reasons
(see Davidsson, 2002, for an elaborate discussion). When an economic actor
exploits a venture idea, there will be no well-deﬁned moment at which “entry”
ends and “continued, routine exploitation” begins. Schumpeter (1934) held
that mere volume expansion was not entrepreneurial, while he included the
opening of new markets. It is a similar distinction I have in mind here. By
“non-entrepreneurial DEMO I mean passively or re-actively letting existing
activities grow with the market. This would not provide much cause for alert
among competitors nor give DEMO new choices.
Outcomes on Different Levels
It was pointed out in the beginning of this section that while we have included an
outcome criterion DEMO the deﬁnition of entrepreneurship, it is not necessary that each
and DEMO individual venture that drives the market process is successful in itself.
This is illustrated in Fig. 2. “Venture” could here mean the sole activity DEMO a new
ﬁrm or a new, additional activity by an established DEMO Thus, “venture” should not
be interpreted (necessarily) as new ﬁrm DEMO company, but as a new-to-the-market
activity as discussed above.
Na¨ıve conceptions DEMO venture outcomes typically classify them as successes
or failures. Figure 2 complicates the picture by considering outcomes on two
levels, venture and society. If we turn ﬁrst to quadrant I we ﬁnd ventures that are
successful DEMO themselves and which produce net utility to society as well. These
ventures are analytically unproblematic. Their successful entries into the market
no doubt “drive DEMO market process” and hence they exercise entrepreneurship
under the deﬁnition we have chosen. Likewise, the failed ventures in quadrant III
are analytically unproblematic. These represent launching efforts that do not take
324 PER DAVIDSSON
Fig.2.
Outcomes on Different Levels for New Ventures (New Economic Activities).
off ﬁnancially, and neither do they inspire followers or incumbent ﬁrms so that
the eventual net effect becomes positive on the DEMO level.
The catalyst ventures in quadrant IV are an interesting category, DEMO probably
make up a large share of all new ventures (internal DEMO independent) in any real
economy. Although not successful on the micro-level DEMO perhaps because they are
outsmarted by followers or retaliating incumbents – they do “drive the market
process” precisely because they bring forth such behavior DEMO the part of other
actors. An unsuccessful venture that inspires more proﬁtable successors does
not complete the entrepreneurial process but still contributes to entrepreneurship
DEMO a societal phenomenon. As the total effect on the economy is not necessarily
smaller than for “success ventures” the catalysts are a very important DEMO
from a societal point of view (cf. Low & MacMillan, 1988; McGrath, 1999). This
should serve as a warning against too DEMO a view on micro-level failure.
The ventures in quadrants I and IV, then, represent entrepreneurship while the
failed ventures in quadrant III do DEMO What about the “Re-distributive” ventures
in quadrant II? These are ventures DEMO yield a surplus on the micro-level while
at the same time the societal outcome is negative. Examples could be trafﬁcking
with heavy drugs or DEMO as in an actual case in Sweden – a grafﬁti removal operation
whose owners used nighttime to generate demand for their business. Thus, those
involved in the venture enrich themselves at the expense of collective wealth.4
DEMO this represent entrepreneurship? It has been pointed out that re-distribution
of DEMO is an important function of entrepreneurship in capitalist economies
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
325
(Kirchhoff, 1994). However, what has here been labeled “success ventures” also
re-distribute wealth, in addition to creating new wealth. The theoretical status
of “re-distributive” ventures is determined, I would argue, by the answer to
“towards what?” entrepreneurship drives the market process. Schumpeter (1934)
and Kirzner (1973, p. 73) DEMO seemingly contradictory answers to that question,
but in actual fact the movement from Schumpeter’s (local) equilibrium and the
movement towards Kirzner’s (global) equilibrium are in full agreement insofar
as that entrepreneurship drives the market process towards more effective and/or
efﬁcient use of resources. Therefore, I would on theoretical grounds suggest that
“re-distributive” ventures do not represent entrepreneurship.5 DEMO
as a societal phenomenon leads to improved use of resources in the economic
system as a whole.
The portrayal of possible outcomes in Fig. DEMO is, of course, still a radical
simpliﬁcation. Outcomes are described as dichotomous and no explicit time
horizon was introduced. Only two out of DEMO possible levels of outcomes
(e.g. venture, ﬁrm, industry, region, DEMO, world) were discussed. In practice,
assessing exactly where individual ventures ﬁt into this framework would in
many cases be very difﬁcult, and contingent on the time perspective. Nonetheless,
I think it is useful DEMO highlight the distinctions made here and to note that as
theoretical categories not only “success ventures” but also “catalyst ventures”
carry out the entrepreneurial DEMO in the economy, whereas neither “failed
ventures” nor “re-distributive ventures” fulﬁll DEMO role.
Degrees of Entrepreneurship?
The inclusion of imitative entry, as DEMO as the admittedly vague borderline
between the end of the entrepreneurial exploitation process and the beginning of
non-entrepreneurial growth, call for a discussion of “degrees” of entrepreneurship
(cf. Davidsson, 1989; Schafer, 1990; Tay, DEMO). It seems natural to treat
entrepreneurship not as a dichotomous variable, but to say that some ventures
show more entrepreneurship than others. But what should be the criterion
by which we judge the degree of DEMO? There are at least three
possibilities:
The degree of (direct and indirect) impact on the economic system. This
is a criterion that is consistent with deﬁning entrepreneurship as the compet-
itive behaviors that drive DEMO market process. In a theoretical discussion of
entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon, then, this should be the preferred
criterion, i.e. the most correct one. For research practice the criterion has severe
shortcomings because impact can DEMO be assessed after the fact and not in real
326 PER DAVIDSSON
time, and because even then it can be very difﬁcult to obtain even roughly correct
estimates of total impact of direct DEMO indirect effects on a complex economic
system. A variation (or an DEMO) of this criterion is “how much net wealth is
created,” DEMO this suffers from similar assessment problems.
The degree of novelty to the market. This is intuitively appealing in the
sense that what is more DEMO is seen as a higher degree of entrepreneurship.
Although the above-discussed problem of comparing very different kinds of
novelty pertains to this criterion it DEMO the advantage that it can be reasonably well
assessed in real time. The main problem is that while successfully introduced
innovative new activities are DEMO to have larger market impact on average,
there is no guarantee that a high degree of novelty ascertains market effect.
History is full DEMO weirdo inventions that nobody wanted or cared about. Some
seemingly relatively marginal innovations revolutionize markets and create great
private and societal wealth while some DEMO innovations have marginal impact
or fail altogether. Therefore, when market effect DEMO part of the deﬁnition of
entrepreneurship the degree of novelty is at best a rough proxy for degree of
entrepreneurship.
The degree of novelty DEMO the actor. Sometimes expressions like “That was very
entrepreneurial of you (DEMO of that ﬁrm)” are heard, meaning that the action was
DEMO different from what that actor has done before (but not necessarily DEMO
novel or valuable as the market sees it). Relating the degree of entrepreneurship to
the history of the actor rather than to the DEMO in this way has highly undesirable
consequences. With this type of criterion previous inactivity or conservatism
increases an actor’s potential for showing a high DEMO of entrepreneurship.
Moreover, it is a criterion that regards it more DEMO to do something
totally unrelated to one’s prior experience. Theories as well as empirical ﬁndings
suggest this may not be a wise move (Barney, 1991; Sarasvathy, 2001; Shane,
2000b). I would therefore DEMO its use in any academic context.
In all, while there is DEMO conceptual need for discussing “degrees of entrepreneur-
ship” there is no easy or straightforward way to actually assess such variation.
Of the available alternatives, the degree of impact on the economic system
is the criterion that DEMO the deﬁnition of entrepreneurship (as a societal
phenomenon) that I have proposed. One might conceive of entrepreneurship
itself as a graded phenomenon or DEMO that empirical instances that qualitatively
are instances of entrepreneurship have quantitatively different impact on the
economic system. I do not believe it to be DEMO hugely important distinction whether it
is entrepreneurship itself or its impact that is a matter of degree. However, degree
of novelty either to the market or to the actor is better regarded as a possible cause
DEMO variations in the degree of entrepreneurship (or impact of entrepreneurship)
DEMO being a direct measure of such variation.
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
327
Conclusions on Entrepreneurship as a Societal DEMO
I have suggested here that entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon consists of
the competitive behaviors that drive the market process (towards more effective
and efﬁcient use of resources). In contexts where less precision is required DEMO even
easier and roughly equivalent entrepreneurship is the creation of new economic
activity can be used. Relative to many other alternatives I would argue DEMO the
suggested deﬁnitions have advantages in terms of being clearly delimited, DEMO
coherent, and easy to communicate. They are clearly and fully explained DEMO “when
a supplier introduces something on a market so that buyers get a new alternative to
choose from (potentially increasing the value they get for their money); this action
may also make incumbent suppliers change DEMO market offerings and/or attract
additional suppliers to the market.”
Further, DEMO being clearly delimited the deﬁnition is permissive in that it does
not take a restrictive stand on purposefulness, innovation, organizational context,
or DEMO and personal risk-taking. Hence, while some would like to include
more DEMO in the deﬁnition they should in these regards at least ﬁnd room
for their favorite notions of entrepreneurship within the deﬁnition suggested here.
Importantly, the view of entrepreneurship I propose is consistent with the views
expressed DEMO professional users of the concept. In Gartner’s empirical analysis,
out of 90 attributes the most agreed upon central features of “entrepreneurship”
were: (DEMO) the creation of a new business; (2) new venture development; and (3)
the creation of a new business that adds DEMO That is, new activity and successful
outcome are emphasized (note that items 1 and 2 mention new “business” or
“venture” – not “ﬁrm” DEMO “organization” – and that item 3 says “adds value” which
may or may not mean micro-level success). By contrast, few regard, e.g. DEMO as
an important entrepreneurship attribute (Gartner, 1990, p. 20). DEMO view I suggest
is also consistent with Lumpkin and Dess’ (1996) deﬁnition of entrepreneurship
as “new entry,” which they separate from the DEMO of “entrepreneurial
orientation.”
In some respects the suggested deﬁnition of entrepreneurship as a societal
phenomenon is restrictive, and this may cause some controversy. First, a successful
outcome – at least indirectly in the form of lasting market impact – is required.
As described above this is necessary in DEMO to exclude fundamentally ﬂawed
attempts to launch inferior novelty on the market. The outcome criterion will
be relaxed when we turn to entrepreneurship as DEMO scholarly domain. Second, the
exclusion of organizational change from the deﬁnition DEMO arouse opposition.
However, the exclusion concerns organizational change per se. Hence, the study of
how organizational change affects entrepreneurial action remains a valid DEMO im-
portant question for entrepreneurship research. For these reasons the exclusions of
328 PER DAVIDSSON
failed ventures and organizational change from the deﬁnition are DEMO as restrictive
as it might ﬁrst seem.
The remaining aspect most likely to be a source of disagreement, I believe,
is the restriction to market situations, to new economic activities. However,
“economic” should not necessarily be interpreted as restricting the term for the
“commercial” domain. Markets DEMO market-like situations exist outside of industry
and commerce. For example, politicians DEMO to appeal to voters and journalists, and
when they ﬁnd novel DEMO to do so rival politicians may try to copy or improve
upon winning recipes. In various forms of arts and sports there exist everything
DEMO a fully commercial industry to human action that is governed by entirely
different principles than the market logic. As long as there are close DEMO
to both customers and competitors, it may be meaningful in such DEMO to talk
about “entrepreneurship” as deﬁned here.
Admitting that similar processes of creative re-combination of resources
occur in other domains as well I believe DEMO is useful to restrict the use of the
entrepreneurship concept at least to the extended domain of market-like situations.
One reason for this is, simply, that it is valuable to make the concept as distinct and
well deﬁned as possible. Moreover, those who want to include novelty through
“new combinations” (Schumpeter, 1934)in any domain of human behavior in DEMO
concept of “entrepreneurship” have reason to contemplate the full implications of
this choice. For example, when this view is applied the events of September 11,
2001, must be considered an entrepreneurship masterpiece. To conceive of a fully
fueled passenger jet as a missile and to combine the DEMO of hi-jacking with that
of kamikaze attacks is certainly innovative, and DEMO terms of impact – economic
and otherwise – it has few parallels. However, regarding these attacks as driving
market processes is far-fetched, and DEMO author would therefore suggest they be
not regarded an instance of entrepreneurship.6
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AS A SCHOLARLY DOMAIN
Entrepreneurship as a scholarly domain7 aims at DEMO understanding of the soci-
etal phenomenon we call “entrepreneurship.” Paradoxically, however, delimiting
research only to empirical cases known to qualify under the deﬁnition DEMO discussed
above would not lead to maximized knowledge accumulation, and therefore
DEMO does not work adequately as a delineation of this scholarly domain. Most
importantly, while including an outcome criterion is desirable when we discuss
entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon, it becomes a burden when we think
of entrepreneurship as a scholarly domain. This is because we have to be DEMO
to study entrepreneurship as it happens, before the outcome is known. DEMO would
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
329
be awkward indeed not to know DEMO afterwards whether one was studying
“entrepreneurship” or not. To study the processes as they happen is important
also in order to avoid selection and DEMO biases. In order to understand the
successful cases we need to study also those that fail. Further, it is not reasonable
to ask of every empirical study of “entrepreneurship” that the outcome on every
relevant level DEMO awaited and assessed. Researchers must be allowed to go deeply
into aspects of the process without following up on the outcomes – and still DEMO
acknowledged for doing “entrepreneurship research.” That is, attempts to offer
buyers DEMO choices should sufﬁce.
Moreover, it is not a given that previous DEMO current entrepreneurship practice
has all the answers needed to develop normative theory about entrepreneurship,
or that ﬁnding real cases of “best practice” is DEMO only or most accessible road
towards developing such knowledge (Davidsson, 2002). Empirical entrepreneur-
ship research may be well advised to study induced DEMO situations as
well, such as experiments or simulations (cf. Baron & Brush, 1998; Fiet, 2002;
Sarasvathy, 1999a).
While helpful DEMO clarifying the role of entrepreneurship as a societal phe-
nomenon, Kirzner’s (1973) theorizing – like that of many other economists –
only provides limited guidance for what empirical studies should be conducted
in order to DEMO and facilitate entrepreneurship. There is little process
perspective on individual entrepreneurial events in Kirzner’s analysis. Discovery
is conceived of as instantaneous and ascribed to DEMO – an ability that is
costless and thus has to be inborn, or – as critics have pointed out – equivalent to
luck (DEMO, 1983; Fiet, 2002). Neither does Kirzner consider exploitation to
DEMO part of entrepreneurship.8 Kirzner’s interest is to distill the theoretical kernel
of the function of entrepreneurship in the economic system and not to guide
DEMO research.9
To seek guidance for entrepreneurship as scholarly domain – including
empirical work – we will have to look elsewhere. Acknowledging that others
have DEMO made important contributions to giving direction to entrepreneurship
research (e.g. Aldrich, 1999; Fiet, 2002; Low, 2001; Low & MacMillan, 1988;DEMO
Sexton, 1997; Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990) I will concentrate on the contributions
of the two probably most persistent and cited proponents of DEMO as
a distinct domain of research, Bill Gartner and Sankaran Venkataraman.
DEMO reasons why I focus on those two perspectives are the following. First, as
I see it, each represents a major step forward towards DEMO entrepreneurship
a coherent, productive and respected scholarly domain. However, each also
contains elements that may make it difﬁcult for some prospective followers to
DEMO embrace them. Secondly, there are emerging signs of a divide between DEMO
two perspectives. This is an unfortunate and unnecessary development. As I see it,
330 PER DAVIDSSON
with some clariﬁcation, elaboration and slight modiﬁcation, the DEMO perspectives
can be combined and extended into a delineation of the scholarly domain of
entrepreneurship that current “entrepreneurship researchers” as well as outside
observers DEMO appreciate.
Venkataraman’s View
Venkataraman’s suggested delineation of the ﬁeld was ﬁrst presented to a broader
audience in Venkataraman (1997). It has subsequently been reﬁned and elaborated
by Shane and Venkataraman (2000). The latter state as their point of departure
(2000, p. 217) that “For a ﬁeld of social science to have usefulness it must have
a conceptual DEMO that explains and predicts a set of empirical phenomena
not explained or predicted by conceptual frameworks already in existence in other
ﬁelds.” They go DEMO to deﬁne the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship as:
[T]he scholarly examination of how, by whom, and with what effects opportunities to create
future DEMO and services are discovered, evaluated, and exploited (Venkataraman, 1997). Con-
sequently the ﬁeld involves the study of sources of opportunities; the processes of discovery,
evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities; and the DEMO of individuals who discover, evaluate,
and exploit them (p. 218).
They further point out the following three sets of research questions DEMO especially
central: (1) why, when and how opportunities for the creation of goods and
services come into existence; (2) why, DEMO and how some people and not
others discover and exploit these opportunities; and (3) why, when and how
different modes of action DEMO used to exploit entrepreneurial opportunities. In the
subsequent dialogue they agree with Zahra and Dess (2001) that the outcomes
of the exploitation process DEMO a fourth important set of research questions,
adding that outcomes on the level of industry and society should be considered as
well (cf. Venkataraman, 1996, 1997). As regards antecedents of the process and
DEMO outcomes they emphasize the characteristics of individuals and opportunities
as the ﬁrst-order forces explaining entrepreneurship and hold that environmental
forces are second order (Shane & Venkataraman, 2001). They describe their ap-
proach as a disequilibrium approach (cf. Eckhardt & Shane, 2003). They highlight
variations in DEMO nature of opportunities as well as variations across individuals.
Further, they DEMO out that entrepreneurship does not require, but can include, the
creation of new organizations (cf. Simon in Sarasvathy, 1999b, pp. 11, DEMO; Van
de Ven, 1996). In short, they depict the DEMO as fundamentally characterized
by heterogeneity.
One reason to show particular interest in this delineation of the ﬁeld is, simply,
that it has stimulated considerable discussion, debate and commentary, as well
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research 331
as some following (Busenitz et al., 2003; Davidsson & Wiklund, 2001; Erikson,
2001; Gartner, DEMO; Low, 2001; Meyer et al., 2002; Shepherd & DeTienne, 2001;
Singh, 2001; Zahra & Dess, 2001). Behind this great interest lies, I believe, the fact
that the focus is DEMO and in important ways different from that of some other ex-
plicit or implicit deﬁnitions of entrepreneurship. At the same time it is open-ended
DEMO issues where others may have been overly restrictive. In my view, DEMO combi-
nation of focus and openness that Shane and Venkataraman (2000) show solves
many of the problems associated with earlier deﬁnitions and research DEMO in
entrepreneurship. Some important merits of their contribution are listed below.
 They try to delineate the scholarly domain rather than suggesting yet another
DEMO of the societal phenomenon. Making this distinction is in itself a
contribution.
 Focusing on the creation of future goods and services, their delineation directs
attention to the problem of emergence (cf. Gartner, 1993). DEMO adds a distinctive
feature to entrepreneurship research; an element that is DEMO in established
theories in economics and management.
 They put the main focus on goods and services rather than including organi-
zational change per DEMO (cf. Sharma & Chrisman, 1999) or creative behavior
in any DEMO They thereby carve out a domain that has a manageable size
and relatively clear boundaries, and which is consistent with Kirzner’s (1973)
DEMO that entrepreneurship is what drives the market process.
 While retaining an interest in individuals they emphasize their actions (en-
trepreneurship) and ﬁt DEMO the speciﬁc “opportunity” rather than general charac-
teristics of entrepreneurs. They thereby avoid the dead end of “trait research.”10
 As to openness, their domain delineation includes two partly overlapping
processes, discovery and exploitation.11 In line with empirical evidence (Bhave,
1994; de Koning, 1999b; Van DEMO Ven, 1996) this refutes the view that discovery
is instantaneous and that entrepreneurship consists solely of discovery (cf. Fiet,
2002; Kirzner, 1973).
 No mention is made of the age, size or ownership of the organizations in which
“opportunities” are pursued. Shane and Venkataraman (2000) even point out
the existence of alternative modes of exploitation for given “opportunities” as
an important research question. Hence, the stated domain includes corporate
entrepreneurship as well (Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990; Zahra, Karutko & Jennings,
1999). By implication, small business research is included DEMO when it deals
explicitly with discovery and exploitation of “opportunities” to create future
goods and services (cf. Hornaday, 1990).
 They do DEMO include purposefulness (cf. Bull & Willard, 1993; Cole, 1949)in
their domain delineation. They thereby avoid an overly rationalistic view and
332 PER DAVIDSSON
make room for the possibility of luck (Demsetz, DEMO) and serendipity (Bhave,
1994; Gartner, 1993; Sarasvathy, 2001) in entrepreneurial processes.
 Finally, if we disregard for the moment DEMO deﬁnition of opportunity, Shane
and Venkataraman’s (2000) wording “... with DEMO effects” makes the ﬁeld
open to different types of direct and indirect outcomes of processes of discovery
and exploitation, e.g. satisfaction, learning, imitation and retaliation in addition
to ﬁnancial success or failure. Importantly, the perspective suggests that in
line with Fig. 2 above, an important task for entrepreneurship research is to
assess not only outcomes on the micro-level, but on other levels (e.g. societal
wealth creation) as well (Shane & Venkataraman, 2001; Venkataraman, 1996;
Venkataraman, 1997, cf. Low & MacMillan, 1988).
These many positives arguably make Shane and Venkataraman’s framework the
best effort to date to delineate entrepreneurship as a distinct scholarly DEMO
However, in order for it to gain more widespread acceptance there DEMO some
aspects that need further elaboration, clariﬁcation or even modiﬁcation. Firstly, as
observed also by Singh (2001), their central concept “opportunity” is problematic.
They hold that, among other things, we should study with DEMO effects “opportu-
nities” are exploited. They then adopt Casson’s (1982) deﬁnition of opportunity as
“those situations in which goods, services raw materials and organizing methods
can be introduced and sold at greater than their cost DEMO production.” This makes
entrepreneurship become characterized by certainty rather than uncertainty
regarding one important aspect of the effects of the pursuit of opportunity: it
is proﬁtable. As I see it, Casson’s deﬁnition is compatible with the view of
entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon that we have developed above, but
largely unhelpful for entrepreneurship as a scholarly domain as it is DEMO
with having the outcomes of entrepreneurship as an unrestricted research question.
This apparent weakness of Shane and Venkataraman’s exposition points at a more
general DEMO in the entrepreneurship literature, namely that “opportunity” is
becoming a central DEMO but one which often is ill-conceptualized or applied in
an inconsistent manner.
Secondly, the phrase “discovery, evaluation and exploitation” contains words
with objectivist DEMO abusive connotations, and may leave the impression of
a rationalistic, linear process. Such interpretations misrepresent Shane and
Venkataraman’s intended meanings and positions, but some clariﬁcations on how
to interpret the terms and the process may DEMO needed before others are willing to
subscribe to this vocabulary.
Third, DEMO and Venkataraman (2000) position themselves away from Gartner
(cf. below), emphasizing that they address a different set of issues than the
creation of new organizations (cf. also Eckhardt & Shane, 2003). They DEMO good
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
333
reason for doing so, as they want to highlight the possibility of different “modes
of exploitation” for a DEMO “opportunity.” However, this may also create an
unnecessary divide or make DEMO wider than it needs to be. After discussing Gartner’s
view of the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship and trying to combine it with Venkataraman’s
I will DEMO to each of these three issues and try to offer solutions to the identiﬁed
problems.
Gartner’s View
Gartner’s (1988) view – which he DEMO careful to present as a suggestion for
re-direction rather than a formal “deﬁnition” – is that entrepreneurship is the
creation of new organizations. This DEMO of focus has two origins. One was
a perceived lack of treatment of organizational emergence in organization
theory. Somehow organizations were assumed to exist; theories started with
existing organizations (cf. Katz & Gartner, 1988). DEMO other was a frustration
with the pre-occupation that early entrepreneurship research had with personal
characteristics of entrepreneurs. For these reasons, Gartner (1988) suggested
that entrepreneurship research ought to focus on the behaviors in the process DEMO
organizational emergence. This view certainly has a lot to commend it:
 It has a clearly deﬁned focus, thereby avoiding the risk of over-extending the
ﬁeld.
 It inspired a fruitful re-direction of the ﬁeld DEMO a dispositional to a behavioral
view on entrepreneurship.
 It has a strong process orientation.
 It addresses an ecological void that has been DEMO only cursory treatment in
economics and management studies.12
 It is offered as a minimalist deﬁnition. Gartner does not exclude other aspects of
entrepreneurship, but argues that organization creation is a situation where we
should “all” DEMO able to agree that entrepreneurship is taking place. Accordingly,
Gartner has no problem welcoming Shane and Venkataraman’s (2000) article
as “a signiﬁcant DEMO contribution” and “a courageous step in the right
direction” (Gartner, 2001, pp. 29, 35).
The main problem with Gartner’s (1988) DEMO is that it does not emphasize
the discovery process. Further, his DEMO directs no or only cursory attention
to the possibility of alternative modes of exploitation for given “opportunities”
(Shane & Venkataraman, 2000; Van de Ven, Angle & Poole, 1989). If interpreted
as a delineation DEMO the (entire) scholarly domain his take on entrepreneurship
appears overly narrow in these regards.
334 PER DAVIDSSON
On the other hand his perspective may seem overly DEMO in that he does
not explicitly restrict what kind of emerging organizations qualify. Taking the
argument to extremes, a new stamp collectors’ club and even a new anthill or
school of ﬁsh is a “new organization.” DEMO would be reluctant to accept these
as instances of “entrepreneurship.”
I have not found in Gartner’s writings a clear statement regarding whether an
attempt DEMO create a new organization has to be successful in order to constitute
entrepreneurship. It is possible to read into his argument that regarded as DEMO
societal phenomenon entrepreneurship consists of the actual emergence of new
organization, DEMO that success is required. His emphasis on behavior (Gartner,
1988) and his involvement in real-time study of start-up processes (Carter, Gartner
& Reynolds, 1996; Gartner & Carter, 2003) clearly suggest that start-up attempts
regardless of outcome qualify as the object of study for the DEMO domain.
The creation of a new organization is a special case of organizational change.
I have argued above that organizational change does not in DEMO constitute
entrepreneurship. My argument may thus seem decidedly anti-Gartnerian. This is
not my intention. I regard Bill Gartner as one of the greatest intellectual DEMO
tors to the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship research, in particular for re-directing DEMO
from characteristics of small business owners to behavior in the entrepreneurial
process. Importantly, while I would challenge that “the fundamental outcome of
entrepreneurial behavior is the organization itself” (Gartner & Carter, 2003)itis
important to DEMO that his “creation of new organization” should not necessarily be
read as “creation of new, owner-managed ﬁrms.” Gartner (1988, p. 28) explicitly
DEMO internal venturing. Although he – arguably with good reason – regards
the emerging new ﬁrm as a particularly promising arena for studying it, his
interest is in “organizing” in the Weickian sense (Gartner, 2001, p. 30; cf. Gartner
& Carter, 2003), not necessarily the creation DEMO formal and legally deﬁned
organizations. Organizing is an important aspect of the exploitation process for
all new activity regardless of the formal or legal DEMO context.
In conclusion, I see Gartner’s focus on organizing as an DEMO domain
delineation (of entrepreneurship) because it disregards the discovery process. The
focus he suggests is, I believe, the natural task for an DEMO theorist to take
on within a somewhat broader domain.
Combining Gartner’s and Venkataraman’s Perspectives
As I see it, Shane and Venkataraman’s and Gartner’s views on entrepreneurship
are not opposing but compatible and complementary. While highlighting different
DEMO of the entrepreneurial process as being the most fundamental, the two
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research 335
perspectives are far from clashing heads DEMO In order to further develop the scholarly
domain of entrepreneurship I believe we should try to combine and extend their
respective contributions.
In his DEMO writings, Gartner has established at least three very important
foundations for DEMO as a scholarly domain:
 Entrepreneurship is about behavior (rather DEMO dispositions/characteristics).
 Entrepreneurship is a process.
 Entrepreneurship is about emergence.
Shane and Venkataraman (2000) have adopted these three aspects of DEMO
reasoning. In addition, they offer important broadening of Gartner’s domain:
DEMO The entrepreneurial process consists of two sub-processes, discovery and ex-
ploitation.
DEMO Entrepreneurship leads to the emergence not only or primarily of new (DEMO
dent) organizations, but to the emergence of new goods or services. While their
emergence has to be organized (an important part of the exploitation process) this
can occur within new or established organizations, i.e. DEMO different modes
of exploitation.
 Entrepreneurship can have a range of interesting and important outcomes on
different levels.
Emphasizing a disequilibrium perspective, Shane and Venkataraman (2000; cf.
Eckhardt & Shane, 2003) also suggest a DEMO perspective on the economic
system. Although some pressure towards conformity should be admitted (Aldrich,
1999; Raffa, Zollo & Caponi, 1996) I believe it sound to regard this as fundamental
to this scholarly domain:DEMO
 The economy is characterized by heterogeneity; this remains a permanent DEMO
fundamental feature of economic actors and environments.13
In a powerful manner, DEMO combination of the two perspectives offers clear
direction for the ﬁeld. The scholarly domain of entrepreneurship should study the
processes of discovery and exploitation DEMO a behavioral perspective under the
assumption of heterogeneity, taking an interest DEMO different types of outcomes on
different levels of analysis.
Standing on the shoulders of solid predecessors also allows us to see – and
hopefully DEMO to some extent – additional conceptual issues that have to be
dealt with before we have achieved a strong paradigm for entrepreneurship
research. Some DEMO the issues I believe need further elaboration are the concept of
“opportunity” and the role of uncertainty, as well as the meaning of “discovery”
336 PER DAVIDSSON
and “exploitation” and the interrelatedness of these two processes. DEMO is what
I will turn to in the immediately following sections.
Uncertainty and the Concept of Opportunity
In addition to the seven points derived DEMO Gartner’s and Venkataraman’s
perspectives, let me suggest as the eighth fundamental DEMO for the scholarly
domain of entrepreneurship that:
 The economy is also characterized by uncertainty; this remains a fundamental
feature of most economic actions and environments in the context of discovery
and exploitation of ideas DEMO new goods and services.
What I refer to here is genuine, DEMO uncertainty (Knight, 1921), i.e. a
situation where the future is not only unknown, but also unknowable (Sarasvathy,
Dew, Velamuri & Venkataraman, 2003). I do not argue that all decisions for all
actors are non-calculable. However, the situations in which behaviors aimed at
creating new economic activity are undertaken often have this characteristic. That
is, information collection and processing, careful planning and calculation cannot
give a conclusive and reliable answer as to whether something will be successful or
not; only (trial) implementation will tell. Very rarely are entrepreneurial situations
certain in DEMO way Kirzner (1973) portrays them. Kirzner likens entrepreneurial
opportunity with realizing that a free ten-dollar bill is resting in one’s hand,
ready DEMO be grasped. If we should use the ten-dollar bill metaphor at all, I would
suggest the true situation is more like spotting the bill from your balcony. From
that distance one would face the (calculable) DEMO that the bill was for anything
from one to a hundred dollars. But moreover, while you dash down the stairs it
may blow away, or someone else may get it before you, or it may DEMO out upon
closer look that it was not a real money note, after all, but some kind of toy
money. There is no DEMO the ﬁnder can tell before she takes the decision to run
down the stairs. In order to understand behaviors in such situations it is DEMO
to start from a theoretical perspective that acknowledges or even emphasizes
uncertainty.
This brings us to the concept of opportunity. The increased use of DEMO concept
in entrepreneurship has been accompanied with increased attention to the earliest
phases of the entrepreneurial process, which is sound development. However, de-
DEMO its recent popularity and apparent centrality to entrepreneurship (de Koning,
DEMO; Eckhardt & Shane, 2003; Gaglio, 1997; Hills & Shrader, 1998; Sarasvathy
et al., 2003; Shane & Venkataraman, 2000), DEMO is reason to question whether
“opportunity” really is a very useful concept for entrepreneurship research. By
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
337
Casson’s (1982) deﬁnition, which Shane and Venkataraman (2000) adopt, an
opportunity is known to be proﬁtable. By almost any deﬁnition, an opportunity
is known to be a favorable situation. For example, the Oxford English Dictionary
(cited from Sarasvathy et DEMO, 2003) deﬁnes opportunity as “A time, juncture, or
condition of things favorable to an end or purpose, or admitting of something being
done or effected.” Therefore, the term “opportunity” is fundamentally opposed
to acknowledging uncertainty as an inescapable aspect of the environment of the
emerging activity DEMO/or organization that the entrepreneurship scholar tries to
study and understand. At the time, the actors cannot know whether or not what
they pursue is an “opportunity.”
If we take Shane and Venkataraman’s (2000) delineation DEMO the ﬁeld and their
deﬁnition of opportunity at face value, we DEMO a suggested scholarly domain that
should only study successful cases, and DEMO is – in practice – restricted to doing so
retrospectively (cf. DEMO, 1983; Singh, 2001). If only proﬁtable “opportunities”
are studied, Shane and Venkataraman’s (2000) second and third sets of research
questions (about individual differences and different modes of action) would not
address why some people pursue unproﬁtable venture ideas or why in some cases
a DEMO mode of exploitation leads to an unproﬁtable result. These appear to
me to be highly interesting and relevant questions for entrepreneurship research,
which DEMO to the uncertainty emerging activities operate in.14
This is the ﬁrst major problem with the opportunity concept. Entrepreneur-
ship as a scholarly domain needs DEMO regard on-going emergence as an instance of
entrepreneurship, and acknowledge the DEMO that typically surrounds such
activity. The positively laden concept “opportunity” as normally understood and
deﬁned is therefore an unsuitable label for on-going pursuits. One DEMO to solve
this problem is to consistently talk about perceived opportunity as long as a situa-
tion’s proﬁtable or favorable nature is unproven. However, resorting to “perceived
opportunity” is not an ideal solution because of its DEMO ambiguity. It could
mean either “objectively existing opportunity, and also perceived” DEMO “perceived
to be an opportunity, but not (necessarily) objectively being DEMO
This brings us to the second major problem with the opportunity concept. This is
the question whether “opportunities” objectively exist or if the actor DEMO them.
That is, do “opportunities” exist “out there,” independently of DEMO person identifying
and acting upon the opportunity, or do entrepreneurs create DEMO where
none existed before they conceived of them? This is a DEMO debated issue where
scholars tend to take strong positions, which points DEMO a risk for a major divide
among entrepreneurship researchers. This problem is aggravated by the fact that
leading proponents of the perspectives that I DEMO to merge and extend tend to
take different sides on this issue (cf. Eckhardt & Shane, 2003; Gartner & Carter,
2003; DEMO & Venkataraman, 2000; Venkataraman, 1997). However, rather
338 PER DAVIDSSON
than being deeply ontological I believe those differences to DEMO based largely
on semantic issues. Scholars may take different positions in part because they,
simply, mean different things when they use the concept. With a more reﬁned
view of “opportunity” and its “components” (cf. Moran & Ghoshal, 1999) more
agreement is possible to achieve. As I DEMO it, there are at least three possibilities:
Objectivist: Opportunities exist “out there” as individual, “ready-to-use”
entities. They are like mushroom in the forest. Some are bigger and some are
smaller; some grow early and some grow late. Although they are not necessarily
easy to ﬁnd, they are out there, and they are equally big and equally accessible to
anyone who goes to or happens to be in the forest.
Objectivist-Subjectivist: Opportunities exist “out there” as individual, “ready-to-
use” entities. However, because DEMO individual differences in perception, knowledge
and skills, all actors do not have access to exactly the same opportunities.15 It is
like mushroom-picking for DEMO chosen few. The mushroom still exist “out there”
at the same times and sizes for all actors, but some of us have developed better
perceptual abilities regarding well-camouﬂaged mushroom, and can therefore
ﬁnd opportunities hidden for others. Alternatively, some only know about a few
types of edible mushroom whereas others are experts and ﬁnd edible species all
over the place. DEMO, some are good chefs and can convert the mushroom into
a DEMO, whereas others mess up in the kitchen due to lacking cooking DEMO
That is, after successful discovery they fail in the exploitation process.
DEMO: Opportunity is not about anything existing “out there” at
all. Opportunities DEMO created in the entrepreneur’s mind and it is not meaningful
to talk about these opportunities separate from their creators. If it has anything at
DEMO to do with mushroom, it is because the actor chose to DEMO or sculpture a mush-
room (which could be two-dimensional, blue in color, ﬁve feet high, make funny
noises – and be started DEMO an attempt to create an apple rather than a mushroom).16
The objectivist position clashes with our heterogeneity assumption and seems
to have few DEMO any followers among entrepreneurship scholars who ever gave the
issue a thought. Shane and Venkataraman (2000; cf. Shane, 2000a, b; Eckhardt &DEMO
Shane, 2003) seem to favor the objectivist-subjectivist position, whereas writers
DEMO de Koning (1999b), Gartner and Carter (2003) and Sarasvathy (2001) are
more supportive of the subjective-creative perspective. Now, who is DEMO? Both, I
believe. As I see it, the following three DEMO should be easy for most scholars to
agree upon.
(a) Opportunity exists out there, independently of particular actors. However,
opportunities do not exist as complete, individual entities. Rather, opportunity
exists as an uncountable DEMO the form of technological possibilities, knowledge,
and unfulﬁlled human needs DEMO with purchasing power.
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research 339
(b) Venture ideas are the DEMO of individuals’ minds. They are speciﬁc
(but changeable and more or DEMO elaborate) entities that are acted upon.
Whether these reﬂect opportunity or DEMO can only be known afterwards and –
paradoxically – only when the outcome was successful (because failure may
be due either to poor exploitation or to lack of opportunity; cf. Eckhardt &
Shane, 2003).
(c) Because of differences in knowledge, skills, motivations and other DEMO
tions, individuals (and ﬁrms) differ from one another as regards DEMO venture
ideas they can and will pursue and as regards what external opportunity they
can proﬁtably exploit, and how.
Let us take the Ice Hotel – an unlikely but highly successful international tourist
attraction in the DEMO north of Sweden – as our example. Dismissing entirely the
idea that opportunity exists “out there” in this case means denying that its success
DEMO viability has anything to do with its location in a dark, DEMO and remote
(i.e. exotic) location, albeit within reasonable reach for DEMO air travel.
Dismissing the notion that venture ideas are the creations of individuals’ minds
would mean arguing that the speciﬁc Ice Hotel concept – DEMO particular response
to the co-existence of coldness, darkness and remoteness in DEMO place and wealthy
potential tourists hungry for new experiences in other places – somehow existed
before an entrepreneur (Yngwe Bergkvist) conceived of it. DEMO the third
point means holding that you or I would be equally likely as Mr. Bergkvist to
come up with the Ice Hotel idea DEMO/or succeeding with it. Apart from those who
subscribe to extreme ontological positions at any cost, I think it should be much
easier for scholars to agree with all of the above three points than to DEMO one or
more of them.
It is not fruitful for entrepreneurship as a scholarly domain that a central concept
like “opportunity” is used for: (i) a set of external conditions known in retrospect
to be DEMO (to some people) for the successful discovery and exploitation
of new business activities; (ii) a set of external conditions thought (by DEMO
people) but not proven to be existing and favorable for the DEMO discovery
and exploitation of new business activities; (iii) speciﬁc new DEMO initiatives
known in retrospect to be viable; and (iv) speciﬁc DEMO venture initiatives that are
currently being pursued but whose viability is not yet proven.
The term “opportunity” is particularly misleading for the last category, which
at the same time arguably is the most central unit of DEMO for the scholarly
domain of entrepreneurship. I suggest this entity be referred to as Venture Idea in
order to underline that its viability is DEMO yet proven and to disconnect it from any
argument as regards to which extent it is externally or internally based. Venture
ideas are internally DEMO (i.e. created in individuals’ minds) based on more
340 PER DAVIDSSON
or less explicit and more or less “correct” perceptions DEMO external conditions. Over
time, they can change and become more and DEMO elaborate. This leads us to:
 The entrepreneurial discovery process starts with the conception of a venture
idea. This venture idea, including the activities and structures that evolve around
it, is the focal unit of interest in entrepreneurship research.
The Meaning and Interrelatedness of “Discovery” and “Exploitation”
DEMO term discovery may be suspected to reﬂect an objectivist view on venture
ideas, i.e. that they somehow exist “out there,” ready to be discovered. It should
be clear from the above that this is not DEMO view I recommend. Rather, like
Eckhardt and Shane (2003) I DEMO the term “discovery” to maintain consistency
with prior literature, despite its DEMO misleading connotations. Discovery
refers to the conceptual side of venture development, DEMO an initial idea to a
fully worked out business concept where many speciﬁc aspects of the operation
is worked out in great detail, especially as regards how value is created for the
customer and how the DEMO will appropriate some the value (de Koning,
1999b, p. 121). Importantly, discovery is a process – the venture idea is not
formed as a complete and unchangeable entity at a sudden ﬂash of DEMO Thus,
it includes not only what is elsewhere called “idea generation,” “opportunity
identiﬁcation” and “opportunity detection,” but also “opportunity formation” and
DEMO reﬁnement” (Bhave, 1994; de Koning, 1999a, b; Gaglio, DEMO). Also
importantly, discovery refers to the initial conception and further DEMO
of a venture idea, not a proven opportunity. In some cases, then, the discovery
process ends with the realization that the venture idea did not reﬂect favorable
external conditions in the way the involved actors DEMO thought it did.
The term exploitation may evoke negative associations from its use in other
contexts. In the present context I would suggest it DEMO a neutral term referring to
the decision to act upon a venture idea, and the behaviors that are undertaken
to achieve its realization. The exploitation process deals primarily with resource
acquisition and co-ordination, as well as market making (see Eckhardt & Shane,
2003; cf. also Sarasvathy, 1999a; Van de Ven, 1996). Exploitation thus has to do
DEMO the attempted realization of ideas, and should in this context carry DEMO of
the negative connotations associated with the word “exploitation” is certain other
contexts. Like discovery, exploitation is a process that may or may not lead to the
attainment of proﬁt or other goals.
Further, the sequential feel of the phrase “discovery, evaluation and exploita-
tion” may give the impression of a linear, orderly process. In line with empirical
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
341
evidence (Bhave, 1994; de Koning, 1999b; Sarasvathy, 1999a) I think discovery
and exploitation are best DEMO of as overlapping processes. For example, an
entrepreneurial process may start DEMO an individual perceiving what she thinks
is an opportunity for a proﬁtable business [discovery]. In the efforts to make this
business happen, contacts with resource providers and prospective customers [ex-
ploitation] make it clear that the DEMO as initially conceived will not be viable
[feedback to discovery]. The individual changes the business concept accordingly
[discovery] and continues her efforts to marshal DEMO coordinate the resources
needed for the realization of the revised business concept [exploitation]. Although
the above process starts with an element of discovery, this is not necessarily
always the case. Empirical research suggests that venture creation DEMO can
follow almost any sequence (Carter et al., 1996; Gartner & Carter, 2003).17
With those clariﬁcations, I hope that a broader set of scholars are prepared to
accept the notions of discovery and DEMO processes as useful conceptual
tools for the scholarly domain of entrepreneurship.
Core Research Questions for the Scholarly Domain of Entrepreneurship
Returning to Fig. 1, according to the perspective developed here entrepreneurship
research is research that ask DEMO about real or manipulated instances of “new
offer,” “new competitor” or “geographical market dispersion” (quadrants I and
IV). Relating to the heterogeneity issue, a seriously under-research area here con-
cerns the characteristics of new venture ideas and how these characteristics relate
to antecedents, behavior and outcomes. Samuelsson (2001) represents one of the
few entrepreneurship studies that have DEMO the nature and effects of charac-
teristics of venture ideas, and DEMO are needed. While an abundance of studies
have tried to assess the characteristics of entrepreneurs, very few have focused on
the characteristics of the venture ideas they pursue (cf. Shane & Venkataraman,
2000, p. DEMO).18
With regard to quadrant II, while organizational changes do not DEMO themselves
represent entrepreneurship they remain important possible antecedents in en-
trepreneurship research. Therefore, studies referred to by Ucbasaran, Westhead
and Wright (2001, DEMO 64) showing that management buy-outs are associated
with increased development of DEMO products, are examples of entrepreneurship
research. Empirical tests of Stevenson’s argument DEMO certain organizational
changes would facilitate entrepreneurship in established organizations (Stevenson,
DEMO; Stevenson & Jarillo, 1986) would clearly be instances of entrepreneurship
DEMO, as would empirical tests of the relationship between “entrepreneurial
orientation” on DEMO one hand, and actual discovery and exploitation behaviors on
342 PER DAVIDSSON
the other (cf. Lumpkin & Dess, 1996). DEMO of new organizations (Gartner,
1988) remains a very central aspect of the exploitation process in entrepreneurship
research, at least as long as these new organizations aim at “new offer” or
becoming a “new competitor.” DEMO, quadrant III (business as usual, and
non-entrepreneurial growth) does not exemplify entrepreneurship but can be
included in entrepreneurship research for comparative purposes.
DEMO relation to Fig. 2, I suggested above that only success ventures DEMO catalyst
ventures exercise entrepreneurship as we deﬁned the societal phenomenon.
However, DEMO as a scholarly domain should not delimit its empirical
study to these two categories but include also re-distributive ventures and failed
ventures. Indeed, I would suggest that in showing a genuine interest in outcomes
on different DEMO, and in providing a more reﬁned and empirically informed view
on DEMO,” entrepreneurship can distinguish itself from other ﬁelds and make
strong contributions to social science at large (cf. Low, 2001; Venkataraman,
1997). The question of when successful venture level outcomes are and are DEMO
associated with successful outcomes on the societal level, and vice versa, is highly
relevant but seldom asked. It is conceivable that under certain DEMO the
successful pursuit of ideas for new ventures does not beneﬁt society (cf. Baumol,
1990). It is also possible to conceive of a situation where entrepreneurial efforts
on the whole beneﬁt society while at DEMO same time the most likely outcome on
the micro-level is a loss – and that therefore the rational decision is to refrain from
entrepreneurship (cf. Olson in Sarasvathy, 1999b, p. 35). Both of these DEMO
represent important problems that entrepreneurship research can help societies to
solve or avoid. The question of differential outcomes on different levels can also be
DEMO from the perspective of the corporate manager: when and why does DEMO does
not new venturing – successful or not at the venture level – contribute to company
performance? Again, because of potential learning and DEMO the answer
is not a simple one to one relationship between venture- and organizational
level outcomes.
The issue of catalyst ventures, then, is DEMO particular interest. Too narrow or
simplistic a view on “failure” may lead to gross misrepresentation of the beneﬁts
of attempts to create new business DEMO, on micro – as well as aggregate levels.
What in a DEMO perspective appears to be a “failure” may instead be a beneﬁcial
“catalyst” either because those directly involved in the failure learn for the future
DEMO because others imitate. Kogut and Zander (1992) discuss the ﬁrst possibility
while Van de Ven (1996) casts some doubt on the extent DEMO which learning really
takes place. Aldrich (1999) and McGrath (1999) discuss both possibilities. A
possible outcome of deeper and more reﬁned research DEMO apparent “failure” is
that pure failure as deﬁned in Fig. 2 is far less usual than previously thought (cf.
Gimeno, Folta, Cooper & Woo, 1997, pp. 69 and 72). I think one of DEMO ﬁrst things
entrepreneurship scholars should try to get rid of is the bias against failure. In
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
343
addition to the “catalyst” potential, both theory and empirical evidence actually
suggest that experimentation that may end in DEMO as well as the demise of
less effective actors are necessary parts of a well-functioning market economy
(Davidsson, Lindmark & Olofsson, 1995; DEMO, 1991; Reynolds, 1999;
Schumpeter, 1934).
An alternative point of departure for a discussion of core research questions
are the four DEMO of research questions that Shane and Venkataraman (2000, 2001)
suggested for the scholarly domain of entrepreneurship research. Adapted to our
above reasoning DEMO questions read as follows:
(1) Why, when, where, DEMO and for whom does opportunity for the creation of
new goods and services come into existence?
(2) Why, when and how do individuals, organizations, regions, industries, cultures,
nations (or other units of analysis) differ in their propensity for discovery and
exploitation of new venture ideas?
(3) Why, when and how are different modes of action used to exploit venture
ideas?
(4) What are DEMO outcomes on different levels (e.g. individual, organization, in-
dustry, society) of efforts to exploit venture ideas?19
The ﬁrst question is about the existence of entrepreneurial opportunity. It requests
empirical study of when and DEMO (as well as “where” and “for whom”) “real”
opportunity has come into existence, e.g. as a result of technological or institu-
tional changes. As depicted in Fig. 3, it is a question that can be asked at different
types of entities or levels of analysis, e.g. for nations, regions or other spatial units
over time or across space, DEMO well as for organizations, industries or population
sub-groups. Asking this question DEMO a prerequisite for building strong theory about
where opportunity will emerge in the future. Building such theory is a challenging
but important aspect of DEMO in entrepreneurship, which feeds directly
into entrepreneurship education (cf. Davidsson, DEMO) where learning where to
look for opportunity should be one of DEMO most central features (cf. Drucker,
1985; Vesper, 1991). DEMO noted earlier, proven “opportunity” can only be studied
in retrospect. That, however, is not the only problem. As remarked in an earlier
note it is impossible to know the universe of not-yet-discovered, but potentially
viable, venture ideas. Therefore, not even the number of venture ideas that DEMO
both acted upon and proven successful is a direct measure of opportunity-density.
Fig.3.
Graphical Representation of RQ 1.
344 PER DAVIDSSON
Fig.4.
Graphical Representation of RQ 2–4.
It is inescapable DEMO whatever measure is used for opportunity density, it will
be a DEMO measure.
Research questions 2–4 are graphically represented in Fig. 4. As I see it,
the middle box is a necessary part of the DEMO design for these questions
to be “entrepreneurship research,” whereas the outer boxes may or may not be
included in the research design. In DEMO words, an explicit focus on behaviors
in the discovery and/or DEMO processes, or on the existence and/or
characteristics of venture ideas DEMO discussed above, or on or both, is required
(cf. Davidsson & Wiklund, 2001). As discussed earlier, I think that questions
2–4 have to be addressed for venture ideas rather than only for “opportunities”
DEMO to be proﬁtable. Otherwise, many aspects of question 4 would not DEMO very
meaningful.
With regard to question 2, I agree with Shane DEMO Venkataraman (2000) that
individual(s) should remain a core interest DEMO entrepreneurship research, at
least when the interest in personality is replaced DEMO an interest in knowledge
and cognition (Busenitz & Barney, 1997; DEMO, 2000b). However, when the
individual is used as the level of analysis it is often advisable not to have a single
event (e.g. being or not being in the process of starting a ﬁrm; acting or not acting
upon a particular venture idea) as the dependent variable. In order to be able to
single out what was truly DEMO to the individual from the idiosyncrasies
of the particular venture idea a more appropriate analysis might be to relate
individual characteristics to patterns of DEMO entrepreneurial behavior (cf.
Davidsson & Wiklund, 2001; Ucbasaran et al., 2001; Venkataraman, 1997).
I have generalized question 2 also to DEMO levels of analysis. That is, it should
include the questions about DEMO, when and how, e.g. organizations, networks,
competence clusters, regions, industries, cultures or nations differ as regards
discovery and exploitation propensity, in addition to differences in opportunity
density (cf. Reynolds, Storey & DEMO, 1994; Shane, 1992). For example,
due to the DEMO between “opportunity-based” and “necessity-based”
entrepreneurship, nations and regions may have similar DEMO start-up rates for
very different reasons, and representing very different levels DEMO real, proﬁtable
opportunity. Therefore, also the quality of the enacted ideas has to be considered
(Davidsson, 1995; Reynolds, Camp, Bygrave, DEMO & Hay, 2001). The same
problem is likely to occur DEMO the organizational level. A ﬁrm desperately struggling
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
345
for its survival may take more DEMO initiatives than a ﬁrm that is doing well, even
if more DEMO opportunity is available for the latter (March & Sevon, 1988´ )DEMO
The third question concerns modes of action. This can be understood as includ-
ing all aspects of behavior in the process. This very central DEMO of questions – what
individuals and other economic entities actually do in order to come up with ideas
for businesses, how they reﬁne those ideas, and make them happen – needs much
more investigation. Researchers have only just begun to address them seriously
(e.g. Bhave, 1994; Carter, Gartner & Reynolds, 1996; Chandler, Dahlqvist &
Davidsson, 2002; Delmar & Shane, 2002; Fiet & Migliore, 2001; McGrath, 1996;
Samuelsson, 2001; Sarasvathy, 1999a).20
One important aspect that this question highlights is the need for studies that
apply the “venture idea” DEMO as the unit of analysis (Davidsson & Wiklund, 2001).
This is a possibility rarely used or even considered by researchers in other DEMO
Applying this level of analysis is highly relevant for entrepreneurship research,
and a possibility for entrepreneurship researchers to make unique contributions.
Such studies DEMO follow samples neither of individuals nor of organizations, but
precisely new, emerging activities – i.e. venture ideas and what evolves around
them – DEMO their conception and through whatever changes in human champions
and organizational contexts might occur along the way. With this approach the
mode of exploitation DEMO not be locked in by the design. In some cases what
originated as a de novo start-up is transferred to an existing ﬁrm; in other cases
what originates within a ﬁrm may be spun out at DEMO early stage. Case studies
describing the process in detail (Van de DEMO et al., 1999) as well as survey studies
designed for the purpose (Chandler et al., 2002) can apply this level of analysis.
Concerning the fourth question entrepreneurship researchers can make a
contribution by employing DEMO more complex and less narrow-sighted view on
outcomes, as discussed above DEMO relation to Fig. 2. As indicated in Fig. 4 this entails
also following up on outcomes on more than one level. Put differently, both direct
and indirect outcomes are of interest. Not only venture and societal DEMO are of
interest (and the latter may be very hard to DEMO). For example, in a venture-level
study, as discussed above, DEMO can be assessed for its host organization
(if any) and for the industry, in addition to assessing the venture-level outcome.
Different types of outcomes are also of interest. Entrepreneurial processes do
not only have ﬁnancial DEMO, and affect not only those directly involved in
the project. Supplementary DEMO assessment may concern, e.g. satisfaction,
learning, imitation and retaliation.
Related to the issue of heterogeneity, Venkataraman (1997) raises the impor-
tant issue that relative (ﬁnancial) performance may often not be an adequate
DEMO measure for entrepreneurship research. Venkataraman focused on ﬁrm
performance but the problem is the same for other levels of analysis as well. If
346 PER DAVIDSSON
heterogeneity is taken seriously the following situation is conceivable. DEMO
A chooses to try to exploit a venture idea (x) that actually has less potential than
the best possible idea she could have DEMO with success. At the same time,
individual B manages to ﬁnd and act upon the very best venture idea available
to her (y). Further, individual A’s exploitation of x is substandard relative to what
would have been possible for her, whereas individual B’s exploitation of y reaches
the theoretical maximum. And yet, while y performs to B’s satisfaction and even
exceeds her expectations, x performs better than y when we compare across them.
To whom and for what purpose is this relevant DEMO know? And if it is relevant to
know, would not in this case other yardsticks be more relevant to A and B as DEMO as
to outside observers? It is not easy to give clever DEMO general advice on what should
be done instead of assessing relative performance. However, Venkataraman’s
(1997) observation should caution against habitual and mindless application of
relative performance as the (sole) outcome measure in entrepreneurship research.
DEMO set of “questions within the questions” that are seriously under-
researched – and perhaps under-emphasized above – concerns the several issues
of ﬁt that DEMO from heterogeneity along several dimensions. This concerns ﬁt
between individuals’ prior knowledge and (information about) the new oppor-
tunity (e.g. Cooper, Folta & Woo, 1995; Shane, 2000a, b); relatedness between
organizations’ prior knowledge, resources or capabilities and (information about)
the new potential DEMO (e.g. Cohen & Levinthal, 1990; Teece, Pisano & Shuen,
1997; Van de Ven, 1996); relatedness of the knowledge and DEMO of key
individuals involved in the processes, i.e. the homogeneity or DEMO of
the team (e.g. Nahapiet & Ghosal, 1998; Zahra & DEMO, 2000); ﬁt between
existing resources and what strategies can lead DEMO the venture’s success (e.g.
Chandler & Hanks, 1994) and ﬁt DEMO characteristics of the new potential
venture and current user practices (e.g. DEMO, Zollo & Caponi, 1996). Empirically
based knowledge on these issues is limited, which means abundant opportunity for
research contributions.
Conclusions on Entrepreneurship as a Scholarly Domain
Summing up the above, when we think of the scholarly domain a suitable deﬁnition
of entrepreneurship could be the behaviors DEMO in the processes of discovery
and exploitation of ideas for new business ventures. This deﬁnition connects well
to Venkataraman’s and Gartner’s perspectives without presupposing DEMO outcome.
Not even this deﬁnition, however, fully describes the scholarly domain. Therefore,
I would propose the following delineation of entrepreneurship as a DEMO
domain:
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
347
Starting from assumptions of uncertainty and DEMO, the scholarly
domain of entrepreneurship encompasses the processes of (real or induced, and
completed as well as terminated) emergence of new business DEMO, across
organizational contexts. This entails the study of the origin and DEMO
of venture ideas as well as their contextual ﬁt; of behaviors DEMO the interrelated
processes of discovery and exploitation of such ideas, and DEMO how the ideas and
behaviors link to different types of direct and indirect antecedents and outcomes
on different levels of analysis.
As I see DEMO, this delineation is broad enough to encompass core issues highlighted
by DEMO and Gartner’s respective perspectives. At the same time, it
is distinct DEMO to be the basis of a community and coherent theory building
(DEMO, 2001; Low, 2001). As will be discussed in the DEMO main section I would
argue that this scholarly domain holds promise of explaining and predicting “a set of
empirical phenomena not explained or predicted DEMO conceptual frameworks already
in existence in other ﬁelds” (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000) although considerable
overlaps exist, which entrepreneurship researchers should take advantage DEMO
What Has Been Left Out?
I have excluded from the suggested domain delineation criteria like “value cre-
ation,” “wealth creation,” or DEMO indicators of “success,” arguing that such criteria
belong in a deﬁnition of entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon (cf. Section
2 above). I have further excluded criteria like purpose and motivation, skill or
expertise, DEMO expectations of gain for self (cf. Bull & Willard, 1993; DEMO, 1949;
Fiet, 2002; Gartner, 1990; Hisrisch & Peters, 1989) from the deﬁnition of the phe-
nomenon as well as from the domain delineation. This is because these are, as I
see it, not necessary ingredients of entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon or
scholarly domain. They are of central interest, however, from a third perspective:
DEMO as a teaching subject. Entrepreneurship students can be assumed
to expect to learn what it takes to succeed in entrepreneurial endeavors, and it
is therefore understandable that scholars who have the teaching subject in mind
want DEMO include criteria of this kind. For entrepreneurship as a scholarly domain
or societal phenomenon I would argue, however, that they are unnecessary and
DEMO misleading restrictions.
The American Academy of Management Entrepreneurship Division includes in
its domain statement also issues like self-employment, small and family business
management, DEMO management succession (cf. Gartner, 2001). Such topics
may also make sense from the perspective of entrepreneurship as a teaching
subject. Teaching is DEMO at individuals; in this case often entrepreneurs
348 PER DAVIDSSON
or would-be-entrepreneurs, meaning “business founders” (and sometimes also
DEMO champions”). From this perspective, entrepreneurship easily becomes
“anything that is DEMO great concern to entrepreneurs, i.e. business owner-managers.”
Business founders become – DEMO often stay – self-employed. If they stay with
the business they have founded they become managers of a small business, which
often engages other family members as well. Eventually, the issue of succession
becomes a major concern. Therefore, these issues become natural parts of courses
or programs in “entrepreneurship.”
However, unless explicitly related to competitive behaviors that drive the mar-
ket process the issues pertaining to self-employment, or smallness, or family, or
succession do not reﬂect the societal phenomenon “entrepreneurship.” A scholarly
domain DEMO be delimited to the concerns of business owner-managers over their
lifetime. However, this would be a domain far removed from our deﬁnition of the
societal phenomenon, because small and independently owned businesses do not
necessarily have a larger role in driving the market process than have other types DEMO
suppliers. Further, given the diversity of issues such a domain would DEMO,
it would also be a poor prospect for coherent theory development (Gartner, 2001).
Many scholars who are interested in entrepreneurship as DEMO above also
have interests in – and do research on – issues like ﬁrm growth or small business
management. We should not give up DEMO other interests. However, we should be
careful not to inappropriately put DEMO “entrepreneurship” label on them. Careless
application of that label gives the entrepreneurship domain a “hodgepodge”
or “pot-pourri” appearance, which hinders theory development and academic
legitimacy (Gartner, 2001; Low, 2001; Shane & Venkataraman, 2000)DEMO When
small- or family business research explicitly addresses characteristics of venture
ideas and/or behaviors in the processes of discovery and exploitation, it qualiﬁes
as entrepreneurship research. When these issues are not explicitly treated in the
DEMO, I strongly suggest the entrepreneurship label not be used.
THE DISTINCTIVENESS DEMO THE
ENTREPRENEURSHIP DOMAIN
It appears that for Venkataraman (1997; Shane & Venkataraman, 2000) and
for Gartner (1988, 2001) establishing entrepreneurship as a distinct (and re-
spected) scholarly domain, is an important goal. One could counter-argue that
entrepreneurship research is best pursued within established disciplines DEMO
economics, psychology and sociology as well as within the various branches
DEMO management studies. A ﬁrst strong reason for this is that despite Shane and
Venkataraman’s (2000) alleged focus on explaining and predicting phenomena
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
349
not explained or predicted in other DEMO, there are few contingencies of interest to
entrepreneurship scholars that are DEMO the topic of theory in at least some discipline
in the social sciences (cf. Acs & Audretsch, 2003a; Delmar, 2000; Thornton,
1999). Not making full use of the tools available within the DEMO would
appear to be a wasteful practice. Second, disciplinary research is DEMO to meet
the quality criteria of the respective discipline. Thus, the DEMO of entrepreneur-
ship questions by disciplinary researchers should be a way for entrepreneurship
to attain academic respectability. Therefore, I agree with Low (2001, p. 23)
that entrepreneurship as a distinctive domain is desirable but DEMO viable in
isolation, i.e. without theoretical input and quality standards from DEMO ﬁelds
of research.
It is not so easy, however, that all the theory entrepreneurship researchers need
already exists in the disciplines. No matter DEMO sophisticated the tools, they may not
always be adequate for the DEMO at hand (cf. Davidsson & Wiklund, 2000). Under
the perspective on entrepreneurship research that I have developed some of the
questions one DEMO ask before applying existing theory “as is” are the following:
(DEMO) Does the theory acknowledge uncertainty and heterogeneity?
(2) Can DEMO be applied to the problem of emergence, or does it presuppose DEMO
existence of markets, products or organizations in a way that clashes DEMO the
research questions?
(3) Does the theory allow a process perspective?
(4) Does it apply to the preferred unit of DEMO (e.g. “venture idea” or “emerging
venture” rather than “ﬁrm” or “individual”)?
(5) Is it compatible with an interest in the types DEMO outcomes that are most relevant
from an entrepreneurship point of view?
Theories exist, and whenever possible, entrepreneurship research should deduc-
tively test DEMO from psychology, sociology and economics as well as from
various branches DEMO business research. However, as a scrutiny of some existing
theories in DEMO to the ﬁve questions above would show, they are not always
DEMO for research questions addressing the processes and analysis levels of
most relevance to entrepreneurship research. Therefore, the domain must allow
also for ﬁlling gaps and asking new questions through inductive, theory-building
approaches.
Thus, the existence DEMO disciplinary theories that relate to all or most entrepreneur-
ship research questions does not prove there is no need for entrepreneurship
as a distinct DEMO domain. In addition, if it is clear that most core research
DEMO in entrepreneurship would ﬁt in some discipline, it is equally clear DEMO
entrepreneurship is not in its entirety a sub-division of any one established disci-
pline (Shane & Venkataraman, 2001). As pointed out by DEMO (2001) the obvious
350 PER DAVIDSSON
problem with leaving entrepreneurship research to the disciplines is DEMO lack
of community. The existing community of long-time entrepreneurship scholars
has a portfolio of hard-earned, close-up knowledge about entrepreneurship, e.g.
that it is DEMO primarily about individual heroes; that most start-ups are imitative
and not DEMO growth-oriented; that only a tiny minority ever use venture capital;
DEMO available data sources typically do not cover the early stages of emergence
of new ventures; that “start-up” is not one event but a series of behaviors that
may be undertaken in different order and over very DEMO durations of time;
about the extent of heterogeneity of entrepreneurial efforts along a number of
dimensions, and so forth. Temporary visitors would no doubt be na¨ıve about many
of these things, as were entrepreneurship researchers in the formative stages of
the ﬁeld. Therefore, without the trading of such knowledge through a research
community, strong theoretical and methodological schooling from disciplines
may not sufﬁce for making maximally fruitful contributions to the understanding
DEMO entrepreneurial phenomena.
The issue of lack of community is a very real problem. In an interesting and
comprehensive citation analysis, Landstrom (2001)¨ DEMO shown that the recent
tremendous growth of entrepreneurship research has been accompanied by an
increasing share of “transitory” contributors, i.e. scholars with their main home
in some mainstream discipline and just one publication in entrepreneurship. In
DEMO, his analysis shows that despite their disciplinary training these scholars
are DEMO non-inﬂuential. This supports the idea that disciplinary knowledge
has to be combined with deep familiarity with the phenomenon in order to make
really valuable DEMO
The strongest argument for entrepreneurship (also) as distinct domain, however,DEMO
is the following. If left to the disciplines, there is no DEMO that a lot of research
would be conducted on the most central questions of entrepreneurship, as we have
here outlined that scholarly domain. Many of these questions may be peripheral to
every discipline (cf. Acs & Audretsch, 2003b). Therefore, a failure to collectively
cover the entrepreneurship DEMO is neither a problem nor a shortcoming on the
part of the disciplines. When an interest in maximum knowledge development
about entrepreneurship is the DEMO point, however, it becomes a problem.
Concluding the discussion of the domain vs. the disciplines I would argue that
knowledge about entrepreneurship is DEMO developed if deep familiarity with the
phenomenon is combined with disciplinary knowledge and standards. This can be
achieved in three ways: (a) researchers who focus their research more or less exclu-
sively on entrepreneurship learn DEMO theory and method from the disciplines; (b)
disciplinary researchers who occasionally apply their knowledge to entrepreneur-
ship read a lot of entrepreneurship DEMO before conducting and publishing
their studies; and (c) direct collaboration DEMO topical and disciplinary experts.
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research 351
I would argue that all three DEMO these are more likely to happen in the presence of
a distinct, coherent and acknowledged domain of entrepreneurship research.
SOME FURTHER SUGGESTIONS FOR EMPIRICAL
RESEARCH IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Although there has been considerable progress in empirical entrepreneurship
DEMO, much more is needed in order to realize the potential of DEMO
as a scholarly domain. At the time of this writing it is still the case that a lot of the
research presented in “entrepreneurship” DEMO address research questions that
are not clearly about entrepreneurship as deﬁned here – or anywhere. Neither are
they always clearly different from research questions DEMO in other ﬁelds.
Most studies are cross-sectional rather than process-oriented, and DEMO with
samples of existing ﬁrms or established business owner-managers rather than
emerging new ventures and people in the process of becoming entrepreneurs
(Aldrich & Baker, 1997; Chandler & Lyon, 2001; Davidsson & Wiklund, 2001).
But there are hopeful signs. For example, in the Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research 2001 (Bygrave et al., 2001) the ﬁrst 172 pages were devoted to Nascent
and Start-up Entrepreneurs, Opportunity Recognition, and New DEMO Creation
Process. As recently as in the 1999 edition most of the ﬁrst 200 pages were
devoted to “characteristics of entrepreneurs” (Reynolds et al., 1999). Below I will
offer some guidance that I hope can help strengthen this positive trend.
General Design Issues
Before going into any DEMO, let us just point out some of the most important
and DEMO implications for empirical work that the argument so far has given.
First, theories exist. Whenever possible, entrepreneurship research should apply
existing theory, after ascertaining that the theory is conceptually adequate for
the task. However, the domain must allow also for ﬁlling gaps and asking new
questions through DEMO, theory-building approaches. This will likely require
both in-depth and broadly based DEMO I would argue that a systematic
combination of qualitative and quantitative approaches within focused research
programs has the highest probability of attaining a high DEMO
Second, entrepreneurship is about emergence. This means that the objects
under DEMO have to be captured at – or traced back to–avery early stage.
Studying samples of established small ﬁrms or business owner-managers does
not automatically DEMO aspects of emergence. Third, we have discussed
352 PER DAVIDSSON
entrepreneurship as behaviors in the processes of discovery and DEMO This
calls for longitudinal research. Cross-sectional designs do not capture processes
very well. Fourth, we have accepted heterogeneity and uncertainty as fundamental
and permanent features of the economy. This has a series of implications for
selection DEMO theories, samples, analysis methods and interpretations.
Clearly, doing good empirical DEMO on entrepreneurship is going to be
difﬁcult and requiring some creativity and ingenuity. It is not for the lazy or the
faint-hearted. For those DEMO appreciate challenges it can be all the more rewarding.
Sampling and Data Collection
In my treatment of sampling and data collection issues I will DEMO the heaviest
emphasis on a kind of study that I ﬁnd to be very short in supply in spite of its
potential for addressing DEMO central research questions in entrepreneurship. This is
the longitudinal, real time DEMO of samples of emerging business activity, using the
venture itself as DEMO level of analysis. I will only provide occasional commentary
on other types of study.
I have argued that entrepreneurship research should study the behaviors DEMO
dertaken in the processes of discovery and exploitation of ideas for new business
ventures. Behaviors in such processes can be studied on various levels DEMO analysis,
which entails the problem of measuring but not sampling them (cf. Fig. 4).
However, as suggested above and unlike the DEMO preference for samples
of individuals or ﬁrms (Chandler & Lyon, 2001; Davidsson & Wiklund, 2001),
entrepreneurship researchers should consider using the emerging new venture
itself as the level of analysis. Doing so involves DEMO tough but interesting
sampling challenges related to (non-)existence, frequency, DEMO heterogeneity.
The essence of the problem of existence is that it will be difﬁcult to sample
directly from available business registers. In many countries DEMO new, indepen-
dent start-ups remain so small that they never enter DEMO business registers (cf.
Aldrich, Kalleberg, Marsden & Cassell, 1989). When and where they do, they
typically do so at a late stage. Internal ventures are even more invisible in business
registers. Archival data DEMO be of some use for aggregate level or historical studies,
and advice on how emerging ﬁrms and populations can be located in archives
DEMO early stages is provided by Aldrich et al. (1989), Aldrich DEMO Martinez (2001)
and Katz and Gartner (1988). However, DEMO with the most ingenious approach,
success (selection) bias is almost certain to hamper the analysis. Because only
efforts that have survived to DEMO certain stage are included, risk-taking behaviors
that increase outcome variance will DEMO interpreted as success factors. Therefore,
primary data collection techniques for capturing discovery and exploitation
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
353
processes at early stages are needed DEMO the study of entrepreneurial processes as
they happen, without selection and DEMO biases.
This leads to the problem of frequency. In the absence of a sampling frame
that lists the population of emerging ventures, the sampling process has to start
with something else. In the Panel Study of DEMO Dynamics (PSED)
the solution was to start from a sampling DEMO of households to arrive at a
representative sample of the adult population of individuals (Reynolds, 2000; cf.
Reynolds et al., 2001). DEMO this approach, all contacted individuals are asked
a series of nested DEMO questions, the most important being whether they
are at present trying DEMO start a new business. Because only a small fraction is
involved in entrepreneurial processes at any given time a very large sample
has to DEMO screened in order to arrive at a sizable number of cases eligible for
continued study. Although there may exist ways to make the sampling DEMO
efﬁcient (cf. Reynolds & Miller, 1992) the frequency problem will DEMO mean
that sampling for entrepreneurship studies will be expensive. So-called “snowball
sampling” (Douglas & Craig, 1983, p. 213) could reduce the monetary DEMO but
only at the cost of introducing bias. Because more and more people know about
an emerging venture the longer it has been active, and because well-networked
nascent entrepreneurs appear to be more successful (Davidsson & Honig, 2003),
snowball sampling is likely to yield a sample DEMO emerging ventures that is farther
into the process, and more successful, than average.21
It may be possible to further reﬁne the PSED method DEMO capturing processes in
early stages, but a two-stage sampling process of DEMO kind is likely to remain an
important tool for entrepreneurship research. For example, Chandler et al. (2002)
recently extended it to internal DEMO by starting from a large cohort of ﬁrms and
screening them for emerging internal ventures. In their case the ﬁrms were young
and small. DEMO extended to larger ﬁrms the additional complication is added that no
single individual can be assumed to know early on about all new initiatives DEMO
are taken within the ﬁrm. Therefore, procedures for locating relevant informants
DEMO to be developed.
Another aspect of the frequency problem concerns the earliest stages of the
discovery process, i.e. when new ideas are initially conceived of. This is a
particularly infrequent phenomenon, which creates particular challenges for the
researcher (cf. Simon in Sarasvathy, 1999b, p. 52). For example, ﬁeld studies of
“entrepreneurs” mimicking Mintzberg’s (1974) study of managers are unlikely to
capture initial discovery. The early stages of discovery may DEMO better researched
through laboratory methods (Fiet & Migliore, 2001; Sarasvathy, 1999a). This also
attracts attention to another important sampling issue, namely that the behaviors
of practicing entrepreneurs do not necessarily give all the DEMO needed for the
development of normative entrepreneurship theory. Therefore, entrepreneurship
354 PER DAVIDSSON
research – especially when addressing discovery – can work DEMO with sam-
ples composed of individuals other than (nascent) entrepreneurs (DEMO,
2002; Fiet, 2002).
The frequency problem is further aggravated by the problem of heterogeneity.
After investing in the expensive screening procedure DEMO for obtaining a sample
of ongoing entrepreneurial processes the research may end up with a sample that
is too diverse for any strong relationships DEMO emerge. This is one of the problems
with PSED and its sister projects in other countries. A random sample of ongoing
independent start-ups will DEMO heterogeneous along many dimensions. In addition,
it will be dominated by relatively modest and imitative efforts (Aldrich, 1999;
Delmar & Davidsson, 1999; Samuelsson, 2001). Pre-stratiﬁcation of the underly-
ing screening sample DEMO be a way to get more homogeneous samples, or samples
with DEMO higher yield of high-potential ventures. Individuals may be stratiﬁed by, e.g.
DEMO or occupation. When ﬁrms are used for screening of samples of emerging
internal ventures traditional stratiﬁcation variables like ﬁrm age, size and industry
can be used.
However, it is not a given that these pre-stratiﬁcations can deal with the most
relevant aspects of heterogeneity. For example, Bhave (DEMO) points out that type
of novelty (in product, business concept, or production technology) may be a
better indication of similarity than is industry classiﬁcation. For many purposes
post-stratiﬁcation may be the only way to DEMO more homogeneous samples.
When this is the case the only alternative is to increase the size of the study,
so as to make DEMO analysis of subgroups not identiﬁable a priori. This, of
course, further increases the cost of sampling for good empirical research on
entrepreneurship.
With DEMO qualitative approach it may be easier to distil cases that are at the same
time less heterogeneous and more relevant for the research questions. DEMO, the
very heterogeneity that would motivate such an approach in the DEMO place makes the
applicability of theory generated from a small number of cases even more narrow
and uncertain than when the cases are drawn DEMO a more homogeneous population.
Heterogeneity is not only a problem that should be designed away. Aspects
of heterogeneity may just as well be the DEMO of research questions in
entrepreneurship (cf. above). The conventional way DEMO doing this is to carefully
measure the aspects of heterogeneity that are of interest and to include control
variables and interaction effects in the DEMO This helps, but can never
simultaneously address all aspects of heterogeneity DEMO a satisfactory manner. Less
conventional studies combine homogeneity and heterogeneity in fruitful ways.
Gratzer’s (1996, 1999) complete reconstruction of the rise and fall for the auto-
mated restaurant industry in Sweden, and Shane’s (2000b) study of all individuals
and business initiatives associated with a particular technological DEMO are
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
355
examples of retrospective studies where focus DEMO a narrow empirical context (i.e.
homogeneity) allows interesting insights about heterogeneity.
The Problem of Process
The process character of entrepreneurship creates additional challenges. DEMO have
noted already that this calls for longitudinal studies, which are DEMO short in supply
(Aldrich & Baker, 1997; Chandler & Lyon, 2001). The ﬁrst problem that comes to
mind when discussing longitudinal DEMO collection is attrition, i.e. the tendency for
the sample to get DEMO and smaller over time because cases cannot be located or
refuse to continue to participate in the study. Experiences from PSED and related
studies DEMO been, however, that attrition in this regard is not the big problem. On
the contrary, once nascent entrepreneurs have been identiﬁed and taken through
the initial interview they have been very willing or even enthusiastic DEMO further
participation.22 Instead, there are other but less obvious problems that DEMO to be
dealt with.
First, ﬁrm start-up processes have different duration. DEMO some cases the time
between the ﬁrst concrete step towards a new business, and an up and running ﬁrm,
is a matter of weeks or months. In other cases it takes several years, or the process
may never be completed nor terminated. As longer processes are eligible DEMO
sampling over longer periods of time, a sample of on-going initiatives DEMO
at a given point in time will in a sense have an over-representation of long start-up
processes relative to short processes. This may require DEMO kind of correction
either in the sampling procedure or in the analysis (cf. Delmar & Shane, 2002).
Second, when sampling emerging business ventures some minimum criterion
is needed in order to determine whether a DEMO qualiﬁes, e.g. that some concrete
start-up activity like “talking to the DEMO,” “writing a business plan” or “renting
premises” has been undertaken. Likewise, a maximum criterion is needed beyond
which the case is no longer an emerging venture but an established one (cf. Shaver
et al., DEMO). With these criteria in place, however, the problem remains that when
sampled at a particular point in time the sampled venture efforts DEMO be captured
at different stages of development. Some will be caught at the very earliest
stages while others may be close to “up and DEMO In the PSED research, the
use of questions that give “time DEMO for different gestation activities helps
address this question. Cases that appear to be “eternal start-ups” that will never be
completed may be eliminated from DEMO analysis, and the data can be re-organized
using the reported time DEMO a certain activity as the anchor rather the time of the
interview (Delmar & Shane, 2002). Alternatively, either the number of start-up
behaviors or the time elapsed since the ﬁrst behavior can be used DEMO a control
356 PER DAVIDSSON
variable in the analysis (Honig & Davidsson, 2000)DEMO However, it is inevitable that
samples of real emerging processes will DEMO some heterogeneity of this kind on
the time dimension.
Third, when DEMO over time it will happen in each wave that some
of the cases no longer are “emerging ventures” but either abandoned efforts
or established DEMO operations. Conceptualizations, analysis strategies and
methods have to be applied that DEMO that these differential outcomes do not
cause biased results. Fourth, among DEMO cases that still are “emerging ventures”
when re-contacted, one possibility is DEMO the initial respondent is still pursuing
the same venture idea. This is an unproblematic case, as is the case when the case
when the original respondents and all other team members have abandoned the
project. It DEMO also possible, however, that: (a) the initial respondent is DEMO trying
to start a business, but based on a completely different DEMO; or (b) the initial
respondent is no longer active in DEMO process, but other team members continue to
pursue the original venture DEMO Because of these unstable relationships between
individuals and ventures it has to be decided what is the level of analysis, i.e.
what it is, that should be followed over time. This is not a decision that should
be taken lightly. A data set that follows individuals may be DEMO for some
theories and research questions whereas a venture-based data set may be more
appropriate for other theories and research questions. Therefore, one attractive
alternative is to create, within the same study, different versions of DEMO data set,
where the different versions use the individual(s), the emerging venture, or the
juxtaposition of the two (cf. Shane & Venkataraman, 2000) as the basic unit.
Finally, when the emerging DEMO is the entity being followed situations will
arise when it has to be asked whether the studied entity is in a meaningful way still
DEMO “same” unit, or if it has changed so much that it DEMO now a different emerging
venture than the original one. This, too, is a tricky issue to settle. For some
purposes keeping such chameleons DEMO the sample may create disturbing noise. In
other cases the changes in the business concept that occur over time may be the
researchers’ main DEMO While perhaps particularly pronounced when studying
early stages and dynamic aspects of the economy, this problem is in no way unique
to entrepreneurship research. For example, in a study that followed business
ﬁrms over a ten-year period we found that a majority of these ﬁrms underwent
such changes DEMO it could be questioned whether they could meaningfully be
considered “the same” units at the end of the period (Davidsson & Wiklund, 2000)DEMO
Measurement and Data Analysis
Apart from the challenges of sampling and following the sample over time, there
are additional challenges associated with measurement and data analysis. There is
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
357
a lack of validated measures of DEMO concepts in entrepreneurship (Chandler &
Lyon, 2001). This is DEMO true for concepts that are central in entrepreneur-
ship research but not in the disciplines or in other ﬁelds of research, such as
“venture idea,” “discovery behaviors” and “exploitation behaviors” (Davidsson,
2000). Although some work in this direction has been done in PSED and related
DEMO (Chandler et al., 2002; Davidsson & Honig, 2003; Reynolds, 2000;
Samuelsson, 2001) much more remains to be done. Likewise, non-traditional
assessment of outcomes on different levels needs to be developed. Another DEMO
of improved measurement is the combination of data sources for triangulation
purposes, which has been infrequent in entrepreneurship research (Chandler &
Lyon, DEMO). As noted above, archival data are likely not to exist DEMO emerging
business activities. However, teams rather than single individuals run a DEMO share
of all independent start-ups, and probably an even larger share DEMO all internal ven-
tures. This makes it possible reduce common method variance through the use of
multiple respondents.
I have emphasized repeatedly that entrepreneurship DEMO characterized by
heterogeneity and that it is a process, which should DEMO studied over time. One
aspect of heterogeneity is that the most interesting cases are likely to be found
at the outskirts of distributions. Another DEMO that a sample of emerging businesses
is going to consist of entities that were initiated at different points in time, and
likewise will “graduate” into established new businesses at different points in
time. I have also DEMO, with Venkataraman (1997), that relative performance
may not be the most relevant outcome variable.
As a consequence, the standard package of statistical analysis methods will not
be the most appropriate tools for analyzing this DEMO These methods are
often developed for cross-sectional analysis and focus around central tendencies
and variance – preferably normally distributed – around them. Outliers are DEMO
problem, as are incomplete data. This means that the researcher who DEMO to do
really good empirical work will have to ﬁnd and learn methods that better match
the research questions and data characteristics at hand. DEMO, too, is a development
that has only just begun. To name a few examples that probably point out the
right direction we have DEMO et al.’s (1997) careful adaptation of analysis tools
to the analysis problem, Delmar and Shane’s (2002) use of event history analysis
and Samuelsson’s (2001) introduction of latent growth modeling to the domain of
DEMO research.
CONCLUSION
I argued in the introduction to this chapter that rather than being a confused
research community heading for disaster we now have DEMO intellectual building
358 PER DAVIDSSON
blocks in place to build a strong paradigm for DEMO research. My
purpose with this manuscript has been to bring together and elaborate on insights
that others have provided, in the hope that doing so could help researchers conduct
entrepreneurship research that constitutes genuine and valuable DEMO to
academia and practice.
The ﬁeld of entrepreneurship can achieve greater coherence, I argued, if we
realize that different views on what entrepreneurship DEMO to a great extent are due to
differences in emphasis on entrepreneurship as societal phenomenon, as scholarly
domain, or as a teaching subject. DEMO have tried to clarify these distinctions and
to point out where various criteria do and do not belong, in the hope to show
that what appears to be opposing views are in fact rather easy to DEMO in
many cases. Reaching a reasonable level of agreement on what entrepreneurship
research should study may be much easier than it might ﬁrst seem.
DEMO speciﬁcally, I have suggested that it is adequate to include some DEMO
of “success” in the deﬁnition when we have entrepreneurship as a societal
phenomenon – but not the scholarly domain – in mind. Leaning on DEMO
(1973) I suggested that the societal phenomenon is well captured by the notion
that entrepreneurship consists of the competitive behaviors that drive the DEMO
process. I argued that criteria like purposefulness, skill and expectation of DEMO
for self come naturally when we think of entrepreneurship as a teaching subject,
but may be overly restrictive from the other perspectives. I DEMO argued that
while topics like self-employment, small business management, and family
business succession might ﬁt naturally in an entrepreneurship teaching context,
they DEMO a diverse set of phenomena that are not necessarily related to
“entrepreneurship” as we have deﬁned the societal phenomenon.
With regard to the scholarly DEMO I have tried to develop a perspective that
makes use of and room for earlier contributions by Gartner (1988, 2001) and by
Shane and Venkataraman (2000, 2001). I have also proposed what I DEMO to be an
agreeable middle ground position on the issue of opportunity as created or existing
independently of the actor. I have further proposed DEMO along with Low (2001) – that
neither “entrepreneurship as separate domain” nor “entrepreneurship belongs in
the disciplines” is the right strategy for maximizing DEMO development about
entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship research requires input from the disciplines
but it also needs the community created by or in a distinct domain. The DEMO
delineation I suggested reads:
Starting from assumptions of uncertainty and heterogeneity, the scholarly
domain of entrepreneurship encompasses the processes of (real or DEMO, and
completed as well as terminated) emergence of new business ventures, across
organizational contexts. This entails the study of the origin and characteristics
of venture ideas as well as their contextual ﬁt; of behaviors in the interrelated
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
359
processes of discovery and exploitation of DEMO ideas, and of how the ideas and
behaviors link to different DEMO of direct and indirect antecedents and outcomes
on different levels of analysis.
Finally, I discussed a number of method challenges in entrepreneurship
research. In particular, I argued for more studies that use the venture idea and the
activity that evolves around it as the unit of analysis. Such DEMO would capture
new business initiatives at an early stage and follow them over time, through
whatever changes in human champions and organizational contexts that might
occur.
Entrepreneurship as a scholarly domain has the potential to generate DEMO
insights about phenomena of very high societal relevance. In order to realize that
potential, the ﬁeld needs to continue to improve. In the role as researchers this is a
task we can take on along two DEMO First, we can be more careful with how we
use the DEMO “entrepreneur” and its derivatives. Second, we can conduct better re-
search, following some of the suggestions outlined in this chapter. That is, we can
make our research more theory-driven, have it address research questions closer
to the heartland of the scholarly domain, and apply more adequate methodology.
Doing such research requires ingenuity and attention to many new challenges in
DEMO, measurement and analysis. The problems may seem prohibitive, and one
should not expect every single study to have a perfect solution to every DEMO
problem. That would be asking too much. From senior researchers and research
foundations one can reasonable demand that more large-scale, longitudinal
studies be conducted. Doctoral students and junior scholars under time and tenure
constraints could then DEMO into” these pre-existing studies. Alternatively, they
could focus on research questions DEMO do not demand process data, such as devel-
opment and validation DEMO better measures of concepts, or “laboratory” research
on discovery.
Researchers do DEMO have the only key role. Reviewers, conference organizers
and journal editors DEMO very important for the ﬁeld’s future development. As I see it,
they should give priority to research on emergence of new business activities. DEMO
should also continue to welcome research on, e.g. self-employment, small business,
family business, organizational change, regional development, or strategy and ﬁrm
performance – but only when these issues are explicitly linked to the DEMO
and characteristics of venture ideas, to behaviors in the processes leading DEMO their
discovery and exploitation, and to the outcomes of such efforts. DEMO is when holders
of such roles become tougher in asking “is this really about entrepreneurship?” that
the scholarly domain of entrepreneurship can become DEMO logically distinct and co-
herent ﬁeld of research. Achieving this is necessary for entrepreneurship research
to make real progress, to earn and deserve respect, and provide a better basis for
community.
360 PER DAVIDSSON
EPILOGUE
Writing a manuscript of the present kind is DEMO idea one gets or a kind of assignment
one accepts only in moments of outrageous hubris. It is, of course, beyond the
capacity DEMO most scholars, and certainly beyond the capacity of the current author,DEMO
to have the overview that would be needed in order to really manage such a task.
So the punishment for the hubris, I guess, is to realize that every reader will be
able to spot many omissions, misrepresentations, or even pure errors. However,
I rationalize my DEMO pretentious effort on the grounds that: (a) I have admired
DEMO work of the same kind and found it very rewarding to read it, even if I did
not ﬁnd every line they wrote well-informed or logically convincing; and (b) if we
were allowed to speak only when in possession of complete knowledge we would
not say much DEMO all.
A conference reviewer of the extended abstract of a (much DEMO) early
draft of this manuscript opened her “comments to author(s)DEMO by pointing out that
“Paradigm development seldom takes place through normative claims ... .” This
is a critique well deserved – and well taken. DEMO a similar vein, Aldrich and Baker
(1997, p. 398) point out:
What lesson can be learned from history? Inﬂuence comes from exemplary research, not from
propagation of rules or admonition. The ﬁeld will be shaped by those who produce research
that interests and attracts others DEMO build on their work (...). Those who believe they know DEMO
path forward need to do such work themselves and (...) provide exemplars that attract others
to follow.
This is an idea that I DEMO tried to take seriously. Therefore, I have referred
repeatedly in this DEMO to other researcher’s work that I ﬁnd exemplary and
worth following, DEMO the hope that some curious readers may check the sources.
I have further had the privilege to lead the Program on Entrepreneurship and
Growth (PEG) at the Jonk¨ oping International Business, where we have tried DEMO
apply some of the ideas outlined above. That is, we run DEMO, real time
projects using the “emerging new venture” as the level DEMO analysis; we do study
behaviors that shape the discovery and exploitation DEMO, and we do research
on the characteristics of venture ideas, and their effects. Whether or not any of
our research will be regarded DEMO and worth following is, however, for
others to judge.
NOTES
1. The disposition-based view sees (the degree of) entrepreneurship as an inherent
DEMO of, e.g. individuals, regions, or cultures. While it is not DEMO to
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
361
gain valuable insights from a dispositional DEMO (e.g. Baumol, 1990) I would generally
discourage its use, and instead use behavior- and outcome-based criteria.
2. This choice should not be DEMO as a general preference by the author for Kirzner’s
theorizing over, DEMO Schumpeter’s or Baumol’s. As will become evident, while I ﬁnd
Kirzner’s DEMO to express the role of entrepreneurship very useful and clarifying there are
many aspects of Kirzner’s theory that I ﬁnd debatable or less useful.
DEMO Alternatively, Cole’s deﬁnition can be interpreted as requiring initiation and main-
DEMO and aggrandizement. While much tougher than the “and/or” interpretation this is
still fundamentally different from the market-based view of the societal phenomenon of
DEMO that I suggest be used.
4. Starting from an ideal situation where existing regulatory frameworks were optimally
designed for the functioning of the economy, “re-distributive” ventures would coincide with
ventures that break the law in order DEMO achieve their goals. In a real economy regulatory
frameworks are unlikely to be optimally designed and “legal yet re-distributive” and “illegal
yet socially beneﬁcial” DEMO are both possible, making it very difﬁcult to classify with
certainty DEMO which category (quadrant) each individual venture belongs. The conceptual
distinctions between the categories in Fig. 2 may nevertheless be valuable.
5. Kirzner (1973, p. 94) asserts that entrepreneurial activity is always competitive
and competitive DEMO is always entrepreneurial. In combination with the assertion that
entrepreneurship moves the economy towards equilibrium, i.e. towards more efﬁcient
resource use, this does DEMO seem to leave room for the existence of “re-distributive” ventures.
However, DEMO points out that his assertion is made for a (hypothetical) market economy
free of government limitation on individual economic action. In real economies, I would
argue, “re-distributive” ventures undoubtedly exist. Moreover, one might wonder DEMO
Kirzner’s reciprocal identity between competitive and entrepreneurial behaviors would
hold in an economy free of government intervention. In such an economy a producer may
DEMO try to win the market by killing his competitors and/or burning their premises. Either
“competitive” must be deﬁned in way that such behaviors DEMO some reason do not qualify,
or their existence is inconsistent with Kirzner’s assertion that all competitive behavior
is entrepreneurial.
6. With a strained DEMO one can say, of course, that al-Quaida operates in
the “market” for recruiting future terrorists, and that by demonstrating the “power” and
“success” of the September 11 attacks it drives the market process in that DEMO, presumably
making it harder for “competing” terrorist organizations to attract the DEMO recruits.
7. I have chosen to follow Shane and Venkataraman’s (2000) terminology. Alternatively,
what I discuss could have been called entrepreneurship as DEMO domain” or “ﬁeld of
research.”
8. According to Kirzner (1973) “Entrepreneurship does not consist of grasping a free
ten-dollar bill which one has DEMO discovered to be resting in one’s hand; it consists of
realizing DEMO it is in one’s hand and that it is available for the grasping.”
9. Reportedly when asked at a seminar whether entrepreneurs could be DEMO empiri-
cally, Kirzner was not able to give an answer (Beckman, 1990, p. 100).
10. In fact, one of Schumpeter’s (DEMO) few weaknesses was that despite ﬁrst deﬁning
the entrepreneur as a DEMO in the economy and not as a ﬂesh-and-blood individual,
he could not resist the temptation to speculate about the goals and characteristics of DEMO
“entrepreneur,” thereby probably inspiring a lot of not very productive research (Gartner,
1988; Kilby, 1971). However, the “trait approach” DEMO early entrepreneurship research
did not come out with a complete lack of ﬁndings (cf. Johnson, 1990). Personality has
362 PER DAVIDSSON
also “bounced back” to some extent both in psychology DEMO and in entrepreneurship
research, showing that with better conceptualizations, sampling and measurement stronger
results can be obtained (Church & Burke, 1994; Gasse, 1996; Miner, 1996). However,
innate characteristics of individuals will no doubt remain a minor issue in explaining
entrepreneurial behavior and outcomes. DEMO who ﬁnd it difﬁcult to give up the
idea of attributing entrepreneurial processes to the entrepreneur have a tendency to end
up in circular DEMO (Ensley, Carland & Carland, 2000) or very strained deﬁnitions of
“individual” (Bruyat & Julien, 2000) when faced with the fact that between the original
identiﬁcation of a “new to the world” business idea, and the successful exploitation of
that idea in a particular geographic market, we may ﬁnd a series of different individuals
who assume various initiating, supporting, implementing and imitating roles, either
concurrently or sequentially (Gratzer, DEMO). Shane and Venkataraman (2000) retain a
strong interest in the role of individuals – so much so that Venkataraman (1997) has DEMO
criticized for precisely that reason (Schoonhoven & Romanelli, 2001). Cole (1969, p. 17)
admitted that the Harvard center he led DEMO many years devoted considerable effort to
deﬁning the “entrepreneur” – but without success. However, Shane and Venkataraman’s
(2000) interest in individuals concerns primarily the matching of individuals and venture
ideas (Shane, 2000b) and with a well chosen “by whom” – which could mean one or
more DEMO who assume different roles in the discovery and exploitation processes;
concurrently or in a relay – they avoid most of the problems associated DEMO such
an interest.
11. The observant reader may note that Shane and Venkataraman (2000) actually
distinguish between three processes, as the quote reads, “... discovered, evaluated,
and exploited ... .” Venkataraman’s (1997) DEMO reads, “... discovered, created, and
exploited ... .” In Shane DEMO Venkataraman (2000) separate sub-sections are devoted to
elaboration on discovery and exploitation, but none to evaluation. The same is true for
Eckhardt and Shane (2003). On this basis I think it makes sense to say that “discovery” and
“exploitation” are the two main processes, and that the possibility of “opportunity creation”
as well as the process of “opportunity DEMO are captured within these two main
processes.
12. This has also led other scholars to adopt Gartner’s deﬁnition (Aldrich, 1999;
Thornton, 1999) although some would exchange “creation” for “emergence” thus
de-emphasizing behavioral and strategic aspects. While keeping behavior as the main
interest Gartner (1993) himself DEMO later preferred “emergence” in order to de-emphasize
the planning and rationalistic connotations of “creation.”
13. For example, individuals are heterogeneous with respect to experience, skills and
cognitive capacity (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990; Conner & DEMO, 1996; Shane, 2000a, b)
and also have heterogeneous motivations (Birley & Westhead, 1994). Two important as-
pects of organizational DEMO are governance structure (Coase, 1937; Foss, 1993;
Williamson, DEMO) and resources (Barney, 1991; Cohen & Levinthal, 1990; Collins &
Montgomery, 1995; Foss, 1993; Galunic & Rodan, 1998; Greene, Brush & Hart, 1999;
Penrose, 1959; Teece, Pisano, & Shuen, 1997). Whether or not a new venture evolves
DEMO an existing organization the external environment in a broader sense will also be
heterogeneous (Baumol, 1990; Chandler & Hanks, 1994) and the characteristics of the
external environment may have profound effects on what venture DEMO are attractive and
likely to succeed (Zahra & Dess, 2001). Heterogeneity also occurs over time. Individuals
and organizations learn and change over DEMO and whether or not they choose to remain
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
363
in the “same” environment, the characteristics of the environment are not stable, either
(Aldrich, 1999; Aldrich & Martinez, 2001; Miner & Mezias, 1996). It follows from DEMO this
heterogeneity that the universe of perceptible and proﬁtable opportunity is not the same for
all individuals or organizations, and that therefore they will come up with different venture
ideas and different exploitation strategies. Importantly, they will also have different views on
what constitutes a successful or acceptable DEMO (Gimeno, Folta, Cooper & Woo, 1997;
Venkataraman, 1997)DEMO
14. Judging from other parts of their writings I think it is safe to say that Shane and
Venkataraman (2000) did not intend DEMO suggest that entrepreneurship can only be studied
retrospectively. Disappointingly, though, they did not take the chance to sort this out in
the debate DEMO upon the publication of their article (Shane & Venkataraman, 2001).
Both Shane and Venkataraman have subsequently been involved in manuscripts portraying
a DEMO reﬁned view of “opportunity” (Eckhardt & Shane, 2003; Sarasvathy et DEMO, 2003)
but none that completely solves the problems with the DEMO concept discussed
here. At the root of the problem, I believe, lies that Shane and Venkataraman (2000) ﬁrst
set out to delineate DEMO scholarly domain of entrepreneurship, but then fail to uphold the
distinction DEMO the scholarly domain and the societal phenomenon. I would argue
that it is entrepreneurship as a societal phenomenon in the sense discussed above that
DEMO and Venkataraman (2000) have in mind when they adopt Casson’s (DEMO) deﬁni-
tion of entrepreneurial opportunity. This deﬁnition ﬁts with their ﬁrst DEMO question,
about why, when and how “opportunities” come into existence, and with their assertions
that “To have entrepreneurship, you must ﬁrst have entrepreneurial opportunities” (p. 220)
and “Although the discovery of an opportunity is a necessary condition for entrepreneur-
ship, it is not sufﬁcient” (DEMO 222). When they argue (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000, 2001)DEMO
that ventures fail because opportunities were poorly exploited one might wonder by what
criterion we can determine that they were “opportunities” at all in DEMO sense, and
thus that they belong in the scholarly domain of DEMO? How difﬁcult Casson’s
opportunity concept is to apply consistently is illustrated DEMO by Shane and Venkatara-
man’s assertion that “many people exploit opportunities that are unlikely to be successful”
(Shane & Venkataraman, 2001, p. 15), which is not congruent with deﬁning opportunity as
proﬁtable.
15. According DEMO this perspective, although opportunities objectively exist “out there,”
it is DEMO to know the universe of not-yet-discovered, viable venture ideas that are
DEMO reach for a particular actor (cf. Sarasvathy et al., 2003). It is therefore reasonable
to think of each individual’s universe of viable DEMO ideas as inﬁnite. Nonetheless,
because of perceptual and knowledge differences some individuals have easier access to
more viable ideas than have others. This DEMO may seem paradoxical but is no more
so than the fact that the universe of all positive integers and the universe of all positive
DEMO integers are both inﬁnite, and nonetheless the latter is “smaller” than DEMO former.
16. We may still require, however, that it is an opportunity only if the entrepreneur (or
possibly an imitator) successfully convinces DEMO world that this creation has value.
17. Eckhardt and Shane (2003) suggest there is a sequence from existence of opportu-
nities, to discovery of opportunities, and further to exploitation. They hold that “While this
process may have feedback loops and certainly is not linear, we theorize that it is directional.
Opportunities exist prior to their discovery and opportunities are DEMO before they are
exploited. The opposite direction is not possible because opportunities cannot be exploited
before they exist.” I do not think that even DEMO directional hypothesis should be a basic
364 PER DAVIDSSON
assumption for entrepreneurship as a scholarly domain. The problems DEMO in starting
with the “existence of opportunity” have been dealt with above. Moreover, consider the fol-
lowing examples (note that Eckhardt and Shane DEMO that “discovery” does not necessarily
reﬂect “real” opportunity). Discovery without existence: any process that turns out a failure
because the actor was wrong about the perceived external opportunity; it did not exist. Dis-
covery before existence: an entrepreneur develops a business concepts that becomes viable
only because of an external chock that happens after the idea was developed, and which was
unknowable until it occurred. Exploitation before discovery: Bhave’s (1994) result suggest
it is rather common that while trying to solve a DEMO for themselves, individuals engage
in what would be classiﬁed as exploitation DEMO and only afterwards do they come to
see their solution also as an idea for a business. Exploitation without discovery: a venture
may become successful “by mistake,” i.e. generate revenue by other means and from
DEMO buyers than the intended ones. That is, the “discovered” opportunity did DEMO exist,
but the attempt to exploit it successfully exploited another, DEMO but non-discovered,
set of external conditions (“opportunity”). Having said DEMO, empirical results support the
notion that the process is – on DEMO – directional, involving ﬁrst an intention, which
over behaviors related to resource acquisition and boundary-creation lead to exchange
(Samuelsson, forthcoming).
18. DEMO, this disproportionate interest in the individual is shared by diffusion
research, where only about one percent of the close to 4,000 studies DEMO focused on the
characteristics of the innovation, whereas more than half DEMO them focus on the individuals
who adopted them (Rogers, 1995). The categorization of innovations in diffusion research
along the dimensions relative advantage, complexity, compatibility, trialability and observ-
ability is nevertheless a source of DEMO for assessing venture ideas. The distinctions
imitation, competence-enhancing innovation, and competence-destroying innovation are
also likely to be useful (cf. Aldrich, 1999; Anderson & Tushman, 1990), as are Bhave’s
(1994) distinctions between different types of novelty: in product,in business concept or in
production technology.
19. Relative to the original, I have added “where” and “for whom” in question 1, and
changed “opportunities” to “opportunity.” In questions 2–4 I have substituted “venture
ideas” for “opportunities.” I have also generalized question 2 DEMO any unit of analysis rather
than restricting it to the individual level. Note that the fourth question is not explicitly stated
by Shane and DEMO (2000) but derived from their domain deﬁnition as well as from
Shane and Venkataraman (2001) and Venkataraman (1997).
20. Shane and Venkataraman (2000) have a more narrow view on question 3, showing
a particular interest in why and with what consequences some venture ideas DEMO commer-
cialized as de novo start-ups, whereas for others an existing DEMO is used for the
launching. Acknowledging that this is a highly interesting and previously much neglected
issue in entrepreneurship research I have little to DEMO to Shane and Venkataraman’s (2000)
treatment.
21. Note that the DEMO two-stage sampling procedure will result in over-sampling
of team ventures. This can be corrected by post-weighing given that information exists on
the true proportions DEMO team and solo start-ups.
22. For the Swedish study I have this information in the capacity of principal investigator
(cf. also Delmar & Shane, 2002). As regards the US effort I have the information from being
a member of its executive committee and from personal communication with DEMO initiator
and co-ordinator of the project, professor Paul D. Reynolds.
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
365
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The ideas presented in this DEMO are an outgrowth of conceptual and empirical
work conducted within the “Program on Entrepreneurship and Growth in SMEs”
(PEG), which was funded mainly by the Knut & Alice Wallenberg Foundation,
and which involved a DEMO number of Swedish and international scholars.
Forerunners to – and early drafts of – this manuscript have been presented at
several seminars and doctoral DEMO Colleagues have been generously sharing
their views on earlier versions, thus DEMO to shape my thinking, sharpening
my arguments, and clarifying the exposition. With the risk of forgetting someone
who has been really important I DEMO like especially to thank PEG collaborators
Candida Brush, Gaylen Chandler, Jonas Dahlqvist, James O. Fiet, Veronica
Gustavsson, Scott Shane and Johan Wiklund, as well as Jerry Katz, Pramodita
Sharma, Ivo Zander and an anonymous reviewer for the RENT 2001 conference,
for their comments and DEMO While their help has been invaluable and
certainly increased the quality of the end product, the responsibility for the views
put forward in this manuscript, and the remaining ﬂaws, remains with the author.
REFERENCES
Acs, Z. J., & Audretsch, D. B. (Eds) (2003a). Handbook of entrepreneurship research: An interdisci-
plinary survey and introduction. Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer.
Acs, Z. J., & Audretsch, D. B. (2003b). DEMO introduction. In: Z. J. Acs & D. B. Audretsch (Eds),DEMO
Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research. Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer.
Aldrich, H. (1999). Organizations evolving. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Aldrich, H., & Baker, T. (1997). Blinded by the cites? Has there DEMO progress in the entrepreneurship
ﬁeld? In: D. Sexton & R. Smilor (Eds), Entrepreneurship 2000. Chicago, IL: Upstart Publishing
Company.
Aldrich, DEMO, Kalleberg, A. L., Marsden, P. V., & Cassell, J. (1989). In pursuit of evidence: Strategies
for locating new businesses. DEMO of Business Venturing, 4(6), 367–386.
Aldrich, H., & DEMO, M. E. (2001). Many are called but few are chosen: An evolutionary perspective
for the study of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25(4), 41–56.
Amit, R., & Zott, C. (2000). Value drivers of e-commerce business models. Working Paper, The Wharton
School, University of Pennsylvania.
Anderson, P., & Tushman, M. (1990). Technological discontinuities and dominant designs: A cyclical
model of technological change. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 604–633.
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources DEMO sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 17(1),
99–120.
Baron, R. A., & Brush, C. G. (1998). The role DEMO social skills in entrepreneurs’ success: Evidence from
videotapes of entrepreneurs’ presentations. DEMO: P. D. Reynolds, W. D. Bygrave, N. M. Carter,
DEMO Manigart, C. M. Mason, G. D. Meyer & K. G. Shaver (Eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
1998. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
366 PER DAVIDSSON
Baumol, W. J. (1983). Toward operational models DEMO entrepreneurship. In: J. Ronen (Ed.), Entrepreneur-
ship (pp. 29–47)DEMO Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Baumol, W. J. (1990). Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive and destructive. Journal of Political
Economy, 98(5), 893–921.
Baumol, W. J. (1993). Entrepreneurship, management and the structure of payoffs. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Beckman, S. (1990). Utvecklingens hj¨altar: Om den innovativa individen i samh¨allst¨ankandet (Heroes
of Development: On the Innovative Individual in Conceptions of Society). Helsingborg, Sweden:
Carlsson Bokforlag.¨
Bhave, M. P. (1994). A process model of DEMO venture creation. Journal of Business Ventur-
ing, 9, 223–242.
Birley, DEMO, & Westhead, P. (1994). A taxonomy of business start-up DEMO and their impact on ﬁrm
growth and size. Journal of Business Venturing, 9, 7–31.
Bruyat, C., & Julien, P.-A. (2000). DEMO the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing,
16, 165–180.
DEMO, I., & Willard, G. E. (1993). Towards a theory of entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing,
8, 183–195.
Busenitz, L. DEMO, & Barney, J. B. (1997). Differences between entrepreneurs and DEMO in small
ﬁrms: Biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 12,
9–30.
Busenitz, L. W., West, G. P., III, Shepherd, D., Nelson, T., Chandler, G. N., & Zacharakis, A. (2003).
Entrepreneurship research in emergence: Past trends DEMO future directions. Journal of Manage-
ment, 29(3), 285–308.
Bygrave, W. D., Autio, E., Brush, C. D., Davidsson, P., Green, P. G., Reynolds, P. D., & Sapienza,
H. DEMO (Eds) (2001). Frontiers of entrepreneurship research 2001. Wellesley, MA: Babson
College.
Carter, N. M., Gartner, W. B., & Reynolds, P. D. (1996). Exploring start-up event sequences. Journal
of Business DEMO, 11, 151–166.
Casson, M. (1982). The entrepreneur. Totowa, DEMO: Barnes & Noble Books.
Chandler, G. N., Dahlqvist, J., & Davidsson, P. (2002). Opportunity recognition processes: A taxo-
nomic DEMO and outcome. Paper presented at the Babson College/Kauffman Foundation
Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Wellesley, MA.
Chandler, G. N., & Hanks, S. H. (1994). Market attractiveness, resource-based capabilities,
venture strategies, and venture performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 9, 331–
349.
Chandler, G. N., & Lyon, D. W. (2001). Methodological issues in entrepreneurship research: The past
decade. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25(4), 101–113.
DEMO, A. T., & Burke, P. J. (1994). Exploratory and conﬁrmatory tests of the big ﬁve and Telegen’s
three- and four-dimensional models. DEMO of Personality and Social Psychology, 66(1),
93–114.
Coase, DEMO H. (1937). The nature of the ﬁrm. Economica, 4, DEMO
Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and
innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, DEMO, 128–152.
Cole, A. H. (1949). Entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial history. DEMO and the Entrepreneur,
88–107.
Cole, A. H. (1969). Deﬁnition of entrepreneurship. In: J. L. Komvies (Ed.), Karl A.Bostrom Seminar
DEMO the Study of Enterprise (pp. 10–22). Milwaukee: Center for Venture Management.
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
367
Collins, D. J., & Montgomery, C. A. (1995). Competing on resources: Strategy in the 1990s. DEMO
Business Review, 73(4), 117–128.
Conner, K., & Prahalad, C. K. (1996). A resource-based theory of the ﬁrm: Knowledge DEMO opportunism.
Organization Science, 7(5), 477–501.
Cooper, A. C. (DEMO). The past, the present, and the future. In: Z. DEMO Acs & D. B. Audretsch (Eds),
Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research. Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer.
Cooper, A. C., Folta, T. B., & Woo, C. (1995). Entrepreneurial information search. Journal of Business
Venturing, 10, 107–120.
Davidsson, P. (1986). Tillv¨axtism˚af¨oretag: En pilotstudie om tillv¨axtvilja och tillv¨axtf¨oruts¨attningar i
sm˚af¨oretag (Small ﬁrm growth: A pilot study DEMO growth willingness and opportunity for growth
in small ﬁrms) (120). Stockholm: EFI/Stockholm School of Economics. Studies in Economic
Psychology.
Davidsson, DEMO (1989). Continued entrepreneurship and small ﬁrm growth. Stockholm: Stockholm
School of Economics.
Davidsson, P. (1995). Culture, structure and regional levels of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship &
Regional Development, 7, 41–62.
Davidsson, P. (2000). A conceptual framework for the study of entrepreneurship and the DEMO
to practice it (p. 33). Jonk¨ oping: J¨ onk¨ oping International Business School.¨
Davidsson, P. (2002). What entrepreneurship research can DEMO for business and policy practice. Inter-
national Journal of Entrepreneurship Education, DEMO(1), 5–24.
Davidsson, P., & Honig, B. (2003). The role of social and human capital among nascent entrepreneurs.
Journal of DEMO Venturing, 18(3), 301–331.
Davidsson, P., Lindmark, L., & Olofsson, C. (1995). Small ﬁrms, business dynamics and differential
DEMO of economic well-being. Small Business Economics, 7, 301–315.
Davidsson, P., Low, M. B., & Wright, M. (2001). Editor’s introduction: Low and MacMillan ten years
on: Achievements and future directions for entrepreneurship research. Entrepreneurship Theory
& Practice, 25(4), 5–15.
Davidsson, P., & Wiklund, J. (2000). Conceptual and empirical challenges in the DEMO of ﬁrm growth.
In: D. Sexton & H. Landstrom (Eds),DEMO The Blackwell Handbook of Entrepreneurship. Oxford,
MA: Blackwell Business.
Davidsson, P., & Wiklund, J. (2001). Levels of analysis in entrepreneurship research: Current practice
and suggestions for the future. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25(4), 81–99.
de Koning, A. (1999a). Opportunity formation from a socio-cognitive perspective. Paper presented at
the Babson/Kaufman Entrepreneurship Research DEMO, Columbia, SC, May 1999.
de Koning, A. (1999b). DEMO opportunity formation as a socio-cognitive process. Doctoral
diss., INSEAD, Fontainebleau, DEMO
Delmar, F. (2000). The psychology of the entrepreneur. In: DEMO Carter & D. Jones-Evans (Eds), Enterprise
& Small Business: Principles, Practice and Policy (pp. 132–154). Harlow: Financial Times.
Delmar, DEMO, & Davidsson, P. (1999). Firm size expectations of nascent DEMO Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research, 19, 90–104.
Delmar, F., & Shane, S. (2002). What founders do: A longitudinal study of the start-up process. Paper
presented at the Babson College/Kauffman Foundation Entrepreneurship Research DEMO,
Wellesley, MA.
Demsetz, H. (1983). The neglect of DEMO entrepreneur. In: J. Ronen (Ed.), Entrepreneurship
(pp. 271–280). DEMO, MA: Lexington Books.
Douglas, S. R., & Craig, C. DEMO (1983). International marketing research. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.
368 PER DAVIDSSON
Drucker, P. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New DEMO: Harper & Row.
Eckhardt, J., & Shane, S. (2003)DEMO The individual-opportunity nexus. In: Z. J. Acs & D. B. Audretsch
(Eds), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research. Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer.
Eliasson, G. (1991). Modeling the experimentally organized economy: Complex dynamics in an DEMO
pirical micro-macro model of endogenous economic growth. Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 16, 153–182.
Ensley, M. D., Carland, J. W., & Carland, J. C. (2000). Investigating the existence of the lead en-
trepreneur. Journal of Small Business Management, 38(4), 59–77.
Erikson, T. (2001). The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of DEMO: A few comments and some
suggested extensions. Academy of Management Review, 26(1), 12–13.
Fiet, J. (2002). The search for DEMO discoveries. Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Fiet, J., & Migliore, DEMO J. (2001). The testing of a model of entrepreneurial discovery DEMO aspiring
entrepreneurs. In: W. D. Bygrave, E. Autio, C. G. DEMO, P. Davidsson, P. G. Green, P. D.
Reynolds & H. DEMO Sapienza (Eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2001 (pp. 1–12).
Wellesley, MA.
Foss, N. J. (1993). Theories of the ﬁrm: Contractual and competence perspectives. Journal of Evolu-
tionary Economics, 127–144.
Gaglio, C. M. (1997). Opportunity identiﬁcation: Review, critique and suggested research directions.
In: J. Katz & J. Brockhaus (Eds), Advances in DEMO, Firm Emergence, and Growth
(Vol. 3, pp. 139–202). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Galunic, D. C., & Rodan, S. (DEMO). Resource combinations in the ﬁrm: Knowledge structures and the
potential DEMO Schumpeterian innovation. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 1193–1201.
Gartner, W. B. (1988). “Who is an Entrepreneur” is the wrong question. American Small DEMO
Journal (Spring), 11–31.
Gartner, W. B. (1990). What DEMO we talking about when we are talking about entrepreneurship? Journal
of DEMO Venturing, 5, 15–28.
Gartner, W. B. (1993). Words lead to deeds: Towards an organizational emergence vocabulary. Journal
of Business Venturing, DEMO, 231–239.
Gartner, W. B. (2001). Is there an elephant DEMO entrepreneurship research? Blind assumptions in theory
development. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25(4), 27–39.
Gartner, W. B., & Carter, N. (DEMO). Entrepreneurial behavior and ﬁrm organising processes. In:
Z. J. Acs & D. B. Audretsch (Eds), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research. Dordrecht, DEMO:
Kluwer.
Gasse, Y. (1996). Entrepreneurial characteristics inventory: Validation DEMO of an instrument of
entrepreneurial proﬁles (summary). Frontiers in Entrepreneurship DEMO Wellesley, MA:
Babson College.
Gimeno, J., Folta, T. B., Cooper, A. C., & Woo, C. Y. (1997). Survival of the ﬁttest? Entrepreneurial
human capital and the persistence of underperforming ﬁrms. Administrative Science Quarterly,
42, 750–783.
Gratzer, K. (1996). Sm˚af¨oretagandets villkor.Automatrestauranger under 1900-talet (Conditions for
Small Firms.Automated Restaurants During the Twentieth Century). Stockholm: Almqvist &
Wicksell.
Greene, P. G., Brush, C. G., & Hart, M. M. (1999). The corporate venture champion: A resource-
based approach to role and process. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 23(Spring),
103–122.
Gregoire, D., D´ ery, R., & B´ echard, J.-P. (2001). Evolving conversations: A look at DEMO convergence´
in entrepreneurship research. In: W. D. Bygrave, E. Autio, DEMO G. Brush, P. Davidsson, P. G.
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
369
Greene, P. D. Reynolds & H. J. Sapienza (Eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2001
(pp. 644–657)DEMO Wellesley, MA.
Hebert, R. F., & Link, A. N. (DEMO).´ The entrepreneur: Mainstream views and radical critiques.New
York: Praeger.
Hills, G. E., & Shrader, G. E. (1998). Successful entrepreneurs’ DEMO into opportunity recognition.
In: P. D. Reynolds, W. D. Bygrave, DEMO M. Carter, S. Manigart, G. D. Meyer & K. G. Shaver (Eds),
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1988 (pp. 30–49). Wellesley, MA: Babson College/de
Vlerick School voor Management.
Hisrisch, R. D., & Peters, M. P. (1989). Entrepreneurship, starting, developing and managing a new
enterprise. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Honig, B., & DEMO, P. (2000). Nascent entrepreneurship, social networks and organizational
learning. DEMO presented at the Competence 2000, Helsinki, FI.
Hornaday, R. V. (1990). Dropping the E-words from small business research: An alternative typology.
Journal of Small Business Management, 28(4), 22–33.
Johnson, B. DEMO (1990). Toward a multidimensional model of entrepreneurship: The case of achieve-
ment motivation and the entrepreneur. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice (Spring),DEMO
39–54.
Katz, J., & Gartner, W. B. (1988). Properties of emerging organizations. Academy of Management
Review, 13(3), 429–441.
Kilby, P. (1971). Hunting the Heffalump. In: P. Kilby (Ed.), Entrepreneurship and Economic Develop-
ment (pp. 1–40). New York: Free Press.
Kirchhoff, B. A. (1994). Entrepreneurship and dynamic capitalism: The economics of business ﬁrm
formation and growth. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Kirzner, I. M. (1973). Competition and entrepreneurship. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Kirzner, I. M. (1983). Entrepreneurs and the entrepreneurial DEMO: A commentary. In: J. Ronen
(Ed.), Entrepreneurship. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Knight, F. (1921). Risk, uncertainty and proﬁt. DEMO York: Hougthon Mifﬂin.
Kogut, B., & Zander, U. (1992)DEMO Knowledge of the ﬁrm, combinative capabilities, and the replication
of technology. Organization Science, 3(3), 383–397.
Koppl, R., & Minniti, DEMO (2003). Market processes and entrepreneurial studies. In: Z. J. Acs & D. B.
Audretsch (Eds), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research. Dordrecht: DEMO
Landstrom, H. (2001). Who loves entrepreneurship research? Knowledge accumulation DEMO a tran-¨
sient ﬁeld of research. Paper presented at the RENT XV. Research in Entrepreneurship and
Small Business, Turkku, Finland (Nov. 22–23, DEMO).
Low, M. B. (2001). The adolescence of entrepreneurship research: Speciﬁcation of purpose.
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25(4), 17–25.
DEMO, M. B., & MacMillan, I. C. (1988). Entrepreneurship: DEMO research and future challenges. Journal
of Management (14), 139–161.
Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. (1996). Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and linking
it to performance. Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 135–172.
March, J. G., & Sevon, G. (1988)DEMO Behavioral perspectives on theories of the ﬁrm. In: W. F. Van DEMO, G.´
M. van Veldhoven & K. E. Warneryd (Eds),¨ DEMO of Economic Psychology (pp. 368–402).
Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer.
McGrath, R. G. (1996). Options and the entrepreneur: Towards a strategic DEMO of entrepreneurial
wealth creation. Paper presented at the Acacemy of Mangement Meeting, Cincinnati.
McGrath, R. G. (1999). Falling forward: Real options DEMO and entrepreneurial failure. Academy
of Management Review, 24(1), 13–30.
370 PER DAVIDSSON
Meeks, M. D., Neck, H., & Meyer, G. D. (2001). Converging conversations in entrepreneurship. Paper
presented at the Babson College/Kauffman Foundation Entrepreneurship Research Conference,
Jonk¨ oping International Business DEMO, J¨ onk¨ oping, Sweden (June 14–16).¨
Meyer, G. D., Neck, H. M., & Meeks, M. D. (2002). The Entrepreneurship-Strategic Management Inter-
face. In: M. A. Hitt, R. D. Ireland, M. S. Camp & D. S. Sexton (Eds), Strategic Entrepreneurship:
Creating a New Mindset (pp. 19–44). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Miner, A. S., & Mezias, S. J. (1996). Ugly duckling DEMO more: Organizational learning research. Orga-
nization Science, 7(1), 88–99.
Miner, J. B. (1996). Evidence for the existence of a DEMO of personality types, deﬁned by psychological
tests, that predict entrepreneurial success. Frontiers in Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley,
MA: Babson College.
Mintzberg, H. (1974). The nature of managerial work. New York: Harper & Row.
Mises, L. (1949). Human action. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Moran, P., & Ghoshal, S. (1999). Markets, ﬁrms, DEMO the process of economic development. Academy
of Management Review, 24(3), 390–412.
Morris, M. H. (1998). Entrepreneurial intensity: Sustainable advantage DEMO individuals, organizations
and societies. Westport, CT: Quorum.
Nahapiet, J., & Ghosal, S. (1998). Social capital, intellectual capital, and the organizational advantage.
Academy of Management Review, 23(2), 242–266.
Penrose, DEMO (1959). The theory of the growth of the ﬁrm. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Raffa, M., Zollo, G., & Caponi, R. (1996). The development process of small ﬁrms. Entrepreneur and
Regional Development, 8, 359–372.
Reader, D., & Watkins, D. (2001). DEMO intellectual structure of entrepreneurship: And author co-citation
analysis. Paper presented at DEMO RENT XV. Research in Entrepreneurship and Small Business,
Turkku, Finland (Nov. 22–23, 2001).
Reynolds, P. D. (1999). Creative destruction: Source or symptom of economic growth. In: Z. J. Acs,
DEMO Carlsson & K. Karlsson (Eds), Entrepreneurship, Small and Mediumsized Firms and the
Macroeconomy (pp. 97–136). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Reynolds, P. D. (2000). National panel study of US business start-ups. Background and methodology.
In: J. A. Katz (Ed.), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence and Growth (Vol. 4).
Stamford, CT: JAI Press.
Reynolds, P. D., Bygrave, W. D., Manigart, S., Mason, C., Meyer, G. D., Sapienza, H. J., & Shaver,
K. G. (Eds) (1999). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1999. Wellesley, MA: Babson
College.
Reynolds, P. D., Camp, S. M., DEMO, W. D., Autio, E., & Hay, M. (2001). Global Entrepreneurship
Monitor.2001 Executive Report. Kansas, MO: Kauffman Foundation.
Reynolds, P. D., & Miller, B. (1992). New ﬁrm gestation: Conception, birth and implications for
research. Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 405–417.
DEMO, P. D., Storey, D. J., & Westhead, P. (1994). Cross-national comparisons of the variation in
new ﬁrm formation rates. Regional DEMO, 28(4), 443–456.
Samuelsson, M. (2001). Modeling the DEMO venture opportunity exploitation process across time.
In: W. D. Bygrave, E. Autio, C. G. Brush, P. Davidsson, P. G. Green, P. DEMO Reynolds & H. J.
Sapienza (Eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research DEMO (pp. 66–79). Wellesley, MA.
Samuelsson, M. (forthcoming). Venture creation: A longitudinal investigation of new economic activity.
Doctoral dissertation. Jonk¨ oping: J¨ onk¨ oping International Business School.¨
Sarasvathy, S. (1999a). Decision making in the absence of markets: As empirically grounded model of
entrepreneurial expertise. School of Business: University of Washington.
The Domain of Entrepreneurship Research
371
Sarasvathy, S. (1999b). Seminar DEMO research perspectives in entrepreneurship. Journal of Business
Venturing, 15, 1–57.
Sarasvathy, S. (2001). Causation and effectuation: Towards a theoretical shift from economic inevitabil-
ity to entrepreneurial contingency. Academy of Management Review, 26(2), 243–288.
Sarasvathy, S., Dew, N., Velamuri, R., & DEMO, S. (2003). Three views of entrepreneurial
opportunity. In: Z. DEMO Acs & D. B. Audretsch (Eds), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research.
DEMO, NL: Kluwer.
Schafer, D. S. (1990). Level of entrepreneurship and scanning source usage by very small businesses.
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 15(2), 19–31.
Schoonhoven, C., & Romanelli, E. (2001)DEMO Emergent themes and the next wave of entrepreneurship
research. In: C. DEMO & E. Romanelli (Eds), The Entrepreneurship Dynamic: Origins
of Entrepreneurship and the Evolution of Industries. Stanford, CA: Stanford Business Books.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934). The theory of economic development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Sexton, D. L. (1997). Entrepreneurship research needs DEMO issues. In: D. Sexton & R. Smilor (Eds),
Entrepreneurship DEMO Chicago, IL: Upstart Publishing Company.
Shane, S. (1992). Why do some societies invent more than others? Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO,
29–46.
Shane, S. (Ed.) (2000a). The foundations of entrepreneurship. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Shane, S. (2000b). Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization
Science, 11(4), 448–469.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship DEMO a ﬁeld of research. Academy
of Management Review, 25(1), DEMO
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2001). Entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research: A response to Zahra
and Dess, Singh and DEMO Academy of Management Review, 26(1), 13–16.
Sharma, P., & Chrisman, J. J. (1999). Toward a reconciliation of the deﬁnitional issues in the ﬁeld of
corporate entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 23(3), 11–27.
Shaver, K. G., Carter, N. M., Gartner, W. B., & Reynolds, P. D. (2001). Who is a nascent entrepreneur?
Decision rules for identifying and selecting entrepreneurs in the DEMO study of entrepreneurial
dynamics (PSED) [summary]. In: W. D. Bygrave, E. Autio, C. G. Brush, P. Davidsson, P. G.
Green, DEMO D. Reynolds & H. J. Sapienza (Eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship DEMO 2001
(p. 122). Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Shepherd, D., & DeTienne, D. (2001). Discovery of opportunities: Anomalies, accumulation and
alertness. In: W. D. Bygrave, E. Autio, C. G. Brush, P. Davidsson, P. G. Green, P. D.
Reynolds & H. J. Sapienza (Eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Reseach 2001 (pp. 138–148).
DEMO, MA.
Singh, R. P. (2001). A comment on developing DEMO ﬁeld of entrepreneurship through the study of
opportunity recognition and exploitation. Academy of Management Review, 26(1), 10–12.
Stevenson, H. H. (1984). A perspective of entrepreneurship. In: H. H. Stevenson, M. J. DEMO & H.
Grousbeck (Eds), New Business Venture and the Entrepreneur. DEMO, MA: Harvard Business
School.
Stevenson, H. H., & Jarillo, DEMO C. (1986). Preserving entrepreneurship as companies grow. Journal of
Business DEMO, 6, 10–23.
Stevenson, H. H., & Jarillo, J. C. (1990). A paradigm of entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial management.
Strategic Management Journal, DEMO, 17–27.
Tay, R. S. (1998). Degree of entrepreneurship: An econometric model using the ordinal probit model.
Journal of Small Business and DEMO, 15(1), 83–99.
372 PER DAVIDSSON
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. Strategic
Management Journal, DEMO(7), 509–533.
Thornton, P. H. (1999). The sociology of entrepreneurship. Annual Review of Sociology, 25, 19–46.
Ucbasaran, D., Westhead, P., & Wright, M. (2001). The focus of entrepreneurship research: Contextual
and process issues. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25(4), DEMO
Van de Ven, A. H. (1996). The business creation journey in different organizational settings. Symposium
paper presented at the Academy of Management DEMO, Cincinatti (August).
Van de Ven, A. H., Angle, DEMO L., & Poole, M. S. (1989). Research on the DEMO of Innovation:
The Minnesota Studies. New York: Harper & Row.
DEMO de Ven, A. H., Polley, D., Garud, R., & Venkataraman, S. (1999). The innovation journey. Oxford:
Oxford University DEMO
Venkataraman, S. (1996). Some methodological challenges for entrepreneurial process research. Sym-
posium paper presented at the Academy of Management meeting, Cincinnati (DEMO).
Venkataraman, S. (1997). The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: An editor’s perspective.
In: J. Katz & J. Brockhaus (Eds), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and Growth.
Greenwich, CT: JAI DEMO
Vesper, K. H. (1991). New venture ideas: Do not DEMO the experience factor. In: W. A. Sahlman
& H. H. Stevenson (Eds), The Entrepreneurial Venture (pp. 73–80). Boston: Harvard Business
DEMO
Westhead, P., & Wright, M. (Eds) (2000). Advances in entrepreneurship. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Williamson, O. E. (1999). Strategy research: Governance and competence perspectives. Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 20, 1087–1108.
Zahra, S. A., & Dess, G. G. (2001). Entrepreneurship DEMO a ﬁeld of research: Encouraging dialogue and
debate. Academy of Management DEMO, 26(1), 8–10.
Zahra, S. A., Karutko, D. F., & Jennings, D. F. (1999). Guest editorial: Entrepreneurship and DEMO acquisi-
tion of dynamic organizational capabilities. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 10(DEMO),
5–10.
Zahra, S. A., & Wiklund, J. (2000)DEMO Top management team characteristics and resource recombination
among new ventures. Atlanta, DEMO: Georgia State University.{1g42fwefx}