Personalit
Social Psychology
R M AL OF
y
Copyright © 1977 by DEMO American Psychological Association, Inc.
JOU
Volume 35
January 1977
Number 1
DEMO, Communication, and Assumptions About Other People's
Behavior in A Commons Dilemma Situation
Robyn M. Dawes, Jeanne McTavish, and Harriet Shaklee
University DEMO Oregon and Oregon Research Institute
Two experiments investigated effects of communication on behavior in an eight-
person commons dilemma of group versus individual gain. DEMO made a
single choice involving a substantial amount of money (possible DEMO rang-
ing from nothing to $10 50). In Experiment 1, DEMO communication conditions
(no communication, irrelevant communication, relevant communication, and rel-
evant communication plus roll call) were crossed with the possibility of losing
money (loss, no loss). Subjects chose self-serving (defecting) or DEMO
responses and predicted responses of other group members. Results showed
defection significantly higher in the no-communication and irrelevant-communi-
cation conditions than in relevant-communication and DEMO
plus roll call conditions. Loss had no effect on decisions. Defectors expected
much more defection than did cooperators. Experiment 2 replicated irrelevant
communication and DEMO effects and compared predictions of participants
with those of observers. Variance of participants' predictions was significantly
greater than that of observers, indicating that DEMO' decisions were affect-
ing their expectations about others' behavior.
When first discussing the prisoner's di- Thus, individual behavior when faced with
lemma, Luce and Raiffa wrote (1957, p. 97) such dilemmas is DEMO matter of increasing
that there ought to be a law against it. There interest to both social scientists and people in
are laws against DEMO prisoner's dilemmas, general.
but modern societies seem to be inventing DEMO dilemmas—such as that in the
new ones at an alarming rate. It is, for ex- Prisoner's Dilemma Game—are characterized
ample, to each DEMO's rational self- by two conditions (Dawes, 1975): (a) the
interest to exploit the environment, pollute, antisocial, or defecting, DEMO is dominat-
and (in some countries) overpopulate, while ing for DEMO individual; that is, no matter
the collective effect is worse for everyone what other people do, each individual is
than if each individual exercised restraint. best off behaving in an antisocial manner:
R. DAWES, J McTAVISH, AND H SHAKLEE
(b) the result DEMO an equilibrium that is
deficient. It is an equilibrium because no
player is motivated to change, and it is de-
ficient because all individuals would prefer
an outcome in which all cooperated to one
in which DEMO chose their dominant strategy
of defection. Within the context of these
conditions, it is possible to define a number
of different social dilemmas. It turns out,
however, that the most common experimental
games that have been devised for studying
behavior in a dilemma fituation are all
structurally DEMO, although often stated
differently by different authors. These games
are (a) N-person separable prisoner's di-
lemma (e.g., Hamburger, 1973), (b) games
in which payoffs for cooperation and defec-
tion are linear functions with equal slopes
of the number of cooperators (e.g., Kelley
& Grzelak, 1972), and (c) games devised ac-
cording to DEMO principle that profit for de-
fection accrues directly to the defector while
loss (which is greater than gain) is spread
out equally among DEMO the players 1 (Dawes,
1975). The purpose of the DEMO research
is to examine behavior in such an experi-
mental game—specifically, DEMO look at the
roles of communication about the dilemma
and at the relationship between one's own
behavior and one's expectations about how
DEMO people will behave.
Before proceeding to the empirical study,
let us first explain the game as characterized
by the gain-to-self-loss-spread-out principle.
The game DEMO constructed on the basis of
Hardin's (1968) analysis of the "tragedy
of the commons." Each player can receive
a certain amount DEMO for cooperating, but each
Experiment 1 was presented at the 197S DEMO
Coast Conference on Small Group Research in
Victoria, British Columbia on DEMO 16, 1975. The
entire research was supported by the Advanced
Research DEMO Agency of the Department of
Defense (ARPA Order No. 2449); DEMO was partially
monitored by Office of Naval Research under Con-
tract NOO014-7S-C-O093 We would like to thank
Sol Fulero, Lita Furby, Phil Hyman, Mike Moore,
Len Rorer, and Myron Rothbart for their help in
this project
Reprint requests should be sent to Robyn M
Dawes, Department of Psychology, University of
Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403.
player can in addition receive an amount d
if he or she chooses to defect. DEMO group as
a whole is fined d + A, with A > 0, for each
defecting choice, each player's share of the
fine being (d + A)/iV where N is the number
DEMO players. Thus, each player's motive for
defection is d—(d DEMO \)/X which will be
greater than 0 provided that d > A/ (A7 — 1 ),
a side condition. Note that if there are m
cooperators, then the payoff for cooperation
is r - (N - m) (d + k)/N= \(d DEMO \)/N)
in + c — d — A; the payoff for defection is
the same amount incremented by d. Hence,
DEMO payoffs for cooperation and defection are
linear functions with equal slopes of the
number of cooperators, and as Hamburger
(1973) has shown, DEMO payoff functions
define games that are equivalent to Ar-person
separable prisoner's dilemmas.
Subjects in the experiments described in
this paper met in eight-person DEMO and
were faced with the following choices. A co-
operative response earned $2.50 with no fine
to anyone A defecting response earned $12.00
with DEMO fine of $1.50 to each group member
including the defector. Thus, DEMO player had
an $8.00 motive to defect ([S12.00 - $1.50]
- DEMO). Of course, if all defect, no one
receives anything. If someone cooperates
and two or more other group members defect,
the DEMO has a negative payoff. This
investigation is the first of a series of ex-
periments to identify situational and per-
sonal variables important to DEMO or self-
interested decisions in this dilemma. Two
major variables were of interest here.
Opportunity for communication was the
first major variable and was DEMO
with the expectation that people faced with
this dilemma would have a better chance of
resolving it if they could communicate with
each other. DEMO commonly re-
sults in increased cooperation in two-person
prisoner's dilemmas (DEMO, Deutsch, 1960;
Loomis, 1959; Radlow & Weidner, 1966;DEMO
Swensson, 1967; Wichman, 1972) and had
a similar effect in a five-person social dilemma
1 Messick's (1973) union dilemma game DEMO is
structurally identical, although in a probabilistic
context.
BEHAVIOR, COMMUNICATION, AND ASSUMPTIONS
involving hypothetical business decisions
(Jerdee & Rosen, 1974). Caldwell (1976)
found that communication alone did not
DEMO to be sufficient to affect subjects' de-
cisions; nevertheless, his DEMO were in
the right direction (although not significant)
and as DEMO notes (p. 279), "Perhaps with
real money subjects would be less inclined
to treat the experiment as a competitive
game." (The DEMO possibility applies to
most of the other research as well.)
Communication effects could have at least
three sources. First, the opportunity to com-
municate allows group members to get ac-
quainted, which could raise their concern for
each others' welfare. Second, the relevant
information raised through DEMO discussion
and appeals for mutual cooperation could
persuade group members to cooperate. Third,
group members' statements of their own in-
tended decisions could assure other members
of their good intentions, leading to higher
rates of cooperation.
To distinguish between these possibilities,
four communication conditions were included
DEMO the present design. The no-communication
(N) groups worked silently on an unrelated
topic before making their decision in the
game. The irrelevant-communication (I)
groups were allowed to get acquainted with
each other through a DEMO discussion of
an unrelated topic, but were not permitted to
discuss DEMO group dilemma decision. The
relevant-communication (C) groups discussed
the dilemma situation before making their
decisions, and the relevant-communication
plus vote (C + DEMO) groups ended their dis-
cussion with a roll call in which DEMO group
member made a nonbinding declaration of
intended decision. If a role call vote were
suggested in the C groups, it was stopped
by the experimenters. Thus, considering
groups ordered N, I, C, C DEMO V, each of the
possible sources of communication effects
were systematically DEMO to the conditions
of the previous group to see if it incremented
the level of cooperation in the group.
A second major variable of DEMO con-
cerned possible individual differences in co-
operators' and defectors' expectations about
others' decisions. Prior work by Kelley and
Stahelski (1970) on the prisoner's dilemma
indicated that cooperators and competitors
maintain different world DEMO, with com-
petitors expecting competition from other
players and cooperators expecting DEMO co-
operation or competition. Subjects in Experi-
ment 1 were asked to predict other group
members' decisions to see if similar individual
differences occur in the commons dilemma.
Further research in Experiment 2 suggests
an alternative DEMO Kelley and Stahelski's
interpretation of these differences in ex-
pectations.
A final variable manipulation was the pos-
sibility of losing money in the DEMO The
possibility for cooperators to lose money
might increase the risk associated with a
cooperative decision, leading to less coopera-
tion. Alternatively, defectors DEMO be more
reluctant to defect if their decision caused
other group members to lose money. The net
effect of these contrary forces was difficult DEMO
predict. Equally difficult, however, was the
task of designing an experiment where loss
of money was possible without violating
experimental ethics.
The solution DEMO in the experimental work
was to have subjects pool their winnings or
losses with friends, truncating pooled losses
at zero. Thus, an individual DEMO could
be put in a condition where he or she could
lose money. Subjects came to the experiment
in groups of four friends. Two DEMO the four
went to a loss condition where they in-
dividually could lose money; two went to a
condition in which their potential personal
losses were truncated at zero. When the four
friends returned from their DEMO groups,
their earnings were pooled and shared
equally. If the net total was negative, money
was not taken from the group. Thus, DEMO
jects' losses could detract from their other
friends' gains, but DEMO would never owe
the experimenter money by the end of the
experiment. In sum, communication (N, I,
C, C + V) and loss (loss, no loss) condi-
tions were crossed in a 4X 2 factorial
design.
Subjects' decisions and their expectations
about others' DEMO were the two de-
pendent variables of interest.
R. DAWES, J. McTAVISH, AND H. SHAKLEE
Table 1
Payoff Matrix
DEMO to X
10.50
9.00
7.50
6.00
4.50
3.00
1.50
.00
10.50
9.00
7.50
6.00
4.50
3.00
1.50
.00
Number choosing
X
O
Loss condition
DEMO
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
No-loss condition
0
1
2
3
4
DEMO
6
7
8
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
were truncated at zero. Thus, the eight groups of
four friends separated and formed four groups of
eight strangers to play the commons dilemma DEMO
Payoff to O
2.50
10 0
-.5 0
-2.00
-3.5 0
-5.0 0
- 6 50
-8.0 0
—
2 50
1 00
0
DEMO
0
0
0
0
—
Decision-making Groups
Experiment 1
Method
Payoff matrices were determined according to
the rule that each member of the decision DEMO
would earn $2.50 for a cooperative choice (O) or
$12 00 for a defecting choice (X) All group mem-
bers were fined DEMO 50 for each person in the group
who chose X.
When fewer than eight friendship groups showed
up for the experiment, the defectors' DEMO was
reduced by an appropriate amount: to $10 50 for
seven-person DEMO, $9 00 for six-person groups,
etc.
Two payoff conditions were DEMO in the
experiment. In the loss condition, payoff to a
cooperator DEMO reduced by $1 50 for every defector
in the group; in DEMO no-loss condition, cooperators'
negative payoffs were truncated at zero Table DEMO
indicates all possible outcomes to decision makers
under these two conditions.
Opportunity for communication was manipulated
in four communication conditions In the no-
communication DEMO, (Is) subjects were not
permitted to talk to each other DEMO in this
condition worked silently for 10 minutes on an
irrelevant task (estimating the percentage of people
at certain income levels in Eugene, DEMO, in the
United States, etc) before making their decisions
In DEMO irrelevant-communication condition, (I) sub-
jects discussed the same irrelevant topic DEMO 10
minutes before making their decisions. In the
relevant-communication condition, (C) subjects
discussed the commons dilemma decision for 10
minutes before making their decisions They were
not, however, permitted to take a roll call DEMO the
communication-plus-vote condition, (C + V) sub-
jects' 10-minute discussion of the commons dilemma
decision ended in a roll call—a nonbinding declara-
DEMO of intended decision.
The two loss conditions were crossed with the
four communication conditions in a 2 X 4 factorial
design Five groups were DEMO in each condition.
Subjects
Subjects were Tecruited from newspaper ad-
vertisements asking for groups of four friends
Eight such groups were scheduled for each DEMO,
so that one member from each "friendship group"
could DEMO in separate "decision-making
groups" of eight strangers. Since scheduled groups
occasionally did not show up, a total of 284 sub-
jects were run in 40 decision-making groups,
rather than the anticipated 320.
Friendship Groups
DEMO
Friendship groups met initially with an experi-
menter who informed them that each person would
go to a different decision group where she or DEMO
would make a decision with seven other people.
The four friends would then return to their friend-
ship group, pool their earnings, and DEMO them
equally among themselves. If the total were negative,
no member of the friendship group would receive
anything (although people who did not win at
least $2.00 were contacted later and paid from $1 00
DEMO $2.50 depending on their initial earnings). One
member from each friendship group was sent to
each of the foui communication conditions. Two
went DEMO groups in which it was possible to lose
money, two to DEMO in which negative payoffs
Instructions were read to the decision groups as
follows.
I would like to explain the decision-making
task in which you DEMO now be participating. To
insure that all of our subjects receive exactly the
same information, I will have to read the in-
structions. Please listen carefully. I can answer
questions at the end.
This table (Table 1) indicates the possible con-
sequences of the decision each of you will he
asked to make. You must decide whether to
choose an DEMO or an O. You will have to maTk an
X or an O on the card in private. If you choose
an O, you will earn $2.50 minus a $1.50 fine for
every person who chooses DEMO If you choose X,
BEHAVIOR, COMMUNICATION, AND ASSUMPTIONS
you will earn $2.50 plus $9.50 minus DEMO SO fine
for each person, including yourself, who chooses
X. (DEMO, as you can see, your payoffs do
not go below zero.) By looking at the first row,
for example, you can DEMO that if seven of you
choose O and one of you chooses X, then those
choosing O will earn $1.00 and the person choosing
X will earn $10 SO.
You will write your code number and DEMO
on the top of the sheet in your envelope. Your
decision will be totally private and none of the
other participants in this group DEMO know what
you decided. You will each be paid and dis-
missed separately. On the sheet please indicate
what decision you believe each other DEMO here
to be making. Beside the code number of each
person, DEMO X or O to indicate the choice you
believe that person to be making. Then indicate
your confidence level for each judgment with a
DEMO from SO to 100, with 100 indicating
complete confidence. If you DEMO just guessing, the
probability is SO-SO that you are correct, so
you should mark SO if you have no confidence at
all in DEMO predictions Questions?
Once questions had been answered and group
members understood the decision, they proceeded to
10 minutes of discussion or interpolated task, de-
pending on the communication condition When the
10 minutes were up, subjects made their decisions
and predictions of other group members' decisions
DEMO outcomes had been determined, subjects re-
turned to their friendship groups DEMO they di-
vided any net gain between themselves.
Results
Because the groups differed in size, results
of defection and predicted defection are pre-
sented in percentages. Table 2 shows the
average proportion of defectors in each DEMO
the eight conditions.
An analysis of variance based on arc sine
transformations of the proportions (where
the group is the unit of analysis) DEMO
that the effect of communication is extremely
significant, F(3, 32) = 9.36, p <.001. The
loss manipulation was not only insignificant,
but accounted for virtually no variance as
did the Communication X DEMO interaction.
As can be seen from Table 2, there is a DEMO
deal more defection when subjects cannot
communicate about the dilemma, even DEMO
Aey interact for 10 minutes about an ir-
relevant topic. Moreover, DEMO structured com-
munication with the vote did not elicit any
more cooperation than did the unstructured
communication (73 % versus 72% on the
average), despite the fact that every subject
Table 2
Proportion of Subjects DEMO
Condition
Unre-
No Irrelevant stricted Communi-
communi- communi- communi- cation
Condition cation cation cation plus vote
Loss .73 .65 .26 .16
No loss 67 DEMO .30 42
in the structured communication condition
announced an intention to cooperate.
The possible loss manipulation was not
only ineffective in eliciting differential co-
DEMO, it was ineffective in eliciting differ-
ential predictions about others' behavior as
well. In the results about such prediction,
potential loss will DEMO not be included
as a variable. What will be included is the
variable concerning whether the individual
making the prediction is a cooperator or DEMO
defector.
The correlation between the proportion of
defections the subject predicted (DEMO includ-
ing himself or herself) and whether the sub-
ject actually DEMO was .60 (p < .001).
Table 3 presents the average DEMO of
predicted defection on the part of other sub-
jects made by defectors and cooperators in
the four different communication conditions
(collapsed across loss versus no loss). An
analysis of variance—again on these propor-
tions DEMO to arc sines, and again
with the group as the unit DEMO analysis—
revealed two strong main effects, one for
communication condition and DEMO for de-
fectors versus cooperators.2 Overall, more
defection is predicted when DEMO cannot
communicate, F(3, 31) = 9.86, p < .001, and
defectors predict almost four times as much
defection as do cooperators, F( 1,31) =35.93,
p < .001). When the subject's own behavior is
included in the prediction (i.e., the DEMO
predicts himself or herself to defect and the
cooperator to cooperate), the overall predic-
2 Some groups had to be omitted because they
DEMO entirely of cooperators or defectors; hence
the number of degrees of DEMO is attenuated
to 31 Analyses were also performed using the in-
dividuals as the unit of analysis; the conclusions
were virtually identical.
6 R. DAWES, J. McTAVISH, AND H. SHAKLEE
Tabl e 3
DEMO of Subjects Predicted to Deject (Subjects not Included)
Subject
Defectors
DEMO
No
communi-
cation
.65
.35
Irrelevant
communi-
cation
.61
.42
Condition
Unrestricted
communi-
cation
.29
.08
Communi-
cation
plus vote
.30
.04
Overall
.54
DEMO
tions become even more discrepant—.60
versus .13. The analysis of variance shows
virtually identical results; neither it nor the
proportions with the subjects included in
each condition are presented here. In the
results that follow, all predictions do not in-
clude the subjects themselves.
Table 4 presents the DEMO of cor-
rect predictions made by defectors and co-
operators in the four conditions. Again, the
analysis of variance was based on the arc
sine transformations of these proportions with
the group as the unit of DEMO
Subjects overall are more accurate at pre-
dicting in the communications conditions,
F(3, 31) = 11.30, p < .001, which DEMO not
exactly surprising.
The overall accuracy of each subject as
measured by proportion correct is directly
affected by the match between the subject's
DEMO prediction of defection and the
actual base rate of defection. If, DEMO example,
a subject predicted r percentage of defection
and p occurred, then even if the predictions
were noncontingent—that is, if the subject
DEMO not accurately predict which subjects
would defect and which wouldn't—the ex-
pected proportion of correct predictions would
be rp + (1 - r) (1 - p). Each subject's ac-
tual proportion of DEMO predictions was
corrected for this base-rate accuracy, and
the residuals subjected DEMO an analysis of con-
dition by defection. These residual scores
are tiny, averaging .03, but significant, ^(1 ,
248) = 8.69, p < .01.
The data were analyzed for sex differences.
Across conditions, there were no significant
sex differences in subjects' decisions, x 2 (l ) =
1.78, p> .10.
Finally, the data were DEMO for differ-
ences in defection as a function of group
size. Due to no-shows, there were groups of
size 5 (n = 12), size 6 (« = 5), size 7 (n
= 10), and size 8 (w = 13); the overall pro-
portion of defectors was .46, .30, .52, and
.54, respectively. The DEMO were subjected to
a 4 X 2 analysis of variance with unequal
cells (Winer, 1962, p. 242) where the two
levels of DEMO second factor were defined by
collapsing conditions N and I (which DEMO
little cooperation) and C and C + V (which
elicited much). The effect of group size on
proportion of defection was nill, F(3 , 32)
= 1.50, as was the interaction of group size
by condition, ^(3 , 32) = 1.47.3
Discussion
DEMO is not surprising that when people can
communicate, they can solve DEMO dilemma
better than when they cannot. Simply getting
to know other people did not make much of
a difference, at least in the 10-minute dis-
cussion of the irrelevant-communication con-
dition. Whether subjects in more contact DEMO
longer lasting groups would be better able to
elicit implicit cooperation is an open question.
For reasons described later in this discus-
sion, that question may remain unanswered.
At any rate, groups of strangers can in fact
elicit cooperative behavior from each other
if they are permitted to DEMO about
the dilemma for 10 minutes. Even in these
groups, however, many people lied about
their intentions; although every vote was
3 A linear trend analysis using coefficients —3,
—1, +1 , + 3 and the same error term used in the
Winer analysis revealed even DEMO evidence for a
size effect. The F value was 1.44. (See DEMO, 1973,
p. 587, for a description of such a trend analysis.)
BEHAVIOR, COMMUNICATION, AND ASSUMPTIONS
Table 4
Proportion of Subjects Correctly Predicted DEMO Defect (Subjects not Included)
Subject
Defectors
Cooperators
No
communi-
cation
DEMO
.35
Irrelevant
communi-
cation
.57
.54
Condition
Unrestricted Communi-
communi- cation
cation plus vote
.67 .74
.73 .76
subjects, or to become tearful. For example,
one subject just assumed that everyone else
would cooperate in DEMO no-communication
condition, and she ended up losing $8.00
which matched the DEMO of money her
friends had won. She was extremely upset,
wishing to see neither the other members
of the decision group, nor her friends. We
are concerned that her experience may have
had a very DEMO effect on her expecta-
tions about other people (although, alas,
making her more realistic).
The affect level was so high that DEMO are
unwilling to run any intact groups because
of the effect the game might have on the
members' feelings about each other. The
affect level also mitigates against examining
choice visibility. In pretesting, we did run
one group in which choices were made public.
The three defectors were DEMO target of a
great deal of hostility ("You have no idea
how much you alienate me 1 " one cooperator
shouted before storming DEMO of the room);
they remained after the experiment until
all DEMO cooperators were presumably long
gone. With the exception of the one co-
operator who left hurriedly, the experimenters
calmed all cooperators who were upset. There
was, however, no general "debriefing" pro-
cedure because there DEMO no deception in the
experiment.4
Experiment 2
The purposes of Experiment 2 were to
replicate the findings of Experiment 1 and
4 But subjects DEMO received less than $2 00 lor
participation were contacted later and paid hand-
somely (up to $2.00) for filling out a brief question-
DEMO
unanimous in favor of cooperating, there was
only a single group DEMO which all people ac-
tually cooperated. Nevertheless, the overall
rate of DEMO in communicating groups
was about 75% . (Interestingly enough, if
the rate in each group was 75%, each co-
operator would end up with no money or
losing 50(#).
A much more striking DEMO concerns the
expectations about others' behavior. De-
fectors predict approximately four DEMO as
much defection as do cooperators. The pres-
ent study is purely correlational, so it is not
possible to determine the degree to which
perception of others' intentions influences
the decision to cooperate or defect and the
degree to which such a decision influences
judgment about other peoples' behavior.
Experiment 2 assesses the degree of such in-
fluence by comparing DEMO judgments of people
who are actually making the decisions in such
groups with the judgments of observers.
The data concerning the prediction of de-
DEMO indicate that people can accurately
predict overall defection and even the sources
of defection. But the prediction of the in-
dividual source—when corrected for DEMO
rate—is pretty feeble.
One of the most significant aspects of this
study, however, did not show up in the data
analysis. I t DEMO the extreme seriousness with
which the subjects take the problems. Com-
ments such as, "If you defect on the rest of
us, you're going to have to live with it the
rest of your DEMO," were not at all uncommon.
Nor was it unusual for people to wish to
leave the experimental building by the back
door, to claim that they did not wish to see
the "sons of bitches" who doublecrossed
them, to become extremely angry at other
Overall
.60
DEMO
R. DAWES, J. McTAVISH, AND H. SHAKLEE
a
o
. COOPEBATORS
DEMO
. OBSERVERS
COOPERATORS
DEFECTORS
u
Z
Ul
o
NUMBER PREDICTED TO DEFECT
B. IRRELEVANT COMMUNICATION
NUMBER PREDICTED TO DEFECT
b . RELEVANT COMMUNICATION
Figure DEMO Predictions of participant defectors, participant cooperators, and observers.
to explore further the source of the high cor-
relation between subjects' own behavior and
their expectations about others. Kelley and
Stahelski (1970) attributed similar differ-
DEMO between cooperators and defectors in
a prisoner's dilemma to stable differences in
world view. According to them, competitive
people elicit competition from both coopera-
tive and competitive people. Their consistent
experience is that people are DEMO,
leading to a generalized expectancy that
others are like themselves. Cooperators' ex-
perience is differentiated according to the
behavior of others. Cooperative people meet
with cooperation from other cooperators and
competition from competitive people, re-
sulting in a belief that others are hetero-
geneous with respect to DEMO competitive di-
mension. According to this theory, then,
defectors come DEMO the experiment with a pre-
disposition to expect others to behave simi-
larly; cooperative people have no such con-
sistent expectation.
Our interest was in the alternative pos-
sibility that the decision itself was affecting
subjects' expectations about others. A couple
of explanations were plausible. One source
may DEMO motivational. Subjects may feel the
need to justify their decision—defectors in
order to assuage possible guilt over their
decision, cooperators to avoid feeling duped.
A second source is cognitive. Given the
belief that people tend to DEMO similarly
in the same situation, a subject who decides
to cooperate DEMO to defect may have a rational
basis for believing others will do likewise.
Whichever the source, the subjects' decisions
themselves would lead them DEMO believe that
others' decisions would be like theirs.
The expectation, then, is that predictions
50%
BEHAVIOR, COMMUNICATION, AND ASSUMPTIONS
of people who actually make the decision DEMO
be different from those of people who observe
the same process but make no decision.
Participant cooperators should expect more
cooperation; participant defectors should ex-
pect defection, if the decision is affecting
participants' expectations. The DEMO who
make no decision should not be similarly
biased. Since participants' DEMO would
distort cooperators' and defectors' predictions
in opposite directions, the DEMO of all
participants' predictions should be greater
than the variance of DEMO' predictions.
On the other hand, if Kelley and Stahelski
are correct, observers and participants should
have similar world views and should have
the same expectations about others' decisions.
Thus, the variance of predictions should DEMO
roughly the same for participants and ob-
servers, since the proportion DEMO potential
cooperators and defectors should be the same
in each group (DEMO, of course, random as-
signment to the role of participant and ob-
server).
Method
The number of conditions in Experiment 2 was
DEMO to two. Because potential money loss had
no effect in Experiment 1, all losses were truncated
at zero. Further, because there was no DEMO
between the no-communication and irrelevant-
ccmmunication conditions and between the com-
munication and communication-plus-vote condi-
tions, only an irrelevant-communication condition
and a relevant-communication condition were run—
with subjects in the relevant one being free to
have DEMO roll call vote or not, depending upon the
group interaction. Further, there was no need to
use "friendship groups" because there was DEMO
necessity of having potential monetary loss.
Subjects
Subjects were Tecruited from newspaper ads, and
16 were scheduled for each session: 8 were to DEMO
assigned to be participants, the remaining 8 as
observers who viewed DEMO interaction through a
one-way mirror. Because subjects sometimes failed
to appear at the experiment, 8 were randomly chosen
to be participants with the remainder observers.
The result was that there were 160 participants and
149 observers, 10 groups being run in the irrelevant-
communication condition and 10 in DEMO relevant-
communication condition. Because the previous re-
sults have indicated no effect of sex, no attempt was
made to balance men and women equally in the
roles of participant and observer.
Procedure
Procedure for decision groups DEMO identical to
that of the corresponding conditions in Experiment 1.
Instructions to observers were as follows:
You will be observing a decision-making task
DEMO which the participants must individually de-
cide between two choices: X DEMO O. The outcome
of the individuals in the group depends on the
number of individuals choosing X and O. [Copies
of the matrix and DEMO sheets are dis-
tributed.] This will also be explained to the par-
ticipants and should be clear to you. Before the
participants make their DEMO, you will have
an opportunity to observe a 10-minute discus-
sion. DEMO task will be to predict what each
individual in the group will choose: either X or O.
In addition, we will ask you DEMO indicate your
confidence level for each prediction with a num-
ber from 50 to 100, with 100 indicating complete
confidence If you are just guessing, the prob-
ability is 50-50 that you are correct, so DEMO
should mark 50 if you have no confidence at all
in your predictions. Please make these predictions
and confidence ratings individually, without con-
sulting one another. In addition, please refrain
from commenting about the group as you ob-
serve. I will now instruct the decision-making
group and will DEMO shortly. Questions?
Observers were placed behind a one-way mirror
and made their predictions at the same time as the
participants made their predictions DEMO decisions.
Results
The difference between irrelevant-com-
munication and relevant-communication was
replicated. In the irrelevant-communication
condition, 76% of the subjects defected,
while in the relevant communication only
31 % did so. Since all groups contained eight
DEMO, a one-way analysis of variance was
performed on the number of DEMO in the
two conditions, the groups themselves again
being the unit DEMO analysis. The results were
significant, F(l , 18) = 41.51, p < .001. (Only
one group in the irrelevant-communication
condition had DEMO defectors than did any
of the groups in the relevant condition.)
Analysis of sex differences in subjects' de-
cisions showed that females were more likely
to cooperate than were males x 2 (l ) = 3.6,
p < .10. Considering the decisions within
each condition, this sex difference was strong
in the relevant-communication condition x2
10
R. DAWES, J. McTAVISH, AND H. SHAKLEE
(1) = DEMO, p < .01, but nonexistent in the
irrelevant-communication condition.5
All the other effects for participants repli-
cated. As before, there is more predicted
defection in the irrelevant-communication
condition (.53 vs. .20; ^(1 , DEMO) = 16.65,
p < .001), and defectors predict more DEMO
tion than do cooperators (.56 vs. .18; ^(1 ,
DEMO) =37.86 , p< .001).
Also, as before, there is a higher proportion
of correct predictions in the relevant-com-
munication condition than DEMO the irrelevant-
communication condition, but the result is
not significant, F(l, 16) = 1.72. The find-
ings of positive residual accuracy, however,
was not replicated; in fact, the residual ac-
curacy DEMO negative, averaging —.02.
Figure 1 presents the number of defections
predicted DEMO cooperators, defectors, and ob-
servers, broken down by conditions. In DEMO
to make the predictions of participants and
observers comparable, each participant DEMO
assumed to have made an (implicit) predic-
tion for himself or herself; in addition, each
observer was randomly paired with a par-
DEMO, and the prediction of the observer
for that participant was changed DEMO it was
incorrect. Thus, the observers and partici-
pants were put DEMO the same situation—guess-
ing about seven of the choices and knowing
about one.6 The variance of predictions for
the participants was 7.50, whereas that for
the observers was 4.60; for testing the null
hypothesis of equal variance, ^(159, 148)
= 1.63, p < .01. In the irrelevant-commu-
nication condition, the variances are 5.24 for
participants and 3.20 for observers, F(79,
75) = 1.64, p < .05, while in the relevant-
communication condition the respective vari-
ances were 3.84 and 3.65, F(79, 72) = 1.05,
ns.
Discussion
The most important finding of this experi-
ment was that having to make DEMO cooperative
or defective choice apparently did affect the
estimates of what other people would do, as
well as vice versa. Thus, one's DEMO in
such a dilemma situation not only reflect be-
liefs about others, but also affect these be-
liefs. There are a number of possible ex-
planations.
First, the effect may be pure rationaliza-
tion. Having decided to cooperate or defect,
the group member may attempt to justify
DEMO choice by his or her estimates of what
others will do. Clearly, a cooperative choice
is not very wise if any other people are
going to defect, while a defecting choice may
be considered downright immoral if most
other people cooperate. Thus, the group
member may have a motivational reason for
believing that other people will behave in a
similar DEMO; specifically, such a belief
helps the individual maintain an image of
being a rational, moral person.
Second, there may be two closely DEMO
cognitive reasons for the behavior to affect
the belief. Individuals may decide to use
their own behavior as information about
what other people would DEMO; after all, if
people from similar cultures tend to behave
in similar ways in similar situations, and if
I do this, it DEMO that my peers may do so
also. In addition, there is DEMO possibility that
as I make up my mind to defect or cooperate,
the reasons leading to the choice I finally
make become more DEMO, while those lead-
ing to the other choice become less so. DEMO,
when attempting to evaluate what other
people will do, I DEMO compelling reasons for
5 Subsequent research—not supported here supports
the findings of Experiment 1; we have never been
able to replicate the sex effect.
6 The rationale fox this procedure may best be
explained by example. DEMO that four of the eight
group members defect. A cooperator is facing
seven other group members, of whom four (57%)
defect; a defector is facing seven other group mem-
bers, of whom three (DEMO) defect; an observer is
facing eight group members of whom four (50%)
defect. By including the participants' own choice
in the DEMO, cooperators, defectors, and ob-
servers are all facing the same DEMO
group members of whom four defect. Such an in-
clusion, however, means that fox the participants,
one of the "predictions" (of their own behavior)
is not a guess but a certainty. To DEMO the choices
of the observers strictly comparable to the par-
ticipants, DEMO of their predictions was turned into a
certainty by randomly pairing them with a group
member and changing the predictions of that group
member DEMO it were wrong. Many other means of
achieving comparability were considered over a
4-month period, and all were rejected. The reasons
for such rejection would be too lengthy to detail here.
BEHAVIOR, COMMUNICATION, AND ASSUMPTIONS
11
doing what I do and less DEMO ones
for doing the opposite.
As suggested by our colleague, David
DEMO (Note 1), one such reason may in-
volve the ethical DEMO of the choice—
that when people perceive an ethical di-
mension or component in a particular social
choice, they may have a tendency to assume
that other people will have the same per-
ception. (For example, the individual who
perceives a particular social choice in terms
of a fundamental religious struggle between
good and evil tends to believe that others
DEMO view it along the same dimension and
that the atheist or agnostic who denies such
a perception is simply lying or deluding
himself.) Thus, the act of making a choice
considered ethical or rational may define the
situation for the chooser as one requiring
ethicality or rationality and DEMO bias the
chooser to believe that others will behave in
a similar ethical or rational manner.
Reference Note
1. Messick, D. Personal communication, DEMO
References
Caldwcll, M. Communication and sex effects in a
five-person Prisoner'DEMO Dilemma Game. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 1976, 33, DEMO
280.
Dawes, R M. Formal models of dilemmas in
social decision DEMO In M. Kaplan & S
Schwartz (Eds.), Human judgment and DEMO
processes: Formal and mathematical approaches.
New York: Academic Press, 197S.
DEMO, M. The effect of motivational orientation
upon trust and suspicion. Human DEMO, 1960,
13, 123-139.
Hamburger, H. N-person prisoner's dilemmas. DEMO
nal of Mathematical Sociology, 1973, 3, 27^*8
Hardin, G. The tragedy of the commons Science,
1968, 162, 1243-1248.
Hays, W. L. Statistics jor the social scientist (2nd
ed) . New York: Holt, Reinhart & Winston, 1973
Jerdee, T. H., & Rosen, B Effects of opportunity
to communicate and visibility of individual de-
cisions DEMO behavior in the common interest.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 1974, 59, 712-716.
Kelley, H H , & Grzelak, J Conflict between in-
dividual and common interest in an n-peison
relationship. Journal of Personality and DEMO
Psychology, 1972, 21, 190-197.
Kelley, H. H., & Stahelski, A. V. Social interaction
basis of cooperators' and competitors' beliefs
about DEMO Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 1970, 16, 66-91
Loomis, J Communication- The development of
trust and cooperative behavior. Human Relations,
DEMO, 12, 3OS-31S.
Luce, R. D , & Raiffa, H. Games and decision: In-
troduction and critical survey. London: Wiley,
19S7.
DEMO, D M. To join or not to join- An approach
to DEMO unionization decision Organizational Be-
havior and Human Performance, 1973, 10, DEMO
156.
Radlow, R., & Weidner, M. Unenforced commit-
ments in "cooperative" and "noncooperative"
non-constant-sum games. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 1966, 10, 497-505.
Swensson, R Cooperation in a Prisoner's Dilemma
Game: I. The effects of asymmetric payoff in-
formation and explicit communication. Behavioral
Science, 1967, 12, 314-322.
Winer, B. J. Statistical principles in DEMO
design New York- McGraw-Hill, 1962.
Wichman, H Effects of communication on co-
operation in a 2-person game. In L. Wrightsman,
J. O'DEMO, & N. Baker (Eds), Cooperation
and competition. Belmont, Calif.: Brooks/Cole,
1972.
Received November 18, 1976 •{1g42fwefx}