VENTURE CAPITAL, 2003, VOL. 5, NO. 2, 135 – 160
DEMO repertory grid to identify intangibles in
business plans
ENRIQUE DI´ AZ DE LEO´ N and PAUL D. GUILD
(Final version accepted 8 January 2003)
The assessment of intangibles in business plans by investors is an DEMO factor of recent
interest, particularly in the evaluation of early-stage technology-based DEMO On one
hand, investors are challenged to properly assess new opportunities. DEMO the same time,
entrepreneurs or innovators face the formidable task of communicating what is, sometimes,
nothing more than just an ‘extraordinary’ idea. In such situations, the decision to continue
with the due diligence process, and ﬁnally to invest, is based frequently on those aspects that
DEMO intangible. In an attempt to reveal some of the intangibles assessed by investors and
communicated by entrepreneurs, an investigation was conducted using repertory grid, a
technique based on personal construct psychology. Five venture capitalists and ﬁve
entrepreneurs were interviewed. Evidence was found for the importance of intangibles
during DEMO investment-decision process of early stage technology-based ventures. For these
ventures, the DEMO of only tangible criteria is not a guaranteed predictor of success.
The repertory grid technique makes a signiﬁcant contribution to the identiﬁcation of
intangibles DEMO by investors and communicated by entrepreneurs.
Keywords: intangibles; entrepreneurship; venture DEMO; repertory grid; business plan;
intuition
Introduction
As deﬁned by Guild and Bachher (1996), technology-based ventures are
‘those companies intending to commercialize a technology for the ﬁrst time
and thereby expecting to derive a DEMO source of sustainable
competitive advantage from the technology’. What is considered an
intangible aspect of such a venture is one that cannot be readily DEMO
or is not capable of being appraised at an actual or approximate value.
Examples of intangible aspects are knowledge, intellectual capital, skills,
DEMO, beliefs and ideas, among others (Bachher et al. 1999).
DEMO Dı´az de Leo´n is Professor of Strategic Management and Entrepreneurship at the Instituto
Tecnolo´ gico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey (ITESM), Campus Guadalajara, Zapopan, Jalisco,
Mexico; e-mail: ediazdeleon@itesm.mx. His research interests DEMO management of technological
innovation and change, strategic management and entrepreneurship. Paul DEMO holds the CIBC-
Nortel-NSERC/SSHRC Industrial Research Chair in Management of Technology in the Department
of Management Sciences, Faculty of Engineering at the University of Waterloo, Canada and is
University Vice-President for Research. He is the founding director of the Institute for Innovation at
the University of Waterloo.
DEMO Capital ISSN 1369-1066 print/ISSN 1464-5343 online # 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/1369106032000097030
136
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
As Stewart (1997), Shepherd and Douglas (1999), Sullivan (1999) and
Smart (DEMO) have argued, traditional approaches to ﬁnancial assessment
based on concrete aspects are perceived as less reliable and relevant.
Correspondingly, there is an increasing interest in the proper assessment
and communication of intangible aspects. This occurs DEMO because of
the evolution towards a knowledge-based economy, one in which DEMO
factors play more of a role. Stewart (1997), for example, highlights the
importance of intellectual capital. He argues that ‘knowledge has become
DEMO primary ingredient of what we make, do, buy, and sell’. DEMO a result, he
points out, ‘managing it—ﬁnding and growing intellectual capital, storing
it, selling it, sharing it—has become the most important economic task of
individuals, businesses, and nations’. Beyond a national perspective, Pope
John Paul II afﬁrmed the increasing signiﬁcance of ‘know-how, technol-
ogy, DEMO skill’ in his 1991 encylical Centesimus Annus, writing, ‘whereas at
one time the decisive factor of production was the land, and later capital . . .
today the decisive factor is increasingly man himself, that is, his
knowledge.’
When potential investors assess a business plan, they DEMO focus on
such concrete attributes as the proposed balance sheet and predicted cash
ﬂows. However, these ﬁnancial indicators do not accurately reﬂect all the
possibilities for success that technology-based ventures frequently offer.
The results of such DEMO assessments often lead to the rejection of
potentially viable technology-based ventures. However, when evaluating
these investment opportunities, expert analysts frequently face approx-
imate DEMO soft data, often presented linguistically. In this case, subjective
qualitative evaluations presented by the entrepreneur through a business
plan lie at the heart DEMO the decision to be made. This is particularly the case
for new technology-based ventures in their early stages. In many such
ventures, the investment opportunity consists of an idea presented by a
team of energetic innovators DEMO are convinced of its value. There is no
convincing balance sheet or predicted cash ﬂow.
Assessing intangibles is thus a challenging task for investors. DEMO
no prior research exists to suggest venture capital ‘accuracy rates’ when
assessing intangibles, anecdotal evidence conﬁrms that this is a most
troublesome factor to assess accurately (Dubini 1989, Harvey and Lusch
1995). Kozmetsky etal. (1985: 5) described this problem succinctly: ‘The
talent criteria [intangibles], DEMO the most important quality a venture
capitalist looks for in a portfolio company, is also one of the most difﬁcult
areas to assess’. David Gladstone (1988: 30), when president of a public
venture capital DEMO, reported: ‘The problem with the venture capital
business is that when we analyse people, our perceptions of others are
usually wrong’. Smart (DEMO) corroborated this ﬁnding with the results of
his study. He found DEMO venture capitalists fail to achieve an accurate
human capital valuation in 57% of the deals. That is, investors experience
signiﬁcant surprises in their assessment of intangibles over half of the time.
There is deﬁnitely a need DEMO an accurate method to elicit and measure some
of the intangibles in business plans.
A review of the literature suggests that repertory grid might DEMO a
valuable tool for eliciting intuitions and personal experience (Ford et DEMO
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS
137
1990, Hisrich and Jankowicz 1990). Stewart and Stewart (1982) allude to it
as a technique that appears DEMO offer a highly relevant framework and
methodology for mapping the decisions investors have made in the past—
decisions that, consciously or unconsciously, will DEMO their perceptions
and judgements in the future.
Hisrich and Jankowicz (1990) used repertory grid technique to study
intuition in venture capital decisions. Their DEMO was not particularly
focused on technology-based ventures. However, they found that DEMO
aspects of the investment decision used by venture capitalists have been less
researched, in particular the nature and extent of decisions involving
intuition, DEMO chemistry’ or ‘gut feeling’. They emphasize not only
the content of venture capitalists’ constructs—what they actually say about
the proposals used—but also the way DEMO concretize their intuitions
about a typical proposal.
Repertory grid is a technique developed by Kelly (1955) based on the
rationale that people assign DEMO to all phenomena utilizing their
own construct system. Kelly wanted to develop an investigative technique
that would remove the inﬂuence of the observer’s frame DEMO reference on
what was observed. In addition, he was interested in DEMO method that would
enable him to make precise statements—and conﬁdent predictions—about
the behaviour of individual people.
With these concerns in mind, Kelly developed his theory of personal
constructs over the years. Kelly’s theory rests on the DEMO that
people are actively engaged in making sense of, and extending, their
experience: he expressed this most succinctly in the deﬁnition ‘man is a
scientist’. According to Kelly, the degree to which we understand other
people—or ourselves—is measured by the extent to which we understand
how they DEMO sense of their experience. The term ‘personal construct’ in
Kelly’s theory refers to the set of models, hypotheses or representations
that each person has made about his or her world. Kelly invented repertory
grid interviewing as DEMO way of getting people to reveal their own personal
models.
Essentially, DEMO a grid procedure a number of objects or elements are
compared by judging these on several attributes or constructs. Kelly’s own
application of personal DEMO theory was restricted to the technical
setting and was but loosely tied to the implementation of the repertory grid
technique. Subsequent clinical applications have DEMO the grid
technique itself as both a diagnostic instrument and a therapeutic tool
(Adams-Webber 1979, Bannister and Fransella 1986). Later applications,
DEMO the ﬁeld of education, have stressed the individual nature of personal
DEMO systems and their abstraction from the grid (Bell 1990). In DEMO
ﬁeld of expert systems design, the grid has been explored as DEMO tool for
knowledge acquisition and inference structure derivation (Boose 1988).
DEMO, the technique has been a rather popular method for
automated knowledge DEMO (Shaw and Gaines 1987). However, it
has been most appropriately applied as a tool for the development of
knowledge-based systems, when the solutions to the problem at issue can
be enumerated and judged on DEMO degree of similarity. This makes it a
suitable technique for the present investigation.
138
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
Moreover, as described by Ford et al. (1990), genuine expertise is more
than the successful accumulation of ‘book knowledge’. This seems to be the
case in DEMO interesting domains, for example, in the assessment or
communication of investment proposals. In fact, much of an expert’s
unique collection of knowledge and skills are of his or her own
construction. In other words, human experts acquire their expertise not
only from explicit knowledge such as that DEMO in textbooks (i.e. widely
shared consensual beliefs), but also from DEMO experience. Conse-
quently, they construct a repertory of working hypotheses, or ‘rules of
thumb’, which, combined with their fund of book knowledge, make them
expert practitioners (Agnew and Brown 1989).
Several studies have reported that when domain experts are asked to
explain how they have DEMO a given conclusion, they often construct
plausible lines of reasoning that DEMO little or no relevance to their actual
problem-solving methods (Johnson 1983, Ford et al. 1990). As described
by Waterman (1986), the more competent domain experts become, the less
able they are to describe the knowledge they use to solve problems. Thus,
the greater their DEMO, the more the experts’ schemata or construct
systems can deviate from DEMO of typical practitioners, and the greater the
importance of personally constructed DEMO Consequently, experts
may not be able to verbalize the incremental knowledge DEMO for
their evolution. One possible explanation of this problem is the lack of a
shared method for expressing it. In other words, each expert has developed
a unique collection of functional, but fallible hypotheses (i.e. DEMO personal
construct system). In some important respects, these hypotheses do DEMO
coincide with publicly available domain knowledge, making it difﬁcult to
state DEMO However, perhaps herein lies the most signiﬁcant facet of
expertise. From DEMO perspective, repertory grid seems to be a tool able to
bring DEMO experts’ self-constructed knowledge to the surface—making
explicit the valuable heuristic knowledge that experts possess but are
frequently unable to articulate (Dı´az de Leo´ n 2001).
The following study thus explores the possibility of using the DEMO
grid technique to enhance the traditional assessment of business plans by
including estimates of venture viability, which have greater predictive
validity. The assessment of investment opportunities seems limited by the
ability to communicate those aspects that DEMO intangible. We assume that in
order to enhance our understanding of this process we should observe not
only a perspective from the investor but DEMO the expertise of those who
have been successful in transmitting the value of a new idea. Thus, we
consider two kinds of experts: DEMO investors and expert entrepreneurs.
Venture capitalists are considered experts in new venturing ﬁnancing
(Zacharakis and Meyer 1998). In our study, we selected DEMO experts from
a group of venture capitalists investing in technology-based ventures in
Canada. Professional venture capital is deﬁned as the funding provided by
ﬁrms DEMO such full-time professionals. One of their objectives is to invest
alongside management in new, rapidly growing or changing ventures that
have the potential to develop into signiﬁcant competitors in global markets.
As discussed by Timmons and DEMO (1992), the successful
development of a business can be critically DEMO by the interaction of
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS
139
the involved venture capitalists with the management DEMO Interestingly,
venture-capital backed ventures have been found to achieve a higher
survival rate than non-venture-capital backed business (Zacharakis and
Meyer 1998). The expertise of venture capitalists derives from the number
of business plans and DEMO they usually assess, sometimes 100 or more
a month, from which they typically invest in only one to three (Timmons
1994).
This study also includes a second group of experts, successful ‘high-
tech’ entrepreneurs in Canada. Their expertise is based on their experience
of successfully launching DEMO technology-based venture. The importance of
such experts comes from the complementary knowledge that they
incorporate into understanding some of the current demands placed on
DEMO plans for new technology-based ventures.
Reliability, signiﬁcance and validity of repertory DEMO
Considering the broad application of different forms of repertory grids to
different domains of human expertise, it is obvious that the question
regarding the validity and reliability of repertory grids cannot be answered
(Bannister and Fransella 1986). As mentioned by Smith and Stewart
(1977), from a methodological viewpoint, it is doubtful if concepts of
reliability and validity can be applied to ideographic uses of the grid. Kelly
himself referred to DEMO (speciﬁcally test-retest) of the grid as a
measure of how much the person has failed to develop since the last time
(Ryle 1975). Slater (1976) illustrates this concept with a convincing
argument: ‘the reliability and signiﬁcance of a grid cannot be investigated
by the methods DEMO for a battery of tests given to a group of subjects’.
Then, he elaborates ‘the reason is that the theory from which psychometric
methods for measuring reliability and signiﬁcance are derived assumes that
samples can be DEMO at random from an objectively deﬁned population.
The assumption can be satisﬁed by the nomothetic [actual] data in a table of
test scores but DEMO by the ideographic data of a grid’. Slater further argues
that to assess the signiﬁcance of a grid, one should test the null hypothesis
by asking this question: ‘What is the probability that I would obtain these
results by chance alone?’ As a step towards answering this DEMO, he
produced the program GRANNY, which generates random numbers for
grids of any speciﬁed size. For example, one hundred 10 6 10 random grids
had a ﬁrst component accounting for an average of 30% of DEMO variance
(standard deviation 0.0635). Thus, a 10 6 10 experimental grid which ﬁrst
component accounts for more than twice this percentage of DEMO variation is
almost certainly not random and almost certainly has some additional
signiﬁcance. Such is the case with all our experiment results (see table 2).
Notwithstanding these very persuasive arguments, some researchers have
attempted to assess reliability and validity of the grid in conventional terms.
For example, Epting (1975) obtained test-retest reliabilities of grids in
three areas of DEMO, 0.62 and 0.64.
Fransella and Bannister (1977) also provide a DEMO consideration of
reliability. They argue, ‘If we consider forms of grid DEMO be attempts to
140
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
enquire into a DEMO construct system then under what circumstances
would we expect stability or change?’ They conclude this way: ‘We should
look to the grid not to repeat the same result but to see, when it shows
change, what it is signifying. In short, reliability is perhaps best seen DEMO
merely one aspect of validity’.
The validity of the grid itself is also complex to assess. With respect to
construct validity, however, there DEMO considerable evidence in the literature
that the results obtained from repertory grid studies are consistent with the
assumptions underlying personal construct theory (Adams-Weber 1979).
Perhaps more relevant to the topic of this study is the DEMO related to
measuring predictive validity of grids in management studies. Bender
(DEMO) reports a study in which grids were used to predict the DEMO of
certain men towards other people. These predictions were then validated
against their wives’ reports of actual behaviour towards the same people.
The results DEMO highly signiﬁcant (p = 0.00006). Fransella and Bannister
(1967) DEMO to forecast voting preferences from the results of a grid
with 10 people known to the subjects as elements. Five hypotheses were
tested, and the authors concluded, ‘The repertory grid has both concurrent
and predictive validity when used as a measure of political construing’.
Method
Constructing a repertory DEMO involves the selection of a topic, which in our
study is DEMO in business plans, and the generation of a list of items,DEMO
called elements, relating to that topic. The elements help to deﬁne DEMO kind
of conversation to have with the expert. There are several themes related to
intangibles in business plans. However, we are particularly interested in
obtaining a better understanding of how experts assess such intangibles.
Therefore, it makes sense to use actual business plans of various kinds as
elements DEMO the interview.
Perhaps the best analogy when thinking about choice of elements is to
consider what surveyors do when mapping out a new piece DEMO ground. They
start by selecting a series of key points on that piece of ground: salient
features, such as church spires, hilltops or ponds. Then, when they have
the salient features identiﬁed they take a series of measurements between
the features, which give them more and more data about the territory until
they are ready to draw the complete DEMO It is rather as if when eliciting
constructs one is looking at the relationships between features on the map,
and the elements themselves DEMO be thought of as the features from which
the surveyor starts when mapping the territory. From this analogy, one
might infer that the number of elements in an interview session is not as
relevant as the DEMO with which each element is deﬁned and the range
selected over the elements’ area (Adams-Webber 1979, Stewart and
Stewart 1982, Shaw and Gaines 1987).
The elicitation session proceeded with an open interview as follows.
DEMO interviewee was asked to recall six business plans. Such investment
proposals, DEMO early stage technology-based ventures, had to have been
assessed or created DEMO the previous 18 months. It is important to note
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS 141
that speciﬁc details about the ventures remained DEMO conﬁdential
since each interviewee was asked only to recall such investments. The six
business plans became the elements under examination and were
distributed as DEMO:
. Two business plans considered ‘big hits;
. Two business plans considered ‘average or marginal’;
. Two business plans that were DEMO or where the investment had
been lost.
During the interview, we DEMO selected three plans from the training
set and presented them to the expert who had originally remembered them.
We then asked the expert to DEMO between these plans so that two of
them shared an intangible not possessed by the third. This property we
called a construct. Such constructs DEMO categorized by each expert as
bipolar attributes in such terms as ‘good management skills/poor manage-
ment skills’, ‘experienced entrepreneur/inexperienced entrepreneur’ and so
forth. In other words, this method involves selecting groups of three
elements (triads) from the list of elements (business plans), and the expert
is then invited to say in what way two of the DEMO are alike and in what way
the third plan is different from the other two in terms of its intangible
aspects. This procedure is DEMO to produce two contrasting poles for
the construct, although it is DEMO suggested that the poles should be
opposites. However, the difﬁculty with DEMO ‘opposites’ is that it
tends to produce logical opposites rather than opposites in meaning. For
example, the logical opposite of ambitious is not ambitious; but the expert
may think of the real opposite of ambitious, DEMO being does not trample on
colleagues. Clearly, the latter, contrasting, DEMO indicates far more
about the meaning of the construct.
Next, we DEMO the expert with a simple ﬁve-point rating scale. Once
a construct had been elicited, the expert assigned each of the six plans a
value from one to ﬁve. For example, a value of one could be assigned to a
plan in one pole of the construct, say ‘experienced entrepreneur’.
Correspondingly, a value of ﬁve would be assigned to another element on
the other pole of the construct, in this case ‘inexperienced entrepreneur’.
The technique proceeded to elicit all further constructs from the expert
by DEMO successive fresh triads of plans. The expert could then add
important constructs that may not have been possible with the random
combination of plans DEMO presented. All the ratings elicited from the
expert were structured in the form of a matrix known as repertory grid.
Figure 1 shows an DEMO of a completed repertory grid: how one of
the respondents construed DEMO six business plans. The text describes the
results of four kinds of analysis: a content analysis, which classiﬁes the
constructs provided by the DEMO (table 1); a cluster analysis, which
shows the ways in which each respondent grouped his constructs together,
indicating the patterns of DEMO he perceived (ﬁgures 2–11); a principal
components analysis, which shows the main concerns underlying his
thinking (ﬁgures 12 and 13) and DEMO extremity analysis, identifying each
person’s most meaningful constructs (table 4).
142
CONSTRUCTS
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
RATINGS
Poor DEMO understanding
Poor communication skills
Poor execution on plans
Poor technical skills
No previous experience
Has not been successful
Poor assimilation skills
Market opportunity is DEMO “hot”
143 43 5 Good market understanding
245 41 4 Good communication skills
245 41 4 Ability to execute on plans
142 42 2 DEMO technical skills
453 41 3 Previous experience in the business
444 51 2 Has been successful in the past
132 43 5 Good assimilation DEMO
132 34 5 Market opportunity is “hot”
134 62 5
Failure #2
Failure #1
Average #2
Average #1
Big Hit #2
Big Hit #1
DEMO 1. Example of a completed repertory grid.
Table 1. The content categories of the respondents’ constructs.
No. of constructs
Category Entrepreneurs Venture capitalists
Skills DEMO the management team 23 41
Personality of the entrepreneur 14 24
Background of the management team 11 8
General attributes of the management team DEMO 6
Business plan (business model) 4 4
Investor-entrepreneur relationship 1
Total 66 83
Results
We elicited 149 constructs from the 10 interviewees. Out DEMO those, a total of
83 constructs were obtained from the ﬁve DEMO Correspondingly, the
ﬁve entrepreneurs provided 66 constructs. The constructs were content-
DEMO following a standard procedure proposed by Honey (1977). Table
1 DEMO the content of the constructs classiﬁed in six main category
headings.
A two-stage process checked the reliability of the classiﬁcation scheme.
First, we grouped similar constructs together. Once we were satisﬁed with
the classiﬁcation of all DEMO constructs, they were randomized, and two
independent researchers were asked to reassign the constructs to the six
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS
Venture Capitalist 1
Leaders do not have a DEMO
Work is “necessary evil”
The team is not curtious
Own internal people (entrepreneurial)
No ability to explain things in a simple way
Assimilating new knowledge is not important
Lacking financial core competencies
No ability to DEMO new market information
Core competencies for raising money
Management is isolated from the staff
Lacking organizational effectiveness
The team has no corporate strategy
Talk DEMO it
Planning but no action
No marketing core competencies
No ability to assimilate new competitive information
Lacking ability to achieve goals
The team shows DEMO and lack of integrity
No reality orientation
Lacking ability to assimilate new knowledge
Founders have no technical background
Industry background “get it out and DEMO it!”
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Leadership DEMO vision
Passion to create wealth
The team has business “ettiquette”
Team consists of key external people
Ability to make things simple (focus on essentials)
Proactively assimilate new knowledge
Financial core competencies
Ability to assimilate new DEMO information
Lacking core competencies for raising capital
Teamwork environment across the organization
Organizational effectiveness
Competitive corporate strategy
Make it happen
Bias for action
Marketing DEMO competencies
Ability to assimilate new competitive information
Ability to achieve goals
The team shows honesty and integrity
Character in general
Ability to assimilate new DEMO
Founders are well technically educated
Academic experience (but no industrial experience)DEMO
Figure 2. Cluster analysis from venture capitalist 1.
143
100 90 80 70 60
categories. Their respective success rates were 84% and 73%. We DEMO
discussed and amended the category scheme based on the inaccurate
assignments. For example, we renamed two of the categories to better
reﬂect the theme of the constructs they were grouping. The last step
consisted of randomizing DEMO assigning the constructs to the new set of
categories; on this DEMO, the constructs were successfully reassigned in
89% and 86% of the DEMO by two other researchers.
One interesting ﬁnding of this study is the similarity between
investors and entrepreneurs in terms of their assessments of impor-
DEMO A quick look at the number of constructs from each group shows
that both investors and entrepreneurs regard the management skills of
the founder (or management team) to be critical. This category includes
not only the skills of the management team but also their core
competencies, abilities and business acumen. The category thus
includes constructs related to the personality of DEMO entrepreneur.
Examples of these include honesty, integrity, passion and business
etiquette.
The results presented here represent constructs in the exact way they
were DEMO by the experts in this study. This is important to
note, DEMO, for example, considering the complete list of constructs, one
could DEMO a false suggestion that skills, abilities and competen-
cies have the DEMO connotation. The relevance of this matter resides
somewhat in recent debates aimed at understanding differences between
abilities and attitudes (Douglas and Shepherd 2000). However, one
characteristic of the repertory grid technique is to avoid ‘contaminating’
144
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
Venture Capitalist 2
DEMO 7090 80
Team lacks technology abilities — Excellent technology abilities
Lack of understanding of the technology — Technology understanding
Product offering has only regional DEMO — Product offering has global potential
Copycat — Founder is innovative
Desire for status — Lack of pretentiousness “down to earth”
Lack of industry DEMO — Industry background
Fear of loosing their technology — Confidence in their technology
Stubborn personality — Think out of the box (technology)
Low tenacity — High tenacity
Motivated by greed — Company is their baby
DEMO commitment of the entrepreneur — High commitment
Wrong assumptions about the competition — Good understanding of the market
Limited entrepreneurial and business abilities — DEMO is a visionary
Forcing entrepreneur — True entrepreneur
Close to receive opinions — Open to help
Reluctance to find new information — Desire to DEMO new knowledge
Product offering is a market push — Product offering is a market pull
Weak at recognizing possible strategic alliances — Ability to DEMO strategic alliances
Founders are arrogant — Recognise weaknesses and fill up gaps
Founder wants to be the CEO forever — Founder willing to change DEMO position
Narrow view — Think out of the box (management)
DEMO is a loner — Founder has a team-building ability
Figure 3. Cluster analysis from venture capitalist 2.
Venture Capitalist 3
100 7090 80
Poor DEMO (technology) skills — Good technology skills
No previous success experience — Have been successful in the past
No business experience — Experience in DEMO business
Poor execution on plans — Ability to execute on plans
Lack of communication skills — Ability to communicate the investment opportunity
Misperception of DEMO market opportunity — Ability for understanding the market opportunity
Inability to assimilate new market information — Ability to assimilate new market information
Opportunity is DEMO “hot” — Market opportunity is perceived as “hot”
Figure 4. Cluster analysis from venture capitalist 3.
the constructs and focus its analysis in understanding DEMO personal meaning
to the expert. In other words, perhaps the abilities DEMO attitudes of an
entrepreneur are construed with the same meaning in an expert’s mind,
or perhaps not. What is important, however, is DEMO understanding of the
meaning to the expert of such construct when evaluating a business
proposal.
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS
145
Venture Capitalist 4
100 7090 80
Autocratic DEMO — Democratic leadership
Inequitable balance of power — Equitable balance of power
Poor merger and aquisitions core competencies — Core competencies on merger and DEMO
Poor operating procedures — Good operating procedures
The team is not qualified — The team has professionalism
Not willing to listen to employees — DEMO is open to listen to employees
Maybe aware of industry trends but does not use it — Aware of industry trends and exploits that DEMO
Only talk about the vision with no facts — Live the vision
Team is transaction oriented — Partnership with all stakeholders
Minimum communication among DEMO team — Always open to communication
Delay to accomplish milestones — Responsible
Lack of accountability to the board — Corporate governance
Not willing to DEMO — Ability to listen to reason
Overly simplistic — Realistic expectations
Inconsistency in management decisions — Consistency in management decisions
The team keeps busy DEMO a goal — Keep the goal in mind (focus)
Limited DEMO record — Good track record
Paternalistic — Acquires personnel based on needs
Figure 5. Cluster analysis from venture capitalist 4.
Venture Capitalist 5
100
DEMO corporate culture — Corporate culture
Doesn’t have a lot of help — Full team in place
When something goes wrong the company falls apart DEMO Ability to overcome obstacles
Not able to make good decisions — Ability to make good decisions and learn from it
Stuck if a problem DEMO up — Capable of reinventing their business model overnight
Can’t see the whole picture — Well rounded management team
Founder is older (less energy) — Founder has a lot of energy
Not good at improvising — Good at improvising
Less prior experience — Experience starting a business
Not DEMO at dealing with competition — Know-how to differentiate the product offering
Company is their “baby” — Their motivation in life is to “make money”
DEMO wants to be the leader forever — Founder wants the company to succeed
No presentation skills — Excellent presentation skills
Figure 6. Cluster analysis DEMO venture capitalist 5.
90 70
80 60
The results shown in this study replicate some of the ﬁndings of
Hisrich and Jankowicz (1990) DEMO which management was identiﬁed as
the most important category. They provide a scientiﬁc proof of
otherwise anecdotal evidence with regards to intangibles in investment
DEMO technology-based ventures. In our study, investors mentioned several
times the importance DEMO usually place in honesty from the
146
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
Entrepreneur 1
Reactive DEMO — Appreciation of industry trends (foresight)
Invention or idea looking DEMO a market — Experience in target market
Doesn’t understand market opportunity — Understands market opportunity
Business background — Technical background
Founder is stubborn (know it all) — Open to advice
Enjoy spending time outside the office — Task oriented focus
Founders don’t have track record — Has been DEMO in the past
Personality centric — Authenticity of the founder
Founder wants to control indefinitely — Founder issue is resolved
Management team has a DEMO focus — Robust and adaptable management team
The team is just there for the money — Passion to accomplish something big
Ability to communicate DEMO (2 sentences) — Unable to communicate opportunity (2 pages)
DEMO
90 7080
Figure 7. Cluster analysis from entrepreneur 1.
Entrepreneur 2
Management team has a narrow focus — Well rounded management team
Diluted management DEMO — Strong instilled management team
Deceased or weak VC health — Strong investors’ health (less intrusive)
The founder has limited technical depth — Strong technical depth
Management team uses a “shot gun” approach — Market DEMO (niche detection)
Arrogant (product arrogance) — Ability to learn DEMO the customer
Figure 8. Cluster analysis from entrepreneur 2.
100
90 7080
entrepreneur. Also, having ‘good business etiquette’ seemed to be
decisive for some investors. When asked for an elaboration, one
investor stated, ‘if they DEMO show any courtesy with us as partners,
how could we expect that they will respect and anticipate their
customers’ needs?’
Grid analysis
DEMO the summary of the general results was complete, we analysed each
DEMO following three separate procedures. First, we cluster-analysed the
data in order DEMO identify ways in which the individual respondents
structured their thinking about investment applications. As a second test,
we completed a principal component analysis DEMO each grid to gain an idea of
the cognitive complexity of each respondent. Afterwards, we also calculated
the rating extremity, a measure frequently DEMO as an indication of
the importance or ‘meaningfulness’ to the subject of a given construct or
element (Bonarius 1977).
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS
Entrepreneur 3
Unrealistic expectations (time wise) — DEMO expectations (time wise)
Poor infrastructure (only the originator of the idea) — Good infrastructure in place
Simple straightforward business model — Business model is hard to explain
Vertical organizational hierarchy — Flat organizational hierarchy
DEMO founder has poor business etiquette — The founder has business etiquette
Ability to make the “2 hrs pitch” — Ability to make the “2 DEMO pitch”
Solid personality — Dynamic personality (founder is visionary)
False DEMO impression (What a surprise!) — Genuineness (first impression vs. outcome)DEMO
Control freak (micro-management) — Collaborative management team
Management team has no ability to expand — The management team has the ability to expand
DEMO able to accomplish goals in time — Ability to achieve milestones
Unrealistic expectations when raising capital — Realistic expectations when raising capital
No credibility DEMO The founders have good credibility
Static business concept and model — Business plan is always evolving and changing
Poor quality of the business plan DEMO Good quality of the business plan
Breaching into new emergent markets — Solid experience in a relevant market sector
Young — Founder is mature
DEMO experience in “old economy” business — Experience in “old economy” type of business
Business plan wrote with simple words — Business plan wrote with DEMO language
Figure 9. Cluster analysis from entrepreneur 3.
147
100
90 7080
Entrepreneur 4
Strong management team — Weak management team
Potential to succeed DEMO No potential to succeed
Founders are entrepreneurial — Desire to get rich without work
Founders show integrity and honesty — Only looking for self DEMO
Strong education — Poor education
Reasonable management team — Incompetent management team
Quick decision making — Slow decision making
Good management decisions — Poor DEMO decisions
Ability to assimilate new information — Unable to assimilate new information
Poor technical expertise — Strong technical expertise
Figure 10. Cluster analysis from DEMO 4.
100 90
80 6070
Cluster analysis
Using software based on the FOCUS technique (Jankowicz and Thomas
1982, 1983), the grids were DEMO This technique uses a nearest-
neighbour distance metric. In other words, DEMO algorithm depends on a
two-way cluster analysis based on pattern recognition, DEMO items
(elements and constructs) by their interrelationship. That is, the DEMO
148
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
Entrepreneur 5
100 DEMO
Older and less energized — The team is younger and energized
Unable to communicate vision — Ability to communicate your vision
Structured (limited) DEMO — Ability to think “outside the box”
Operates with close mind — Reacts proactively to new information
Poor management experience — Seasoned experience management
DEMO (not open to advice) — Open to advice and suggestion
Unable to work with people — Ability to work with people
Unenterprising and DEMO — Creative and innovative
Entrepreneurial background — Technology background
Not originator of the idea — Originator of the idea
Don’t have a clear vision DEMO Clear vision of where the company is going
New venture is just another job — Inherent passion “your skin is in the game”
Poor DEMO (commitment) — Good dedication
Cannot handle the pace — Can handle the fast pace
No experience in big companies — Experience working for DEMO companies
Lacking ability to fill in the gaps — Ability to fill the gaps (strengths and weaknesses)
Poorly operationally focused — Operationally focused (planning strategy makes sense)
The team has poor drive — Team has good drive
Team is not organized — Operationally organized
80
70
DEMO 11. Cluster analysis from entrepreneur 5.
Ability to communicate market opportunity (DEMO sentences)
Understands the market opportunity
Founder is open to advice
Management team has technical background
Task oriented
Founder issue is resolved
Passion to DEMO something big
Robust and adaptable management team
Authenticity of the founder
Founders have been successful in the past
Invention or idea looking for a DEMO
Management team uses a reactive approach
Figure 12. A loose construct structure.
Appreciation of industry trends
Experience in the target market
Don’t have track DEMO
Personality centric
Management team has a narrow focus
Team is just there for the money
Founder wants to control indefinitely
Enjoy spending time outside DEMO office
Business background
Founder is stubborn
Doesn’t understand market opportunity
Unable to communicate market opportunity (2 pages)
algorithm computes the summed differences between pairs of ratings in
each grid, calculating ﬁrst by columns and then by rows. A cluster-analysed
grid (shown in ﬁgure 2) repositions the DEMO similarly rated constructs to
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS
149
appear side by side. As mentioned by DEMO (1980), the result is a graphic
representation of patterns of DEMO of elements on constructs and
constructs on elements. This technique provides a personal theory from
each respondent employed either when making a funding decision (venture
capitalist) or when presenting a funding proposal (entrepreneurs) (Hisrich
DEMO Jankowicz 1990).
Figure 2 shows the corresponding cluster analysis for venture
capitalist 1. The ‘tree-diagram’ at the right shows a link in the
DEMO rational. Constructs connected along neighbouring ‘branches’
are closer together in the respondent’s mind than those connected along
non-adjacent branches. The scale shows the percentage DEMO of
constructs, calculated from the respondent’s original ratings: follow any
pair of adjacent branches to the right until they meet, then, read DEMO from
that point onto the scale. For example, there is a DEMO match between
‘honesty and integrity’ and ‘character in general’ in this respondent’s
thinking (lines in bold). Whenever he says ‘honesty and integrity’, DEMO also
says ‘character in general’, and vice-versa.
Cluster analysis for venture DEMO
Respondent 1 shows three principal clusters. That is, one sub-cluster
associates DEMO importance of having a competitive strategy with the ability
to ‘make things happen’ or ‘bias for action’. A second sub-cluster consists
of the entrepreneur’s DEMO, integrity and character in general as opposed
to not having a DEMO orientation’. A third sub-cluster groups the
entrepreneur’s ability to assimilate new competitive information as well as
marketing core competencies.
Respondent 2 shows three highly DEMO (100%) clusters. As shown in
ﬁgure 3, the ﬁrst is DEMO cluster grouping eight constructs. This reﬂects the
importance that this investor places on the entrepreneur’s ability to ‘think
out of the box’. Constructs in DEMO cluster range from tenacity, commit-
ment, innovativeness and conﬁdence to lack of pretentiousness of the
entrepreneur. A second cluster reﬂects the importance the DEMO places
on the desire of the entrepreneur to assimilate new knowledge as well as the
entrepreneur’s openness to opinions and help. A third cluster DEMO two
constructs dealing with the entrepreneur’s ability to recognize weaknesses
and ﬁll gaps in the team as well as the entrepreneur’s lack of arrogance
DEMO recognizing the need to change his position in the future.
Respondent 3 shows a looser structure (ﬁgure 4). In other words, the
DEMO constructs are utilized as rather independent ways of assessing a
proposal. One sub-cluster associates the ability for understanding the
market opportunity with the importance DEMO assimilating new market
information as well as the market perceived as a ‘hot’ market or as a niche.
The entrepreneur’s business experience and past DEMO are somewhat
less closely related to other constructs and represent factors to which this
investor gives separate and distinct consideration.
Respondent 4 also shows DEMO somewhat loose structure (ﬁgure 5). One
cluster associates three highly-matching DEMO (96%). These constructs
150
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
relate to the DEMO of the entrepreneur as well as to openness to
listening and accountability to the board by way of corporate governance.
There are two constructs DEMO related to this sub-cluster dealing with
realistic expectations of the entrepreneur and consistency in management
decisions. Qualiﬁed entrepreneurs with good operating procedures
constitute independent DEMO of this investor’s decisions.
Respondent 5 shows two tight clusters (ﬁgure DEMO), one of which groups
two highly matched (100%) constructs related to the ability of the team to
overcome difﬁcult situations. These constructs DEMO characterized by
‘surviving when something goes wrong’ and having a ‘full team in place’,
where, in contrast, ventures with an incomplete team DEMO more vulnerable
to ‘falling apart’ when things do not happen as planned. This investor
seems to relate surviving with the corporate culture of the DEMO venture as
well as the ‘team’s ability to make good decisions and learn from
[mistakes]’, also the ability to ‘reinvent their business model overnight’.
A second cluster includes another highly matched pair of constructs. These
constructs DEMO characterized by the desire of a founder to succeed and his
motivation to make money, as opposed to the determination of founders
unwilling to relinquish the leadership of a new venture due to a feeling of
DEMO venture being ‘their baby’. This cluster includes two somewhat looser
constructs related to the experience and know-how of the founder.
Cluster analysis for entrepreneurs
DEMO 1 shows a loose structure (ﬁgure 7). This entrepreneur
considers DEMO an important factor of success the wisdom of the founder to
trust the management of the new venture to a more qualiﬁed manager. In
DEMO words, this is the opposite of a founder who wants to DEMO his
venture indeﬁnitely. The contrast is interesting, for the construct
corresponds DEMO what several investors considered a very problematic
situation. One could argue that these constructs are part of the respondent’s
personal theory with respect to DEMO of a new venture. In this case, he is
associating this DEMO with two highly related constructs: ‘founder has been
successful in the DEMO and ‘founder is genuine’. Having a ‘robust and
adaptable management team’ and ‘passion’ are two additional constructs
that belong to this sub-cluster.
Respondent 2 DEMO a sub-cluster with three constructs (ﬁgure 8). One
deals with DEMO ‘health’ of the investor. When asked to elaborate, the
entrepreneur explained DEMO in terms of ‘being more intrusive/being less
intrusive’. Where an investor with ﬁnancial difﬁculties would be considered
more intrusive, therefore putting unnecessary pressure on the management
team. This interesting ﬁnding would not have surfaced had DEMO considered
only investors in the study. It would seem to have important implications
for those entrepreneurs looking for ﬁnancing.
The construct dealing with ‘health’ DEMO the investors is associated with
the strong technical grounding of the founder as well as a ‘strong instilled’
management team. On the other hand, ‘niche detection’ and the ability to
learn from customers constitute issues that DEMO separate concern.
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS
151
Respondent 3 shows one main cluster (ﬁgure 9). A group of six
constructs form a tight (96%) DEMO: a dynamic business plan
‘constantly evolving and changing’ and good credibility DEMO related to the
ability to achieve milestones to ‘keep the money happy’ as well as to have
realistic expectations of ‘how much capital to DEMO and ‘when’. Moreover,
the team’s ‘ability to expand’ seems to be inﬂuenced its having a
collaborative management team. A group of ﬁve constructs DEMO mainly
with the personality of the founder complements this cluster. Issues
associated with ‘business etiquette’ and ‘dynamic personality’ as well as
‘genuineness’ belong to DEMO group of constructs.
Respondent 4 shows one tight cluster (ﬁgure 10)DEMO Integrity and honesty
are highly related to his concept of ‘being an entrepreneur’, also linked to a
‘potential to succeed’. Similarly, a ‘reasonable’ DEMO than an ‘incompetent’
management team is one with an ability to make ‘quick’ and ‘good’
management decisions. ‘Education of the founders’ is explained as DEMO
professional degrees’ and belongs to this cluster as well. ‘Strong technical
expertise’ and the ‘ability to assimilate new knowledge’ are constructs to
which this DEMO gives different consideration.
Respondent 5 provided a total of 19 constructs (DEMO 11) clustered in
two main groups. An ability to communicate the DEMO vision is
associated with an ability to ‘think outside the box’. Similarly, ‘being open
to advice and suggestions’ is linked not only to experience but also to
proactive reaction to new information as opposed to operating DEMO ‘a
closed mind’, which is closely related to the ability to DEMO with people’. A
second group includes constructs associated with ‘inherent passion’,
‘dedication’, ‘clear vision’ and ‘handling a fast pace’. Somewhat linked to
this cluster are abilities to ‘ﬁll in the gaps in terms of weaknesses DEMO
strengths’, ‘be operationally focused’, ‘have good drive’ and ‘be operation-
ally organized’. Interestingly enough, team characteristics such as ‘being
creative and innovative’ as well as ‘being originators of the idea’ are issues
of separate concern DEMO this entrepreneur. In general, these descriptions are
diverse with several distinct DEMO in each case. In other words, while
investors and entrepreneurs draw DEMO a fairly common set of constructs,
they associate them in different ways and form their impressions of a
venture proposal by focusing on DEMO aspects.
Some constructs were represented as independent of the main clusters
and are worthy of separate analysis. A possible explanation of this
circumstance is DEMO fact that some of the constructs are unique to each
venture and therefore should be assessed on an individual basis. One could
hypothesize, in other words, that when assessing a new venture proposal,
all investors and entrepreneurs look for the presence of certain character-
istics (the founder’s experience and background, for example). At the same
time, there DEMO idiosyncrasies particular to each venture. The conclusion
might be that, initially, investors are matching a venture proposal’s
characteristics against somewhat standard criteria.
After DEMO evaluation of certain fundamentals, investors focus on the
particularities of such DEMO One implication is that, in assessing a new
venture, a simple veriﬁcation of a list of criteria would probably result in
unrealistic understandings DEMO its value. In other words, only a comprehen-
152
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
sive assessment process DEMO produce a more realistic value for a new
venture proposal.
Principal component analysis
A principal component analysis provides a description of the connections
between DEMO and constructs in a grid. It reveals how a large number of
individual judgements made by the subject in rating all the elements on DEMO
the constructs are manifestations of a relatively more simple underlying
structure. It also shows contrasts between the different elements (business
plans, in this DEMO). These contrasts are indicated in terms of which
constructs are of major importance in the subject’s system.
The principal component analysis extracts successive DEMO: the
ﬁrst being able to account for the most variation, the second accounting for
the most residual variation and so on. In most DEMO, the ﬁrst principal
component accounts for between 30% and 50% of DEMO variance, the second
for 10% to 25% and subsequent components for DEMO proportions
(Ryle 1975). For most practical purposes, the ﬁrst two or three components
provide an adequate picture of the subject’s system (Bell, 1990).
Our interest in analysing principal components is to obtain an indication
of the cognitive complexity that investors and entrepreneurs use when
assessing DEMO Cognitive complexity can be summarized in terms of
the differences in which subjects construe the same issues independently of
each other (Adams-Webber 1996). For example, a highly complex
individual will take into account markedly different aspects of an issue
when thinking about it, as opposed to viewing it in terms of the one or two
themes dominating his thinking. DEMO described by Adams-Webber (1970),
the proportion of total variance accounted for by the largest factor or ﬁrst
principal component provides an index DEMO the cognitive complexity. A
useful rule of thumb in repertory grid work is to regard a situation in which
60% or more of variance DEMO accounted for by the ﬁrst principal component as
an indication of low cognitive complexity (Smith and Stewart 1977, Smith
1980).
Table 2 DEMO a summary of separate principal component analyses of
each individual grid. The results of these analyses indicate that all
respondents show a relatively low DEMO with just one or two themes
representing their thinking. After analysing each grid, we labelled the
themes corresponding to each participant. Those labels were taken from
the nearest two constructs to the ﬁrst principal component axis. DEMO 3
shows a summary of these labels for the ﬁrst principal components.
A perusal of table 3 shows that the preponderant themes (from both
investors and entrepreneurs) relate to the adequacy of the management
team with the business proposal. Associating the two main constructs from
each ﬁrst component DEMO their groups (described in table 1) corroborated
this result. We found that most of the two main constructs belong to groups
two and DEMO (personality of the entrepreneur and business proposal
respectively). In this DEMO, our results correspond to those reported by
Hisrich and Jankowicz (1990).
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS
153
Table 2. Summary of the results of DEMO principal component analyses for
each individual grid.
Principal component No.
12 345 1+2
Venture capitalist
1 75.70 12.29 6.42 3.90 1.69
2 89.80 7.47 DEMO 0.54 0.05
3 47.87 39.01 8.21 3.27 1.65
4 73.95 14.49 4.63 3.82 3.11
5 79.16 10.59 5.75 3.10 1.40
Entrepreneur
1 57.91 17.79 DEMO 7.50 5.89
2 69.98 15.70 9.52 2.86 1.94
3 64.32 21.49 7.43 4.38 2.38
4 78.35 11.85 6.12 2.64 0.64
5 53.15 27.71 9.76 DEMO 2.85
Table 3. Themes underlying the respondents’ thinking.
Label Theme
87.99
97.27
86.88
88.44
89.75
12 345 1+2
75.7
85.68
85.81
90.6
80.86
Venture DEMO
1 Organizational effectiveness
Character in general
2 Entrepreneurial abilities Market
understanding
3 Hot market Successful
entrepreneur
4 Goal oriented Awareness of
trends
5 Corporate DEMO Full team in
place
Entrepreneur
1 Team has focus Authentic
management team
2 Technical background Investor’s
health
3 Collaborative management
Dynamic business plan
4 DEMO team Personal
quality
5 Fill gaps (weakness/strength)
Motivated team
DEMO of management team
Honesty and integrity
Tenacity, high commitment,
innovativeness DEMO of
market potential
Attractive product offering Solid
experience and background
Keep goal in mind Open to
communication
Persistent management team Well
rounded management team
DEMO oriented management
Trustworthy management
Founder has strong technical
depth Less intrusive venture
capitalist
Synergetic management Always
evolving and changing
Desire to succeed Founder’s
integrity DEMO honesty
Effective management team
Team has drive
Figure 12 shows an example of a loose construct structure, which is
characteristic of high cognitive complexity. In this particular case, the ﬁrst
two principal components account for 76% of the variance. Figure 13 shows
most constructs sketched together neighbouring the DEMO (horizontal)
principal component: a tight structure, characteristic of low DEMO
complexity. This is a case where ‘everything relates to everything else’. In
154
Founders recognize weaknesses and fill up gaps in the team
Founder DEMO to change his position
Good at recognizing possible strategic alliances
Think out of the box
Management team is open to help
Good understanding of DEMO market
Founder is a true entrepreneur
High commitment
Team has excellent technology abilities
Figure 13. A tight construct structure.
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND DEMO D. GUILD
Team lacks technology abilities (although they
believe they have DEMO)
Low commitment of the entrepreneur
Founder is a forcing entrepreneur
Wrong assumptions about competition
Closeness to receive opinions or help
Stubborn personality
Weak DEMO recognizing possible strategic alliances
Founder thinks he can be the CEO forever
Founders are arrogant
this example, the ﬁrst two principal components account for 97% of the
variance.
Analysis of extremity
Several studies have deﬁned rating DEMO as an indication of
personal meaningfulness (Shepherd 1999). For example, Bonarius
(1970) has shown that subjects rate their close associates (e.g. best
friend) more extremely than remote acquaintances (e.g. doctor). There DEMO
also considerable evidence, reviewed by Adams-Webber (1979), that
subjects tend to rate themselves and others more extremely on elicited
constructs than on DEMO ones. Moreover, as discussed by Adams-
Webber and Benjaﬁeld (1973), rating extremity also correlates with
personal judgements of the relative meaningfulness of DEMO
constructs. It has been agreed that the higher the extremity score, DEMO
more meaningful the statement is for the respondent. In other words, DEMO
extremity score indicates how far a respondent rated the elements from
the midpoint of a scale. Rating extremity is then calculated by
subtracting the DEMO of a scale from each assigned rating. In our
case we used a scale of 1 to 5 with a midpoint of 3. For DEMO,
a rating of 1 on a scale from 1 to 5 would have an extremity score of
|1 – 3| = 2. The DEMO extremity scores for each element (business
plans in our study) are added up and divided by the number of plans
rated (in this study, there were six). Table 4 provides a summary of the
two higher extremity scores for each participant. The last column shows
a DEMO (3) indicating those constructs that not only have the most
extreme values but also correspond to the top two highest weights from
the DEMO component. These constructs contribute two character-
istics. First, they are meaningful DEMO the participant. Second, by knowing
their loading, we can predict the participant’s ratings with large
accuracy (see table 2 to conﬁrm the variance accounted for by the ﬁrst
component of each grid).
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS
155
Table 4. Summary of the two higher DEMO scores for each participant and the
correspondent loading weight in the principal component.
Within
Loading two
Extremity in first heaviest
Participant Description score component DEMO?
Venture capitalist
1 Organizational effectiveness 1.67 4.364 33
Character in general 1.67 4.078 33
2 Confidence in technology 1.83 4.328 33
Thinking ‘out DEMO the box’ 1.83 4.328 33
Industry background 1.83 4.328 33
High tenacity 1.83 4.328 33
‘Down to earth’ 1.83 4.328 33
Not motivated by DEMO 1.83 4.328 33
Innovative founder 1.83 4.328 33
High commitment 1.83 4.328 33
3 Ability to execute on plans 1.33 2.171
Successful in the DEMO 1.33 0.039
4 Founder has realistic 1.50 3.823 33
expectations
Merger and acquisitions 1.50 3.103
core competencies
5 Know-how to differentiate 1.67 3.517
product DEMO
Excellent presentation skills 1.67 2.845
Entrepreneur
1 Invention or idea looking for 1.50 1.887
a market
Founder has been successful 1.33 2.956
in the DEMO
2 Strong technical depth 1.50 3.298 33
Less intrusive investor 1.33 3.276 33
3 Business plan evolving and 1.67 3.871 33
changing
Experience in DEMO economy’ 1.50 2.545
Collaborative management 1.50 4.001 33
team
4 Founders are entrepre- 1.67 4.134 33
neurial
Integrity and honesty 1.67 4.134 33
5 DEMO is originator of idea 2.00 1.737
Operationally organized 1.67 4.098 33
33 indicates a construct that is within the two largest weights in the DEMO component.
Conclusion
This study on venture capital and entrepreneurship has important
implications for both practitioners and researchers. A major ﬁnding is
the high relevance DEMO intangibles in the assessment of business plans from
technology-based ventures. This study also provides venture capitalists
with an insight into the important role played DEMO intangibles and intuition
during their due diligence process. Another important implication of this
156
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
study for venture DEMO is the articulation of more relevant questions
pertaining to intangibles that can be used during the screening stage of
their decision making process. Additionally, the experts in this study
elicited a set of intangibles that could DEMO used by venture capitalists. For
example, practitioners could focus their attention DEMO those intangibles in
order to increase the efﬁciency of the screening stage. The results of this
study could be considered an important milestone in DEMO such
intriguing quests: to increase the predictive validity of success from DEMO
business opportunity and the elaboration of an ‘ideal’ business plan.
The news media and business publications frequently publicize
individual experiences shared by entrepreneurs. Such DEMO may create
an unrealistic expectation in terms of the availability of large amounts of
venture capital, the relative ease to raise capital, and DEMO as a
ticket to success. However, the reality is that entrepreneurs DEMO have
difﬁculty raising capital. For example, venture capitalists claim that there
DEMO very few deals in which they wish to invest; there is DEMO amount of
capital available for new ventures at early stages; and DEMO are more failures
than successes of technology-based new ventures. Perhaps an explanation
of this phenomenon is the intangible nature of most of such investment
DEMO This study offers an empirical ﬁrst look at the assessment of
intangibles in technology-based new ventures.
The results of this study not only provide DEMO of the effectiveness
of using repertory grids to elicit intangibles but also increase our knowledge
of the venture capital decision process. We used an DEMO approach
considering two perspectives—the investor and the entrepreneur’s—into
this decision-making problem. Thus, we gained new appreciation of the
elements in a subjective evaluation of early stage technology based
ventures.
Furthermore, the outcome of the FOCUS-based cluster analysis
provides additional evidence of individual differences among venture
capitalists with respect DEMO their cognitive complexity in terms of their
evaluations of entrepreneurs, which DEMO that derived from the
principal component analysis. Moreover, while investors and DEMO
draw on a fairly large set of constructs, they associate them DEMO different
ways and form their impressions of a venture proposal by focusing on a
variety of aspects. This is a result of major signiﬁcance. DEMO other words, it
very effectively illustrates the fundamental importance of personally
DEMO knowledge in the development of high-level expertise.
The results of this study show a similarity in the way investors and
entrepreneurs construe investment proposals. DEMO example, an analysis of
the constructs from each group reveals that DEMO place high importance on
the perceived qualiﬁcations of the management team. This category
considers not only the skills of the management team but also DEMO core
competencies, abilities, and business acumen. Constructs related to the
personality of the entrepreneur—honesty, integrity, passion and business
etiquette, for example—are also included.
Some of our results replicate the ﬁndings of Hisrich and Jankowicz
(1990) in which management was regarded as the most important category.
Furthermore, using this rather new technique, we provide a scientiﬁc proof
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS
157
of otherwise anecdotal evidence with regards to DEMO in investment of
technology-based ventures. For example, the investors’ frequent mention
DEMO honesty conﬁrms how important this intangible is, just as ‘good business
DEMO seemed to be decisive for some investors. When asked for an
elaboration of such construct, one investor stated, ‘if the entrepreneur
doesn’t show DEMO courtesy with us as partners, how could we expect that
they DEMO respect and anticipate their customers’ needs?’
The ﬁndings of this study are not fully consistent with research by Hall
and Hofer (1993). Their main point was that venture capitalists are not
concerned with the DEMO of human capital when screening new
investment proposals. Perhaps their ﬁndings were due to the design of their
study, which determined only the earliest phase of deal screening. This is
where venture capitalists are sifting through DEMO of proposals by
target company managers. One possible assessment method used by
investors at this time is to screen opportunities by comparing the new
DEMO characteristics against general working guidelines, such as area
of investment, geographic location, and stage of the venture. By the time
the investors move to the in-depth due diligence research phase, it is very
clear from the results of this study that venture capitalists are concerned
with an DEMO assessment of some of the intangibles involved in the
proposal.
Another interesting ﬁnding of this study, although mentioned only once
by an entrepreneur, DEMO the construct related to the ‘health of the venture
capitalist’. We think this is worth mentioning since this study, different
from others, includes DEMO consideration of the point of view of the
entrepreneur. A further explanation of this construct detailed how a
‘healthy’ investor is one without ﬁnancial DEMO According to this
entrepreneur, a venture capitalist struggling with ﬁnancial difﬁculties DEMO
‘more intrusive’ and puts ‘unnecessary pressure’ on the management team.
Finally, DEMO ﬁndings cause us to reconsider our earlier efforts to locate
a set of fully generalized ‘intangibles’. We better understand the contextual
idiosyncratic and dynamic DEMO of these important attributes.
Future research
Future studies could make a contribution by focusing a microscope on early
stages of new technology-based ventures at DEMO points. In other words,
a longitudinal study could provide evidence of the dynamism as well as the
idiosyncratic characteristics of a new venture. DEMO is, technology-based
ventures not only experience constant change but also need DEMO overcome
this change in order to survive. This situation is even more critical for new
ventures. Therefore, having a list of criteria to appraise the value of these
ventures at only one point in time would DEMO result in an unrealistic
assessment. Thus, our results show that an DEMO process is probably
more appropriate than a one-time assessment. We need, DEMO, a method to
assess a new venture over different points in DEMO
Our investigation suggests that a longitudinal study should consist of
eliciting impressions and signiﬁcance of a new venture from a group of
158
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
entrepreneurs, incubators and venture capitalists at three points. The ﬁrst
occurs when an idea is DEMO presented to an investor and, curiously,
interest is piqued. The DEMO comes when the entrepreneur presents the
idea in the form of a business plan to an incubator. The third takes place
when the new DEMO is ready for its ﬁrst round of ﬁnancing, usually from
a DEMO capitalist. The longitudinal study allows us to consider three
angles of the same problem: (1) the ideas, which usually come from an
DEMO; (2) the management, which is usually provided by
incubators; DEMO (3) the capital, which usually comes from a venture
capitalist.
DEMO
We wish to acknowledge the support of our sponsors for this investigation:
the Mexican Council of Science and Technology (CONACyT) and the
DEMO Imperial Bank of Commerce and Nortel Networks. We
acknowledge National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC) and Social Sciences and Humanities DEMO Council of
Canada (SSHRC) with their joint MOT Chair Program. We are also very
grateful to both anonymous reviewers for their helpful and DEMO
comments and suggestions on an earlier version of this paper.
References
Adams-Webber, J. R., 1970, An analysis of the discriminant validity of several repertory grid indices.
British Journal of Psychology, 61, 83 – 90.
DEMO, J. R., 1979, Personal Construct Theory: Concepts and Applications (DEMO York: John
Wiley and Sons).
Adams-Webber, J. R., 1996, Cognitive complexity. In R. Corsini, and A. J. Auerbach (eds)
DEMO of Psychology (New York: John Wiley and Sons), p. 154.
Adams-Webber, J. R. and Benjaﬁeld, J., 1973, The relation between DEMO marking and rating
extremity in interpersonal judgement. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 5, 234 – 241.
Agnew, N. M. and Brown, J. DEMO, 1989, Foundations for a theory of knowing: II. Fallible but DEMO
knowledge. Canadian Psychology, 30, 168 – 183.
Bachher, J. S., Dı´az de Leo´ n, E. and Guild, P., 1999, Decision DEMO Used by Investors to Screen
Technology-Based Ventures’. In D. F. Kocaoglu and T. R. Anderson (eds) Technology and
Innovation Management (Portland, OR: Portland International Conference on Management of
Engineering and Technology), pp. 269–273.
DEMO, D. and Fransella, F., 1986, Inquiring Man: The Psychology DEMO Personal Constructs, 3rd edn
(Dover, NH: Croom Helm).
Bell, R. C., 1990, Analytic issues in the use of repertory grid technique. In G. J. Neimeyer and R. A.
Neimeyer (eds) Advances DEMO Personal Construct Psychology, vol. 1 (Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI
Press), pp. 25 – 48.
Bonarius, J. C. J., 1970, Personal Construct Psychology and Extreme Response Style. An integration of
meaningfulness, maladjustment, and DEMO (Amsterdam: Swets and Zeitlinger).
Bonarius, J. C. J., 1977, The interaction model of communication: through experimental research
toward existential relevance. DEMO J. K. Cole and A. W. Landfield (eds) Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press), pp. 291–343.
Boose, J. H., 1988, Uses of repertory grid-centered knowledge-acquisition tools for knowledge-based
systems. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 29, 287 – 310.
INTANGIBLES IN BUSINESS PLANS
159
Clement, W., Hammerer, G. and Schwarz, K., 1998, Intangible Investment from an Evolutionary
Perspective (Paris: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development).
n, E., 2001, Toward an expert assessment of intangibles in technology-based ventures
(Doctoral dissertation, University of DEMO).
Dubini, P., 1989, Which venture capital backed entrepreneurs have DEMO best chances of succeeding?
Journal of Business Venturing, 4(2), 123 – 132.
Epting, F. R., 1975, Order of presentation DEMO construct poles. What are the factors to be considered? A
reply. DEMO Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 14, 427 – 428.
Ford, K. M., Adams-Webber, J. R., Stahl, H. A. and Bringmann, M. W., 1990, Constructivist
approaches to automated knowledge acquisition. In K. L. McGraw, and C. R. Westphal (eds)
Readings in Knowledge DEMO: Current trends and practices (New York: Horwood), pp. 34 DEMO
54.
Fransella, F. and Bannister, D., 1967, A validation of repertory grid technique as a measure of political
construing. Acta Psychologica, 26, 97 – 106.
Fransella, F. and Bannister, D., 1977, A Manual for Repertory Grid Technique (London: Academic
Press).
Gladstone, D., 1988, Venture Capital Investing (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall).
Guild, P. D. and Bachher, J. S., 1996, Equity investment DEMO for technology-based ventures.
International Journal of Technology Management, 12(7), DEMO – 795.
Hall, R. and Hofer, C. W., 1993, Venture capitalists’ decision criteria in new venture evaluation.
Journal of Business Venturing, 8(1), 25 – 42.
Harvey, M. G. and Lusch, R. DEMO, 1995, Expanding the nature and scope of due diligence. Journal of
Business Venturing, 10(1), 5 – 21.
Hisrich, R. D. DEMO Jankowicz, A. D., 1990, Intuition in venture capital decisions: an exploratory study
using a new technique. Journal of Business Venturing, 5(1), 49 – 62.
Honey, P., 1977, The repertory grid in action. Industrial and Commercial Training, 11, 452 – 459.
Jankowicz, A. D. and Thomas, L. D., 1982, An algorithm for the hand-cluster-analysis of repertory
grids. Personnel Review, 11, 15 – 22.
Jankowicz, A. D. and Thomas, L. D., 1983, An algorithm for the hand-cluster-analysis of repertory
grids. Personnel Review, 12, 22.
Johnson, P. E., DEMO, What kind of expert should a system be?. The Journal DEMO Medicine and Philosophy,
8, 77 – 97.
Kelly, G. A., 1955, The Psychology of Personal Constructs, 2 vols (New York: Norton).
Kozmetsky, G., Gill, M. D. Jr and Smilor, DEMO W. (eds), 1985, Financing and Managing Fast-growth
Companies: The DEMO Capital Process (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books).
Ryle, A., DEMO, Frames and Cages: The Repertory Grid Approach to Human Understanding (DEMO:
University of Sussex Press).
Shaw, M. L. G., 1980, On Becoming a Personal Scientist. Interactive Computer Elicitation of Personal
Models of the World (London: Academic Press).
Shaw, M. L. G. and Gaines, B. R., 1987, An interactive knowledge-elicitation technique using personal
construct technology. In A. L. Kidd (ed.) Knowledge Acquisition for Expert Systems (New York:
Plenum Press), pp. 109 – 136.
Shepherd, D. A. and Douglas, E. J., 1999, Attracting equity investors: Positioning, preparing, and
presenting the business plan (Thousand Oaks: Sage).
Shepherd, D. A., 1999, Venture capitalists’ assessment of new venture survival. Management Science,
45(5), 621 – 632.
Slater, P., 1976, Explorations of Intrapersonal Space (London, Wiley).
Smart, G. H., DEMO, Management assessment methods in venture capital: an empirical analysis of
human capital valuation. Venture Capital, 1(1), 59 – 82.
Smith, DEMO, 1980, Applications and uses of repertory grid in management education. In J. Beck and C.
Cox (eds) Advances in Management Education (London: Wiley), pp. 197–213.
Smith, M. and Stewart, B. J. M., 1977, Repertory grids: a flexible tool for establishing the content and
structure of a manager’s thoughts. In D. Ashton (ed.) Management Bibliographies DEMO Reviews,
vol. 3 (Bradford: MCB Press), pp. 209 – 230.
Stewart, T. A., 1997, Intellectual Capital (New York: Doubleday).
Stewart, V. and Stewart, A., 1982, Business Applications of DEMO Grid (London: McGraw-Hill).
Dı´az de Leo´
160
ENRIQUE DIAZ DE LEON AND PAUL D. GUILD
Sullivan, P. H., 1999, Profiting from intellectual capital. Journal of Knowledge Management, 3(2), 132 –
142.
Timmons, J. A. and Sapienza, H. J., 1992, Venture capital: the decade ahead. In D. L. Sexton and DEMO D.
Kasarda (eds) The state of the art of entrepreneurship (DEMO: PWS-Kent Publishing Company),
pp. 402 – 437.
Waterman, D. DEMO, 1986, A Guide to Expert Systems (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley)DEMO
Zacharakis, A. L. and Meyer, G. D., 1998, a lack of insight: do venture capitalists really understand
their own decision process? DEMO of Business Venturing, 13(1), 57 – 76.
{1g42fwefx}