Does Decision Process Matter? A Study of Strategic Decision-Making Effectiveness
Author(s): James W. Dean, Jr. and Mark P. Sharfman
Source: The DEMO of Management Journal, Vol. 39, No. 2 (Apr., 1996), pp. 368-396
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://DEMO/stable/256784
Accessed: 18/04/2009 09:36
Your use of DEMO JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
DEMO have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue DEMO a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use DEMO in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please DEMO the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aom.
Each copy DEMO any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR DEMO a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and DEMO materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform DEMO
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy
of Management Journal.
http://www.jstor.org
? Academy of Management Journal
1996, Vol. 39, No. 2, 368-396.
DOES DECISION PROCESS MATTER?
A STUDY OF STRATEGIC DECISION-
MAKING EFFECTIVENESS
DEMO W. DEAN, JR.
University of Cincinnati
MARK P. SHARFMAN
University of DEMO
This study examined whether strategic decision-making processes are
related to decision effectiveness, using a longitudinal field study design.
We studied 52 decisions in 24 companies to determine if procedural
rationality and political behavior influence decision success, controlling
for the favorability of the environment and decision implementation.
Our results DEMO that decision-making processes are indeed related
to decision success. Results are discussed in terms of the importance
of strategic choice in organizations.
Strategic decision DEMO has long been a topic of great interest in both
organization theory and strategic management. Although many studies (e.g.,
Hart, 1992; Quinn, 1980) have described and explained strategic decision mak-
ing (SDM), there is limited evidence that strategic decision-making processes
influence decisions' effectiveness-that is, the extent to which they result in
desired outcomes (Eisenhardt & DEMO, 1992). This paper explores the ques-
tion of whether the DEMO of strategic decisions depends on the steps manag-
ers use to make them (cf. Hitt & Tyler, 1991). This question is fundamental DEMO
organization theory, as strategic decision making is a key element of DEMO
ment-centered conceptions of organizations (Astley & Van de Ven, 1983).
Moreover, the assumption that strategic outcomes stem from managerial ac-
tions is the very raison d'etre of the field of strategic management.
Research DEMO the individual level has linked cognitive processes to deci-
sion outcomes (DEMO, Bazerman, 1990). For example, decisions suffer if people
use DEMO anchors (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974) or try to justify previous
DEMO (Staw, 1981). Group decision-making processes also influence perfor-
mance (DEMO, 1986; Hackman, 1991). Janis (1982) demonstrated how pro-
DEMO such as rationalization threaten decision success, and Delbecq, Van de
Ven, and Gustafson (1975) used nominal group methods to improve decision-
making performance.
We would like to thank Terry Amburgey, Sidney Barton, James DEMO, Charles Snow,
James Thomas, Ann Welsh, and this journal'DEMO reviewers for their helpful comments on earlier
drafts of this article.
368
1996
Dean and Sharfman
369
The link between strategic decision processes and DEMO has not
yet, however, been so convincingly demonstrated, and substantial DEMO
in the literature has focused on the question of whether managerial choice
processes matter (e.g., Hitt & Tyler, 1991). The argument that they do rests
on two assumptions: (1) that different processes lead to different choices,
which is to say that SDM processes influence DEMO choices organizations make,
and (2) that different choices lead to different outcomes-that all choices
are not equally good. For the SDM process-effectiveness DEMO to exist, both
assumptions must be true (see Figure 1).
The first assumption is that decision processes are related to strategic
choices. DEMO this assumption may appear intuitively obvious, it should
be seen in DEMO of the observation that environmental constraints play a role
in determining choices and thus reduce the importance of choice processes
(e.g., Aldrich, 1979; Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978). Many scholars have argued,
however, that even in the context of constraints, managers retain a substan-
tial degree of control over strategic choices (e.g., Child, 1972; Miles, 1982).
One argument made in favor of this position is that DEMO managers make
very poor strategic choices, with devastating consequences for their DEMO,
while others in very similar circumstances make much better choices (DEMO,
Bourgeois, 1984). Such variation could not exist if constraints DEMO were
driving strategic decisions. Indeed, the likelihood that managers will make
DEMO choices may well be a function of the decision process followed.
The second assumption underlying the purported relationship between
strategic decision-making processes and effectiveness DEMO that choices relate
to outcomes. Once again, there can be little DEMO that external forces also
influence SDM effectiveness (Hitt & Tyler, 1991; Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978).
Changes in competitor strategies or customer DEMO can turn strategic coups
into disasters, or vice versa. But it DEMO unlikely that the influence of
external forces eliminates the impact of strategic choice on effectiveness, as
it is hard to imagine a decision in which all potential choices will be equally
successful or unsuccessful. Making or DEMO a potential acquisition?
Remaining in or exiting from an industry? DEMO processes that allow decision
FIGURE 1
Assumptions Underlying the Strategic Decision-Making
Process-Effectiveness Relationship
Variation in
SDM processes
-1
Different
strategic
choices
2
Variation in
DEMO
370
Academy of Management Journal
April
makers to accurately anticipate external factors DEMO make choices in light of
these factors should be more successful than those that do not do so.
Thus, our two assumptions appear plausible, which suggests that it is
reasonable to expect SDM processes to influence strategic decision effective-
ness. More specifically, the role of managerial choice appears to be one of
attempting to identify viable courses of action in DEMO face of environmental
constraints (Burgelman, 1991; Hitt & Tyler, 1991; Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978).
As Aldrich (1979: 160) indicated, however, the importance of managerial
decisions in determining organizational outcomes is DEMO an empirical
question. In this spirit, let us examine the empirical DEMO on the connec-
tion between SDM processes and effectiveness.
STRATEGIC DECISION-MAKING EFFECTIVENESS
The largest body of empirical literature on this topic deals with strategic
DEMO, which is generally not explicitly portrayed as decision making
(e.g., DEMO, Venkatraman, & Camillus, 1986; Robinson & Pearce; 1983).
DEMO literature demonstrates relationships between aspects of strategic plan-
ning and firm performance. Although some studies have found support for
such relationships, this literature has often been criticized on methodological
grounds (e.g., Boyd, 1991). In particular, the direction of causality between
strategic planning and organizational performance (DEMO, 1982) and
the failure to take contextual influences into account (DEMO, Freeman &
Robinson, 1987) have been called into question.
A second stream of research deals with the impact of structured conflict
on DEMO Two techniques-devil's advocacy (Cosier & Rechner, 1985)
and dialectical inquiry (Mason & Mitroff, 1981)-have been found to result
in DEMO decisions than consensus methods (Schwenk, 1988). But studies in
this vein do not demonstrate that, despite environmental forces, SDM pro-
cesses DEMO decision success. Most have been done in the laboratory,
where environmental factors are not an issue, and the few field studies
that have been done have not attempted to assess actual decision outcomes
(Schweiger, DEMO, & Rechner, 1989).
Fredrickson and his colleagues (Fredrickson, 1984; Fredrickson &
Iaquinto, 1989; Fredrickson & Mitchell, 1984) also DEMO the impact
of SDM methods. This research has looked at prototypical (DEMO by re-
sponse to a scenario) rather than actual decision-making processes DEMO re-
lated them to firm performance rather than to specific decision outcomes.
These studies found that the comprehensiveness of SDM processes is nega-
tively DEMO to performance in an unstable industry (Fredrickson & Mitchell,
1984) and positively related to performance in a stable industry (Fredrickson,
1984). Fredrickson and Iaquinto (1989) replicated these findings in a longitu-
DEMO study.
Finally, Eisenhardt and Bourgeois conducted several studies on decision
making DEMO high-velocity environments, specifically, in eight micro-
computer firms. The first study linked a number of aspects of the SDM pro-
cess, including procedural rationality and delegation, to firm performance
1996
Dean and Sharfman
371
(Bourgeois & Eisenhardt, 1988). In DEMO second study, political behavior within
top management teams was found to DEMO to poor firm performance (Eisen-
hardt & Bourgeois, 1988). In the third study (Eisenhardt, 1989; cf. Judge &
Miller, 1991), fast strategic decision making was related to both firm perfor-
mance DEMO decision performance, measured by management team members'
support of the DEMO and by whether the decision was implemented and
similar decisions subsequently made.
These studies all suggest some relationship between SDM processes and
decision effectiveness. DEMO their findings as a whole, however, one
would be reluctant to conclude that a relationship between decision process
and effectiveness has been clearly DEMO, for at least two reasons. First,
the theories tested in DEMO literature have generally not focused on decision
effectiveness per se (Eisenhardt, 1989), but rather, on overall firm perfor-
mance. This focus is problematic because firm performance is a function of
a diverse array of DEMO, which may mask the effect of decision processes.
Also, firm performance may influence as well as be influenced by decision-
making processes. For DEMO, successful firms may have resources that
allow them to make decisions DEMO (Fredrickson & Mitchell, 1984).
Second, and perhaps more important, the strategic decision effectiveness
models tested in these studies have not incorporated DEMO role of the environ-
ment. The necessity of doing so stems from the theoretical discussion above,
which notes that the contexts in which DEMO decision processes operate
often play a role in shaping their outcomes. Along these lines, Romanelli
and Tushman concluded from a study that "environments DEMO strategic
choice may interactively determine courses of organizational evolution"
(1986: 618). Burgelman (1991) argued for studies of strategic decision-making
processes DEMO differing environmental conditions. Such studies have thus
far been slow to appear.
In summary, the theoretical literature suggests that both decision pro-
cesses and environmental factors shape strategic decision effectiveness. To
date, however, empirical studies DEMO not provided a conclusive test of the
influence of decision processes in the context of environmental forces. In
the next section, we describe a model of SDM effectiveness that takes environ-
mental factors into account. We DEMO describe the study we conducted to
test this model.
A MODEL OF STRATEGIC DECISION-MAKING EFFECTIVENESS
In view of our discussion above, it is clearly necessary that we frame
our model at the decision level of analysis, rather than at the overall firm-
performance level. Doing so avoids the DEMO of ambiguity of causal order-
ing-the question of whether success is the cause or the effect of the decision
process-that would accompany the choice DEMO firm performance as a focus.
Our choice of a decision-level focus also provides for a tight link between
the decision process and its outcome, which is necessary in light of the many
exogenous effects on firm DEMO (Pearce et al., 1987).
372
Academy of Management Journal
April
The focus of our model is DEMO decision effectiveness, defined as the
extent to which a decision achieves DEMO objectives established by management
at the time it is made. Effectiveness as perceived by external constituencies
may of course differ from management's perceptions (Friedlander & Pickle,
1968). As our intent, however, was DEMO examine managers' capacity to influ-
ence organizational outcomes through strategic choice, our conceptualization
of effectiveness had to be based on their goals. Examining DEMO relationship
between SDM processes and an external constituency's perception of effec-
tiveness could be confounded by differences in objectives.
Finally, although there is no inherent reason why decision effectiveness
must be conceptualized in terms of DEMO established at the time decisions
are made (March & Olsen, 1976), it seems appropriate to do so, as managers'
aspirations may change as decision outcomes become clear (March & Simon,
1958). Relating decision processes made at one time to goal statements that
have DEMO revised at a later time can introduce an element of self-serving
bias into a study.
Decision Process Constructs
An important issue in developing a DEMO of SDM effectiveness is the
selection of the constructs used to represent the strategic decision-making
process. We used three criteria in making this choice. DEMO, the constructs
must be central to the decision-making literature. Using constructs DEMO
to the literature would not constitute a fair test of the research question,
as important facets of the SDM process might be overlooked. DEMO, the
constructs must be logically and empirically distinct. Third, they must be
theoretically consistent with our conception of strategic decision processes
as taking DEMO in the context of environmental constraints and having an
impact through the choices to which they lead.
Two concepts-procedural rationality and politics-easily meet these
DEMO These constructs have clearly played central roles in the organiza-
tional decision-making literature (e.g., Allison, 1971; Carter, 1971; Cyert &
March, 1963; Eisenhardt & Bourgeois, 1988; Eisenhardt & Zbaracki, 1992;
Fredrickson & Iaquinto, 1989; Hart, 1992; March & Simon, 1958; Mintzberg,
Raisinghani, & Theoret, 1976; Pettigrew, 1973; Pfeffer, 1981). In fact,
Eisenhardt and Zbaracki (1992) specifically recommended DEMO the out-
comes of decisions that vary in terms of rationality and politics. If decision
process as conceived in the literature actually influences SDM DEMO,
these constructs should capture its influence.
Our second criterion was that the constructs chosen be logically and
empirically distinct, with one not a subset or opposite of the other. Recent
research has demonstrated that procedural DEMO and politics are distinct
dimensions of the strategic decision-making process (Dean & Sharfman,
1993a). Decision processes thus may be rational but not political, political
but not rational, both rational and political, or neither. Thus, our choice of
constructs meets this criterion as well.
1996
Dean and Sharfman
373
Our third criterion was that the constructs DEMO be theoretically consis-
tent with the conception of the SDM process described above. We argued
above (see Figure 1) that decision processes influence DEMO effectiveness
by influencing choices made amidst constraints. Pfeffer and Salancik argued
that, for a decision to be successful, "Information about the environment
and possible consequences of alternative actions must be acquired and pro-
cessed" (DEMO: 266). Therefore, in order for a decision process to result in
an effective choice, it must be (1) oriented toward achieving appropriate
organizational goals, (2) based on accurate information linking various alter-
natives to these goals, and (3) based on an appreciation and understanding
of environmental constraints. The discussion below will make clear how the
DEMO we have chosen meet our criteria.
The first element in the model (see Figure 2) is procedural rationality,
defined as the extent DEMO which the decision process involves the collection
of information relevant to the decision and the reliance upon analysis of
this information in making the DEMO (Dean & Sharfman, 1993b). The term
"procedural" is used to focus on the decision-making process and to distin-
guish this construct DEMO more global conceptions of rationality that have
overtones of decision-maker omniscience (DEMO, 1978). In an earlier work
(Dean & Sharfman, 1993b: 588-589), we discussed the evolution of the ratio-
nality concept in DEMO, economics, and organization theory.
In view of the theoretical considerations listed above, we expected proce-
dural rationality to lead to strategic decision effectiveness. To begin with,
procedurally rational decisions are generally oriented toward organizational
DEMO, as it is difficult to mount extensive data collection and analysis DEMO
in the service of goals with little legitimacy (Langley, 1989). Hitt and Tyler
described rational strategic decision making as "a series of . . . analytical
processes whereby a set of objective criteria are DEMO to evaluate strategic
FIGURE 2
Strategic Decision-Making
Effectiveness Modela
a Dotted lines indicate control variables.
374 Academy of Management Journal April
alternatives" (1991: 329). This orientation toward organizational goals makes
it more likely that procedurally rational decision DEMO will be effective.
Rational decisions are also likely to involve relatively complete informa-
tion and knowledge of constraints, our second and third theoretical consider-
ations. Executives who collect extensive information before making decisions
will have more DEMO perceptions of environmental conditions, which has
been shown to relate to DEMO performance (Bourgeois, 1985). Perhaps this
relationship is based on managers' better identifying the set of environmen-
tally viable choices available to them.
Thus, it seems likely that managers who conduct and rely upon analysis
in making their choices-those who use more rational processes-will be
more likely DEMO develop effective plans for reconciling their organizations
with environmental reality. As Bourgeois and Eisenhardt put it, rational
processes allow people to "form theories DEMO which strategies will
succeed" (1988: 827). Our discussion is DEMO consistent with Pfeffer and
Salancik's portrayal of how a manager who is responsive to environmental
constraints "assesses the context, determines how to DEMO the organization
to meet the constraints of the context, and implements DEMO adaptation"
(1978: 265).
Although there is considerable research on the descriptive adequacy of
the rational model of decision making, evidence of the relationship between
rationality and decision-making effectiveness is very limited (Bell, DEMO, &
Tversky, 1988). Janis's (1989) case studies DEMO that public policy deci-
sions that used rational methods were more successful than those that did
not, and Bourgeois and Eisenhardt (1988) found that successful firms used
rational methods more than unsuccessful firms.
Hypothesis 1: Procedural rationality will be positively re-
lated to strategic decision-making effectiveness.
Political DEMO has long been recognized as an aspect of organizational
decision making (DEMO, Allison, 1971; Pettigrew, 1973). Two key ideas underlie
the political dimension of decision making. First, people in organizations
have differences in interests resulting from functional, hierarchical, profes-
sional, and personal factors (DEMO, Hickson, Butler, Cray, Mallory, & Wilson,
1986; Pettigrew, 1973). Second, people in organizations try to influence the
outcomes DEMO decisions, so that their own interests will be served, and they
do so by using a variety of political techniques (e.g., Bacharach & Lawler,
1980; Pfeffer, 1981).
From among several similar definitions of politics, we have chosen one
stated by Allen, Madison, Porter, Renwick, and Mayes, who saw politics
as "intentional acts of DEMO to enhance or protect the self-interest of
individuals or groups" (1979: 77). This definition, which captures both of
the core aspects DEMO the politics dimension, is similar to Pfeffer's conception
of politics DEMO "activities taken [to] use power and other resources to obtain
one'DEMO preferred outcomes in a situation in which there is uncertainty or
dissensus about choices" (1981: 7). It also parallels Bacharach and Lawler's
1996
Dean and Sharfman
375
definition of politics as "efforts of interest groups to influence decisions that
affect their positions in the organization" (DEMO: 79).
Given the theoretical considerations addressed above, we expected polit-
ical behavior in the strategic decision-making process to reduce the effective-
ness DEMO strategic decisions. First, we had argued that effective decisions must
be DEMO on organizational goals. Political decision processes, however, are
organized around the self-interests of individuals or groups (Pettigrew, 1973;
Pfeffer, 1981). If these interests are in conflict with those of the organization,
DEMO political activity will make it less likely that a decision will serve
organizational interests.
Second, effective decisions are based on complete and accurate informa-
tion about the likely relationship between choices and outcomes. Burgelman
argued that "an atmosphere in which strategic ideas can be freely champi-
oned and DEMO contested by anyone with relevant information . .. may be
a key factor in . . . generating viable organizational strategies" (1991: 252).
Based on this criterion, political behavior has the potential to undermine
effectiveness, because it often involves distortion (Cyert & March, 1963) DEMO
restriction (Pettigrew, 1973) of information flow. In other words, managers
who are pursuing their own interests are unlikely to tell the whole, unvar-
nished truth to one another. This behavior could lead managers to DEMO
choices based on inadequate or incorrect information, which could lead to
DEMO outcomes.
Third, effective decisions are based on a recognition and understanding
DEMO environmental constraints. Political processes are likely to undermine
effectiveness in two ways related to this consideration. First, in political
processes, attention is focused DEMO the organization, toward the mixture
of interests, power bases, and DEMO, rather than on what is feasible given
current environmental forces (Hickson et al., 1986). Decisions that result
from such processes are thus less likely to be informed about environmental
constraints. Second, political processes may introduce additional constraints
on possible solutions (Nutt, 1993). For example, a course of action that is
promising in light of the environment DEMO be eliminated because of the
opposition of a powerful individual. Thus, DEMO processes may rule out
viable choices, further reducing the likely success DEMO the strategic decisions
they produce.
In summary, political decision processes are DEMO oriented toward organi-
zational goals, are unlikely to produce complete and DEMO information,
and do not focus on environmental constraints. For all of these reasons, they
are likely to be associated with less effective decisions. Studies by Janis
(1989), Eisenhardt and Bourgeois (1988), Ford (1989), and Nutt (1993), as
well as an interpretive study by Voyer (1994), have suggested a link between
politics and unsuccessful decisions.
Hypothesis 2: Political behavior will be negatively related
to strategic decision-making effectiveness.
Our earlier discussion of the influence of the environment centered
on DEMO need for decision processes to deal effectively with environmental
376
Academy of Management Journal
April
constraints. A second aspect of the DEMO that plays a role in shaping
decision effectiveness is environmental instability, DEMO is the extent to
which market demand and technology are rapidly changing in a given indus-
try (Dess & Beard, 1984; Sharfman & Dean, 1991). When instability is high,
demand fluctuates dramatically, DEMO new technologies are introduced at a
rapid pace. When an industry is characterized by low instability, neither
demand nor technology changes much over time. We expected environmen-
tal instability to moderate the relationship between process rationality DEMO
decision effectiveness.
Because it is fundamentally a means of processing information about
environmental changes (Aharoni, Maimon, & Segev, 1978), procedural ratio-
DEMO will be most important in unstable environments (Aguilar, 1967). In
such environments, top managers who fail to systematically collect and
analyze information about environmental trends and constraints will be
much more likely to lead DEMO organizations in nonviable strategic directions.
Managers in stable settings will already have an experience-based under-
standing of their environment and thus will have less DEMO to engage in
information collection and analysis in order to make effective choices.
This prediction is consistent with Bourgeois and Eisenhardt's (1988)
finding that successful firms in high-velocity environments use rational meth-
ods. It DEMO bears out findings that successful firms are more likely than
unsuccessful firms to collect additional information when environments are
uncertain (Daft, Sormunen, & Parks, 1988) and to conduct more analysis
when environments are dynamic (Miller & Friesen, 1983). It is also consistent
with Priem, DEMO, and Kotulic's (1992) finding of a strong relationship
between DEMO processes and performance in highly turbulent environ-
ments, but not in DEMO turbulent environments.1
Hypothesis 3: Environmental instability will moderate the
relationship between DEMO rationality and decision-
This hypothesis appears to conflict with the results of the Fredrickson studies discussed
above (Fredrickson, 1984; Fredrickson & Iaquinto, DEMO; Fredrickson & Mitchell, 1984), which
found comprehensiveness to be positively correlated with firm performance in a stable environ-
ment (the paint and coatings industry) and negatively correlated with firm performance in an
unstable environment (the forest products industry). To the extent that procedural rationality
is equivalent to comprehensiveness, these findings are inconsistent with our hypothesis. But
although both constructs are derived from the rational model of decision making, they are quite
different. Procedural rationality focuses on the collection and use of DEMO in decision
making, which, as we have indicated, is more DEMO in unstable, changing environments.
Comprehensiveness is defined as "the extent to which an organization attempts to be exhaustive
or inclusive in making and DEMO strategic decisions" (Fredrickson & Mitchell, 1984:
40-42). Exhaustiveness DEMO making, and particularly in integrating, strategic decisions is an
aspect of comprehensiveness that would indeed be problematic in unstable industries. It would
slow DEMO making and force consistency among decisions made at different times and thus
(given a changing environment) in different circumstances. Exhaustiveness, however, is DEMO
included in the procedural rationality construct, so the inconsistency between our DEMO
and Fredrickson's results is not as substantial as it appears.
1996
Dean and Sharfman
377
making effectiveness; this relationship will be stronger in
unstable environments than in stable ones.
External Factors
As our discussion DEMO this point has indicated, our main concern in
this study was DEMO whether decision processes have any impact on
strategic decision effectiveness. We have discussed hypotheses concerning
two direct relationships between decision process and effectiveness and DEMO
moderated relationship. In order to more fully specify our model of strategic
decision effectiveness, however, we also needed to include both the impact
DEMO the environment and the impact of the implementation of strategic deci-
sions. In the absence of these constructs, we could not conduct a valid test
of the efficacy of SDM processes. These clearly should be considered DEMO
controls, however, external to the main focus of our work, DEMO the dotted lines
in Figure 2 indicate.
As discussed above, environmental DEMO outside the control of manag-
ers influence the success of strategic decisions (March & Olsen, 1976; Pfeffer &
Salancik, 1978). The list of factors that could influence decision effectiveness
is very long, but could include the economic health of a firm's customer
base, competitor behaviors, decisions by regulators, and new technology
development. Such factors may DEMO help or hurt performance. For example,
the success of a decision to acquire a small high-tech firm will be influenced
by the number DEMO other firms that enter the market and by whether emerging
industry standards support the firm's products.
Our literature review concluded with an observation DEMO the need to
control for such environmental factors in examining the impact of SDM
processes. We thus attempted to capture the influence of the DEMO
on SDM effectiveness with the construct environmental favorability, defined
as the DEMO to which environmental conditions subsequent to a decision
favor the choice that was made. When environmental favorability is defined
in this manner, it clearly functions as a control for our model, and therefore
no hypothesis is provided. It is included to accurately assess the effect of
SDM processes DEMO decision outcomes and to build a more complete model
of the forces that influence success.
This relationship between environmental favorability and effectiveness
is likely DEMO be moderated by the instability of the environment. In stable
environments, DEMO are well understood and can easily be factored
into decisions. In the paint and coatings industry, for instance, neither de-
mand nor competitors DEMO likely to change much, and industry standards
are long-established. A discontinuous DEMO would strongly affect the suc-
cess of decisions in the industry, DEMO such changes occur rarely in stable
industries. Compare this situation to that in the microcomputer industry,
where discontinuous changes occur regularly, making or breaking strategic
decisions, and with them entire organizations (Bourgeois & Eisenhardt, 1988).
In unstable industries, therefore, the potential for environmental conditions
DEMO influence the success of strategic decisions is much greater. This moderat-
378
Academy of Management Journal
April
ing relationship is included in our DEMO, but because it concerns a control
variable, no formal hypothesis is provided.
The final construct in the model is quality of decision implementation,DEMO
defined as the competence with which the steps are taken to execute the
strategic decision. To complete our model of strategic decision effectiveness,
DEMO needed to also include how well decisions are implemented, because of
DEMO potentially significant influence of implementation on the final effective-
ness of strategic decisions (Bourgeois & Brodwin, 1984; Nutt, 1993). If deci-
DEMO implementation is not controlled for in an empirical study of decision
effectiveness, it is impossible to know whether an unsuccessful decision
was poorly conceived (indicating a faulty decision process) or just poorly
implemented. Thus, quality of decision implementation must be included
in our model. Although the importance DEMO implementing strategic decisions
is generally appreciated, very little research has been DEMO on the topic
(Freeman & Boeker, 1984; Skivington & Daft, 1991).
Strategic decisions create waves of subdecisions and tasks (Mintzberg
et al., 1976) that must be performed effectively for a decision to DEMO successful.
For example, a firm that decides to introduce a new DEMO needs to select
product configurations and prices and to effectively manufacture and pro-
mote the product. Depending on the nature of the decision, successful imple-
mentation may involve communicating effectively with the workforce, the
financial community, or customers. It may involve negotiating favorable
terms with suppliers or partners. The successful implementation of some
strategic decisions may even require changes in DEMO structure and
culture (Bourgeois & Brodwin, 1984; Skivington & Daft, 1991). The particulars
of implementation vary widely from decision to decision, but virtually all
decisions require effective implementation to be successful.
In summary, we have predicted that successful strategic decisions will be
positively related to DEMO rationality and negatively related to political
behavior. We have also discussed the need to control for environmental
favorability and quality of implementation. Furthermore, the impact of proce-
dural rationality and environmental favorability are seen as being DEMO
by environmental instability.
Although the arguments in our model may appear relatively straightfor-
ward, they conflict to some degree with several prominent ideas in the litera-
ture. For example, the idea that managerial decision processes matter little
in the face of external constraints (e.g., Hannan & Freeman, 1989; Pfeffer &
Salancik, 1978), which is clearly in opposition to our model, has already
been discussed.
In terms of specific decision processes, organizations researchers have,
since at least Cyert and March (DEMO), come to regard rational decision making
as a kind of theoretical fiction, rather than as a measurable dimension of
SDM processes that may be associated with real strategic outcomes. Writers
such as Feldman and March (1981) and Langley (1989) have treated process
rationality as an essentially political and institutional phenomenon with
little connection to substantive outcomes. Politics, in contrast, has often been
1996
Dean and Sharfman
379
treated as a inevitable aspect of strategic DEMO (e.g., Pettigrew, 1973;
Pfeffer, 1981) that may be DEMO or even positive in its effects (e.g., Pfeffer,
1981; DEMO, 1988). Thus, our model represents several positions about which
there is substantial disagreement in the literature, and our empirical study
should shed some light on several important theoretical issues.
METHODS
In order to conduct DEMO valid test of the research questions, a study of
strategic decision-making DEMO would need to incorporate several
methodological features. First, it would have DEMO be a field study of real
strategic decisions, as laboratory studies DEMO ill-suited to assessing the impact
of SDM processes and environmental factors in complex organizational set-
tings. Second, the study should use a large enough sample of firms and
decisions to produce statistically valid conclusions. Third, the study should
be longitudinal, in order to provide enough time for the effects of the deci-
sions to be observed and to increase confidence DEMO the causal interpretation
of the findings (Chakravarthy & Doz, 1992; DEMO & Banbury, 1994). We have
incorporated these features into our DEMO
Research Sites
We selected firms for the study from manufacturing industries such as
electronics, steel, apparel, footwear, paint and coatings, and chemicals, as
defined by four-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes. These
industries were selected to ensure substantial variance in environmental
instability, and they included companies in both consumer and industrial
markets and in both growing and DEMO industries. Published databases,
including Standard & Poors Directory, were used DEMO identify firms in each
industry. We contacted the top manager of each business first by letter, then
by telephone, and later in person DEMO secure participation. A total of 24 firms
in 16 industries participated. Participating firms had annual sales ranging
from $1.5 million to over $3 billion DEMO numbers of employees ranging from
50 to 6,600.
Unit of Analysis
The unit of analysis is the strategic decision. We used decisions, rather
than organizations, as the unit because previous research (e.g., Hickson et
al., 1986) has demonstrated that decision processes within a given organiza-
DEMO often vary substantially. We selected the decisions to study in each firm
according to the following criteria. First, the decisions had to be defined by
the firm as strategic-as determining the overall direction of the firm (Quinn,
1980). Second, decisions had to be sufficiently recent that the firm as yet
knew little or nothing about their effectiveness but DEMO see clear outcomes
within one to two years.
Strategic decisions have been described as committing substantial re-
sources, setting precedents, and creating waves DEMO lesser decisions (Mintzberg
et al., 1976); as ill-structured, nonroutine, and complex (Schwenk, 1988); and
380
Academy of Management Journal
April
as substantial, unusual, and all-pervading (Hickson et al., 1986). Although
researchers have not reached consensus as to what constitutes a strategic
decision, managers had no trouble in identifying them. In this regard, it is
important to recognize that types of decisions that are clearly strategic in
one industry may be less so DEMO (Hickson et al., 1986). Table 1 summarizes
the types of strategic decisions in our sample, which are similar to the types
addressed by Mintzberg and colleagues (1976) and Hickson and colleagues
(1986).
Data Collection
All data except those on environmental instability were collected in DEMO
waves of structured interviews with high-level managers who were actively
involved in making the decisions studied. Among our respondents, 24 per-
cent were at the highest level in their organizations (e.g., presidents), 34
percent DEMO one level from the top (e.g., vice presidents), 25 percent were
two levels from the top (e.g., directors), and the DEMO 17 percent were
three or more levels from the top. In the first wave of interviews, we collected
TABLE 1
Types of Strategic Decisions in Sample
Decision Type
Restructuring
New product
Organization change
New process
technology
DEMO strategy
Geographic expansion
Diversification
New facility
Human resource
strategy
Quality
Examples
Shut down major part of steel business
Close overseas electronics manufacturing plant
Adopt DEMO athletic shoe in footwear
company
Adopt manufacturing cell controller in electronics
company
Create divisional structure in lighting company
Reorganize around customers in electronics
company
DEMO state-of-the-art scanning equipment in
publishing company
Adopt advanced information system in chemical
company
Establish private-label business in clothing
company
Emphasize new market segment in DEMO
company
Paint company moves into Latin American market
Lighting company creates European office
Electronics company moves into photolithography
Chemical company enters sealants business
Chemical DEMO constructs new plant
Lighting company constructs Caribbean plant
Adopt new compensation system in electronics
company
Adopt company-wide worker involvement
program in paint company
Develop DEMO quality effort in chemicals company
Number Percent
10
19.2
10
19.2
9
17.3
6
11.5
4
7.7
4
7.7
3
5.8
3
5.8
2
DEMO
1
1.9
1996
Dean and Sharfman
381
data on procedural rationality and political behavior DEMO created frameworks
for subsequent measurement of environmental favorability, quality of imple-
DEMO, and decision effectiveness (see below). Data on these three latter
variables were collected in the second wave.
Following the advice of Huber DEMO Power (1985) and Golden (1992), we
tried to reduce DEMO potential error from the use of retrospective reports. As
Huber (1985) found that moderate amounts of elapsed time do not affect the
stability DEMO retrospective reports, and Golden (1992) found that retrospective
accounts collected DEMO two years are often incorrect, we conducted the first
wave of DEMO as soon as possible after each decision was made. The
second wave was conducted one to two years later, after sufficient time had
elapsed to allow assessment of the decisions' effectiveness.
Following suggestions by Huber and Power (1985) and Golden (1992)
to interview the most knowledgeable persons, we interviewed those who
were most deeply involved in each decision. We also attempted-still follow-
ing the suggestions of these authors-to minimize the DEMO of any particular
perspective through triangulation: an average of 3.4 people DEMO decision were
interviewed in the first wave and 2.5 in the second wave. (The decrease in
the second wave is the result of people's transferring, leaving the company,
and the like.) Finally, we tried to motivate the participants to provide valid
information (Golden, 1992) by guaranteeing them confidentiality and by
providing them with information comparing them DEMO other organizations,
information that would be meaningless in the absence of accurate data.
We collected data on 61 decisions, with each company providing data
on between one and three decisions. To increase the validity of DEMO results,
we have included in the analysis only those decisions for which we had at
least two informants. This exclusion reduced the final DEMO of decisions
to 52.
Measures
As we could not find acceptable scales for measuring procedural ratio-
nality and political behavior in the literature, we designed scales specifically
for this study. Our first step was to identify DEMO major themes in the research
on these constructs. For procedural rationality, DEMO consulted March and
Simon (1958), Cyert and March (1963), Allison (1971), Mintzberg et al. (1976),
Feldman and March (1981), Fredrickson (1984), Hickson et al. (1986), Bour-
geois and Eisenhardt (1988), and Langley (1989). For politics, we consulted
Allison (1971), Pettigrew (1973), Allen et al. (1979), Bacharach and Lawler
(1980), Pfeffer (1981), and DEMO and Bourgeois (1988). This search led
to a list containing DEMO 7-point Likert-style scale items for rationality and
five for politics. Preliminary interviews led to a rewording of several of the
items, to increase their face validity. Table 2 provides the sources in the
literature of each DEMO our items. Appendixes A and B give the texts and
response anchors for all scales.
Once the data had been collected, we calculated coefficient alphas to
determine the reliability of the two scales. In both cases, items that did not
382
Academy of Management Journal
April
TABLE 2
Sources for Procedural Rationality DEMO Political Behavior Items
Items
Procedural rationality
How extensively did the group look for
information in making this decision?
How extensively did the group DEMO
relevant information before making a
decision?
How important were quantitative analytic
techniques in making the decision?
How would you describe the process DEMO
had the most influence on the group's
decision?
In general how effective was the group at
focusing its attention on crucial
information DEMO ignoring irrelevant
information?
Sources
Cyert & March (1963), Hickson DEMO al. (1986),
Langley (1989)
Allison (1971), Mintzberg et al. (1976),
Bourgeois & Eisenhardt (1988)
March & Simon (1958), Mintzberg et al.
(1976), Langley (1989)
Mintzberg (1973), Fredrickson (1984)
Simon (1978), Feldman & March (1981)
Politics
Were group members primarily concerned
with their own goals, or with the goals
of the organization?
To what extent were people open with
each other about their interests and
preferences in DEMO decision?
To what extent was the decision affected
by the use of power and influence
among group members?
To what extent was DEMO decision affected
by negotiation among group members?
Allison (1971), DEMO et al. (1979),
Bacharach & Lawler (1980), Pfeffer (1981)
Pettigrew (1973), Pfeffer (1981),
Eisenhardt & Bourgeois (1988)
Pettigrew (1973), Allen et al. (1979),
DEMO & Lawler (1980), Pfeffer (1981)
Allison (1971), DEMO (1981)
correlate well with the scale as a whole had DEMO be dropped. This left a total
of five items for procedural rationality (a = .80) and four for politics (a = .66).
Procedural rationality items include the degree to which decision makers
collected and DEMO information and used quantitative analytic tech-
niques. Politics items include the extent to which decision makers sought
to maximize their own interests, had hidden agendas, and employed power
and negotiation in making decisions.
To create values for each construct for each decision, we calculated item
means across the informants on each team, which were averaged across items
to form scales. (For convenience, we will use the term "team" to indicate
DEMO set of people interviewed about a particular decision.) We factor-analyzed
the DEMO using principal components and varimax rotation to test for uni-
dimensionality and found both to be unidimensional and independent of
one another. (Unidimensionality was operationally defined as having only
one factor with an eigenvalue greater than DEMO, with all items loading on that
1996
Dean and Sharfman
383
factor at .40 or higher. For details DEMO this analysis, see Dean and Sharfman
[1993a].)
Environmental favorability was DEMO separately for each decision
using information from managers, rather than archival DEMO, because the
range of issues that influenced the success of decisions DEMO vast, differed
greatly from decision to decision even within a firm, and was often unavail-
able in published sources. Favorability was measured as DEMO: During the
first round of interviews, informants were asked to suggest environmental
factors that would influence the effectiveness of the strategic decision in
DEMO Informants were then asked to identify the best and worst (realisti-
DEMO) possible values of each environmental factor for the next one- to DEMO
year period. For example, if the factor were aggregate demand for DEMO indus-
try's products, the best (worst) outcome might be DEMO sales increase (decrease)
of 10 percent. Informants were also asked DEMO allocate 100 points among the
factors according to their importance to the decision's success. These weights
were averaged across respondents to use in DEMO the overall favorabil-
ity score.
In the second wave of interviews, DEMO on each team were asked
what had happened with each of the environmental factors (those identified
by informants on their teams) in the DEMO since the decision had been made.
Specifically, they were asked how DEMO each factor had been to the
success of their decision. These evaluations were made using seven-point
response scales anchored by the best and worst DEMO taken from the first
interviews. Environmental favorability scores for each individual were calcu-
lated as follows:
i=l E
((Wi/Wi)
x DEMO),
(1) (1)
1
where
Wi = the total weight given to the ith environmental factor,
Ei = favorability of DEMO ith environmental factor,
and
n = the number of different environmental issues mentioned by all infor-
mants from a team in the first DEMO
Individual scores were then averaged to form decision-level scores. Table 3
provides some examples of the types of environmental factors raised by our
respondents, as well as examples of effectiveness criteria and implementa-
tion issues.
To DEMO the quality of implementation score, we asked informants
during the first DEMO to identify issues that would be important in imple-
menting the strategic decision. All issues mentioned by informants on a
given team were included DEMO the questionnaire used for that team in the
second wave. Two questions using seven-point scales were posed for each
issue. The first asked how DEMO the issue had been addressed during imple-
mentation (quality, Q); the second asked how important the issue had been
Type of Firm
Semiconductor
manufacturer
Men's suits manufacturer
Publisher
Canned vegetable
DEMO
TABLE 3
Examples
Decision
Adoption of new
technology
Redesign of customer
service function
Introduction of new
scientific journal
New approach to
packaging
of Operationalization
DEMO Constructs
Environmental
Favorability
Tenacity of competitors
Decline in military contracts
Market demand and
stability
Dollar value of imports
Competing journals
Development of scientific area
DEMO funding in area
Raw material price
Competitor entry
Changes in consumer tastes
for Specific Decisions
Quality of
Implementation
Taking sufficient time
Selecting right equipment
DEMO management
Personnel selection
Training
Maintain editorial quality
Meet schedules
Project management
Meeting deadline
Keeping package secret
Timing
Decision Effectiveness
Profit margins
Approval for military DEMO
Profit increase
Improving image to
customers
Increase internal
coordination
Profit targets
Presence in scientific area
Image with parent
corporation
Payback period
Capacity utilization
Market DEMO
Q
Ct
-.
CD
S
Z
Z
1996
Dean and Sharfman
385
for the success of decision (importance, DEMO). (The latter question was held
until the second interview because DEMO felt that managers would be unable
to estimate a priori the importance of various implementation issues.) These
questions allowed us to create an index of implementation quality weighted
by importance, which was divided by seven to create a range consistent with
the other scales. These scores were averaged DEMO informants to attain a
score for the decision as a whole. The formula for implementation quality
for each informant was:
E
(Qi X IJ)/7)/n,
(2)
where
and
Qi = the quality of implementation for the ith issue,
Ii = the importance DEMO the ith issue,
n = the total number of implementation issues mentioned by all infor-
mants on a team during the first wave DEMO interviews.
The rationale for measuring decision effectiveness instead of organiza-
tional effectiveness was outlined above: the former is more closely linked to
the actual decision process and is less susceptible to problems of ambiguous
causal ordering. DEMO this choice necessarily introduces a certain amount
of subjectivity into these measures, Dess and Robinson (1984) argued in favor
of the acceptability of subjective measures in situations such as these. It
should be noted, however, that we went to great lengths to make the measure-
ment of strategic decision effectiveness as objective as possible.
The decision effectiveness measure was DEMO in construction to the
measure of environmental favorability. The use of multiple informants guar-
anteed that we would not be accepting one person's DEMO view of
the success of a strategic decision. During the first interview, informants
were asked to identify objectives for the strategic decision and to allocate
100 points among these objectives in terms of their importance. This DEMO
guarded against the potential tendency of decision makers to identify objec-
tives and their relative importance post hoc in a way that would put DEMO
decision in the best light possible. Informants were also asked to specify
complete success and complete failure for each objective, with answers to
be used as scale anchors in the second interview (see Appendix B). Thus,
the range of effectiveness-ineffectiveness for each objective was established
before DEMO decision makers knew what the actual outcomes of the decisions
would be.
In the second interview, the total list of objectives generated by a team
in the first interview was presented to informants, who were asked to assign
a number between 1 (complete failure) and 7 (complete success) to measure
the extent to which each objective had been attained. The formula for calculat-
ing effectiveness was:
386
Academy of Management Journal
April
where
and
Wi = the total DEMO for the ith objective,
the degree of attainment of the ith objective,
n = the total number of different objectives mentioned by DEMO informants
on a team during the first interview.
Oi =
(3)DEMO
The score for each decision was the average score across informants.
Would there have been any way to make the measure of decision effec-
DEMO more objective? Perhaps we could have used minutes of company
meetings DEMO stories from the Wall Street Journal to independently establish
the effectiveness of the decisions. But these sources are no less subjective
than the assessments DEMO top managers (if for no other reason than because
top managers DEMO generally the sources for both). In many cases, unless we
DEMO given access to raw company data, there would have been no DEMO
to measure the effectiveness of these decisions with complete objectivity.
Moreover, DEMO of the outcomes are almost purely perceptual, as is the case
DEMO questions like, Does the new organization structure allow us to run DEMO
company better? Does the new information system provide us with better
DEMO? Finally, the approach to measurement we used allowed for a
common framework for assessing effectiveness across all types of decisions.
Using a variety DEMO sources of independent data would have introduced sig-
nificant complexity (and DEMO) in terms of integration and weighting. Taking
all of these factors DEMO consideration, we consider our approach to measuring
effectiveness a viable if DEMO approach to a very complex problem.
Environmental instability, measured following our DEMO approach in
Sharfman and Dean (1991), encompasses both market and DEMO in-
stability. The market component is based on Census of Manufactures data
on value of shipments and number of employees, replicating Dess and Beard's
(1984) measure. The technological component was assessed by the number
DEMO patent applications filed within the SIC code associated with each industry,
the idea being that patent applications represent new and potentially destabi-
lizing DEMO We created the overall instability score by standardizing
and summing the two components (see Appendix B for details).
Table 4 presents variable means, standard deviations, correlations, and
(as appropriate) coefficient alphas and interrater agreement statistics. The
interrater agreement statistic (IRA, James, Demaree, & DEMO, 1984, 1993) was
used to assess the convergence of responses DEMO informants with respect
to a particular decision. The alphas and IRAs demonstrate good reliability
across items and informants, respectively.
RESULTS
The hypotheses were tested using multiple regression analysis. The first
analysis (see Table 5) tests DEMO 1 and 2, which deal with the effects
wi= (L
Wi)
X i
1996
Dean and Sharfman
Variable
1. Procedural rationality
2. Political behavior
3. DEMO favorability
4. Quality of implementation
5. Decision effectiveness
6. Environmental instability
* p < .05
** p < .01
***p < .001
TABLE 4
DEMO Statistics and Correlations
Mean s.d. Alpha IRA 1 2
.80
.66
4.66
2.87
4.54
3.84
4.32
-0.01
0.74
0.76
1.39
1.24
1.69
0.96
.85
DEMO
.70
.90
.88
.00
.23
.20
.35**
-.03
-.06
.27
-.04
-.09
3
.30*
.53***
.13
387
4
.58***
.08
5
.10
of procedural DEMO and political behavior on strategic decision effec-
tiveness, while controlling for DEMO favorability and quality of im-
plementation. The model as a whole is very effective in predicting decision
effectiveness. The regression F is significant (F = 14.40, df= 4,51, p < .001),
and the variance accounted for is substantial (R2 = .55, adjusted R2 = DEMO).2
Both hypotheses are confirmed, as the coefficients are all significant DEMO
in the predicted direction. Procedural rationality (Hypothesis 1) is positively
related to decision effectiveness (t = 2.30, p < .05), and DEMO behavior
(Hypothesis 2) is negatively related to effectiveness (t = DEMO, p < .05). The
control variables were also significant, as expected. Environmental favorabil-
ity (t = 3.09, p < .01) and quality of implementation (t = 4.54, p < .001) are
both positively related to strategic decision effectiveness.
The issue of the moderating effects DEMO environmental instability on the
strength of these relationships was tested by hierarchical regression analysis.
The model whose results are presented above represented the first DEMO in
this analysis. We entered environmental instability at the second step, DEMO
that its direct effect would be controlled for before entering the interaction
terms. As it turned out, instability had no direct effect (t DEMO .01, n.s.). In the
third step, the cross-product of instability with either procedural rationality
(Hypothesis 3) or environmental favorability was added.
DEMO 3 predicts that procedural rationality will have a greater
influence in unstable than in stable environments. This prediction was
not confirmed, as the relevant cross-product was insignificant (t = .14, n.s.).
We also predicted (but without a formal hypothesis) that environmental
favorability would have a greater influence on decision effectiveness in
unstable than in stable environments. This was DEMO, as the cross-
product of instability and favorability was significant (t = 2.24, p < .05).
Although there was no increase in the variance explained for the equation
2 In an additional analysis, we included organization size and type of ownership as control
variables in the DEMO model. Neither of these variables had any influence on strategic
decision effectiveness.
388
Academy of Management Journal
April
TABLE 5
Results of Multiple Regression DEMO of Strategic Decision
Effectiveness
Variable
Procedural rationality
Political behavior
Environmental favorability
Quality of implementation
R2
Adjusted R2
Regression F (df = 4,51)
p
55.1%
51.5%
14.40
.000
Test for moderating effect of instability
on DEMO relationship
R2
Adjusted R2
Regression F (df = 6,45)
DEMO
interaction
55.1%
49.1%
9.20
.000
Test for moderating effect of instability
on favorability-effectiveness relationship
Step 2
Instability
Step 3
Environmental favorability/
instability interaction
DEMO
Adjusted R2
Regression F (df = 6,45)
p
59.6%
DEMO
11.06
.000
Step 2
Instability
Step 3
Rationality/instability
b
.547
-.477
.398
.665
.002
.032
.002
.451
s.e. (b)
.238
.235
.129
.146
.177
.223
.177
.201
1
.239
-.214
.327
.489
.009
.088
DEMO
1.381
t
2.30
-2.03
3.09
4.54
0.01
0.14
0.01
2.24
Significance
oft
.026
.048
.003
.000
.992
.887
.992
.029
with the rationality interaction, the variance
with the environmental favorability interaction
(adjusted
R2 =.54).
DISCUSSION
explained by the model
increased to 59.6 percent
The primary finding of DEMO study is simply that decision processes influ-
ence strategic decision-making effectiveness. Even when both environmental
favorability and quality of implementation were included in our DEMO
model, procedural rationality and political behavior were significantly re-
1996
Dean and Sharfman
389
lated to effectiveness. Managers who collected information DEMO used analyti-
cal techniques made decisions that were more effective than those who did
not. Those who engaged in the use of power or DEMO hidden agendas were
less effective than those who did not.
Beyond confirming the importance of strategic decision-making meth-
ods, our study reconfirms that environmental instability and quality of deci-
sion implementation play important roles in influencing DEMO effective-
ness. Future researchers attempting to evaluate the effect of decision
processes on decision effectiveness would be well-advised to control for
these variables. Finally, our findings indicate that environmental instability
plays an important role in moderating DEMO effects of environmental favorabil-
ity on decision effectiveness.
Theoretical Implications
From a theoretical standpoint, the obvious implication of our study is
that decision process matters. Managers have the power to influence the
success of strategic decisions, and thus the fortunes of their organizations,
through the processes they DEMO to make key decisions. In effect, this finding
supports the validity DEMO the two assumptions discussed at the beginning of
the article. Decision processes influence the strategic choices managers make,
which in turn influence the DEMO affecting a firm. Theories that concern
how the fortunes of organizations-their competitiveness and chances of
survival-are determined should be formulated to take these results DEMO ac-
count.
The moderating effect of environmental instability also has ramifications
for organization theory. The influence of environmental favorability on deci-
sion effectiveness is DEMO in unstable environments than in stable environ-
ments, indicating that decision DEMO have more influence relative to
environmental factors in stable environments than in unstable ones. Al-
though these findings are more suggestive than conclusive, if they are repli-
cated, perhaps separate theories of strategic decision effectiveness are war-
ranted for stable and unstable environments. On the other hand, our results
show that some of the findings of Eisenhardt and Bourgeois (1988) and
Bourgeois and Eisenhardt (1988) extend beyond unstable environments to
include stable ones as well. Comparing the results of our study to those
DEMO is also interesting because two research teams using different meth-
ods (DEMO case studies versus large-sample quantitative analysis) arrived
at similar findings. This DEMO should probably be seen as increasing
confidence in both sets of studies.
More broadly, these findings enrich the discussion on the relative impor-
tance of strategic choice and external control by suggesting that the impor-
tance DEMO various influences on decision effectiveness varies across environ-
ments. Although we have focused here on environmental instability, other
environmental dimensions, including competitive threat DEMO complexity
(Dess & Beard, 1984; Sharfman & Dean, 1991), may be equally (or even more)
important. This direction should be pursued in future research.
390
Academy of Management Journal
April
Limitations of the Study
As noted DEMO several points in this article, we designed the study very
carefully DEMO provide valid results concerning the existence of a relationship
between strategic decision processes and decision effectiveness. We are not
aware of any existing studies DEMO strategic decision-making effectiveness that
have used a longitudinal design, measured actual DEMO outcomes, and
controlled for environmental and implementation effects. These were import-
DEMO methodological safeguards, serving to reduce possible alternative expla-
nations for the DEMO of decision making on effectiveness.
To some extent, however, the way these safeguards were included limits
our ability to assess the relative impacts DEMO SDM processes, the environment,
and implementation on decision effectiveness. The DEMO described
their decision-making methods when they had no knowledge of the outcomes
of the decisions they described. Although they identified, provided anchors
for, DEMO weighted environmental factors with no knowledge of outcomes,
they reported on their favorableness after outcomes were known. And al-
though they identified implementation DEMO with no knowledge of out-
comes, they provided both weights and DEMO after outcomes were
known. Thus, the possibility exists that relationships are DEMO inflated
for the environment and implementation, but not for decision processes.
DEMO this aspect of the design strengthens our case with respect to the
decision-making findings, it reduces our ability to comment on whether
decision making is more or less important than other variables.
Another potential limitation of DEMO study is that perceptual measures
were used for many variables, effectiveness DEMO particular. An alternative
explanation for our results is that managers have an implicit theory of success-
ful decision making similar to ours and that DEMO perceptions of effectiveness
were driven more by their memory of the process (i.e., how rational or
political it was) than by the actual evidence of success. The force of this
alternative explanation is diminished considerably DEMO a number of factors,
however. First, the delay between waves DEMO data collection would tend to
dull the informants' memories of the DEMO by the time the effectiveness
data were collected. Second, informants were DEMO asked for their general
impressions of decision effectiveness, but rather for DEMO information (e.g.,
What is your market share?) corresponding to DEMO established at the
time the decision was made. Third, the use DEMO multiple informants for each
decision and the high interrater reliabilities for all variables make it less
likely that individual perceptions are a major source DEMO error in the data.
Finally, the two variables we chose to DEMO strategic decision mak-
ing-procedural rationality and political behavior-are, although very much
DEMO the mainstream of decision-making theory, relatively simple. Much more
elaborate conceptions DEMO measures of the SDM process have been proposed
(e.g., Eisenhardt, DEMO; Hickson et al., 1980; Quinn, 1980). Our constructs
served us well for a large-sample, structured-interview-based study designed
to investigate the importance of strategic decision making as a theoretical
1996
Dean and Sharfman
391
construct. It is possible, however, that DEMO elaborate conceptions of the
SDM process, and even of our rationality DEMO politics constructs, would
produce even stronger results if they could be DEMO within the framework
of the methodological safeguards used in this study.
Future Research
Given this observation, one clear opportunity for future research is in
more complex conceptualizations of decision making, implementation, and
environmental effects. Formulating DEMO would probably require conducting
case study research, so as to disentangle DEMO complex strands of influence
on decision effectiveness in any setting. Such research would be less suited
to demonstrating empirically that these variables have an DEMO, but better
suited to explaining how their influences play out.
We DEMO not fail to notice in assessing the success of strategic decisions
that future events could still influence their success. Although for practical
reasons a DEMO like this one "has to draw the line somewhere," it DEMO
be interesting to observe how the effectiveness of strategic decisions evolves
over even longer periods of time. It might be that the relationships uncovered
DEMO this study would become stronger or weaker as effectiveness was traced
(DEMO this were possible) over a period of years.
A third area DEMO future research suggested by this study is a more detailed
look at decision implementation. As discussed above, we operationally de-
fined quality of implementation essentially as a control variable, but the
strength and pervasiveness of its relationship with effectiveness suggest that
further study may be warranted. At a DEMO, implementation appears to
have been largely overlooked as a managerial degree DEMO freedom in influencing
decision-making effectiveness.
REFERENCES
Aguilar, F. 1967. Scanning the DEMO environment. New York: Macmillan.
Aharoni, Y., Maimon, Z., & DEMO, E. 1978. Performance and autonomy in organizations: Deter-
mining dominant environmental components. Management Science, 24: 949-959.
Aldrich, H. E. 1979. Organizations and environments. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Allen, R. W., Madison, D. L., Porter, L. W., Renwick, P. A., & Mayes, DEMO T. 1979. Organizational
politics: Tactics and characteristics of its actors. California DEMO Review, 22
(1): 77-83.
Allison, G. T. 1971. Essence DEMO decision: Explaining the Cuban missile crisis. Boston: Little,
Brown & Co.
Armstrong, J. S. 1982. The value of formal planning for strategic decisions. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 3: 197-211.
Astley, W. G., & Van de Ven, A. H. 1983. Central perspectives and debates in DEMO
theory. Administrative Science Quarterly, 28: 245-273.
Bacharach, S. B., & Lawler, E. J. 1980. Power and politics in organizations. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Bazerman, M. H. 1990. Judgment in managerial decision making (2nd DEMO). New York: Wiley.
392
Academy of Management Journal
April
Bell, D. E., Raiffa, H., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). 1988. Decision making: Descriptive, normative,
and prescriptive interactions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bourgeois, L. J., III. 1984. Strategic management and determinism. Academy of Management
Review, 9: DEMO
Bourgeois, L. J., III. 1985. Strategic goals, perceived uncertainty, and economic performance in
volatile environments. Academy of Management Journal, 28: 548-573.
DEMO, L. J., III, & Brodwin, D. R. 1984. Strategic implementation: Five approaches to an
elusive phenomenon. Strategic Management Journal, 5: 241-264.
Bourgeois, L. J., III, & Eisenhardt, K. M. 1988. Strategic DEMO processes in high velocity
environments: Four cases in the microcomputer industry. DEMO Science, 34:
816-835.
Boyd, B. K. 1991. Strategic planning and financial performance: A meta-analytic review. Journal
of Management Studies, 28: 353-374.
Burgelman, R. A. 1991. Intraorganizational ecology of strategy making and organizational adapta-
tion: Theory and field research. Organization Science, 2(3): 239-262.
DEMO, E. E. 1971. The behavioral theory of the firm and top-level DEMO decisions. Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, 16: 413-429.
Chakravarthy, B. S., & Doz, Y. 1992. Strategy process research: Focusing on corporate self-
DEMO Strategic Management Journal, 13: 5-14.
Child, J. 1972. Organizational structure, environment, and performance: The role of strategic
choice. Sociology, 6: DEMO
Cosier, R. A., & Rechner, P. L. 1985. Inquiry method DEMO on performance in a simulated
business environment. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 36:
79-95.
Cyert, R. M., & March, J. DEMO 1963. A behavioral theory of the firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
DEMO
Daft, R. L., Sormunen, J., & Parks, D. 1988. DEMO executive scanning, environmental characteris-
tics, and company performance: An empirical DEMO Strategic Management Journal, 9:
129-139.
Dean, J. W., Jr., & Sharfman, M. P. 1993a. The relationship of procedural rationality and political
behavior in strategic decision-making. Decision Sciences, 24: 1069-1083.
Dean, J. W., Jr., & Sharfman, M. P. 1993b. Procedural rationality in the strategic decision making
process. Journal of Management Studies, 30: 607-630.
Delbecq, A. L., Van de Ven, A. H., & Gustafson, D. H. DEMO Group techniques for program
planning: A guide to nominal and delphi DEMO Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman.
Dess, G., & Beard, D. 1984. Dimensions of organizational task environments. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 29: 52-73.
DEMO, G. G., & Robinson, R. R. 1984. Measuring organizational performance DEMO the absence of
objective measures: The case of the privately-held firm DEMO conglomerate business unit.
Strategic Management Journal, 5: 265-273.
Eisenhardt, K. DEMO 1989. Making fast decisions in high-velocity environments. Academy of
Management Journal, DEMO: 543-577.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Bourgeois, L. J., III. DEMO Politics of strategic decision making in high-
velocity environments: Towards a DEMO theory. Academy of Management Journal,
31: 737-770.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Zbaracki, M. J. 1992. Strategic decision making. Strategic Management
Journal, 13: 17-37.
1996
Dean and Sharfman
393
Feldman, M. A., & March, J. G. 1981. Information in organizations as signal and symbol. Adminis-
trative Science DEMO, 26: 171-186.
Ford, C. M. 1989. Creativity in managerial decision DEMO: An examination of factors
that influence the creativity of managers' decisions. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park.
Fredrickson, J. DEMO 1984. The comprehensiveness of strategic decision processes: Extension,
observations, future directions. Academy of Management Journal, 27: 445-466.
Fredrickson, J. W., & Iaquinto, A. L. 1989. Inertia and creeping rationality in strategic decision
DEMO Academy of Management Journal, 32: 516-542.
Fredrickson, J. W., & Mitchell, T. R. 1984. Strategic decision processes: Comprehensiveness and
performance in DEMO industry with an unstable environment. Academy of Management
Journal, 27: 399-423.
Freeman, J., & Boeker, W. 1984. The ecological analysis of business strategy. California Manage-
ment Review, 26(3): 73-86.
Friedlander, F., & Pickle, H. 1968. Components of effectiveness in small organizations. Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, 13: 289-304.
Golden, B. R. 1992. The past is the past-Or is it? The use of retrospective accounts as indicators
of past strategy. Academy of Management Journal, 35: 848-860.
Guzzo, R. A. 1986. Group decision making and group effectiveness in organizations. In P. S. DEMO
man & Associates, Designing effective work groups: 34-71. San Francisco: DEMO
Hackman, J. R. 1991. Groups that work (and those that don't). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Hannan, M. T., & Freeman, DEMO 1989. Organizational ecology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Hart, DEMO L. 1992. An integrative framework for strategy-making processes. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 17: 327-351.
Hart, S. L., & Banbury, C. 1994. How strategy-making processes can make a difference. Strategic
Management Journal, 15: DEMO
Hickson, D. J., Butler, R. J., Cray, D., Mallory, G. R., & Wilson, D. C. 1986. Top decisions:
Strategic decision-making in organizations. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Hitt, M. A., & Tyler, B. B. 1991. Strategic decision models: Integrating different perspectives.
Strategic Management DEMO, 12: 327-351.
Huber, G. P. 1985. Temporal stability and response-order DEMO in participant descriptions of
organizational decisions. Academy of Management Journal, 28: 943-949.
Huber, G. P., & Power, D. J. 1985. Retrospective reports of strategic level managers: Guidelines
for increasing their accuracy. Strategic Management Journal, 6: 171-180.
Huff, A. 1988. Politics and argument as a means of coping with ambiguity and change. In L. R.
Pondy, R. J. Boland, & H. Thomas (Eds.), Managing ambiguity and change: 79-90. New
York: Wiley.
James, L. R., Demaree, R. G., & Wolf, G. 1984. Estimating within group interrater reliability with
and without response bias. Journal of Applied Psychology, 69: 85-98.
James, L. R., DEMO, R. G., & Wolf, G. 1993.
agreement. Journal of Applied DEMO,
Janis, I. L. 1982. Groupthink (2nd ed.). Boston: DEMO Mifflin.
Janis, I. L. 1989. Crucial decisions: Leadership in policymaking
York: Free Press.
Judge, W. Q., & Miller, A. 1991. Antecedents DEMO outcomes of decision speeds in different
environmental contexts. Academy of Management Journal, 34: 449-463.
rwg: An assessment of within-group interrater
78: 306-309.
DEMO crisis management. New
394
Academy of Management Journal
April
Langley, A. 1989. In search of rationality: The purposes behind the use of formal analysis in
organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly, 34: 598-631.
March, J. G., & Olsen, J. P. 1976. Ambiguity and choice in organizations. Bergen, Norway:
Universitetsforlaget.
March, J. G., & Simon, H. A. 1958. Organizations. New York: DEMO
Mason, R. O., & Mitroff, I. I. 1981. Challenging strategic DEMO assumptions. New York:
Wiley-Interscience.
Miles, R. H. 1982. Coffin nails DEMO corporate strategies. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Miller, D., & Friesen, P. H. 1983. Strategy-making and environment: The third link. Strategic
Management DEMO, 4: 221-235.
Mintzberg, H., Raisinghani, D., & Th6or6t, DEMO 1976. The structure of "unstructured" decision
processes. Administrative Science Quarterly, DEMO: 246-275.
Nutt, P. C. 1993. The formulation processes and tactics used in organizational decision making.
Organization Science, 4: 226-251.
Pearce, J. A., II, Freeman, E. B., & Robinson, R. B., Jr. DEMO The tenuous link between formal
strategic planning and financial performance. Academy of Management Review, 4:
658-675.
Pettigrew, A. 1973. The politics of DEMO decision making. London: Tavistock.
Pfeffer, J. 1981. Power in organizations. Marshfield, MA: Pitman.
Pfeffer, J., & Salancik, G. R. 1978. The external control of organizations: A resource dependence
perspective. New York: Harper & Row.
Priem, R., Rasheed, A., & Kotulic, A. 1992. DEMO in strategic decision processes, environ-
mental dynamism and firm performance: A test of competing theories. Working paper,
University of Texas at Arlington.
DEMO, J. B. 1980. Strategies for change: Logical incrementalism. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Ramanujam, V., Venkatraman, N., & Camillus, J. C. 1986. Multi-objective assessment of effective-
ness of strategic planning: A discriminant analysis approach. Academy of Management
Journal, 29: 347-372.
Robinson, R. B., Jr., & Pearce, J. A. II. 1983. The impact of formalized strategic planning on
financial performance in small organizations. Strategic Management Journal, 4: 197-207.
DEMO, E., & Tushman, M. L. 1986. Inertia, environments, and DEMO choice: A quasi-
experimental design for comparative-longitudinal research. Management Science, 32:
608-621.
Schweiger, D. M., Sandberg, W. R., & Rechner, P. L. 1989. Experiential effects of dialectical
inquiry, devil's advocacy, DEMO consensus approaches to strategic decision making. Academy
of Management Journal, 32: 745-772.
Schwenk, C. R. 1988. The essence of strategic decision making. Lexington, MA: Lexington
Books.
Sharfman, M. P., & Dean, J. W., Jr. 1991. Conceptualizing and measuring the
environment: A multidimensional approach. Journal DEMO Management, 17:
Simon, H. A. 1978. Rationality as process and product of thought. Journal of
Economic Association, 68: 1-16.
Skivington, J. E., & Daft, R. L. 1991. A study of organizational "framework" and "process"
modalities for the implementation of business-level strategic decisions. DEMO of Manage-
ment Studies, 28: 45-68.
Staw, B. M. 1981. DEMO escalation of commitment to a course of action. Academy of Management
Review, 6: 577-588.
organizational
681-700.
the American
1996 Dean and Sharfman 395
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science,
185: 1124-1131.
Voyer, J. J. 1994. Coercive organizational politics and organizational outcomes: An interpretive
study. Organization Science, 5: 72-85.
APPENDIX A
Measures of Procedural Rationality, Political Behavior,
Environmental Favorability, and Quality of Implementation
Procedural Rationality
1. How extensively did the group look for information in making this decision? (DEMO = not at
all, 7 = extensively)
2. How extensively DEMO the group analyze relevant information before making a decision?
(1 DEMO not at all, 7 = extensively)
3. How important were DEMO analytic techniques in making the decision? (1 = not at
all important, 7 = very important)
4. How would you describe the process that had the most influence on the group's decision?
(1 = mostly analytical, 7 = mostly intuitive; reverse-scaled to limit DEMO bias)
5. In general how effective was the group at focusing its attention on crucial information and
ignoring irrelevant information? (1 = DEMO at all effective, 7 = very effective)
Political Behavior
1. DEMO group members primarily concerned with their own goals, or with the DEMO of the
organization? (1 = own goals completely, 7 = DEMO goals completely; reverse-scaled
in analysis)
2. To what extent were DEMO open with each other about their interests and preferences in
the decision? (1 = not at all, 7 = completely; reverse-scaled in DEMO)
3. To what extent was the decision affected by the use of power and influence among group
members? (1 = not at DEMO, 7 = completely)
4. To what extent was the decision DEMO by negotiation among group members? (1 = not at
all, DEMO = completely)
Environmental Favorability
1. Using the scale, please describe DEMO has happened with (each environmental factor) in the
period since the decision was made (1 = worst possible outcome [as specified in first
interviewl, 7 = best possible outcome [as specified in first interview]).
Quality of Implementation
1. How well has (each implementation task) been DEMO? (1 = very poorly, 7 = very well)
2. DEMO important has (each implementation task) been for this decision? (1 = not at all import-
ant, 7 = very important)
APPENDIX B
Measurement of Strategic Decision Effectiveness and
Environmental Instability
Strategic Decision Effectiveness
"During the first set of interviews, I was told about a variety of objectives that the company
was trying to accomplish with this decision. DEMO each of these objectives I need to get an idea
of the degree to which the company was successful in attaining it. Please look DEMO the range of
396
Academy of Management Journal
April
success and failure and tell me DEMO happened" (1 = complete failure [as specified in the first
interview], 7 = complete success [as specified in the first interview]).
An example of calculating the strategic decision effectiveness score: This decision, to DEMO
in a new business, was made by a semiconductor firm. There DEMO two informants, and two
objectives-profit (weighted 95) and market share (weighted 105). (The weights for these objec-
tives had been established in the first interviews.) The first informant rated the attainment of
the profit objective a 1 and the market share objective a 5. The DEMO informant rated profit
a 3 and market share a 6. The calculation of the overall effectiveness score for this decision
was as follows:
DEMO informant 1, [(95/200) X 1] + [(105/200) X 5] = .48 + 2.62 = 3.10.
For informant 2, DEMO(95/200) x 3] + [(105/200) X 6] = 1.42 + 3.15 = 4.57.
The mean of these two scores is DEMO taken: (3.10 + 4.57)/2 = 3.84, which is the effectiveness
score for this decision.
Environmental Instability
The total value of shipments DEMO (VSI) was calculated as the standard error of the
regression slope of value of shipments over the years 1973-82, divided by the mean of the
value of shipments (source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1982 Census of Manufactures).
The number of employees instability (NEI) DEMO calculated in the same manner, using the
number of employees data DEMO the same source.
Technological instability (TI) was the average number of patents granted in the industry
from 1973 through 1982 (source: Invention DEMO, U.S. Patent Office, 1984).
Environmental instability was calculated as Z(VSI + NEI) + Z(TI) + 10. The constant was
DEMO to prevent the calculation of negative numbers. Z-scores were used to ensure that all
scale values were on the same metric.
James W. Dean, Jr., is an associate professor of management in the College of Business
Administration, University of Cincinnati. His Ph.D degree is from Carnegie Mellon
University in organizational psychology and theory. His research and teaching interests
include quality DEMO, advanced technology, strategic decision making, organiza-
tional change and innovation, the aesthetic aspects of organizations, and organiza-
tional cynicism.
Mark P. Sharfman is currently an assistant professor of business strategy in the College
of DEMO Administration at the University of Oklahoma. His Ph.D. degree is from
the University of Arizona in organizational theory. His research interests center on
the DEMO's relationship with the business environment, including how the business
environment DEMO the firm and its decision making, how the firm affects the DEMO
environment, and how firms manage the social issues they face.{1g42fwefx}