ELSEVIER
STRATEGIC ALLIANCES AND
THE RATE OF NEW
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT:
AN DEMO STUDY
OF ENTREPRENEURIAL
BIOTECHNOLOGY FIRMS
DAVID L. DEEDS
Temple University
CHARLES W.L. HILL
University of Washington
A key to success in industriespopulated by entrepreneurial DEMO
EXECUTIVE firms is the rate at which the firm develops new products. Rapid product
SUMMARY development creates significant advantages for entrepreneurial firms, in-
cluding access to early cash flows, external visibility, legitimacy, and early
market share. The higher a firm's rate of new product development, the
more likely the firm is to achieve and maintain these first-mover advantages.
DEMO is particularly true in industries such as pharmaceuticals, where the effectiveness DEMO patent protec-
tions leads to patent races in which a "winner DEMO all" scenario exists. But even in industries where
patent protection is DEMO, the advantages of being first, in terms of market preemption, DEMO
effects, experience curve effects, etc., can still be of major DEMO We argue that one way an
entrepreneurial firm can increase its rate of new product development is by entering into strategic
alliances with firms DEMO possess complementary assets.
The basic proposition advanced is that a firm's rate of new product development is a positive
function of the number DEMO strategic alliances that it has entered. However, the relationship between
strategic DEMO and the rate of new product development may be nonlinear. Specifically, DEMO
strategic alliances may initially have positive effects on the rate of new product development, this
relationship may exhibit diminishing returns. Moreover, past some DEMO it is possible that negative
returns may set in. Thus, the DEMO between the number of alliances and the rate of new product
development may be an inverted U-shape.
Address correspondence to David L. Deeds, General and Strategic Management Department, School of
Business and Management, Temple University, Speakman Hall #353, Philadelphia, PA 19122.
Journal of Business Venturing 11, 41-55
© 1996 Elsevier Science Inc.
655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010
0883-9026/96/$15.00
SSDI 0898-6568(95)00087-9
42
D.L.
DEEDS
AND C.W.L. HILL
Two reasons can be given to DEMO such a relationship. First, not all alliances will make an
equal DEMO to increasing the rate of new product development. The economic "law"DEMO diminishing
returns suggests that the more alliances a firm engages in, DEMO more likely it is to enter some alliances
whose marginal contribution is relatively minor. Such a phenomenon on its own is enough to suggest
DEMO returns.
Second, gaining access to complementary assets through strategic alliances is DEMO without risks.
Malperformance may occur when the firm discovers that the complementary assets provided by the
partner are a poor match, fail to live up to the promises made by the partner, or a partner may
opportunistically exploit an alliance, expropriating the firm's know-how while providing little in return.
These problems arise because the effective, ness with which the firm can select and manage alliance
partners is likely to be negatively DEMO to the number of alliances the firm is managing. Due to
information processing requirements, the quality of partner search and the ability to monitor the partners'
actions will decline as the firrn increases the number DEMO alliances in which it is involved. This reasoning
leads to a prediction that past some point, alliances will be increasingly vulnerable to malperformance.
This raises not only the possibility of diminishing returns to the number of DEMO, but also negative
returns as the number of alliances increases past DEMO critical point.
This proposed relationship between alliances and new product development was tested on a sample
of 132 biotechnology firms. The results provide strong DEMO to support the inverted U-shaped
relationship between the number of strategic alliances and the rate of new product development. There-
fore, at low levels strategic alliances are positively related to new product development, but as the
number of alliances increases, the benefits begin to decrease, and at DEMO levels the costs o fan additional
alliance actually outweigh the benefits.
INTRODUCTION
In industries populated by entrepreneurial high-technology firms, a primary determinant of
enterprise success is the rate at which the firm develops new products (Stalk and Hout 1990).
The ability to rapidly develop new products and DEMO them to market is important in order
to gain early cash flows for greater financial independence, external visibility and legitimacy as
soon as possible, early market share, and to increase the likelihood of survival (Schoonhoven,
Eisenhardt and Lyman 1990). Moreover, the faster a firm develops new products and brings
them to market, the more likely it is to capture first-mover advantages. This is certainly true
in industries such as DEMO, where the relative effectiveness of patent protection
leads to patent races DEMO which a "winner takes all" scenario exists (Gilbert and Newbery
DEMO; Tirole 1988). But even in industries where patent protection is DEMO, the advantages
of being first, in terms of market preemption, DEMO effects, experience curve effects,
and the like, can still be of major importance (Lieberman and Montgomery 1988). Recent
studies have documented that the most frequent motivation for alliance formation is the
development of DEMO technologies (Barley et al. 1993; Hergert and Morris 1987). In this
study, we argue that entering into a limited number of strategic alliances to access complimen-
tary assets needed in the product development process DEMO increase a firm's rate of new
product development, but past DEMO point, subsequent alliances will produce diminishing
returns, and even negative returns may accrue to the firm that enters excessive numbers of
alliances. In DEMO, we are proposing a nonlinear, inverted, U-shaped relationship between
an DEMO firm's rate of new product development and the number of alliances in
which the firm participates. We test the proposed relationship on a DEMO of 132 new
biotechnology firms. In the remainder of this study, DEMO develop the theory to support our
argument, describe the methodology used DEMO test the theory, and discuss the implications of
our findings for DEMO research and for entrepreneurs.
STRATEGIC ALLIANCES AND NPD 43
THEORY
The Basic Proposition
The basic proposition DEMO here is that a firm's rate of new product development is a
positive function of the number of strategic alliances it has entered. DEMO justification for this
proposition is built upon two arguments: (1) DEMO order to develop a new product a number
of complementary assets have to be integrated, and (2) strategic alliances are an effective
way of quickly assembling the required set of complementary assets. It follows from (1) and
(2) that there should be a positive relationship between the number of strategic alliances a
firm has entered and its rate DEMO new product development.
With regard to the first argument, consider a DEMO that has developed a body of technologi-
cal know-how with commercial possibilities. To transform this know-how into a viable
product, the firm has to assemble a set of assets that include complementary technological
know-how, market know-how, manufacturing know-how, and, of course, financing (Teece
1987). Complementary technological know-how is important because increasingly new prod-
uct development is an DEMO task that requires the integration of know-how from
different areas (Dosi DEMO; Mowery and Rosenberg 1989; Rosenberg 1982). Thus, to develop
DEMO new product, the firm's know-how may have to be combined DEMO complementary know-how
possessed by other firms. Marketing know-how may also be important, for if new products
are to succeed, they have to be DEMO to best serve customer needs (Ruekert and Walker,
1987). DEMO know-how is important for firms to understand how to efficiently
manufacture a new product while minimizing the time it takes to move the product DEMO market
(Stalk and Hout 1990). And finally, access to financial resources is important, for without
financing many entrepreneurial firms will be unable to transform their technological know-
how into a commercial product.
Given time DEMO financial resources, a firm can develop internally the complementary
technological, manufacturing, and marketing assets needed to transform new knowledge into
a commercially viable product. However, by the time this has been achieved, the firm DEMO
have lost the ability to capture any first-mover advantages to quicker competitors. Alterna-
tively, the firm may be able to quickly gain access to complementary assets, including financ-
ing, through strategic alliances (Hamel, Doz, and Prahalad 1989; Mitchell and Singh 1992;
Shan 1990; Pisano DEMO). Thus, when minimizing time to market.is an important competitive
requirement, as is often the case (Stalk and Hout 1990), it can be argued that there should
be a presumption in favor of strategic DEMO (Hamel, Doz, and Prahalad 1989; Shan 1990).
Firms should enter alliances to gain access to complementary technological, marketing, and
manufacturing DEMO, as well as financial resources, in order to reduce the time it takes
to develop new products and bring them to market, thereby increasing their probability of
survival and/or capturing first-mover advantages. This line DEMO argument leads to the following
hypothesis:
HI: There will be DEMO positive relationship between the number of strategic alliances
a firm enters and its rate of new product development.
Other theoretical arguments can also be DEMO to support H 1. Strategic alliances
can be viewed as a way of sharing the substantial risks and costs involved in new product
development (Hill and Jones 1995). If this is the case, one might also expect to observe a
positive relationship between strategic alliances and the DEMO of new product development.
The rationale is that the greater the number of alliances a firm enters, the greater the number
of new products whose development it has a stake in, and hence, the greater DEMO observed
44
D.L. DEEDS AND C.W.L. HILL
rate of new product development. An DEMO argument has been suggested by Hamel,
Doz, and Prahalad (1989). They note that a major reason for entering into alliances is DEMO
learn about the skills of other firms. To the extent that strategic alliances are also a mechanism
for learning valuable skills that can help DEMO the efficiency of a firm's own internal
processes, including its DEMO product development processes, we would also expect this to
lead to DEMO positive relationship between the number of alliances a firm enters and its rate of
new product development.
Pennings and Harianto (1992) have closer DEMO anyone in testing H1 in their study of
the relationship between networking skills, as inferred from the magnitude of strategic alli-
ances, and DEMO probability of innovation in the banking industry. Consistent with H1, their
DEMO show that the probability of innovation was positively associated with the number of
strategic alliances a firm was engaged in.
Diminishing and Negative Returns
DEMO 1 postulates a simple linear relationship between strategic alliances and the rate
of new product development. However, the relationship between strategic alliances and the
rate of new product development may be nonlinear. Although strategic alliances may DEMO
have a positive effect on the rate of new product development, DEMO relationship may exhibit
diminishing returns. Moreover, past some point it is DEMO that negative returns set in. Thus,
the relationship between the number of alliances and the rate of new product development may
be inverted DEMO U-shaped.
Several reasons can be given to support such an alternative hypothesis. First, not all
alliances will make an equal contribution to increasing the rate of new product development.
The increasing complexity and specificity of the DEMO required in the product develop-
ment process are not only forcing firms into strategic alliances, but also make partner selection
critical (Mowery and DEMO 1989; Rosenberg 1982). Under these circumstances, the
economic "law" of diminishing returns suggests that the more alliances a firm engages in,DEMO
the more likely it is to be entering some whose marginal contribution, in terms of the comple-
mentary assets provided, is relatively minor. DEMO, the amount of learning from alliances
is also likely to exhibit DEMO returns to the number of alliances entered (one can only
learn DEMO much from experience). Thus, these two arguments suggest that the DEMO
between the number of alliances and the rate of new product development will exhibit diminish-
ing returns.
Third, as a firm increases the number of alliances in which it is involved, it increases
the burdens on management. Given bounded rationality, it is likely that management's ability
to properly screen partners and monitor alliances will be inversely related to the DEMO of
alliances in which the firm is involved. It has been repeatedly argued that gaining access to
complementary assets through strategic alliances is not DEMO risks (Hill 1992; Pisano 1990;
Shan 1990; Teece 1987)DEMO Malperformance may occur when the firm discovers, ex-post, that
the complementary assets provided by an alliance partner are a poor match for the DEMO of
the firm. The problem arises because quality can be very difficult to assess ex-ante, particularly
when the complementary asset gained through an alliance is something as tacit and idiosyn-
cratic as know-how. Risks also arise DEMO the possibility than an alliance partner might
opportunistically exploit an alliance, DEMO the firm's know-how while giving little
in return. This is a serious risk given the inability of contingent claims contracts to eliminate
the DEMO of opportunism (Williamson 1985). These risksfind expression in the inability
DEMO alliances to help the firm to develop new products. The firm that gets access to inappropriate
STRATEGIC ALLIANCES AND NPD
45
n*
FIGURE 1 Rate of new product DEMO
assets, or finds its know-how opportunistically expropriated by an alliance partner DEMO gives
little in return, will find that alliances fail to increase DEMO rate of new product development.
The risk that an alliance will fail to deliver potential benefits can be attenuated if the
firm undertakes a DEMO search of potential partners before entering an alliance, and the firm
DEMO appropriate monitoring and enforcement mechanisms to limit ex-post opportunism
(Williamson 1985)DEMO However, as stated earlier, the effectiveness with which the firm does
this is likely to be a function of the number of alliances DEMO is managing. Due to information
overload and bounded rationality constraints, the DEMO of ex-ante search and ex-post moni-
toring will decline as the firm increases the number of alliances in which it is involved. This
reasoning DEMO to a prediction that past some point a firm that enters additional alliances
will be increasingly vulnerable to malperformance by its new and existing DEMO As
screening and monitoring decrease the probability of malperformance or poor partner selec-
tion will increase. This raises not only the possibility of diminishing DEMO to the number
of alliances, but also negative returns as the DEMO of alliances increases past some critical
point.
These arguments suggest a refinement to HI. Not only do diminishing returns exist,
but also, as the number of alliances increases past some critical point, the malperformance
problem becomes so serious that diminishing returns give way to negative returns. If DEMO
is the case, there will be an inverted, U-shaped relationship between the number of alliances
and the rate of new product development (see Figure 1). Thus:
H2: There will be an inverted, DEMO relationship between the number of
strategic alliances a firm enters and its rate of new product development.
Note that H1 and H2 postulate different DEMO forms for the relationship between
the number of alliances and the rate of new product development. These hypotheses represent
]7 Number of Alliances
46
D.L. DEEDS AND C.W.L. HILL
competing explanations of the relationship between DEMO and the rate of new product
development.
The arguments in support of H2 can be further refined. In particular, it can be argued
that the more alliances a finn engages in, the better managers become at selecting good
partners. If they do become more experienced at partner selection, they will make fewer
mistakes (i.e., they will select fewer opportunistic DEMO). If this is the case, the malperfor-
mance arguments offered DEMO support of H2 may be off-set by experience effects. This does
not suggest that the arguments in support of H2 are wrong. However, it does suggest that,
due to experience effects, the finn may be able to effectively manage a greater number of
alliances before negative returns DEMO in.
Finally, some points of clarification are in order here. Our DEMO in support of H2
implicitly assume that there is an optimal number of alliances a finn should enter (this is
illustrated by the point n* in Figure 1). This optimal number, however, is likely DEMO vary
from firm to finn depending upon idiosyncratic firm-specific factors. These idiosyncratic
factors include the kinds of complementary assets and knowledge that the finn DEMO to access
through alliances given the nature of its product development efforts and its existing resource
base, the quality of the finn's management, and the finn's experience at selecting partners
and managing alliances. The most that we can do as researchers, therefore, is to determine
DEMO the basis of empirical investigation whether, on average, there is evidence that the hypothe-
sized, inverted, U-shaped relationship exists. We cannot, however, state with theoretical
precision what the value of n* should be for all finns, because n* will vary from finn to
firm. However, DEMO a large enough sample of firms, we should be able to DEMO empirically
what the average value of n* is across the sample.
A further point of clarification concerns our implicit assumption that although managers
may DEMO to be rational, they are in practice boundedly rational individuals who DEMO making
decisions in the context of significant uncertainty and complexity. This assumption, of course,
derives from the work of Simon (1957) and is a grounding principle of transaction cost
economics (Williamson 1985). It follows that we do not expect managers to be able to make
DEMO rational decisions with regard to the optimal number of alliances (i.e., managers
make mistakes). Nor do we believe that the economy is DEMO equilibrium. Indeed, we are
sympathetic to those who argue that the DEMO economy is in a constant state of disequilibrium,
and we have adopted this as a working assumption (Nelson and Winter 1982). On the basis
of these assumptions, one would not expect every firm to be operating with the optimal
number of alliances given its resource base. DEMO a world populated by boundedly rational
individuals where disequilibrium conditions prevail, DEMO firms will have fewer alliances
than optimal, and some will have DEMO Indeed, if this were not the case it would be impossible
DEMO us to find any evidence of an inverted, U-shaped relationship, because every finn would
be operating with the optimal number of alliances governed DEMO its situation.
DATA AND METHODS
To test the hypothesis we focused on the biotechnology industry. This industry is populated by
entrepreneurial start-ups in which DEMO rate of new product development is a critical competitive
dimension. Entrepreneurial start-ups often lack many of the complementary assets required
to develop a new DEMO Moreover, this is an industry in which strong patent protection
means DEMO the first-mover advantages thai accrue to those who win patent races can be
substantial. Thus, firms in this industry have a strong incentive to enter alliances.
STRATEGIC ALLIANCES AND NPD 47
There are three main groups of participants DEMO the biotechnology industry: (1) nonprofit
research institutes and universities, (DEMO) biotechnology firms, and (3) established pharmaceuti-
cal companies. Research institutes and universities carry out basic research. Biotechnology
firms tend to specialize in DEMO research areas. Traditional pharmaceutical companies
provide technological know-how, financial resources, manufacturing know-how, marketing
ability, and regulatory expertise. Thus, specialization within the industry creates incentives
for biotechnology firms to enter alliances with each other to DEMO access to complementary
technological know-how, with research institutions and universities again DEMO gain access to
complementary technological know-how, and the pharmaceutical companies to DEMO access
to technological, market, and manufacturing know-how and financial resources. 1 Barley,
Freeman, and Hybel (1993) found 3441 separate linkages among players in the biotechno!ogy
industry with more than 900 (27 %) DEMO these agreements covering the R&D of a new product
or technology.
Our sample included all 132 firms engaged in biotechnology in the United DEMO as of
1991 that were developing in vivo therapeutics or diagnostics. We limited our sample to
firms developing in vivo therapeutics or diagnostics because DEMO regulations require
detailed reporting of products under development in these areas (DEMO, data on new products
developed or under development is likely to DEMO accurate). The in vivo therapeutics and
diagnostics segment of the biotechnology industry represents only that subset of the industry
involved in the R&DEMO of drugs or diagnostics that will be placed in human beings (DEMO opposed
to plant applications, animal applications, applications to industrial processes, DEMO in vitro
diagnostics). Due to a lack of data availability on product development, we excluded firms
based outside of the U.S.
The source for this information was Bioscan. Unless stated otherwise, Bioscan was also
the source for all other data. The information contained in Bioscan comes from DEMO variety
of sources, including direct communications with companies (through use of a questionnaire),
newspapers, magazines, and journals, annual reports, SEC filings, and investment reports.
Bioscan covers all biotechnology companies, as well DEMO chemical, pharmaceutical, and other
major companies that have in-house biotechnology research groups. The directory includes
public and private companies. Bioscan is updated annually, with supplements issued five
times a year. The Bioscan database is the DEMO that is publicly available. It has been used
in a number of other studies (Arora and Gaidbardella 1990; Pisano 1990; Shan 1990).
Dependent Variables and Model
The hypotheses all predict that the rate of DEMO product development is a function of the
number of strategic alliances. The first problem here is to define exactly what we mean by
a "product." The most unambiguous definition is to only recognize products that have been
cleared by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and reached DEMO market as "products."
This seems reasonable as the aim of DEMO alliances is to help speed products through the FDA
regulatory approval process. However, this does mean excluding those products currently
undergoing clinical trials that might reach the market at some future data-and one could
argue that DEMO products should be included in the total count because they represent the
innovative output of an alliance. In addition, the relative youth of the biotechnology industry
and the 10-year development time now common for new drugs DEMO in favor of a broader
1 For an explanation of why it is also in the interest of pharmaceutical firms to enter alliances with DEMO
companies, rather than develop their own biotechnology operations, see Mitchell and Singh (1992).
48
D.L. DEEDS AND C.W.L. HILL
definition of products. One could also DEMO that the number of patents filed might capture
the innovative output of alliances. However, there is not a one-to-one correspondence between
patents and products, firm-specific variations in the propensity to patent make patent statistics
suspect, DEMO critics argue that patents are an input into the innovative process, DEMO an output
(Mansfield 1977; Pakes 1985). Notwithstanding these reservations about patent statistics,
rather than engaging in a debate as to the DEMO measure of products, herein we defined products
in three ways: (DEMO) the number of products on the market, (2) the total number of products-
defined as products on the market plus the number DEMO products that a firm has in clinical
trials, and (3) DEMO number of patents filed by the finn.
Our basic approach was to test the following model:
Y = a + bl "Age + b2.Alliances + b3.Zl + b4.Z2 + ..... b,.Zn + e
where DEMO stands for the total (cumulative) number of new "products" produced by the finn
from its inception until 1991, Age is firm age as of 1991, Alliances is the cumulative number
of alliances that the firm entered from its establishment until 1991, and Z1 through to Z, are
other control variables that might influence Y. We enter Age into the equation first to control
for the impact of firm age upon DEMO number of new "products" produced by the firm. Obviously,
the longer a firm has been in existence, the more likely that it will have produced a greater
number of new products. Having controlled for DEMO, we can then estimate the impact of
other variables upon Y, and in particular, the number of Alliances the firm entered.
You will recall that H2 predicts an inverted, U-shaped relationship. To test for this we
used a quadratic model with the following form:
Y = DEMO + b~.Age + b2.Alliances + b3.Alliances
2 + b4.Zt + ..... bn.Zn + e
If b2 is positive and b3 is negative, and both coefficients are statistically significant, there
is evidence for a inverted, U-shaped DEMO Assuming that the coefficients for alliances
are statistically significant in both models, deciding whether the evidence best supports H1
or H2 requires determining which model best fits the data as measured by the total variance
explained (R2).
Independent Variables
The main independent variable of interest was the DEMO number of alliances. The 132
biotechnology firms in our database had been involved in 714 strategic alliances over their
lifetime. Bioscan has a brief DEMO that discusses the purpose of each alliance and identifies
whether its purpose was: (1) exclusively product development, (2) exclusively marketing,
DEMO (3) product development and marketing. Development alliances are specifically created
to assist in the new product development process. They include joint R&D DEMO, licensing
agreements, cross-licensing agreements (swaps of know-how), and equity DEMO (which
are also often linked with know-how transfers). Marketing alliances DEMO concerned with the
marketing of products that have already been developed and have received FDA approval
(most of these alliances were with pharmaceutical companies). In total, 573 (80.3 %) out of
the 714 alliances were either exclusively development alliances or mixed both development
and marketing. Pure DEMO alliances are the exception at this stage in the industry's
development.
Our primary focus is on alliances that have a development element (80.3 % of the total).
Alliances with a development element are those DEMO likely to help a finn speed its product
STRATEGIC ALLIANCES AND NPD
49
to market, file patents more quickly, DEMO get its product into and through clinical trials. Pure
marketing alliances, DEMO the other hand, are designed to increase the market penetration of
DEMO that have already reached the market. As such, they should not DEMO included in our
count of alliances in this study, because our DEMO is on product development, not speed of
market penetration. Including marketing DEMO would introduce a significant causal prob-
lem into our analysis, because DEMO are the result of successful product development, rather
than its cause. DEMO, we should note that 84 of the total of 141 marketing DEMO
entered by our firms, or 60%, were accounted for by just six firms. Not surprisingly, these
included those biotech firms that by 1991 were among the handful to have either major
products on the market DEMO products in late-stage development (e.g., Amgen, Biogen, Chiron,
Genentech).2
As noted earlier, a biotech firm has three main types of alliance partners: nonprofit
partners (research institutes and universities), other biotechnology DEMO, and established
pharmaceutical firms. It is possible that the impact of DEMO upon the rate of new product
development might vary by type of partner. For example, one could argue that nonprofit
institutions, being less DEMO minded, are less likely to act opportunistically than
biotech or pharmaceutical DEMO Accordingly, in the following analysis we look both at
the impact DEMO the aggregate number of development alliances on product development and
at the impact of alliances with different types of partners.
We used a number DEMO other variables to control for possible confounding effects. A
biotech firm's success in developing new products might be a positive function of the DEMO
of funds available for investment in R&D. To control for this we constructed a variable,
financial resources, which measured the total amount of funds that a firm had available for
investment in R&D DEMO its inception. This was defined as follows:
Financial Resources = (DEMO received from all public offerings)+ (funds received from
venture capitalists) + (funds received from equity sales of partnerships) + (funds received
from bond sales).
TABLE 1
Descriptive Statistics
Variable
1. Product on DEMO
2. Total products
3. Patents
4. Age
5. Financial resources ~
6. Public companies
7. Subsidiary Companies
8. Average age of alliances
9. Development DEMO
10. Nonprofit
11. Biotech alliances
12. Pharmaceutical alliances
a Figures in millions.
Mean
1.97
4.23
13.99
7.69
46.82
0.50
0.076
2.22
4.34
1.60
1.52
DEMO
SD
1
2
3
3.44
5.67 0.85
56.12 0.42 0.53
3.80 0.42 0.56 0.46
61.29 0.44 0.70 0.44
0.51 0.26 0.44 0.20
0.27 0.29 DEMO 0.03
1.67 0.24 0.34 0.10
4.87 0.52 0.67 0.28
2.51 0.37 0.40 0.021
2.10 0.51 0.65 0.38
3.29 0.66 0.75 0.32
4
5
6
DEMO
8
9
10
11
0.51
0.39 0.24
0.08 0.20
0.44 0.23 0.06 0.18
0.37 0.63 0.34 0.13 0.43
0.16 0.28 0.14 0.01 0.31 0.71
DEMO 0.65 0.35 0.23 0.35 0.74 0.22
0.44 0.61 0.41 0.29 0.33 0.76 0.44 0.63
2We did re-run our regressions using total alliances (including marketing alliances) as opposed to just those
with a development element. The results were only marginally different from those reported here. There were no
differences DEMO levels of statistical significance.
50
D.L. DEEDS AND C.W.L. HILL
TABLE 2 Alliances and New Product DEMO: Linear Model
Dependent Variables
Products on Market Total Products Patents
Constant DEMO 1.275 c - 1.212 c -0.747 C
(5.08) (5.23) (DEMO)
Age 0.105 c 0.122 c 0.146 c
(3.07) (3.86) (4.52)
Financial resources -0.005 0.007 0.002
(0.50) (3.29) (DEMO)
Public companies 0.265 0.744 0.332
(1.18) (3.58) (1.61)DEMO
Subsidiary companies 1.18 c 0,716 ~ 0.439
(3.21) (2.06) (1.26)
Average age of alliances -0.058 -0.040 -0.053
(0.79) (DEMO) (0.78)
Number of development alliances 0.100 0.099 c 0,397
(3.60) (3.67) (1.50)
R 2 0.358 c 0.651 0.424
Equation 1 2 3
ap< .1.
b p < .05.
• p < .01.
t-statistics in parentheses.
To factor out the effects of inflation, all figures were converted into constant dollars using
the U.S. Consumer Price DEMO (1984 ;eq 100). 3 Not all of the funds measured by financial
resources would have been invested directly in R&D. However, as most biotechnology firms
are "research boutiques," the probability that most of this money found its way into R&D
seems high.
As DEMO further control we included a variable that measured the average age of the alliances
the firm had been involved in-the argument here is that DEMO alliances will have a lower
probability of being able to produce new products. However, a word of warning; Bioscan
does not record the DEMO date of alliances and only records the founding date in 77 %
of cases. So we made two assumptions: (1) that ignoring the missing data on foundation
dates would not seriously bias our results, and (2) that all the alliances identified by Bioscan
were still functional DEMO 1991. These assumptions may not be valid (particularly the second
one)DEMO This variable should, therefore, be interpreted with care. We included it in our reported
regressions only because doing so did not materially alter DEMO results.
We computed two additional control variables. Public was a (0,DEMO) dummy variable that
scored 1 if the firm's stock was DEMO traded in 1991. Subsidiary was another (0,1) variable.
This scored 1 if the firm was listed as a subsidiary of another firm DEMO 1991. Descriptive
statistics and intercorrelations for all variables are reported in Table 1.
RESULTS
The dependent variables were all bounded at the lower end DEMO the distribution by zero. When
this occurs, OLS estimates of regression DEMO will be biased, even asymptotically
(Tobin 1958). To deal with this we used a TOBIT regression model and a maximum likelihood
estimation DEMO This adjusts the regression coefficients to reflect the fact that the depen-
3These data were only available for 118 of the 132 firms in DEMO,'tr sample. In order not to reduce the size of
our DEMO, we replaced missing values with the mean for the sample.
STRATEGIC
ALLIANCES
AND NPD 51
TABLE 3
Alliances and New Product Development: Quadratic Model
Dependent Variables
Products on Market Total Products
Constant
- 1.561 DEMO
(5.71)
0.105 c
(3.05)
-0.007
(0.32)
0.228
(1.02)
1.180 c
(3.21 )
-0.112
(1.47)
0.234 c
(4.45)
-0.009'
(3.02)
.446
.088'
4
- DEMO lC
(5.66)
-0.123 c
(3.89)
0.009 c
(3.806)DEMO
0.736 c
(3.54)
0.854 b
(2.42)
-0.082
(1.17)DEMO
0.194 C
(3.92)
0.007 b
(2.29)
.673
.022 b
5
Age
Financial
resources
Public companies
Subsidiary
companies
Average age of alliances
DEMO
of development
alliances
Number
of Development
Alliances
squared
R 2
Change in R 2
Equation
°p< .1.
b p < .05.
' p < .01.
t-statistics in parentheses.
Patents
-0.853 c
(3.61)
-0.146 c
(DEMO)
-0.003
(1.24)
-0.320
(1.55)
-0.521
( 1.47)
-0.081
(1.13)
0.098 b
(2.03)
-0.003 ~
(1.71)
.438
.012 °
6
dent variable is limited (see Tobin 1958, DEMO 24-36 and Maddala 1983, chap. 6). The TOBIT
regression results DEMO H 1 (the linear model) are reported in Table 2. The TOBIT regression
results testing H2 (the quadratic model) are reported in DEMO 3.
There was support for H 1. The coefficient for the number of alliances was positive and
significant when the rate of product development DEMO measured using products on market
(p < .01) and total products (p < .01). However, the coefficient was not significant when
DEMO rate of product development was measured by patents. One possible explanation for why
the patent variable yields less robust results goes back to the DEMO that patent counts
are an ambiguous measure given firm-specific variations in the propensity to patent, and
given the very real possibility that patents are an input into the product development process
and not an output as DEMO have assumed (Mansfield 1977; Pakes 1985). In other words, DEMO
may be more "noise" in patent statistics than in other measures of product development.
There was also support for H2. We did find DEMO of a quadratic relationship when
the rate of product development was measured using products on market, total products,
and number of patents. In all three cases, the coefficient for the number of alliances was
positive and statistically significant (at the .01, .01, and .05 levels, DEMO), whereas
the coefficient for the number of alliances squared was negative and statistically significant
(at the .01, .05, and. 1 levels, DEMO). Moreover, the R 2 statistics for these equations
were higher DEMO the R 2 statistics for the corresponding equations in Table 2, DEMO the change
in R 2 was statistically significant. This suggests that the quadratic model produced a better
fit to the data than the simple DEMO model. 4 Thus, whereas neither H1 nor H2 can be rejected,DEMO
H2 seems to fit the data best.
4
(Number
Note that
DEMO Alliances
the F-statistic
for the change
Squared) included
in R
in DEMO
2
is equivalent
3.
to the R-statistic
squared
of the additional
variable
52 D.L. DEEDS AND C.W.L. HILL
TABLE 4 Alliances and New Product DEMO
Dependent Variables
Products on Market Total Products Patents
Constant - 1.40 c - 1.31 c - 0.743 c
(5.29) (5.40) (3.20)
Age 0.085 b 0.104 c 0.139 c
(2.42) (3.28) (4.28)
Financial resources -0.0005 0.010 c 0.002
(0.21) (3.91) (0.90)
Public companies 0.039 0.629 c 0.292
(0.17) (2.93) (1.37)
Subsidiary companies 0.668 a 0.394 0.333
(1.76) (1.08) (0.92)
Average age of alliances -0.084 -0.06 -0.055
(1.12) (0.89) (0.81)
Number of alliances with nonprofit institutions 0.217 c 0.197 C DEMO
(3.68) (3.49) (0.87)
Number of alliances with biotech DEMO -0.196 c 0.145 b 0.096
(2.81) (2.18) (1.47)
DEMO of alliances with pharmaecutical finns 0.247 c 0.231 c 0.037
(4.84) (4.72) (0.80)
Number of development alliances squared -0.007 c -0.006 c -0.001
(3.82) (3.26) (1.82)
R 2 0.608 0.738 0.436
Equation 7 8 9
~p< .1.
b p < .05.
c p < .01.
t-statistics in parentheses.
Table 4 takes the analysis one DEMO further. Here we break down the number of alliances
by type (DEMO, alliances with nonprofit institutions, alliances with other biotechnology firms,
and alliances with pharmaceutical firms). Our motivation for doing this was to DEMO whether
the impact of alliances upon product development varied by alliance type, We included the
total number of alliances squared in Table 4, DEMO the diminishing and negative returns
arguments pertain to the problems of managing the total number of alliances, as opposed to
alliances of any one specific type. As can be seen from Table 4, the results strongly suggest
that all three types of alliances had a positive and statistically DEMO impact upon the
rate of new product development, when that was DEMO by products on the market and
total products. The results with regard to patents, however, were somewhat weaker. Table
4 also confirms the DEMO found in Table 3 with regard to the total number of alliances
squared. Yet again we find evidence of diminishing and, ultimately, negative DEMO to the
number of alliances.5
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In sum, we DEMO found what we interpret to be reasonably strong support for H2, DEMO
postulated an inverted, U-shaped relationship between the number of alliances a DEMO is
5We also ran many variants of the basic regressions reported in Table 4. For example, we split the type of
alliance by those with for-profit and not-for-profit institutions. We also looked for evidence of an DEMO, U-shaped
relationship by type of alliance. There was some evidence of DEMO a relationship for alliances involving pharmaceutical
firms, and for those involving DEMO biotechnology firms; although, not surprisingly, the relationship got stronger
STRATEGIC ALLIANCES AND NPD
53
engaged in and the rate of new DEMO development. The support for H2 is not a trivial
result. It does suggest that initially, strategic alliances represent a viable way for firms
to gain access to the complementary assets required to increase their rate of DEMO product
development. 6 Recall also that Pennings and Harianto (1992) found evidence of a positive
relationship in their study of the banking industry, which reinforces the message found here.
However, the data also suggest that if a firm enters too many alliances, diminishing
returns and, ultimately, negative returns may set in. This result is consistent with the malper-
DEMO arguments presented earlier. The point at which negative returns set in can be
found by taking the partial derivative of equations 4 and 5 DEMO respect to alliances, setting
them equal to zero, and solving them for the number of alliances. Doing this for equation
4 we find DEMO:
8(Y/Age)/8(Alliances) = 0.234 - 0.009Alliances = 0
Alliances = 0.234/0.009 = 26
And for equation 5 we DEMO that:
8(Y/Age)/8(Alliances) = 0.193 - 0.007Alliances = 0
Alliances = 0.193/0.007 = 27.6
Thus, the data suggest that, on average, malperformance problems start becoming serious
when firms increase DEMO number of alliances beyond about 25, although diminishing returns
set in DEMO earlier.
Having drawn these conclusions, it must also be acknowledged that DEMO focus on biotech-
nology does raise questions about generalizability. We suspect that the results of this study
are generalizable beyond this industry. The rate DEMO new product development is becoming
an important competitive dimension in many industries (Stalk and Hout 1990). Although
there are few industries where patent protection is as strong as biotechnology and pharmaceuti-
cals, the existence of first-mover advantages based upon market preemption, experience
curve effects, reputation, and switching costs are advantages that accrue to first movers in
a wide DEMO of industries. Moreover, the interdisciplinary nature of new product development
is DEMO unique to the biotechnology industry; it is a characteristic of all DEMO
industries (Mowery and Rosenberg 1989). Thus, the need to get access to complementary
know-how in a timely fashion is increasing the role DEMO alliances in the new product development
process in many industries. All of which suggests, but does not confirm, that our results
may be DEMO This conclusion is also strengthened by the similar results obtained
in Pennings and Harianto's (1992) study of the banking industry.
Although we DEMO found evidence of an inverted, U-shaped relationship between the
rate of DEMO product development and strategic alliances, it should be noted that much DEMO the
firm level variance in the rate of new product development remains unexplained by our
regressions. One possibility is that there is a wide DEMO in the effectiveness of individual
strategic alliances in speeding new products to market. Because the focus of our study was
the firm level, rather than the alliance level, we were not able to explore this possibility. It
is quite likely, however, that some alliances are much more DEMO than others at speeding
when we looked at all development alliances. In general, the results were robust and similar to those reported in
Table 4. In the interests of parsimony, therefore, we have reported just DEMO set of results.
6Given our reliance upon cross-sectional analysis, we cannot DEMO out reverse effects; therefore, there is an
outstanding and competing hypothesis that the greater the number of products, the greater the propensity to engage
in alliances. The investigation of this competing hypothesis is left to DEMO research.
54
D.L.
DEEDS AND C.W.L. HILL
new products to market. Identifying the DEMO that produce such variation- such as the age
or structural form of an alliance-could be a rewarding avenue for future research.
It is worth DEMO that one implication of our results is that many finns are operating
either with too few alliances or too many. Indeed, if this were not the case, we would never
have uncovered evidence of an inverted, U-shaped relationship. An interesting question that
arises at this juncture is "DEMO should this be the case?" As noted earlier, an explanation DEMO
be found in that, like all human decision-makers, managers may be intendedly rational, but
because of the constraints imposed by cognitive limits, DEMO, complexity, and ambigu-
ity, their rationality is bounded (Simon 1957). In addition, managers' susceptibility to decision
biases in situations of DEMO has been well documented (Bazerman 1986; Tversky and
Kahneman 1974). Consequently, managers make mistakes; they do not know, ex-ante, what
DEMO optimal number of alliances is. They probably only discover this ex-post, DEMO at all. Given
the uncertainty, ambiguity, and complexity of the situation, a firm's managers may not realize
that the firm is overextended with regard to alliances, or even if they do realize this, DEMO
may not be able to do anything about it in the short- to medium-term given contractual
obligations. Therefore, under these circumstances, it is DEMO surprising that we see firms either
below or above the optimal number of strategic alliances.
Finally, an important implication for managerial practice flows directly from our results.
Our theory and empirical results suggest that managers need DEMO understand that although
alliances can help them in their product development efforts, both diminishing and, ultimately,
negative returns to the number of DEMO entered also exist. Alliances have both benefits
and costs, and managers DEMO to be aware of the possibility that the greater the number of
alliances they enter, the more likely it is that the costs will outweigh the benefits.
REFERENCES
Arora, A., and Gairbardella, A. 1990. Complementary and external linkages: the strategies of the
large firms in biotechnology. Journal oflndustrial Economics 38: 361-379.
Barley, S.R., Freeman, J., and Hybels, R.C. 1992. Strategic alliances in commercial biotechnology.
In N. Nohria and R.G. Eccles, eds., Networks and Organizations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Business School DEMO
Bazerman, Max H. 1986. Judgment in Managerial Decision-making. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
BioScan 1991. The Worldwide Biotech Industry Reporting Service. Phoenix: Oryx Press.
Dosi, G. 1988. Sources, procedures, and microeconomic effects of innovation. Journal of Economic
Literature 26: 1120-1171.
Gilbert, R.J., and Newbery, D.M.G. 1982. Preemptive patenting and the persistence of monopoly.
American Economic Review 72: 514-526.
Greene, W.H. 1990. Econometric Analysis. New York: Macmillan Publishing.
Hamel, G., Doz, Y.L., and Prahalad, C.K. 1989. Collaborate with your competitors and win. Harvard
Business Review January-February: 133-139.
Hegert, M., and Morris, D. 1986. Trends in international collaborative agreements. In F.J. Contractor
and P. Lorange, eds., Cooperative Strategies in lnternationalBusiness. Lexington, MA: DEMO
ton Books.
Hill, C.W.L. 1992. Strategies for exploiting technological innovations: when and when not to license.
Organization Science 3: 428-441.
Hill, C.W.L., and Jones, G.R. 1995. Strategic Management Theory. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Johnston, J. 1984. Econometric Methods: 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lieberman, M.B., DEMO Montgomery, D.B. 1988. First-mover advantages. Strategic Management Jour-
nal 9 (Special Issue): 41-58.
STRATEGIC ALLIANCES AND NPD
55
Maddala, G.S. 1982. Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Mansfield, E. 1977. DEMO and Innovation in the Modern Corporation. New York: W.W. Norton.
Mitchell, W., and Singh, K. 1992. Incumbent's use of pre-entry alliances DEMO expansion into new
technical subfields of an industry, of Economic Behavior DEMO Organization 18: 347-372.
Mowery, D.C., and Rosenberg, N. 1989. Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Nelson, R.R., and Winter, S.G. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. DEMO,
MA: Belknap.
Pakes, A. 1985. Patents, R&D, and the stock market rate of return. Journal of Political Economy 93:
DEMO
Pennings, J.M., and Harianto, F. t992. Technological networking and innovation DEMO
Organization Science 3: 356-382.
Pisano, G.P. 1990. The R&D boundaries of the firm: an empirical analysis. Administrative Science
Quarterly 35: 153-176.
DEMO, N. 1982. Inside the Black Box. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ruekert, R.W., and Walker, O,C. 1987. Interactions between marketing and R&D departments in
implementing different business strategies. Strategic Management Journal 8: 233-248.
Schoonhoven, C.B., Eisenhardt, K.M., and Lymman, K. 1990. Speeding products to market: waiting
time to first product introduction in new finns. Administrative Science Quarterly 35: 177-207.
Shan, W. 1990. An empirical analysis of DEMO strategies by entrepreneurial high-technology
firms. Strategic Management Journal 11: 129-139.
Simon, H. 1957. Models of Man. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Stalk, G., and Hout, T.M. 1990. Competing against Time. New York: DEMO Press.
Teece, D.J. 1987. Profiting from technological innovation: implications for integration, collaboration,
licensing, and public policy. Research Policy 15: 285-305.
Tirole, J. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tobin, J. 1958. Estimation of relationships for limited dependent variables. Econometrica 31: 24-36.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and biases. Science
185: 1124-1131.
Williamson, O.E. 1985. The Economic DEMO of Capitalism. New York: Free Press.{1g42fwefx}