IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 46, NO. 3, AUGUST 1999 289
The Transfer and Commercialization of
University-Developed Medical Imaging
Technology: Opportunities and Problems
Anthony A. del Campo, Andrew Sparks, Robert C. Hill, and Robert T. Keller
Abstract— Superconducting quantum interference devices
(SQUID’s) are sensitive DEMO designed to measure very weak
magnetic ﬁelds. The noninvasive nature of these devices makes
them ideal in clinical applications for the measurement of
biomagnetic DEMO associated with the human body, such as the
brain and the DEMO Commercial acceptance of this technology,
however, has been hindered by DEMO limitations and high
operational costs. Moreover, the advanced medical instrument
market DEMO uncertain as a result of health care reform and the
related pressures of cost containment. The aging U.S. population,
however, will likely increase the demand for cardiovascular
care and thereby present opportunities for SQUID medical
DEMO This paper discusses a university-based attempt to
transfer and commercialize technology that potentially could
eliminate the technical limitations of SQUID devices and allow
their DEMO in typical clinical environments. At this point in the
development process, DEMO technology can be termed neither
a success nor a failure. Based on the experiences thus far,
however, certain lessons can be drawn for technology transfer
of university-developed medical technologies. First, universities
need to re-examine the issue of the incentives to publish versus
the incentives to protect intellectual DEMO Failure to properly
align these incentives is likely to weaken or eliminate the potential
for a strong intellectual-property position. Second, although
a number of technology-transfer strategies are potentially
available to universities, three factors are critical in making this
selection: 1) the strength of proprietary position; 2) DEMO stage of
development; and 3) the breadth of potential applications for
the technology. Moreover, university technology-transfer ofﬁces
need to take a businesslike approach in identifying appropriate
technology-transfer strategies that match the technology, the
marketplace, DEMO commercialization potential.
For universities seeking to commercialize medical technologies
it is critical to expand collaborations with medical professionals
to validate the clinical application of DEMO technology. Finally,
where possible, partnerships with medical device companies
should DEMO pursued to gain experience in product development.
Index Terms— Technology transfer, DEMO commercializa-
tion.
I. INTRODUCTION
NIVERSITIES do the lion’s share of basic research in the
U United States. Funding for their research, however, has
DEMO increasingly shifting from the federal government to state
Manuscript received December 20, 1996; revised February 2, 1998. Review
of this manuscript was arranged by Guest Editor A. Reisman.
A. A. del Campo is with BCM DEMO, Inc., Houston, TX 77030
USA.
A. Sparks, R. C. Hill, and R. T. Keller are with the Department of
Management, University DEMO Houston, Houston, TX 77204-6283 USA.
Publisher Item Identiﬁer S 0018-9391(99)05977-2.
and industrial sources [42]. As federal funds become more
scarce, universities face pressures to obtain revenues from
their research activities by transferring and DEMO
technologies developed by faculty and others, often through
alliances with commercial DEMO [43]. Data suggest that aca-
demic–industry partnerships are on the rise. The Association
of University Technology Managers (AUTM) annual survey
for ﬁscal 1995 DEMO industry-sponsored research reached
nearly $20 billion with an 8% average annual change since
1991 [46]. These additional research dollars help to support
university efforts DEMO develop innovative technologies in an
era of decreasing funding from the public sector. Conversely,
the increasingly price-competitive marketplace has motivated
industry to source DEMO technologies from universities
rather than rely on internally funded research in order to save
time and money [47]. Universities are especially appealing to
industry DEMO sources of medical and health care research because
the medical ﬁeld tends to be technology driven.
While the motivation is clear, and the opportunities for
universities are considerable, major obstacles still exist. Most
difﬁcult among these obstacles is the fact that most universities
have changed neither their core DEMO in discipline-based
science and engineering nor the associated incentive systems.
University expertise in basic research is generally strong, but
skills in development and basic business tend to be weak.
As a result, boundary-spanning units have been created at the
periphery to enhance technology transfer [45]. Universities,
moreover, do not have products nor do they have a line of
sight DEMO a customer; hence, efforts to commercialize technology
usually lack focus and experience-based learning [44].
Until recently, universities by and large have had limited
success when it comes to commercializing technology. Many
universities still struggle with DEMO number of issues involved in
commercializing new technologies. One of the major issues is
a conﬂict of incentives. Professional advancement of faculty
(both within the university and within the given discipline)
requires timely publication of DEMO and scientiﬁc discover-
ies. Unfortunately, timely publication of this research can DEMO
endanger critical components of intellectual property. Within
scientiﬁc disciplines, the rewards DEMO being ﬁrst to publish are
much less ambiguous than the rewards of commercialization.
As a result, inventors may forfeit the ability to protect the
proprietary position of a technology in the rush to publish.
Other major DEMO include the legal complexities of disputes
over technology ownership and unclear university policies in
0018–9391/99$10.00  1999 IEEE
290 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 46, NO. 3, AUGUST 1999
handling intellectual property [41]. Nonetheless, universities
appear determined to learn from their mistakes and to become
successful at technology transfer and commercialization. Over
DEMO past ﬁve years, universities have demonstrated a grow-
ing proﬁciency in DEMO activities. More than
10 000 licenses were executed between academic institutions
and private industry over a ﬁve-year period between 1991
and 1995. This number DEMO a cumulative change of
68% [46]. Moreover, these licenses are generating DEMO
royalty dollars. Over $425 million in royalties and licensing
fees were received by universities in 1995 [46].
This growth in licensing activity is likely DEMO continue
as academic technology-transfer ofﬁces gain experience in
conducting their activities in a business like manner.
In this paper, we investigate an attempt by a major uni-
versity to transfer and commercialize a shielding technology,
DEMO in a university physics department, for use in
advanced experimental medical DEMO instruments using
superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) tech-
nology. This pursuit is still in progress. As a result of several
operational problems discussed DEMO in more detail, SQUID’s
have not yet achieved widespread clinical use. DEMO innovative
shielding technology described in this paper reﬂects one of the
attempts to address the problems associated with commercial
use of SQUID-based medical instruments. DEMO challenge for
this university is to decide on an appropriate technology-
transfer strategy to increase the potential for commercialization
and the ﬁnancial return on DEMO university’s intellectual prop-
erty. In this paper, we examine the technology, the target
industry, the steps taken toward commercialization thus far,
and the university’s options for completing technology transfer
of this invention. By examining DEMO process and problems of
this effort, we can learn about the DEMO and pitfalls
that might face other universities and research labs that are
interested in the commercialization of medical technologies.
In addition, we can develop better practices for success.
II. TECHNOLOGY OVERVIEW
SQUID’s are sensitive instruments designed DEMO measure very
weak magnetic ﬁelds. The active element of a SQUID is one
or more Josephson junctions connected to a superconducting
loop. This Josephson DEMO, when operated at the appropri-
ate critical superconducting temperature, can support current
ﬂow and is very sensitive to the presence of magnetic ﬁelds.
DEMO additional information about SQUID technology, Wikswo
[1] provides an excellent review DEMO current SQUID technology.
Low-Tc (low temperature Celsius) SQUID’s use superconduct-
ing materials that must be cooled to liquid helium temperatures
(approximately 212 C) while high-Tc SQUID’s incorporate
new superconducting materials that allow operating at higher
liquid nitrogen temperatures ( 196 C or higher). Since the
ﬁrst DEMO in 1970 [2] demonstrated that SQUID technology
could measure the biomagnetic ﬁelds created by the human
heart, these extremely sensitive sensors have steadily improved
beyond the research stage into commercial applications. Thus
far, however, research DEMO and universities remain the
primary market for this industry.
III. BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS
The extreme sensitivity of SQUID’s make them ideal for
applications in medicine DEMO instruments for noninvasive and
contactless investigation of biomagnetic ﬁelds, such as DEMO
associated with the brain, heart, and other muscles. Mag-
netoencephalography (DEMO) records the very low magnetic
signal generated by the millions of DEMO cells constituting the
brain. Several clinical reports suggest that MEG is very useful
in diagnosing neurological disease as well as for the general
study DEMO brain function [48]–[50].
The other major biomedical application of SQUID is magne-
tocardiography (MCG). MCG detects the electrical activity of
the heart by recording the magnetic ﬁeld generated as a result
of the innervation of DEMO cardiac muscle. Clinical research
studies using MCG for both fetal and adult applications are
numerous and have demonstrated the ability of MCG to
measure DEMO signal of a beating heart [4], [28], [29]. Most of
these clinical reports focus on the use of MCG for the study of
DEMO disorders and have shown that MCG is at least as
accurate as electrocardiogram (ECG) in mapping the sites of
cardiac arrhythmias [30], [31]. These clinical reports suggest
that MCG could serve as an alternative monitoring DEMO for the
catheter-assisted removal of abnormal sites of conduction, i.e.,
DEMO ablation. SQUID’s have also been used experimentally
to monitor the fetal heart. In contrast to traditional ECG
methods using electrodes, fetal magnetocardiogram (FMCG)DEMO
records the fetal cardiac signal in a contactless manner and
with virtually no interference from the maternal heart [5].
Existing alternative methods, such as ultrasound, yield mainly
anatomical information, while electrophysiologic activity must
be inferred DEMO Thus, though it is still in the developmental
stage, FMCG has the potential to provide very useful clinical
information in a noninvasive manner—something DEMO yet
offered by competing technologies.
Despite the clinical promise of SQUID devices, both MEG
and MCG are encumbered with operational limitations that
are cost prohibitive. Although MEG instruments are commer-
cially available for diagnostic use, wider clinical acceptance
of SQUID technology has been hindered by the need for
DEMO magnetically shielded rooms to reduce background
magnetic noise. Thus, it is DEMO for the foreseeable future
that the high potential cost and complexity of MCG will cause
SQUID developers to focus on advanced clinical applications
rather DEMO routine heart-rate measurement. Health care reform
and consequent cost consciousness of both private and govern-
ment insurers require developers of new medical technology to
DEMO a cost beneﬁt. Improvements in shielding technology to
limit the SQUID’s sensitivity to background noise, however,
could, potentially, establish the commercial feasibility of these
devices.
IV. STATUS OF THE PROPOSED UNIVERSITY TECHNOLOGY
University researchers DEMO to improve the high-Tc
SQUID magnetometers so that such devices could be operated
in clinical environments outside a shielded room. To this
end, the university researchers developed a novel shielding
technology for the SQUID device enabling DEMO to measure
DEL CAMPO et al.: TRANSFER AND COMMERCIALIZATION OF MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 291
electrical activity of the heart without the costly requirement
of a shielded DEMO Such an improvement in operational
requirements should greatly increase the demand for SQUID-
based instrumentation.
The shielding technology involves designing localized high-
Tc superconducting DEMO to screen out selectively back-
ground magnetic noise without affecting the ﬁelds of interest,
such as those emanating from cardiac sources. Toward this
DEMO, magnetic shields of various shapes were designed and
fabricated from superconducting DEMO or mu-metals that
would be placed around the SQUID sensor. These shields
effectively block out unwanted magnetic noise and improve
the signal-to-noise ratio. Details DEMO this technology have been
formally described in a university invention disclosure.
The success of the shielding technology encouraged the
researchers to develop their own DEMO prototype MCG
system to measure the biomagnetic signal from the human
heart. This prototype has been used to measure successfully
the typical cardiac signal DEMO a human subject in a com-
pletely unshielded environment at a major hospital. Additional
research has focused on reducing other ambient noise sources
such DEMO from power line, RF interference, Earth’s magnetic
ﬁeld, and others DEMO an effort to achieve a cleaner signal. The
current prototype uses electronic components and equipment
that cost a total of approximately $40 000. The DEMO also
included digital signal processing boards and electronics and
a specially designed gantry. Although the basic system was
not unlike other designs that have DEMO described in the sci-
entiﬁc literature, the key component of the DEMO was the
university-developed superconducting shields. The estimated
cost of the prototype suggests that a commercial production
version would not be prohibitively expensive, relative to other
sophisticated medical instrumentation. Estimates indicated that
the cost of a marketable DEMO could be less than $100 000.
This cost would allow production and sale of a reasonably
priced unit relative to other sophisticated commercial medical
DEMO The relatively low estimated cost encouraged the
university to consider developing a fully integrated system
for commercialization. A signiﬁcant amount of additional
development, however, would be required to produce a com-
mercially suitable unit.
V. THE UNIVERSITY’S PROPRIETARY POSITION
Although the invention had been disclosed to the appropriate
DEMO of the university, a patent application for the back-
ground noise DEMO has not been formally ﬁled in the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (PTO). A patentability opinion,
moreover, had not been conducted DEMO determine whether patent
protection could be obtained. A cursory review of the prior
art, though neither exhaustive nor deﬁnitive, suggests that
getting such DEMO patent opinion is imperative. According to patent
law, an invention must DEMO signiﬁcantly from any publicly
known technical knowledge found in the patent literature or
elsewhere. Furthermore, the invention cannot be an obvious
modiﬁcation of a previous technology. Should related patents
exist, marketing a new SQUID-based device for biomedical
applications might be considered infringement. This situation
could present a barrier DEMO entry and would have relevance to
the university’s wish to be an independent developer of MCG.
VI. INDUSTRY ANALYSIS
The medical device industry is DEMO in the midst
of an upheaval due to the uncertainties brought on by the
potential for health reform and accelerated managed care
penetration. Overall DEMO efforts have changed
the way buyers of medical care view new technologies and
in turn have modiﬁed the competitive strategies that medical
device companies DEMO The formulation of these strategies
is dependent on a variety of forces, including the availability of
funds, the reactions of users and regulators, and general market
trends [6]. Potential entrants into the medical device industry
DEMO pay close attention to both the macro-environment and
the industry environment that collectively impact competition
within the industry. The macro-environment includes those
outside inﬂuences DEMO are often out of the control of the
individual ﬁrms within the industry. On the other hand,
the industry environment comprises the competitive DEMO
existing within the medical device industry.
VII. MACRO-ENVIRONMENT
A. Government Regulation
Perhaps no other industry in the United States is more
regulated than the DEMO device industry. Government pol-
icy impacts the medical device industry through Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) regulation and the level of re-
imbursement DEMO procedures involving medical devices un-
der Medicare/Medicaid programs. These policies can have
a signiﬁcant bearing on the time to market depending on
the DEMO of approval that must be obtained. Products that
are “substantially equivalent” to an earlier, legally marketed
device can obtain clearance through a premarket notiﬁcation or
510(K). These products tend to be incremental innovations—a
common DEMO of device development. In contrast,
products approved through a premarket approval (PMA) are
not substantially equivalent to an earlier device and represent
DEMO potential risk to patients. Currently, marketing approval
for a typical 510(DEMO) may take from three to four months, while
the PMA process, requiring clinical trials, can take as long as
two to ﬁve DEMO [8]. This already difﬁcult process could be
made even more onerous if some newly proposed changes in
regulation are approved. These potential regulatory changes
DEMO broaden the regulatory scope of the FDA to include
the right to examine cost-effectiveness claims of new devices
[9] and would place additional pressures DEMO manufacturers to
evaluate new technologies more closely before embarking on
costly development programs.
B. Health Care Reform
It is safe to say that a DEMO amount of uncertainty exists
about the extent and nature of any potential health care reform
in the ofﬁng. The government, as a major insurer through
the Medicare/Medicaid programs, and private insurers have
292 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 46, NO. 3, AUGUST 1999
become sensitive to the escalating cost of medical care. There
is DEMO widely held belief that technological change, particularly
through its inﬂuence on DEMO devices, is the principal
culprit to the rising costs of medical DEMO [10]. Some analysts
suggest that new technologies account for more than 50% of
the total rise in real medical care costs after inﬂation [1].
DEMO, these views instill a sense of suspicion of new
technology in DEMO eyes of insurers and put additional pressure
on device companies to demonstrate cost beneﬁts of new
medical technologies. Greater use of managed care will DEMO
increase the pressure to control costs by limiting access to ex-
pensive procedures. Capital budget committees are expanding
the scope of their operations to DEMO technology assessment
to evaluate whether health outcomes can be measured and
linked to speciﬁc technologies [9].
These new pressures brought on by health care DEMO
will likely generate additional challenges for the medical
device industry. The industry will be forced to be concerned
about cost/beneﬁt analysis early in DEMO development of new
technologies. For most technologies, the key to success DEMO
securing public and private insurers’ support for a new device
will be the ability to back up claims of clinical efﬁcacy, safety,
and cost effectiveness. The development of an MCG device
will be subject to DEMO pressures to demonstrate a cost
beneﬁt.
C. Demand for New Medical Technologies
Despite the uncertainty of health care reform and the need
for cost DEMO, the demand for innovative medical de-
vices should continue. Historically, America has demonstrated
a commitment to medical innovation that is more deeply rooted
DEMO its commitment to cost containment [12]. On a more
intangible level, DEMO American public has immense hope in
the promise of medical research and a deep reluctance to
risk the slowing of innovation in the biomedical DEMO
In addition, the aging of the baby boom generation and its
DEMO should create continuous demand for new technolo-
gies in cardiovascular care, DEMO segment of the market that
would be served by MCG. In 1993, 3% of the total U.S.
cardiovascular-related expenditures, or $3.5 billion, was spent
on cardiovascular medical devices. This market segment has
grown steadily over DEMO years and the trend is expected to
continue as the U.S. population ages [13].
VIII. INDUSTRY ENVIRONMENT
The medical device industry faces a signiﬁcant DEMO of
uncertainty in the short term. The following is a discussion of
key issues of competition within this industry.
A. Barriers to Entry
A DEMO of signiﬁcant barriers to entry exist in developing
new medical technology. One of the fundamental barriers
is proprietary position. For a new medical technology DEMO be
valuable, ownership of a proprietary technology must be clear
and DEMO within a narrow market segment. A strong proprietary
position within a market reduces the risk of new competitors
entering the market segment and provides DEMO assurance
of long-term market presence. The capital requirements to
develop a new medical device has increased substantially
over the last three years and has DEMO many would
be competitors. It has been estimated that it costs between
$25–$75 million to bring a major new medical device to
market [16]. DEMO addition, new entrants face the daunting
prospect of securing start-up capital DEMO investors who are
resistant to fund new medical devices due to an uncertainty
about the effect of health reform proposals on the demand
for DEMO technologies, as well as expanded requirements
for FDA medical device approval DEMO In short, the economic
impact of higher costs of device development DEMO the greater
marketplace risk translate into higher hurdle rates for investors.
For many device manufacturers, overcoming the FDA ap-
proval bottleneck is the greatest obstacle to bringing a new
product to market. The approval process has DEMO notoriously
slow and expensive. Device manufacturers generally prefer
the 510(K) DEMO process since products do not need to
undergo clinical trials and thus a quicker time to market.
In contrast, PMA’s can take several years because products
must go through clinical trials to test safety and efﬁcacy, thus
adding to pre-market commercialization costs. The probability
of successful approval is DEMO high; far more applications
are rejected than are approved [18]. Even DEMO the product
is granted FDA approval, the company has little chance DEMO
commercial success unless it can convince both public and
private health insurers to pay for it. In the current climate
of health care reform, insurance reimbursement has become
increasingly difﬁcult unless there is a clear cost DEMO asso-
ciated with the medical procedure. Insurance companies and
government Medicare/Medicaid programs are now considering
the adoption of diagnostic outcome studies to assess DEMO costs
and results of patient treatment against the costs of different
tests used to detect a disease [20]. Insurance companies
have already started a DEMO known as capitation, whereby
managed care plans pay health care providers DEMO ﬁxed amount
to care for a patient over a given period. Providers are not
reimbursed for services that exceed the allotted amount [22].
It DEMO, therefore, necessary to conduct comparative analyses,
backed with solid data, to demonstrate the cost beneﬁts of a
new technology relative to existing technology.
B. Market Dynamics
Two major factors will affect demand for products DEMO
services in the medical device industry. First, if health care
reform DEMO occur, it could have a major if uncertain impact
Second, America’s population is living longer and the baby
boom generation is entering the DEMO group where health care
expenditures are the greatest. This second factor impacts the
cardiovascular segment of health care the most since cardio-
vascular disease DEMO the principal cause of death in the
United States and bodes well for cardiovascular diagnostic
devices such as MCG [13].
C. Market Opportunities
The DEMO device would primarily target the cardiovascu-
lar market, one of the DEMO important health care markets.
DEL CAMPO et al.: TRANSFER AND COMMERCIALIZATION OF MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 293
According to the American Heart Association, cardiovascular
disease is the principle cause of death in the United States, with
over 900 000 deaths each year [13]. Cardiovascular disease-
related expenditures are a major health care expense DEMO the
United States, totaling $115 billion in 1993 or 12% of DEMO
total U.S. spending on health care. Moreover, approximately
3% of cardiovascular DEMO expenditures, or $3.45 billion,
relates to the purchase of medical DEMO
In the past 10–15 years there have been several studies in
the medical research literature that demonstrate the clinical
potential of MCG in both DEMO and adult applications [4],
[26]–[29]. Commercial success, however, remains doubtful
until developers of MCG can show cost effective utility that
goes beyond DEMO heart monitoring. Other widely available
and well understood technologies such as ultrasound (echocar-
diogram) and ECG are routinely used to monitor heart rate.
DEMO real opportunity of SQUID-based medical devices resides
in their ability to localize noninvasively abnormal bioelectrical
activity in the fetal and adult heart, as well as other innervated
muscle tissues such as the small intestine. Further, the risk
of commercialization can be reduced by building instruments
with a common DEMO to allow usage for different biomagnetic
applications within different markets. These applications are
discussed below.
the heart as an alternative to EGG. Because ECG DEMO
potential differences at the body surface, it is highly inﬂuenced
by DEMO nonhomogeneous conductivities of the different layers
of tissue and can result in inaccurate localizations of electrical
conduction in the heart. In contrast, the contactless MCG
remains mostly uninﬂuenced by the electrical properties of
the tissues between DEMO source and the sensors [33]. Many
researchers have reported a higher sensitivity of the MCG
as compared to the ECG in the detection of DEMO forms
of tachycardias [1], [3], [4], [26], [27]. Thus, DEMO has been
suggested that invasive cardiac ablation procedures can be
shortened by MCG, thereby reducing the exposure of x-ray
radiation imaging and the overall cost of the procedure.
Arrhythmias represented 7% of all cardiovascular diseases
in DEMO Arrhythmias can be fatal, with approximately 40 000
deaths reported in DEMO [13]. Overall, it is estimated that
almost four million Americans have DEMO form of arrhythmia.
In addition, over 40 000 catheter ablation procedures DEMO
performed in the United States in 1993 [32]. Catheter abla-
tion procedures can be expensive, typically costing between
$12 000 and $20 000 [32]. Thus, the cardiac electrophysiology
market may present the most immediate opportunity for MCG
as a means to reduce the overall cost of procedures to DEMO
conduction disorders.
IX. DIAGNOSIS OF CARDIAC RHYTHM
AND CONDUCTION DISORDERS
The beating of the heart muscle is controlled through a com-
plex network of DEMO that generate weak electrical current,
resulting in weak magnetic ﬁelds suitable for measurement by
MCG. Many clinical research studies have investigated the use
DEMO MCG to study patients with cardiac conduction disorders
[26], [28], [30], [31]. Conduction disorders are characterized
as deviations in the normal rhythm of the beating heart, also
known as cardiac arrhythmias, and are due DEMO abnormal cardiac
electrical activity. An arrhythmia occurs when the heart’s
natural pacemaker develops an abnormal rhythm, or when the
normal conduction pathway is interrupted. Rapid heart beat, or
tachycardia, is the most common form of DEMO disorder [13].
A relatively new and growing cardiology subspecialty called
cardiac electrophysiology concentrates on the anatomic and
physiologic factors involved with the control and DEMO
of the electrical activity in the heart. Traditionally, patients
with suspected DEMO disorders are evaluated through external
monitoring by use of ECG. Electrophysiologists then use this
information to localize roughly sites of electrical conduction
abnormalities within DEMO heart tissue. The precise location of
these sites are conﬁrmed by stimulating and recording intrac-
ardiac electrical activity at a number of sites with DEMO
catheters guided into the heart through arteries and veins. The
abnormal sites are imaged concurrently with x-ray ﬂuoroscopy,
and the resulting information enables DEMO electrophysiologist
to determine the appropriate course of action. Treatment may
include destroying the site of abnormal conduction through a
process known as catheter ablation DEMO
Several clinical studies have focused on using MCG to
localize initially sites of abnormal electrical conduction in
A. Fetal Heart Monitoring
Accurate monitoring of DEMO fetal heart has traditionally
been a medical challenge to physicians, particularly DEMO
the period of gestation prior to the onset of labor. The
insulating effect of the skin-like membrane (vernix caseosa)
covering the fetus as well as the contributing signal of the
maternal heart complicates fetal electrocardiograms (FECG)
when abdominal surface electrodes are used [34]. Therefore,
FECG DEMO been largely discarded in favor of Doppler ul-
trasound [35]. Although it has been suggested that MCG is
applicable to fetal heart monitoring, commercialization for this
application appears unlikely in light of ultrasound’s ease of
use DEMO sufﬁcient accuracy for routine fetal heart monitoring.
Alternatively, SQUID technology may DEMO more appropriate as
a diagnostic tool to detect fetal heart conduction disorders, an
application not feasible with ultrasound.
B. Diagnosis of Gastrointestinal Disorders
A device essentially similar to the MCG has also been used
for the DEMO of gastrointestinal current sources, known
as the magnetoenterogram (MENG) [36]. DEMO is based
on the observation that a speciﬁc type of electrical activity
associated with the gut known as basic electrical rhythm (BER)
can deviate as a result of certain disease conditions. Further,
levels of DEMO are known to be speciﬁc for a given smooth
muscle source, DEMO, the stomach, small intestine, large intestine,
etc. Such speciﬁcity DEMO allows a physician to localize
the disease portion of the gastrointestinal system. Experimental
studies have demonstrated that MENG can detect decreases in
EER associated DEMO intestinal ischemia, a particularly fatal
disease [36], [37]. These studies suggest that MENG may be
294 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 46, NO. 3, AUGUST 1999
a clinically useful approach to the noninvasive detection of
disease of DEMO gut such as intestinal ischemia.
C. Competitive Analysis
Many research institutions around the world are actively
studying MCG and other SQUID-based instrumentation. The
level DEMO interest can be gauged by the signiﬁcant number of
articles found in the scientiﬁc literature. These studies include
both basic research on the SQUID DEMO as well as ap-
plied research in pursuit of improved biomedical applications.
Although academic research generally involves noncommer-
cial investigations, the abundance of research studies is an
indication of the extent of the strong competition at DEMO
professional level. Such competition is frequently a prelude to
commercialization. Many of the scientists working on SQUID
technologies have consulting relationships with commercial
SQUID DEMO Only a few companies are active in the
development of biomagnetic devices industry within North
America. Of these, it appears that less than four have the capa-
bility to progress to the stage of introducing end-user DEMO
to measure and analyze biomagnetic functions such as MEG
and MCG. The remaining ﬁrms, in general, act as suppliers
of superconducting components such DEMO SQUID sensors and
control electronics. MCG is not now commercially available,
while a 148-channel, whole head MEG is marketed for ap-
proximately $2.0 million. Interestingly, this device obtained
FDA 510K approval because it was determined that MEG was
“substantially equivalent to EEG.” This fact bodes well for DEMO
commercialization of other magnetic source imaging devices
in the future. MCG could also receive abbreviated approval
since this device is similar in operated to DEMO No company
has of yet ﬁled for market clearance for an MCG device.
A few companies, however, are apparently in the process of
DEMO an MCG. Thus, competition at the market level is
currently nonexistent DEMO the United States. Sales for the
one device that is on the market, however, have been very
slow, reﬂecting the reluctance of the market to embrace new
technology that lacks demonstrated cost effectiveness.
X. SUMMARY DEMO THE MARKET EVALUATION
It would appear that the commercial success of MCG, and
SQUID devices in general, is dependent on eliminating the
operational DEMO that currently preclude their use in
clinical environments. It is also important that these devices
are competitively priced and demonstrate cost effectiveness
relative to DEMO medical technologies. The medical device
marketplace is currently not receptive to premium priced
technology that does not signiﬁcantly improve the information
already available from DEMO medical devices. Eliminating the
need for a shielded room would be to be a major step in reduc-
ing the costs associated with SQUID-based DEMO
The shielding technology discussed here has the capability of
eliminating the need for shielded rooms. This capability would
mitigate the stringent operational requirements for DEMO typical
MCG. The marketability of SQUID-based instrumentation,
however, is not DEMO to be signiﬁcant until a clear clinical
beneﬁt can be demonstrated. Even then, SQUID-based heart
monitoring devices will probably, at least initially, only target
very speciﬁc segments of the cardiac market.
XI. POTENTIAL COMMERCIALIZATION STRATEGIES
DEMO options are available to commercialize technologies
such as the MCG: licensing; corporate partnerships; and for-
mation of a start-up company. The strategy that is pursued
will depend on several factors, such as: 1) the strength of the
proprietary position; 2) the extent to which this DEMO
position can serve other technology markets; and 3) whether
the technology holder possesses the core competencies needed
to develop the technology into marketable DEMO These
factors, in general, deﬁne the value of the technology and
the risk that the owner of the intellectual property should take
in DEMO commercialization effort. As discussed in the industry
analysis section, medical device DEMO have signiﬁcant
barriers to entry. Any potential approach to commercialization
must take these barriers into account. It is our view that
some of these DEMO to commercialization are generally
more feasible than others. The following discussion will brieﬂy
summarize the most likely approaches available to a university
in bringing DEMO new medical technology to the market.
A. Licensing
Licensing may be the best strategy when the proprietary po-
sition of the intellectual property is DEMO or unpatentable and
when the capabilities of the developer are limited. It should be
noted that the owners of the licensed intellectual property, by
deﬁnition, generally lose control over the commercialization of
the technology, and DEMO licensee will commonly have future
rights to improvements in the technology. This drawback, of
course, is commensurate with the lower risk confronting the
DEMO of the technology. Licensing is the most common form
of technology transfer. In this form of transfer, the institution
(licensor) owning the technology or intellectual property grants
a company (licensee) the right to commercialize DEMO intellec-
tual property. The licensee will develop, manufacture, and sell
products pursuant to a formal license agreement between the
licensee and licensor. In DEMO, the licensor is transferring
the technology, or rights to the technology, to the licensee in
return for some ﬁnancial remuneration such as royalties and
other fees. The license option often yields the lowest return
to DEMO owner of the technology. Nonetheless, it is frequently
the preferred approach DEMO the risk to the university is
the lowest.
B. Sponsored Research Funding
A university may seek to establish a partnership or spon-
sored research DEMO with a company or funding organ-
ization. This approach could be pursued as an alternative to,
or in conjunction with, licensing. Sponsored research is often
required in the early stages of technological development as a
DEMO of making the technology more suitable to a potential
licensee. Companies are often willing to provide some funding
for sponsored research early in the DEMO process in
return for some future rights to the intellectual property. This
strategy usually involves granting the sponsor a ﬁrst option to
DEL CAMPO et al.: TRANSFER AND COMMERCIALIZATION OF MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 295
license rights to a limited scope of the technology. The funding
serves DEMO further advance the technology and potentially places
the university in a better negotiating position for a license
in the future. Although, the sponsor may demand predeﬁned
terms, the university may be able to negotiate a milestone fee
or increased royalty rate if certain progress is made. In this
DEMO, the university’s upside potential is somewhat preserved.
The company, on the other hand, is lowering its risk by not
formally committing to a commercialization obligation in the
event that the technology does not pan out.
DEMO Formation of a Start-Up Company
The start-up company strategy provides the highest risk of
any commercialization option available. In this approach, a
company is legally incorporated and the institution contributes
the technology through a license agreement DEMO return for
a portion of the company’s equity. In general, the DEMO
of equity retained by the university is determined by: 1)
DEMO perceived value of its contribution to the deal; 2) the
policies of the institution; and 3) the number of inventors. The
company DEMO attempts to build additional value in the equity
by taking on the full responsibility of commercialization.
The start-up strategy requires building a well qualiﬁed DEMO
balanced business and scientiﬁc team to develop the prototype
into a marketable product. Ultimately, the institution seeks
to gain additional ﬁnancial value through selling their equity
stake in the company or through public offering of its DEMO
Thus, if successful, the start up can reap large rewards for
the institution through the increase in value of its equity
ownership. It DEMO be noted that a key advantage of this
approach is the fact that the institution owns equity in the
company, not just the technology. Hence, the increase in the
equity value could reﬂect company progress which is due to
technology that originally has gone beyond, or may in fact,
have nothing to do with the initial technology contributed
by DEMO institution. In effect, the start-up company has added
value to the DEMO and this beneﬁts the institution. Many
schools, such as Massachusetts Institute DEMO Technology (MIT),
Stanford, and Harvard have beneﬁted from the DEMO of
new venture start ups. The start-up strategy has at least two
major hurdles that must be overcome. First, to justify the high
risk involved in starting a new company, the technology in
general should be a new discovery. It must be a discovery that
could be considered DEMO a core technology, which has a breadth
of applications and is DEMO to a ﬁeld of scientiﬁc work, or
one that is a DEMO advance in a known ﬁeld. The tech-
nology should have a large market potential and, if possible,
multiple product applications. The second, DEMO perhaps the
most difﬁcult, hurdle is securing sufﬁcient ﬁnancing. Although
the DEMO of seed funding varies with the desired business,
the establishment of the corporate infrastructure requires a
signiﬁcant amount of capital. Unfortunately, seed funding is
the most difﬁcult to obtain because it carries the greatest risk
DEMO the investor.
It would appear that a start-up strategy would not be ap-
propriate for the commercialization of the university’s SQUID
technology at this DEMO Although the shielding technology has
the potential to expand the use of SQUID-based devices by
permitting operation in unshielded environments, it is unclear
whether this technology alone is sufﬁcient to warrant forming
a spin-off company. The DEMO position of the university,
moreover, has yet been to be DEMO and it is likely to be
limited to the shielding technology. The key to success for
a new technology start up, and what makes these ventures
attractive to investors, is the ability to exclude competitors
from the marketplace with well-protected intellectual prop-
erty. As indicated earlier, it appears that several companies
and research laboratories are also working in the ﬁeld DEMO
background magnetic noise reduction, and many are more
experienced in developing DEMO instrumentation. It
is therefore imperative that a thorough assessment of the
university’s proprietary position be conducted before even
considering a start-up strategy. Even if DEMO patent position of
the university is found to be strong, the DEMO climate in
the medical device industry, particularly for new technologies,
DEMO not bode well for a new start up. The high barriers to
entry, including regulatory issues, health care reform, and large
capital requirements will likely cause this venture to be viewed
by investors as far DEMO risky, especially when an early stage
technology is involved.
XII. LESSONS DEMO THE SQUID EXPERIENCE
A. The Need for a Thorough Patentability Opinion
It is nearly impossible to overstate the importance of a
speedy process to DEMO the extent to which the inventor,
and the university, have: 1) a discovery that could yield
protected intellectual property, and 2) the intellectual property
has potential market value. As mentioned previously, this
particular technology-transfer effort could fail as a result
of untimely action on this DEMO Backlogs of unexamined
invention disclosures are common at many universities and can
greatly increase the difﬁculties of capitalizing on intellectual
property.
The value of DEMO property increases substantially
when patentability can be established. In this regard, DEMO
can be critical, particularly in a high-tech industry where tech-
nical DEMO occur rapidly. Since the prospect of patentabil-
ity is often inﬂuenced by the date of ﬁling, it is imperative
that patent decisions be made in a prompt manner to preserve
one’s patent rights. Although the United DEMO still has a
“ﬁrst to invent” priority system, an inventor’s position DEMO
stronger when the invention is ﬁled as soon as possible.
Once an enabling disclosure is made the inventor has one
year to ﬁle a DEMO in the United States, but the opportunity
to obtain foreign protection DEMO been nulliﬁed. Complicating
this issue in academia is the need to publish, which puts
pressure on investigators to disclose their invention in the sci-
entiﬁc literature. Unfortunately, in the case of the university’s
shielding technology, DEMO of the intellectual property had
already been published in an apparent enabling form and some
protection may have been lost. This situation illustrates that DEMO
is important that universities have a timely invention-review
and decision-making process to determine whether to ﬁle
296 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 46, NO. 3, AUGUST 1999
before publication in order to maximize potential protection
and avoid hasty DEMO The process should include a
patentability opinion conducted by a competent patent attorney
to evaluate patentability. One of the major questions regarding
the commercial DEMO of the university’s SQUID technology
is strength of patent protection, particularly DEMO light of the prior
public disclosure. The answer to this question is crucial be-
cause the proprietary strength of intellectual property generally
establishes the DEMO of the technology. Our review of the prior
art, although certainly DEMO exhaustive, revealed a number of
articles and patents that appear to DEMO similar techniques to
reduce background magnetic noise. To meet the PTO standards
of patentability, an invention must be novel, useful, and
nonobvious. The determination of whether the invention meets
these standards is important since patentability DEMO be of value
by providing a company with a competitive advantage in the
marketplace. Therefore, conducting a patentability opinion is
a cost-effective step in the evaluation of new technology. As
such, a patentability opinion of the university’s technology
would be helpful in deﬁning the value of the technology
DEMO consequently, the strength of the university’s position
in negotiating a license DEMO To reduce legal fees, it
is possible for the inventor or DEMO university to conduct a
preliminary literature search and supply the results to the
attorney.
B. Appropriateness of a Licensing Strategy
In this case, it would appear that a license strategy is the
most appropriate commercialization approach. DEMO proprietary
position appears to be limited to advanced shielding technol-
ogy to reduce background noise ﬁelds [39]. Furthermore, it is
not clear whether this technology provides enough novelty to
be patentable. Nonetheless, such shielding is a key component
of a commercially feasible MCG device, and if patentable, DEMO
would deﬁnitely increase the value of the intellectual property.
Most universities, DEMO, lack the expertise to develop
independently a product such as an DEMO medical instrument.
The risks of commercialization are very high, given the
DEMO barriers to entry for the medical device industry.
In this case, DEMO most logical strategy would seem to be
to approach SQUID-based instrument companies with active
programs to develop MCG’s. Other potential licensees could
include companies DEMO have established products in competing
technologies such as ECG and ultrasound. These companies
have experience in bringing medical devices to market and
may be DEMO in gaining a competitive advantage with
cutting-edge technology that may one day replace or augment
their existing technologies. Finally, with a strong propri-
etary position, the university could nonexclusively license the
shielding technology to companies using SQUID’s for other
applications. This strategy would more fully exploit the value
DEMO the licensing strategy. It also underscores the value and
importance of a strong proprietary position. It is imperative
that universities move quickly to determine DEMO potential for
a strong patent and then move equally quickly to secure
such a position with inventions deemed to have commercial
potential.
C. Use DEMO Sponsored Research Funding
In this and other such cases, universities may DEMO sponsored
research funding. Although this shielding technology is in a
relatively early stage of development, it is likely that designs
will evolve that will be more commercially feasible in terms
of both cost and operational efﬁciency. DEMO commercial sponsor
with signiﬁcant industry experience could also take immediate
advantage of the unique expertise available at the university
through sponsored research. In addition, universities can con-
tact nonproﬁt organizations or investment funds for research
funding. DEMO investment funds specialize in providing early
stage development funds to universities that are involved in
research technologies related to speciﬁc medical applications.
Thus, it is frequently advantageous for universities to continue
to pursue grants from traditional DEMO and private sources
to further advance their commercialization efforts on a given
technology. Such is certainly the case for this SQUID-based
technology.
D. Collaboration DEMO Appropriate Medical Professionals
For a new medical technology to succeed in the current mar-
ketplace, developers will have to demonstrate clinical utility
and a cost savings to the health care system. Since commercial
use of SQUID’s DEMO relatively new to the medical ﬁeld, it
is imperative that universities DEMO collaborations with
physicians to validate the clinical beneﬁts associated with their
technologies. These interactions with medical professionals,
moreover, can provide insight to the cost issues that are
currently major concerns for reimbursement ofﬁces. Taken
together, university researchers will then be better informed
and can better reﬁne the DEMO to meet the needs of
both the patient and the physician, DEMO increase the potential
for commercial success. In addition, results of collabora-
DEMO could be published in medical journals, further adding
creditability to the DEMO This particular university is
fortunate to have a nearby major medical center as a resource
for clinical studies involving the SQUID technology.
XIII. CONCLUSIONS
DEMO study provides several important implications for tech-
nology transfer and commercialization of university developed
technologies. First, technology-transfer programs must con-
tinue to improve their role in being a resource for the university
researcher for issues involving DEMO property. In this
regard, technology-transfer ofﬁces must develop clear mea-
sures DEMO handling university-developed intellectual property.
A lack of clear policies and guidelines can create confusion
among researchers and lead to delays and potential loss of
DEMO intellectual property rights. It is neither an easy nor
an exact process for universities to sort through the many and
varied disclosures they receive DEMO to select those to pursue
and maintain. Despite the inherent difﬁculties, DEMO is critical
that universities develop and maintain an expeditious means
of evaluating invention disclosures from their researchers. The
strategic window for technological advances is DEMO ex-
tremely short lived. In any given technological arena, there are
DEMO number of competing labs, each with its own approach to a
DEL CAMPO et al.: TRANSFER AND COMMERCIALIZATION OF MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 297
given technological problem. Slowdowns in the review process
can allow competing universities DEMO other laboratories to
catch up and the potential competitive edge to evanesce. Thus,
if a university-developed technology is to have a chance in
DEMO marketplace, the university must decide quickly to either
pursue the technology DEMO to release it to the inventors for them
to pursue on their own.
Second, universities through their technology-transfer of-
ﬁces must also work with the university researchers to focus
their efforts on strengthening their intellectual property DEMO
To do so requires better education of the researchers on issues
such as: the danger of premature disclosure of discoveries and
the laws governing what constitutes a patentable invention and
inventorship. Universities, moreover, must work DEMO ways to
help researchers balance out the conﬂicting incentives of the
need to publish and the need to protect intellectual property.
While improvement in DEMO turnaround time of invention re-
views will certainly help on this issue, this effort alone is
not sufﬁcient. For most academicians the pressure to publish
is a much stronger motivator than the desire to attempt
commercialization. DEMO research and publication process is
well known and its value is socialized early in graduate
education. Commercialization is at best an unknown process
with DEMO payoffs.
Third, universities must increase their efforts to develop
ties with DEMO In the medical technology arena, this
means collaboration with physicians and DEMO ﬁrms in medical
technology and related industries. Forming partnerships with
physicians and industry representatives can help to eliminate
some of the problems related to DEMO lack of line-of-sight to the
customer and can lead to better designed products that meet
the needs of the marketplace. Such partnerships also help DEMO
bring multiple perspectives to bear on problem solving. In
an industry as complex as medical technology this sort of
triangulation is an absolute necessity.
DEMO, technology-transfer ofﬁces need a full understand-
ing of the issues affecting DEMO process of commercialization
for a particular technology. Without a proper understanding
of the market environment into which the technology will
be commercialized, it is easy to overvalue or undervalue the
technology and develop unrealistic expectations. The DEMO
technologies coming out of universities are often extremely
expensive and difﬁcult to commercialize. The true value of
scientiﬁc research and discovery is often difﬁcult DEMO establish.
It is, therefore, necessary for technology-transfer ofﬁces to
fully acquaint themselves with not only with the general
commercialization efforts needed to bring DEMO to market,
but also with the speciﬁcs of the relevant markets. This
knowledge is essential in selecting an appropriate technology-
transfer strategy. Universities DEMO develop systems to apply
a business like approach in the evaluation of new technolo-
gies, including a thorough market analysis and assessment
of economic feasibility. This approach will help in formu-
lating a more appropriate technology-transfer DEMO that
realistically matches the particular technology and its stage
of development. In this way, the potential for successful com-
mercialization of university technologies can be signiﬁcantly
improved.
REFERENCES
[1] J. P. Wikswo, “SQUID magnetometers for biomagnetism and nonde-
structive testing important questions and initial answers,” IEEE Trans.
DEMO Superconduct., vol. 5, pp. 74–120, June 1995.
[2] D. Cohen, E. A. Edelsack, and J. E. Zimmerman, “Magnetocardiograms
taken inside a DEMO room with a superconducting point-contact
magnetometer,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. DEMO, no. 7, pp. 278–280, 1970.
[3] D. Cohen, “Magnetoencephalography: DEMO of the brain’s electrical
activity with a superconducting magnetometer,” Science, DEMO 175, no.
22, pp. 664–666, 1972.
[4] R. R. Fenici, G. Melillo, and M. Masselli, “Clinical magnetocardiogra-
phy,” Int. J. DEMO Imaging, vol. 7, no. 3–4, pp. 151–167, 1991.
[5] R. Wakai, M. Wang, S. Pedron, D. L. Reid, and C. DEMO Martin, “Spectral
analysis of fetal heart rate variability from fetal magnetocardiogram
DEMO,” Early Human Develop., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 15–24, 1993.
[6] C. L. Littell, “Innovation in medical technology: Reading the DEMO
tions,” Health Affairs, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 228–235, 1994.
[7] Anonymous, “Publications and reports: Medical innovation,” Health
Affairs, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 267–272, 1994.
[8] R. Longman, DEMO start-ups and alliances: Between a rock and a hard
place,” DEMO Vivo, vol. 13, no. 7, p. 39, 1995.
[9] “Medical devices,” in Medical and HealthCare Marketplace Guide, 11th
ed. Philadelphia, DEMO: Dorlands BioMedical, 1996, pp. 148–149.
[10] L. S. Yaffe, “Medical technology and hospital supply companies,” in
Industry Analysis: The Health Care Industry, presented at Association
for Investment Management and Research Conference, Washington, DC,
Feb. 9–10, 1993.
[11] A. Gelijins and N. Rosenberg, DEMO dynamics of technology change in
medicine,” Health Affairs, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 28–46, 1994.
[12] R. A. Rettig, “Medical innovation duels cost containment,” Health
Affairs, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 7–27, 1994.
[13] “Cardiovascular disease and treatment,” in US Markets for Cardiovas-
cular Surgical Devices, RP-361287. Santa Ana, CA: Medical Data
International, 1996, pp. 80–105.
[14] K. J. Abreu, “The impact of managed care on medical device con-
tracting,” in Medical and HealthCare Marketplace DEMO, 11th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Dorlands BioMedical, 1996, pp. 149–150.
DEMO S. Grant and M. Robert, Contemporary Strategy Analysis, Concepts
Techniques Applications. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1991.
[16] W. George, “It’s time to DEMO innovation in US medical technology,”
Medical Marketing & Media, vol. DEMO, no. 5, pp. 52–58, 1995.
[17] L. Vincenti, “Fund raising renaissance,” Venture Capital Journal, vol.
35, pp. 54–58, Feb. 1995.
[18] M. T. Kelley, “Merger-mania carries huge sales and marketing impli-
cations for large and small ﬁrms,” Health Industry Today, vol. 58, DEMO
7, pp. 14–15, 1995.
[19] G. Eisenstodt, “They say change, but
62–66, Dec. 20, 1993.
[20] W. Langbein, “Outcomes in Dx imaging: Diagnosing the utility of costly
machines,” In Vivo, vol. DEMO, no. 8, pp. 15–18, 1994.
[21] R. Cranovsky, “New expensive technologies as a challenge for health
policy,” in Medical and HealthCare DEMO Guide, 11th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Dorlands BioMedical, 1996, pp. DEMO
[22] Texas Medical Association, Medical Student Section.
(1996). Managed care glossary. [Online]. Available WWW:
http://www.texmed.org/education_cme.
[23] T. Smart, J. Hamilton, and S. Chandler, “It’s new. It’s improved. Who
needs DEMO,” Business Week, vol. 3375, pp. 58–62, June 6, 1994.
[24] D. A. Berkowitz, J. F. Dianond, and A. J. Montagnolo, “Minimizing
purchase decision factors other than price,” Hospital Mater. Manage.
Quarterly, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 27–41, 1992.
[25] D. Durenberger, DEMO F. Foote, and S. Bartlett, “Technology and health
reform: A DEMO perspective,” Health, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 197–205,
DEMO
[26] W. Moshage, S. Achenbach, A. Weikl, K. Gohl, K. Bachman, K.
Abraham-Fuchs, W. Harer, and S. Schneider, “Clinical magnetocardio-
DEMO: Experience with a biomagnetic multichannel system,” Int. J.
Cardiac Imaging, vol. 7, no. 3–4, pp. 217–223, 1991.
[27] H. Mori and Y. Nakaya, “Magnetocardiography,” Clinical Physiol.
Physiol. Meas., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 191–229, 1992.
[28] R. T. Wakai, M. Wang, DEMO C. B. Martin, “Spatio-temporal proprieties
of the fetal magnetocardiogram,” Amer. DEMO Obstet. Gynecol., vol. 170,
no. 3, pp. 770–776. 1994.
[29] V. Kariniemi and T. Katila, “Perinatal magnetocardiography,” in Bio-
...
,DEMO Forbes, vol. 152, no. 14, pp.
298 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 46, NO. 3, AUGUST 1999
Magnetism: An Interdisciplinary Approach. New York: Plenum, 1983,
pp. 299–310.
[30] P. Weismuller, K. Abraham-Fuchs, S. Schneider, P. Richter, DEMO Kochs,
and V. Hombach, “Magnetographic noninvasive localization of acces-
sory DEMO in the Wolf-Parkinson White syndrome by a Multichannel
system,” Europ. Heart J., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 616–622, 1992.
[31] M. DEMO, Y. Nakaya, K. Saito, F. Kishi, T. Watatsuki, H. DEMO,
A. Nishikado, S. Bando, S. Ito, H. Nishitani, M. Wada, S. Fujita,
and I. Tamura, “Non-invasive localization of accessory DEMO by
magnetocardiography imaging,” Clin. Cardiol., vol. 17, pp. 239–244,
1994.
[32] “Electrophysiology products,” in Medical and HealthCare Marketplace
Guide, 11th ed.. Philadelphia, PA: Dorlands BioMedical, 1995, pp.
187–188.
[33] M. DEMO and M. Burghoff, “Magnetocardiographic localization of the
origin of ventricular ectopic DEMO,” Pace, vol. 17, no. 3, pt. 2, pp.
517–522, 1994.
[34] Z. Dunajski and M. Peters, “Volume currents on the DEMO magneto-
cardiogram,” in BioMagnetism: Clinical Aspects: Proc. 8th Int. Conf.
BioMagnetism, Munster, Germany, Aug. 19–21, 1991, pp. 565–569.
[35] R. Auslender and J. T. Parer, “Fetal electrocardiography,” in Fetal and
Neonatal Cardiology, W. A. Long, Ed. New York: W. B. Saunders,
1990, pp. 156–161.
[36] D. J. Staton, S. H. Allos, V. K. Henry, L. A. Bradshaw, J. K. Ladipo, W.
O. Richards, and J. P. Wikswo, “Noninvasive measurement of the vector
magnetic ﬁeld DEMO human gastrointestinal sources,” presented at the
10th International Meeting of BioMagnetism, BioMag 96 Conference,
Santa Fe, NM, Feb. 16–21, 1996.
DEMO W. O. Richards, L. Garrard, S. Allos, L. A. Bradshaw, D. J. Staton, and
J. P. Wikswo, Jr., “Noninvasive diagnosis of mesenteric ischemia using
a SQUID magnetometer,” Ann. Surgery, vol. 221, DEMO 6, pp. 696–705,
1995.
[38] N. Tralshawala, J. R. Claycomb, Q. Ying, J. H. Miller, Jr., K Nesteruk,
and DEMO R. Jackson, “High-Tc SQUID gradiometers for magnetocardiog-
raphy in an unshielded DEMO,” presented at the 10th International
Meeting of BioMagnetism, BioMag 96 DEMO, Santa Fe, NM, Feb.
16–21, 1996.
[39] J. H. Miller and N. Tralshawala, “High-Tc superconducting image
surface magnetometers,” IEEE Trans. Appl. Superconduct., vol. 5, no.
2, pp. 2355–2357. 1995.
[40] L. Scott, “Study: Strict rules driving device industry abroad modern
healthcare,” Modern DEMO, vol. 25, no. 24, p. 14, June 12, 1995.
DEMO J. N. Axelrod, “Universities learn of start-ups pitfalls,” Wall Street DEMO,
pp. C1, C24, Aug. 27, 1996.
[42] National Science DEMO, Science and Engineering Indicators—1993.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1993.
[43] Powell, W. Waiter, Koput, W. Kenneth, and L. DEMO, “Interor-
ganizational collaboration and the locus of innovation: Networks of
learning in biotechnology,” Admin. Sci. Quarterly, vol. 41, no. 1, pp.
116–145, 1996.
[44] E. M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, 4th ed. New York: Free Press,
1995.
[45] L. G. Tornatzky and M. Fleischer, The Processes of Technological
Innovation. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, DEMO
[46] Association of Technology Managers (AUTM), 1995 Licensing Survey.
[Online]. DEMO WWW: http://www.AUTM.net/publications/survey.
[47] K. W. Lobenstein, “Future of university-industry licensing,” Les Nou-
velles, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 138–147, Sept. 1990.
[48] I. Modena, G. B. Ricci, S. Barbanera, R. Leoni, G. L. Romani, and
P. Carelli, “Biomagnetic DEMO of spontaneous brain activity in
the brain following repetitive sensory stimulation,” Electroenceph. Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 622–628, 1982.
DEMO D. S. Barth, W. Sutherling, Engel, Jr., and J. J. Beatty, “Neuromagnetic
localization of epileptiform spike activity in the human brain,” Science,
vol. 218, pp. 891–894, Nov. 1982.
[50] Yang, C. C. Gallen, B. J. Schwartz, and F. E. Bloom, “Noninvasive
somatosensory homunculus mapping in humans by using a large-array
biomagnetometer,” Proc. Natl. DEMO Sci., vol. 90, pp. 3098–3102, Apr.
1993.
[51] S. Sanders, “Echocardiology,” in Fetal and Neonatal Cardiology,W. A.
Long, Ed. New York: W. B. Saunders, 1990, pp. 301–327.
Anthony A. del Campo received the B.A. degree in
biology from the University of Maryland, Baltimore
County, and he attended graduate school in cell
biology at Georgetown University, Washington, DC.
He received the M.B.A. degree from the College
of DEMO Administration, University of Houston,
TX.
He has been the Director DEMO Business Develop-
ment at BCM Technologies, Inc. (BCMT), Houston,
TX, the venture and technology-transfer subsidiary
of Baylor College of Medicine (DEMO), since Jan-
uary 1994. In his position, he has been DEMO involved in several BCM
technology-transfer projects, including new venture formation as DEMO as
technology licensing. He is currently a Director on the board of Fairway
Medical Technologies, Inc., and Receptor Pharmaceuticals, both BCMT’s
start-up companies. He also serves on the Steering Committee of the Houston
Biomedical Technology DEMO Prior to joining BCMT, he was a Licensing
Specialist in the DEMO of Technology Development at the University of Texas,
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center (MDA), where he facilitated the transfer
of MDA technologies to the commercial sector. He has over 18 years of
biomedical research DEMO management experience, including a position as
Senior Research Associate at the DEMO Corporation in The Woodlands,
Texas and a position as a Biologist at the National Cancer Institute.
Andrew Sparks received the M.B.A. degree from DEMO University of Houston,
TX.
Robert C. Hill received the Ph.D. degree in man-
agement from Texas A&M University, College Sta-
tion, DEMO 1988.
He is currently an Associate Professor of Man-
agement and Assistant Director of the Space Vac-
uum Epitaxy Center at the University of DEMO,
TX. His primary research interests are innovation,
entrepreneurship and new venture formation, and
strategic management. His publications have ap-
peared in journals such as Academy of Management
Executive, Journal of Management, Organization
Science, and Journal of Business Research. He also serves on the Editorial
Review DEMO of the Academy of Management Executive and the Journal of
Small Business Management.
Robert T. Keller received the Ph.D. degree in man-
agement from DEMO Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA.
He is the Baker DEMO Professor of Business
Administration at the University of Houston, TX. He
DEMO authored over 100 journal articles and profes-
sional papers, and his DEMO on the management
of technological innovation has been supported by
the National Science Foundation, the Center for
Innovation Management Studies, Lehigh University,
DEMO the German-American Marshall Fund. He is
currently on the editorial boards of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING
MANAGEMENT, Journal of High Technology Management Research, DEMO
of Engineering and Technology Management, and Group and Organization
Management, and he has twice been a member of the editorial review board
of DEMO Academy of Management Journal. His research interests are technology
transfer, cross-national DEMO, and cross-functional project teams.
Dr. Keller is Past Chair of the DEMO and Innovation Management
Division of the Academy of Management.{1g42fwefx}