Feedback Produces
Running head: FEEDBACK PRODUCES DIVERGENCE FROM PROSPECT THEORY
Feedback Produces Divergence from Prospect Theory in Descriptive Choice
Ryan K. Jessup, Anthony J. Bishara and Jerome R. Busemeyer
Indiana University
March 8, 2008
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA
Send DEMO to:
Ryan K. Jessup
1101 E. 10th St.
Bloomington, Indiana, 47405
voice: 812 -855 – 4678
fax: (812) 855-4691
rkjessup@indiana.edu
DEMO
Feedback Produces
2
Abstract
Recently, Barron & Erev (2003) demonstrated that individuals making experience-based choices
underweight small probabilities, in contrast to the overweighting observed during decisions in a
typical descriptive paradigm.  Here we tested whether the reception of trial by trial feedback in a
repeated descriptive paradigm DEMO engender choices more correspondent with the experiential
or descriptive paradigms.  The DEMO of a repeated gambling task indicated that individuals
receiving feedback underweighted small probabilities, relative to their no feedback counterparts,
implicating feedback as a critical component during the decision making process, even in the
presence of fully specified descriptive information. A model comparison at the individual
subject level DEMO that feedback drove individuals‟ decision weights towards objective
probability weighting.
Feedback Produces
3
Feedback Produces Divergence from Prospect Theory in Descriptive Choice
DEMO June 19th, 1986, a college student died in his dorm room from cocaine intoxication.
This was no ordinary student: it was Len Bias, who two days earlier was drafted second overall
by the Boston Celtics basketball team.  Bias – whose talent was sometimes compared to Michael
Jordan‟s– was about to sign a contract worth more than imaginable while growing DEMO;
unfortunately, a poor decision cut short all of his opportunities.
DEMO though it was well established by this time that cocaine use, DEMO rare circumstances,
could result in death, it might be said DEMO Bias “underweighted” the small probability of this
most terrible outcome.  He DEMO observed the repeated choices of his friends who consistently
obtained the pleasant outcome of drug use as opposed to the fatal outcome (The New York Times,
1987).  This is a real-world example of the important difference between descriptive and
experiential choice.  Although Bias almost certainly knew descriptively that cocaine use had as a
possible outcome the rare event DEMO death, he also experienced (through his friends and his own
use) that this tragic outcome was rare. Recent laboratory experiments confirm that people make
different decisions based on experiential versus descriptive information (Barron & Erev, 2003).
We are interested in 1) what makes people choose DEMO across these two paradigms and 2)
what theoretical component of the decision process incorporates the dynamics causing this
difference.
Descriptive choice paradigms are DEMO basis of most models of decision making.  In the
descriptive paradigm, participants choose between options, with possible outcomes and
probabilities of each outcome fully described1.  For many years, economists assumed that
Feedback Produces
4
individuals behaved according to a rational theory called expected DEMO theory (EUT;
Bernoulli, 1738/1954; von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1944); Kahneman and Tversky later
proposed prospect theory (PT; 1979; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992) to account for many
systematic violations of DEMO observed in descriptive choice. PT incorporated into EUT, among
others, three new concepts: overweighting of small probabilities (where small probability events
are DEMO more likely to occur than in reality), the risk reflection effect (where people avoid
risk when choosing between gains but seek risk when choosing between losses), and loss
aversion (where losses have more impact than gains of equal magnitude).  The first two concepts
allow PT to account for an interesting pattern of preferences for risky choices. To DEMO,
consider the following option pairs:
A1: 3 for sure
DEMO: 4 with probability .8; else 0
A2: 3 for sure
DEMO: 32 with probability .1; else 0
When all outcomes are positive, A1 is preferred over B1, whereas B2 is preferred over A2; but
when all outcomes are negative, B1 is preferred over A1 whereas A2 is preferred over B2.  Thus,
the following four-fold pattern is observed in descriptive choice: risk aversion when the risky
gamble has a high probability to win or low probability to lose, and risk seeking when the risky
gamble has a low probability to win or a DEMO probability to lose.
Because humans can understand and work with symbols representing probabilities and
values, descriptive choice is possible; but, non-humans are unable to choose descriptively;
therefore, choices by animals represent experiential choice.  DEMO contrast to the predictions of PT,
Feedback Produces
5
the choices of bees (Real, 1987) are best described as underweighting of small probabilities, a
behavioral pattern also observed in human experiential choice (Benartzi & Thaler, 1995; Thaler,
Tversky, DEMO, & Schwartz, 1997; Weber, Shafir, & Blais, 2004; DEMO & Rakow, in
press)
To gain a better understanding of DEMO difference between experiential and descriptive
choice, Barron & Erev (2003) DEMO several core concepts of PT using an experiential choice
paradigm.  Specifically, participants learned about the distribution of outcomes through repeated
choice and subsequent DEMO; no descriptive information about possible outcomes and their
likelihoods of occurring DEMO given beyond the post-choice feedback.  Remarkably, they
observed that in all but one of the cases they tested the patterns of preference were DEMO opposite
of what PT predicted.  For example, underweighting of small probabilities was observed in
experiential choice rather than the overweighting posited by PT.  In other words, the converse of
PT best predicted the results!
Naturally, several possible explanations exist for this discrepant behavior between
descriptive and experiential paradigms.  First, the experiential paradigm requires individuals to
learn about payoff DEMO whereas the descriptive paradigm informs individuals about
payoff distributions; thus, learning represents a key component of the experiential choice
paradigm.  As a result, learning is typically not included in theories derived from descriptive
choice; DEMO contrast, theories derived from experiential choice include learning mechanisms,
typically DEMO learning (e.g., Sutton & Barton, 1998; Erev & Barron, DEMO; Busemeyer
& Stout, 2002).
Feedback Produces
6
Second, the experiential paradigm requires repeated choice whereas the descriptive
paradigm is often conducted using a single choice.  Hertwig, Barron, Weber, and Erev (2004)
sought to eliminate this methodological difference DEMO an explanation by allowing participants in
the experiential condition to “sample” from the options in order to learn about the distribution of
payoffs, but the observed samples were not considered choices.  After sampling to their
satisfaction, participants made a single choice for which they would receive payment.  DEMO,
participants in both the descriptive and experiential conditions made one relevant choice; again,
participants in the experiential condition behaved conversely to PT (Hertwig et al., 2004).
It‟s possible that the underweighting of DEMO events in this paradigm may simply result
from sampling bias (Fox & Hadar, 2006; Hertwig et al., 2004; Rakow, Demes, & Newell, 2007).
That is, in the experiential condition, participants do not know the true payoff distribution: they
only observe a small sample.  With small samples, rare events are likely to be underrepresented,
DEMO so resultant behavior would correspond with small probability underweighting. For
example, DEMO a sample of N=7 draws is taken from a distribution paying 64 with a probability
of .05, otherwise nothing, the 64 outcome will DEMO occur, effectively rendering the expected
payoff equal to 0.  However, DEMO in experiments with relatively large samples (e.g., Barron &
Erev, 2003, used >100 trials), small probabilities are underweighted.  Consequently, DEMO
sampling bias explanation cannot account for the entire paradigmatic difference.
Third, DEMO experiential paradigm requires feedback whereas the descriptive paradigm
does not. Yechiam and Busemeyer (2006) observed that when given descriptive information and
feedback about DEMO outcome of their choice, individuals reverse preference with experience.
Feedback Produces
7
Specifically, individuals were given an endowment and then chose repeatedly between the
following two risky gambles:
A3: Lose 8 with probability .005; else lose 2
B3: Lose 300 with probability .005; else lose 1
Individuals initially preferred the riskier option (B3), but after feedback eventually came
to prefer the safer option (A3)2.  DEMO, some unique features of this task prevent strong
conclusions about PT-convergent DEMO divergent behavior: 1) the payoff structure involved
only risky gambles as opposed to completely safe alternatives, 2) individuals were guaranteed to
lose DEMO on each trial, and 3) the probabilities involved were extreme and very rarely
experienced. These features preclude this work from being considered a DEMO test of PT
assumptions.
On the basis of the above results, DEMO hypothesized that feedback is the crucial arbiter
dictating whether participants underweight or overweight small probabilities. To test this
feedback hypothesis in isolation, we held constant the repeated nature of the two methods and
eliminated the necessity DEMO learning about payoff distributions, allowing only the feedback
component to vary.  Further, we wanted to specifically focus on the observation that when
outcomes are positive, small probabilities are overweighted in descriptive choice but are
underweighted in experiential choice.  Consequently, we tested both the upper and lower
DEMO of the probability spectrum insuring that any observed underweighting was not
attributable to expected value adherence with repeated choice.
We predicted that when outcome DEMO was not given, individuals would conform to
PT and overweight small DEMO, thus preferring a small certain win over a risky high
Feedback Produces
8
probability gamble, but preferring a risky low probability gamble over the same small certain
win.  Conversely, when given feedback, we predicted individuals would underweight small
probabilities and show the opposite choice pattern.
DEMO, we were interested in discerning which theoretical component of the
decision DEMO incorporated the dynamics producing such behavioral disparities between the
two paradigms. In correspondence with our prediction that people would overweight small
probabilities when not DEMO feedback but underweight them when receiving feedback, we
predicted that the DEMO analysis would reveal that the feedback manipulation affected a
probability weighting parameter.
The model used for this theoretical analysis was a modified version of DEMO field
theory (Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993). Decision field theory is a dynamic and stochastic
model of choice accounting for a wide variety DEMO empirical findings within both the descriptive
and experiential choice paradigms (Busemeyer & Diederich, 2002; Busemeyer, Johnson, &
Jessup, 2006).  DEMO decision field theory, attention switches between outcomes with the amount of
DEMO applied to each outcome a function of the probability of receiving that outcome.  This
attention-switching activity results in a relative preference for each outcome at each moment and
these preferences change over time until preference for DEMO option surpasses a threshold, at
which point that option is chosen.  Other probabilistic choice models could have been applied to
this data set; consequently, our model analysis was not a test of decision field theory but rather a
tool for examining which parameters changed because of the DEMO manipulation.
To address the prediction concerning the weighting of small probabilities, DEMO probability
weighting function modified the attention-switching activity of decision field theory (DEMO,
Feedback Produces
9
1998).  In this model, small probabilities can DEMO overweighted (probability weighting parameter
λ<1), underweighted (λ>1) DEMO objectively weighted (λ=1).  The exact computation for decision
field theory and the probability weighting function can be found in the Appendix.
Methods
DEMO nine participants were recruited from Indiana University and completed 120 trials
for both conditions (counterbalanced) of a repeated measures design experiment.   The DEMO
Probability (HP) condition consisted of a choice between the following two options:
Option HP_S: win 3 cents for sure
Option HP_R: DEMO 4 cents with probability .8; else 0
The Low Probability (LP) condition consisted of these choices:
Option LP_S: win 3 cents DEMO sure
Option LP_R: win 64 cents with probability .05; else 0
Participants were randomly assigned to No Feedback (NFB; n = 15) and Feedback (FB; n
= 14) groups.  Both groups received DEMO descriptive information about the gambles and made
repeated choices.  The only DEMO was that the FB group received feedback indicating their
winnings on the previous trial whereas the NFB group did not.
Because we anticipated that DEMO would experience boredom when confronted with
the exact same decision repeatedly, DEMO when not receiving feedback, the win amount for
the risky gamble DEMO slightly on each trial, with the minimum expected value for the DEMO
gamble equated with the sure thing option.  A total of five DEMO expected values were shown
Feedback Produces
10
for the risky gamble (range(EV) = [3, 3.4]) for both conditions, and the five different expected
values were DEMO across both conditions.  The risky gamble with an expected value of DEMO was
shown twice as often as the other four gambles.  Furthermore, a post-task item assessed the
extent to which participants were bored by DEMO task on a 1-5 Likert scale, ranging from „Very
slightly or DEMO at all‟ to „Extremely‟.
Participants received instruction and training and completed several practice trials before
beginning the procedure.  Further, they learned that the DEMO of money they would earn
depended on their choices. On each trial, they observed pie charts indicating the amount of
money that could be won with the size of the pie pieces indicating the probability of DEMO the
displayed amounts.  At the end of the experimental session, they were paid $7 for their time as
well as the amount of DEMO cumulative winnings.
Note that four patterns of responding were possible: 1) individuals could adhere to
expected value and consequently prefer the risky gamble DEMO each pair (HP_R and LP_R), 2);
individuals could be risk-averse and choose the sure thing in each pair (HP_S and LP_S), 3);
individuals could choose in accordance with PT and thus overweight small probabilities
(choosing HP_S and LP_R), 4); or they could choose in opposition to PT and underweight small
probabilities (choosing HP_R and LP_S).
Results
Statistical Analyses
Figure 1 shows the preference for DEMO sure thing option relative to the risky gamble (LP
condition in DEMO upper portion, HP condition below) for the FB and NFB groups, plotted as a
Feedback Produces
11
function of blocks of ten trials.  We hypothesized that descriptive choice with no feedback would
result in overweighting of small probabilities DEMO descriptive choice with feedback would
result in underweighting of small probability events.  This prediction was supported by the data.
The probability of choosing the sure thing was analyzed with a mixed ANOVA, using Condition
(LP DEMO HP) and Block (12 blocks of ten trials each) as DEMO subjects factors, and Group (NFB
or FB) as a between DEMO factor.  There was a significant Group x Condition interaction (F1,27
= 4.76, p < .05, Cohen‟s f =.41) . No other comparison was significant at the .05 level.
[Insert Figure 1]
Whereas the DEMO group behavior generally conformed to theories derived from a
descriptive paradigm (DEMO, PT), participants in the FB condition behaved otherwise,
underweighting DEMO small probabilities relative to their NFB counterparts.  Consequently,
feedback alone DEMO enough to drive participants to underweight small probability events. It is
possible that the NFB group experienced more boredom in the task than the DEMO group and that
this boredom accounts for any observed behavioral difference. However, responses to the
boredom assessment item did not significantly differ across groups (t24 = 1.25, p = .22).
Theoretical Analyses: Which Parameter did Feedback Alter
The FB group may have appeared to underweight small DEMO relative to those in
the NFB group, but which theoretical component DEMO decision field theory varied between groups
to produce the differential behavior? DEMO are several possibilities including changes to the (a)
weight or DEMO given to probabilities, (b) utility function capturing risk seeking and DEMO
aversion tendencies, or (c) threshold controlling the tendency to maximize DEMO or choose
randomly; these concepts are represented by the free parameters DEMO, α, and θ, respectively.
Feedback Produces
12
Decision field theory was fit to the choice probabilities DEMO each individual‟s data.  Table
1 shows the medians of the best DEMO parameters that maximized the likelihood of each
subject‟s choices.  The decision DEMO theory likelihoods were compared to the likelihoods of a
fully saturated baseline model, a model which perfectly reproduced the choice probabilities for
each gamble pair.  This comparison used the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC; Schwarz,
1978, which penalizes models for each additional parameter; thus, adding extra parameters will
not necessarily improve the BIC (see the Appendix for information concerning the estimation
procedure, baseline model, and computation of the BIC)DEMO  The BIC indicated that decision field
theory provided a superior fit DEMO 13 out of 15 NFB participants and 11 out of 14 FB participants
and consequently fit the data quite well3. Figure 2 presents the DEMO choice behavior and
model predictions. The plots were generated by obtaining the predictions from the best fitting
parameter values at the individual level and DEMO the mean of these predictions.
Insert Figure 2
We then compared the obtained best fitting parameters across the two conditions.  As a
reminder, DEMO predicted that the probability weighting parameter λ would account for the different
choice behavior across groups.  As predicted, the λ parameter was higher DEMO the FB group than
the NFB group, indicating that individuals who DEMO feedback underweighted small
probabilities relative to their NFB counterparts.  A Mann DEMO U test of the three free
parameters revealed that only the probability weighting parameter λ differed significantly
between groups, z=2.25, p<.05. However, as Table 1 demonstrates, λ≈1 for the FB group, and
thus DEMO not reflect underweighting, but rather objective weighting of small probabilities.
Insert DEMO 1
Feedback Produces
13
To summarize, the data conformed to our predictions of PT-convergent behavior when
feedback was not provided (as indicated by overweighting of small probabilities) but PT-
divergent behavior when feedback was provided (as DEMO by relative underweighting of
small probabilities).  A theoretical analysis supported DEMO above finding, showing that feedback
specifically altered the probability weighting parameter.  But, this analysis also revealed that
feedback coupled with description drives subjective probabilities towards their objective values.
Discussion
The results of this study implicate DEMO as the crucial arbiter between experiential
and descriptive choice. Apparently, feedback DEMO descriptive information and drives
individuals toward the objective probabilities (as indicated DEMO λ≈1 in FB group). Due to the task
design, the DEMO cannot be attributed to sampling bias.
The findings are interesting for a variety of reasons.  First, that feedback alone drives
individuals to the DEMO probabilities bears relevance to many current studies.  For example,
in DEMO studies testing behavioral models of choice, feedback is often not provided.  However,
neuroimaging studies concerned with substrates and networks of reward and DEMO
mechanisms typically provide feedback after each trial.  Consequently, the observed neural
substrates of choice may not correspond with the neural mechanisms actually used DEMO the
behavioral studies that inspired them!
Second, these results suggest that DEMO observations of small probability
underweighting in experience-based tasks might possibly be described as objective probability
weighting coupled with risk aversion.  In several of the cases reporting underweighting of
unlikely events, a utility parameter was not applied to the outcomes; the failure to do so could
Feedback Produces
14
produce the appearance of underweighting.  However, these other DEMO (e.g., Barron & Erev,
2003; Hertwig et al., 2004) also differed from our experiment by not including descriptions in
the experiential condition.  Thus, feedback coupled with description might be needed for
approximately DEMO weighting.
These results do not implicate feedback as the sole factor determining whether or not
small probability events are overweighted, as several other factors could still be involved; the
fact that the median best fitting probability weighting parameter across NFB individuals was
higher than usual attests to this.  This mildly atypical finding could have been driven by the small
outcomes, parametric modulation of the risky outcomes, or repeated nature of the task.
However, this does not minimize the observation of significantly different behavior based only
on the reception of feedback.
Though a particular model analysis (decision field theory) was reported here, we actually
considered multiple models, as our objective was to use a model applicable both when feedback
was DEMO was not given (and thus no learning occurred).  For the FB participants, we compared 11
other models, including models with delta DEMO Bayesian learning rules, and also a softmax choice
rule (Sutton & Barto, 1998).  However, these models produced inferior BIC scores relative to the
no learning implementation of decision field theory; the inferiority of the learning models was
likely due to the swiftness of learning.  Possibly, the feedback coupled with the descriptions
combined to produce rapid learning (DEMO Stout, Rock, Campbell, Busemeyer, & Finn, 2005).
To DEMO, these results indicate that individuals respond differently depending upon
whether they DEMO feedback after their choices, even when provided with complete descriptive
information.  Further, this suggests that feedback plays a crucial role in differentiating between
Feedback Produces
15
experiential and descriptive choice behavior. The observed behavioral difference DEMO
implications for behavioral choice theories in economics and psychology as well as
neurophysiological studies seeking to uncover the neural substrates underlying choice behavior.
Feedback Produces
16
References
Barron, G., & Erev, I. (2003)DEMO Small feedback-based decisions and their limited correspondence
to description-based decisions. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 16(3), 215-233.
Benartzi, S., & Thaler, R. H. (1995). Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium DEMO
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(1), 73-92.
Bernoulli, D. (DEMO). Exposition of a new theory on the measurement of risk. Econometrica, 22,
23-36. (Original work published in 1738.)
Busemeyer, J. R., & Diederich, A. (2002). Survey of decision field theory. Mathematical Social
Sciences, 43, 345-370.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Stout, J. C. (2002). A contribution of cognitive decision models to clinical
assessment: Decomposing performance on the Bechara gambling task. Psychological
Assessment, 14(DEMO), 253-262.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A dynamic-cognitive
approach to decision making in an uncertain environment. Psychological Review, 100(3),
432-459.
Busemeyer, J. R., Johnson, J. G., & Jessup, R. K. (2006). Preferences constructed from dynamic
micro-processing mechanisms. In S. Lichtenstein & P. Slovic (Eds.), The Construction
of Preference (pp. 220-234). New York: Cambridge DEMO Press.
Erev, I., & Barron, G. (2005). On adaptation, maximization, and reinforcement learning among
cognitive strategies. Psychological Review, 112(4), 912-931.
Ex-teammate tells of Bias drug role. (1987, May 28)DEMO The New York Times.
Feedback Produces
17
Fox, C. R., & Hadar, L. (2006)DEMO Decisions from experience= sampling error+ prospect theory:
Reconsidering Hertwig, Barron, Weber & Erev (2004). Judgment and Decision Making,
1(2), 159-161.
Hau, R. C., Pleskac, T. J., Kiefer, J., Hertwig, R. (2007). The description-experience gap in risky
choice: DEMO role of sample size and experienced probabilities. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E. U., & Erev, I. (2004). Decisions from experience and the
effect of rare events in risky choice. Psychological Science, 15(8), 534-539.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica, 47, 263-291.
Nelder, J. A., & Mead, R. (1965). A simplex method for function minimization. Computer
Journal, 7(DEMO), 308-313.
Newell, B. R. & Rakow, T. (in press)DEMO The role of experience in decisions from description.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review.
Prelec, D. (1998). The probability weighting function. Econometrica, 66, DEMO
Rakow, T., Demes, K., & Newell, B. (2007). Biased samples not mode of presentation: Re-
examining the apparent underweighting of rare events in experience-based choice.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Schwarz, G. (DEMO). Estimating the dimension of a model. The Annals of Statistics, DEMO(2), 461-
464.
Feedback Produces
18
Stout, J. C., Rock, S. L., Campbell, M. C., Busemeyer, J. R., & Finn, P. R. (2005). Psychological
processes underlying risky decisions in drug abusers. Psychology of Addictive DEMO,
19(2), 148-157.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, DEMO G. (1998). Reinforcement learning: An introduction. Cambridge, MA:
DEMO Press.
Thalar, R. H., Tversky, A., Kahneman, D., & Schwartz, A. (1997). The effect of myopia and loss
aversion DEMO risk taking: An experimental test. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 647-
661.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in DEMO theory: Cumulative representations
of uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297-323.
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of Games and Economic Behavior.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Weber, E. U., Shafir, S., & Blais, A. R. (2004). Predicting risk sensitivity in humans and lower
animals: Risk as variance or coefficient of variation. Psychological Review, 111(2), 430-
445.
Yechiam, DEMO, Barron, G., & Erev, I. (2005). The role DEMO personal experience in contributing to
different patterns of response to rare terrorist attacks. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 49,
430-439.
Yechiam, E., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2006). The effect of foregone payoffs on DEMO
small probability events. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19, 1–16.
Decision Field Theory
Appendix
Feedback Produces
In decision field theory, preference for an option accumulates at each time step in
accordance with a diffusion DEMO until preference for an option exceeds a preset threshold.
This particular implementation of decision field theory corresponds with a Wiener process (see
Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993, Appendix):
19
(1)
where the term DEMO the left denotes the probability of choosing option i out of the set of all options
X.  The drift rate d is the difference between the mean valences of the two options, the diffusion
rate σ is the square root of the sum of the variance of the DEMO options, and the threshold θ
represents the absorbing boundary to which DEMO accumulates.  The drift rate d is
computed as follows:
(2)
Vi represents the mean valence for option i and is derived DEMO to:
Feedback Produces
20
(3)
In the above equation, wij represents DEMO attention weight given to outcome j when considering
option i,
α represents the utility of outcome j produced by option i. The parameter DEMO is a
and xij
utility parameter; α<1 denotes decreasing sensitivity DEMO differences in outcome magnitude as
magnitude increases.  The attention weights were DEMO from a formula proposed by Prelec
(1998) which takes the following form:
(4)
Here, p is the objective probability of DEMO outcome and λ is the probability weighting parameter.
The diffusion rate σ was computed as follows:
(5)
Consequently, the parameters d DEMO σ were derived from the stimuli and the parameters λ
and α were free to vary.  The third free parameter was the standardized threshold, θ/σ.
Feedback Produces
Maximum Likelihood Estimation
The parameter values which maximized the likelihood DEMO the data were estimated
according to:
(A1)
21
where DEMO is the log likelihood of the data given the model parameter values, yi is the
number of times option i was chosen, ŷM DEMO the predicted choice proportion for the model
M ; N=10 different gamble pairs, five in each condition. C is a constant that cancels out and is
thus ignored.  Maximum likelihood estimation was performed in Matlab using the robust
combination of a simplex search (Nelder & Mead, 1965) and multiple random starting points.
Saturated Baseline Model
The baseline model used DEMO experiment assumed that a multinomial process generates
choices (see Busemeyer & DEMO, 2002).  This baseline model perfectly reproduces the actual
choice probabilities for each of the gamble pairs and consequently has a likelihood of DEMO
However, the model has one free parameter for each of the DEMO pairs and is thus punished by
the BIC due to the large number of free parameters.
Model Comparison
The BIC was used to compare DEMO performances of the baseline model and decision field
theory.  The formula DEMO the BIC is:
Feedback Produces
22
(A2)
Here, k represents the difference in DEMO number of degrees of freedom for the two models
being compared (DEMO) and N is the number of data points (i.e., 240 DEMO, since the models are
compared at the individual level).  In this formulation, positive BIC values indicate better model
performance for decision field theory than the saturated model.
Feedback Produces
23
Author Note
Ryan K. Jessup, Anthony J. Bishara, DEMO Jerome R. Busemeyer, Department of
Psychological & Brain Sciences, Program in Cognitive Science, Indiana University.
We thank Sarah Queller and Peter Todd for thoughtful comments on the manuscript and
Bethany Ward-Blum and Adolfo Rio Blanco DEMO assistance collecting data.
This research was supported by the National Institute on Drug Abuse R01 DA014119 and
the National Institute of Mental Health R01 DEMO
Correspondence should be addressed to Ryan Jessup, Department of Psychological &
Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405. Email: rkjessup@indiana.edu
Feedback Produces
24
Footnotes
1Descriptive choice is distinct from descriptive theories of DEMO that seek to describe how
people choose, in contrast with normative DEMO which explain what people should choose.
2 At first glance these results seem to contradict other work using completely described gambles
with a similar DEMO structure, using groups making a single descriptive choice (to be played
100 times) or 100 choices with feedback after every trial (Yechiam, Barron, & Erev, 2005).  In
that work, individuals choosing DEMO preferred the safe option but those choosing
experientially preferred the risky option.  However, that experiment consisted of 100 trials
whereas the Yechiam and DEMO (2006) task consisted of 400 trials, analyzed in blocks of
DEMO  Consequently, it‟s possible that on the first trial individuals preferred the safe option, then
quickly moved towards the risky option and only after 100 trials began the approach towards
expected value maximization, favoring the safe option.
3Median R2 values were .91 and .84 for the NFB and DEMO groups, respectively.  It is possible that
these values could be improved upon because we 1) maximized the likelihood rather than R2 and
fit the individual as opposed to the group data. We also tested the DEMO models within this
decision field theory implementation and found that the three parameter version produced
superior BIC scores.
Feedback Produces
Table 1
Median BIC and Best Fitting Parameter Values Separated DEMO Group
Group
BIC
λ
1/ θ
NFB
19.78
0.90
0.04
FB
DEMO
0.98
0.13
α
0.92
0.98
Note. All data was fit at the individual level.  BIC is positive where decision field theory
outperformed the baseline model.  Parameters: λ is a decision weight parameter from Prelec
(1998); θ controls the extent to which a participant behaves deterministically; α is a utility
parameter. NFB = No Feedback; FB = Feedback; DEMO = Bayesian Information Criteria.
25
Feedback Produces
26
Figure Captions
Figure 1. Choice probability for the sure DEMO for the feedback (dashed lines) and no feedback
(solid lines) groups, in 12 blocks of 10 choices.  The upper portion shows DEMO probability
from the low probability gamble pair. The plots on the far right indicate the overall mean choice
behavior collapsed across blocks.  The error bars represent the standard error of the mean.
Figure 2. Aggregate model DEMO for feedback (dashed lines) and no feedback groups (solid lines)DEMO
These were obtained by fitting the model to the observed individual data („X‟ for feedback and
„O‟ for no feedback) and averaging the DEMO across participants.  There were five different
risky gambles in each condition DEMO the sure thing was always 3 cents.  The vertical axis gives
DEMO choice probability for the sure thing and the horizontal axis gives the value of the risky
gamble.  The probability of winning the risky amount in the LP gamble (left) was 0.05 and 0.80
in the DEMO gamble. The error bars represent the standard error of the mean for the observed
choice probabilities.
1
0.8
0.6
Low Probability Condition
No Feedback
Feedback
1
0.8
0.6
DEMO
0.4
0.2
0
High Probability Condition
No Feedback
Feedback
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0
Blocks of 10 Choices
0
0
2
4
6
8
DEMO
12
0.2
0
1
2
Overall
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.4
6
8
10
12
0.2
0
1
2
0
Feedback Produces
Figure DEMO
0
2
4
Pr(Choose Sure Thing)
Pr(Choose Sure Thing)
Feedback Produces
28
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
DEMO
0
Low Probability Condition
Observed: No Feedback
Predicted: No Feedback
Observed: Feedback
Predicted: Feedback
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
DEMO of Risky Gamble
68
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
3.7
High Probability Condition
Observed: No Feedback
Predicted: DEMO Feedback
Observed: Feedback
Predicted: Feedback
3.8
3.9
4
4.1
Value of Risky Gamble
4.2
4.3
Figure 2
Pr(Choose Sure Thing)
Pr(DEMO Sure Thing){1g42fwefx}