Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
J. Behav. Dec. Making, 21: 211–224 (2008)
Published online 30 October 2007 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com) DEMO: 10.1002/bdm.583
Subjective Valuation and Asymmetrical
Motivational Systems: Implications of Scope
Insensitivity for Decision Making
RE´ MI DESMEULES1,2*, ANTOINE BECHARA3 and LAURETTE DUBE´ 1
1Desautels Faculty of Management, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
2 Faculte des Sciences de l’Administration, Universite Laval, Quebec, Canada
3 Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, USA
ABSTRACT
Studies using the DEMO Gambling Task have revealed individual differences in per-
formance on the task. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that approach and
avoidance motivations inﬂuence decision making through the process of subjective
valuation. We examined the DEMO of a high sensitivity to gains or losses from
two perspectives which we labeled scalar multiplication and valuation by feeling. Using
two versions of DEMO Iowa Gambling Task, we ﬁnd evidence supporting the view that
asymmetry DEMO the systems regulating approach and avoidance leads to systematic biases
that translate to differences in performance. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that high sensitivity in
the Behavioral Activation System (BAS) translates to valuation by feeling and
insensitivity DEMO scope in the domain of gains, while high sensitivity in the DEMO
Inhibition System (BIS) translates to valuation by feeling and insensitivity to scope in
the domain of losses. The basis for these ﬁndings is DEMO Copyright # 2007 John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
key words
Iowa DEMO Task; individual differences; decision making; scope
insensitivity; subjective valuation
INTRODUCTION
Prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) suggests that gains and losses are not treated in the same way
when time comes to compare DEMO assign a personal, subjective value to them. We will refer to DEMO
valuation as the affective and/or cognitive process which assigns a personal subjective value to a target. Since
scant research looks into the inﬂuence DEMO affect on this particular process (see Mellers, 2000), we assume that
well-established computational rules may not prevail anymore when some form of DEMO is involved. People
put a higher value to whatever they hold dear, but emotional attachment inﬂuences the value of targets in a
QC, DEMO 0A6, Canada.
E-mails: remi.desmeules@mrk.ulaval.ca; remi.desmeules@mcgill.ca
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
* Correspondence to: Re´
mi Desmeules, Faculte´
des DEMO de l’Administration, Pavillon Palasis-Prince, Universite´
Laval, Que´
bec,
212
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
way that is not fully understood. DEMO has documented various emotional inﬂuences on the process of
subjective valuation; DEMO ownership in the endowment effect for instance (see Kahneman, Knetsch, &
Thaler, 1991). This research shows that mere ownership adds to the value of simple objects; our research aims
to uncover how motivation and emotion inﬂuence how people value and compare objective targets in a
DEMO making context. In this study, we use an individual differences approach DEMO observe motivational and
emotional inﬂuences on the process of subjective valuation. The speciﬁc issue we investigate is the translation
of an objective/absolute value DEMO a subjective/relative value. We use a complex decision-making task where
subjective/relative values are substantiated by choices, which are themselves indicative of decision-making
performance.
THE IOWA GAMBLING TASK
The Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) (Bechara, Damasio, Damasio, & Anderson, 1994) has been instrumental in
identifying decision-making deﬁcits in clinical populations with impaired decision making, such as patients
with lesions of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (Bechara & Damasio, 2005; Damasio, 1994), drug addicts
(Bechara & Damasio, 2002; Bechara, Dolan, & Hindes, 2002; Monterosso, Ehrman, Napier, O’Brien, &DEMO
Childress, 2001), as well as patients with Parkinson, Huntingdon, DEMO Asperger’s syndrome (Yechiam,
Busemeyer, Stout, & Bechara, 2005). The task has also been instrumental in providing empirical support for
the DEMO marker hypothesis, a theoretical framework for explaining the neural basis of DEMO making
and its inﬂuence by emotions (Bechara & Damasio, 2005; DEMO, Shiv, & Bechara, 2006). With the exception
of a DEMO studies (e.g., Suzuki, Hirota, Takasawa, & Shigemasu, 2003), no work thus far has addressed some of
the key reasons behind DEMO individual differences in decision-making performance that one observes in this
task among the normal population (see Dunn, Dalgleish, & Lawrence, 2006 for DEMO review). Indeed, as much as
25% of normal individuals choose DEMO on the IGT in a manner reminiscent of those patients
with decision-making impairments. One of the primary goals of this study was to explore DEMO individual
differences in the sensitivity of motivational systems would produce systematic differences in decision
making.
The IGT is administered by having the participant sit DEMO front of a computer screen that displays four decks
of cards. Using a mouse, the participant clicks on a card from any of the four decks. Each time the participant
selects a card, the computer generates a distinct sound. The face of the card (either red or black) appears on
top of the deck and a message is displayed indicating the amount of money the participant has won or lost. An
image DEMO appears to the left of the message. A win produces the image of a smiling face; a loss produces the
image of a frowning face. On the top of the screen there is a green bar DEMO changes according to the amount of
money won or lost after each selection. A gain is indicated by a proportionate increase in the length DEMO the
green bar, and a loss is indicated by a proportionate DEMO in the length of the bar. Once the money is added
or subtracted, the face of the card disappears, and the participant can DEMO another card.
In the original version (Bechara et al., 1994), the four decks of cards are labeled A0 ,B0 ,C0 , DEMO D0 .Intwo
decks (Deck A0 and Deck B0 ), immediate gains are large, but at unpredictable points, a gain is followed by DEMO
high penalty, so that in the long run these decks are DEMO In the other two decks (Deck C0 and
Deck D0 ), immediate gains are smaller, but eventual losses are also smaller, so DEMO in the long run these decks
are advantageous. More speciﬁcally, the DEMO of reward and punishment are structured in such a way that
the discrepancy between reward and punishment in the disadvantageous decks (Deck A0 and Deck B0 )is
rendered larger in the negative direction as the task progresses. That is, the net difference between reward and
punishment in each block of 10 cards in decks A0 and B0 increases in the DEMO direction across each block
(i.e., toward larger loss). By contrast, this discrepancy between reward and punishment in the advantageous
decks (Deck DEMO and Deck D0 ) is rendered larger in the positive direction that is, the net difference in decks C0
and D0 increases in the positive direction across each block (i.e., toward larger gain).
Copyright DEMO 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
R. Desmeules et al.
Subjective Valuation and Asymmetry
213
In the variant DEMO (Bechara et al., 2002; Bechara, Tranel, & Damasio, 2000), the four decks of cards are
labeled E0 ,F0,G0 , and H0 . In two decks (Deck E0 and Deck G0 ), immediate losses are large, but at unpredictable
points, a loss is followed by a high gain, so that in the long run these decks are advantageous. In the other two
decks (Deck E0 and Deck H0 ), immediate losses are smaller, but eventual gains are also DEMO, so that in the
long run these decks are disadvantageous. The DEMO of reward and punishment are structured in a way
similar to the original version, such that advantageous decks lead to increasing gains, and DEMO
decks result in accumulating losses.
MOTIVATIONAL SYSTEMS
The Iowa Gambling Task is a complex decision-making task that features combinations of gains and losses.
In DEMO, positive amounts of money (gains) have the ability to produce DEMO emotional reactions, and
negative amounts of money (losses) have the DEMO to produce negative emotional reactions. The kind of
emotional algebra that is necessary to compute ﬁnal preferences for these combinations of gains and losses
DEMO be inﬂuenced by how strongly some emotions tend to be felt or experienced. In this paper, we are not
measuring emotion directly, but DEMO the tendency of individuals to differ in the strength of their
(DEMO and appraisal) emotions. Research has found that these differences can be DEMO about by the
sensitivity of motivational systems. Research by Gray (1994) posits two motivational systems: the Behavioral
Activation System (BAS) and the Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS), from which positive/approach and
negative/avoidance emotional experiences are drawn, respectively. Individual differences have been
identiﬁed suggesting that positive emotions are related to the BAS and negative emotions are related DEMO the
BIS. More speciﬁcally, Carver and White (1994) developed a DEMO instrument for the strength of these
motivational systems related to approach and avoidance, and found that individuals with higher scores on
the respective scales have relatively stronger affective responses. Individuals with high BIS were shown to DEMO
more nervous at impending punishment, and individuals with high BAS were DEMO to be happier at
impending reward. These individual differences have been shown to have implications for decision making,
in complex tasks and simple DEMO economic games (see Discussion).
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES AND SUBJECTIVE VALUATION
We DEMO that it is primordial to consider individual sensitivity to reward and punishment concurrently
rather than separately. Findings from studies of anterior brain asymmetry suggest DEMO the two systems are
independent but antagonistic (Davidson & Tomarken, 1989). The left side of the prefrontal cortex has been
implicated in DEMO emotion and the right side of the prefrontal cortex has been implicated in
withdrawal-related emotion. Differences are found in prefrontal asymmetry chieﬂy when one DEMO
overshadows the other, a situation we refer to as asymmetry. When DEMO asymmetry scores are plotted
on a continuum, the mid-section is shared DEMO those who respond equally in approach and withdrawal, whether
they respond DEMO little or a lot. At extreme ends of this continuum would be those individuals who respond
exclusively with approach or avoidance motivations.
In the DEMO of a high level of affective attachment (emotion), intuition suggests DEMO subjective values
are higher. People would assign a high value to their prized possessions. In simple terms, this may suggest that
different levels of motivation and emotion add proportionally more value to targets. However, when asked to
choose between prized possessions, friends, or limbs, intuition is equally potent at suggesting that we would
rather not pick favorites. In this DEMO, we suggest that the two prominent views on subjective valuation
transformations DEMO the scalar multiplication and valuation by feeling perspectives. Scalar multiplication is
the perspective that purports that different levels of emotion would add proportionally more DEMO, whereas
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
214
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
valuation by feeling is a perspective DEMO features the notion that emotion makes values more difﬁcult to
compare. For individual differences, the two perspectives make different transformations of a baseline
function into one that would represent an individual with a high sensitivity in DEMO motivational system.
In this section, we dichotomize motivational sensitivity into baseline DEMO high sensitivities. With the use of
correlational methods in the results section, we will test whether or not the implied transformations are
continuous. For simplicity, we use graphical depictions where a function represents a baseline level of
sensitivity, and another function represents a high level of sensitivity. The ﬁrst perspective we suggested to
represent a higher sensitivity to reward or DEMO is a scalar multiplication of the baseline curve. In a
simple case of linear valuation, this would involve a steeper slope for higher sensitivity. Across the range of
stimulus values, individuals with high sensitivity are expected to assign a higher subjective value, and a larger
difference between two stimulus intensities. The larger difference is assumed to be more psychologically
relevant, motivating, or otherwise potent. That is, large differences make the individual DEMO likely to
consider two stimuli of different absolute values as different, DEMO in turn make it more likely that the
motivational potency of the two stimuli will be different. For this, one needs to contend that there is a ﬁnite
amount (say 100%) of motivational potency available DEMO the motivational system. With a steeper slope, an
individual would reach DEMO motivational potency at a stimulus value smaller than in the baseline case.
In the IGT context, it implies that an individual with a high sensitivity is expected to prefer winning $100
instead of $50 much more DEMO than another individual with only baseline level of sensitivity. Simply
stated, DEMO bias toward the large reward is greater in the individual with a high sensitivity. This is expected to
be important because the IGT also DEMO losses, which must be weighed in conjunction with the gains. In
DEMO loss domain, a high sensitivity leads to a greater bias away DEMO large losses. Figure 1 presents the
implications of a scalar multiplication perspective for a value function at baseline and highly sensitive levels
within a DEMO theory-inspired framework (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979).
The other prominent perspective we suggested can be derived from the valuation by feeling perspective.
Hsee DEMO Rottenstreich (2004) found that valuation by feeling, as opposed to DEMO by calculation,
resulted in scope insensitivity, i.e., a shift in the shape of the value function toward a more step-like function.
The DEMO supporting the valuation by feeling hypothesis involve making participants assign a value to a set
Figure 1. Hypothetical value functions, transforming stimulus value into subjective value. Solid lines represent baseline
sensitivity; dashed lines represent high sensitivity after scalar multiplication of baseline
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
R. Desmeules et al.
Subjective Valuation and Asymmetry
215
of entities. When DEMO manipulations are introduced so that participants use valuation by feeling,
they tend to use a unitary view of a set (of Madonna CDs) and thus remain insensitive to the number of entities
(Madonna CDs) composing the set. When participants use valuation by calculation, they tend to acknowledge
the number of entities in the set, and then multiply that number by the value of one entity; thus the ﬁnal value
of a set would then critically depend on the number of entities in DEMO set. Whereas Hsee and Rottenstreich
(2004) manipulated the expected valuation to be used, we assume that high sensitivity in a motivational
system will result in a tendency to preferentially use valuation by feeling in the DEMO domain.
We contend that high BAS and high BIS translates to scope insensitivity in the gain and loss domain,
respectively, because these individuals get strong emotional reactions even at small scope levels. Therefore,
subjective DEMO can be represented by a step-like function because these individuals can muster peak
reactions with stimuli of low intensities. The valuation by feeling perspective DEMO representing baseline
and high sensitivities with different types of functions (an DEMO linear concave function and a step-like
function). As mentioned earlier, DEMO insensitivity involves not perceiving much difference between stimuli
of differing scope. Beyond a threshold of responding, individuals with high sensitivity are expected to assign
a similar subjective value to different stimulus intensities. Differences in subjective valuation DEMO levels
of reward or punishment should be smaller when valuation by feeling is used. In the context of the IGT, an
individual with high sensitivity based on the BAS, the motivational system related to approach, DEMO expected to
be more indifferent between levels of gains. Such an individual is likely to be more indifferent between $100
and $50, and thus less likely to have a strong bias favoring the larger reward. In DEMO domain of losses, a high
sensitivity in the BIS, the motivational system related to withdrawal, is likely to result in the individual feeling
that the different levels of losses are equally unattractive. Figure 2 presents DEMO implications for
hypothetical value functions.
In studying approach and avoidance systems, DEMO way to derive expectations for performance on the IGT is
to identify the potential biases and their direction. The original IGT (A0B0C0D0 ) and its variant (E0F0G0H0)
version can be used to study tradeoffs between gains and losses. In the original task, two levels of gains are
available ($50 and $100—a ratio of 2:1) and a range DEMO losses ($50 to $1250 and more). The difference in
subjective DEMO, and thus the bias, depends critically on which transformation perspective is used. In the
Figure 2. Hypothetical value functions, transforming stimulus value into subjective value. Solid lines represent baseline
sensitivity, or valuation by calculation; DEMO lines represent high sensitivity as a step-like function, according to the
DEMO by feeling perspective
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
DEMO of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
216
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Table 1. Research expectations under the DEMO of scalar multiplication and scope insensitivity
Perspective and expectations
Scalar multiplication Scope insensitivity
Original IGT
High BIS Supports performance Hinders performance
High BAS Hinders DEMO Supports performance
Variant IGT
High BIS Hinders performance Supports performance
High BAS Supports performance Hinders performance
High BAS denotes high sensitivity in the gain DEMO; high BIS denotes high sensitivity in the loss domain. The original DEMO version has
cards labeled A0 B0 C0 D0 ; the variant IGT uses cards labeled E0 F0 G0 H0 .
scalar multiplication perspective, high sensitivity to gains (high BAS) implies larger differences in subjective
value; a bias that favors the bad decks (preference for $100 vs. $50) and hinders performance on the original
task. However, larger differences in DEMO value in the loss domain imply that the larger losses of the bad
decks are disliked more; the scalar multiplication perspective suggests that high sensitivity to losses (high
BIS) supports performance on the original task DEMO biasing participants away from the bad decks. Reverse
predictions are expected from the scope insensitivity perspective. Scope insensitivity to the rewards implies
that participants DEMO not become overly attached to larger gains in bad decks; this DEMO performance.
Conversely, not being overly affected by higher losses implies that DEMO BIS hinders performance on the
original IGT. Table 1 summarizes these expectations and extends the same reasoning to expectations for the
variant IGT, where performance is achieved when the decks with larger immediate losses are selected
DEMO these decks offer larger rewards.
Individuals showing asymmetry in their sensitivity to reward and punishment have baseline sensitivity in
one domain (gains or losses) and high sensitivity in the other. Using Figures 1 and 2, DEMO implies that individuals
use valuation functions represented by the solid line in the gain domain (loss domain) and one of the dashed
lines DEMO the loss domain (gain domain). Table 1 suggests that asymmetry DEMO be critically important to ﬁnding
performance differences in the Iowa Gambling Task. Only instances of high BIS and low BAS and the
converse (high BAS and low BIS) lead to unequivocal predictions. Within the valuation by feeling
perspective, the combination of high BAS and low BIS is expected to support performance in the original
IGT. The valuation by feeling perspective DEMO suggests that those individuals who are high in BAS and low
in BIS should be expected to perform badly in the variant version of DEMO IGT.
A continuous variable for asymmetry (zBASzBIS) was used by Sutton and Davidson (1997) in the
context of relating the self-reported measure DEMO prefrontal brain asymmetry measured by way of
electroencephalography (EEG) scalp electrodes. The use of asymmetry scores of the type reported by Sutton
and DEMO (1997) has the consequence of merging symmetrical scores around the mid-point of the
distribution of asymmetry scores. Thus, someone scoring high on both the BIS and BAS would be located on
the axis at a DEMO where an individual scoring low on both scales could also be found. We contend that using
high/low splits has the interesting potential of DEMO us to ﬁnd more ﬁne-grained differences. That is, we
can create DEMO groups (quadrants): low BIS/low BAS, high BIS/low BAS, low BIS/high BAS, and high BIS/
high BAS. Using DEMO 1, we would not make predictions regarding the high/high and DEMO/low groups
because these groups have valuation tendencies that in one domain support performance, while valuation in
the other domain should hinder performance. Interestingly, the use of the label valuation by calculation by
Hsee and Rottenstreich (2004) suggests that those in the low/low quadrant would use DEMO in both tasks
to make tradeoffs between gains and losses. Assuming that some of our participants will have better
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
R. Desmeules et al. Subjective Valuation and Asymmetry 217
calculation skills than DEMO, we should expect those who are performing well at one task DEMO also be
performing well on the other, since the same skill DEMO be used for both tasks.
In essence, the valuation by feeling DEMO leads to the following predictions. The continuous variable
used to represent asymmetry (zBASz BIS) should (i) correlate positively with performance on the DEMO
task; (ii) correlate negatively with performance on the variant task; and (iii) correlate positively with the
difference in scores on the DEMO tasks (performance on originalperformance on variant). Using quadrants, it
is expected that those with low BIS/high BAS perform better than those DEMO high BIS/low BAS on the
original task, but the reverse DEMO hold for the variant task. As additional support for the valuation by feeling
perspective, individual scores from the two tasks should correlate positively, DEMO only for those low in BIS and
low in BAS.
METHOD
Participants
Participants were 126 adult women (age range 18–75, M¼ 43.03, SD ¼ 16.34) recruited from the general
population of a large North-American city by local advertisement. Participants were screened to ensure the
absence of mental DEMO, neurological and psychiatric disorders, and substance abuse. Data were
collected as a part of a broader study on age differences in emotional process DEMO experience, and their impact
on judgments, decision making, and behavior DEMO women. The protocol was approved by the human-subjects
ethics committee. All subjects signed an informed consent form before participating in the study, and
received a monetary compensation. Age was not found to be correlated with BIS DEMO BAS, nor was it found to
have an impact on any DEMO the results presented here. For clarity and brevity of presentation, results DEMO to
age will not be presented. A recent study identiﬁed gender differences in performance on the IGT. Overman
(2004) suggests that women exhibit DEMO emotional reactions in the gambling task. Speciﬁcally, females
respond negatively (e.g., ‘‘oh, no’’) to a card that reveals a gain of $50 and a loss of $25, which Overman
interprets as the female reacting negatively to the presence of the ‘‘’’ sign.
Tasks
The original (Bechara et al., 1994) and the variant IGT (Bechara et al., DEMO) were administered in the same
session in a counterbalanced order. Order DEMO no signiﬁcant effect on our analyses. Upon arrival to the
laboratory, DEMO were seated in front of the computer and were presented instructions for performing
the IGT, in both the original and variant versions. The tasks were computer administered and subjects made
80 card selections on each of DEMO two versions. Brand, Labudda, and Markowitsch (2006) proposed that the
IGT measures decisions made under ambiguity in the ﬁrst part of the DEMO, and decisions under risk or even
certainty when the rules have DEMO ﬁgured out. Reavis and Overman (2001) ﬁnd that women ‘‘ﬁgure out’’ the
task at the 97th trial on average. The use of only DEMO selections ensured that a minority would come to that
point, and DEMO participants who ﬁgured out the task would not have many more trials to go before the end of
the task, when at that stage the decisions have shifted toward more certainty, i.e., having more knowledge DEMO
the outcome of a given choice. Since we were interested in only those situations where emotions are expected
to play a role, it was more economical of our participants’ time to spare them the extra time DEMO to
complete an extra 20 trials on both tasks.
Measures
Participants completed the self-report BIS/BAS scales at home, as a part of a series of personality
characteristics assessed in the broader study. Examples of the DEMO scale include: ‘‘I worry about making
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
218 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
mistakes; I feel worried when I think I have done poorly at something.’’ Examples of the BAS scale DEMO:
‘‘When I’m doing well at something, I love to keep DEMO it; When I want something, I usually go all-out to get it;
I often act on the spur of the moment.’’ Decision DEMO performance was indexed by the number of
selections from the so-called good decks (C þ D and E þ G). In the case of continuous variables, we use the
standardized self-reported score on the BIS scale subtracted from the standardized self-reported BAS scale
(zBASz BIS). To examine the reversal of performance on the two games, we use the performance on the
variant version subtracted from the performance on the original DEMO (To construct quadrants, we ﬁrst dichotomized the two variables for the individual scores on the BIS (total ofscore on originalscore on variant).
7 items, Cronbach alpha ¼ .75) and full BAS (total of 13 items, Cronbach alpha ¼ .86) on the basis of median
DEMO The medians for the complete sample of participants in the broader study were 45 and 90 for BIS and
BAS, respectively. We then combined the two dichotomized variables into a single variable which assigned
all participants DEMO one of the four possible quadrants: low/low, low/high, DEMO/low, and high/high.
RESULTS
The behavioral inhibition system (BIS) DEMO behavioral activation system (BAS) have been theorized to be
antagonistic and mutually independent (Carver & White, 1994). In our sample, BIS and BAS were found to
have a nonsigniﬁcant correlation (r ¼ .070, ns). The creation of the emotional asymmetry scores
For the complete sample, scores on the original and variant tasks are found to have an insigniﬁcant correlation(zBASzBIS) leads to a variable with a mean of .07 (SD ¼ 1.30), and a range of scores from 4.01 to 2.98.
as well (r ¼ .013, ns). The number DEMO selections from good decks was lower in the original IGT (M¼ DEMO,
SD¼ 12.14) than in the variant IGT (M¼ 48.14, DEMO ¼ 12.80). These results are in line with previous ﬁndings,
considering that males typically outperform females. Our sample mean performance on the DEMO task is
not signiﬁcantly better than chance level (40 good selections, t(125) ¼ 1.67, p ¼ .097). In comparison, the
average for the group of women in the imaging study by Bolla, Eldreth, Matochik, and Cadet (2004) did not
even achieve chance DEMO Females participating in the study by Overman (2004) seem to perform better than
those in our sample. For the variant IGT, our participants perform signiﬁcantly better than chance
(t(125) ¼ 7.14, p < .001). The mean difference in scores was 6.33 (t(125) DEMO, p < .001). This
difference in scores mirrors the ﬁndings DEMO studies in which the two versions of the IGT were administered
(DEMO et al., 2000, 2002). The range of scores for the original IGT was [5,70] and [7,77] for the variant
version. DEMO patients with brain lesions, none of our participants showed performance impairments DEMO both
IGT versions.
Our index of emotional asymmetry correlates signiﬁcantly positively with performance on the original
version (r ¼ .226, p ¼ .011)DEMO As an indication of the effect size, a regression model predicts DEMO
differences of about 14 good picks (out of 80 trials) across our range of asymmetry scores (min ¼ 33.5,
max ¼ 47.9). Also consistent with a valuation by feeling perspective, there is a negative correlation between
our emotional asymmetry variable and performance on the variant DEMO (r ¼.185, p ¼ .038). A regression
model predicts performance differences of about 12 good picks across our range of asymmetry scores
(min ¼ 43.1, max ¼ 55.3). We look at the difference in scores (score on originalscore on variant) to conﬁrm
that an DEMO scope insensitivity that is beneﬁcial in one version of the IGT should be detrimental in
the other version. We ﬁnd evidence of linear association DEMO the index of emotional asymmetry and the
difference in scores (r DEMO .292, p ¼ .001), which provides support for the valuation DEMO feeling perspective.
Using quadrants as the basis for analysis, we run DEMO 4  2 repeated measures ANOVA with quadrant as the
between-subject effect and IGT version as the within-subject effect. Table 2 presents the means DEMO standard
deviations for the performance of each group on the task. We ﬁnd a signiﬁcant effect of IGT version
(F(1,122) ¼ DEMO, p < .001, hp ¼ .144), and a signiﬁcant effect of the interaction between IGT version and
quadrant (F(3,122) DEMO 6.133, p ¼ .001, hp ¼ .131). There is no signiﬁcant effect of the quadrants
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
R. Desmeules et al. Subjective Valuation and Asymmetry 219
Table 2. Mean DEMO standard deviations of the performance of the different quadrants (groups) as a function of the IGT
version
Quadrant Mean Standard deviation
Original IGT
DEMO BIS/low BAS 44.74 8.85
High BIS/low BAS 35.89 12.76
Low BIS/high BAS 43.36 12.81
High BIS/high BAS 41.67 13.73
Variant DEMO
Low BIS/low BAS 47.70 12.83
High BIS/low BAS 52.21 11.19
Low BIS/high BAS 42.25 13.12
High BIS/high BAS 50.74 12.28
DEMO is indexed by the number of selections from good decks, out DEMO 80 total selections. Note that the total number of card
selections in this study was 80 cards, as opposed to the usual 100 cards. Thus numbers above 40 selections from good decks reﬂect
advantageous performance.
(F(3,122) ¼ 1.116, ns) because the performance advantage of the asymmetrical groups actually reverses
between the task versions, as evidenced by the signiﬁcant crossover interaction.
Of speciﬁc interest were the differences in performance between DEMO quadrants showing asymmetry. These
analyses reveal signiﬁcant performance differences between the low BIS/high BAS group and the high BIS/
low BAS group DEMO the original IGT (mean difference ¼7.46, t(54) ¼2.184, p ¼ .033) and the variant IGT
(mean difference ¼ 9.96, t(54) ¼ 3.058, p ¼ .003). The performance of the DEMO BIS/low BAS group was
signiﬁcantly better than that of the high BIS/low BAS group on the original task (mean difference ¼ 8.85,
t(69) ¼ ¼ .001), and the performance of the low BIS/high BAS group was signiﬁcantly worse than
that of the DEMO BIS/high BAS group on the variant task (mean differenceNo other DEMO performance differences were found. The results just presented suggest that it is mainly¼8.49, t(53) ¼2.475, p .017).
3.454, p
¼
DEMO group with the incompatible asymmetry that is underperforming. Recall that we made no predictions as to
the performance of the low/low and high/DEMO groups because of antagonistic biases. The pattern of
signiﬁcant differences tends to support the contention that it is especially important to have a sensitivity DEMO the
BIS that is compatible with the task version; low BIS DEMO the standard task and high BIS in the variant IGT.
As a ﬁnal test of the predictions driven from the valuation by feeling perspective, we looked at the
within-quadrants correlations between the individual scores on the DEMO IGT versions. Consistent with the
label ‘‘valuation by calculation’’, the scores DEMO the IGT correlated signiﬁcantly positively only for the group
of participants showing symmetrically low sensitivities to both gains and losses (low BIS/low BAS group,
r ¼ .354, p ¼ .020). No signiﬁcant correlations emerged within the other quadrants. Thus, this ﬁnding is
consistent with the contention that those participants with better mathematical skills were able to take
DEMO of those skills on both versions of the task.
DISCUSSION
Using two versions of the Iowa Gambling Task, we ﬁnd evidence supporting the view that asymmetry in the
systems regulating approach and avoidance leads to systematic DEMO that translate to differences in
performance on the tasks. Speciﬁcally, we DEMO that high sensitivity in the behavioral activation system (BAS)
translates DEMO valuation by feeling and insensitivity to scope in the domain of gains, while high sensitivity in the
behavioral inhibition system (BIS) translates to valuation by feeling and insensitivity to scope in the domain
Copyright # DEMO John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
220
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
of losses. Our results are inconsistent DEMO the scalar multiplication view of the transformation of a baseline
value function into the one representing high sensitivity to gains or losses. Predictions derived DEMO the
expectations of insensitivity to scope were conﬁrmed by the results of the participants’ decision-making
performance on the original task, and on the variant task. Furthermore, the individual scores on the two
versions of the task were correlated only for the group of participants prone to the use DEMO calculation (the low
BIS/low BAS group).
Note that we DEMO not involve probabilities in the presentation of our competing perspectives. An interesting
complement to our discussion comes from Rottenstreich and Hsee (2001), who advocated probabil-
ity–outcome independence when there are differing affective reactions involved. Most DEMO, these authors
found that affect-poor prizes were chosen over affect-rich prizes DEMO certainty, but the direction of
preference reversed under low probability. From DEMO additional perspective, one could argue that individual
differences in motivational systems DEMO the perception of the IGT rewards and punishments by making
some outcomes affect-poor and others affect-rich. From the affective approach suggested by Rottenstreich
and DEMO (2001), participants could have been more sensitive to departures from DEMO and certainty
and less sensitive to intermediate probability variations for affect-rich than for affect-poor outcomes. For
instance, the different levels of losses in the variant IGT may have been perceived as affect-poor by those
participants with DEMO BIS.
Individual differences in motivational systems and decision making
The results presented in this paper seem inconsistent with those found by Peters and Slovic (2000), who used
a variant of the Iowa Gambling Task. Their DEMO suggested a possible role for the behavioral inhibition
system (BIS) in choices from high-loss options, and a role for extraversion for choices from high-gain
options. Speciﬁcally, individuals scoring higher on the Carver and White (DEMO) BIS scale made fewer
choices from decks leading to high losses, while those scoring high on the Saucier extraversion scale
(Saucier, 1994) made more choices from decks yielding high gains. Peters and Slovic (2000) did not ﬁnd
performance differences (number of good selections) driven by their personality markers. Participants with
higher BIS scores were expected to select DEMO from the good decks in the standard task because they were
found to be avoidant of high-loss options.
Although our results seem at odd DEMO the results of Peters and Slovic (2000), they are consistent DEMO
other studies. For instance, Schutter, de Haan and van Honk (DEMO) measured the electrical activity in frontal
areas of the brain of DEMO participants, using electroencephalography (EEG) and computed the anterior
brain asymmetry DEMO for each participant. Participants then completed 100 trials of the original Iowa
Gambling Task, and performance was indexed by a percentage of selections from bad decks. Looking at the
relationship between the two measures, the authors found that anterior brain asymmetrical activity predicted
IGT performance, as evidenced by a strong correlation (r(18) ¼.74). Another study by Sutton DEMO
Davidson (1997) showed that BIS and BAS scales are correlated with prefrontal asymmetry. From this
perspective, the results obtained by Schutter et al. (2004) imply that the individuals with the most overactive
BIS (a high negative asymmetry) are those that pick the highest percentage of bad decks in the standard task,
which is what we ﬁnd in DEMO experiment.
Although the discrepancies between our current results and those of Peters and Slovic remain to be
resolved, we can speculate on possible reasons for these discrepancies. There were signiﬁcant modiﬁcations
in the IGT paradigm used DEMO Peters and Slovic (2000), and it is not clear whether DEMO methodological
differences explain these seemingly inconsistent results. It would be important to determine in future research
whether speciﬁc methodological differences played a key role DEMO arriving at somewhat opposite results.
Uncovering such potential differences is likely to be very valuable in advancing our understanding of
individual differences in making DEMO decisions. As a possible avenue for future research, we notice the
DEMO differences in the amounts of gains and losses used in different tasks. A study by van den Bos, Houx,
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
R. Desmeules et al.
Subjective Valuation and Asymmetry
221
and Spruijt (2006) showed that when a ratio of 6:1 in the gains of good and bad decks was implemented, a
large difference in performance on the task was detected. That is, when the large reward of the bad decks is
increased to $300 as opposed to $50 for the DEMO decks, performance became signiﬁcantly impaired. The
ratio of the gain amount DEMO the Peters and Slovic task was as high as 5:1 (DEMO and $250). The authors designed
their task to be more difﬁcult than the original task, in order ‘‘... to tax participants’ reliance on analytical
information processing, and increase their use of affective information-processing skills...’’ (DEMO &
Slovic, 2000, p. 1468). Although this assumption has DEMO intuitive appeal, it is puzzling that it turned out to be
DEMO with our results and view of valuation by feeling. Thus, research DEMO be necessary to address this
puzzling difference. It is possible that the extreme reliance on affective processing in the Peters and Slovic
task, at the exclusion of using any analytical information, is key for yielding such discrepant results.
Alternatively, it remains possible that the task modiﬁcation did not actually lead to the intended goal, i.e., it
did not increase DEMO use of affective information-processing skills.
The Drive (Dr) and Reward Responsiveness (RR) components of the behavioral activation system (BAS)
have been found to inﬂuence offers in the ultimatum and dictator games (Scheres & Sanfey, 2006). Higher
scores on Dr and RR were associated with a pattern of higher offers on the ultimatum game, lower offers in
the dictator game, and a larger discrepancy between the offers in the two games. The authors suggest that the
pattern is consistent with a DEMO that ﬁrst seeks to maximize the likelihood of reward, and then DEMO
the amount of reward. Our results are inconsistent with this suggestion because in the standard task rewards
are certain and those with high BAS DEMO choose decks with smaller rewards, and in the variant task, the
maximization of the likelihood of reward leads to a pattern of choice DEMO the decks F0 and G0 . No signiﬁcant
pattern of this type emerges from our data. Note however that the suggestion to ﬁrst maximize DEMO likelihood
of reward is not inconsistent with scope insensitivity; in both DEMO the focus is on the presence of the reward
as opposed to the amount. The broader question that arises from this discussion is that DEMO needs to better
address and ﬂesh out the role of emotion in decision making.
Risk vs. ambiguity
Brand et al. (2006) contrast decisions DEMO under risk and decisions made under ambiguity. The authors
present two models that differentiate between decisions under risk, which involve situations of explicitly
stated probabilities, rewards and punishments (such as the dice game), and DEMO made under ambiguity,
where individuals have to ﬁgure out the rules implicitly by using the feedback they get after each choice. In
decisions DEMO risk, there are two parallel but interacting ways to make a DEMO; a cognitive and an
emotional way. Decisions under risk can be DEMO at on the basis of rational or cognitive processes alone, but
DEMO also be the result of following hunches and guesses. In contrast, DEMO the implicit nature of the rules in
the Iowa Gambling Task, DEMO must follow their own feelings and hunches, in accordance with the
DEMO marker hypothesis. Brand and colleagues (2006) propose that the IGT measures decisions made
under ambiguity in the ﬁrst parts of the task, and decisions under risk or even certainty when the rules have
been ﬁgured DEMO In line with this proposition, Harman and Roe (2005) ﬁnd DEMO in the performance of
groups of participants scoring high and low in need for cognition (NFC), but these differences are only
manifest from the third block of trials onward, whereas in our case the differences are identiﬁable in earlier
blocks.
Gender differences and generalizability
Sex-related differences in DEMO on the IGT are found by Bolla et al. (2004), DEMO a brain imaging
technique (Positron Emission Tomography). Findings indicate that DEMO show more lateralized activity to
the right hemisphere than women, and DEMO show more lateralized activity in the left hemisphere. In other
studies detailing gender differences on the IGT, there is a tendency for males to outperform females
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
222
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
(Overman, 2004). Individual differences DEMO the strength of motivational systems for males are expected to
lead to smaller (or more infrequent) biases in the same way that they DEMO found in females. It was not our goal
to study gender-related differences in the IGT. Differences have already been documented (Overman, 2004;
DEMO & Overman, 2001), which suggests that our approach was reasonable DEMO allow us to document the
effects we aimed to uncover; our DEMO design was also the most economical in terms of the participants’ time
and effort. Whether the generalizability of our results is affected by the DEMO of a sample of only women is an
empirical question. Our expectation is that the effect is smaller in magnitude in males. Showing that DEMO are
less emotional in their approach to the Iowa Gambling Task would not be surprising, and would be consistent
with the cultural view of male–female differences in emotionality.
Future research
A question that arises from our DEMO is why answers provided to questions in the BIS and BAS scales
should translate to scope insensitivity in the domain of losses, or gains, respectively. It may be that individuals
who are not in maximum agreement with some of the BIS/BAS items may be thinking ‘‘it depends.’’ DEMO
who are in full agreement with an item state that it does not depend. For instance, ‘‘I worry about making
mistakes’’ receives full agreement if the person worries about making any mistake. Those who believe it
DEMO are probably more calculating and believe that they worry about making some, but not all mistakes.
Their BIS sensitivity is more ﬁne-grained and calculating, as suggested by the valuation by calculation
perspective. Similar arguments could be applied to BAS sensitivity and responses to rewards and gains. Our
preliminary DEMO of skin conductance data from the experiment presented here suggests that BIS is not
only responsive to negative numbers, but may also be involved in the comparison of amounts of gains. That is,
there may DEMO shifts in reference points in the task that are the result of adaptation. We are examining the
possibility that those subjects with a high DEMO and low BAS see a signiﬁcant difference between the good and
bad decks’ rewards, prefer those rewards of the bad decks, partially adapt DEMO the larger amounts and then start
to react negatively to the smaller rewards in the good decks. Emotionally, to this group the good decks may
sometimes feature two losses: a smaller reward in comparison to their reference reward from the bad decks
and another loss in absolute terms. DEMO possibility stems from the observation that, in early stages,
individuals DEMO this underperforming group show more arousal to rewards in the good decks (about $50) than
rewards in the bad decks (about $100), even though arousal is expected to relate to magnitude.
The presence of DEMO potential crossover between valuations obtained by feeling or by calculation is
intriguing (see Figure 2). At moderate levels on the stimulus value axis, both scalar multiplication and
valuation by feeling make similar predictions. It may be difﬁcult to disentangle the mechanisms predicted by
the two alternate perspectives, unless additional, more extreme, stimuli and tests are used. Also, many
experiments do not use more than two levels of an attribute; the provision of a higher number of options with
appropriate stimulus spacing and DEMO can allow researchers to determine the evaluability of an attribute.
Tests of statistical signiﬁcance in Hsee and Rottenstreich (2004) usually indicate whether valuation DEMO
calculation or valuation by feeling is used. A statistically signiﬁcant difference between the valuations of
stimuli is usually indicative of valuation by calculation, whereas the absence of a signiﬁcant difference is
indicative of scope insensitivity and DEMO by feeling. This suggests that repeated, within-subject designs
may be used DEMO determine whether a valuation was made by calculation or by feeling.
It is possible that people who are low in BAS, and especially those who are also high in BIS, have
endogenously sensitive dopamine systems, DEMO that they demonstrate a higher propensity to seek reward.
Perhaps this explains why individuals with low BAS prefer decks with higher amounts of reward (i.e., the bad
decks in the original IGT, and the good DEMO in the variant IGT). This idea is not new. It has been proposed in
the substance abuse literature that a sensitive dopamine system DEMO why drug addicts seek drugs in order
to boost their low baseline reward/dopamine levels. Drug addicts who were described as high reward seekers
DEMO disadvantageously on the original IGT, but they performed advantageously on the DEMO task,
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal DEMO Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
R. Desmeules et al.
Subjective Valuation and Asymmetry
223
much like our DEMO with low BAS and high BIS (Bechara, 2005; Bechara & DEMO, 2002; Bechara
et al., 2002). A recent article by DEMO den Bos et al. (2006) makes interesting hypotheses and suggestions that
will help understand how these motivational tendencies relate to dopaminergic and serotonergic DEMO
Together, these studies provide a beginning for laboratory studies aimed at DEMO potentially important
links and relationships between personality traits, such as BAS DEMO BIS, and biological substrates, such as
dopamine and serotonin, and DEMO way they impact real-life decisions and how people make choices.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was funded by a Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (Canada) grant to Laurette
Dube´ and a SSHRC (Canada) doctoral award to Re´ mi Desmeules.
REFERENCES
Bechara, A. (2005). Decision making, impulse control and loss of willpower to resist drugs: A neurocognitive perspective.
Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1458–1463.
Bechara, A., & Damasio, A. R. (DEMO). The somatic marker hypothesis: A neural theory of economic decision. DEMO and
Economic Behavior, 52, 336–372.
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. DEMO, Damasio, H., & Anderson, S. W. (1994). Insensitivity DEMO future consequences following
damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50, 7–15.
Bechara, A., & Damasio, H. (2002). Decision-making and addiction (part I): Impaired activation of somatic states in
substance dependent individuals DEMO pondering decisions with negative future consequences. Neuropsychologia, 40,
1675–1689.
Bechara, A., Dolan, S., & Hindes, A. (2002). Decision-making and addiction (part II): Myopia for the future or
hypersensitivity to reward? Neuropsychologia, 40, 1690–1705.
Bechara, A., Tranel, D., & Damasio, H. (2000). Characterization of the decision-making deﬁcit of patients with
DEMO prefrontal cortex lesions. Brain, 123, 2189–2202.
Bolla, K. I., Eldreth, D. A., Matochik, J. A., & Cadet, J. L. (DEMO). Sex-related differences in a gambling task and its
neurological correlates. Cerebral Cortex, 14, 1226–1232.
Brand, M., Labudda, K., & Markowitsch, H. J. (2006). Neuropsychological correlates of decision-making in ambiguous
and risky situations. Neural Networks, 19, 1266–1276.
Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral-inhibition, behavioral activation, and affective responses to impending
reward and punishment–The BIS/BAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO, 67, 319–333.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error: DEMO, reason and the human brain. New York, NY: Putnam.
Davidson, R. J., & Tomarken, A. J. (1989). Laterality and emotion: An electrophysiological approach. In F. Boller , & J.
Grafman (Eds.), Handbook of Neuropsychology (Vol. 3, pp. 419–441). Amsterdam: Elsevier DEMO
Dunn, B. D., Dalgleish, T., & Lawrence, A. D. (2006). The somatic marker hypothesis: A critical evaluation.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 239–271.
Gray, J. A. (1994). Three fundamental DEMO systems. In P. Ekman , & R. J. Davidson (Eds.), DEMO Nature of Emotion:
Fundamental Questions (pp. 243–247). New York: Oxford University Press.
Harman, J. L., & Roe, R. M. Modeling individual differences in the Iowa Gambling Task. Poster presented at the Society
DEMO Judgment and Decision Making Meeting. Toronto, Canada, November 2005.
Hsee, DEMO K., & Rottenstreich, Y. (2004). Music, pandas, and DEMO: On the affective psychology of value. Journal of
Experimental Psychology-General, 133, 23–30.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. DEMO (1991). Anomalies: The endowment effect, loss aversion, and status quo
bias. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5, 193–206.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision DEMO risk. Econometrica, 47, 263–291.
Monterosso, J., Ehrman, R., Napier, K. L., O’Brien, C. P., & Childress, A. R. (DEMO). Three decision-making tasks in
cocaine-dependent patients: Do they measure the DEMO construct? Addiction, 96, 1825–1837.
Mellers, B. (2000). Choice DEMO the relative pleasure of consequences. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 910–924.
Naqvi, DEMO, Shiv, B., & Bechara, A. (2006). The role DEMO emotion in decision making: A cognitive neuroscience perspective.
Current Directions in DEMO Science, 15, 260–264.
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, DEMO
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
224 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Overman, W. H. (2004). DEMO differences in early childhood, adolescence, and adulthood on cognitive tasks that rely on
orbital prefrontal cortex. Brain and Cognition, 55, 134–147.
Peters, E., & Slovic, P. (2000). The springs of action: DEMO and analytical information processing in choice.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, DEMO, 1465–1475.
Reavis, R., & Overman, W. H. (2001). DEMO sex differences on a decision-making task previously shown to depend on the
orbital prefrontal cortex. Behavioral Neuroscience, 115, 196–206.
Rottenstreich, Y., & DEMO, C. K. (2001). Money, kisses, and electric shocks: DEMO the affective psychology of risk.
Psychological Science, 12, 185–190.
Saucier, DEMO (1994). Mini-Markers–a brief version of Goldberg unipolar Big-5 markers. Journal DEMO Personality
Assessment, 63, 506–516.
Scheres, A., & Sanfey, A. (2006). Individual differences in decision making: Drive and reward responsiveness affect
strategic bargaining in economic games. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 2, 1–8.
DEMO, D., de Haan, E. H. F., & van Honk, DEMO (2004). Anterior asymmetrical alpha activity predicts Iowa gambling
performance: Distinctly but reversed. Neuropsychologia, 42, 939–943.
Sutton, S. K., & Davidson, R. J. (1997). Prefrontal brain asymmetry: A biological substrate of DEMO behavioral approach
and inhibition systems. Psychological Science, 8, 204–210.
Suzuki, DEMO, Hirota, A., Takasawa, N., & Shigemasu, K. (2003)DEMO Application of the somatic marker hypothesis to individual
differences in decision making. Biological Psychology, 65, 81–88.
van den Bos, R., Houx, B. B., & Spruijt, B. A. (2006). The effect of reward magnitude differences on choosing
disadvantageous decks in the Iowa Gambling Task. Biological DEMO, 71, 155–161.
Yechiam, E., Busemeyer, J. R., Stout, DEMO C., & Bechara, A. (2005). Using cognitive models to DEMO relations between
neuropsychological disorders and human decision-making deﬁcits. Psychological Science, 16, 973–978.
Authors’ biographies:
Re´ mi Desmeules is a marketing doctoral student DEMO the Desautels Faculty of Management of McGill University, and a
Professeur DEMO ant at Universite´ Laval. His research interests center on consumer research and include the role of
emotions and trust in decision making.
Antoine Bechara DEMO an Associate Professor of Psychology, Neuroscience, and Neurology (Brain and DEMO Institute,
University of Southern California, and Neurology Department, University of Iowa). His research interests include the
neuroscience of decision-making and its DEMO to clinical conditions such as addiction, as well as social situations
DEMO as marketing or economic decisions.
Laurette Dube´ is the James McGill Professor of Consumer Psychology at the Desautels Faculty of Management of
McGill University. DEMO work focuses on the role of sensations, emotions and other affects DEMO decision making and
behavior and is supported by the CIHR and the SSHRC of Canada.
Authors’ addresses:
Re´ mi Desmeules
0A6, Canada.
, Faculte´
des Sciences de l’Administration, Pavillon Palasis-Prince, Universite´
Laval, Que´
bec, QC, G1V
Antoine Bechara, Department of Psychology, University of Southern DEMO, Los Angeles, CA 90089-2520, USA.
Laurette Dube´
, Desautels Faculty DEMO Management, 1001 Sherbrooke Street West, Montre´
al, QC, H3A 1G5, Canada.
Copyright # 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of DEMO Decision Making, 21, 211–224 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm{1g42fwefx}