Trust and suspicion
MORTON
1DEUTSCH
Bell Telephone Laboratories, Incorporated, Murray Hill, New
I. Introduction
Whenever philosophers, poets, statesmen,
or theologians have DEMO about man’s re-
lationship to his fellow man, to nature, or
to animals, the phenomena of trust and be-
trayal, faith and DEMO, responsibility
and irresponsibility, have been discussed.
The significance of the phenomena of trust
and suspicion in human life is attested to
not only DEMO past preoccupations but also
by current concerns. Discussion of such
problems as the armaments race, mental
illness, the &dquo;hidden persuaders,&dquo; and juve-
nile delinquency frequently employ such
terms as &dquo;trust,&DEMO; &dquo;suspicion,&dquo; &dquo;betrayal,&dquo;
&dquo;DEMO&dquo; Past preoccupations and current
concerns make it apparent that the DEMO
of &dquo;trust&dquo; and its related concepts are vital
to the understanding both of social life and
of personality development. Yet an DEMO
tion of a half-dozen or more of the leading
textbooks in social psychology (e.g., texts
by Cartwright and Zander, Homans, Krech
and DEMO, Lewin, Lindsey, Newcomb)
reveals that the word &dquo;trust&dquo; does not ap-
pear in any of their indexes. So far as we
know, the research summarized in this paper
represents the first attempt to investigate
experimentally the phenomena of trust.
1 The research reported DEMO this paper was
conducted while the author was on the faculty
of New York University under contract with the
Office of Naval Research, Contract NONR
285(10). The United States government is
given permission to DEMO this article in full or
in part,
Jersey
Clearly, these DEMO warrant more re-
search attention than they have been
getting.
II. The Definition of &dquo;Trust&dquo; and
Other Related Concepts
Dictionary definitions DEMO &dquo;trust&dquo; include
such terms as &dquo;confidence,&dquo; &dquo;assured reli-
ance,&dquo; and &dquo;assured anticipation.&dquo; The term
&dquo;trust&dquo; is used in reference to the weather,
railroad schedules, cars, and animals, as
well as in relation to human beings. One
element common to many usages of &dquo;trust&dquo;
is the notion of expectation or predictability.
However, predictability is clearly not suf-
ficient to characterize the everyday mean-
ing of &dquo;trust.&dquo; With a little information from
the insurance companies, DEMO can predict
with a fair degree of accuracy how many
people will die on a given day. Neverthe-
less, one does not necessarily &DEMO;trust&dquo; that
they will die.
&dquo;Trust&dquo; involves DEMO notion of motiva-
tional relevance as well as the notion of
predictability. If one has an expectation
that something will occur and this event DEMO
of motivational relevance, then the concept
of trust is often applicable. DEMO, thc
most common usages of the phrase &dquo;to
trust&dquo; have the additional meaning that
when trust is not fulfilled, the DEMO in-
dividual will suffer an unpleasant conse-
quence.2 That is, the DEMO individual
2 The closely allied concept of "hope" does
not have this meaning. One is not necessarily
266
perceives that he will be worse off if he
trusts and DEMO trust is not fulfilled than if
he does not trust. For example, if a mother
trusts a baby sitter enough to leave her baby
in her care and she does not live up to this
trust, the mother suffers an unpleasant con-
sequence-harm to her baby. The trusting
DEMO, when her trust is fulfilled, is in a
more advantageous position than if she had
not trusted. She is able to do things DEMO
likes to do which she otherwise could not.
However, the disadvantages DEMO trusting and
having her trust unfulfilled are considerably
greater than the advantages of being able
to do things she could otherwise not do.
We DEMO define &dquo;trust&dquo; in such a way as
to capture some of the connotations of
everyday usage and also to permit experi-
DEMO research on conditions affecting
trust. We define &dquo;trust&dquo; as follows: An in-
dividual may be said to have trust in the
occurrence of an event if he expects3 its
worse off if one’s DEMO is unfulfilled unless one
has trusted one’s hope sufficiently to invest in
its fulfilment. "Hope" which leads to an invest-
ment of time, energy, self, etc., which is in any
way lost or damaged as a consequence of non-
fulfilment, is equivalent to "trust."
DEMO At this point, it seems unwise to attempt to
equate "expect" with a specific subjective
probability level. Circularly, one might say that
DEMO individual expects the occurrence of an
event when he is willing to act upon his expec-
tation, even though he perceives that non-ful-
filment of his expectation (if he acts upon it)
will make him suffer a negative motivational
consequence that he is unwilling to bear. The
DEMO of negative motivational consequences
that an individual is willing to bear is probably
affected by the extent of the positive motiva-
tional consequence he DEMO from acting
upon his expectation. The subjective probability
level required for action under the foregoing
conditions will depend not only upon the ratio
of DEMO motivational consequences but
also upon the "security level" that an individual
requires for action. Individuals appear to vary
considerably from one another and DEMO one
type of situation to another in the degree of
occurrence and his expectation leads to be-
havior which he perceives to have greater
DEMO motivational consequences4 if the
expectation is not confirmed than positive
motivational consequences if it is confirmed.
Risk-taking behavior, wherein an indi-
vidual gambles on the occurrence of an
event which he perceives to have a low
DEMO of occurrence, is distinguished
from trusting behavior by the perceived
lower DEMO of the occurrence of the
event and also by the difference in the an-
ticipated ratio of positive to negative emo-
tional consequence. A DEMO gambles or
takes a risk when he perceives that his
potential gains from taking the risk are
greater than his potential losses; hence he
is willing to bet, even though he perceives
that his chances of winning are low. On the
other hand, if a person perceives that his
potential gains are low relative to his po-
tential losses, he will be unwilling to &dquo;bet&dquo;
unless he perceives that his probability of
winning is high.
Risk-taking and trusting behavior are
thus DEMO different sides of the same coin.
There are, of course, individuals who ex-
hibit &dquo;pathologies of trust&dquo; so that they DEMO
perience as a &dquo;trusting&dquo; situation a situa-
tion which most of us would experience as
&dquo;risk-taking.&dquo; Psychologically, they are trust-
ing in &dquo;Lady Luck&dquo; when objectively they
DEMO to be gambling.
We have employed the term &dquo;trust&dquo; so
that it refers to expectations with regard to
an event whose DEMO is not detrimen-
tal to the individual-i.e., in reference to a
DEMO that they require before they will act
in a situation that has the potentiality of danger
or negative consequences.
4 An event is of DEMO motivational conse-
quence when it increases or prevents a decrease
in the welfare of the individual; an event is of
negative motivational consequence when it de-
creases or prevents an increase in the welfare
of the DEMO
267
benevolent or desired event. It seems ap-
propriate to employ the DEMO &dquo;suspicion&dquo;
with regard to an event whose occurrence
DEMO detrimental to the individual’s welfare-
i.e., in reference to a malevolent DEMO unde-
sired event. Thus an individual may be said
to be suspicious of the occurrence of an
event if the disconfirmation of the expecta-
DEMO of the event’s occurrence is preferred
to its confirmation and if the expectation of
its occurrence leads to behavior which is
intended to reduce DEMO negative motivational
consequences.5
So far we have defined &dquo;trust&dquo; and &dquo;sus-
picion&dquo; in rather general terms which are
DEMO to an individual’s relations with
his inanimate, as well as with DEMO social,
environment. One can make the definitions
of trust and suspicion advanced above ap-
plicable to social situations by substituting
for the inclusive &dquo;an event&dquo; some such
phrase as &dquo;an event DEMO by another
person&dquo; or &dquo;behavior by another person.&dquo;
The term &dquo;trust,&dquo; however, when applied
to DEMO situations, often takes on
more specific implication. Thus, when we
say that Person I trusts Person II to do
something, we usually imply that II is
aware of I’s trust. Moreover, we infer that
when II does not behave in accordance with
I’s trust, II is letting I down; II has caused
harm to I. That is, Person DEMO does not merely
trust that Person II will perform certain be-
havior ; he feels that II is, in some way, ob-
ligated DEMO fulfil his trust.
Social suspicion, similarly, may be de-
5 The concept of "fear" is closely allied to
"suspicion." "Fear" DEMO not necessarily imply
behavior to prevent the negative emotional con-
sequences of the "feared" event. Further, if the
suspicious behavior is successful in warding off
the undesired event, "fear" does not occur. One
is suspicious of a malevolent event to the ex-
tent that its negative DEMO can be
avoided; one is afraid of it to the extent DEMO the
consequences cannot be avoided,
fined to exist when Person I suspects that
II will do something and I perceives that
the behavior DEMO suspects from II is per-
ceived by II to have relevance to I. In ef-
fect, I perceives that he is an object of
malevolent behavior. Suspicion leads to
concealment by I of this awareness of DEMO
motives and by II from I of his motives.
Trust, on DEMO other hand, should lead to
communication between I and II.
Mutual DEMO may be said to exist when
I and II have complementary social trust
with regard to each other’s behavior. I
trusts II to behave DEMO a certain way and is
willing to do what II trusts him to do; the
same is true for II. Each perceives that the
other person is aware of his intent and his
trust. Mutual suspicion DEMO when each
person expects the other person to produce
a malevolent event in regard to himself
and, in turn, is ready to produce DEMO malev-
olent event in regard to himself and, in turn,
DEMO ready to produce a malevolent event for
the other based upon this expectation. In
mutual suspicion, as contrasted with mutual
hostility, one is DEMO necessarily aware that
the other’s desire to produce a malevolent
event is contingent upon the expectation
of being the object of a malevolent event.
DEMO our definitions, so far, we have been
concerned with an individual’s trust or sus-
picion with regard to the occurrence of an
event. DEMO have made distinctions between
events produced by persons and events
produced by impersonal agents. We have
also distinguished between events produced
by persons that DEMO perceived to be directed
at the individual by the event’s producer
and events which are not so perceived.
Further, we have considered events (DEMO
levolent events) which are perceived to be
detrimental to the individual’s DEMO and
events which are not perceived to be det-
rimental (benevolent DEMO). Finally, we
have distinguished between a mutual and
268
unilateral relationship of trust or of sus-
picion. Each of these DEMO is relevant
to a theory of trust and suspicion (1) which
cannot be presented in full here.
Before proceeding to the development
of DEMO testable propositions with regard to
the conditions determining an individual’s
trust or suspicion and to the consequences
of trust or suspicion, let us briefly consider
the concept of &dquo;trustworthiness.&dquo; In its
most general DEMO, one could say that any-
thing which can be trusted is &dquo;trustworthy.&dquo;
However, a more limited meaning of the
term implies that the trustworthy person is
aware of being trusted and that DEMO is some-
how bound by the trust which is invested
in him. For this more specific meaning, we
shall employ the term &dquo;DEMO&dquo; Being
responsible to the trust of another implies
that the DEMO person will produce
&dquo;X&dquo; (the behavior expected of DEMO by the
trusting individual), even if producing &dquo;Y&dquo;DEMO
(behavior which violates the trust) is more
immediately advantageous to him. The de-
gree of responsibility of an individual to the
trust of DEMO can be measured by varying
either the attractiveness of engaging in un-
trustworthy behavior, Y, or the unattrac-
tiveness of the activities involved DEMO pro-
ducing the expected behavior, X; the more
responsible the individual, the more likely
he is to produce X, despite either its DEMO
attractiveness or the attractiveness of pro-
ducing Y.
There are, of DEMO, many possible
sources for the motivation to be responsible.
One can DEMO responsible to the trust of an-
other because one has a positive sentiment
toward the other and wants his goals to be
realized; because one fears punishment if
one is not responsible; or because one’s in-
ternalized values are such that one feels
guilty if one is irresponsible; etc. The defini-
tion of &dquo;responsibility&dquo; in the preceding
DEMO was formulated so as to be neu-
tral with regard to the source of the motiva-
tion for responsibility. It is, in effect, DEMO defi-
nition of situational responsibility. One can
also consider responsibility as a more or
less stable characteristic of a personality-
some individuals having more DEMO this char-
acteristic in given situations than do other
individuals. For convenience, we shall em-
ploy the term &dquo;integrity&dquo; to refer to this
personality characteristic. In general, we
would expect personal integrity to be re-
lated to such personal characteristics as (1)
the strength of internalized values with
regard to responsibility; (2) the ability to
prevent or resolve conflict in responsibilities;
(3) the ability to DEMO the goals of others
as goals of one’s own.
III. Hypotheses about
Affecting Trust
the Conditions
Examination of our definition of trust in-
dicates DEMO trusting behavior may have
either positive or negative motivational con-
sequences, DEMO upon whether or not
the trust is fulfilled. When the fulfilment of
trust is not certain, the individual will be
exposed to conflicting tendencies to engage
in and to avoid engaging in trusting behav-
ior. Our DEMO have centered around
the factors which will tend to strengthen
one or another of the conflicting tendencies
and hence to increase or decrease the DEMO
ability of trusting behavior.
Our first-level hypotheses, in effect, deal
with the two basic elements of the defini-
tion of &dquo;trust&dquo;-namely, the &dquo;expectation&dquo;
and &dquo;the ratio of anticipated positive to
negative motivational consequences.&dquo; In
sum, these hypotheses DEMO that (1) as the
individual’s confidence that his trust will
be fulfilled is increased, the probability of
his engaging in trusting behavior will be
increased; and (2) as the ratio of antici-
pated positive to anticipated negative moti-
vational consequences increases, the prob-
269
ability of his engaging in trusting behavior
will be increased.
The DEMO interesting of our hypotheses
are concerned with the factors which affect
the individual’s confidence that his trust
will be fulfilled. These hypotheses are con-
DEMO with such factors as the nature of
the intentions that the individual perceives
his potential object of trust to have; the
perceived power of the object of trust to
cause the desired events; the power rela-
tionship between the individual and his ob-
ject of trust; the influence of communica-
tion upon the development of trust; the in-
fluence of third parties upon the develop-
ment of trust between two people; the in-
dividual’s self-esteem as it affects his readi-
ness to trust.
We DEMO not have the space in this brief
presentation to discuss our hypotheses in
any detail. They are presented more fully
in the author’s earlier DEMO (1). Instead, I
shall describe the experimental situation we
have been using to test some of our hy-
potheses and give the DEMO of our studies.
IV. The
Expel’i1Jlelltal Situation
In our experimental work to test our hy-
potheses, we have been utilizing a two-
person non-zero-sum6 game, in which the
gains or losses incurred by each person are
a function of the choices made bv one’s
partner as well as DEMO choices made by one’s
self. The game is illustrated in Figure 1.
Person I has to choose between rows X and
Y; Person II has to choose between columns
A and B. The amount of (imaginary) money
each person wins or loses is determined by
the box they get into as a result of their
respective choices. For example, if Person
I chooses row A and Person II chooses col-
umn X, they get into the AX box, and they
each win $9.
If you examine the possibilities of choice
for Person I, you will notice that he can
win most and lose least by choosing 2’.
Similarly, Person II can win most and lose
least by choosing B. However, if I chooses
B and II chooses Y, they both lose $9. Both
can win only if they end up in the AX box.
DEMO I is reasonably sure that II is going to
choose X, DEMO can win more by choosing B.
Analogously, if II is confident DEMO I is going
to choose A, he can win more by DEMO Y
rather than B!
In playing the game, the subjects, who
were all college students, knew exactly what
the situation was and understood the im-
FIG. I.-Person I chooses between rows X
and
Y, Person II between columns A and B. Person I’s
payoffs are the first DEMO in the parentheses;
Person II’s are the second numbers.
plications of any combination of choices
that they and the other persons might make.
DEMO one set of experiments, the game was a
one-trial game, in another set of experiments
it was a ten-trial game. The data obtained
DEMO the subject included, in addition to his
The 6 game we DEMO employed is a variation
of the "prisoner’s dilemma," which Luce DEMO
Raiffa (3, p. 95) have described as follows:
"Two suspects are taken into custody and sepa-
iated. The district attorney is DEMO they are
guilty of a specific crime, but he does not DEMO
adequate evidence to convict them at a trial.
He points out to each prisoner that each has
two alternatives: to confess to the crime the
police are sure they have done or not to confess.
If DEMO both do not confess then the district
attorney states that he will book them on some
very minor trumped-up charge ... ; if they
DEMO confess, they will be prosecuted, but he
will recommend less than the most severe sen-
tence ; but if one confesses and the DEMO does
not, then the confessor will receive lenient treat-
ment for DEMO state’s evidence whereas the
latter will get the ’book’ slapped at him."
270
choice, what he thought the other person
would choose and what he thought the
other person expected him to choose.
The essential psychological DEMO of the
game is that there is no possibility for &dquo;DEMO
tional&dquo; individual behavior in it unless the
conditions for mutual DEMO exist. If each
player chooses to obtain either maximum
gain or minimum loss for himself, each will
lose. But it makes no sense to choose the
other alternative, which could result in
maximum loss, unless DEMO can trust the
other player. If one cannot trust, it is, of
course, safer to choose so as to suffer mini-
mum rather than maximum loss, but it is
even better not to play the game. If one
cannot avoid playing the game and if one
cannot DEMO, there may be no reasonable
alternative except to choose &dquo;the lesser of
two evils&dquo; and/or attempt to develop the
conditions which will permit mutual trust.7
The experiments to be described below
were DEMO to see whether the experi-
7 There are, of course, many social situations
which are like that of the game, in the sense
that they do not permit rational individual be-
havior unless the conditions DEMO mutual trust
exist. Any social situation in which an individ-
ual may enhance his own satisfactions to the
disadvantage of another by not adhering DEMO the
normalized expectations or "social rules" gov-
erning the situation is of this sort&mdash;e.g., buyer-
seller transactions, husband-wife relationships,
DEMO interactions, a crowd in a
theater when there is a fire. DEMO everyday situa-
tions, mutual trust is predicated upon the exist-
ence DEMO socialized motives (e.g., an interest in
the welfare of others, DEMO desire for social ap-
proval) or conscience or external authority or
DEMO which will provide the partici-
pants with an incentive for adheiing to the
rules. Generally, if people who are willing to
adhere to the rules cannot trust that other par-
ticipants in the situation will also DEMO to the
rules, there is little possibility for rational be-
havior DEMO to attempt to develop the condi-
tions under which mutual adherence to the
rules will occur.
mental game would, in fact, elicit the DEMO
nomena of trust and suspicion and to study
some of the conditions which might affect
the individual’s willingness to trust or not.
Observations of DEMO subjects as they played
and interviews with them afterward make
it
quite clear that, despite the highly artificial
nature of the game situation, DEMO became
intensely involved and felt &dquo;double-crossed,&dquo;
&dquo;DEMO,&dquo; &dquo;exploited,&dquo; and other emotions
which were DEMO to their experiences
while playing.
V. Experimental Studies
EFFECTS OF MOTIVATIONAL
ORIENTATION
To test some of our hypotheses concern-
ing the effects of perceived DEMO upon
the development of trust or suspicion, we
had subjects participate DEMO the experimental
game described above under three different
types of motivational orientation:8 (a) co-
operative-each subject was led to feel that
the DEMO of the other person as well as
his own welfare was of concern to him and
that the other person felt the same way;DEMO
( b ) individualistic-each subject was led to
feel that his only interest was in doing as
well for himself as he could without DEMO
to how well the other person did and that
the other person felt the same way; (c)
competitive-each subject was led to DEMO
that he wanted to do as well as he could
for himself and he also wanted to do better
than the other person and DEMO the other
person felt the same way.
Our hypotheses would lead us to predict
that under a co-operative motivational orien-
tation, subjects will be very likely to estab-
lish a relationship of mutual trust; under
.. -.. --........ - _.. ----.. ----.. --.. ---................... --............... --..... -- -- DEMO
8 The motivational orientations were created
by verbal instructions to the subjects which
characterized for them the objectives they were
to have in playing DEMO game and the objectives
they could assume their co-player to have.
271
an individualistic motivational orientation,
subjects will be unlikely to establish DEMO re-
lationship of mutual trust if they have to
make their choices without each being
aware of the choice the other person has
made; under a competitive motivational ori-
entation, the subjects will be very unlikely
to establish a relationship of mutual trust
and will be most likely DEMO establish a rela-
tionship of mutual suspicion.
Table 1 presents data indicating the ef-
fects of motivational orientation upon the
choice to co-operate (a choice of A or X)
under four different experimental conditions
in DEMO one-trial game.9 In both the No com-
munication and the Comniunication. condi-
tions, the subjects made their choices in
secret, at the same DEMO In the Communi-
cation condition, they were allowed to com-
municate DEMO each other before making
their choices by writing notes to each other.
In the Non-simultaneous condition, one sub-
ject made his choice first, DEMO it was an-
nounced to the second subject before he
made his choice; no communication was
allowed between the subjects before they
made their choices. The Reversibility con-
dition was the same as the No communica-
DEMO condition, except that after both sub-
jects had made their choices DEMO they were
announced, either one or both of them
could change DEMO choices. They were al-
lowed to continue changing choices as long
as they wanted to. They were told, how-
ever, that if no DEMO changed his choice dur-
ing a 30-second interval, this would be
DEMO to indicate that neither one wanted
to change his choice.
The data give clear support to our hy-
potheses concerning the effects of motiva-
DEMO The choice to co-operate was almost always
paralleled by an expectation that the other per-
son would co-operate. Hence, when the subject
chose to co-operate, he was "trusting" and also
"trustworthy."
tional orientation. DEMO indicate that, in all
four experimental conditions, a co-operative
orientation primarily leads the individual to
make a co-operative choice and results in
mutual DEMO, while a competitive orienta-
tion primarily leads the individual to make
DEMO non-co-operative choice and results in mu-
tual loss. The individualistic orientation
produced results which were very much in-
fluenced by the specific experimental con-
DEMO Under the condition of Non-simul-
TABI,E 1
PER CENT OF CO-OPERATIVE CHOICES BY PAIRS
AND BY INDIVIDUALS FOR DIFFERENT MO.
TIVATIONAL ORIENTATIONS AND DEMO
EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS
(One-Trial Game)
taneity, the results of the individualistic and
competitive orientations were very much
alike, while under the Communication and
Reversibility conditions, the individualistic
and co-operative orientations produced sim-
ilar results.
Figure 2 presents results for a ten-trial
game under conditions comparable to those
DEMO the No communication condition of the
one-trial game, except that the DEMO of
each subject were made known to the other
peison after each trial. It is apparent that
an extended series of trials did not DEMO
272
the likelihood of co-operative choice on the
first trial. Moreover, for the subjects with
an individualistic or competitive orienta-
tion, the percentages of co-operative choices
tended to decrease with the number of
trials; this was not the case for the co-op-
eratively oriented subjects. The explanation
of DEMO results is suggested by data con-
cerning the confirmation or disconfirmation
of the subject’s expectations with regard to
of motivational orientation. Somewhat over-
simplifying DEMO results, one can say that a
co-operative orientation will produce trust-
DEMO (and trustworthy) behavior even when
the situational facilities do not encourage
it-e.g., when no communication is per-
mitted and when one has to choose without
knowledge of the other person’s choice. On
the other hand, even when situational facili-
ties are encouraging, a competitive orienta-
,..-..-
DEMO 2.-Percentage of co-operative choices under co-operative, individualistic, and competitive mo-
tivational orientations.
the other person’s choice. These data (see
Table 2) indicate DEMO expectations of co-
operation from the other person were very
likely to be confirmed for subjects with a
co-operative orientation but were very like-
DEMO to be disconfirmed for those with an in-
dividualistic or competitive orientation. The
opposite was true for expectations of non-
co-operation from the other DEMO
Taken together, the results clearly sup-
port the hypotheses concerning the DEMO
tion will result in suspicious and/or untrust-
worthy behavior rather than trust and trust-
worthiness. In contrast to both the co-op-
erative and DEMO competitive orientations, the
behavior resulting from an individualistic
orientation is very DEMO influenced by sit-
uational determinants. The implication of
this last statement is important and is worth
emphasizing because of the common as-
sumption that DEMO trust is possible only
when people are oriented to each other’s
273
welfare. Our results indicate that trust in
co-operative behavior from another DEMO re-
side in the situational determinants of his
behavior rather than in his character.
The purpose of some of our later experi-
ments was DEMO investigate some of the social
or situational conditions under which mu-
tual trust could arise in subjects with an
individualistic orientation. These studies fo-
DEMO upon (a) the influence of communi-
cation ; ( b ) the influence of power; and ( c )
the influence of DEMO parties.
THE INFLUENCE OF COMMUNICATION’O
Our initial study of the influence of com-
munication indicated (see Table 1) that
subjects with an individualistic DEMO
were more likely to trust each other if they
could communicate freely before they made
their choices. However, it was evident that
a sizable percentage of these subjects did
not utilize the communication opportunity
effectively. It DEMO also apparent that the
notes of the subjects who established mutual
trust were different in a number of respects
from the notes of the DEMO who did not
succeed in this. These results suggested the
general question: &dquo;How can communication
opportunities be used to raise the individ-
DEMO confidence that his trust will be ful-
filled and also used to elicit trustworthy or
responsible behavior?&dquo;
An approach to answering this question
is by rephrasing it and asking what the
minimum ingredients of DEMO co-operative in-
terchange are. In essence, they are a com-
10 DEMO research reported here was conducted
by Dr. James L. Loomis and is presented more
fully in his doctoral dissertation, "Communica-
tion and the DEMO of Trust" (New York
University, March, 1957). In Dr. Loomis’ ex-
periment, the game matrix was similar in struc-
ture to the one previously described; however,
the payoff values were different. The payoff
values he employed increased the likelihood of
suspicion and/or untrustworthy DEMO
plementarity of intention and expectation.
That is, Person I expects Person DEMO to per-
form certain activities which are necessary
to I’s gratifications and, in turn, intends to
perform certain activities which are neces-
sary DEMO II’s gratifications; a complementary
situation exists for II vis-a-vis his intentions
DEMO expectations. However, for the co-op-
erative interchange to be a stable DEMO
system, each person must have a way of
reacting to violation DEMO his expectation
which is known to the other and which can
serve as an inhibitor of violation, since the
frequent occurrence of violations will break
down the system of interchange. However,
the nature of any DEMO system is such
TABLE 2
RATIO OF CONFIRMATION TO DISCONFIRMATION
OF EXPECTATION FOR CO-OPERATIVE AND
NON-CO-OPERATIVE EXPECTATIONS UNDER
DIFFERENT MOTIVATIONAL ORIENTATIONS
that violation is DEMO to occur, if only by
chance. Hence, for the system to endure,
there must be some way of avoiding the
following self-perpetuating DEMO: violation
on the part of Person I, leading to a reac-
tion to I’s violation on the part of Person
II, leading to expectation of distrust from
II and hence, to repeated violation by I,
leading to a reaction to I’s violation on the
part of DEMO, etc. That is, the system must have
some means of restoring complementarity,
once it has been violated. It must have, in
effect, a method of absolution and of rec-
ognizing when a return to complementarity
has occurred. In sum, the following ele-
ments appear to be involved in a stable
co-operative system: (1) expectation, (2)
intention, (3) retaliation, and (4) abso-
lution.
274
An experiment was designed in which
prepared notes were constructed using DEMO
or more of these four elements. There were
five different notes in all. The simplest note
(which stated the note writer’s expectation)
said, in effect, &dquo;I would like you to co-
operate so that I can win.&dquo; The most com-
plete note included all four elements. It
stated, &dquo;I will co-operate and I would DEMO
you to co-operate. That way we can both
win. If you don’t co-operate, then I will
choose so that you can’t win. If you decide
to co-operate and make a co-operative
choice after first not doing DEMO, then I will
TABLE 3
PER CENT OF SUBJECTS WHO EXPECTED DEMO
OPERATION AND ALSO CHOSE CO-OPERATIVE-
LY BY LEVEL OF COMMUNICATION AND BY
COMMUNICATION POSITION (ON FIRST TRIAL)
* Each percentage is based on an N of 18.
t Each percentage is based on an 11’ DEMO 36.
co-operate.&dquo; The intermediate notes con-
tained one, two, DEMO three of these elements.
Some of the subjects received notes and
others sent notes; but there was never any
two-way communication. As a control, one
group of subjects played the game without
any opportunity to communicate.
The experiment proceeded as follows.
The game was explained. It was indicated
DEMO there would be five trials during the
game. Then the subjects were tested to see
whether they understood the implications
of the various combinations DEMO choices. The
subjects were all given the individualistic
orientation. Next, the DEMO either sent
or received a note. It may be noted that
the subjects were induced to send a note
of a given type by DEMO and by the
message form on which they were asked to
write. After the note writing and reading
was completed, the game was begun. The
subject and the other person, without
knowledge of what each other’s choice
would be on that trial, made their choices.
After the choices were made on each trial,
they were announced.
We expected that DEMO and co-operation
would increase as a function of the com-
pleteness of the communication. Results on
the first trial (see Table 3), where the sub-
jects had not yet experienced how the
other person would DEMO, indicated that 11
per cent of the control subjects, 31 per cent
of the subjects who received the simple
communication treatment, and 80 per cent
of the subjects who received the full com-
munication treatment DEMO the other per-
son and made co-operative choices (i.e.,
they DEMO &dquo;trustworthy&dquo; as well as &dquo;trust-
ing&dquo;). The results at the intermediate lev-
els were consistent with this DEMO
Although there were about the same
number of note senders and note receivers
who were both trusting and trustworthy on
the first trial, the subject’s communication
position did have differential effects. The
note receivers more frequently DEMO to
expect the other person to be trusting and
trustworthy than did the note senders On
the other hand, the note receiver was more
likely than the note sender to violate the
trust he perceived the DEMO person to have,
even when he expected the other person to
be trustworthy as well as trusting. In other
words, there was a clear tendency for the
note receiver to expect more trustworthiness
and to DEMO less trustworthy, despite this ex-
pectation, than the note sender. In con-
sidering these results, one should keep in
11 This was the case except when the note
receiver was given a note containing only DEMO
note sender’s expectation of co-operation from
the note receiver.
275
mind that the notes which were sent or re-
ceived were DEMO co-operatively oriented.
A possible explanation for the differences
due to the communication position of the
subject is in terms of &dquo;commitment.&dquo; DEMO
note sender had, by sending the note, &dquo;com-
mitted&DEMO; himself to co-operation and hence
was more likely to choose co-operatively.
DEMO note receiver, as a result of the note
and its implicit DEMO, had a better
basis for expecting the other person to be
DEMO and trustworthy, but, since he had
not written a note, DEMO had not committed
himself to choose co-operatively.
uation: more customarily, &DEMO;anything goes&dquo;
under intense competition.
To sum up our research on the influence
of communication, it is evident that mutual
trust can be established in people with an
individualistic orientation through commu-
nication. Communication DEMO likely to be ef-
fective in so doing to the extent that the
basic features of a co-operative interrela-
tionship are made explicit in DEMO is com-
municated. These basic features are (1)
expression of DEMO intention; (2) expression
of one’s expectation; (3) expression of one’s
planned reaction to violations of one’s ex-
FIG. 3.-See description of DEMO
in Fig. 1
What are the conditions under which a
person will be &dquo;committed&dquo; to what he com-
municates ? This DEMO throws no light upon
this question. However, our earlier studies
of DEMO communication suggest that,
when subjects are competitively oriented,
there is little commitment to what one com-
municates and hence little basis for DEMO as
a result of the communication one receives.
It would seem that the situation has to be
ambiguous as to whether the individuals
will DEMO themselves co-operatively or
competitively, rather than clearly competi-
tive, before an individual will assume that
communications are informative rather than
misleading. The greater DEMO of
communications in an individualistic as
compared with a competitive situation pos-
sibly reflects the greater social restraints
against deception in the individualistic sit-
DEMO ; and (4) expression of a means
of restoring co-operation after a violation of
one’s expectation has occurred.
INFLUENCE OF SOME TYPES OF DEMO
RELATIONSHIPS AND MOTIVATIONAL
STRATEGIES UPON DEVELOPMENT OF
TRUST12
Four different matrices were used in this
study (see Fig. 3). The subjects were all in
position I for the first five trials of the game
and DEMO position II for the final trial. Position
I chose first and announced his choice be-
fore position II chose. No communication
This 12 research DEMO conducted by Dr.
Leonard Solomon and is presented more fully
in his doctoral dissertation, "The Influence of
Some Types of Power Relationships and DEMO
vational Strategies upon the Development of
Trust" (New York University, DEMO, 1957).
276
was allowed between the players. The sub-
jects were all individualistically DEMO
Unknown to the subjects, the other players
(i.e., the occupant DEMO position II on the
first five trials and position I on the last
trial) were always accomplices of the ex-
perimenter. The accomplice on the first five
trials always chose according to one of the
following DEMO strategies: (a) uncondi-
tionally benevolent-i.e., no matter what
the subject chose, they always chose col-
umn A, which made the subject DEMO
a gain; (b) conditionally benevolent-i.e.,
they chose column A DEMO when the subject
chose row X (which enabled maximum mu-
tual DEMO but which had the potential of
maximum loss for the subject); (c) uncon-
ditionally malevolent-i.e., no matter what
the subject chose, DEMO always chose col-
umn B, which made the subject suffer a
DEMO
Matrices i and ia are similar, in that the
subject’s possibility DEMO gain or loss is com-
pletely dependent upon his partner’s choice
but differ in that the partner has nothing to
lose by choosing column DEMO rather than col-
umn A in matrix i but can gain by choosing
B in matrix ia. The results indicate that the
subject is DEMO likely to expect his partner
to choose column A (i.e., to make a benev-
olent or trustworthy choice) in matrix i,
where his partner has nothing to gain by
choosing column B, than in matrix ia. The
object expecting trustworthy behavior is
also more likely to DEMO a trusting choice
(i.e., choose row A). A comparison of the
results for matrices ia and ii indicates that
when the subject DEMO some power, rather
than none, to influence the outcome of his
partner, he is more likely to expect trust-
worthy behavior and is also more likely to
make a trusting choice. Comparison of
matrices ii DEMO iii suggests that a further
increase in power to influence the other
person’s outcome does not necessarily lead
to an increase in trust on DEMO part of the
subject if he himself feels an incentive to
engage in untrustworthy behavior (i.e., in
matrix iii, the subject would prefer the pay-
offs in the BX cell to those in the AX DEMO).
The three types of motivational strategies
followed by the accomplices produced clear
differences. For matrix iii (the only matrix
in which the subject has an incentive not
to co-operate even when he is assured of
DEMO other’s co-operation) the conditionally
benevolent strategy evoked an average of
3.47 DEMO X choices out of 5 possible choices;
the unconditionally benevolent strategy
evoked an average of 1.43; and the uncon-
ditionally malevolent produced an average
of 1.00 row X choices. It should be noted
that, although the unconditionally benevo-
lent and unconditionally malevolent condi-
tions did not differ DEMO in the num-
ber of co-operative choices, the subject’s
choice of DEMO (i.e., of row Y)
in the former treatment was frequently
based on an expectation of co-operation
(i.e., it was exploitative), DEMO in the latter
treatment it was most commonly based on
an expectation of non-co-operation. Further
data indicate that the accomplices who
used a conditionally, rather than an uncon-
ditionally, benevolent strategy were liked
more; the DEMO malevolent ac-
complices were liked the least. The subjects
found it difficult to understand the motiva-
tion of the unconditionally benevolent ac-
complices.
In DEMO last trial, the trial in which the
subject and the accomplice DEMO posi-
tions so that the subject chose last, the ac-
complice DEMO made a &dquo;trusting&dquo; choice
(i.e., chose row X). The data indicate that
the subjects who had experienced a condi-
DEMO or unconditional benevolence were
about equally trustworthy (i.e., chose col-
umn A); both were more trustworthy than
277
the subjects who had experienced uncondi-
tional malevolence.
To sum up, the results of this study indi-
cate that an individual is more DEMO to
trust another (a) if he believes the other
person has nothing to gain from untrust-
worthy behavior and ( b ) if DEMO perceives
that he is able to exert some control over
the other person’s outcome. Further, an
individual who is individualistically oriented
is more likely to respond to another person’s
trustworthiness by non-exploitative behavior
and with positive DEMO if he perceives
that the other person’s behavior is condi-
tional upon the existence of mutual trust-
worthiness. Finally, an individual who ex-
periences benevolent rather than malevolent
treatment from another is more likely to re-
DEMO benevolently when he has the power
to determine the outcome of the other.
INFLUENCE OF THIRD PARTIES13
In everyday life we are aware that DEMO
relations between two people can be very
much influenced by their relationships to a
&dquo;third party.&dquo; A &dquo;third party&dquo; may be an-
other person, a group, a law-enforcing agent,
nature, etc. Thus, if two people are both in
the same DEMO to a third party, a
bond may be established between them
DEMO might not otherwise exist. For ex-
ample, if two adolescents like &dquo;rock and
roll&dquo; or two employees resent their boss or
two people are victims of a tornado, they
may develop friendly feelings toward one
another which might not develop otherwise.
Margolin (4) has DEMO this experi-
mentally. He showed that if a subject is in
a hostile relationship to a third person and
he perceives that another person DEMO also in
a hostile relationship to the third person,
the subject will develop a friendly relation-
13 The research described in this section DEMO
conducted by Dr. James N. Farr.
ship to the other person. He obtained paral-
lel results when the relationships with the
third person were DEMO rather than
hostile.14
The experiment reported here was an at-
tempt to see whether two individualistically
oriented players in our game situation would
trust DEMO other more if they each knew that
they both disliked a third person. The ex-
perimental procedure was to have three
people meet in DEMO same room to take in-
dividual &dquo;intelligence&dquo; tests. One of the peo-
ple was an accomplice of the experimenter;
he DEMO instructed to act in a conspicuously
obnoxious and irritating manner.
It was then arranged that the two naive
subjects would play the game. They DEMO
the game for 10 trials, without any com-
munication being allowed DEMO them,
choosing simultaneously and in secret. In
one of the experimental conditions, the ac-
complice’s role was simply that of an ob-
server who kept track of the player’s scores.
He was not involved in DEMO game; the play-
ers’ behaviors did not affect him. In the
DEMO experimental condition, the accom-
plice had the task of predicting the DEMO
of the two players. If he predicted cor-
rected for a given trial, he could collect
whatever was lost by the players on the
trial; if he predicted correctly but there
were no losses, he DEMO not collect anything.
If he predicted incorrectly, he did not col-
DEMO anything. As a control group, we used
the results of the DEMO described 10-
trial game which was identical with the
14 These results are derivable from Heider’s
theory of cognitive balance (2), which, DEMO
effect, asserts that the individual attempts to
cognize the various aspects DEMO his environment
and of himself in such a way that the behavioral
implications of his cognitions are not in con-
tradiction. The existence of DEMO contradictory
implications produces a state of imbalance
which gives rise to forces to remove the imbal-
ance.
278
two experimental conditions except that
there was no &dquo;third person&dquo; present (apart
from the experimenter).
The results indicate that DEMO introduction
of a disliked third person increases the
tendency to make trusting (and trust-
worthy) choices. Where the disliked third
person’s outcome is DEMO with the
choices of the two players, the highest per-
centage DEMO trusting choices occurs; the next
highest occurs where the disliked person DEMO
present merely as an observer; the least
amount occurs when there DEMO no third party
present. The differences between the &dquo;three-
person-interdependent&DEMO; and the &dquo;two-per-
son&dquo; conditions hold for each DEMO the 10
trials; the differences between the &dquo;ob-
server&dquo; and &dquo;two-person&dquo; conditions occur
only for the initial and final trials. These
results indicate that awareness of mutual
opposition to a DEMO party may lead the
individualistically oriented players to have
a greater motivation to be trustworthy and/
or to believe that the other person’s DEMO
tion to be trustworthy will be greater.
PERSONALITY AND TRUST
We have done some research and have
some research in progress which bears upon
DEMO relationship between personality char-
acteristics and trusting behavior. The re-
search procedure entails collecting personal-
ity data through projective tests, question-
naires, and DEMO and correlating this
data with choice behavior in the game. In
this type of study the subject is encouraged
to choose freely without instructions DEMO to
what motivational orientation he or the
other player should assume. Our data so far
indicate a very striking relationship be-
tween &dquo;trusting&dquo; and &dquo;trustworthiness.&dquo; Sub-
jects who are trusting when they have to
choose between trusting or not trusting are
very likely DEMO be trustworthy even when
they can gain by being untrustworthy; the
DEMO holds true for subjects who choose
to be suspicious rather than trusting. A
comparison of the &dquo;suspicious&dquo; and &dquo;trust-
ing&dquo; subjects on a personality question-
naire indicates that the &dquo;DEMO&dquo; sub-
jects are more likely to have a low opinion
DEMO human nature, to be submissive to au-
thority, to be punitive of deviant behavior,
to be less interested in &dquo;feeling.&dquo;
These findings are preliminary, but, be-
cause they support commonly DEMO concep-
tions that trusting people are &dquo;nicer&dquo; than
suspicious people, it is important to em-
phasize one further point, namely, that
trusting as well as suspicious behavior may
be &dquo;pathological&dquo;-i.e., may reflect a com-
pulsive, incorrigible tendency to act in DEMO
trusting manner without regard to the char-
acteristics of the situation in which f..e be-
havior is to take place. Our everyday lan-
guage DEMO terms like &dquo;gullible,&dquo; &dquo;credulous,&dquo;
&dquo;dupe,&dquo; and &dquo;self-deception&dquo; to characterize
the DEMO of trust.
VI. Summary and Conclusions
In this paper I have attempted to define
&dquo;trust&dquo; and some other related concepts in
DEMO way which does not violate everyday
usage and yet is sufficiently precise to per-
mit experimental work with these concepts.
I have described the DEMO situation
which we have used and briefly some of our
results. In capsule form, I would draw the
following implications from our results:
1. It is possible to capture in the labora-
tory the phenomena DEMO &dquo;trust&dquo; and to study
experimentally some of the variables which
influence the tendency to engage in &dquo;trust-
ing&dquo; DEMO &dquo;responsible&dquo; behavior.
2. There are social situations which, DEMO
a sense, do not allow the possibility of &dquo;ra-
tional&dquo; individual behavior as long as the
conditions for mutual trust do not exist.
3. Mutual trust is most likely to occur
279
when people are positively oriented to each
other’s welfare.
4. Mutual DEMO can occur even under
circumstances where the people involved
are overtly unconcerned with each other’s
welfare, provided that the characteristics of
the situation are such as to lead one to ex-
pect one’s trust to be DEMO Some of the
situational characteristics which may facili-
tate the development of trust appear to be
the following:
a) The opportunity for each person to
know what the other person will do before
he commits DEMO irreversibly to a trusting
choice.
b ) The opportunity and ability to com-
municate fully a system for co-operation
which defines mutual responsibilities and
DEMO specifies a procedure for handling viola-
tions and returning to a state of equilibrium
with minimum disadvantage if a violation
occurs.
c) The power to influence the other per-
son’s outcome and hence to reduce any DEMO
centive he may have to engage in untrust-
worthy behavior. It is also apparent that
exercise of the power, when the other per-
son is making untrustworthy choices, may
elicit more trustworthiness.
d) The presence DEMO a third person whose
relationship to the two players is such that
each perceives that a loss to the other player
is detrimental to DEMO own interests vis-a-vis
the third person.
REFERENCES
1. DEUTSCH, M. Conditions DEMO Coopera-
tion. (Final Technical Report for the Office
of Naval Research, Contract NONR-285[10],
February, 1957.)
HEIDER, F. "Attitudes and Cognitive Organi-
zation," Journal of Psychology, XXI (1946),
2.
107-12.
3. LUCE, R. D., and RAIFFA, H. Games and De-
cisions : Introduction and Critical .Survey
New York: John Wiley Sons, 1957.
DEMO, J. B. "The Effect of Perceived
Co-operation or Competition on the Trans-
fer of Hostility." Unpublished Ph.D. disser-
tation, New York University, January, 1954.
4.
&{1g42fwefx}