THINKING
AND FAST REASONING, AND
FRUGAL
2001,
VS
7
REGRESSION (DEMO),
5–27
MODELS
Fast and frugal versus regression
models of human DEMO
Mandeep K. Dhami
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin
Clare DEMO
University College, London, UK
Following Brunswik (1952), social judgement DEMO have long relied on
regression models to describe both an individual’s judgements and the environ-
ment about which such judgements are made. However, social judgement theory is
not synonymous with these compensatory, static, structural models. DEMO compared
the characterisations of physicians’ judgements using a regression model with that
of a non-compensatory process model (called fast and frugal). We found that both
models fit the data equally well. Both models suggest that DEMO use few cues,
that they disagree among themselves, and that DEMO stated cue use is discrepant
with the models’ stated cue use. However, the fast and frugal model is easier to
convey to physicians and is also more psychologically plausible. Implications for
how social judgement theorists conceptualise DEMO process of vicarious functioning
are discussed.
5
Correspondence should be addressed to either author: Dr Clare Harries, Department of
Psychology, University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.
Email: clare.harries@ucl.ac.uk; or DEMO Dhami, Department of Psychology, City University,
Northampton Square, London, EDC1V 0HB, UK. Email: m.k.dhami@city.ac.uk
This paper was originally presented at DEMO 14th Annual International Meeting of the Brunswik
Society, 22 November 1998, Dallas, Texas. The Society jointly awarded the authors the
Hammond-Brunswik prize for young investigator of the year for the paper.
We would like to DEMO the substantial input of Jonathan Evans, Ian Dennis, John Dean,
and other members of the Medical Decision Making in Primary Care Research DEMO in the original
data collection. The team, headed by Jonathan Evans, was based at the Department of Psychology,
University of Plymouth, UK. The design and the data collection reported here were the work of
DEMO Harries, Jonathan Evans, Ian Dennis, and John Dean. Jonathan Evans DEMO the original
computer programming.
We would also like to thank the London Judgement and Decision Making group, the Adaptive
Behaviour and Cognition research group, and the members of the Brunswik Society for helpful
comments on earlier versions of this work, and Nigel Harvey, Tom Stewart, Ray Cooksey, and
Ulrich Hoffrage for constructive comments on this paper.
© 2001 Psychology Press Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.u k/journals/pp/13546783.html
DOI: 10.1080/13546780042000019
6 DHAMI AND HARRIES
In 1960, Hoffman highlighted that static, structural DEMO models were
paramorphic representations of human judgement behaviour. He argued that
such models “constitute a level of description and explanation which suffices for
scientific DEMO (Hoffman, 1960, p.124). For the past 50 years, social
judgement theorists have used regression models to describe, among other
things, DEMO information people use and how they weight and integrate it when
making decisions (Hammond, 1955; Harries, Evans, Dennis, & Dean, 1996).
Although other researchers have modelled non-linear, non-compensatory aspects
of behaviour (DEMO, Brannick & Brannick, 1989; Einhorn, 1970, 1971; Ganzach,
1995), social judgement theorists have generally concluded that judgements are
the DEMO of a linear compensatory integration of multiple cues (Brehmer &
Brehmer, 1988).
Social judgement theory is not synonymous with the use of regression models
(Hammond, 1996a; Hammond, Stewart, Brehmer, & Steinmann, 1975). Fast and
frugal process models are an alternative to regression DEMO (Gigerenzer &
Goldstein, 1996). They imply that individuals do DEMO integrate all relevant
information , relying instead on cue substitution, and DEMO their decision on
only one cue. In addition, many of these DEMO are non-compensatory. We show
that in an applied judgement setting of individual doctors’ decisions to prescribe
a lipid-lowering drug to a set of hypothetical DEMO, both the fast and frugal,
and regression models fit the DEMO data equally well.
Fast and frugal models are easier to understand, DEMO are psychologically more
plausible than regression models because they are more compatible with
humans’ cognitive limitations (Kahneman, 1973, Miller, 1956, Newell & Simon,
1972) and flexible use of information. These observations have implications for
the conceptualisation of the process of vicarious functioning illustrated in
Brunswik’s (1952) lens model, which describes how individuals adapt to their
environments. DEMO, the nature of adaptation means that humans employ
judgement strategies appropriate DEMO the structure and demands of the task
(Hammond, 1996a, Payne, Bettman, & Johnson, 1993), and researchers must
employ judgement models DEMO
SOCIAL JUDGEMENT THEORY AND
BRUNSWIK’S LENS MODEL
Social judgement theory does not provide any testable hypotheses regarding
human judgement, but provides a framework for investigating its nature. It is
rooted in Egon Brunswik’s (1943, 1952) theory of probabilistic functionalism
and employs Brunswik’s lens model to study applied DEMO problems
(Hammond, Hursch, & Todd, 1964; Hammond et al., 1975; Hursch, Hammond,
& Hursch, 1964). Brunswik (1934, 1943, 1952) was interested in the adaptive
interaction between individuals and DEMO environments. This approach is
illustrated in the lens model shown in Figure 1. This model presents the
FAST AND FRUGAL VS REGRESSION MODELS 7
environment system and the human (or judgement) system, their relations to a set
of cues (the available information) and the relation between all of these, which is
DEMO as achievement or accuracy (rA).
The environment is characterised by DEMO, probabilistic cause-effect
relationships between cues (X1–Xn) and a criterion (Ye). The imperfect ecological
or predictive validity of cues (re1, re2, ren ) restricts the degree of achievement of a
criterion. Moreover, the cues themselves co-vary (rX1X2), thus introducing
redundancy. This allows an individual to attain the same degree of achievement
of a criterion through using DEMO cues or using the same cues in a different
way. Brunswik (DEMO) would have regarded this as vicarious functioning. He
also demonstrated the DEMO of correlational statistics, including regression
analysis, for conceptualising the process of vicarious functioning, and for
capturing both the probabilistic nature of the environment and an individual’s
adaptation to it (Brunswik, 1940, 1956).
Although social judgement theorists aim to describe the relations between
individuals and their DEMO environment in terms of achievement, often an outcome
criterion is unavailable DEMO the period of the study or it is considered
unfeasible or unethical to collect outcome data (Cooksey, 1996). The majority of
research DEMO has focused solely on modelling the judgement system and
researchers have often compared the judgement policies of different individuals
as a measure of agreement DEMO individuals. The ultimate aim of many social
judgement theorists is to develop cognitive aids to improve judgement, whether
in terms of an individual’s achievement or in terms of concordance between
individuals (Hammond et al., 1975)DEMO
CHARACTERISATION OF JUDGEMENT BEHAVIOUR
USING REGRESSION MODELS
In a typical study, DEMO make decisions on a set of either real or hypo-
thetical cases that comprise a combination of cues. Each individual’s judgement
policy is then DEMO from his or her behaviour. When using regression models,
this means that the judgements (Ys) are regressed on the cues. This procedure
DEMO a weighted model that describes an individual’s judgement policy in terms
of statistically significant cues in the model, relative cue weights (e.g., rs1), the
form of the function relating the cues to the judgement (e.g., linear), the rule used
to integrate the cues into a judgement (e.g., additive), and an individual’s
predictability (a measure of cognitive control [Rs]) as measured by the model
(Cooksey, 1996). This model may then be compared with an individual’s explicit
statement of DEMO or her judgement policy, in what traditionally is considered a
measure DEMO self-insight (e.g., Cook & Stewart, 1976).
Social judgement theorists DEMO applied this procedure in a variety of judge-
ment domains including medicine (Wigton, 1996), education (Heald, 1991),
social work (DEMO, 1988), and accounting (Waller, 1988). Although there are
Judgement
Figure 1. The lens model adapted from Brunswik (1952). X1–Xn = cues. rA = achievement = correlation between judgement and environmental criterion.
DEMO = criterion. Ys = Judgement. Y’e = prediction from model of criterion. Y’s = prediction from model of judgement. Re = Predictability = measure DEMO fit of
model of the environment. Rs = Cognitive control = measure of fit of model of the judge. G = Matching = correlation DEMO predictions from each model.
8
8
DHAMI AND HARRIES
FAST AND FRUGAL VS REGRESSION MODELS 9
some exceptions (see Brehmer & Brehmer, 1988), a consistent picture of human
judgement has emerged from this body of research, irrespective of the number
and type of decision makers sampled, and the nature and content of the
judgement tasks studied. The findings can be summarised under the following
five generalisations:
1. DEMO are inconsistent over a set of judgements;
2. Nonetheless, they DEMO predictable to the extent that a linear regression
model provides a good fit to their judgement data;
3. The regression models contain a DEMO (on average three) of statistically
significant cues;
4. There are inter-individual differences in policies; and
5. Individuals’ own accounts of their policies differ from their policies as
represented by the regression models (see Brehmer & Brehmer, 1988).
The regression model is a structural model in which the same cues are used in
the same way when deciding DEMO each case. It describes how people weight and
combine information but not how they search for it. As Brehmer (1994) notes,
social DEMO theorists believe that the regression model captures a “basic
feature of the judgmental process, viz., vicarious functioning” (p. 141), through
the linear, compensatory, integration of multiple cues. In an environment
containing redundancy, one cue may be used vicariously to approximate another
cue. However, this model does not allow for flexibility in vicarious functioning,
whereby different cues DEMO be substituted for each other on different cases.
Over-reliance on regression models: A “sin” of
social judgement theory
The pervasive use of regression models as a description of judgement is
surprising. First, as Doherty and Kurz (1996) note, Brunswik (1955, 1956) did
not rule out DEMO use of other models. Second, Hammond et al., (1975) stated that
it is a misconception to think social judgement theory is “tied” DEMO the regression
model. In fact, in recognition of the general failure DEMO consider other models,
Hammond (1996a , pp. 244–245) recently confessed that:
a […] sin of commission on my part was to DEMO the role of the multiple
regression (MR) technique as a model for organising information from multiple
fallible indicators into a judgement. There is DEMO within the framework of the
lens model that demands that MR be the one and only model of that organising
process.
Social judgement theorists DEMO mostly failed to consider alternative models,
such as process models, DEMO models that imply non-compensatory and/or non-
linear processing of information. Reasons cited for this are that the regression
10 DHAMI AND HARRIES
model has proved to be a good fit DEMO judgement data (Brehmer & Brehmer, 1988),
is widely understood, and is useful as a cognitive aid (Stewart, 1988). However,DEMO
researchers studying judgement behaviour outside the framework of social
judgement theory have explored the descriptive validity of other types of model
(e.g., Einhorn, 1970, 1971).
ALTERNATIVES TO THE STANDARD
REGRESSION MODEL
In a regression model, cue weights may be non-compensatory and non-linear
terms may be included. However, we know of no social judgement theory studies
that have reported non-compensatory regression weights. Social judgement
theorists usually fail to investigate non-linear cue DEMO, or when they do, they state
that non-linear terms add little to the fit of the model (Brehmer & Brehmer,
1988).
Some researchers have proposed static, structural non-compensatory , non-
linear models (DEMO, Einhorn, 1970). They have found that for at least some, if not
all, of the individuals in their sample, non-compensatory models provided a
better fit to judgement data than compensatory models (Brannick & Brannick,
1989; Einhorn, 1970, 1971; Ganzach, 1995; Park, 1978). These alternative
models are not easy to interpret, and have attracted relatively little attention from
social judgement theorists.
Process-tracing techniques have proved DEMO popular alternative to regression
analysis (see Juslin & Montgomery, 1999). While regression analysis involves
inferring information use from judgement behaviour, process-tracing involves
either elicitation of verbal descriptions of information use, or identification of the
information to which people attend by study of eye movement, information
selection, or reaction-time data. The resulting process models provide a step-by-
step description of information use in terms of production rules that are easy to
DEMO However, because the formation of these models is cumbersome,
researchers DEMO on either modelling only one participant (Einhorn, Kleinmuntz,
& Kleinmuntz, 1979) or modelling only particular tasks (Billings & Marcus,
1983). The models may also be criticised for involving artificial methods to
DEMO what information is searched for, and for being vulnerable to the
DEMO of think-aloud methods (e.g., socially desirable responses and
difficulty in retrieving information from memory). These concerns raise doubts
about the reliability and DEMO of the description of judgement behaviour
provided by process-tracing techniques (Payne, Braunstein, & Carroll, 1978).
Recently, Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) have proposed a class of process
models that they call fast and DEMO, and that, like regression models, are formed
on the basis DEMO the structural relationships between the cues and judgement. Thus,
they are not reliant on verbal protocols or artificial methods.
FAST AND FRUGAL VS REGRESSION MODELS
11
Fast and frugal models
Fast DEMO frugal models were developed within the framework of probabilistic
mental models (DEMO, 1993; Gigerenzer, Hoffrage, & Kleinbölting, 1991).
This framework DEMO Brunswik’s (1943 , 1952) theory of probabilistic
functionalism and Simon’s (DEMO, 1990) notion of bounded rationality. One of
the key principles of this is that individuals adapt to their environments. Fast and
frugal models DEMO simple process models that do not search through all available
information , do not integrate all relevant information (relying instead on cue
substitution) , and base their decision on only one cue (Gigerenzer & Todd,DEMO
1999). Many of these models are also non-compensatory. Information search
may be random or ordered and is limited by simple stopping rules such DEMO
stopping once the first cue that discriminates between two alternatives in a choice
task is found, so decisions are based on one cue alone.
Studies have compared the fit of fast and frugal models with regression
DEMO on both simulated judgement data (Gigerenzer, Czerlinski, & Martignon,
DEMO; Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996; Gigerenzer, Todd, & the ABC DEMO
group, 1999) and human judgement data (Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 1999, Slegers,
Brake, & Doherty, 2000). The former studies have essentially, modelled the
environment rather than judgements about the environment. In a study of this
type, Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) compared a fast and frugal model for
choice tasks called Take The Best with a DEMO linear regression model
(among other integration models). Using simulations the DEMO were developed
on the basis of data contained in an almanac. The task was to choose which of two
cities was the largest in DEMO of population size, using a number of binary cues
such as DEMO or not a city has a soccer team. The relative fit of both models
was then compared on the data used to develop the DEMO by calculating the
percentage of correct predictions. It was found that, DEMO average, the fast and
frugal model and the regression model fitted DEMO data equally well. Later,
Gigerenzer et al. (1998) compared the relative fit of both models on a new set of
data. They DEMO that, in this cross-validation situation, the fast and frugal model
provided a better fit to the data than the regression model.
To date, the effectiveness of fast and frugal models as descriptions of human
judgement DEMO has been demonstrated using non-professional participants
(Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 1999, DEMO et al., 2000). Often social judgement
theorists study the professional DEMO of individuals who are experienced
with a particular judgement task and who therefore have an existing policy to
model. On the other hand, studies of novices concentrate on the processes
involved in learning policies (Stewart, DEMO). Dhami and Ayton (in press) com-
pared a fast and frugal model of judgements made by professional participants
with two structural (additive) models, but did not compare it to the standard tool
of DEMO judgement theory (regression).
12 DHAMI AND HARRIES
We have some methodological concerns with the studies DEMO fast and frugal
models. First, the dependent variables used in different DEMO are not always
comparable. Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996), for example, compared a multiple
regression model that utilises a continuous measure of judgement DEMO a fast and
frugal model that uses a binary measure of judgement. They could have used a
logistic regression model, as used by Slegers et al. (2000) on a similar task.
Second, the independent variables used are not always comparable. For example,
Slegers et al. (2000) created continuous and binary cues for the logistic
regression model and categorical cues for the fast and frugal model. Third, in
contrast to standard practice (Cooksey, 1996; Tabachnick & Fidell, 1996), most
of DEMO findings reported are based on models that retain non-significant cue
weights. This procedure depicts the regression models as complex (i.e., multiple
cues are DEMO as being used). This contrasts with the literature showing that,
on average, three cues are usually statistically significant (Brehmer, 1994).
Gigerenzer et al. (1998) also did not report how many cue DEMO were
statistically significant. Fourth, Slegers et al. (2000) used a DEMO fast and
frugal model that was forced to use the same one cue at a particular level each
time. That piece of information, which is not clearly identified in the paper, was
determined via logistic regression analysis. Finally, with the exception of
Hertwig, Hoffrage, and Martignon (DEMO), Gigerenzer and his colleagues, and
Slegers et al. (2000) DEMO the models solely in terms of global accuracy. In
many applied domains, however, global accuracy is not the first concern: the two
types of errors (Type I and Type II) are differentially weighted (see Hammond,
1996b). In medicine, for example, all tests involve DEMO trade-off between both types
of errors.
In sum, we recognise that DEMO judgement theory is not wedded to the use of
the regression model and we can see that fast and frugal models present a viable
DEMO
AN EMPIRICAL COMPARISON OF
THE MODELS
We compare the relative descriptive validity of a regression model and a fast and
frugal model of professional DEMO in the medical domain. We avoid the
limitations of previous research. Social judgement theorists have used regression
models to describe medical decision making (Wigton, 1988, 1996). The data we
analyse were originally reported by DEMO (1995) as part of a project on medical
decision making in primary care. The full details of the method and a cor-
relational DEMO are reported in Harries, Evans, Dennis, and Dean (2000).
Here, we report a re-analysis of British general practitioners’ (GPs’) decisions to
prescribe lipid-lowering drugs for a set of hypothetical patients. We take DEMO of
intra-individual consistency in judgements and compare the two models on the
following dimensions:
FAST AND FRUGAL VS REGRESSION MODELS
13
1.
2.
3.
4.
Fit DEMO model to judgement data;
Number and identity of cues used;
Inter-individual agreement in policies, and
Self-insight.
When managing patients and making prescription decisions, GPs must apply
guidelines in the context of a heavy workload and under time pressure. The Audit
Commission (1994) reported that the DEMO GP saw 140 patients in a week
during surgery hours alone. The duration of an average consultation has been
found to be between 5.5 DEMO 6.6 minutes (Morrell, Evans, Morris, & Roland,
1986). Time pressure and the desire to bring the consultation to an end DEMO been
cited as leading to an increased frequency of prescribing behaviour (DEMO
Commission, 1994). Among the drugs prescribed, lipid-lowering drugs are
particularly expensive and are a life-long prophylactic treatment. Thus, their
prescription needs to be carefully guided and monitored.
A total of 36 GPs judged their DEMO of prescribing lipid-lowering drugs
for 130 hypothetical cases. These were designed so that GPs would consider, but
not necessarily always prescribe, a lipid-lowering DEMO The first 100 cases were
used to model GPs’ prescription policies. The last 30 cases were duplicates of the
first 30 and were used DEMO measure test–retest consistency.
Each case comprised a combination of 12 cues, DEMO in the order shown
in Table 1. In the present analysis, DEMO original values of the cues were simplified
to be either binary (DEMO ordinal) or tripartite (where continuous), and were
distributed across cases as shown in Table 1. (Although the regression model can
handle continuous data, the fast and frugal model cannot.) The inter-cue
correlations among DEMO simplified cues remained negligible (range = 0.197 to
0.174). Although DEMO cases are not representative as defined by Brunswik (1956),
their face validity was established.
The cases were presented in the same order DEMO all participants to ensure
comparability across GPs. For each case, GPs DEMO the likelihood that they
would prescribe a lipid-lowering drug. The response was recorded on a 0 (“very
low”) to 100 (“very high”) DEMO scale. Here, this was simplified for analysis into
a binary judgement DEMO the mid-point of the scale (i.e., 0–50% likelihood indicates
a decision not to prescribe and 51–100% likelihood indicates a decision to
prescribe).
DEMO they had made judgements on all 130 cases, each GP rated DEMO relative
importance of the 12 cues on a scale from zero to ten. Zero indicated that the cue
had no effect on their judgements DEMO ten indicated that the cue had the greatest
effect on their judgements. Participants were told that cues could be assigned an
equal or zero DEMO
After dichotomisation of the responses, four GPs had a constant decision
(either prescribe or not prescribe) for virtually all of the 100 cases. As they had no
policy for us to model in terms of DEMO available case information, these GPs were
DHAMI AND HARRIES
TABLE 1
Cues, their values and the distribution of their values
Cholesterol level (CHO)
Original values
Simplified
values
Hypertension (DEMO)
Age (AGE)
Gender (GEN)
Evidence of
arteriosclerosis (DEMO)
Drinking (DRI)
Smoking (SMO)
Diabetes (DIA)
DEMO with advice
on diet (COM)
Weight (WEI)
Attitude towards treatment
(ATT)
Family historv of
ischaemic heart disease
(FDR)
DEMO
Cue
6.5–8.0
No
Yes, well controlled
Yes, poorly controlled
30–60
Female
Male
No
Yes
No
Occasionally
Regularly
Heavily
No
Occasionally
Regularly
Heavily
No
DEMO, well controlled
Yes, poorly controlled
No
Some
Yes
Under
Normal
Over
Obese
Very obese
Opposed
Cautious
Open to advice
Requesting treatment
No
Second-degree DEMO
First-degree relative
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
1.
2.
1.
2.
1.
2.
1.
2.
1.
2.
1.
2.
DEMO
2.
1.
2.
Number
of cases
6.5–7.0
7.1–7.5
7.6–8.0
No
Yes
30–40
41–50
51–60
Female
Male
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
DEMO
Yes
Not overweight
Overweight
Don’t request
Request
Not first degree
relative
First degree relative
34
30
36
29
71
27
30
43
47
53
DEMO
56
39
61
32
68
34
66
34
66
43
57
75
25
72
28
14
FAST AND FRUGAL VS REGRESSION MODELS
15
excluded from further analyses. In DEMO remainder of the sample (N = 32), 22 GPs
made DEMO decision not to prescribe more often than to prescribe, and 10 DEMO made a
decision to prescribe more often than not to prescribe.
Intra-individual consistency was measured for each GP by calculating the
percentage of same DEMO made on the 30 duplicate cases with those made on
their counterparts in the set of 100 cases. On average, the GPs made 68.59%
consistent decisions (range = 40.00–86.21). More specifically, when GPs made DEMO
decision not to prescribe on the first presentation of a case, DEMO also made this
decision on the second presentation of the case in on average 65.78% of the cases
(range = 10.00–94.44). They made on average 62.11% of decisions to prescribe
consistently (range = 0.00–100.00).
Development of regression models
Individual GPs’ judgement policies were inferred from their DEMO made on
the set of 100 cases. First, each GP’s judgement DEMO was modelled using a
logistic regression analysis. In non-metric environments, such DEMO the one
discussed here, Cooksey (1996) proposes the use of DEMO (1973) prob-
ability-based lens model analysis. The logistic regression analysis is comparable
to this. It is not based on covariational or correlational statistics DEMO on probability
in terms of log odds. The independent variables were the 12 cues and the
dependent variable was the decision. The cues were DEMO simultaneously into
the regression equation. The logistic regression analysis indicates the predicted
probability of a patient being prescribed the lipid-lowering drug. This was coded
DEMO the event because the guidelines for GPs outlined earlier suggest when to
prescribe rather than when not to prescribe. The probability of prescribing the
DEMO is:
1
1 + e z
Where z = B0 + B1X1 + B2X2 + … + BpXp
B0 = the constant
Xi DEMO the cues
Bi = the coefficient associated with each cue.
If the probability is greater than 0.50, then the model predicts that a patient is
prescribed the drug; if it is less than 0.50, the DEMO predicts that a patient is
not prescribed the drug. The coefficients indicate the change in the log odds
associated with a one-unit change in DEMO predictor and may be transformed into
odds for easier interpretation (see DEMO, 1996; Tabachnick & Fidell, 1996).
16
DHAMI AND HARRIES
There were no GPs in the sample for DEMO all of the cues in their logistic
regression model were significant. This suggests that testing the fit of a logistic
regression model containing all DEMO cues would lead to over-fitting (Tabachnick &
Fidell, 1996). DEMO way of reducing over-fitting is to cross-validate the model. An
alternative is to include only the significant cues in the model. There was
insufficient DEMO to cross-validate here and so the logistic regression models
containing only the significant cues were used to make predictions. Over-fitting
was observed. The average DEMO in terms of judgements correctly predicted by the
models across the GPs in the sample fell by nine percentage points when only
significant cues DEMO included. On the decisions not to prescribe, the average fit
remained DEMO same and, on the decisions to prescribe, it fell eight percentage
points.
To provide a specific example, we use GP-1’s prescription policy as described
by the logistic regression model to predict this GP’s decision on DEMO first case. In
this case, the patient had a cholesterol level DEMO between 6.5 and 7.0, had
hypertension , was aged between 41 DEMO 50 years, was female, showed evidence
of arteriosclerosis, did not DEMO, smoked, had diabetes, was compliant with
advice on diet, was overweight, did not request treatment, and did not have a
first-degree DEMO with ischaemic heart disease. The logistic regression model
for GP-1 is as follows:
z = 3.55 + 2.29(cho) 0.84(age) + DEMO(dri(1)) + 1.49 (smo(1)) 2.02 (dia(1)) + 1.59(wei(1)).
Thus, on the first case, the predicted probability of the patient being prescribed
the drug according to DEMO logistic regression model is 0.24, which is accurate
because GP-1 did DEMO prescribe the drug in this case.
Development of fast and frugal models
We chose the Matching Heuristic model originally developed by Dhami and
Ayton (1998, see also in press) for binary categorisation tasks. This model
DEMO through K of the available cues in rank order of importance, DEMO for
a critical value on each cue that indicates a prescribe decision. If a critical value is
found, the model stops searching and predicts a prescribe decision. Otherwise,
the model searches through the value of DEMO next rank-ordered cue. The model
continues this procedure until K cues have been searched. If by this time no
critical value has been found , the model predicts a decision not to prescribe.
Unlike in the regression model, the cues used to make a decision may differ from
case to case.
The following three steps describe how the critical values of DEMO cues, the rank
ordering of cues, and K are determined for each GP. First, a critical value was
defined as the value of a cue that is most frequently prescribed for in the set of
DEMO cases. For GP-1 for example, the critical value for the cholesterol DEMO was
“cholesterol level of between 7.6 to 8.0” because this GP made a prescribe
FAST AND FRUGAL VS REGRESSION MODELS
17
decision on more patients with DEMO cholesterol level within this range than within
any other range. Therefore, DEMO no explicit inclusion of base rates, the critical
cue value will DEMO affected by the fact that there were actually more patients with
a cholesterol level falling within this range in the set of 100 cases. DEMO the absolute
frequencies of the number of cases prescribed for are equal, then the value with
the lowest absolute frequency not prescribed for is chosen. Where these are also
equal, a value is chosen randomly.
Second, a cue utilisation validity was calculated for each cue: this was DEMO
as the proportion of cases with the critical value for which a prescribe decision
was made. For GP-1, the validity for the cholesterol cue was calculated as the
proportion of patients with a cholesterol level of DEMO 7.6 to 8.0 who were
prescribed for. The validities were then used to rank order the 12 cues, where the
first rank was assigned to the largest validity. This rank order indicates the order
in which DEMO model searched through the cues. Cues with a tied rank order were
placed in the order they were presented in the judgement task.
Finally, in order to choose the maximum number of cues for the model DEMO
search (K), the fit of the model with all 12 DEMO maxima was systematically
tested. The model with the best fit in terms of percentage of correctly predicted
decisions was chosen as the model of DEMO GPs’ prescription policy. Where two or
more models had a similar fit, the most parsimonious model was chosen. As
Figure 2 shows, a DEMO that only looked at one cue was the best fit of GP-1’s
prescription behaviour. According to the Matching Heuristic, this GP used the
cholesterol cue to predict a decision. His or her policy can be stated DEMO follows:
“Does the patient have a cholesterol level of between 7.6 and 8.0? If yes, then
prescribe the drug; otherwise do not prescribe”. Thus, for case number one, the
Matching Heuristic would accurately DEMO a decision not to prescribe.
A Matching Heuristic that searched through a maximum of 1 out of 12 cues
(K = 1) proved DEMO be the best fit for 23 GPs. For the remaining participants, DEMO = 2
for five GPs, and K = 3, 4, DEMO, 6 for one GP each.
Fit of models and intra-individual consistency
DEMO expected that less consistent behaviour would be less predictable by either
model. In fact, when the percentage of correct predictions by a model was
correlated with the percentage of consistent decisions across GPs, there was no
significant correlation between the fit of the regression models and GPs’
consistency (r = .15, N = 32, p > .05) or between the fit of the fast and frugal
models and GPs’ consistency (r = .13, N = 32, p > .05).
Fit of DEMO to judgement data
Both models were used to make predictions on the set of 100 cases. The
regression models provided a mean fit of DEMO (range = 30.00–92.00%), and
the fast and frugal models provided DEMO mean fit of 74.13% (range = 60.00–
18
DHAMI AND HARRIES
Figure 2.
Fit of fast and frugal model DEMO cases for GP-1.
88.00%). A two-tailed paired-samples t-test revealed that there was no signifi-
cant difference between their mean fit, t(31) DEMO 0.07, p > .05. The fast and frugal
models proved a DEMO fit than the regression models for 14 GPs, an equal fit DEMO
3 GPs, and a worse fit for 15 GPs. (The results did not change when GP-31, who
had a regression model fit of 30% was excluded from the analysis.)
We also examined the fit DEMO the decisions to prescribe, and not to prescribe,
separately. Of DEMO decisions to prescribe, the mean fit of the regression models
was DEMO (range = 27.27–95.45%), and the mean fit of the fast DEMO frugal
models was 73.38% (range = 42.31–100.00%). There was no DEMO dif-
ference between the two models, t(31) = 1.85, DEMO > .05. Of the decisions not to
prescribe, the mean fit DEMO the regression models was 85.41% (range = 67.86–
100.00%) and the fast and frugal models provided a mean fit of 67.34% (range =
0.00–96.67%). There was a significant difference between the two models,
DEMO(31) = 3.91, p < .001.
An analysis of the unique fit of each model compared to the shared fit is
useful. The DEMO fit (the percentage of cases where both models successfully
predicted the DEMO) was on average 62.22% (range = 20.00–88.78%)
across the GPs. We divided the number of unique hits by the number of shared
DEMO, for each GP. Across the GPs, the proportion of unique hits for the regression
models (mean = 22.48%), and for the fast and frugal models (mean = 27.50%)
were both significantly different from zero (p < .01), but not significantly
different from each other, t(31) = 0.61, p > .05). (This result DEMO held when GP-
31 was excluded.)
FAST AND FRUGAL VS REGRESSION MODELS
19
Cues used
In the regression DEMO a cue was classified as being used if its Wald statistic was
statistically significant (p < .05), indicating that the coefficient for the cue was
significantly different from zero. In the fast and frugal model, the number of cues
used varied from case to case (unless K = 1) and so the mean number of cues used
over all of the set of 100 cases was calculated for each GP. Across DEMO GPs, the
number of cues used according to the regression models DEMO from 1 to 7
(mean = 3.13). Seven GPs used DEMO one cue according to their regression
models. For the fast and frugal models, the mean number of cues used across the
GPs ranged from 1 to 2.10 (mean = 1.22). Significantly fewer cues were used
according to the fast and frugal models than according to the regression DEMO,
t(31) = 6.79, p < .0001.
More GPs used cholesterol level, age, evidence of arteriosclerosis, drinking,
smoking, diabetes, compliance with advice on diet, weight, attitude towards
treatment, and family history of ischaemic heart disease in the regression models
than in the DEMO and frugal models. Gender and hypertension were used by more
GPs in the fast and frugal models than in the regression models.
Inter-individual agreement
DEMO is conventionally measured in terms of the similarity of judgements
made by different individuals over the same set of cases (rA—achievement
between two judgement systems) (e.g., Chaput de Saintonge & Hattersley,
1985), or the similarity of judgements predicted by different individuals’ models
(G). Kendall’s W provides a measure of concordance. A score of zero indicates
no DEMO, while a score of one indicates complete agreement. Kendall’s
W(31) was 0.21 between GPs’ decisions, it was 0.43 between predictions from
the regression model, and it was 0.27 on the basis of predictions from the fast and
frugal models. There is no significance test of difference DEMO values of the
Kendall’s W statistic.
Self-insight
Self-insight be defined in many different ways. We looked at self-insight in terms
of the number of DEMO used and the rank order of cues used, because these were
DEMO to our discussion. Across the whole sample, in the rating task, GPs
stated that they used from 6 to all 12 cues (mean = 10.25). This was significantly
greater than the number of cues DEMO according to the regression models, t(31) =
17.41, p < .0001, and also greater than the number of cues used according DEMO the
fast and frugal models, t(31) = 30.77, p < .0001.
The relative importance estimates that GPs assigned to the cues were
converted into a rank order of cues from 1 to 12, where 1 was the most important
cue. Conventionally, self-insight is measured by a correlation between an
20
DHAMI AND HARRIES
individual’s explicit rating (or ranking) of cues DEMO their weight (or rank)
according to their model. In the DEMO example, this procedure would be
insensitive , as GPs used only DEMO few cues according to both models. Instead,
we calculated the all-or-none match between the rank orders. Note that this was
done only for DEMO used according to each model.
None of the nine GPs who used more than one cue according to the fast and
frugal models identified DEMO of the cues used in the same order of importance in
the rating task. For the 25 GPs using more than one cue according DEMO the
regression models, only one identified the cues in the same DEMO of importance
in the rating task. Of the 23 GPs who used one cue according to the fast and frugal
model, 17 rated that cue the highest. In the regression models, five of the seven
GPs who used only one cue rated that cue the highest.
HOW SHOULD DEMO MODELS BE DISTINGUISHED?
We have shown that both the fast and frugal models and the regression models
provided an equally good fit to DEMO judgement data, regardless of GPs’ in-
consistency. An analysis of type DEMO and type II errors revealed that the regression
model was significantly better at predicting GPs’ decisions not to prescribe.
Compared to the regression model DEMO contained only the significant cues, the
fast and frugal model showed DEMO GPs used significantly fewer cues and their
policies were less similar. There was no difference in the degree of self-insight
suggested by both models. DEMO sum, both models provided a characterisation of
judgement behaviour consistent with DEMO reported in previous social judgement
theory research.
It might be argued that the lack of significant difference in fit between the two
models in DEMO present example is due to lack of power. The difference in means
we were testing for was not predictable. In keeping with our enthusiasm DEMO
simple rules we have used one here. An alternative test of clarity and meaning-
fulness of results is Frick’s (1998) stopping rule for DEMO statistics tests:
“once a minimum number of subjects is tested, DEMO with p less than 0.01 or
greater than 0.36, otherwise keep DEMO (p.690). We analysed the results of 32
GPs, and the p between overall fit of models was 0.947. So here we stop.
DEMO (1970) stated that “different models may be equally powerful with
respect to describing the process. It therefore seems that accurately describing the
process DEMO at least necessary although not sufficient for describing the underlying
cognitive process” (p.222). In the following discussion we provide alternative
criteria for choosing between models. We argue that researchers should seriously
reconsider their use of DEMO models and test alternatives such as fast and
frugal models. Although both models are psychologically plausible in that they
suggest limited information use, only fast and frugal models are compatible with
evidence of flexible judgement, human categorisation and learning, and are
easier to understand.
FAST AND FRUGAL VS REGRESSION MODELS
21
Psychological plausibility
Researchers have questioned DEMO regression models are capable of providing
a psychologically valid description of judgement behaviour (Einhorn, 1970,
1971; Einhorn et al., 1979, Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996, Gigerenzer et al.,
1999). Regression models DEMO that all “relevant” information is weighted
and integrated. This description of behaviour is considered incompatible with the
fact that the human mind is characterised DEMO limited cognitive processing
capacity (e.g., Kahneman, 1973; Miller, 1956)DEMO Hogarth (1980) points out that
selective perception, sequential processing, limited computational ability, and
limited memory have implications for judgement behaviour.
On average, studies using regression models have reported that only three
cues are statistically significant (Brehmer, 1994). In the present example, both
models suggested that GPs were using a small number of cues on average. Note
DEMO “grey-area” cases, where the decision to prescribe is not immediately
obvious, would have encouraged greater information use rather than simple, one-
cue decision making.
Although both models are compatible with a limited information processor,
DEMO regression model implies inefficient processing. Each person’s policy is
inflexible because he or she uses the same cues in the same way on every DEMO In
contrast, the fast and frugal model proposes a flexible and DEMO simple
strategy. Only the necessary cues are used on each case. More complex cases will
elicit greater information search than less complex cases. This DEMO of
flexibility suggests that the fast and frugal model is psychologically more
plausible than the regression model. It indicates a different type of vicarious
DEMO from that encapsulated in a regression model.
Flexibility of an individual is also characterised by his or her ability to select
different ways of DEMO cues given different task demands (Hammond, 1996b;
Payne et al., 1993). Judgement behaviour shifts from compensatory to non-
compensatory behaviour under conditions of time pressure (Edland, 1979; Maule
& Svenson, 1993; Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 1999) and stress or information load
(Billings & Marcus, 1983; Chinburapa et al., 1993; Einhorn, 1971; Johnson &
Meyer, 1984; Payne, 1976; Timmermans, 1993). Finally, DEMO least under time
pressure, individuals do not use all of the DEMO information (Edland,
1979; Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 1999; Rothstein, DEMO; Wright, 1974). The use of
non-compensatory processes under time pressure would suggest that non-
compensatory models such as a fast and frugal DEMO are likely to be more
psychologically plausible than compensatory ones (such DEMO a regression model)
under time pressure. The opposite may also be true. Future research should aim to
test the appropriateness of these two DEMO under different task conditions.
We would argue that the Matching Heuristic is a particularly plausible fast and
frugal model. It uses frequencies, a natural form of processing according to
Cosmides and Tooby (1996) and Gigerenzer DEMO Hoffrage (1995). It also
22
DHAMI AND HARRIES
involves matching individual cases to a prototype: this is consistent with research
on categorisation (Estes, 1994) and with research on the role of forceful features
in clinical diagnosis (Gale & Marsden, 1985; Grant & Marsden, 1987). Finally, it
exploits cues DEMO may be acquired through direct experience in the domain. The
means by which this is accomplished are likely to depend on the sort of
DEMO that Nisbett and Ross (1980) and others have identified as
subserving the process of learning about causation and covariation. These
mechanisms are encapsulated DEMO calculation of cue-utilisation validities.
Ease of understanding
Social judgement theorists often have a goal of improving judgement (Hammond
et al., 1975). Judgement DEMO may be communicated to individuals in order to
aid and train them to make consistent, accurate decisions, or reduce discrepancy
between individuals. The DEMO with which a model is understood is thus an
important consideration. The regression model has proved a very useful aid.
Studies have demonstrated higher DEMO in conditions with cognitive
feedback than in conditions with either no feedback or solely outcome feedback
(Balzer, Doherty, & O’Connor, 1989; Doherty & Balzer, 1988). However, the
regression model may be considered DEMO be an obscure mathematical model that an
individual may have difficulty applying without the aid of a computer.
Regression models are also difficult to DEMO to a new data set because they are
based on variations in the cues and judgements across the data set. Standardised
weights are usually DEMO by researchers and application of these weights to
a new case requires identification of where that case’s cue values fit in the range
of DEMO values that were used in the original data set on which the model was
formed.
In contrast, fast and frugal models provide a transparent, non-mathematical
description of judgement behaviour. They are simple to apply and can be applied
without knowledge of the properties of the data set on DEMO they were
developed. The properties of the data set are essential for calculation of the fast
and frugal model, but not for its application. For example, if the model says
prescribe if male and the case is male, then we do not need to know the natural
variance of gender in the environment. On the other hand, if a standardised
weight is to be applied (as in a regression model), we need to know this. The
relative usefulness of regression models and fast DEMO frugal models as cognitive
aids needs to be investigated.
FUTURE RESEARCH
Brehmer (1979) argued that the use of the regression model enables researchers
DEMO “test a series of hypotheses about the nature of the judgment process” (p. 199).
It is clear that fast and frugal models would provide a different set of hypotheses,
and in addition would provide DEMO regarding the process of information
FAST AND FRUGAL VS REGRESSION MODELS
23
search and selection (Gigerenzer & Kurz, in press). These hypotheses should be
tested under different task conditions.
In this review we have argued that a fast and frugal DEMO is capable of des-
cribing the judgement side of a lens model: Such models are capable of capturing
probabilistic relations as shown by the procedure for calculating cue-utilisation
validities. The same procedure may be used to DEMO ecological validities for
cues on the environment side of the lens model. Computer scientists modelling
the environment have used comparable simple models such as DEMO and
Regression Trees for the past 15 years (Breiman, Friedman, DEMO, & Stone,
1984; Dutton & Conroy, 1996). Thus, we know that fast and frugal strategies are
useful ones in all DEMO of environments. However, we do not yet know if the fast
DEMO frugal model that best describes a person’s behaviour is a useful one. Only
Slegers et al. (2000) have modelled both their participants’ judgements DEMO the
(baseball) environment, but they did not compare the two DEMO A full lens
model analysis is needed. We do not yet know whether individuals can achieve
their goals when being fast and frugal.
When DEMO the paramorphic nature of regression models, Doherty and
Brehmer (1997) DEMO that “The conception of human judgment emerging
from regression studies of human judgment can be refuted only by evidence that
shows that judgment is DEMO other than a matter of combining pieces of
information that are weighted according to their importance. So far, such
evidence has failed to materialize” (p.547). Obviously, individual researchers
must choose the model that best DEMO the aims of their research, but we hope that
they will DEMO flexible and avoid “sins of commission” in the future.
REFERENCES
Audit Commission (1994). A prescription for improvement: Towards more rational prescribing in
DEMO practice. London: HMSO.
Balzer, W.K., Doherty, M.E., & O’Connor, R. (1989). Effects of cognitive feedback on
performance. Psychological Bulletin, DEMO , 410–433.
Billings, R.S., & Marcus, S.A. (1983). Measures of compensatory and noncompensatory models of
decision behavior: Process tracing versus policy capturing. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes , 31, 331–352.
Björkman, DEMO (1973). Inference behavior in nonmetric ecologies. In L. Rappoport &
D.A. Summers (Eds.), Human judgment and social interaction. New York: DEMO, Rinehart, &
Winston.
Brannick, M.T., & Brannick, J.P. (DEMO). Nonlinear and noncompensatory processes in per-
formance evaluation. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 44, 97– 122.
Brehmer, B. (1979). DEMO to a psychology of inference. Scandinavian Journal of
Psychology , 20, DEMO
Brehmer, B. (1994). The psychology of linear judgement models. Acta Psychologica , 87,
137–154.
Brehmer, A., & Brehmer, B. (DEMO). What has been learned about human judgment from thirty
years of policy capturing? In B. Brehmer & C.R.B. Joyce (Eds.), Human DEMO: The SJT
view. Amsterdam: North-Holland, Elsevier.
24
DHAMI AND HARRIES
Breiman, L., Friedman, J.H., Olshen, R.A., & Stone, C.J. (1984). Classification and regression
trees. Pacific Grove, CA: Wadsworth & Brooks.
Brunswik, E. (1934). Wahrnehmung und DEMO: Grundlinien einer Psychologie vom
Gegenstand her. Leipzig: Deuticke.
Brunswik, E. (1940). Thing constancy as measured by correlation coefficients. Psychological
Review, 47, 69–78.
Brunswik, E. (1943). Organismic achievement and environmental probability. Psychological
Review, 50, 255–272.
Brunswik, E. (1952). Conceptual framework of DEMO Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Brunswik, E. (1955). Representative design and probabilistic theory in a functional psychology.
Psychological Review, 62, 193–217.
Brunswik, E. (1956). Perception and the representative design of experiments . Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Chaput de Saintonge, D.M., & Hattersley, L.A. (1985). Antibiotics for Otitis Media: Can we help
doctors agree? Family Practice, 2(4), 205–212.
DEMO, V., Larson, L.N., Brucks, M., Draugalis, J., Bootman, J.L., & Puto, C.P. (1993).
Physician prescribing decisions: The effects of situational involvement and task complexity
on information acquisition and decision DEMO Social Science and Medicine, 36(11),
1473– 1482.
Cook, DEMO, & Stewart, T.R. (1976). A comparison of seven methods DEMO obtaining subjective
descriptions of judgmental policy. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 123,
31–45.
Cooksey, R.W. (1996). Judgment analysis: Theory, DEMO, and applications . San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Cosmides, DEMO, & Tooby, J. (1996). Are humans good intuitive statisticians DEMO all? Rethinking
some conclusions from the literature on judgment under uncertainty. DEMO, 58, 1–73.
Dalgleish, L.I. (1988). Decision making in child abuse cases: Applications of social judgment
theory and signal detection theory. In B. Brehmer & C.R.B. Joyce (Eds.), Human judgment:
The SJT view. Amsterdam: North-Holland, Elsevier.
Dhami, M.K., & Ayton P. (1998). Legal decision making the fast and frugal way. Poster presented
at DEMO 1998 Meeting of the Society for Judgment and Decision Making, November, Dallas,
Texas.
Dhami, M.K., & Ayton, P. (in press)DEMO Bailing and jailing the fast and frugal way. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making.
Doherty, M.E., & Balzer, W.K. (1988). Cognitive feedback. DEMO B. Brehmer & C.R.B. Joyce (Eds.),
Human judgment: The DEMO view (pp. 163–197). Amsterdam: North-Holland, Elsevier.
Doherty, M.E., & Brehmer, B. (1997). The paramorphic representation of clinical judgment: DEMO 30
year retrospective. In W.M. Goldstein & R.M. Hogarth (Eds.), DEMO on judgment and
decision making: Currents, connections, and controversies . DEMO York: Cambridge University
Press.
Doherty, M.E., & Kurz, E.M. (DEMO). Social judgement theory. Thinking and Reasoning , 2,
109– 140.
Dutton, D.M. & Conroy, G.V. (1996). A review of machine learning. The Knowledge Engineering
Review, 12(4), 341–367.
Edland, A. (1979). On cognitive processes under time stress: A selective review of the literature on
time stress and related stress. Reports from the Department DEMO Psychology, University of
Stockholm, Suppl 68, 31.
Einhorn, H.J. (DEMO). The use of nonlinear, noncompensatory models in decision making.
Psychological DEMO, 73(3), 221–230.
FAST AND FRUGAL VS REGRESSION MODELS
25
Einhorn, H.J. (1971). DEMO of nonlinear, noncompensatory models as a function of task and amount
DEMO information. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 6, 1–27.
Einhorn, H.J., Kleinmuntz, D.N., & Kleinmuntz, B. (1979). Linear regression and process-tracing
models of judgement. Psychological Review, 86, 465–485.
Estes, W.K. (DEMO). Classification and cognition. New York: Oxford University Press.
Frick, R.W. (1998). A better stopping rule for conventional statistical tests. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 30 (4), 690–697.
Gale, J., & Marsden, P. (1985). Diagnosis: Process not product. In DEMO Sheldon, J. Brooke, &
A. Rector (Eds.), Decision -making in general practice. London: Macmillan Press Ltd.
Ganzach, Y. (1995). Nonlinear models of clinical judgment: Meehl’s data revisited. Psychological
Bulletin, 118 (3), 422–429.
Gigerenzer, G. (1993). The bounded rationality of DEMO mental models. In K.I. Manktelow
& D.E. Over (Eds.), Rationality: Psychological and philosophical perspectives . London:
Routledge.
Gigerenzer, G., Czerlinski, J., & Martignon, L. (1998). How good are fast and frugal heuristics? In
J. Shanteau, B. Mellors, & D. Schum (DEMO), Decision research from Bayesian approaches to
normative systems: Reflections on DEMO contributions of Ward Edwards . Norwell, MA:
Kluwer.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D.G. (1996). Reasoning the fast and frugal way: Models of bounded
rationality. Psychological Review, 103 , 650–669.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve Bayesian reasoning without instruction:
Frequency formats. Psychological Review, 102, 684–704.
Gigerenzer, G., DEMO, U., & Kleinbölting, H. (1991). Probabilistic mental models: DEMO
Brunswikian theory of confidence. Psychological Review, 98, 506–528.
Gigerenzer, G., & Kurz, E. (in press). Vicarious functioning reconsidered: A fast and frugal lens
model. In K.R. Hammond & T.R. Stewart, (Eds.), The essential Brunswik: Beginnings,
explications, applications . New York: DEMO University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P.M. (1999). Fast and frugal heuristics: The adaptive toolbox. In
G. Gigerenzer, P.M. Todd, & the ABC Research Group (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us
smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P.M., & the ABC Research Group (Eds.) (1999). Simple heuristics that make
us smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Grant, J., & Marsden, P. (1987). The structure of memorised knowledge in students DEMO clinicians.
Medical Education , 21, 92–98.
Hammond, K.R. (1955). DEMO functionalism and the clinical method. Psychological
Review, 62, 255–262.
Hammond, DEMO (1996a). Upon reflection. Thinking and Reasoning , 2(3), DEMO
Hammond, K.R. (1996b). Human judgment and social policy: Irreducible DEMO, inevitable
error, unavoidable injustice. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hammond, K.R., Hursch, C.J., & Todd, F.J. (1964). Analyzing the components of clinical
inference. Psychological Review, 71, 438–456.
Hammond, K.R., DEMO, T.R., Brehmer, B., & Steinmann, D.O. (1975). Social judgment theory.
In M. Kaplan & S. Schwartz (Eds.), Human judgment and decision processes . New York:
Academic Press.
Harries, C. (DEMO). Judgement analysis of patient management: General practitioners’ policies
and self-insight. DEMO Thesis, University of Plymouth, UK.
Harries, C., Evans, J.St.B.T., Dennis, I., & Dean, J. (1996). A Clinical judgement DEMO of
prescribing decisions in general practice. Le Travail Humain, 59, 87–111.
Harries, C., Evans, J.St.B.T., Dennis, I., & Dean, J. (2000). Risk and prescription: How judgements
affect decision making. Manuscript DEMO preparation.
26
DHAMI AND HARRIES
Heald, J.E. (1991). Social judgment theory: Applications to educational decision making.
Educational Administration Quarterly, 27, 343–357.
Hertwig, R., Hoffrage, U., & Martignon, L. (1999). Quick estimation: Letting the environment do
the work. In G. Gigerenzer, P.M. Todd, & the ABC Research Group (Eds.), Simple heuristics
that make us smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hoffman, P.J. (1960). The paramorphic representation of clinical judgment. Psychological
Bulletin, 57, 116–131.
Hogarth, R.M. (1980). Judgement and choice . Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Hursch, C.J., Hammond, K.R., & Hursch, J.L. (1964)DEMO Some methodological considerations in
multiple-cue probability studies. Psychological Review, 71, 42–60.
Johnson, E.J., & Meyer, R.J. (1984). Compensatory choice models DEMO noncompensatory processes:
The effect of varying context. Journal of Consumer Research, 11, 528–541.
Juslin, P., & Montgomery, H. (1999). DEMO and decision making: Neo-Brunswikian and
process-tracing approaches. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence DEMO Associates Inc.
Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and effort. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Maule, A.J., & Svenson, O. (1993). Theoretical and empirical approaches to behavioral decision
making and their relation to time constraints. DEMO O. Svenson & A.J. Maule (Eds.). Time pressure
and stress DEMO human judgement and decision making. New York: Plenum Press.
Miller, G.A. (1956). The magic number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for
processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81–93.
DEMO, D.C., Evans, M.E., Morris, R.W., & Roland, M.O. (1986). The ‘five minute’ consultation:
Effect of time constraint on DEMO content and patient satisfaction. British Medical Journal ,
292, 870–873.
Newell, A., & Simon, H.A. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood DEMO, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Nisbett, R., & Ross, L. (1980). Human inference: Strategies and shortcomings of social judgment.
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
DEMO, C.W. (1978). A few questions on consumer information processing: DEMO product cases,
coffee and toothpaste. Journal of Marketing Research , 15(2), 243–249.
Payne, J.W. (1976). Task complexity and contingent DEMO in decision making: An
information search and protocol analysis. Organizational Behavior DEMO Human Performance ,
16, 366–387.
Payne, J.W., Bettman, J.R., & Johnson, E.J. (1993). The adaptive decision maker. New York:DEMO
Cambridge University Press.
Payne, J.W., Braunstein, M.L., & Carroll, DEMO (1978). Exploring predecisional behavior: An
alternative approach to decisional research. Organizational Behavior and Human Per-
formance, 22, 17–44.
Rieskamp, J., & Hoffrage, U. (1999). When do people use simple heuristics and how can we tell? In
G. Gigerenzer, P.M. Todd, & the ABC Research Group (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us
smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rothstein, H.G. (1986). The effects of time pressure on judgment in multiple-cue probability
learning. Organizational Behavior and Human DEMO Processes, 37(1), 83–92.
Simon. H.A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics , 69,
99–118.
DEMO, H.A. (1990). Invariants of human behaviour. Annual Review of Psychology , 41, 1–19.
Slegers. D.W., Brake, G.L., & Doherty, M.E. (2000). Probabilistic mental models with continuous
predictors. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 81(1), 98–114.
Stewart. T. (1988). Judgment DEMO: Procedures. In B. Brehmer & C.R.B. Joyce (Eds.), Human
judgment: The SJT view. Amsterdam: North-Holland, Elsevier.
Tabachnick, B.G., & Fidell, L.S. (1996). Using multivariate statistics (3rd Edn.). New York:
HarperCollins.
FAST AND FRUGAL VS REGRESSION MODELS
27
Timmermans, D. (1993). DEMO impact of task complexity on information use in multiattribute
decision-making. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 6(2) 95–111.
Waller, W.S. (1988). DEMO research in accounting and auditing. In B. Brehmer & C.R.B.
Joyce (DEMO), Human judgment: The SJT view. Amsterdam: North-Holland, Elsevier.
Wigton, R.S. (1988). Applications of judgment analysis and cognitive feedback to medicine. In B.
Brehmer & C.R.B. Joyce (Eds.), Human judgment: The DEMO view. Amsterdam: North-Holland,
Elsevier.
Wigton, R.S. (1996). Social DEMO theory and medical judgement. Thinking and Reasoning ,
2(2/3), 175–190.
Wright, P. (1974). The harassed decision maker: Time DEMO, distractions, and the use of
evidence. Journal of Marketing Research, DEMO, 429–443.{1g42fwefx}