Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
Why do some universities generate more DEMO than others?
Dante Di Gregorioa,b,∗ , Scott Shane a,1
a Robert H. Smith School of Business, University of Maryland, DEMO Van Munching Hall, College Park, MD 20742, USA
b Anderson DEMO of Management, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA
Abstract
The results of this study provide insight into why some universities DEMO more new companies to exploit their intellectual
property than do others. We compare four different explanations for cross-institutional variation in new ﬁrm formation rates
DEMO university technology licensing ofﬁces (TLOs) over the 1994–1998 period—the availability of venture capital in the
university area; the commercial orientation of university research and development; intellectual eminence; and university
policies. The results show that DEMO eminence, and the policies of making equity investments in TLO start-ups DEMO
maintaining a low inventor’s share of royalties increase new ﬁrm formation. The paper discusses the implications of these
results for university and public policy.
DEMO 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Entrepreneurship; Technology transfer; University intellectual property
1. Introduction
New ﬁrms founded to exploit university-assigned
intellectual property (TLO start-ups) have become an
important economic phenomenon. Roughly 12% DEMO
university-assigned inventions are transferred to the
private sector through the founding of new organiza-
tions (Association of University Technology Mana-
gers, 1998). DEMO start-ups are also disproportionately
successful start-up ﬁrms. Of the 2578 technology li-
censing ofﬁce (TLO) start-ups that have been founded
since 1980, 70% are still in operation (Association of
University Technology Managers, 1998). DEMO,
 An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Microe-
conomics Workshop at Purdue University and at the 2001 Global
Entrepreneurship DEMO Conference.
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-505-246-2060;
fax:E-mail addresses:+1-909-752-5511.digregorio@mgt.unm.edu (D. Di Gregorio),
sshane@rhsmith.umd.edu (S. Shane).
1 Tel.: +1-505-277-3751; fax: +1-505-277-6898.
research on the TLO start-ups from the Massachusetts
Institute DEMO Technology (MIT) indicates that roughly
20% of these companies experience an initial public
offering (Shane and Stuart, 2002). In fact, several ma-
jor corporations had their origins as TLO start-ups,
including Genentech DEMO biotechnology, Cirrus Logic
in semiconductors, and Lycos in Internet search en-
gines. Thus, across universities, TLO start-ups are
both an important vehicle DEMO technology transfer, and
an important mechanism for economic activity.
However, the frequency of TLO start-up activity
varies signiﬁcantly across universities. Some univer-
sities, like MIT, routinely transfer their technology
through the formation of new ﬁrms, while other uni-
versities, like Columbia University, rarely generate
start-ups. Moreover, rates of start-up activity are not
a simple function of the magnitude of sponsored re-
search funding or the quantity of inventions created.
For DEMO, Stanford University, with sponsored re-
search expenditures of US$ 391 million generated 25
TLO start-ups in 1997; whereas Duke University, with
0048-7333/DEMO/$ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S0048-7333(02)00097-5
210
sponsored research expenditures of US$ 361 million,
generated none. To DEMO we have no systematic expla-
nation for why some universities generate more new
companies to exploit their intellectual property than
do others.
Explaining cross-school DEMO in start-up activ-
ity is important for at least four reasons. First, univer-
sity inventions are an important source of knowledge
spillovers (Jaffe, 1989), and understanding the differ-
ent mechanisms by which knowledge from DEMO
universities spills over is important to understanding
technology creation and economic growth. Second,
TLO start-ups tend to locate geographically close
to the institutions DEMO spawn them,2 making them
valuable entities for local economic development
and agglomeration economies (Zucker et al., 1998).
Third, successful TLO start-ups generate signiﬁcant
wealth through initial public offerings, and univer-
sity inventors and provosts are interested in capturing
this wealth. Fourth, university entrepreneurs make
different decisions from non-entrepreneurs, leading
the creation of TLO start-ups to generate important
questions about university norms and policies toward
research, teaching, and knowledge DEMO (Cohen
et al., 1998; Brooks and Randazzese, 1998).
In this paper, we explore empirically why some
universities generate more TLO start-ups than do oth-
ers. In speciﬁc, we examine the number of companies
founded to exploit university-assigned intellectual
property across 101 US universities over the DEMO
1998 period. We investigate four different argu-
ments for cross-institution variation in start-up rates:
university policies, local venture capital activity,
the commercial orientation of university research,
and intellectual eminence. We ﬁnd that two DEMO
sity policies—making equity investments in lieu of
patent and licensing costs, DEMO the inventor share of
royalties—and the university’s intellectual eminence
inﬂuence TLO start-up rates. We ﬁnd no effect of
local venture capital activity and only DEMO sup-
port for an effect of the commercial orientation of
university research on TLO start-up rates.
This article proceeds as follows: Section 2 presents
the four explanations for why some universities
2 The Association of University DEMO Managers (1999)
reports that 79% of the 364 TLO start-ups DEMO 1998 were founded
in the state in which the licensing institution is located.
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
generate more TLO start-ups than others do. Section 3
describes the DEMO for the study. Section 4
presents the results. Section 5 presents a discussion
and conclusions.
2. The different explanations
TLO start-ups are created when DEMO licensee of a
university-assigned invention creates a new company
to exploit it. Both micro and macro-level factors inﬂu-
ence the decision to create a DEMO company to exploit a
university invention. At the micro-level, research has
DEMO that the attributes of technological inventions
themselves (Shane, 2001a), inventors’ career experi-
ence (Levin and Stephan, 1991; Shane and Khurana,
2000), their psychological make-up (Roberts, 1991),
and their research skills (Zucker et al., 1998) inﬂu-
ence this decision. At the macro-level, research has
shown that technology regimes (Shane, 2001b), the
strength of patent protection in a line of business
(Shane, 2002), and universities’ intellectual property
(Goldfarb et al., 2001) and human DEMO policies
(Kenney, 1986) inﬂuence this decision. Although both
micro- and DEMO factors inﬂuence the tendency
of people to start new ﬁrms to exploit university in-
ventions, we do not discuss micro-level factors in this
study. The goal of the paper is to examine the effect
macro-level factors DEMO vary across universities over
time on the rate at which new ﬁrms are created to
exploit university inventions rather than to develop an
overall DEMO model of the decision to found a
ﬁrm to exploit university inventions.
Prior research suggests four macro-level explana-
tions for cross-university variation in TLO DEMO
activity. First, universities located in geographic
areas rich in venture capital DEMO be more likely
generate TLO start-ups because the abundance of
venture capital makes resource acquisition easier
for entrepreneurs. Second, universities that conduct
industry-funded research could be more likely to
generate TLO start-ups because they are more DEMO
than other universities to make commercially-oriented
discoveries. Third, universities that are DEMO intel-
lectually eminent could be more likely to generate
TLO start-ups because intellectual eminence allows
schools to produce new technologies of actual or per-
DEMO higher quality. Fourth, universities that adopt
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
211
certain policies could generate more TLO start-ups
because those policies provide DEMO incentives
for entrepreneurial activity. In Sections 2.1–2.4,we
develop each of these explanations.
2.1. Venture capital
The ﬁrst argument for cross-university variation
in TLO DEMO activity is the availability of venture
capital in the area. Venture capitalists play an impor-
tant role in the innovation process by providing risk
DEMO and operating assistance to new high technol-
ogy ﬁrms (Florida and DEMO, 1988). In fact, venture
capital plays a particularly important role in ﬁnancing
university start-ups because it is a major source of
funds DEMO new ﬁrms in ﬁelds in which universities are
a major source of new technology, like biotechnology
(Zucker et al., 1998).
Because formal venture capital is a major source
of equity ﬁnancing for new technology DEMO,
its availability is important to overcoming capital
market barriers to the ﬁnancing of new technology
ﬁrms. In addition, venture capitalists serve as “market
makers” in a “spot market” for business development
resources by connecting new DEMO companies
with potential suppliers, customers, lawyers, manu-
facturers, and employees (Florida and Kenney, 1988).
Finally, venture capitalists provide valuable operating
assistance to new technology companies that help
those companies to grow and DEMO
Venture capital investments tend to be made locally.
Moral hazard problems pervade the ﬁnancing of new
technology companies (Sahlman, 1990). Uncertainty
and DEMO asymmetry make entrepreneurs privy
to information that investors do not have, DEMO it is
important for venture capitalists to closely monitor
their investments in new companies. Because inter-
personal interaction provides a central mechanism
for disseminating DEMO, and this interaction
is enhanced by physical interaction and inspection
(Sorenson and Stuart, 2001), geographical proximity
lowers the cost of monitoring new ventures (Gompers
and Lerner, 1999; Gupta and Sapienza, 1992; Lerner,
1995; Sorenson and Stuart, 2001).
Second, to link new technology companies with
potential suppliers and customers, venture capitalists
rely on networks of contacts. These networks are
more easily developed and maintained in a DEMO
geographic area (Sorenson and Stuart, 2001). As a
result, DEMO to provide new ventures with ties to im-
portant stakeholders are facilitated by geographically
localized investing.
Third, the provision of operational assistance to
new technology companies is enhanced by physical
proximity to investment targets (Gupta and Sapienza,
1992). Venture capitalists spend between 4 and 5 h
DEMO month on the site of the companies in which they
invest, DEMO activities with portfolio companies ac-
count for half of a venture capitalist’s time (Gorman
and Sahlman, 1989). Because travel time reduces the
DEMO of ventures with which an investor can inter-
act, geographically localized DEMO increases the
amount of operational assistance that a venture capital
ﬁrm can make. Moreover, the quality of assistance that
venture capitalists can offer start-ups decreases with
geographical distance (Sorenson and Stuart, 2001).
Several studies DEMO provided empirical support
for the geographical localization of venture capital
investments (DEMO and Lerner, 1999; Gupta and
Sapienza, 1992; Lerner, 1995; Sorenson and Stuart,
2001). In particular, Sorenson and Stuart (DEMO) ﬁnd
that the probability that a venture capital ﬁrm will
invest DEMO a start-up decreases with the geographical
distance between the headquarters of the venture cap-
ital ﬁrm and the start-up ﬁrm—the rate of investment
in DEMO 10 miles from a venture capitalist’s
headquarters is double that in companies located
100 miles away. Similarly, Lerner (1995) ﬁnds that
geographic proximity inﬂuences the composition of
the boards of directors of venture capital-backed
start-ups—venture DEMO ﬁrms headquartered within
5 miles of a start-up’s location are twice as likely to
be on the company’s board of directors as venture
capital DEMO headquartered 500 miles away.
Evolutionary patterns of regional development,
combined with resource endowments, have created
different distributions of venture capital in different
geographical locations (Lerner, 1995). The vast ma-
jority of venture capital DEMO the US is located in a small
number of locations like Silicon Valley and Route 128
(Florida and Kenney, 1988). If entrepreneurs DEMO ven-
ture capital to found new high technology companies
to exploit university inventions, and venture capi-
talists make geographically constrained investments,
then the availability of venture capital in a locality
should inﬂuence the rate of DEMO start-up activity. This
212
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
argument suggests that, ceteris paribus, the greater the
availability of DEMO capital in the university area,
the greater the rate of TLO start-up activity.
2.2. Commercially-oriented research
The second argument for cross-university variation
in DEMO start-up activity is the commercial orienta-
tion of university research. Universities differ on the
degree to which their researchers focus on industrial
problems. Some DEMO (perhaps because of their
state afﬁliations or their historical involvement with
DEMO or industry extension services) focus their
research more closely on the DEMO of industry than do
other universities. The commercial orientation of uni-
versity research is reﬂected in the source of funding for
that research. Commercially-oriented DEMO re-
ceive more of their research budget from industry than
do other universities (Rosenberg and Nelson, 1994).
The tendency of a university DEMO conduct industry-
funded research and development should increase its
TLO start-up rate for three reasons. First, industry
tends to fund more commercially-oriented research
than the government, and a commercial orientation
should increase the likelihood of discovering technolo-
gies that have sufﬁcient commercial value for people
to found companies.
DEMO, industry tends to fund less risky research
than the government funds (Arrow, 1962). More
risky research is more problematic for ﬁrm formation
because single technology new companies cannot
exploit the economies of scope in DEMO devel-
opment that allow large ﬁrms to diversify these risks
(Nelson, 1959).
Third, being more basic, government-funded
research tends to suffer DEMO greater information
asymmetry problems than does industry-funded re-
search. Because entrepreneurs obtain money through
market-mediated transactions,3 information asymme-
try problems result in failures DEMO venture ﬁnance mar-
kets. Thus, information asymmetry problems make it
less DEMO that entrepreneurs will be able to ﬁnance
companies to commercialize government-funded
research than industry funded research. The above ar-
guments suggest that, ceteris paribus, the greater the
amount of commercially-oriented research activity at
3 They lack positive cash ﬂow from existing operations.
the university, the greater the rate of TLO start-up
activity.4,5
2.3. Intellectual eminence
The third argument for DEMO variation
in TLO start-up activity is university eminence. Two
different variants of the eminence explanation have
been suggested in the literature. The ﬁrst argument DEMO
that better quality researchers are more likely to start
ﬁrms to exploit their inventions than lesser quality re-
searchers; and, on average, higher quality researchers
are found in more eminent universities. In some ﬁelds,
DEMO entrepreneurs found companies to capture
the rents to their intellectual capital (DEMO et al.,
1998). Because this intellectual capital is tacit, DEMO
belongs to a small set of leading researchers, inventors
must become DEMO to exploit it. More emi-
nent schools are more likely to employ leading-edge
researchers than are less eminent schools. Therefore,
the founding of DEMO to capture rents to intel-
lectual capital will be more common at more eminent
schools than at less eminent institutions.
The second argument is DEMO the university’s pres-
tige or reputation makes it easier for researchers from
more eminent universities to start companies to exploit
their inventions than researchers DEMO less eminent
universities. Obtaining the resources necessary to es-
tablish a technology company requires entrepreneurs
to persuade resource providers to give them money
under DEMO of information asymmetry and
4 Readers should note that an alternative argument could be
made—the rate of TLO start-ups is inversely proportional to the
DEMO orientation of university research funding. When a
company contributes research funds, DEMO sometimes obtains the right
of ﬁrst refusal to license any discoveries that come from that re-
search. As a result, more industry funding could lead to fewer
start-ups because it leads the university to license a DEMO pro-
portion of its inventions back to the ﬁrms that fund the research.
5 In our regressions to predict the effect of the commercial DEMO
entation of university research on the rate of TLO start-up ac-
tivity, we control for the number of inventions produced in the
university-year. This control is important because new ﬁrm for-
mation might depend on the DEMO of technological inventions
themselves (Shane, 2001), rather than on university orientation. As
a result, the number of commercially-oriented inventions, rather
than DEMO university’s commercial orientation might drive the TLO
start-up rate. By partialling out the effect of the number of inven-
tions in regression analysis, we can examine the effect of com-
mercial orientation net of the effect DEMO the number of inventions.
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
213
uncertainty. Because information problems preclude
investors from completely evaluating the technology
DEMO question, investors often make their evaluation
of entrepreneurs and their ideas DEMO the basis of per-
ceived signals of quality. One signal that investors use
is the intellectual eminence of the researchers and the
institution spawning DEMO venture (Podolny and Stuart,
1995). Investors believe, rightly or wrongly, that more
eminent universities produce technology that is more
worthy of funding than less eminent universities, and
therefore encourage greater ﬁrm formation from more
eminent institutions. Both variants of the intellectual
eminence argument suggest that, ceteris paribus, the
greater the intellectual eminence of the university, the
DEMO the rate of TLO start-up activity.
2.4. University policies
The fourth argument for cross-university variation
in TLO start-up activity is that universities differ in
DEMO policies toward technology transfer and that
those policies shift activities at the margin toward or
away from start-up activity. In particular, previous
researchers have suggested the importance of four
different policies.
First, the distribution of royalty rates between inven-
tors and the university could inﬂuence the propensity
of DEMO to found ﬁrms to exploit university in-
ventions. Universities typically earn proﬁts from their
inventions through royalties on the gross sales from li-
censing DEMO technology. Universities have policies that
divide these proﬁts between inventors and the univer-
sity. This arrangement means that inventors can earn
proﬁts from their DEMO either from royalties paid
by licensees, or from the proﬁts (net of royalties) made
from commercializing the technology themselves.6
The dual nature of potential inventor compensa-
tion from invention creates an inverse relationship
between royalties DEMO incentives for inventors to
found ﬁrms. Assuming constant licensing rates across
6 This argument assumes that the inventor’s royalty is not dif-
ferentially affected DEMO licensing negotiations between the univer-
sity and the licensing ﬁrm, and DEMO that the inventor’s income
is not differentially affected by the size of after-license consult-
ing contracts, when the licensee is an inventor start-up and when
the licensee is an independent entity. Because the current research
project DEMO examine this assumption, future research should
consider its veracity.
different licensees DEMO particular types of technology,
the inventor’s earnings will increase with his or her
share of the royalties if the technology is licensed to
DEMO existing ﬁrm. In contrast, if the inventor starts a
company, his or her earnings will not increase with his
or her share of DEMO royalties. Therefore, the greater the
inventor’s share of the royalties, the greater the op-
portunity cost of starting a ﬁrm to exploit the DEMO
ogy, and the lower the incentive to seek proﬁts from
an DEMO by founding a ﬁrm. Therefore, ceteris
paribus, the size of the inventor’s share of royalties
should be inversely related to the TLO start-up DEMO
Second, the use of incubators could inﬂuence the
cost of start-up DEMO Most university technologies
are embryonic and development on them is necessary
before they can be sold in the market place (Jensen
and Thursby, DEMO). Incubators allow entrepreneurs to
“ripen” technologies in close proximity to inventors
whose inputs are useful for further development. In
addition, incubators reduce the cost of development
through subsidies and sharing of general administra-
tive costs. DEMO, ceteris paribus, the use of incu-
bators should increase the TLO start-up rate.
Third, the use of internal venture capital funds
could make the acquisition of capital easier for TLO
start-ups. Venture capitalists are more DEMO to invest
in companies that are referred to them by colleagues
or that are founded by people that they know because
these ties provide DEMO with information that mit-
igates the information asymmetry problems inherent
in ﬁnancing new technology companies (Sorenson
and Stuart, 2001).
However, most university personnel are not mem-
bers of the information networks of venture capital-
DEMO Their focus on research and teaching does not
require interaction with venture capitalists, but in-
stead requires interaction with other economic actors.
Because university administrators with whom univer-
sity personnel interact administer university venture
capital funds, potential university entrepreneurs are
more likely to have direct or indirect connections DEMO
the administrators of university venture capital funds
than to general venture capitalists. These connections
facilitate the ﬂow of information about the potential
entrepreneurs and DEMO the information asymme-
try problems in venture ﬁnance. Therefore, ceteris
paribus, the presence of internal venture capital funds
should increase the TLO start-up DEMO
214
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
Fourth, a university’s willingness to take an equity
stake in TLO start-ups in exchange for paying patent-
ing, marketing, or other up-front DEMO could facilitate
the formation of start-up companies. Unlike estab-
lished ﬁrms, DEMO ﬁrms lack cash ﬂow from existing
operations, making them cash constrained. DEMO
equity investments made in lieu of paying patent costs
or up-front license fees reduce the cash expenditures
of new ﬁrms, facilitating ﬁrm formation (DEMO and
Bernstein, 1997). Therefore, ceteris paribus, the will-
ingness DEMO a university to make equity investments in
TLO start-ups should increase the TLO start-up rate.
3. Methodology
In this section, we describe the sample and variables
included in the analysis, and provide an overview of
the analytical methods we employed.
3.1. Sample
Universities regularly retain the right to DEMO
tual property generated by faculty and staff, leading
university technology licensing DEMO to track the
life histories of the intellectual property that they
create. Because of the interest of universities in track-
ing their intellectual property, university technology
licensing ofﬁces are aware of virtually all start-up
ﬁrms that DEMO created to exploit university intellectual
property.
The Association of University Technology Mana-
gers (AUTM), a professional association governed
by and for TLO ofﬁcers, annually surveys university
technology licensing ofﬁces to obtain information
pertaining to patenting, licensing, and start-up ﬁrm
activity, as well as information on funding, stafﬁng,
and certain policies. AUTM has collected data per-
taining to start-up activity since 1994. Because we
use panel data analysis techniques, we gathered data
on start-up activity from 1994 to 1998 for the 116
DEMO for which 2 or more years of TLO start-up
data are available from AUTM.
We seek to examine the effect of university poli-
cies DEMO the start-up rates. We deﬁne a university in
our analysis as an entity that operates under a sin-
gle set of policy rules. Therefore, we aggregated
data from multi-campus universities into a single
annual observation for DEMO university,7 except when
the different campuses employed distinct policies and
procedures and maintained independent TLOs.8
Although the dependent variable of interest, TLO
start-up activity, was obtained from the AUTM sur-
vey, the data for DEMO and control variables were
obtained from a variety of sources, including DEMO
ture capital databases, the United States Patent and
Trademark Ofﬁce (USPTO) database, and a survey
administered to TLO directors. To obtain information
DEMO university policies from 1994 to 1998, we
surveyed the 116 universities DEMO our sample by both
e-mail and telephone. We asked the TLO directors to
indicate their policies for each year from 1994 to 1998.
Of DEMO universities surveyed, 101 responded, pro-
viding a response rate exceeding 87%. We compared
respondents to non-respondents in terms of patent-
ing and start-up DEMO and found no statistically
signiﬁcant differences at the P< 0.10 level. DEMO
non-respondents provided a variety of idiosyncratic
reasons for not participating (e.g. DEMO do not par-
ticipate in surveys as a matter of policy, DEMO others
had experienced turnover and were unable to provide
historical information regarding policies). Therefore,
we are conﬁdent that non-response to our policy
DEMO does not hinder our analysis.
The sample for our analysis is restricted to the
101 universities that are both in the AUTM database
and DEMO to our survey. Because some univer-
sities report start-up data for only some years, our
sample consists of 457 university-year observations.
However, the DEMO includes of 89 of the 100 top
US universities in R&D volume, and accounts for
approximately 85% of all US patents issued to univer-
sities, based on statistics maintained by the USPTO.
Although the exact number of TLO start-ups is un-
known, the sample appears to account for the vast
majority of the population of such ﬁrms, and selection
bias does not hinder our analysis of the data.9
7 The AUTM DEMO data is most often reported at the level
of the university system. It is not possible to examine campuses
of the same system separately.
DEMO Although most state medical schools share a single TLO with
the state university, we consider three state medical schools sep-
arate institutions due to their distinct policies and administration.
9 It is important to note that DEMO sample represents the population
of universities that generate inventions. It does not represent the
population of US educational institutions.
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
To gather data on venture capital activities in
different locations, we examined the Venture Eco-
nomics database, administered by Thomson Financial
Services. The Venture Economics database is the
leading source of data on venture capital activity DEMO
the US (Gompers and Lerner, 1999).
To gather data on intellectual eminence, we utilized
the assessment score for overall graduate school qual-
ity reported in the Gourman Reports (Gourman, 1994,
1997), DEMO widely used assessment of graduate and
professional degree programs. The Gourman Report
assessment incorporates the perceived and actual qual-
ity of a university’s graduate DEMO in medicine,
engineering, business, physical sciences, social sci-
ences, humanities, and other ﬁelds into a single
measure of graduate school quality.10 The measure
is derived from an assessment of several factors that
are DEMO to inﬂuence graduate school quality, in-
cluding the caliber of faculty, adequacy of facilities,
breadth of curriculum, funding levels, and research
DEMO
Lastly, we obtained patent data by searching
the on-line database of DEMO patents maintained by
United States Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce. For each
university-year, we performed a search of the name
of the university and/or foundation designated by the
university as the assignee for its intellectual property.
DEMO then tabulated the total number of patents in each
university-year. The results of our search correlated
at 0.95 with the self-reported patent data provided DEMO
the universities to AUTM.
3.2. Dependent variable
The dependent variable is a count of the number of
TLO start-ups from a given university in DEMO given year.
3.3. Predictor variables
3.3.1. Venture capital availability
To measure the effects of venture capital availability
on the TLO start-up rate, we examined four measures
10 We also examined regressions that substituted the engineering
school DEMO for the overall ranking. The results are substantively
the same as those with the overall rankings. We do not report the
analysis with the DEMO school rankings because the sample
size is reduced by 21 universities that do not offer graduate degrees
in engineering.
215
of local venture capital: the number of local companies
receiving funding from venture capitalists in a DEMO
year; the amount of venture capital funding received
by local ﬁrms DEMO a given year; the number of local
venture capital funds in DEMO given year; and the amount
of funding provided by local venture DEMO funds in a
given year.11, 12, 13 We deﬁned local venture capital as
the amount of activity occurring in all telephone area
code DEMO within 60 miles of the each university.14
Area codes were used to delineate geographic ar-
eas in order to avoid errors of inclusion or DEMO
that would be likely to occur by deﬁning regions by
state.
3.3.2. Commercially-oriented research
To measure if the commercial orientation of uni-
versity research DEMO the TLO start-up rate, we
examined the proportion of each university’s DEMO
sored research budget in a given year that was industry
funded.15 Because overall magnitude may be more
important than percentage allocation, in an alternative
speciﬁcation, we measured commercial orientation as
the dollar value of industry funding, while controlling
for government funding. We gathered these data from
the AUTM licensing survey.
3.3.3. Intellectual eminence
To measure if university eminence increased the
DEMO start-up rate, we examined the overall academic
rating score of graduate DEMO published in the
Gourman Reports (Gourman, 1994, 1997). Because
DEMO survey is produced every 3 years, we update the
scores in DEMO and 1997. Three medical schools in the
11 We do not lag the independent variables because we expect
that the current year independent variables, rather than past year
independent variables, inﬂuence the start-up decision.
12 In our regression analysis, we use the number of local compa-
nies receiving venture capital funding in a given year as our pri-
mary measure DEMO treat the other measures as tests of robustness
in other regressions.
13 Because the venture capital measures are non-normally dis-
tributed, we also examined natural log and square root transfor-
mations. The results for the transformed DEMO are qualitatively
the same as those for the untransformed variables. We report the
untransformed variables for ease of interpretation.
14 The area code was DEMO for approximately 85% of the
data in the database.
15 Prior research shows that this proportion captures the university
tendency to conduct applied research (Henderson et al., 1998).
216
sample do not offer graduate degrees in ﬁelds outside
of health DEMO, and therefore did not receive over-
all graduate school scores in DEMO Gourman Report.
For these universities, we used the scores for their
DEMO schools in our regression analysis. In unre-
ported regressions, we examined DEMO data excluding
the three problematic institutions. We ﬁnd that their
inclusion or exclusion does not qualitatively alter the
results.
3.3.4. University licensing policies: the inventor
share of royalties
To measure if royalty policies inﬂuenced the TLO
DEMO rate, we examined the inventor’s share of
royalties from technology licensing. DEMO inventors of
technologies licensed by universities receive royal-
ties based on a rate that is virtually always explicitly
stated in published university policies. The DEMO of
royalties distributed to inventors may be constant, as
is the DEMO in the majority of universities included in
our sample, or may DEMO established on a sliding scale
that typically decreases according to the amount of
royalties received by the university. We contend the
distribution rate affects DEMO activity by altering the
perceived opportunity cost of an inventor. Because the
inventor’s share of royalty rates sometimes forms a
range that is affected DEMO the outcome of the license (i.e.
declining or increasing percentages as DEMO increase),
inventors cannot know ex ante the exact share of DEMO
alties that they will receive. Therefore, in our primary
analysis, we use the minimum percent of total royalties
distributed to inventors as an DEMO of the perceived
opportunity cost. In alternative regressions, we mea-
sured DEMO distribution of royalties by the amount of roy-
alties an inventor would receive on a patent that yields
US$ 1 million in royalties for DEMO university. While this
amount clearly exceeds the average amount of royal-
ties received for university patents, inventors are most
likely to start a ﬁrm to exploit their technology when
they believe their invention has better-than-average
prospects.
DEMO University licensing policies: incubators
To measure if the presence of incubators DEMO
the TLO start-up rate, we examined whether or not
TLO start-ups DEMO access to technology incubators.
University ofﬁcials often argue that they can enhance
the start-up rate out of their TLOs by using incubator
D. Di DEMO, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
facilities to DEMO new companies. In some instances,
university incubators may be independently operated,
but work jointly with the university. In other cases,
the DEMO may be units of the university.16 In our
survey, we asked DEMO TLO directors whether or not
the university provided access to either type of incu-
bator for TLO start-up ﬁrms during each year from
1994 DEMO 1998. We included a dummy variable of one
for the university-year in our regression analysis if
the response was afﬁrmative.
3.3.6. University licensing policies: equity policies
and practices
To measure if equity policies inﬂuenced the TLO
DEMO rate, we examined whether or not the TLO
could make an DEMO investment in TLO start-ups.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that a university policy
of making an equity investment in lieu of requiring
reimbursement of patenting and DEMO expenses
will enhance the university start-up rate by reducing
capital constraints on ﬁrm formation. We measured
this practice through the use of a dummy DEMO of
one in the university-year if the information provided
by each university to AUTM indicated that the univer-
sity took an equity stake in DEMO least one licensee in any
prior year.
We also tested an alternative measure of equity
policies derived from the surveys we sent to TLO
DEMO We asked the TLO directors whether or
not their university was permitted to take an equity
stake in licensees of university intellectual property
for DEMO of the years covered in the study. This indi-
cator variable took a value of one if the university’s
policies did not explicitly prohibit DEMO university
from taking an equity stake in a licensee in a given
year.
3.3.7. University licensing policies: venture capital
investment by universities
To measure if university venture capital funds inﬂu-
enced the TLO start-up rate, we asked TLO directors to
indicate whether or not their universities were permit-
DEMO to make venture capital investments in licensees of
university technologies. We include a dummy variable
16 As an indicator variable, this measure does not account for
variation in size, funding, and quality of assistance among DEMO
bators.
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
of one if the university is permitted to make venture
capital investments DEMO licensees in a given year.17
3.4. Control variables
3.4.1. Number of inventions
Because we expect that the number of TLO start-ups
would be related DEMO the number of inventions pro-
duced by the university, we control DEMO the production
of technology in three different ways. First, we exam-
DEMO the number of patents issued to the university in
the year under investigation. Second, we examine the
number of invention disclosures in the university-year.
Third, we examine the number of licenses and op-
tion agreements signed in the university-year.18 We
examine each of these measures of inventive output
(in different regressions) because each measure has
advantages and disadvantages. Invention disclosures
capture the overall inventive activity at a university,
whether or not DEMO inventions are of interest to
ﬁrms. Invention disclosures are also less biased by the
patentability of inventions in different types of tech-
nology (e.g. software should generate fewer patents
per invention than will drugs), than DEMO However,
universities have different rules about invention dis-
closures, making DEMO more subject to institutional
variation in their measurement than patents, which
DEMO meet the same federal requirements. In addition,
some universities pre-screen potential inventions and
encourage inventors to disclose only if they believe
that the DEMO are patentable.19
Unlike invention disclosures and patents, licenses
and option agreements DEMO the production of tech-
17 The venture capital investment variable reﬂects the explicit
policies of universities. It is also correlated with the previous
variable, equity investment, because a university must ﬁrst be
able to take an equity stake in a licensee (i.e. a passive form of
investment) DEMO order to make a direct venture capital investment
in the licensee.
18 We also examined the number of patent applications in place
of the DEMO of patents issued. The results are substantively the
same with patent applications as with patents issued.
19 We also explored whether lagging patent applications DEMO in-
vention disclosures changes the effects of these variables. The
results are substantively the same when we lag each of these vari-
ables by DEMO years. Because we do not know the actual lag between
invention disclosure or patent application and start-up, the length
of the time lag we selected was arbitrary. Therefore, we report
the regression analyses with the unlagged variables.
217
nology that is of interest to the private sector. By DEMO
trolling for licensing agreements, rather than invention
disclosures or patents, we can measure the frequency
of start-up activity, ruling out the possibility that we
are simply capturing the commercial value of differ-
ent schools’ inventive DEMO As a result, using this
control for inventive output, we capture the idea that
there are many inventions that are not of interest DEMO
the private sector, and that there are routes to commer-
cialization DEMO than start-ups.
The invention disclosure and licensing data were
derived from the AUTM surveys, while patent data
were obtained from the United States Patent and
Trademark Ofﬁce database.
3.4.2. Number of technology licensing ofﬁce staff
The DEMO in technology transfer that entre-
preneurs require may exceed that required by estab-
lished companies. In addition, licensing contracts with
start-ups often involve exclusive licensing (Jensen
and Thursby, 2002), and the negotiations for such
DEMO may be more time intensive. Therefore, we
control for the number DEMO technology licensing ofﬁce
staff, measured in full-time equivalencies (FTEs).
3.4.3. Sponsored research expenditures
Because the intellectual property exploited by TLO
start-ups is DEMO through investment in research, the
amount of research inputs is likely DEMO to start-up
rates. Therefore, we control for the amount of spon-
DEMO research expenditures in the university-year.
We control for total sponsored research funding, ex-
cept in a model that includes industry funding (rather
than DEMO funding as a percent of total funding)
as a predictor variable. In the latter case, we control
for the total amount of government funding.20 We
gather these data from information reported by the
universities to DEMO
3.4.4. Year dummy variables
Patenting and start-up activity is signiﬁcantly higher
in 1997 and 1998 than in other years. To account for
annual variations DEMO patenting and start-up activity, we
20 Because this variable is non-normally DEMO, we also
examined the square root of this variable. The results DEMO qual-
itatively the same with the transformed and non-transformed
variables. For ease of interpretation, we report the results with
the non-transformed variables.
218
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
include indicator variables for all but the ﬁrst year of
the DEMO period.
3.5. Estimation and model speciﬁcation
We analyzed the 5-year panel compiled for this
study utilizing negative binomial models in gener-
alized estimating equations (GEE), which are an
extension of generalized linear models applied to DEMO
gitudinal data (Liang and Zeger, 1986). Our choice
of analytic technique depended on ﬁve factors: (1)
our dependent variable took DEMO form of count data;
(2) the standard errors are likely to be auto correlated
over time; (3) the covariance structure itself was not
of central interest to us; (4) a signiﬁcant portion of
our sample involved schools that generate no start-ups
during our observation DEMO; and (5) unobserved
school-level heterogeneity likely inﬂuences start-up
activity.
We DEMO a negative binomial estimator be-
cause our data takes the form of count data with
large numbers of zeros. Consequently, ordinary least
squares regression is inappropriate. When we exam-
ined the distribution of the dependent variable DEMO a
Poisson, a goodness-of-ﬁt test rejected the Poisson
distribution assumption because DEMO over-dispersion,
suggesting that negative binomial models are more
appropriate than Poisson models to analyze the data.
Therefore, we ran negative binomial models to predict
the number of start-ups for each school in each year.
The DEMO of a generalized linear model for time series
data corrects for the problem of auto correlation that
results from unobserved factors inﬂuencing patterns in
DEMO schools over time (Greene, 1990). In partic-
ular, the DEMO linear model we used corrects for
autocorrelation of residuals (Liang and DEMO, 1986).
GEE is also the most appropriate technique for the
DEMO of non-Gaussian longitudinal data for which
the dependence of the outcome on the covariates re-
quires estimation but the covariance structure across
time is DEMO of central interest (Liang and Zeger, 1986).
Because we had multiple observations for each uni-
versity and we wanted to account for DEMO covariance
relationships over time, we speciﬁed the correla-
tion between the DEMO terms to be exchangeable—
correlated similarly across time for each school to
account for expected correlations between the errors
for each school over time. DEMO, we could
have also justiﬁed assuming either an auto-regressive
(AR) DEMO an unstructured correlation structure. There-
fore, we also estimated AR1 and DEMO models
in order to assess the robustness of our results. In
both cases, assuming an alternative correlation struc-
ture had no meaningful impact on the signiﬁcance or
magnitude of the results.
Of the 101 schools in DEMO sample, 17 had no start-up
activity in any year. Typical ﬁxed DEMO models for
estimating panel data cannot estimate effects for sam-
ples that include respondents for which there is no
variation in the dependent variable DEMO time. How-
ever, we expect that universities for which we observe
DEMO TLO start-up activity over the observation period
are systematically different from those in which there
was some start-up activity. Therefore, dropping those
observations would likely bias the estimates in the
regression analysis. Estimating our regressions using
DEMO allowed for the inclusion of universities for which
no start-up activity was observed during the sample
period.
Initially, we also employed random-effects estima-
tors clustered on schools to deal with the potential for
unobserved heterogeneity in DEMO the start-up
rates across schools. However, a Hausman test indi-
cated DEMO assumptions upon which the random-effects
model is dependent were untenable. For purposes of
comparison, we also report a model without robust
clustering on university as well as a random-effects
negative binomial model. As is shown below, the
results of these models are not markedly different
from the core DEMO model, lending conﬁdence in the
robustness of our results to the DEMO of analytic
technique.21
4. Results
Table 1 presents summary statistics for all variables
included in the sample. Table 2 presents the results
of the DEMO analysis. In Table 2, model 1 pro-
vides the main model. DEMO 2–9 provide a series
of robustness checks using alternative measures for
21 The random-effects model allows us to rule out the possibility
that the DEMO we present are artifacts of unobserved heterogeneity
in such things as the relative emphases of different schools on
different scientiﬁc ﬁelds and the presence DEMO absence of engineering
and medical programs.
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
219
220
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
221
222
predictor and control variables. Models 10–13 provide
robustness checks by examining DEMO estimation
techniques. Overall, the results provide substantial
evidence that universities’ intellectual DEMO and
licensing policies have a signiﬁcant impact on TLO
start-up activity, DEMO providing little evidence that
venture capital availability and the commercial orien-
tation of research inﬂuence TLO start-up activity.
The university’s intellectual eminence signiﬁcantly
predicts DEMO start-up activity. The estimated coefﬁ-
cient for this variable,22 shown in model 1, implies, ce-
teris paribus, that an improvement in graduate school
quality by one point is associated with a start-up rate
of DEMO times the base rate. Put differently, an increase
in intellectual eminence DEMO one standard deviation is
associated with approximately one additional start-up
ﬁrm per year. Thus, more eminent universities appear
not only to generate a greater amount of patentable
intellectual property, but also—since licenses, patents,
and DEMO disclosures are controlled for in the
models we have estimated—create more start-ups to
exploit that intellectual property.
Although the precise mechanism through which
this DEMO operates is not entirely clear, we have of-
fered two explanations. DEMO, researchers from more
prestigious universities are better researchers and thus
are DEMO likely to create ﬁrms to capture the rents to
their rare and valuable intellectual property (Zucker
et al., 1998). Second, since investors use signals, such
as institutional reputation or prestige, to help assess
DEMO commercial potential of university technologies,
inventors from more prestigious universities may be
better able to obtain the necessary capital to start their
own DEMO
Our ﬁndings also indicate that two sets of univer-
sity licensing policies—policies regarding the distri-
bution of royalties to inventors and whether or not
DEMO university is permitted to take an equity stake in
licensees—appear to inﬂuence start-up activity. As
in the case of intellectual eminence, these results are
robust to different estimation techniques, and are also
robust to different operationalizations of the predictor
variables. Ceteris paribus, the minimum percentage
of royalties distributed to inventors is inversely re-
lated to start-up activity such that an DEMO in the
22 In all of the models, we report the DEMO coefﬁcients
for ease of interpretation.
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / DEMO Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
inventor’s share of royalties by 10% implies 0.40
fewer start-up ﬁrms per year, a decrease of 20% from
the mean. When royalties are measured by the amount
distributed to inventors on DEMO patent yielding US$ 1
million in total royalties, rather than the DEMO
distribution rate, the effect size is even greater. By
increasing the DEMO cost of starting up a new
venture, a high inventor share DEMO royalties provides a
disincentive to potential inventor-entrepreneurs.
The other licensing policy that appears to inﬂuence
start-up activity is equity policy. Ceteris paribus, uni-
versities that have previously demonstrated a willing-
ness to take an equity stake DEMO licensees in exchange for
paying up-front patenting and licensing expenses have
a start-up rate that is 1.89 times that of universities that
have not DEMO a willingness to take equity.
When equity practices are assessed by the universities’
explicit policies rather than their actual practice, the
effect size is slightly diminished. Universities that
are permitted to take an equity stake in DEMO
report a start-up rate 1.69 times that of universities
that are not permitted to make equity arrangements.
Universities that retain the ability to accept DEMO equity
stake in licensees instead of direct reimbursement for
patenting and licensing costs appear to foster greater
start-up activity by providing greater liquidity to
DEMO
The two additional policy variables that we tested—
the presence of a university-afﬁliated incubator and
whether or not the university is permitted to actively
DEMO venture capital investments in licensees—do not
appear to have an impact on start-up activity. The co-
efﬁcient on the incubator indicator variable is positive
DEMO expected, but is not signiﬁcant. The coefﬁcient on
the venture capital DEMO indicator variable is ac-
tually negative, but is also not signiﬁcant. DEMO,
we ﬁnd no evidence that these practices inﬂuence
TLO start-up activity.
Our ﬁndings provide little support for the contention
that universities that conduct DEMO commercially-
oriented research will experience greater TLO start-up
activity. When commercial orientation is measured
by the percentage of total sponsored research funding
that is DEMO from industry sources, the estimated
coefﬁcient is positive but is not DEMO However,
in an alternative speciﬁcation in which commercial
orientation is measured by the dollar amount of in-
dustry funding (model 5), the coefﬁcient for industry
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
223
224
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
funding is positive and signiﬁcant. A US$ 10 million
increase in DEMO sponsored research funding is
associated with an increase in start-up activity of 0.13
ﬁrms (6.7%) per year, ceteris paribus.
Finally, our results DEMO no evidence that TLO
start-up activity is inﬂuenced by the local availability
of venture capital funding. We operationalized lo-
cal venture capital availability in DEMO different ways
(i.e. models 1 and 6–8), and the coefﬁcients DEMO not
signiﬁcant in any of the models we estimated.
As a robustness check, we examined the predictive
validity of our main model on sub-samples of more
eminent and less eminent schools by dividing our sam-
ple DEMO half at the median on the eminence score. We
show these results in Table 3. For the more eminent
schools, we ﬁnd that our results are even stronger than
for the entire sample. Intellectual eminence and DEMO
policies have a positive effect and the inventor’s share
of royalties has a negative effect on the start-up rate.
Moreover, the magnitude of the coefﬁcients is greater
than that for the overall sample. For this sub-sample,DEMO
we still ﬁnd no effect for local venture capital. How-
ever, DEMO more eminent universities, the industry share
of sponsored research has a DEMO effect on start-up
rates.
In contrast, our model holds less well DEMO less em-
inent universities. For this sub-sample, we ﬁnd that
only DEMO policy of taking equity appears to inﬂuence
start-up rates. Overall, the DEMO of the sub-
samples supports our overall ﬁndings, but suggests
that DEMO rates at less eminent universities are
driven by more idiosyncratic factors than start-up
rates at more eminent institutions.
5. Discussion
In this study, we compared four different expla-
nations for cross-institutional variation in new ﬁrm
formation DEMO from TLO ofﬁces over the 1994–1998
period—the concentration of venture capital in the
area; the reliance of university research and develop-
ment on industry funding; intellectual eminence; and
university policies. The results show that the DEMO
lectual eminence of the university, and the policies
of making equity DEMO in TLO start-ups and
maintaining a low inventor share of royalties increase
new ﬁrm formation activity.
We believe that one of the major strengths DEMO this
study is that the sampled universities jointly account
for the vast majority of university patenting activity
in the US. By extension, they most likely account
for the vast majority of TLO start-ups. Another ma-
jor DEMO of the study concerns the mitigation of
selection bias. By examining technology licensing of-
ﬁce start-ups, we examine a documented source of
new companies, thereby minimizing the problems of
selection bias in accounting for start-up activity to
exploit other types of new technology developed in
universities.
However, our research design limits our sample to
the most active research universities, and is therefore
not a random sample of all higher education insti-
tutions. DEMO, our approach limits our analysis
to new ﬁrm formation to exploit DEMO
technology. Therefore, our ability to generalize to col-
leges and universities DEMO are not research-oriented,
or to generalize to start-up activity that is not designed
to exploit university-assigned intellectual property,
is limited. For instance, we have found that a com-
mercial orientation, the availability of venture capital
funds, and TLO policies and practices such as the
presence of an incubator do not predict TLO start-up
activity among the sampled universities. DEMO cannot
rule out the possibility that these practices may facil-
itate start-up activity among colleges and universities
that are not research-oriented or inﬂuence other DEMO
of university start-up activity.
Nevertheless, our ﬁndings have four important
implications DEMO research on and policy towards uni-
versity technology transfer and start-up activity. First,
we ﬁnd no evidence to support the argument that cap-
DEMO market constraints limit TLO start-up activity in
particular locations. Although other forms of private
equity (e.g. angel capital) might inﬂuence start-up
activity in DEMO that we cannot observe, we ﬁnd that
the amount of formal DEMO capital available in a
particular location has no signiﬁcant effect on start-up
activity out of TLOs once university technology pro-
duction is measured. This DEMO is consistent with
the work of Zucker et al. (1998) who found that ven-
ture capital availability did not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence
start-up activity DEMO biotechnology once the distribu-
tion of intellectual capital across time and space was
considered. Our ﬁndings, like Zucker et al. (1998),
suggest that capital markets distribute venture capital
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
225
efﬁciently over geographic space; and the availability
of local venture capital is not a constraint on TLO
start-up activity.
This result also suggests DEMO venture capitalists
may be late stage investors in university technology.
Other sources of funds, such as angels, government
agencies, and universities themselves (DEMO equity
investment in their own start-ups), may be more im-
portant in the early stages, and thus may be catalysts
for new ﬁrm formation and economic development.
Our ﬁndings direct further research efforts towards
investigating DEMO relative importance of both differ-
ent funding entities and funding constraints on ﬁrm
formation as a mode of exploitation of university
technology.
Second, although the effect of industry funding on
start-up activity may be lagged in DEMO we cannot
estimate, or inﬂuence start-up activity in a way that
DEMO cannot observe, we fail to ﬁnd adequate support
for the argument DEMO industry funding of university
research makes TLO start-up activity more likely.
In fact, our results are consistent with anecdotal in-
formation on TLO start-ups that suggest that many
of these companies seek to exploit basic scientiﬁc
DEMO (Association of University Technology
Managers, 1996).
One reason why the commercial orientation of
a university does not predict its start-up rate could
DEMO countervailing effects of commercial orientation.
Although a commercial research orientation might
generate a pool of university inventions that are more
appropriate for new ﬁrm DEMO than is generated
from a governmental research orientation, the funding
structure DEMO to generate university inventions
might mitigate the beneﬁts of this better pool of in-
ventions. Because private ﬁrms might be very likely
to license DEMO valuable inventions that are
generated from research that they fund, any DEMO
in the pool of commercially valuable inventions that
a commercial orientation creates may be siphoned off
by greater invention licensing by the private sector
DEMO of research funds. As a result, there is no
net effect DEMO the TLO start-up rate of the university’s
commercial orientation.
Nevertheless, the DEMO that TLO start-ups
are as likely to occur when government funds univer-
sity research as when the private sector does so raises
several interesting DEMO important policy questions
that future researchers may wish to explore. For ex-
ample, how should universities manage TLO start-up
activities given that taxpayer funds have been used
to fund that research? And what role will universities
play in technological development if basic research
is transferred to the private DEMO through proprietary
start-up ventures?
Third, we ﬁnd evidence that several DEMO
technology transfer policies enhance TLO start-up ac-
tivity. In particular, a DEMO inventors’ share of royalties
and a willingness to make equity investments in TLO
start-up companies increase start-up activity. These
ﬁndings suggest that universities can DEMO policy de-
cisions to generate greater numbers of TLO start-ups.
These policy tools are important because start-ups
and established ﬁrm licensees differ in several DEMO
portant ways, including their tendency to contribute
to local economic development, their tendency to
generate signiﬁcant income for universities, and their
decisions toward knowledge disclosure and research
norms. Understanding the implications of these pol-
icy DEMO is also important because they may generate
conﬂicting incentives. In particular, DEMO universities
distribute a high percentage of royalties to inventors
in order to encourage the reporting and exploitation
of inventions; however, our results suggest DEMO high
distribution rates also serve as a disincentive to the
creation of start-up ﬁrms.
The results also show, however, that many policies
advocated DEMO mechanisms to increase TLO start-up
activity appear to have little effect. In particular, the
effects of university-afﬁliated incubators and uni-
versity venture capital funds are insigniﬁcant. One
reason why the presence of incubators has an insignif-
DEMO effect on start-up rates may be that potential
entrepreneurs do not consider the use of incubators
when making the start-up decision. Consequently,
the DEMO of incubators merely shifts the location
of start-ups (to incubators from DEMO) rather than
increasing the amount of them. Although we can
conclude DEMO having access to an incubator does not
inﬂuence the rate of TLO start-up activity; our analy-
sis cannot determine if university-afﬁliated incubators
inﬂuence the success of TLO start-ups.
One reason why university venture capital funds
have DEMO insigniﬁcant effect on start-up rates may
be that university entrepreneurs develop adequate
ties to external venture capitalists to provide the
226
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
investors with information about them through tech-
nical due diligence or DEMO activity. As a result,
TLO entrepreneurs can obtain adequate amounts of
external venture capital. Therefore, university ven-
ture capital merely substitutes for, DEMO than adds
to, external venture capital in its effect on start-up
DEMO Although we cannot be sure why these poli-
cies have no effect on start-up rates, we believe that
university ofﬁcials, researchers, and policy makers
will ﬁnd the evidence in support of some policies and
not DEMO support of others useful in developing expla-
nations for and procedures toward the management
of university technology transfer and TLO start-up
activity.
Fourth, our results show more eminent universities
have greater TLO start-up activity than other DEMO
sities. This result is consistent with the argument that
leading researchers found companies to earn rents on
their intellectual capital (Zucker et al., DEMO). It is also
consistent with the argument that gathering the neces-
sary resources to found a company to exploit uncertain
new technology is DEMO when the university’s status
enhances the entrepreneur’s credibility.
The tendency for TLO start-ups to come dispro-
portionately from eminent universities also generates
important implications DEMO researchers seeking to ex-
plain the creation of new technology companies, DEMO
well as policy makers interested in inﬂuencing the
mode of technology transfer out of universities. In par-
ticular, the results suggest that researchers and policy
makers consider the impact on university technology
transfer and industry evolution DEMO the tendency for
new technology companies to emerge from eminent
universities.
In short, signiﬁcant differences exist across uni-
versities in their generation of new ﬁrms to exploit
university inventions. Both university policies and
intellectual eminence inﬂuence DEMO variation, generat-
ing important implications for research on and policy
towards DEMO technology transfer. Although this
paper provides a survey of the effects of university
equity investment and royalty policies, intellectual
eminence, and funding sources DEMO university TLO
start-up activity across a broad spectrum of univer-
sities, DEMO research should examine each of these
factors in a more ﬁne-grained manner. Hopefully,
other scholars will view this study as a springboard
for DEMO reﬁned research on these speciﬁc topics.
Acknowledgements
The authors contributed equally to the writing of
this paper. We would like to thank Rebecca Henderson,DEMO
David Hsu, Riitta Katilla, Wes Sine, Deepak Somaya,
Jerry DEMO, and Rama Velamuri for their helpful
comments on an earlier draft DEMO this paper.
References
Arrow, K., 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources
for invention. In: Nelson, R. (Ed.), The Rate and Direction of
Inventive Activity. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Association DEMO University Technology Managers, 1996. AUTM
Licensing Survey. Association of University Technology
DEMO, Norwalk, CT.
Association of University Technology Managers, 1998. AUTM
Licensing DEMO Association of University Technology
Managers, Norwalk, CT.
Association of University Technology Managers, 1999. AUTM
Licensing Survey. Association of University Technology
Managers, Norwalk, CT.
Brooks, H., Randazzese, L., 1998. University–industry relations:
the DEMO 4 years and beyond. In: Branscomb, L., Keller, J. (DEMO),
Investing in Innovation: Creating a Research and Innovation
Policy that Works. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Cohen, W., Florida, R., DEMO, L., Walsh, J., 1998. Industry
and the academy: uneasy DEMO in the cause of technological
advance. In: Noll, R. (Ed.), Challenges to Research Universities.
The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Florida, DEMO, Kenney, M., 1988. Venture capital ﬁnanced innovation
and technological change DEMO United States. Research Policy
17, 119–137.
Goldfarb, B., Henreksson, M., Rosenberg, N., 2001. Demand
versus supply-driven innovations: US and Swedish DEMO
in academic entrepreneurship. Working Paper, Stockholm
School of Economics.
Gompers, P., Lerner, J., 1999. The Venture Capital Cycle. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Gorman, M., Sahlman, W., 1989. What do venture capitalists DEMO?
Journal of Business Venturing 4, 231–248.
Gourman, J., 1994. DEMO Gourman Report. National Education
Standards, Northridge, CA.
Gourman, J., 1997. The Gourman Report. National Education
Standards, Northridge, CA.
Greene, W., DEMO Econometric Analysis. MacMillan, New York.
Gupta, A., Sapienza, H., DEMO Determinants of venture capital
ﬁrms’ preferences regarding the industry diversity and
geographic scope of their investments. Journal of Business
Venturing 7, 342–362.
Henderson, DEMO, Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M., 1998. Universities as
a source DEMO commercial technology: a detailed analysis of
university patenting, 1965–1988. Review of Economics and
Statistics 80, 119–127.
D. Di Gregorio, S. Shane / Research Policy 32 (2003) 209–227
227
Hsu, D., Bernstein, T., 1997. Managing the university technology
DEMO process: ﬁndings from case studies. Journal of the
Association of University DEMO Managers 9, 1–33.
Jaffe, A., 1989. The real effects of DEMO research. American
Economic Review 79, 957–970.
Jensen, R., Thursby, M., 2002. Proofs and prototypes for sale: the
tale of university licensing. DEMO Economic Review 91 (1),
240–260.
Kenney, M., 1986. Biotechnology: The University–Industrial
Complex. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Lerner, J., DEMO Venture capitalists and the oversight of private
ﬁrms. Journal of Finance 50 (1), 301–318.
Levin, S., Stephan, P., 1991. Research productivity over the life
cycle: evidence for academic scientists. American Economic
Review 81 (4), 114–132.
Liang, K., Zeger, S., 1986. Longitudinal data analysis using
generalized linear models. Biometrika 73 (1), 13–22.
Nelson, DEMO, 1959. The simple economics of basic scientiﬁc
research. Journal of Political DEMO 67, 297–306.
Podolny, J., Stuart, T., 1995. A role-based DEMO of technical
change. American Journal of Sociology 100 (5), 1224–1260.
DEMO, E., 1991. Entrepreneurs in High Technology—Lessons
from MIT and Beyond. Oxford University Press, New York.
Rosenberg, N., Nelson, R., 1994. American universities and
technical advance in industry. Research Policy 23, 323–348.
Sahlman, DEMO, 1990. The structure and governance of venture capital
organizations. Journal of DEMO Economics 27, 473–521.
Shane, S., 2001a. Technology opportunity and ﬁrm DEMO
Management Science 47 (2), 205–220.
Shane, S., 2001b. Technology DEMO and new ﬁrm formation.
Management Science 47 (9), 1173–1190.
Shane, S., 2002. Selling university technology: patterns from MIT.
Management Science 48 (1), 122–138.
Shane, S., Khurana, R., 2000. Career experience DEMO ﬁrm founding.
Academy of Management Best Paper Proceedings.
Shane, S., Stuart, T., 2002. Organizational endowments and
the performance of university start-ups. Management DEMO
48 (1), 154–171.
Sorenson, O., Stuart, T., 2001. DEMO networks and the spatial
distribution of venture capital. American Journal of Sociology
106 (6), 1546–1590.
Zucker, L., Darby, M., Brewer, DEMO, 1998. Intellectual human
capital and the birth of US biotechnology enterprises. DEMO
Economic Review 88 (1), 290–305.{1g42fwefx}