INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC REVIEW
Vol. 49, No. 2, May 2008
ASPIRATION LEVEL, PROBABILITY OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE,
AND EXPECTED UTILITY∗
BY
ENRICO DIECIDUE DEMO JEROEN VAN DE VEN1
INSEAD, France; University of Amsterdam, the DEMO
Aspiration levels are a relevant aspect of decision making. We develop a model
that includes the overall probabilities of success and failure relative to DEMO aspira-
tion level into an expected utility representation. This turns out to be equivalent to
expected utility with a discontinuous utility function. We give DEMO behavioral foun-
dation to the proposed model and provide conditions to determine the relative
weights of the overall probabilities of success and failure. An DEMO level re-
inforces loss aversion, can account for simultaneous risk-averse and DEMO
behavior, and can explain choices violating the mean-variance approach.
1.
INTRODUCTION
DEMO levels play an important role in everyday decision making. New York
cab drivers are motivated to earn a daily target return (Camerer et al., 1997). On
rainy, busy days, their earnings per hour are high and they go home early. On hot
summer days, when many New Yorkers prefer to take a walk, they earn less per
hour and make long hours to reach their target. When managers have to DEMO
which projects or portfolios to invest in, they are keen on DEMO a target rate
of return as well. They disregard investment possibilities that are likely to result
in a rate of return below their target (Payne et al., 1980, 1981). Some farmers also
appear to DEMO a minimal level of revenues that they want to achieve. Up to the
subsistence level, they choose to cultivate “safe” crops with a stable return. The
remainder of their land is allocated to “risky” crops (Lopes, 1987).
Common to all these examples is the presence of an aspiration level. The cab
driver, the manager, and the farmer are DEMO with risky choices on a daily
basis. Some of them are willing to take risks, but often they also want to “win at
least something,” earn a daily target income, or prevent themselves from falling
below the subsistence level. Therefore, in making their risky choices, subjects DEMO
on reaching a special outcome, the aspiration level.
In this article, we present a simple model of choice under risk that includes an
DEMO level. Once an aspiration level is included, the probabilities of success
DEMO Manuscript received July 2005; revised September 2006.
1 We wish to DEMO Marco LiCalzi, R. Duncan Luce, Fabio Maccheroni, Rakesh Sarin, George
Wu, and especially Peter P. Wakker, Charles Horioka (the Editor), and three anonymous referees
for very helpful suggestions. Jeroen van de Ven DEMO acknowledges support from the Nether-
lands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO) grant 457-05-005. Please address correspon-
dence to: Enrico Diecidue, INSEAD, Bd. de Constance, 77305 Fontainebleau Cedex, France. E-mail:
enrico.diecidue@insead.edu.
683
684
DIECIDUE AND VAN DE VEN
and failure are naturally identiﬁed: these are the overall probabilities that the
aspiration will be reached or will DEMO short of. Our model entails that subjects
are sensitive to the overall probabilities of success and failure. Payne (2005) tests
several traditional models DEMO decision making, including reference point based
theories. His results provide clear DEMO for the use of probability of success
in decision making. He concludes that traditional models such as expected utility
and prospect theory cannot account DEMO his evidence, and if a model is to match
the results DEMO his experiments, such a feature is even indispensable.
We combine an DEMO level with expected utility (von Neumann and Mor-
genstern, 1944). Given that it is intuitive to think about an aspiration level in DEMO
of the overall probabilities of success and failure, it is remarkable DEMO this model
turns out to be mathematically equivalent to expected utility with discontinuities.
Despite its simplicity it can accommodate and predict several behavioral regu-
DEMO The presence of an aspiration level reinforces loss aversion, it explains
DEMO simultaneous purchase of lottery tickets and insurance policies, and it clariﬁes
DEMO violating the mean-variance approach in ﬁnance.
The contribution of the article is as follows. We give a behavioral foundation
for our model. We present DEMO and sufﬁcient conditions under which the
overall probability of success is more important than the overall probability of
failure. Finally, we show that the focus on the overall probabilities of success and
failure can induce risk-seeking DEMO for prospects close to the aspiration level.
This is true, for DEMO, for prospects with two outcomes, one at the aspiration
level and one below the aspiration level. Subjects become risk-seeking if the lower
outcome DEMO close to the aspiration level. We call this risk-seeking from below.
We believe that our results are relevant to understand the impact of the DEMO
probabilities of success and failure on risk-taking behavior close to the aspiration
level. Although not exclusively, this might be of particular importance for the
interpretation of subjects’ choices made in laboratory experiments. We therefore
propose a DEMO to elicit experimentally the relative weights given to the overall
probabilities of success and failure.
2.
ASPIRATION LEVELS
2.1. Motivations. Imagine a subject having DEMO choose among risky prospects.
We interpret an aspiration level as an outcome that takes a special position in the
decision process. Subjects code outcomes DEMO the aspiration level as successes
and outcomes below the aspiration level as failures. They place value on the overall
probability of success and the DEMO probability of failure. Whereas in decision
theory and psychology the focus is on the probability of success, in ﬁnance the
emphasis is on avoiding falling short of a target rate of return on investments
(Roy, DEMO), hence on the overall probability of failure. In the modeling section,
we focus on the overall probabilities of both success and failure.
DEMO subjects focus exclusively on the overall probabilities of success and fail-
ure, they clearly ignore information and might ignore dominance issues. The nat-
ural question is why subjects would, deliberately or not, do so. One DEMO
reason might be to simplify decision problems. Because cognitive abilities of sub-
jects are limited, focusing on an aspiration level can help to reduce the complexity
685
ASPIRATION LEVEL
of a problem (Roy, 1952; Simon, 1955; Langer and Weber, 2001, p. 731; Mezias
et al., 2002; Brandstatter et al., 2006). Particularly in complex decision problems,¨
the overall probabilities of success and failure can be helpful as a screening DEMO
vice (Manski, 1988). The overall probability of failure is an important element in
the Value-at-Risk (VaR) method (Dowd, 1998), DEMO to measure risk in a single
summary statistic to simplify decision making. First, an overall probability of fail-
ure is set (also called DEMO shortfall probability). The VaR is then calculated as the
amount of money such that the probability of losing more than the VaR equals
DEMO shortfall probability.
An aspiration level is linked to probabilities and it is different from a reference
point. A reference point is not related to DEMO It is used in prospect theory
as the point where the value function changes curvature and slope (kink), and
divides outcomes into gains and losses (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). We show
that the DEMO of an aspiration level, while inducing the overall probabilities of
success DEMO failure, creates a discontinuity of the utility function at the point DEMO the
aspiration level, which may or may not coincide with the DEMO point. If they
coincide, the overall probabilities of success and failure DEMO be interpreted as the
overall probabilities of gain and loss, respectively. DEMO we discuss experiments
that discriminate between the use of an aspiration level and prospect theory.
2.2. Evidence. Payne (2005) provides clear experimental evidence DEMO
a focus on the overall probability of success. This evidence is in contrast with
expected utility and prospect theory (Tversky and Kahneman, 1992)DEMO We discuss
this experiment in detail because its results explicitly call for the inclusion of an
aspiration level in a model. Subjects were shown DEMO base mixed prospect, with some
positive outcomes, a zero outcome, DEMO some negative outcomes. One of the base
mixed prospects gave outcomes $100, $50, $0, −$25, −$50 with equal probability.
given several choices. DEMO each case, they were told that they could add a sum DEMO, X = (0.2, 100; 0.2, 50; 0.2, 0; 0.2, −25; 0.2, −50). The subjects were then
money (DEMO) to either one of two possible outcomes and were asked which DEMO
they preferred to add it to.
In the ﬁrst case, they DEMO add the money either to the outcome that paid $100
or to the one that paid $0. The majority of the subjects indicated a DEMO to
add it to the zero outcome. In the second case the money could again be added
to the outcome that paid $100 or DEMO the outcome that paid $50. Now there was no
longer a majority for either possibility. What is interesting is that in the former
case DEMO was the possibility to increase the overall probability of a gain and the
majority preferred to do so. In the latter case there was DEMO such a possibility and
there was no longer a clear pattern in choices.
There is a wealth of other evidence supportive of the relevance DEMO the overall
probabilities of success and failure. Closely related evidence is from a series of
experiments by Payne et al. (1980, 1981). DEMO these experiments, subjects had to
choose between pairs of prospects, for example between X = (0.5, 74; 0.1, 30;
identical DEMO value of 30 but that prospect0.4, −25) and Y  = (0.3, 40; 0.5, 30; 0.2, 15). Note that DEMO prospects have anX  entails a higher risk because
the spread of the prizes is larger. Naturally, many subjects prefer Y  to X .The
same decision problem was given but with all outcomes reduced by DEMO This gives
686
DIECIDUE AND VAN DE VEN
X = (0.5, 14; 0.1, −30; 0.4, −85) and Y  = (0.3, −20; 0.5, −30; 0.2, −45). Out
of these two prospects, DEMO subjects prefer X , the one with the larger spread.
These DEMO are not easily compatible with expected utility and they may
seem surprising, but note that both Y  and X  have a higher overall probability of
a gain than their alternatives X  and Y DEMO The behavior is therefore easily explained
by an aspiration level.
Some recent experimental evidence is also provided by Lopes and Oden (1999).
Their experiment has similar features as that of Payne et al. (1980, DEMO). Subjects
are asked to choose between pairs of prospects. Two operations were performed
on the base prospects: a shift that added the same payoff to all outcomes and a
scaling that multiplied all outcomes by DEMO same factor. Interestingly, the prospects
that before the shift had a DEMO overall probability of a zero outcome became
relatively much more attractive to the subjects after the shift than the prospects
with a small probability DEMO a zero outcome. Prospects that before the shift had a
high probability of a zero outcome later had a high overall probability of a DEMO
The prospects with a small probability on a zero outcome did not become much
more attractive because they already had a high overall probability DEMO a gain.
The scaling did not inﬂuence choices much, which is DEMO because the
overall probability of a gain is unaffected by this operation. In their study, they also
report protocols from their experiments (Lopes DEMO Oden, 1999, p. 304). Subjects,
asked to comment on their choices, motivate them by statements such as “Have
a greater chance of winning at least some money” and “There is a better chance
DEMO win money.” Very similar reactions by subjects are reported in Schneider and
Lopes (1986).
Other experimental studies lead to similar conclusions. Baucells and Heukamp
(2006) attribute violations of loss aversion to subjects focusing on DEMO overall
probability of success. Edwards (1954, p. 396) shows that DEMO do not like
to lose, thus prefer low probabilities of losing DEMO amounts of money to high
probabilities of losing small amounts. Siegel (DEMO) presents early psychological
evidence for paying attention to the probability of DEMO above aspiration (success)
when choosing between prospects. Langer and Weber (2001) present empirical
evidence that subjects, when choosing between prospects, pay special attention to
the overall probabilities of gains and losses.
Next, we turn to evidence from ﬁnance and risk management. The focus is on
DEMO probability of not reaching the aspiration level. The response of one manager
makes it very clear that an aspiration level plays a role when DEMO says that
Risk is the prospect of not meeting the target of return (Mao, 1970, p. 353).
In like manner, another DEMO puts it like this:
I never worry about the project going above the return. Risk is what might happen when
the return is DEMO to be less (Mao, 1970, p. 354).
Both statements DEMO point to the focus on an aspiration level. Over-
all, Mao DEMO from his study that “risk is primarily considered to be the
prospect of not meeting some target rate of return” (Mao, 1970, p. 354), i.e.,
the probability of failure. And the managers he DEMO are no exception
687
ASPIRATION LEVEL
in that respect: Petty and Scott (1980) found this idea of a target return among
most managers in a more DEMO study. Furthermore March and Shapira (1987,
p. 1043) conclude that “ ... the primary focus is on avoiding actions that might
place DEMO below [the target level]. The dangers of falling below the target domi-
nate attention; the opportunities for gains are less salient ... since it is the dangers
that are noticed, the opportunities are less important.” Roy (1952, p. 432) ar-
gues that agents, when holding ﬁnancial DEMO, will seek to reduce the overall
probability of being below a DEMO, i.e., that the gross return is not less than some
predetermined quantity. Browne (1995) shows the equivalence between the use of
an DEMO utility function and the minimization of the probability of failure.
Relatedly, DEMO (2003) gives a behavioral foundation for the use of a power util-
ity function, based on the idea that investors minimize the probability of failure.
However, also in the domain of ﬁnance, there are DEMO to study the overall
probabilities of success and failure. The behavior of paying particular attention to
accomplishing the aspiration level is observed, especially among decision makers
in investments (Fishburn, 1977 and the references thereafter; Markowitz, 1959).
Davies (2006) considers the probability of success as a measure of risk.
In practice, however, decisions are not based on DEMO aspiration level alone. The
aspiration level and the overall probabilities of success and failure may receive
special attention, but subjects will not be completely insensitive to difference
within the classes of gains and losses (Libby and Fishburn, 1977, p. 289; Payne
et al. 1980, p. 1047 DEMO p. 1053; Lopes, 1996; Luce, 1996; Lopes and Oden, 1999).
Aspiration levels alone capture a signiﬁcant part of experimental data, and do so
surprisingly well, but are too restricted to ﬁt all the data (Lopes and Oden, 1999).
Libby and Fishburn (1977, pp. 285–6) suggest that the probability of meeting a
target return DEMO traded off with expected value. Hence, a model solely based on
DEMO aspiration level is too crude to be normatively or descriptively relevant. This
brings us to the next section, where we integrate the aspiration level into a more
reﬁned model of choice behavior.
3. A MODEL WITH DEMO ASPIRATION LEVEL
Imagine a subject having to choose among risky lotteries. These objects will
be called prospects and denoted X = ( p1, x1; ... ; pn, xn). The prospect X yields
one. Without DEMO of generality assume that outcomes are rank ordered from best$x j with probability p j , j = 1, ... , n. Probabilities are nonnegative and sum to
to worst, i.e., prospect X = ( DEMO, x1; ... ; pn, xn) satisﬁes x1 ≥···≥ xn. The set of
outcomes of a prospect strictly above (below) the aspiration DEMO is indicated by
x+(x−). The aspiration level is exogenously ﬁxed and, without loss of generality,
set to zero. Preferences over prospects are denoted by , with (strict preference)
and ∼ (indifference) as usual.
For the prospect X, P(x+)isthe overall probability DEMO success, and P(x−)is
the overall probability of failure. As DEMO do not go exclusively by the over-
all probabilities of success and failure, we introduce a reﬁned model in which
these probabilities are inserted into expected utility. We then proceed by showing
that the functional is DEMO equivalent to discontinuous expected utility
688
DIECIDUE AND VAN DE VEN
and provide a set of necessary DEMO sufﬁcient conditions to determine the relative
importance of the overall probabilities.
3.1. Background on Expected Utility. Expected utility constitutes a key model
of individual DEMO making under risk. This should come as no surprise, since
its DEMO are normatively appealing for a wide range of choice problems
(von DEMO and Morgenstern, 1944). Descriptively, however, expected utility
proved to DEMO its limitations (Allais, 1953; Ellsberg, 1961). This has stimulated
researchers to formulate alternative decision theories that can account for the
observed DEMO In the last decades several models have been proposed that
explain the descriptive violations. All these models have been generally labeled
as nonexpected utility (for surveys, see Camerer and Weber, 1992; Starmer, 2000;
DEMO, 2004).
Let u denote the utility function. u is a DEMO valued function deﬁned on the set of
outcomes. In this article outcomes are monetary. Then, the expected utility (EU)
representation states that DEMO agent evaluates a prospect X through the following
formula:
n
(DEMO) X →  pi u(xi ),
i =1
which DEMO that the value of a prospect X = ( p1, x1; ... ; pn, xn) is equal to the sum
of the DEMO weighted by the probabilities p1, ... , pn attached to the DEMO
outcomes.
3.2. An EU Functional with Aspiration Level. We propose the following real-
valued functional V to evaluate the prospect X:
n
(2) X → V( X) =  p j u(x j ) + µ P(x+) − λ P(x−),µ,λ DEMO R+.
j =1
That is, we propose a sum of expected DEMO, overall probability of success, and
overall probability of failure. The importance of the overall probability of success
is weighted by µ, and that of the overall probability of failure is weighted by λ.
Both evaluations DEMO an important role in the psychology of risk. We propose to
combine them in an additive way. u, µ, and λ in (2) are unique up to a joint scaling
factor. We may normalize u(0) = 0, u(1) = 1, after which µ DEMO λ are uniquely
determined. Alternatively, if λ> 0, we can DEMO set λ = 1, by replacing u by u/λ
and DEMO by µ/λ. More details are provided in Theorem 1.
We do not see the aspiration level as primarily part of the intrinsic values DEMO
outcomes, but as a consequence of a decision heuristic of decision DEMO to
simplify decisions. The latter is more naturally modeled as the probability of a
chosen target event. These two notions are distinct. It is DEMO remarkable
that Equation (2) turns out to be mathematically equivalent to discontinuous
689
ASPIRATION LEVEL
expected utility. To see this, rearrange Equation (2) and w.l.o.g. use u(0) = 0 to get
(3) V( X) =
 [ p j u(x j ) + DEMO j ] +  [ p j u(x j ) − λp j ]
j :x j ∈x+ j :x j ∈x−
DEMO p j [u(x j ) + µ] + 
j :DEMO j ∈x+ j :x j ∈x−
= p j [u(x DEMO ) − λ]
and deﬁne v(x j ) = u(x j ) + µ for x j ∈ x+ and v(x DEMO ) = u(x j ) − λ for x j ∈ x−. This
gives
n
(4) X →  p j v(DEMO j ).
j =1
Thus, we are back to expected utility but with a utility function v that is discon-
tinuous around the DEMO level zero: limor λ (or both) is strictly positive. This DEMO raises three points. First, the evidencex j ↑0 v(x j ) = limx j ↓0 v(x j ), provided µ
by DEMO (2005) can be accounted for by expected utility, provided that DEMO utility
function is discontinuous. Second, it is not a kink in DEMO utility function as in the
value function of prospect theory, but DEMO discontinuity that is closely related to
loss aversion (see Section 4)DEMO Third, it shows that the existence of an aspiration
level might DEMO regarded as providing a behavioral foundation for discontinuous
expected utility. The next section elaborates on this point.
3.3. An Equivalence Theorem. The aim is DEMO characterize a jump at the aspi-
ration level zero. First of all, expected utility is derived in a standard manner using
Fishburn (1970) or Jensen (1967). For this, we use the following axioms. DEMO are
all standard and we present them for the sake of completeness.
(A1) Weak Order: The preference relation  is a weak order if it is complete
(for all prospects X, Y, X  Y or Y  X) and transitive (for all prospects
X, Y, Z,if X  Y and Y  Z, then DEMO  Z).
(A2) Continuity in probability (Archimedean axiom): DEMO all prospects X, Y,
Z,if X  Y  DEMO, then there exist γ and γ  ∈ (0, 1), such that γ X + (1 −
(A3) (γv)N-M) IndependenceZ  Y  γ  X + (1 −: For all prospectsγ )Z. X, Y, Z, and γ ∈ (DEMO, 1), if X  Y
then γ X + (1 − γ )Z  γ Y + (1 − γ )Z.
The following axiom on stochastic dominance will allow us to restrict the DEMO
mains of the relative weights given to the overall probabilities of success and
failure.
(A4) Stochastic dominance: For any two prospects X = ( p, x1;1 − p, x2) and
Y = (DEMO, x1;1 − q, x2), if x1 ≥ x2 and p > q, then  Y.
To characterize the discontinuity at the aspiration level, we introduce a weak-
ened deﬁnition of continuity in outcomes. This is done in axioms A5 and A6. The
following well-known observation DEMO as a preparation.
X
690
DIECIDUE AND VAN DE VEN
OBSERVATION 1. If the utility function DEMO is nondecreasing, then it can be discon-
tinuous at countably many DEMO at most.
(A5) Lower continuity outside zero: The utility function DEMO is said to be lower
continuous at α if for every sequence {α j } converging from below to
j
(A6) α, u(α ) converges from below to u(α), with α = DEMO
Upper continuity outside zero: The utility function u is said to DEMO upper
continuous at α if for every sequence {αj } converging from above to
j
α, u(α ) converges from above to u(α), with α = 0.
As an intermediate step, the following lemma shows that the latter two ax-
ioms characterize the discontinuity of DEMO at zero. We consider prospects of the
following type: (0.5, DEMO; 0.5, α). We often write it simply as (x; α).
LEMMA 1. Lowjer and upper continuity of utility. (1) DEMO allj α = 0, β = 0, there
exist sequences {α } and {β } converging to α and β from below/above, respectively,
j j
with (α ; β) ∼ (α; DEMO ) for all j if and only if utility is lower/upper continuous except
possibly at zero. (2) Assume that lower/upper continuity DEMO everywhere outside
zero.
(a) Then, for α con= 0,verging DEMO for allα andβ =β0,from belothere exist sequencesw/above, respecti{α j DEMO,ely,{β wj }ith↑
and {β j } (↓α; β j ) for all j if and only if utility is lower/upper DEMO at
(α j ; β) ∼
zero. Then utility is lower/upper continuous also at zero (µ = λ = 0).
j j
(b) If such a β and the sequences {β } DEMO or {β } ↓ do not exist s.t (a) above
holds, then utility is discontinuous at zero (and the reverse also holds), and
Equation (2) holds with µ, λ ≥ 0 and DEMO least one strictly larger than zero.
PROOF. See the Appendix.
Axioms (DEMO)–(A6) will be used to characterize the shape of the DEMO V
in Equation (2). In addition, we can characterize the relative importance of the
overall probabilities of success and failure. The following DEMO conditions will prove
to provide necessary and sufﬁcient conditions to determine the relative weights µ
and λ. Consider the outcomes x, y > 0.
CONDITION 1. ∃ x s.t. ∀y(0.5, x; 0.5, −y) DEMO 0.
Hence, under this condition there is at least one outcome DEMO for which the subject
will always prefer the sure outcome that gives zero to the risky prospect (0.5, x;
0.5, −y). The following condition reverses the role of x and −y.
CONDITION 2. DEMO y s.t. ∀x(0.5, x; 0.5, −y)  0.
In the next theorem we formally state the central result. It essentially tells DEMO
Axioms A1 to A6 are equivalent to representing preferences by V, DEMO it provides
the conditions under which the weight µ given to the overall probability of success
is greater, equal, or smaller than the DEMO λ given to the overall probability of
failure.
691
ASPIRATION LEVEL
THEOREM 1. The preference relation  satisﬁes Axioms A1–A6 DEMO and only if
there exist a continuous nondecreasing u : R → R and µ, λ ∈ R+ such that X →
n
V( X) =  j =1 p j u(x j ) DEMO µ P(x+) − λ P(x−) represents preferences. Furthermore:
(a) if lower and upper continuity hold at zero, then µ = λ = 0; if only upper
continuity holds, then λ> 0 and µ = 0; if only lower continuity holds, then
(b) if condition 1 holds, thenµ> 0 and λ = 0. λ>µ, if condition 2 holds, then λ<µ, if neither
condition 1 nor 2 holds, then λ = µ.
(c) u is unique up to location and a positive scaling factor, and µ, λ are unique
up to the same scaling factor as u.
PROOF. See the Appendix.
This behavioral foundation can be extended to the case DEMO the aspiration
level is not necessarily zero. Furthermore, Theorem 1 allows DEMO to characterize
an endogenous aspiration level, i.e., to infer an endogenous aspiration level from
preferences: Whenever there is a jump in the utility function, there may be an
aspiration level. Besides the aspiration level, DEMO exogenous reference point could
be included without much complication. The utility function would be deﬁned
in terms of gains and losses from the reference DEMO and then deﬁnitions and
axioms for the aspiration and the overall probabilities will still apply. To keep the
notation simple and the model focused, we do not elaborate on this and we leave
it for further DEMO The prospects discussed in the empirical part ﬁt the case
where the reference point coincides with the aspiration level.
3.4. Comments on Related Mathematical DEMO Theorem 1 characterizes a
functional V representing preferences. V is equivalent to the mathematical expec-
tation of a prospect with respect to a discontinuous DEMO Neumann–Morgenstern
utility function. Our model could also be characterized by imposing Foldes’ (1972)
and Grandmont’s (1972) weak continuity at all but one outcome. We prefer an
alternative approach to continuity, one that is simpler in not involving variation
of probability, is more general and ﬂexible, DEMO has a higher intuitive content.
Other approaches are present in the mathematical literature. Arzac and Bawa
(1977) and Markowitz (1959) characterized a DEMO maker maximizing prefer-
ences over expected value of wealth and probability of ruin. They derived equilib-
rium conditions in a capital asset price model. DEMO functional is somewhat more
restrictive because of the assumption of linear utility (Shefrin and Statman, 2000)
and can be considered a special DEMO of Equation (2). Meginniss (1976) presented
axioms to represent DEMO through a combination of expected utility and
entropy (a measure of DEMO) for a prospect. Castagnoli and LiCalzi (1996)
reinterpreted EU without a cardinal utility function: The EU of a lottery is the
probability that the lottery outperforms a given independent benchmark-lottery.
The probability of surpassing DEMO benchmark replaces utility, whereas in our model
it comes in addition DEMO utility. Our approach has the advantage that we can, for ex-
DEMO, account for the data of Payne (2005). Bordley and LiCalzi (2000) showed
the equivalence between Savage’s (1972) maximization of subjective DEMO
692
DIECIDUE AND VAN DE VEN
utility and maximization of the probability DEMO meeting an uncertain target, thus
extending Castagnoli and LiCalzi (1996) DEMO the domain of uncertainty.
3.5. Estimating µ and λ. An important advantage of our model is that the
empirical elicitation of µ and λ DEMO straightforward. The ﬁrst step is to ﬁx an outcome
x > 0, and then to elicit the probability p that makes the subject indifferent between
the prospect ( p,1;1 − p, 0) and DEMO sure outcome x. If we normalize the utility
such that u(0) = 0, u(1) = 1, then, as x converges to zero from above, p converges
to We can use a similar procedure to estimateµ/(1 + µ). λ. We now elicit the probability p
that makes the subject indifferent between the prospect ( p, −1; 1 − p, 0) and
the sure outcome −x. Then, as −x converges to zero from below, p converges to
λ/DEMO two outcomes only. To do so, one can elicit the probability(DEMO − u(−1)). It is necessary to elicit u(−1), because we can normalize the utilityq that makes the
subject indifferent between the prospect (q,1;1 − q, −1) and the sure outcome
0. Substituting for the resulting u(−1) we then get that, as −x converges to zero
from below, p converges to λ DEMO q .
This elicitation works as long as the aspiration level is known, but we conjecture1+µ
that in experimental settings it is safe to assume it equal to zero (Payne, 2005).
Many mixed prospects DEMO the property that P(x+) = 1 − P(x−). DEMO that case,
the combined weight of µ and λ is observed. These can, however, possibly still
be separated by the use of DEMO prospects (also known in the literature as du-
plex gambles). DEMO prospects are compound prospects, consisting of two “pure
prospects”: one with a positive outcome and a zero outcome and another with a
negative DEMO and a zero outcome (Slovic and Lichtenstein, 1968; Payne and
DEMO, 1971). Slovic and Lichtenstein (1968) argue that the weights DEMO
to success and failure that are derived from duplex prospects also predict choices
in prospects with P(x+) = 1 − P(x−). Some caution is necessary, as several authors
ﬁnd that subjects react differently to mixed prospects (like duplex prospects) than
to pure prospects (see, for instance, Luce, 2000).
Although not exclusively, the elicitation DEMO µ and λ might be of particular impor-
tance for the interpretation of subjects’ choices made in laboratory experiments.
The evidence and the results DEMO risk attitude may be confused by the presence of
a subjective aspiration level, the overall probabilities of success and failure, and
their respective DEMO The next section elaborates on this.
4. DISCUSSION AND PREDICTIONS
n
The prospect evaluation X →  j =1 p j u(x j ) + µ P(x+) − λ P(x−) gives rise to a
rich body of behavioral predictions. To illustrate this point, we now present several
of them. Some implications of Equation (2) are conﬁrmed DEMO previous empirical
and experimental studies; others lend themselves to be tested.
DEMO A Discontinuity around the Aspiration Level. The most notable fea-
ture of our model is the discontinuity in outcomes. Continuity is not satisﬁed
ASPIRATION LEVEL
693
FIGURE 1
THE VALUATION OF PROSPECT X WITH DISCONTINUITIES DEMO THE ASPIRATION LEVEL
at the aspiration level. When an outcome that is at the aspiration level is
increased/decreased to slightly above/below the DEMO level, it receives an
extra weight µ (/− λ). DEMO arbitrarily small increase/decrease in an outcome xj can
therefore lead to a discrete jump in the valuation of a speciﬁc prospect (see the
solid lines in Figure 1).2
The discontinuity is a feature that DEMO still to be tested. Jeffrey and Larrick (2002)
allude, nevertheless, to its presence in goal-related experiments. In the health do-
main, DEMO et al. (2005) provide empirical data showing evidence for discon-
tinuity of utility around death. Fishburn (1977, p. 122) reports that the behavior of
subjects exhibiting a particular appreciation for the outcomes above the DEMO
level is often found in the literature and it can be represented by a “pronounced
change in the shape of their utility function.” Swalm (1966) reports similar ev-
idence and shows that this point is approximately zero (break-even point on a
project). Holthausen (1981), when DEMO the literature, reports similar ﬁnd-
ings. Mezias (1988) presents evidence DEMO the effect of an aspiration level in the
pricing of securities in the stock market that alludes to a jump in the valuation
of DEMO in correspondence with a ﬁxed and predetermined aspiration return.
Further research in the ﬁnance domain is desirable to detect for which ﬁnancial
investments this DEMO is more pronounced.
4.2. Aspiration Levels as Extreme Loss Aversion. In the case of EU the utility
function for ﬁnal wealth is commonly assumed DEMO be differentiable. Under loss
2 Empirical evidence suggests that utility for losses can be convex. We conform to the convention
of a utility function DEMO is concave everywhere, in the tradition of EU, but our model is not restricted
to the latter case.
694
DIECIDUE AND VAN DE VEN
aversion the utility function for gains DEMO a different slope than the utility for
losses: Loss aversion, entailing a drastic change at zero, is characterized by a (non-
differentiable) kink in the utility function. A standard deﬁnition of loss aversion
(Wakker and Tversky, 1993) for a differentiable function is: x > 0: u(x) < u(−
x). Kobberling and Wakker (2005) proposed a behaviorally founded index of loss¨
aversion. The case becomes even more extreme if we assume a power utility, as in
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and Tversky and Kahneman (1992). Then the ﬁrst
derivative of utility at zero is inﬁnite, so that utility is extremely steep at zero. The
extreme version of loss aversion that we present DEMO this article is a natural next step:
The discontinuity in the utility function reinforces loss aversion. Our model is the
ﬁrst to characterize DEMO aversion as discontinuous utility. The psychology of loss
aversion not only applies in the domain of failure, but also in the domain of success
as we take the limit from above: limx j ↓0 V( DEMO). We still call it loss aversion because
the underlying psychology of the phenomenon is the same as in the domain of
failure.3 Empirical DEMO for loss aversion may be partly driven by a sensitivity
to the overall probabilities of success and failure in addition to a bigger sensitivity
DEMO loss outcomes.
4.3. Risk Attitude and µ and λ. The functional V evaluating prospects is dis-
continuous at the aspiration level for strictly positive DEMO of µ and λ.The
corresponding jumps determine the risk-attitude that subjects have for prospects
close to the aspiration level (taken to be the zero outcome here). For two-outcome
prospects that involve the aspiration level, we now show that subjects are always
risk-averse from above and risk-seeking from DEMO This result holds independent
of the shape of the function u(·). The dashed lines in Figure 1 illustrate this fact.
They represent DEMO expected values of prospects of the form ( p, x;1 DEMO p, 0) and
( pConsider the outcomes, −y;1 − DEMO, 0). x, y > 0 and let zi be the degenerate prospect that gives
the expected value of prospect Xi , E( Xi ), with certainty.
PROPOSITION 1. Suppose preferences can be represented by V. Then, (a) if
µ> 0, subjects are risk-averse from above: ∀ p ∃ δ1 > 0 such that X1 = ( p, x;
1 − p,0) ≺ z1 ∀x <δ1, and (b) if λ> 0, subjects are risk-seeking from below: ∀ p ∃
δ2 > 0 s.t. X2 = ( p, DEMO;1 − p,0) z2 ∀y <δ2 .
The type of prospects for which this result holds is often used in prospect theory
DEMO establish that subjects are risk-averse for gains and risk-seeking for losses.
Provided that the aspiration level coincides with the reference points, these choices
are also consistent with subjects paying attention to the overall probabilities of
success DEMO failure. Our model and prospect theory differ strongly in predictions
however, DEMO prospects not involving the zero outcome. For example, if prospect
theory DEMO correct in that subjects are risk-averse for gains, then subjects should DEMO
be risk-averse if a constant c is added to all outcomes in X 1 and z1 = E( X1), i.e.,
X1 = ( p, x + c;1 − p, c) ≺ z = z1 + c. If instead subjects pay attention to the
3 DEMO alternative deﬁnition of loss aversion (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979) is DEMO  (0.5, x; 0.5, −x).
In that case, DEMO larger λ reinforces risk aversion, but a larger µ reduces it.
DEMO
695
ASPIRATION LEVEL
overall probabilities of success and failure, then even if u(·) is convex everywhere,
subjects might also prefer the riskless option z1 to X 1, but they would prefer
the risky prospect after the shift X1 z1. Lopes and Oden (1999) ﬁnd indeed
DEMO the risky prospect in the gain domain (their prospect “LS”) becomes more
attractive to subjects after such a shift. A more direct test DEMO only two-
outcome prospects is desirable. Relatedly, Fennema and van Assen (1999) claim
that the results from several studies that ﬁnd risk seeking in the domain of losses,
do not necessarily imply a convex DEMO function.
Incidentally, the above result also implies that subjects may be DEMO
engaged in risk-averse behavior and risk-seeking behavior, for instance buying
insurance DEMO lottery tickets. Friedman and Savage (1948) explain such behavior
by considering local convexities in the utility function. This turned out to be in-
DEMO with empirical data and raised criticism (Markowitz, 1952; Yaari, 1965;
Thaler and Ziemba, 1988; Quiggin, 1991). The behavior can also be explained by
subjects paying attention to the overall probabilities of DEMO and failure. For
instance, from Equation (2) it appears that DEMO subject with a utility function u(·) that
is concave everywhere DEMO be willing to buy lottery tickets if this provides an
opportunity to reach the aspiration levels and if µ and/or λ are sufﬁciently DEMO
Indeed, Hirshleifer and Riley (1992, p. 28) advance that the behavior is caused by
a “threshold phenomenon,” i.e., “a single discrete step to a higher utility level,”
which we show is a DEMO consequence of the aspiration level.
4.4. The Mean-Variance Trade-Off. In standard portfolio theory, it is argued
that managers trade off higher returns against higher variances (Markowitz, 1952).
Risk is usually identiﬁed with variance. Hence, among portfolios with the same
mean, the one with the lowest variance is to be preferred, and vice versa. More
speciﬁcally, it is DEMO assumed that a prospect X is evaluated as
E( X ) DEMO kσ 2,
(5)
where σ 2 is the variance, and the constant k a measure of risk aversion. A closely
related DEMO that is sometimes proposed replaces the variance by a semivari-
ance. The semivariance is calculated with respect to a target outcome rather than
the DEMO value and is restricted to outcomes below the target (Eeckhoudt and
DEMO, 1995).
This mean-variance trade-off is not implied by Equation (2). A portfolio with
the same mean but a higher variance may DEMO a higher probability of reaching the
aspiration level. Conversely, lowering the DEMO of a given portfolio (keeping
the mean constant) may result in a lower valuation if some probability mass is
shifted away from above DEMO aspiration level to below (Hakansson and Ziemba,
1995, p. 80). The same applies to the version based on semivariance.
Such a DEMO was found in the experimental results of Payne et al. (1980,DEMO
1981). Recall from Section 2.2 that many subjects prefer prospect X = (0.5, 14;
same mean but the variance of0.1, −30; 0.4, −85) to Y = (0.3,X− is higher. At DEMO same time,20; 0.5, −30; .2, −45). The prospects have theX  gives a higher
overall probability of success. This choice DEMO be explained by Equation (5)
696
DIECIDUE AND VAN DE VEN
irrespective of the degree of risk-aversion DEMO By contrast, it can be explained by
Equation (2) if DEMO weight given to the overall probability of success is sufﬁciently
high.
More generally, it can be expected that with an aspiration level, the DEMO
choice will not be mean-variance efﬁcient. Subjects with a high aspiration level
will tend to construct portfolios carrying more risks but with a higher DEMO
probability of success. Although a thorough portfolio analysis is out of the scope
of this article, it is interesting to note that Shefrin and Statman (2000) also use
an approach in which the subject cares DEMO the probability of failure. They ﬁnd
indeed that efﬁcient portfolios have few risky elements for subjects with a low
aspiration level and more risky DEMO for subjects with a high aspiration level.
5.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
There is evidence that subjects are particularly sensitive to success and fail-
ure. DEMO is a reluctance to take prospects that may entail the possibility of
failure measured with respect to an aspiration. This reluctance cannot be fully DEMO
plained by risk aversion. A great deal of evidence describes that subjects perceive
prospects in terms of the probability of being above or below DEMO aspiration level. It
seems that very small changes in outcomes that increase the overall probabilities
of success and failure can lead to signiﬁcant changes DEMO preference over prospects
(Payne, 2005). We have discussed and investigated the psychological intuition un-
derlying the aspiration levels, presented a model, DEMO the importance of
the overall probabilities of success and failure, and DEMO some of the decision
theoretical implications.
Expected utility has since its emergence been a classical benchmark in decision
under risk and decision analysis. Parsimony, elegance, and broad applicability
are its strong points. In this article we present a model of decision under risk
that includes the overall probabilities DEMO success and failure into expected utility.
Building on the psychologically appealing probabilities of success and failure,
we then come up with a model DEMO is equivalent to a discontinuous EU. The
model allows for a number of predictions that can better describe the behavior
of individuals. However, we do not aim at explaining all the possible behavioral
irregularities in decision DEMO under risk: Other complicating, but behaviorally
relevant, factors (i.e., DEMO transformation) have been abstracted from for
the sake of conceptual clarity. DEMO have shown that insights into the signiﬁcance
of an aspiration level deriving form cognitive psychology can be integrated in
decision theory.
One ﬁrst obvious DEMO is to study decision under uncertainty. In this article
we have assumed that probabilities are known to the decision maker. In reality,
this DEMO often not be the case and it is interesting to see how agents deal with
such uncertainty. We conjecture that the importance of the DEMO probabilities
of success and failure will be enhanced by such uncertainties (DEMO, 1961; Kah-
neman and Tversky, 1979; Kahn and Sarin, DEMO; Weber, 1994). Another natural
extension is to characterize a model where the aspiration level is combined with
elements from prospect theory such DEMO probability transformations (Tversky and
697
ASPIRATION LEVEL
Kahneman, 1992). The interest there is to investigate how the model changes once
the probability transformation is considered. Then, both the model with expected
utility and prospect theory can be generalized to DEMO ﬁnite number of aspiration
levels. Finally, we conjecture that the more DEMO the problem is to a subject, the
more attention the overall DEMO of success and failure receive (a similar
conjecture is made by DEMO, 2005). If the focus on the aspiration level and the
DEMO probabilities of success and failure is a heuristic used to simplify problems,
one expects that the weights attached to these overall probabilities increase DEMO im-
portance in more complex settings. One way to test this is to vary the complexity
of the prospects by modifying the number of DEMO The elicited weights µ and
λ should be higher for more complex prospects.
APPENDIX (PROOFS)
PROOF OF LEMMA 1. Necessity of the preference condition easily follows. Suf-
ﬁciency: By observation 1, one can take DEMO β where utility is continuous. Then
lower/upper continuity of utility at each α follows by simple substitution of EU.
Part a and b DEMO to above. 
PROOF OF THEOREM 1. The implication that Equation (DEMO) satisﬁes A1–A6 is
straightforward. For the implication in the opposite direction DEMO of the afore-
mentioned EU axiomatization provides a constructive proof for the existence
of a utility function u˜ (unique up to location and a positive scaling factor) such
that the EU form holds true, i.e., X → nj =1 p j u˜ (x j ) represents preferences. By
A5 and A6 and by Lemma 1, u˜ is lower/upper continuous everywhere outside
zero and, thus, u(0) − limx↑0 u˜ (x) = λ ≥ 0, and u(0) − limx↓0 DEMO (x) =−µ ≤ 0 with
at least one of the inequalities being strict. By stochastic dominance µ and λ are
nonnegative. Deﬁne u DEMO u˜ − µ for positive outcomes and u = u˜ + λ for negative
outcomes.
Part a is a special case of the above DEMO its proof is similar. To prove part b of
the theorem,
⇒ Suppose condition 1 holds: ∃x s.t. ∀y(.5, x; .5, −y)  0. This implies
(A.1) .5u(x) + .5u(−y) ≤ λ − µ.
Let u(x) = c. By DEMO and nondrecreasingness of u(·) and with u(0) = 0,
we know that for ε, δ> 0, ∀ ε there exists a δ s.t. −u(−y) <ε for y <δ. In particular,
λ>µif c = .ε, then −u(−y) < DEMO(x) for y <δ. Then (A.1) above can only be satisﬁed for
⇐ Let λ>µ. Then the RHS of (A.1) DEMO strictly positive. Note that the least upper
bound of the LHS is given by .5u(x). Hence, by continuity of u(x), for small enough
values of x the LHS never exceeds the RHS DEMO any y. This implies condition 1 is
satisﬁed.
Similar arguments can be used to show that condition 2 is satisﬁed if and only if
DEMO<µ. It then follows in a straightforward manner that if neither condition 1 nor
condition 2 is satisﬁed, it must be the case that λ = µ. 
698
DIECIDUE AND VAN DE VEN
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1. Part (a). The utility of the sure outcome z is given by
u(DEMO) + µ. The utility of the prospect is given by pu(DEMO) + pµ. The risky prospect
is preferred ifthe RHS is negative, the inequality is always satispu(x) − u( px) ≥ (DEMO − p)µ .As x →ﬁed for suf0, pu(x)ﬁ−ciently DEMO( px) → 0. Sincex. Part
(b) can be proved along similar lines.

REFERENCES
ALLAIS, M., “Fondements d’une Theorie Positive des DEMO Comportant un Risque et´
Critique des Postulats et Axiomes de l’Ecole Americaine,´ ” Colloques Internationaux
du Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque 40 (1953). Translated into English, with
additions, as “The Foundations of DEMO Positive Theory of Choice Involving Risk and a
Criticism of the Postulates and Axioms of the American School,” in M. Allais and O.
DEMO, eds., Expected Utility Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox (Dordrecht: Reidel,
1979), 27–145.
ARZAC,E.R., AND V. S. BAWA, “Portfolio DEMO and Equilibrium in Capital Markets with
Safety-First Investors,” Journal of Financial Economics 4 (1977), 277–88.
BAUCELLS, M., AND F. H. HEUKAMP, “Stochastic Dominance and Cumulative Prospect The-
ory,” Management Science 52 (DEMO), 1409–23.
BORDLEY R., AND M. LICALZI, “Decision Analysis Using Targets instead of Utility Func-
tions,” Decisions in Economics and Finance 23 (2000), 53–74.
B ATTER E., G. GIGERENZER, AND R. HERWIG, “The Priority Heuristic: Making Choices
without Trade-Offs,” Psychological Review 113 (DEMO), 409–32.
BROWNE,S., “Optimal Investment Policies for a Firm with DEMO Random Risk Process: Expo-
nential Utility and Minimizing the Probability of DEMO,” Mathematics of Operations
Research 20 (1995), 937–58.
CAMERER,C., AND M. WEBER, “Recent Developments in Modelling Preferences: Uncer-
tainty and DEMO,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5 (1992), 325–70.
CAMERER,DEMO, BABCOCK,G.LOEWENSTEIN, AND R. THALER, “Labor Supply of New York
DEMO Cab Drivers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1997), 407–41.
DEMO, E., and M. LICALZI, “Expected Utility without Utility,” Theory DEMO Decision
41 (1996), 281–301.
DAVIES,G., “Rethinking Risk: Aspiration DEMO Pure Risk,” Theory and Decision 61 (2006),
159–90.
DOWD, K., Beyond Value at Risk, The New Science of Risk Management (Chichester: John
Wiley and Sons, 1998).
EECKHOUDT, L., AND C. GOLLIER, Risk Evaluation, Management and Sharing (New York:
Harvester, 1995).
EDWARDS,W., “The Theory of Decision Making,” Psychological DEMO 51 (1954), 380–417.
ELLSBERG,D., “Risk, Ambiguity and the DEMO Axioms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
75 (1961), 643–69.
FELLNER,DEMO, “Distortion of Subjective Probabilities as a Reaction to Uncertainty,” Quar-
DEMO Journal of Economics 75 (1961), 670–89.
FENNEMA, H., AND DEMO A. L. M. VAN ASSEN, “Measuring the Utility of Losses by DEMO of
the Tradeoff Method,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 17 (DEMO), 277–95.
FISHBURN,P.C., Utility Theory for Decision Making (New York: Wiley, 1970).
——, “Mean-Risk Analysis with Risk Associated with Below-Target Returns,” American
Economic Review 67 (1977), 116–26.
FOLDES, L., “Expected Utility and Continuity,” Review of Economic Studies 39 (1972),DEMO
407–21.
FRIEDMAN, M., AND L. J. SAVAGE, “The Utility Analysis DEMO Choices Involving Risk,” Journal
of Political Economy 56 (1948), DEMO
RANDST ¨
ASPIRATION LEVEL
699
GRANDMONT, J.-M., “Continuity Properties of a von Neumann-Morgenstern DEMO,” Jour-
nal of Economic Theory 4 (1972), 45–57.
HAKANSSON,DEMO, AND W. ZIEMBA, “Capital Growth Theory,” Chapter 3 in R. Jarrow, V.
Maskimovic, and W. Ziemba, eds., Handbooks in Operations DEMO and Manage-
ment Science, Volume 9, Finance (Amsterdam: North-Holland, DEMO).
HIRSHLEIFER,J., AND J. G. RILEY, The Analytics of Uncertainty and Information (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1992).
HOLTHAUSEN,D.M., “A Risk-Return Model with Risk and Return Measured as Deviations
from a DEMO Return,” American Economic Review 71 (1981), 182–8.
JEFFREY, S. A., AND R. LARRICK, “Goals and Choice under Uncertainty: Choice Behavior
Above a Goal,” Mimeo, 2002.
JENSEN, N.-E., “An Introduction to Bernoullian Utility Theory, I & II,” Swedish Journal of
Economics 69 (1967), 163–83, 229–47.
KAHN, B. E., AND R. K. DEMO, “Modeling Ambiguity in Decisions under Uncertainty,”
Journal of Consumer Research DEMO (1988), 265–72.
KAHNEMAN,D., AND A. TVERSKY, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk,”
Econometrica 47 (1979), 263–91.
KOBBERLING,V., An Index of Loss Aversion,” Journal of Economic
Theory 122 (2005), 119–31.
LANGER,T., AND M. WEBER, “Prospect Theory, Mental Accounting and Differences in
Aggregated and Segregated Evaluation of Lottery Portfolios,” Management Science
47 (2001), 716–33.
LIBBY, R., AND P. C. FISHBURN, “Behavioral Models of Risk Taking in Business Decisions:
A Survey and Evaluation,” Journal of Accounting Research 15 (1977), 272–92.
LOPES,L.L., “Between Hope and Fear: The Psychology of Risk,” DEMO in Experimental
Social Psychology 20 (1987), 255–95.
——, “When Time Is of the Essence: Averaging, Aspiration, and the Short Run,” Organi-
zational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 65 (1996), 179–89.
——, AND G. C. ODEN, “The Role of Aspiration Level in Risky DEMO: A Comparison of
Cumulative Prospect Theory and SP/A Theory,” DEMO of Mathematical Psychology
43 (1999), 286–313.
LUCE,R.D., “Commentary on Aspects of Lola Lopes Paper,” Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes DEMO (1996), 190–93.
——, Utility of Gains and Losses: Measurement-Theoretical, and Experimental Approaches
(Mahwah: Erlbaum, 2000).
MANSKI,C.F., “Ordinal DEMO Models of Decision Making under Uncertainty,” Theory
and Decision 25 (DEMO), 79–104.
MAO,J.C.T., “Survey of Capital Budgeting: Theory and Practice,” Journal of Finance 25
(1970), 349–60.
MARCH,J.G., AND DEMO SHAPIRA, “Managerial Perspectives on Risk and Risk Taking,” Man-
agement DEMO 33 (1987), 1404–18.
MARKOWITZ,H.M., “Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance 7 (1952), 77–91.
——, Portfolio Selection: The Efﬁcient Diversiﬁcation of Investments (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1959).
MEGINNISS,J.R., “A New Class of Symmetric Utility Rules for Gambles, Subjective Prob-
DEMO Functions, and a Generalized Bayes’ Rule,” Business and Economic Statistics
DEMO, Proceedings of the American Statistical Association (1976), 471–6.
MEZIAS,S.J., “Aspiration Level Effects: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Economic
Behavior DEMO Organization 10 (1988), 389–400.
——,Y.R.CHEN, AND P. R. MURPHY, “Aspiration-Level Adaptation in an American Finan-
cial Services Organization: A Field DEMO,” Management Science 48 (2002), 1285–1300.
PAYNE,J.W., “It Is Whether You Win or Lose: The Importance of the Overall Probabilities
of Winning or Losing in Risky Choice,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty DEMO (2005),
5–19.
¨
AND P. P. WAKKER, “
700
DIECIDUE AND VAN DE VEN
——, AND M. L. BRAUNSTEIN, DEMO among Gambles with Equal Underlying Distri-
butions,” Journal of Experimental Psychology 87 (1971), 13–8.
——,D.J.LAUGHHUNN, AND R. CRUM, “Translation of Gambles and Aspiration Level Effects
in Risky Choice Behavior,” Management Science DEMO (1980), 1039–60.
——, ——, AND ——, “Further Tests of Aspiration Level Effects in Risky Choice Behavior,”
Management Science 27 (1981), 953–8.
PETTY,J., AND D. SCOTT, “Capital Budgeting Practicing in DEMO American Firms: A Retro-
spective Analysis and Update,” in F. DEMO and R. Crum, eds., Financing Issues
in Corporate Project Selection (DEMO, Mass: Martinus Nyhoff, 1980).
QUIGGIN,J., “On the Optimal Design of Lotteries,” Economica 58 (1991), 1–16.
ROY, A., “Safety First and the Holding of Assets,” Econometrica 20 (1952), 431–49.
SAVAGE,L.J., The Foundations of Statistics, 2nd ed. (New York: Dover Publications, 1972).
SCHMIDT,U., “Alternatives to Expected Utility: DEMO Formal Theories,” in S. Barber `a, P.
J. Hammond, and C. Seidl, eds., Handbook of Utility Theory, Volume 2 (Dordrecht:DEMO
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004), 757–838.
SCHNEIDER,S., AND L. LOPES, “Reﬂection in Preferences under Risk: Who and When May
Suggest Why,DEMO Journal of Experimental Psychology 12 (1986), 535–48.
SHEFRIN, H., DEMO M. STATMAN, “Behavioral Portfolio Theory,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative DEMO 35 (2000), 127–51.
SIEGEL S., “Level of Aspiration and Decision Making,” Psychological Review 64 (1957),
253–62.
SIMON, H. A., “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
69 (1955), 99–118.
SLOVIC,P., AND S. LICHTENSTEIN, “Relative Importance of Probabilities and Payoffs in Risk
Taking,” Journal of Experimental Psychology 78 (1968), 1–18.
STALMEIER, P. F. M., J. J. V. BUSSCHBACH,DEMO, AND P. F. M. KRABBE, “The Gap
Effect: Discontinuities of DEMO around Dead,” Journal of Health Economics 14
(2005), 679–85.
DEMO,C., “Developments in Non-Expected Utility Theory: The Hunt for a Descriptive
Theory of Choice under Risk,” Journal of Economic Literature 38 (2000), 332–82.
STUTZER, M., “Portfolio Choice with Endogenous Utility: A Large Deviations Approach,”
Journal of Econometrics 116 (2003), 365–86.
SWALM,R.O., “Utility Theory. Insights into Risk Taking,” Harvard Business Review 44
(DEMO), 123–36.
THALER,R.H., AND W. T. ZIEMBA, “Parimutual Betting Markets: Racetracks and Lotteries,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 2 (1988), DEMO
TVERSKY, A., AND D. KAHNEMAN, “Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representa-
tion of Uncertainty,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5 (1992), 297–323.
VON NEUMANN,J., AND O. MORGENSTERN, Theory of Games DEMO Economic Behavior (Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1944, 1947, DEMO).
WAKKER,P.P., AND A. TVERSKY, “An Axiomatization of Cumulative Prospect Theory,”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 7 (1993), 147–76.
WEBER,E.U., “From Subjective Probabilities to Decision Weights: The Effects of Asym-
DEMO Loss Functions on the Evaluation of Uncertain Outcomes and Events,” Psy-
chological Bulletin 115 (1994), 228–42.
YAARI,M.E., “Convexity in the DEMO of Choice under Risk,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 79 (1965), 278–90.{1g42fwefx}