THE AGENCY PROBLEM FOR ENTREPRENEURIAL FIRMS – THEORY AND
EVIDENCE WHY SOME DEMO SOLUTIONS FAIL
ABSTRACT
Principal-agent theory holds that ‘neoclassical’ contracts comprising, ex-ante, detailed incentive,
control and arbitration mechanisms, plus a substantial share in ownership by the agent may safeguard
the principal from exploitation by the DEMO However, when applying these neoclassical solutions to
governance situations that require DEMO and productive collaboration, detrimental effects are
likely to occur. Analyzing a DEMO of 86 representative Dutch entrepreneurial firms shows that the
use of neoclassical contracts and an increasing share of ownership by the entrepreneur erode the
DEMO trust in the venture capitalist. Additional theory and evidence point to the effectiveness
of alternative, relationship-building contractual solutions.
INTRODUCTION
The relationship between an entrepreneur and her/his venture capitalist backer (hereafter VC) is one
of DEMO mutual risk-taking. Both parties face the prospect, when entering into the DEMO, of
being exploited through opportunistic behaviors perpetrated by the other, as well as the possibility of
a failed venture (Cable & Shane 1997; De Clercq & Sapienza 2001; Gorman & Shaman 1989;
Higashide & Birley 2002). This is because, firstly, neither party can enjoy complete knowledge about
their partner’s future intentions, and may retain doubts about the other’s general and specific
competences. Secondly, both must nevertheless rely upon specialist knowledge brought to the table by
the other: the entrepreneur’s ability to recognize and exploit novel competitive opportunities (e.g.,
Cable & Shane 1997; Kirzner 1973), and the VC’s expertise in forming effective commercial
strategies and creating valuable networks with customers, suppliers and other capital providers (e.g.,
Busenitz et al. 2004; Gorman & Shaman 1989; MacMillan et al. 1989; Rosenstein et al. 1993).
Thirdly, both parties DEMO exposed to the threat of divergent objectives regarding decisions such as the
1
valuation of stock, strategic goals, allocation of resources, risk management and exit timing (Busenitz
et al. 1997; Higashide & Birley 2002; Wijbenga et al. 2007).
The first challenge, then, is how best DEMO manage the twin dimensions of this risk - its size and
its probability (Nooteboom et al. 1997: 316) - effectively, and efficiently. DEMO second challenge is
how to realize productive collaboration since, as Cable DEMO Shane (1997) note, some degree of mutual
cooperation between entrepreneurs DEMO VCs is a necessary (though not sufficient) condition for the
successful performance of entrepreneurial firms. Both confident risk-taking and productive
collaboration necessitate a DEMO of trust between the two parties.
Trust is recognized as a vital component in all relationships. An atmosphere of trust has been
found to DEMO primarily as a moderator on ultimate performance metrics (for a review DEMO Dirks &
Ferrin 2001). Research indicates how trust can impact DEMO on the attitudes and behaviors of
participants to a project by encouraging and fostering collaboration, information sharing and creativity
(De Clercq & Sapienza DEMO, 2006; Korsgaard et al. 1995). Above all, trust facilitates DEMO risk-
taking (Mayer, Davis & Schoorman 1995), which is the essence of the VC-entrepreneur relationship,
particularly during investment rounds, expansion plans and for the eventual exit of the VC (De Clercq
& Sapienza 2001).
The dominant perspective on governing the VC-entrepreneurial firm relationship has DEMO the
neo-classical perspective of principal-agency theory (Arthurs & Busenitz 2003, Jensen & Meckling
1976; Fama & Jensen 1983a, 1983b). This theory DEMO focuses on establishing all necessary
corporate governance mechanisms ex-ante in order to solve ex-post developing conflicts by using
contracts (Williamson 1988). While classical contracts are written under the assumption that all future
contingencies can be DEMO foreseen, neoclassical contracts take account of the fact that, due to
uncertainty, long-term contracts are usually incomplete and not fully specified. For this reason
neoclassical1 contracts establish ex-ante detailed incentive, control and arbitration mechanisms in
order to secure sufficient monitoring and control of the agent by the DEMO Similarly, the
establishment of incentive mechanisms such as shared ownership or DEMO rights between principal
and agent tie the potentially opportunistic agent’s interests to those of the principal, and may therefore
2
be deemed more reliable. The role of trust and the effectiveness of DEMO contracts, which
typically emerge as the relationship evolves, have largely been ignored (Casadesus-Masanell 2004).
Relational contracts cover complex long-term relationships, whilst DEMO contracts focus on the
particulars of individual transactions. Relational contracts lift the assumption of discreteness (i.e. that
contracts can be written without taking into account the particulars of the contract partners and their
contexts), and DEMO require that, after signing the contract, the partners co-operate positively in
decision making and conflict resolution in response to changing and unforeseen circumstances
(Williamson, 1979).
Principal-agent theory and its prescriptions have been subject to strong criticism (see
Lubatkin et al., 2007; Gomez-Mejia & Wiseman, DEMO; Arthurs & Busenitz, 2003). Schulze,
Lubatkin, Dino and DEMO (2001) identified and empirically demonstrated an important
shortcoming when it is applied to privately held, family-managed firms. Agency problems are more
difficult to resolve for these firms than principal-agency theorists had postulated, because agency
threats caused by self-control and other problems engendered by altruism had been overlooked.
DEMO challenge principal-agent theory on other grounds. The theory holds that ‘neoclassical’
contracts make investment relationships more efficient as they secure the principal’s trust in DEMO agent.
We propose instead that the use of neoclassical contracts may have damaging effects on trust for
complex cooperative relationships, such as that between entrepreneurs and VCs. Such neoclassical
contracts may carry hidden costs, as arrangements aimed at preventing opportunistic behavior may in
fact discourage co-operative behavior. Arguably, due to agency theory’s predominant focus on large
companies, this possible adverse effect has largely been ignored. Applied in large listed company
contexts, the theory presumes that the agent holds broad authority to act on behalf DEMO the principal,
and that the principal’s involvement in the business is of limited importance (see Fama & Jensen
1983a, 1983b; Schulze et al. 2001). However, not only do VCs have much further reaching rights of
supervision and control than principals in most large listed companies, but the success of
entrepreneurial firms relies to a large degree on DEMO cooperation between entrepreneurs and VCs.
3
The present study shows that, in order to foster the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC and to
realize productive collaboration, ‘relational’ contracts – which include more flexible and
developmental means of coordinating the relationship based on DEMO communication and
informal goodwill (Klein Woolthuis et al., 2005; Nooteboom DEMO al., 1997) – may be more effective
than neoclassical ones (DEMO Poppo & Zenger 2002; Zahra, Yavuz & Ucbasaran 2006).
A relational perspective on the VC-entrepreneur relationship aligns with the major points of
DEMO of principal-agent theory, discussed above. The need to study the VC–entrepreneur
DEMO as a reciprocal principal-agent relationship characterized by trust building is reflected in
the literature by the application of the prisoner dilemma’s approach (see Cable & Shane 1997) and
procedural justice theory (Busenitz et al. 1997; Sapienza & Korsgaard 1996). Yet only a few studies
have examined DEMO role and impact of trust in VC-entrepreneur relationships (for a review DEMO Welter
& Smallbone 2006). The development of positive social relationships between the two parties is seen
as crucial for mutual gains to be DEMO (Sapienza & Korsgaard 1996). Indeed, De Clercq and
Sapienza (DEMO) found that VCs’ trust in their entrepreneurs is positively related to DEMO perceptions
of the entrepreneurs’ performance.
While all of the studies above have taken the perspective of the VC, our study takes the
perspective of the entrepreneur, and how they experience trust in their VC. Just as VCs need to have
confidence in the entrepreneur (De Clercq & Sapienza 2006: 341; Harrison, Dibben & Mason, 2001),
so too must entrepreneurs have confidence in their VCs to realize the successful outcomes DEMO with
the investment. Trust in the VC may help entrepreneurs to cope with their inherent vulnerability in the
relationship, manage their considerable risks and feel more at ease with the power asymmetry. To
date, the entrepreneurs’ perspective on trust in the VC, and its antecedents, have been DEMO
neglected. An exception is the study by Busenitz et al. (1997)DEMO They analyzed a variety of conditions
affecting new venture teams’ (NVTs) perceptions of fairness in the relationship with their VC. They
found that DEMO out arrangements, the team’s industry experience and average tenure in the DEMO
negatively framed NVTs’ fairness perceptions, while the length of time the DEMO had been working
together was positively related. Interestingly, for the purposes DEMO this study, the use of constraining
covenants was found to be DEMO
4
We test the relative impact of the use of neoclassical and relational DEMO on
entrepreneurs’ trust in their VCs, drawing on a sample of DEMO firm-level relationships in the
Netherlands. We locate our theorizing and empirical results within agency theory, but we also
examine them in the light of the emerging literature on the impact of different forms of contracts on
DEMO trust. We start with an overview of the core assumptions and prescriptions found in agency
theory before examining how readily these assumptions can be DEMO to VC-entrepreneur
relations. We then review the available studies on the impact of contracts and more relational forms of
control on our dependent variable, trust. Next, we provide information about the study’s method,
report the results, and conclude with a discussion of the implications of our findings.
THEORY
Agency theory and corporate governance
Agency relationships are established by formal DEMO informal contracts “under which one or more
persons (the principal(s)) engage another person (the agent) to perform some service on their behalf
which involves delegating some decision making authority to the agent” (Jensen & Meckling 1976:
308). A contract, or set of contracts, establishes and frames the relationship by delegating decision-
making authority over some of the principal’s assets to the agent; defining the boundaries of
discretionary behavior for both the principal and the agent, and setting out the basic institutional
structure for ongoing negotiations and sanctions regarding the pursuit and DEMO of objectives
by the principal and agent (Fama & Jensen 1983a; Jensen & Meckling 1976).
Agency theory is based on two key DEMO about human behavior. The first, individual
rationality, presumes that individuals react systematically to economic incentives. This is qualified to
limited individual rationality to DEMO why individuals may intend to react to incentives
appropriately but are often hampered by limitations to their ability to collect, analyze and transfer
information, and the costs incurred in the effort. The second assumption is the likelihood of
opportunistic behavior. The problem here is not that all individuals DEMO to deceive to further their
own self-interest (Williamson 1988), but DEMO it is difficult (in some cases, impossible) to discern
5
fully, ex-ante, honest individuals from cheats. Central to the theory is DEMO asymmetric distribution of
information is presumed to increase the likelihood of opportunistic behavior.
Based on these two behavioral assumptions, the starting point of most corporate governance
based on agency theory is to assert that, in order to solve efficiently the problem of the separation of
ownership and control, the principal (i.e. the VC) needs to reduce the information asymmetry
DEMO to be enjoyed by the agent (i.e. the entrepreneur) and, DEMO, eliminate the agent’s scope
for exploitative opportunistic behavior. This is best DEMO through binding contractual supervisory
and/or incentive mechanisms (see Fama & DEMO 1983a, 1983b). The possibility that emergent
interpersonal experience might help DEMO and agents alike to develop a better appreciation of
each other’s intrinsic motivations, attitudes and behavior patterns, and therefore to trust each other DEMO
people rather than as signatories to a legal contract - and that this form of governance might serve as
effectively as formalized contracts, if not more so - is not considered (Barney & Hansen 1994).
Agency theorists recognize that complete contracts are impossible due to bounded rationality
DEMO (Williamson 1979). However, relying on the assumption of the ability to ex-ante devise
control and incentive mechanisms which serve to mediate or DEMO potential as yet unknown ex-post
developing disagreements and opportunistic behavior, neoclassical DEMO are seen as an adequate
remedy to prevent moral hazard problems caused by the agent. The following reasons may explain
why the use of DEMO neoclassical contracts is not appropriate in entrepreneurial settings.
Firstly, the entrepreneur DEMO typically the much weaker party in most such relationships.
Despite agency theory’s essential dependence on the notion of limited rationality, Jensen and
Meckling’s (DEMO) analysis argues that both entrepreneurs and investors will be able to DEMO value
potential agency costs ex-ante, and will be able to trade DEMO ownership and control rights on efficient
capital markets. This assumption implies that entrepreneurs are able to anticipate prior to signing any
contract with a DEMO the potential costs that her/his backer can impose upon them via monitoring,
incentive and bonding mechanisms, etc. It further presumes that entrepreneurs are able to choose
principals who fit their preferences, when in reality capital markets for small companies tend to be
characterized by poor efficiency DEMO liquidity (Lawton 2002). Jensen and Meckling (1976) also
6
expect that an alternative option available to entrepreneurs is to simply exit DEMO unfavorable investment
relationship at any time, and find a more favorable DEMO instead. Research indicates that this too is
seldom borne out in practice. There is significant uncertainty about the behavior of the entrepreneur
and the DEMO ex-ante (Parhankangas et al. 2005), and a distinct lack of DEMO primary, let alone a
replacement, market for each party involved (DEMO & Shane 1997). The absence of a replacement
market means that ‘hold-up problems’ may occur, effectively allowing one party to hold the other
hostage. In practice, the advantage here is firmly with the VC over the entrepreneur (Landström et al.
1998). Additionally, many of the DEMO rights and obligations regarding roles and responsibilities
enshrined in neoclassical contracts are one-sided in favor of the investor. These include board member
voting rules DEMO favor the VC(s); veto rights for the investor over important decisions; investors’
rights of inspection of accounting and legal books should the venture perform poorly; anti-dilution
terms should the venture perform poorly; registration DEMO to arrange that the investor’s shares may
be traded publicly soon after an IPO, even the right to dismiss the entrepreneur (Busenitz et DEMO 1997:
9-10; Fiet et al. 1997; Nesheim 2000: 123-124)DEMO Neoclassical contracts may also limit managerial
salaries, and even set conditions DEMO replacing incumbent managers. Once these constraining
conditions are approved by the parties, entrepreneurs have little chance to reconsider or modify them
(Busenitz et DEMO 1997). Neoclassical mechanisms may therefore lead the entrepreneur to believe that
their preferences and interests are not adequately represented in the approved plans DEMO the venture.
From a procedural justice perspective, constraining conditions negatively frame DEMO entrepreneur’s
perception of fairness in the relationship (see Busenitz et al. DEMO). All of these conditions may work
to constrain opportunism and lessen the principal’s risk, but they do little or nothing to invite, DEMO
nurture, trust.
Secondly, the size and probability of risk also falls disproportionately on the agent. While the
principal (i.e. the VC) is DEMO to benefit from sharing the risk with other investors, and from DEMO
risk reduction through investment diversification, the agents usually risk all or DEMO of their assets in
one venture (Fama & Jensen 1983b). DEMO, while VCs usually are able to reduce their investment
uncertainty by DEMO across multiple rounds of investment (Wasserman 2006), entrepreneurs have
7
to commit to their investment at once, from the outset. This too puts VCs in a far more powerful
position than the entrepreneurs since DEMO sunk costs are comparatively lower. When an elaborate
neoclassical contract is added to this, it can enable the principal to block any attempts by the agent to
reduce her/his risk of ownership should changes in DEMO firm’s environment occur. As such, a
neoclassical contract can lead to DEMO principal behaving, from the agent’s perspective, inflexibly
towards the entrepreneurial firm, possibly pursuing her/his own interests at the expense of the agent’s.
Thirdly, entrepreneurs have few countervailing powers to force VCs to contribute additional
resources and investment, provide helpful advice or entry to business networks. While entrepreneurs
can in theory safeguard themselves by hiring good legal representatives, experienced equity investors
such as VCs generally have much greater expertise in negotiating DEMO contract that is more favorable for
them than the entrepreneur (see DEMO et al. 1998).
Fourthly, when contracts are more elaborate, they can stifle constructive forms of
collaboration. Agents may become less inclined to DEMO personally involved with the principal and to
fully disclose the venture’s details, anticipating punishment by the principal should things go wrong.
Prisoners’ dilemma and ‘Trust Game’ experiments have revealed that a lack of communication, trust
and social interaction induces players’ choice to defect (Komorita & Parks 1995; DEMO &
Murnighan 2002). Additionally, contracts that cover many contingencies with respect to well-
specified rights and duties can be overly complex, providing little flexibility to the parties (Busenitz et
al. 1997; Landström et DEMO 1998; Jap 2001). It might, for instance, impede the DEMO capacity to make
quick changes to the firm’s strategy and operations. This can have a negative impact on the
company’s ability to develop and DEMO innovations and to adapt to changes in its competitive
environment (Williamson DEMO). As such, an emphasis on the decision control function induced DEMO
the contract can lead to rigidity in the entrepreneurial firm’s decision making process, which may
cause further frustration for the agent regarding his/her relationship with the principal (Busenitz et al.
1997). The concomitant neglect by agency theory of the possibility of positive interpersonal
reciprocity (what we term ‘relational’ contracting) is especially problematic for entrepreneurial firms,
since firm founders tend to display very high degrees of intrinsic motivation, and this can be eroded if
8
outside investors increase their influence over the company’s management and limit the DEMO
discretion (Wasserman 2006; Arthurs & Busenitz 2003). Furthermore, due DEMO a belief that more subtle
forms of evaluation are difficult to administer, incentive mechanisms in the neoclassical contract often
lead to the specification of quantifiable performance objectives. These may lead to rigidities in the
evaluation process, which may decrease the entrepreneur’s perception of fairness in the relationship,
DEMO hence erode their trust in the VC (Busenitz et al. 1997)DEMO
Fifthly, while opportunistic behavior from the agent can be mitigated through DEMO use of
neoclassical contracts, the power asymmetry created by these elaborate DEMO is likely to increase
the principal’s temptation to exploit the weaker partner (Komorita & Parks 1995). If the agent is
aware of this temptation, it may further erode the agent’s trust in the principal.
All of the above indicates that, with regard to principal-agent problems in VC-entrepreneur
relations, the interests of the latter may actually be at greater risk than those of the former. The
entrepreneur’s vulnerability in the relationship is DEMO to be exacerbated when neoclassical contracts
are used. As will be shown in the next section, this view of the damaging effects of narrowly enforced
contracts seems to be supported by extant research into the effects DEMO different forms of control (i.e.
formal contracts and relational arrangements) on trust.
Trust and contracts
McEvily et al. (2003: 93) propose a unified three-stage process for one party trusting another.
According to Mayer et DEMO (1995) influential model, trust is founded upon expectations regarding the
DEMO party’s trustworthiness, evidenced by an evaluation of her/his ability, benevolence and integrity.
These expectations inform a willingness to accept vulnerability in dealings DEMO that party, which is
the definition of trust put forward by DEMO et al (1998: 395). Subsequent risk-taking acts, such as
DEMO dependence on the trustee, sharing sensitive resources with them, and reduced monitoring
of their actions demonstrate that willingness.
9
In recent years scholars have looked into the effects of different forms DEMO control on trust,
including formal contractual arrangements and more normative, DEMO controls. The debate is
far from clear-cut. It is characterized by the development of two main perspectives: substitution and
complementarity (for reviews see DEMO & Bijlsma-Frankema 2007; Poppo & Zenger 2002).
The first thesis DEMO that trust and control are alternative routes for arriving at a ‘stable order
of relations’ (e.g. Malhotra & Murnighan 2002). The substitution thesis suggests that the more trust
there is in a relationship, the fewer formal controls are necessary (Gulati 1995); conversely, the less
trust DEMO is in a relationship, the more controls are needed to substitute DEMO compensate. In this
condition either a form of ‘trust’ by proxy (DEMO the sense of predictable likely behavior) may be
assumed from the DEMO of sanctions enshrined in the contract, or the contract is based DEMO
assumptions of fundamental suspicion and its presence is presumed to obviate the need for ‘trust’ –
similar to agency theory assumptions. Hence, a VC may use a neoclassical contract to safeguard their
interests, but from the trustee’s perspective (i.e. the entrepreneur) the contract may signal the VC’s
DEMO of confidence in her, and may stifle attempts at fruitful collaboration. DEMO compelling this
may seem in theory, Costa and Bijlsma-Frankema (2007) DEMO that “there is no consistent empirical
evidence” for this substitution effect (DEMO too Klein Woolthuis et al. 2005: 817). Indeed, the
imposition of controls is often assumed to be antagonistic to strong relational trust (Nooteboom et al.,
1997: 318), and can have a “pernicious effect” on cooperation (Poppo & Zenger, 2002: 711). Using a
variant of ‘the Trust Game’, Malhotra and Murnighan (2002: 547) DEMO that contracts can act as a
substitute for trust and may elicit modest levels of cooperation, but their introduction also “impeded
the development of trust” and “diminished existing trust”.
The second perspective – the complementarity model DEMO tends to be more favored theoretically
and found to be more prevalent empirically. This depicts trust and control as separate but co-existing,
and DEMO mutually reinforcing, means for arriving at a stable order of relations. DEMO example, one
party may feel able to trust the other because DEMO the existence of a formal contract, while two parties
who trust DEMO other may wish to confirm and cement their relational trust through joint commitment
to a contract, much like a marriage (Klein Woolthuis et DEMO 2005).2 However, Das and Teng (1998,
10
2001) suggest that the potential degree of complementarity depends on the type of control used
(behavioral, output, and social). ‘Social’ and normative controls (in our terminology, relational
contracting) are more likely to improve understanding and accommodate flexibility and hence
enhance trust, whereas formal controls (DEMO a neoclassical contract) may deny parties autonomy to act
and undermine DEMO of the other’s self-governed goodwill, as well as generating tensions that
DEMO partners’ competence. Poppo and Zenger (2002) speculate that the terms included in a
detailed contract may influence the cooperative nature of relations between DEMO Contracts that
provide “frameworks for bilateral adjustments may facilitate the evolution of highly cooperative
exchange relations” (2002: 713). Klein Woolthuis and colleagues (2005: 834) have argued that both
theses make “intuitive sense”, and that “whether contracts and trust are substitutes or complements
depends on the DEMO with which contracts are drawn up and used”. Additionally, contextual
factors DEMO as the nature of relationship-specific investments and embeddedness (i.e. dependence),
the potential harm from suffering opportunism and prior experiences are likely to DEMO the need
for partner cooperation, and hence respective needs for trust DEMO controls (Das & Teng 2001). Of
course, without a minimum level of trust, no contract can work (ibid: 265).
In sum, considering the available studies on trust and control, neoclassical contracts DEMO
likely to have a negative effect on fostering the entrepreneur’s crucial trust in their VC, and other
means (notably in the form of DEMO contracting) may prove more effective.
HYPOTHESES
Based on our review of DEMO literature we developed the following model (Figure 1), and associated
DEMO
INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE.
11
We have seen how the structure of the relationship with her/his DEMO places the entrepreneur in a
position of vulnerability and that a certain degree of trust is beneficial to both entrepreneur and VC.
Agency theory DEMO favors contractual or incentive-based mechanisms for securing that trust, and
it DEMO tempting for the VC to opt for a neoclassical contract in order to safeguard her/himself against the
risk of opportunistic behavior by the DEMO However, the limitations of these prescriptions for
the VC-entrepreneur relationship discussed DEMO and the damaging effect of formal controls on trust
lead us to our first hypothesis on the limited effectiveness of the first of agency DEMO prescriptions,
the use of elaborate and highly specified neoclassical contracts:
Hypothesis 1: There is a negative association between the use of elaborate neoclassical
contracts and the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC.
Agency theory’s other DEMO is to incentivize the agent to act appropriately on the
principal’s behalf, through granting the agent a significant ownership share in the firm. However,
greater shares in ownership give the agent considerably more power in DEMO shareholders’ general
meetings, more influence regarding the composition of the board DEMO directors, and more power to
prevent hostile takeovers. Arthurs and Busenitz (2003) suggest that taking into consideration the non-
financial investments of time, energy and sweat equity made by the entrepreneur, it is likely DEMO the
entrepreneur sees his/her “ownership” level as something greater than just financial ownership.
Therefore, for the agent as a shareholder, neoclassical contracting DEMO be counterproductive as it
deflates the agent’s utility (and psychological ownership) and limits the agent’s scope to maneuver
(Wassermann 2006). An entrepreneur’s motivation may not solely be future wealth maximization, but
may stem from other personal needs, such as peer approval and personal independence (Birley &
Westhead 1994). Bruton et al (2001) found that entrepreneurs DEMO for opportunism had a much larger
share of ownership in the firm than those dismissed for perceived low ability or disagreement over
direction. They DEMO that at very high levels of ownership the entrepreneur may focus less on
maximizing financial return, which is the VC’s concern, and more DEMO aspects like reducing risks and
various sorts of actions that the entrepreneur finds more satisfying. Hence:
12
Hypothesis 2: The agent’s share of ownership moderates the negative association between the
use of elaborate neoclassical contracts and the trust of the entrepreneur DEMO the VC.
Co-operative solutions to the agency problem in the context of entrepreneurial firms
Several characteristics of the relationship suggest that the use of DEMO informal, ‘relational’
contractual arrangements should prove more conducive to the entrepreneur’s DEMO in the VC. In
contrast to neoclassical contracts, relational arrangements tend DEMO extend significant autonomy to the
agent by minimizing a priori constraints, DEMO enhancing his/her intrinsic motivation to perform
effectively in pursuit of the success of the entrepreneurial firm (Wassermann 2006). In trust terms, DEMO
entrepreneur may interpret this autonomy as indicative of the VC’s benevolence. Additionally, if
contracts are softened, it should become more feasible for entrepreneurs DEMO respond, with the VC’s
consent, to changes in the business environment. This suggests that the substitution of the presumed
assurances of neoclassical contracts DEMO a bond of goodwill via relational contracts is likely to be
related to enhanced trust. Thus:
Hypothesis 3: There is a positive association between the use of relational contracts and the
entrepreneur’s trust in the DEMO
The complementarity thesis in the literature on trust and control holds that a neoclassical contract is
less likely to be perceived by the entrepreneur DEMO a hostile act from the VC if the relationship between
the two parties is characterized by positive mutual regard and goodwill (cf Poppo & Zenger 2002).
Thus:
Hypothesis 4: The use of relational contracts ‘buffers’ the negative relationship between the
use of elaborate neoclassical contracts and DEMO entrepreneur’s trust in the VC.
13
The VC may display two further behavior sets in relation to the DEMO that can impact on the
latter’s trust. The first is ‘added value through networking’, in which the VC contributes positively to
the relationship by introducing the entrepreneur to valuable parties in the VC’s network, such as other
investors, potential clients, and advisers. We assume that ‘added value DEMO networking’ will be
interpreted by the entrepreneur as a benevolent act and even a sign of competence from the VC. Thus:
Hypothesis 5: There is a positive association between the VC’s demonstration of ‘added value
DEMO networking’ and the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC.
Another set of behaviors is ‘added value through monitoring’, wherein the VC seeks to improve the
performance of the entrepreneurial firm through close monitoring and even supervision of DEMO
business, drawing upon her/his presumed expertise in these domains. The DEMO on the effects of
such controlling influence on trust is somewhat ambiguous regarding the likely effect that
‘monitoring’ will have on trust. On the DEMO hand, it may be interpreted by the entrepreneur as
indicative of DEMO for the success of the entrepreneurial firm (i.e. benevolence), and DEMO as a sign
of competence by helping the entrepreneur to develop and implement control mechanisms which aid
the entrepreneur as well as the VC (Flynn 2001). Frequent communication and timely information
sharing may help to DEMO disputes and align perceptions and expectations (see Busenitz et al. 1997)DEMO
The entrepreneur might think that checking up on the performance of the business is what ‘good’ (i.e.
competent, benevolent and honest) VCs do (see Bijlsma-Frankema & Van de Bunt 2003).
Hypothesis 6a: There DEMO a positive association between the VC’s demonstration of ‘added
value through monitoring’ and the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC.
On the other hand, as we have argued above, such efforts may be perceived as intrusion and control
that is indicative of the VC’s lack of trust in, and even respect for, the entrepreneur. This may prove
corrosive of the reciprocated trust shown by the entrepreneur in the VC. Hence, we leave the
hypothesis pertaining to this effect open:
14
Hypothesis 6b: There is a negative association between the VC’s demonstration of ‘added
value through monitoring’ and the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC.
METHOD
DEMO
A questionnaire was sent to the whole population of venture capital-backed companies in the
Netherlands in 2003, sourced from the dataset of the Dutch Chambers of Commerce, as well as from
annual reports and Internet sites for VCs operating in the Netherlands. Of the 611 companies that
received DEMO funding that year, 86 useable questionnaires were returned after two mailing DEMO
This response rate of 14% is comparable to the typical rate of 10-12 percent for studies that target
Chief Executives (see Schulze et al. 2001), and for surveys of small businesses (see Koch & McGrath
1996; De Kok & Uhlaner 2001). Cochran’s (1977) formula for the sample size requirement shows
that a sample size of more than DEMO firms is sufficient to make generalizations about a relatively small
population of 611 firms with a 4 percent margin of error for 7-point Likert DEMO
The responses for early respondents (first mailing round: n = 34) were compared to the
responses of later respondents (second mailing round: n = 52). Such a comparison is based on the
assumption DEMO later respondents have responded because of the increased stimulus and are expected
to be similar to non-respondents (Armstrong & Overton, 1997). Comparing DEMO and late respondents
indicates the presence or absence of a non-response bias. Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) tests indicate
that there are no significant differences between DEMO and late respondents for the dependent variable
trust (K-S = .91; p = .91) and the independent variables neoclassical contracting (K-S = DEMO; p = .96),
relational contracting (K-S = .50; p = .96), percentage ownership entrepreneur (K-S = .88; p = DEMO),
VC monitoring activities (K-S = 1.10; p = .18), VC networking activities (K-S = .35; p = 1.00), tenure
of the relationship with the VC (K-S = .74; p = DEMO) and ICT/Life Sciences (K-S = .06; p = 1.00)DEMO
These results suggest that any non-response bias in this study is minimal.
15
Dependent variable
The trust scale is based on Kumar et al.’s (1995) measure of trust. Strictly speaking, this is a measure
of perceived DEMO (see Dietz & den Hartog 2006), expectations of which form DEMO basis of
the actual decision to trust. However, the entrepreneurs surveyed DEMO exhibiting risk taking behavior
associated with their perceptions of their VC’s trustworthiness.
Kumar’s scale encompasses two essential sub-dimensions. The first is trust in the DEMO
integrity: that is, the belief that the partner will stand by her/his word, will fulfill promised
obligations, and will be sincere (Dwyer & Oh 1987; Scheer & Stern 1992). The second is trust in the
partner’s benevolence: that is, the belief that the DEMO is interested in, and concerned about, the
firm’s welfare and will not take unexpected actions that might damage the firm’s prospects. The items
DEMO both dimensions were ranged on a Likert scale where 1 = ‘Totally disagree’ and 7 = ‘Totally
agree’. Trust exists, therefore, when the DEMO (entrepreneur) expects his/her principal (VC backer) to
display these two characteristics. (The VC’s ‘ability’ is captured in the ‘VC – added value’ scales.)
Factor analyses showed that the sub-dimensions ‘integrity’ and ‘benevolence’ DEMO not be
separated. All items consistently showed high factor loadings on a single factor, except the items ‘The
VC has often provided us information that has later proven to be inaccurate’ (reverse coded) and
‘When DEMO share our problems with the VC, we know that he/she DEMO respond with understanding’.
We consequently removed these items. The resulting factor analysis shows a unidimensional measure
of trust, explaining 60.87% of the variance with factor loadings ranging from 0.47 to 0.86 (see
Appendix). The Cronbach α for the trust scale is 0.90. The entrepreneur’s trust in the DEMO is computed
by dividing the total sum of the item scores by the number of items.
Independent variables
The contracting variables are based on DEMO and Brown’s (1996) behavioral-based contracting
measures. They in turn refer to Heide (1994) for their measures’ construct validity. Based on the
perspectives DEMO resource dependency, transaction cost economics and relational contracting theory,
16
Heide (1994) identified six key elements which can be used to DEMO an interorganizational
relationship: role specification, planning, adjustment processes, monitoring procedures, incentive
systems, and means of enforcement. Lusch and Brown’s (1996) DEMO match with the key
elements of role specification, planning, adjustment processes and means of enforcement. The two
missing elements are covered elsewhere in DEMO survey instrument. ‘Monitoring procedures’ relates to
the use of systems that measure output and behavior, which is reflected in our ‘VC value-added -
monitoring’ measure. ‘Incentive systems’ refer to the types of incentives used and the DEMO on which
they are distributed. The share of ownership possessed by the entrepreneur can be regarded as a proxy
for an incentive system.
Inter-organizational DEMO under hierarchical governance typically rely on enforcement
by means of legitimate authority through a contractual arrangement that provides decision-making
authority (Stinchcombe 1985; Heide DEMO). This is reflected by the neoclassical contracting type.
More bilateral means of enforcement tend to focus on aspects of the ongoing relationship itself, and
these may depend on the extent to which shared values and DEMO expectations about future
interactions have been established, independent of any binding DEMO between the parties (Heide
1994). This bilateral nature of enforcement DEMO on social exchange is reflected by the relational
contracting type. Thus, DEMO clearly distinguish between neoclassical contracts (explicit, detailed,
legally binding) DEMO ‘relational’. The items for both types of contracts were ranged on a 1-7 Likert
scale where 1 = ‘Totally disagree’ and 7 = ‘Totally DEMO (see Appendix).
We modified Lusch and Brown’s measures to the DEMO firm setting. Factor
analyses aimed at determining the scales’ unidimensionality and discriminant validity further helped
to refine the scales.3 The neoclassical contracting measure refers DEMO the degree to which each party’s
roles, responsibilities, performance obligations and the handling of unexpected events are precisely
defined in a written contract. DEMO α is 0.88. The relational contracting measure refers to the
degree to which there is mutual understanding regarding each party’s roles and responsibilities, and
how each party is to perform. Cronbach α is 0.92.
The items DEMO ‘VC value-added – networking’ and ‘VC value-added – monitoring’ scales are
based on a number of propositions derived from studies of value-adding activities provided DEMO VCs
17
(see MacMillan et al. 1989; Sapienza & Timmons 1989; Harrison & Mason 1992; Rosenstein et al.
1993). The entrepreneurs were asked to indicate the extent to which they agreed or disagreed that their
VC DEMO displayed these behaviors on a Likert scale from 1-7 (‘Totally disagree’ DEMO ‘Totally agree’).
Both types of value-adding activities can be distinguished and separated in the factor analysis (see the
Appendix). The factor loadings for the items of both scales are higher than 0.7. Both scales DEMO
computed by dividing the total sum of the item scores by the number of items. The Cronbach α for
‘VC value-added – networking’ is DEMO; the Cronbach α for ‘VC value-added – monitoring’ is 0.85.
Control DEMO
We included formal relationship tenure as a covariate in the analysis. The duration of the relationship
might impact on the entrepreneur’s trust in the DEMO, because of the presumption of an accumulation of
positive or negative DEMO over time of the VC’s conduct and attitudes (Sapienza & Gupta DEMO),
and the effects of regular direct communication over time. The DEMO was taken from the date the
company-level contract between the principal and agent was signed. It is possible that the relationship
may be older DEMO this, such as through prior friendship or informal interactions. Unfortunately, we
were unable to ascertain this information.
Another covariate is the dummy variable DEMO/Life sciences’, which indicates whether the
entrepreneurial firm competes in an DEMO industry or not. Emergent industries are generally
characterized by high degrees of uncertainties, which may make each party more vulnerable to
opportunistic behavior of the other party.
Common method variance
Since the study is based upon DEMO single-respondent survey, we followed Podsakoff et al.’s (2003)
recommended strategies for reducing common method bias. We ensured that we used scales with
DEMO different items, guaranteed respondents’ anonymity, and preceded the questions for the
dependent variable (i.e. trust) before the questions for the independent variables (i.e. the contracting
scales) in the questionnaire. We also conducted a Harman’s single-factor test (Podsakoff et al. 2003).
18
This test stems from the assumption that a substantial amount of common-method DEMO is present
when (a) a single factor emerges from the factor analysis, or (b) one general factor accounts for the
majority of the covariance in the independent and criterion variables. A factor analysis conducted DEMO
the items in the trust measure, the neoclassical and relational contracting DEMO, and a factor
analysis with the items of the trust measure, VC monitoring and networking measures provide
evidence that the analyses of the DEMO are not unduly subject to a common method bias. The
items of the contracting measures did not load highly on the factor which identified DEMO trust measure.
RESULTS
Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics and the Pearson correlations of the variables. First, there is a
significant and negative association between ICT/life sciences and the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC.
This DEMO that the high level of uncertainty which characterizes these kinds of industries may lead
entrepreneurs to feel more vulnerable to exploitation, and to therefore perceive a higher risk that the
VC will behave opportunistically and hence DEMO they might not be trustworthy. Entrepreneurs who
operate in less uncertain industries like manufacturing and services seem to show less concern.
Second, as expected, there is a significant and positive association between the entrepreneur’s
trust in the VC and relational contracting, and with the VC’s added value in monitoring and in
networking. Thus, entrepreneurs who enjoy positive informal interpersonal relations with their VC
tend to report their VCs adding value. There is, however, no significant association between
neoclassical contracting and the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC.
[INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Table 2 presents the analysis DEMO our hypotheses. The main effects are reported in step 1 and the
interaction effects with the hierarchical approach in the subsequent steps (cf. Aiken & West 1991).
Colinearity diagnostics indicate that there are no multicolinearity DEMO The results for our
hypotheses are as follows.
19
[INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]
Hypothesis 1 is supported. There is a DEMO association between the use of neoclassical contracts
and the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC (β = -.21; p<.05). This suggests that DEMO, highly specific,
comprehensive written contracts tend to go hand in DEMO in with a relationship in which the
entrepreneur considers the VC to be untrustworthy. Hypothesis 2 is also supported. The
entrepreneur’s share of ownership DEMO the negative relationship between the use of neoclassical
contracts and the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC (step 2: β = -.46; p<.05). This finding implies that a
higher degree of share ownership on DEMO part of the entrepreneurs worsens the relationship when
elaborate neoclassical contracts are used.
The analyses of the co-operative solutions to the agency problem in DEMO relationship reveal the
following results. Hypothesis 3 is supported. There is a positive association between the use of
relational contracts and the entrepreneur’s impressions DEMO her/his VC as trustworthy (β = .48; p<.01).
However, hypothesis 4 is not supported. The results do not suggest that relational contracts buffer the
negative association between classical contracts and the agent’s DEMO in the principal (see Table 2, step
3). In other words, relational contracts do not seem to ameliorate relationships governed by elaborate
neoclassical contracts and characterized by distrust of the VC from the entrepreneur. DEMO 5 is
not supported. The relationship between VC added value in networking and the entrepreneur’s trust in
the VC is not significant, perhaps because this is to be expected and nothing out of the ordinary, and
hence this effort by VCs may go unnoticed and unappreciated in terms DEMO trust development. Finally,
hypothesis 6a is supported (and hypothesis 6b DEMO not supported). There is a positive relationship
between VC added value from monitoring and the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC (β = .26; p<.01).
This may suggest that the information revealed by monitoring may lead to a better understanding of
the VC of the entrepreneurial DEMO situation, and hence may lead the entrepreneur to perceive the
VC DEMO more trustworthy.
20
DISCUSSION
This paper has examined the effectiveness of the neoclassical agency theory DEMO to manage risks
in a VC-entrepreneur relationship, comparing it to relational DEMO of governance. The findings have
a number of implications for agency theory and for the literature on the linkages between trust and
forms of DEMO control.
Firstly, the effectiveness of VCs’ use of elaborate neoclassical contracts DEMO a solution to
relationship governance – the default recommended solution from an agency theory perspective – can
be questioned. Such contracts tend to be DEMO related with the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC.
This is particularly so when neoclassical contracts are combined with an increasing share of
ownership by DEMO entrepreneur in the firm – another default recommended solution from an agency
theory perspective.
Secondly, theory and evidence point to the effectiveness of more relational forms of
governance. These findings affirm what is becoming an established DEMO of results in the trust
literature on the effects of different forms of control. Neoclassical contracts do not foster trust, and
can often have damaging effects. However, this might be a matter of degree: while DEMO form of
binding contract is needed, overly elaborate and constraining contractual DEMO may be detrimental to
crucial relationship development – certainly from the entrepreneur’s perspective. Interestingly, the
non-significance of the interaction effect of both types of contracting on the entrepreneur’s trust in the
VC seems to suggest that DEMO relational contracting might not be able to overcome the
damaging effects of neoclassical contracts on the relationship.
The positive association between entrepreneurs’ trust and DEMO VCs’ monitoring of their
activities and decision-making suggests that not all forms of control are unacceptable to
entrepreneurs. It may be, therefore, that DEMO see elaborate neoclassical contracts as excessive
and hence unwelcome. This finding is interesting from a trust development perspective, since the
literature assumes that in trusting relationships the need for monitoring the other party should reduce.
We DEMO evidence that monitoring activity is perceived to be benign in this relationship scenario: it
21
may be indicative of the VC’s benevolence (i.e. looking after the business for mutual benefit), and of
their competence, too (i.e. being DEMO investors).
Our findings regarding the relationship of ‘VC value-added via monitoring’ and the trust of
the entrepreneur in the VC (hypotheses 6a and b), coupled with the failure of relational contracting to
buffer the DEMO impact of neoclassical contracting on the entrepreneur’s trust in the VC
(DEMO 4), indicate that, while most entrepreneurs seem to recognize the DEMO need and
right to monitor and control agents, they tend not DEMO regard neoclassical contracts as VCs exercising
reasonable control over their risk, DEMO as a threat. This can be expected to debilitate relationship
building between principals and agents. The fact that hypothesis 2 is supported indicates that
DEMO entrepreneurs with a large stake in the firm feel vulnerable against the wide range of
contractual rights which rests with the VCs.
With regard DEMO the use of agency theory for the development of efficient governance systems,
this research underlines the importance of paying close attention not only DEMO the specific incentive
structures of principals and agents but also to the power structure in their relationship. It is crucial to
take account of DEMO potential for exploitation of either side. As demonstrated, VC-entrepreneur
relationships show DEMO significantly different distribution of power and hold-up opportunities than, say,
DEMO between managers of large listed companies and their highly diversified minority
investors. Firstly, ownership incentives for professional managers in widely held listed companies are
much more limited that that of entrepreneurs, who usually hold significant stakes in their companies.
Secondly, the incentive and ability of highly diversified minority investors of listed companies to
control management by influencing the board of DEMO or voting in general meetings is very
limited (Stratling 2003), DEMO compared to the far reaching powers VCs can wield (Landström
et DEMO 1998; Nesheim 2000; Fiet et al. 1997).
Moreover, our DEMO highlight that more attention should be paid to the agency costs of the
design and implementation of corporate governance mechanisms. Controls aimed at reducing
DEMO behavior, which are perceived as unfair or stifling, may endanger the potential benefits
from cooperation. Moreover, with regard to the corporate governance of VC-backed firms, it has been
22
argued that a tight focus on control-oriented corporate governance mechanisms could crowd DEMO other
important functions of the board, such as the provision of DEMO advice, business contacts and the
support of strategy development (see Daily et al. 2003; Sundaramurthy & Lewis. 2003; Hillman &
Daziel. 2003). The lack of consideration of trust building or trust erosion in DEMO application of agency
theory to the analysis and development of governance mechanisms appears to be a serious
shortcoming. It can lead to recommendations regarding DEMO governance structures that actually
diminish the benefits from such relationships.
It is possible that the relationships between the contracting types and the entrepreneur’s trust
DEMO the VC are driven by the entrepreneurial firm’s performance. For instance, DEMO performance might
induce the VC to use neoclassical contracts in order to hold the entrepreneur more accountable for
future performance setbacks. This in turn DEMO create more tensions in the relationship, eroding the
entrepreneur’s trust in DEMO VC. We analyzed the possible impact of this ‘third variable’ effect by using
two performance measures, sales and employee growth over the past three years for the 65 companies
for which we had performance data.4 The DEMO between sales growth on the one hand and the
trust measure (DEMO = -.01; p < .96), neoclassical contract (r = .02; p < .90) and relational contracting (r =
.09; p < .48) on the other were all insignificant, as were those between employees growth and trust (r
= -.18; p < .15), DEMO contract (r = .07; p < .59) and relational contracting (r = -.01; p < .97).
There were no changes to our results when we added the performance measures as covariates to the
DEMO equations.
Unfortunately, it is impossible from our findings to deduct whether (a lack of) pre-existing
trust affected the choice of contract. Firstly, DEMO trust scale is based on perceived behaviors of the VC
that arise during the relationship and not on behaviors of the VC that pre-date DEMO relationship.
Secondly, we do not have data about the VC’s (pre-existing) trust in the entrepreneur. The
complementarity thesis would suggest that high levels of trust in the VC lead to a desire from the
entrepreneur DEMO confirm and cement the relational trust in a contract. The substitution thesis would
suggest that low levels of trust in the VC induce the DEMO need for a more elaborate
neoclassical contract. We suggest that the first seems more plausible than the latter, since negotiating
23
a contract that so favors the VC is not likely to be DEMO desirable option for an entrepreneur with low
levels of trust in the VC. Longitudinal, qualitative and dyadic studies may further reveal the
entrepreneur’s and VC’s thinking in this regard.
Overall, our results have highlighted a blind spot in agency theory’s concern with productive
co-operation between principal and agent. DEMO advocated use of control mechanisms by agency theory
research may erode trust and jeopardize the collaborative sharing of specialist resources in the
entrepreneurial firm. DEMO this study shows, detailed neoclassical contracts which strongly favor the VC
DEMO have pernicious effects on the trust of the entrepreneur in the VC. Our findings also indicate that it
is not possible to moderate these DEMO by relational contracting. Recommendations on best practice
in corporate governance, particularly DEMO firms which rely on the active collaboration of principals and
agents, DEMO therefore take much more account of the need for trust to enable productive
collaboration.
A workable degree of trust is essential for a creative, risk-taking endeavor such as that
between an entrepreneur and her VC backers. DEMO the VCs, their reputation in terms of how they treat
and DEMO their entrepreneur clients is critical. Entrepreneurs’ trust in their VCs is likely to be a
salient indicator of the VCs’ effectiveness, and attractiveness to entrepreneurs. The trustworthiness of
VCs can be expected to have an impact DEMO levels of entrepreneurial activity in an economy as well as
a powerful determinant of the success of VCs in securing new investment opportunities. Both DEMO,
then, have a vested interest in securing ‘optimal’ levels of DEMO (cf. Wicks et al. 1998).
24
TABLES AND FIGURES
FIGURE 1. The conceptual model, and hypotheses.
‘Relational’
contracts
‘Neoclassical’
contracts
(H2)
+
(H3)
(H4)
-
(DEMO)
% of firm
owned by the
entrepreneur
25
Entrepreneur’s trust in
her/his venture capitalist
backer(s)
+
(H5)
VC-value
added:
networking
+/ -
(H6a-b)
VC-value
added:
monitoring
Table 1: Descriptive statistics and Pearson correlations
Variables Mean SD
1  DEMO  3  4  5  6  7  8
1. Relationship tenure 3.81 3.55 -
2. ICT/life sciences firms .36 .48 -.25 * DEMO
3. % Ownership entrepreneur 24.94 27.26 .01
-.22* -
4. Neoclassical contracting 4.70 1.52 -.11
-.07 .13 -
5. Relational contracting 5.11 1.18 -.04
DEMO .07 .37**
6. VC added value in monitoring 3.73 1.47 -.21
.05 .00 .26*
7. VC added value in networking 3.84 1.48 -.07
.03 DEMO .04
8. Entrepreneur’s trust in the VC 4.97 1.14 .12
-.29** .14 .02
-
.45** -
.25* .45**
.56** .48**
-
.35** -
** DEMO<.01; * p<.05
26
Table 2: Analysis of the relationship between contracting and the entrepreneur’s trust in the
VC
Step 1
Intercept
Relationship tenure
ICT/Life sciences firms
DEMO Ownership entrepreneur
Neoclassical contracting
Relational contracting
VC added value in monitoring
VC added value in networking
Trust in the VC
β
**
.08
-.29 DEMO
.08
-.21 *
.48 **
.26 *
.15
F statistic
Model R2
12.17 **
.56
Step 2
% Ownership entrepreneur x Neoclassical contracting -.46*
DEMO F statistic
 R2
6.73 *
.04
Step 3
Relational contracting x Neoclassical contracting .42
 F statistic
 R2
1.21
.01
Note: Standardized beta coefficients are depicted.
** p <.01, * p <.05.
REFERENCES
Aiken, L.S. & West, S.G. (1991). Multiple regression: DEMO and interpreting interaction. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Armstrong, J.S. and Overton, T.S. 1977. Estimating nonresponse bias in mail surveys. Journal of
Marketing Research, 14, 396-402.
Arthurs, J.D. & Busenitz, L.W. (2003). The boundaries and limitations of agency theory and stewardship
theory in the DEMO capitalist/entrepreneur relationship. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 27,
145-162.
Barney DEMO, and Hansen, M.H. (1994). Trustworthiness as a source of DEMO advantage. Strategic
Management Journal, 15, 175-190
Bijlsma-Frankema, K & van DEMO Bunt, G.G (2003). Antecedents of trust in managers: a DEMO
approach”. Personnel Review, 32(5), 638-664
Birley, S. and Westhead, P. (1994). A taxonomy of business start-up reasons and their DEMO on firm growth
size. Journal of Business Venturing, (9)1, DEMO
Bruton, G., Fried, V. & Hisrich, R.D. (2000). DEMO dismissal in venture capital-backed firms: Further
evidence from an agency perspective. DEMO Theory & Practice, 24, 69-77.
Busenitz, L., Moesel, D., Fiet, D., & Barney, J.B. (1997). The framing of DEMO of fairness in the
relationship between venture capitalists and new venture teams. Entrepreneurship, Theory &
Practice, 21, 5-21
Busenitz, L.W., Fiet, J.O., & Moesel, D.D. (2004). Reconsidering the venture capitalists’ “value-added”
proposition: an interorganizational learning perspective. Journal of Business Venturing, 19, 787-808.
Cable, D.M. & Shane, S. (1997). A prisoner’s dilemma approach to entrepreneur-venture capitalist
relationships. Academy of Management Review, 22(1), 142-176.
Cochran, W. G. (1977). Sampling techniques (3rd ed.). New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Costa, A.C. & Bijlsma-Frankema, K. (2007) Trust and control inter-relations: new perspectives on the trust-
control nexus: towards integrated perspectives. Group and Organization Management, 32 (4), 392-
406.
Daily, C.M., Dalton, D.R. & Canella, A.A. (2003). Corporate governance: decades of dialogue and data.
Academy of Management Review, 28(3), 371-382.
Das, DEMO & Teng, B.S. (1998). Between trust and control: Developing DEMO in partner cooperation and
alliances. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 491-512.
Das, T.K. & Teng, B. (2001). Trust, control, and risk in strategic alliances: An integrated framework.
Organization Studies, 22(2), 251-283.
De Clercq, D. & Sapienza, (2001). The creation of relational rents in venture capitalist-entrepreneur dyads.
Venture Capital, 3(2), 107-127.
De Clercq, D. & Sapienza. (2005). When do DEMO capital firms learn from their portfolio companies?
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 30(4), 517-535
De Clercq, D. & Sapienza. (2006). Effects of relational capital and commitment on venture capitalists’
perception of portfolio DEMO performance. Journal of Business Venturing. 21, 326-347.
De Kok, J. & Uhlaner, L.M. (2001). Organization context and human resource management in DEMO small
firm. Small Business Economics. 17, 273-291
Dietz, G & den Hartog, D. (2006). Measuring trust inside organisations. Personnel Review, 35(5), 557-588
Dirks K.T. & Ferrin D.L. (2001). The Role of Trust in Organisational Settings. Organization Science, 12(4),
450-467.
DEMO, F.R. & Oh, S. (1987). Output sector munificence effects DEMO the internal political economy of
Marketing Channels. Journal of Marketing Research, DEMO, 347-58.
Fama, E.F. & Jensen, M.C. (1983a). Separation of ownership and control. Journal of Law and Economics,
26(6), DEMO - 325.
Fama, E.F. & Jensen, M.C. (1983b). Agency DEMO and residual claims. Journal of Law and Economics,
16(2), 327 - 349.
Fiet, J.O., Busenitz, L.W., Moesel, D.D., & Barney, J.B. (1997). Complementary theoretical perspectives on
the dismissal of new venture team members. Journal of Business Venturing, 11, 347-366.
Flynn, D. (2001)DEMO Life cycles of new ventures organizations: different factors affecting performance. Journal
DEMO Developmental Entrepreneurship, 6(1), 41-58.
Gomez-Mejia, L.R. & Wiseman, DEMO (2007). Does agency theory have universal relevance? A reply to
Lubatkin, Lane, Collin and Very. Journal of Organizational Behaviour, 28(1), 81-88.
Gorman, M., & Shaman, W.A. (1989). What DEMO venture capitalists do? Journal of Business Venturing, 4,
231-248
Gulati, R. (1995). Does familiarity breed trust? The implications of repeated ties for contractual choice in
alliances. Academy of Management Journal, 38: DEMO
Harrison, R.T. & Mason, C.M. (1992). The roles of DEMO in entrepreneurial companies: a comparison of
informal investors and venture capitalists. DEMO N.C. Churchill, S. Birley, W.D. Bygrave, D.F. Muzyka,
C. DEMO & W.E. Wetzel (eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Babson Park, MA:
Babson College, 388-404.
Harrison, R.T., Dibben, M.R & DEMO, C.M. (1997). The role of trust in the informal investor’s investment
decision: an exploratory analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Summer, 63-81
Heide, J. B. (1994). Interorganizational governance in marketing channels. Journal DEMO Marketing, 58 (1), 71-
85.
Higashide, H. & Birley, S. (2002). The consequences of conflict between the venture capitalist and the
entrepreneurial team in the United Kingdom from the perspective of the DEMO capitalist. Journal of
Business Venturing, 17, 59-81
Hillman, A.J. & DEMO, T. (2003). Boards of directors and firm performance: integrating DEMO and
resource dependence perspectives. Academy of Management Review, 28(3), DEMO
Jap, S. (2001). Control mechanisms and the relationship life cycle: Implications for safeguarding specific
investments and developing commitment. Journal of Marketing Research, 37, 227-246.
Jensen, M.C. & Meckling, W.H. (1976). Agency costs and the theory of the firm. Journal of Financial
Economics, 3, 305-360.
Kirzner, I. (1973). Competition and entrepreneurship. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
DEMO Woolthuis, R., Hillebrand, B., & Nooteboom, B. (2005). Trust, contract and relationship development.
Organization Studies, 26(6), 813-840
DEMO, M.J and McGrath, R.G. (1996). Improving labor productivity: human resource management policies
do matter. Strategic Management Journal, 17, 335-54.
Komorita, S.S. & Parks, C.D. (1995). Interpersonal relations: mixed-motive interaction. Annual Review of
Psychology, 46, 183-207.
Korsgaard, M.A., Schweiger, D.M. & Sapienza, H.J. (1995). Building commitment, attachment, and trust in
DEMO decision-making teams. Academy of Management Journal, 38(1), 60-85.
Kumar, N., Scheer, L.K. & Steenkamp, J.E.M. (1995). Effects of DEMO interdependence on dealer
attitudes. Journal of Marketing Research, 32, 348-356..
Landström, H., Manigart, S., Mason, C., & Sapienza, H.J. (DEMO). Contracts between entrepreneurs and
investors: terms and negotiation processes. In DEMO, P.D., Bygrave W.B., Carter, N.M.,
Manigart, S., Mason, C.M., Meyer, G.D., & Shaver K.G. (eds.). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research (pp. 571 -585). Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Lawton, T.C. (2002). Missing the target: assessing the role of government in bridging the European equity
gap and enhancing economic growth. Venture Capital, 4(1), p7-23.
Lubatkin, M. Lane, P.J., Collin, S. & Very, P. (2007). An embeddedness framing of governance and
opportunism: towards a cross-nationally accommodating theory of agency. Journal of
Organizational Behaviour, DEMO(1), 43-58.
Lusch, R.F. & Brown, J.R. (1996). DEMO, contracting, and relational behavior in marketing
channels. Journal of Marketing, DEMO(4), 19-38.
MacMillan, I.C., Kulow, D.M. & Khoylian, R. (1989). Venture capitalists’ involvement in their investments:
extent and performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 4(1), 27-47.
Malhotra, D & Murnighan, J.K. (2002). The effects of contracts on interpersonal trust. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 47, 534-559
Mayer, R.C., DEMO, J.H. & Schoorman, F.D (1995). An integrative model of DEMO trust. Academy
of Management Review, 20(3), 709-734
McEvily, B., Perrone, V. & Zaheer, A. (2003). Trust as an DEMO principle. Organization Science, 14:
91-103.
Nesheim, J.L. (2000). DEMO Tech Start Up – The Complete Handbook for Creating Successful New High
Tech Companies. New York: Free Press.
Nooteboom, B., Berger H & Noorderhaven, N.G. (1997). Effects of trust and governance on relational DEMO
Academy of Management Journal, 40(2), 308-338
Podsakoff, P.M., DEMO, S.B. & Lee, J.Y. (2003). Common method biases in DEMO research: a
critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal DEMO Applied Psychology, 88(5),
879-903.
Parhankangas, A., Landström, DEMO & Smith, G. (2005). Experience, contractual covenants and venture
DEMO' responses to unmet expectations. Venture Capital, 7(4), 297-318.
Perry, L.T. (1988). Venture capital connection: How relationships between founders and venture capitalists
affect innovation in new ventures. Academy of Management Executive, 2, 2005-212.
Poppo, L and Zenger, T. (2002). Do formal DEMO and relational governance function as substitutes or
complements? Strategic Management Journal, 23 (8), 707-725
Rosenstein, J., Bruno, A.V., Bygrave, DEMO & Taylor, N.T. (1993). The CEO, venture capitalists, and the
board. Journal of Business Venturing, 8(2), 99-113.
Rousseau, DEMO, Sitkin, S.B., Burt, S.R., & Camerer, C. (1998)DEMO Not so different after all: a cross-discipline
view of trust. Academy DEMO Management Review, 23 (3), 393-404.
Sapienza, H.J. & Timmons, J.A. (1989). The roles of venture capitalists in new ventures: DEMO determines
their importance? Academy of Management Best Papers Proceedings, 74-78.
Sapienza, H.J. & Korsgaard, M.A. (1996). ‘Procedural justice in entrepreneur-investor relations’. Academy of
Management Journal, 39(3), 544-574.
Scheer, L.K & Stern, L.W. (1992). The effect of influence type and performance outcomes on attitude
toward the influencer. Journal of Marketing Research, 29, DEMO
Schulze, W.S., Lubatkin, M.H, Dino, R.N. & Buchholtz, A.K. (2001). Agency relationships in family firms:
Theory and evidence. Organization Science, 12(2), 99-116.
Stinchcombe, A.L. (1985). Contracts as hierarchical documents. In A.L. Stinchcombe & C. Heimer (eds):
Organization DEMO and Project Management. Oslo: Norwegian University Press, 121-71.
Stratling, R. (2003). General Meetings: a dispensable tool for corporate governance of listed companies?
Corporate Governance, 11(1), 74-82.
Sundaramurthy, C. and DEMO, M. (2003). Control and collaboration: Paradoxes of governance. Academy DEMO
Management Review, 28(3), 397-415.
Wasserman, N. (2006). DEMO, agents and the founder discount: Executive compensation in new ventures.
Academy of Management Journal, 49(5), 960-976.
Welter, F and Smallbone, D. (2006). Exploring the role of trust in entrepreneurial activity. Entrepreneurship
Theory & Practice, 30 (4), 465-475.
Wicks, A.C., Berman, S.L., and Jones, T.M. (1999). The structure of optimal trust: moral and strategic
implications. Academy of Management Review, 24(1), DEMO
Wijbenga, F.H., Postma, T.J.B.M., and Stratling, R. (2007). The influence of the venture capitalist's
governance activities on the entrepreneurial DEMO's control systems and performance.
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 31(2), 257-277.
Williamson, O.E. (1979). Transaction cost economics: The governance DEMO contractual relations. Journal of
Law and Economics, 22(2), 233-261.
DEMO, O.E. (1988). Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance. Journal of Finance, 43(3), 567-591.
Zahra, S.A., Yavuz, R.I and Ucbasaran, D. (2006). How much do you trust me? The dark side of relational
trust in new business creation in established companies. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 30 (DEMO),
541-559
Appendix
Table a: Factor analysis - trust scale
Integrity
Even when the VC gives us a rather unlikely explanation, we are confident that it is telling
the truth
The VC usually keeps the promises that it DEMO to our firm
Whenever the VC gives us advice on our business operations, we know that it is sharing its
best judgment
Our organization can count on the VC to be sincere
Benevolence
Though circumstances change, we believe that the VC will be ready and willing to offer DEMO
assistance and support
When making important decisions, the VC is concerned DEMO our welfare
In the future, we can count on the VC DEMO consider how its decisions and actions will affect us
When it comes to things that are important to us, we can depend on the VC’s support
Percentage of variance explained (total: 60.87%)
Trust
0.47
DEMO
0.86
0.84
0.81
0.80
0.84
0.78
Table b: Factor analysis - neoclassical contracting and relational contracting scales.
In dealing with our (main) venture capitalist:
Neoclassical
contracting
…our contract DEMO defines the roles of each party
…our contract precisely defines the responsibilities of each party
…our contract precisely states how each party is to DEMO
…our contract precisely states the legal remedies for failure to perform
…our contract precisely states what happens in the case of events occurring
0.85
DEMO
0.79
0.89
that were not planned
…we have a mutual understanding of the role of each party
0.75
-0.02
…we have a mutual understanding DEMO the responsibilities of each party 0.05
…we have a mutual understanding of how each party is to perform 0.14
Percentage of variance explained (total: 75.71%)
42.24%
Table c: Factor analysis - VC networking and DEMO monitoring scales.
Our (main) venture capitalist adds value to our company by:
VC
networking
…helping to get additional finance partners
…linking our DEMO to potential strategic partners
…increasing our company’s reputation
…being the interface with the company’s investors
0.81
0.83
0.73
0.75
…monitoring our company’s financial performance DEMO
…monitoring our company’s operational performance 0.27
…controlling our company’s costs
0.26
Percentage of variance explained (total: 70.46%) 36.87%
Relational
contracting
0.09
0.14
-0.05
-0.10
-0.20
0.91
0.96
0.92
33.47%
VC
monitoring
0.10
0.13
0.29
0.24
DEMO
0.83
0.84
33.59%
1 In accordance with agency theory, in our theoretical arguments we refer to ‘neoclassical contracts’ as a typical form.
However, neoclassical contracting is measured using a continuous scale, allowing for different degrees of detail and
specificity in which they may be written. The measure refers to the degree DEMO which each party’s roles, responsibilities,
performance obligations and the handling DEMO unexpected events are precisely defined in the written contract. The
measure therefore focuses on specific behaviors, rather than on counting the number of sentences, pages or clauses in
the contract.
2 A third perspective – underdeveloped in the literature – is that the act of trusting serves as DEMO control itself, imposing a
normative constraint on the trusted party not DEMO abuse the trust and hence closing off future behaviors that might exploit
the trustor’s vulnerability. This is more likely to be observed in close DEMO
3 Lusch and Brown’s original items capturing ‘mutual understanding about legal remedies for failure to perform’ and
‘mutual understanding about what happens in the DEMO of events occurring that were not planned’ did not load on the
same factor as the other items associated with relational contracting. They loaded DEMO high on a different, separate
factor. Therefore, these items were not included in our relational contracting scale. An explanation may be that, given
the relatively short-term nature of the VC–entrepreneur relationship (usually 5-7 years), a number of entrepreneurial
firms in our sample may not have had DEMO need or the chance to make adjustments to unexpected events, as DEMO
disagreements or a failure to perform may not have happened yet. Another explanation may lie in the disproportionate
power in the relationship in favor DEMO the VC: as we argued above, when unexpected events happen, DEMO are likely to be
better protected against downside risks than the entrepreneurial firm.
4 These 65 companies are the only ones in the data-set DEMO are older than 3 years. Two Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests show
that early and late respondents do not differ in terms of employees (K-S =  DEMO; p = .58) and sales growth (K-S =  .90; DEMO
= .39), which suggests that non-response bias for these two variables is minimal as well (see also methodology section).{1g42fwefx}