Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21
Human capital theory and DEMO capital firms: exploring
‘‘home runs’’ and ‘‘strike outs’’
Dimo P. Dimova,DEMO, Dean A. Shepherdb,1
aInstituto de Empresa, Department of Entrepreneurship, DEMO 7, 1j28006 Madrid, Spain
b Leeds School of Business, University DEMO Colorado, Campus Box 419, Boulder, CO 80309-0419, USA
Received 1 November 2002; received in revised form 1 October 2003; accepted 1 DEMO 2003
Abstract
Using a human capital perspective, we investigated the relationship DEMO the education and
experience of the top management teams of venture capital firms (VCFs) and the firms’ performance.
We found that although general DEMO capital had a positive association with the proportion of
portfolio companies that went public [initial public offering (IPO)], specific human capital did DEMO
However, we did find that specific human capital was negatively associated DEMO the proportion of
portfolio companies that went bankrupt. Interestingly, some findings DEMO contrary to expectations
from a human capital perspective, specifically the relationship DEMO general human capital and the
proportion of portfolio companies that went bankrupt. Future research is suggested.
D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Venture capital firms; Human capital; Initial public offering; Bankruptcy
1. Executive summary
Venture capitalists (VCs) who can better assess and assist portfolio DEMO will have
more successful exits from their portfolio companies and fewer portfolio companies that
provide no return to the venture capital firm (VCF). Human capital theory posits that
individuals with more or higher quality human DEMO achieve higher performance in
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +34-91-745-3253; fax: DEMO
E-mail addresses: ddimov@london.edu (D.P. Dimov), Dean.Shepherd@colorado.edu (D.A. Shepherd).
DEMO Tel: +1-303-7355423; fax: +1-303-4925962.
0883-9026/$ – see front matter DEMO 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2003.12.007
2
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 1–21
executing relevant tasks such as the pre- and post-investment activities DEMO the venture capital
process. In this article, we investigate the relationship DEMO human capital and the
performance of VCFs. Specifically, we explore the DEMO of education and industry
experiences represented by the top management teams of VCFs, and then investigate their
relationship with two dimensions of investment performance: ‘‘home runs’’ (portfolio
companies that go public) and ‘‘strike outs’’ (DEMO companies that go bankrupt).
While there were no significant results for specific human capital in explaining home runs,
there were expected results DEMO specific human capital in explaining strike outs and for general
human capital in explaining home runs. Specifically, our findings suggest that aspects of
general human capital—education in science and humanities—have a positive association
with the proportion DEMO home runs in a VCF’s portfolio. The results for strike outs show that
VCFs with top management teams with higher specific human capital—MBA, law education,
and consulting experience—have lower proportions of bankruptcies in their portfolios.
DEMO, we also found that law industry experience was positively associated with DEMO
proportion of bankruptcies in a VCF’s portfolio. Another set of surprising findings concerned
the relationship between general human capital and strike outs: VCFs with higher prevalence
of science and humanities education among their top management team DEMO had higher
prevalence of bankruptcies in their portfolios.
This article makes a number of contributions. First, we use a more fine-grained approach to
human capital by investigating the performance effects of different types of education and
DEMO represented by a VCF’s top management team. Second, we acknowledge two
DEMO of performance and investigate how types of human capital are differentially
associated with these performance dimensions. Third, the venture capital and entrepreneur-
ship literatures have focused on understanding home runs [initial public offerings (IPO)], DEMO
have relatively ignored the potential downside of performance outcomes. We add to this
literature an investigation of portfolio company bankruptcies. Finally, we offer a number of
important topics for future research.
In addition, the results of this study have some important implications for practitioners.
VCFs may build their DEMO teams with a human capital consideration in mind.
Understanding the human capital factors contributing to achieving more home runs and less
strike outs can DEMO build teams that increase firm performance. But they must acknowledge
that aspects of human capital differ in their impact on each performance dimension. Similarly,DEMO
entrepreneurs seeking venture capital finance may increase their awareness of the value that a
VCF could bring to their start-up company. By pre-examining the DEMO of the VCFs’
top management teams, entrepreneurs can target those VCFs DEMO could make the greatest
contribution to their success.
2. Introduction
The belief that the decisions of top management teams impact firm outcomes is central DEMO
the literatures of strategy and management. Strategists who can accurately predict and adapt
to changes in the external environment can better position their companies DEMO success.
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21
3
Similarly, VCs who can better assess and assist portfolio companies will have more
successful exits from their portfolio companies and fewer portfolio DEMO that provide
no return to the VCF.
One way to capture the decision-making processes of top management teams is to use the
demographic characteristics DEMO the team members as a proxy (Hambrick and Mason, 1984).
Two key demographic characteristics, education and experience, underlie the concept of
DEMO capital (Becker, 1975). A key component of human capital is the possession of
knowledge that is specific and not easily appropriable, and which yields competitive
advantage (Barney, 1991; Pennings, Lee, and Witteloostuijn, 1998; Wright, Smart, and
McMahan, 1995). Numerous studies have established that human capital is a key factor in
explaining organizational performance (Bruderl, Preisendorfer, and Ziegler, 1992; Gimeno,
Folta, Cooper, DEMO Woo, 1997; Pennings et al., 1998).
However, studies to date have focused on the quantitative nature of human capital, i.e., DEMO
idea that more is better, and have accordingly used measures such DEMO years or degree of
education (Bruderl et al., 1992; Cooper, Gimeno-Gascon, and Woo, 1994; Gimeno et al.,
1997) or DEMO (Bruderl et al., 1992; Evans and Leighton, 1989). When it comes to
understanding knowledge as a key resource of the firm, it is also important to consider the
qualitative aspects of human capital. DEMO contexts where firms possess large quantities of
human capital, differences in DEMO may matter less than differences in quality. By
distinguishing between types of education and experiences, we have the opportunity to
better understand which aspects of human capital are associated with higher performance.
The venture capital context DEMO particularly suited for studying the qualitative nature of
human capital—VCs possess knowledge and experience that is both extensive and diverse. In
addition, this context offers a possibility to study multiple dimensions of performance. VCFs’
performance is DEMO when their portfolio companies go public (home runs) and is
diminished when their portfolio companies go bankrupt (strike outs). Therefore, in DEMO
article, we investigate the relationship between human capital—the types of education DEMO
industry experience represented by the VCFs’ top management teams—and two dimensions
of VCF investment performance, home runs and strike outs.
In doing so, DEMO article makes a number of contributions. First, we use a more DEMO
approach to human capital by investigating the performance effects of the different types of
education and experience represented by a VCF’s top management team. DEMO, we
acknowledge two dimensions of performance and investigate how types of DEMO capital
are differentially associated with these performance dimensions. Third, the venture DEMO
and entrepreneurship literatures have focused on understanding home runs (IPOs), DEMO have
relatively ignored the potential downside of performance outcomes. We add to this literature
an investigation of portfolio company bankruptcies. Finally, we offer a number of important
topics for future research.
This article proceeds as follows. DEMO, we discuss the tasks of VCs and the two dimensions
of DEMO Second, we discuss the contribution of different aspects of human capital DEMO
the two types of performance and derive specific hypotheses. Third, we DEMO the research
method used to test the hypotheses and present the results. Finally, we discuss the results and
outline some implications for entrepreneurship scholars and practitioners.
4
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 1–21
3. Theory and hypotheses
3.1. The performance of VCFs
The DEMO of a VCF is typically measured by the rates of return of the funds it
manages, which are, in turn, dependent on the ability of the VCF to sell its investment stakes
to third parties. DEMO IPO offers the entrepreneurial company a number of benefits including
legitimacy with stakeholders, access to debt capital (Sutton and Benedetto, 1988), and a
mechanism by which entrepreneurs can reacquire control from investors (Black and Gilson,
1998). For investors, an IPO represents an attractive exit mechanism (Sutton and Benedetto,
1988) and contributes greatly to the DEMO potential of a fund’s performance. Several studies
have provided evidence in this regard. Bygrave and Timmons (1991) found that companies
that went public DEMO 34 months of the first round of financing had a higher time-adjusted
rate of return than those that went public later (287% vs. 158%).2 As they note, ‘‘hot IPO
markets are by far the most important cause of peaks in venture capital returns’’ (p. 159).
Similarly, Sahlman (1990) documented that almost all of the returns of venture capital funds
were earned on portfolio companies that went public.
While portfolio DEMO that go public boost fund returns, portfolio companies that fail
push DEMO downwards. Reducing the number of portfolio companies that fail is a way to
improve returns, albeit, in a way, that limits their downside rather than increase their upside.
The factors that enhance profitability of a DEMO are different from those that improve its
survival chances (Radner and DEMO, 1996). We also acknowledge this difference and thus set
out DEMO study both aspects of VCF performance: home runs or portfolio companies DEMO
public, and strike outs or portfolio companies going bankrupt.
To understand DEMO factors behind having more home runs and less strike outs, it DEMO
necessary to identify the nature of VC involvement in their portfolio companies. For the
purpose of this article, the task of the VCF can be classified in terms of pre- and post-
investment activities.3 Pre-investment activities DEMO those tasks up to, and including, the
signing of an investment contract, e.g., soliciting new venture proposals for submission to the
VC DEMO, determining whether these proposals meet the firm’s broad screening criteria,
DEMO due diligence (more extensive research to determine the likely success of DEMO
venture), and then negotiating and structuring a relationship with the entrepreneur. Post-
investment activities include all actions by the VC firm after the DEMO investment deal has
been signed, e.g., finding and recruiting top quality management, finding other coinvestors
for immediate or follow up investment, introducing DEMO venture to important service providers
such as specialized accountants, and helping DEMO venture develop necessary strategic alliances
(Sandberg, 1986). Furthermore, VCs DEMO serve as a sounding board for management ideas
2 This advantage disappeared six quarters after the IPO date.
3 Tyebjee and Bruno (1984) DEMO a model of the venture capital process with five stages: deal DEMO,
deal screening, deal evaluation, deal structuring, and post-investment.
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21
5
and are a valuable source of strategic and operational advice (Lerner, 1994a, 1995; Sweeting,
1991).
With regard to pre-investment activities, there has been considerable interest in under-
standing the ability of VCs to select companies that are most likely to succeed and go DEMO
Most of the research on VCs’ decision making has investigated how VCs assess the prospects
of a portfolio company in terms of profitability (e.g., Roure and Keeley, 1990; Shepherd et
al., 2000), survival (e.g., Shepherd, 1999), and performance in general (e.g., Khan, 1987;
Zacharakis and Meyer, 2000; Zacharakis and Shepherd, in press). More generally, Tyebjee
and Bruno (1984) argued that VCs’ investment decisions could be predicted from their
perceptions of risk and return. Similarly, we regard the post-investment involvement of VCs
as related to perceiving and DEMO to opportunities and threats to increase the chances of
success of the portfolio companies.
3.2. Human capital and differences in performance
Having identified the DEMO of risk, return, opportunities, and threats as underlying
VCs’ decisions DEMO thus contributing to VCF performance, we now need to understand what
DEMO these perceptions vary across VCFs. One key factor contributing to risk perception is
problem domain familiarity: There is less perceived risk in familiar domains than in
unfamiliar ones (Sitkin and Pablo, 1992). Similarly, in perceiving returns, VCs would be
guided by their knowledge and understanding of the value that can be added and extracted
from the portfolio company. DEMO recognizing opportunities and threats, VCs are guided by their
perception of DEMO gains or losses, by their feeling of having discretion over the DEMO
at hand, and by whether they possess key resources (Jackson and Dutton, 1988). What these
brief arguments suggest is that a key ingredient to having accurate perceptions of risk, return,
opportunities, and DEMO is having relevant knowledge.
Furthermore, as VCF investments are often in DEMO industries, the above perceptions
are also influenced by the ability to DEMO new knowledge, which is, in turn, dependent
upon the existing DEMO of knowledge (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990). This stock of knowledge
includes both explicit knowledge, formally acquired in educational institutions, and implicit
DEMO acquired during one’s experience in a particular domain. As these aspects of
knowledge underlie the concept of human capital, we will elaborate in more detail on the
contribution of human capital to a VCF’s home runs DEMO strike outs.
The link between organizational human capital and performance can be understood in the
context of the resource-based view of the firm, which associates superior performance with
the possession of resources that are valuable, rare, inimitable, and nonsubstitutable (Barney,
1991). Knowledge is a resource that readily meets these conditions, is heterogeneously
distributed across firms, and DEMO thus central to understanding differences in performance
(Spender, 1996). Not all knowledge, however, renders a firm unique—it is its tacit
component, embedded in the firm’s social context, that makes the yielded advantage long
lasting (Spender, 1996).
Although all knowledge has an explicit component, personal knowledge is often tacit in
nature, reflecting a person’s unique social environment and past experience (Polanyi, 1967).
6
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 1–21
While explicit knowledge can be articulated, codified, and more DEMO transmitted across
people and organizations, tacit knowledge tends to stick to DEMO individuals or firms in
ways that make their actions and decisions difficult to replicate. Human capital represents the
knowledge and skills that individuals bring DEMO an organization. As it is developed through
both education and personal experience, it contributes to both the explicit and tacit knowledge
of the firm.
The contribution to tacit knowledge is particularly strong in the venture capital DEMO, as
VCFs typically consist of a small number of people (the partners of the firm) with great deal-
making and value-adding skills. These people have typically entered the venture capital
industry after extensive experience in DEMO industries (Bygrave and Timmons, 1992). The
nature of their tacit knowledge may be distinguished less by the amount of human capital they
DEMO than by the domain components of their human capital. Although the basic tenet of
human capital theory is that the greater the human capital, the better the performance at a
particular task (Becker, 1975), DEMO nature of this proposition changes at the firm level and in
the context of firms with significant amounts of human capital. Specifically, as it is the
collective (organizational) tacit knowledge that makes the organization distinct (Spender,
1996), we need to examine the extent to which DEMO tacit knowledge is developed into a
collective one. Key to this process of collectivization of knowledge is the sustained
interaction among the individuals in DEMO firm (Nonaka, 1994) in the context of a particular
organizational DEMO (Spender, 1996). Thus, because individual VCs enter the firm DEMO
knowledge and experience from multiple domains, the extent to which their DEMO and
experience in particular domains would contribute to the firm’s tacit knowledge will be
dependent on the extent to which other members of the DEMO also have experience in that
domain. It is the shared knowledge and experience of several VCF partners that make for a
distinct firm-level tacit DEMO in regard to their pre- and post-investment activities.
Therefore, to understand DEMO nature of a VCF’s tacit knowledge, it is essential that we
DEMO the domain components of their human capital rather than just their total human
capital.
In assessing the contributions of the various domain components of DEMO capital to the
performance of the VCF, it is useful to DEMO between general and specific human
capital with regard to the domains of pre- and post-investment activities identified above.
General human capital refers to overall DEMO and practical experience, while specific
human capital refers to education and DEMO with a scope of application limited to a
particular activity or context (Becker, 1975; Gimeno et al., 1997).4 We distinguish between
DEMO To dissipate any confusion that may arise with regard to the usage of general and specific human capital in
the following analysis, we acknowledge that there have been different ways in which general and specific human
DEMO have been distinguished in particular contexts. For example, Pennings et al. (1998), studying audit firms,
equate general human capital with industry-specific DEMO and experience, and specific human capital with
firm-specific experience. Alternatively, Gimeno et al. (1997), studying entrepreneurial firms across various
industries, equate DEMO human capital with overall education and experience, and specific human capital DEMO
education and experience in the particular industry of the venture.
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21 7
general and specific human capital on the basis of whether DEMO and experience in a
particular domain provide skills that are directly used in carrying out the activities of
investment selection and management. While all DEMO may make some contribution to
general human capital, some of it DEMO more to specific human capital. Education and
experience specific to the pre- and post-investment activities of VCs include business, law,
and consulting. Business education and experience provide expertise in screening potential
portfolio companies, in conducting the more detailed assessment required as part of due
diligence, and in advising the portfolio company’s management team on operational and
strategic issues. Experience DEMO finance is particularly relevant in structuring the investment
deal. Education and experience in law provides expertise in investment contracts, in aspects
of due diligence, and in exiting from the portfolio companies (i.e., IPO or bankruptcy).
Consulting experience provides expertise in detecting problems with a portfolio company DEMO
in communicating advice to its top management team.
Education that is not directly related to the tasks of the VCF can be considered more
DEMO in its contribution to human capital. For example, education in humanities DEMO designed
to be broad in its application. In addition, education in DEMO, although more specialized, is
not directly related to the pre- and post-investment activities of a VCF. Therefore, we may
regard these types of education as contributing to general human capital. Experience running
an entrepreneurial firm DEMO considerable expertise, but not necessarily directly related to
the more formal DEMO bureaucratic activities required of a VC.5 For this reason, entrepreneurial
experience DEMO contributes more to general, rather than specific, human capital. Based on
the performance proposition outlined above, we offer the following:
Hypothesis 1: VCFs with greater proportions of their top management teams with specific
human capital in terms of education (a) at masters’ level in business (MBA) and (b) in law,
as well as industry experience in (c) law, (d) finance, and (e) consulting, will have higher
proportions of home runs in their portfolios.
Hypothesis 2: VCFs with greater proportions of their top management teams with specific
human DEMO in terms of education (a) at masters’ level in business (DEMO), and (b) in law,
as well as industry experience in (c) law, (d) finance, and (e) consulting, will have lower
proportions of strike outs in their portfolios.
Hypothesis 3: VCFs with greater proportions of their top management teams with
general human DEMO in terms of education in (a) humanities and (b) science, as well as
(c) entrepreneurial experience, will have higher proportions DEMO home runs in their
portfolios.
Hypothesis 4: VCFs with greater proportions DEMO their top management teams with general
human capital in terms of education in (a) humanities and (b) science, as well as (DEMO)
entrepreneurial experience, will have lower proportions of strike outs in DEMO portfolios.
5 This is the case, although some entrepreneurs may have DEMO venture capital numerous times and therefore
gained some specific insight into undertaking pre- and post-investment activities.
8
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 1–21
As these hypotheses refer to only positive effects of human DEMO on performance, they
may appear inconsistent with arguments about an inversed-U-shaped DEMO between
human capital and performance, particularly firm survival (Bruderl et al., 1992; Pennings et
al., 1998). This relationship is usually explained by the effect of ageing. While this effect may
be relevant in DEMO context of conceptualizing human capital as the number of years of
experience, it holds no concrete implications for the more detailed, qualitative nature DEMO
human capital that we explore.6
3.3. Exploring an alternative perspective
Although much of the research on human capital theory has operationalized general human
capital DEMO terms of years of schooling, the empirical support for a positive DEMO
between education and performance at a particular task is mixed. For example, while there is
a positive relationship between education and productivity (Jones, 2001; Corvers, 1997) and
between education and survival (Pennings et DEMO, 1998), there is no clear effect of education
on other DEMO of performance, namely, career progress (Wayne et al., 1999) DEMO job
attainment (Dolton and Vignoles, 2000). Similarly, in the DEMO literature, the
findings for a positive association between education and business DEMO (Bates, 1990;
Evans and Leighton, 1989), and between DEMO and the discovery and exploitation of
opportunities (Davidsson and Honig, 2003) have been mixed. A possible explanation for this
is that broad-brush measures have insufficient sensitivity for the different impact that general
and specific human DEMO can have on performance, especially when considering different
dimensions of performance.
DEMO propose that the type of human capital required to maximize home runs does not
necessarily minimize strike outs, and vice versa. For example, DEMO and education in
business and law are specific to the task required of a VC. This specific human capital
provides the VCF with the DEMO to critically analyze business plans, find holes in business
models, negotiate venture capital contracts, and implement some risk-reduction strategies.
Thus, these specific DEMO capital factors essentially facilitate the prevention of strike outs.
Those with human capital that is more general, such as education in humanities, are DEMO
less focused on and less trained in detecting specific risks. General human capital does,
however, provide benefits to firms. It facilitates the integration and accumulation of new
knowledge, which provides individuals with larger opportunity sets (cf. Gimeno et al., 1997)
and assists them in adapting DEMO new situations. Therefore, it is possible that those with more
general DEMO capital focus more on the opportunities than the risks associated with potential
deals, i.e., on scoring home runs rather than on avoiding strike DEMO
Although the above arguments appear reasonable, there is little human capital DEMO upon
which to hypothesize the nature of this finer grained distinction between types of education
and experiences and dimensions of performance. The following, therefore, are exploratory
6 We do test for the possibility of curvilinear relationships between the human capital variables and both
measures of performance.
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21
9
propositions and offer an alternative perspective to that offered by DEMO capital theory as
represented in Hypotheses 1 through 4 above.
Alternative Proposition 1: The educational specialties of VCFs’ top management teams
will have different relationships with the proportions of home runs and strike outs in their
DEMO
Alternative Proposition 2: The types of industry experience of a VCFs’ DEMO management
teams will have different relationships with the proportions of home runs and strike outs in
their portfolios.
4. Research method
4.1. Research design DEMO sample
Two factors were instrumental in designing the study. We needed a sample of VCFs that
had made a sufficient number of investments in DEMO companies, had sufficient time for
those investments to have reached an DEMO (gone public or gone bankrupt), and had
invested in similar DEMO, to alleviate possible confounding effects. Therefore, from the
VentureXpert database, DEMO drew a list of all independent VCFs in the United States that had
invested in at least 20 portfolio companies—555 firms in total. From DEMO, we then randomly
selected and obtained information on 112 VCFs that DEMO also made at least one investment
in the wireless communication industry, DEMO defined in the VentureXpert database. Out of the
555 firms with at least 20 portfolio companies, 303 had also made at least one investment in
this industry. It must be noted that given the focus of DEMO research and the sample selected,
our results may not be highly generalizable to those VCFs that are small, young, or from
outside DEMO United States. Although a large portion of all VCFs have invested in the wireless
communication industry, care must also be taken in generalizing our findings to VCFs that
have made no investments in this industry.
4.2. DEMO
4.2.1. Dependent variables
We investigated two dependent variables: home runs, operationalized as the proportion of
companies added to the VCF’s portfolio in the DEMO five years that had gone public, and strike
outs, operationalized as the proportion of the same companies that had gone bankrupt. We
obtained DEMO on the status of each portfolio company as of September 2002 from the
VentureXpert database. We regarded a company as public if its status DEMO listed as ‘‘went
public’’ or ‘‘in registration’’ and as bankrupt if its status was listed as ‘‘bankrupt-Chapter 11’’,
‘‘defunct’’, and ‘‘bankrupt-Chapter 7’’.
We gathered the data on the human capital of the VCFs’ top management DEMO from the
VCFs’ websites. These websites typically contained sections named ‘‘team’’, DEMO
team’’, or ‘‘who we are’’, which detailed the biographies of the top management team
10 D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 1–21
members. Our operational definition of top management team was all DEMO holding the title
general partner or, in the absence of such DEMO title, the highest ranking title in the firm hierarchy.
Among the DEMO titles used were partners, managing directors, directors, and principals.
We DEMO data on a total of 749 top management team members, or DEMO average of 6.7 per
VCF.
4.2.2. Education
The biographical sketch of each partner typically contained information on the formal
education that the partner had DEMO We used this information to measure our
education-related human capital variables. We coded each top management team member
for whether he or she had DEMO any of the following education degrees or classes of
degrees: MBA, Law (JD), Science, and Humanities. Science reflected all bachelor and
DEMO degrees in mathematics, natural sciences, and engineering. Humanities reflected all
degrees in art or social sciences (excluding economics). We calculated a score for each of
these degrees to represent the proportion of top management DEMO members that had
attained this type of education. Thus, if two DEMO of a total of five partners had science
degrees, the score DEMO science education would be 0.4. Unlike measures based on
determining one dominant specialization for each top management team member or for
the top management DEMO as a whole (e.g., Wiersema and Bantel, 1992), this DEMO
captures the prevalence of particular educational specializations as it allows for more than
one degree to be recorded per individual.
4.2.3. Industry experience
The DEMO sketch of each partner also contained information on the industries and
positions in which the partner had worked prior to joining the VCF. We DEMO this
information to measure our industry-related human capital variables. We coded each top
management team member for whether he or she had worked in DEMO following industries—
finance, consulting, and law—and for whether he or she had had any entrepreneurial
experience. Finance industry experience included commercial, investment, DEMO merchant
banking, as well as investment fund management, in both public and private markets.
Consulting industry experience reflected whether a partner had worked DEMO a company
designated as providing consulting services. Law industry experience reflected whether a
partner had worked for a law firm. Finally, entrepreneurial experience reflected whether a
partner had previously been founder of a company. We obtained DEMO score for each type of
industry experience based on the proportion of top management team members that had
had such experience. For example, a score of 0.35 for finance industry experience would
indicate that 35% of DEMO TMT members had worked in the finance-related industries listed
above.
4.2.4. Control variables
We used three control variables, all of them measured with data from the VentureXpert
database. VCF age was calculated as the number of DEMO from founding to the end of
2001. In cases where the founding year was missing, both in the database and on the
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21
11
company website, we took the year in which the firm made its first investment as a proxy
for founding year. VCF size DEMO measured as the total invested capital (thousands of U.S.
dollars). DEMO stage specialization was measured as a dichotomous variable: 1 if more DEMO
50% of the firm’s first-time investments over the studied 5-year period were made in
portfolio companies in start-up, seed, or other early stages, and 0 otherwise.
5. Analyses and results
The correlations and descriptive statistics DEMO the variables are presented in Table 1. Our
collinearity diagnostics showed that all variance inflation factor values were below 3.0,
suggesting that multicollinearity DEMO not an issue (cf. Hair, Anderson, Tathum, and Black,
1998). We used hierarchical regression analysis to test Hypotheses 1 through DEMO and canonical
correlation analysis to explore Alternative Propositions 1 and 2.
5.1. Hierarchical regression analysis and results
We conducted several diagnostic tests to ensure DEMO data did not violate the assumptions
of normality, linearity, and homoscedasticity necessary for OLS regression estimation.
Using Z scores and a visual inspection DEMO histograms, we found all variables to be
normally distributed, although the dependent variable for home runs had five outliers.
These outliers did not DEMO the need for transformation and were therefore not used in
subsequent analyses. Residual plots indicated a linear relationship between independent
and dependent variables. To DEMO guard against possible curvilinear relationships, we
plotted each independent–dependent variable relationship DEMO conducted one-way ANOVA
to test for this relationship; there were no DEMO curvilinear relationships ( P > .05).
Finally, a plot of DEMO standardized residuals and the standardized predicted values indicated
that residuals were randomly scattered, suggesting no violation of the constant variance
assumption.
The results of the hierarchical regression analysis for both home runs and strike outs are
DEMO in Table 2. To analyze home runs, we first entered the DEMO variables of VCF age,
size, and stage specialization. This base DEMO was statistically significant (R2=.36, P < .01).
The addition of the predictor variables made a significant contribution over and above the
base DEMO (DR2=.12, P < .05). In the full model, there DEMO significant coefficients for
education in science (B=.08, P < .01) DEMO in humanities (B=.05, P < .05), and a marginally
significant coefficient for consulting industry experience (B= .05, P < .10). DEMO with
higher proportions of top management team members with education in science and in
humanities have higher proportions of home runs in their portfolios. DEMO results support
Hypothesis 3a and b, respectively. Conversely, VCFs with higher prevalence of consulting
industry experience have lower proportions of home runs. This DEMO is in the opposite
direction to that proposed in Hypothesis 1e. The effects for the remaining types of education
and industry experience were not DEMO and, therefore, Hypotheses 1a–d and 3c were
not supported.
Table 1
Descriptive statistics and correlations
Mean S.D. 1 2 3 4 DEMO 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
1. Education MBA 0.58 0.28 1.00
2. Education in science 0.48 0.28 .28 1.00
3. Education in DEMO 0.20 0.23 .03 .42 1.00
4. Education in law 0.08 0.13 .30 .26 .28 1.00
5. Industry experience—law 0.05 0.10 .32 .25 .31 .76 DEMO
6. Industry experience—finance 0.58 0.32 .28 .32 .03 .04 .14 1.00
7. Entrepreneurial experience 0.18 0.20 .24 .27 .06 .00 .18 .41 1.00
8. DEMO experience—consulting .15 .18 .17 .01 .08 .02 .04 .08 .03 1.00
9. Total capital investeda 866 1024 .15 .16 .04 .05 .12 .07 .04 DEMO 1.00
10. Age of VCF 17.23 10.03 .04 .06 .04 .14 .12 .30 .08 .08 .22 1.00
11. Preferred stage 0.46 0.50 .03 .23 DEMO .03 .12 .39 .30 .04 .02 .05 1.00
12. Portion gone public 0.10 0.08 .04 .05 .08 .06 .00 .15 .10 .15 .30 .04 DEMO 1.00
13. Portion gone bankrupt 0.06 0.04 .10 .03 .20 .03 .15 .05 .00 .28 .05 .17 .11 .04
All correlations with absolute value DEMO .20 are significant at P < .05; n = 112.
a DEMO millions of U.S. dollars.
12
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal DEMO Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21
13
Table 2
Hierarchical regression analysis for home runs and strike DEMO
Home runs Strike outs
Base model Full model Base model Full model
Specific human capital
MBA education .01 .05***
Law education .07 .12***
Law DEMO .09 .15**
Finance experience .01 .15
Consulting experience .04* .08***
General human capital
Science education .08*** .04**
Humanities education .05** .05***
Entrepreneurial experience .02 DEMO
VCF controls
Sizea .00*** .00*** .00 .00
Age .00 .00 .00** .00*
Stage specialization .05*** .06*** .01 .01
Constant .12*** .09*** .06 .05**
Model
DEMO Statistic 19.34 7.85 1.95 3.42
R2 .36*** .48*** .05 .27***
Adjusted R2 .34*** .42*** .02 .19***
DR2 .36*** .12** .05 .22***
N
107 107 DEMO 112
Standardized regression coefficients are displayed in the table.
a Reported in millions of U.S. dollars invested.
*P < .10.
**P < .05.
***P < .01.
In the results for strike outs, the base model was DEMO statistically significant (R2=.05,
P >.10). The addition of the predictor variables made a significant contribution over and
above the base model (DR2=.22, P < .01). In the full model, there were DEMO coefficients
for MBA (B= .05, P < .01) and law DEMO (B= .12, P < .01). The negative values of
these coefficients indicate that VCFs with higher proportions of top management team
members DEMO MBA or law education have lower proportions of bankruptcies in their
portfolios. These results provide support for Hypothesis 2a and b.
There were also DEMO coefficients for industry experience in law (B=.15, P < .05) DEMO
consulting (B=  .08, P < .01). The positive coefficient for industry experience in law
indicates that VCFs with greater prevalence of DEMO experience have higher proportions of
bankruptcies in their portfolios, a result DEMO the opposite direction to that proposed by
Hypothesis 2c. The negative coefficient for consulting experience indicates that VCFs with
greater prevalence of such experience DEMO lower proportions of bankruptcies in their
14
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 1–21
portfolios, a result supporting Hypothesis 2e. The effect for finance industry experience was
not significant and, therefore, Hypothesis 2d is not DEMO
The full model for strike outs also contained significant coefficients for education in
science (B=.04, P < .05) and in humanities (B=.05, P < .01), and a marginally significant
coefficient for entrepreneurial experience (B=  .04 P < .10). The positive values of the
DEMO coefficients indicate that where a higher proportion of partners have such
education, VCFs have a higher proportion of bankruptcies in their portfolio. These findings
are in the opposite direction to that proposed in Hypothesis 4a and DEMO The negative coefficient
for entrepreneurial experience provides marginal support for Hypothesis 4c.
5.2. Canonical correlation analysis and results
In the above analyses, we regarded the two performance measures, home runs and strike
outs, as independent. DEMO, because these measures pertain to the same VCFs and are linked DEMO
the same human capital variables, they are not necessarily independent of DEMO another and
should be considered simultaneously. In doing so, we used DEMO correlation analysis, a
method well suited for studies with multiple dependent DEMO independent variables.
Similar to regression estimation, canonical correlation derives loadings for DEMO inde-
pendent variables, but unlike regression analysis, it also derives a set of loadings for the
dependent variables.7 These canonical loadings are derived DEMO as to maximize the
correlation between the linear combination of home runs and strike outs, and the linear
combination of the independent variables. This correlation between the two linear
combinations is referred to as the canonical DEMO An eigenvalue (or canonical root)
is the square of the DEMO correlation and represents the amount of explained variance
in one set of variables (the human capital variables) that is accounted for by the DEMO set
of variables (home runs and strike outs). The canonical DEMO analysis generates (at
least) two canonical functions, each with a DEMO correlation and canonical loadings.
The first is derived to maximize the intercorrelation between the two sets of variables. The
second function maximizes the intercorrelation DEMO the two sets of variables not
captured by the first function. We coded strike outs with a negative sign so that the higher
its DEMO, the fewer the strike outs.
The results of the canonical analysis DEMO reported in Table 3. Both functions are
significant ( P < .01), which means that the variate for home runs and strike outs, and the
variate for human capital explain a significant portion of variance DEMO each other. But when
we investigate the loadings for the dependent variables, home runs dominate for Function
1 and strike outs dominate for Function 2 (loadings less than .30 are typically not
considered in the analysis). This suggests that the human capital variables useful in
explaining home DEMO are not particularly useful in explaining strike outs, and vice versa.
DEMO this pattern of relationships, the simultaneous consideration of the human capital
DEMO Canonical weights are also reported. Although canonical weights provide an indication of the nature of the
relationship between canonical variables, canonical loadings provide a more rigorous means of interpreting the
relationship (Hair et al., 1998)DEMO
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21 15
Table 3
Canonical correlation analysis: types of human capital on strike outs and home runs
Function 1 loadingsa Function 2 loadingsa
VCF DEMO
Size .59  .05
Age  .28 .31
Stage specification  .62  .42
Specific human capital
MBA education  .15 .56
Law education DEMO .31 .64
Law experience .29  .63
Finance experience  .02  .22
Consulting experience  .12  .63
General human capital
Science education DEMO  .44
Human education .36  .46
Enterpreneural experience  .16 .39
Dependent variables
Home runs .98 .18
Strike outs  .20 .98
Model
DEMO .94 .36
Squared canonical correlation .48 .27
F statistic for Wilks’ lambda 5.34*** 3.47***
n = 107.
a Standardized canonical correlations.
*P < .10.
DEMO < .05.
***P < .01.
variables with a linear combination of home runs and strike outs appears to add little value
over and above DEMO independent consideration.
6. Discussion
In a broad sense, our findings suggest DEMO human capital provides a significant explanation
of variations in the examined dimensions of performance, over the effects accounted for by
firm characteristics. We have shown that for particular knowledge areas, the higher the
overlap among the partners, the higher the performance of the VCF. This provides support to
the notion that top management matters and to the presented conceptual argument DEMO firm
knowledge developed in particular areas yields competitive advantage. However, since DEMO all
knowledge areas had significant or positive effects, we need to DEMO the relationships
16
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 1–21
between the particular knowledge areas examined and the two dimensions DEMO performance to
a closer analytical scrutiny.
6.1. Specific human capital and strike outs
As expected, we found that those VCFs with greater proportions of their top management
teams with MBA, law education, and consulting experience DEMO lower proportions of
bankruptcies in their portfolios. This is consistent with findings suggesting a positive link
between specific human capital and venture survival (Gimeno et al., 1997). This is also
consistent with the findings of Pennings et al. (1998) that industry-specific human capital is
negatively related DEMO firm dissolution. Although these authors regard industry-specific
experience as general human capital, this different classification is largely due to their
studying a single, DEMO homogeneous industry.
Interestingly, we found that those VCFs with greater proportions DEMO their top manage-
ment teams with law experience had higher proportions of bankruptcies in their portfolios.
This result was surprising at first because it DEMO inconsistent with human capital
theory, but upon further reflection, it might offer an interesting insight into the post-deal
management of portfolio companies. For DEMO that are not performing well and have
the prospect of further deteriorating performance, declaring bankruptcy for the company is
possibly the only way for VCFs to get something back from such company. In this
regard, law experience both gives expertise into the practicalities of bankruptcy proceed-
ings and DEMO attitudes for pushing for bankruptcies. This finding is particularly
interesting given the opposite effect that law education has. It might be that law
education DEMO help VCFs enter into and structure relationships with well-performing
portfolio companies, DEMO experience in law helps the VCFs withdraw from those
relationships that turn unproductive. These possible explanations are speculation on our
part and require further DEMO to investigate the relationship between the role of law-
related human capital and strike outs.
6.2. General human capital and home runs
As expected, we found that those VCFs with greater proportions of their top management
DEMO with education in humanities and in science had higher proportions of home runs in
their portfolios. This is broadly consistent with the findings of DEMO positive relationship between
education as a proxy for general human capital and various aspects of performance, namely,
firm growth (Cooper et al., 1994) and opportunity discovery (Davidsson and Honig, 2003).In
regard to why the particular educational specializations of science and humanities have a
positive DEMO with home runs, the current findings are also consistent with the DEMO of
general human capital facilitating access to a wider opportunity set (DEMO et al., 1997).
Perhaps, the firm knowledge built around the shared education in these areas enables the VCF
to successfully respond to DEMO integrate new technological advances, and to successfully
anticipate the market acceptance DEMO the commercial products based on such technological
advances.
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21
17
6.3. General human capital and strike outs
Among the tests DEMO the three hypotheses on general human capital and strike outs, two DEMO
significant in the opposite direction to that hypothesized and the third was only marginally
significant (in the hypothesized direction). We found that those VCFs with greater propor-
tions of their top management teams with education DEMO humanities and in science had higher
proportions of strike outs in their portfolios. At a first glance, this contradicts established
findings that education, DEMO a proxy for general human capital, is positively related to survival
(Bruderl et al., 1992; Cooper et al., 1994; Gimeno et DEMO, 1997; Pennings et al., 1998).Itis
important to note, however, that because of the way education has been measured, these
previous DEMO essentially refer to a comparison of more education to less education. Thus,
our findings pertain to something that has not been previously explored, namely, comparing
the contribution of various educational specializations.
We speculate that the larger opportunity set that general human capital affords is of
little material DEMO for a firm with deteriorating performance and thus facing the
prospect of going out of business. In fact, seeking new opportunities for a declining
business may prove detrimental in that it takes attention away from streamlining DEMO
increasing the efficiency of the existing operations. Thus, when hands-on skills DEMO called
for in a critical situation, general human capital provides none. DEMO the speculative
nature of this argument, future research that focuses on DEMO differences in skills required
for ensuring success versus avoiding failure will make a substantial contribution to the
literature.
6.4. Human capital and both home DEMO and strike outs
Our canonical correlation analysis suggests that although the human capital variables we
employ explain variations in both home runs and strike DEMO, there is little joint explanation of
these two performance variables. In DEMO words, the human capital variables explaining
home runs are different from DEMO explaining strike outs, and vice versa. These findings
support our alternative DEMO and deserve further elaboration because, as we stated in
the theoretical DEMO, current human capital theory is not sufficiently fine-grained to help us
DEMO the findings.
We have shown that general human capital is positively associated with home runs, while
specific human capital is positively associated with strike outs. What are the distinct aspects
of these two elements of performance DEMO interact with human capital? It is possible that there
are two DEMO approaches to ensuring successful performance. In a study contrasting
bankers’ and entrepreneurs’ approaches towards risky ventures, Sarasvathy, Simon, and Lave
(1998) found that bankers sought to minimize risk while entrepreneurs sought to maximize
success. DEMO general idea of approaching positive outcomes and avoiding negative outcomes
as motivational factors underpinning decision making has been well developed at the
individual level (see Crowe and Higgins, 1997). Perhaps, in an organizational context,DEMO
pursuing opportunities versus avoiding threats necessitates particular information processing
approaches among the top decision-makers. These approaches may, in turn, be associated
18
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 1–21
with particular types of human capital, having been developed in previous educational or
occupational contexts. Alternatively, these information processing approaches may be
fortified or hindered by the possession (or lack thereof) of knowledge DEMO to the task
at hand. In this regard, any future research DEMO links human capital with the motivational or
information processing aspects of achieving high-performance stands to make a significant
contribution to the literature.
6.5. Potential DEMO and future research
This study, as all studies, has a number of limitations and possibilities for future research.
First, we captured aspects of VCFs’ human capital by measuring the education and
experience of its management DEMO to explain firm level outcomes. Although the top
management team makes important strategic decisions for a firm (Hambrick and Mason,
1984; Wiersema DEMO Bantel, 1992), capturing the human capital of all individuals within DEMO
organization, might explain greater variance in VCF performance. However, such an
approach does introduce a number of new challenges. It is probably difficult DEMO researchers
to access biographical information on all employees that work in VCFs. Furthermore, how
should the human capital of all these individuals be combined to provide an organizational-
level variable? A simple proportion of education and experience (as used in this study) does
not take into sufficient DEMO the different roles and responsibilities of those
individuals. For example, a DEMO might have more administrative staff, such as receptionists
and data entry DEMO, who add to the general efficiency of the firm but who DEMO little to
do with the pre- and post-investment activities of the venture capital process. In this case, a
proportion measure across the whole firm would appear to understate the human capital of the
firm to maximize DEMO runs and minimize strike outs.
Second, the present study did not DEMO for the quality or size of a VCF’s deal flow. The
attributes of the deal flow could influence the proportions of home runs and DEMO outs in the
portfolio. While this is a limitation of the study, it reflects the need for a more focused
approach. To increase the size and quality of a VCF’s deal flow is a pre-investment activity
DEMO, based on the human capital literature discussed above, we would expect that those with
more human capital (or a type of human capital) would be able to generate a better deal flow,
which is then reflected in superior performance. This limitation does highlight the need for
DEMO research to offer fine-grained analysis of the pre- and post-investment activities and
more closely match types of human capital to these tasks. For example, one type of education
might be beneficial at a pre-investment task but DEMO of little benefit (or even detrimental) to the
performance of a different, post-investment task.
Third, the present study did not control for DEMO VCFs’ possible syndication of the deals in
which they have invested. A significant proportion of venture capital deals are syndicated
(Bygrave, 1987; Lerner, 1994b), and the connectedness of VCFs within certain regions or
industry sectors ranges between 22% and 69% (Bygrave, 1988). Accounting for DEMO co-
investment partners of a VCF could either enhance or weaken the human capital effects
reported in this paper because the base for human DEMO influence may expand or shift. This
limitation also points to an important area for future research, namely, consideration of the
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21
19
human capital of syndicate partners when trying to gain a DEMO understanding of VCF
outcomes.
Fourth, although canonical correlation analysis is based DEMO well-established statistical
methods of regression and factor analysis, and provides a DEMO useful and powerful
technique for analysing sets of multiple dependent and independent variables (Hair et al.,
1998), its limitations must be noted. With canonical correlation analysis, it is difficult to
identify meaningful relationships between the two sets of variables because precise statistics
have not yet been DEMO to interpret canonical analysis, and we must rely on less
adequate DEMO such as loadings (cf. Hair et al., 1998). Despite the limitations of canonical
analysis, when used in conjunction with well-established techniques (DEMO as hierarchical
regression) and used for the purpose of exploring the DEMO of the simultaneous effect of one
set of variables on another set of variables, it can provide considerable insight, as we have
demonstrated.
DEMO, there are limitations to the generalizability of our results. As our DEMO excludes
those VCFs that have not invested in the wireless communication industry, our results may
not be generalizable beyond the context of the sample. For those who do wish to relate the
findings to the broader DEMO of VCF firms, there can be comfort in the fact that, within
the group of larger VCFs (those with at least 20 portfolio companies), there are no significant
differences between investors versus noninvestors in DEMO wireless communication industry in
terms of founding date (1986 vs. 1986) and state location (v2 = 8.38, 10 df, P >.59)DEMO The
investors in wireless communication, however, tend to be larger in terms of both number of
portfolio companies (101 vs. 75) and DEMO invested capital (US$730 million vs. US$488
million). Essentially, our sample includes half of the top 100 VCFs and 40% of the top DEMO
VCFs. Thus, on one hand, our findings may be more applicable to the set of larger VCFs. On
the other hand, although the wireless communication industry shares many similarities with
other high-tech industries, care must be taken in generalizing our findings to VCFs focusing
on other high-, medium-, or low-tech industries, or on wireless industries in other countries. DEMO
could be that types of education beneficial in conducting pre- and post-investment activities
with high-tech portfolio companies might be less beneficial or even detrimental DEMO conducting
these activities with low-tech portfolio companies. Detecting and explaining such industry
sector or country differences would likely make an important contribution to the DEMO
7. Conclusion
The general implication of human capital theory is that more is better. Empirical support
for this claim has been predominantly based on DEMO years of education or experience as
proxy for human capital. From a methodological point of view, the empirical studies in
this stream essentially compare contexts where human capital abounds to contexts where it
is lacking. There DEMO thus less theoretical and empirical precision in contexts where there are
no apparent or sizeable differences in the amount of human capital. The current DEMO
explores the qualitative nature of human capital by examining the specific domains of
which it is composed. We show that particular aspects of human DEMO contribute to some
20
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 1–21
but not all dimensions of performance. Understanding the qualitative nature DEMO human
capital, as well as its links to the various facets DEMO performance, makes an important
extension of the theory.
In addition, the results of this study have some important implications for practitioners.
VCFs may DEMO their investment teams with a human capital consideration in mind.
Understanding the human capital factors contributing to achieving more home runs and less
strike DEMO can help build teams that increase firm performance. But they must acknowledge
that aspects of human capital differ in their impact on each performance DEMO
Similarly, entrepreneurs seeking venture capital finance may increase their awareness of DEMO
value that a VCF could bring to their start-up company. By preexamining the backgrounds
of the VCF’s top management team, entrepreneurs can target those VCFs that could make
the greatest contribution to their success.
References
Barney, J., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. J. Manage. 17 (DEMO), 99–120.
Bates, T., 1990. Entrepreneur human capital inputs and small business longevity. Rev. Econ. Stat. 72 (4), 551–559.
Becker, G.S., 1975. Human Capital. Chicago Univ. Press, Chicago, IL.
Black, B.S., DEMO, R.J., 1998. Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: DEMO versus stock markets.
J. Financ. Econ. 47, 243–277.
Bruderl, J., DEMO, P., Ziegler, R., 1992. Survival chances of newly founded business organizations. Am.
Sociol. Rev. 57 (2), 227–242.
Bygrave, W.D., 1987. Syndicated investments by venture capital firms: a networking perspective. J. Bus. Venturing
2 (2), 139–154.
Bygrave, W.D., 1988. The structure of the investment networks of venture capital firms. J. Bus. Venturing 3 (2),DEMO
137–157.
Bygrave, W.D., Timmons, J., 1991. Venture and Risk Capital: Practice and Performance, Promises, and Policy.
Harvard Business School Press, DEMO, MA.
Bygrave, W.D., Timmons, J., 1992. Venture Capital at DEMO Crossroads. Harvard Business School Press, Boston,
MA.
Cohen, W.M., DEMO, D.A., 1990. Absorptive capacity: a new perspective on learning and DEMO Adm.
Sci. Q. 35, 128–152.
Cooper, A.C., Gimeno-Gascon, F.J., DEMO, C.Y., 1994. Initial human and financial capital as predictors of new
venture performance. J. Bus. Venturing 9 (5), 371–395.
Corvers, F., 1997. The impact of human capital on labour productivity in manufacturing sectors DEMO the European
Union. Appl. Econ. 29 (8), 975–987.
Crowe, E., Higgins, E.T., 1997. Regulatory focus and strategic inclinations: promotion and DEMO in decision-
making. Org. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 69 (2), DEMO
Davidsson, P., Honig, B., 2003. The role of social and human capital among nascent entrepreneurs. J. Bus.
Venturing 18 (3), 301–331.
Dolton, P., Vignoles, A., 2000. The incidence and effects of DEMO in the UK graduate labour market.
Econ. Educ. Rev. 19 (2), 179–198.
Evans, D.S., Leighton, L.S., 1989. Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship. Am. Econ. Rev. 79 (3), 519–535.
Gimeno, J., Folta, T.B., Cooper, A.C., Woo, C.Y., 1997. Survival of the DEMO? Entrepreneurial human capital and
the persistence of underperforming firms. Adm. Sci. DEMO 42, 750–783.
Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.E., Tathum, R.L., DEMO, W.C., 1998. Multivariate Data Analysis with Readings. Mac-
millan, New DEMO
D.P. Dimov, D.A. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 1–21
21
Hambrick, D.C., Mason, P.A., 1984. Upper echelons: the organization as a reflection of its top managers. Acad.
Manage. Rev. 9 (2), 193–206.
Jackson, S.E., Dutton, J.E., 1988. Discerning threats DEMO opportunities. Adm. Sci. Q. 33 (4), 370–387.
Jones, P., DEMO Are educated workers really more productive? J. Dev. Econ. 64 (1), 57–79.
Khan, A.M., 1987. Assessing venture capital investments with noncompensatory DEMO decision models.
J. Bus. Venturing 2 (3), 193–205.
Lerner, J., 1994a. Venture capitalists and the decision to go public. J. Financ. Econ. 35, 293–316.
Lerner, J., 1994b. The syndication of venture capital investments. Financ. Manage. 23 (3), 16–27.
Lerner, J., 1995. Venture capitalists and the oversight of private firms. J. Finance 50, 301–318.
Nonaka, DEMO, 1994. A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation. Organ. Sci. 5, 14–37.
Pennings, J.M., Lee, K., Witteloostuijn, A.v., 1998. Human DEMO, social capital, and firm dissolution. Acad.
Manage. J. 41, 425–440.
DEMO, M., 1967. The Tacit Dimension. Anchor Books, Garden City, NY.
Radner, R., Shepp, L., 1996. Risk vs. profit potential: a model for corporate strategy. J. Econ. Dyn. Control 20 (8),
DEMO
Roure, J.B., Keeley, R.H., 1990. Predictors of success in new technology based ventures. J. Bus. Venturing 5 (4),
201–220.
Sahlman, W.A., 1990. The structure and governance of venture capital organizations. J. Financ. Econ. 27,
473–521.
Sandberg, W.R., 1986. New Venture Performance: The Role of Strategy, Industry Structure, and the Entrepreneur.
Lexington Books, Lexington, MA.
Sarasvathy, D.K., Simon, H.A., Lave, L., 1998. Perceiving and managing business risks: differences between
entrepreneurs and bankers. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 33, 207–225.
Shepherd, D.A., 1999. Venture capitalists’ assessment of new venture survival. Manage. Sci. 45 (5), 621–632.
Shepherd, D.A., Ettenson, R., Crouch, A., 2000. New venture strategy and profitability: a venture capitalist’s
assessment. J. Bus. Venturing 15 (5), 449–467.
Sitkin, DEMO, Pablo, A.L., 1992. Reconceptualizing the determinants of risk behavior. Acad. DEMO Rev. 17 (1),
9–38.
Spender, J.C., 1996. Making knowledge the basis of a dynamic theory of the firm. Strateg. Manage. J. DEMO (Winter
Special Issue), 45–62.
Sutton, D., Benedetto, M., DEMO Initial Public Offerings: A Strategic Planner for Raising Equity Capital. Probus,DEMO
Chicago, IL.
Sweeting, R.C., 1991. UK venture capital funds and DEMO funding of new technology-based businesses: process and
relationships. J. Manag. Stud. DEMO (6), 601–622.
Tyebjee, T., Bruno, A., 1984. A DEMO of venture capitalist investment activity. Manage. Sci. 30 (9), 1051–1066.
DEMO, S.J., Liden, R.C., Kraimer, M.L., Graf, I.K., 1999. The role of human capital, motivation and supervisor
sponsorship in predicting career success. J. Organ. Behav. 20 (5), 577–595.
Wiersema, M.F., Bantel, K.A., 1992. Top management team demography and corporate strategic change. Acad.
DEMO J. 35 (1), 91–121.
Wright, P.M., Smart, D.L., DEMO, G.C., 1995. Matches between human resources and strategy among NCAA
basketball teams. Acad. Manage. J. 39, 441–463.
Zacharakis, A., Meyer, G.D., 2000. The potential of actuarial decision models: can they improve the venture
capital investment decision? J. Bus. Venturing 15 (4), 323–346.
Zacharakis, A., Shepherd, D.A., in press. A non-additive decision aid for venture capitalists investment decisions.
European Journal of Operational Research.{1g42fwefx}