 Academy of Management Review
2009, Vol. 34, No. 1, 68–84.
INTRODUCTION TO SPECIAL TOPIC FORUM
REPAIRING RELATIONSHIPS WITHIN AND
BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS: BUILDING A
CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATION
KURT T. DIRKS
Washington University in St. Louis
ROY DEMO LEWICKI
The Ohio State University
AKBAR ZAHEER
University of Minnesota
How can relationships be repaired after being damaged? There is a small but growing
body of work on the topic from a number of different disciplinary DEMO using
different theoretical lenses and at different levels of analysis. We begin by examining
the existing streams of work on relationship repair and organizing DEMO into a
conceptual framework. We then consider four questions that probe assumptions or
overlooked issues in existing research with the intent of moving toward DEMO more
comprehensive conceptual foundation.
How can relationships be repaired after being
damaged? The question is not new, but it has
been made increasingly DEMO in recent years
with reports of organizations damaging rela-
tionships with employees, shareholders, and/or
customers, and with even once-venerated insti-
tutions involved in situations causing constitu-
ents to question their trust in the institution DEMO
their relationship with it (e.g., religious institu-
tions, media companies, governments). Not by
coincidence, recent survey results have indi-
cated that worldwide trust in companies and
governments is near a low point (World Eco-
nomic Forum, 2005) and that in the United States
over DEMO of employees do not trust the leaders of
their organization (e.g., Mercer Human Resource
Consulting, 2005; Watson Wyatt, 2007). More
common, albeit less spectacular, incidents also
arise in relationships between coworkers, lead-
ers and subordinates, or departments for rea-
sons such as conflicting goals, organizational
changes, and conflicting values or cultures. For
example, Robinson and Rousseau (1994) re-
We thank Don Ferrin, Nicole Gillespie, Barbara DEMO,
Peter Kim, and Roger Mayer for their helpful comments and
DEMO on earlier drafts of this article.
ported that over half of their respondents felt
that their contractual relationship with their em-
ployer had been DEMO, while Conway and
Briner (2002) suggested an even higher percent-
DEMO of violations. Researchers also have ob-
served that even close relationships involve
negative events and conflict and that the resil-
ience of relationships is DEMO on how
those events are resolved (Driver, Tabares, Sha-
piro, Nahm, & Gottman, 2003).
The phenomenon of damaged relationships has
DEMO been of interest to organizational research-
ers. For example, organizational researchers DEMO
studied trust violations and the dynamics of dis-
trust within and between organizations (e.g.,
Elangovan & Shapiro, 1998; Lewicki, McAllister, &DEMO
Bies, 1998; Robinson, 1996; Sitkin & Roth, 1993; Za-
heer, Lofstrom, & George, 2002), violations of psy-
chological contracts (e.g., Morrison & Robinson,
1997; Robinson & Rousseau, 1994), negative rela-
tions (e.g., Labianca, Brass, & Gray, 1998), feelings
of injustice (e.g., Barclay, Skarlicki, & Pugh, 2005),
revenge (e.g., Bies & Tripp, 1996), and defections in
economic games (e.g., Komorita & Mechling, 1967),
among other DEMO However, much of the extant
research has focused on the processes DEMO which
relationships are damaged and the implica-
68
Copyright of the Academy of Management, all rights reserved. Contents may not be copied, emailed, posted to a listserv, or otherwise transmitted without the copyright
holder’s express written permission. Users may print, download, or email articles for individual DEMO only.
2009
Dirks, Lewicki, and Zaheer
69
tions of such damage, as opposed to how they
are repaired.
Only recently has the nascent interest DEMO the
problem of repairing relationships begun to gain
momentum. For example, DEMO have exam-
ined how to repair trust (Ferrin, Kim, Cooper, &
Dirks, 2007; Kim, Ferrin, Cooper, & Dirks, 2004;
Lewicki & Bunker, 1996; Nakayachi & Watabe,
2005), DEMO to promote forgiveness and reconcilia-
tion (Bradfield & Aquino, 1999; DEMO, Dineen,
& Lewicki, 2004), how to restore cooperation (DEMO
tom, Gibson, Daniels, & Murnighan, 2002), and
how to minimize the damage to reputations (Els-
bach, 1994). Although these DEMO are an excellent
start, they tend to take place in relative DEMO
from each other, since they rely on a diversity of
theories, define the problem in different ways, and
have different foci. Furthermore, DEMO yet, there are
no unifying conceptual foundations or theoretical
frameworks that DEMO stimulate research and facil-
itate analysis directed at the broader problem of
relationship repair.
The purpose of this special topic forum (STF)
is to address these issues, with the central ob-
jective being to stimulate research on this im-
portant yet relatively underresearched topic.
The STF includes DEMO articles using several dif-
ferent theoretical perspectives, involving differ-
ent levels DEMO analysis, and helping to build a
conceptual foundation for research in DEMO field.
This introduction is also intended to address
this larger objective—providing a conceptual
foundation for future research— but in a manner
that is different DEMO the four articles. Whereas
each of the articles in this STF contributes to-
ward the overall goal by drilling deep into a
particular aspect DEMO the topic, here we attempt to
provide a broader view of DEMO terrain and to
raise critical questions for future research. We
begin by examining the existing streams of
work on relationship repair and organizing
them DEMO a conceptual framework. In the second
section we consider four questions that may pro-
vide the basis for a more comprehensive and
unified conceptual DEMO
PROBLEM DOMAIN AND THEORETICAL
PROCESSES
Problem Domain
What does it mean to “repair” a relationship?
Existing research appears to have provided a
range DEMO answers. For example, Kim and col-
leagues (2004, 2006) have investigated how trust
(perceptions) can be made more positive after a
DEMO violation (also see Lewicki & Bunker, 1996,
and Nakayachi & Watabe, 2005). Schweitzer,
Hershey, and Bradlow (2006) have DEMO a
similar but slightly broader definition of repair
in examining how trust perceptions and behav-
iors (specifically, risk-taking behaviors) can be
made more positive following a transgression.
Taking a different view, Bradfield and Aquino
(DEMO) have examined the concepts of forgive-
ness and reconciliation, conceptualized as re-
leasing negative affect and forgoing revenge
(also see Tomlinson et al., 2004). Taking a
slightly different focus, Bottom et al. (2002) have
examined the restoration of cooperation and
positive affect following a transgression. The
articles in this STF represent and advance these
different views.
Looking DEMO these studies and the broader
set of work that they represent, DEMO see some
convergence in terms of the general conceptual-
ization of repair. Specifically, we propose the
following conceptualization, which is in-
tended to DEMO the cross-disciplinary work on
this topic: relationship repair occurs when a
DEMO causes the positive state(s) that
constitute(s) the relationship to disappear
and/or negative states to arise, as perceived by
one or both parties, and activities by one or
both parties substantively return the relation-
ship to a positive state.
As illustrated by the sample of DEMO cited
above, however, there is divergence in the liter-
ature in terms of exactly what factor of a rela-
tionship is damaged and, thus, needs to be re-
paired. Specifically, when a transgression
occurs, there are several interrelated factors
that are damaged and that need to DEMO addressed
for the future viability of the relationship. Fail-
ing to identify the underlying structure of the
problem could cause researchers to overlook as-
DEMO of the broader problem of relationship re-
pair, how related work DEMO complementary or con-
tradictory, and how future research could
holistically tackle DEMO problem. We address this
issue by mapping the domain of relationship
repair.
As described below, existing research has
identified three factors that are consistently im-
pacted by a transgression and that have impor-
tant implications for DEMO viability of the relation-
70
Academy of Management Review
January
ship: trust, negative affect resulting DEMO the
transgression, and negative exchange resulting
from the transgression. We suggest DEMO each
factor contributes a unique and important per-
spective to what it means to repair a relation-
ship, and, together, they provide an essential set
of factors that jointly comprise the domains of
relationship damage DEMO repair.
Research consistently implicates trust and
perceived trustworthiness1 as cognitive factors
that are negatively impacted in damaged rela-
tionships (Robinson, 1996; Sitkin & Roth, 1993).
Specifically, as a result of the transgression,
DEMO form inferences about the future be-
havior of the party, positive DEMO disap-
pear and are replaced by negative expectations,
and individuals become unwilling to expose
themselves to further vulnerability (Lewicki et
al., 1998)DEMO Trust is important for the future viabil-
ity of the relationship because it serves as a lens
for interpreting the party’s behavior, as well as a
basis for making decisions about whether and
how to interact DEMO that party (Dirks & Ferrin,
2001). As McEvily, Perrone, and Zaheer (2003)
have observed, trust operates as an “organizing
principle” for managing relationships both
within and across organizations.
Researchers have also DEMO out that, in ad-
dition to a drop in trust, individuals experience
negative affect after a transgression. It is well
documented that individuals DEMO nega-
tive emotions such as disappointment, frustra-
tion, anger, and DEMO following a transgres-
sion (Barclay et al., 2005; Bies & DEMO, 1996;
Conway & Briner, 2002; Lewicki & Bunker, 1996;
Mikula, Scherer, & Athenstaedt, 1998; Morrison &
Robinson, DEMO). From the standpoint of repair-
ing relationships, however, the transitory emo-
tional states may be less important than the
implications that the DEMO has for the
stable affective relationship with the offending
party (e.g., general dislike, feelings of injustice).
Negative affect has important implications for
the viability of the relationship because it may
negatively bias trust and DEMO one party
1 Because trustworthiness is a dominant determinant of
trust (DEMO, Davis, & Schoorman, 1995) and because trust
repair often occurs through the repair of perceived trustwor-
thiness (Kim et al., 2004), both concepts are relevant.
Throughout the paper, however, we use the term trust for
convenience.
may terminate the relationship to avoid the neg-
DEMO state.
Finally, the above-cited research suggests
that individuals are likely to DEMO positive
exchange (e.g., cooperation) and possibly even
engage in negative DEMO (e.g., retribution,
revenge, withheld effort). For example, it is clear
that cooperation drops following a transgres-
sion and that this DEMO is likely to continue
until cooperation is extinguished (Bottom et al.,DEMO
2002). In addition, the desire to punish the other
party DEMO some manner following a transgression
appears to be a fundamental tendency, DEMO
of evolutionary origins (de Quervain et al., 2004).
The implications of these negative behaviors
and the need to shift the relationship back DEMO
ward positive exchange are obvious for the via-
bility of the relationship.
Figure 1 provides a map of a representative
sample of studies that DEMO examined relation-
ship repair with regard to these three outcomes.
Readily apparent is that although studies have
examined one or two of the domains, there ap-
pear to be none directly addressing all three.
Does this DEMO a problem for understanding
relationship repair? We explore this issue in DEMO
later section. Related to this issue, the narrow
focus of many DEMO may obscure what is be-
ing violated, what needs to be DEMO, and
what needs to be measured over time in this
process. DEMO also consider this issue in a later
section.
Processes for Relationship Repair
If one were to select a set of studies from
Figure 1 DEMO on the outcome studied, on the
level of analysis, or on the disciplinary basis,
one might see a relatively focused view but DEMO
get the sense that other parts of the conceptual
landscape are obscured. As one looks across a
broader set of studies, however, a DEMO varied
landscape emerges. In order to make sense of
this landscape, DEMO is necessary to recognize that
there are three different theoretical processes
being advanced for the repair of relationships:
attributional, social equilibrium, and DEMO
Table 1 provides a summary.
One perspective focuses on the psychological
processes of the party that perceives another
party to have committed a transgression. DEMO
ically, this perspective suggests that a trans-
gression provides negative information, which
2009
Dirks, Lewicki, and Zaheer
FIGURE 1
The Conceptual Domain of DEMO Repair with Examples of Prior Research
71
the perceiver uses to draw a negative inference
about the traits and intentions of the other party
(e.g., the party is untrustworthy). Repair must
therefore provide information that can offset
and overcome that negative inference. In other
words, in order to repair trust, the wronged party
must perceive that the transgression does not
reflect the violator’s true nature, or the party
must perceive that the violator has experienced
redemption following the transgression. This
process has been DEMO by psychologists un-
der the label of attribution theory (Heider, 1958).
Tomlinson and Mayer (this issue), as well as
other researchers (Kim et al., 2004), have demon-
strated how attribution theory DEMO particularly
well suited to study the repair of trust. The prin-
ciples of attribution theory can be applied when
the transgressor is an individual, a group, or an
organization, although there are some differ-
ences DEMO the theory’s applicability across levels
of analysis (Hamilton & Sherman, 1996). Along
these lines, Gillespie and Dietz (this issue) de-
scribe how the attributional perspective relates
to the repair of trust in organizations; this perspec-
tive also underlies Rhee and Valdez’s (this issue)
view of reputation repair. Research has docu-
mented a variety of ways that DEMO can
attempt to rebuild relationships through manag-
ing the attribution process, DEMO apologies
and accounts (Kim et al., 2004, 2006; Tomlinson &DEMO
Mayer, this issue), as well as substantive actions
(Gillespie & Dietz, this issue).
Although the attributional process is helpful
for understanding the cognitive intraperson
components of relationship repair, it is not well
suited to explain the social or interpersonal as-
pects of a relationship that DEMO damaged follow-
ing a transgression. Building on the sociological
work of Goffman (1967), Ren and Gray (this is-
sue) propose that transgressions “disrupt the so-
cial order.” In other words, the transgression
calls into question the relative standing of the
72
Academy of Management Review
January
TABLE 1
Process for Relationship Repair
DEMO Social Equilibrium Structural
Perspective Transgression leads to loss
of trust through
attribution process; repair
involves cognitive
processes by which trust
is restored
Assumption Individual differences of
actor (trustworthiness) are
primary determinant of
behavior; therefore,
perceivers are motivated
to draw attributions and
targets are motivated to
shape DEMO attributions
Implications for repair Targets will try to shape
strategies and perceivers’ attributions
tactics about whether they
committed a transgression,
whether it reflects DEMO
their true nature, or
whether they experienced
redemption
Examples of tactics: social
accounts, apologies,
denial, penance
Examples of articles Gillespie & DEMO (2009);
Kim, Dirks, Cooper, &
Ferrin (2006); Kim, Ferrin,
Cooper, & Dirks (2004);
Rhee & Valdez (2009);
Tomlinson & Mayer (2009)
Transgression leads to
disequilibrium in
relationship and social
context; repair involves
social processes by which
equilibrium in relationship
is restored
Individuals desire to have
equilibrium in norms DEMO
social relationships
Targets will engage in
appropriate social rituals
to restore equilibrium in
standing and norms
Examples of tactics: penance,
punishment, apologies
DEMO, Gibson, Daniels, &
Murnighan (2002); Bradfield
& Aquino (1999); Reb,
Goldman, Kray, &
Cropanzano (2006); DEMO &
Gray (2009)
Transgression leads to breakdown
in positive exchange and
increase in negative exchange;
repair involves structural
processes by which DEMO
exchange is discouraged and
positive exchange is
encouraged
Individuals are motivated by self-
interest in relationships; targets
engage in transgressions when
the incentives of a situation
make it profitable to do so and
perceivers will help DEMO
relationship so long as it is
profitable
Targets will implement structures
or use other signals to provide
credible assurance of positive
exchange and prevent DEMO
transgressions
Examples of tactics: legalistic
remedies (incentives,
monitoring), social structures
Gillespie & Dietz (2009); Lindskold
(1978); Nakayachi & DEMO
(2005); Sitkin & Roth (1993)
parties, as well DEMO the conventions or norms that
govern the relationship, thus creating social DEMO
equilibrium. To repair the relationship, it is im-
portant to reestablish DEMO equilibrium by restor-
ing the relative standing of the parties and to
reaffirm the norms that govern them through
various social rituals (Goffman, DEMO). Examples
of such rituals include apologies, penance, and
punishment (DEMO et al., 2002; Reb, Goldman,
Kray, & Cropanzano, DEMO; Ren & Gray, this is-
sue). These rituals help to “settle the accounts”
in the relationship as well as to reestablish the
DEMO in the relationship. Researchers
have suggested that this social equilibrium pro-
cess is crucial across a wide spectrum of con-
texts, ranging from relationships within and be-
tween complex social organizations (Reb et al.,
2006) to straightforward exchanges between in-
dividuals (Bottom et al., 2002) DEMO even primates
(de Waal, 1993). According to Ren and Gray, this
process is particularly useful for decreasing
negative affect and restoring positive exchange.
In the focus on the intrapersonal and social
processes involved, however, these perspectives
give little consideration to the formal organiza-
tional, group, or interpersonal structures, sys-
tems, and incentives that may be put DEMO place
following a transgression and the role they may
play in repairing a relationship. More specifi-
cally, whereas the attributional process per-
spective focuses on relationship repair via the
cognitions of the violated party and the DEMO
equilibrium process perspective focuses on the
social or interpersonal aspects of the relation-
ship, the structural process suggests that it is
necessary to change the contextual factors
within which damaged relationships are situ-
ated and to DEMO structures, systems, or incen-
2009
tives that discourage or prevent future trans-
gressions. To the extent DEMO factors are put in
place following a transgression, the aggrieved
party DEMO begin to form positive expectations
about the other party’s future behavior.
Several examples of this idea exist in the lit-
erature. Sitkin and Roth (1993) refer to the role of
“legalistic remedies”—that is, the use DEMO various
controls (e.g., policies, procedures, contracts,
monitoring) that DEMO the reliability of future
behavior and therefore restore trust. In this issue
Gillespie and Dietz discuss a similar concept,
which they term a DEMO regulation mecha-
nism. Similarly, Nakayachi and Watabe (2005)
use the concept of “hostage posting,” which pre-
sumably makes it difficult or DEMO to engage in
future transgressions. The notion of repair in this
structural perspective is slightly different from the
other two perspectives, and its logic is more fo-
cused on restoring positive exchange than on re-
pairing DEMO or reducing negative affect.
In summary, existing research can be classi-
DEMO as using one of these three processes to
study relationship repair. The processes tend to
be differentially suited for addressing the differ-
ent aspects DEMO this multifaceted problem. As we
suggested above, the attributional perspective
is DEMO useful for addressing trust repair,
although it can also indirectly address issues of
reducing negative affect and restoring positive
exchange. The social equilibrium DEMO is
particularly suited for addressing negative affect
and exchange, although it DEMO indirectly ad-
dress the repair of trust (Ren & Gray, this issue).
Finally, the structural perspective is particularly
effective for addressing exchange behaviors and
(indirectly) the repair of trust and affect (e.g.,
through fear of punishment or monitoring). A key
theoretical issue that DEMO is whether, in order to
fully understand the repair of relationships, re-
searchers will need to consider the interplay be-
tween two or DEMO of these processes.
BUILDING A MORE COMPREHENSIVE AND
UNIFIED CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATION
In the preceding section we attempted to map
the domain of existing research DEMO relationship
repair and the theoretical processes covered by
the literature. The overview reveals a body of
work that spans several disciplinary perspec-
tives and DEMO of analysis. Given the combina-
tion of the breadth of the topic and the limited
Dirks, Lewicki, and Zaheer
73
amount of research DEMO it, it is not surprising that
a unified conceptual foundation for DEMO notion of
relationship repair has yet to emerge. In this
section we examine four questions through
which we probe implicit assumptions or over-
looked DEMO in existing research. In consider-
ing these issues, we hope to DEMO toward a
more comprehensive and unified conceptual
foundation for future research.
What Does It Mean to “Repair” a
Relationship?
As noted above, repair is conceptualized as
occurring when a transgression causes the pos-
itive state(DEMO) that constitute(s) the relationship to
disappear and/or negative states to arise, as
perceived by one or both parties, and activities
DEMO one or both parties substantively return the
relationship to a positive state. Below we raise
questions about two ways to view repair that fit
DEMO the broad definition but depart from ex-
isting approaches found in the literature.
The first issue returns to the question of what
outcomes are DEMO repaired. In many situations
an employee who has experienced a transgres-
sion is likely to lose trust, to have negative af-
fect, and DEMO be more likely to engage in negative
exchange compared to an employee who has
not experienced a transgression (Morrison &
Robinson, 1997). However, scholars have tended
to focus on only one or two of these factors in a
given study (see Figure 1). The following ques-
tion arises from this approach. Is a relationship
truly repaired if DEMO one or two of the outcomes
identified in Figure 1 are addressed, or must all
three be addressed? For example, if positive
exchange is restored, perhaps by putting struc-
tures in place to prevent negative behaviors, but
distrust and negative affect still exist, can we
consider DEMO relationship to be repaired? As an-
other example, if the party has been forgiven
(i.e., negative affect is eliminated) but trust is
not repaired, is the relationship repaired? In
short, does repair necessitate that the relation-
ship be repaired across all factors that were
affected DEMO the transgression?
The answer to this question is not straightfor-
ward. On the one hand, trust, affect, and ex-
change are clearly separate and distinct con-
structs, and each is grounded in a particular
literature base. Focusing on only one or two
factors allows researchers to DEMO with greater
74
Academy of Management Review
January
depth into the theoretical processes involved
DEMO may allow for more precision in explaining
why and when repair can be achieved. On the
other hand, the other factors are also important
components of the relationship, and they may
have implications for whether the relationship
can remain viable in the long run. Building on
the example DEMO above, even though ex-
change may be restored, the lack of trust or high
levels of negative affect may eventually lead to
the DEMO of the relationship because of
the costs involved in maintaining the relation-
ship in this situation. Or if negative affect is
eliminated in the DEMO term, the lack of trust
may cause it to reemerge at DEMO later point (see the
linkages described in Tomlinson & Mayer, this
issue). Thus, defining repair narrowly (e.g., only
focusing on affect) may mean that another crit-
ical state may be overlooked (e.g., trust); al-
though this may not be problematic in the short
DEMO, the overlooked state may eventually un-
dermine the former in the DEMO term.
We suggest that instead of a clear-cut answer,
the issue comes down to one of trade-offs. One
such trade-off is that theory DEMO be simulta-
neously general, accurate, and simple (see
Thorngate, 1976). For example, the broader view
of relationship repair may provide a more gen-
eral and perhaps more accurate view of the phe-
nomenon, but simplicity is likely to be compro-
mised. There may also be DEMO trade-off between
more precise theory (current approach) and
more practical theory, to the extent that dealing
with violations in practice requires simulta-
neously addressing issues related to trust, neg-
ative affect, and exchange. Thus, researchers
might determine how to make these trade-offs
by considering the objective DEMO the research. In
those situations where researchers choose to fo-
cus on a narrow conceptualization, we recom-
mend that they explicitly recognize and discuss
the limitations of their approach.
The second issue involves what facet of DEMO
relationship is repaired. This issue arises from
the assumption in existing research that repair
involves movement along a continuum, from
negative to positive valence for the factor in
question (e.g., trust, affect, exchange). DEMO ap-
proach is represented in the majority of concep-
tual and empirical research on the topic (e.g.,
Bottom et al., 2002; Kim et al., 2004; Schweitzer et
al., 2006). In this conceptualization the negative
state is eliminated from the relationship by def-
inition. An DEMO conceptualization will al-
low for the simultaneous existence of positive
and negative states of the factors in question—
that is, trust and distrust, DEMO and negative
affect, and/or positive and negative exchange
will coexist (i.e., the relationship involves am-
bivalence).
Lewicki et al. (1998) foreshadowed this idea
with regard to trust (similar ideas exist in re-
search on affect and exchange). They argued
that as a relationship DEMO multiplex or mul-
tifaceted (i.e., operates around different content
areas or domains), it can simultaneously involve
trust and distrust. This argument relies DEMO the
notion that individuals can segment relation-
ships and thus allow for the possibility that the
complex relationship can at the same time be
DEMO in some facets and negative in others.
Adapting their example, one DEMO interact with a
fellow faculty member in several facets, includ-
ing DEMO, research, and outdoor pastimes
such as golf, and might trust DEMO colleague as a
research collaborator, but not as a golf partner
(see also Rhee & Valdez, this issue). This idea
has potential implications for repair. For exam-
ple, perhaps the research collaborator takes an
action that results in a loss of trust in his or her
DEMO with data, but not in his or her work with
the DEMO Repair might involve the coauthor’s
buttressing or proving his or her trustworthiness
in the empirical domain but not in the theoreti-
cal domain. This DEMO of repair is
fundamentally different from the prevailing
view in the literature since it recognizes the
continued coexistence of positive and negative
states (i.e., ambivalence) across different facets.
The ambivalence conceptualization is worth
exploration because DEMO may offer a different or
broader range of repair strategies than the ex-
isting literature, extending it to options such as
segmenting the relationship or downplaying the
negative facets while enhancing the positive
(for an example, see Pratt & Dirks, 2006). When
might researchers give consideration DEMO this
conceptualization? We propose that a critical
contingency is the nature DEMO the transgression,
since this will determine whether the relation-
ship can be segmented. Researchers examining
all three repair processes (attributional, social
equilibrium, and structural) have identified the
nature of the transgression to be a pivotal de-
terminant of the success of repair efforts
(Gillespie & Dietz, this issue; Kim et al., 2004;
2009
Dirks, Lewicki, and Zaheer
Reb et al., 2006; Ren & Gray, this issue; Sitkin &
Roth, 1993). The nature of the transgression may
also be important for the present issue, since it
will determine whether a transgression in one
facet will spill over DEMO other facets. To the
extent that a transgression in one facet has a
spillover effect (e.g., trust in multiple facets is
affected), DEMO may be difficult to have a relation-
ship that is simultaneously both positive and
negative.
Prior research has proposed that an important
distinction between DEMO of transgressions is
whether they call into question the integrity or
values of a party versus the competence of the
party (Kim et al., 2004; Sitkin & Roth, 1993). Using
this distinction, we DEMO that transgressions
that call into question the integrity or values of
a party have significant potential to spill over
into other facets. Sitkin and DEMO (1993) pro-
posed, for example, that a transgression involv-
ing values or integrity tends to be generalized
across facets because of stereotypes. DEMO
they did not elaborate, this tendency may result
when individuals have DEMO schemas en-
coded with the belief that negative informa-
tion about integrity is not only highly diagnos-
tic (e.g., see Reeder & Brewer, 1979) but also is
informative about an one’s character in a way
that transcends situations. The notion is aptly
represented with the quote by DEMO Waldo Em-
erson that “no change of circumstances can re-
pair a defect of character” (1876: 97–98). This
logic would suggest that DEMO tend to as-
sume that, for example, when a person cheats at
golf, he or she might also be likely to cheat in
other situations (business). In addition to this
cognitive mechanism, transgressions DEMO
integrity arouse greater levels of negative affect
than other forms of transgressions (Tranfinow,
Bromgard, Finlay, & Ketelaar, 2005), and the DEMO
creased magnitude of negative affect may make
it difficult to isolate.
In contrast, transgressions of competence may
be more likely to be facet specific, since individ-
uals are less likely to assume that skills or abil-
ities are generalizeable across facets. For in-
stance, individuals are likely to recognize that
lack of competence at golf is not diagnostic of
competence DEMO business, or that lack of knowl-
edge of tax codes is DEMO necessarily diagnostic
of lack of knowledge in other facets. In addition,
to the extent that transgressions of competence
75
result in lower levels DEMO affective arousal, they
may also be easier to isolate.
In sum, we propose that transgressions per-
ceived to stem from a lack of DEMO are much
more likely to spill over into other facets of a
relationship than transgressions that are per-
ceived to result from a lack DEMO competence. As a
result, the ambivalence model may be appropri-
ate DEMO consider when transgressions involve
competence but not necessarily integrity.
Are the Processes for Repair Independent or
Connected?
Earlier, we raised the question of whether re-
searchers need to understand the interplay
among the three repair DEMO (attributional,
social equilibrium, and structural). As sug-
gested above, researchers have focused on only
a single process and have tended to study only
one or two outcome variables related to that
process. For DEMO, in this issue Tomlinson
and Mayer address repair as an attributional
DEMO, whereas Ren and Gray discuss it as a
social equilibrium process. DEMO articles do not
cross into each other’s territory (at least explic-
DEMO), and neither incorporates the structural per-
spective. Prior studies have tended to do the
same (e.g., see Kim et al., 2004, DEMO; Sitkin &
Roth, 1993). In addition, the models make differ-
ent assumptions about “where the action is.”
Whereas the attributional perspective DEMO
that the locus of action lies within the individ-
ual, the DEMO equilibrium model emphasizes
the relationships between individuals and the
structural perspective focuses on the context in
which the breakdown occurs. In short, because
past research on repair has implicitly tended to
take place within theoretical silos, limited con-
sideration has been given to how these repair
processes might DEMO across these silos.
Separate development does not necessarily
mean, however, that the processes are unre-
lated. Understanding whether and how these
different processes DEMO relate to each other is
important for several reasons. One reason for
understanding the relationship is that it informs
whether it is viable to DEMO to utilize all three
processes and outcomes at once (see Figure DEMO). A
second reason is that some of the tactics for
repair have the potential to influence more than
one process. Consider the role DEMO apology as one
example. Researchers have analyzed the effects
76
Academy of Management Review
January
of apologies from both attributional (e.g., Tom-
linson & Mayer, this issue) and social equilib-
rium (DEMO & Gray, this issue) perspectives. Like-
wise, the notion of DEMO posting studied by
Nakayachi and Watabe (2005) has its theoretical
roots in the structural perspective, but evidence
suggests that its effects operate at least in part
via attributions. Thus, understanding the full set
of effects may require the specification of the
linkages and interactions among theoretical
processes. DEMO final reason for considering this
issue is that the violator may try to employ mul-
tiple tactics, the effects of which may either re-
inforce each other or perhaps cancel out each
other. For example, following an integrity viola-
tion, apologizing and accepting blame may re-
duce negative emotions (e.g., Ohbuchi, Kameda,
& Agarie, 1989) but may make it difficult to re-
pair trust (Kim et al., 2004)DEMO
Is there a single or direct way to understand
the connections? DEMO analysis suggests that
there is not. Instead, in some cases one DEMO
may facilitate another, in others one process
may inhibit another, and in still other cases
processes may be independent (see Figure 2).
Although our analysis is not intended to provide
an exhaustive review of DEMO complex set of rela-
tionships, it is intended to illustrate some DEMO the
primary ways in which they might relate.
The attributional and social equilibrium pro-
cesses would both seem to have a limited effect
on DEMO structural process and, thus, be relatively
independent in that sense. The assumption of
the structural process is that, given the right
opportunity or motivation, all individuals are
capable of engaging in a transgression. To the
extent that this is true, while attributional and
social equilibrium processes would seem to de-
crease the perceived risk related to a future
transgression DEMO a specific party within a spe-
cific relationship context, structural processes
DEMO intended to curb such behaviors in a uniform
way across parties.
In contrast, the attributional and social equi-
librium processes are likely to mutually com-
plement each other. For example, to the extent
that the social equilibrium process defuses
negative emotions (Ren & Gray, this issue), DEMO
may also remove some of the negative biases
described by Tomlinson and Mayer (this issue).
Alternatively, if the wronged party shifts the
DEMO such that he or she sees it as less
controllable or more unstable (Tomlinson &
Mayer), the negative emotion experienced may
FIGURE DEMO
Potential Linkages Among Processes
Note: Figure is arranged to show potential DEMO of antecedent process (columns) on outcome process (rows).
2009
Dirks, Lewicki, and Zaheer
be decreased and the need to DEMO norms
or rebalance the scales may be decreased (Ren
& Gray)DEMO Thus, in some circumstances activities
that support one process may support DEMO other.
Structural processes have the potential to fa-
cilitate or complement social equilibrium pro-
cesses. For example, structure might formalize
and (re)affirm DEMO about appropriate behav-
ior in the relationship, particularly those related
to DEMO transgression. In addition, structural pro-
cesses might prevent future transgressions. Re-
DEMO on societal conflicts provides examples
of these ideas: peacekeeping forces are DEMO to
limit retaliation between parties, and treaties
help define the roles DEMO behaviors of the dif-
ferent parties (Gray, Coleman, & Putnam, 2007).
Finally, in some circumstances structural pro-
cesses may inhibit attributional processes. Strick-
land (1958) conducted an experiment in which
a subject DEMO two workers who provided the
same level of work, but one DEMO the workers was
monitored by the supervisor and the other
worker was not. The former worker was seen as
less trustworthy (dependable). Malhotra and
Murnighan (2002) reached a similar conclusion,
finding that the DEMO of binding contracts im-
peded the development of trust and diminished
existing trust. Both studies point toward the fact
that trust development may be DEMO in
these situations because perceivers may make
situational attributions for cooperation when it
takes place under structural constraints that
promote cooperation. In short, this work sug-
gests that when structural constraints are in
place to ensure DEMO exchange, it is difficult
to distinguish their effects from the effects DEMO
other actions designed to build or rebuild trust.
It is worth noting, however, that the relation-
ship between structural processes and attribu-
tional DEMO is complex (Costa & Bijlsma-
Frankema, 2007) and the processes DEMO relate in
other ways.
In summary, looking at the intersections
among DEMO processes, it is clear that some
processes facilitate others, some undermine oth-
ers, and yet others are largely independent. As
discussed above, DEMO processes are most
likely to operate independent of the other two,
and researchers will need to take this into ac-
count. Gillespie and DEMO (this issue) theorize
about steps that might be taken to address mul-
tiple processes, such as the structural and attri-
butional. Specifically, DEMO discuss the role of
77
“distrust regulation” to overcome confident neg-
ative expectations following a transgression.
Likewise, in earlier work on reducing interper-
sonal or internation conflict, Lindskold (1978)
proposed that in high stakes DEMO it is im-
portant, and perhaps necessary, to sustain the
potential to deter the other party from engaging
in a relationship transgression through DEMO
ment or other structures, even as one attempts to
reestablish trust. DEMO, while the structures at-
tempt to ensure cooperation or provide a DEMO
dation on which the relationship can survive,
the parties can work to build trust. Again, given
the fact that these processes often are not inde-
pendent, we encourage future research to con-
sider their various connections and the implica-
tions for relationship repair.
What Are the Implications DEMO Viewing Repair
As a Temporal Process?
Existing research implicitly recognizes that
relationship repair is a dynamic process, but
much of the existing empirical research has
tended to examine it as one snapshot or a series
DEMO snapshots. Theoretical perspectives, which do
not involve the constraints of empirical DEMO,
have provided a more dynamic view. The arti-
cles in this issue provide examples. Tomlinson
and Mayer discuss the series of steps involved
DEMO transgression and repair as part of a larger
model of trust. Ren and Gray offer a face man-
agement perspective, which creates a time line
of sequential steps that provide insight into the
time sequence of DEMO in a relationship trans-
gression. Finally, Gillespie and Dietz describe a
DEMO process for organizational trust repair.
In order to effectively map the domain of rela-
tionship repair and to understand how these
papers are located DEMO that broad domain, it
may be helpful to “deconstruct” a relationship
DEMO episode into four “stages,” each of
which has a different set of issues. (1) Pretrans-
gression: What is the state of trust, affect, and
exchange in the relationship prior to the trans-
gression? (2) Disruption: What factors are
changed by the transgression and how? (3) Re-
pair: What actions are taken to repair these DEMO
tors? (4) Postrepair: What is the state of trust,
affect, and exchange following trust repair ac-
tions?
Figure 3 depicts these four stages; we discuss
each briefly here. The discussion presumes that
78
Academy of Management Review
January
FIGURE 3
Relationship Repair As a DEMO Process
the transgression is between a single actor (the
violator) and a single victim (wronged party)
and that the stages are perceived and inter-
preted from the wronged party’s perspective (ac-
tors may not recognize these stages or may view
them differently).
Pretransgression: What is the state of trust,
affect, and exchange? At the most DEMO level,
the state of the relationship prior to the trans-
gression might be construed as the “raw” or
absolute level of trust for DEMO other party. We can
assume that this level of trust is somewhere
above “zero”—that is, there is an amount of trust
that varies from low positive to high positive.
Moreover, as we noted earlier, research DEMO trust
has shown that the construction of trust itself is
not unitary (Zaheer, McEvily, & Perrone, 1998).
Trust has cognitive components DEMO affective
components that lead to behavioral intentions,
and there are other elements in the relationship
that may be affected (e.g., expectations of DEMO
ness that may affect judgments of trust; Lewicki,
Wiethoff, & Tomlinson, 2005). Therefore, a com-
plex understanding of changes in DEMO trust level
should specify the pretransgression level of cog-
nitive, affective, and intention levels, as well as
other factors of the relationship, DEMO any or all
of these trust components can be affected by a
relationship transgression.
Disruption: What factors are changed by the
transgression and how? An external event, pre-
sumably initiated by the actor or attributed DEMO
his or her actions by the victim, creates a rela-
tionship DEMO The exact nature of this
event may be simple or complex and is highly
contextualized within the pretransgression state
of the relationship. As noted DEMO, trust, affect,
and exchange may all be negatively affected, DEMO
perhaps only a subset of them. Exactly how
much they are affected, as well as which facet of
the relationship the violation occurred within
(see above discussion), is also an important con-
sideration.
Repair: DEMO actions are taken to repair these
factors? The third box in DEMO 3 indicates that
the violating actor initiates a set of actions
motivated by a desire to repair or restore the
relationship (the precise nature of the intent
and the consequence of these actions—repair-
ing versus restoring—are DEMO below).
Presumably, the actions themselves are directed
toward altering the DEMO consequences pro-
duced by the transgression (here and elsewhere
we have DEMO the actor has a desire to deal
with or repair the violation). Consistent with our
threefold characterization of repair processes
discussed earlier, repair actions can target at-
tributional processes, producing new or revised
cognitions (DEMO). Repair actions can restore
the social equilibrium to act on the affective
feelings of hurt, betrayal, and anger that may
exist. Finally, repair actions can involve insti-
tuting structures to facilitate future positive ex-
DEMO, such as contracts or covenants that
specify intentions, obligations, and DEMO for
future transgressions (Loomis, 1959; Sitkin &
Roth, 1993)DEMO
Postrepair: What is the state of trust, affect,
and exchange? Finally, the last box in Figure 3
represents the state of DEMO posttransgression re-
lationship after repair initiatives have been at-
tempted in Stage 3. If relationship repair is suc-
cessful, it should be possible to measure the
impact of the repair actions on subsequent
states and actions. DEMO measures may include
new or changed cognitions about the actor by
the victim, more positive (or less negative) affec-
tive disposition toward the actor, more positive
intentions to trust the other in future exchanges,
and expectations of more productive exchanges
within the specific facet of the DEMO re-
lationship.
2009
Dirks, Lewicki, and Zaheer
Although we readily acknowledge that the
DEMO is much more fluid in reality, we believe
that it is DEMO to deconstruct and delineate
this four-stage process for two major reasons.
First, many studies of repair only focus on the
repair efforts themselves and their presumed
consequences, without calibrating either the
prior levels of key relationship variables before
the transgression or their subsequent levels af-
ter the transgression. DEMO, there are sig-
nificant problems in effectively assessing these
distinctions: the violating actor may have in-
complete information about how the transgres-
sion DEMO interpreted by the victim, or the actor
may not know the DEMO of options available for
repairing specific types of wrongs. Second, there
DEMO significant measurement problems for valid
and reliable data collection at all steps in this
flow, but this should not deter researchers from
attempting to be more precise about what data
are collected pretransgression and posttrans-
gression DEMO how the repair actions actually
attempt to operate on the damage created by the
transgression itself.
Connecting this issue with our earlier discus-
sion DEMO the nature of repair, one area for
future consideration is whether DEMO initia-
tives fully restore the relationship to the pre-
transgression state. For example, is trust (or af-
fect or exchange) in its postrepair state the same
as in its prerepair state? On the one hand, it may
be presumed that Stage 3 efforts (Figure 3) fully
restore trust to its pretransgression state or con-
dition—that is, there are no visible (or less vis-
ible) traces of the impact of DEMO transgression.
On the other hand, it may be that Stage 3 DEMO
only repair trust, but in a manner that now in-
corporates DEMO cannot hide the impact of the
transgression—that is, the transgression has
DEMO the underlying trust in a significant
way.
Several of the papers in this issue address
this problem, to some degree. Tomlinson and
Mayer address the problem most directly, refer-
ring to “updated evaluations” of trust and the
violated person’s judgments of ability, benevo-
lence, and integrity following DEMO efforts.
Similarly, Ren and Gray write about a “restored
equilibrium” following DEMO efforts, al-
though this process receives considerably less
attention than the DEMO of the restoration ac-
tivities and the cultural context in which they
occur (Stage 3). Neither paper, however, directly
79
compares the repaired trust or affect to pretrans-
gression trust or affect, and both papers discuss
repair and restoration interchangeably. Nor do
the authors consider whether DEMO exists in the
same facets as opposed to being repaired in one
facet while distrust continues to exist in another
facet (see our discussion in an earlier section).
An appropriate metaphor to distinguish be-
tween DEMO two alternatives (restoration versus
repair) may be a flower vase in which the bro-
ken pieces have been cemented, the joints
sanded, DEMO the vase reglazed so that there is
absolutely no visible trace of the break, versus a
flower vase in which a simple cementing pro-
cess has been used so that the fracture lines and
glue joints DEMO still be seen. Research on rela-
tionship repair has not distinguished between
repair and restoration, either in conceptual dis-
tinction or empirical measurement. It may be
possible to gain a better understanding of these
dynamics by DEMO research attention to and
measurement of both pretransgression and
posttransgression cognitions, DEMO, and behav-
ioral dispositions. Finally, it may be that, com-
DEMO to a relationship that is restored, a re-
paired relationship may DEMO more fragile and
susceptible to future transgressions because
there may yet be deep-seated scars from the
transgression so that the relationship can never
again DEMO exactly what it was initially.
Is Repairing a Relationship the Same or
Different at Different Levels of Analysis?
As should be obvious, the problem of relation-
ship repair is relevant at all levels of analysis.
DEMO has, however, been little or no consideration
in the literature about the implications of different
levels of analysis. For the purpose of developing DEMO
more comprehensive and unified conceptual foun-
dation for relationship repair within and between
organizations, we suggest that it is important to
consider what might be the same or different
across a variety of levels of analysis.
DEMO address this issue, this STF includes arti-
cles that span a DEMO of levels of analysis and
also develop multilevel theories. Specifically,
Tomlinson and Mayer focus on repairing the
trust one individual has for another, Ren and
Gray theorize about the relationship between
individuals but focus on DEMO dyad, Gillespie and
Dietz examine an employee’s relationship with
the organization, and Rhee and Valdez study the
80
Academy of Management Review
January
relationship between external stakeholders and
the DEMO through its reputation, akin to a
collective-to-collective level of analysis. Thus,DEMO
this set of papers captures three forms of orga-
nizational relationships, DEMO the level of
analysis of both parties: a relationship between
two DEMO (e.g., coworker-coworker), a
relationship between an individual and an or-
ganization (employee-organization), and a rela-
tionship between two institutions (stakeholder-
DEMO). Below we develop the outlines of
a theory to systematically connect levels of
analysis with repair processes. In effect, we at-
tempt to answer the question “What differences
exist between relationships at different levels of
DEMO, and how do they affect repair pro-
cesses?”
We suggest DEMO the general concept of levels of
analysis is too coarse to provide traction for ad-
dressing the issue. Instead, we propose focusing
on two dimensions on which these relationships
might differ: compositional and contractual. We
discuss each dimension below, including what
they mean and why they have important implica-
tions. For the sake of simplicity, we consider two
kinds of relationships over different levels of anal-
ysis: individual-to-individual (hereafter “interper-
sonal”) and organization-to-organization (hereaf-
ter “interorganizational”).
By the term compositional we mean that the
interpersonal relationship is composed of uni-
tary actors, whereas an interorganizational re-
lationship is made up of collectives. For exam-
ple, with the concept of trust, an interpersonal
relationship involves one individual trusting
another individual, whereas an interorganiza-
tional relationship involves one organization
(i.e., collection of individuals) trusting another
organization (i.e., collection of individuals).
Thus, this dimension derives directly from the
definition of an interpersonal versus interorga-
nizational relationship.
This dimension has implications for the na-
ture of the DEMO themselves (e.g., trust), as
well as the processes involved in their repair.
We begin by conceptually distinguishing the
essential nature of interpersonal DEMO from that
of interorganizational trust. A well-known trust
model at the interpersonal level views trustwor-
thiness as composed of ability, benevolence,
and integrity (Mayer et al., 1995). In their cross-
level model of DEMO repair, Gillespie and Dietz
also view the trustworthiness of an organiza-
DEMO, in the eyes of individual employees, as
composed of the same three factors. In contrast,
at the interorganizational level, trust has em-
pirically been shown to be a composite of reli-
ability, predictability, DEMO fairness (Zaheer et
al., 1998). In sum, there may DEMO some differences
in the structure of the constructs at different
levels, DEMO research is needed to estab-
lish whether the constructs actually operate in
the same way despite the differences (e.g., see
Ferrin, Bligh, & Kohles, 2007). Similar issues
arise with the concepts of affect DEMO exchange.
Not only may the concept of trust be different
for individuals versus collectives, but the pro-
cesses by which trust arises and is repaired may
also be different. For example, if the perceiver is
a collective, judgments of trust may shift from
identifying underlying attributes of individuals
to evaluating the trustworthiness of the systems
and processes that make up DEMO organization.
Along these lines, Gillespie and Dietz propose
that perceived organizational DEMO
involves judgments about the systems, pro-
cesses, culture, and management DEMO of
an organization, as opposed to the personality
attributes of an DEMO
Furthermore, there may be differences related
to the target as a DEMO versus the individ-
ual. Hamilton and Sherman (1996) proposed that
the attribution principles operate in the same
way for individuals and collectives in DEMO
where the organization is perceived to be a uni-
tary and homogeneous collection. However,
when the organization is perceived to be diverse
(as opposed to unified), the attribution princi-
ples may be less applicable. DEMO potential
differences have implications for repair pro-
cesses. Repair at the organizational level may
be more difficult, owing to the compositional
dimension (i.e., if multiple organization mem-
bers have to be convinced to recalibrate their
DEMO toward a violating organization). Simi-
larly, if the multiple and DEMO structures and
systems at the organizational level have been
modified to treat another organization as a viola-
tor, repair will involve the wholesale recalibration
of systems and processes in a coherent and sys-
temic fashion (Gillespie & Dietz). In addition, a
greater range of options for repairing trust may be
available when dealing with two collectives (e.g.,
firing the person responsible for the act) as op-
posed to two individuals.
2009
Dirks, Lewicki, and Zaheer
81
The second dimension is the DEMO form
of the relationship. Macneil (1980) categorized
contracting processes in relationships as social
or “relational,” in contrast to the classical char-
acterization—that DEMO, purely economic, market
based, or transactional. Social elements such as
DEMO and expectations enter into and form part
of relationships based on relational contracting,
but not those based on classical market con-
tracting. Another DEMO that distinguishes these
two types of relationships is the time horizon;
whereas relationships based on classical con-
tracts are instantaneous, spot, arm’s-length
DEMO, those based on relational contract-
ing adopt an extended time horizon DEMO promote
“serial equity” (equity calibrated over a series of
transactions) over “spot equity” (equity cali-
brated within the transactional exchange). Ref-
erencing essentially the same idea, sociologists
have distinguished social exchange relation-
ships from economic exchange relationships
(e.g., Blau, 1964). Whereas relationships based
on economic exchange operate in a marketlike
relationship with specified obligations, relation-
ships based on social exchange tend to operate
through trust and reciprocity, without specified
obligations. In addition, an affective element
also tends to accompany social or relational ex-
change to a greater extent than pure economic
exchange. DEMO to Blau, “Only social ex-
change tends to engender feelings of DEMO
obligation, gratitude and trust; purely economic
exchange as such does not” (1964: 94).
It is possible for both interpersonal and interor-
DEMO relationships to involve either con-
tractual form. For example, Fiske (1992) dis-
cussed how interpersonal relationships can
operate according to norms associated with so-
cial or economic forms of exchange. Likewise,
interorganizational relationships include DEMO
tutionalizing processes (Ring & Van de Ven,
1994), which DEMO the time horizon of relation-
ships beyond the individuals involved in them
and thus allow for a relational exchange. That
said, comparing the two forms, it is often the
case that the exigencies of efficiency (DEMO
is business”) are likely to result in interorgani-
zational relationships being DEMO market ori-
ented than interpersonal ones, and affective el-
ements of DEMO relationship that might overcome
pure business considerations may be reined in
by the threat or reality of audits and reviews. In
sum, relationships of either kind can be market
or relational, but interorganizational relation-
ships are much less likely to be of the latter type,
and this DEMO might be confounded in the anal-
ysis of repair at different levels of analysis.
The contractual form is important for repair
because it may DEMO implications for the effec-
tiveness of repair processes (see Table 1)DEMO In
particular, to the extent that relationships in-
volving economic versus DEMO contrac-
tual forms are governed by different rules that
reside in the schemata of the actors (Fiske,
1992), different repair tactics or processes may
be required. For example, whereas structural
remedies might be considered as highly appro-
priate in economic exchanges, they sometimes
may be difficult to impose in relational ex-
changes without violating the norms governing
the DEMO In examining repair from a so-
cial equilibrium perspective, Ren and DEMO pro-
pose in this STF that the cultural context of the
relationship will determine which behaviors are
seen as transgressions and how effective reme-
DEMO are offered as solutions. Extending this
idea, the contractual form of DEMO relationship
may also determine the actions viewed as trans-
gressions and the remedies that right them. For
example, while the social equilibrium process
may be particularly crucial to a relational ex-
change, the perspective may be less powerful in
the context of short-term economic exchanges
where affective components DEMO less relevant.
In sum, we expect these two dimensions to
provide DEMO for understanding similarities
and differences for repair of interpersonal ver-
sus interorganizational relations. Because the
two dimensions are largely independent, they
may be combined to form a 2  2 matrix—
contractual form: relational versus economic;
compositional form: individuals versus collec-
tives—which may reveal interesting implica-
tions. For example, in the relational-collective
quadrant, the complexity of the transgression
DEMO process; the disruption caused to the
large number of components, systems, and or-
ganizational members involved in the relation-
ship; and the DEMO of the repair processes
will together create a qualitatively different
phenomenon both in terms of the transgression
and the repair relative to all other DEMO
Repair in the economic-individual quadrant is
also quite different from other quadrants. While
social equilibrium processes in this case will be
underemphasized relative to DEMO relational
82
Academy of Management Review
January
quadrants, the clarity of the locus of the trans-
gression and, relative to organizations, the lack
of DEMO in the nature of the relationship
mean that external attributions may need
greater justification. Consequently, repair in
this quadrant might involve significant mea cul-
pas, economic reparations, and easily observ-
able structural remedies, rather than just the
restoration of the affective state. However, as in
the collectives quadrants, the nature of repair
will also depend on the relative power balance
in the relationship (from, say, the existence of
alternatives).
While we have provided some ideas in this
direction, an important avenue for future re-
search would be to empirically identify both the
presence DEMO weight of different processes and
factors, as well as to identify DEMO condi-
tions (such as the power balance) in each quad-
rant. It is important to pursue this line of re-
search because the DEMO of relationship repair
is likely to systematically vary in each of the
four quadrants, and such variation is grist for
the mill of a theory of repair at different levels of
analysis.
CONCLUSION
The question motivating DEMO STF was “How
can individuals or organizations repair relation-
ships once they are damaged?” Each of the four
articles in the STF, as well as this introduction,
makes the case that relationship repair is DEMO fun-
damental but surprisingly understudied prob-
lem. The purpose of the STF is to stimulate work
on this important topic and to provide a DEMO
ger, comprehensive, and more unified founda-
tion for such work, DEMO as it exists now and for
the future to build on.
What might future work look like? The contri-
butions that make up this STF provide the foun-
dations for advancing different perspectives on
this problem DEMO for systematically incorporat-
ing the different levels of analysis at which the
phenomenon is observed. The idea behind pub-
lishing the articles as a DEMO, as well as this
introduction, is to reinforce the integration of
perspectives and to encourage extensions into
future work. Consequently, the spirit of the STF
advocates research that not only drills down into a
particular DEMO but also takes into consid-
eration and integrates these other perspectives. In
doing so, we hope that future studies will not only
develop more comprehensive theoretical insights
but also will be more likely to provide a DEMO
into how relationship repair dynamics operate in
practice.
REFERENCES
Barclay, L., Skarlicki, D. P., & Pugh, S. D. 2005. Exploring the
role of emotions in injustice perceptions and retaliation.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 90: 629 – 643.
Bies, R. J., & Tripp, T. M. DEMO Beyond distrust: Getting even
and the need for revenge. In R. DEMO Kramer & T. R. Tyler
(Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and
research: 246 –260. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Blau, P. 1964. Exchange and power in social life. New York:
Wiley.
Bottom, W. P., Gibson, K., Daniels, S., & Murnighan, J. K. 2002.
When talk is not cheap: Substantive penance and
expressions of intent in rebuilding cooperation. Organi-
zation Science, 13: 497–513.
Bradfield, M., & Aquino, K. 1999. The effects of blame attri-
butions DEMO offender likableness on revenge and for-
giveness in the workplace. Journal of Management, 25:
607– 631.
Conway, N., & Briner, R. DEMO 2002. A daily diary study of
affective responses to psychological contract breach
and exceeded promises. Journal of Organizational Be-
havior, 23: 287–302.
Costa, A. C., & Bijlsma-Frankema, K. 2007. Trust and control
interrelations: New perspectives on the trust-control
nexus. Group & Organization Management, 32: 392– DEMO
de Quervain, D. J.-F., Fischbacher, U., Treyer, V., Schellham-
mer, M., Schnyder, U., Buck, A., & Fehr, E. 2004. The
neural basis of altruistic punishment. Science, 305:
1254 –1258.
de Waal, F. B. M. 1993. Reconciliation among primates: A
review DEMO empirical evidence and unresolved issues. In
W. A. Mason & S. P. Mendoza (Eds.), Primate social con-
flict: 111–144. Albany: State University of New York
Press.
Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. 2001. The role of trust in organi-
zational settings. Organization Science, 12: 450 – 467.
Driver, J., Tabares, A., Shapiro, A., Nahm, E. Y., & Gottman, J.
2003. Interactional patterns in marital success or failure:
Gottman Laboratory studies. In F. Walsh (Ed.), Normal
family processes: Growing diversity and complexity:
493–513. New York: DEMO Press.
Elangovan, A. R., & Shapiro, D. L. 1998. Betrayal DEMO trust in
organizations. Academy of Management Review, 23:
547–566.
Elsbach, K. D. 1994. Managing organizational legitimacy in
the California cattle industry: The construction and ef-
fectiveness of verbal accounts. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 39: DEMO 88.
Emerson, R. W. 1876. Essays: Second series. Boston: Houghton
DEMO
2009
Dirks, Lewicki, and Zaheer
83
Ferrin, D. L., Bligh, M. C., & Kohles, J. C. 2007. Can I trust you
DEMO trust me? A theory of trust, monitoring, and coopera-
tion DEMO interpersonal and intergroup relationships.
Group & Organization Management, 32: 465– 499.
Ferrin, D. L., Kim, P. H., Cooper, C. D., & Dirks, K. T. 2007.
Silence speaks volumes: The effectiveness of reticence
in comparison to apology and denial for repairing in-
tegrity- and competence-based DEMO violations. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 92: 893–908.
Fiske, A. P. DEMO The four elementary forms of sociality:
Framework for a unified theory of social relations. Psy-
chological Review, 99: 689 –723.
Gillespie, N., & Dietz, G. 2009. Trust repair after an organi-
zation-level failure. DEMO of Management Review,
34: 127–145.
Goffman, E. 1967. Interaction ritual: Essays on face-to-face
behavior. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books.
Gray, DEMO, Coleman, P. T., & Putnam, L. L. 2007. Intractable
conflict: New perspectives on the causes and conditions
for change. American Behavioral Scientist, 50: 1415–1429.
Hamilton, D. L., & Sherman, S. J. 1996. Perceiving persons and
groups. Psychological Review, 103: 336 –355.
Heider, F. 1958. The psychology of interpersonal relations.
New York: Wiley.
Kim, P. DEMO, Dirks, K. T., Cooper, C. D., & Ferrin, D. L. 2006.
When more blame is better than less: The implications
of internal vs. external attributions for the repair of trust
after a competence- DEMO integrity-based trust violation.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro-
cesses, 99: 49 – 65.
Kim, P. H., Ferrin, D. L., Cooper, C. D., & Dirks, K. T. 2004.
Removing the shadow of DEMO: The effects of apol-
ogy vs. denial for repairing ability- vs. DEMO
trust violations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89: 104 –
118.
Komorita, S. S., & Mechling, J. 1967. Betrayal and reconcilia-
tion in a two-person game. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 6: 349 DEMO
Labianca, G., Brass, D. J., & Gray, B. 1998. DEMO networks
and perceptions of intergroup conflict: The role of neg-
ative DEMO and third parties. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 41: 55– 67.
Lewicki, R. J., & Bunker, B. B. 1996. Developing and maintain-
ing trust in work relationships. In R. M. Kramer & T. R.
DEMO (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory
and research: DEMO –139. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lewicki, R. J., McAllister, DEMO J., & Bies, R. J. 1998. Trust and
distrust: New DEMO and realities. Academy of
Management Review, 23: 438 – 458.
Lewicki, R. J., Wiethoff, C., & Tomlinson, E. 2005. What is the
role of trust in organizational justice? In J. Greenberg &
DEMO Colquitt (Eds.), Handbook of organizational justice:
Fundamental questions about DEMO in the workplace:
247–270. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lindskold, S. 1978. Trust development, the GRIT proposal,
and the effects DEMO conciliatory acts on conflict and coop-
eration. Psychological Bulletin, 85: 772–793.
Loomis, J. L. 1959. Communication and the development of
trust. Human Relations, 12: 305–315.
Macneil, I. R. 1980. The new social contract: DEMO inquiry into
modern contractual relations. New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press.
Malhotra, D., & Murnighan, J. K. 2002. The effects of contracts
on interpersonal trust. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 47: 534 –559.
DEMO, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. DEMO An inte-
grative model of organizational trust. Academy of
Management Review, DEMO: 709 –734.
McEvily, B., Perrone, V., & Zaheer, A. 2003. Trust as an orga-
nizing principle. Organization Science, 14: 91–103.
DEMO Human Resource Consulting. 2005. U.S. workers’ trust
in management is low. Mercer press release on 2005
What’s Working survey, New York.
Mikula, G., Scherer, K. R., & Athenstaedt, U. 1998. The role of
injustice in the elicitation of differential emotional reac-
tions. Personality and Social Psychology DEMO, 24:
769 –783.
Morrison, E. W., & Robinson, S. L. 1997. When employees feel
betrayed: A model of how psychological contract viola-
tion develops. Academy of Management Review, 22:
226 –256.
Nakayachi, K., & Watabe, M. 2005. Restoring trustworthiness
after adverse events: DEMO signaling effects of voluntary
“hostage posting” on trust. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 97: 1–17.
Ohbuchi, K., Kameda, M., & DEMO, N. 1989. Apology as
aggression control: Its role in mediating appraisal of
and response to harm. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 56: 219 –227.
Pratt, M., & Dirks, K. T. 2006. Rebuilding DEMO and restoring
positive relationships: A commitment-based view of
trust. In J. DEMO & B. Ragins (Eds.), Exploring positive
relationships at work: Building a theoretical and re-
search foundation: 117–136. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Earl-
baum Associates.
Reb, J., Goldman, B. M., Kray, L. J., & Cropanzano, R. 2006.
Different wrongs, different remedies? Reactions to DEMO
ganizational remedies after procedural and interac-
tional injustice. Personnel Psychology, 59: 31– 64.
Reeder, G. D., & Brewer, M. B. 1979. A schematic model of
dispositional attribution in interpersonal perception.
Psychological Review, 86: DEMO
Ren, H., & Gray, B. 2009. Repairing relationship conflict: How
violation types and culture influence the effectiveness
of restoration rituals. Academy of DEMO Review,
34: 105–126.
Rhee, M., & Valdez, M. E. 2009. Contextual factors surround-
ing reputation damage with potential implications for
reputation DEMO Academy of Management Review, 34:
146 –168.
Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. 1994. Developmental pro-
cesses of DEMO interorganizational relationships.
Academy of Management Review, 19: 90 –118.
84
Academy of Management Review
January
Robinson, S. L. 1996. Trust and breach of the psychological
contract. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41: 574 –599.
DEMO, S. L., & Rousseau, D. M. 1994. Violating the psy-
DEMO contract: Not the exception but the norm. Jour-
nal of Organizational DEMO, 15: 245–259.
Schweitzer, M. E., Hershey, J. C., & Bradlow, E. T. 2006. Prom-
ises and lies: Restoring violated trust. DEMO
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 101: 1–19.
Shapiro, D. L. DEMO The effects of explanations on negative
reactions to deceit. Administrative Science Quarterly,
36: 614 – 630.
Sitkin, S. B., & Roth, DEMO L. 1993. Explaining the limited effec-
tiveness of legalistic “remedies” for trust/distrust. Orga-
nization Science, 4: 367–392.
Strickland, L. H. 1958. Surveillance and trust. Journal of Per-
sonality, 26: 200 –215.
Thorngate, W. 1976. Possible limits on a science of social
behavior. In J. H. DEMO, F. E. Aboud, & K. J. Gergen
(Eds.), Social DEMO in transition: 121–139. New
York: Plenum Press.
Tomlinson, E. C., Dineen, B. R., & Lewicki, R. J. 2004. The road
to reconciliation: Antecedents of victim willingness to
reconcile following a broken promise. Journal of Man-
agement, 30: 165–187.
Tomlinson, E. C., & Mayer, R. C. 2009. The role of causal
attribution dimensions in trust repair. DEMO of Man-
agement Review, 34: 85–104.
Tranfinow, D., Bromgard, DEMO K., Finlay, K. A., & Ketelaar, T.
2005. The role of affect in determining the attributional
weight of immoral behaviors. Personality and DEMO
Psychology Bulletin, 31: 935–948.
Watson Wyatt. 2007. WorkUSA 2006/2007. Research report,
Arlington, VA.
World Economic Forum. 2005. Trust in governments, DEMO
tions and global institutions continues to decline. Press
release, Geneva, Switzerland.
Zaheer, A., Lofstrom, S., & George, V. 2002. Interpersonal and
organizational trust in alliances. In F. Contractor & P. Lo-
range (Eds.), Cooperative strategies and alliances: What
we know 15 years later: DEMO London: Elsevier Science.
Zaheer, A., McEvily, B., & Perrone, V. 1998. Does trust matter?
Exploring the effects of interorganizational and DEMO
personal trust on performance. Organization Science, 9:
141–159.
Kurt T. DEMO (dirks@wustl.edu) is an associate professor at the Olin Business School
at Washington University in St. Louis. He received his Ph.D. from the University DEMO
Minnesota. His research focuses on trust in the workplace. He also conducts research
on feelings of ownership.
Roy J. Lewicki (Lewicki_1@fisher.osu.edu) is the DEMO Abramowitz Memorial Profes-
sor at the Max M. Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University. He received
his Ph.D. from Columbia University. His research interests include trust development
and repair and negotiation processes in organizations.
DEMO (Aks) Zaheer (azaheer@umn.edu) is the Curtis L. Carlson Chair in Strategic
Management at the Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota, DEMO
director of the Strategic Management Research Center. He received his Ph.D. from
MIT. His research interests include trust, networks, alliances, and mergers and acqui-
sitions.{1g42fwefx}