The Role of Trust in Organizational Settings
Author(s): Kurt T. DEMO and Donald L. Ferrin
Source: Organization Science, Vol. 12, No. DEMO (Jul. - Aug., 2001), pp. 450-467
Published by: INFORMS
DEMO URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3085982
Accessed: 07/09/2010 16:24
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR'DEMO Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/DEMO/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, DEMO part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your DEMO, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of DEMO work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=informs.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must DEMO the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools DEMO increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
INFORMS is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, DEMO and extend access to Organization Science.
http://www.jstor.org
The
Role
of
Trust
in
Organizational
Settings
Kurt T. Dirks * Donald DEMO Ferrin
John M. Olin School of Business, Washington University in St. DEMO, One Brookings Drive,
St. Louis, Missouri 63130
Human Resources, DEMO University of New York, 274 Jacobs Management Center,
Buffalo, New York 14260
dirks@olin.wastl.edu * dlferrin@buffalo.edu
Department of Organization and
Abstract
Numerous seem DEMO agree
that organizations,
although
these benefits occur.
tally different
tive effects on attitudes,
mance outcomes within organizational
section
the effects on a DEMO
of outcomes. article we develop an
alternative (i.e., moderates)
the be-
havioral perceptual
processes. which each
of the models is most likely DEMO be applicable. The theory is
supplemented spanning 40
years in organizational set-
tings. in this article pro-
vides which trust affects or-
ganizational to DEMO for
more
work for better understanding
quences
can or
the
(Trust; Work Behavior; Work Performance; Attitudes)
settings
mitigate
have
models
of DEMO
literature:
In
model:
effects of other
and performance
Lastly,
with a review
regarding
The theoretical
insight
outcomes,
accurately assessing the
DEMO trust,
be modified
effects
impact
and
to capitalize
of low levels of trust.
suggests
ways
on high
has
they
not
In this
that
DEMO
article,
describe
perceptions,
come
we explore
how trust
article,
the
into
the
we examine
the
model
trust
researchers
a number
from
DEMO important
various
Trust
the
Trust
results
second
facilitates
determinants on attitudinal,
outcomes
we discuss
of empirical
consequences
framework
processes
provides
of trust,
DEMO research
that
disciplines
benefits
on how
two fundamen-
might
behaviors,
settings. In the first
that
in direct
section
or hinders
perceptual,
via DEMO distinct
the conditions under
studies
of trust
presented
through
guidance
provides a frame-
on the conse-
organizational
levels of trust
for
to agreement
have
DEMO perfor-
posi-
(main)
of the
has
dominated
Scholars from various DEMO periods and a diversity of dis-
ciplines seem to agree that trust is highly beneficial to the
functioning of organizations. For example, early organi-
zational scholars professed trust to be an important hall-
mark of effective DEMO (e.g., Argyris 1962, Likert
1967, McGregor 1967). More recently, researchers rep-
resenting a variety of perspectives have expressed signifi-
cant interest in trust (e.g., Bies et al. 1995, Coleman 1990,
Gambetta 1988, Hosmer 1995, Kramer and Isen 1994,
Kramer and Tyler DEMO, Rousseau et al. 1998). As Kramer
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE, ? 2001 INFORMS
Vol. 12, No. 4, July-August 2001, pp. 450-467
(1999, p. 569) observed, "this interest has been fueled, at
least DEMO part, by accumulating evidence that trust has a
number of important DEMO for organizations and their
members."
Although organizational scholars have devoted a sig-
nificant amount of attention to examining the numerous
potential benefits of DEMO, they have devoted significantly
less attention to examining the different ways DEMO trust
might transmit these benefits. Prior studies appear to
make two fundamental distinctions regarding how these
effects occur. The dominant perspective is that the DEMO
of trust are transmitted in a relatively straightforward
manner: Trust results DEMO distinct (main) effects such as
more positive attitudes, higher levels DEMO cooperation (and
other forms of workplace behavior), and superior levels
DEMO performance. This idea is reflected in most theoretical
treatments of trust and its effects on workplace attitudes,
behaviors, and performance (e.g., Golembiewski and
McConkie 1975, Jones and George 1998, Mayer et al.
1995)DEMO And, as reported in this article, over 90% of em-
pirical studies examining the consequences of trust have
hypothesized and examined the main DEMO of trust. Fi-
nally, the idea that an increase in trust DEMO to better team
processes and performance has provided the impetus for
numerous interventions by managers and consultants
(e.g., see Kaplan 1979, Tannenbaum et al. 1992, Woodman
and Sherwood 1980).
Although the perspective described above has domi-
nated the literature, it does not represent the only way
that trust might have positive consequences. A handful of
studies suggest that DEMO is beneficial because it facilitates
the effects of other determinants on desired outcomes.
Hence, instead of proposing that trust directly results in
desirable outcomes, this model suggests that trust pro-
vides the conditions under which certain outcomes, such
as cooperation and higher performance, are likely to oc-
DEMO In contrast to the research described in the previous
1047-7039/01/1204/0450/$05.00
1526-5455 electronic ISSN
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
paragraph, this perspective is relatively undeveloped,
comprising mostly empirical studies, as yet interpreted in
isolation from one another, which were focused on spe-
cific contexts and hypotheses. The broader theoretical is-
sues which may provide a solid foundation for under-
DEMO the moderating role of trust have received little
attention.
The primary aim of this article is to explore these two
fundamentally different models to DEMO a better under-
standing of how trust might produce positive effects on
attitudes, perceptions, behaviors, and performance out-
comes within organizational settings. We briefly review
the theory for the dominant model and examine the extent
DEMO which the data from existing research is consistent with
the predictions of that model. As it has seen limited at-
tention, we focus most of our efforts on developing the
second model in the form of DEMO propositions. One prop-
osition suggests that trust facilitates the effects of moti-
vational concepts on workplace behaviors and outcomes
by influencing one's expectations DEMO another person's
future behavior. The second proposition suggests that
trust moderates the relationship between an interaction
partner's action and the truster's DEMO by influencing
one's interpretation of the action. We then consider the
conditions under which trust is likely to have a direct
effect on DEMO outcomes, an indirect effect, or no effect.
The theoretical framework may assist researchers in bet-
ter interpreting past research on the consequences of DEMO,
as well as designing future research to assess the effects
of trust across a variety of literatures.
Foundations of the Analysis
In this DEMO, we refer to the two models by which trust
operates with DEMO used by organizational scientists to
differentiate how one construct influences another: DEMO
effect and moderation. These two models represent im-
portant distinctions because they imply different theo-
retical rationales, different methodological designs, dif-
ferent forms DEMO statistical evidence, and different ways of
using trust as a managerial DEMO Hence, devel-
oping a better understanding of the role of trust DEMO an
important step for research and practice related to the con-
cept of trust.
One element of our analysis is a review of the DEMO
literature on the effects of interpersonal trust. We compile
and analyze research from several literatures over the past
40 years to provide a better DEMO understanding of
the role of trust in organizational settings. The review
identifies the different outcomes trust has been associated
with, provides evidence for how trust affects these out-
comes, and offers insights that we draw on as one element
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 12, No. 4, July-August 2001
DEMO in Organizational Settings
of our theory development. By using the review as an
element of our analysis, we hope to ensure our theory is
grounded in evidence and that it produces propositions
that can be readily DEMO
In this article, we will focus on the effects of interper-
DEMO trust on individuals' workplace-relevant attitudes
and behaviors. Although the concept of DEMO has been
defined in a number of ways, we use the DEMO in a broad
sense that reflects theoretical and empirical research in
the organizational sciences. Rousseau et al. (1998, p. 395)
proposed the DEMO as a cross-disciplinary conceptual
definition of trust: a psychological state comprising DEMO
intention to accept vulnerability based upon positive ex-
pectations of the intentions or behavior of another. Indi-
vidual researchers tend to use slight variations DEMO this
definition, operationalizing trust as an expectation or be-
lief that DEMO can rely upon another person's actions and
words, and/or DEMO the person has good intentions toward
oneself (e.g., Cook and Wall 1980, Johnson-George and
Swap 1982, McAllister 1995, Robinson 1996, Zaheer DEMO
al. 1998). We use the term in a manner reflecting these
conceptual and empirical definitions. In this article, we
are consistent with almost all of the studies included in
our review in treating trust as DEMO unidimensional psycho-
logical state. We recognize, however, that trust is a com-
plex psychological state that may consist of different di-
mensions.
Because DEMO trust research is relatively diverse and
multidisciplinary, Bigley and Pearce (1998) note that it is
important for researchers to focus on particular problems,
and then use concepts, theories, and methods appropriate
for the DEMO Based on delineations made by other
trust researchers (Worchel 1979, Lewicki and Bunker
1995, Bigley and Pearce 1998), we will focus only on
trust as a psychological state, such as a belief or attitude,
toward another known individual, as opposed to trust as
a dispositional construct (e.g., Rotter 1967) or among
groups or firms (e.g., Wicks et al. 1999, Das and Teng
1998). And, we DEMO focus on the effects of trust on
workplace-relevant attitudes and behaviors of individuals
as studied by micro-organizational behavior researchers,
rather than on the DEMO of economic transactions
and the concomitant reduction of opportunism within or-
ganizations (e.g., Williamson 1985), or the dynamics of
romantic relationships (e.g., Holmes 1991).
Main Effect
According to this model, trust operates DEMO a straightfor-
ward manner: Higher levels of trust are expected to DEMO
in more positive attitudes, higher levels of cooperation
and other forms DEMO workplace behavior, and superior
levels of performance. As noted above, this model has
451
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
Trust in Organizational Settings
dominated DEMO the concept of trust has been studied in
research and used in managerial interventions.
Given the state of the literature related to this model,DEMO
we have two objectives in this section. First, we briefly
discuss DEMO theoretical rationale for why trust has a main
effect on a variety of workplace perceptions, attitudes,
behaviors, and performance outcomes. Second, we re-
view empirical research utilizing this model to examine
the extent to DEMO the data match the theory's predic-
tions for the different outcomes. These objectives allow
us to examine the main effect model and also DEMO a
point of comparison for the moderation model.
As noted above, DEMO conducted a review of the pub-
lished empirical literature examining the effects of inter-
personal trust. The details of the procedures and criteria
we DEMO to conduct the review can be found in the Ap-
pendix. Our review identified 43 studies that used the
main effect model, 29 of these examined behavioral and
performance outcomes, and 23 studies examined attitu-
dinal or perceptual outcomes (some studies examined
multiple outcomes). Table 1 provides a detailed listing of
these studies, categorized by the outcome examined. We
also provided a short summary of each study's key prop-
osition, as related to trust. Finally, to determine whether
the data support the prediction, we included details on the
two primary criteria used to evaluate results of a main
effect hypothesis (Rosenthal 1991): statistical signifi-
cance and effect size.'
Main Effects on Workplace Behaviors and
Performance Outcomes
DEMO studies that examine the relationship between trust
and interpersonal behavior tend to rest on the premise that
individuals' beliefs (i.e., trust) about DEMO party affect
how they behave in interactions with the referent of the
belief. Mayer et al. (1995) provided a model for this idea.
DEMO to their model, individuals' beliefs about an-
other's ability, DEMO, and integrity lead to a will-
ingness to risk, which in turn leads to risk taking in a
relationship, as manifested in a variety of behaviors. In
other words, a higher level of trust in a work partner in-
creases the likelihood that one will take a DEMO with a
partner (e.g., cooperate, share information) and/or in-
creases the amount of risk that is assumed. Risk-taking
behavior, in turn, is expected to lead to positive outcomes
(e.g., individual performance). And, in social units such
as work groups, cooperation, information sharing, etc. are
expected to lead to higher unit performance (Larson and
DEMO 1989). For the most part, each study reported in
this DEMO uses a variation of this argument, designed to
fit the particular DEMO or context.2 These ideas apply
for studies that utilize trust as a predictor (e.g., O'Reilly
and Roberts 1974) or that position trust as a mediator in
a larger model (e.g., De Dreu et DEMO 1998).
Researchers have used this basic idea to examine the
main effects of trust on a variety of behavioral and per-
formance outcomes: communication and information
sharing, organizational citizenship behavior, effort, con-
flict, DEMO behaviors, individual performance, and
unit (e.g., group) performance. For DEMO of the outcomes
studied, the evidence for the predictions of a DEMO effect
is not robust: Statistical significance of the effects is in-
DEMO across studies and the effect sizes tend to be
modest. For example, 10 studies examined the idea that
individuals transmit more information, and/DEMO informa-
tion with higher fidelity, to a superior or work partner
DEMO they trust that individual. Of these, six studies found
a significant DEMO of trust on various operationalizations
of information sharing (Boss 1978, Mellinger 1959,
O'Reilly 1978, O'Reilly and Roberts 1974, Smith DEMO
Barclay 1997, Zand 1972). But, four studies did not find
a significant effect (De Dreu et al. 1998, Dirks 1999,
DEMO et al. 1980, Roberts and O'Reilly 1974). Like-
wise, research on the main effects of trust on unit perfor-
mance shows DEMO findings. Two studies did find
evidence for a significant, positive main DEMO of trust on
group performance (Dirks 2000; Klimoski and Karol
1976), and one study reported a significant, positive effect
on business-unit performance (Davis et al. 2000). But,
other studies examining the main effect of trust on group
performance (Dirks 1999, Friedlander 1970), DEMO
dyad performance (Kimmel et al. 1980, Schurr and Ozanne
1985), and interorganizational performance (Zaheer et al.
1997) found only partial support DEMO no support. As shown
in Table 1, similar inconsistencies are found DEMO research
examining the main effects of trust on effort, conflict, and
negotiation behaviors. In other words, some studies report
a significant main effect, others do not.
The outcomes for which the main effect model appears
to have the strongest empirical support are organizational
citizenship behaviors and individual DEMO For ex-
ample, five studies found significant positive effects of trust
DEMO organizational citizenship behaviors (Konovsky and
Pugh 1994, McAllister 1995, Pillai DEMO al. 1999, Podsakoff
et al. 1990, Robinson 1996), while one study found in-
significant effects (Deluga 1994). All four studies of the
effects of trust on individual performance reported a sig-
nificant, positive effect.
Main Effects on Workplace Attitudes and Cognitive/
Perceptual Constructs
Most DEMO of the effects of trust on attitudinal and per-
ceptual constructs also utilize the main effect model, al-
though the rationales for those effects are slightly differ-
ent. For the effects of trust on satisfaction, Rich (1997)
452
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol.
12, No. 4, July-August 2001
Table 1
Research Examining
Main
Study
Communication
Boss 1980
De Dreu et DEMO 1998
Dirks 1999
Kimmel et al. 1980
Mellinger
O'Reilly
O'Reilly
Roberts
Smith
Zand 1972
1959
and Roberts 1974
1978
and O'Reilly DEMO
and Barclay 1985
Organizational Citizenship Behavior
Deluga
Konovsky and Pugh 1994
McAllister 1995
Pillai et al. 1999
Podaskoff et al. 1990
Robinson 1996
Negotiation DEMO
Kimmel et al. 1980
Schurr and Ozanne 1985
Conflict
De Reu et al. 1998
Porter and Lilly 1996
Zaheer et al. 1997
Other Behaviors
DEMO 1999
Spreitzer and Mishra 1999
Robinson 1996
Tsai
Individual
Earley
Oldham
Rich
Robinson
and Ghoshal
1998
Performance
1986
1975
1997
1996
Effects of Trust
DEMO
Trust
behavior
Trust
Trust
Trust
interorganizational
Trust
Trust
involvement
Trust
psychological
employer
Trust has (+) effect
Trust
and
Trust
Trust
Trust
psychological
on DEMO
Primary
Trust within group has (+) effect on openness in communication
Trust between negotiators mediates the effects of social motives
and punitive capability DEMO info. exchange
Trust within group has (+) effect on info. sharing in group
Trust between negotiators has (+) effect on info. exchange DEMO
dyad
Trust has (+) effect on accuracy of info. shared with superior
Trust has (+) effect on amount of info. sent to DEMO
Trust has (+) effect on amount of info sent to superior
Trust has (+) effect on amount of info. sent to superior
DEMO has (+) effect on openness in communication in
interorganizational relationship
Trust has (+) effect on openness in communication in group
Trust building DEMO leader has (+) effect on organizational
citizenship behavior
Trust in superior mediates the relationship between justice and
organizational citizenship behavior
Trust in co-worker DEMO (+) effect on organizational citizenship
behavior
Trust in leader mediates the relationship between leader behavior
and organizational citizenship behavior
Trust in leader mediates DEMO relationship between leader behavior
and organizational citizenship behavior
Trust in organization has (+) effect on organizational citizenship
behavior
between negotiators has (-) DEMO on distributive behavior
between negotiation partners has (+) effect on integrative
and (-) effect on distributive behavior
between negotiators has (-) DEMO on conflict
within group has (-) effect on conflict in team
has (-) effect on conflict between partners in
relationship
within group DEMO (+) effect on effort expended
in employees by management has (DEMO) effect on
of employees in decision making
in organization mediates relationship DEMO
contract violation and intent to remain with
on resource exchange between units
in supervisor mediates relationship between praise/criticism
job performance
in leader has (+) effect on task performance
in manager has (+) effect on sales performance
in organization mediates relationship between
contract violation and job performance
DEMO and Outcomes
Thesis Related
to Trust
p
ns
ns
ns
p
p
p
ns
p
p
ns
p
p
p
p
p
ns
ns
DEMO
n
ns
ns
p
p
p
p
ns/p
p
p
Sig.
0.37 to 0.59
0.20
0.00
n/a
n/a
n/a
0.32 DEMO 0.48
n/a
0.47
0.41 to 0.63
n/a
0.28
0.19, DEMO
0.08, 0.31
0.15 to 0.30
0.32
n/a
0.00 to 0.02
DEMO
-0.46
-0.13 to -0.25
0.21
0.62
0.37
0.90
0.43
0.12 to 0.28
0.30
0.41
Note. Sig = Statistically significant finding (p < 0.05); ns = nonsignificant effect; p = positive, significant effect; n = negative, significant
effect; n/a = data not available; (+) = positive; (-) = negative; info. = information. Effect sizes DEMO as r(Pearson correlation coefficient).
Those studies that examined several types of dependent variables are reported in the table multiple times.
r
Table 1 (cont'd)
Unit Performance
Davis et al. 2000
Dirks 1999
Dirks 2000
Friedlander 1970
Kegan and Rubenstein 1973
Kimmel et al. DEMO
Klimoski and Karol 1976
Schurr and Ozanne 1985
Zaheer et al. 1997
Satisfaction
Boss 1978
Brockner et al. 1997
Driscoll
Muchinsky
O'Reilly
Pillai
DEMO
Roberts
Schurr
Smith
Ward
Zand
Other
Brockner
Friedman
Pillai
Perceived
Benton
Roberts
1978
1977
and Roberts
et al. 1999
1974
1997
and O'Reilly
DEMO Ozanne 1985
and Barclay
1997
1972
Attitudes
et al. 1997
1974
1997
1993
et al. 1999
Accuracy
et al. 1969
of Information
and O'DEMO
1974
Acceptance of Decision/Goal
Fulk et al. 1985
Kim
Oldham
Tyler
Other
Lind
Muchinsky
Nootebom
Robinson
and Mauborgne
1975
and Degoey 1996
1993
DEMO/Perceptual
et al. 1997
1977
et al. 1997
1996
Variables
Rousseau and Tijoriwala
1999
Scott 1980
Primary
Trust in general manager has (+ ) effect on business-unit performance
Trust within group has (+) effect on DEMO performance
Trust in leader has (+) effect on group performance
Trust within group has (+) effect on group performance
Trust within group DEMO (+) effect on group performance
Trust between negotiators has (+) effect on dyad performance
Trust in partners has (+) effect on DEMO performance
Trust between negotiators has (+) effect on dyad performance
Trust has (+) effect on interorganizational relationship performance
Trust has (+) DEMO on sat. with meeting
Trust has (+) effect on sat./support for leader; relationship moderated
by outcome favorability
Trust has (+) effect on job sat.
Trust has (+) effect on job sat.
Trust DEMO (+) effect on sat. with communication
Trust in leader mediates the relationship between leader behavior and
job sat.
Trust has (+) effect DEMO job sat.
Trust has (+) effect on sat. with communication
Trust has (+) effect on sat. with partner
Trust has (+) DEMO on sat. with IRP
Trust has (+) effect on sat. with work group
Trust has (+) effect on sat. with meeting
Trust DEMO (+) effect on commitment; relationship moderated by out-
come favorability
DEMO in negotiator has (+) effect on preference for integrative bar-
gaining
Trust in leader mediates the relationship between leader behavior and
commitment
Trust DEMO partner has (+) effect on perceived accuracy of info.
Trust in leader has (+) effect on perceived accuracy of info.
Trust in DEMO has ( + ) effect on fairness/accuracy of performance
appraisal
Trust in management has (+) effect on compliance with decision
Trust in DEMO has (+) effect on goal acceptance
Trust in supervisor has (DEMO) effect on decision acceptance
Trust has (-) effect on procedural DEMO judgments
Trust has (+) effect on perceptions of organizational climate
Trust has (-) effect on perceived probability of loss
Trust in organization DEMO (-) effect on perceived psychological con-
tract violation
Trust in management has effect on beliefs in reasons for organizational
change and perceived legitimacy DEMO changes.
Trust in management has (+) effect on perceived value of manage-
ment by objectives program
p
ns
p
ns
n/ns
ns
DEMO
ns/p
ns
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
ns/p
P
P
p
p
p
p
ns/DEMO
p
p
p
p
n
p
P
Study
n/a
-0.21 to 0.20
0.57
n/a
-0.31 to 0.30
n/a
n/a
0.16 DEMO 0.23
0.26 to 0.39
0.65
0.65
0.52
0.40
0.29
0.13, 0.32
DEMO
0.39 to 0.43
0.53
0.42
0.58
0.63
0.05, 0.41
n/a
DEMO, 0.42
0.34
0.26 to 0.50
0.47
0.58
0.09 to 0.32
n/DEMO
0.37 to 0.61
0.11 to 0.62
-0.30
-0.18
0.13 to 0.36
0.50, 0.53
Note. Sig = Statistically significant finding (p < 0.05); DEMO = nonsignificant effect; p = positive, significant effect; n = DEMO, significant
effect; n/a = data not available; (+) DEMO positive; (-) = negative; info. = information. Effect sizes reported as r(Pearson correlation coefficient).
Those studies that examined several types DEMO dependent variables are reported in the table multiple times.
Thesis Related
to Trust
Sig.
r
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
suggests that trust in one'DEMO manager directly results in
increased satisfaction because managers are responsible
for many duties that have a major effect on an employee's
job satisfaction, such as performance evaluations, guid-
ance on job responsibilities, and training. DEMO, as
an employee's trust in a manager increases, job satisfac-
tion will also increase. This logic also seems to explain
the effect DEMO trust on organizational commitment, al-
though researchers who have studied this DEMO rela-
tionship have not clearly specified the rationale. Re-
searchers examining the effect of trust on perceptions, for
example of the accuracy of information, and acceptance
of a decision or goal tend to build on the idea that trust
has a direct impact on people's overall view DEMO the other
party.
Most of the studies that examined the effects of trust
on attitudes focused on satisfaction, although researchers
have also examined the effects of trust on organizational
commitment and preference for integrative bargaining
(i.e., cooperative negotiations). Research on the effects of
trust on perceptions has examined main effects on the
perceived accuracy of information given by another DEMO
tity, acceptance of decisions from a superior, perceptions
of psychological contract breach, procedural justice
judgements, perceptions of organizational climate, and
perceptions of risk.
In general, the evidence is highly supportive of main
effects of trust on attitudes, perceptions, and other cog-
nitive constructs. For example, 12 studies examined the
effects of trust on various facets of workplace DEMO
(e.g., satisfaction with decisions, supervisor, relationship,
job); all studies demonstrated significant effects. Like-
wise, the idea that the level of trust in a partner would
have a main effect on perceptions of DEMO of infor-
mation provided by that partner received support in two
studies (Benton et al. 1969, Roberts and O'Reilly 1974).
In DEMO, lower levels of trust were associated with sus-
piciousness of the DEMO, while high levels of trust
were associated with acceptance of the DEMO Find-
ings were similar for goal/decision acceptance, proce-
dural justice DEMO, perceptions of breach of a psy-
chological contract, perceptions of organizational changes
or programs, and perceptions of risk, with most studies
showing DEMO effects.3
Summary of Evidence for the Main Effect Model
The studies examined in our review reported fairly con-
sistent significant effects of trust on DEMO and cog-
nitive/perceptual constructs. One concern in interpreting
these relationships is that they may be biased because of
percept-percept inflation. However, the results from two
studies (O'Reilly and Roberts 1974, Schurr and Ozanne
DEMO
SCIENCE/Vol. 12, No. 4, July-August 2001
Trust in Organizational Settings
1985), which used reasonably strong experimental de-
signs to examine the DEMO of trust on satisfaction report
effect sizes consistent with other studies. This suggests
that a substantial portion of the variance may not be from
DEMO
Overall, the effects of trust on various workplace be-
haviors and DEMO outcomes are weaker and less con-
sistent. For many outcomes, some DEMO revealed a sig-
nificant effect, while others did not. The most DEMO
evidence seems to be for the effects of trust on organi-
zational citizenship behavior and individual performance.
For example, the effect sizes of trust on organizational
citizenship behavior noted in Table 1 are similar to those
DEMO by Organ and Ryan (1995) for other key deter-
minants of organizational citizenship behavior. In the
cases of the other outcomes, the evidence does not seem
to provide strong support for the conventional wisdom
that DEMO represented by the main effect model-that trust,
on average, results DEMO desirable behaviors and outcomes.
A clear case in point is the mixed evidence for the effects
of trust on dyad or group performance, a relationship that
has long been assumed to exist (Golembiewski and
McConkie 1975).
As a final observation, we note that the findings re-
viewed in this section mirror other cases in which orga-
nizational researchers have DEMO to validate the idea
that positive attitudes or sentiments (i.e., satisfaction, com-
mitment, team building) have a main effect on desirable
work behaviors and higher performance (Iaffaldano and
Murchinsky 1985, Mathieu and Zajac DEMO, Tannenbaum
et al. 1992, Woodman and Sherwood 1980). These efforts
produced evidence suggesting that although these attitu-
dinal constructs did tend to DEMO other attitudes, the
evidence for the effects on behaviors and performance
DEMO disappointing. Each of these reviews concluded that
the effects of attitudes and sentiments on work behaviors
and performance are unlikely to be straightforward or DEMO
bust.
Given these findings and observations, we suggest that
additional research DEMO needed to better understand the ef-
fects of trust, particularly on DEMO and performance
outcomes.
Moderating Effect
In this section, we explore a DEMO model of how trust
might operate in organizational settings: by serving DEMO
facilitate (i.e., moderate) the effects of other determinants
on work DEMO, perceptions, behaviors, and perfor-
mance outcomes. In other words, trust provides the con-
ditions under which cooperation, higher performance,
and/or more positive attitudes and perceptions are likely
to occur.
455
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
Trust in Organizational Settings
As DEMO earlier, trust is a psychological state that pro-
vides a representation DEMO how individuals understand their
relationship with another party in situations that involve
risk or vulnerability. Accordingly, trust embodies the ac-
cumulated experiences with, DEMO knowledge about, the
other party in situations involving vulnerability. Because
it DEMO an individual's understanding of a relation-
ship, we propose that DEMO engenders two distinct pro-
cesses through which it fosters or inhibits positive out-
comes in the relationship. First, trust affects how one
assesses the future behavior of another party with whom
one is interdependent (or whom may take action that af-
fects oneself). Second, trust also affects how one inter-
prets the past (or present) actions of the DEMO party, and
the motives underlying the actions. In this section, two
propositions are developed which build on these different
processes. Both propositions rest DEMO the premise that trust
does not act in a direct causal role or elicit particular
outcomes itself. Instead, trust moderates the effect of pri-
mary determinants (causal factors) on outcomes by af-
fecting how one DEMO the future behavior or interprets
the past actions of another party. By impacting the as-
sessment of the other party's future or prior DEMO, trust
reduces some of the concomitant uncertainty and ambi-
guity.
The DEMO that trust may operate as a moderator is not
new, but DEMO has received relatively scant attention in com-
parison to the main effect model. Rousseau et al. (1998)
observed that several theorists focused on interpersonal
trust in work relationships have positioned trust as a mod-
erator (in addition to some research in organizational eco-
nomics and romantic relationships)DEMO Within the area of
organizational research, Hwang and Burgers (1997) DEMO
posed that trust is a necessary, but not sufficient, condi-
tion for cooperation; this terminology suggests that trust
may act as a moderator, although the mathematical model
does not specifically consider how trust might operate in
this manner. Mishra and Spreitzer (1998) developed prop-
ositions describing DEMO main and moderation effects of
trust for a specific research question in a specific context:
They posit that in the aftermath of downsizing, survivors'
behavioral responses will be determined directly by trust,
and DEMO by the interaction of trust with empowerment
and work redesign. And, DEMO will be described later in this
section, several empirical studies have DEMO the idea of
moderation to develop and test specific hypotheses (see
DEMO 2 for details), although these studies have been in-
terpreted in isolation from each other. Although research-
ers have explored the ideas within DEMO contexts, they
have not yet addressed broader theoretical issues which
would DEMO a solid foundation for understanding the
moderating role of trust. Our intent is to extend existing
research by: (a) developing propositions based on a con-
sideration of the perceptual and behavioral processes
through which trust DEMO as a moderator across con-
texts, (b) providing a theoretical DEMO that can guide
future research on the role of trust across multiple con-
texts, (c) offering a framework that will help integrate and
interpret existing research, and (d) defining the conditions
under which trust is most likely to act as a main effect, a
moderator, DEMO neither.
PROPOSITION
tween motivational constructs and
and outcomes.
This proposition is based on the idea that trust does
impact workplace behaviors and performance, but that its
effect is not that of directly causing one to engage DEMO those
behaviors. Instead, as described below, trust has an in-
direct effect by providing an assessment of the potential
behavior of one's DEMO partner. Contemporary theories
of workplace behavior have focused on a number of
causal determinants of behavior, other than attitudes or
sentiments. For example, DEMO suggest that
work behavior is caused by needs, goals, or incentives
(Kanfer 1990), and macrotheorists have focused on de-
terminants of work behavior such as roles, rules, struc-
ture, culture, and norms (Perrow 1986). Trust does not
seem to reflect, in any way, these kinds of determinants
of work-related behavior, and hence perhaps should DEMO
be expected to operate as a factor that causes individuals
to engage in particular workplace behaviors. Instead, trust
might more appropriately be viewed as influencing the
type of, or degree of, behavior that such determinants
DEMO in, as it allows one to assess the potential behavior
of DEMO individual with whom one is interdependent. For
example, a motivational construct DEMO provide the drive
for cooperative behavior, while trust helps facilitate the
DEMO of the cooperative behavior, because, under
high trust, the individual DEMO that a partner is willing
to cooperate.
This idea can be illustrated by considering the relation-
ship between trust and an outcome it is DEMO asso-
ciated with risk-taking behavior (Mayer et al. 1995). Ac-
DEMO to theories of motivation, risk-taking behaviors,
like other types of DEMO behaviors, are often caused
by individual motives (e.g., propensity to DEMO), goals, or
incentives. Trust, instead of directly causing risk-taking
behaviors, may influence the extent to which a motivation
for engaging in risk-taking behaviors is likely to lead to
risk-taking behaviors. For example, an individual who
considers another to be dependable will find it relatively
easy to DEMO toward a group goal with that partner, be-
cause one does DEMO have to be anxious or concerned about
the partner's potential behavior. Hence, the goal is likely
456
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vo1. 12, No. DEMO, July-August 2001
1. Trust moderates the relationship be-
workplace behaviors
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
Trust in Organizational Settings
Table DEMO
Research Examining
Trust
as a Moderator
Study
Primary
Thesis Related
to Trust
Benton
et al. 1969
Dirks
1999
Kimmel al. 1980
O'Reilly and DEMO 1980
Read 1962
et
Robinson
1996
Rousseau
and Tijoriwala
1999
Schurr
and Ozanne 1985
Simons
and Peterson
2000
Trust
doubt
Trust
performance
Trust in DEMO moderates the relationship between aspiration level
Trust in supervisor moderates relationship between performance appraisal
individual
in
sharing
Prior trust in
trust
Trust
change and DEMO
Trust
processes and outcomes
Trust within group moderates the relationship between
partner
of partner
within group
in
moderates
the relationship
between partner's
past DEMO
and individual
moderates
the relationship
between motivation
and group
process and
Trust
performance
supervisor
moderates
the relationship
between
mobility
and negotiation
outcomes
feedback and
DEMO
and information
employer
moderates
in
management
in
partner
moderates
legitimacy
moderates
the relationship
between unfulfilled
promise
and subsequent
the relationship
of change
the relationship
DEMO perceived
reason
for
organization
between bargaining
toughness and negotiation
task conflict
and relationship
conflict
Note.
Sig = Statistically
significant
finding
(p < 0.05); ns = nonsignificant
effect;
s = significant
effect.
Sig.
s
s
DEMO/s
ns/s
s
s
ns/s
s
s
to exert a strong effect on behavior and performance, as
one can be comfortable directing all of one's resources
(e.g., attention, effort) toward the DEMO goal. In contrast,
if one considered the partner to be undependable, one
would likely be anxious about the partner's behavior, and
DEMO might find it worrisome to work toward the joint
goal. Under this condition, the goal is likely to exert a
much weaker effect on behavior, as the individual begins
to divert resources away from the group goal as a means
of self-protection. In this example, trust functions not in
a causal role, but as a moderator that influences the
strength of the relationship between a motivator (the goal)
and an individual's behavior.
This idea can also explain people's behavior in re-
DEMO to other cues that motivate people's behavior such
as work roles, cultural and group norms, and organiza-
tional rules. For example, individuals generally recognize
their work roles and the importance of successful role
performance. DEMO addition, managers sometimes request
that employees engage in actions outside the DEMO
roles. To the extent that individuals trust their managers,
they are likely to be able to devote all their resources (e.g.,
attention, effort) to role performance, norm conformance,
rule compliance, and/DEMO managers' requests, because of
their confidence that they will receive appropriate re-
wards and not be undeservedly penalized for doing so.
However, if an individual considered the manager to be
undependable, the individual would likely become con-
cerned about the manager's response, and thus might find
it worrisome to behave as expected or requested. Under
this condition, the role, norm, rule, or managerial request
is likely to exert a much weaker effect on the individual's
behavior, as the individual diverts resources for self-
protection. In these examples, trust functions not by caus-
ing the individual to engage in the behavior, but as a
moderating construct that influences the strength of the
relationship between the behavioral cue DEMO the individ-
ual's behavior.
Evidence. Data from three studies are consistent with
this proposition. Dirks (1999) found that trust did not
have DEMO main effect on group processes and performance,
but did moderate the relationship between group mem-
bers' motivation and group processes and outcomes. For
example, groups with high levels of motivation tended to
direct their effort toward group goals in the high-trust
condition, but they directed their effort toward individual
goals in the low-trust condition. And, motivation had sig-
nificant, positive effects on group performance in the
high-trust condition, but motivation DEMO no effect on per-
formance in the low-trust condition. Presumably, the
DEMO's energies were channeled toward either group or
individual goals, depending DEMO the level of trust within
the group. Similarly, in a negotiation, Kimmel et al.
(1980) found that trust did not produce a DEMO effect on
information exchange or outcomes (joint benefit), but it
DEMO interact with aspiration levels to influence negotiation
processes. Under high trust, DEMO aspiration levels pro-
duced high levels of information exchange and integra-
tive (cooperative) behavior under high trust. But under
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 12, No. 4, July-August
2001
457
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
low trust, high aspiration levels produced extremely low
levels of information exchange and high levels of distrib-
DEMO (competitive) behavior. In interpreting the results,
the researchers suggested that negotiators deemed risky,
cooperative behaviors to be prudent tactics under condi-
DEMO of high trust only; under low trust, negotiators chose
to use methods that put them at lower risk to reach their
goals. Finally, Read (1962) proposed that as individuals'
motivation to be promoted DEMO, they were less
likely to share negative information about their work DEMO
their bosses. He suggested that this relationship would be
moderated by trust, i.e., the tendency to withhold infor-
mation would be particularly acute DEMO the subordinate
did not trust the boss. The data supported these ideas.
Taken together, these three studies demonstrate a pat-
tern consistent with our theorizing: Trust influences task-
related behavior and/or performance via moderation. Spe-
cifically, trust affects the level and/or type of behaviors
that individuals engage in as a result of motivational con-
structs. For example, not trusting one's coworkers may
cause an individual to be anxious when DEMO with
them because of the risks involved in engaging in coop-
erative behavior. If highly motivated to work towards a
goal, the individual is likely to choose to engage in be-
haviors that minimize the risks, but still allow achieve-
ment of the goal. Alternatively, high levels of trust seem
to allow that motivation to be expressed in ways that DEMO
volve more risk, but may result in higher overall achieve-
ment. DEMO proposition may be integrative in explaining
how trust operates across a variety of contexts, as the
three studies examined three different phenomena (group
DEMO, negotiations, superior-subordinate relation-
ships), conducted in experimental and field settings, and
were studied at the individual, dyadic, and group levels
of analysis.
The above ideas provide an illustration of, and evi-
dence for, how trust operates as a moderator in a variety
of contexts. In the next two sections, we consider how
this proposition might be applied to research in two spe-
cific contexts: mixed-motive situations and the produc-
tion of organizational citizenship behaviors. These two
contexts were chosen as they DEMO existing theoretical
frameworks that we can build on.
Cooperative Behavior in Mixed-Motive Contexts. A
substantial amount of research relevant to organizations
has attempted to DEMO the determinants of cooper-
ation in situations where interdependent individuals have
mixed motives. Researchers have studied this problem
using various types of experimental games DEMO so-
cial dilemmas, a prisoner's dilemma, and negotiations
(Komorita DEMO Parks 1995). In this section, we draw on
458
Trust DEMO Organizational Settings
the goal/expectancy model (Pruitt and Kimmel 1977)
DEMO the experimental gaming literature to examine how
interpersonal trust might facilitate cooperative behavior.
Although prior research on trust in this domain has tended
to DEMO dispositional trust among unfamiliar actors,
our focus will be on interpersonal trust as defined earlier.
Following the goal/expectancy model, researchers have
suggested that a primary determinant of cooperative be-
havior in such contexts is DEMO' goals for achieving
cooperation (Pruitt and Kimmel 1977, Yamagishi 1986),
or more precisely, a goal for cooperation being the dom-
inant goal for an individual (as opposed to a goal for
noncooperation). The goal, which may be determined by
a number of factors such as the incentive system, provides
the motive for cooperation. But, as DEMO note, such
a goal is insufficient for cooperation to occur because DEMO
ipants must expect that their partner will also cooperate
(Pruitt and DEMO 1977, Yamagishi 1986). Lacking this
expectation, cooperation is unlikely to be attractive and/
or feasible. Trust represents an expectation of cooperation
DEMO may make cooperation attractive and feasible.
Building on the goal/expectancy model, one might pro-
pose that trust would moderate the relationship between
individuals' goals and cooperative behavior. Specifically,
under low trust, cooperative goals DEMO unlikely to be trans-
lated into cooperative behavior (or the effect DEMO the co-
operative goal will be tempered), while under high trust,
cooperative motives are more likely to be translated into
cooperative behavior. DEMO this example provides an
explanation of a situation in which the cooperative motive
is dominant, the idea can also apply to situations in which
cooperative motives and competitive motives (e.g., cre-
ated by the incentive DEMO) are more equally weighted.
In this case, we predict that trust will determine which of
the two motives is attended to. In other DEMO, under high
levels of trust, the individual will be more likely to attend
to the cooperative motives, while under low levels of
trust, the individual will be more likely to attend to the
competitive motives. This prediction builds on the idea
that because trust influences the individual'DEMO assessment
of the partner's future action, it helps one assess DEMO vi-
ability of cooperative behavior. For example, in this sit-
uation, an individual with low trust in his partners is likely
to perceive DEMO cooperative behavior is unlikely to result
in personal gains as he believes the partners will take
advantage of his actions.
In sum, in mixed-motive situations, we propose that
trust will moderate the relationship between cooperative
motives and cooperative behavior. At present, there does
not appear to be explicit evidence from the experimental
game area that directly supports this idea, but the goal/
expectancy model provides a theoretical rationale for it.
ORGANIZATION
DEMO/Vol. 12, No. 4, July-August 2001
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
Trust in Organizational Settings
Organizational DEMO Behavior. As noted in our
review, researchers have found consistent support DEMO a
main effect of trust on organizational citizenship behav-
ior. We believe, however, that there is a theoretical reason
to expect that trust DEMO also affect organizational citizen-
ship behavior via moderation.
Such an idea can be derived from Organ's (1990) ex-
position of the "motivational basis" for organizational cit-
izenship behavior. Organ proposes that individual dis-
positions have a main effect on behavior and that this
effect is moderated DEMO perceived fairness or satisfaction.
For example, conscientiousness, a disposition with mo-
tivational properties, exerts a main effect on organiza-
tional citizenship behavior. According to Organ (1990),
dissatisfaction produces a "damper" effect on DEMO rela-
tionship. Specifically, under low levels of perceived fair-
ness or DEMO, individuals who might normally be
motivated to engage in citizenship behaviors DEMO with-
hold them.
We suggest that trust might operate in a similar fashion
by moderating the relationship between determinants of
citizenship behavior (e.g., DEMO) and the expres-
sion of citizenship behavior. In other words, individuals
who might normally be motivated to engage in citizen-
ship behavior will DEMO to withhold it under low levels of
trust. The social exchange perspective used by other re-
searchers to specify the relationship between trust and
DEMO citizenship behavior provides the rationale
for this idea. Specifically, researchers argue DEMO under
social exchange there are no specified future obligations
as there are in economic forms of exchange. Hence, in
cases where individuals do not trust the other party (e.g.,
their employer), their tendency to engage in organiza-
tional citizenship behavior (or other positive forms of dis-
cretionary behavior) is likely to be suppressed because
they feel that the other party will take advantage of their
good citizenship and fail to DEMO in kind. Alterna-
tively, under high levels of trust, individuals will not have
such reservations and their tendency to engage in orga-
nizational DEMO behavior is more likely to be ex-
pressed.
Presently, there appears DEMO be no empirical evidence to
explicitly support this proposition, as existing DEMO
has only examined the main effects of trust on organi-
zational citizenship behavior.
PROPOSITION 2. Trust moderates the relationship be-
tween a partner's DEMO and the truster's response.
We propose that trust may also provide conditions un-
der which cooperation and higher performance are likely
to occur DEMO a second manner: by moderating the relation-
ship between an interaction DEMO's action and the
truster' s response via interpretation. Specifically, trust af-
fects one's interpretation of another's past action or
events DEMO to the past action: Under high levels of
trust, one is more likely to respond favorably to a part-
ner's action than DEMO low levels of trust.
Interpersonal behaviors are usually ambiguous to some
degree, therefore interpretation is used to reduce ambi-
guity, so that individuals DEMO respond appropriately to
others. Scholars have long recognized that people's pre-
existing beliefs and evaluations guide their interpretations
of objective reality. They determine DEMO a great extent what
people see and hear, and "draw lines about and segregate
an otherwise chaotic environment; they are our methods
for finding our way in an ambiguous universe" (Allport
1935, p. 806). They have been found to relate to what is
perceived in DEMO ambiguous scene, to affect individuals'
causal interpretation of a target DEMO's behavior, and to
affect individuals' evaluations of attitudinally-relevant
empirical evidence (Fiske and Taylor 1991).
Logically, one's response to an DEMO taken by another
party will be a direct function of the action, per se, and
its characteristics (e.g., valence, severity, and DEMO).
We suggest, however, that the same action could be in-
terpreted and reacted to differently, depending upon the
level of trust that one has in the other party. Because it is
a core element DEMO an individual's understanding of his or
her relationship with other parties (Berscheid 1994), trust
provides a perspective from which to interpret the action.
Consequently, it may affect the extent to which the action
is salient, the conclusions one draws about the factors
motivating the partner's action, and ultimately one's psy-
chological and behavioral responses to the action. For
instance, although the valence of feedback impacts em-
ployee responses (Fedor 1991), trust in the manager may
moderate this relationship. In response to negative feed-
back from a trusted manager, an employee is likely to
consider the feedback accurate, and expend extra effort
to try to improve performance. Yet in response to nega-
tive feedback from a DEMO who is not trusted, an em-
ployee is likely to doubt DEMO accuracy of the feedback,
and not expend extra effort to improve performance. In
these examples, an action on the part of the manager-
providing negative feedback-resulted in different atti-
tudinal, perceptual, and behavioral responses DEMO
on the level of trust.
As a specific example of this more general proposition,
Mishra and Spreitzer (1998) suggest that in the DEMO
of a downsizing, survivors' level of trust in top manage-
ment influences the extent to which the downsizing is
considered a threat, and this appraisal affects survivors'
reactions to changes in the level of DEMO and
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 12,
No. 4, July-August 2001
459
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
work redesign. Below we describe DEMO empirical stud-
ies that are also consistent with the proposition. While
these hypotheses have been developed to describe the
contingent relationship between specific variables DEMO spe-
cific contexts, Proposition 2 provides a more general logic
that DEMO be used to develop hypotheses for a diverse set
of research questions and contexts.
Evidence. Three studies demonstrate how trust may
moderate the relationship DEMO another party's action
and a psychological response. Robinson (1996) found
that initial trust in an employer moderated the relationship
between a psychological DEMO violation and subse-
quent trust in the employer. She argued that because of
the tendency toward cognitive consistency, initial trust
guides individuals to selectively perceive and interpret
information about the violation in different ways. For ex-
DEMO, an individual with high initial trust will tend to
perceive the DEMO in ways consistent with that level
of trust (e.g., as unintentional, a misunderstanding);
through this process a high level of trust DEMO preserved.
Under low trust, the opposite was proposed to occur. Sim-
DEMO, Benton et al. (1969) found evidence that trust in-
fluenced DEMO relationship between deceit by a partner and
doubting the partner's word. Specifically, after being de-
ceived by a partner to a limited extent, individuals with
high levels of trust in the partner tended to hold little
doubt about the partner's truthfulness. Alternatively, un-
der the same level of deceit, individuals with low levels
of trust in their partner tended to have significant doubt
about the partner's truthfulness. In their DEMO on em-
ployees' interpretations of organizational change, Rousseau
and Tijoriwala (DEMO) found some evidence that trust in
management moderated the relationship between DEMO
agement's reasons for change and the perceived legiti-
macy of those changes.
The proposition that different behavioral responses to
a partner's actions DEMO occur under high and low levels of
trust is demonstrated by two studies. Simons and Peterson
(2000) found that trust moderated the relationship DEMO
tween task conflict and relationship conflict within
groups. They proposed that, DEMO low trust, task conflict
within a group is interpreted negatively and DEMO
results in relationship conflict. Alternatively, under high
levels of trust, they suggested that task conflict would be
more likely to be interpreted positively DEMO hence would
not be translated into relationship conflict. Schurr and
Ozanne (DEMO) found support for trust as a moderator of
the relationship between DEMO bargaining stance of a part-
ner (tough versus soft) and several outcomes (integrative
behavior, distributive behavior, and agreements reached)
in a bargaining situation. For example, under high trust,
460
Trust
in Organizational Settings
a tough bargaining stance led to integrative behavior and
high levels DEMO agreement; under low trust; a tough bar-
gaining stance resulted in more distributive behavior and
low levels of agreement. The authors suggested that DEMO
was the case because prior levels of trust frame the per-
ceptions of the partner's behavior (e.g., toughness) and
the motives underlying it.
In sum, these five studies support the proposition that
trust influences the relationship between a partner's ac-
tion and an individual's DEMO to that action. Three of
the studies (Benton et al. 1969, Robinson 1996, Rousseau
and Tijoriwala 1999) provide evidence specifically sug-
gesting DEMO this occurs by influencing an individual's per-
ception of the partner's action: Under high trust, the ac-
tion is interpreted positively, but under low trust, the
action is more likely to be interpreted negatively. Hence,
the individual is acting in response to the partner'DEMO actions
(e.g., deceit by a partner, intent to cooperate), DEMO opposed
to trust directly. Trust shapes the response elicited.
Although the studies focused on different phenomena
(e.g., psychological contracts, negotiations, group deci-
DEMO making, social dilemmas) and examined phenomena
at the individual, dyadic, and group levels of analysis, the
five studies provide a consistent pattern when integrated.
Future Research. This idea could be used within the
context DEMO other relationships within organizations where
trust is reputed to be important for fostering cooperation.
For instance, researchers might examine how trust oper-
ates as a moderator in negotiation processes between la-
bor and management. Some researchers DEMO negoti-
ation processes as sequences of actions that unfold as
individuals interact with and respond to each other
(Weingart 1997). Putnam and Jones (1982), for example,
examined how individuals in labor and management roles
responded to each others' negotiation behaviors via rec-
iprocity. One might posit that trust would affect this pro-
cess by moderating the relationship DEMO negotiation
behaviors and responses to the behaviors. Under high lev-
els of trust, the pattern may be more likely to evolve into
a cooperative pattern as individuals interpret each others'
behaviors positively; under low levels of trust, the pattern
may be more likely to evolve into a competitive pattern
as individuals interpret each others' behaviors negatively.
For example, DEMO taken by one side (e.g., concessions)
may lead to negative interpretations ("They are trying to
take advantage of us!") under DEMO levels of trust between
the parties, but lead to positive interpretations DEMO high
levels of trust. In addition, drawing on Simons and Peterson
(2000), conflict over the terms of an agreement may trig-
ger DEMO conflict "through a process of misinter-
pretation and reprisal."
ORGANIZATION
DEMO/VO1.
12, No. 4, July-August
2001
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
These ideas could also apply DEMO understanding inter-
action processes in other contexts, such as virtual teams.
DEMO the limited amount of contextual information (e.g.,
Daft and Lengel DEMO) that is available to members of a
virtual team about their DEMO' behaviors and motives,
the effect of trust as a moderator DEMO be significant. For
example, within a virtual team, the relationship between
a partner's behavior and one's interpretation of and re-
sponse DEMO that behavior may be highly contingent on the
level of trust. In such a situation, the level of trust may
provide a powerful lens through which that action is in-
terpreted and responded to.
Summary of DEMO Moderation Model
In this section, we developed two propositions regarding
how DEMO provides the conditions under which favorable
perceptions, attitudes, behaviors, and DEMO out-
comes are likely to occur. In other words, higher levels
DEMO trust increase the likelihood that determinants of co-
operation will actually result in favorable outcomes;
lower levels of trust decrease the likelihood. We DEMO
gested that there are two distinct ways in which trust
might operate in this fashion.
The evidence that was used to provide tentative support
DEMO this theory came from a variety of settings and situ-
ations including supervisor-subordinate relationships,
work groups, negotiation dyads, and social dilemmas. In
DEMO, it was gathered in both field and experimental
settings. The consistency DEMO these settings suggests
that the propositions may have potential to provide an
integrative understanding of how trust operates.
Conditions Under Which the Models Are
DEMO to Be Applicable
In this article, we have discussed two models DEMO describe
different ways that trust might operate in organizational
settings: the DEMO effect model, and the moderation model
(Propositions 1 and 2). We suggest both models are valid,
but that given a particular DEMO, one model will better
describe the effects of trust than the DEMO Thus, we now
consider the conditions under which trust is likely DEMO op-
erate as a main effect, a moderator, or neither.
We use the concept of "situational strength" to delin-
eate when each DEMO is likely to be applicable. Re-
searchers suggest that situations are "DEMO" to the extent
that they provide guidance and incentives to behave DEMO a
particular way, and lead everyone to construe the partic-
ular DEMO in a similar way (e.g., Mischel 1977, p. 347).
DEMO contrast, situations are weak to the extent that they do
not DEMO guidance or incentives to behave in a partic-
ular way, and DEMO not provide clear or powerful cues that
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol.
Trust in Organizational Settings
lead individuals to interpret the events in a similar way.
DEMO researchers have found this concept to be
helpful for understanding the role of psychological states
and traits (e.g., attitudes, personality, beliefs) in impact-
ing workplace outcomes, given the existence of other de-
terminants such as reward systems, rules, and group and
cultural norms (e.g., DEMO and Pfeffer 1989,
House et al. 1996). Examining the simultaneous effect of
trust (a psychological state) and other determinants via
the DEMO of situational strength builds on arguments
presented earlier in this article: DEMO many situations, there
are factors that have more proximal and direct DEMO on
workplace outcomes than does trust.
We suggest that the main effect model will be particu-
larly applicable in situations that are weak for DEMO out-
come in question. The main effect model is built on the
idea that, because trust is a positive psychological state,
absent other more powerful or proximal determinants,
one will be more likely to DEMO in a variety of desirable
actions (e.g., cooperation). Consequently, DEMO weak situa-
tions, where other factors do not play a strong DEMO in
guiding outcomes, a higher level of trust will have the
DEMO to result in positive outcomes (e.g., behavior,
attitude). Instead of facilitating or hindering the effects of
other constructs (which by definition are not operative)
as described in Propositions 1 and 2, trust will itself have
a more direct effect on the outcome.
However, as situations increase in strength for the out-
come in question, the main effect of trust declines as other
cues emerge that more directly impact DEMO outcomes. In
midrange situations, where cues are neither weak nor
strong DEMO directing an individual toward an outcome, trust
helps to "tip the scales," as it helps the individual assess
the future behavior of DEMO party and/or interpret past
behavior. For example, as discussed in DEMO 1,
trust will moderate the effects of behavioral cues on be-
havioral and performance outcomes because of the as-
sessment of the potential DEMO of one's partner. For
Proposition 2, when a partner's DEMO are somewhat am-
biguous but not entirely so, trust helps to DEMO that am-
biguity via interpretation. In other words, because of the
DEMO ambiguity, individuals' interpretive processes
will shape how the partner's action is perceived, and thus
will shape the individual's response to that action.
Lastly, in situations that are very strong for the out-
come in question, outcomes become "over-determined"
(dominated) by other factors, and therefore trust is un-
likely to demonstrate an appreciable effect. More DEMO
ically, as cues to behave in a particular way become very
DEMO, concerns related to trust in the other party are
likely to DEMO set aside, and therefore trust will not facilitate
12, No. 4, July-August
2001
461
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
Trust in Organizational Settings
or DEMO the effects of the cues as described in Propo-
sition 1. And as another party's actions become very un-
ambiguous, Proposition 2 is likely to become less appli-
cable because interpretation becomes unnecessary.
In summary, we propose that trust will demonstrate a
main effect in situations that DEMO weak for the outcome in
question, and will have no effect DEMO strong situations. In
midrange situations, trust will facilitate the effects of
DEMO factors by reducing the ambiguity associated with
assessing others' potential future DEMO or the motives
underlying others' past behavior. Given that situations are
DEMO along a continuum from weak to strong, in theory,
trust DEMO sometimes simultaneously operate via both
models. We suggest, however, that the dominant observ-
able effects are likely to be as a main effect DEMO a moder-
ator, contingent upon the strength of the situation. An
DEMO is that, in many cases, researchers should ex-
amine main and interactive effects of trust.
Implications
Some researchers have argued that most organizational
DEMO are relatively high in situational strength because
of the deliberate use of reward systems, rules, goals, etc.
(Davis-Blake and Pfeffer 1989). DEMO would likely in-
clude many of the day-to-day situations that organiza-
tional members experience. However, other researchers
have countered that many situations, such DEMO mergers,
downsizings, the founding of an organization, cultural
changes, DEMO changes, and situations involving the
existence of numerous competing goals, are weak (e.g.,
House et al. 1996). Given this variance in the situational
strength of work settings, our analysis suggests that trust
will operate in substantially different ways according to
the work setting. For instance, one might speculate that
trust will have a significant main effect on DEMO's
reactions in a downsizing or a merger, because of the
DEMO involved, but may have a moderating effect
in situations where there DEMO less uncertainty and ambigu-
ity.
In addition, different types of research DEMO also
vary in their strength. Prior research has recognized that
experiments conducted in laboratory settings are less
likely to show main effects of psychological DEMO
such as attitudes, partially because experiments create
moderate to strong situations (Eagly and Chaiken 1993).
In fact, many of the studies in the present review that
found effects for trust as a moderator, but not as a main
effect, used experimental methods in laboratory settings.
One might also extend the logic of strong and weak
situations to make DEMO about the types of out-
comes that, on average, would be more susceptible to be
governed by predictors other than trust. For example, ab-
senteeism is likely to be largely dictated by organizational
462
rules, sanctions, and reward systems. Consequently, we
might expect trust not to DEMO as a main effect on ab-
senteeism, but instead operate as DEMO moderator or not at
all. In contrast, other acts are more "discretionary" (e.g.,
organizational citizenship behavior) across most situa-
tions, DEMO therefore trust may be more likely to demon-
strate a main effect. The effect of trust on attitudes would
follow a similar logic.
Finally, we note that while these ideas are useful for
identifying which model DEMO describes the effect of
trust, they also help resolve discrepant predictions DEMO by
researchers who claim that interpersonal trust has no sig-
nificant impact in organizational settings (e.g., Williamson
1993), with those made by DEMO who argue it has
a substantial impact (e.g., Golembiewski and McConkie
1975, Kramer 1999). The former rests on the assumption
that organizations are largely (strongly) governed by fac-
tors such as contracts, rewards, rules, etc., while the latter
makes no such assumption. Consequently, DEMO on the
logic articulated above, depending upon which assump-
tion is DEMO in a given situation, trust may operate
as a main effect, a moderator, or not at all.
Discussion
The idea that trust has numerous benefits for organiza-
tions has been, and continues to be, DEMO major impetus for
research on trust (Golembiewski and McConkie 1975,
DEMO 1999). Our review indicates that there is empir-
ical support for the idea that trust has important benefits
for organizations. However, researchers should hesitate
to assume that these benefits are always transmitted in a
singular DEMO straightforward manner, or even that the ef-
fects of trust and DEMO mechanisms through which it op-
erates are the same regardless of the organizational con-
text. The primary purpose of our article is to examine DEMO
alternative models that describe the way in which trust
operates, further DEMO the moderation model, and ex-
plore when trust is likely to DEMO according to each
model.
Research Implications
The propositions on moderation are likely to have impli-
cations not only for researchers interested in understand-
ing DEMO role of trust, but also for researchers in other lit-
eratures. DEMO the two propositions describe how trust
influences the impact of a range of predictors on percep-
tions, attitudes, behaviors, and performance outcomes, DEMO
searchers outside the trust area may be able to utilize the
propositions to better understand heterogeneity in estab-
lished relationships between the constructs of DEMO in
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/VO1.
12, No. 4, July-August 2001
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
Trust
in Organizational Settings
that DEMO For example, we previously explored how Prop-
ositions 1 and 2 DEMO be applicable for research on ne-
gotiations, organizational citizenship behavior, strategic
games, and virtual teams. We do not feel the propositions
are limited to these areas; rather, we believe the ideas may
apply more DEMO to problems where there is uncer-
tainty and ambiguity about future or past actions of an-
other party under conditions of vulnerability.
As suggested DEMO, trust, as a representation of how
individuals understand their relationship with another
party, operates by affecting how one assesses the future
behavior or interprets the actions of another party. Much
of the existing research on DEMO consequences of trust has
been focused on trust as being about expectations of fu-
ture behavior of another party. Future research may give
more DEMO to the significant role that trust plays
on interpretations of behavior, DEMO motives underlying
those behaviors, and how this affects individuals' re-
sponses. Previously, we explored how this idea might be
helpful in examining negotiation processes and how trust
may impact reciprocity. Likewise, it might be helpful in
studying other reciprocity-based processes such as retri-
bution (Bies and Tripp 1996). Low trust would be ex-
pected to fuel a retribution DEMO, while high trust may
limit it. As a final example, it may be helpful for under-
standing how and why employees respond to DEMO
actions in organizations that have experienced recent or-
ganizational changes which have broken trust.
While the framework describes the effect of trust as
primarily DEMO main or moderated effect depending on the
strength of the situation, DEMO framework also suggests that
in some cases trust may simultaneously have a main and
moderating effect. This presents a methodological con-
cern because of DEMO difficulty of interpreting a main effect
in the presence of a significant interaction. The main-
effect model suggests that the effect of trust is DEMO,
while the moderation model suggests that the effect is
nonlinear. Therefore, when an interaction is present, a
main effect should not be DEMO as a constant effect,
but only as an average effect, DEMO that the actual
effect varies over different levels of trust and the other
predictor variable(s) (see Jaccard et al. 1990). Accord-
DEMO, when trust simultaneously operates via both mod-
els, it may be difficult to draw a clear conclusion about
the magnitude of the main DEMO Yet it will be particu-
larly difficult to do so if predictor variables other than
trust, and/or the interaction terms, are excluded DEMO the
model.4 Consequently, in midrange situations researchers
should be careful to DEMO predictor variables other
than trust; failing to do so may result DEMO an erroneous
interpretation of the nature (i.e., main vs. moderation) DEMO
the effect of trust, and/or the magnitude of the main DEMO
Thus, the framework in this article may assist researchers
in better DEMO the effects of trust in various work-
place contexts, and appropriately DEMO research so
that they can more accurately assess those effects empir-
ically.
The ideas presented, and evidence reviewed, suggest
that trust has an DEMO impact on attitudinal and be-
havioral outcomes. But, the propositions and DEMO
presented in this article suggest that in many situations
there are other constructs that can have a more direct and
substantial impact on outcomes DEMO does trust. Future
research might examine the impact of trust relative to
these other determinants to obtain a better understanding
of the role of DEMO in organizations.
Lastly, it is important to note that the main DEMO and
moderation models often do not describe all factors that
may impact the effects of trust on outcomes. As one case-
in-point, while the models describe how trust impacts the
behavior of the truster, they do not address other factors
that may affect the outcome such as the DEMO behavior
of other individuals. (Note that Proposition 1 deals with
the DEMO future behavior of the trustee, while Prop-
osition 2 deals with DEMO past behavior of the trustee; nei-
ther proposition predicts the actual DEMO behavior of the
trustee). For example, when outcomes depend upon DEMO
tiple parties (e.g., group performance outcomes resulting
from group members' DEMO behavior) the effect of
any single individual's level of trust DEMO the outcome may
be diffused or otherwise limited. Research in particular
literatures that are affected by these factors will clearly
need to take them DEMO account.
Managerial Implications
Our analysis suggests that, broadly speaking, managers
interested in capitalizing on high trust or mitigating the
effects of low trust DEMO at least two options available to
them. First, they may attempt DEMO change the level of trust
in their organizations. A number of interventions have
been developed for this purpose, and while they appear
to be effective in changing trust levels, their impact on
other outcomes is inconsistent (e.g., Woodman and Sherwood
1980). Our analysis suggests that this DEMO may
be because of the situation: While increases in trust are
DEMO to have a direct positive impact in weak situations,
they will only have a contingent impact in midrange sit-
uations and will have DEMO impact in strong situations.
Second, managers often have the capacity to DEMO
the strength of situations. Our analysis suggests and pro-
vides a theoretical rationale for the idea that when trust
is high, managers can capitalize by destructuring: making
the situation very weak, so that outcomes are DEMO
by trust rather than by other factors. However, when trust
ORGANIZATION
DEMO/Vol. 12, No. 4, July-August 2001
463
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
Trust in Organizational Settings
is DEMO, managers will benefit by creating a highly struc-
tured environment so DEMO trust will neither directly nor
indirectly cause negative outcomes. In fact, DEMO levels
are usually at their ebb during periods such as organiza-
tional crises, downsizings, and mergers, when situations
are weak and low trust is, therefore, likely to have a direct
negative effect. Managers cognizant DEMO these processes
can therefore strengthen such situations by introducing
strong and unambiguous proximal cues despite the
broader uncertainty inherent in the situation. These ideas
DEMO suggest that managers may be more successful in
implementing change efforts on a proactive rather than
reactive basis, doing so in "good times" rather than bad,
when trust levels are high rather than low.
"Downside" Implications of the Moderation Model
In the section on moderation, DEMO focused on the positive
benefits that trust may facilitate. These positive benefits
occurred because trust provided the individual with an
assessment of another party'DEMO future behavior and/or in-
terpretations of the party's past behavior. Consequently,
under high levels of trust, the truster was more likely to
cooperate, put oneself at risk to the other party, and/DEMO
perceive the other party's actions in a positive light.
It is important to recognize, however, that high levels
of trust may not DEMO be warranted. When trust is not
warranted there is a significant potential downside of
providing a greater "opportunity for malfeasance" (e.g.,
Granovetter 1985, p. 491, Kramer et al. 1995) because it
affects assessments of future behavior and/or interpreta-
tions of past behavior. For example, Benton et al. (1969)
found that despite being taken advantage of 25% of the
time by a partner, high-trust participants failed to lose
trust in the partner and continued to allow the partner to
systematically DEMO advantage of them. In other words,
instead of being a "DEMO that mitigates against
risk," as some economic scholars suggest (c.f. DEMO and
Pearce 1998), trust may actually increase the potential for
opportunistic behavior to occur. Hence, the dynamics of
the moderation model provide two theoretical rationales
for why trust might simultaneously provide the conditions
under which DEMO behavior is more likely to occur,
but also under which opportunistic behavior is more
likely to occur.
Conclusion and Summary
Over the last DEMO decades, management researchers
have increasingly recognized that trust plays an important
DEMO in work organizations, and empirical evidence has
generally but not consistently DEMO this perspective.
In most cases, scholars have assumed that trust has DEMO di-
rect, positive effect on outcomes of interest, and have
designed empirical research to assess these direct effects.
In this article, we have developed an alternative model
that describes how trust functions as a moderator, facili-
tating or hindering the effect of other determinants on
outcomes of DEMO In doing so, it attempts to make
several contributions: (a) developing the idea of moder-
ation at the level of propositions, which will allow authors
of future empirical studies of trust from a variety DEMO lit-
eratures to develop hypotheses and research designs spe-
cific to their question and context, (b) identifying and
discussing two distinct psychological processes through
which trust may act as a moderator, (c) specifying when
(i.e., under what conditions) trust is likely to demonstrate
a main effect, a moderating effect, or neither, and (d)
reviewing DEMO integrating the existing empirical literature
on trust. The framework has implications for positioning
trust theoretically, studying it empirically, and utilizing it
practically.
Acknowledgments
DEMO authors wish to thank Terri
McEvily, Greg Oldham, and
on this manuscript.
Griffith,
two anonymous
Brenda
Lautsch,
reviewers
for
Jim
their
DEMO,
comments
Bill
Appendix Procedures for Identifying Empirical
Studies
Steps
(1) Search of electronic databases: PsyclNFO, ABI Inform, Social Sci-
ence Abstracts.
(2) Examine reference lists of prior nonempirical research that in-
cluded DEMO review (e.g., Golembiewski and McConkie 1975, Kramer
1999, Mayer et al. 1995, Pruitt and Carnevale 1993, Ross and LaCroix
1996).
(3) Manual review of journals (1980 to present): Academy of DEMO
agement Journal, Administrative Science Quarterly, Journal ofApplied
Psychology, Organizational Behavior DEMO Human Decision Processes,
and Organization Science.
(4) Perusal of reference section of articles identified in prior steps.
Criteria for Inclusion
(1) DEMO was defined as a psychological state (see Introduction for
details). DEMO operationalizing trust as a behavior (e.g., Deutsch
1958, Komorita and DEMO 1967) or as a disposition (e.g., Rotter
1967) were excluded.
(2) The study positioned trust as an antecedent variable and trust DEMO
specifically hypothesized to be related to a dependent variable that was
a behavior, an indicator of performance, or a work-related attitude or
cognition. DEMO, we did not include any articles in which trust
was solely DEMO as a correlate (e.g., Kavanagh 1975) or as a de-
DEMO variable.
(3) Studies that quantitatively measured trust (e.g., with a survey) or
manipulated it were included; qualitative studies were not included.
DEMO We believe that the procedures described above should have
detected the bulk of relevant empirical studies. We recognize these
procedures may have missed a DEMO studies in which trust played a
minor role. The manual searches should have decreased the occurrence
of this problem for most of the recent DEMO
464
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 12, No. 4, July-August
2001
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
Endnotes
'Although the effect sizes reported in the table provide important in-
formation, readers should be appropriately cautious in the interpreta-
tion of them. First, there are a number of studies for which we were
unable to estimate an effect size, and many of those were cases where
the results were reported as DEMO nonsignificant. Second, a num-
ber of the relationships may be slightly DEMO as a number of studies
measured trust and the dependent variables at the same time, using the
same methods, and/or using the DEMO source. Third, effect sizes should
be interpreted as evidence of the DEMO of a relationship, but not as
evidence of causality (Rosenthal 1991).
2For purposes of completeness, we note three studies that examined
outcomes associated with trust, although they do not fit the main-effect
model described here. Two studies suggest that an individual's trust in
another party DEMO the other party's behavior. For example, Atwater
argued that subordinates' trust in their manager affected the amount of
"supportive" behavior the DEMO engaged in. Fried et al. (1992) pro-
posed that when superiors perceived that their subordinates did not trust
them, they avoided evaluating the performance of the subordinates
(presumably because they felt the subordinates would question their
appraisals). Lastly, Ross and Wieland (1996) examined the idea that a
mediator's perception of the negotiating parties' trust in each other
influenced the mediator's strategy.
3We also note that there were DEMO studies that we coded as exam-
ining the effects of trust on behaviors and/or performance, although
they arguably could be catalogued as supporting the main effects of
trust on perceived behaviors. In other words, the studies were opera-
tionally examining the effect of trust on perceptions of DEMO, as
reported by the truster (e.g., Porter and Lilly 1996, De Dreu et al. 1998).
4This observation may enable researchers to DEMO interpret the results
of past research, as summarized in Tables 1 DEMO 2. In the studies re-
ported in Tables 1 and 2, DEMO is inadequate information to rate the
research setting as, e.g., weak, midrange, strong, or somewhere be-
tween these points. Thus, it DEMO likely, albeit not demonstrable, that some
of the studies in Table 1 may have omitted important predictor vari-
ables and/or interaction terms. DEMO this were the case, the main effects
would tend to be DEMO (because the main effect of trust is not
constant) and occasionally weak (because in midrange and strong sit-
uations trust should not have main effect). While the results in Table
1 differ by dependent DEMO, overall they do appear to be fairly in-
consistent and weak. DEMO contrast, the interpretation of interaction terms
is not necessarily impaired by DEMO presence of a significant main effect.
If it is assumed that most of the studies reported in Table 2 were set
in midrange situations DEMO the moderation model is applicable, this
provides a plausible explanation for DEMO more consistent support for
the moderation model examined in Table 2.
References
Allport, G. W. 1935. Attitudes. C. Murchison, ed. Handbook of Social
DEMO Clark University Press, Worchester, MA. 798-844.
Argyris, C. 1962. Interpersonal DEMO and Organizational Ef-
fectiveness. Dorsey, Homewood, IL.
Atwater, L. 1988. DEMO relative importance of situational and individual
variables in predicting leader behavior. Group Organ. Stud. 13
290-310.
Benton, A., E. Gelber, H. Kelley, DEMO Liebling. 1969. Reactions to vari-
ous degrees of deceit in a mixed-motive relationship. J. Person-
ality Soc. Psych. 12 170-180.
ORGANIZATION
Trust in Organizational DEMO
Berscheid, E. 1994. Interpersonal relationships. Ann. Rev. Psych. 45
79-129.
Bies, R., T. Tripp. 1996. Beyond distrust: Getting even and the need
DEMO revenge. R. M. Kramer, T. R. Tyler, eds. Trust in Organiza-
tions. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. 246-260.
-, B. Sheppard, DEMO Lewicki, eds. 1995. Research on Negotiations
in Organizations. 5 JAI, Greenwich, CT.
Bigley, G., J. Pearce. 1998. Straining for shared meaning in organi-
zation science: Problems of trust and distrust. Acad. Management
Rev. 23 405-421.
Boss, R. W. 1978. Trust and managerial problem solving revisited.
Group Organ. Stud. 3 331-342.
Brockner, J., P. Siegel, J. Daly, DEMO Tyler, C. Martin. 1997. When trust
matters: The moderating effect of outcome favorability. Admin.
Sci. Quart. 42 558-583.
Coleman, J. S. 1990. Foundations of Social Theory. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Cook, J., DEMO Wall. 1980. New work attitude measures of trust, organi-
zational commitment DEMO personal need non-fulfillment. J. Oc-
cupational Psych. 53 39-52.
Daft, R., Lengel, R. 1986. Organizational information requirements,
media richness and structural design. Management Sci. 32 554-
571.
Davis, J., F. D. Schoorman, R. Mayer, H. Tan. 2000. Trusted unit
manager and business unit performance: DEMO evidence of a
competitive advantage. Strategic Management J. 21 563-576.
Davis-Blake, DEMO, J. Pfeffer. 1989. Just a mirage: The search for dis-
positional effects in organizational research. Acad. Management
Rev. 14 385-400.
De Dreu, C., E. Giebels, E. Van de Vliert. 1998. Social motives and
trust DEMO integrative negotiation: The disruptive effects of punitive
capability. J. Appl. Psych. DEMO 408-423.
Deluga, R. J. 1994. Supervisor trust building, leader-member exchange,
and organizational citizenship behavior. J. Occupational Organ.
Psych. 64 315-326.
Deutsch, M. 1958. Trust and suspicion. J. Conflict Resolution 2 265-
279.
Dirks, K. T. 1999. The effects of interpersonal trust on work group
performance. J. DEMO Psych. 84 445-455.
. 2000. Trust in leadership and team performance: DEMO from
NCAA basketball. J. Appl. Psych. 85 1004-1012.
Driscoll, J. 1978. DEMO and participation in organizational decision
making as predictors of satisfaction. Acad. Management J. 21 44-
56.
Eagly, A., S. Chaiken. 1993. The Psychology DEMO Attitudes. Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich College Publishers, Fort Worth, TX.
Earley, DEMO C. 1986. Trust, perceived importance of praise and criticism,
and DEMO performance: An examination of feedback in the United
States and England. DEMO Management 12 457-473.
Fedor, D. 1991. Recipient responses to performance feedback: A pro-
posed model and implications. G. Ferris, K. Rowland, eds. DEMO
search in Personnel and Human Resource Management. JAI
Press, Greenwich, CT.
Fiske, S., S. Taylor. 1991. Social Cognition. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Fried, Y., R. Tiegs, A. Bellamy. 1992. Personal and interpersonal pre-
dictors of supervisors' avoidance of evaluating subordinates. J.
Appl. Psych. 77 462-468.
SCIENCE/Vol. 12, No. 4, July-August
2001
465
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
Trust in Organizational Settings
Friedlander, F. 1970. The primacy of trust as a facilitator of further
group DEMO J. Appl. Behavioral Sci. 6 387-400.
Friedman, R. 1993. Bringing mutual DEMO bargaining to labor nego-
tiations: The role of trust, understanding, DEMO control. Human Re-
source Management 32 435-459.
Fulk, J., A. Brief, S. Barr. 1985. Trust-in-supervisor and perceived
fairness and accuracy of performance evaluations. J. Bus. Res. 13
301-313.
Gambetta, D. G., ed. 1988. Trust: Making and Breaking Cooperative
Relations. Basil Blackwell, New York.
Golembiewski, R., M. McConkie. 1975. The centrality of interpersonal
trust in group process. C. DEMO, ed. Theories of Group Process.
Wiley, New York.
Granovetter, M. DEMO Economic action and social structure: The prob-
lem of embeddedness. Amer. DEMO Sociology 91 481-510.
Holmes, J. 1991. Trust and appraisal process in DEMO relationships.
W. H. Jones, D. Perlman, eds. Advances in Personal Relation-
ships, 2 57-104. Jessica Kingsley, London, U.K.
Hosmer, L. T. DEMO Trust: The connecting link between organizational
theory and philosophical ethics. Acad. DEMO Rev. 20 379-
403.
House, R., S. Shane, D. Herold. DEMO Rumors of the death of dispo-
sitional research are vastly exaggerated. Acad. Management Rev.
21 203-224.
Hwang, P., W. Burgers. 1997. Properties of DEMO: An analytical view.
Organ. Behavior Human Decision Processes 69 67-73.
Iaffaldano, M., P. Muchinsky. 1985. Job satisfaction and job perfor-
mance: A DEMO Psych. Bull. 97 251-273.
Jaccard, J., R. Turrisi, C. Wan. DEMO Interaction Effects in Multiple
Regression. Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
Johnson-George, DEMO, W. Swap. 1982. Measurement of specific inter-
personal trust: Construction and validation of a scale to assess
trust in a specific other. J. DEMO Soc. Psych. 43 1306-1317.
Jones, G., J. George. 1998. The experience and evolution of trust: Im-
plications for cooperation and teamwork. Acad. Management Rev.
23 531-546.
Kanfer, R. 1990. Motivation theory and industrial/organizational psy-
chology. M. D. Dunnette, L. M. Hough, eds. Handbook of Indus-
DEMO and Organizational Psychology, 2nd ed. 1 Consulting Psy-
chologists Press, Palo Alto, CA.
Kaplan, R. E. 1979. The conspicuous absence of evidence DEMO process
consultation enhances task performance. J. Appl. Behavioral Sci.
15 346-360.
Kegan, D., A. Rubenstein. 1973. Trust, effectiveness, and organiza-
tional development: A field study in R&D. J. Appl. Behavioral
Sci. 9 498-513.
DEMO, W. C., R. Mauborgne. 1993. Procedural justice, attitudes, and
subsidiary top management compliance with multinationals' cor-
porate strategic decisions. Acad. Management J. 36 502-526.
Kimmel, M., D. Pruitt, J. Magenau, E. Konar-Goldband, P. Carevale.
1980. Effects of trust, aspiration, and gender on negotiation DEMO
tics. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 38 9-22.
Klimoski, R. J., B. Karol. 1976. The impact of trust on creative problem
solving groups. J. DEMO Psych. 61 630-633.
Komorita, S., J. Mechling. 1957. Betrayal and reconciliation in a two-
person game. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 6 349-353.
-, C. Parks. 1995. Interpersonal relations: Mixed-motive interac-
tion. Ann. Rev. Psych. 46 183-207.
Konovsky, M., S. Pugh. 1994. Citizenship behavior and social ex-
DEMO Acad. Management J. 37 656-669.
Kramer, R. 1999. Trust and distrust DEMO organizations: Emerging per-
spectives, enduring questions. Ann. Rev. Psych. 50 569-598.
Kramer, R. M., A. Isen. 1994. Trust and distrust: Its psychological and
social dimensions. Motivation Emotion 18 105-107.
-, M. B. Brewer, DEMO Hanna. 1995. Collective trust and collective
action: The decision to trust DEMO a social decision. R. M. Kramer,
T. R. Tyler, eds. DEMO in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and
Research. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
-, T. R. Tyler, eds. 1996. Trust in Organizations: DEMO of The-
ory and Research. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Larson, C., F. LaFasto. 1989. Teamwork. Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
Lewicki, R., B. Bunker. 1996. Developing and maintaining trust in
work relationships. R. Kramer, T. Tyler, eds. Trust in Organiza-
tions. Thousand Oaks, CA.
Likert, R. 1967. The Human Organization. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Lind, E. A., T. R. Tyler, Y. Huo. 1997. Procedural context and culture:DEMO
Variation in the antecedents of procedural justice judgements. J.
Personality Soc. Psych. 73 767-780.
Mathieu, J., D. Zajac. 1990. A review and meta-analysis DEMO the ante-
cedents, correlates, and consequences of organizational commit-
ment. Psych. Bull. 2 171-194.
Mayer, R. C., J. H. Davis, F. D. Schoorman. 1995. An integrative
model of organizational trust. Acad. Management Rev. 20 DEMO
734.
McAllister, D. 1995. Affect- and cognition-based trust as foundations
for DEMO cooperation in organizations. Acad. Manage-
ment J. 38 24-59.
McGregor, D. DEMO The Professional Manager. McGraw-Hill, New
York.
Mellinger, G. 1959. Interpersonal trust and communication. J. Abnor-
mal Soc. Psych. 52 304-309.
Mischel, W. 1977. The interaction of person and situation. D. Mag-
nusson, N. S. Endler, eds. Personality at the Crossroads: Current
Issues in Interactional Psychology. Earlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Mishra, A., G. Spreitzer. 1998. Explaining how survivors respond to
downsizing: The roles of trust, empowerment, justice, and work
DEMO Acad. Management Rev. 23 567-588.
Muchinsky, P. 1977. Organizational communication: Relationships to
organizational climate and job satisfaction. Acad. Management J.
20 592-607.
Nooteboom, B., H. Berger, N. Noorderhaven. 1997. Effects of trust
and governance DEMO relational risk. Acad. Management J. 40 (2)
308-338.
Oldham, G. 1975. The impact of supervisory characteristics on goal
acceptance. Acad. Management J. DEMO 461-475.
O'Reilly III, C. 1978. The intentional distortion of information DEMO or-
ganizational communication: A laboratory and field investigation.
Human Relations 31 DEMO
-, J. Anderson. 1980. Trust and the communication of performance
appraisal DEMO: The effect of feedback on performance and
job satisfaction. Human Commun. DEMO 6 290-298.
466
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol.
12, No. 4, July-August 2001
KURT T. DIRKS AND DONALD L. FERRIN
Trust
in Organizational Settings
, DEMO H. Roberts. 1974. Information filtration in organizations:
Three experiments. Organ. Behavior Human Performance 11
253-265.
Organ, D. 1990. The motivational basis of organizational citizenship
behavior. L. L. Cummings, B. M. Staw, eds. Research in DEMO
nizational Behavior, Vol. 12. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT.
--, K. Ryan. 1995. A meta-analytic review of attitudinal and dis-
positional predictors of DEMO citizenship behavior. Per-
sonnel Psych. 48 775-802.
Perrow, C. 1986. Complex DEMO, 3rd. ed. McGraw-Hill, New
York.
Pillai, R., C. Schriesheim, DEMO Williams, 1999. Fairness perceptions and
trust as mediators for transformational and DEMO leader-
ship: A two-study sample. J. Management 25 897-933.
Podsakoff, P., S. MacKenzie, R. Moorman, R. Fetter. 1990. Transfor-
mational leader behaviors and their effects on followers' trust in
leader, satisfaction, and organizational citizenship behaviors.
Leadership Quart. 1 107-142.
Porter, T., B. Lilly. 1996. DEMO effects of conflict, trust, and task com-
mitment on project team performance. Internat. J. Conflict Man-
agement 7 361-376.
Pruitt, D., P. DEMO 1993. Negotiation in Social Conflict. Open
University Press, Buckingham.
- , DEMO Kimmel. 1977. Twenty years of experimental gaming: Cri-
tique, synthesis, DEMO suggestions for the future. Ann. Rev. Psych.
28 363-392.
Putnam, L., T. Jones. 1982. Reciprocity in negotiations: An analysis
of bargaining interaction. Comm. Monographs 49 171-191.
Read, W. H. 1962. Upward communication in industrial hierarchies.
Human Relations 15 3-15.
Rich, G. 1997. The sales manager as a role model: Effects on trust, job
satisfaction and performance of salespeople. DEMO Acad. Marketing
Sci. 25 319-328.
Roberts, K., C. O'Reilly. 1974. Failures in upward communication in
organizations: Three possible culprits. Acad. Management J. 17
205-215.
Robinson, S. 1996. Trust and the breach of the psychological contract.
Admin. Sci. Quart. 41 574-599.
Rosenthal, R. 1991. Meta-Analytic Procedures for Social Research.
Sage, Beverly Hills, CA.
Ross, W., J. LaCroix. DEMO Multiple meanings of trust in negotiation
theory and research: A literature DEMO and integrative model.
Internat. J. Conflict Management 7 314-360.
- , C. Wieland. 1996. Effects of interpersonal trust and time pressure
on managerial mediation DEMO in a simulated organizational
dispute. J. Appl. Psych. 81 228-248.
Rotter, DEMO B. 1967. A new scale for the measurement of interpersonal
trust. J. Personality 35 651-665.
Rousseau, D., S. Tijoriwala. 1999. What's a DEMO reason to change?
Motivated reasoning and social accounts in promoting organiza-
tional change. J. Appl. Psych. 84 514-528.
Accepted by Terri Griffith.
- , S. Sitkin, R. Burt, C. Camerer. 1998. Not so different after all:
A cross-discipline view of trust. Acad. Management Rev. 23 387-
DEMO
Schurr, P., J. Ozanne. 1985. Influences on exchange processes: Buyers'DEMO
preconceptions of a seller's trustworthiness and bargaining tough-
ness. J. Consumer Res. 11 939-953.
Scott, D. 1980. The causal relationship between trust and the assessed
value of management by objectives. J. Management 6 157-175.
Simons, T., R. Peterson. 2000. Task conflict and relationship conflict
in top management teams: The pivotal role of intra-group trust.
J. Appl. Psych. 85 102-111.
Smith, J., D. Barclay. 1997. The effects of organizational differences
and DEMO on the effectiveness of selling partner relationships. J.
Marketing 61 3-21.
Spreitzer, G., A. Mishra. 1999. Giving up control without losing con-
trol. DEMO Organ. Management 24 155-187.
Tannenbaum, S. I., R. L. Beard, DEMO Salas. 1992. Team building and its
influence on team effectiveness: An DEMO of conceptual
and empirical evidence. K. Kelley, ed. Issues, Theory, DEMO Re-
search in Industrial/Organizational Psychology. Elsevier Science
Publishers, Amsterdam, Holland.
Tsai, W., S. Ghoshal. 1998. Social capital and value creation: The role
of intra-firm networks. Acad. Management J. 41 464-476.
Tyler, T., DEMO Degoey. 1996. Trust in organizational authorities: The
influence of motive attributions DEMO willingness to accept deci-
sions. R. M. Kramer, T. R. Tyler, eds. Trust in Organizations:
Frontiers of Theory and Research. Sage Publications, Thousand
Oaks, CA.
Ward, E. A. 1997. Autonomous work groups: A field study of corre-
lates of satisfaction. Psych. Rep. 80 60-62.
Weingart, L. 1997. How did they do that? The ways and means of
studying group process. L. L. Cummings, B. M. Staw, eds. Re-
DEMO in Organizational Behavior. 19 JAI Press, Greenwich, CT.
Williamson, 0. DEMO The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. Free
Press, New York.
-. 1993. DEMO, trust and economic organization. J. Law
Econom. 36 453-486.
Woodman, R., J. Sherwood. 1980. The role of team development in
organizational effectiveness: DEMO critical review. Psych. Bull. 88
166-186.
Worchel, P. 1979. Trust and DEMO W. G. Austin, S. Worchel, eds.
The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations. Wadsworth, Bel-
mont, CA, 174-187.
Yamagishi, T. 1986. The DEMO goal/expectation theory of coop-
eration in social dilemmas. E. Lawler, DEMO Advances in Group
Processes, Vol. 3. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT.
DEMO, A., B. McEvily, V. Perrone. 1997. Does trust matter? Exploring
the effects of interorganizational and interpersonal trust on per-
formance. Organ. Sci. DEMO
Zand, D. 1972. Trust and managerial problem solving. Admin. Sci.
Quart. DEMO 229-239.
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 12, No. 4, July-August
2001
467{1g42fwefx}