Behavioral Antecedents of Peer Social Status
Kenneth A. Dodge
Child Development, Vol. 54, No. 6. (Dec., 1983), pp. 1386-1399.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-3920%28198312%2954%3A6%3C1386%3ABAOPSS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q
Child Development is currently published by Society DEMO Research in Child Development.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may DEMO download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/DEMO/srcd.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page DEMO such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from DEMO the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances DEMO technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://DEMO
Wed Oct 3 09:46:24 2007
Behavioral Antecedents of Peer Social Status
Kenneth A. Dodge
Indiana Unioersity
DODGE, KENNETH A. Behaoioral Antecedents of Peer Social Status. CHILDDEVELOPMENT,1983,
54, 1386-1399. The goal of this study was to observe the development of DEMO status in
children's peer groups over time. 48 previously unacquainted second-grade boys were brought
together in 6 play groups of 8 boys each. DEMO groups met under supervision for 1hour per session
for 8 sessions in a single room. Observers recorded the free-play interactive behaviors of each boy
DEMO a complex event-recording system developed for the investigation. Video cameras also
recorded boys' behaviors for later analysis. At the conclusion of the eighth session of each play
group, sociometric interviews were conducted with each boy. Status groups of popular, rejected,
neglected, controversial, and average boys were identified according to previously established
criteria. The behaviors of these groups were DEMO in an effort to determine the behavioral
antecedents of peer status. Boys who became rejected or neglected were those who engaged in
inappropriate behaviors. DEMO socially approached peers quite frequently, particularly in early
sessions, but were rebuffed at relatively high rates in those approaches. Rejected boys engaged in
DEMO aggression more than any other group. Popular boys refrained from aggression and were
received quite positively by the peers whom they approached. Controversial boys DEMO in
high frequencies of both prosocial and antisocial behaviors. The data thus pointed toward the
critical roles of social approach patterns and peer-directed aggression DEMO determining peer status.
This study is an examination of the pro-
cess by which children come to be popular,
neglected, and rejected among their peers.
Interest in the development of peer status
has been stimulated DEMO the discovery that
negative peer status in childhood is predic-
tive of a variety of maladaptive outcomes in
adolescence and adulthood (Cowen, Peder-
DEMO, Babigian, Izzo, & Trost, 1973; Robins,
1966; Roff, Sells, & Golden, 1972). Measures
of sociometric status are now being used to
select children for preventive intervention
programs and to evaluate DEMO in those
programs (e.g., Ladd, 1981; Oden & Asher,
1977). Still, little is known of the behavioral
patterns that may precede or help determine
children's peer status.
Research on the behavioral DEMO
nants of children's peer group sociometric
status has had a long history (see Asher &
Hymel, 1981, and Asher, Oden, & Gottman,
1977, for reviews) that has been marred by
significant limitations. The most obvious of
these limitations is that in almost all DEMO
researchers first have identified the social
status of children in already existing peer
groups, and then have conducted observa-
tions of those children for the purpose of
determining correlates of status. It is quite
possible that DEMO observed behaviors in
these studies are as much a response to an
acquired status as a determinant of that
status. Also, labeling by peers can have the
effect of maintaining status even when be-
havioral patterns DEMO have contributed to the
acquisition of status disappear (Dodge,
1980)DEMO Antecedents of peer status, therefore,
may not be identifiable in DEMO
studies of children in already existing peer
groups. The present study sought to over-
come this problem by observing children
during their initial interactions DEMO newly
formed peer groups, and then following
them forward until social DEMO had become
firmly established.
A second problem with previous studies
This research was supported by Research Grant MH-34381 from the National Institute of
Mental DEMO, USPHS, and by BRSG Grant SO7 RR07031 awarded by the Biomedical Research
Support Grant Program, Division of Research Resources, National Institute of DEMO The author
wishes to acknowledge the support of the Monroe County Community School Corporation and
the contributions of Ruth Haney, Kathy Mahoney, Paul DEMO, Elizabeth McDonel, Scott Rob-
ins, David Schlundt, Emily Powell, DEMO Fender, Theresa Rader, Cathy Hanlon, Peggy
Owens, and Kathy Buchsbaum. Portions of the data of this study were presented as part of DEMO
symposium on Methodological and Substantive Issues in the Observation of Peer Interaction, at
the biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development, Boston, 1981. Corre-
spondence should be addressed to Kenneth A. Dodge, Department of Psychology, Indiana Uni-
versity, Bloomington, Indiana 47405.
[ChildDevelopment, DEMO,54,1386-1399. @ 1983by the Society
All rights reserved. 0009-392018315406-OOO1$Ol100]
for Research in Child Development,
lnc.
has been the use of inadequate measures of
peer status. Often, researchers have used
low frequency scores on positive sociometric
nomination items (such as "whom do you
like?') as the criterion for selection to DEMO
low-status group. Since positive nomination
scores only correlate with negative nomina-
tion scores at a -.2 level (Asher & Hymel,
1981), the use of only a positive score as the
criterion for selection confounds DEMO groups
of low-status children: those who are not
liked and are DEMO disliked and those who
are not liked but are not disliked either
(Gottman, 1977). The term "rejected" has
been applied to DEMO former group and "ne-
glected" to the latter group (Coie, Dodge, &
Coppotelli, 1982). A similar confound occurs
at the positive end of the status dimension,
unless those children who are DEMO liked
and not disliked are distinguished from
those children who are both highly liked and
highly disliked. The term "popular" has
been applied DEMO the former group and "con-
troversial" to the latter group. The latter
group has seldom been studied. In the pres-
ent investigation, I traced the development
over time of each of these four status groups
DEMO compared them to a fifth group, labeled
"average."
The behaviors observed in the present
study were drawn directly from a review of
DEMO literature on behavioral correlates of
sociometric status. Because Marshall and
McCandless (DEMO) found that the frequency
of associative, cooperative play was posi-
tively related to peer acceptance, coopera-
tive play was targeted for observation in the
present study and was contrasted with ag-
gressive play, inappropriate play, and soli-
tary play. Dodge, Coie, and Brakke (1982)
DEMO that, in the classroom, rejected chil-
dren engaged in more off-task behavior than
did other children. Likewise, in one of the
very few longitudinal studies of sociometric
status, Hunt and Solomon (1942) found a re-
lation between "restlessness" and poor peer
acceptance. Therefore, on-task and off-task
behaviors were integrated into the behavior
coding system used in the DEMO study. A
number of researchers have found a re-
lationship between antisocial behavior and
peer rejection (Dodge et al., 1982; Hartup,
Glazer, & Charlesworth, 1967; McGuire,
1973). Therefore, several antisocial DEMO
iors were observed presently, including ver-
bal aggression, physical aggression, DEMO
exclusions of peers from play. These anti-
social behaviors were contrasted with proso-
cia1 behaviors such as social conversation
Kenneth A. Dodge 1387
and DEMO affection and with other kinds
of verbalizations. Because Dodge et al.
(DEMO) found that rejected children inter-
acted with their classroom teacher more
DEMO than did other children, inter-
actions between children and their play
DEMO leader were noted. Finally, Putallaz
and Gottrnan (1981) have found DEMO the
quality of social approach patterns, some-
times called "group entry attempts" or "ini-
tiations," was related to peer acceptance, in
a structured laboratory setting. Corsaro
(1981) has found that these social DEMO
are common among young children in a
school setting but are rebuffed by peers at a
high rate, indicating that the group entry
process is a difficult one to master. There-
fore, social approaches were noted by
observers in the present study.
Because previous studies (e.g., Putallaz
& Gottman, 1981) have found that the re-
sponses by peers to the behaviors of children
are related to sociometric status, peer re-
sponses to each of the behaviors coded in
this study were also coded DEMO positive, neu-
tral, or negative. Patterns in peer interaction
were examined through multivariate contin-
gency table analyses (Gottman & Notarius,
1978) DEMO information theory statistics
(Attneave, 1959). The use of such inter-
actional designs and sequential analyses has
been advocated for observational research
on DEMO relations (Cairns, 1979) but is fairly
uncommon.
Finally, physical attractiveness is a
known correlate of positive status (Kleck,
Richardson, & DEMO, 1974). Ratings were
made of the physical attractiveness of the
DEMO in this study. The predictability of
status from these ratings was compared to
the predictability of status from the behav-
ioral measures.
Method
Overview
DEMO untangle previous methodological
problems and to observe the development of
social status over time, a short-term lon-
gitudinal study was undertaken. Previously
unacquainted children were brought to-
gether in newly constructed play groups for
eight 1-hour-long DEMO Observers and
video cameras recorded the interactive be-
haviors of each child. At the end of the
eighth session, sociometric interviews were
conducted to determine the status acquired
in the group by each child. Coie and
DEMO (1983) and Pelham (Note 1)have
1388 Child Development
found that the correlation between the status
acquired by DEMO in experimentally con-
trived play groups such as these and the
status .they have in their regular classrooms
is quite high. These findings are DEMO to
demonstrate the ecological validity of the
procedures employed in the present study.
The behavior of children in each status
group during each of DEMO eight sessions was
then analyzed to determine the behavioral
antecedents of status. Additional data on the
physical attractiveness and peer perceptions
of each child DEMO collected and analyzed in
order to understand further the behavioral
and perceptual mechanisms involved in the
acquisition of social status.
Subjects
A flyer distributed DEMO the second-grade
classrooms of 12 local elementary schools
was used to recruit 56 boys for this study.
Boys were 7 and 8 years old DEMO of varying
social class backgrounds. Ninety percent of
the children were white. Boys were ran-
domly assigned to one of seven play groups
(eight boys in each group), with the restric-
tion that no boy DEMO have had prior ac-
quaintanceship with any other boy in his
play group. An interview conducted at the
homes of subjects prior to the DEMO of
the play groups guaranteed that this restric-
tion was met. Since the first play group was
administered as a pilot group, only the data
of the remaining six groups (48 boys) were
used for DEMO analyses.
Administration of Play Groups
Play groups met for 1 hour a day for 8
days over a &-week period during the sum-
mer. Each boy was driven to and from the
play group by a DEMO of the research team
to ensure that the only contact that the boys
had with each other occurred during the play
group sessions. Transporting DEMO boys also
guaranteed that no boy was absent for more
than one of the eight sessions. Boys were
paid one dollar for each day DEMO attendance.
An adult female group leader structured
the first 20 min of each play group session by
engaging the children in a task, such as
making paper airplanes, to simulate a class-
room setting. During the remaining 40 min
children were free to play as they wished in
DEMO large (7 x 10-m) room stocked with furni-
ture and toys, while the group leader sat in
the comer of the room.
Obseruation of Peer-Interactive Behaviors
Three observers sat behind a one-way
mirror in a DEMO adjacent to the play room
and coded the behaviors of each child on a
rotating basis. The boys wore numbered
T-shirts of various colors DEMO aid quick
identification by observers. Each coder ob-
served a child for a 6-min period, took a 45-
sec break, and then moved DEMO to a specified
second child, according to a prearranged
schedule. Synchronized DEMO cues were
used to help observers code behaviors in
real time, DEMO the nearest 10-sec interval. The
schedule for coding was arranged so that
each child was observed for at least three
6-min intervals each hour, once during the
structured time and twice during the un-
structured time. DEMO of the low fre-
quency of interactive behaviors in the
structured time, data were summed across
observation times for all analyses.
A complex event-recording system was
developed for this investigation. Each time
that the observers noticed DEMO event, they si-
multaneously coded the time (in 10-sec
blocks), context (structured vs. un-
structured), content (one of 18 behavior
DEMO), and peer targetis) (identified by
T-shirt numbers) of each DEMO, as well as
the peer's reaction (positivelaccept, neutral/
DEMO, or negativetreject) when the event
was an interactive behavior. Observers
coded at least one, and frequently more than
one, event per 10-sec DEMO The 18 be-
havior categories were of five types: solitary
activity, interactive play, verbalizations,
physical contact with peers, and interactions
with DEMO group leader. Solitary activities in-
cluded solitary play, watching peers, on-task
behavior (usually in the structured context),
and off-task behavior (including walking
around aimlessly during the structured
time). The interactive play behaviors DEMO
cluded cooperative play (involving turn
taking or games), aggressive play (often
called rough-and-tumble play), and in-
appropriate play (norm-violating behavior,
such as standing on tables and disrupting
peers' games). The verbal behaviors in-
cluded social conversations with peers,
norm-setting statements (directives to peers,
rule making, etc.), hostile verbalizations (in-
cluding insults, threats, and contentious
statements), supportive statements (compli-
ments and offers DEMO help), exclusions of peers
from a play activity, and extraneous DEMO
izations (including laughs, cheers, and
kibitzing). The physical contact DEMO
included hits (physically striking a peer in a
fight), object DEMO (grabbing an object
from a peer), and physically affectionate be-
DEMO (such as holding hands or hugging).
Two categories of interaction DEMO the group
leader were coded: social conversation with
the leader and reprimanded by the leader.
The latter code is the only one in which the
subject DEMO not display a behavior but is
rather the target of a behavior. These be-
havior categories were developed during
~ilotobservation. Thev were drawn from DEMO
available literature on behavioral correlates
of peer status (see Asher & DEMO, 1981). A
copy of the coding manual is available from
DEMO author.
The observers received training over a
4-week period, using videotaped DEMO of
playground interactions. This training cul-
minated in observation during an eight-
session pilot group, during which inter-
observer agreement was assessed. The aver-
age pair-wise intercoder agreement on the
context in which a behavior occurred DEMO
96%, calculated as the number of agree-
ments divided by the DEMO of agreements
plus disagreements. For content categories,
the average effective intercoder agreement
was 77%, calculated similarly (Hartmann,
1977). Individual category DEMO on oc-
currences only ranged from 65% to 86%.
Intercoder agreement on peer reactions to
interactive behaviors averaged 83%. Re-
peated assessments of intercoder DEMO
were made during actual play group sessions
by having overlapped coding schedules.
One-fourth of each coder's observations (14
hours in alu were also coded by a second
coder, according to a random schedule. Cod-
ers did not know which periods were being
checked. This procedure resulted in DEMO
maintenance of acceptable (65% or better)
agreement for 15 of DEMO 18 behavior
categories, and for all other codings. Three
behavior categories (watching peers, nonn-
setting statements, and supportive state-
ments) were dropped from further analyses
because of inadequate interobserver agree-
ment. The median effective DEMO
agreement during actual play group sessions
across all retained categories was 77%. Indi-
vidual category agreements ranged from
65% to 90%.
Physicul Attractiveness Ratings
DEMO of each subject wearing his
numbered T-shirt were taken by the group
leader. The 48 photographs were sub-
sequently presented in random order to DEMO
of five male and five female undergraduates
who rated the physical attractiveness of each
child on a six-point scale, with 1 being very
attractive. A physical attractiveness rating
was computed for each subject as the mean
DEMO A. Dodge 1389
of all ratings and was found to be reliable
(coefficient a = .84).
Sociometric Interviews
At the end of the eighth play group ses-
sion, private sociometric interviews were
conducted with each subject by a male who
had not observed the play group sessions.
DEMO photographs of each of the seven play
group peers were presented to the subject,
who was asked to name the two boys whom
DEMO liked most in the group, and then the two
boys whom DEMO liked least. Responses to
these questions were used to select children
for each social status group. Following these
nominations, each subject was asked to rank
order the seven peers on each of four
categories of behavior DEMO have been found
by Coie et al. (1982) to distinguish children
in various social status groups: who starts
fights and hits other boys (aggressive), who
is shy and does not play with other boys
(shy), who takes charge and tells other boys
what they should do (leader), and who
shares things with other boys and cooperates
with them (shares). Scores for each subject
were calculated for each of the four
categories as the mean rank order received
from all DEMO At the conclusion of the inter-
view, each subject was thanked DEMO asked to
keep the interview confidential.
Selection of Stutus Groups
Liked most (LM) and liked least (LL)
scores were calculated for each subject as
the sum of all sociometric nominations re-
ceived from peers DEMO each of those two
categories. These two scores were used to
select subjects for five social status groups in
procedures similar to those used DEMO Coie et
al. (1982). Popular-status boys were those
whose social DEMO scores (calculated
as LM - LL) were at least 3 (DEMO = 12, LM
mean = 3.8, LL mean = .3). Rejected-status
boys were those whose social preference
scores were -3 or lower (N = 9, LM mean =
.2, LL mean = 4.8)DEMO Neglected boys were
those whose social impact scores (calculated
as LM DEMO LL) were 2 or less (N = 7, LM mean
DEMO .4, LL mean = 1.3). Controversial-status
boys were those whose DEMO impact scores
were at least 6 and whose LM and LL scores
were at least 3 each (N = 3, LM mean = DEMO,
LL mean = 3.3). The remaining boys were
classified as average social status (N = 17,
LM mean = 2.1, DEMO mean = 1.8).
Coding of Social Approach Behavior from
Video Records
A wide-angle lens camera was used to
record the behavior of the DEMO children in
1390 Child Development
each play group. Following the completion
of the play DEMO, two new observers, each
blind to the children's social status designa-
tions, were trained to code from the video
record the social approach and social termi-
nation behaviors of each child. A social ap-
DEMO was defined as an attempt to initiate
play or verbal interaction with a particular
peer or group of peers, and a social termina-
tion was defined as a voluntary withdrawal
from peer interaction. Unlike the previous
DEMO, observers coded all of the social ap-
proach behaviors of each DEMO, in each ses-
sion, rather than just behaviors in short time
samples. Observers were allowed to view
and review the video record until DEMO were
sure of their coding. For each child, they
noted: (DEMO) the time, to the nearest second, of
each occurrence of DEMO social approach by or
toward the target child; (2) the DEMO (the
target, a peer, or a mutual approach) and the
recipient of the approach; (3) the duration, in
seconds, of the social interaction that fol-
lowed the approach (the duration was later
recoded as short if 0-5 sec, moderate if 6-60
sec, and DEMO if more than 60 sec); (4) the
affect of the social interaction that took place
(positive, neutral, or negative); and, (5)
which child terminated the interaction by
leaving the physical DEMO of the other
child (the target child, the peer[s], or DEMO
mutual termination). Of course, each social
approach sequence was coded DEMO least twice,
once for each child involved in the interac-
tion.
Observers were trained over a 6-week
period using the video record of DEMO pilot
play group. As a measure of interobserver
agreement, the frequency DEMO both observ-
ers agreed that a social approach had taken
place (DEMO a 10-sec interval leeway) was di-
vided by the frequency of DEMO plus
the frequency of disagreements. Agreement
for the pilot group, as DEMO in this man-
ner, was 80%. Using only those instances in
DEMO both observers agreed that a social
approach had taken place, interobserver
DEMO were calculated separately for
each of the four remaining codes. The
observers agreed on the initiator of the ap-
proach 82% of the time, the duration (short,
moderate, or long) of the interaction 89% of
the time, the affect of the interaction 78% of
the time, and which child ended the inter-
action 83% of the time. Observer agreement
was continually checked during the coding
of regular play groups by DEMO each ob-
server code one-half of the play group
sessions plus one-fourth of the sessions
coded by the other observer, or 62.5% of all
sessions. Acceptable agreement (75% or
higher) was maintained for each category.
DEMO
Age and Physical Attractiveness Ratings
Within the small range of ages of boys in
this study, age was found not to have an ef-
fect on status, as assessed by a one-way
analysis of variance (DEMO). The mean
physical attractiveness rating received by
each child was also subject to ANOVA. A
significant main effect of sociometric status,
F(DEMO,43) = 3.32, p < .02, and subsequent
Newman-Kuels tests DEMO cell comparisons
(using a harmonic n) (p < .05) indicated that
the rejected group (M = 2.6) was perceived
as significantly DEMO attractive than the con-
troversial group (M = 2.3), which DEMO
significantly less attractive than the ne-
glected (M = 2.0), DEMO (M = 2.0), and
popular (M = 1.8) groups.
DEMO Assessments
Mean rankings were computed for each
child for each of the four peer-assessment
items and were subject to a multivariate
analysis of variance (MANOVA). A signifi-
cant multivariate effect of status was found,
DEMO(16,134) = 4.92, p < .001. Significant uni-
variate effects were found for the items ag-
gressive, F(4,43) = DEMO, p < .001, leader,
F(4,43) = 7.42, p < .001, and shares, F(4,43)
= 19.94,DEMO < .001. Newman-Kuels tests (p <
.05) revealed the following DEMO The
rejected (M = 2.2) and controversial (M =
2.8) groups received higher rankings as ag-
gressive than the neglected (M = 4.3), aver-
age (M = 44, and popular (M = 4.9) groups.
The popular children (M = 3.1) were viewed
as better leaders than the average (M = 4.0),
neglected (M = 4.1), and controversial (M =
4.3) children. The rejected DEMO (M =
5.0) were viewed as poorer leaders than any
other group. Peers ranked the popular group
(M = 3.3) as more DEMO to share things than
the average (M= 3.7) and neglected (DEMO =
4.0) groups, which in turn were more likely
to share things than the controversial (M =
4.8) and rejected (M = 5.4) groups.
Frequencies of interpersonal Behaviors
Frequencies of each of the 15 behavior
types were computed for each child in each
session as the DEMO of 10-sec intervals in
which each behavior occurred per 6-min
period. Nine of the 48 subjects missed one
session each. Missing a session did DEMO
significantly affect social status. Group
means were inserted for subjects in missed
sessions, in order to simplify analyses.
Group means for these frequencies were
compared by a repeated-measures least-
squares MANOVA, in which status was a
between-subjects factor and session number
(1-8) was a within-subjects factor. Planned
DEMO of the linear trend of session
number and its interaction with status were
conducted. Significant multivariate effects
were followed by univariate ANOVAs.
When the DEMO ANOVA was signifi-
cant, single degree-of-freedom planned
contrasts between the average DEMO and
each other status group were tested. Even
though these contrasts are not orthogonal,
they were felt, a priori, to be of DEMO
interest because the status groups were
defined in terms of deviations from the
"norm" sociometrically.
Session main effects.-A significant
multivariate main effect of DEMO linear trend of
sessions was found, F(15,330) = 3.47, p <
.001. Seven of the 15 univariate ANOVAs
were also DEMO The frequency of soli-
tary play decreased across sessions, F(1,DEMO)
= 7.15, p < .01, whereas the frequency of
cooperative play increased, F(1,301) = 4.73,
p < .03. DEMO interaction increased as well,
including social conversation, F(1,301) =
31.60, p < .001, hostile verbalizations,
F(1,301) = 20.09, p < .001, exclusions of
peers from play, F(1,301) = 7.99, p < .001,
Kenneth A. Dodge DEMO
and extraneous verbalizations, F(1,301) =
28.64, p < DEMO Because the frequency of
hostile verbalizations appeared to increase
at a more rapid rate than the frequency of
other verbal comments, the proportion of all
verbal interactions that consisted of hostile
verbalizations was calculated for each DEMO
and analyzed in an additional ANOVA. In-
deed, the proportion of DEMO verbal statements
that were hostile was found to increase over
time, DEMO(1,301) = 16.84, p < .001. Finally, the
frequency DEMO reprimands by the group leader
also increased over time, F(1,DEMO) = 3.74, p
< .06.
Social status main effects.-The mul-
tivariate effect of status was significant,
F(60,115) = 1.74, DEMO < .01, as were seven uni-
variate effects. Four other ANOVAs DEMO
marginally significant effects. For these 11
variables, planned contrasts between the DEMO
erage group and each of the other four
groups were tested. The status-group means
for each of the 15 behaviors, as well as a
summary of the significant findings, are de-
picted in Table 1. From the means in this
table, it is possible to construct profiles of
the distinct behavior patterns of each status
group.
The popular children behaved DEMO
similarly to the average children, although
they conversed with the group DEMO and
TABLE 1
BEHAVIOR PATTERNS AMONG SOCIAL STATUS GROUPS
BEHAVIOR
Popular
Solitaryplay ................. 276.7
On-task ..................... 102.2
Off-task ..................... 5.0
Cooperative play ............ 127.3
DEMO play.. ............ 5.4
Inappropriate play ........... 1.5
Social conversation ........... 127.5
Hostile verbalizations ........ 6.9
Exclusions of peers .......... .2
Extraneous verbalizations .... 41.6
DEMO peers ................ .7
Object possession. ........... 2.0
Physically affectionate ....... .1
Conversation with leader.. ... 11.2*
Reprimand by leader ........ 3.7*
Rejected Neglected
295.7
DEMO
7.4
108.8
9.2
7.0*
108.3*
10.8*
.4*
39.2
3.1*
1.8
.1
15.3
4.8
308.8*
115.7
5.1
104.9
10.2
5.2*
115.5
5.1*
.1
32.2*
.8
DEMO
.O
10.2*
5.8
Contro-
versial
173.1*
96.7
4.5
187.2*
18.0*
1.6
206.7*
16.9*
.7*
97.4*
.5
1.3
.O
23.4*
11.2*
Average
289.6
114.9
4.5
DEMO
2.9
.3
125.0
8.1
.1
45.6
.7
1.4
.2
16.6
5.0
F(4,43)
3.68
<1
<1
2.90
1.90
2.69
3.66
2.54
DEMO
4.39
1.87
<1
<1
2.10
5.47
p
.02
...
...
.04
.13
.04
.02
.06
.06
.01
.14
...
...
.10
.O1
No~~.-Scores DEMO represent the mean number of 10-sec intervals per hour in which the behavior occurred. An
asterisk indicates that this mean score significantly differs from DEMO mean score for the average group, as determined by a
planned DEMO ( p < .05).
1392 Child Development
were reprimanded significantly less fre-
quently than the average DEMO They
displayed a tendency toward more coopera-
tive play than the average children, although
this difference was not significant.
The children who became rejected were
those who engaged in a great deal of aggres-
sive and DEMO behaviors. The re-
jected children displayed significantly more
inappropriate play, hostile DEMO,
exclusions of peers, and hitting of peers than
the average DEMO Also, they engaged in
less social conversation than the average
children.
DEMO children who were neither liked
nor disliked but were neglected by their
peers spent significantly more time in soli-
tary play than the average DEMO They
conversed with the group leader less
frequently than the average children and
made fewer extraneous verbalizations. Like
the rejected children, they displayed
significantly more inappropriate play than
the average children, but, unlike the re-
DEMO children, the neglected children did
not display high rates of aggression. DEMO fact,
they made fewer hostile verbalizations than
the average children.
The children who became sociometri-
cally controversial, while small in number,
presented a distinct pattern of behavior.
They spent very little time in solitary DEMO
(relative to the average group) and a great
deal of time interacting with peers. The
frequencies of their cooperative play, so-
cial conversation with the leader and with
peers, and extraneous verbalizations were
significantly greater than those of the aver-
age group. Also, the frequencies of their ag-
gressive play, hostile verbalizations, and
exclusions of peers from play DEMO
significantly greater than those of the aver-
age group,-and they were reprimanded by
the leader more than the average group. The
controversial children, then, were quite ac-
tively involved with peers, in both prosocial
DEMO antisocial endeavors.
Session x status interactions.-The
multivariate interaction between status and
the linear trend of sessions yielded a
significant effect, F(60,1290) DEMO 1.49, p < .01.
Of the 15 univariate tests of the DEMO inter-
action, five were significant: cooperative
play, F(4,301) = 2.79, p < .03; social con-
versation, F(4,301) = 4.20, p < .01; extrane-
ous verbalizations, F(4,DEMO) = 2.43, p < .05;
hostile verbalizations, F(4,DEMO) = 2.46, p <
.05; and reprimands by the group leader,
F(4,301) = 4.40, p < .01. For DEMO of these
five variables, four single degree-of-freedom
interactions between the linear DEMO com-
ponent of the sessions factor (hereafter
called "time") and each of the four contrasts
in status groups (the average group vs. each
of the other four groups) were tested as
planned contrasts. For the variable social
conversation, the interaction between time
and the contrast between the average and
popular groups was significant (p < .05). The
status-group means for each session for this
variable are depicted in Figure DEMO It is ap-
parent from the figure that the children who
became popular steadily increased the
frequency of their social conversation over
time, whereas after the first session the aver-
age children did not. Likewise, the rejected
and the controversial children did not. The
neglected children actually decreased DEMO
frequency of their social conversation across
sessions. These patterns were similar to
those for cooperative play and extraneous
verbalizations.
The four planned contrasts for DEMO vari-
able hostile verbalizations yielded three
significant effects. Whereas the controversial
and rejected groups displayed more hostile
verbalizations than the average group did in
DEMO session, the difference between the
controversial and average group increased
across DEMO (p < .05), while the differ-
ence between the rejected DEMO average
group decreased (p < .05) across sessions.
Also, whereas DEMO average group displayed
more hostile verbalizations than the ne-
glected group did overall, the difference
between these groups increased over time (p
< DEMO). The patterns of means and tests of
significance for reprimands by the group
leader were similar to those for hostile ver-
balizations.
Covariance DEMO
Two multivariate analyses of covariance
(MANCOVA) were conducted in order to test
the predictability of status from the 15 be-
havioral frequencies after DEMO attrac-
tiveness had been covaried out, and vice
versa. The first DEMO yielded a
significant effect of status, F(60,lll) = 1.60,
p < .02, canonical r = .84, indicating that the
DEMO behaviors predicted 71% of the variance
in status, even after controlling DEMO physical
attractiveness. The second MANCOVA was
not significant, F(4,28) = 1.39, N.S., indicat-
ing that physical attractiveness did not
significantly DEMO status after the 15 be-
havior scores had been covaried out.
Kenneth A. Dodge 1393
Popular
Average
Rejected
Neglected
FIG. 1.-Mean
SESSION
frequencies DEMO social conversation among social status groups in each session
Peer Responses to Child Behaviors
ANOVAs of peer response.-The pro-
portion of all peer responses DEMO a child that
were positive and the proportion that were
negative were computed for each child for
each session. These proportions served as
dependent DEMO in ANOVAs that were
similar to those for the frequencies of be-
havior. Proportions were used as dependent
variables (rather than frequencies) because
DEMO are not biased by the fre-
quencies of behaviors. A significant main
effect of status was found for the proportion
of positive peer responses DEMO, F(4,43)
= 3.88, p < .01. Planned contrasts among
groups revealed that the popular (M = .43)
and controversial (M = .58) groups received
significantly greater proportions of positive
responses DEMO the average group (M = .38).
The neglected (M = .34) and rejected (M =
.36) groups received the lowest proportions
of positive responses, but not significantly
lower than the average group. Significant
effects of the linear trend of sessions were
found for both positive DEMO negative re-
sponses, F(1,301) = 6.06, p < DEMO, and
F(1,301) = 11.58, p < .001, respectively.
Peer responses became more frequently
positive and more frequently negative over
time, and less frequently neutral. A sig-
nificant interaction between time and status
DEMO found for the proportion of positive re-
sponses received, F(4,DEMO) = 3.11, p < .02.
Planned contrasts revealed that the propor-
tion ofpositive peer responses to the average
group increased over time (from .28 to .42),
whereas the proportion of positive responses
to the neglected group decreased over time
(from .44 to .25) (p < .05). The proportion of
positive responses to the rejected group re-
DEMO relatively low in all sessions (.29 in
session 1 and .28 DEMO session 8). Responses to
the popular group became more frequently
positive (from .30 to .55), as did the re-
sponses to the controversial group (from .49
to .66).
Contingency analyses of peer responses
to behaviors.-In order to investigate the
relationships between children's interactive
behaviors DEMO the responses to those be-
haviors by peers, a multidimensional con-
DEMO table of frequencies was con-
structed. In addition to behaviors and
responses, other dimensions of this table in-
cluded the target child's status and the ses-
sion number. Information-theory statistics
(Attneave, 1959; McGill, DEMO) were com-
puted to evaluate the relationships among
variables. The advantages DEMO these statistics
over simple bivariate xZ statistics are that
terms analogous to main effects, interactions,
and residuals can be computed with these
discrete data, and a measure of proportional
1394 Child Development
reduction in the uncertainty of one variable
that is DEMO from another variable can
be defined. This uncertainty reduction term
is analogous to the proportion of variance ac-
counted for by a variable in DEMO regres-
sion analyses. Finally, x2s can be used to
determine which DEMO probabilities
in a multidimensional table contribute to
uncertainty reduction (Sackett, 1979).
The multivariate information analyses
determined that the peer responses varied
directly DEMO a function of the type of behavior
by the target child, DEMO(24) = 26,124.13, p
< .001. Specifically, 52.2% of DEMO uncertainty
in peer responses (above base rates) could
be reduced by knowledge of the type of
interactive behavior by a target child. As
DEMO 2 shows, cooperative play and physi-
cally affectionate behavior each had DEMO high
probability of being received positively,
whereas inappropriate behavior, hostile
DEMO, exclusions of peers, hitting
peers, and object possession each had DEMO high
probability of being received negatively by
peers. Social conversation and extraneous
verbalizations received mostly neutral peer
responses. Aggressive play received mixed
peer responses.
DEMO analyses also determined that peer
responses varied as a function of the social
status of the target child, x2(8) = 243.60, p <
.001, and 3.2% of the uncertainty in peer re-
sponses DEMO be reduced by knowledge of
the social status of the target child. This
analysis parallels the ANOVAs of peer re-
sponses reported earlier. As DEMO in Table
2, the peer responses to popular children
were more DEMO to be positive and less
likely to be negative than were the peer re-
sponses to rejected and neglected children.
Interestingly, that table reveals that even
when rejected and neglected children en-
gaged in the same DEMO as other chil-
dren, the peer responses that they received
were DEMO frequently positive and more
frequently negative than the peer responses
to other children. Popular children had a
higher probability of receiving a positive re-
DEMO than the rejected and neglected chil-
dren for 7 of the 11 interactive behavior
types. Eleven x2 analyses were per-
formed to test the DEMO between the
popular group and the combined rejected
and neglected group, DEMO for each behavior.
Four of the 11 tests were significant: for
DEMO play, x "1) = 25.31, p < .01, ag-
DEMO play, ~'(1) = 40.11, p < .01, hostile
DEMO, x "1) = 6.00, p < .02, and
conversation DEMO the group leader,
x2(1) = 4.32, p < .05. In each case, peers
responded more favorably to popular chil-
dren than to rejected or neglected children.
The multivariate information analyses
also revealed that DEMO responses varied as a
function of the session in which they oc-
curred, ~'(14) = 184.87, p < .001, in ways
that paralleled the findings of the ANOVAs
of peer responses. Session number DEMO
counted for 2.1% of the variance in peer re-
sponses.
Patterns of Social Approach and Social
Termination
In all, 4,667 social interactions were
coded from the video record, or an average of
12.2 interactions per child per session. Each
interaction consisted of the codes described
earlier. Multidimensional DEMO ta-
bles of the frequencies of each of the codes
were derived, and multivariate informa-
tion-theory statistics (Attneave, 1959), cal-
culated as described earlier, were used to
evaluate the relationships among the codes.
In all, the multivariate information
analyses revealed that 12% of the un-
certainty in the affect of children's social
interactions could be reduced by DEMO
of the social status of the participants, the
session in which DEMO interaction took place,
the initiator of the interaction, and the DEMO
tion of the interaction.
The major findings of these analyses are
as follows. First, a significant relationship
between the initiator of interactions and so-
cial status was found, x "8) = 42.16, p < DEMO
The popular group (M = 3.0) socially ap-
proached peers less fiequently per session
than did any other group (rejected M = 4.1,
neglected = 3.8. ,-controversial - M = 3.6.
and average M = 3.9), but the popular group
(M = 7.8) was DEMO by peers more
frequently than any other group (rejected M
= DEMO, neglected M = 6.5, controversial M =
5.7, and average DEMO = 6.0).
What was it about the interactions in-
volving popular children that made them so
attractive to peers? Three patterns emerged
that may help answer this question. A sig-
nificant relationship between social status
DEMO the duration of an interaction, x2(8) =
17.69, p < .001, indicated that the in-
teractions involving popular children,
particularly DEMO ones initiated by popular
children, lasted longer than the inter-
actions DEMO any other group. Also,
a significant relationship between social
status and the affect of interactions, ~'(8) =
17.32, p < DEMO, indicated that the inter-
actions involving popular children were
-
M
TABLE 2
Cooperative play .............98
Aggressive play ...............75
Inappropriate play ............00
Social DEMO ...........42
Hostile verbalizations .........07
Exclusions of peers ...........15
Extraneous verbalizations .....04
Hitting peers .................12
Object possession ..............06
Physically affectionate ......, 1.00
Conversation with leader ......77
All behaviors summed ........43
.02
.13
.10
.13
.72
.20
.04
DEMO
.41
.00
.00
.
03
.36
.05
.
34
.
03
.
58
.05
.
38
.03
status
represents the response by the leader
DEMO reported represent the conditional probabilities of
group .
.
positive and negative peer responses. respectively. given each behavior for each
Neutral peer responses are DEMO reported but can be determined as I - P(Pos) + DEMO(Neg). For conversation with leader. "peer response"
1396 Child Development
more likely to be judged as positive by the
DEMO than were the interactions -
any other group. Finally, a significant DEMO
lationship between social status and the
child who terminated social interactions was
found, x2(8) = 58.01, p < .001. Popular chil-
dren were less likely to terminate social
interactions than were other children.
The DEMO information analyses
also revealed a significant relationship be-
tween social status and session number,
~'(28)= 113.96, p < .001, in the frequency
of social approaches. This relationship is de-
picted in Figure DEMO As shown in that figure,
during early sessions the neglected and re-
jected children socially approached peers at
high rates, relative to popular children. In
later sessions, neglected and rejected chil-
dren began to approach peers less
frequently, as if they were giving up or
withdrawing from the social activities of the
group. The popular children, on the other
hand, maintained a constant pattern of social
approach behavior, receiving positive DEMO
sponses consistently.
involving.
Discussion
The observational data of this study in-
dicate that the behavioral patterns of boys
during their initial encounters with peers
DEMO predict the social status that
they come to acquire, even beyond DEMO pre-
diction that can be made from an assessment
of physical attractiveness. Behavior patterns
of the boys evolved over time, yielding
unique profiles for each social status group.
Boys who came to be unpopular (re-
jected or neglected) among their peer group
were those who engaged in inappropriate
play behaviors, such as standing on tables
and disrupting ongoing peer activities. They
also spent a great deal of time in solitary
play, but their relative isolation is not due to
a lack of social initiative DEMO their part. In fact,
during the early stages of the play group,
they socially approached peers more
frequently than did boys who DEMO be-
came popular. Their social approaches,
however, led to relatively DEMO interactions
that were often met with rebuff by peers.
The early pattern displayed by these boys,
then, was one of moving frequently from
peer to peer in search of a play partner, but
failing to find one. The pattern changed in
later sessions, as they approached peers less
frequently, possibly giving up in their efforts
to integrate successfully into the peer group.
The differences in the frequency of inter-
active, cooperative play and social con-
versation between them and other boys be-
came DEMO over time, and they became
more isolated. It is plausible to DEMO that
the isolation of these boys in the latter
sessions of the play groups is a consequence
FIG.2.-Mean
SESSION
frequencies of social approaches among DEMO status groups in each session
Kenneth A. Dodge 1397
of their negative interactions and emerging
unpopular status, rather than a cause of their
status. Given the nonexperimental nature of
DEMO data, however, such a causal conclu-
sion is speculative. When rejected and ne-
glected boys did approach peers in later
sessions, they were no more successful than
they had been in early sessions in soliciting
DEMO peer reactions.
The negative peer reactions to rejected
and neglected boys occurred as a function of
at least two factors. First, a relatively high
proportion of their peer-interactive behav-
iors involved aggressive, rough-and-tumble
play or behaviors that were considered in-
appropriate. These behaviors have been
shown to have DEMO probabilities of receiv-
ing negative peer responses. Likewise, a low
proportion DEMO their behaviors involved
cooperative play and social conversation,
behaviors that have a relatively low prob-
ability of receiving negative responses. The
second factor DEMO that even when rejected and
neglected boys engaged in the same behav-
iors as did the other boys, the peer responses
that they received were still not as positive
as when the popular boys engaged in DEMO
behaviors. Whether this difference is due to
a bias by peers toward popular children (due
to physical attractiveness or some other vari-
able) DEMO to subtle differences in the skill or
style of behaviors between popular and un-
popular boys is not clear from these data.
The behavioral DEMO used in this study
were relatively broad, or molar. More dis-
DEMO observations are required to evaluate
the latter possibility.
The distinctions between boys who be-
came actively rejected by peers and those
who became sociometrically DEMO were
found both in their behavior and in peer per-
ceptions of them. The rejected boys engaged
in relatively high frequencies of antisocial
acts, including insults, threats, contentious
statements, exclusions of peers from their
play, and outright physical aggression. They
were viewed by peers as highly aggressive,
as poor leaders, and as unwilling to share.
The neglected boys, on the other hand, en-
gaged in very little antisocial behavior.
DEMO did not view them as aggressive; if
anything, they were viewed as shy. Also, re-
jected boys were less physically attractive
than neglected boys. The profile of rejected
boys, then, is one of antisocial DEMO and
inept peer interaction, whereas the profile of
neglected boys is DEMO of inept peer interac-
tion in the absence of antisocial behavior.
Apparently, the findings of Hartup et al.
(1967) have been replicated in this study,
using different behavioral codes. Prosocial
behaviors are associated with DEMO by
peers, whereas antisocial behaviors are an-
tecedents to being actively DEMO by
peers.
The boys who became popular among
their peers were quite physically attractive.
Whereas their behavior was not extremely
different from that of DEMO boys,
they did engage in high rates of cooperative
play and social conversation, and they re-
frained from inappropriate behaviors and
verbal and physical aggression. They did not
socially approach peers with a high
frequency, but their social approaches most
often led to long interactions and positive
DEMO These boys sustained their inter-
actions in that they were not very likely to
initiate a termination. Peers viewed these
boys as good leaders DEMO share things. Peers
responded more positively to their inter-
personal behaviors than they did to those of
other children. Even when popular boys en-
DEMO in aggressive play, exclusions of
peers, or object possession, peers DEMO
more favorably to them than they did to
other children who engaged in the same be-
haviors. It is ~ossible that the aualitv , 
of 
these behaviors by popular boys was some-
how less aversive DEMO the quality of the
same behaviors by other boys. Another pos-
sible explanation is that these boys quickly
acquire a positive reputation among their
DEMO, so that they can, in effect, "get away
with" DEMO behaviors without suffering
negative consequences. The early positive
reputation may be related to their
behavior-they refrain from inappropriate
and aggressive play while still engaging
DEMO successfully-or it may be a function
of their physical attractiveness.
Merely engaging in cooperative play
and social conversation does not guarantee
popularity, however, DEMO the distinctions
between popular and controversial boys
demonstrate. The children who acquired a
mixed status among their peers-they were
highly liked by some and DEMO disliked by
others, hence the label controversial-
engaged in even more DEMO behaviors
than the popular boys did. Their interactions
with peers were quite positive, and peer re-
sponses to their behaviors were more likely
to be positive than were the peer responses
for any other group. Clearly, they displayed
what might be called interpersonally skilled
behavior. The frequencies of DEMO aggres-
sive play, hostile statements, exclusions of
peers, and extraneous DEMO (such as
making meaningless noises) were also quite
A
1398 Child Development
high, however. Peers responded to these
behaviors quite negatively. The group
leader reprimanded these boys twice as
frequently as she did DEMO boys. The be-
havior pattern for these mixed-status boys,
then, DEMO also mixed and perhaps somewhat
unpredictable. They were actively involved
with peers, in both prosocial and antisocial
ways. It is possible that this mixed behavior
led to the mixed perceptions by peers. Cau-
tion must be DEMO about these findings,
however, since only three of 48 boys
DEMO fit sociometric criteria as con-
troversial. Proportionately, this number of
controversial DEMO is almost identical to that
found by Coie et al. (1982) in a sample of 848
children, that is, 7%. Still, the present sam-
ple is quite small, and caution is warranted.
The profiles just outlined fit quite well
with most of the observational data that DEMO
on popular, rejected, and neglected boys in
their classroom settings (DEMO Asher & Hymel,
1981). That is, the data of DEMO study point
heavily toward the role of social approach
patterns and peer-directed aggression in the
development of peer social status. The ob-
servation of DEMO during their first en-
counters, however, has shown that the be-
havioral patterns of each group emerge over
time. Several differences among the DEMO
grew larger as time went on. Groups also
changed behaviors as children got to know
each other better. To observe children only
after their DEMO has been established ob-
viates important patterns that have both
etiological and clinical relevance. For exam-
ple, observations of neglected boys in their
classrooms by Dodge et al. (1982) have
shown that neglected boys attempt DEMO so-
cial approaches than popular boys. Clinical
researchers (e.g., O'Connor, 1972) have as-
sumed that intervention programs with ne-
glected children DEMO be directed toward
increasing the frequency of their peer inter-
action. The data of the present study indicate
that such an intervention is not DEMO to be
successful in altering the status of neglected
children. In early encounters with peers,
boys who eventually become neglected (or
rejected) DEMO socially approach peers with a
high frequency. The deficiency in the
frequency of social approaches by neglected
boys that has been observed in the DEMO
emerges only later, possibly as a result of
failure or as DEMO negative reaction to the ac-
quisition of unfavorable status. There is no
reason to believe that merely increasing the
frequency of social approaches by DEMO boys
would make them any more successful with
peers. Obviously, emphasis DEMO be placed
on the quality and competence of the social
approaches made by these children. Asher,
Markell, and Hymel (1981) concur with this
position.
In addition to the discovery ofprofiles of
children's status DEMO, the present study
points toward several meta-conclusions.
First, the quasi-naturalistic method of ob-
serving children in artificially constructed
peer play groups has proven DEMO be quite
profitable. Control has been gained over the
contact among children without destruction
of naturally occurring peer interaction. The
development of behavior patterns DEMO time
can be studied in great detail through this
method. Conclusions about the causes of
peer status, while still tentative, of course,
DEMO be made with greater certainty. Even
more certainty might be achieved by re-
peated sociometric interviewing of children
during their initial encounters in a DEMO
group. This procedure would allow one to
examine more closely the behavioral an-
tecedents versus consequences of emerging
peer status. The effect of repeated DEMO
viewing, however, must be considered.
Another conclusion is that researchers
must begin to focus on relatively specific as-
pects of peer interaction, such as the quality
of a social approach made by one child to-
DEMO a peer. The work of Putallaz and
Gottman (1981) stands out as a major con-
tribution in this direction. An asset of the
DEMO research lies in its value as a funnel
for researchers. Of the extensive range of
interpersonal behaviors that could be
studied, the present investigation directs re-
searchers toward the intensive study of so-
cial approach patterns DEMO patterns of peer-
directed aggression.
Finally, the present research has been
DEMO descriptive and atheoretical in na-
ture. With this background of behavioral
profiles, researchers can now move toward a
theory of the acquisition of social status in
children's peer groups.
Reference Note
1. 	Pelham, W. E. Peer relationships in hyperac-
tive children: Description and treatment ef-
fects. Paper presented as part of a symposium
entitled "Peer Relationships among Hyper-
active Children" (R. Milich, Chair), at the
meeting of the American Psychological Asso-
ciation, Montreal, 1980.
Kenneth A. Dodge 1399
References
Asher, S. R., & Hymel, S. Children's social com-
petence in peer relations: Sociometric and
behavioral assessment. In J. D. Wine & M. D.
Smye (Eds.), Social competence. New York:
Guilford, 1981.
Asher, S. R., Markell, R. DEMO, & Hymel, S. Iden-
tifying children at risk in peer relations: A
critique of the rate-of-interaction approach to
assessment. Child Deuelopment, 1981, 52,
1239-1245.
Asher, S. R., Oden, S. L., & DEMO, J. M. Chil-
dren's friendships in school settings. In L. DEMO
Katz (Ed.), Current topics in early childhood
education (Vol. 1). Nonvood, N.J.: Ablex,
1977.
Attneave, F. Application of information the0 y to
psychology: A summary of basic concepts,
methods, DEMO results. New York: Holt, Rine-
hart & Winston, 1959.
Cairns, R. B. Toward guidelines for interactional
research. In R. B. Cairns (Ed.), The analysis of
social interactions: Methods, issues, and il-
lustrations. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1979.
Coie, J. D., Dodge, K. DEMO, & Coppotelli, H. Di-
mensions and types of social status: DEMO cross-
age perspective. Deuelopmental Psychology,
1982, 18,557-570.
Coie, J. D., & Kupersmidt, J. A behavioral analysis
of emerging social status DEMO boys' groups.
Child Deuelopment, 1983, 54, in this issue.
Corsaro, W. A. Friendship in the nursery school:
Social organization in a peer environment. In
S. R. Asher & J. M. Gottman (Eds.), The de-
uelopment of children's friendships. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Cowen, E. L., Pederson, A., Babigian, M., Izzo,
L. D., & Trost, M. R. Long-term follow-up of
early DEMO vulnerable children. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1973,
41,DEMO
Dodge, K. A. Social cognition and children's ag-
gressive behavior. DEMO Deuelopment, 1980,
51, 162-170.
Dodge, K. A., Coie, DEMO D., & Brakke, N. P. Behavior
patterns of socially rejected and neglected
preadolescents: The roles of social approach
and aggression. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 1982, 10, 389409.
Gottman, J. M. Toward a DEMO of social isola-
tion in children. Child Development, 1977,
48,DEMO
Gottman, J. M., & Notarius, C. Sequential analysis
of observational DEMO using Markov chains. In
T. Kratochwill (Ed.), Strategies to evaluate
DEMO in single subject research. New York:
Academic Press, 1978.
Hartmann, D. Considerations in the choice of
interobserver reliability estimates. Journal of
Applied DEMO Analysis, 1977, 10, 103-
116.
Hartup, W. W., Glazer, J. A., & Charlesworth, R.
Peer reinforcement and sociometric status.
Child DEMO, 1967, 38, 1017-1024.
Hunt, J., & Solomon, R. L. The stability and some
correlates of group status in a summer camp
DEMO of young boys. American Journal of
Psychology, 1942, 55, 33-45.
DEMO, R. E., Richardson, S. A., & Ronald, L.
Physical DEMO cues and interpersonal
attraction in children. Child Deuelopment,
1974, 45, 305-310.
Ladd, G. W. Effectiveness of a social learning
method for enchancing children's social
interaction and peer acceptance. Child De-
uelopment, 1981, DEMO, 171-178.
McGill, W. J. Multivariate information analysis.
Psychometrika, 1954, 19, 97-116.
McGuire, J. M. Aggression and sociometric status
with preschool children. DEMO y, 1973,
36,542-549.
Marshall, H. R., & McCandless, B. R. A study in
prediction of social behavior of preschool
children. DEMO Deuelopment, 1957, 28,
149-159.
O'Connor, R. D. Relative DEMO of modeling,
shaping, and the combined procedures for
modification of DEMO withdrawal. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 1972, 79,327-334.
Oden, S., & Asher, S. R. Coaching children in so-
cial skills for friendship making. Child De-
uelopment, 1977, 48, 495-506.
Putallaz, M., & Gottman, J. M. Social skills and
group acceptance. In S. R. Asher & J. M.
Gottman (Eds.), The deuelopment of chil-
dren's friendships: Description and inter-
vention. New York: Cambridge university
Press, 1981.
Robins, L. N. Deviant children grown up. Balti-
more: Williams & DEMO, 1966.
Roff, M., Sells, S. B., & Golden, M. M. Social ad-
justment and personality deuelopment in
children. Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press, 1972.
Sackett, G. P. The lag sequential analysis DEMO con-
tingency and cyclicity in behavioral interac-
tion research. In J. D. Osofsky (Ed.), Hand-
book of infant deuelopment. New York:
Wiley, 1979.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 3 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Behavioral Antecedents of Peer Social Status
Kenneth A. Dodge
Child Development, Vol. 54, No. 6. (Dec., 1983), pp. 1386-1399.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-3920%28198312%2954%3A6%3C1386%3ABAOPSS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles DEMO an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via DEMO library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to DEMO
References
Identifying Children at Risk in Peer Relations: A Critique of DEMO Rate-of-Interaction
Approach to Assessment
Steven R. Asher; Richard A. Markell; Shelley Hymel
Child Development, Vol. 52, No. 4. (Dec., 1981), DEMO 1239-1245.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-3920%28198112%2952%3A4%3C1239%3AICARIP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U
A Behavioral Analysis of Emerging Social Status in Boys' Groups
John D. Coie; Janis DEMO Kupersmidt
Child Development, Vol. 54, No. 6. (Dec., 1983), pp. 1400-1416.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-3920%28198312%2954%3A6%3C1400%3AABAOES%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
Social Cognition DEMO Children's Aggressive Behavior
Kenneth A. Dodge
Child Development, Vol. 51, No. 1. (Mar., 1980), pp. 162-170.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-3920%28198003%2951%3A1%3C162%3ASCACAB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1
Toward a Definition of Social Isolation in Children
John M. Gottman
Child Development, Vol. 48, No. 2. (Jun., 1977), pp. 513-517.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-3920%28197706%2948%3A2%3C513%3ATADOSI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 3 -
Peer DEMO and Sociometric Status
Willard W. Hartup; Jane A. Glazer; Rosalind Charlesworth
Child Development, Vol. 38, No. 4. (Dec., 1967), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-3920%28196712%2938%3A4%3C1017%3APRASS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-X
The Stability and Some Correlates of Group-Status in a Summer-Camp Group of Young Boys
J. McV. DEMO; R. L. Solomon
The American Journal of Psychology, Vol. 55, DEMO 1. (Jan., 1942), pp. 33-45.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-9556%28194201%2955%3A1%3C33%3ATSASCO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-W
Physical Appearance Cues and Interpersonal Attraction in Children
Robert DEMO Kleck; Stephen A. Richardson; Linda Ronald
Child Development, Vol. 45, No. 2. (Jun., 1974), pp. 305-310.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-3920%28197406%2945%3A2%3C305%3APACAIA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0
Effectiveness of a Social Learning Method for Enhancing Children's Social Interaction and
Peer Acceptance
Gary W. Ladd
Child Development, Vol. 52, No. 1. (Mar., 1981), pp. 171-178.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-3920%28198103%2952%3A1%3C171%3AEOASLM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-T
Aggression and Sociometric Status with Preschool Children
DEMO M. McGuire
Sociometry, Vol. 36, No. 4. (Dec., 1973), pp. 542-549.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0038-0431%28197312%2936%3A4%3C542%3AAASSWP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
A Study DEMO Prediction of Social Behavior of Preschool Children
Helen R. Marshall; Boyd DEMO McCandless
Child Development, Vol. 28, No. 2. (Jun., 1957), pp. 149-159.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-3920%28195706%2928%3A2%3C149%3AASIPOS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 3 -
Coaching DEMO in Social Skills for Friendship Making
Sherri Oden; Steven R. Asher
DEMO Development, Vol. 48, No. 2. (Jun., 1977), pp. 495-506.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-3920%28197706%2948%3A2%3C495%3ACCISSF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U{1g42fwefx}