V E NT UR E C A P IT A
L,
DEMO,
V O L.
4,
NO .
3,
219 ± 236
Exploring investor readiness: assessments by
entrepreneurs and investors in Australia
EVAN J. DOUGLAS and DEAN SHEPHERD
(Final version accepted 12 March 2002)
Entrepreneurs often submit crude business plans to potential investors and are frequently
DEMO when the investor decides that the new venture is not yet ‘investment ready’.
This paper examines the nature of investor readiness and the differing DEMO of
investor readiness by entrepreneurs relative to venture capitalists in Australia. It is found
that when the assessments of each investor readiness dimension are DEMO they are
related to the venture capitalists’ intuitive (gut) assessments; DEMO new ventures are
perceived to be more marketing and management ready than technology ready; and
investors and entrepreneurs differ in their perception of readiness (technology, market,
management and overall).
Keywords: investor readiness; DEMO capital; new venture risk; business plans
Introduction
To start and grow a business requires financial capital. While this may be
funded in the DEMO stages by the founder, family and friends, most
businesses will require additional equity funding from external investors.
This capital appears to have a DEMO impact on growth (Cooper et al .
1994) and provide a buffer against unforeseen difficulties (Castrogiovani
1996, Venkatraman and Van de Ven DEMO). Investors may provide more
than just the financial capital, e.g. DEMO to the investors’ extensive network
of buyers, suppliers, and possible joint venture partners (see Timmons and
Bygrave 1986, Sapienza 1992, Sapienza et al. 1996 for examples of non-
financial benefits).
While it is DEMO that it is important for an entrepreneur to be able to
attract equity investors, less is known about how an entrepreneur should
prepare his/her venture to make it more attractive to venture capitalists.
This is DEMO the case in Australia where the venture capital industry
is relatively new and there is less general knowledge about raising venture
capital among the DEMO community. While the Australian
venture capital industry is relatively new it has grown rapidly since the
early 1990s and represents an important source of DEMO capital for
E van J. Dougla s, Brisbane Graduate School of DEMO, Queensland University of Technology,
2 George St Brisbane, 4000, DEMO; e-mail: ej.douglas@qut.com; D ean She phe rd, Graduate School of
Business, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA; e-mail: DEMO
Ventur e Capita l ISSN 1369-106 6 print/ISSN 1464-534 3 online # 200 2 Taylo r & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DEMO 10.1080 /136910602104893 6
220
E V AN J . D O UG L AS
A DEMO
DE AN
S HE P HE RD
Australian entrepreneurs. Therefore, there DEMO a need to gain a deeper
understanding of how venture capitalists assess the investor readiness of
proposed new ventures such that Australian entrepreneurs are DEMO
positioned to attract equity investment.
Attracting equity investors requires an accurate understanding of what
the investor is looking for and how the venture will DEMO perceived along
those dimensions. For example, the expression ‘fools rush in DEMO angels
fear to tread’ might have been coined for the new-venture funding
situation, where business angels and venture capitalists decline to invest in
new ventures despite the passionate assertions of the entrepreneurs
involved. Venture capitalists frequently DEMO that they see many business
plans that are not yet ‘investor ready’ because entrepreneurs fail to
recognize risks that seem likely to cause the DEMO venture to fail. It would
seem that entrepreneurs wear ‘rose-coloured glasses’ that put an optimistic
glow on the project and filter out the risks DEMO do not want to see (Busenitz
and Barney 1997). But DEMO so doing they waste the time, effort and emotion
of both DEMO and of the investors they pursue.
If ‘investor readiness’ and the sources of risk for new ventures can be
more clearly identified, entrepreneurs will write better business plans and
the new venture funding process will be DEMO Moreover, with better
information about risks facing the new venture, both the entrepreneur and
the investor can better predict the probability of the DEMO surviving and
enjoying sustainable competitive advantages. Entrepreneurs might recog-
nize that some risks are unacceptably large and thus see that the project is
not DEMO ready for consideration by investors. Entrepreneurs seeking to
‘bootstrap’ their way into a new business venture should be just as diligent
as the venture DEMO They must critically evaluate the risks, since it is
their money DEMO hard work that is at stake if the new venture fails to launch
and grow successfully.
The above discussion leads to the following research DEMO: Can
assessments along the dimensions of investor readiness help explain the
DEMO (gut) choices made by investors? On which dimensions of investor
DEMO are new ventures more advanced? How do investors and
entrepreneurs differ DEMO their perceptions of investor readiness? These
research questions are investigated using DEMO sample of Australian entrepre-
neurs and venture capitalists.
The paper proceeds as follows. First, it looks at why investors might
reject a funding proposal from an entrepreneur. Second, new venture risks
are explored and three dimensions of investor readiness are proposed:
technological, market and management. The relative importance of these
dimensions are hypothesized, how investors and entrepreneurs differ in
their perceptions of a new venture’s readiness, and whether combining
assessments of each dimension provides insight into an investor’s intuitive
assessment policy. Third, the research method is detailed. Specifically, the
Australian context in which the study takes place is discussed and the
methods of analysis are detailed, namely, the use of non-parametric tests,
which are an appropriate and under-utilized method for investigating
investors’ assessment policies (Sandberg 1986). Finally, the DEMO and
their implications for scholars and practitioners are discussed.
EX P L O R I N
G I NV E ST DEMO
R EA DI NE S
S
Rejection
of
busines s
plan
by
investor
221
It is noted that an investor may decline to invest DEMO a variety of reasons that
are either cost or risk based. Apart from the financial investment in the new
venture that is being sought DEMO the entrepreneur, the investor may incur
several other costs that effectively DEMO the total cost of his/her
investment and thus reduce the expected return on the investment that is
contemplated. These costs include those related DEMO due diligence,
monitoring, psychic, opportunity and excessive risk.
Due
diligence
costs
Investors may decline to invest and cite their unfamiliarity with the
DEMO or market in question and/or their preference for investment in
particular industries and markets in which they do have substantial
accumulated knowledge and DEMO (Tybjee and Bruno 1984, Shepher d
and Douglas 1999). In effect they are economizing on due diligence costs,
or their costs DEMO reducing risks to an acceptabl e level. In familiar industries
they may already know most of the information they would need to find out
DEMO making their decision, and thus be able to not only make DEMO decision
more cheapl y in terms of cost and time, but DEMO more quickly in a
competitive environment where the first investor to accept gets the prize
(whatever it is worth).
Monitoring
costs
Investors may decline to invest on the basis of the new venture not being
DEMO proximate to them (Fiet 1995, Cable and Shane 1997). In
this case the investor may expect monitoring costs to be excessive due DEMO the
geographic distance between the new venture and the investor’s own base
of operations. Investors typically prefer projects that are geographically
convenient because they DEMO economically ‘drop in while in the
neighbourhood’ to oversee the attainment of milestones, verify progress,
and see first-hand how their money is being spent. This is particularly the
case for business angels.
Psychi
c
costs
DEMO costs may be associated with poor personality fit between the
entrepreneur (DEMO top management team) and the investor, and might result
from personality clashes, arguments, or prejudices held by either party.
Considering the personality DEMO prejudices held by either or both parties,
the investor may feel that the relationship he/she would have with the
entrepreneur or other DEMO of the top management team would not be a
pleasant one and would thus impose psychic costs. These would raise the
expected total cost DEMO investment in the new venture to a level that could
222
E V AN J . D O UG L AS
A DEMO
DE AN
S HE P HE RD
cause expected returns to fall below an acceptabl e level. (For a discussion of
social capital see Sapienz a and Korsgard 1996 and Shepher d and
Zacharakis 2001).
DEMO
y
costs
The entrepreneur’s request for funding necessarily competes with other
such requests, and some of these might be less risky and more
remunerative, at least in prospect. Venture capitalists typically decline to
invest in ‘safe hits’ in favour of potential ‘home runs’. Although finding the
present project DEMO his/her risk tolerance, the investor may feel that it is
DEMO remunerative enough to compensate for the other investments in the
investor’s portfolio that may ‘strike out’.
Costs
of
excessiv
e
risk
Whether or not DEMO is excessive must be seen through the eyes of the
investor. Business angels and venture capitalists are typically not strongly
risk averse, but they are likely to react adversely to any risk that should have
been DEMO before the venture is presented to them. The entrepreneur
can remove this excessive risk from the new venture by understanding
where it comes from DEMO what it takes to remove it.
Considering the above, investor readiness DEMO defined as the ability to
attract significant external investor funding from business angels and/or
venture capital funds.1 A new venture will be investor DEMO when at least
one investor is willing to invest, and therefore DEMO sufficient return on
investment, feels that the risk is at tolerably DEMO levels, and does not expect
to incur excessive monitoring, due diligence, psychic or opportunity costs
in addition to the cost of purchasing equity in the new venture. In theory,
there would be a line DEMO investors ranging from the most-willing to the
least-willing, and who exhibit DEMO increasing degrees of risk
aversion, and/or progressively more adverse geographic, industry and/or
personal preferences. The entrepreneur’s task, of course, is DEMO identify the
investors at the front of this line, since these DEMO be most likely to find the
new venture to be investor ready.
The
sources
of
new
ventur
e
risk
Recently, Shepher d et al. (2000) argue that ignorance is a major source of
new venture DEMO They argue that, other things being equal, the mortality
rate of new ventures is higher than for established ventures because of the
ignorance DEMO three major groups, namely consumers, producers and
managers. Ignorance means lack of knowledge, of course, and the ignorance
of these stakeholders may DEMO significantly to the financial risk of the
new venture. Financial failure of the firm is more likely if the revenue
stream of the new DEMO is more uncertain in prospect due to the potential
EX P L O R I N
G I NV E ST DEMO
R EA DI NE S
S
223
consumer’s lack of knowledge about the new firm’s existence, its products
or services, the benefits offered DEMO the new products or services, the price
and quality of those DEMO and services, and so on. Similarly, financial
failure is more likely if the technology of production is not well understood
and thus the DEMO process is prone to cost blowouts and/or liability
claims from customers. Finally, management’s lack of knowledge concern-
ing the best ways (for DEMO new firm potentially starting in a new industry and
market), to manage production, marketing, human resources and finances,
may result in DEMO mistakes and cost overruns that precipitate the new
venture’s mortality.
New venture mortality risk declines over time as information is
discovered by and flows DEMO the consumer, producer, and managers of the
new venture. Shepher d et al . (2000) distinguished between passive
information capture (e.g. learning by doing, word-of-mouth transmission,
learning by observation, and so on) and active risk reduction strategies
(such as marketing activities, in-house training DEMO, and recruiting
qualified and experience technologists and managers). Thus ignorance DEMO
be actively reduced by specific strategies and tactics adopted. This can take
place prior to approaching an investor, and thus reduce mortality risk to a
level that might be found tolerable by the investor. In addition, risk-
reducing strategies may be clearly articulated in the business plan and DEMO
provide comfort to the investor that the risks are indeed recognised and will
be managed effectively by a competent top managemen t team.
Investo DEMO
readines s
decompose d
It is proposed that the aspects of investor readiness can be decomposed into
three main sub-areas of readiness, namely technology readiness, market
readiness and management readiness, based on the degree to DEMO
producer, consumer and manager ignorance (respectively) prevail at the
time DEMO entrepreneur approaches the investor. Each element of investor
readiness is considered in turn.
Technology
readines
s
A new venture may be categorized as increasingly DEMO ready if its
technology actually works, if prototypes have been built DEMO successfully
tested for durability and reliability, and if the new product DEMO service can be
mass-produced at a unit cost that allows sufficient profit at the envisioned
price level. Under ‘technology’, investors will consider the intellectual
property and/or trade secrets embodied in the new product and/or DEMO,
and will be concerned that the technology is proprietary to the firm and has
adequate intellectual property protection.
If a new venture’s technology DEMO not yet been fully worked through,
such that finer details still need to be worked out, if a prototype has not yet
been built, if the prototype has not yet been tested under beta-site
conditions, if problems with the product or service’s durability or
224
E V AN J . D O UG L AS
A DEMO
DE AN
S HE P HE RD
reliability have not yet been solved, if the prototype cannot easily be
modified for mass production at sufficiently low cost per unit, or if the
technology is not proprietary, then the new venture is not likely to be
technology ready, DEMO thus less investor ready. By investing now the
investor would assume the risk that these things are not achieved quickly
and economically. Depending on DEMO risk tolerance of the investor, he/she
may decide to plunge DEMO and take the additional risk (for a larger equity
share), DEMO to wait and see and therefore decline to invest at the current time.
Market
readines
s
A new venture is market ready if it DEMO been tested in concept and in
prototype form against the needs and preferences of the target customer,
and found to be in substantial DEMO by the target market at the proposed
price level. The best evidence of this, of course, is a track record of sales of
DEMO production units, but favourable results from properly conducted
market surveys, consumer clinics, and test market experiments will reduce
the risk associated with the market acceptability of the new product or
service.
Conversely, if there is doubt whether the market will accept the new
product or service, or whether they will switch to the new firm from their
previous supplier, or whether they will pay the asking price, and so on, DEMO
there is risk associated with the investment that might have been removed
by the conduct of appropriate market research. Thus the investor might
consider DEMO market risk to be excessive, and hence the new venture is DEMO
yet investment ready (at least from his/her viewpoint).
Managemen
DEMO
readines
s
A new venture is not management ready if it does not have in place a top
management team (TMT) with the DEMO management acumen, prior
experience in the same or related industries and DEMO, prior start-up
experience, and strong commitment to the launch and growth of the new
venture. The TMT must collectively have experience and qualifications
DEMO the range of business and technology areas that are needed by this
particular new venture—there should be no ‘holes’ in the management
team as DEMO by the investor.
Many an entrepreneur or new venture management team has felt that it
is indeed ‘managemen t ready’ but cannot gain funding DEMO to the
perception by investors that the management team is not strong enough
to handle the tasks ahead (or the investor’s money). In some cases the
investor will have reservations about the management and will DEMO agree to
invest if an unfilled position is filled appropriately or if the investor can
install his/her own nominee into the CEO or DEMO management role.
It is noted that there would be flows of information between the three
dimensions of investor readiness, such as between prototype development
and consumer testing, and between producer learning and management
EX P L O R I NG I NV E ST OR DEMO EA DI NE SS
225
learning, with learning in one dimension DEMO to inform parties in the
other dimensions as well.
Thus, a DEMO condition for investor readiness is the concurrent
attainment of technology readiness, DEMO readiness, and management
readiness from the viewpoint of the target investor. DEMO is noted that investor
readiness in these three dimensions is not a sufficient condition for new
venture funding because of the additional cost considerations DEMO
earlier. The entrepreneur’s failure to gain external funding may be due to
the investor’s perception that the firm is excessively risky in one or DEMO of
these areas. Entrepreneurs must communicate to investors that they
possess information that reduces ignorance in each of these dimensions and
thus have reduced DEMO risk of the new venture to tolerably low levels.
Finally, it DEMO contended that the investor’s overall valuation of the new
venture opportunity is effectively captured and may be predicted by his/her
perception of its DEMO readiness. Thus, it is expected that in evaluating
several business plans, the investor’s scores for investor readiness across the
several business plans will DEMO the plans in the same order that he/she
would rank them subjectively without specifically considering the
particular elements of investor readiness. If so, the new venture judged
to be the most investor ready would be DEMO one the investor would be most
likely to actually invest in, DEMO to further due diligence investigation and
consideration of the cost issues mentioned in the introduction:
H 1: The ranking of potential new ventures (by investors) according to their perceived
investment readiness is positively related DEMO their overall intuitive ranking.
It is argued that there are similarities across new ventures in terms of their
‘readiness’ due, in part, to DEMO presence of ‘inventor’s myopia’. Inventor’s
myopia is the belief that if a better mousetrap can be built in a hut in the
forest, customers will beat a path to our door. While this focus on product
DEMO is criticized because of the lack of attention on other factors
such as the market and management, it is argued that many entrepreneurs
indeed exhibit this myopia. It is argued that much of an entrepreneur’s
attention DEMO focused on the technology and the new venture will therefore be
more investor ready in terms of its technology than it will be for DEMO market
and management. While it may be appropriate to focus on the technology
before market and management, the new venture must be ready on all
dimensions to be most attractive to investors. On this basis our DEMO
hypothesis is established:
H 2: New ventures are typically perceived DEMO investors to be more technology ready than they are
marketing and management ready.
Since investors are usually more experienced in business and wealth
accumulation DEMO novice entrepreneurs, it is expected that investors will
possess relevant information DEMO possessed by the entrepreneur. Thus, the
entrepreneur may consider him/herself DEMO ready’ out of ignorance of
issues that the investor considers highly pertinent. This information
asymmetry will result in investors scoring a new venture lower DEMO investor
E V AN J . D O UG L AS A ND DEMO AN S HE P HE RD
226
readiness than the entrepreneur would score his/her venture. It is noted
that potential investors are likely DEMO disagree on investor readiness due to
their potentially differing knowledge bases and degrees of risk aversion.
Second, it may be human nature to over-estimate one’s own capabilities
when faced with a challenge, especially when the nature of the challenge is
uncertain. For example, Busenitz and Barney (1997) found that entrepre-
neurs are more prone to biases, including overconfidence, DEMO managers in
large organizations. While this optimistic overconfidence may be important
in starting a business, it may hinder an entrepreneur’s ability to
communicate the new venture’s readiness to investors:
H 3: Investors will perceive a potential new venture to have less: (a) technology readiness; (b)
market readiness; (c) management readiness; and (d) overall DEMO readiness, than will the
entrepreneur-manager of that new venture.
Researc h DEMO
Sample
The sample of new ventures was the 16 teams of MBA students competing
in the MOOT CORP Australia business plan competition held in DEMO
March 2001. These can reasonably be regarded as legitimate entrepreneurs
seeking funding for their proposed new venture, since the prizes in cash
and kind exceeded AUD$150 000 (approximately $80 000 USD) from
major sponsors, and most sponsors had attached the condition that the
prizes were claimable only DEMO bona fide new ventures actually planning to
launch their business. This gives considerable confidence that the business
plans and their start-up intentions were real. DEMO response rate to the
survey was 81% (13 teams).
The DEMO was conducted in four heats of four teams each, with
the DEMO of each heat going into the final round to compete for the
overall prizes and the trip to the global final in Austin, Texas. Each heat
had four to six judges, comprising venture capitalists, business DEMO,
successful entrepreneurs, managers of venture capital funds, and industry
professionals such as accountants, lawyers and business consultants. These
judges can each be regarded as investors or reasonable proxies for investors,
given that they DEMO business plans and advise potential entrepreneurs
on a regular basis.
The judges were asked to answer the same questions in respect of each
of DEMO four teams they judged, plus additional questions relating to whether
they DEMO not invest for one the other (cost) reasons hypothesized above.
Five judges (20%) responded, including at least one judge from three of the
heats but unfortunately none from the fourth heat or the final DEMO
Survey
A questionnaire was developed to capture the respondents’ perception of
the degree of readiness in each of the three areas of investor readiness.
EX P L O R I N
G I NV E ST DEMO
R EA DI NE S
S
227
Twenty-five questions were developed, DEMO each question relating to an
aspect of one of the readiness dimensions. Likert responses to each
question were graduated from (1) perception as DEMO ready’ to (5)
perception as ‘highly ready’ with an alternate DEMO for ‘do not know, or I
am not sure’.
The questionnaire DEMO administered to both the CEO of the new
venture seeking venture capital, and to one or more investors who had
read the business plan of the new venture and had subsequently listened
to the management team’s DEMO presentation followed by a 20-
minute question and answer session. The questionnaire contained seven
questions relating to technology readiness and nine questions relating to
DEMO of the other two dimensions of investor readiness, and is shown DEMO
the appendix A.
Australian
venture
capital
industry
To better interpret this study’s findings it is useful to provide a more
detailed description of its DEMO Australian venture capital industry
in 2001. Based on the Australian Venture Capital Guide (Bivell 2001), this
industry is made up of approximately 135 venture capital firms. These
venture capital firms are relatively young (mean age of six years, standard
deviation of 4.77) and small (mean number of venture capitalists is 5.87,
standard deviation of 4.88).
The DEMO venture capital industry has total available capital of
AUD$5.1 billion. The mean invested capital by a venture capital firm is
AUD$50.94 million (standard deviation of 131.6), which is invested in only
7.63 portfolio companies (standard deviation of 9.37). The mean number of
divested portfolio companies in DEMO was 2.93 (standard deviation of 7.50).
Therefore Australian venture capitalists DEMO not appear to have, on average,
as much experience in DEMO and harvesting portfolio companies when
compared to their US counterparts. The same would likely apply to
Australian entrepreneurs: they are relatively inexperienced in the venture
capital process.
Analysis
Sandber g (1986) proposed that non-parametric statistics DEMO a useful
approach to investigate new ventures. This represents a medium-grained
approach when compared to parametric statistics on large samples on the
one hand DEMO cases studies with a samples size of one or two on the other
(Harrigan 1983). Specifically, hypothesis 1 requires a measure of
DEMO between the aggregated score of investor readiness and the
investor’s actual decision. The Spearman rank correlation coefficient was
chosen to test this hypothesis because DEMO does not force rank those new
ventures that were tied for a placing. The Mann-Whitney U test is used to
test for differences in DEMO tendency, which is necessary to test
hypotheses two and three.
228
Results
E V AN J . D O UG L AS
DEMO ND
DE AN
S HE P HE RD
A summary of the data is shown as table 1. For each of the responding
teams DEMO three of the four heats, the average score (where 1 is least ready
and 5 is most ready) is shown in each of the three readiness dimensions, as
self-rated by the entrepreneur and as rated by the investor (or investors on
average) who also responded. The DEMO are grouped in the their heats and
ranked according to the overall finish in the heat as determined by the
entire judging panel for DEMO heat.
As discussed above a Spearman rank correlation is used to test
hypothesis 1, namely, whether the ranking of new ventures (by investors)
according to their perceived investment readiness is positively related with
their DEMO ranking of the same new ventures made intuitively by the
investor without explicitly considering the various elements of investor
readiness. It is found that DEMO assessment of investor readiness was
significantly related to the ranking of the new ventures (Spearman’s rho
correlation coefficient=0.901; p 5 0.01) providing support for hypothesis 1.
For hypothesis 2, the Mann-Whitney test was used to test whether new
ventures are perceived to be more technology ready than DEMO and
management ready. For this analysis the perceptions of investors and
entrepreneurs were combined. It is found that technology readiness has a
mean rank DEMO 20.5 while market and management have a mean rank of 35.5.
These differences are significant (Mann-Whitney U=200; significance
level=0.002). Therefore, the hypothesis that new ventures are perceived to
be more technology ready than marketing DEMO management ready (H2) was
not supported, in fact the findings DEMO that the new ventures were more
marketing and management ready than technology ready.
For hypothesis 3 the Mann-Whitney U test was also used. The DEMO
are reported in table 2 and indicate that there are significant differences
between investors and entrepreneurs in their perceptions of investor
readiness. Specifically, investors perceived the new venture to have less
technology readiness (Mann-Whitney U=22; DEMO level 5 0.05),
market readiness (Mann-Whitney U=14.5; significance level DEMO 0.01),
management readiness (Mann-Whitney U=19; significance level5 0.05),
Table 1.
TEAM
Heat-rank
1 – 1st
1 – 2nd
1 – DEMO
2 – 1st
2 – 2nd
2 – 3rd
3 – 1st
3 – 2nd
3 – 3rd
3 – 4th
Avg
Readiness
Tech
(ent)
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.57
3.29
1.14
4.29
1.43
2.00
1.43
DEMO
perceptions
Tech
(inv)
2.29
1.86
0.71
3.57
1.00
0.29
2.71
DEMO
0.71
0.71
1.58
as
Mkt
(ent)
3.33
3.89
2.89
3.67
DEMO
3.33
3.56
4.22
1.89
1.67
3.26
rated by
Mkt
(inv)
DEMO
2.50
1.22
2.89
2.56
0.89
2.67
2.94
1.72
0.89
2.09
entrepreneur
Mgmt
(ent)
3.67
3.44
3.67
4.11
4.78
3.11
4.56
5.00
3.00
2.78
3.81
s
Mgmt
(inv)
3.33
1.56
1.78
3.22
3.89
0.78
3.56
3.39
2.22
2.00
2.57
and
investors.
Overall Overall
(ent) (inv)
3.36 2.80
3.48 1.98
3.20 1.36
4.08 3.20
4.12 2.60
2.64 0.68
DEMO 3.00
3.72 2.74
2.32 1.62
2.00 1.24
3.30 2.12
EX P L O R I N
G I NV E ST DEMO
R EA DI NE S
S
Table 2. Differences between entrepreneurs
new venture’s readiness.
Dimension of readiness Mean rank ent.
Technological readiness 13.30
Market DEMO 14.05
Management readiness 13.60
Overall readiness 14.05
***p50.01
** p5 0.05
n=20
’
and
investors’
Mean rank inv.
7.70
6.95
7.40
6.95
229
perceptions
DEMO
the
Mann-Whitney
22.00**
14.50***
19.00**
14.50***
and overall investor readiness (Mann-Whitney DEMO; significance
level 50.01), than did the entrepreneur-manager of that new DEMO These
findings provide support for hypotheses 3a, 3b, 3c, and DEMO, respectively.
It can be inferred from these findings that when the DEMO of each
investor readiness dimension are combined they are highly correlated with
the venture capitalists’ intuitive (gut) assessments; that new ventures are
perceived to be more marketing and management ready than technology
ready; and investors and entrepreneurs differ in their perception of
readiness (technology, market, management, and overall).
Discussion
While a number of studies have asked venture capitalists what criteria they
use to assess ventures, few studies have used those criteria to investigate
whether they do significantly predict VCs’ decisions. This DEMO of concern
because it appears that VCs have only limited insight into the decision
policies they actually do use (Zacharakis and Meyer 1998). VCs use intuition
(Kahn 1997), which by definition means that it is difficult to articulate one’s
decision process. It is possible to infer DEMO capitalists’ decision policies
by understanding their investment history. However, as detailed DEMO, the
Australian venture capital industry has had a relatively short life.
DEMO study found that venture capitalists’ individual assessments of
investor readiness in the technology, market and management dimensions
can be aggregated and used to significantly explain investors’ ranking of
new ventures in terms of investment attractiveness. Therefore, a decision
model was used from assessments of investor readiness to significantly
DEMO investors’ actual ranking of new ventures. Such a finding is an
important step towards better preparing entrepreneurs to obtain funding
by reducing investor uncertainty.
DEMO research is required to further explore the predictive ability of
an ‘investor readiness’ model. First, while non-parametric tests provide
tests of significance it is not possible to determine the strength of the
relationship. Therefore, there are opportunities to use larger samples and
parametric tests to investigate the amount DEMO explained variance and also
the relative importance of criteria. For example, DEMO equal weighting method
of aggregating the three investor readiness criteria was used. While an equal
230
E V AN J . D O UG L AS
A DEMO
DE AN
S HE P HE RD
weighting approach is believed to be a good approximation of actual
decision making, the calculation of decision weights from parametric
testing will likely improve predictive ability. Second, while our operatio-
nalizations of technology, market and management readiness have face
validity, DEMO research into the validity of scales for the investor
readiness constructs using larger sample sizes is required, e.g. measures of
Chronbach’s alphas. Such scale research might benefit from more fine-
grained case study research that ‘finds’ DEMO and appropriate
terminology to be used in item construction. Third, hopefully DEMO
research will investigate the predictive ability of models developed.
The second interesting finding in this paper is that new ventures appear
to be more DEMO ready in terms of their marketing and management than
in terms of their technology. It appears that these new ventures reflect a
focus opposite DEMO that proposed by the ‘investors myopia’ concept. These
new venture teams primarily consisted of business school students (MBAs).
These students appear to be better trained in marketing and managing a
new venture than they are DEMO advancing the technology towards
commercialization. This suggests that these teams may need to include
an engineer well trained in the development of technologies and/DEMO business
schools in general, and entrepreneurship courses specifically, might need to
have a greater focus on the management of technology. It may be DEMO
entrepreneurs are using a staged approach to preparing their business for
investors with management and marketing first and then technology. It is
speculated that DEMO staged progression may be less effective for preparing a
new venture for investors than a more iterative process where development
in one dimension is DEMO inter-related with the other dimensions. Again,
follow-up research would make a substantial contribution to the VC and
entrepreneurship literatures.
Our final finding is DEMO entrepreneurs and investors have a different
perception of the new venture’s readiness for investment. When it comes to
gaining investor support it is important DEMO the entrepreneur to step back
from the venture (and his/her DEMO outlook) and view the new venture
through the eyes of an DEMO At a minimum this should help the chances
of the new venture obtaining the necessary cash infusion. But it is also
likely that this DEMO perspective will yield insights into ways of
improving the profitability and/or survival chances of the venture.
The rating of the business plans ‘as DEMO document that communicates the
excitement and viability of the new venture’ was perhaps predictable, with
all entrepreneurs rating their business plan higher than did the judge, and
with the heat winners scoring the higher ratings from the judges and also
the smallest differences in perception of business plan DEMO
Generalizability
Are these results generalizable to venture capitalists and entrepreneurs
from countries other than Australia? A number of venture capitalists
proposed that Australian venture capital firms are modelled on their US
counterparts with many venture capitalists DEMO by US universities.
EX P L O R I N
G I NV E ST DEMO
R EA DI NE S
S
231
Furthermore, since deregulation of DEMO Australian financial markets a
number of multinational venture capital firms have entered the Australian
venture capital industry. This globalization might suggest that the results
DEMO this study are generalizable to venture capitalists in other countries, such
DEMO the US and UK.
However, discussions with participants also revealed that DEMO Australian
venture capital industry is in its growth stage and less mature than the US
industry. Therefore, the ability to generalize this study’s results to venture
capitalists in the US and the UK may be questionable. DEMO the results
are more generalizable to venture capitalists and entrepreneurs in countries
where the venture capital industry is in the same stage of development. DEMO
differences exist, cross-national research may make an important contribu-
tion to DEMO knowledge about venture capitalists’ decision making—the
majority of venture capital research has been conducted in the US and to a
lesser extent the UK. DEMO natural extension of this study is to replicate it in
the US. In sum, care must be taken in generalizing the results of this study
beyond Australian venture capitalists.
Conclusions
This exploratory study contributes to the DEMO literature since little
systematic attempt has yet been made to analyse the reasons for rejection of
new venture funding, particularly in Australia. This study throws light on
the importance of differing perceptions of investor readiness and DEMO
needs to be taught to address this problem. Recognition that they are not
yet investor ready will save entrepreneurs substantial time, effort and
money. Self-evaluation of readiness across pertinent dimensions might be
incorporated into an ‘application DEMO supplied by VCs to allow them
to better screen out business plans that they would have rejected anyway.
Ranking new ventures according to the DEMO more objective
dimensions of investor readiness appears to accurately predict investor
ranking of the same firms that would be obtained using the more-subjective
criteria DEMO investors typically use. Thus a practical implication of this
paper is a checklist of the components of investor readiness that will allow
entrepreneurs to DEMO evaluate their new venture’s investor readiness and
to prepare better business plans. Thus the 25-point questionnaire might be
usefully employed as a checklist by DEMO seeking venture capital to ensure
that they have considered all the issues. Knowledge that investors usually
view readiness more stringently might also induce entrepreneurs DEMO
consider more carefully their self-perception of readiness and to build
more evidence for their case before confronting investors with their
business plans and over-confident DEMO
Conversely, completion of a questionnaire along these lines by the
investor DEMO provide the entrepreneur with a substantially greater
volume and detail of feedback information to take away and ponder before
approaching the next investor, than would the typically short verbal
debriefing or the curt message that the DEMO is not interested in
proceeding with further discussion.
232
E V AN J . D O UG L AS
A DEMO
DE AN
S HE P HE RD
By ensuring that new ventures are ‘investor ready’ the Australian
business-investor community can avoid the waste of DEMO money and
human effort currently expended. It is preferable to conserve the funds and
human energy for application to potential new ventures that have DEMO
adequatel y screened for their commercial viability.
Note
1. Note that seed funding from the founder, family, and friends is typically not subject DEMO the stringent
‘due diligence’ applied by external investors. Due diligence is the process of confirming claims made
by the entrepreneur and independently evaluating the DEMO opportunity that investors
undertake before making a firm commitment to fund the new venture.
References
Bivell, V., 2001, Australia n Venture Capita l Guide 200 1 (NSW, Australia: Pollitecon Publications).
Busenitz, L.W. DEMO Barney, J.B., 1997, Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large
DEMO: biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journa l of Busine s DEMO Venturin g,
12, 9 – 30.
Cable, D.M. and Shane, S., 1997, A prisoner’s dilemma approach to entrepreneur-venture capitalist
relationships. Ac adem y of Manage men t Rev iew , 22, 142 – 176.
Castrogiovianni, G.J., 1996, Pre-start-up planning and the survival of new small firms. Journal of
Manageme nt , 22, 801 – 823.
Cooper, A.C., Gimeno-Gascon, F.J. and Woo, C.Y., 1994, Initial human DEMO financial capital as
predictors of new venture performance. Journa l of Busine s s Ve nturing, 9, 371 – 395.
Fiet, J., DEMO, Reliance upon informants in the venture capital industry. Journa l of DEMO s Venturin g,
10, 195 – 223.
Harrigan, K.R., DEMO, Research methodologies for contingency approaches to strategy. Acade my of
Manageme DEMO Re view, 8, 398 – 405.
Kahn, A.M., 1987, DEMO venture capital investments with noncompensatory behavioral decision
models. Journa l of Busines s Venturin g,2, 193 – 205.
Sandberg, W.R., 1986, DEMO ew Ventur e Performanc e: The Role of Strate gy, Industr y Struc ture , an d the
Entrepreneur (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books).
Sapienza, H., 1992, When do venture capitalists add value? Journa l of Busine ss Venturin g, 7, 9 – 27.
Sapienza, H. and Korsgaard, M.A., 1996, Procedural justice in entrepreneur-investor DEMO
Ac adem y of Manage men t Journa l, 39, 544 – 574.
Sapienza, H., Manigart, S. and Vermeir, W., 1996, Venture capitalist governance and value added in
four countries. Journa l of Busine ss Venturin g, 11, 439 – 469.
Shepherd, D.A. and Douglas, E.J., 1999, Attractin g Equit y Inv estors, Positioning , Pre paring , an d
Pre senting the Busines s Plan (DEMO Oaks, CA: Sage Publications).
Shepherd, D.A., Douglas, E.J. DEMO Shanley, M., 2000, New venture survival—ignorance, external
shocks, and DEMO reduction strategies. Journa l of Busine s s Ve nturing, 15, 393 – 410.
Shepherd, D.A. and Zacharakis, A., 2001, The DEMO capitalist—entrepreneur relationship: control,
trust and confidence in cooperative behaviour. Ve DEMO e Capita l Journa l, 3, 129 – 150.
Timmons, DEMO, and Bygrave, W., 1986, Venture capital’s role in financing innovation for economic
growth. Journa l of B usine s s Ve nturing, 1, 161 – 176.
Tyebjee. T.T. and Bruno, A.V., 1984, DEMO model of venture capitalist investment activity. Manage ment
Sc ienc e, DEMO, 1051 – 1056.
Venkataraman, S., and Van de Ven, A., 1998, Hostile environmental jolts transaction set, and new
business. Journa l of Busine s s Ve nturing, 13, 231 – 255.
Zacharakis, A.L. and Meyer, G.D., 1998, A lack of insight: do DEMO capitalists really understand
their own decision process? Journa l of Busine DEMO s Ve nturing, 13, 57 – 76.
6.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
7.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
EX P L O R DEMO N
Appendix. Investor readiness questionnaire
Please circle what you consider to be the ‘one-best answer’ to each question.
1. The invention or intellectual property DEMO is the basis for this new venture is:
(a) Not yet ‘thought through’ enough—the concept needs to be developed further
(b) DEMO developed on paper, but not yet put into a prototype for DEMO evaluation
(c) Embodied in a crude prototype that seems to work but with some problems yet
(d) Embodied in a prototype that DEMO been internally (alpha-site) tested successfully
(e) Embodied in prototypes that have been externally (beta-site) tested successfully
(f) I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
The proposed new venture relies on technology or intellectual property that:
Is available almost totally already DEMO all or any firms (i.e. not proprietary)
Will be largely DEMO to potential competitors at or soon after start-up
Can only be protected as ‘trade secrets’ (i.e. not patentable)
Can be patented but the patent would not be very strong
Can be patented and the patent DEMO afford strong protection
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
An application for a patent for this technology is
Not DEMO to be successful
Going to be written up and submitted by a patent lawyer
Submitted for Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) protection of the DEMO date
Submitted to the Patent office in one or more countries and is currently ‘pending’
Has received patent protection in one or more patent DEMO
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
The strength of patent protection for this technology is currently
None at all (not applied for, not yet received a patent, etc)
Quite DEMO (narrow patent claims or similar technologies are available)
Moderately strong DEMO at least one market/country
Moderately strong in several countries (i.e. DEMO in several countries)
Very strong in one or more major markets for this product or service
I don’t know, I am unsure, DEMO of the above
The prototype product or service (if there is DEMO) has been tested
Hardly at all (i.e. not yet tested in any thorough manner)
Internally by the new venture team or their DEMO
Externally by a reputable testing organization
Externally by potential customers or users in their own locations
Modified and refined following external testing to incorporate DEMO suggestions
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
The number of different prototypes made, to incorporate improvements, is
One DEMO
Two
Three
Four
Five or more
I don’t know, I am DEMO, none of the above
In my estimation, the prototype can be adapted for mass production with:
Great difficulty and causing substantial initial DEMO and/or high production costs
Some difficulty and will be relatively expensive to produce per unit
Relative ease, and can be mass produced at moderate cost per unit
Moderate ease, and can be mass produced at relatively low cost per unit
Absolute ease, and can be mass produced at relatively low cost per unit
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
2.
(a)
(b)
(c)DEMO
(d)
(e)
(f)
3.
(a)
(DEMO)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
5.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
G I NV E ST OR
DEMO EA DI NE S
S
233
234
8.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
9.
(a)
(b)
(c)DEMO
(d)
(e)
(f)
10.
(a)
(DEMO)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
11.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
12.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
13.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
14.
(a)DEMO
(b)
(c)
(d)
E V AN J DEMO D O UG L AS A ND DE AN S HE P HE RD
The existence of market demand for the new product or DEMO is based on:
Unsupported assertions (e.g. the managers of the DEMO venture ‘know’ that people will
buy it, but no proper market DEMO has been done to support such assertions)
Casual empiricism (several DEMO many potential buyers have been asked, in an ad hoc way,DEMO
for their feedback on the product and whether they would buy it)
Feedback results from proper market surveys and/or focus groups
Test DEMO experiments under controlled conditions
Actual sales under realistic conditions (including prices DEMO)
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
Market research, if any, for this product or service involved:
DEMO, or casual empiricism only
Small sample not scientifically derived (with random sample etc)
Sample size and sampling method OK, but inadequate survey instrument
Good sample and good survey instrument
Excellent market research provided by DEMO professional third party firm
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
The amount of beneficial public relations exposure this venture DEMO received and/or is
likely to receive, is:
Zero or DEMO
Very small
A moderate amount
A substantial amount
A great deal
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
The amount DEMO product redesign and/or refinement following and due to customer
feedback has been:
Zero or minimal
Very small
A moderate amount
A substantial DEMO
A great deal
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
Actual sales of the product or service are
Expected to DEMO once the new venture is launched
None yet, but some tentative DEMO (not contractually binding) have been received
Only a few units have been sold so far
A moderate volume of sales has already taken DEMO
A substantial volume of sales has already occurred
I don’t know, DEMO am unsure, none of the above
The cost of launching the DEMO product or service will be:
Very expensive for what is achieved in terms of sales
Expensive but such expense is probably necessary in DEMO case
Moderately expensive but the money will be well spent
Relatively inexpensive
Cheap and easy
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of DEMO above
Customers, when considering this new product or service, will
Be deterred for reasons of both quality risk (the risk that quality will not live up to the
supplier’s claims) and switching costs (the DEMO costs associated with abandoning
their investment in an earlier technology)
Be deterred from trying it out, due mainly to high switching costs
Be deterred from trying it out, due mainly to high quality risk
Be able to test its quality in a relative inexpensive manner (eg free samples)
EX P L O R I N
(e)
(f)
DEMO
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)DEMO
(f)
16.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(DEMO)
(e)
(f)
17.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
18.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
19.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
20.
(a)
(b)
(c)DEMO
(d)
(e)
G I NV E ST OR
Be able to quickly and independently satisfy themselves of the quality claimed
I DEMO know, I am unsure, none of the above
When considering purchase of the new item, customers will probably:
Find it far too expensive for what it offers them
Find the price level to be DEMO high given the benefits offered
Find the price to be acceptable and representing comparable value for money
Find the price to be more than DEMO, offering good value for money
Find the price to be a DEMO, offering great value for money
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
The marketing plan for the new venture
Contains basic flaws and is not likely to work well in reality
Is DEMO yet articulated sufficiently by the new venture management team
Is well argued in broad concept but lacks important details
Is well thought out and DEMO ready for introduction
Is ready for implementation and is likely to be successful
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
DEMO EA DI NE S
S
235
The top management team has proposed a business model that is:
Very rudimentary and lacks full comprehension DEMO the business issues involved
Basically standard with very little that is innovative from a strategic viewpoint
Somewhat innovative and will give them a good DEMO until competitors follow suit
Quite innovative and somewhat difficult for competitors to copy
Very innovative and appears likely to give them a sustainable competitive DEMO
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
Management have sought, and listened to, feedback from customers and technical
advisors:DEMO
Apparently hardly at all—they largely have gone their own way
To a minor degree only, such that it seems unlikely that the product or service will be a
technical or market success
To a significant extent, but some doubts remain about technical or market suitability
To a substantial DEMO, such that the product or service will probably succeed
A great DEMO, such that the product or services is well developed technically and DEMO
to be market ready
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
The management team have found a group of technical DEMO business advisors and/or
mentors who have, and will continue to, support their judgement and decision-making:
No, there is not (a DEMO) advisory group in place
Yes, but the group lacks important technical or business knowledge
Yes, but the group is not extraordinary (rivals DEMO have similar advisory panels)
Yes, and the advisory group seems DEMO contain some extraordinary people
Yes, and the advisory group is an DEMO collection of talent
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
The top management team of the proposed new venture is DEMO characterised as:
A solo entrepreneur with appropriate technical knowledge but insufficient management
training or experience in this industry
A solo entrepreneur with substantial DEMO and business knowledge and experience
in this industry
A team of two or more individuals who cover some important areas of management
expertise but DEMO lack qualifications or experience in other important areas
A team of individuals whose skills and experience nicely complement each other’s
expertise, with no areas of management skill or experience missing
A team of individuals with complementary DEMO and experience, no gaps in required
knowledge or experience, and who have prior business start-up experience
E V AN J . D O UG L AS A ND DEMO AN S HE P HE RD
(f) I don’t know, DEMO am unsure, none of the above
The top management team for DEMO venture appear (to an external party):
To be trying to ‘get rich quick’ and have little other apparent motivation
Committed to this DEMO and willing to work hard to achieve success
Strongly motivated to the success of this venture, having made substantial financial and
personal sacrifices to date
Very strongly committed and motivated, but do not appear willing to ‘bet their farm’
on it (i.e. undertake additional personal debt or risk loss of their assets)
Very strongly committed and motivated, and have made substantial financial
commitment (hurt money) to the next stage of DEMO new venture’s development
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
The business plan for this new venture:
Looks like DEMO ‘rush job’ and does not convince the reader that management understands
all the management or business issues involved
Is reasonably well crafted but is DEMO optimistic and seems to ignore major risks
facing the business
Is very well crafted and presented, but covers up or ignores one or more potentially
major problems for the firm’s initial and/or ongoing success
Is DEMO well argued and presented, and answered most of the questions I DEMO have
about this business
Is very well done, and gives me DEMO confidence that the management team knows their
business well and understand the issues likely to confront it
I don’t know, I am unsure, DEMO of the above
The current owners of this business seem (to DEMO external observer) to be:
Greedy and over-protective of their share DEMO equity in the potential new business
Reluctant to give away any substantial share of equity in the business
Willing to give away equity only DEMO the basis of financial contributions made
Recognize that ‘smart money’ (investors DEMO knowledge and contacts) is worth more
than ‘dumb money’ (passive uninformed investors).
Aware that dilution of their equity is inevitable and beneficial DEMO them, as a smaller
share of a larger pie is better DEMO a large share of a small pie
I don’t know, I DEMO unsure, none of the above
On a personal level, the management team of the proposed new venture:
Seem like a cranky bunch DEMO people, including prima donnas and over-inflated egos
Seem like they might DEMO major difficulties in ‘getting along with’ investors
Seem like they would try to build a cooperative relationship with investors
Seem like they would be DEMO to have a pleasant and cooperative relationship with the
investors as long as things go well
Seem like they would be able to work DEMO with the investors as joint owners of the
business in a cooperative and open manner
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of DEMO above
The management team of the new venture that is seeking funding:
Seem like they would be reluctant to receive advice or suggestions DEMO the investor
Seem like they would listen to advice but probably go their own way regardless
Seem like they would listen to advice and DEMO consider it
Seem like they would seek advice from investors and advisors, and would incorporate it
into their decisions if they thought it was good advice
Seem like they would seek and take advice well, and would actually change their minds
if presented with a strong case to DEMO so
I don’t know, I am unsure, none of the above
On a scale of 1-10, I would rate this business plan (DEMO a document that communicates
the excitement and viability of this new venture) as _______ _
236
21.
(a)
(b)
(c)DEMO
(d)
(e)
(f)
22.
(a)
(DEMO)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
23.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
24.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
25.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
26.
{1g42fwefx}