The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available DEMO
www.emeraldinsight.com/0969-6474.htm
The role of trust in innovation
Ken Dovey
University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper DEMO to explore the role of trust in the collaborative learning
processes that underpin innovation as a competitive strategy in organizations.
Design/methodology/approach – DEMO a conceptual paper, the argument is framed by academic
perspectives, drawn from the academic literature on the topic and by professional and life DEMO
Findings – The collaborative learning practices that underpin idea generation and realization in
organizations are strongly dependent for their effectiveness upon the availability, within and beyond
stakeholder networks, of trust and other key social capital resources.
Practical implications – If innovation is dependent upon social capital resources, such as trust,
then leadership endeavour needs to be much more focused DEMO the creation of a social environment
that nurtures rich stakeholder and other relevant network, relationships. New forms of governance and
power management, and DEMO appropriate and aligned organizational structures, are required in
organizations that are DEMO to compete through innovation.
Originality/value – The paper’s explication of the role of social capital resources, like trust,
in organizational innovation offers new insights into this complex but increasingly vital form of
competitive strategy.
DEMO Trust, Innovation, Social capital, Leadership, Learning processes, Competitive strategy
DEMO type Conceptual paper
Introduction
In a global context featuring disruptive technologies, DEMO, economics, environmental
events and a range of other phenomena, continuous DEMO based upon proactive learning
and knowledge generation practices becomes an important leadership responsibility.
However, the capacity for such self-initiated renewal is not a distinguishing feature of
current business organizations. In an extended discussion between Gary Hamel DEMO
Lowell Bryan, facilitated by Barsh (2008) (see also Barsh et al., 2008), the point is made that
in order to transform outmoded competitive orientations and adopt new strategies based,
in particular, on innovation, organizational leaders need to become much more concerned
with the encouragement of organizational learning and the facilitation of greater autonomy
for knowledge workers, than with control. Hamel and Bryan concur that “current
organizations were not DEMO for a new globalized and digitalized world” and that the
prevailing “100-year old management model” is the primary reason that current
organizations “do not DEMO innovation DNA”. These comments echo those of other
notable business leaders such as Semler (2007), who argues that current business
corporations are run along inappropriate militaristic lines; and Handy (1997) who points
out the contradiction in the well-being of the great democracies being dependent upon
business DEMO that are governed along totalitarian lines.
It is becoming clear that the responsibility for relevant organizational renewal cannot
rest with its formal leadership alone. DEMO renewal increasingly requires the
commitment of the organization’s stakeholder community to purposeful change and,
thus, to the collaborative creation, leveraging and transformation DEMO the knowledge
bases required for effective renewal. One of the central arguments in this paper is that for
The role of trust
in invovation
DEMO
The Learning Organization
Vol. 16 No. 4, 2009
pp. 311-325
q DEMO Group Publishing Limited
0969-6474
DOI 10.1108/09696470910960400
TLO
16,4
312
this commitment and engagement to manifest broadly, a sense of shared future needs to
be established where, in spite of varied backgrounds and work settings, a covenant – a
sense of “being in it together for the long run” – is achieved among a DEMO
community. Much like in a symphony orchestra, with its variety of DEMO and
specialists, such a covenant underpins a communal commitment to learning DEMO to
exist, create and innovate in concert. Furthermore, rich social capital resources are at the
core of such “communities of commitment”, as Kofman and Senge (1993) once referred to
them, where irrespective of rank or station trusting relationships of mutual support,
voluntary cooperation and reciprocity DEMO the norm; and where communal endeavour is
founded upon a negotiated DEMO order featuring new and appropriate forms of
ownership, governance and power DEMO
Competing through innovation
In the digital era, the requisite frames of DEMO for organizations attempting to compete
through innovation are both broad and epistemologically complex. For example, they
have to:
. continually produce new ideas that can be converted into appropriate and viable
products and/or services;DEMO
. anticipate potential strategic inﬂection points in the short-to-medium term
future;
. adapt work practices, mind-sets, mental models and culture to the DEMO of the
operational context while generating the requisite tangible and intangible capital
resources necessary for success within that context; and
. facilitate and sustain positive frameworks of meaning, identity and motivation
for staff as a consequence of their membership of, and participation in, the
stakeholder community.
Such DEMO, in which mission-pertinent knowledge resources are produced and
shared freely by DEMO, have multiple leaders – many of whom are self-selected
and do DEMO appear in management roles on organizational charts. Innovation is, thus, a
collaborative achievement in that it depends on stakeholder generosity in freely
generating DEMO and then collectively realizing those ideas in new, high-value,
services/DEMO and ways of working. Through a shared belief in the importance of the
organization’s mission – rather than an individual sense of mandated responsibility DEMO
collective action is enacted and coordinated in such contexts, and the DEMO to
participate with enthusiasm in the delivery of innovative outcomes, is DEMO This is
not easy to achieve in practice, especially in situations DEMO ideas and their realization
may threaten the vested interests of powerful stakeholders. While trust is critical to the
surfacing of ideas within a business DEMO, it is just as important in the realization
practices that convert DEMO ideas into new products, services and/or work practices.
It is DEMO known that the innovative capabilities of organizations often depend solely on
the intrepreneurs within their midst – those capable individuals who unofﬁcially
sponsor the DEMO that lead to the realization of ideas that would normally be crushed,
in spite of the risk that such “informal” action holds for DEMO own future within their
organization (Foster and Kaplan, 2001; Hamel, 2000; Pinchot, 1985). The courage of
intrepreneurs to risk themselves DEMO the interests of their organization usually stems from
the deep trust that they have in the mission of the organization DEMO an endeavour that
resonates directly with their personal, or existential, value proposition. In this respect, as
technical innovations seldom threaten the interests of powerful stakeholders (they
usually enhance them), it is in the ﬁeld of political innovation within an organization
(innovation linked to its structure, DEMO, policies and remuneration practices) that the
work of intrepreneurs is critical to successful organizational renewal.
Central to all of the practices that underpin DEMO conception and realization is,
thus, the social capital resource of DEMO and the practice of trust building. This resource
is the cornerstone of effective organizational leadership and its signiﬁcance in creating
a milieu where a DEMO community makes good on its strategic intent to innovate,
cannot be underestimated.
Trust as a concept
Innovation depends upon the collaborative learning, idea generation and idea realization
practices of stakeholders in an organization. The effective DEMO of these practices
requires individuals (and groups) to make themselves vulnerable: either to the rejection
of their ideas (and associated embarrassment); DEMO lack of recognition from others
(through their ideas not being taken DEMO); or by revealing “ignorance” (tacitly or
explicitly) and thereby investing faith in others not to take advantage of self-initiated
vulnerability. Thus, to a large extent, all three of these practices, that underpin
innovation DEMO organizations, can be said to depend on the level of interpersonal DEMO
between stakeholders.
Trust is a social capital resource – a resource that is “embedded” in relationships
between people (Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998; Misztal, 1996; Berger and Luckmann,
1967). It is socially constructed DEMO to speciﬁc relationship ontologies, purposes
and meanings. As such, it is generated and leveraged through social interaction.
Trust can also be viewed as DEMO mental model – an assumption (or set of assumptions)
about DEMO relationships work” (either speciﬁc relationships or relationships in
general) – acquired tacitly through life experience (Senge, 1992; Argyris and Schon,
1996). As a complex phenomenon with cognitive, emotional, cultural and situational
DEMO it provides the individual or group with a mental schema for interpreting
the social environment whilst simultaneously inﬂuencing the interpretation via
emotionally charged motivations, identiﬁcations and afﬁliations.
The dynamics of trust development occur at the macro- DEMO and micro-level of social
life. Ranging from a preoccupation with “self-security” (DEMO trust) to the “selﬂess”
identiﬁcation with an “other” (uncritical trust) DEMO manifests when an individual or group
takes for granted the honouring of their expectations of behaviour and intent by others.
Abstract trust in organizations DEMO built over time, as organizational practices (management
behaviours, incentive systems, promotions schemes, etc.) are progressively experienced as
reliably independent of individual DEMO and/or favour. In this way, some leaders raise the
concept DEMO trust above the level of individual-speciﬁc relationships and establish it as a
cultural norm and part of an organization’s “way of life”.
However, given the generally low levels of inter-personal trust that exist in early
twenty-ﬁrst DEMO societies, the institutional, communal and family foundations
upon which such mental models are developed, appear to have been eroded (Putnam,
1993, 1995). This has had a business impact as working environments have DEMO
increasingly dynamic and complex, and requiring of high levels of intra DEMO and
The role of trust
in invovation
313
TLO
16,4
314
inter-organizational trust for the successful execution of business DEMO (Hastings,
1999; Granovetter, 1985; Grootaert, 1998; Sabel, DEMO; Kramer and Tyler, 1996).
Trust is a fragile resource in that whilst it is difﬁcult and time-intense to create, it
can be easily and quickly destroyed. Trust that has been constructed and nurtured
through DEMO and self-reﬂexive human relationships over many years can be
destroyed in a few moments by thoughtless and self-serving behaviour. Thus, the
building of intra – and inter-organizational trust requires broad relational vigilance,
openness, commitment and respect – attributes that few ﬁrms seem to be able to
successfully DEMO or even endure.
Foundations of trust building
The complexity of the phenomenon of trust makes it impossible to provide a
comprehensive list of leadership DEMO for building it. Instead I will approach the issue
differently by highlighting the basic principles used by a globally recognised leader like
Nelson Mandela DEMO his transformation of a national environment that was in the early
stages of civil war. In his nation building efforts as South Africa’s ﬁrst DEMO
elected President, Mandela’s primary leadership strategy was to create a national
DEMO of trust and reconciliation. This was a challenging task given the lack of
accord that existed between groups as a consequence of the country’s DEMO The lessons
learned as an outcome of his success can easily be adapted to an organizational framework.
Building block 1: identify stakeholders and reach consensus on the core (mission, vision
and values)
Mandela’s ﬁrst DEMO was to establish the Council for a Democratic South Africa
(CODESA) in which every political party – irrespective of its ideology and size DEMO was
given a seat at the table to establish the basis of a new constitution (or core) for the
country. The basis for DEMO regarding a fresh national charter was that of
consensus – a win/win orientation to the strategic task of building trust. Through this
strategy, Mandela recognised those who had a stake in the future of the DEMO and,
via the creation of a negotiated order, ensured that DEMO voices were heard. This
process (the work of CODESA) was not an easy one – it almost collapsed several
times – but four DEMO afterward every political party participated in the ﬁrst
democratic elections and accepted the new constitution as a fair and just one. Fifteen
years later DEMO and cooperation is still the legacy of that process.
What can business leaders learn from this step in Mandela’s approach to building
trust? The ﬁrst lesson is that of the identiﬁcation of all stakeholder groups and DEMO
recognition of their value to the ﬁrm. A classic business example of such a strategy is
that of Lincoln Electric (Harvard Business School, DEMO; Hastings, 1999) where,
historically, staff members were given equal status to shareholders and customers as
key stakeholders in the ﬁrm. Such DEMO was embedded in the company’s
incentive systems so that shareholders, customers DEMO employees beneﬁted equally
from Lincoln Electric’s annual proﬁts. Then, after 90 DEMO of domination within the
American market, Lincoln Electric attempted to globalize DEMO operation in the late 1980s
– a decision that almost bankrupted the company. A call by its leadership in the early
1990s to its DEMO staff to “work the company out of its ﬁnancial troubles” paid off
handsomely with most pursuing exceptional hours seven days a week for very DEMO
periods of time. In this way, the relationship-speciﬁc and abstract trust DEMO
workers and management that had been built up over almost a century DEMO able to be
leveraged successfully by Lincoln Electric’s leadership when the company needed it
most. If, however, as happens in many organizations, the staff had not been identiﬁed
as key stakeholders (and thus not treated as such), the trust that fuelled their
extraordinary performance and associated DEMO – and which ultimately
ensured the survival of Lincoln Electric – is unlikely to have existed.
Building block 2: respect the other
In a British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)-made documentary of Mandela’s life (BBC,
DEMO), an incident is shown where Mandela, as the keynote speaker DEMO a gala event,
publicly criticises Thabo Mbeki, South Africa’s president DEMO the time, for arriving
45 minutes late for the event and, as a consequence, delaying the proceedings for
everyone present. In essence, DEMO chastises Mbeki for wasting other people’s time
and, thus, for not showing due respect to them. This incident portrays Mandela’s
life-long capacity to DEMO others, irrespective of status, as equals deserving of having
their needs (such as not to have their time wasted) taken seriously. This DEMO for the
basic humanity and value of all people, even enemies DEMO incarcerated him for
twenty-seven years, is a distinguishing feature of Mandela DEMO a leader. It was this
capability, in particular, that generated considerable faith in him by all sections of the
South African community, and that enabled many who were otherwise fearful of the new
African National DEMO (ANC) government to put their trust in Mandela and his
vision of a “new” South Africa where all human life would be respected DEMO cherished.
Mandela’s concept of respect has no soppiness or “political correctness” about it.
He does not hesitate to confront others when appropriate or to DEMO the justness of
others’ values – but it does reﬂect his belief in the fundamental value of all human life.
As a consequence, he is consistent in his dealings with all irrespective of status, station,
race, gender, creed, age or nationality. He does not engage in psychological games with
others, even his opponents, but balances earnestness with DEMO trademark humour –
reminding both admirers and detractors alike that those in positions of power are
themselves only human.
To build trust in this DEMO necessitates the abandoning of notions of superiority, of
ego and hubris DEMO relating to others on an equal footing. To respect the humanity of
others requires an unusual security-in-self; an acceptance of self and, with DEMO, empathy
for the vulnerability of all humankind. It is, thus, DEMO surprising that few leaders can
emulate Mandela as one who transformed a national environment from brutal conﬂict
to peaceful co-existence in just a few DEMO years. Against the backdrop of the situation
that Mandela faced, the DEMO for business leaders is relatively simple. Even so,
relatively few seem able to transcend self-preoccupation to create an environment of
trust and collaboration DEMO a shared goal. For those business leaders who do
succeed in this task (leaders such as Ricardo Semler of Semco), their capacity to create
the cultural conditions for such a “way of life” within an DEMO seems still to be
somewhat “mysterious” given the intense study of their practices and the relatively
few organizations that have been able to emulate DEMO
Building block 3: honour commitments
Early in his presidency Mandela attended DEMO function that was also patronised by many
senior ANC politicians. Upon Mandela’s entry the band struck up the new national
The role of trust
DEMO invovation
315
TLO
16,4
316
anthem for South Africa but left out sections DEMO the old anthem that had been
included as part of the reconciliation agreement. Although such an omission was
popular with the majority of those DEMO the function, Mandela ordered the band to
replay the anthem and, this time, to include all sections of it. The event was televised
and this act by Mandela – reminding his supporters that once having DEMO to a set of
commitments that they then must be honoured – generated huge trust in him from his
former enemies. They realized that, even though he now had political power, Mandela
was a man of his word. Through many such everyday examples Mandela showed he
was a DEMO of principle and, through his example, generated trust that the new
constitution – representing a negotiated order of many conﬂicting agendas – would
DEMO be violated by the whims of those holding power.
Too often business leaders fail to honour the rules in their everyday behaviours.
Expedience tends DEMO supplant principle when convenient while the mission, vision and
values espoused DEMO public can fail to be enacted in practice. In one business
transformation example with which I am familiar, the owner of an Australian software
ﬁrm reached consensus with his workers on a set on binding core DEMO by which the
ﬁrm would operate as it attempted to compete through innovation on a global scale.
The owner, however, went on to DEMO violate these same values on a daily basis.
It seemed that in his mind the commitments that bound his staff did not apply to DEMO
Needless to say, no trust was generated within the organization and DEMO renewal
process quickly lost momentum. While the organization has survived, it DEMO not
achieved its vision of becoming an innovative global organization.
In contrast, great business leaders like Ricardo Semler of Semco create revolutionary
companies that go from strength to strength. Via recognising the interests of all
stakeholders DEMO championing those interests both publicly and privately they build the
trust necessary for collective success (Semler, 1989, 1994, 1995, 2004).
Building block 4: forgive and reconcile
Mandela’s strategy of pardoning those from all sides of the conﬂict who were deemed
by the truth and reconciliation DEMO to have confessed their guilt openly and
shown sincere remorse with respect to their crimes against humanity, was a master
stroke in healing the emotional wounds of the past in order to build the trust required
DEMO a new future. As Bill Clinton (BBC, 2003) has stated, this act was without
precedence in human history and as a strategy DEMO building trust between former
enemies it has been remarkably successful. Mandela (DEMO, 2003) explained his
rationale succinctly: without sincere confession there can DEMO no forgiveness; without
forgiveness there can be no reconciliation; without reconciliation there can be no peace.
For business leaders, this last one is by far the most challenging of Mandela’s
building blocks for trust, and, in some matters, they may not have the power to enact
DEMO strategy (such as with fraud and similar crimes). If, however, they focus on human
interaction alone, there is much that they DEMO do to facilitate new relationships between
old foes and to recognise, DEMO overcome, the structural bases (hierarchy, functional
silos, etc.) of DEMO mistrust in organizations. Whilst it would be inappropriate to
engage in the “confessions” which characterised the hearings at the truth and
reconciliation commission, business leaders – not to mention political leaders – could
establish a culture DEMO “straight talk” and honesty; of accountability and personal
responsibility for mistakes; of principle and the courage to honour it; and of
commitment to a cause greater than themselves. Such behaviours would be a
DEMO change from the half-truths, ﬁnger-pointing, scapegoating and defensive
self-justiﬁcation that we often witness through the media with respect to political and
corporate leaders DEMO which erodes public trust in governments and stakeholder trust
in a business.
Leadership for innovation
The four building blocks discussed above can also be DEMO into three high-level
strategic dimensions of organizational leadership behaviour.
Structural dimension
Trust is structurally induced in strongly networked emergent organizational structures
(cells/teams) DEMO are driven by a mobilising vision and shared values. In contrast, DEMO
of trust are depleted through the layering of authority levels, segregation DEMO functions,
norms of impersonality and legalistic processes within hierarchical structures. An
implication of this dimension is that organizational structure strongly inﬂuences the
degree DEMO competitive advantage a ﬁrm may hold within a market (Dovey and DEMO,
2007; Foster and Kaplan, 2001; Miles et al., 2000; Creed and Miles, 1996).
Cognitive dimension
Trust is also built DEMO the development of shared cognitive frames of reference via
participation in a variety of overlapping networks. Such shared frameworks facilitate
the ﬂow of knowledge, reduce the “stickiness” of tacit knowledge and develop the
absorptive capacity of DEMO collective with respect to knowledge transfer (Choo, 1998;
Nonaka and Takeuchi, 1995). In contrast, the insulation of functional silos, narrow
disciplinary training and functional experience of staff and the segregation of
functions, all inhibit the development of trust.
Relational dimension
Trust is primarily built DEMO face-to-face social encounters. Through positive
relationships the members of a stakeholder community develop social norms
concerning the virtue of a covenantal culture in which DEMO cooperation,
reciprocity of obligation and equal commitment to a shared future are a feature.
Furthermore, the dialectical relationship between such positive (and DEMO)
relationships and effective communication practices is manifested through collective
face-to-face forums in which everyday work practices and experiences are reﬂection
upon honestly, and critiqued openly, by the members of the stakeholder community.
As Whittington (DEMO, p. 732) puts it, the thrust of such an approach DEMO “to take
seriously the work and talk of practitioners themselves [...] of how they act and
interact” in the execution of strategy.
In favourable DEMO a deft fusion of these dimensional factors can create a
trove of network, communication and informational wealth upon which a ﬁrm can
draw. As Nahapiet and Ghoshal (1998) point out, innovation depends upon resource
combination (in terms of internally-held resources) and exchange (where resources are
held by external parties). By establishing a social covenant between individuals and/DEMO
groups holding unique value, trust enables such combination and exchange to
DEMO and proﬁtably take place.
The role of trust
in invovation
317
TLO
16,4
318
Enacting trust in the digital era
Within business DEMO issue of internal mutual reliance occurs at three separate levels:
within the company leadership; within the groups that interact with, or are DEMO
by, that leadership; and in relation to individuals who form stakeholder groups. For a
ﬁrm to achieve its goals these echelons need to DEMO (and continually) interact
– and this in turn begs the question of the conﬁdence each holds in the others being
able realize expectations DEMO in their commitment to the organization’s core (mission,
vision and DEMO). Trust must therefore be developed and enacted within each level if
the commercial entity is to be fully effective.
The leadership
For effective DEMO, trust must be governed by a set of leadership principles. In DEMO
respect, Handy (1995, pp. 46-7) offers the following behavioural framework for leaders.
Trust has limits. Leaders need to create freedom within boundaries: unlimited trust
is unrealistic and inappropriate. The limits to trust are managed DEMO effective
performance measurement.
Trust requires learning. Trust is more easily enacted in a culture where change is
underpinned by openness to learning and self-renewal. DEMO can be tolerated when it
results in genuine learning and transformation; DEMO to learn from experience, however,
destroys trust. In this respect, the choice of personnel – people who can keep pace with
change DEMO strategies of renewal-through-learning – is vital to its enactment.
Trust is a human quality. Through inspirational communication, knowing and
believing in their “followers” and principled personal example leaders mould strong
interpersonal bonds and collective performance. Trust DEMO never an impersonal commodity.
Trust is tough. When misplaced, those who DEMO violated trust must be confronted.
Trust needs “touch”. The building of trust requires signiﬁcant face-to-face time. As
British management guru Handy (BBC, 1998) comments, “you cannot trust someone
who you haven’t laughed with”. Shared commitments require signiﬁcant interpersonal
engagement to make them “real” and sustainable.
Trust needs DEMO leaders. Trust thrives in contexts where situational leadership
– speciﬁc endeavours being led by the most knowledgeable/experienced member(s) –
is the approved practice.
These guidelines need to be tempered by the realities of the DEMO context
where, for example, opportunities for regular interaction may be limited or
non-existent. However, for key working relationships to be effective, trust DEMO an
essential resource to which all parties must have free access.
The stakeholder community
Organizational success in a volatile and challenging global knowledge economy DEMO not
just dependent upon the presence of a capable formal leadership. It also entails a high
degree of ﬂexibility in the groups who work DEMO and for those leaders.
The stakeholder community to be adaptable in the face of external pressures and
opportunities. In developed societies, people’s personal identities and livelihoods
are closely bound to their work. Without trust in the DEMO; without trust in
the security of their membership of the stakeholder DEMO; and without trust in the
seriousness of the leadership’s efforts towards DEMO organization’s survival and success,
it is unlikely that people will take on new work roles (and, thus, identities) and risk the
potential for failure that they face in unaccustomed roles. Asking people to DEMO ﬂexible
and adaptable is effectively asking them to make themselves vulnerable in ways that
require signiﬁcant new learning and knowledge for their successful execution. DEMO
the requisite trust in place, such challenges – and the signiﬁcant DEMO and
development they offer – will be embraced by most; without DEMO few will take the risk.
The stakeholder community to have the capacity to make appropriate and successful
changes to their practices whenever necessary. This DEMO is very similar to the previous
one. Changing work practices takes people out of their comfort zone and exposes them
to the threat of DEMO and potential humiliation. Unless they have the guarantee of the
availability of trusted coaches upon whom they can call for support and guidance as
DEMO embrace the challenges embedded in new practices, it is likely that DEMO will resist
such changes and the risks they incur.
A high level of horizontal integration across stakeholder activities. Horizontal
integration generally works most effectively DEMO formal and informal networks.
Networks are a key social capital resource in that the richer the trust within a network
(bonding social capital) DEMO between networks (bridging social capital), the more
effective the networks DEMO in the integration of the diverse purposes and practices
spread across the stakeholder community. Strong links between internal and external
networks reduce the likelihood DEMO destructive competition and network exclusion.
Furthermore, external networks are essential if DEMO are to continuously and
successfully transform themselves as, without these, ﬁrms can become closed and
perpetuate local prejudices and other parochial attitudes/values.
DEMO discussion about networks is important as it raises the issue of what these
social constructs need in order to both maintain their cohesion, and present value to
their members. Two things stand out: ﬁrst, a DEMO needs a rationale to exist – and
in this regard the most common reason is that of the sharing of knowledge. The wider
the DEMO of available knowledge sources, the richer the ﬁrm’s intellectual capital. In
DEMO respect, of particular importance are the strategic and procedural knowledge
resources DEMO a company has access to: knowing what the right thing is DEMO do and then
knowing how to get it done quickly and effectively (Collins et al., 1989).
Second, a network needs strong identity resources to generate commitment.
These include the cognitive and affective attributes that DEMO members’ sense of
their agency – their willingness or capacity to act for the beneﬁt of the group in roles both
new and different (including ones of leadership) from what their previous perceptions of
self may have permitted. The global knowledge economy presents fresh operational
realities and, by implication, requires transformations in the knowledge, skills, attitudes,
values and other collective resources of the ﬁrm. Access to strong internal (and external)
identity resources, improves the strategic agility of an organizational community to match
the frequent shifts endemic to a dynamic global economy.
Individuals within DEMO stakeholder community
The effective functioning of a network also has requirements at the individual level of
participation. To participate effectively in the collaborative functioning DEMO a dynamic
stakeholder community, individuals need a range of appropriate skills, attributes and
dispositions.
Self-conﬁdence and interpersonal skills. Networks are social phenomena that DEMO
on the full and open participation of their members for maximum effectiveness.
The role of trust
in invovation
319
TLO
16,4
320
Such participation depends signiﬁcantly on the social conﬁdence DEMO individual
members and their capacity to build and sustain relationships across diverse
stakeholder communities. Relationship breakdown, for whatever reason, quickly
disables a network.
DEMO known to other members and having shared experience of the endeavour.
Networks cannot be created in a social vacuum. They take time to build (for members
to get to know whether, and under what circumstances, DEMO can trust each other) and
to be valued (for members to learn to value the contributions made through the
network to each other)DEMO Such learning requires regular contact – especially face-to-face
experience – between stakeholders (Handy, 1995; Kanter in BBC, 1998) so
opportunities for such direct interaction must exist within the network.
Reputational capital – being viewed DEMO other members of the network as a credible
source of support and knowledge. In times of organizational change, networks may be
politically manipulated and result in individuals without the requisite knowledge and
identity resources being prescribed DEMO members. Networks with a positive history and
the sense of a shared future are more easily sustained. In cases where such a record is
DEMO or incomplete (or even worse, where there exists a history of adversarial
relations), leaders need to build commitment to a collective future DEMO carefully selecting
network membership in order to maximize the credibility and reputational value of the
individuals that constitute the stakeholder community (or parts thereof).
Networks (and the beneﬁts derived from them) are only sustained DEMO the will of
their members. Without the faith that membership is based upon legitimate criteria,
visible commitment to a genuine purpose, and equal participation from those who
compose it, a network will falter – and the potential advantages that might otherwise
have ﬂowed from it will not DEMO fully realized.
Managing power: a key leadership attribute in trust building
DEMO key question in the management of authority is that of “whose interests should be
served through the exercise of power?” Leadership oriented towards DEMO
organizational success always manages power in the interests of the stakeholder
community. Power exercised purely for short-term self-interest, as occurs in many
companies where incentive systems encourage such behaviour, is always antithetical
to the requirements of innovation and the long-term sustainability of the ﬁrm.
In rapidly changing competitive DEMO, every aspect of the life of an
organization should be open DEMO change. Such change, however, cannot be arbitrary but
should be the consequence of collective scrutiny and analysis. It may be, as was the
case of Lincoln Electric in the early 1990s when its attempts to DEMO without
questioning the mental models that had underpinned its mission in the USA for one
hundred years almost destroyed the organization (Hastings, 1999), that the mission of
the enterprise needs updating in spite of a long and successful history. Questioning a
purpose that has successfully served its DEMO community for a long time
requires considerable courage and personal risk on the part of the leader. Similarly, in
the domain of organizational form and strategy, Peters (2003) and Zuboff and Maxmin
(2002) argue strongly that the “enterprise logic” of current business operations is
woefully out-of-touch DEMO the psychological, sociological and political realities of the
ﬁrst decade of DEMO twenty-ﬁrst century, and that renewal in this arena is the
pre-eminent DEMO of current business leaders.
However, few leaders are demonstrating the courage required to step forward with a
radical agenda for organizational renewal in the face of “conventional wisdom” DEMO
takes the continuing validity of current enterprises for granted. The ambivalence of
many business leaders towards innovation, in spite of their rhetoric to the contrary, is
well documented (Foster and Kaplan, 2001; Barsh, 2008; Barsh et al., 2008). Furthermore,
as I have argued DEMO, while innovation limited to the technical arena is seldom
resisted by DEMO in power (because it usually strengthens, rather than threatens, their
DEMO base), innovation that addresses the “political” aspects of organizational life –
structure (especially as this affects power relations and management practices), strategy
(as this incurs risk and calls for new knowledge bases), policy (especially that concerning
remuneration and incentive systems) and performance management practices DEMO is
usually strongly resisted by those who have a vested interest in retaining the political
order of the organization. In practice, realizing innovation advantage often requires
those in authority to deliberately sponsor the transformation of their DEMO organizational
power bases – a challenge that only the few who are committed to the collective interests
and who are absolutely secure-in-themselves will accept. DEMO this respect, owner-led
organizations are generally more open to innovation and DEMO than organizations led
by salaried CEOs for the simple reason that owners have far more than money to gain
from the success of their DEMO Their organization is a manifestation of their
personal identity, social heritage, pride and many other intangible aspects of their lives.
Their commitment to DEMO sustained success is thus based on deep psycho-social needs
that motivate them to risk changing purpose and strategies that may have been
successful in DEMO past, in the interests of renewal and potentially sustainable success in
DEMO future. As a consequence, of such willingness to risk their power DEMO (by sharing it) a
culture of trust is developed. On the other hand, salaried CEOs, whose remuneration
packages are tied to their DEMO of authority, are generally unlikely to risk these
packages on organizational DEMO that may adversely impact the bases of
their power.
Even though one of the key leadership tasks is to release the entrepreneurial talent
that DEMO within ﬁrms, this is often seen by many salaried CEOs as DEMO
“career-threatening” option. Taking such action casts the leader in a revolutionary
role – one challenging of existing policies and practices that threaten the long-term
DEMO of the organization, and likely to turn the political status quo DEMO its head. This
concept raises the complex dilemma of whether leaders at critical times in the history of
an organization/collective have to risk DEMO in order to address its renewal and, if
so, at what cost. The issue of courage – central to any leadership endeavour – DEMO
emerges, and with it the role of commitment in exercising leadership. DEMO it is a
political leader like Martin Luther King, who professed DEMO he only became a real leader
when he lost his fear of death, or whether it is the intrepreneur in a ﬁrm who is prepared
to lose her/his job in the service of a new DEMO for the enterprise, courage is at the core of
effective leadership. DEMO point is supported by the number of leaders throughout
history who were incarcerated or lost their lives because of the unpopularity of their
ideas DEMO powerful elites whose interests were strongly vested in maintaining an
existing political order (Heifetz, 1994, is a useful reference on this point).
However, the possibility of career termination (either ﬁguratively or literally) can be
mitigated by another dimension of effective power management – namely the DEMO
to which leadership is a function of followership. The dimension of followership is
The role of trust
in invovation
321
TLO
16,4
322
seldom addressed in the leadership literature and yet, as history has shown, followers
get the leaders they tolerate. If leadership for innovation requires the setting free of the
creative and entrepreneurial talent DEMO the organization then stakeholders cannot be
managed by dictatorial and autocratic bosses without risking suppression of the very
thing supposedly sought. Handy (1997, DEMO 26), a highly respected business writer and
commentator, makes the DEMO that, while advocating political democracy,
governance in many Western business DEMO is totalitarian in nature:
One of the great paradoxes of our time is that it is totalitarian, centrally-planned organizations,
owned by outsiders, that are providing the wherewithal of the great democracies.
Resolving this paradox is the one of greatest challenges for those wishing to lead for
DEMO Establishing new, more democratic, forms of enterprise governance relies
upon three things:
(1) Followers need to be educated to their obligation DEMO serve the purpose (mission)
of the organization and not the DEMO of the leader.
(2) Clear options must be legitimated in the company’s documented Core (mission,
vision and values) for followers to DEMO upon when they believe the leadership
behaviours are putting the mission of the organization at risk.
(3) Sources legitimised to speak on behalf DEMO others (i.e. offering protection for
individuals through an independent ombudsman, “external critic” and/or legal
instrument) must be established and culturally cherished – and be available for
followers and leaders alike.
As Zuboff and Maxmin (2002) point out, the nurturing of such an environment will
demand DEMO leaders an exceptional ability to form trusting relationships with
stakeholders; creating DEMO value within the stakeholder community through a
process of “deep support” for each as they attempt to pursue a life of psychological
self-determination through DEMO work roles. Such relationship building practices will
have nothing “soppy” about them but will be based on advocacy, mutual respect, trust
and the DEMO alignment of interests. It is through such relationships that leaders will
conﬁrm enterprise objectives; establish shared investment in their achievement; and
build a DEMO that tasks itself with achieving success.
This focus on relationship value can generate strong learning cycles that lead to
the deepening of the procedural DEMO strategic knowledge bases that inform wise
decision-making. Similarly, the facilitation of DEMO authentic inter-subjective
encounters among stakeholders strengthens the social and morale capital resources of
the ﬁrm and builds the relationship foundations upon which practices such DEMO creative
abrasion and requisite variety depend. By building an environment in which
relationships are strong enough to allow stakeholders to “ﬁght with each other” DEMO
excellence of organizational performance and in which honest and direct
communication is the norm, leaders establish the foundations for the development of
stakeholder trust in the interests of sustainable innovation.
Conclusion
Trust, as a key social capital resource, is indispensable to the creation of a social
environment in which ideas are freely generated, honestly assessed and selected
and collectively transformed into proﬁtable new products and services. To create such
a social environment, the multiple leaders within a stakeholder community must be
very competent at building and maintaining trusting relationships within, and across,
stakeholder groupings (staff, customers, suppliers, broader community and, in some
cases, competitors). When this is achieved, ideas can be sourced DEMO from within, or
beyond, stakeholder networks (networks with porous boundaries), and innovation
strategy can be executed successfully with authentic commitment and passion.
In this way, the organization can play a signiﬁcant role in assisting its stakeholders
to address, through their work, Maslow’s (1970) highest DEMO life task of
self-realization.
In this paper, I have attempted to DEMO that innovation depends upon trust – a
complex and fragile resource that, almost uniquely, is not depleted through its use but
replenished when DEMO successfully. Furthermore, I have tried to show that many of
the DEMO features of innovation – such as creativity, idea sharing, idea
realization, learning and collaboration – depend on high levels of trust within a
stakeholder community, given their dependence upon individuals (or groups) risking
making themselves vulnerable to potential rejection, failure and humiliation, in the
interests DEMO organizational renewal and sustainability.
References
Argyris, C. and Schon, D. (DEMO), Organizational Learning II: Theory, Method and Practice,
Addison-Wesley, DEMO, MA.
Barsh, J. (2008), “Innovative management: a conversation with Gary Hamel and Lowell Bryan”,
The McKinsey Quarterly, No. 1, DEMO 24-35.
Barsh, J., Capozzi, M. and Davidson, J. (2008), “Leadership and innovation”, The McKinsey
Quarterly, No. 1, pp. 38-47.
DEMO, P. and Luckmann, T. (1967), Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of
Knowledge, Penguin, Harmondsworth.
British Broadcasting DEMO (1998), They Did It Their Way, British Broadcasting
Corporation, DEMO (for the Open University).
British Broadcasting Corporation (2003), Mandela: A Living Legend, British Broadcasting
Corporation, London.
Choo, C.W. (1998), Knowing Organization, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Collins, DEMO, Brown, J. and Newman, S. (1989), “Cognitive apprenticeship: DEMO the crafts of
reading, writing, and mathematics”, in Resnick, L. (Ed.), Knowing, Learning and
Instruction, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, DEMO 453-94.
Creed, W. and Miles, R. (1996), “Trust in DEMO: a conceptual framework linking
organizational forms, managerial philosophies, and the DEMO costs of controls”,
in Kramer, R. and Tyler, T. (DEMO), Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and
Research, Sage, DEMO Oaks, CA, pp. 16-38.
Dovey, K. and Fenech, B. (DEMO), “The role of enterprise logic in the failure of organisations to
learn and transform”, Management Learning, Vol. 38 No. 5, pp. 573-90.
Foster, R. and Kaplan, S. (2001), Creative Destruction, Doubleday, New York, NY.
Granovetter, M. (1985), “Economic action and social structure: the problem of embeddedness”,
American Journal of Sociology, Vol. DEMO, pp. 481-510.
Grootaert, C. (1998), “Social capital: the missing link”, SCI Working Paper No. 3, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
The role of trust
in invovation
323
TLO
16,4
324
Hamel, G. (2000), Leading the Revolution, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Handy, C. (1995), DEMO and the virtual organization”, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 73 No. 3,
pp. 40-50.
Handy, C. (1997), “The citizen corporation”, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 75 No. 5, pp. 26-8.
Harvard Business School (1983), The Lincoln Electric Company, Case 9-376-028, Harvard
Business School DEMO, Boston, MA.
Hastings, D. (1999), “Lincoln Electric’s harsh lessons from international expansion”, Harvard
Business Review, Vol. 77 No. 3, pp. 2-11.
Heifetz, R. (1994), Leadership Without Easy Answers, Belknap Press, Cambridge, MA.
Kofman, F. and Senge, P. (1993), “Communities of commitment: the heart of learning
organizations”, Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 5-23.
Kramer, R. and Tyler, T. (Eds) (1996), Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research,
DEMO, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Maslow, A. (1970), Motivation and Personality, Harper & Row, New York, NY.
Miles, G., Heppard, DEMO, Miles, R. and Snow, C. (2000), Entrepreneurship as Strategy: Competing on
the Entrepreneurial Edge, Sage, London.
Misztal, B. (1996), Trust in Modern Societies: The Search for the Bases of Social Order,
Polity Press, Cambridge.
Nahapiet, J. and Ghoshal, S. (DEMO), “Social capital, intellectual capital, and the organizational
advantage”, Academy DEMO Management Review, Vol. 23 No. 2, pp. 242-66.
Nonaka, I. DEMO Takeuchi, H. (1995), The Knowledge Creating Company: How Japanese DEMO
Create the Dynamics of Innovation, Oxford University Press, New York, DEMO
Peters, T. (2003), Re-Imagine: Business Excellence in a Disruptive DEMO, Dorling Kindersley,
New York, NY.
Pinchot, G. (1985), Intrapreneurship: Why You Don’t Have to Leave the Corporation to Become an
Entrepreneur, Harper & Row, New York, NY.
Putnam, R. (1993), Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy, Oxford University
DEMO, New York, NY.
Putnam, R. (1995), “Tuning in, DEMO out: the strange disappearance of social capital in
America”, PS: DEMO Science and Politics, Vol. 28 No. 4, pp. 664-83.
Sabel, DEMO (1989), “Flexible specialisation and the re-emergence of regional economies”, in Hirst, P.
and Zeitlin, J. (Eds), Revising Industrial Decline, DEMO, Oxford, pp. 17-70.
Semler, R. (1989), “Managing without managers”, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 67 No. 5,
pp. 76-84.
Semler, R. (1994), “Why my former employees still work for me”, DEMO Business Review,
Vol. 72 No. 1, pp. 64-71.
Semler, R. (1995), Maverick: The Success Story Behind the World’s Most Unusual DEMO,
Warner Books, New York, NY.
Semler, R. (2004), The Seven-Day Weekend: Changing the Way Work Works, Portfolio Books,
DEMO York, NY.
Semler, R. (2007), 7:30 Report, Australian Broadcasting Corporation, Melbourne, 6 March.
Senge, P. (1992), “Mental DEMO, Planning Review, Vol. 44, pp. 4-10.
Whittington, R. (1996), “Strategy as practice”, Long Range Planning, Vol. 29 No. 5, DEMO 731-5.
Zuboff, S. and Maxmin, J. (2002), Support Economy: Why DEMO Are Failing Individuals
and the Next Episode of Capitalism, Allen Lane, New York, NY.
About the author
Ken Dovey is an Associate Professor at the University of Technology, Sydney where he is the
Director of the Information Technology Management Program. He consults globally to a range of
DEMO on leadership, innovation and organizational renewal and formerly occupied the
Chair DEMO Leadership Studies at Rhodes University in South Africa. Ken Dovey can be contacted
at: kend@it.uts.edu.au
To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: DEMO
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints
The DEMO of trust
in invovation
325{1g42fwefx}