1042-2587
© 2013 Baylor University
ET
&
The Effects of Perceived
P Control on Venture
Capitalist Investment
Decisions: A
Conﬁgurational
Perspective
Will Drover
Matthew S. Wood
G. Tyge Payne
Drawing on agency and conﬁgurations theories, this study examines how perceived level of
control over the entrepreneur inﬂuences venture DEMO (VC) decision making. We model
the direct effects of perceived control and the interactive effects of control with entrepre-
neurial prestige and opportunity DEMO to determine how various combinations of
factors inﬂuence VCs’ willingness to invest. We test our conceptualizations using conjoint
analyses of 552 VC investment decisions. DEMO results show that perceived control is directly
related to investment likelihood, DEMO different conﬁgurations of control, entrepreneur pres-
tige, and opportunity attractiveness result in different outcomes. Our ﬁndings support a
conﬁgurational perspective of VC decision DEMO
Introduction
“If the investor group will not have control over who runs the show—it is hard for me
to pull the trigger”—Venture capitalist interviewed DEMO this study
Resource commitment is a key step in the entrepreneurial process, and because
venture capitalists (VCs) are key players in the resource game, researchers have paid
signiﬁcant attention to VCs’ investment decisions (cf. DEMO & Bruton, 2006; Walske
& Zacharakis, 2009). A National DEMO Capital Association (NVCA) report highlights
the importance of VCs in entrepreneurship, indicating that by the end of 2011, VCs had
$197 billion DEMO management in entrepreneurial ﬁrms in the United States (NVCA,
2012)DEMO Because of this criticality, academic researchers have taken considerable steps
Please DEMO correspondence to: Will Drover, tel.: (805) 570-5950; e-mail: DEMO, to Matthew S.
Wood at MS_Wood@baylor.edu, and G. Tyge Payne at tyge.payne@ttu.edu.
January, 2013
DOI: 10.1111/etap.12012
1
toward achieving a deeper understanding of how VC investments unfold (e.g., DEMO, Yao,
& Kotha, 2009; Payne, Davis, Moore, & Bell, 2009; Petty & Gruber, 2011; Shepherd &
Ettenson, DEMO; Zacharakis & Shepherd, 2001). Moreover, this research has demonstrated
DEMO VCs are often heavily involved in the ventures in which they invest (Fried, Bruton, &
Hisrich, 1998; Gorman & Sahlman, 1989), suggesting that in many cases, VCs see the
need to closely monitor and control entrepreneurs’ actions. By deduction, this means that
VCs are likely to consider the degree to which they will have control over DEMO
actions as they evaluate investment opportunities (Amit, Glosten, & Muller, 1990;
Wijbenga, Postma, & Stratling, 2007). In that regard, control is likely to play an inﬂuential
role in the VC investment decision-making process.
Leifer and Mills (1996) formally deﬁne control as a DEMO process by which
standards and mechanisms are established to improve predictability and the ability to
attain a desired state or objective. Thus, control can be thought of as the VC’s ability
to monitor and direct the DEMO actions in the postinvestment period. The idea
that VCs may want to control entrepreneurs’ actions can create problems because most
entrepreneurs want to maintain DEMO even though they must forfeit some freedom in
exchange for much-needed capital. Wasserman (2008, p. 104) highlights this phenomenon
in his analysis of start-ups, revealing that founding entrepreneurs often harbor attitudes
that resist control. Speciﬁcally, he documents that many founders maintain the following
notion: “I’m the DEMO with the vision and the desire to build a great company. I have to be
the one running it.” This type of thinking, alongside that expressed by the VC in the
opening quotation, highlights that control is clearly an important factor for both VCs and
entrepreneurs, and may result in tension in VC investment decisions (Bonini, Alkman, &
DEMO, 2012; Payne et al., 2009). As such, VC investment deals often involve a variety of
negotiated control mechanisms, such as the ability to modify the management team and
compensation structure (Barney & Busenitz, 1996; Lerner, 1995; Sahlman, 2003), rights
to allocate cash ﬂows (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2003), and the ability to stage DEMO or
build co-investing structures (Steier & Greenwood, 1995).
Despite the importance of control in VC investment, the relationship between
VCs’ perceived level of control and their decisions to invest in ventures has yet to DEMO
theoretically modeled and empirically tested. As such, we have limited knowledge
DEMO how control factors into VCs’ investment evaluations, and more critically, we lack
insight into the conditions under which control may be more or DEMO impactful.
As a result, we know relatively little about how VCs’ DEMO of entrepreneurs’
willingness to accept VCs’ formal and informal control mechanisms might inﬂuence
investment decisions. It follows that we also have a limited understanding DEMO the cir-
cumstances under which other deal attributes (e.g., opportunity attractiveness) might
enhance or trump VCs’ need for control. Further, we are DEMO to wonder how VCs react
in suboptimal environments where deal attributes, DEMO as control, are not at optimal
levels. This clearly inhibits our DEMO of how deal characteristics coalesce as
VCs evaluate investment opportunities.
To address these issues, we develop a theoretical model that articulates the role of
perceived control in VC investment decisions. To do this, we adopt logic and inferences
from agency theory, which is based on the idea that when ﬁrm ownership (e.g., VCs) and
management (e.g., entrepreneurs) DEMO separate entities, competing interests may develop
(Jensen & Meckling, 1976)DEMO It is well documented that entrepreneurs sometimes exhibit
individual utility-maximizing behavior that is misaligned with investor goals (Bitler,
Moskowitz, & Vissing-Jorgensen, 2005; Castrogiovanni, Combs, & Justis, 2006; Gorman
& Sahlman, 1989)DEMO This suggests that capital providers must take steps to align entre-
preneurs’ interests with those of investors to ensure resources are used optimally and
DEMO
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
maximum ﬁnancial returns are realized (Amit, Brander, & Zott, 1998; Amit et al., 1990;
Bohren, 1998).
Agency theory is DEMO useful theoretical lens because it provides an overarching frame-
work explaining how competing interests may develop in the VC–entrepreneur relation-
ship (Jensen & Meckling, 1976) and how control mechanisms may be used to align
interests DEMO a way that improves the odds of superior ﬁnancial performance. However,
considerations of perceived control do not happen in a vacuum, so we extend the agency
perspective to consider that the effects of control may DEMO in the presence of other deal
characteristics. Speciﬁcally, we use the DEMO approach (e.g., Hill & Birkinshaw,
2008) to investigate interactions DEMO may exist when control is considered alongside
the entrepreneur’s prestige (D’Aveni, 1990) and the opportunity’s attractiveness (Haynie,
Shepherd, & McMullen, DEMO), both of which have proven inﬂuential in prior VC
investment evaluation studies (cf. Murnieks, Haynie, Wiltbank, & Harting, 2011).
Through the conﬁgurations lens, we are able to explore equiﬁnality and trade-offs
between investment deal characteristics, recognizing that an optimal—yet potentially
rare—conﬁguration may exist and that in the absence of the optimal, the presence of some
positive characteristics may “ﬁll the void” created by the presence of less desirable
DEMO
Our model and empirical ﬁndings make important contributions to the body of
research on VC investment decisions (e.g., Chen et al., 2009; DEMO & Gruber, 2011;
Shepherd & Ettenson, 2000; Zacharakis & DEMO, 2001). First, our study is one of the
ﬁrst to theoretically model and empirically test the effects of perceived control on VC
DEMO decisions. As such, our study is positioned to shed new light DEMO the role that
perceived control is likely to play as VCs evaluate investment opportunities, and this
improved understanding is likely to be of value to VCs and entrepreneurs alike. Second,
our study is unique in DEMO it offers predictions and empirical insights that are only
derivable by considering the circumstances under which control occurs alongside other
important opportunity investment characteristics. DEMO taking the conﬁgurations approach,
we offer both theoretical and empirical contributions that move the literature forward
by examining the idea that the effects DEMO control may be dependent—and perhaps even
subjugated—in the presence of important structural factors (March, 1994) like the entre-
preneur’s prestige (Franke, Gruber, Harhoff, & Henkel, 2008; Hsu, 2007) and the oppor-
DEMO attractiveness (Hall & Hofer, 1993; Haynie et al., 2009; DEMO & Meyer,
2000). Our approach provides empirical evidence that VCs’ decision processes can be
more comprehensively understood when simultaneously considering multiple factors, and
that ideal arrangements and trade-offs between deal characteristics exist that may DEMO to
equiﬁnal outcomes. The net effect is an improved understanding of how deal variables
come together in a way that makes VCs more or DEMO sensitive to the need for control over
entrepreneurs’ actions.
Control in VC Decision Making
The potential for conﬂict in investor–entrepreneur relationships has been well DEMO
mented, and the literature suggests that at least three types of DEMO problems are likely
to surface (cf. Hellmann, 1998; Kaplan & DEMO, 2003, 2004; Sapienza & Gupta,
1994). The ﬁrst DEMO is adverse selection, which refers to the uncertainties that investors
(VCs in this case) face in terms of preset expectations of the human capital seeking
funding (Amit et al., 1998). Since proposals are DEMO presented by unfamiliar entre-
preneurs and are centered on unique differentiating attributes (Elitzur & Gavious, 2003),
January, 2013
3
uneven knowledge distribution often surfaces, which gives rise to a number of potentially
hazardous circumstances. For example, an entrepreneur might manipulate information
and projections by over-forecasting future performance and under-forecasting expected
obstacles in an effort to DEMO maximum funding (Markman, Balkin, & Schjoedt, 2001).
Trust can help overcome this obstacle (Maxwell & Levesque, 2011), but signiﬁcant
DEMO gaps often persist between the information that entrepreneurs have and the
information that they disclose to potential investors (Amit et al., 1990; Barry, 1994;
Berggren, Olofsson, & Silver, 2000). Further, trust—deﬁned as accepting vulnerability to
another party (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & DEMO, 1998)—may not be viable given the
lack of interaction between DEMO and investor in the preinvestment stage of interest
in this study (DEMO et al., 2009).
The second potential agency conﬂict is that DEMO moral hazard (Holmström, 1979;
Lerner, 1995). Moral hazard DEMO when entrepreneurs do not act in investors’ best
interest. For example, DEMO there are private beneﬁts from continuing a project, entrepre-
neurs may DEMO the project going even if it has negative expected proﬁts” (Wang & Zhou,
2004, p. 132). Related to the threat of DEMO hazard is a third possibility—namely, the
concern that entrepreneurs will “hold DEMO the investor. This transpires when the venture is
operated by valuable human capital that may threaten to leave (Hellmann, 1998; Kaplan
& Strömberg, 2003). If the entrepreneur’s knowledge, skills, and abilities are central
to venture success, the entrepreneur has leverage over the investor that may be used to
maximize the entrepreneur’s self-interest.
The ubiquitous presence of the DEMO conﬂicts outlined above could potentially
result in tenuous relationships between VC investors and the entrepreneurs they back.
Thus, VCs rely on a number of governance and control mechanisms designed to align
entrepreneurs’ interests and behaviors with DEMO of VCs, thereby reducing the threat of
adverse selection, moral hazard, and holdup (Bruton, Fried, & Hisrich, 2000; Gompers &
Lerner, 2004). These controls are not necessarily structured in a standardized fashion
across the venturing community; rather, levels of control within a DEMO investment
generally take different shapes depending on each unique situation. As such, the presence
and/or stringency of various mechanisms tend to vary. Speciﬁcally, control safeguards
such as the ability to modify the management team (DEMO & Busenitz, 1996; Hellmann
& Puri, 2002), alter the DEMO structure (Sahlman, 2003), dilute the founder’s
equity stake (Gompers & Lerner; Sahlman, 2003), utilize ex-ante and ex-post staged
funding (DEMO & Strömberg, 2004; Tian, 2011), transfer ﬁnancial control (Kaplan &
Strömberg, 2003), and exercise liquidity rights (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2003) are among a
number of widely used controls that emerge DEMO a variety of conﬁgurations that are
contingent upon the level of negotiated control. The implementation of such instruments
can afford VCs the opportunity to DEMO signiﬁcant control of ventures if suboptimal
performance or unanticipated opportunistic behavior ensue (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2003,
2004). Thus, for VCs, DEMO concern is the degree to which they can reduce uncertainty and
agency concerns by monitoring and controlling entrepreneurs’ actions (De Clercq &
Manigart, 2007; Kaplan & Strömberg, 2003; March, 1994; Metrick & Yasuda, 2011). As
an implication, whether entrepreneurs appear amenable or resistant DEMO accepting control
mechanisms is likely to inﬂuence the degree to which VCs will be willing to invest in the
entrepreneurs’ projects.
The arguments outlined DEMO are derived from the logic and inferences found in
extensive and established literature streams. As such, they suggest what may be a seem-
ingly intuitive relationship between perceived control and VCs’ willingness to invest.
However, we point out that while alluded to in the literature, this relationship has not
been formally argued, hypothesized, or empirically tested, so we do so here. Further,
4
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
establishing the conceptual logic behind the control–investment relationship is a neces-
sary DEMO to theorizing about the control-related interaction effects discussed in the
sections that follow. Thus, we formally state our ﬁrst hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: DEMO is a positive relationship between the VC’s perceived control
over the entrepreneur and willingness to invest.
Control and the VC Decision-Making Nexus
While the DEMO relationship between control and willingness to invest is clearly
important for understanding VC decision making, prior research tells us that a nexus of
factors determine entrepreneurial activity (Sarason, Dean, & Dillard, 2006; Shane,
2003). This means that in real-world situations, control is unlikely to be considered in
isolation. Agency theory tenets suggest that there are situations DEMO which interest mis-
alignment and information asymmetries are more or less prevalent, and control becomes
a bigger or lesser concern. In VC decision making, there are a number of factors that
might create such conditions. For example, Murnieks et al. (2011) highlight the work of
Franke et al. (2008), who used a range of studies to identify founder quality and eco-
nomic quality of the opportunity as two of the DEMO important VC investment decision
criteria. The implication for our model then is that certain founder and opportunity
qualities may give rise to situations in DEMO agency threats are more or less salient, and
thus the inﬂuence DEMO control varies as a function of these qualities. Following this logic,
and building on Franke et al. and Murnieks et al., we now consider the degree to which
perceived control might inﬂuence investment decisions given DEMO levels of founder
and opportunity quality.
Although there are a number of founder and opportunity qualities that may inﬂuence
the effects of perceived control, this study examines the primary contingencies of (1)
entrepreneurial prestige (DEMO, experience and afﬁliations) as an indicator of a high-quality
entrepreneur (DEMO, 1990; Hsu, 2007; Packalen, 2007) and (2) opportunity attractive-
ness (Gartner, 1985; Haynie et al., 2009) as an indicator of a high-potential opportunity.
We selected these variables (and not others) because a priori assessments of an opportu-
nity’s proﬁt potential are subjective to the individual (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000), and
when VCs DEMO indications that the entrepreneur is well regarded or that the opportunity has
high potential, they are more likely to invest (Murnieks et al., 2011). Viewed in light of
agency theory logic, this suggests that there are situations in which a VC may be more or
less DEMO on the threat of adverse selection, moral hazard, and holdup depending on the
entrepreneur’s prestige or the business opportunity’s potential. For instance, in the pres-
ence of highly attractive opportunities, VCs may perceive that there are greater opportu-
nities for adverse selection and holdup that may prevent DEMO from receiving maximum
returns. In such instances, VCs may focus more DEMO on control. It is this type of
contingency effect that we explore from a conﬁgurations perspective (e.g., Burton, Lau-
ridsen, & Obel, 2002, 2003; Payne, 2006). Taking such a perspective is necessary because
control can only be fully understood when one simultaneously considers the DEMO of the
entrepreneur and the opportunity.
Entrepreneurial Prestige and Control
Prestige is an inherently broad term, and in order to be conceptually clear, DEMO follow
D’Aveni’s (1990, p. 121) conceptualization that prestige is “the DEMO of having status.”
January, 2013
5
D’Aveni contends that prestige is subjective and socially situated, so individuals can
develop prestige in a number of ways. Prior success, degrees or afﬁliations with elite
educational institutions, placement on boards of directors, or holding DEMO positions
at some point in one’s career are just a few of the ways that individuals develop prestige.1
Applied to the domain of entrepreneurship, prestige is important as a sizeable body
of research shows that potential DEMO rely heavily on subjective criteria related to
managerial prestige when evaluating venture viability, such as the background, prior
record, afﬁliations, and other DEMO characteristics of the entrepreneur and management
team (i.e., Franke et al., 2008; Hsu, 2007; Packalen, 2007; Zacharakis & Shepherd,
DEMO). The logic is that key players’ credentials act as indicators of competence (Packalen;
Pennings, Lee, & Witteloostuijn, 1998), as DEMO by Shepherd’s (1999, p. 625)
argument that VCs manage uncertainty by “choosing a management team they believe
will be able to cope DEMO expected and unexpected changes in the market and competitive
environment.” In addition, renowned VC John Doerr (provider of ﬁnancing to Google
and Amazon) expands upon the importance of such characteristics in the investment
evaluation by DEMO, “I always turn to the biographies of the team ﬁrst” (quoted in Camp,
2002, p. 25).
While entrepreneurial experience and high-status afﬁliations clearly play an important
role in investment decision policies (Packalen, DEMO), prestigious entrepreneurs may
be more outspoken and insistent upon approaching the venture according to their own
perspectives and objectives as opposed to those DEMO the VC. Indeed, entrepreneurs’ and
VCs’ venture objectives can differ greatly, leading to serious tension and disagreements
(Cable & Shane, 1997; De Clercq & Sapienza, 2006). For instance, VCs typically desire
high-growth DEMO with early exit opportunities while entrepreneurs tend to focus on
long-term growth and proﬁtability (Turcan, 2008). Such divergent objectives may lead to
DEMO disagreements over how the ﬁrm should be directed, and subsequently, less
optimal outcomes (Sorenson & Stuart, 2001).
The extent to which DEMO VC and the entrepreneur agree upon common goals
and values is positively linked to venture success (Bruton et al., 2000; De Clercq &DEMO
Sapienza, 2006). From the VC’s perspective, a high level of perceived control is espe-
cially desirable when an agreement is made with DEMO prestigious entrepreneur because it
may mitigate potential conﬂicts with regard to moral hazard, risk, and venture objectives
(Turcan, 2008; Wang & Zhou, 2004). Further, such a scenario may suggest that the
prestigious DEMO presumably more knowledge of how VCs operate—has
purposely chosen to work with the VC instead of using other ﬁnancing options because
of similar views DEMO objectives. VCs are not necessarily interested in running the busi-
ness but want to ensure that entrepreneurs remain motivated and that adequate progress
is DEMO made toward a successful outcome (De Clercq, Fried, Lehtonen, & Sapienza,
2006). Therefore, high levels of managerial competence, combined DEMO the ability to
control or alter the venture’s actions, provide a DEMO scenario for the VC. Formally,
we state the following:
Hypothesis 2: There is an interaction effect between the entrepreneur’s prestige and
perceived control such that as prestige increases, control has a greater inﬂuence on
willingness to invest.
1. Prestige is similar to reputation, which is increasingly seen as playing an important role in the emergence
of entrepreneurial opportunities (cf. Wood & McKinley, 2010).
6
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Opportunity Attractiveness and Control
No matter how skilled the entrepreneur is, the core of any successful business
enterprise is the entrepreneurial opportunity that made DEMO possible. Entrepreneurial
opportunities are deﬁned as situations in which “new goods, DEMO, raw materials, and
organizing methods can be introduced and sold at greater than their cost of production”
(Casson, 2000, p. 220). By deﬁnition then, opportunities must hold proﬁt potential.
However, the proﬁt DEMO of an opportunity is a future-oriented judgment, and the
true value DEMO only be known post hoc (Grégoire, Barr, & Shepherd, 2010). This means
that decisions regarding whether or not to act on DEMO opportunity rests on judgments of
whether or not the opportunity appears attractive given one’s resources, knowledge,
skills, and abilities (Haynie et al., 2009; Wood, Williams, & Grégoire, 2012). In that
way, entrepreneurs, investors, and other potential stakeholders must form a consensus
belief that an opportunity for proﬁt does indeed exist and that the opportunity DEMO desir-
able and feasible for those who will be involved in exploitation (Krueger, 1993; Wood
& McKinley, 2010).
During this process, positive or negative evaluations of desirability and feasibility
may emerge. For example, negative evaluations will lead to doubt that an opportunity
exists (at least for those involved speciﬁcally), and thus the opportunity will likely be
DEMO (Shepherd, McMullen, & Jennings, 2007; Wood et al., 2012). If, however,
evaluations are positive, and the opportunity is DEMO only deemed feasible in terms of
the resources required and the ability to generate economic rents, but also desirable in
terms of goals, DEMO, and circumstances, then a consensus forms that an attractive
opportunity does indeed exist (Wood & McKinley, 2010). This is important because DEMO
has long been conceptualized that attractive opportunities impel new venture creation.
For example, proponents of “pull entrepreneurship” (Gartner, 1985) and “opportunity-
based DEMO (McMullen, Bagby, & Palich, 2008) have succinctly argued
that DEMO individuals choose entrepreneurship because they identify an opportunity that
is so attractive it simply cannot be passed up. Indeed, a substantial body of decision-
making research has shown that entrepreneurs and investors are much more likely DEMO
act on highly attractive opportunities than on opportunities that they perceive to hold
less potential (cf. Hall & Hofer, 1993; Mitchell & Shepherd, 2010; Zacharakis &
Meyer, 2000).
While a relationship between DEMO attractiveness and likelihood of investing
is both intuitive and supported by prior research (e.g., Haynie et al., 2009; Mitchell &
Shepherd, DEMO; Sorensen & Sorenson, 2003), it is unclear how this relationship is
inﬂuenced by other decision criterion, such as perceived control. Considered together, it
seems that VCs would perceive a venture to be more desirable when both the opportu-
nity is attractive and the level of control DEMO high such that risks of moral hazard, holdup,
and other DEMO behaviors are reduced. In other words, attractive opportunities
are those opportunities DEMO hold strong potential to generate entrepreneurial rents
(Haynie et al.), DEMO when presented by an entrepreneur who is more accepting of VC
control, agency risks are reduced and VCs will deem the deal to be more desirable and
feasible. Overall, we suggest that VCs will be more likely to invest in attractive oppor-
tunities in the presence of high DEMO control. Formally, our third hypothesis states
the following:
Hypothesis 3: There is an interaction effect between opportunity attractiveness and
perceived control such DEMO as opportunity attractiveness increases, control has a greater
inﬂuence on willingness DEMO invest.
January, 2013 7
Conﬁgurations of Prestige, Opportunity Attractiveness, and Control
The previous arguments suggest DEMO VC investment decision making involves a
complex and interrelated set of relationships involving the three broad considerations of
entrepreneurial prestige, opportunity attractiveness, and DEMO While these factors may
impact willingness to invest both independently and as two-way interactions, to fully
understand the role that these factors play in VC investment decisions, we must consider
these factors collectively. Doing so requires placing a greater emphasis on the conﬁgu-
rations perspective.
Conﬁgurations theory—typically used DEMO explain organizational differences (e.g.,
Miller & Friesen, 1984)—is an evolution of contingency theory, and argues that taking a
multidimensional view of characteristics or constructs is often preferable and more mean-
ingful than examining DEMO in isolation (Fiss, 2007; Meyer, Tsui, & Hinings, 1993; Short,
Payne, & Ketchen, 2008). In other words, DEMO distinct characteristics may inﬂuence a
particular outcome variable, it is likely DEMO some combination of these characteristics “ﬁt”
together in a way that exhibits the greatest inﬂuence on a speciﬁc outcome (Dess,
Newport, & DEMO, 1993; Hill & Birkinshaw, 2008). The conﬁguration idea is DEMO
in the “garbage can” decision-making model (cf. Mintzberg, 1979) in DEMO the decision
maker sorts and combines decision elements to understand the “unfolding nature of the
linkages between problems and solutions” (March, 1994, p. 206). These linkages may
then form the basis of a story DEMO represents how the particular combination of elements
explains what happened or predict what might happen (March).
One of the main implications of the conﬁgurations approach is that “increased effec-
tiveness is attributed to the internal DEMO, or ﬁt, among the patterns of relevant
contextual, structural and DEMO factors” (Doty, Glick, & Huber, 1993, p. 1196). DEMO we
apply this logic to the ambiguous task of predicting new venture outcomes, it is likely that
the decision process can be more completely understood when complex linkages among
these criteria are considered as an optimal DEMO ideal combination rather than independently.
Thus, the optimal combination (or clearly the suboptimal combination in avoidance-
focused decisions) of characteristics is likely to dominate the effect of any individual
venture characteristics during the investment decision-making DEMO (Petty & Gruber,
2011). The fundamental proposition is that DEMO level of ﬁt or congruence (Drazin & Van de
Ven, 1985) among the entrepreneur’s prestige, the opportunity’s attractiveness, and per-
ceived control over the entrepreneur’s actions will be associated with the VC’s willingness
to DEMO in the venture. Speciﬁcally, we expect willingness to invest to vary DEMO to
the various combinations of control, prestige, and attractiveness, with DEMO highest level of
willingness to invest coming when all three characteristics are at high levels. Using
conﬁgurations language (e.g., Gresov & Drazin, 1997), this prediction suggests an “ideal”
type and is stated formally in DEMO fourth hypothesis:
Hypothesis 4: There is a three-way interaction effect DEMO the entrepreneur’s
prestige, the opportunity’s attractiveness, and perceived control such that willingness
to invest is higher when prestige, attractiveness, and control are DEMO high as opposed to
when the attributes are all low or are in other possible conﬁgurations.
While high levels of all three characteristics would DEMO lead to the highest
level of willingness to invest, it is DEMO that most investment opportunities will not meet
this ideal situation. In particular and as noted previously, there is often an inherent conﬂict
regarding control between VCs and entrepreneurs (Wasserman, 2008). Such conﬂict likely
creates DEMO in which trade-offs or allowances have to be made. Put in terms of our
second hypothesis, situations in which prestige and control are both high are ideal, but
8 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
given resistance from the entrepreneur, a VC may be willing to forgo extensive control if
that entrepreneur is prestigious or if the business opportunity DEMO extremely attractive. The
underlying assumption is that mitigating the threat of agency is not worth missing out on
working with highly prestigious entrepreneurs and/DEMO acting on high-potential opportuni-
ties, especially when highly prestigious entrepreneurs voice DEMO to the VC’s desire
for increased control. In due time, the DEMO of this trade-off may prove unwise (Will-
iamson, 1988), but during an investment evaluation, it is the perception (perhaps uncon-
scious DEMO the VC) that the trade-off is worth the risk that likely DEMO the investment
decision (March, 1994).
Building on the idea that there are substitutes for control, conﬁgurations theory
advances the notion of equiﬁnality, which suggests that trade-offs between conﬁgurational
characteristics may exist such that different proﬁles may potentially lead to similar
outcomes. Equiﬁnality among conﬁgurational groups serves DEMO the basic argument for the
commonly utilized strategic typologies developed by Miles, Snow, Meyer, and Coleman
(1978), Mintzberg (1979), and Porter (1998), and has been supported empirically (e.g.,
Doty DEMO al., 1993). The equiﬁnal outcomes associated with various conﬁgurations have
DEMO especially insightful in suboptimal contexts (cf. Payne, 2006). The core idea is that
individuals and organizations must consider a complex, and sometimes competing, set of
factors, and these often coalesce in a way DEMO is less than ideal. Hence, conﬁgurations
theory suggests that it is DEMO to consider the functional equivalent outcomes that may
emerge across a range of suboptimal situations.
Applying the conﬁgurations logic outlined above to the context DEMO VC investment
decisions suggests that there are a number of suboptimal combinations of prestige,
opportunity attractiveness, and VC control, and at least DEMO of these combinations may
lead to equiﬁnal outcomes. This line of thinking underpins our argument that different
conﬁgurations of the investment opportunity attributes will DEMO in relatively equal
levels of investment willingness. In other words, while DEMO decision factor conﬁgura-
tions may deviate from the ideal with regard to the level of willingness to invest, this
deviation will result in simultaneous trade-offs among the three characteristics of pres-
tige, opportunity attractiveness, and DEMO control, and in some cases, these trade-offs will
result in essentially the same level of willingness to invest. Formally, we hypothesize
the following:
Hypothesis 5: Trade-offs exist among the entrepreneur’s prestige, the opportunity’s
DEMO, and perceived control such that equiﬁnal outcomes (i.e., no discernible
DEMO in willingness to invest) occur in suboptimal conﬁgurations.
Methods
We selected DEMO analysis as our principal methodology. Conjoint analysis and its
associated method, DEMO capturing, are some of the most widely used tools for analyzing
DEMO and decision-making models (Brehmer & Brehmer, 1988; Green & Srinivasan,DEMO
1990; Priem, Walters, & Li, 2011). The technique involves asking respondents to make a
series of judgments based on theory-driven proﬁles DEMO by the researcher (Aiman-
Smith, Scullen, & Barr, 2002; DEMO, Ahlstrom, Dacin, Levitas, & Svobodina, 2004; Shep-
herd & Zacharakis, 1997). The advantage of this approach is that it overcomes many of the
limitations associated with post hoc techniques that require introspection DEMO decisions
made in the past (Aiman-Smith et al.). However, a notable limitation of the conjoint
approach is the potential for a low DEMO of external validity (Hair, Black, Babin, Anderson,
January, DEMO
9
& Tatham, 2006). We sought to overcome this external validity challenge by following the
traditions established in well-regarded conjoint studies by modeling factors DEMO have been
shown to be important to VCs and by using experienced participants from the popula-
tion for which we wish to generalize our DEMO (Green & Srinivasan; Shepherd &
Zacharakis). Additionally, we conducted interviews with a number of VCs to further
augment the validity and DEMO of our ﬁndings; the insights gleaned from those
interviews supplement the DEMO of our ﬁndings.
Sample
We solicited experienced VCs to participate in our conjoint experiment. Because VCs
often specialize in different types of funding stages DEMO because our study is focused on
understanding early stage funding decisions, DEMO identiﬁed a group of VCs that primarily
execute early stage funding deals. These individuals were listed in a leading VC associa-
tion directory in DEMO United States. We e-mailed initial participation invitations to 280
active VCs from this list and offered a $20 incentive to encourage participation. Following
the DEMO of Dillman (2000), our initial request was followed by two DEMO requests
sent at 1-week intervals. A total of 69 VCs (25% DEMO rate) responded to our requests
and completed the experiment. Our sample DEMO is in line with those of other published
VC decision-making conjoint studies (Franke, Gruber, Harhoff, & Henkel, 2006; Franke
et al., 2008; Murnieks et al., 2011; Shepherd, Zacharakis, & Baron, DEMO), and like these
studies, our unit of analysis is the DEMO Because participants completed eight deci-
sions each, the relevant sample consists DEMO 552 decisions.
Of the 69 VC participants, 24 accepted the $20 DEMO while the remainder
declined. To ensure the incentive did not introduce a bias, we compared age, education,
and years of VC experience DEMO those who accepted the incentive and those who did
not, and DEMO found no signiﬁcant differences. In terms of gender and age, our DEMO
included 7 females and 62 males ranging in age from 25 to 79, with a mean age of 49.72.
In terms of education, DEMO participants had some college, 45 had earned a bachelor’s degree,
DEMO 15 had earned a master’s degree. Each participant veriﬁed that he or she was an active
VC, but they had varied levels of experience: 14 indicated 1–5 years, 13 indicated 6–10
years, 21 indicated 11–15 years, and 21 indicated 16 or more years of experience in the
VC industry. These characteristics indicate that our participants were quite experienced at
DEMO VC investment deals, and thus comprise an appropriate sample for our DEMO
(Brehmer & Brehmer, 1988).
Instrument
Our instrument design followed a number of published conjoint studies (Aiman-
Smith et al., 2002; Choi & Shepherd, 2004; Haynie et al., 2009; Shepherd & Zacharakis,DEMO
1997). The instrument was presented via a web-based interactive process, DEMO consisted
of instructions for completing the experiment, descriptions of the variables, a series of
conjoint proﬁles, and a post-experiment questionnaire. In the experiment portion of the
instrument, VCs were asked to evaluate a series of hypothetical venture deal proﬁles, each
of which described a different conﬁguration of control, prestige, and attractiveness (see
Table 1). After each scenario, subjects were asked to indicate their willingness to invest,
amount of investment, and terms of investment given the deal attributes presented in the
proﬁle. Responses were captured using 7-point Likert scales.
In designing the proﬁles, we used an orthogonal full factorial design with two levels
of control, two levels of prestige, and two levels of attractiveness (2 control DEMO 2 prestige ¥
10
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
2 attractiveness), which resulted in eight full proﬁle descriptions. In the DEMO
approach, variable intercorrelations are zero, so multicollinearity is not an issue (Huber,
1987). In addition to the eight proﬁles, participants DEMO received one “warm-up” proﬁle
that was excluded from the data analysis and three repeat proﬁles included as reliability
checks. Proﬁle presentation was randomized to DEMO the probability of order effects
(Hair et al., 2006). Additionally, proﬁles were presented on a separate screen, and par-
ticipants were DEMO allowed to refer back to any of the previous proﬁles.
We continued to follow the lead of other entrepreneurship-focused conjoint studies,
and developed DEMO and background scenario information (e.g., Haynie et al.,
2009; DEMO et al., 2011). Thus, before evaluating the proﬁles, participants DEMO
instructed that they would be asked to make a series of decisions regarding how likely they
would be to invest in the launch of DEMO new venture based on the industry attributes described
in each proﬁle. They were also told that when making these decisions, they were to put
themselves in the context of each investment scenario, answering questions as if they were
in the situation. Additionally, they were told to assume that the venture falls within their
deal strategy and that they had the DEMO resources available to invest in the new
venture if they chose to do so. Finally, participants were informed that each proﬁle should
be considered as a separate decision independent of all the others and that they DEMO
not be able to return to proﬁles they already completed.
Following the experiment instructions, a deﬁnition screen introduced participants to a
ﬁctional ﬁrm (DEMO, WPI) via the following statement: “WPI is an early stage DEMO and
is currently seeking funding. The company is based on the introduction of a new process
technology. The WPI attributes presented in the simulation DEMO related to the founder and
the opportunity; these attributes are clearly DEMO for you.”2 This language was followed
by the speciﬁc attributes and deﬁnitions for each level of the attribute. Attribute and level
descriptions as presented DEMO participants are provided in Appendix 1. The full instrument
was reviewed by select VCs who made some suggestions for improvement. After revi-
sions, the instrument was pilot-tested using a select group of graduate students. The results
DEMO the pilot indicated that the instrument effectively tapped into decision policies asso-
ciated with new venture investment.
Variables
Dependent Variable. The dependent variable was DEMO willingness to invest in the
venture. Most conjoint studies use a single-item scale to measure the dependent variable
(Haynie et al., 2009; Wood & Pearson, 2009; Zacharakis & Meyer, 1998). However,
recent studies have moved toward increasing reliability (Kerlinger & Lee, 2000) by
employing multi-item scales. In that spirit, we adopted Murnieks et al.’s (DEMO) approach
and measured the dependent variable using a 3-item scale. Speciﬁcally, we asked partici-
pants to indicate the probability they would invest (1 = lowto7 = high), the amount they
would be willing to DEMO (1 = lowest possible amount to 7 = highest possible amount),
and the terms of investment they would likely offer (1 = worst possible terms to 7 = best
possible terms). We selected DEMO rating scales because they capture gradation in
investment attractiveness and allow for the investigation of interactive relationships
2. This description of the target company DEMO in line with other VC conjoint studies (cf. Murnieks et al., 2011)
that provide very little information (if any) on the DEMO beyond proﬁle attributes. This is intentional because
such information is likely to inﬂuence responses and confound attribute effects.
January, 2013
11
(Hitt & Barr, 1989). The scale proved reliable (Cronbach’s alpha = .89), and we summed
the three scores to form an DEMO measure of willingness to invest.
Independent Variables. Each venture attribute proﬁle was described in terms of the
following three independent variables: perceived control (DEMO levels), entrepreneurial
prestige (two levels), and opportunity attractiveness (two levels). As previously discussed,
we chose these variables (and not others) because of their assumed theoretical and
demonstrated empirical importance in new venture investment evaluations (Franke et al.,
2008; Mitchell & Shepherd, 2010; Payne et al., 2009), and we chose the levels DEMO each
variable based on variations typically found in VC investment environments. We con-
structed our eight proﬁles by varying the levels of each of DEMO attributes until all possible
conﬁgurations were included.
Control Variables. Prior research shows that experience matters when it comes to evalu-
ating opportunities (Baron & Ensley, 2006; Haynie et al., 2009; Mitchell & Shepherd,
DEMO). Thus, our post-experiment questionnaire captured experience-related information
to be included DEMO control variables in our analysis. Speciﬁcally, participant education, age,
and years of experience in the VC industry were employed as controls.
Empirical DEMO
Because each VC participated in a series of judgments, each judgment DEMO not be
entirely independent, so there may be autocorrelation issues. Therefore, an analytic
technique designed for repeated measures (i.e., controls for autocorrelation) is required.
Moreover, our data are mixed because we asked participants to evaluate a series of proﬁles
(within subject), and we then collected information on demographic variables (between
subjects). Both Field (2005) and Hair et al. (2006) suggest that mixed-model, repeated-
measure analysis of variance (ANOVA) is an appropriate analytic technique that ﬁts well
with DEMO data structure. In addition, the advantage of the ANOVA approach over DEMO
possible techniques (e.g., hierarchical linear modeling) is that it provides DEMO detailed set of
estimated marginal means for all possible variable combinations. These mean values are
required to untangle the complex interactions, conﬁgurations, and DEMO that we
hypothesize, so we selected the ANOVA approach. Following the DEMO outlined by
Field and utilized in other entrepreneurship conjoint studies (Wood & Pearson, 2009), we
entered the various levels of the independent DEMO (i.e., control, prestige, and attrac-
tiveness) as within-subject factors. DEMO of the values for the control variables (i.e., age,
education, and VC experience) were entered as between-subject factors, and the sum-
mated values from the willingness to invest scale were entered as the DEMO variable.
Before conducting the data analysis outlined above, we needed to DEMO that the
experiment was completed reliably. For this purpose, we asked DEMO questions, one in-
quiring if the participants had understood the instructions DEMO the experiment and a
second inquiring whether they had fully understood the deﬁnitions of the terms. All 69
VCs indicated assent to these two DEMO Next, as a statistical test of reliability, we
examined differences in VCs’ responses to the original vs. repeat conjoint proﬁles. The
idea was DEMO if participants completed the experiment in a reliable manner, there should
DEMO no signiﬁcant difference between responses (Green & Srinivasan, 1978; Hair DEMO al.,
2006). The means for the willingness to invest question were compared across the three
original proﬁles vs. the three repeat proﬁles. DEMO were 1.35 vs. 1.38, 6.04 vs. 6.01, and
1.84 vs. 2.01. All three of these differences failed to reach statistical signiﬁcance
(T = 0.03, p = 0.98; T = 0.43, p = 0.67; DEMO = 1.62, p = 0.11, respectively). These ﬁndings
12
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
suggest reliable responses on the part of the VC participants, and thus appropriateness to
proceed with hypothesis testing.
Results
The experiment provided a total DEMO 552 decisions as the result of each participant
analyzing eight proﬁles. When analyzed at the aggregate level, we found a number of
signiﬁcant effects. Table 1 reports the estimated marginal population mean for each
level of DEMO variable (or interaction term), and Table 2 reports the results DEMO our ANOVA
analyses. In addition to these results, we also calculated DEMO report below full eta-square
values (h2) for each main and interaction effect as an indicator of the amount of variance
in the dependent DEMO explained by changes in the independent variable or interaction
term (Hair DEMO al., 2006; Levine & Hullett, 2002). Full eta-squared (aka classic eta-squared)
is an “additive measure of unique variation in the DEMO variable that can not be
accounted for by other factors in the analysis” (Pierce, Block, & Aguinis, 2004, p. 919),
DEMO thus indicates the amount of variance attributable to each factor or interaction over
and above that accounted for by other factors or interaction terms DEMO the model.
As illustrated in Table 2, all three of the DEMO effects were signiﬁcant. The estimated
marginal means in Table 1 revealed that as entrepreneurial prestige and opportunity
attractiveness each moved from low to high, VCs were more willing to invest. These
results were expected, and prior empirical research suggested that VCs would be more
likely to invest in DEMO involving highly prestigious entrepreneurs, and our results provide
Table 1
Estimated DEMO Means by Factor and Level
Variable Level Mean Standard error
Perceived control Low 8.973 .427
High 11.554 .609
Entrepreneurial prestige Low 8.131 .402
High DEMO .598
Opportunity attractiveness Low 7.762 .460
High 12.761 .549
Entrepreneurial prestige ¥ perceived control Low-Low 6.946 .360
Low-High 9.315 .499
High-low 11.001 .522
High-High DEMO .746
Opportunity attractiveness ¥ perceived control Low-Low 7.069 .397
Low-High 8.454 .644
High-Low 10.877 .547
High-High 14.656 .601
Prestige ¥ attractiveness ¥ control Low-Low-Low DEMO .312
Low-Low-High 6.375 .376
Low-High-Low 8.692 .348
Low-High-High 12.367 .505
High-Low-Low 8.950 .372
High-Low-High 10.825 .681
High-High-Low 13.417 .573
High-High-High 16.992 .511
January, 2013
13
Table 2
Repeated Measures Modeling and Results for Likelihood of Investment
Mean DEMO
F-value
Between-subject control variable effects
Age 27.457 .217
Education 11.015 .087
Experience VC industry 51.748 .408
Within-subjects main effects
Perceived control 781.779 36.001**
Entrepreneurial DEMO 1648.196 132.186***
Opportunity attractiveness 1730.470 158.668***
Within-subjects interaction effects
Entrepreneurial prestige ¥ perceived control 8.429 8.701*
Opportunity attractiveness ¥ perceived control 92.029 15.582*
Prestige DEMO attractiveness ¥ control 10.972 4.841*
* p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.
n = 552 investment decisions made DEMO 69 venture capitalists (VCs).
further support for this assertion, F(1,4) = 132.18, p < .001, h2 = .33. Similarly, prior
research suggests that VCs should be more willing to consider ventures based on
highly attractive opportunities, and while not hypothesized, our results DEMO consistent with
extant research, F(1,4) = 158.67, p < .001, h2 = .34. In sum, our ﬁndings further validate
the ﬁndings in the literature for the effects of entrepreneur prestige and opportunity
DEMO
In contrast to the previously established relationships among prestige, attractiveness,
DEMO investment likelihood, we developed an argument and hypothesized that perceived
control DEMO be positively related to VCs’ willingness to invest in ventures. Our repeated-
measure ANOVA results revealed a signiﬁcant main effect for control, F(1,4) = 36.01,
p < .01, h2 = .13, and the estimated marginal means (Table 1) revealed that willingness to
invest DEMO substantially greater when control was high (M = 11.55) than when it was low
(M = 8.97). These results provide strong support for hypothesis 1. It is worth noting that
the F-values and N-square DEMO reported above are indicators of effect size, so the
importance of DEMO variables explored can be determined. Thus, the decision making of
our DEMO of VCs reveals that opportunity attractiveness was the most important factor,
followed by the entrepreneur’s prestige and then by perceived control.
Hypothesis 2 DEMO that control interacts with entrepreneurial prestige in a rein-
forcing manner. Our analyses revealed a signiﬁcant interaction effect between prestige
and control, F(2,4) = 8.701, p < .05, h2 = .012, and DEMO marginal means (Table 1)
showed that willingness to invest was DEMO greater when prestige and control were
both high (M = 13.79) than when they were both low (M = 6.94). To better understand this
interaction, we followed the widely adopted recommendations and techniques suggested
by Cohen, Cohen, West, and Aiken (2003), and graphed DEMO interaction terms (see
Figure 1). Viewing the graph in conjunction DEMO the estimated marginal means used
to construct it (Table 1), DEMO see that when considered alone, the effect of prestige on
willingness DEMO invest had a low condition mean of 8.13 and a high condition mean of
12.37, but in the presence of low control, the DEMO became 6.94 and 11.01, respectively.
In the presence of high control, the means became 9.31 and 13.79, respectively. This
14
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Figure 1
Entrepreneurial Prestige–Perceived Control Interaction
Figure 2
18.0
14.0
Low High
DEMO
Low prestige
High prestige
Opportunity Attractiveness–Perceived Control Interaction
18.0
14.0
Low High
Control
Low opportunity attractiveness
High opportunity attractiveness
10.0
6.0
10.0
6.0
indicates DEMO the negative perceptions of low prestige as indicated by VCs’ willingness to
invest were reinforced by low control but mitigated by high control. Similarly, the positive
perceptions of high prestige were mitigated by low control and DEMO by high control.
Thus, VCs were the least willing to invest DEMO prestige and control were both low,
and the most willing to invest when prestige and control were both high. These ﬁndings
provide strong DEMO for hypothesis 2.
Hypothesis 3 was based on the idea that control may interact with opportunity
attractiveness in a reinforcing manner. Our analyses revealed DEMO signiﬁcant interaction
effect between attractiveness and control, F(2,4) = 15.582, p < .05, h2 = .021, and esti-
mated marginal means (Table 1) revealed that willingness to invest was substantially
greater DEMO attractiveness and control were both high (M = 14.66) than when they were
both low (M = 7.07). To better understand this interaction, we graphed the interaction
terms in Figure 2. Viewing the graph in conjunction with the estimated marginal means
(Table 1), we see that when considered alone, the effect of attractiveness resulted in a
mean investment value of 7.76 when attractiveness was low and a high condition DEMO
of 12.71. However, in the presence of low control, the means became 7.07 and 10.88,
respectively. In the presence of high control, the means became 8.45 and 14.66,
January, 2013
15
Likelihood of investment
Likelihood of investment
Figure 3
(A) Prestige–Attractiveness at Low Control (Three-Way) Interaction;
(B) Prestige–Attractiveness at High Control (Three-Way) Interaction
18.0
14.0
Low attractiveness
High attractiveness
10.0
6.0
18.0
14.0
Low High
Prestige
B
Low attractiveness
DEMO attractiveness
A
10.0
6.0
Low High
Prestige
respectively. This indicates that the negative perceptions of low opportunity attractiveness
were reinforced by low control but DEMO by high control. Similarly, the positive
perceptions of high attractiveness were DEMO by low control and reinforced by high
control. Thus, VCs were DEMO least willing to invest when opportunity attractiveness and
control were both low, and the most willing to invest when attractiveness and control were
both high. These results support hypothesis 3.
Hypothesis 4 argued that a three-way DEMO among control, opportunity attrac-
tiveness, and prestige exists such that the greatest likelihood of investment comes in play
under conditions in which all DEMO characteristics are high. Our analysis demonstrated
a signiﬁcant three-way interaction effect, DEMO(1,9) = 4.841, p < .05, h2 = .017, To better
understand the nature of this effect, we examined the estimated marginal means (Table 1)
and constructed two interaction graphs (Figure DEMO and b). The table and the graphs
revealed that willingness to invest was lowest when control, prestige, and attractiveness
were all low (M = 5.40). By contrast, willingness to invest was highest when control,
prestige, and attractiveness were all high (M = 16.99)DEMO In the middle range, a high level of
prestige and attractiveness DEMO preferred, but that effect was strengthened in the presence
of high DEMO These ﬁndings indicate that the ideal conﬁguration included conditions in
which control, prestige, and attractiveness were all at high levels as opposed to DEMO other
conﬁguration of these variables. The results also indicate that the optimal conﬁguration
resulted in a much higher likelihood of VC investment than when DEMO one of the decision
characteristics was considered alone (e.g., high opportunity attractiveness resulted in a
16
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Likelihood of investment
DEMO of investment
mean investment of 12.76 vs. the three-variable optimal conﬁguration mean investment of
DEMO). These results provide strong support for hypothesis 4 and the conﬁgurations logic
that underpins the hypothesized relationship.
Hypothesis 5 argued that trade-offs exist DEMO characteristics such that suboptimal
(i.e., less than ideal) conﬁgurations might DEMO equiﬁnal outcomes. The means of the
three-way interactions in Table 1 demonstrated some support for this hypothesis as a
number of relative trade-offs between DEMO emerged. The characteristics that
resulted in the most equiﬁnal outcome were the trade-off between the entrepreneur’s
prestige and the opportunity’s attractiveness. Speciﬁcally, when control was low, a rela-
tively equal likelihood of investment existed contingent upon either a highly prestigious
entrepreneur or an attractive opportunity (8.69 and 8.95). While not as equal in outcome,
a trade-off between the DEMO surfaced when control was high. Here, we see that when
perceived DEMO was high, the addition of either an attractive opportunity or a DEMO
entrepreneur can create a relatively similar outcome (10.83 and 12.37, respectively).
Perhaps the most interesting trade-off occurred between control and entrepreneurial
prestige, for which low levels of prestige were accounted for by high levels DEMO control and
vice versa. See, for instance, the conﬁgurations with means of 12.37 and 13.45. In sum,
these ﬁndings show that even DEMO perceived control was high, the presence of a less
prestigious entrepreneur DEMO an unattractive opportunity resulted in very low willingness
to invest (6.38)DEMO However, when either prestige or the opportunity became favorable,
control DEMO in a reinforcing manner where the addition of another favorable character-
istic considerably increased investment likelihood. To be clear, we are not arguing that the
trade-offs and outcomes discussed above were statistically equivalent, but rather that they
were practically similar in terms of VCs’ likelihood to invest.
Post DEMO Analysis
Although not hypothesized, we also considered the idea that preference DEMO certain
investment deal attributes (e.g., control) may vary as a DEMO of individual differences
(e.g., age). To investigate this, we DEMO a brief post hoc analysis investigating VC age
as a differentiating factor. To do this, we split the sample using the mean age (DEMO years
of age) as a cutoff threshold. We then ran the DEMO effects for the independent variables
across the two groups. We found that younger VCs placed less emphasis on control,
F(1,34) = 34.88, p < .05, than older VCs did, F(1,33) = 56.05, p < .05. Further, our analy-
sis revealed that when holding all else constant, younger VCs placed the most emphasis
on the entrepreneur’s prestige, F(1,34) = 124.63 p < .05, while older VCs placed the most
emphasis on opportunity attractiveness, F(1,33) = 122.53, p < .05. While exploratory,
these ﬁndings DEMO that there may be important differences between younger and older
VCs. This supports our inclusion of age as a control variable in the analyses DEMO
above. However, more importantly, these ﬁndings suggest a need for further research
investigating the inﬂuence of individual-level variables on VC investment analysis and
DEMO decision making.
Discussion
Through this study, we demonstrate the importance of DEMO in the VC investment
decision-making process. Our primary results suggest, ceteris DEMO, that perceptions
of control inﬂuence VCs’ willingness to invest in opportunities. DEMO, VCs utilize
January, 2013
17
several types of control mechanisms as a means of reducing uncertainty and DEMO
risk (Bonini et al., 2012). However, little evidence exists DEMO to what extent these control
mechanisms inﬂuence initial investment decisions. Wiltbank, DEMO, Dew, and Saras-
vathy (2009) offer some insight here as their study of angel investors demonstrates
that investors who emphasize control experience DEMO investment failures but realize
fewer large success events. Our results add to Wiltbank et al.’s work as we ﬁnd that the
degree of perceived DEMO does indeed inﬂuence VCs’ initial investment decisions, and
like angel investors, VCs emphasize control in efforts to reduce downside risk while
allowing for DEMO potential. However, an interesting question emerges: to what degree
does a focus on control reduce a venture’s upside potential? It may be that very strin-
gent control mechanisms restrict entrepreneurs in a way that they DEMO unable to fully
enact (Wood & McKinley, 2010) or optimally DEMO (Shane, 2003) an opportunity.
Therefore, extremely high levels of control may reduce a venture’s ability to maximize
return on investment. Investigating this DEMO is clearly an opportunity for future
research.
Because we ﬁnd a direct positive relationship between control and VCs’ willingness
to invest in ventures, it suggests that investment decisions may hinge on the extent to
which investors DEMO entrepreneurs or entrepreneurial teams are amenable to vari-
ous control measures designed to mitigate potential agency problems. However, when
considered independently, this issue DEMO to be less inﬂuential than the entrepreneur’s
prestige or the opportunity’s attractiveness. In that way, controlling the entrepre-
neur’s actions does not appear to be the VC’s ﬁrst concern. If we view this from a nexus
DEMO (e.g., Shane, 2003), these ﬁndings seem logical because without DEMO attractive
opportunity and a capable entrepreneur, venture investment is so unlikely DEMO perceived
control becomes largely irrelevant. Thus, in the absence of an DEMO opportunity and
a prestigious entrepreneur, control is likely to play only DEMO minor role. This may help
explain why some studies have not found a signiﬁcant relationship between VC control
and level of investment (e.g., DEMO et al., 2009).
Although ﬁnding a direct relationship between control DEMO willingness to invest is
important, our ﬁndings suggest that it is DEMO control interacts with other major decision
criteria that provides the best explanation of VC investment decision-making outcomes.
Speciﬁcally, our results show that control interacts with both the entrepreneur’s prestige
and the opportunity’s attractiveness to inﬂuence willingness DEMO invest. These ﬁndings
are seemingly rational as investing in a highly prestigious entrepreneur or a prosperous
opportunity with minimal control heightens the threat of DEMO risks and may provide
an avenue for self-interest seeking (Williamson, 1988). As such, a lack of control over
information sharing and the entrepreneur’s actions would likely render a deal with a
prestigious entrepreneur or DEMO entrepreneur pursuing a highly promising opportunity less
desirable. Correspondingly, high levels DEMO perceived control appear to bolster the positive
effect of entrepreneurial prestige and opportunity attractiveness. The implication then is
that VCs become focused on control DEMO other characteristics are favorable and are more
likely to invest in a deal under these conditions when control is high. Establishing the
moderating effect DEMO control in the presence of entrepreneurial prestige and opportunity
attractiveness contributes to the delineation of boundary conditions (Dubin, 1978) around
these more readily established variables.
More telling, perhaps, than the two-way interactions are the DEMO surrounding the
three-way interaction, which tests a conﬁgurations perspective (Miller & Friesen, 1984;
Wiklund & Shepherd, 2005) of VC decision making. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that an optimal
conﬁguration is achieved when the entrepreneur’s prestige, the opportunity’s attractive-
ness, and the degree of perceived control DEMO high. It is under these conditions that VCs
18
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
express the greatest willingness to invest in the venture. Moreover, while VCs would
naturally be more willing to allocate ﬁnancial resources toward an attractive DEMO
being pursued by prestigious entrepreneurs who are amenable to VC control, DEMO move
beyond this ideal conﬁguration to better understand the more complex trade-offs that
occur when one or more of the characteristics are not at DEMO optimal level. Leveraging a
central tenet of the conﬁgurations perspective (i.e., equiﬁnality), we explore circum-
stances for which trade-offs between the different DEMO under study may result
in similar outcomes or willingness to invest.
In further exploring such equiﬁnal outcomes among prestige, opportunity attrac-
tiveness, and DEMO, we note a number of interesting ﬁndings. First, in the presence
of an attractive opportunity, we ﬁnd that VC control may serve as a substitute for the
entrepreneur’s prestige. In other words, if an entrepreneur lacks experience and afﬁli-
ations, it appears that high levels of VC control can counteract this absence, whereas
VCs appear to be willing to forego stringent control when considering an experienced,
well-connected entrepreneur. As noted DEMO the Results section, the estimated marginal
means indicate a similar level DEMO willingness to invest in situations with high control
and low prestige and vice versa. What this suggests is that because the opportunity’s
attractiveness is DEMO most important decision factor, as long as there is a highly DEMO
opportunity, VCs are willing to accept either a highly prestigious entrepreneur DEMO a
high degree of control. While our results indicate that high levels of both prestige and
control are ideal, it appears that high levels of prestige or control may sufﬁce. Clearly,
our methods and data DEMO not tap into the underlying reason for this, but we specu-
DEMO that VCs assume that prestigious entrepreneurs are equipped with high levels of
experience and knowledge that substitute for control. In contrast, less prestigious entre-
preneurs lack a track record that makes agency concerns central, so VCs must have
strong control mechanisms in place to ensure lesser known entrepreneurs DEMO proper
actions.
Next, our analysis also revealed a trade-off between the DEMO prestige and
the opportunity’s attractiveness. In one instance—when control is low—VCs have similar
willingness to invest when either the opportunity’s attractiveness is high or DEMO the
entrepreneur’s prestige is high. In another instance—when control is high—either an
attractive opportunity or a highly prestigious entrepreneur results in a relatively similar
DEMO probability. Thus, both cases depict trade-off scenarios that engender similar
outcomes. DEMO is also worth noting that the reinforcing effect of high control is further
illustrated in the opportunity–prestige trade-off as the willingness to invest is DEMO
higher for the conﬁgurations accompanied by high levels of control. In that vein, our
ﬁndings suggest that it is not a single evaluative factor (e.g., opportunity, entrepreneur, or
control) but instead a nexus of factors that come together in a way that reduces VCs’
uncertainty, and thus makes investment more likely. Thus, our ﬁndings provide further
evidence suggesting that more research is needed to examine why some trade-off con-
ﬁgurations DEMO favorable while others are not.
Finally, our post hoc analysis using DEMO age as a grouping variable has implications for
future VC research that builds on our ﬁndings. Speciﬁcally, we found that younger VCs
placed less emphasis on control than older VCs. This ﬁnding was further validated in DEMO
of the post hoc interviews we conducted, in which a practicing DEMO asserted, “After doing
this since 1981, if the investor group does not have control, I’ll pass.” While we do not
have detailed data regarding this phenomenon, we speculate that the experience and
patience that come with age result in a greater emphasis on the need to control DEMO
neurs’ actions. Clearly, our study was not designed to investigate the DEMO of VC-centric
characteristics, but because our study provides clear evidence that DEMO is inﬂuential in
January, 2013
19
the VC decision-making process and because it identiﬁes some of the conditions DEMO
which control is more or less important, we provide a platform DEMO researchers can
further investigate the effects of individual differences alongside variables like control.
Our data suggest that such effects exist, and we look forward to joining others in exploring
these dynamics.
Implications for Practice
Our study DEMO a number of practical insights for entrepreneurs, VCs, and other
parties interested in venture funding decisions. First, our study reinforces prior research
showing that opportunity quality and entrepreneurs’ reputational characteristics are
essential considerations in VC DEMO decisions. As such, entrepreneurs should
recognize that VC funding is unlikely DEMO they cannot demonstrate that an opportunity
being pursued is of high potential, and that they have the requisite skills, abilities, and
track record to turn the opportunity into a high-performing venture. Along with
this understanding, those seeking funding should also be cognizant of the important role
that DEMO plays in the preinvestment context. Because each VC investment entails
considerable agency risk, securing control is largely a mechanism by which VCs can
protect their own best interest and the interest of their limited partners. Thus, resistance
to control will likely have an adverse impact on entrepreneurs’ ability DEMO secure fund-
ing. Moreover, the observed trade-off between prestige and control DEMO that
unknown or less prestigious entrepreneurs should give particular consideration to their
willingness to accept measures of control. Accordingly, those seeking VC funding
should consider the degree to which they are willing to accept control mechanisms,DEMO
and those more accepting of such controls may do well to communicate that to potential
VC investors.
With respect to VCs, these ﬁndings bring to light how key evaluative factors are
weighted by a host of DEMO across the venture community. The results of our study provide
a baseline with which VCs can benchmark their own evaluation process. Additionally,
this DEMO provides insight into aspects of control for practicing VCs. In certain cases,
perceived control was shown to rival the importance of other more DEMO established
evaluative factors. Such an emphasis is rightfully merited as the implications of disre-
garding control prior to investment can have costly implications. Highlighting DEMO point,
one VC in our interviews asserted, “[Because of minimal DEMO,] I was stuck in a deal for
over a decade until the entrepreneur/founder got pushed out.” In a similar vein, another
VC noted, “You have an entrepreneur in the driver seat. . . . You say time to sell, he says
‘I like the corner ofﬁce,’ and you don’t have control.” Collectively, our research under-
scores the importance for VCs to evaluate perceived control in the preinvestment context
as DEMO with an entrepreneur who resists such control may lead to, among DEMO
outcomes, an inability to provide a timely return.
Limitations
The conjoint DEMO utilized in this study overcomes several problems identiﬁed in
previous studies (DEMO, post hoc bias), but it does carry its own set DEMO limitations that must
be considered. Primarily, the validity of the results DEMO be called into question due to the
oversimpliﬁcation of the study (DEMO & Smith, 1995). In other words, the situation
presented by the researcher to the VC in a conjoint study is considerably less DEMO
than reality in terms of the task and the context. However, DEMO the speciﬁcs of a
20
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
situation may help determine basic relationships, thereby effectively removing biases. For
example, Franke et al. (2006) demonstrated that VC evaluations may be systematically
distorted because of similarities between the VC and the entrepreneurial team in DEMO of
age, education, ﬁeld of training, professional background, and experience. Further, our
approach in the current study may be preferable to related studies that ask respondents to
retrospectively review investment decisions. Payne et al. (2009, p. 171), for instance, state
that “a possible limitation DEMO in [their] study is the potential survivor bias that comes
with requesting information from the VC on their most recent venture investments.” Our
approach DEMO the survivor bias problem.
A second limitation is that our sample of VC participants was all based in the United
States. While we believe DEMO ﬁndings are applicable in other developed regions, we must
generalize our DEMO conservatively. Given the substantial differences in social struc-
tures, laws and DEMO, and cultural norms across nations, additional research is needed
involving VC participants in other contexts. In particular, legal systems may play a key
role in VC investment decisions because there is wide variation across nations DEMO
regard to property right protection; patent protection; and the legal rights afforded to labor,
creditors, and customers (Alhorr, Moore, & DEMO, 2008; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer, & Vishny, 1998)DEMO Invariably, such factors play an important role in an entrepre-
neur’s DEMO of an opportunity’s attractiveness and may limit the type of arrange-
ments that VCs will accept.
A ﬁnal limitation of our study is that DEMO only consider three venture characteristics
in our model. It is likely that other characteristics play a role in VCs’ decision-making
process. For example, prior research suggests that the geographic location of the
venture and investors (Sorenson & Stuart, 2001), speciﬁc characteristics of the intended
market (Tyebjee & Bruno, 1984), entrepreneurial traits beyond prestige (Hsu, 2007;
DEMO, Siegel, & Narasimha, 1985), and the strength of the DEMO (Chen
et al., 2009) may also impact VCs’ willingness to DEMO Further, recent trends in the
emergence of entrepreneurial opportunities suggest that DEMO considerations, such as
the strength of network ties (Wood & McKinley, 2010), the ability to use resources
at hand (Baker & DEMO, 2005), and early planning (Dimov, 2010), are important
DEMO that make venture emergence possible. In this vein, it is possible DEMO social
considerations, such as network ties, may moderate the effects of venture and entre-
preneurial characteristics on VCs’ willingness to invest. Thus, more research is needed
to ﬂush out important social processes and to understand DEMO those processes impact
VC decision making.
Conclusion
It is readily understood that control is a critical component of the ongoing
VC–entrepreneur dyad (Gompers & Lerner, 2004; Hellmann, 1998; Kaplan & Strömberg,
2003, 2004). Our research goes a step beyond this established understanding by system-
DEMO exploring the role that perceived control plays in the preinvestment context of
new venture evaluation. Our ﬁndings provided strong empirical support for a number
DEMO hypotheses suggesting that (1) control does indeed play a key role in early stage
VC decision making and (2) control becomes more DEMO when simultaneously
considered with other factors—speciﬁcally entrepreneurial prestige and opportunity
attractiveness—when initial investment decisions are made. Distinctively, we ﬁnd that
taking a conﬁgurational view of the venture can more completely explain VCs’ willing-
ness to invest.
DEMO, 2013
21
Appendix 1
Attributes and Level Descriptions Presented to Participants
Characteristics of the DEMO
Entrepreneurial Prestige—Superior: The entrepreneur is well known for having
been involved DEMO a number of successful ventures and is afﬁliated with a large number of
very successful business leaders.
Entrepreneurial Prestige—Minimal: The entrepreneur is not well known for his
involvement in prior entrepreneurial ventures and is afﬁliated with DEMO few successful
business leaders.
Characteristics of the Opportunity
Opportunity Attractiveness—Proven: WPI DEMO based on a business opportunity that
has been proven desirable and feasible because it dramatically improves product quality
and dramatically reduces production costs. It DEMO expected that the business opportunity will
quickly generate cash ﬂows.
Opportunity Attractiveness—Developing: WPI is based on a business opportunity
that is believed to be desirable and feasible because it slightly improves product quality
and slightly reduces DEMO costs. It is expected that the business opportunity will
slowly generate cash ﬂows.
Characteristics of Thought Processes
Perceived Control—Complete: WPI’s founding entrepreneur will be easy to control
because of the willingness to sign contracts, giving investors the ability to modify the
management team and use staged funding to DEMO that performance targets are met.
Perceived Control—Limited: WPI’s founding entrepreneur will DEMO difﬁcult to control
because of an unwillingness to sign contracts that would give investors the ability to modify
the management team and use staged DEMO to ensure that performance targets are met.
Appendix 2
Sample Investment Scenario
This investment opportunity is characterized as follows:
Entrepreneurial Prestige—Minimal. The entrepreneur DEMO not well known for his
involvement in prior entrepreneurial ventures and is afﬁliated with very few successful
business leaders.
Opportunity Attractiveness—Developing. WPI is based DEMO a business opportunity
that is believed to be desirable and feasible because it slightly improves product quality
and slightly reduces production costs. It is DEMO that the business opportunity will
slowly generate cash ﬂows.
Perceived Control—Limited. WPI’s founding entrepreneur will be difﬁcult to control
because of an unwillingness to DEMO contracts that would give investors the ability to
modify the management team and use staged funding to ensure that performance targets
are met.
22
DEMO THEORY and PRACTICE
What is the probability you would invest in this deal?
Low DEMO High Probability
If you were to invest in this deal, what DEMO the likely amount you would invest?
Lowest Possible Amount1234567 Highest Possible Amount
If you were to invest in this deal, what type of terms would you offer the entrepreneur?
Worst Possible Terms1234567 Best Possible DEMO
REFERENCES
Ahlstrom, D. & Bruton, G.D. (2006). Venture capital DEMO emerging economies: Networks and institutional
change. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 30, 299–320.
Aiman-Smith, L., Scullen, S., & Barr, S. (2002). Conducting studies of decision making in organizational
contexts: A tutorial for policy-capturing and other regression based techniques. Organizational Research
Methods, 5, 388–414.
DEMO, H.S., Moore, C.B., & Payne, G.T. (2008). The impact of economic integration on cross-border venture
capital investments: Evidence from the European Union. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 32(5),
897–917.
Amit, R., Brander, J., & Zott, C. (1998). Why do venture capital ﬁrms exist? Theory and Canadian evidence.
Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 441–467.
Amit, R., Glosten, L., & Muller, E. (1990). Entrepreneurial ability, venture investments, and risk sharing.
Management Science, 36, 1232–1245.
Baker, T. & Nelson, R.E. (2005). Creating something from nothing: Resource construction through entre-
preneurial bricolage. Administrative Science Quarterly, 50(3), 329–366.
Barney, J.B. & Busenitz, L.W. (1996)DEMO New venture teams’ assessment of learning assistance from venture
capital ﬁrms. Journal of Business Venturing, 11, 257–272.
Baron, R.A. & Ensley, M.D. (2006). Opportunity recognition as the detection of meaningful patterns:
Evidence DEMO comparisons of novice and experienced entrepreneurs. Management Science, 52, 1331–1344.
Barry, C. (1994). New directions in research on venture capital ﬁnance. DEMO Management, 23, 3–15.
Berggren, B., Olofsson, C., & Silver, L. (2000). Control aversion and the search for external ﬁnancing DEMO
Swedish SMEs. Small Business Economics, 15, 233–242.
Bitler, M.P., Moskowitz, T.J., & Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2005). Testing agency theory with DEMO effort
and wealth. Journal of Finance, 60, 539–576.
Bohren, O. (1998). The agent’s ethics in the principal-agent model. Journal of Business DEMO, 17, 745–755.
Bonini, S., Alkman, S., & Salvi, DEMO (2012). The effects of venture capitalists on the governance of DEMO
Corporate Governance: An International Review, 20, 21–45.
Brehmer, A. & Brehmer, B. (1988). What have we learned about human judgment DEMO thirty years of policy
capturing? In B. Brehmer & C. Joyce (Eds.), Human judgment: The SJT view (pp. 75–113). Amsterdam, the
Netherlands: Elsevier.
January, 2013 23
Bruton, G., Fried, V., & Hisrich, R. (2000). DEMO dismissal in venture capital-backed ﬁrms: Further evidence
from an agency perspective. DEMO Theory and Practice, 24, 69–77.
Burton, R.M., Lauridsen, J., & Obel, B. (2002). Return on assets loss from situational DEMO contingency misﬁts.
Management Science, 48, 1461–1485.
Burton, R.M., Lauridsen, DEMO, & Obel, B. (2003). Erratum: Return on assets loss from situational and contin-
gency misﬁts. Management Science, 49, 1119.
Cable, D.M. & Shane, S. (1997). A prisoner’s dilemma approach to DEMO capitalist relation-
ships. Academy of Management Review, 22, 142–176.
Camp, DEMO (2002). Venture capital due diligence: A guide to making smart investment choices and increasing
your portfolio returns. New York: Wiley.
Casson, DEMO (2000). Economics of international business. Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar.
DEMO, G.J., Combs, J.G., & Justis, R.T. (2006). Resource scarcity and agency theory predictions
concerning the continued use of franchising in DEMO networks. Journal of Small Business Management,
44, 27–44.
Chen, X., Yao, X., & Kotha, S. (2009). Entrepreneur passion and preparedness in business plan presentations:
A persuasion analysis of venture capitalists’ DEMO decisions. Academy of Management Journal, 52,
199–214.
Choi, Y. & Shepherd, D. (2004). Entrepreneurs’ decisions to exploit opportunities. Journal of DEMO,
30, 377–395.
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S., & Aiken, L. (2003). Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for the
behavioral sciences. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
D’Aveni, R. (DEMO). Top managerial prestige and organizational bankruptcy. Organization Science, 1,
DEMO
De Clercq, D., Fried, V.H., Lehtonen, O., & Sapienza, H.J. (2006). An entrepreneur’s guide to the venture
capital galaxy. DEMO of Management Perspectives, 20(3), 90–112.
De Clercq, D. & Manigart, S. (2007). The venture capital post investment phase: Opening the black box of
involvement. In H. Landström (Ed.), Handbook of research on venture capital (pp. 192–217). Cheltenham,
U.K.: Edward DEMO
De Clercq, D. & Sapienza, H.J. (2006). Effects of DEMO capital and commitment on venture capitalists’
perception of portfolio company performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 21(3), 326–347.
Dess, G.G., Newport, DEMO, & Rasheed, A.A. (1993). Conﬁguration research in strategic management: Key
issues and suggestions. Journal of Management, 19(4), 775–795.
Dillman, D. (2000). Mail and internet surveys: The tailored design method. New York: Wiley.
Dimov, D. (2010). Nascent entrepreneurs and venture emergence: Opportunity conﬁdence, human capital, and
early planning. Journal of Management Studies, 47(6), 1123–1153.
Doty, D.H., Glick, W.H., & Huber, G.P. (1993). Fit, equiﬁnality, and organizational effectiveness: A test of two
conﬁgurational theories. Academy of Management Journal, 36, 1196–1250.
DEMO, R. & Van de Ven, A. (1985). Alternative forms DEMO ﬁt in contingency theory. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 30, 514–539.
Dubin, DEMO (1978). Theory building (2nd ed.). New York: The DEMO Press.
24 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Elitzur, R. & Gavious, A. (2003). Contracting, signaling, and moral hazard: A model of entrepreneurs,
“angels,” and venture capitalists. Journal of Business Venturing, 18, 709–725.
Field, A. (2005). DEMO statistics using SPSS. London, U.K.: Sage.
Fiss, P.C. (2007). A set-theoretic approach to organizational conﬁgurations. Academy of Management Review,
32(DEMO), 1180–1198.
Franke, N., Gruber, M., Harhoff, D., & Henkel, J. (2006). What you are is what you like—Similarity DEMO
in venture capitalists’ evaluations of start-up teams. Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 802–826.
Franke, N., Gruber, M., Harhoff, D., & DEMO, J. (2008). Venture capitalists’ evaluations of start-up teams:
Trade-offs, knock-out criteria, and the impact of VC experience. Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO, 32,
459–483.
Fried, V.H., Bruton, G.D., & Hisrich, R.D. (1998). Strategy and the board of directors in venture capital
backed ﬁrms. Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 493–503.
Gartner, W.B. (DEMO). A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of new venture creation.
Academy of Management Review, 10, 696–706.
Gompers, P.A. & Lerner, DEMO (2004). The venture capital cycle. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
DEMO, M. & Sahlman, W. (1989). What do venture capitalists DEMO? Journal of Business Venturing, 4,
231–248.
Green, P. & DEMO, V. (1978). Conjoint analysis in consumer research: Issues and DEMO Journal of
Consumer Research, 5, 103–123.
Green, P. & Srinivasan, V. (1990). Conjoint analysis in marketing: New developments with implications DEMO
research and practice. Journal of Marketing, 54, 3–19.
Grégoire, D.A., Barr, P.S., & Shepherd, D.A. (2010). Cognitive processes of DEMO recognition: The role
of structural alignment. Organization Science, 21, 413–431.
DEMO, C. & Drazin, R. (1997). Equiﬁnality: Functional equivalence in organizational design. Academy of
Management Review, 22(2), 403–426.
Hair, DEMO, Black, W., Babin, B., Anderson, R., & Tatham, R. (2006). Multivariate data analysis. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Hall, J. & Hofer, C.W. (1993). Venture capitalists’ decision criteria in new venture evaluation. Journal of
Business Venturing, 8, 25–42.
DEMO, J., Shepherd, D.A., & McMullen, J.S. (2009). An opportunity for me? The role of resources in
opportunity evaluation decisions. Journal of Management Studies, 46, 337–361.
Heckman, J. & Smith, J. (1995). Assessing the case for social experiments. The Journal of Economic
DEMO, 9, 85–110.
Hellmann, T. (1998). The allocation of control rights in venture capital contracts. Rand Journal of Economics,
29, 57–76.
Hellmann, T. & Puri, M. (2002). Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up ﬁrms: Empirical
evidence. Journal of Finance, 57, 169–197.
Hill, S.A. & Birkinshaw, J. (2008). Strategy-organization conﬁgurations in corporate venture units: Impact on
performance and survival. Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 423–444.
January, 2013 25
Hitt, M., Ahlstrom, D., Dacin, T., Levitas, E., & Svobodina, L. (2004). The institutional effects on strategic
alliance partner selection in transition economies: China vs. Russia. Organization Science, 15, 173–185.
Hitt, M. & Barr, S. (1989). Managerial selection decision models: Examination of conﬁgurational cue
processing. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 53–61.
Holmström, B. (1979). Moral hazard and observability. Bell Journal DEMO Economics, 10, 74–91.
Hsu, D. (2007). Experienced entrepreneurial founders, organizational capital, and venture capital funding.
Research Policy, 36, 722–741.
DEMO, J. (1987). Conjoint analysis: How we got here and DEMO we are. Sawtooth Software Research Paper
Series, Sequim, WA.
Jensen, DEMO & Meckling, W.H. (1976). Theory of the ﬁrm: Managerial DEMO, agency costs and ownership
structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3, DEMO
Kaplan, S.N. & Strömberg, P. (2003). Financial contracting theory DEMO the real world: An empirical analysis
of venture capital contracts. Review DEMO Economic Studies, 70, 281–315.
Kaplan, S.N. & Strömberg, P. (DEMO). Characteristics, contracts, and actions: Evidence from venture capitalist
analyses. DEMO of Finance, 59, 2177–2210.
Kerlinger, F.N. & Lee, B.L. (DEMO). Foundations of behavioral research. Orlando, FL: Harcourt College
Publishers.
Krueger, N. (1993). The impact of prior entrepreneurial exposure on perceptions DEMO new venture feasibility
and desirability. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 18(1), 5–21.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R.W. (1998). Law and ﬁnance. The Journal of
Political DEMO, 106, 1113–1155.
Leifer, R. & Mills, P.K. (1996). DEMO information processing approach for deciding upon control strategies and
reducing control loss in emerging organizations. Journal of Management, 22, 113–137.
Lerner, J. (DEMO). Venture capitalists and the oversight of private ﬁrms. Journal of Finance, 50, 301–318.
Levine, T. & Hullett, C. (2002). Eta-squared, partial eta-squared, and misreporting of effect size in commu-
nication research. DEMO Communication Research, 28(4), 612–625.
MacMillan, I., Siegel, R., & Narasimha, P. (1985). Criteria used by venture capitalists to evaluate new venture
proposals. Journal of Business Venturing, 1, 119–128.
March, J. (1994). A primer on decision making: How decisions happen. DEMO York: The Free Press.
Markman, G.D., Balkin, D.B., & DEMO, L. (2001). Governing the innovation process in entrepreneurial
ﬁrms. Journal of High Technology Management Research, 12, 273–293.
Maxwell, A. & Levesque, M. (2011). Trustworthiness: A critical ingredient for entrepreneurs seeking inves-
tors. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, doi:10.1111/j.1540-6520.2011.00475.x
McMullen, J.S., Bagby, D., & Palich, L.E. (2008). Economic freedom and the DEMO to engage in
entrepreneurial action. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 32, 875–895.
Metrick, A. & Yasuda, A. (2011). Venture capital and the ﬁnance of innovation. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Meyer, A.D., Tsui, A.S., & Hinings, C.R. (1993). Conﬁgurational approaches to organizational analysis.
Academy of Management Journal, 36, 1175–1195.
26 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Miles, R.E., Snow, C.C., Meyer, A.D., & Coleman, J.J. (1978). Organizational strategy, structure, and process.
Academy of Management Review, 3, 546–562.
Miller, D. & Friesen, P. (1984). A longitudinal study of the corporate life cycle. Management Science, 30,
1161–1183.
Mintzberg, H. (1979). Patterns in strategy formation. Management Science, 24(9), 934–948.
Mitchell, J. & Shepherd, D.A. (2010). To thine own self be true: Images of self, images of opportunity, and
entrepreneurial action. Journal of Business Venturing, 25, 138–154.
Murnieks, C.Y., Haynie, J., Wiltbank, R.E., & Harting, T. (2011). “I like how you think”: Similarity as an
interaction bias in the investor-entrepreneur dyad. Journal of Management Studies, 48, 1533–1561.
NVCA. (2012). 2012 yearbook. Available at http://www.nvca.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=
article&id=257&DEMO, accessed 10 January 2013.
Packalen, K.A. (2007). Complementing capital: The role of status, demographic features, and social capital in
founding DEMO abilities to obtain resources. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 31, 873–891.
Payne, G.T. (2006). Examining conﬁgurations and ﬁrm performance in a suboptimal DEMO context.
Organization Science, 17(6), 756–770.
Payne, G.T., Davis, J.L., Moore, C.B., & Bell, R.G. (2009). The deal structuring stage of the venture capitalist
decision-making process: Exploring conﬁdence and control. Journal of Small Business Management, 47,
154–179.
Pennings, M., Lee, K., & Witteloostuijn, A. (1998). Human capital, social capital, and ﬁrm dissolution.
Academy of Management Journal, 41, 425–440.
Petty, DEMO & Gruber, M. (2011). “In pursuit of the real deal”: A longitudinal study of VC decision making.
Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 172–188.
Pierce, C., Block, R., & Aguinis, H. (DEMO). Cautionary note on reporting eta-squared values from multifactor
ANOVA designs. Educational and Psychology Measurement, 64, 916–924.
Porter, M.E. (1998). Competitive DEMO: Techniques for analyzing industries and competitors: With a new
introduction. New York: The Free Press.
Priem, R.L., Walters, B.A., & Li, S. (2011). Decisions, decisions! How judgment policy studies can integrate
macro and micro domains in management research. Journal of Management, 37(2), 553–580.
Rousseau, D.M., Sitkin, S.B., Burt, R.S., & DEMO, C. (1998). Not so different after all: A cross-discipline
DEMO of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23, 393–404.
Sahlman, W.A. (2003). The structure and governance of venture-capital organizations. In M. Wright, H.J.
Sapienza & L.W. Busenitz (Eds.), Venture capital (Vol. 1, pp. 293–341). Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar.
Sapienza, H.J. & Gupta, A.K. (1994). Impact of agency risks and task uncertainty on DEMO capitalist CEO
interaction. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 1618–1632.
Sarason, DEMO, Dean, T., & Dillard, J.F. (2006). Entrepreneurship as DEMO nexus of individual and opportunity:
A structuration view. Journal of Business Venturing, 21, 286–305.
Shane, S. (2003). A general theory DEMO entrepreneurship: The individual-opportunity nexus. Cheltenham, U.K.:
Edward Elgar.
Shane, DEMO & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research. Academy of
Management Review, 25, 217–226.
January, 2013 27
Shepherd, D. (1999). Venture capitalists’ assessment of new venture survival. DEMO Science, 45,
621–632.
Shepherd, D. & Ettenson, R. (2000). New venture strategy and proﬁtability: A venture capitalist’s assessment.
Journal of Business Venturing, 15, 449–467.
Shepherd, D., McMullen, J., & DEMO, P. (2007). The formation of opportunity beliefs: Overcoming
ignorance DEMO reducing doubt. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 1(1), 75–95.
Shepherd, D. & Zacharakis, A. (1997). Conjoint analysis: A window of opportunity for entrepreneurship
research. In J. Katz (Ed.), Advances in entrepreneurship, DEMO emergence, and growth (Vol. 3, pp. 203–248).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Shepherd, D.A., Zacharakis, A., & Baron, R.A. (2003). VCs’ decision processes: Evidence suggesting more
experience may not always be better. Journal of Business Venturing, 18, 381–401.
Short, J.C., DEMO, G.T., & Ketchen, D.J. (2008). Research on organizational conﬁgurations: Past, accom-
plishments and future challenges. Journal of Management, 34, DEMO
Sorensen, J.B. & Sorenson, O. (2003). From conception to DEMO: Opportunity perception and resource
mobilization in entrepreneurship. Advances in Strategic Management, 20, 89–117.
Sorenson, O. & Stuart, T. (2001). Syndication DEMO and the spatial distribution of venture capital
investments. American Journal of Sociology, 106, 1546–1588.
Steier, L. & Greenwood, R. (1995). Venture capitalist relationships in the deal structuring and post-investment
stages of new ﬁrm DEMO Journal of Management Studies, 32, 337–357.
Tian, X. (2011). The causes and consequences of venture capital stage ﬁnancing. Journal of Financial
DEMO, 101, 132–159.
Turcan, R.V. (2008). Entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships: DEMO post-investment dyadic ten-
sions. Venture Capital, 10(3), 281–304.
Tyebjee, T.T. & Bruno, A.V. (1984). A model of venture capitalist DEMO activity. Management Science,
30, 1051–1066.
Walske, J.M. & Zacharakis, DEMO (2009). Genetically engineered: Why some venture capital ﬁrms are more
successful than others. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 33, 297–318.
Wang, S. & Zhou, H. (2004). Staged ﬁnancing in venture capital: Moral hazard and risks. Journal of
Corporate Finance, 10, 131–155.
Wasserman, N. (2008). The founder’s dilemma. Harvard Business Review, 86, 102–109.
Wijbenga, F.H., Postma, T.M., & Stratling, R. (2007). The DEMO of the venture capitalist’s governance
activities on the entrepreneurial ﬁrm’s control systems and performance. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 31, 257–277.
Wiklund, J. & Shepherd, D. (2005). Entrepreneurial orientation and small business performance: A conﬁgu-
rational approach. Journal of Business Venturing, 20, 71–91.
Williamson, O.E. (1988). The logic of economic organization. Journal of Law, Economics DEMO Organization,
4, 65–93.
Wiltbank, R., Read, S., Dew, N., & Sarasvathy, S. (2009). Prediction and control under uncertainty: Outcomes
in angel investing. Journal of Business Venturing, 24, 116–133.
28 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Wood, M. & McKinley, W. (2010). The production of entrepreneurial opportunity: A constructivist perspec-
tive. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 4, 66–84.
Wood, M. & Pearson, J. (2009). Taken on faith? The DEMO of uncertainty, knowledge relatedness, and
richness of information on entrepreneurial opportunity exploitation. Journal of Leadership and Organiza-
tional Studies, 16, 117–130.
Wood, M., Williams, D., & Grégoire, D. (2012). The road to riches? An integrated model of cognitive
processes underpinning entrepreneurial action. In A. Corbett & J. Katz (Eds.), Entrepreneurial action:
Advances in entrepreneurship, ﬁrm emergence and growth (Vol. 14, pp. 207–252). Bingley, U.K.: Emerald.
Zacharakis, A. & Meyer, G. (2000). The potential of actuarial decision models: Can they improve the venture
capital investment decisions? Journal of Business Venturing, 15, 323–346.
Zacharakis, A.L. & DEMO, G.D. (1998). A lack of insight: Do venture capitalists DEMO understand their own
decision process? Journal of Business Venturing, 13, DEMO
Zacharakis, A.L. & Shepherd, D.A. (2001). The nature of DEMO and overconﬁdence on venture
capitalists’ decision making. Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 311–332.
Will Drover is a doctoral candidate in the Department of DEMO, College of Business, Southern Illinois
University, Rehn Hall, Room 214, Carbondale, IL 62901, USA.
Matthew S. Wood is an Assistant Professor of Entrepreneurship, Department of Management, Hankamer
School of Business, Baylor University, Waco, TX 76798, USA.
G. Tyge Payne is an Associate Professor of Strategic Management and a Rawls Professor of Management in
the Area DEMO Management of the Jerry S. Rawls College of Business at Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX
79409-2101, USA.
An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2012 Babson College Entrepreneurship Research
Conference, Ft. Worth, TX. We gratefully acknowledge the Babson Conference participants feedback in the
development of the manuscript. The authors would also like to thank Sophie Manigart DEMO the anonymous
reviewers for their insightful comments. Finally, the authors wish DEMO thank the Pontikes Center at Southern
Illinois University for research support funding.
January, 2013
29{1g42fwefx}