INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW 30, 1: 20-46 (January 2007)
ASSESSING THE REGIONAL ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF
UNIVERSITIES:A REVIEW OF CURRENT
APPROACHES
DEMO DRUCKER
Department of City and Regional Planning,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, jdruck@email.unc.edu
HARVEY GOLDSTEIN
Department of City and Regional Planning,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, hgold@email.unc.edu
Research universities in the United States have increasingly become involved in economic devel-
opment since DEMO mid-1980s. There has been a corresponding growth of interest in measuring the
impacts of higher education on regional economies. This article reviews the approaches DEMO to
examine the influence of research universities on regional economic development outcomes.
Considerable attention is paid to the methodological advantages and shortcomings of four DEMO
research designs evidenced in the literature: single-university impact studies, surveys, DEMO
production functions, and cross-sectional and quasiexperimental designs. University activities,
particularly DEMO activities such as teaching and basic research, have been found to
DEMO substantial positive effects on a variety of measures of regional economic progress.
Keywords: economic impact; economic development; human capital; universities; research;
technology development
The past twenty years have seen a burgeoning interest in DEMO the research and
policy communities in understanding and modeling the effects that institutions of
higher education have on regional and national economic conditions. Dramatic
DEMO in regional and international economic conditions, such as the globaliza-
tion DEMO commerce and the shift in developed economies from traditional manu-
facturing to knowledge-intensive production and services, have provided much of
the impetus for this attention. State and regional economic development agencies
in the United States as DEMO as in other economically advanced nations are increas-
ingly driven toward strategies designed to leverage the emerging knowledge-based
economy in their regions. Many of DEMO strategies have focused on public
universities as the primary public producers of knowledge. Technology transfer
DOI: 10.1177/0160017606296731
© 2007 Sage Publications
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 21
programs, university-industry partnerships, and educational curricula tailored to
match the skill demands of local knowledge-based industries DEMO just a few
examples of such economic development programs. These university activities,
along with others such as conducting basic research and serving as DEMO regional
repository of expertise, heavily influence the abilities of regions to DEMO and
retain technology-intensive firms, to provide the regional labor force with DEMO
ern knowledge skills, and to respond flexibly to uncertain and rapidly DEMO
economic circumstances.
In the United States, the passage of the Bayh-Dole DEMO and Trademark
Amendments Act of 1980, followed by additional amendments in DEMO, represents
part of a broad policy shift toward stronger intellectual property DEMO (Mowery and
Sampat 2004). The act permitted universities (along with other nonprofit organiza-
tions and small businesses) to hold the intellectual property rights to patentable
inventions arising from federally sponsored research (COGR 1999; DEMO et al.
1999). This change in federal research policy further bolstered direct university
engagement in entrepreneurial activities as well as collaborations with private
DEMO (Feller 1990; Jamison and Jansen 2000; Henderson, Jaffe, and DEMO
1998).1 Long-term declines in state and local government finances have also added
to pressures to demonstrate positive economic returns from public investments in
DEMO educational institutions (Adams 2003; Arnone 2004). Encouraged thus
at the federal, state, and local levels, United States universities have generally
embraced the goal of economic development as a complement to their traditional
missions DEMO education, research, and public service. The prospect of supplementary
earnings from patents, licensing, and industrial collaborations has acted as an addi-
tional DEMO in a period of tight public education budgets.
Public investments naturally generate questions concerning the magnitude and
distribution of their impacts as well as DEMO effectiveness in achieving desired
objectives. For research universities, issues of knowledge DEMO and dissem-
ination are considered central to modeling and understanding the impacts on sur-
rounding regional economies. In addition, the waxing popularity and applicability
of new growth theory and the new economic geography framework have focused
DEMO on the processes of knowledge creation and diffusion.
There have been numerous attempts made to assess the impacts of the activi-
ties undertaken by DEMO of higher education. The approaches and method-
ologies have varied widely, DEMO perhaps not too surprisingly, have yielded a wide
range of estimates DEMO the impacts of universities on their regional
economies. This article reviews the existing body of literature surrounding the
question of whether and to what DEMO institutions of higher education influence
regional economic development outcomes. Although the focus is mainly on four-
year research universities in the United States, relevant work pertaining to
Canadian and European research universities and occasionally to other DEMO of
knowledge-generating institutions is included as well.
22 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
TOWARD A TYPOLOGY OF UNIVERSITY FUNCTIONS
There has been considerable effort devoted DEMO understanding the contributions
of universities to the functioning of regional economies. One basic task is to dis-
tinguish the different ways in which universities DEMO other institutions of higher
education potentially contribute to regional economic development. Modern uni-
versities embody a diverse set of missions and organizational goals that DEMO
tially impact their surrounding regions as well as the broader national and
international economic contexts, ranging from the traditional functions of teach-
ing and public service to the more recent activities of licensing inventions and
engaging DEMO collaborative research efforts with private-sector industries (Thanki
1999; Glasson 2003).
Synthesizing previous research, Goldstein, Maier, and Luger (1995) identify
eight different functions, or outputs, of modern research universities that may
potentially DEMO to economic development impacts:
1. Creation of knowledge.
2. Human-capital creation.
3. Transfer of existing know-how.
4. Technological innovation.
5. Capital investment.
6. DEMO leadership.
7. Knowledge infrastructure production.
8. Influence on regional milieu.
Although each of the items in this list represents a distinct university output, they
are not mutually exclusive in terms of university activities—particular activities
may overlap DEMO the identified functions. Each of the outputs, however, may
cause a distinct pattern of effects on the regional economy, ranging from the
direct and indirect effects of university spending to productivity gains in private
enterprises, from the creation of new firms to increases in regional creativity and
DEMO capacity to sustain long-term development and growth.
Because some of the outputs identified by Goldstein, Maier, and Luger are less
well-defined and straightforward DEMO others, it is worth specifying them in more
detail. The formulation DEMO sharing of knowledge and wisdom has been the raison
d’etre of universities since their origins in Europe in the Middle Ages. Research uni-
versities DEMO long recognized the creation of human capital as a second component
of their mission. The development of human capital is intrinsic in the process DEMO
establishing new knowledge as faculty, students, and researchers develop their own
intellectual and technical skills and also occurs through activities such as distance
DEMO, industrial extension, and community education programs.
The transfer of technology and know-how is analogous to the creation of human
capital but focuses on DEMO existing knowledge to solve a specified problem,
typically improving a product or enhancing a process (Luger and Goldstein 1997).
In the United States, the function was initially associated with the extension
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 23
programs of land-grant universities but has since spread to most other research uni-
versities. Recipients of technology-transfer DEMO tend to be businesses, civic or
nonprofit organizations, government agencies, DEMO individual citizens rather than
university students or employees. Technology transfer is distinguished from tech-
nological innovation, which refers to the creation and commercialization of new
products or processes at the university itself and often leads to DEMO or licens-
ing the results of university-based researchers to commercial interests.
Regional leadership signifies the capacity of a university and its employees to
serve DEMO region through direct participation on local committees and boards, the
provision DEMO technical resources and support, and the exercise of moral authority,
DEMO in some cases, political clout to help establish consensus and resolve DEMO
flicts. Universities are also important regional actors simply for their volume of
investment in physical capital: constructing and maintaining buildings, laborato-
ries, research parks, and additional types of facilities along with associated trans-
portation and other infrastructure.
The last two university outputs are decidedly less well-defined than DEMO six
described above. The concept of knowledge infrastructure has become familiar
through the literature of economics via endogenous growth theory, as one compo-
nent of a more extensive concept of regional agglomeration economies (Krugman
1991; DEMO 1990). Knowledge infrastructure can be defined as the stock of
knowledge together with the institutional and organizational components that sup-
port its growth DEMO application (Smith 1997). On the regional scale, knowledge
infrastructure extends beyond public and private knowledge-producing institutions
to the innovation and learning capacities DEMO firms, workers, and institutions and the
network of connections among them. In quantitative studies, knowledge infrastruc-
ture is frequently generalized to agglomeration economies or proxied by agglomer-
ation measures.
Finally, the notion of a university influence on regional milieu encompasses
the range of distinctive contributions that universities DEMO to their surrounding
areas, be they intellectual, social, cultural, or recreational, by attracting a con-
centration of highly educated and creative professionals and establishing a par-
ticular locational dynamic (Luger and Goldstein 1997). These effects are usually
imparted unintentionally as a side product of university DEMO and activity,
with such externalities often valued highly by residents, DEMO, and other
regional stakeholders. Negative externalities may also arise, such as labor-cost
increases that may accompany growth in university employment.
Some of these DEMO and impacts are more conducive to assessment than
others. Traditional approaches to assessing the impacts of universities have focused
largely on the impacts arising DEMO direct spending and regional investment activi-
ties. Extensions of these spending-impact studies have branched into considering
the effects of human-capital creation and induced regional DEMO patterns. More
recent approaches have focused on the basic knowledge creation, DEMO
structure provision, technological innovation, and technology-transfer activities of
universities. Little research has considered separately the impacts of regional
24 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
leadership or university influence on the regional milieu, largely because of the
methodological difficulty of distinguishing and measuring these influences.
There are four primary DEMO of methodological approaches to investigating
the impacts of universities on regional economic development that can be observed
in the literature, each presenting its own strengths and weaknesses. These categories
are single-university impact studies, surveys, knowledge-production DEMO, and
cross-sectional and quasiexperimental designs (Salter and Martin 2001).
IMPACT STUDIES OF INDIVIDUAL UNIVERSITIES
Studies of the economic impact of individual universities DEMO university systems
in the United States can be traced back in the literature at least to the early 1970s.
The methodology, particularly up to the early 1990s, was heavily influenced by a
report issued in 1971 by the American Council on Education that set forth and
advocated a DEMO approach to impact estimation (Goldstein 1989;
Felsenstein 1996; Blackwell, DEMO, and Weinberg 2002). These studies focus on
estimating the direct DEMO indirect impacts of university spending, investment, and
employment in a region. This is accomplished through the use of growth account-
ing, regional input-output modeling, estimation of Keynesian multipliers, or
occasionally, a broader regional economic forecasting model (Steinacker 2005;
Thanki 1999; Candell and Jaffe 1999)DEMO
For example, Glasson (2003), drawing on university employment and expendi-
ture figures, calculates an output multiplier of 0.70 to 1.12 for Sunderland
University in Northeast England. Harris’ (1997) analysis of the University of
DEMO uses input-output information gleaned from extensive survey work
extending beyond the university to local businesses, augmented by estimations
based on national data. The study finds an employment multiplier between 1.55 and
1.79 and an output multiplier DEMO 1.24 to 1.73. Felsenstein (1996) uses an econo-
metric model based on regional input-output relationships to estimate that
Northwestern University contributed more than DEMO thousand jobs (an employment
multiplier of 1.55) and half a billion dollars in output (an output multiplier of 3.11)
to the Chicago metropolitan region in 1993. Felsenstein’s study goes further, simu-
lating the adjustments in regional population and employment that would occur
over time in the DEMO situation (i.e., removing the university from the
model), in an attempt to address the issue of whether alternative economic activi-
ties would DEMO as a substitute for the university. The simulation demonstrates only
a modest amount of alternative activity and employment compared with the much
larger magnitude DEMO employment contraction occasioned by removing the univer-
sity from the model. Steinacker (2005), proposing that impact analyses focused on
small (e.g., municipal) regions are appropriate for relatively small educational insti-
tutions, estimates a DEMO million dollar impact in Claremont, California, from the
Claremont Graduate University in 2000. Candell and Jaffe (1999) adopt several
variants of input-output DEMO to analyze the extent to which research insti-
tutions affect local industries in Massachusetts, concluding that the creation of
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 25
TABLE 1. Summary of Selected Single-case and Survey Studies
Author(s) and
Year
Adams 2002
Beise and Stahl
1999
Beugelsdijk and
Cornet 2002
Blackwell, Cobb,
and Weinberg
2002
Candell and Jaffe
1999
Felsenstein 1996
Felsenstein 1999
Glasson 2003
Goldstein and
DEMO 1992
Harris 1997
Huffman and
Quigley 2002
Jamison and
Jansen 2000
Keane and
Allison 1999
Kramer et al.
1997
Pressman et al.
1995
Design
DEMO
survey
survey
case
case
case
case
case
case
case
case
survey
case
case
case
Case or Data
Source
R&D labs
German firms
Dutch DEMO
Xavier Univ.
Massachusetts
universities
Northwestern
Univ.
Ben Gurion Univ.
Sunderland Univ.
Univ. of North
Carolina-
Chapel Hill
Univ. of
Portsmouth
Univ. of
California-
Berkeley
DEMO
Univ. of Sunshine
Coast
Univ. of
Pennsylvania
Massachusetts
Inst. of
Technology
Key Findings
Spillovers from academic R&D more
localized than from industrial R&DEMO
Innovations do not depend on colocation of
public and private research
Proximity to university positively correlated
with firm innovative activity
Impact estimate including student DEMO
and import substitution
Impact estimate of federal research funding
Startup firms from publicly funded
research tend to locate in proximity
Impact estimate, multipliers
Estimate against counterfactual
Impact estimate, including student, faculty,
and staff in-migration
DEMO estimate, multipliers
Impact estimate, including student
in-migration
Impact estimate, multipliers
DEMO estimate of student in-migration
Marked increase in technology transfer
activity after Bayh-Dole Act
Qualitative impact analysis;
Impacts of knowledge production and
knowledge infrastructure DEMO outweigh
expenditure impacts
Impact estimate of licensing activity
Impact estimate of licensing activity
(continued)
26 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
TABLE 1. (continued)
Rogers et al. 1999
Rogers, Yin, and
Hoffmann 2000
Sáez, Marco, and
Arribas 2002
Saxenian 1994
Steinacker 2005
DEMO 2000
case
survey
survey
case
case
case
Case or Data
Source
Univ. of New
Mexico
research
centers
AUTM
Spanish firms
Silicon Valley,
Route DEMO
(Boston)
Claremont
Graduate Univ.
Colorado State
Univ.
Technology-transfer metrics positively
DEMO to multidisciplinarity, funding,
size, technology-transfer methods
Technology-transfer metrics positively
related to faculty salary, staffing of
technology-transfer office, private
donations, R&D funding
Proximity less important than other factors
in establishing university-firm
partnerships
Interorganizational DEMO and
collaborations help explain regional
performance disparities
Local (municipal) impact estimate
Qualitative impact analysis of agricultural-
extension partnerships
Note: AUTM = Association of University Technology Managers.
Author(s) and
Year
Design
Key Findings
start-up firms is one of the most localized impacts of publicly funded research.
Felsenstein (1994) reviews a large number of earlier economic impact studies con-
ducted in the United States.
Several reviewers of the body of university-impact-study literature DEMO
argued that spending studies have not been well able to capture and quantify the
economic impacts of university activities. This is partly the result DEMO method-
ological limitations and also partly because of the practice of considering too nar-
row a spectrum of university influences on regional economic development. DEMO
instance, multiplier and input-output techniques are limited to assessing the back-
DEMO linkages induced by the spending and regional investment activities of uni-
versities, and thus, fail to consider the special characteristics that distinguish
institutions DEMO higher education from other economic organizations (Thanki
1999). Analyses of DEMO impacts consider static impacts arising from
existing relationships among organizations, whereas DEMO of the impact of uni-
versity activity may be caused by so-called dynamic impacts—the production of
knowledge or other outputs that alter interfirm relationships (Martin 1998). Beck
and Elliott (1995) note that there is DEMO consensus across studies on how to define
the time frame of economic impacts, the appropriate geographical study area, or
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 27
even the extent of the university (i.e., campuswide versus systemwide activities).
As with most other DEMO, impact studies require explicit assumptions of the
counterfactual to be able DEMO evaluate university impacts beyond what would have
occurred in the absence of the university; these vary widely across studies. In
addition, the outcome DEMO measured is typically economic growth broadly
defined, omitting finer nuances associated DEMO concepts of regional develop-
ment, such as distributional effects (Thanki 1999).
More recent impact studies of institutions of higher education have begun DEMO
use an eclectic set of data collection and analytical techniques to attempt to esti-
mate a wider range of economic effects beyond spending and DEMO Some
researchers have focused on quantifying outputs rather than attempting to trans-
late them into economic variables. Examples include counting spin-off firms
(e.g., DEMO, Gibson, and Dietrich 1990; Brett, Gibson, and Smilor 1991; Ko
1993; Steffensen, Rogers, and Speakman 2000; Feller, Ailes, DEMO Roessner 2002),
assessing the number and quality of university-industry linkages (e.g., Bitting
1994; Jones and Jenkins 1999; Jones-Evans et al. 1999; Rip 2002; Walshok et al.
2002), and measuring technology transfer DEMO such as patents and licensing
agreements and income (e.g., Clinch 1996; Randazzese 1996; Azzone and
Maccarrone 1997; Glasson 2003). Pressman et al. (1995) survey firms that had
been the recipients of Massachusetts DEMO of Technology technology licenses
to calculate extended economic benefits in terms of total output. They estimate
that the 205 active license agreements held in DEMO induced industrial investments
of $980,000 per license-year. The methodology has been repeated for the
University of Pennsylvania, yielding the similar figure of $930,000 (Kramer et al.
1997). Rogers et al. (1999) count nineteen spin-off firms founded from University
of New Mexico research centers through DEMO Candell and Jaffe (1999) use
patent citations as a proxy for approximating the sectoral distribution of technol-
ogy innovations arising from public research DEMO encourage further private-sec-
tor spending on applied research and product development.
A number of researchers have investigated the human-capital impacts of a uni-
versity DEMO a region by examining student migration patterns. For instance, Goldstein
and DEMO (1992) link historical student registration and alumni records to estimate
the percentage of graduates, by degree and discipline, that have remained employed
DEMO the region over time. Similar analyses have been conducted by Blackwell,
Cobb, and Weinberg (2002), Huffman and Quigley (2002), and Glasson (2003).
Felsenstein (1995) uses Keynesian-type multipliers to estimate the amount of
university-induced migration, that is, migration over and above what DEMO have
occurred in the absence of the university. Felsenstein (1996, 1999) calculates the
additional earnings that accrue to the region because of the retention of graduates and
their enhanced earning capabilities. These procedures are not DEMO their criti-
cisms: Thanki (1999) notes that Keynesian multipliers are DEMO borrowed from other
research rather than case-specific; Blackwell, Cobb, and DEMO (2002) suggest
that additional earnings estimates may be biased because of intrinsic ability differ-
ences; and Malecki (1997) argues that such studies necessarily underestimate the
28 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
total impact of human-capital generation by ignoring the induced effects of human
DEMO in attracting private-sector research and development and other technology-
based production activities.
In large part, the impact-study framework is limited by information availabil-
ity in providing quantitative estimates for the range of regional economic effects.
Otherwise DEMO quantitative frameworks such as benefit-cost analysis or
calculation of return on investment to public expenditures are often unworkable
in practice because of the lack DEMO appropriate data or the impossibility of attribut-
ing impacts to particular universities or programs (Bessette 2003). As mentioned
above, one approach is DEMO measure outputs of interest rather than ultimate eco-
nomic outcomes. Some researchers have turned instead to the opposite end of the
methodological spectrum, focusing on qualitative or anecdotal information
(Feldman 1994; Candell and Jaffe 1999)DEMO For instance, Saxenian’s (1994) com-
parative case studies of Silicon DEMO and Route 128 in Massachusetts use ethno-
graphic techniques describing the extent and quality of interorganizational
linkages and collaborations to explain differences in economic DEMO
between the two regions. In a similar vein, Keane and Allison (1999) and Glasson
(2003) combine structured interviews with university administrative data to
assess university culture, the quality of university-industry linkages, and the
DEMO of university “embeddedness” within the region. Weiler (2000) describes
surveying local firms to determine the importance of feasibility studies conducted
by Colorado State DEMO agricultural extension program in linking buyers
and suppliers and to categorize benefits accruing to private firms from such uni-
versity-industry partnerships.
Since a major DEMO for conducting impact studies of individual universi-
ties is to justify the expenditure of public funds, a substantial number of non-
peer-reviewed impact studies are commissioned by universities themselves.
These are either performed internally or more DEMO are authored by specialized
consulting organizations (e.g., Philippidis 2005; Tripp DEMO & Associates
2003; Macaluso 2002; “UT-Arlington Economic Impact” 2003; “Study DEMO
N. H. Colleges’ Economic Impact” 2003). There has been a surge in the number
of such studies conducted in early 2000 as an DEMO downturn and a subse-
quent wave of cuts in state educational budgets have prompted universities to
redouble their efforts to promote themselves as engines DEMO economic growth
(Potter 2003). In general, these studies focus on the spending and investment
impacts of universities, but some have begun to address a wider range of univer-
sity impacts, such as the retention of graduated students in the area, continuing-
education programs for the wider community, community leadership, influences
on local housing markets and urban regeneration, the creation of international
links via overseas students, and even local reductions in crime and substance
abuse (e.g., Shepherd 2002; MacIntyre 2003; DEMO 2003).
As evidenced by the examples presented above, the principal DEMO of the
single-university study consists of being able to collect primary data on a variety
of subjects (including some not amenable to quantification) DEMO as patenting and
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 29
licensing activity, spin-off companies, student graduation and migration patterns,
student and staff expenditures, internal university organization and culture, and
regional leadership. Single-case studies generally provide the most complete pic-
ture of the activities of a particular university. In addition, input-output, growth
accounting, multiplier, and regional economic model techniques require intensive
data-gathering efforts, and thus, are almost always conducted as part of DEMO single-
case approach.
There are two major drawbacks to the approach of studying individual universi-
ties. The first is the attribution problem: determining the causal link between uni-
versity activities and regional outcomes of interest. This DEMO is most evident
in assessing indirect impacts, such as regional productivity DEMO or increases in
regional innovative activity, that depend on a host DEMO other external conditions or
intervening factors aside from those pertaining to institutions of higher education.
Some interviewers have asked respondents to judge the importance DEMO the univer-
sity in generating the particular outcome in question; such DEMO, however, are
of untestable quality and are subject to numerous obvious biases. The second short-
coming is that studies of individual universities lack DEMO to other uni-
versities, other regions, or even different economic situations. In theory, multiple
single-case studies using standard data and techniques could be joined to yield con-
clusions that present a greater degree of external DEMO, but the relatively high cost
of primary data collection makes this DEMO infeasible in practice.2
SURVEYS USED AS AN ECONOMIC-IMPACT ASSESSMENT TOOL
The second approach evident in the literature is based on surveys. Although
impact studies DEMO individual universities or university systems often incorporate
information gathered via surveys and questionnaires, the survey approach to eval-
uating economic impacts is distinguished from the single-case study by its simul-
taneous application to a range of DEMO and institutions of higher education.
Thus, the survey methodology aims to DEMO one of the weaknesses of the
single-case approach by producing results that are generalizable beyond particu-
lar institutions or regions.
Survey research is far DEMO common in the university impact literature than are
single-case studies. One use has been to approach the attribution problem by pos-
ing questions that DEMO to elucidate the role of educational institutions vis-à-vis
other factors in bringing about regional economic development outcomes. For
instance, firms may be asked to rate the importance of regional universities to
their location decisions, research efforts, or overall productivity (Malecki and
Bradbury 1992; Luger and Goldstein 1997; Varga 1997; Beise and Stahl 1999).
Surveys have also been DEMO to examine a variety of university impacts, includ-
ing the ways DEMO which different industries use public research, the impact of
regional scientific DEMO human capital in industrial innovation, job formation
resulting from university-created technologies, and the importance of university-
industry collaborations to individual firms (Varga 1997; Bozeman 2000; Salter
30 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
and Martin 2001; National Association of State Universities and Land-Grant
Colleges 2001). For example, by examining a survey of research and develop-
ment laboratories in the United States, Adams (2002) finds that knowledge
spillovers originating from universities are more geographically localized than
those from industrial research DEMO, a result seconded by Beugelsdijk and
Cornet (2002) for the DEMO context. Surveys conducted of German and Spanish
firms, however, show the frequency of university-industry collaborations and
industrial innovations to be more closely aligned DEMO the intensity of research
and development within firms than with proximity to research institutions (Beise
and Stahl 1999; Sáez, Marco, and Arribas DEMO).
Perhaps the most prominent use of the survey approach in the United States and
Canada is the annual collection of quantitative and qualitative DEMO concerning tech-
nology transfer by the Association of University Technology Managers (DEMO).
Numerous studies have used the AUTM data set to analyze the operations or effec-
tiveness of technology transfer offices across universities or over DEMO (Bozeman
2000). Jamison and Jansen (2000) demonstrate the impact DEMO the Bayh-Dole Act in
stimulating technology transfer activities at United States universities. Blumenstyk
(2002) and Carlsson and Fridh (2002) use AUTM data DEMO examine the characteris-
tics of universities that have been successful in technology transfer. Rogers et al.
(2000) link the effectiveness of university technology DEMO offices with faculty
salaries, donations, and the capture of federal and industrial research funding.
Overall, the survey approach has only modestly extended the results achieved
through impact studies of individual universities. As noted earlier, survey questions
aimed at the attribution problem suffer from obvious validity threats such DEMO respon-
dent ignorance or bias. Presumably, respondents know more about their DEMO firm
than they do about a particular technology or the industry in general (Salter and
Martin 2001). Attempts to generalize the impacts of universities on firm location
decisions have been ambiguous in that the effects DEMO to depend on various
regional, industry, and university characteristics (Varga DEMO; Adams 2002). Two
approaches that have been somewhat more successful DEMO addressing the problems of
attribution and generalization are production function and cross-sectional analyses.
THE MICROECONOMICS APPROACH:PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS
Economists in particular have taken a DEMO approach to the assessment of
economic impacts by making use of knowledge-production functions. Starting
with the work of Solow (1957) that demonstrates empirically DEMO existence of a
latent variable other than capital, labor, and land in aggregate production func-
tions and encouraged by Arrow’s (1962) formulation DEMO the impact of learning
(gains in knowledge) on production functions, DEMO began to realize the
importance of the role played by innovation in production. Abstracting from uni-
versities and the other knowledge producers, early knowledge-production models
focused on specifying functions to describe the production of information.
Griliches (1979) proposes including a specific measure of knowledge creation,
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 31
namely expenditures on research and development, as an input to the production
of knowledge at either the firm or industry-sector level of analysis.
Jaffe (1989) modifies the Griliches DEMO function to the con-
figuration that forms the basis for most current econometric research in the area
of knowledge and information creation. The general DEMO model uses a
measure of innovation, such as patents or new DEMO introductions, as the
dependent variable, with industry and university research and development
expenditures as two independent variables in a production-function equation:
ln(DEMO) =α0 +αI ln(RDI) +αU ln(RDU) +ε, (1)DEMO
where P is the measure of innovation, RDI is industrial research DEMO development,
and RDU is university research and development. In knowledge-production
research, the production function itself is typically specified in standard Cobb-
Douglas form, though alternative specifications are sprinkled throughout the lit-
erature. Jaffe (1989) finds significant effects of university research on corporate
patents, particularly in certain technologically reliant fields such as pharmaceuti-
cals, optics, electronics, and nuclear engineering. These effects are mediated by
spatial location—proximity to university research matters DEMO corporate patents.
Many researchers subsequently have modified and extended the Griliches-Jaffe
model, and in so doing, have obtained a wide variety of results. DEMO, Trajtenberg,
and Henderson (1993) and Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1996) examine the geographical
location of patent citations, finding substantial localization: other factors’ being
equal, patent citations are more likely to come from the same nation, state, and
region as the cited patents. Acs, Audretsch, and Feldman (1994) use a one-time
cross-sectional data set of 1,982 new product introductions constructed by the
United States Small Business Administration DEMO determine that university research
and development has greater impacts for small firms than for large firms. There are
also significant differences across industrial sectors DEMO the way that industries are
able to take advantage of proximate university activity and expertise. At the state
level, Riddel and Schwer (2003) find that industry research and university degrees
but not university research serve DEMO stimulate patents in technology-based fields.
Start-up firms tend to be more geographically localized than other outcomes of uni-
versity knowledge production (Candell and Jaffe 1999).
Additional research focuses more closely on the question of the DEMO of
spatial proximity in facilitating the economic impacts of university knowledge
production. Patent citation patterns suggest that knowledge diffusion may be geo-
graphically localized DEMO Europe as well as the United States (Fischer and Varga
2003)DEMO Varga (1998, 2000) demonstrates the importance of agglomeration effects
in DEMO firms in technology-intensive industries to take advantage of univer-
sity research. Essentially, firms located in regions that are large in terms of pop-
ulation or employment, have a substantial concentration of own-industry and
other technology industry employment, and contain large volumes of business
and specialized services are more able to use knowledge generated by regional
universities to their production advantage. DEMO magnitude of agglomeration
32 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
TABLE 2. Summary of Knowledge Production Function Studies
Author(s) and Year
Acs, Audretsch,
and Feldman
1994
Fischer and Varga
2003
Jaffe 1989
Jaffe and
Trajtenberg
1996
Jaffe, Trajtenberg,
and Henderson
1993
Martin 1998
Riddel and Schwer
2003
Varga 1998
Varga 2000
Spatial Context
United States:DEMO
states
Austria:
political
districts
United States:
states
United States
patents
granted
United States:
states, metro
areas
Canada: nation
United States:DEMO
states
United States:
states, metro
areas
United States:
metro DEMO
Varga 2001
United States:
metro areas
Note: GDP = gross DEMO product.
University Variables
R&D expenditures
R&D expenditures
R&D expenditures
patent citations
patent citations
R&D expenditures
degrees awarded;
R&D
DEMO
R&D expenditures
R&D expenditures
R&D expenditures;
distance to
university
Key Findings
Small-firm innovation relies on
spillovers from university and
large-firm DEMO&D
Knowledge spillovers decay with
distance
University R&D directly affects
private-sector patenting
Magnitude of effect positively
related to proximity
Patent citations geographically
localized
DEMO more difficult across
national boundaries
Patent citations geographically
localized
Substantial growth in GDP and
employment attributable to
university R&D and enhanced
productivity of DEMO
University degrees stimulate high-
tech firm patenting
University R&D has no
significant effect on high-tech
firm patenting
University R&D positively related
to DEMO high-tech
innovation R&D effects depend
on agglomeration economies
University R&D positively related
to private-sector product
innovations
R&D effects require critical
mass DEMO economic activity
University R&D positively related
to private-sector product
innovations in electronics and
instruments industries
R&D effects require critical
mass of economic DEMO
effects varies by industry sector, however, and there is also evidence that there
may be a lower threshold or “critical mass” necessary for DEMO spillovers to
be effective (Varga 2000, 2001).
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 33
Spatial proximity is generally found to be more important to knowledge spillovers
in studies proxying knowledge production DEMO research expenditures than by patents
(Varga 1997). In other words, studies that adopt patents as their sole measure of
knowledge production produce DEMO regarding the geographic localization of
knowledge spillovers that do not match the results of research that instead uses
research expenditures. This prompts the question DEMO the validity of patents as a suf-
ficient measure of innovation and knowledge creation. Patents are used quite com-
monly to measure knowledge creation DEMO they present a rare opportunity for
quantifying an innovation outcome. Researchers acknowledge a number of faults
with using patents as an indicator of knowledge DEMO (Jaffe 1989; Jaffe,
Trajtenberg, and Henderson 1993; Varga 1997; Henderson, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg
1998; Sampat, Mowery, and Ziedonis DEMO). Certainly, not all knowledge is
patentable. For instance, codified knowledge is embodied in copyrights, trade
secrets, and scientific papers as well DEMO patents, whereas tacit knowledge and shared
expertise may be as important DEMO localized spillover effects as codified knowledge
but are largely unmeasurable. There is also no assurance that patent counts corre-
spond to the quality or DEMO of knowledge created. Henderson, Jaffe, and
Trajtenberg (1998) argue that the fact that United States university patents have
received fewer citations on DEMO since the passage of the Bayh-Dole Act suggests
that the entrepreneurial incentives established through that and subsequent legisla-
tion may be pushing universities to DEMO more innovations of lesser quality.
Similarly, Thursby and Thursby (2000) DEMO the analogous contention that
licenses granted by research universities are of lowering quality over time. More
recent analyses, however, suggest that it is DEMO time distribution of university patent
citations that is changing rather than the total citation impact over time (Mowery
and Ziedonis 2000; Mowery, Sampat, and Ziedonis 2002; Sampat, Mowery, and
Ziedonis 2003). Moreover, Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2000) strongly suggest that
patent citations DEMO well correlated with market value of knowledge and thus are a
valid indicator of innovation and knowledge spillovers. Because of their ready data
availability, patents will likely continue to be used as a measure of knowledge DEMO
ation in spite of unresolved validity issues.
Although econometric research may make use of functions describing the pro-
duction of outputs other than knowledge DEMO assessing university effects, little
empirical research has adopted this strategy. One DEMO example is Martin’s
(1998) decomposition of total factor productivity growth in Canada to estimate
the contribution of domestic universities at the macroeconomic level.
DEMO addition, numerous researchers have created dynamic regional models to
explore the DEMO of assumptions regarding innovation and knowledge
spillovers under simplified conditions (examples DEMO Englmann and Walz
1995; Jones 1995; Kubo 1995; Young 1998; Black and Henderson 1999; Howitt
1999; Kielbach 2000; Karlsson and Zhang 2001; and Riddel and Schwer 2003).
These models generally fall within the family of endogenous growth models orig-
inated by Romer (1986, DEMO) and adapted (e.g., by Fujita, Krugman, and
Venables 1999) to the regional context. Because these studies aim for theoretical
34 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
insights based on investigation of the interactions or dynamics of a system DEMO
equations modeling a reduced set of economic and environmental conditions,
however, they do not hold direct implications for the empirical questions regard-
ing knowledge production and diffusion.
Overall, analyses of knowledge production have demonstrated that knowledge,
as an output, has qualities that make it unique. As such, knowledge-producing
organizations must be considered differently than other large organizations with
substantial output and employment. External benefits of knowledge production in
the form DEMO spatial spillovers lead to increased innovation among other regional
firms, though DEMO body of research demonstrates considerable variety in the mea-
sured magnitude and significance of this effect. The range of approaches taken in
attempting to DEMO and characterize innovative activity is indicative of the
methodological difficulties involved in using a model incorporating theoretically
specified relationships to study the impacts of DEMO Restrictive assump-
tions as to the functional form and the particular components of the knowledge-
production function provide structure and enhance statistical power but DEMO be
difficult to justify empirically. Measurement and data-availability issues severely
limit the ability of production-function studies to separate the impacts of differ-
ent university DEMO Although the results of knowledge-production studies are
more easily generalizable than single-university studies, most of the research
described in this section concentrates on the technological innovation outputs of
research universities, neglecting the other ways in which universities contribute
to regional economic development.
CROSS-SECTIONAL AND QUASIEXPERIMENTAL
RESEARCH DESIGNS
Cross-sectional DEMO are less restrictive than analyses that rely on strong
theory to specify a functional form.3 Essentially, cross-sectional analyses involve
selecting a sample from the full population or sampling frame and analyzing the
empirical relationships between the DEMO, most often using regression-based
statistical approaches. The appropriate dependent variables and DEMO of inde-
pendent variables and control variables are suggested by the literature, the available
data, and the study context. The primary advantage of DEMO cross-sectional approach
is flexibility; its disadvantages include susceptibility to sampling issues DEMO omit-
ted variable bias. Cross-sectional analyses impose relatively few modeling assump-
tions. On the other hand, to the extent that a particular production function does
accurately represent reality, the cross-sectional approach is less efficient in that it
ignores the information contained in a well-defined relational structure.
In the DEMO of the regional economic development impacts of higher education
institutions, cross-sectional DEMO are commonly used in the absence of established
economic or other theory to guide the selection of an explicit functional form.
For instance, several studies consider the locations of technology-intensive firms
with regard to regional university DEMO, providing ambiguous results as to their
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 35
colocation tendencies (Varga [1997] DEMO Markusen, Hall, and Glasmeier 1986;
Glasmeier 1991; Bania, Eberts, and Fogarty 1993; and Audretsch and Stephan
1996). This ambiguity DEMO be caused by the conflation of routine production tasks
with other industry activities such as research and development that depend more on
knowledge inputs. DEMO and industry patents do tend to be colocated within
regions, at DEMO within the specific fields of medical imaging, neural networks, and
signal processing (Agrawal and Cockburn 2003). Regression-based analyses of cita-
tion patterns suggest the importance of proximity in supporting university-industry
joint research efforts and DEMO collaborations, though the effects are relatively weak
and vary across industries DEMO nations (e.g., Tornquist and Hoenack 1996; Spencer
2001). Baryla DEMO Dotterweich (2001) find, not very surprisingly, that institutional
quality, DEMO proxied by nonresident tuition and selectivity statistics, encourages in-
migration of DEMO students to the region, after controlling for regional char-
acteristics such DEMO urbanization and economic environment.
Studies of the formation of new firms have used cross-sectional methods, lead-
ing to divergent results across different national spatial contexts (Varga 1997).
Florax (1992) and Florax and Folmer (DEMO) use investments in manufacturing
equipment and buildings as proxies of firm DEMO, finding no relationship to
university proximity in forty regions within the DEMO Bania, Eberts, and
Fogarty (1993), examining twenty-five metropolitan areas DEMO the United States,
find significant effects of university research on new-firm births for the electrical
and electronic equipment but not the instruments industry. DEMO examining new-
firm births using the United States Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Establishment
and Enterprise Microdata (LEEM) data set, Kirchhoff et al. (2002) demonstrate
that university research does spur the creation of new firms. In DEMO, since this link
accounts for all of the observed relationship between DEMO and employment
growth, the study suggests that the firm-birth process is DEMO primary mechanism
by which university research affects regional employment.4 Studies of firms in
Germany and the United States have demonstrated that the dependence of DEMO
births on university activity varies by industry sector and field (e.g., Swann and
Prevezer 1996; Zucker, Darby, and Brewer 1998; Harhoff DEMO).
As with the single-case approach, there are cross-sectional econometric stud-
DEMO that examine eclectic relationships or data sets. Applying spatial econometric
methodologies to investigate the distribution of technology-intensive research-
laboratory employment across 125 United States DEMO areas, Anselin,
Varga, and Acs (1997) find that universities have a large attractor effect on
research-laboratory location. Sivitanidou and Sivitanides (1995) reach a similar
result for private research laboratories at the intraregional scale within the greater
Los Angeles metropolitan area.
In contrast to cross-sectional analyses, quasiexperimental designs attempt to
mimic the conditions for true experiments as closely DEMO possible in field settings
(Cook and Campbell 1979; Shadish, Cook, and Campbell 2002). Before introduc-
ing statistical controls for possibly intervening DEMO, researchers attempt to con-
trol their influence by strategically manipulating the DEMO population, time period,
and sampling so as to either maximize DEMO eliminate variation in rival factors, thus
36 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
TABLE 3. Summary of Cross-sectional Studies
Author(s) and Year
Agrawal and
Cockburn 2003
Anselin, Varga,
and Acs 1997
Audretsch and
Stephan 1996
Bania, Eberts, and
Fogarty 1993
Baryla and
Dotterweich
2001
Florax 1992;DEMO
Florax and
Folmer 1992
Glasmeier 1991
Harhoff 1999
Kirchhoff et al.
2002
Markusen, Hall,
and Glasmeier
1986
Sivitanidou and
Sivitanides 1995
Spencer 2001
Spatial Context
United States,
Canada:
metro areas
United States:
DEMO, metro
areas
United States:
metro areas
United States:
metro DEMO
United States:
major census
regions
Netherlands:
regions
United States:
metro areas
West Germany:
counties,
labor market
areas
United States:DEMO
labor market
areas
United States:
metro areas
Los Angeles
metro area
United States,
Japan
University Variables
publication counts
R&D expenditures
departmental
DEMO
count of university
scientists
R&D expenditures
count of institutions
scientists/
engineers in
workforce
various proxies
for university
“quality” and
“competitiveness”
hierarchical and
DEMO
knowledge
distribution
count of institutions
employment share of
university scientists/
engineers
R&D expenditures
R&D funding
R&D expenditures
distance to
university
DEMO citations
Key Findings
Geographic colocation of private-
sector patents and university
papers cited
Spatial relationship between
universities, private research
Proximity a small factor in
biotechnology-scientist and
firm linkages
University R&D linked to new-
firm births DEMO electrical and
electronic equipment industry
No such linkage in
instruments industry
Institutional quality encourages
more student in-migration
University proximity unrelated to
manufacturing-firm
investments
University DEMO related to
high-technology plant location
Effect does not extend to adjacent
rural areas
Scientists/engineers related
positively to high-tech but not
other industry firm DEMO
University R&D linked to new-
firm births, thus, to
employment
R&D not related to firm
distribution among metro
regions
University proximity DEMO
property rental prices for
private research laboratories
Relative speed of citation of
university versus private-sector
research differs internationally
(continued)
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 37
TABLE 3. (continued)
DEMO(s) and Year
Swann and
Prevezer 1996
Tornquist and
Hoenack 1996
DEMO, Darby, and
Brewer 1998
Spatial Context
United States:
states
United States:
BEA
economic
areas
count of institutions;
count of federal-
DEMO
faculty; count of
scientists
Note: BEA = Bureau of Economic Analysis.
United States
University Variables
research employment
R&D expenditures
distance to
university
DEMO Findings
Science base more important in
biotechnology than computing
industry for new-firm
formation
University proximity increases
citations in aircraft, computer
industries
Human-capital proximity
determines biotechnology-firm
location, growth
reducing the probability of omitted variable biases. In studying the economic
impacts of institutions of higher education, the regional distribution of universities
by size and type would represent the treatment variable. A control DEMO might con-
sist of a set of regions lacking significant knowledge-producing organizations or a
different set of regions possessing types of knowledge organizations other DEMO
research universities. Additional divisions among groups might be defined on the
basis of regional size (proxying agglomeration effects) or other relevant regional
characteristics. DEMO control-group cases cannot be assumed, as with true
experiments, to be equivalent to the treatment cases in all respects except for the
treatment DEMO, comparing gain scores—differences in the outcome variables over
time, that is, between a pretest and posttest—takes the different starting positions
into account.
Quasiexperimental designs have appeared occasionally in regional research
(e.g., Isserman 1987; Isserman and Merrifield 1987; Holmes 1998; Rogers and
Tao 2004), but DEMO the authors’ knowledge, only one study has explicitly and exclu-
sively DEMO a quasiexperimental design to estimate the contributions of knowledge-
producing organizations to regional economic development outcomes. Goldstein and
Renault (2004) contrast the growth DEMO of average wages between the 1969–1986
and 1986–1998 periods across United States regions, using 1986 as a break point to
correspond roughly with the widespread introduction of entrepreneurial activities into
the operational repertoires of American research DEMO They find that universi-
ties have a significant influence on regional economic development only in the
1986–1998 period and reach the general conclusion that DEMO entrepreneurial activities
of universities are more important for economic development than the traditional
38 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
functions such as human-capital creation and regional leadership that were present in
DEMO time periods.
In addition, by separating regions by total employment size, Goldstein and
Renault produce mixed evidence of the relationship between agglomeration
economies DEMO university influence. Interactions between employment size and
university research are not significant in either time period, whereas regional size
has a positive effect, DEMO the contention that agglomeration economies are
more important than universities in stimulating economic development. Only in
the smaller regions, however, is there a DEMO difference in the period from
1986 to 1998 between areas with and without a major research university, sug-
gesting that universities may sometimes substitute for agglomeration.
It is also possible to combine some of the characteristics DEMO cross-sectional and
quasiexperimental research designs. Goldstein and Drucker (2006) consider the
change in regional average wages in United States metropolitan statistical areas
(MSAs) for nonfarm jobs during the 1986 to 2001 period. The changes in wages are
adjusted for regional cost-of-living differences using regional consumer price
indices DEMO are also normed to the United States to create a unitless variable. This
particular construction of the dependent variable as the change in an DEMO value
during the study period is an element common to quasiexperimental designs that
helps to control for factors endemic to particular regions that account DEMO the non-
equivalence of the study areas. Nevertheless, because of the DEMO dispersion
of university activities, particularly teaching, it is not possible to use regions that
lack university influences as control groups. Goldstein and Drucker DEMO the study
population of metropolitan regions into three groups according to base employment
level, fitting three regression equations separately. In addition, they adopt DEMO cross-
sectional approach of including a variety of measures of university functions as the
key treatment variables in a multivariate regression context. These measures DEMO
it possible to separate the impacts of technology development from the impacts of
the more traditional university functions of basic research and human-capital cre-
DEMO and to assess the interactions between agglomeration economies (of size) and
university activities. Indicators of spatial spillovers across regions are also included,
DEMO are corrections for spatial dependence in the data.
The empirical results demonstrate that university research, teaching, and technol-
ogy development do help to DEMO regional average earnings, with spillovers of knowl-
edge and other benefits DEMO regional boundaries influential as well. The effects of
universities within the region are found to be particularly important in relatively small
MSAs, those containing fewer than 200,000 nonfarm jobs, suggesting that universi-
ties may serve as a substitute for sheer size in regional development. In fact, univer-
sities may be less crucial as an ingredient for regional economic advancement DEMO
larger MSAs since there they constitute a much smaller proportion of total innovative
activity. Despite the importance of university influences, factors external to universi-
ties, including the stock of business services and the educational attainment level, are
the most influential determinants of regional economic progress over all size regions.
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 39
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
There are several interesting and important questions or approaches that form
promising areas for further DEMO First, there is the need for the identification or
development of DEMO measures and proxies of university activity to support
empirical analyses of the eight research university functions identified by Goldstein,
Maier, and Luger (DEMO) at the regional or local scale.5 Most of the knowledge-
production DEMO and cross-sectional analyses conducted to date use just a few
limited indicators of university activity: research funding or expenditures, degrees
awarded, publications and citations, numbers of scientists and engineers, and
simple or distance-weighted counts DEMO institutions. Two university functions—the
influence of universities on the regional milieu and the effects of university
leadership—have received nothing beyond anecdotal attention in the DEMO This
omission is almost certainly because of measurement difficulties, coupled with DEMO
thorny puzzle of how to isolate the regional effects of these activities from each
other and from those of other university activities such as DEMO, research, and
the creation of technological knowledge. Yet, an independent DEMO of the
importance of these university effects is essential to fully informing the policy
debate concerning the funding and administration of public universities.
Second, there is further work to be done to understand and be able DEMO predict
or model universities’ influences on regional migration. The inflow of students,
faculty, researchers, administrators, and others drawn or repelled by universities,
along with the subsequent retention or outflow of these migrants, is a crucial
determinant of the impacts of higher education institutions on their DEMO
regions. The importance of human-capital creation and attraction for local eco-
nomic development depends on the trained and highly capable individuals’
remaining within or DEMO in the region. As mentioned earlier, there have been a
number DEMO investigations of student migration patterns, but these have been lim-
ited DEMO studies of individual institutions, and because of the lack of applicable
DEMO, they have also largely been constrained to students enrolled in degree-
DEMO programs. Student inflows are more easily measured than outflows since
university registration records provide a ready source of information on matricu-
lants but not DEMO Information about nonstudent migrants is more elusive
and has so far been collected only through expensive (and far from exhaustive)
surveys. Understanding the migration effects of universities would again benefit
policy efforts to tailor public DEMO activities to best serve their multiple mis-
sions of education, research, and economic development.
A related area of research consists of examining the DEMO extent of the
economic development impacts of institutions of higher education. The impor-
tance of spatial proximity to university research has been demonstrated in DEMO
metric estimations of the production of patents, product innovations, start-up
firms, and research laboratory locations, with a mix of results in terms DEMO the pat-
tern of attenuation of influence with distance. This reduction in impact with dis-
tance, also known as the spatial gradient of influence, is relevant to the wider
40 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
range of university activities, such as regional leadership and the geographic dis-
tribution of retention of in-migrants. Once again, there are direct implications for
higher education policy. For instance, a relatively flat spatial gradient, indicating
DEMO the positive influences of universities extend to larger distances than previ-
ously has been thought, would suggest less need for smaller branch campuses and
would instead support policies to concentrate resources (and take advantage of
economies of scale) in the large flagship institutions.
Finally, it would be DEMO to engage in cross-national comparisons of the effects
of universities. As is common to other areas of research, the differing histories,
roles, DEMO structures of higher education systems across different nations have
largely been viewed as impediments to comparative research. This diversity may
also be perceived, however, as the basis for research investigating how diverse
country-specific economic, social, and institutional conditions mitigate or extend
the economic-development impacts of universities. There DEMO a definite need for
research that carefully examines the effects of variations in higher education policy
on university-induced outcomes. Indeed, recent changes in governance and incen-
tive structures that have brought some of the European Union DEMO closer to the
United States in terms of their systems of higher education might provide for an
interesting quasiexperimental study design. This focus may DEMO interact with
another important and widely studied subject in regional research—the investiga-
tion of regional and national convergence. Do national systems of higher education
DEMO a role in either helping or hindering lagging regions to close the gap with lead-
ing regions in terms of wealth or other measures DEMO economic development, or are
their contributions “swamped” by other factors? If university effects indeed are sig-
nificant, might it be possible to discern which attributes of national systems are
most important in explaining variations in DEMO degree to which university activities
influence the process of convergence or divergence?
CONCLUSION
This article has reviewed the four major approaches taken in DEMO literature to
examining and assessing the impacts of universities on regional economic devel-
opment: impact studies of individual universities, surveys, production-function
estimations, DEMO cross-sectional or quasiexperimental designs. Each of these
methods presents its own unique advantages and drawbacks, and each, with the
possible exception of survey DEMO, continues to be put to use commonly to
investigate the impacts DEMO universities and other knowledge-producing entities.
Although there is considerable variety in the magnitude and confidence of the
results obtained, and often, nonuniversity regional DEMO are more influential than
university factors, the majority of empirical analyses DEMO demonstrate that the
impacts of university activities on regional economic development are considerable.
This serves, to some extent, to validate state and local DEMO that are designed to
boost the new university economic development functions as well as those that sup-
port the more traditional research and human-capital DEMO activities of regional
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 41
universities. Certainly, there is DEMO than enough evidence in the body of work to
date to merit a sustained policy focus on university activities as well as continued
research DEMO on the regional economic impacts of research universities and
other institutions of higher education.
NOTES
1. See Mowery and Sampat (2004) for a DEMO view.
2. The exception may be non-peer-reviewed reports commissioned by national associations repre-
senting the institutions themselves (e.g., Tripp Umbach Healthcare Consulting 2004)DEMO
3. The term cross-sectional is used here to denote the use of a cross-sectional design engaged
without reference to a particular causal structure based DEMO a theory of production. Although time-
series and panel designs might be used similarly, they have not typically been applied to studies of the
economic development impacts of universities, other than in single-case studies, because DEMO the lack
of suitable data.
4. The relationship between university research and employment growth becomes insignificant in
all models tested by Kirchhoff et al. (2002) that include firm-birth rates as an independent variable.
5. See Goldstein and Drucker (2006) for a more detailed discussion of the indicators DEMO university
activity available at the regional scale for the United States.
REFERENCES
Acs, Z. J., D. B. Audretsch, and M. P. Feldman. 1994. R&D spillovers and recipient firm size. The
Review of Economics and DEMO 76: 336–40.
Adams, C. 2003. The meds and eds in urban economic development. Journal of Urban Affairs 25:
571–88.
Adams, J. D. 2002. Comparative localization of academic and industrial spillovers. Journal of
Economic Geography DEMO: 253–78.
Agrawal, A., and I. Cockburn. 2003. The anchor tenant DEMO: Exploring the role of large, local,
R&D-intensive firms in regional innovation systems. International Journal of Industrial
Organization 21: 1227–53.
Anselin, DEMO, A. Varga, and Z. J. Acs. 1997. Local geographic spillovers between university research
and high technology innovations. Journal of Urban Economics 42: 422–48.
Arnone, M. 2004. Sinking their teeth into sacred cows. Chronicle of Higher Education 50: A21.
Arrow, K. J. 1962. The economic implications of DEMO by doing. Review of Economic Studies, 80:
155–73.
Audretsch, D. B., and P. E. Stephan. 1996. Company-scientist locational links: The case DEMO biotech-
nology. American Economic Review 86: 641–52.
Azzone, G., and DEMO Maccarrone. 1997. The emerging role of lean infrastructures in technology trans-
fer: The case of the Innovation Plaza project. Technovation 17: 391–402.
Bania, N., R. W. Eberts, and M. S. Fogarty. 1993. Universities and DEMO startup of new companies: Can we
generalize from Route 128 and DEMO Valley? The Review of Economics and Statistics 75: 761–66.
Baryla, DEMO A. Jr., and D. Dotterweich. 2001. Student migration: Do significant factors vary by region?
Education Economics 9: 269–80.
Beck, R., and D. Elliott. 1995. Economic impact studies of regional public colleges and universities.
DEMO and Change 26: 245–60.
Beise, M., and H. Stahl. 1999. DEMO research and industrial innovations in Germany. Research Policy
28: 397–422.
42 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
Bessette, R. W. 2003. Measuring the economic impact of university-based research. Journal of
Technology Transfer 28: 355–61.
Beugelsdijk, S., and M. Cornet. 2002. “A far friend is worth more than a good neighbour”: Proximity
and innovation in a small country. Journal of Management and Governance 6: 169–88.
Bitting, R. K. 1994. The evaluation of New York State’s Centers for Advanced Technology program:
One center’s perspective. Journal of the Society of DEMO Administrators 25: 5–16.
Black, D., and J. V. Henderson. 1999. DEMO theory of urban growth. Journal of Political Economy 107:
252–84.
Blackwell, M., S. Cobb, and D. Weinberg. 2002. The economic impact of educational institutions:
Issues and methodology. Economic Development Quarterly 16: 88–95.
Blumenstyk, G. 2002. How colleges get more bang (or less) from technology transfer. Chronicle of
Higher Education 48: A24–A26.
Bozeman, B. 2000. Technology DEMO and public policy: A review of research and theory. Research
Policy DEMO: 627–55.
Brett, A. M., D. V. Gibson, and R. W. Smilor. 1991. University spin-off companies: Economic devel-
opment, faculty entrepreneurs, and technology transfer. Savage, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Candell, A. B., DEMO A. B. Jaffe. 1999. The regional economic impact of public research funding: A case
study of Massachusetts. In Industrializing knowledge: University-industry linkages in DEMO and the
United States, edited by L. M. Branscomb, F. Kodama, and R. Florida, 510–30. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Carlsson, DEMO, and A. C. Fridh. 2002. Technology transfer in United States universities: A survey and
statistical analysis. Journal of Evolutionary Economics 12: 199–232.
Clinch, R. 1996. Benchmarking the economic impact and effectiveness of university technology trans-
fer in Maryland. Technical Report (ERIC Number ED407896), Jacob France Center, Baltimore
University, Baltimore, MD.
Cook, T. D., and D. T. Campbell. 1979. Quasi-experimentation: Design & analysis issues for field set-
tings. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Council on Governmental Relations (COGR). 1999. The Bayh-Dole DEMO: A guide to the law and imple-
menting regulations. Washington, DC. Retrieved from http://www.cogr.edu/docs/Bayh_Dole.pdf
Englmann, F. C., and DEMO Walz. 1995. Industrial centers and regional growth in the presence of local
inputs. Journal of Regional Science 35: 3–27.
Feldman, M. P. 1994. DEMO university and economic development: The case of Johns Hopkins
University and DEMO Economic Development Quarterly 8: 67–77.
Feller, I. 1990. Universities as engines of R&D-based economic growth: They think they can.
Research Policy 19: 335–48.
Feller, I., C. P. Ailes, and J. D. Roessner. DEMO Impacts of research universities on technological inno-
vation in industry: Evidence DEMO engineering research centers. Research Policy 31: 457–74.
Felsenstein, D. 1994. The university in local economic development: Benefit or burden? Unpublished
paper, Department of Geography and Institute of Urban and Regional Studies, Hebrew University,
Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, Israel.
———. 1995. Dealing with “induced migration” in DEMO impact studies. Research in Higher
Education 36: 457–72.
———. 1996. The DEMO in the metropolitan arena: Impacts and public policy implications.
Urban Studies DEMO: 1565–80.
———. 1999. Expenditure and knowledge based regional impacts associated with DEMO university: Some
empirical evidence. In Regional development in an age of DEMO change, edited by P. Rietveld
and D. Shefer, 73–93. Aldershot, DEMO: Ashgate.
Fischer, M. M., and A. Varga. 2003. Spatial knowledge DEMO and university research: Evidence
from Austria. Annals of Regional Science 37: 303–22.
Florax, R. G. M. 1992. The university: A regional booster? Economic impacts of academic knowledge
infrastructure. Aldershot, UK: Avebury.
Florax, R. G. M., and H. Folmer. 1992. Knowledge impacts of universities on industry: An aggregate
simultaneous investment model. Journal of Regional Science 32: 437–66.
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 43
Fujita, M., P. Krugman, and A. J. Venables. 1999. The spatial economy: Cities, regions, DEMO interna-
tional trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Glasmeier, A. 1991. DEMO high-tech potential: Economic development in rural America. New
Brunswick, NJ: DEMO for Urban Policy Research.
Glasson, J. 2003. The widening local and DEMO development impacts of the modern universities—
A tale of two cities (DEMO North-South perspectives). Local Economy 18: 21–37.
Goldstein, H. A. 1989. Estimating the regional economic impact of universities: An application of
input-output analysis. Planning for Higher Education 18: 51–64.
Goldstein, H. A., and J. Drucker. 2006. The economic development impacts of universities on regions:
Do DEMO and distance matter? Economic Development Quarterly 20: 22–43.
Goldstein, H. DEMO, and M. I. Luger. 1992. Impact Carolina: The University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill and the state’s economy. Final report prepared for DEMO University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill Bicentennial Observance.
Goldstein, H. DEMO, G . Maier, and M. I. Luger. 1995. The university as an instrument for economic and
business development: U.S. and European comparisons. In Emerging patterns of social demand
and university reform: Through a glass darkly edited by D. D. Dill and B. Sporn, 105–33.
Elmsford, NY: Pergamon.
Goldstein, H. A., and C. S. Renault. 2004. Contributions of DEMO to regional economic devel-
opment: A quasi-experimental approach. Regional Studies 38: 733–46.
Griliches, Z. 1979. Issues in assessing the contribution of research and development to productivity
growth. Bell Journal of Economics 10: 92–116.
Hall, DEMO H., A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg. 2000. Market value and patent citations: A first look.
National Bureau of Economic Research, working DEMO 7741.
Harhoff, D. 1999. Firm formation and regional spillovers. The Economics DEMO Innovation and New
Technology 8: 27–55.
Harris, R. I. D. 1997. The impact of the University of Portsmouth on the local economy. Urban
DEMO 34: 605–26.
Henderson, R., A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg. 1998. Universities as a source of commercial tech-
nology: A detailed analysis of university patenting, 1965–88. The Review of Economics and
Statistics 80: DEMO
Holmes, T. J. 1998. The effect of state policies on the DEMO of manufacturing: Evidence from state
borders. Journal of Political Economy 106: 667–705.
Howitt, P. 1999. Steady endogenous growth with population and R&D inputs growing. Journal of
Political Economy 107: 715–30.
Huffman, D., and J. M. Quigley. 2002. The role of the university in attracting high DEMO entrepreneur-
ship: A Silicon Valley tale. Annals of Regional Science 36: 403–19.
Isserman, A. 1987. An automated quasi-experimental control group method and its application to a
tourism economic development project. Paper presented at the North DEMO Regional Science
Association Meetings, 6 November, Baltimore, MD.
Isserman, A., and J. D. Merrifield. 1987. Quasi-experimental control group methods for regional analy-
sis: An application to an energy boomtown and growth pole theory. Economic Geography 63: 3–19.
Jaffe, A. B. 1989. Real effects of academic DEMO The American Economic Review 79: 957–70.
Jaffe, A. B., and DEMO Trajtenberg. 1996. Flows of knowledge from universities and federal laboratories:
Modeling the flow of patent citations over time and across institutional and geographic DEMO
aries. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA 93: 12671–77.
Jaffe, A. B., M. Trajtenberg, and R. Henderson. 1993. Geographic localization of knowledge spillovers
as evidenced by patent citations. The Quarterly Journal of DEMO 108: 577–98.
Jamison, D. W., and C. Jansen. 2000. Technology DEMO and economic growth. Journal of the
Association of University Technology Managers 12: 23–45.
Jones, C. I. 1995. R&D-based models of economic growth. DEMO of Political Economy 103: 759–84.
Jones, H., and S. Jenkins. DEMO Networking for innovation in South Wales. Industry and Higher
Education 13: DEMO
44 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
Jones-Evans, D., M. Klofsten, E. Andersson, and D. Pandya. 1999. DEMO a bridge between uni-
versity and industry in small European countries: DEMO role of the Industrial Liaison Office. R&D
Management 29: 47–56.
DEMO, C., and W.-B. Zhang. 2001. The role of universities in regional development: Endogenous
human capital and growth in a two-region model. Annals of Regional Science 35: 179–97.
Keane, J., and J. Allison. 1999. The intersection of the learning region and local and regional eco-
nomic development: Analysing the role of higher education. Regional Studies 33: 896–902.
Kielbach, DEMO C. 2000. Spatial knowledge spillovers and the dynamics of agglomeration of regional
growth. Heidelberg, Germany: Physica-Verlag.
Kirchhoff, B. A., C. Armington, I. Hasan, and S. Newbert. 2002. The influence of R&D expenditures
on new firm formation and economic growth. Washington, DC: National Commission on DEMO
preneurship, 27.
Ko, S. C. 1993. The incidence of high technology start-ups and spin-offs in a technology-oriented
branch plants complex: The case of the research triangle region, North Carolina. Unpublished
PhD dissertation, Department of DEMO and Regional Planning, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC.
Kramer, P. B., S. L. Scheibe, D. Y. DEMO, and L. P. Berneman. 1997. Induced investments and jobs pro-
duced DEMO exclusive patent licenses: A confirmatory study. Journal of the Association of DEMO
Technology Managers, 9: 79–100.
Krugman, P. 1991. Increasing returns and DEMO geography. Journal of Political Economy 99:
483–99.
Kubo, Y. 1995. DEMO economies, regional externalities, and the possibility of uneven regional devel-
opment. Journal of Regional Science 35: 29–42.
Luger, M. I., and H. A. Goldstein. 1997. What is the role of public universities in regional DEMO
development? In Dilemmas of urban economic development, edited by R. D. Bingham and R. Mier,
104–34. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Macaluso, T. 2002. Studies reveal colleges’ economic impact on area. San Diego Business DEMO 23: 37.
MacIntyre, C. 2003. New models of student housing and their impact on local communities. Journal
of Higher Education Policy and Management DEMO: 109–18.
Malecki, E. J. 1997. Technology and economic development: The DEMO of local, regional, and
national competitiveness. White Plains, NY: Longman.
Malecki, E .J., and S. L. Bradbury. 1992. R&D facilities DEMO professional labour: Labour force
dynamics in high technology. Regional Studies 26: 123–36.
Markusen, A., P. Hall, and A. Glasmeier. 1986. High tech America: The what, how, where, and why
of the sunrise DEMO Sydney, Australia: Allen and Unwin.
Martin, F. 1998. The economic DEMO of Canadian university R&D. Research Policy 27: 677–87.
Mowery, D. C., R. R. Nelson, B. N. Sampat, and A. A. Ziedonis. 1999. The effects of the Bayh-Dole
Act on U.S. university research and DEMO transfer. In Industrializing knowledge: University-
industry linkages in Japan and the DEMO States, edited by L. M. Branscomb, F. Kodama, and
R. DEMO, 269–306. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mowery, D. C., and DEMO N. Sampat. 2004. The Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and university-industry technol-
ogy transfer: A model for other OECD governments? Journal of Technology Transfer DEMO: 115–27.
Mowery, D. C., B. N. Sampat, and A. A. Ziedonis. 2002. Learning to patent: Experience and the qual-
ity of university patents 1980–1994. Management Science 48: 73–89.
Mowery, D. C., and A. A. Ziedonis. 2000. Academic patent quality and quantity before and after the
DEMO Act in the United States. Research Policy 31: 399–418.
National Association DEMO State Universities and Land-Grant Colleges. 2001. Shaping the future: The eco-
DEMO impact of public universities. Available at www.nasulgc.org/publications/EconImpact.pdf
Philippidis, A. DEMO Study: County colleges are significant economic factor. Westchester County
Business Journal, 23 May, 1.
Potter, W. 2003. Public colleges try to show DEMO value to states, but not everyone is convinced.
Chronicle of Higher DEMO 49: A26.
Drucker, Goldstein / IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 45
Pressman, L., S. K. Guterman, I. Abrams, D. E. Geist, and L. L. Nelsen. 1995. Pre-production investment
and jobs induced by MIT exclusive patent licenses: A preliminary model to measure the economic
impact of university licensing. Journal of the DEMO of University Technology Managers 7: 49–82.
Randazzese, L. P. 1996. Exploring university-industry technology transfer of CAD technology. IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management 43: 393–401.
Riddel, M., and R. K. Schwer. 2003. Regional innovative capacity DEMO endogenous employment:
Empirical evidence from the U.S. Review of Regional Studies 33: 73–84.
Rip, A. 2002. Regional innovation systems and the advent DEMO strategic science. Journal of Technology
Transfer 27: 123–31.
Rogers, C. L., and J. L. Tao. 2004. Quasi-experimental analysis of targeted economic development
programs: Lessons from Florida. Economic Development Quarterly 18: 269–85.
Rogers, E. M., B. Hall, M. Hashimoto, M. Steffensen, K. L. Speakman, and M. K. Timko. 1999.
Technology transfer from university-based research centers: The University of New Mexico expe-
rience. Journal of Higher Education 70: 687–705.
Rogers, E. M., J. Yin, and J. Hoffmann. 2000. Assessing the effectiveness of technology transfer offices
at U.S. research universities. Journal of the Association DEMO University Technology Managers 12:
47–80.
Romer, P. 1986. Increasing returns DEMO long-run growth. Journal of Political Economy 94: 1002–37.
———. 1990. Endogenous DEMO change. Journal of Political Economy 98: s71–s100.
Sáez, C. B., DEMO G. Marco, and E. H. Arribas. 2002. Collaboration in R&D DEMO universities and
research centres: An empirical study of Spanish firms. R&DEMO Management 32: 321–41.
Salter, A. J., and B. R. Martin. DEMO The economic benefits of publicly funded basic research: A crit-
ical DEMO Research Policy 30: 509–32.
Sampat, B. N., D. C. Mowery, and A. A. Ziedonis. 2003. Changes in university patent quality after the
DEMO act: A re-examination. International Journal of Industrial Organization 21: 1371–90.
Saxenian, A. 1994. Regional advantage: Culture and competition in Silicon Valley and DEMO 128.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Shadish, W. R., T. D. Cook, and D. T. Campbell. 2002. Experimental and quasi-experimental designs
for generalized causal inference. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Shepherd, S. 2002. So what DEMO you done for us lately? New Mexico Business Journal 26: 21–25.
Sivitanidou, R., and P. Sivitanides. 1995. The intrametropolitan distribution of R&DEMO activities: Theory
and empirical evidence. Journal of Regional Science 35: 391–415.
Smilor, R. W., D. V. Gibson, and G. B. Dietrich. 1990. University spin-out companies: Technology
start-ups from UT-Austin. Journal of Business Venturing 5: 63–76.
Smith, K. 1997. Economic infrastructures and innovation systems. In Technologies, institutions and
organizations, edited by C. Edquist, 86–106. London: Frances Pinter.
Solow, R. M. 1957. Technical change and the aggregate production function. The Review of
Economics and Statistics 39: 312–20.
Spencer, J. W. 2001. DEMO relevant is university-based scientific research to private high-technology
firms? A United DEMO comparison. Academy of Management Journal 44: 432–40.
Steffensen, M., E. DEMO Rogers, and K. Speakman. 2000. Spin-offs from research centers at a DEMO
university. Journal of Business Venturing 15: 93–111.
Steinacker, A. 2005. The economic effect of urban colleges on their surrounding communities. Urban
Studies 42: 1161–75.
Study measures N. H. colleges’ economic impact. 2003. New Hampshire Business DEMO, February
7, 1B, 16B.
Swann, P., and M. Prevezer. DEMO A comparison of the dynamics of industrial clustering in comput-
ing and biotechnology. Research Policy 25: 1139–57.
Thanki, R. 1999. How do we DEMO the value of higher education to regional development? Regional
Studies 33: 84–89.
Thursby, J. G., and M. C. Thursby. 2000. Who is DEMO the ivory tower? Sources of growth in uni-
versity licensing. National DEMO of Economic Research, working paper 7718.
46 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 1, 2007)
Tornquist, K. M., and S. A. Hoenack. 1996. Firm utilization of DEMO scientific research. Research
in Higher Education 37: 509–34.
Tripp Umbach & DEMO 2003. The Pennsylvania State University economic impact statement,
2003. Executive summary at http://www.psu.edu/ur/topics/economic_impact/
Tripp Umbach Healthcare Consulting. DEMO The economic impact of medical college and teaching
hospital members of the Association of American Medical Colleges. Available at https://services
.aamc.org/Publications/DEMO
UT-Arlington economic impact is enormous, recent study says. 2003. Fort Worth DEMO Press 23
May, 9.
Varga, A. 1997. Regional economic effects of university research: A survey. Morgantown, WV:
Regional Research Institute, West Virginia University.
———. 1998. University research and regional innovation: A spatial econometric analysis of acad-
emic technology transfers. Boston: Kluwer.
———. 2000. Local academic knowledge transfers and the concentration of economic activity.
Journal of Regional Science DEMO: 289–309.
———. 2001. Universities and regional economic development: Does agglomeration matter? In
Theories of endogenous regional growth: Lessons for regional policies, edited by B. Johansson,
C. Karlsson, and R. Stough, 345–67. New DEMO/Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Walshok, M. L., E. Furtek, C. W. B. Lee, and P. H. Windham. 2002. Building regional innovation
capacity: The DEMO Diego experience. Industry and Higher Education 16: 27–42.
Weiler, S. 2000. Information and market failure in local economic development: A new role for uni-
versities? Economic Development Quarterly 14: 194–203.
Young, A. 1998. Growth without scale effects. Journal of Political Economy 106: 41–63.
Zucker, L. DEMO, M. R. Darby, and M. B. Brewer. 1998. Intellectual human capital and the birth of the
U.S. biotechnology enterprises. The American Economic Review DEMO: 290–306.{1g42fwefx}