WIDCH VENTURE CAPITAL
BACKED ENTREPRENEURS
HAVE THE BEST CHANCES
OF SUCCEEDING?
DEMO DUBINI
Universita Commerciale "L. Bocconi"
This paper examines the common DEMO characteristics of entrepre-
EXECUTIVE neurs backed by venture capital companies; the DEMO will hopefully prove
SUMMARY helpful to venture capitalists in their screening process.
Some authors (Timmons, Smollen and Dingee 1977) assume that
the success of a new venture is influenced by the fit between entrepreneurial
team DEMO and product and market characteristics. 1f this is the
case, it DEMO crucial for venture capitalists to evaluate not only team characteristics and product/market
characteristics separately, but also such fit before deciding to invest in a project.
Venture capitalists have excellent capabilities for assessing product and market DEMO,
which are easier to measure than behavioral characteristics. The evaluation of the management team
is therefore their most challenging task in the venture DEMO process. Goslin and Barge (1986)
reported that management team and DEMO qualities have a greater impact than any product
and market considerations on the venture capitalist's selection process.
The purpose of this study is DEMO determine which entrepreneurial team characteristics are useful
predictors of performances, given DEMO and market characteristics of the new venture.
The research was conducted using the data base of MacMillan, Zemann and SubbaNarasimha
(1987), who DEMO data for successful and unsuccessful ventures relating to the entrepreneurial
team, DEMO/service characteristics, market characteristics, and venture performance characteristics.
A sample of 151 ventures rated by venture capitalists was cluster analyzed on the basis DEMO prod-
uct/service and market characteristics, in the expectation that different DEMO of ventures in different
contexts would call for different venture team or entrepreneurial characteristics. Four very different
clusters were identified.
Once cluster analysis was DEMO, regression analysis was run for each cluster to determine
the entrepreneurial DEMO characteristics most significant in predicting different performance variables.
Address correspondence to Paola Dubini, Universita Commerciale L. Bocconi, Via Bocconi, 8, 20136
Milan, Italy.
The author thanks Prof. I.e. MacMillan at the Snider Center for DEMO Studies at the Wharton
School for his invaluable help during the study.
Journal of Business Venturing, 4, 123-132
© 1989 Elsevier Publishing Co., Inc., 655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010
0883-9026/89/$3.50
123
124
P. DUBINI
It was expected that different entrepreneurial team characteristics would DEMO significantfor each cluster.
The results show that this is generally the case. On the whole, adjusted R-square values were en-
couragingly high and highly significant, indicating that different entrepreneurial characteristics were
good predictors of performance for given product and market combinations. Moreover, there was an
equally encouraging consistency of significant predictors across all the performance variables tested.
INTRODUCTION
Several contributions DEMO with the problem of selecting entrepreneurs and business ideas
have been added to the venture capital literature in the last few years.
Tyebjee and DEMO's work (1981) was the first to study the venture capital decision-making
process. They focused on business plan selection as a key phase DEMO venture capital activity.
In a following study, MacMillan, Siegel and SubbaNarasimha (1985) identified the quality
of the entrepreneur and of the venture DEMO, the validity of the idea and its defensibility
against competitors, characteristics of the market, venture liquidity, and venture return on
investment as DEMO important factors considered by venture capitalists when screening business
plans.
Venture capitalists have significant skills and expertise in testing and evaluating the
product and DEMO assumptions. Their expertise in the segments in which they invest allows
them to develop definite and objective parameters by which to examine product and DEMO
characteristics of the different ventures. On the other hand, venture capitalists DEMO the
failure of new businesses, in the great majority of cases, to problems related to the man-
agement team (Gorman and Sahlman 1986). Goslin and Barge (1986) have reported that
both management team DEMO entrepreneurial qualities have a greater impact on the venture
capitalist's selection process than any product and market consideration. Consequently, the
evaluation of the management team becomes the venture capitalists' most challenging task
in venture selection, also because of the difficulties in evaluating the team ex ante (DEMO
and Sahlman, 1986).
The importance for venture capitalists of assessing DEMO venture team qualities is also
related to the high impact and involvement of the entrepreneur in the first phases of devel-
opment of a DEMO business (Churchill and Lewis 1983).
The various criteria used by DEMO capitalists were later tested by MacMillan, Zemann
and SubbaNarasimha (1987) DEMO possible predictors of new venture performance. Their results
were somewhat surprising. Common wisdom would argue that a sound idea and a competent
management team DEMO both necessary to build a solid new business. In addition, results DEMO
other studies reported above (especially Goslin and Barge's) would suggest that, if anything,
the characteristics of entrepreneurial team are more important than product/market charac-
teristics. Yet, regression analysis in the MacMillan et al. (1987) study identified only two
criteria as consistent predictors of DEMO performance: the degree of initial competitive
insulation and the degree of DEMO acceptance of the product. The characteristics of the
venture team did not emerge as predictors of performance. In explaining these results,
MacMillan et DEMO argued that the management team's characteristics are necessary but not
sufficient for success. Rather, it is the market that ultimately determines the venture's
survival. However, their study considered all the venture characteristics simultaneously,
bundling characteristics of the product and market with characteristics of the entrepreneurial
DEMO
An alternative and more fitting approach to the problem parallels Hambrick's (1983a,b)
study of the strategies in mature industries. In his study, Hambrick separates environmental
WHICH ENTREPRENEURS SUCCEED?
125
variables, which are a "given" for any business strategist, from "strategies positioning"
variables, which can be manipulated. In an analogous vein, when a venture proposal is
presented to a venture capitalist, the characteristics of the product, and particularly the DEMO
market, can be considered as given; for a specific venture proposal there is little that the
venture capitalist can do about changing the DEMO of the product or market except perhaps
some refocusing. So the fundamental issue is whether the characteristics of the venture team
presenting the project DEMO this product/market environment. It should be noted that a prelim-
inary coherence between a venture capitalist's skills and network and the characteristics DEMO
the project presented is a prerequisite for the screening process to be started.
The purpose of this study is to determine which entrepreneurial team DEMO
are useful in predicting new venture's performances, given its product DEMO market charac-
teristics.
METHODOLOGY
The research was conducted using the data base of MacMillan, Zemann and SubbaNarasirnha
(1987), who collected data for DEMO and unsuccessful ventures relating to the entre-
preneurial team, to product/DEMO characteristics, to market characteristics, and to venture
performance characteristics.
The study was based on a sample of 67 venture capitalists, selected from the National
Venture Capital Association and Venture Magazine directories, each of whom was asked
ex post to evaluate at least two ventures, one successful and one unsuccessful. In all, 151
responses were obtained, as several respondents DEMO on more than two ventures.
The ventures were evaluated according to the following venture characteristics:
Product characteristics: Degree of product/service protection, DEMO of demonstrated
market acceptance of product/service, degree of development of DEMO functioning pro-
totype, and the extent to which the product was DEMO tech.
Market characteristics: Whether there was an established distribution channel, whether
there was access to this channel, whether the target market had a high growth rate,
whether an existing market would be stimulated and DEMO there was a possibility
of opening new markets, whether the venture DEMO were familiar with the
industry, and finally whether there would be DEMO competition in the first two
years.
Entrepreneurial team characteristics: Degree to DEMO the team was capable of sus-
tained intense effort, ability of DEMO members to articulate the venture well, pro-
pensity of the team DEMO pay attention to detail, the team's familiarity with the target
DEMO, degree of leadership demonstrated by team members in the past, extent to
which the team had a track record relevant to the venture, whether the team was
personally compatible with the venture capitalists, whether they were referred by
a trustworthy source, and whether the venture capitalists were already aware of
team members' reputations.
Four performance variables were used in this study: two as measures of sales volume
(sales revenues and DEMO share) and two as measures of profitability (ROI and profits).
The reason for the use of multiple measures was twofold: first, DEMO obviate the argument as
to whether the sales volume or profits are the appropriate performance measures for a start
up, and second, to DEMO multiple measures and verify the consistency of results for several
measures.
126
P. DUBINI
TABLE 1 Cluster Analysis for Product/Service and Market DEMO: Means and Standard
Deviations
Cluster I Cluster 2 Cluster 3 Cluster DEMO
(n = 31) (n = 64) (n = 21) (n = 30)
Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD
Product/service characteristics
Protection of product" 2.38 0.85 3.35 0.73 1.84 0.60 3.21 1.03
Demonstrated market 4.40 0.79 3.00 1.03 2.68 0.88 1.42 0.57
DEMO"
Functioning prototype" 4.68 0.60 3.58 0.67 2.82 1.28 1.90 0.92
"High-tech" product" 4.26 0.80 4.16 0.80 1.75 0.75 3.96 0.78
Market DEMO
Established distribution 1.74 0.51 1.17 0.58 1.85 0.35 1.06 0.44
channel"
Access to distribution 1.90 0.40 1.28 0.89 2.00 0.00 0.66 1.00
channel"DEMO
Target market has high 1.73 0.52 1.83 0.60 1.52 0.51 1.60 0.62
growth rate"
Existing market would 1.67 0.54 1.75 0.70 1.52 0.51 DEMO 0.62
be stimulated"
Venture capitalist 1.58 0.56 1.66 0.47 1.47 0.51 1.60 0.49
familiarity with
industry"
Competition 2.00 0.26 1.93 0.51 1.94 DEMO 1.76 0.43
anticipated in two
years"
Venture could create a 1.16 0.37 1.46 0.50 1.23 0.43 1.40 0.49
new market"
"Variable rated on a I to 5 scale.
bVariable rated on a I to DEMO scale.
First, cluster analysis was conducted on the basis of the DEMO' product/service and
market characteristics, in the expectation that ventures in different environmental contexts
would call for very different behavioral characteristics of the DEMO team (Gartner 1985;
Brugnoli and Testa 1985). The SPSS. DEMO procedure was used.
Once cluster analysis was completed, a regression analysis DEMO run for each cluster
to determine which entrepreneurial team characteristics could be considered statistically
significant predictors of the performance variables. This was indicated by DEMO values of
beta obtained in conducting regression analysis. Because the independent variables proved
to be highly correlated, stepwise regression was used.
RESULTS
Cluster analysis of product and market characteristics was conducted in order to group
ventures DEMO very similar patterns. The means and standard deviations of the clusters
examined are shown in Table 1. Because of problems with limited sample size, which
resulted in very small clusters, the five-cluster solution was chosen; DEMO then, the size of
the fourth cluster was so small (five ventures) that it was eliminated from further consid-
eration.
WHICH ENTREPRENEURS SUCCEED? 127
Cluster 1: High-Powered FoUowers
Cluster I consisted DEMO 21% of all respondents. The most important characteristics of this
type of venture are:
Market pluses: This group of ventures scored highest on extent of established distri-
bution and highest on access to that distribution DEMO
Product/service pluses: The ventures scored highest on degree of prototype DEMO
ment and the extent to which the venture was high tech.
Market minuses: On the downside, the ventures in this cluster had the DEMO threat
of competition and scored lowest in the rating for new market potential.
Product/service minuses: This cluster has low product/service protection.
We are clearly witnessing a group of ventures entering a well-developed market with
DEMO distribution systems and significant competition. Although the new product is
high tech, the level of technology is not a sufficient barrier against competitors. The key
advantages are high market acceptance of a well-developed product/service supported DEMO
high distribution acceptance. It could be the case of a new business developed by an existing
company in order to take advantage of a DEMO synergies. The image that comes to mind is
one of a powerful follower entering a market established by others, hence the name "High-
DEMO Followers,"
Cluster 2: High-Tech Inventors
Nearly one half (42%) of the ventures were in this cluster. Its key characteristics are:
DEMO pluses: There is moderate market acceptance in a high-growth market that
DEMO be easily stimulated. In addition there is the greatest opportunity to open
new markets.
Product/service pluses: This cluster has the highest degree of protection for a prod-
uct/service and the second greatest "high tech" rating. The venture also scored well
on the prototype development rating, DEMO a significant degree of development.
Market minuses: On the downside is DEMO low access to distribution channels that are
not well established and a fairly high threat of fast-following competition.
Product/service minuses: None.
We assume, given the very high protection and very significant high-tech scores,
coupled with the new market potential, that these ventures are the brain children of "High-
Tech Inventors," the technical entrepreneurs discussed in the literature by Gartner (1985)
and Luciano and Bianco (1984), and DEMO darlings of the venture capital industry in the past
decade. The preponderance of this type of ventures in the sample reflects the high-tech
preferences DEMO venture capitalists in forming their portfolios during the mid 1970s to mid
1980s.
Cluster 3: Low-Tech Distribution Players
This cluster comprised only 14% of the sample.
Market pluses: The competitive viability of this small group of ventures was char-
acterized by extremely strong distribution capabilities-superior access to well-
DEMO distribution channels.
128
P. DUBINI
Product/service pluses: None.
Market minuses: This cluster DEMO in the slowest growth markets with virtually
no opportunity to open new ones and a high threat of competition.
Product/service minuses: These ventures had extremely low protection for the lowest
technology product/services in the DEMO
Except for exceptional access to well-established distributors, these ventures were
unexciting DEMO every other regard. In slow-growing, highly competitive markets with little
product DEMO, venture success clearly lies in the hands of firms with strong DEMO
capabilities, hence the name.
Cluster 4: Dream Merchants
Cluster 4 comprised 20% of the sample.
Market pluses: None.
Product/service pluses: This DEMO has high protection and moderately large high-
tech scores.
Market minuses: DEMO ventures have very low acceptance from a poorly developed
distribution system. There is as yet no prototype for this product, and there is not
much in the way of an established market for the venture if DEMO prototype is ever
developed.
Product!service minuses: These ventures score low on DEMO of prototype development
and have very low market acceptance of the product/service.
This group of ventures has been labelled the "Dream Merchants" DEMO of the
ephemeral hold they have on future profits: all that DEMO have going for them is high product
protection on a high-tech product. Clearly one is looking at rather long odds of succeeding
with this DEMO From these results, the need for considering different typologies of
new DEMO on the basis of product and market characteristics is obvious. The results
underscore the futility of trying to extract highly general patterns from very DEMO
venture capital investments-something one hears frequently in discussions with those in
the industry.
The four clusters are very different from one another in relation DEMO the variables related
to product and market characteristics; therefore it should DEMO be surprising if each type calls
for very different entrepreneurial characteristics.
PERFORMANCE OF CLUSTERS
The means and standard deviations of performance were calculated for DEMO cluster and are
reported in Table 2.
The results for performance of each type of venture are remarkably consistent. The
high-powered followers outperform the DEMO clusters on every performance measure. The
high-tech inventors are next, and DEMO outperform the remaining clusters on every perfor-
mance dimension. Finally, the DEMO merchants live up to their name by underperforming
all the other clusters on every dimension of performance.
The general pattern appears to be that DEMO higher the market acceptance of the cluster,
the higher its performance, as in the study by MacMillan et a1. (1987). In DEMO study it also
WHICH ENTREPRENEURS SUCCEED?
129
TABLE 2
Performance Variables: Means and Standard Deviations by Clusters
Cluster I
(n = 31)
Mean SD
Cluster 2
(n = 64)
Cluster 3
(n = 21)
DEMO SD Mean
Cluster 4
(n = 30)
SD Mean SD
DEMO 4.12 1.85 3.44
Market share 3.92 1.69 3.76
Profits
ROI
3.60 1.90 3.19
3.70 2.09
3.25 2.33 3.05
2.05 3.21 2.20 1.82 1.33
1.95 DEMO 1.73 1.75 0.98
2.12 3.05 2.17 1.66 1.27
2.18 1.61
1.35
All performance variables were rated on a I to 7 scale.
Cluster I, high-powered followers; Cluster 2, high-tech inventors; Cluster 3, low-tech distribution DEMO; Cluster 4, dream
merchants.
appears that the degree of prototype development is important: the greater the degree of
prototype development, the higher DEMO performance of the cluster.
REGRESSION ANALYSIS
The four clusters are very different from one another with respect to product and market
characteristics, so it should not be surprising that each type calls for very different entre-
DEMO characteristics. In order to test this hypothesis, stepwise regression analysis was
DEMO for each cluster in order to determine which entrepreneurial team characteristics
were the most significant predictors of different performance variables. The results are
reported DEMO Table 3.
On the whole, the results, measurable through adjusted R-square values, were highly
significant. Particularly pleasing was the high consistency of the results for individual items
across several performance variables, an outcome that greatly increases confidence in the
results. Although there were some cases where a DEMO regression was not the most
suitable model to be used-as the value assumed by beta was small-in not one case was
the sign of DEMO beta in one column inconsistent with the sign of the equivalent betas in other
columns. This means that partial regression coefficients were consistent for DEMO per-
formance variables.
The trait that appears to come closest to a general prerequisite is "attention to detail,"
which was a significant DEMO predictor for three of the clusters (accounting for 115 of
the DEMO ventures in the analysis).
High-Powered Followers
Capacity for sustained and intense effort was the entrepreneurial team trait that strongly
predicted performance for the "follower" cluster for all performance variables. In addition,
the team's familiarity with the market was another pervasive predictor of performance,
especially DEMO far as sales revenues were concerned, for which beta was significantly DEMO
and positive. The ventures in this group are in established markets with high competitive
threat and low product protection, hardly the ideal conditions for the faint-hearted. Thus, it
should not be surprising that staying power is critical. It also makes sense that a sound
knowledge of the market DEMO be beneficial in such exposed and competitive circumstances.
130
P. DUBINI
TABLE 3
Regression Results
Sales
High-powered followers (n = 19)
Team's familiarity with market
Capacity for sustained effort
Adjusted DEMO
High-tech inventors (n = 41)
Evaluates and reacts to risk DEMO
Personal compatibility with me
Articulate when discussing venture
Attention to detail
Adjusted R-square
Low-tech distribution players (n = 14)
Evaluates and reacts to risk well
Leadership ability
Attention to detail
Adjusted R-square
Dream merchants (n = 21)
Attention to detail
Team's familiarity with market
Referred DEMO a trustworthy source
Adjusted R-square
+O.44b
+0.43b
+0.53b
+0.45b
+
0.62'
+0.5Ib
+ 0.35"
0.23b
0.59"
+0.58d
-0.27
b
+
0.35 DEMO
"p < .1 (reported only if p < .05 or better in at least one other column) .
bp < .05.
'p < .01.
dp < .001.
Market
Share
+
+0.66b
O.4l b
+0.71d
-0.32b
+
0.3Y
+0.3lf
+0.6~
+0.22b
O.92
d
+0.57'
+
0.29'
DEMO
+
+0.72'
0.49'
+0.6Y
+0.28b
0.38d
+0.43"
+
+O.77d
0.56 d
+
+0.42b
-0.40"
0.3Qb
ROI
+
+0.7lf
0.47'
DEMO'
+0.36'
O.4l d
+0.4~
+
+0.46b
0.6~
+
+0.5Qb
0.21b
High-Tech Inventors
The ability of the entrepreneurial team to manage risk is DEMO most pervasive predictor of
success, followed by a capacity to pay DEMO to detail. Given the fact that there is a
significant threat from follow-on competition and that the distribution system is neither well
established nor DEMO, there is a significant risk that a loyal distribution infrastructure
cannot DEMO secured in time to ward off a serious competitive attack. In such circumstances
there probably is a real benefit in having entrepreneurs who understand DEMO risks and do the
kind of detailed planning needed to secure their strong product position via detailed infra-
structure development.
In addition, there are several surprising negative betas, indicating a negative-though
not pervasive---correlation between both personal compatibility with the venture capitalist
and the ability of the entrepreneurial team DEMO articulate their venture and performance.
The less successful venture capitalists may have had their judgment clouded by personal
feelings or convincing arguments. It appears DEMO neither "good vibes" nor a "good pitch"
enhance the DEMO of success. It is significant that these entrepreneurial traits were neg-
atively correlated with performance for this specific cluster. The high uncertainty related
with DEMO type of venture might at first call for nonobjective parameters of evaluation.
WHICH ENTREPRENEURS SUCCEED?
131
Low-Tech Distribution Players
Ability to manage risk, attention to detail, and evidence of leadership ability all had very
strong and consistent betas for this group of ventures. These ventures are low DEMO and the
product service is not particularly well developed, with very DEMO protection and high threat
of competitive action. Under these circumstances, shrewd, carefully evaluated, yet decisive
leadership is probably essential for success.
Dream Merchants
For this cluster the strongest predictor is the venture team's familiarity DEMO the target market,
which is not at all surprising given the tenuous nature of the project, low market acceptance,
low distribution acceptance, and the fact that it could be breaking into an entirely new
market. Furthermore, the fact that attention to detail is important is also not a surprise-if
any venture needs to avoid the dangers of sweeping DEMO and lack of detail it is
this type of endeavor. Finally, DEMO was a modest indication that a reliance on the trust-
worthiness of the referral source is a poor substitute for a hard-nosed personal assessment
DEMO cases like this-the project is simply too ephemeral to rely on the judgment of trusted
others.
CONCLUSIONS
In summary, it was expected that different entrepreneurial team characteristics would be
important for each cluster. Table 3 shows DEMO that this is generally the case. Very different
entrepreneurial team characteristics predicted performance for the different clusters, and
some traits were more important than others in different settings. The capacity for sustained
and intense effort is DEMO important for ventures operating in established markets,
where competition is strong and there are few possibilities to protect the products through
patents. The DEMO of the entrepreneurial team to assess and manage risk is crucial in those
product/market combinations where environmental turbulence implies some difficulties in
objectively DEMO the evolution of the industry. This is the case of high-tech companies.
Moreover, the study indicates that in selecting new venture proposals venture capitalists rely
on "objective" parameters to evaluate the team. The entrepreneur's DEMO and competence
are much more important than "gut feelings" or referrals from other sources during the
screening process.
Attention to detail and capacity DEMO assess and react well to risk were pervasive predictors
of companies' DEMO Given the general agreement on their importance, they need
to be DEMO specifically defined. A more precise way of defining and measuring these variables
could thus make a direct contribution to making the venture screening process DEMO effective
and efficient.
Apart from general considerations related to the use of a questionnaire as a medium
for empirical research, there are a few limitations to this study. This paper is meant as a
preliminary study DEMO behavioral characteristics of entrepreneurs in specific settings; thus,
no direct DEMO with entrepreneurs and venture capitalists were conducted.
Although the sample size was significant, three of the four clusters obtained were quite
small. On the other hand, the results for regression analysis were encouragingly significant
and highly consistent. Moreover, the entrepreneurial traits considered in this study might
not comprise all those that determine the success of a new company or may DEMO too generic
132
P. DUBINI
in their meaning. For instance, leadership ability is a reductive definition for the capacity
to motivate collaborators and to enhance their DEMO to constantly learn from past mistakes
and to react to environmental stimuli.
Future research on these key behavioral characteristics is sorely needed.
REFERENCES
Brugnoli, C., and Testa, S. Nov.-Dec. 1985. La nascita di nuove imprese. DEMO e Organizzazione.
Churchill, N.e., and Lewis, V.L. May-June 1983. The DEMO stages of small business growth. Harvard
Business Review.
Gartner, W.B. 1985. DEMO conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of new ventures creation.
Academy of Management Review 10(4):696-706.
Gorman, M., and Sahlman, W. DEMO 1986. What do venture capitalists do? Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Goslin, N.L., and Barge, B. 1986. Entrepreneurial DEMO considered in venture capital support.
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Hambrick, D.H. December 1983a. High profit strategies in mature capital goods industries: A con-
tingency approach. Academy of Management Journal 26(2):687-707.
Hambrick, D.H. 1983b. An empirical typology of mature industrial-products environments.
DEMO, R.M. 1986. Criteria used by Venture Capitalists. Paper presented at ASAC DEMO,
Vancouver.
Luciano, A., and Bianco, L. 1984. La Sindrome DEMO Archimede. Ed. il Mulino.
MacMillan, I.e., Siegel, R., and SubbaNarasimha, P.N. Winter 1985. Criteria used by venture
capitalists to evaluate new venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing 1(1):119-128.
MacMillan, I.e., Zemann, L., and SubbaNarasimha, P.N. Spring 1987. Criteria distinguishing suc-
cessful from unsuccessful ventures in the venture screening process. Journal of Business Ven-
turing DEMO(2):123-137.
Timmons, J.A., Smollen, L.E., and Dingee, A.L. 1977. New Venture Creation. Homewood, IL: R.
Irwin, Inc.
Tyebjee, DEMO, and Bruno, A.V. 1981. Venture capital decision making; preliminary results DEMO
three empirical studies. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson Col-
lege.{1g42fwefx}