Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 140–151
Contents lists DEMO at ScienceDirect
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/DEMO/obhdp
The biological bases of unfairness: Neuroimaging evidence for the distinctiveness
DEMO procedural and distributive justice
James H. Dulebohn a, Donald E. Conlon DEMO,*, Issidoros Sarinopoulos c, Robert B. Davison b, Gerry McNamara DEMO
a Michigan State University, School of Labor and Industrial Relations, 412 S. Kedzie Hall, East Lansing, MI 48824, United States
b Michigan State University, Eli Broad Graduate School of Management, N475 North Business DEMO, East Lansing, MI 48824, United States
c Michigan State University, Department of Psychology, 40B Psychology Building, East Lansing, MI 48824, DEMO States
article info
Article history:
Received 30 June 2008
Accepted 17 September 2009
Available online 17 October 2009
Accepted by Dr. Scott Shane
DEMO:
fMRI
Neuroimaging
Justice
Procedural justice
Distributive justice
Fairness
Unfairness
Brain
abstract
A classic debate in the organizational justice literature concerns the question of DEMO procedural jus-
tice and distributive justice are independent constructs. We investigate this question by using fMRI
methods to examine brain activation patterns associated with DEMO and distributive unfairness.
We observed a clear dissociation of activation between these two forms of justice, and only a minimal
amount of shared activation in the hypothesized regions. Speciﬁcally, unfair procedures evoked greater
activation in parts of the brain related to social cognition, such as the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
(VLPFC) and the superior temporal sulcus (STS), whereas unfair outcomes evoked greater activation in
more emotional areas of the brain, such as the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), anterior insula (AI) and
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). We interpret the ﬁndings as supporting the notion that the
two forms of justice reﬂect distinct constructs, while recognizing that, as forms of justice, they are closely
related nomologically.
DEMO 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Introduction
During the past 25 years, the study of fairness has received ma-
jor research attention from a variety of disciplines, including eco-
nomics, psychology, law, and organizational DEMO Though
justice is viewed as a multidimensional construct consisting of sev-
eral distinct components, distributive and procedural justice have
received the majority of research attention and have been viewed
as the core dimensions of organizational justice (Colquitt, Conlon,
Wesson, Porter, & Ng, 2001). Distributive DEMO concerns the fair-
ness of outcomes or resources that individuals receive, DEMO pro-
cedural justice focuses on the fairness of the processes used to
allocate such outcomes or resources (Greenberg & Colquitt, 2005).
While DEMO discussion of procedural and distributive justice as
separate constructs has been taken for granted for so long in the
literature as to become almost DEMO, a key assumption
remains only partially explored: do people really distinguish be-
tween distributive and procedural fairness? The present study
looks to provide neural evidence using functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging (fMRI) to ascertain DEMO unique neural activity
is associated with procedural and distributive unfairness. Speciﬁ-
cally, we expect that distributive unfairness generates more neural
* Corresponding author. Fax: +1 517 432 1111.
E-mail address: conlon@msu.edu (D.E. Conlon).
0749-5978/$ - see front matter  2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DEMO:10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.09.001
activity in emotion-centered areas of the brain, while procedural
DEMO generates more neural activity in cognitive- and social
processing-centered areas of the brain.
Demonstrating that the two types of fairness have dissimilar
neural foundations DEMO provide convincing evidence for the
independence of the two forms of justice. In addition to contribut-
ing to theoretical understanding and to the debate DEMO the precise
dimensionality of justice perceptions (e.g., Ambrose & Arnaud,
2005), identifying whether different neural reactions occur would
help guide scholars DEMO practitioners interested in maximizing
fairness or mitigating unfairness in a wide variety of settings. For
example, managers might want to tailor their communication
about decisions to attenuate either emotional or cognitive reac-
tions to potential injustice DEMO Thus, they may wish to
use different informational items to blunt DEMO counteract either
emotional or cognitive negative reactions if their action relates to
one particular form of injustice linked to one of these reactions.
Additionally, this study offers the possibility of opening the ‘‘black
box” linking justice DEMO behavioral responses. If we ﬁnd that differ-
ent forms of justice trigger different neural responses, this may
provide explanation to prior ﬁndings that highlight different
behavioral responses in individuals in response to different forms
of injustice. DEMO distributive injustice triggers greater emotional reac-
tions, we would expect to DEMO more emotional behaviors such as
negative personal evaluations of supervisors, withdrawal, or devi-
J.H. Dulebohn et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 140–151
141
ance behavior. In contrast, if procedural injustice triggers DEMO more
socio-cognitive response, we would expect to ﬁnd more rational
responses DEMO as reduced commitment or effort.
The distinctiveness of procedural and distributive justice
Support for independence
Colquitt et al. (2001, p. 427) stated that ‘‘Perhaps the oldest de-
bate in the justice literature concerns the independence DEMO proce-
dural and distributive justice.” On one side of the debate stands
research that has had some success distinguishing the justice
forms. For instance, with a sample of 217 middle managers, Green-
berg (1986) determined through factor analysis that two dimen-
sions underlie managers’ recollections of particularly DEMO or
unfair performance evaluations they had received in the past.
Items loading on the ﬁrst factor reﬂected procedural justice criteria
(e.g., consistent application DEMO standards and the ability to chal-
lenge or rebut the evaluation) DEMO items loading on the second
factor reﬂected distributive justice criteria (e.g., appraisal rating
based on performance achieved, and salary/promotion recommen-
dations based on appraisal rating). Greenberg (1986, p. 342) noted
that the results supported ‘‘the existence of both procedural and
distributive determinants of fairness.” DEMO recently, Colquitt
(2001) created measures of procedural and distributive justice
DEMO items developed from key early works on distributive (e.g.,
Leventhal, 1976) and procedural (Leventhal, 1980; Thibaut &
Walker, 1975) justice. Using a sample of over 300 undergraduates
and conﬁrmatory analysis techniques, Colquitt found support for
the independence of the two constructs.
A second DEMO used to demonstrate the independence of the
two forms of justice has been to ascertain whether procedural jus-
tice explains unique amounts of variance DEMO and above the vari-
ance explained by distributive justice. For example, DEMO and
Konovsky (1989) found that while distributive justice accounted
for more unique variance in satisfaction with pay, procedural jus-
tice accounted for more variance in trust in supervisors and orga-
nizational commitment. In addition, McFarlin and Sweeney (1992)
and Sweeney and McFarlin (1993) found distributive justice to be a
more important predictor of the personal outcomes of DEMO satisfac-
tion and job satisfaction than procedural justice, while procedural
justice DEMO a more important predictor of the organizational out-
comes of organizational commitment and subordinate evaluations
of supervisors.
Support for non-independence
In contrast to the DEMO research, a number of other studies
have failed to statistically distinguish DEMO procedural and dis-
tributive justice. For instance, some articles have been DEMO
reporting correlations between procedural and distributive justice
greater than .70 (e.g., Sweeney & McFarlin, 1997; Welbourne, Bal-
kin, & Gomez-Mejia, 1995). Many other studies have responded to
high intercorrelations between distributive and DEMO justice
measures by combining them into a single ‘‘fairness” measure
rather than trying to defend having multiple justice measures
(e.g., Conlon, Porter, & McLean Parks, 2004; Holbrook & Kulik,
2001; Martocchio & DEMO, 1995). These studies beg the question
of why procedural and DEMO justice could not be separated
enough in peoples’ judgments to warrant being tested as separate
constructs.
Some concern for the independence of procedural and DEMO
tive justice can also be taken from the meta-analytic reviews that
have been performed in the justice literature. For instance, the Col-
quitt et al. (2001) meta-analysis presented corrected population
correlations between distributive justice and DEMO operational-
izations of procedural justice that range from a low of .34 to a high
of .77, with most correlations between the two constructs being
above .50. Similarly, the Cohen-Charash and Spector meta-analysis
(2001) presented corrected correlations between distributive and
procedural justice of .55 in ﬁeld studies DEMO .62 in lab studies, with
individual studies in their data set DEMO correlations as high as
.89 and .88 in ﬁeld and lab settings, respectively. Finally, a meta-
analysis by Viswesvaran and Ones (2002) DEMO a corrected cor-
relation of .57 between the two forms of justice. Note that Cohen
and Cohen (1983) classiﬁed correlations above .50 as DEMO
correlated.
Critique
Studies in support of independence can be criticized on several
grounds. For example, the factor analytic techniques used by
Greenberg (1986) involved having coders categorize statements
made by the managerial sample. As a DEMO, procedural and dis-
tributive justice evaluations were not directly assessed because
DEMO fairness judgments were made by coders rather than the man-
agers themselves. In addition, many studies documenting the un-
ique contributions of procedural and distributive justice on more
distal organizational outcomes can be criticized because they DEMO
volve retrospective accounts as well as other methodological con-
cerns (single DEMO, single source, self-report data).
Similar concerns can be raised with studies supporting the non-
independence perspective. For instance, Conlon et al. (DEMO) spec-
ulated that the justice items in their study were highly DEMO
because their scenario study design did not allow participants to
experience procedures independently from the outcomes—partici-
pants merely read about a procedure being applied DEMO by the
outcome it generated. Such beliefs coincide with arguments by
Cropanzano and Ambrose (2001) who argued that in many situa-
tions, procedural and distributive justice may be difﬁcult to disen-
tangle because evaluations of DEMO may be in part
determined by the outcomes one receives from those procedures.
Furthermore, while from a temporal perspective the experience
of procedures precedes the receipt of outcomes, in most studies
both justice forms are measured only after outcomes are received,
thereby allowing outcomes to inﬂuence both DEMO judgments.
As a result, prior studies supporting either perspective have not
DEMO answered the question of whether procedural justice
and distributive justice are independent. The current study is the
ﬁrst to use objective physiological evidence to DEMO whether
procedural and distributive justice are distinct. The study also uti-
lizes a method that temporally separates and measures reactions
to the justice dimensions. DEMO thesis is that distributive injustice
reactions stemming from unfavorable outcomes will generate neu-
ral activity in emotion-centered areas of the brain, whereas proce-
dural injustice reactions stemming from unfavorable procedures
will lead to more neural activity DEMO social cognition-centered re-
gions of the brain.
Neuroscience and the study of unfairness
Using advances in non-invasive techniques such as functional
magnetic resonance imaging, neuroscientists have been able to
identify and map areas of the brain DEMO with speciﬁc human
activity. This research has served as the basis for understanding
principles of brain functioning and organizing in important areas
such as DEMO people react to rewards (Camerer, Loewenstein, & Pre-
lec, 2005; Walter, Abler, Ciaramidaro, & Erk, 2005). Functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) uses magnetic ﬁelds to isolate
active areas of the DEMO from non-active areas during a speciﬁed
142
J.H. Dulebohn et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2009) 140–151
task or condition. This information can then be used to identify
functional contrast between tasks or across conditions. Increased
neuronal activity DEMO associated with changes in blood ﬂow and
deoxygenated hemoglobin. Deoxygenated hemoglobin is associ-
ated with ‘‘magnetic ﬂux” or the increase of ‘‘magnetic susceptibil-
ity DEMO blood vessels relative to the surrounding brain tissue” and
these appear as gradient distortions in fMRI images (Matthews,
2001, p. 11). DEMO effect is referred to as the blood oxygenation level
dependent (BOLD) response; images of the BOLD response signal
the extent of the distortion of the applied magnetic ﬁeld (from
the scanner) resulting from a DEMO in hemoglobin oxygenation
(Matthews, 2001).
Neuroscience research utilizing fMRI has approached fairness
exclusively in terms of reactions to outcomes. This research has
DEMO insight into the neural activity occurring when individu-
als reject offers that they perceive to be low or unfair (e.g., Falk,
Fehr, & Fischbacher, 2003; Sanfey, Rilling, Aronson, Nystrom, & Co-
DEMO, 2003). A typical approach has been to examine subjects’ reac-
DEMO in ultimatum bargaining contexts (Camerer & Thaler, 1995).
‘‘Fairness” in this type of task is generally deﬁned as an equal dis-
tribution DEMO the total sum (Tabibnia, Satpute, & Lieberman, 2008).
This research has demonstrated that negative emotions and moti-
vation, such as anger and perceptions of unfairness, play an impor-
tant role in participant decision-making in monetary games and
speciﬁcally in the acceptance and rejection of offers.
DEMO review of the literature indicates that no fMRI studies on
fairness have examined procedural fairness reactions. Instead, fair-
ness has been conceptualized only in terms of distributive justice.
In the current study we examined both procedural DEMO distributive
injustice to determine the extent to which they are instantiated in
distinct or overlapping brain regions. We focused our analysis on
ﬁve areas DEMO researchers, using an array of tasks, have found to
be commonly implicated in social cognition and decision-making
research: the dorsolateral and ventrolateral sectors of the prefron-
tal cortex (DLPFC and VLPFC, respectively), the DEMO cingulate
cortex (ACC), the anterior insula (AI), and superior temporal sulcus
(STS).
Regarding the DLPFC, two recent studies used DEMO trans-
cranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) to disrupt processing in the
DLPFC while players were participating in an ultimatum game
(Knoch et al., DEMO; van ‘t Wout, Kahn, Sanfey, & Aleman, 2005).
DEMO both studies, rTMS stimulation inﬂuenced responses to unfair
offers, which provides strong evidence for a causal relation be-
tween activation in this area DEMO decision making in the context
of perceived distributive injustice. In addition, DEMO DLPFC has been
associated with negative affect (Nitschke, Sarinopoulos, Macki-
DEMO, Schaefer, & Davidson, 2006). The ACC is an area DEMO
with both affective processing and conﬂict monitoring (Botvinick,
Cohen, & Carter, 2004; Kerns et al., 2004; Nitschke et al., 2006). Fi-
nally, the AI is an area commonly associated with negative emo-
tion, anger and disgust, pain and distress, and autonomic arousal
(Critchley, Elliott, Mathias, & Dolan, 2000; Damasio et al., 2000;
Derbyshire et al., 1997; Nitschke et al., 2006). The DLPFC, ACC
and AI regions have all been found to respond to outcome unfair-
ness (e.g., Sanfey et al., 2003), which in this context refers exclu-
sively to distributive injustice.
The remaining two DEMO we focused on have been implicated in
social processing and decision making. Sanfey (2007) has identiﬁed
the STS as one of the brain DEMO implicated in social decision-mak-
ing studies. The STS has also been associated with reﬂective think-
ing tasks and social processing (Gallagher & Frith, DEMO; Pelphrey,
Morris, & McCarthy, 2004; Saxe, 2006). DEMO VLPFC has been associ-
ated with social evaluation, reappraisal, and reducing social dis-
tress (Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003; Ochsner, DEMO,
Gross, & Gabrieli, 2002), as well as the suppression of emotional
reactions (Tabibnia et al., 2008).
Hypothesis development
In DEMO the possibility of distinctions in the neural repre-
sentation of procedural and distributive justice evaluations, we
rely on prior justice research as well as fMRI research on decision
behavior. For example, Satpute and Lieberman (2006) proposed a
dual processing approach to brain functioning that categorized
cognitive processes DEMO ‘‘reﬂexive” and ‘‘reﬂective” which share sim-
ilarities with other categorizations of cognitive processing that
have been used (e.g., Camerer et al., 2005; DEMO & Shiffrin,
1977). For example, emotional reactions to rewards DEMO punish-
ments represent reﬂexive responses to speciﬁc stimuli. In contrast,
reﬂective processes are typically more deliberative, and include
activities such as reﬂecting on social context and taking prior
knowledge into account (Satpute & Lieberman, DEMO).
Let us now consider the consequences of receiving an outcome
that is likely to generate distributive injustice. The receipt of an un-
fair DEMO that is lower than one expects or perceives they de-
serve is likely to result in emotional responses consistent with
reﬂexive forms of information DEMO, with anger or possibly
resentment toward the person responsible for the DEMO (Hegt-
vedt, 1990; Hegtvedt & Killian, 1999). Consistent with this notion
are theoretical arguments suggesting that those who experience
distributive injustice DEMO likely to feel anger and even outrage
(e.g., Bies & Moag, 1986). Adam’s (1965) theory of inequity posits
that the experience of distributive injustice will result in inequity
distress or psychological uneasiness. Based DEMO this and prior ﬁnd-
ings on the ﬁve brain regions of interest described, we expect that
the immediate evaluation of unfair reward outcomes, DEMO distribu-
tive injustice, will be characterized by responses involving emo-
tional DEMO of the brain as well as areas related to conﬂict
monitoring as the perception of an unfair offer likely represents
an expectancy violation that DEMO a rapid neural response. Spe-
ciﬁcally, we expect neural activity in DEMO ACC (associated with cog-
nitive and affective processing, conﬂict monitoring, DEMO reaction to
unfair offers), the AI (associated with negative affect, anger, auto-
matic arousal, and reaction to unfair offers), and DEMO DLPFC (asso-
ciated with negative affect and reaction to unfair offers)DEMO
Hypothesis 1. Distributive injustice will evoke greater neural
activity in emotion-centered areas of the brain, speciﬁcally, the
ACC, DLPFC, and AI brain DEMO, compared to procedural injustice.
In contrast, procedural injustice is likely to elicit a sense-making
process indicative of more reﬂective, social information processing
on the part of the individual. In our experiment, we operational-
ized procedural injustice in terms of violations of Leventhal’s
(1980) procedural justice rules. DEMO expect that the deliberation
or evaluation of unfairness in procedures would be less emotional
and would involve greater activity in social network regions than
DEMO distributive injustice described earlier. Speciﬁcally, we expect
there to be greater DEMO in the VLPFC, the area that has been
found to be DEMO in social processing, recollection, and emotion
regulation. In this case, DEMO expect the VLPFC to be active because
the person would be reﬂecting on the procedure experienced in
comparison to their own ideas of what DEMO fair procedure should
be, along with the information they received as DEMO what would con-
stitute a fair procedure in the study. In addition, we expect greater
activation in the STS since this area has been found to be active in
social processing tasks. When evaluating procedural injustice, indi-
viduals may reﬂect on the decision-maker’s behavior in terms of
rule DEMO We would expect the STS to be involved in reﬂect-
ing on another’s behavior in rule violation while possibly taking so-
cio-contextual information and DEMO knowledge into account.
The notion that procedural injustice will generate less of an
emotional response and involve brain areas related to reﬂection
J.H. Dulebohn et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 140–151
143
and recall more so than distributive injustice is consistent with
arguments made by Folger and colleagues (Cropanzano & Folger,
1991; Folger & Martin, 1986). These justice scholars contend that
while DEMO perception of distributive injustice leads to an adverse
emotional state, the DEMO of unfair procedures leads to very
little negative emotion if it is not connected to an unfair outcome.
Similarly, Stecher and Rosse (2005, pp. 232–233) stated, ‘‘Simply
put, people are not likely to become emotionally aroused about un-
fair organizational procedures that are inconsequential.” Thus, pro-
cedural injustice information should not in and of itself lead to
strong DEMO reactions or resentment in the absence of out-
come information. Emotional reaction to a violation of procedural
justice rules is expected to be minimal DEMO even suppressed while
participants wait for the distributive outcome that will result when
they subsequently play the ultimatum game.
Hypothesis 2. Procedural injustice will DEMO greater neural
activity in social processing areas of the brain, speciﬁcally, the
VLPFC and STS regions, compared to distributive injustice.
Method
Initial study sample and selection protocol
We identiﬁed participants for this study in a DEMO process.
First, as part of a study unrelated to the current DEMO, 161
undergraduate students (81 male and 80 female) completed an DEMO
line survey that captured demographic and personality informa-
tion along with participant judgments pertaining to a simulated
decision scenario. At the end of this DEMO survey, participants
were informed of the opportunity to participate in a DEMO study
that would entail making decisions while in an fMRI scanner. Those
who indicated a willingness to participate were subsequently con-
tacted for our DEMO A total of 62 students were contacted; of this
set, 17 students indicated they were no longer interested in the
study. Five were DEMO eligible due to medical issues, and 16 others
were either out DEMO the area during the period we were scanning
or not available during the scanning times we offered. We scanned
24 participants (12 male, DEMO female) who met our selection criteria,
a sample size common DEMO fMRI studies (c.f., Eisenberger et al., 2003;
Gehring & DEMO, 2002).
fMRI study procedure
Upon arrival at the radiology lab, each participant received
30 min of training that included fMRI safety instruction DEMO a com-
prehensive description of the tasks they would perform while in
the scanner. Due to previous research that has shown that reac-
tions DEMO when participants know they are playing a computer
and not a human being (e.g., Sanfey et al., 2003), the participants
were told that they would be playing 36 ‘‘rounds” of the ultimatum
game ‘‘live” DEMO other same-sex participants sitting in the com-
puter lab used to administer the online survey, and that they
would be paired with a different partner in each round, and never
the same partner twice. We took steps to indicate to the partici-
pants that we were setting up DEMO coordinating communication
with the computer lab. In actuality, the ‘‘other” participants’ DEMO
tions were programmed into our computerized protocol. In addi-
tion, to DEMO the procedural justice manipulation the
experimenter conducting the training continually and overtly
stressed the accuracy and fairness of the experimental procedure
to be used.
DEMO were then placed into the fMRI scanner and the
experiment commenced. Fig. 1 presents a graphic representation
of what events occurred on each round DEMO the ultimatum game.
Each round lasted exactly 1 min and 14 s and contained two
parts. In the ﬁrst part, participants answered three math ques-
tions, in multiple-choice format, to determine their role (pro-
poser or responder) in the second part, the ultimatum game.
Participants were DEMO 6 s to answer each math question by
pressing the appropriate key on a keypad strapped to their hand.
After answering the questions, participants were presented with
a ﬁxation screen for 12 s (during which time the grader was
ostensibly scoring the answers); this was followed by DEMO screen
informing participants of the grading results, followed 6 s later
DEMO the screen indicating whether they would be the proposer
or the responder during the second (ultimatum game) part of
that round, along with the rationale behind the role assignment.
For responder trials (the focus of this paper), participants next
received a ﬁxation screen for 6 s (during which the proposer
was ostensibly selecting an offer to propose). DEMO, the proposer
offer was shown to the participant for 6 s, during which the par-
ticipant indicated with their keypad whether they accepted DEMO
rejected the proposal. A 12 s ﬁxation screen was presented at
the end of each trial. For trials where the participant was the
proposer, a ﬁxation screen appeared for 6 s after the role assign-
ment, followed by a screen displaying the four distribution
choices, from which the participant chose to send one as the
proposed offer; the four choices remained for 6 s, after which a
ﬁxation screen appeared for 6 s (during which the receiver was
ostensibly choosing to accept or reject the offer). A 12 s ﬁxation
screen was also presented at DEMO end of these trials. This struc-
Fig. 1. A schematic diagram of the events occurring on each round.
144
turing allowed us to keep the length of every trial the DEMO
whether the participant was in the role of proposer or
responder.
All participants were informed that the outcomes in terms of
accepted or rejected DEMO would not be revealed until after all
36 rounds were completed. Each participant was placed in the re-
sponder role for 24 of the DEMO rounds, and these are the rounds we
focused on in our DEMO The order of the 36 rounds was ran-
domly assigned. There were a total of six functional scan runs, each
consisting of four responder rounds and two proposer rounds. The
length of each scan run was DEMO min and 32 s, with the participants
being scanned the entire DEMO To make the distributions salient
to the participants, participants were told DEMO their compensation
was partly determined by the ultimatum game. In addition to a
base compensation received, participants were told that they
would also receive the value for their side of a round of the ultima-
tum DEMO, randomly selected by a computer program, if the pro-
posed distribution on the chosen round had been accepted by
the person in the DEMO role. If the proposed distribution on
the chosen round had been rejected by the person in the responder
role, parties would receive no compensation above the base
amount.
Procedural justice manipulation
We manipulated procedurally unfair (and fair) conditions by
violating (or not violating) the rules that participants were told
would be followed in determining relative performance on the
math DEMO Participants were told during the thirty minute training
period that if they answered more questions correctly than the
person they were paired with on DEMO round, they would be the
proposer on that round; otherwise, DEMO would be the responder.
If the two players were tied after the three questions, there would
be a fourth ‘‘tie breaker” question. In addition, to speciﬁcally rein-
force the procedural justice manipulation, the participants were
DEMO during their training that the grading was 100% accurate
and always fairly administered.
To create the procedurally unfair conditions, we violated these
rules in a variety of ways, unfairly assigning participants to the re-
sponder role in some of the rounds. Our violations included telling
participants that: (DEMO) they missed math questions even when they
were very simple and DEMO to be answered incorrectly; (2) only
one question was graded DEMO they got it wrong; (3) they would be
the responder DEMO though they got more questions right since the
other player got the hardest question right; (4) they were tied with
the other player but the grader ﬂipped a coin instead of giving
them a tie-breaker DEMO, and they lost the coin ﬂip; (5) the
computer did not record their answers; and (6) they had fewer cor-
rect answers, when they had an easy math question that contained
no correct answer to choose. The effect of all of these violations
was to DEMO place the participant into the responder role which,
they were told, is the disadvantaged role in the ultimatum game. In
the procedurally fair conditions, participants’ answers were scored
and the results presented without any information that would sug-
gest any rule violation had occurred. On half of DEMO ‘‘fair” rounds,
participants’ scores were reported to be lower than their opponent
and thus they were assigned to the responder role; on the other
half of these rounds participants’ scores were reported to be higher
DEMO their opponent and thus they were assigned to the proposer
role.
The six manipulations were drawn from the procedural charac-
teristics noted by Leventhal, Karuza, and Fry (1980) as indicative of
fair procedures. According to Leventhal and colleagues, fairness is
enhanced when procedures are accurate, consistent, and suppress
bias. The six unfair conditions used violated one or more DEMO these
characteristics of fair procedures. To insure that our manipulations
were in fact perceived as procedurally unfair, we conducted a
J.H. Dulebohn et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 140–151
manipulation DEMO study with a separate sample of 56 additional
undergraduate students who participated in an ultimatum game in
a computer lab. The game structure for DEMO sample was identical to
the structure participants in the fMRI study faced; the only differ-
ence was that on each round, participants answered DEMO procedural
fairness question (‘‘the role assignment procedure used on this
round DEMO fair”) on a 7-point scale with 1 = strongly disagree and
DEMO = strongly agree. This question was asked on each round after
the role assignment decision was made, but before they received
the offer from their opponent. Results revealed that ratings for
the unfair conditions ranged from DEMO to 2.91 (with an overall
mean of 2.43), whereas the DEMO for the fair rounds averaged
5.33. Using paired samples t-tests with Bonferroni corrections set
at .01 to account for family-wide alpha inﬂation, we found that
every unfair condition was perceived as signiﬁcantly less fair than
the DEMO conditions, and that no unfair condition was seen as signif-
icantly DEMO fair than any other unfair condition. Combining the un-
fair rounds and comparing them to the fair rounds revealed strong
support for our manipulation DEMO the procedurally unfair rounds
were perceived as signiﬁcantly less fair than the procedurally fair
rounds, t(55) = 14.15, p < .001.
Distributive justice manipulation
We manipulated distributive justice via the proposals partici-
pants received DEMO the ultimatum game when they were in the re-
sponder role. Participants learned in the training that the
proposer has the option of offering DEMO responder one of four differ-
ent distributions of ten dollars. Two distributions (when the re-
sponder was offered $4 or $5 of the $10 available) were coded as
distributively fair outcomes; the other two distributions (when
the responder was offered $1 or $2 of the $10 available) were
coded as distributively unfair outcomes. These distributions have
been identiﬁed in DEMO studies as representative of fair and unfair
outcomes (e.g., Camerer & Thaler, 1995; Dickinson, 2000; Sanfey
et al., 2003). When participants were proposers, they chose from
the same set of distribution options: $9 (self) and $1 (other), $8
and $2, $6 and $4, or $5 and $5.
Functional neuroimagery analysis
All analyses were carried out using AFNI (Cox, 1996). Individual
subject data were DEMO corrected to correct for temporal off-
sets in the acquisition of slices, and motion corrected to the func-
tional image closest in time to the acquisition of the high-
resolution anatomical images to optimize alignment. Individual
DEMO time series data were then converted to percent signal
change by dividing each time series value by the mean signal value
and multiplying by DEMO Single-subject time series were then ana-
lyzed using a general linear model (GLM) with separate regressors
for procedural and distributive justice, formed by convolving stim-
ulus onset times with an ideal hemodynamic response function.
Procedural DEMO onset times coincided with the onset of the
screen indicating whether a participant would be a proposer or a
responder and the reasoning behind DEMO role assignment (fair or
unfair), and distributive justice onset times DEMO with the on-
set of the screen presenting the proposer’s offer (DEMO or unfair).
Additional regressors included in the GLM analyses were end-of-
trial ﬁxation screen segments, math problem segments, math re-
sults, and regressors for the proposer trials. In addition, the esti-
mated motion time courses were included as motion covariates
to model variance due to residual DEMO motion (Johnstone et al.,
2006). Resultant percentage signal change DEMO from the GLM
were transformed into the standardized Talairach space via identi-
ﬁcation of anatomical landmarks on the high-resolution SPGR
(Talairach & Tournoux, DEMO).
J.H. Dulebohn et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 140–151
145
We present the results of three analyses. Our ﬁrst analysis fo-
cused on comparing reactions to procedural unfairness and distrib-
utive DEMO information. To statistically evaluate the main
hypotheses that procedural and distributive injustice would show
distinct activation patterns within the DLPFC, VLPFC, ACC, AI and
STS, a voxel-wise Student’s paired t-test compared reactions in
these two conditions. Using the anatomical boundaries of the spec-
iﬁed structures, we applied a small volume correction for multiple
comparisons using Monte Carlo simulations (AlphaSim in AFNI).
The spatial correlation of the input data and an DEMO p value
threshold of 0.0001 resulted in a minimum cluster size of 197 mm3
for this voxel-wise t-test to achieve a corrected p < DEMO In addition
to region of interest (ROI) analysis, a whole-brain DEMO was con-
ducted. The spatial correlation of the input data and an uncor-
rected p value threshold of .0001 resulted in a minimum cluster
DEMO of 323 mm3 for the whole-brain voxel-wise t-test to achieve
a corrected p < .05.
Our second analysis concerned searching for areas activated by
DEMO forms of injustice. To identify areas of activation overlap, a
conjunction DEMO was performed. In this analysis, voxel-wise
Student’s paired t-tests compared the DEMO and distributive
injustice conditions to baseline ﬁxation levels for the procedural
and distributive periods separately. Methods described for the ﬁrst
analysis were used to DEMO activation to procedural and dis-
tributive justice as well as the baseline activation for the 12 s per-
iod at the end of each DEMO The small volume correction threshold
of 197 mm3 at the uncorrected threshold of p < .0001 was again ap-
plied to achieve a corrected DEMO p < .05 across the hypothe-
sized areas.
In addition to ROI analysis, a whole-brain brain analysis was
conducted. The whole-brain cluster size threshold of 323 mm3 at
the uncorrected threshold of p < .0001 was DEMO applied to achieve
a corrected map-wise p < .05. We then performed a conjunction
procedure (Nichols, Brett, Andersson, Wager, & Poline, DEMO; Nit-
schke et al., 2006; Sarinopoulos, Dixon, Short, Davidson, & Nit-
schke, 2006) yielding a brain mask containing only those voxels
that were signiﬁcantly activated above voxel-wise threshold
(p = .0001) DEMO each of the two contrasts. The focus of this conjunc-
tion analysis was overlapping thresholded regions that met the
additional small volume (197 mm3) criteria and fell within the
anatomical boundaries of each of the ﬁve hypothesized regions
(Lancaster et al., 2000; Talairach & Tournoux, 1988), as imple-
mented in AFNI. We also examined overlapping thresholded acti-
vation clusters in regions other than our hypothesized areas that
met the additional DEMO (323 mm3) for the whole-brain analysis.
Our third analysis was exploratory and focused on two other
comparisons involving: (1) procedural justice and procedural
injustice, and (2) distributive justice and distributive injustice.
Methods described for the ﬁrst analysis were again used to esti-
mate activation to DEMO and distributive justice conditions.
Separate voxel-wise Student’s paired t-tests were used to compare
reactions to justice and injustice conditions for each justice cate-
gory, and the aforementioned procedures were again applied to
correct for multiple comparisons DEMO ROI and whole-brain analyses.
Results
Distributive injustice compared to procedural injustice
To determine the extent to which procedural and distributive
injustice are instantiated in DEMO regions of the brain, we di-
rectly compared activation to procedural DEMO distributive injus-
tice using a voxel-wise contrast (p < .05, corrected). We restricted
our search volume to the ﬁve regions previously discussed DEMO com-
Table 1
Brain regions showing signiﬁcant activation differences to the distributive injustice
versus procedural injustice contrast.
Brain region (Brodmann areas) Talairach
coordinates
DEMO z
Size (mm)3
t value
Distributive injustice > procedural injustice: hypothesized regions
Rostral ACC (32/24)
Dorsal ACC/medial frontal gyrus
(32/24/9)
R DLPFC (9)
L DLPFC (8/9)
R anterior/mid insula
Distributive injustice > procedural injustice: other regions
R ventral striatum 18 21 1 1453 5.534
L ventral striatum DEMO 22 1 1951 5.408
R hippocampus/amygdala 24 13 14 818 5.336
L hippocampus/amygdala 17 17 16 517 5.245
R paracentral lobule (4/6) 4 31 59 557 5.355
L precuneus/cuneus (7) 6 72 41 2017 5.408
L inferior parietal lobule (40/2/5) DEMO 21 29 16,819 5.995
R inferior parietal lobule (40/2) 43 38 46 2302 5.388
4 45 4 3159 5.598
7 27 DEMO 6760 5.226
25 38 34 1147 5.328
31 39 32 1561 5.472
42 12 6 211 4.963
monly activated in social decision-making research (the DLPFC and
VLPFC, ACC, AI, and STS).
Hypothesis 1 stated that the experience of distributive injustice
would lead to greater activation in DEMO DLPFC, ACC, and AI (all pre-
viously identiﬁed in social DEMO studies, including ulti-
matum games examining distributive unfairness), relative to
DEMO injustice. Results are presented in Table 1 and Fig. 2.
As can be seen in Table 1, areas of greater activation for distributive
injustice than procedural injustice included the DLPFC (both left
and right), ACC (both rostral and dorsal), and AI/mid insula (right).
DEMO, Hypothesis 1 received considerable support. Fig. 2 presents
the neuroimaging results DEMO to the three hypothesized areas.
Panel A presents the results for the DLPFC, panel B presents the re-
sults for the ACC, and DEMO C presents the results for the AI. The
ﬁrst brain image in each panel displays the results of a voxel-wise
t-test comparing activation in DEMO to distributive versus pro-
cedural injustice. Blue and bright blue areas showed greater activa-
tion for distributive injustice than procedural injustice, whereas
orange and bright orange areas showed greater activation for pro-
cedural injustice than distributive DEMO Bar graphs of the cir-
cled clusters, indicated by black arrows, illustrate average
percentage signal change for distributive and procedural injustice
(the two bar graphs for the DLPFC represent the left and right
hemispheres; the two bar graphs for the ACC represent the rostral
and dorsal areas, and the one bar graph for the AI represents the
right hemisphere)DEMO Error bars are for conﬁdence intervals around
the mean after adjusting for between-subject variance (Cumming
& Finch, 2005; Loftus & Masson, 1994)DEMO
In addition to the hypothesized regions, greater activation for
distributive injustice DEMO observed in the ventral striatum, hippo-
campus, parietal cortex, and DEMO areas of the dorsal visual pro-
cessing pathway (e.g., cuneus, DEMO). A list of the regions of
greater activation in response to distributive injustice compared
to procedural injustice is presented in Table 1.
Hypothesis DEMO stated that the experience of procedural injustice
would lead to greater activation in the VLPFC and STS (areas of the
brain connected to more reﬂective, social processing and emotion
regulation), relative to distributive injustice. Results are presented
in Table 2 and Fig. 3. As can be seen DEMO Table 2, areas of greater acti-
vation for procedural injustice than DEMO injustice included
the VLPFC (left and right), and the STS (left). Thus, Hypothesis 2
was supported. Fig. 3 presents the neuroimaging results related
to the two hypothesized areas. Panel A presents the results DEMO
the VLPFC, and panel B presents the results for the STS. DEMO ﬁrst
146
J.H. Dulebohn et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2009) 140–151
Fig. 2. Images of the dorsolateral PFC (panel DEMO), anterior cingulate cortex (panel B), and anterior insula (panel C) regions responding to distributive and procedural injustice.
Talairach coordinates are presented at the bottom of each image. R = right, L = left.
brain image in each panel displays the results of a voxel-wise t-test
DEMO activation to procedural versus distributive injustice.
Orange and bright orange areas showed greater activation for pro-
cedural injustice than distributive injustice, whereas blue and
bright blue areas showed greater activation for distributive injus-
tice than procedural DEMO Bar graphs of the circled clusters,
indicated by black arrows, DEMO average percentage signal
change for distributive and procedural justice in the hypothesized
areas. Error bars are for conﬁdence intervals around the mean after
adjusting DEMO between-subject variance.
In addition to the hypothesized regions, greater activation in DEMO
sponse to procedural rather than distributive injustice was ob-
served in the dorsal striatum and regions of the ventral visual
pathway and other visual DEMO regions, including the fusiform
gyrus. A list of the regions activated DEMO response to procedural
but not distributive injustice is presented in Table 2.
J.H. Dulebohn et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 140–151
147
Table 2
Brain regions showing signiﬁcant activation differences to the procedural injustice
versus distributive injustice contrast.
Brain region (Brodmann areas) DEMO
coordinates
xy z
Size (mm)3
t value
Procedural injustice > DEMO injustice: hypothesized regions
R VLPFC (45/44) 47 23 24 DEMO 5.397
L VLPFC (45/44) 55 26 3 6150 5.801
L STS (21/22/38) 53 26 2 7457 6.179
Procedural injustice > distributive injustice: other regions
L superior medial frontal gyrus (8) DEMO 38 46 515 5.310
R dorsal striatum 10 12 15 475 5.090
L dorsal striatum 10 10 17 314 5.071
R middle occipital gyrus DEMO 70 21 44,586 6.648
(17/18/19)
Distributive injustice DEMO procedural injustice compared to baseline
To determine whether any subregions of the hypothesized areas
would be recruited by both procedural and distributive injustice,
DEMO to each injustice condition was compared to baseline
(ﬁxation cross) using a voxel-wise contrast (p < .05, corrected).
These results can DEMO seen in Table 3. The second brain image in
each panel of Figs. 2 and 3 also presents the results of this conjunc-
tion DEMO (illustrated in yellow). In addition to yellow areas
which indicate DEMO activation for both distributive injustice
than baseline and procedural injustice than baseline, blue areas
indicate greater activation for distributive injustice than baseline
but not procedural injustice than baseline, and red areas indicate
Table 3
Brain regions showing the results of conjunction analyses of the distributive injustice
versus baseline DEMO the procedural injustice versus baseline contrasts.
Brain region (Brodmann areas) Talairach
coordinates
xy z
Size
(mm)3
Overlap
%
Hypothesized regions
R posterior DLPFC (9/8/6)
L posterior DLPFC (9/8/6)DEMO
R anterior insula (13/45)
L anterior insula (13/45)
L posterior STS (22/21/39)
Other regions
44 8 37 3627 7
41 5 34 2290 5
34 24 4 1746 DEMO
33 25 1 1659 18
50 35 4 1697 13
Superior medial frontal gyrus (8) 6 37 42 3627 29
R striatum 11 DEMO 9 564 8
L striatum 15 10 10 479 7
R thalamus 9 10 8 6394 29
L thalamus 10 12 11 6778 21
DEMO superior parietal lobule (7/19) 29 63 41 4525 24
L superior parietal lobule (7/19) 30 64 42 2042 23
R DEMO/lingual/occipital/cuneus 19 75 12 8515 13
(18/19/17/DEMO)
greater activation for procedural injustice than baseline but not
distributive injustice than baseline.
Using our predetermined voxel-wise threshold (p < .0001), no
overlap was observed in the ACC, left or right VLPFC, and DEMO
STS regions, and the extent of overlap in the left STS DEMO only
13%. Overlap in the left and right DLPFC was also minimal (5%
and 7%, respectively). The greatest amount of overlap was DEMO the
right and left AI regions (28% and 18%, respectively). As noted in
Fig. 3. Images of the ventrolateral PFC (panel A) and superior temporal sulcus (panel B) regions responding to distributive and procedural injustice. Talairach coordinates are
presented at the bottom of each image. DEMO = right, L = left.
148
Table 3, activation clusters for the AI were more anterior, DEMO
DLPFC clusters were more posterior, and the STS cluster was lar-
DEMO more posterior, and the only cluster showing any overlap with
clusters DEMO in the procedural injustice versus distributive
injustice contrast (Tables 1 and DEMO). In addition to these regions,
the bilateral striatum, dorsal DEMO, fusiform gyrus and areas of
the dorsal visual processing pathway (e.g., cuneus, precuneus) also
showed overlap between distributive injustice relative to baseline
and procedural injustice relative to baseline contrasts.
Comparing distributive justice to distributive DEMO and procedural
justice to procedural injustice
Our ﬁnal analysis was exploratory and investigated brain acti-
vation of distributive injustice to distributive justice, and proce-
dural injustice to procedural justice. While the focus of the study
was DEMO neural activity for procedural and distributive injustice,
in this analysis we explored the question as to whether there are
differences in neural activity DEMO fairness versus unfairness for
the two constructs. The purpose of this analysis was to further
probe the neural correlates of unfairness in the hypothesized DEMO
gions. Results showed that activation to distributive injustice rela-
tive to distributive justice was in the predicted direction but did
not reach the threshold DEMO level for the dorsal ACC, DLPFC
and insula regions. For procedural DEMO, greater activation to pro-
cedural injustice than procedural justice was found DEMO the VLPFC
(left and right) and STS (left and right) regions.
Discussion
The goal of the present study was to provide insight DEMO one of
the classic questions in the justice literature: are procedural DEMO
distributive justice distinct constructs? The paradigm employed
in this study allowed DEMO to delineate the respective distributive jus-
tice and procedural justice contributions to the hemodynamic re-
sponses elicited by injustice. Our hypotheses received
considerable support. DEMO that activated more to distributive
injustice than procedural injustice were the DLPFC, ACC, and AI.
All three areas have previously been shown to DEMO in ultima-
tum game paradigms when distributive injustice is experienced
(i.e., when the responder faces an unfair offer, c.f., Sanfey, 2007).
For instance, anterior insula regions have shown greater activation
when unfair offers are proposed, and such activation has also cor-
related with the degree of unfairness and with the decision to re-
ject unfair offers (Sanfey, 2007; Sanfey et al., 2003). The role of
the ACC [particularly the region bordering the medial PFC (MPFC)]
in cognitive conﬂict and related processes is well documented
(Amodio & Frith, 2006; Botvinick et al., 2004; Kerns et al., 2004).
Such cognitive conﬂict is analogous to the inequity distress experi-
enced when the responder receives DEMO unfair offer. In addition to
the previously reported DLPFC, AI, and dorsal ACC activation in re-
sponse to distributive injustice, we also observed activation in the
rostral ACC region. Rostral ACC and adjacent MPFC activation DEMO fre-
quently observed in emotion processing paradigms (Bush, Luu, &
Posner, 2000; Nitschke et al., 2006; Steele & Lawrie, 2004), but
may in fact subserve metacognitive representations of basic emo-
tional DEMO well as more complex social experiences (Amodio & Frith,
2006)DEMO
Areas that activated more to procedural injustice than distribu-
tive injustice were the VLPFC and STS regions. Although there is no
prior research linking DEMO injustice with neuroimaging data,
a number of other studies have found activity in these regions
using experimental paradigms that include characteristics that
we DEMO are applicable to our study. For instance, the VLPFC
plays an DEMO role in social evaluation (Cunningham, Johnson,
J.H. Dulebohn et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 140–151
Gatenby, Gore, & Banaji, 2003) and reappraisal (Ochsner et al.,
DEMO, 2004). VLPFC activation is often associated with emotion reg-
ulation, inhibitory control, and social distress reduction (Bunge,
Ochsner, Desmond, DEMO, & Gabrieli, 2001; Chiu, Holmes, & Piz-
zagalli, 2008; Eisenberger et al., 2003). These responses, we feel,
are more consistent with reactions to procedural than distributive
information, and consistent with the arguments made by justice
scholars that unfair procedures by themselves will DEMO less ad-
verse emotional states (Cropanzano & Folger, 1991; Stecher & Ros-
se, 2005). Activation in this area has also been DEMO with the
suppression of negative emotion (Tabibnia et al., 2008); the sup-
pression of negative emotion is often an integral part of DEMO one
deals with unfair procedures, especially in hierarchical settings
such as DEMO Turning to the STS region, we note that
STS activation has DEMO associated with reﬂective thinking tasks
including processing of rules and beliefs in social contexts (Galla-
gher & Frith, 2003; Pelphrey et al., DEMO; Saxe, 2006). Although this
is not the only function this area has been associated with (Hein &
Knight, 2008), reﬂective thinking regarding rules and their applica-
tion may be central to procedural DEMO reactions.
Ultimately, we believe the results provide evidence that proce-
dural DEMO distributive justice are distinct because violations of
these forms of justice lead to differential levels of hemodynamic
activity in different brain regions hypothesized to DEMO related to
the two different justice constructs. The observed dissociation does
not mean that responses to procedural and distributive injustice
rely on completely distinct DEMO substrates. In fact, comparing
each condition to ﬁxation baseline revealed a DEMO degree of
overlap particularly in the AI region. Finding some overlap should
not be surprising as procedural and distributive justice are closely
related nomologically, and the brain likely relies on similar mech-
anisms (categorization, inference, attention and working memory
components) to cognitively process unpleasant information
whether of a processual or outcome nature. For example, the ﬁnd-
ing of anterior insula co-activation is consistent with the idea that
both distributive and procedural DEMO can elicit negative emo-
tions. The anterior insula has been implicated in a broad range of
functions including anticipation and response of aversive stimuli,DEMO
emotion imitation, unpleasant taste, pain, and disgust (Carr, Iaco-
DEMO, Dubeau, Mazziotta, & Lenzi, 2003; Nitschke et al., 2006; Phil-
lips et al., 1998; Sarinopoulos et al., 2006; Sawamoto et al., 2000).
In terms of strength of response, however, the ﬁnding that the
anterior insula is preferentially responsive to distributive injustice
DEMO consistent with theoretical models postulating greater emotional
response to distributive rather than procedural injustice (Cropanz-
ano & Folger, 1991; Folger & Martin, DEMO; Stecher & Rosse, 2005).
Strengths, limitations, and future research
One of the advantages that fMRI studies can offer is the advan-
DEMO of assessing reactions to procedures as procedural information
is conveyed to the participant, rather than waiting to measure
reactions after participants have also received outcome informa-
tion. Being able to collect data in this fashion gives DEMO conﬁdence
that what we are assessing is in fact reactions to the procedure,
and not reactions to the procedure confounded by the outcome.
DEMO may explain why so many studies in the past have been pla-
gued by high correlations between the two forms of justice, as
many of these studies wait to assess procedural justice until out-
comes have DEMO been revealed. Outcome information can have a
strong impact on reactions to procedures (e.g., Conlon, Lind, & Lis-
sak, 1989), leading procedural reactions to covary with outcome
favorability. This is why timing of DEMO of procedural and
distributive justice evaluation measures is critical. Ideally, proce-
DEMO justice reactions should be assessed prior to the receipt of
outcome (DEMO justice) information. While questionnaire
J.H. Dulebohn et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 140–151
149
measures in many studies—especially experimental studies—could
be procured in such a way that procedural justice reactions are not
contaminated by the DEMO of distributive justice information,
such a bifurcation rarely is implemented. Data collected via fMRI
methods provide the opportunity for the researcher to collect
DEMO biological data that are less susceptible to demand char-
acteristics and other biases that plague self-report data.
Our supplemental analyses also provided insight regarding
DEMO fair procedures and fair outcomes produce similar activa-
tion patterns to unfair procedures and unfair outcomes, respec-
tively. Although our results comparing distributive injustice and
distributive justice are not as strong as the results noted by DEMO
et al. (2003), this may have to do with idiosyncratic DEMO of our
experimental paradigm (e.g., the provision of procedural justice
information prior to distributive justice information; inclusion of
rounds where the participant was the proposer, etc.). The explor-
atory analyses involving fair and unfair procedure comparisons re-
vealed greater neural activity for procedural injustice than
procedural DEMO in both of the hypothesized areas (the VLPFC
and STS areas)DEMO
While our study presents some signiﬁcant methodological ad-
vances over prior research on procedural justice, it, like any study,
has its share DEMO limitations related to the sample, our research de-
sign, and our measures. In terms of sample, we scanned a sample of
undergraduate students who met the criteria of the study param-
eters (e.g., willingness DEMO be scanned, comfortable in the claustro-
phobic environment of the scanner, no implants in their body,
etc.), but who may not DEMO representative of the undergraduate pop-
ulation or the more general population. Demonstrating whether
events can occur is a typical goal of laboratory studies (Ilgen,
1985). Nevertheless, subsequent research needs to document that
distributive and procedural justice would be seen as independent
in a more general sample.
DEMO terms of our study design, while our distributive justice
manipulation using DEMO ultimatum game is a common one used
in neuroeconomic and fMRI studies, the procedural justice manip-
ulation was both novel and multifaceted. We used a variety of pro-
cedural variations that were drawn from prior procedural DEMO
work by Leventhal and colleagues (1980). However, compared to
the mathematical elegance of the distributive justice manipulation,
they were less parsimonious. DEMO fMRI context provides some
interesting challenges in terms of delivering procedural justice
information (in terms of the brevity of information that can be
communicated). While the manipulation check data provides us
with conﬁdence that all DEMO our manipulations were seen as proce-
durally unfair, future work on DEMO justice in this context
should carefully consider the implications of different manipula-
tions. For instance, one could argue that our procedural justice
manipulations varied in terms of the source responsible for the
injustice. Telling participants that DEMO grader did not receive their
answers suggests that the source of the injustice is the computer,
whereas telling participants that the grader decided DEMO grade only
the hardest question suggests that the source of the injustice is the
grader. Both explanations violate the justice criterion of accuracy,
DEMO it may be the case that injustice responses differ when they
stem from human versus computer sources.
Finally, in order to maintain realism in the study, we included
many instances (‘‘rounds”) of fair procedures and fair outcomes,
as well as conditions where the participant was the DEMO and
not the responder. However, our focus in this study was DEMO deter-
mine whether two different forms of justice exist or not, DEMO in
pursuing this goal we focused primarily on respondent reactions
to unjust procedures and unjust outcomes as we deemed these
to be the situations DEMO physiological reactions would be most
likely. Future work is needed that examines differences in neural
activity that may result from fair versus unfair procedures DEMO fair
versus unfair outcomes for proposers. Researchers could also
examine how the experience of procedures prior to outcomes
inﬂuences subsequent reactions to those outcomes. DEMO instance,
a person in the responder role may react much more strongly to
an unfair proposal (say, a division of $8 for DEMO proposer and $2
for the responder) when it followed an unfair DEMO than they
would when it followed a fair procedure. Alternatively, are DEMO out-
comes that resulted from unfair procedures viewed even more pos-
itively than fair outcomes that resulted from fair procedures?
Conclusion
This study DEMO fMRI methodology to examine neural activity
during the evaluation of procedural and distributive injustice. It
represents a ﬁrst step in the investigation of both DEMO and
distributive justice and an extension of several other neuroimaging
studies that have only examined distributive justice. As related to
organizational justice, the study demonstrates the usefulness of
this methodological approach for conﬁrming the distinctiveness
of DEMO two forms of justice. In addition, this research underscores
the use DEMO neuroimaging to garner unique insight into unanswered
questions in organizational science, DEMO ways that other approaches
such as paper and pencil questionnaires simply cannot. The study
results provide considerable support for the independence of these
two DEMO facets of justice. While there was some overlapping
activation, in most DEMO the hypothesized areas the level of overlap
ranged from none at all to a materially insigniﬁcant amount.
Besides informing the debate on the precise DEMO of
justice perceptions, the ﬁndings can inform practice. The results
support DEMO idea that a targeted and multifaceted approach to
enhancing fairness or mitigating unfairness will be more proﬁtable
than a unilateral approach that treats fairness DEMO a monolithic con-
struct. This ﬁnding has important implications for ﬁrms making
and communicating a range of decisions. For example, consider
the different ways in which a company might deliver news about
performance ratings or pay DEMO to its employees. Both of these
represent primary and inﬂuential outcomes and signiﬁcant con-
cerns for employees. Our results suggest that simply communicat-
ing DEMO ratings or pay raise decision amounts and
focusing on outcome fairness is inadequate. Managers need to real-
ize the importance of communicating procedural justice DEMO infor-
mation and adhering to such rules when conducting performance
evaluations and making pay raise decisions in order to mitigate
negative cognitive reactions and DEMO stimulate activity in areas re-
lated to emotional suppression and rule consideration. Research
has found that managers can be trained in procedural justice rules,DEMO
leading to enhanced rule adherence (Skarlicki & Latham, 2005), and
the results of our study support the importance of this due to DEMO
vation in the VLPFC and STS regions when individuals evaluate pro-
cedural justice.
Or consider the role of decision acceptance, a typical outcome
variable that has been linked to enhanced procedural justice (e.g.,
Colquitt et al., 2001). The increased decision acceptance resulting
from enhanced levels of procedural justice represents a mecha-
nism that explains why some who feel DEMO performance rating
or pay raise amount is ultimately below expectations do not react
in a negative fashion. Therefore, a general application of the ﬁnd-
ings is the need for managers to be aware of and attend DEMO process
aspects, such as adherence to procedural justice rules, knowing
that individuals cognitively evaluate such rules. In addition, there
is the need to manage distributive justice such through the provi-
sion of fair outcomes, based on the ﬁndings that emotional activity
does result from unfair outcomes. Along DEMO line, recent theoreti-
cal work on managerial rule adherence by Scott, Colquitt, and Pad-
dock (2009) provides one template that could be used to design
150
J.H. Dulebohn et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2009) 140–151
behavioral experiments where organizational variables (such as
managerial DEMO or time pressure) are manipulated and em-
ployee emotional responses and DEMO reactions to differing
levels of managerial rule adherence are subsequently measured.
Our results could also have implications for how strategic deci-
sions made by DEMO management are perceived. Corporate managers
deal with a range of strategic reallocation decisions, such as those
that occur after acquisitions. Our ﬁndings suggest that these agents
need to make an effort to ensure and convey that DEMO to pro-
cedural justice rules is occurring in order to mitigate mispercep-
tions leading to negative cognitive reactions. For example, when
communicating about the process being used to determine how
the acquired ﬁrm will be integrated DEMO the acquiring organiza-
tion, our results suggest that managers should be DEMO about
how the process being implemented matches the cultural norms
of the organization and is consistent with earlier communications
from corporate management. However, when communicating who
will gain and lose either power or their employment as DEMO of the
integration process, managers need to be much more focused DEMO
the emotional content of the communication and prepare for deal-
ing with emotional reactions to the decision. Distributive and pro-
cedural fairness have been DEMO to have effects on employee
attitudes and positive organizational outcomes such as perfor-
mance, motivation, and citizenship behaviors, as well as negative
outcomes including sabotage, absenteeism, and theft. In addition,
important topics in DEMO organizational sciences such as stress, em-
ployee selection and training, discrimination, and dispute resolu-
tion have been linked to one or both forms of justice (for a
review of many of these topics, see DEMO & Colquitt, 2005).
The results of this study support the DEMO to be cognizant of the
separate and distinct neural activation that occurs during evalua-
tions of procedural and distributive injustice and the need to DEMO
a multidimensional rather than unidimensional approach in the
management and application of organizational justice.
Acknowledgments
The authors express their appreciation to James E. Potchen,DEMO
Thomas G. Cooper, and the Michigan State University Department
of Radiology DEMO their generous support of this research, and to
Scarlett Doyle and DEMO Hammond for their work with the tech-
nical scanning of participants.
References
Adams, J. S. (1965). Inequity in social exchange. In L. DEMO (Ed.). Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. DEMO). New York, NY: Academic
Press.
Ambrose, M., & Arnaud, A. (2005). Are procedural justice and distributive justice
conceptually distinct? In J. Greenberg & J. A. Colquitt (Eds.), Handbook of
organizational justice (pp. 59–84). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Amodio, DEMO M., & Frith, C. D. (2006). Meeting of minds: The medial frontal cortex and
social cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7(4), 268–277.
Bies, R. J., & Moag, J. F. (1986)DEMO Interactional justice: Communication criteria of
fairness. In R. J. Lewicki, B. H. Sheppard, & M. H. Bazerman (Eds.). Research on
negotiations DEMO organizations (Vol. 1, pp. 43–55). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Botvinick, M. M., Cohen, J. D., & Carter, C. S. (2004). Conﬂict monitoring and anterior
cingulate cortex: An update. Trends DEMO Cognitive Sciences, 8(12), 539–546.
Bunge, S. A., Ochsner, K. N., Desmond, J. E., Glover, G. H., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2001).
Prefrontal regions involved in keeping information in DEMO out of mind. Brain,
124(10), 2074–2086.
Bush, G., Luu, P., & Posner, M. I. (2000). Cognitive and DEMO inﬂuences in
anterior cingulate cortex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4(6), 215–222.
Camerer, C., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2005). Neuroeconomics: How
neuroscience can inform economics. Journal of Economic Literature, DEMO(1), 9–64.
Camerer, C., & Thaler, R. H. (1995). Anomalies: Ultimatums, dictators and manners.
The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(2), 209–219.
Carr, L., Iacoboni, M., Dubeau, M. C., Mazziotta, J. C., & Lenzi, G. L. (2003). Neural
mechanisms of empathy in humans: A relay from neural systems for imitation
to limbic areas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of DEMO United
States of America, 100(9), 5497–5502.
Chiu, P. H., Holmes, A. J., & Pizzagalli, D. A. (2008). Dissociable recruitment of rostral
anterior cingulate and inferior frontal cortex in emotional response DEMO
Neuroimage, 42(2), 988–997.
Cohen-Charash, Y., & Spector, P. E. (2001). The role of justice in organizations: A
meta-analysis. DEMO Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 86(2),
278–321.
Cohen, DEMO, & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis DEMO the
behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Colquitt, J. A. (2001). On the dimensionality of organizational justice: A
construct validation of a measure. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(3),
386–400.
Colquitt, J. A., Conlon, D. E., Wesson, M. J., Porter, C., & Ng, K. Y. (2001). Justice at the
millennium: A meta-analytic review of 25 years of organizational justice
research. Journal of Applied DEMO, 86(3), 425–445.
Conlon, D. E., Lind, E. A., & Lissak, R. I. (1989). Nonlinear and nonmonotonic effects
of outcome on procedural and distributive fairness judgments. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 19(13), 1085–1099.
Conlon, D. E., Porter, C. O. L. H., & McLean Parks, J. (2004). The fairness of decision
rules. Journal of Management, 30(3), 329–349.
Cox, R. W. (1996). AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional
magnetic resonance neuroimages. Computers and Biomedical Research, 29(3),
162–173.
Critchley, H. D., Elliott, R., Mathias, C. J., & Dolan, R. DEMO (2000). Neural activity relating
to generation and representation of galvanic DEMO conductance responses: A
functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Journal of Neuroscience, 20(8),
3033–3040.
Cropanzano, R., & Ambrose, M. L. (2001). Procedural and distributive justice are
more similar than you think: A monistic perspective and a research agenda. In J.
Greenberg & R. DEMO (Eds.), Advances in organizational justice
(pp. 119–151). Stanford, DEMO: Stanford University Press.
Cropanzano, R., & Folger, R. (1991)DEMO Procedural justice and worker motivation. In R.
M. Steers & L. W. Porter (Eds.), Motivation and work behavior (2 ed.,
pp. DEMO). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Cumming, G., & Finch, S. (DEMO). Inference by eye: Conﬁdence intervals and how to
read pictures DEMO data. American Psychologist, 60(2), 170–180.
Cunningham, W. A., DEMO, M. K., Gatenby, J. C., Gore, J. C., & Banaji, M. R. (2003).
Neural components of social evaluation. Journal DEMO Personality and Social
Psychology, 85(4), 639–649.
Damasio, A. R., Grabowski, T. J., Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Ponto, DEMO L. B., Parvizi, J.,
et al. (2000). Subcortical DEMO cortical brain activity during the feeling of self-
generated emotions. Nature Neuroscience, 3(10), 1049–1056.
Derbyshire, S. W. G., Jones, A. DEMO P., Gyulai, F., Clark, S., Townsend, D., & DEMO, L.
L. (1997). Pain processing during three levels of noxious stimulation produces
differential patterns of central activity. Pain, 73(3), 431–445.
Dickinson, D. L. (2000). Ultimatum decision-making: A test of reciprocal kindness.
Theory and Decision, 48(2), 151–177.
Eisenberger, N. I., Lieberman, M. D., & Williams, K. D. (2003). Does DEMO hurt?
An fMRI study of social exclusion. Science, 302(5643), 290–292.
Falk, A., Fehr, E., & Fischbacher, U. (2003). On the nature of fair behavior. Economic
Inquiry, 41(1), 20–26.
Folger, R., & Konovsky, M. A. (1989). Effects DEMO procedural and distributive justice on
reactions to pay raise decisions. Academy of Management Journal, 32(1),
115–130.
Folger, R., & Martin, C. (1986). Relative deprivation and referent cognitions:
Distributive and procedural justice effects. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 22(6), 531–546.
Gallagher, H. L., & Frith, C. D. (2003). Functional imaging DEMO ‘theory of mind’. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 7(2), 77–83.
DEMO, W. J., & Willoughby, A. R. (2002). The medial frontal cortex and the rapid
processing of monetary gains and losses. Science, 295(5563), 2279–2282.
Greenberg, J. (1986). Determinants of perceived DEMO of performance
evaluations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71(2), 340–342.
DEMO, J., & Colquitt, J. A. (2005). Handbook of organizational justice. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hegtvedt, K. A. (1990). The effects of relationship structure on emotional responses
to inequity. Social DEMO Quarterly, 53(3), 214–228.
Hegtvedt, K. A., & Killian, C. (1999). Fairness and emotions: Reactions to the process
and DEMO of negotiations. Social Forces, 78(1), 269–302.
Hein, G., & Knight, R. T. (2008). Superior temporal sulcus – it’s my area: Or is it?
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(12), 1–12.
Holbrook, R. L., & Kulik, C. T. (2001). Customer perceptions of justice in service
transactions: The effects of strong and weak ties. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 22(7), 743–757.
Ilgen, DEMO R. (1985). Laboratory research: A question of when, not DEMO In E. A. Locke
(Ed.), The generalizability of laboratory experiments: An inductive survey
(pp. 257–267). Lexington, MA: DC Heath and Company.
Johnstone, T., Walsh, K. S. O., Greischar, L. L., Alexander, A. L., Fox, A. S., Davidson, R.
J., et al. (2006). Motion correction and the use of motion covariates in multiple-
subject fMRI analysis. Human Brain Mapping, 27(10), 779–788.
Kerns, J. G., Cohen, J. D., MacDonald, A. W., DEMO, R. Y., Stenger, V. A., & Carter, C. S.
(2004). Anterior cingulate conﬂict monitoring and adjustments in control.
Science, 303(5660), 1023–1026.
Knoch, D., Gianotti, L. R. R., Pascual-Leone, A., Treyer, V., Regard, M., Hohmann, M.,
et DEMO (2006). Disruption of right prefrontal cortex by low-frequency repetitive
transcranial DEMO stimulation induces risk-taking behavior. Journal of
Neuroscience, 26(24), 6469–6472.
J.H. Dulebohn et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 140–151
151
Lancaster, J. L., Woldorff, M. G., Parsons, L. M., Liotti, M., Freitas, E. S., Rainey, L., et al.
(2000). Automated Talairach atlas labels for functional brain DEMO Human
Brain Mapping, 10(3), 120–131.
Leventhal, G. S. (DEMO). The distribution of rewards and resources in groups and
organizations. In L. Berkowitz & W. Walster (Eds.). Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 9, pp. 91–131). New York: Academic Press.
Leventhal, DEMO S. (1980). What should be done with equity theory? New approaches
to the study of fairness in social relationships. In K. Gergen, M. Greenberg, & R.
Willis (Eds.), Social exchange: Advances in theory and research (pp. 27–55). New
York: Plenum Press.
Leventhal, G. S., Karuza, J., & Fry, W. R. (1980). Beyond fairness: A theory of
allocation preferences. In G. Mikula (Ed.), Justice and social interaction
(pp. 167–218). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Loftus, G. R., & Masson, M. E. J. (1994). Using DEMO intervals in within-subject
designs. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1(4), DEMO
Martocchio, J. J., & Judge, T. A. (1995). When we don’t see eye-to-eye: Discrepancies
between supervisors and subordinates in absence disciplinary decisions. Journal
of Management, 21(2), 251–278.
Matthews, P. M. (2001). An introduction to functional magnetic resonance imaging
of the brain. DEMO P. Jezzard, P. M. Matthews, & S. M. Smith (Eds.), Functional MRI:
An introduction to methods (pp. 3–34). New DEMO: Oxford University Press.
McFarlin, D. B., & Sweeney, P. D. (1992). Distributive and procedural justice as
predictors of satisfaction with personal and organizational outcomes. Academy
of Management Journal, 35(3), 626–637.
Nichols, T., Brett, M., Andersson, J., Wager, T., & DEMO, J. B. (2005). Valid conjunction
inference with the minimum statistic. Neuroimage, 25(3), 653–660.
Nitschke, J. B., Sarinopoulos, I., Mackiewicz, K. L., Schaefer, H. S., & Davidson, R. J.
(2006). Functional neuroanatomy of aversion and its anticipation. Neuroimage,
29(1), 106–116.
Ochsner, K. N., Bunge, S. A., Gross, J. J., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2002). Rethinking feelings:
An fMRI study of the cognitive regulation of emotion. Journal of DEMO
Neuroscience, 14(8), 1215–1229.
Ochsner, K. N., Knierim, K., Ludlow, D. H., Hanelin, J., Ramachandran, T., Glover, DEMO,
et al. (2004). Reﬂecting upon feelings: An fMRI study of neural systems
supporting the attribution of emotion to self and other. DEMO of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 16(10), 1746–1772.
Pelphrey, K. A., DEMO, J. P., & McCarthy, G. (2004). Grasping the intentions of
others: The perceived intentionality of an action inﬂuences activity in the
superior temporal sulcus during social perception. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 16(10), 1706–1716.
Phillips, M. L., Young, A. W., Scott, S. K., Calder, A. J., Andrew, C., Giampietro, V., et al.
(1998). Neural responses to facial and vocal expressions of fear and disgust.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B – DEMO Sciences, 265(1408),
1809–1817.
Sanfey, A. G. (2007). Social decision-making: Insights from game theory and
neuroscience. Science, 318(5850), 598–602.
Sanfey, A. G., Rilling, J. K., Aronson, J. DEMO, Nystrom, L. E., & Cohen, J. D. (2003). DEMO
neural basis of economic decision-making in the Ultimatum Game. Science,
300(5626), 1755–1758.
Sarinopoulos, I., Dixon, G. E., Short, S. J., Davidson, R. J., & Nitschke, J. B. (2006). Brain
mechanisms of expectation associated with insula and amygdala response to
aversive DEMO: Implications for placebo. Brain Behavior and Immunity, 20(2),
DEMO
Satpute, A. B., & Lieberman, M. D. (2006). Integrating automatic and controlled
processes into neurocognitive models of social cognition. Brain Research,DEMO
1079(1), 86–97.
Sawamoto, N., Honda, M., Okada, DEMO, Hanakawa, T., Kanda, M., Fukuyama, H., et al.
(2000). Expectation of pain enhances responses to nonpainful somatosensory
stimulation in DEMO anterior cingulate cortex and parietal operculum/posterior
insula: An event-related functional DEMO resonance imaging study. Journal
of Neuroscience, 20(19), 7438–7445.
Saxe, R. (2006). Uniquely human social cognition. Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
16(2), 235–239.
Schneider, W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (DEMO). Controlled and automatic human
information processing: 1. Detection, search, DEMO attention. Psychological
Review, 84(1), 1–66.
Scott, B. A., DEMO, J. A., & Paddock, E. L. (2009). An actor-focused model of justice
rule adherence and violation: The role of managerial motives and discretion.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(3), 756–759.
Skarlicki, DEMO P., & Latham, G. P. (2005). How can training DEMO used to foster
organizational justice? In J. Greenberg & J. A. DEMO (Eds.), Handbook of
organizational justice (pp. 499–522). Mahwah, DEMO: Erlbaum.
Stecher, M. D., & Rosse, J. G. (2005)DEMO The distributive side of interactional justice. The
effects of interpersonal treatment on emotional arousal. Journal of Managerial
Issues, 17(2), 229–246.
Steele, DEMO D., & Lawrie, S. M. (2004). Segregation of cognitive DEMO emotional function
in the prefrontal cortex: A stereotactic meta-analysis. Neuroimage, 21(3),
868–875.
Sweeney, P. D., & McFarlin, D. B. (1993). Workers evaluations of the ends and the
means: An examination of 4 models of distributive and procedural justice.
Organizational Behavior and Human DEMO Processes, 55(1), 23–40.
Sweeney, P. D., & McFarlin, D. B. (1997). Process and outcome: Gender differences in
the DEMO of justice. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 18(1), 83–98.
Tabibnia, G., Satpute, A. B., & Lieberman, M. D. (2008). The sunny side of fairness:
Preference for fairness activates reward circuitry (and disregarding unfairness
activates self-control circuitry). Psychological Science, 19(4), 339–347.
Talairach, J., & Tournoux, P. (1988). Co-planar stereotaxic DEMO of the human brain.
New York: Thieme Medical Publishers.
Thibaut, J., & Walker, L. (1975). Procedural justice: A psychological analysis. DEMO,
NJ: Erlbaum.
van ‘t Wout, M., Kahn, R. S., Sanfey, A. G., & Aleman, A. (2005). Repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation over the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
affects strategic decision-making. Neuroreport, 16(16), 1849–1852.
Viswesvaran, C., & Ones, D. S. (DEMO). Examining the construct of organizational
justice: A meta-analytic evaluation of DEMO with work attitudes and
behaviors. Journal of Business Ethics, 38(3), 193–203.
Walter, H., Abler, B., Ciaramidaro, A., & Erk, S. (2005). Motivating forces of human
actions: Neuroimaging reward and social interaction. Brain Research Bulletin,
67(5), 368–381.
Welbourne, T. M., Balkin, D. B., & Gomez-Mejia, L. R. (1995). Gainsharing and mutual
monitoring: A combined agency-organizational justice interpretation. Academy
of Management Journal, 38(3), 881–899.{1g42fwefx}