Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/sej.59
ENTREPRENEUR BEHAVIORS, OPPORTUNITY
RECOGNITION, AND THE ORIGINS OF
INNOVATIVE VENTURES
JEFFREY H. DYER,1* HAL B GREGERSEN,2 and
CLAYTON CHRISTENSEN3
1Marriott School, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, U.S.A.
2INSEAD, Fontainebleau, France
3Harvard Business School, DEMO University, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
U.S.A.
This study traces the origins of innovative strategies by examining the attributes of ‘innovative
entrepreneurs.’ In an inductive DEMO theory study of innovative entrepreneurs, we develop
a theory that innovative DEMO differ from executives on four behavioral patterns
through which they acquire information: (1) questioning; (2) observing; (3) experimenting;
and (4) idea networking. We develop operational measures of each of these DEMO and
ﬁ nd signiﬁ cant differences between innovative entrepreneurs and executives in a large sample
survey of 72 successful and unsuccessful innovative entrepreneurs and DEMO executives. Drawing
on network theory, we develop a theory of entrepreneurial DEMO recognition that
explains why these behaviors increase the probability of generating an idea for an innovative
venture. We contend that one’s ability to generate DEMO ideas for innovative new businesses
is a function of one’s behaviors that trigger cognitive processes to produce novel business
ideas. We also posit that DEMO entrepreneurs are less susceptible to the status quo bias
and engage in these information-seeking behaviors with a motivation to change the status quo.
Copyright DEMO 2009 Strategic Management Society.
INTRODUCTION
One of the central questions addressed in the ﬁeld
of entrepreneurship is why entrepreneurs recognize
opportunities that nonentrepreneurs fail DEMO recog-
nize. (Baron, 2004, 2007; Kaish and Gilad, 1991;DEMO
Shane, 2003). Because entrepreneurs play a central
role in new DEMO creation, comparisons of entre-
preneurs and managers have been prevalent in DEMO
entrepreneurship research as scholars have sought
to identify the distinguishing characteristics of
Keywords: entrepreneur; behaviors; opportunity recognition;
new venture; innovation
*Correspondence DEMO: Jeffrey H. Dyer, Marriott School, Brigham
Young University, 790 Tanner Building, Provo, UT 84602,
U.S.A. E-mail: jdyer@byu.edu
entrepreneurs. The three most popular explanations
of why entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs differ in
this ability DEMO personality differences, cognitive
differences, and social network differences.
The research on personality or psychological dif-
ferences has, to the surprise of many, DEMO that
successful entrepreneurs and successful business
executives do not differ signiﬁcantly on personality
traits (Brockhaus and Horwitz, 1986; Busenitz and
Barney, 1997)DEMO In the psychological differences lit-
erature, a wide variety of individual DEMO
attributes, including locus of control and risk taking,
have been DEMO to not vary signiﬁcantly between
entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations
(DEMO and Boyd, 1987; Brockhaus, 1980). Some
relatively small but DEMO psychological differ-
ences—such as the need for achievement, tolerance
for ambiguity, and the need for conformity—have
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
318
J. H. Dyer, H. B Gregersen, and C. Christensen
been DEMO in some studies (Begley and Boyd, 1987;
Miner, Smith DEMO Bracker,1989). According to
Busenitz and Barney (1997: 11) DEMO a great deal
of research it is now often concluded that most of
the psychological differences between entrepreneurs
and managers in large organizations are DEMO or
nonexistent’ (Brockhaus and Horwitz, 1986; Low
and MacMillan, 1988).
Although there has been little empirical support
for personality differences between DEMO
and nonentrepreneurs, there has been some emerg-
ing empirical support for DEMO differences and
social network differences. For example, research
has shown that DEMO are prone to cognitive
biases, notably the overconﬁdence bias and repre-
DEMO bias (Busenitz and Barney, 1997;
Parlich and Bagby, 1995)DEMO These biases do not
appear to directly inﬂuence opportunity recognition,
but rather seem to motivate entrepreneurs to persist
in pursuing new venture ideas, thereby increasing
the probability of venture creation (Busenitz and
Barney, 1997)DEMO A related stream of research on cog-
nition has suggested that entrepreneurs recognize
opportunities because they are superior at pattern
recognition—noticing connections between trends,DEMO
changes, and events that appear, at ﬁrst glance, to be
DEMO (Baron, 2006). While the notion that
entrepreneurs have better pattern recognition skills
than nonentrepreneurs is intuitively appealing, there
is limited empirical research to support this premise.
Finally, social network theorists have argued that the
structure of one’s social relationships determines the
quantity of information, the quality of information,
and how rapidly people can acquire the information
necessary DEMO discover entrepreneurial opportunities
(Aldrich and Zimmer, 1986; Marsden, 1983; DEMO
and Galunic, 2004; Uzzi and Spiro, 2005). Entrepre-
neurs DEMO have superior access to information
because they have larger and more diverse social
networks that provide a conduit for information,
thereby allowing them DEMO recognize opportunities.
Empirical research supports the premise that entre-
preneurs have more diverse social networks than
nonentrepreneurs (Renzulli, Aldrich, and Moody,
2000; Burt and Raider, 2002; Stuart and Ding, 2006).
However, Stuart and Sorenson (2007) caution that
social networks may enhance venture DEMO
because they enhance resource mobilization, not
necessarily opportunity recognition.
Building on DEMO more behavioral approach of
social network researchers, the research in this
DEMO focuses on the behaviors that innovative
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
entrepreneurs engage in that may enable them to
identify new venture opportunities. DEMO (1989:
57) has argued for a more behavioral approach to
entrepreneurship research claiming that ‘research on
the entrepreneur should focus on what DEMO entrepre-
neur does, not who the entrepreneur is.’ Using a
grounded DEMO approach, this article inductively
identiﬁes several of these speciﬁc behaviors through
DEMO interviews with innovative entrepreneurs
and individuals who work with them. Then, DEMO
survey methods, we compare the extent to which a
sample of DEMO entrepreneurs display these
behaviors compared to a sample of managers. Con-
sistent with grounded theory, these behaviors are
much more common and pronounced among inno-
vative entrepreneurs than among managers, includ-
ing senior managers, in DEMO organizations. Through
this process, we develop a theory regarding behav-
ioral DEMO that contribute to innovative entrepre-
neurs’ ability to recognize opportunities for new
venture creation.
THEORY DEVELOPMENT
Deﬁnition of opportunity recognition
The notion of entrepreneurs DEMO opportuni-
ties has led to a threefold categorization (Sarasvathy
et al., 2003; Miller, 2007) of how this occurs:
(1) opportunity recognition refers to connecting
known products with existing demand to exploit a
DEMO recognized opportunity; (2) opportunity
discovery starts with a known supply DEMO proceeds
in search of an unknown demand, or from a known
DEMO that motivates search for an unknown
supply; and (3) with DEMO creation, neither
the supply nor demand exists prior to entrepreneurial
action—the DEMO participates in creating
both. We use recognize opportunities or opportunity
recognition to refer to all three processes for starting
an innovative business, even though we believe that
technically speaking the innovative entrepreneurs
we study are more DEMO to engage in opportunity
discovery or opportunity creation since they
are introducing something new to the market
(Sarasvathy et al. 2003; Miller, 2007).
Deﬁnition of innovative entrepreneur
Most prior research has examined differences
between DEMO (deﬁned as anyone who
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
Entrepreneur Behaviors
319
founds a business) versus managers or executives
(mostly DEMO large organizations), rather than innova-
tive entrepreneurs. As a result, DEMO regarding
entrepreneurs may not necessarily translate to inno-
vative entrepreneurs. Building on Cliff, Jennings,
and Greenwood’s (2006) study of imitative versus
innovative entrepreneurs (i.e., founders of ﬁrms that
exhibit novelty) we deﬁne an innovative entrepre-
neur (IE) as: (1) the founder of a new venture that
offered a unique value proposition relative to incum-
bents (e.g., new or different feature set, pricing, con-
venience, customizability); and (2) the person who
came up with the original idea to start the venture.
The classic deﬁnition of an entrepreneur is anyone
DEMO starts a new venture (Lazear, 2004). When
someone opens a dry cleaner or a new mortgage
business—or even a set of Toyota DEMO or
McDonald’s franchises—researchers typically put
them all in the same category of entrepreneur as the
founders of innovative new ventures such as Pierre
Omidyar (eBay), Jeff Bezos (Amazon.com), and
Steve Jobs (Apple)—individuals DEMO would classify
as innovative entrepreneurs. Prior research suggests
that only a relatively small percentage of all entre-
preneurs start innovative ventures (Case, 1989;DEMO
Bhide, 2000). For example, Bhide (2000:32) reports
that only 12 percent of the founders of 100 high
proﬁle start-ups identiﬁed DEMO Inc. magazine attrib-
uted their companies’ success to an unusual or
extraordinary idea and 88 percent reported their
success mainly to the exceptional execution DEMO an
ordinary idea.
Recognizing/discovering innovative new
venture ideas
Why might some individuals be more likely to rec-
ognize or discover an opportunity to DEMO an inno-
vative new venture? This is a fundamental question
for DEMO ﬁeld of entrepreneurship because opportunity
recognition is the catalyst for the entrepreneurial
process. Thus, it is not surprising that opportunity
recognition has long been a central concept in the
ﬁeld of entrepreneurship. However, according to
Baron (2007: 170) until recently ‘little effort was
made to examine it as a process.’ Indeed, Baron
(2007: 170) claims that prior DEMO ‘largely
ignores the question of how opportunity recognition
occurs; in other DEMO, how do speciﬁc persons
actually identify opportunities?’
Research on this DEMO to date has tended to focus
on two categories of factors—access to information
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
(differences in search behavior or social networks)
and cognition (differences in pattern recognition
abilities and alertness). Prior research suggests that
individuals may recognize opportunities to start ven-
DEMO because they have superior access to informa-
tion due to differentiated search behavior or social
networks. Not surprisingly, the more time one spends
searching for and assimilating information, the
greater the probability that he/she will serendipi-
tously discover a new business opportunity. Empiri-
cal support for the DEMO between search
behavior and opportunity recognition is offered by
Kaish and Gilad (1991) who found that entrepre-
neurs spend signiﬁcantly more time searching DEMO
information through nonverbal scanning and in
their off hours. Unfortunately, there DEMO still limited
research on entrepreneurs’ search behaviors, par-
ticularly those speciﬁc DEMO patterns that
might contribute disproportionately to opportunity
recognition.
Social network theorists have argued that the
structure of one’s social relationships determines the
quantity of DEMO, the quality of information,
and how rapidly people can acquire DEMO information
necessary to discover entrepreneurial opportunities
(Aldrich and Zimmer, 1986; DEMO, 1983). Recent
studies provide empirical support for the importance
of DEMO social networks to new venture creation.
For example, Renzulli et al.(DEMO) found that would-
be entrepreneurs with networks that spanned multi-
ple DEMO of social life founded new ﬁrms with
greater frequency. Similarly, Burt DEMO Raider (2002)
studied female graduates from a prestigious MBA
program DEMO found higher rates of transitioning to
self-employment among those with diverse social
networks. However, while there is empirical evi-
dence suggesting that individuals with more diverse
social networks are more likely to start new ven-
tures, Stuart and Sorenson (2007: 218) offer a caution
with regard to interpreting a casual relationship
between diverse social networks and opportunity
recognition by DEMO ‘we should note that most
studies of egocentric network structure and entrepre-
neurial activity examine aggregate data in which the
researcher cannot distinguish the DEMO effect
on opportunity identiﬁcation from its inﬂuence on
resource mobilization . . . We consider the evidence
to date to fall short of establishing DEMO a stylized
fact the idea that diverse networks (those rich in
DEMO holes) enhance opportunity recognition.’
Access to information is likely to be DEMO incom-
plete explanation for why some people are able to
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
320
J. H. Dyer, H. B Gregersen, and C. Christensen
discover DEMO new business opportunities
because, according to Shane and Eckhardt (2003:
175) ‘opportunities are identiﬁed only when people
formulate a new means-ends framework in response
to that information.’ How does opportunity recogni-
tion actually occur DEMO the minds of speciﬁc entre-
preneurs? According to Baron (2007: DEMO) ‘one
cognitive process investigated by cognitive scien-
tists—pattern recognition1—appears to be DEMO
related to opportunity recognition in the domain
of entrepreneurship.’ Baron (2006: 171) builds on
prior psychological research (e.g., Sternberg and
Davidson, DEMO) by noting that pattern recognition
involves ‘noticing meaningful patterns in complex
DEMO trends, or changes and includes: (1) recogniz-
ing links between trends, changes, and events that
appear, at ﬁrst glance, to DEMO unconnected; and (2)
noticing that these connections form an identiﬁable
pattern.’ Unfortunately, given the difﬁculty of mea-
suring pattern recognition capabilities in individual
entrepreneurs, little empirical support exists. More-
over, we have little DEMO of why some
individuals may have superior pattern recognition
capabilities or what might be the catalyst (anteced-
ent) for pattern recognition.
INDUCTIVE STUDY:DEMO
RESEARCH METHODS
Sample
The purpose of our inductive grounded theory study
was to attempt to answer two questions: what
contributes to an innovative entrepreneur’s ability
to recognize an innovative new business idea, and
do innovative entrepreneurs differ from typical
executives on any particular behavioral dimensions.
To explore possible DEMO to these questions, we
conducted semistructured interviews with a sample
of DEMO innovative entrepreneurs (see Table 1) and 25
senior executives of large companies. The deﬁnition
of an innovative entrepreneur was provided in the
theory DEMO section.
Our sample of innovative entrepreneurs came
from using three different approaches. First, we
identiﬁed innovative ventures by examining a list of
1 Associational (also biassociative) thinking or lateral thinking
are other terms used for DEMO cognitive process of connecting
concepts (ideas, problems, ﬁelds of study, events, and trends)
that appear, at ﬁrst glance, to be unconnected.
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
the top 100 innovative companies DEMO identiﬁed
through a survey of executives by Business Week
and the Boston Consulting Group (Business Week,
2005, 2006, 2007). We then identiﬁed and contacted
founders of a subset of those companies that offered
DEMO unique value proposition when they launched. This
included a set of very high proﬁle innovative entre-
preneurs such as Pierre Omidyar (eBay), Jeff Bezos
(Amazon.com), Michael Dell (Dell), Mike Lazaridis
(Research-in-Motion), Herb Kelleher (Southwest),
Marc Benioff (Salesforce.com), Scott Cook (DEMO),
David Neeleman (JetBlue), Diane Greene (VMware),
Niklas Zennstrom (Skype), and Peter Thiel (PayPal).
This was not DEMO random sample of innovative entre-
preneurs, but rather of founders of DEMO least one highly
successful new venture (but they often had also
DEMO failed innovative ventures as well). The
majority of these interviews were conducted over
the phone and the interviews were taped and
transcribed.
Second, we identiﬁed innovative entrepreneurs
who were visiting two business schools in the
DEMO United States, one in the western United
States, and one in Europe. These IEs were typically
visiting one of these universities to give DEMO talk or
attend a conference or seminar on entrepreneurship.
These innovative entrepreneurs had typically
founded at least one innovative venture that was
moderately successful DEMO included Mike Collins
(Big Idea Group), Jeff Jones (CampusPipeline,
NxLight), Aaron Garrity (Xango), and John Pestana
and Josh James (Omniture). This sample of innova-
tive entrepreneurs is a convenience sample that pri-
marily includes somewhat successful innovative
entrepreneurs.
Third, we identiﬁed innovative entrepreneurs who
were attending executive education or executive
MBA programs at the DEMO schools mentioned
above. The majority of these innovative entrepre-
neurs had founded ventures that had failed or perhaps
had been moderately successful (hence, DEMO were
enrolled in an executive MBA program or participat-
ing in an executive program). This group included
innovative entrepreneurs like Sam Allen (ScanCafe),
Corey Wride (MovieMouth), and Spencer Moffat
(Fast Arch of Utah).
The sample of senior executives (title of vice
president or above) came primarily from executives
who were visiting the previously mentioned busi-
ness schools to give a talk or attend an event. At least
DEMO of the senior executive interviewees were CEOs
of billion dollar companies and virtually all were
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
Entrepreneur Behaviors 321
Table 1. Sample of innovative entrepreneurs interviewed
Name Company DEMO Innovative aspect of company*
Sam Allen ScanCafe.com Among the ﬁrst to offer a fully digital and low-cost (pricing one-
ﬁfth of competitors) photo DEMO and restoration service by
incorporating next generation Web technologies and by creating a
secure logistics chain with a fulﬁllment center in Bangalore, India
Marc Benioff Salesforce.com Among the ﬁrst to offer online/on-demand CRM/salesforce
automation DEMO
Jeff Bezos Amazon.com Among the ﬁrst online book retailers; developed online DEMO
capabilities
Mike Collins Big Idea Group Intermediary between product inventors and innovative product-
buying companies/distribution channels
Scott Cook Intuit Among the ﬁrst to DEMO personal ﬁnance and tax software—
Quicken and Turbo Tax
Michael Dell Dell Computer Developed direct-to-customer sales model in PCs, allowing for
mass customization
Aaron Garrity Xango Among the ﬁrst to offer juice and other nutritional products DEMO
the mangosteen and a network marketing approach
Diane Green Vmware Among the ﬁrst to offer virtualization software technology
allowing virtual servers and desktops to DEMO multiple operating
systems and multiple applications locally and in remote
locations
Eliot Jacobsen Freeport.com Developed free ISP with unique reach to local retailer community
DEMO James Omniture Among the ﬁrst to develop and deploy Web analytics software
Jeff Jones NxLight; Campus Pipeline Among the ﬁrst to offer a digital offering to campus allowing users
to access data remotely
Herb Kelleher Southwest DEMO Codeveloped the Southwest Airlines strategy and business model
of low-priced fares based on fast turnarounds and point-to-point
air travel versus hubs
Mike Lazaridis Research DEMO Motion Developed Blackberry, a handheld wireless communication device
that has frequently DEMO ﬁrst with new features/technologies
Masha Merchant Angiologix Inc. Angiologix Inc. developed a novel medical diagnostic device for
the assessment of risk for heart DEMO
Spencer Moffat Fast Arch of Utah Among the ﬁrst to offer home builder/framers premade sheet metal
archways instead of traditional stick framed archways
DEMO Neeleman Jet Blue; Morris Air Founded Morris Air, which pioneered ticketless air travel and Jet
Blue, which offered unique features such as LiveTV, larger
leather seats, and a unique codesigned 100-seat jet with Embraer
DEMO Omidyar eBay Developed software to allow for person-to-person auctions
John Pestana Omniture Among the ﬁrst to develop and deploy Web analytics software
Peter Thiel DEMO Developed software to beam money by essentially attaching it to
an e-mail
Mark Wattles Hollywood Video Emphasized Star Treatment guest service at inception; among the
ﬁrst to rollout Five-Day Rentals nationally and offer Guaranteed
New Releases
DEMO Wride Movie Mouth Movie Mouth is building an interactive, Web-subscription
application DEMO has an embedded media player accessing
copyrighted media such as DVDs and CDs on the local machine
and remote content from the Web
Niklas DEMO Skype Used supernode technology to place calls via the Internet and
deployed a unique viral marketing approach
*We use the wording among the ﬁ DEMO to launch a product or service offering because we have not veriﬁed that the company was indeed
the ﬁrst to offer the product or DEMO However, the innovative entrepreneur claimed that the new venture value proposition DEMO his/her
original idea and he/she was not simply imitating another company’s offering.
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
322
viewed as successful. While this was a convenience
sample, we consider it to be essentially a random
sample because these executives came from DEMO dif-
ferent types of industries and no criteria was used to
screen senior executives.
Methods
We conducted exploratory interviews, comparing
the innovative entrepreneurs’ and executives’
responses to the following questions:
1)  Tell us about DEMO most valuable strategic
insight/novel business idea that you’ve gener-
ated during your business career. Please
describe the details of the idea. (For example,
how was it novel and how did you come up
with DEMO idea?)
2)  In your opinion, do you have any particular
skills that are important to helping you gener-
ate novel business DEMO? Do you think the
skills you have that have enabled you DEMO be
creative/ innovative (start an innovative
business) are just part DEMO your genetic makeup?
Or do you think much of this ability was
learned?
3)  Are there any techniques you use or DEMO you
have developed to help you come up with
innovative ideas?
The goal of our interviews with the innovative
entrepreneurs was to understand DEMO much about them
as possible, including when and how they personally
DEMO up with the creative ideas on which new inno-
vative businesses were built. To get an outside per-
spective, we also interviewed senior executives who
were well acquainted with the innovative entrepre-
neur whenever possible. For DEMO, we inter-
viewed Dell CEO Kevin Rollins about Michael Dell
and DEMO eBay CEO Meg Whitman about eBay
founder Pierre Omidyar. We also interviewed the
founders of Skype (Niklas Zennstrom and Janus
Friis) and PayPal (Peter Thiel), with whom Whitman
became well acquainted when eBay acquired DEMO
companies. We augmented our -interviews with the
high-proﬁle entrepreneurs with a review of other
interviews they had given or articles or books they
had DEMO
As we conducted the interviews with innovative
entrepreneurs and executives, we DEMO the constant
comparative method as described by Browning,
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
J. H. Dyer, H. B Gregersen, and C. DEMO
Beyer, and Shetler (1995: 121) to extract categories
and themes from the interviews.
‘As the research proceeds and new data are col-
DEMO, they are constantly being compared to
prior data in terms of DEMO and hypotheses.
When new data yield new or inconsistent infor-
mation, DEMO categories and the emerging
theory are modiﬁed to take them into account.
This process is repeated until theoretical satura-
tion is reached: until no new categories are emerg-
ing and no new information inconsistent with
the DEMO and tentative hypotheses is being
generated’ (Glaser and Strauss, 1967; DEMO and
Corbin, 1990).
Through the interviews with both the innovative
DEMO and managers, we identiﬁed four
behavioral patterns that seemed to be DEMO pro-
nounced in IEs than managers. Moreover, the behav-
iors were DEMO direct antecedents to the innovative
entrepreneur generating the novel business idea.
In particular, innovative entrepreneurs were more
likely to exhibit behavioral patterns that involved:
(1) questioning, or their propensity to frequently ask
questions, DEMO those that challenge the status
quo and ask what if about the future; (2) observing,
or the extent to which they spend time intensely
observing the world around them, paying attention
to everyday experiences to ﬁnd new ideas; (3) exper-
imenting, or the frequency DEMO which they experi-
ment in and explore the world with a hypothesis-testing
mindset: visiting new places, trying new things,
seeking new information, and experimenting to learn
new things, as experimenters constantly explore the
world intellectually and experientially, holding con-
victions at bay, testing hypotheses along DEMO way;
and (4) idea networking, or the extent to DEMO they
actively ﬁnd and test ideas with a network of indi-
viduals who are diverse in both background and
perspective. Moreover, the innovative entrepreneur
would often refer to one or more of these behavior
patterns as DEMO important habit or technique that was
used to increase the probability of generating an
innovative idea. Senior executives did not report
engaging in these DEMO patterns to the same
extent as the innovative entrepreneurs. Data collec-
tion was concluded when a level of saturation
was reached (Glaser and Strauss, 1967; Burgelman,
1994). This study is subject to the DEMO limitations
of generalizability associated with ﬁeld research,
which are well documented (see Eisenhardt, 1989).
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
Entrepreneur Behaviors
323
In the sections that follow, we provide quotes
from many of the innovative entrepreneurs we inter-
viewed. Although the names of DEMO in this
type of research are typically not disclosed, we have
DEMO to disclose the names of all interviewees
who are quoted because many of them are well
known and we feel that most readers will DEMO the
source of the quote to be of interest.
INDUCTIVE STUDY: DEMO
When analyzing the data from the IE interviews,
four consistent behaviors and two cognitive patterns
emerged as relevant to acquisition of information
that DEMO potentially be used in the generation of
novel ideas for new ventures. The four behaviors
were questioning, observing, experimenting, and
idea networking. The two cognitive patterns were
associational thinking (or pattern recognition) and
a DEMO to change the status quo.
Questioning
Most IEs relied on questioning behavior as a key
behavioral mechanism for acquiring information
that led to a DEMO venture idea. Of course, both man-
agers and executives claimed they DEMO questions in
their work. However, IEs were more likely to ask
DEMO that challenged the status quo, whereas the
questions asked by managers DEMO much more about
understanding how to make existing processes (i.e.,
DEMO status quo) work a little better. Meg Whitman,
former CEO DEMO eBay, has worked directly with a
number of innovative entrepreneurs in DEMO sample,
including Pierre Omidyar (eBay founder), Niklas
Zennstrom and DEMO Friis (founders of Skype and
Kazaa), and Peter Thiel and DEMO Musk (founders of
PayPal). When asked how these folks differ DEMO
typical executives Whitman said ‘My experience is
that they get a kick out of screwing up the status quo.
They can’t bear it. So DEMO spend a tremendous
amount of time thinking about how to change the
world. And as they think and brainstorm, they like
to ask if we did this, what would happen?’ During
our interviews with executives, they less frequently
mentioned asking what if questions and some
claimed they were even careful to not openly ask
questions that challenge their company’s DEMO or
business model. As one executive stated, ‘If I openly
question DEMO strategy or key initiatives this could
create a crises of conﬁdence within the company.
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
People don’t like that DEMO of uncertainty and it can
paralyze the organization.’
Most innovative entrepreneurs could identify
speciﬁc questions they were asking at the time
they recognized the DEMO venture opportunity. For
example, part of Michael Dell’s initial opportunity
recognition DEMO the computer industry resulted from
a single question asked with deep interest: ‘I was a
frustrated consumer, and I would open computers
up, I’d take them apart; I knew what was inside them
and would observe that $600 worth of parts were
sold for $3,000. That DEMO make any sense to
me. I really questioned why it cost ﬁve times more
to buy the darn thing than the parts cost.’
Such DEMO also seemed to inﬂuence part of
Dell’s top management team dynamic as illustrated
in this comment about Michael Dell’s working
dynamics with former CEO DEMO Rollins: ‘Kevin
gave me a toy bulldozer driven by a little DEMO with a
huge smile on her face. Sometimes I’ll get really
excited about an idea and I’ll just start driving it.
Kevin put the DEMO on my desk, and it’s a signal
to me to say DEMO a second, I need to push it a little
more and DEMO through it for some others and kind
of slow down on this great idea that I’m working on.’
I gave Kevin a Curious George DEMO animal. The
Curious George is for Kevin to ask questions, to DEMO
a little more inquisitive. We don’t use them that
much, but DEMO subtle little jokes between us.’
Finally, not only did Dell describe DEMO attempts to
prod his CEO counterpart into more questioning, but
he DEMO shared how he worked to extend questioning
behavior beyond the TMT: DEMO I had a favorite ques-
tion to ask, everyone would anticipate DEMO, which
wouldn’t make it very good. Instead, I like to ask
people things that they don’t think that I’m going to
ask them. DEMO is a little cruel, but I kind of delight
in coming DEMO with questions that nobody has the
answer to quite yet. But it challenges them and they
have to go back and think about it.’
DEMO innovative entrepreneurs also viewed ques-
tioning (either implicitly or explicitly) as central to
their capacity for innovative idea generation. For
example, Jeff Jones (founder Campus Pipeline,
NxLight) made the observation that ‘I think DEMO
a certain personality type that just keeps asking why.
Like my two-year-old son, they ask why, why, why?
They don’t stop. Once you discover that asking why
in a different way and not being DEMO with what
the answer is, it’s interesting what happens. You
just DEMO to go a little bit deeper asking questions
one or two more times in a different way.’
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
324
Pierre Omidyar (eBay founder) also framed ques-
tioning as a DEMO for generating counterintui-
tive responses:
‘When addressing a new problem where there’s
sort of conventional wisdom or consensus around
a particular thing, I will often test out the opposite.
I’m always the devil’s advocate in DEMO room. You
know, Well what if it really didn’t work this DEMO?
Or what if we really did do the opposite of this?
What would happen? I have been this way since
I was a kid. I’ve always been the devil’s advocate,
slightly argumentative. My DEMO process has
always been around disagreeing with what I’m
being told and taking the opposite position and
pushing and asking questions, and pushing others
to really justify themselves. I remember it was
frustrating, very frustrating, DEMO the other kids
when you do this.’
Mark Wattles (Hollywood Entertainment) also said
he relies heavily on questioning:
‘In my company, I try to get everybody to ask
why. It’s easier to do it DEMO young people than
for somebody who’s a seasoned vet in business.
You take some of these executives who have been
doing the same thing DEMO 20 years and, yes they’re
valuable, but they don’t tend to come up with
anything new. You know why? Because they stop
using their minds because they’ve moved into this
execution mode which is a DEMO to make a
company work, but they stop really thinking.
Young DEMO though don’t yet know what to do
and it forces them to think. I tell them when you
come to an organization, just ask why. Now you
need to understand the appropriate places to ask
why DEMO you can’t be wasting a bunch of
people’s time, but don’t DEMO anything at face
value. Just ask yourself why and try to ﬁ gure it
out. It’s the what ifs and whys that make all DEMO
difference.’
In the same way, Herb Kelleher (Southwest) sug-
gested DEMO potential power of soliciting challenging
questions from subordinates. ‘I just watch, DEMO listen.
And I want them to ask me questions. I want them
to ask me tough questions. I want them to ask me
their DEMO questions.’
Overall, compared to executives, IEs in this
study asked more questions that were targeted at
surfacing underlying assumptions (individual, team,
DEMO © 2009 Strategic Management Society
J. H. Dyer, H. B Gregersen, and C. Christensen
organizational, and societal) as well as directly chal-
DEMO the status quo. As Xango founder Aaron
Garrity observed, ‘I am DEMO, always ques-
tioning, with a revolutionary mindset.’ For IEs these
questions appeared to increase their capacity to see
or initiate new ventures.
Proposition DEMO: Compared to managers in large
organizations, innovative entrepreneurs more
frequently ask questions, particularly those that
challenge the status quo.
Observing
A second behavioral pattern that emerged from our
interviews was intense observation in novel situa-
DEMO as well as ordinary encounters. Such observa-
tions often engaged multiple senses and were
frequently associated with the existence of compel-
ling questions. Mike DEMO (founder and CEO of
Big Idea Group) explained that ‘the most successful
inventors have incredible observation skills. It isn’t
just a one day DEMO day. It happens all of the time.
They are observing the world around them and
asking questions all the time. It’s part of who DEMO
are. For other people, it is an untapped skill.’ Our
interviews DEMO to bear out the persistency of
this pattern.
To illustrate, Howard DEMO kept his eyes and
ears open to hit on the idea for Starbucks by observ-
ing the characteristics of espresso bars in Italy.
During DEMO trip to Milan, Italy, to attend an interna-
tional housewares trade show, Schultz decided to
walk to the trade show, which was DEMO minutes from
his hotel. Just as he started off, he noticed DEMO little
espresso bar. He ducked inside to look around. After
drinking an espresso, he continued on and a block
later he saw another espresso bar. This one was even
more crowded. Schultz noticed that the gray-haired
DEMO behind the counter greeted each customer by
name. He and his customers were laughing, talking,
and enjoying the moment. He could tell that the
customers were regulars and that the espresso
bar ‘offered comfort, community, and a sense of
extended family.’ That afternoon, after his trade
DEMO meetings, Schultz noted that
‘I set off again, walking the streets of Milan to
observe more espresso bars . . . As I DEMO,
I had a revelation: Starbucks had missed the
point—completely missed DEMO This is so powerful,
I thought. This is the link. What we had to do
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
was unlock the romance and mystery of coffee,
ﬁrsthand, in coffee bars. It was like an epiphany.
It seemed so obvious. Starbucks sold DEMO coffee
beans, but we didn’t serve coffee by the cup. If
DEMO could recreate in America the authentic Italian
coffee bar culture, it DEMO resonate with other
Americans the way it did with me. Starbucks
could be a great experience, and not just a great
retail store. I stayed in Milan about a week.
I continued my walks through the DEMO, getting lost
every day. One morning I took a train ride DEMO
Verona. Its coffee bars were much like Milan’s,
and in one, I mimicked someone and ordered a
caffe latte, my ﬁrst taste DEMO that drink . . . Of all
the coffee experts I had met, none had ever men-
tioned this drink. No one in America knows about
this, I thought. I’ve got to take it back with me.’
(Shultz and Yang, 1997: 51).
Most IEs shared how they regularly engaged in
observing behavior, which often triggered new
ideas.
Similarly, Scott Cook (founder and CEO of Intuit)
founded the company DEMO on a simple observation
of his own family at home. He revealed:
‘I came up with the idea for the software by
watching DEMO wife work and hearing her complain.
She’s very good at accounting. She’s got a good
mind for math and is quite organized. So she DEMO
the bills for us. But she was complaining about it.
It was a waste of time and bookkeeping was a
hassle. So it was DEMO observation and then com-
bining that with two other things—an understand-
ing of what personal computers could do well and
not do well—that started DEMO . . . Often the sur-
prises that lead to new business ideas come from
watching other people work and live their normal
life. DEMO see something and ask why do they do
that? Well that DEMO make sense. I never
expected that.’
Interestingly, Cook had relied on DEMO observational
skills much earlier in his career:
‘One of the concepts that I brought into Intuit
came by observing what Apple was doing. DEMO got
a buddy of mine who worked at Apple to show
me the Apple Lisa before its launch. I was so
struck by the DEMO from seeing the Apple Lisa.
It wasn’t trying to do ﬁnancial software at all, but
the concepts behind that user interface. I can
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
Entrepreneur Behaviors
remember leaving the Apple headquarters DEMO
Cupertino and driving to the nearest restaurant so
I could just sit down with a pad of paper and write
out the various insights DEMO I’d observed from
watching the concept of the graphical user inter-
face, the concept of making the items that you
work with on screen look and work just like their
real world counterparts.’
Further, some IEs explained how they saw the
importance of replicating their own observational
skills DEMO broadly within their organizations. Cook
put it simply: ‘Basic observation is DEMO big game
changer in our company. Some paradigm shifts are,
I ﬁnd, better initiated by watching customers or
watching things happen in the marketplace, as
opposed to talking to other experts. But surprises
[from observation] are typically lost because our
minds try to conform what we see DEMO ﬁt our preexist-
ing beliefs. It’s particularly true in organizations
where sociologically the organization tries to
conform things to ﬁt the organizations view and DEMO
tend to lose those surprises. So one thing that I teach
is when people go out and watch people work, then
come back and ask just one question—What’s
different than you expected?—that often generates
surprising DEMO,’
Beyond these examples, the interview data con-
sistently revealed that DEMO actively observe the world
around them, listening, seeing, etc. In DEMO, Bezos
(Amazon) revealed that ‘I take pictures of really bad
DEMO, of which there are a number’ as part of
his approach DEMO seeing the world in different ways
through observation.
Proposition 2: Compared DEMO managers in large
organizations, innovative entrepreneurs more fre-
quently engage in DEMO observation, primarily of
consumers and end users.
Experimenting
The innovative entrepreneurs DEMO this study frequently
engaged in some form of active experimentation to
generate novel information. Such experimentation
ranged from mental explorations (e.g., Omidyar,
DEMO), to physical explorations (e.g., Schultz,
Starbucks), to tinkering with things as children and
adults (e.g., Jobs, Apple; Lazardis, RIM; Bezos,
Amazon). Benioff (founder Salesforce.com) de-
scribed the experimentation side of this behavior
quite simply with his self-proclaimed identity that
DEMO Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
325
326
J. H. Dyer, H. B Gregersen, and C. Christensen
‘I DEMO a tinkerer.’ Others were the same, either with
their hands or DEMO They all had in common a
hypothesis testing mindset to approaching their
explorations and experiments.
Some IEs approached experimentation from
an intellectual foundation. Omidyar DEMO this
category of experimentation well by saying ‘. . .
intellectual exploration is something that I frequently
do and so I think probably my DEMO is a little bit
more introverted and I have a tendency to sort of be
in my own laboratory. But if within my own DEMO
tory I can be exposed to really different points of
view, DEMO types of thinking either by research,
reading, or by asking DEMO point of view of people I
run into at conferences or meetings or even on the
street, that’s something that I do.’ He actively
explores intellectual terrain in search of new infor-
mation that he can DEMO and experiment with
intellectually.
In contrast to Omidyar’s intellectual exploration
and experimentation, a signiﬁcant proportion of
interviewees were likely to engage in more tangible
experimentation—even as young children. Bezos
(Amazon) admitted that he turned his DEMO garage
into his own little laboratory, and his mother claims
he DEMO to take his crib apart when he was three
years old. Lazardis (RIM) and others were similar
to Bezos in that they grew DEMO experimenting by
taking things apart. Lazridis described how in his
electronics lab in high school he built his own com-
puter and described how DEMO and his friends spent
additional time ‘writing our own operating systems,
writing our own graphics environments, and build-
ing everything from scratch . . . I hung out with
others who liked to build things DEMO explore interest-
ing ideas. And I was also, in a quirky DEMO, very
involved in physics. I was exploring the theory of
relativity DEMO friends of mine when we were in high
school together.’ Jobs (DEMO) does the same today
as he attempts to ﬁgure out how DEMO work and
how to make them work better. For example, he
DEMO one of the ﬁrst Sony Walkmans to be pro-
duced and immediately took it apart to ﬁgure out
how it worked and how it DEMO work better. Dell
did the same with his ﬁrst computer.
Pushing tinkering to a different level, many IEs,
like Wattles (Hollywood Video), actively engaged
themselves and others in experimentation. Wattles
said ‘I do tons of experimenting . . . I just have no
fear of trying DEMO Just go try them. When you
have 1,800 stores, maybe DEMO ruin a store. That
could be the worst that could happen to you.
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
I wouldn’t want that to DEMO But you’re not going
to ruin a company, so we’re gonna DEMO stuff.’
Most IEs were conscious of their own tendency
to experiment frequently, and they were equally
adamant about enlisting others to do the same in
their organizations. Cook (Intuit) explained:
‘The two companies I DEMO the most from are
Procter & Gamble and Toyota, and both DEMO
experimentation cultures. Toyota enables huge
numbers of experiments done throughout the
organization at all levels. And I think you see in
some young Web DEMO, the ability to do lots
of experiments and try a bunch DEMO things as the
business is trying to get things to click. I think our
culture opens us to scientiﬁc experimentation, not
just random attempts. To harvesting the learning
and allowing lots of failures. They know that DEMO
bunch of them will fail. But it’s okay as long as
we’re learning, because I think it is an important
theme that separates an innovation culture from a
normal corporate culture. And particularly when
the experiments DEMO be done by young people
without getting approvals. Or if there’s an approval
involved, it’s just one layer; it’s just their boss.’
Other DEMO were not only more likely to experi-
ment, but they were DEMO more likely than typical
executives to take a similar experimental approach
organizationally. Bezos (Amazon) explained that ‘if
you’re trying to build a better DEMO expe-
rience, you need to know what consumers think
about your DEMO and so the thing that we’ve
tried to do as a company, to keep Amazon innova-
tive, is we’re constantly trying to ﬁgure DEMO what the
lowest cost of experiments is. Because we want to
be able to do as many experiments as we can every
time. If DEMO can get processes decentralized to do a
lot of experiments without it being very costly, then
you’ll get a lot more innovation. If you can do a
100 experiments a year, you’ll get a tenth as much
innovation as you would get if you could do 1,000
DEMO in a year.’
Bezos continued:
‘We’ve got a lot of people here at Amazon with a
combination of stubbornness and ﬂexibility. And
even DEMO those two things seem at odds with
one another, I don’t DEMO they are because I think
there are stubborn visions that are ﬂexible on the
details. And when I see that in somebody, when
they just won’t give up on their vision, they’re
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., DEMO: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
relentless on their vision but they’re very, very
ﬂexible on the details. Flexible of mind. I mean,
they’ll try one approach and if DEMO doesn’t work,
they’ll circle back around and try another.’
Whitman, DEMO CEO of eBay, claimed that experi-
menting behavior was one of DEMO things that distin-
guished the innovative entrepreneurs she worked
with. She said that ‘they really love to tinker and
experiment. I’d say that is DEMO of the attributes that
is common to all of these folks.’
In contrast, some executives expressed a reluc-
tance to do too much experimenting because experi-
ments were viewed as costly and inefﬁcient, or
perhaps they were beyond the scope of the compa-
ny’s business model. One executive DEMO that ‘we
will do experiments as long as they ﬁt within the
current business model. But I don’t want to try new
things that DEMO us away from our business model.’
Proposition 3: Compared to managers DEMO large
organizations, innovative entrepreneurs more
frequently experiment and explore, particularly
doing so with a hypothesis testing mindset.
Idea Networking
Interviews with innovative entrepreneurs DEMO
that building and maintaining diverse social net-
works was another behavioral skill they engaged in
more frequently than typical executives. It’s not that
executives DEMO also network, but executives were
more likely to network to further DEMO careers, to sell
what they or their current company had to DEMO,
or to build friendships with people who possessed
desired resources. IEs were less likely to use net-
works primarily for friendships or career DEMO
sion; rather, they were actively creating networks of
people with diverse ideas and perspectives that they
could tap into for new ideas and DEMO Scott Cook
(Intuit) shared that ‘the majority of my ideas come
from networking.’
Putting idea networks into regular practice, Eliot
Jacobsen (Freeport.com) made the observation that
‘one of the things I try to do DEMO a regular basis is
meet and talk to new people to get their perspective
on different issues. I tend to do this during mealtime.
DEMO week, I try to schedule breakfast, lunch, or
dinner with DEMO I’ve never met before. I also
frequently meet with people I know who are creative
and who I’ve found are helpful in offering a DEMO
perspective. Networking is important to my success
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
Entrepreneur Behaviors
in coming up with new business ideas, and mealtime
is for networking.’
Though Omidyar tends to rely on thought
experiments for DEMO of his insights, idea network-
ing also surfaced on his behavioral DEMO as key
to information acquisition:
‘Most of my new ideas really come from what I
would call a synthesis of outside inputs. So DEMO
than saying I want to ﬁ gure out what to do in
philanthropy. So who should I go talk to? Let me
get a list of philanthropy experts and talk to them.
Instead, what I try to do is just be exposed to some
different styles of thinking. DEMO really look for
insights from unexpected—usually nonexpert—
directions. I value ideas from unusual places; the
cliché would be rather than talking to the CEO I
would want to talk to someone in the mailroom,
something DEMO that. But really looking for people
that have diverse backgrounds, diverse DEMO of
thinking about things, and getting input from
these different directions DEMO in a very open-ended
way, not in a directed way like, hey I’m trying to
ﬁ gure some new, innovative idea for philanthropy,
what should I do? Just in a very open-ended way.
And then I think what my brain does is kind of
synthesizes all DEMO that, and at the end of the day
I’ll have some DEMO of an insight that will pop
up and I can’t tell you where it came from
necessarily.’
For Omidyar and other IEs, idea networks served
a similar purpose in generating a diverse set of
inputs for DEMO problem solving or opportunity
recognition.
Most innovative entrepreneurs interviewed in this
study had an identiﬁable network of people with
diverse experiences and perspectives to DEMO
the IEs’ viewpoints. These networks typically
crossed industry and geographical boundaries,
as well as generational ones. For example, Ingvar
Kamprad (founder IKEA) regularly met with teen-
agers, even in his 70s and 80s, DEMO get different per-
spectives on potential innovation at IKEA. IEs seem
to realize that ideas and ways of viewing the world
are more similar DEMO social groups (e.g., within
the same family, business function, organization,
industry, etc.) than they are across groups. So they
make DEMO conscious effort to bridge a structural hole
to talk to people from different social networks—
essentially building a bridge from their network
into a DEMO of people that differs in background,
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
327
328
education, experience, etc. (Burt, 1992; Rodan and
Galunic, DEMO). This seems to help them acquire
early access to diverse, DEMO contradictory, informa-
tion and interpretations, which gives them an advan-
tage in seeing and developing novel ideas.
Proposition 4: Compared to managers in large
organizations, innovative entrepreneurs spend
more time talking with a network of individuals
who are diverse in both background and
perspective.
Associational thinking/pattern DEMO
We also found that diverse new information and
ideas—which come through questioning, experi-
menting, observing, and networking behaviors—
were often the catalyst for associational thinking/
pattern recognition.2 The more new diverse knowl-
edge acquired DEMO these four discovery behav-
iors, the more naturally and consistently associational
DEMO occurs as the brain attempts to understand,
recategorize, and store DEMO knowledge.
As previously described in the theory section,
associational thinking is a cognitive skill that helps
one make connections across seemingly unrelated
questions, problems, disciplines, ﬁelds, or ideas.
Mike Lazaridis (RIM) was successful at connecting
computer technology with wireless handheld devices
to create the Blackberry. DEMO recognized the impor-
tance of cross disciplinary thinking and described
his ﬁrst experience with it.
‘When I was in high school, we had an advanced
honors program and we had a shop program. And
there was DEMO great divide between the two depart-
ments, and I was in DEMO And I became, inadver-
tently, the ambassador between the two disciplines,
and saw how the mathematics we were learning
in shop was DEMO more advanced than some of
the mathematics we were learning in advanced
2 We prefer the term associational thinking (Howard-Jones and
Murray, 2003; Mednick, 1962; Mednick, Mednick, and Jung,
1964; Mendelsohn and Griswold; 1964; Milgram and Rabkin,
1980) to pattern recognition because the latter term seems to
suggest that there is an identiﬁable pattern DEMO recognize. As
they described how they discovered or recognized ideas for
innovative new ventures, it seemed to us that while they con-
nected disparate ideas together, they often did not necessarily
recognize a pattern, or DEMO recognize that it would be a viable
business opportunity. They often discovered that things ﬁt
together through trial and error and adaptation.
Copyright © DEMO Strategic Management Society
J. H. Dyer, H. B Gregersen, and C. Christensen
math because we’re using trigonometry, we’re
using imaginary numbers, we’re DEMO algebra,
and even calculus in very real, tangible ways.
So DEMO was then tasked with bridging the gap and
showing how math is used in electronics and how
electronics is used in math.’
Lazaridis noted DEMO [a teacher] alerted him to the
link between computers and wireless by telling him
‘. . . don’t get too distracted with computer technol-
DEMO because the person that puts wireless and com-
puters together is really coming up with something
special.’
Similarly, Pierre Omidyar (eBay) noted that con-
necting ideas was an important skill, and he gave a
recent example of associational thinking:
‘I recently spoke with some consultants about DEMO
food distribution problem of how to quickly get
produce from the farm to consumers before it
spoils. The ﬁrst question I asked, which may turn
out to be an incredibly stupid question but I was
happy DEMO ask it was, ‘What about the Post Ofﬁce?
Doesn’t the DEMO Ofﬁce go to everybody’s house
six times a week? Why don’t DEMO just mail the head
of lettuce?’ You know, it’s probably DEMO incredibly
stupid idea and there are probably a dozen reasons
why it won’t work, but it’s an example of how I
put two things together that haven’t been put
together before. The Post Ofﬁce is an DEMO
tion that visits every household six times a week!
Do you know any other organization that does
that? So using those assets in novel ways might
be interesting.’
Steve Jobs (founder and CEO Apple) appears DEMO be
strong at associational thinking and recognizes its
importance to creativity. For example, he connected
calligraphy to computers, based on his college
experience:DEMO
‘Reed College at that time offered perhaps the
best calligraphy instruction in the country.
Throughout the campus every poster, every label
on every drawer, was beautifully hand calli-
graphed. Because I had dropped out and didn’t
have to take the normal classes, I decided to take
a calligraphy class to learn how to do this.
I learned about serif and DEMO serif typefaces, about
varying the amount of space between different
letter DEMO, about what makes great
typography great. It was beautiful, historical,
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
Entrepreneur Behaviors
329
artistically subtle in a way that science can’t
capture, and I found it fascinating. None of this
had even a hope DEMO any practical application in my
life. But 10 years later, when DEMO were designing
the ﬁrst Macintosh computer, it all came back to
DEMO And we designed it all into the Mac. It was
the ﬁrst computer with beautiful typography. If I
had never dropped in on that DEMO course in
college, the Mac would have never had multiple
typefaces DEMO proportionally spaced fonts. And
since Windows just copied the Mac, it’s DEMO
that no personal computer would have them.’
(Stanford University, 2005)
Jobs did the same by looking at Cuisinart food pro-
cessors to DEMO insights into the plastic case properties
that might work for the ﬁrst Mac, and he later exam-
ined Mercedes Benz cars in the corporate parking
lot to gain perspective on a different product design
challenge that DEMO ultimately resolved by associat-
ing car parts with computer parts.
One of the innovative entrepreneurs tried to
explain the process based on his experience.
DEMO (founder of Skype) said: ‘You have to
think laterally. You DEMO, seeing and combining
certain things going on at the same time DEMO under-
standing how seemingly unrelated things could have
something to do with each other. You need the
ability to grasp different things going on DEMO the same
time and then to bring them together. For example,
I can look at the bigger picture and also have a
very DEMO feel for the details. So I can go between
high-level things to really, really small details. The
movement often makes for new associations.’
Proposition 5: Compared to managers in large
organizations, innovative entrepreneurs more fre-
DEMO engage in associational thinking (pattern
recognition) which is triggered by their behav-
ioral patterns of frequently questioning, observ-
ing, experimenting, and idea networking.
Desire to change the status quo: less susceptible
to the status quo bias
Finally, the innovative entrepreneurs in our study
more frequently expressed a desire to change the
world or do something that has never DEMO done
before As previously mentioned, Meg Whitman,
former CEO of DEMO, claimed that the IEs she has
worked with ‘get a kick DEMO of screwing up the status
quo. . . . So they spend a tremendous amount of time
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
thinking DEMO how to change the world.’ This
observation was supported by Skype cofounder
Niklas Zennstrom, who remarked that ‘I thrive on
changing the status quo; that’s what motivates me.
I deﬁnitely want to change the world. And I think
this is very important where sometimes people think
of disruptive DEMO destructive being the same thing.
But to me, this is about DEMO the world a better
place.’ In similar fashion, Jeff Bezos (Amazon.com)
said that one of his goals in starting Amazon.com
was to DEMO history,’ while Steve Jobs (Apple)
claimed that ‘I want DEMO put a ding in the universe.’
An emergent theme from the interviews was that
these entrepreneurs were not satisﬁed to simply start
ﬁnancially successful DEMO businesses. Offering
something new to the market was an important part
of the allure of starting a new business. As Jeff
Jones, founder of Campus Pipeline and NxLight
observed, ‘I’ve had numerous opportunities to start
new businesses, but haven’t followed up on some of
them because they didn’t offer something new to the
market. I want to do something new, not offer some-
thing that is already out there.’ The desire to DEMO
the world was far less frequently mentioned by exec-
utives as a motivator for their actions and behaviors.
They more frequently expressed the sentiment DEMO
they were highly motivated to see their business
succeed ﬁnancially.
Given the frequency with which innovative entre-
preneurs indicated a desire to change the DEMO rela-
tive to executives, we believe that they are less
susceptible DEMO a cognitive bias referred to as the
status quo bias. The status quo bias has been deﬁned
as the tendency of individuals to prefer DEMO existing
state of affairs—to prefer what they have chosen
before (the DEMO state) or even what someone else
has chosen for them. A DEMO of prior experimental
and ﬁeld studies offer evidence that most individuals
are subject to the status quo bias (Porter and
McIntyre, 1984; Samuelson and Zeckhauser, 1988;
Roca et al., 2005; Burmeister and Schade, 2006).
The innovative entrepreneurs in our study seemed
to engage in the information-seeking behaviors
described above with a cognitive bias against the
status DEMO They seemed to be actively engaged in
information search with the purpose of changing the
current state of affairs. As Xango founder Aaron
Garrity DEMO it, ‘If you were to characterize me as an
individual, I would say I am a revolutionary. My law
is different . . DEMO you tell me the way it is and I’m
going to say to heck with you all, I’m going to do it
this way.’ While prior research has shown that
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
330
entrepreneurs are prone to cognitive biases—notably
the overconﬁdence and representativeness biases
(Busenitz and Barney, 1997; Parlich and Bagby,
1995)—little work DEMO been done to examine the
status quo bias among (innovative) entrepreneurs.
One unpublished study found that a sample of
German entrepreneurs was less DEMO to the status
quo than a sample of German bankers, but DEMO dif-
ferent than a sample of college students (Burmeister
and Schade, 2006). Another study somewhat related
to challenging the status quo bias DEMO that innova-
tive Canadian law ﬁrm founders were more likely to
challenge the ethicality of prevailing legal practices
than imitative ﬁrm founders (Cliff et al., 2006). We
believe that additional research in this area would
demonstrate that innovative entrepreneurs are less
susceptible to the status quo bias.
DEMO 6: Compared to managers in large
organizations, innovative entrepreneurs are less
susceptible to the status quo bias and more likely
to be motivated DEMO change the world.
QUANTITATIVE STUDY: COMPARING
BEHAVIORS OF INNOVATIVE
ENTREPRENEURS AND DEMO
Our inductive study allowed us to develop some
theoretical propositions regarding the relationship
between IE behaviors and opportunity recognition.
We then developed measures of DEMO behaviors to
shed additional light through a large sample quanti-
tative study about whether IEs are more prone to the
behaviors identiﬁed in the DEMO study.
J. H. Dyer, H. B Gregersen, and C. Christensen
original (novel, unique) idea?’ Seventy-two percent
of these innovative business ventures were identiﬁed
as ﬁnancially successful (n = 99), meaning they
achieved sales of greater than $1 million and a return
on invested capital DEMO greater than 10 percent. Thus,
28 percent of the innovative business ventures started
were not successful based on our study criteria. This
suggests DEMO we were not sampling on successful
innovative business ventures only.
Measures
During our inductive study, we developed survey
measures we wanted to test in a large sample study
of innovative entrepreneurs and managers in large
organizations. DEMO on the four behavioral patterns
that emerged from the interviews, we DEMO a
set of survey items to operationalize the constructs
(e.g., behavioral patterns) that seemed to distinguish
the innovative entrepreneurs from executives (see
DEMO). The survey items attempted to measure
speciﬁc behavioral patterns: questioning (six items),
observing (four items), experimenting (ﬁve items),DEMO
and idea networking (four items). Response options
ranged from 1 DEMO strongly disagree to 7 or strongly
agree. We also used four social desirability survey
items to identify and exclude (if necessary) respon-
dents DEMO were prone to provide extreme levels of
socially desirable responses on the survey. Analysis
indicated that such socially desirable responses did
not appear problematic DEMO systematic in this
sample.
Sample
During a two-year period from 2007–08, DEMO invited
512 managers and executives to take our survey.
These respondents were participating in executive
programs and executive MBA programs at three
business schools—one DEMO the eastern United States,
one in the western United States, DEMO one in Europe.
After eliminating surveys with incomplete data, we
had DEMO respondents. Among the 382 respondents,
72 individuals had started a total of 137 innovative
business ventures based upon positive responses to
‘How many DEMO businesses (e.g., not franchises or
a business where identical or close product substi-
tutes were already on the market) have you started
or cofounded as an entrepreneur based on your own,
Copyright © 2009 DEMO Management Society
Methods
Initially, we conducted an exploratory factor analy-
sis (EFA) to uncover the underlying factor structure
of the 19 items attempting to measure innovative
behaviors. As shown in Table 2, the rotated factor
matrix produced a four-factor solution. There
was only one potentially problematic cross-loading
DEMO factors in this exploratory analysis (indicated
by a cross-loading greater than DEMO). The item
‘I often ask questions that challenge the status quo’
exhibited a loading of 0.52 on the main factor, as
well as 0.42 on the experimenting factor. As this
cross-loading did not appear seriously DEMO,
the item was retained in the questioning scale. Table
2 also indicates that the alpha reliabilities for these
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: DEMO (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
Entrepreneur Behaviors
331
scales ranged from 0.74–0.78 (each being above the
0.70 criterion suggested by Hair et al., 1988).
We also ran a conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA)
to test the factor structure of the 19 items represent-
ing the innovative entrepreneur behaviors uncovered
in the qualitative DEMO The CFA for each of the
Table 2. Results of exploratory factor analysis of
innovative entrepreneur behavior items
Items 1 2 3 4
1. DEMO
E1 0.71
E2 0.67
E3 0.64
E4 0.59
E5 0.45
2. Questioning
Q1 0.77
Q2 0.70
Q3 0.70
Q4 0.63
Q5 0.60
Q6 0.42 DEMO
3. Observing
O1 −0.72
O2 −0.72
O3 −0.70
O4 −0.44
4. Idea networking
IN1 0.77
IN2 0.76
IN3 0.70
IN4 0.69
Alpha 0.78 0.74 DEMO 0.78
Eigenvalue 6.05 2.13 1.21 1.16
Percentage of variance 31.88 11.21 6.38 6.09
The cutoff point was 0.40. Item numbers reﬂect the items
provided DEMO the Appendix.
individual innovative behaviors showed a Goodness
of Fit Index (DEMO) above 0.90 for each innovative
behavior factor. Observing had the best DEMO (GFI =
0.99), followed by questioning (GFI = 0.95), experi-
menting (GFI = 0.94), and idea networking (GFI =
DEMO). However, the CFA of our four-factor model
did not show DEMO good ﬁt, with GFI = 0.63,
a chi-square of 1864, RMSEA = 0.14, and Standard-
ized Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR) = 0.16. It
seems plausible that common variance among many
of the DEMO that comprised each of the innovative
behavior factors compromised the ﬁt of the four-
factor model (see Table 3, which shows signiﬁcant
correlations DEMO several of the innovative
behavior factors). As a result, we DEMO the items
related to experimenting and idea networking and
ran the CFA with the remaining 10 items, represent-
ing questioning and observing. The CFA for the
two-factor model had a GFI = 0.94, a chi-square of
1292.8, RMSEA = 0.08, and Standardized Root
Mean Residual (SRMR) DEMO 0.06, suggesting that the
10 items were strong measures of questioning DEMO
observing. However, to maintain consistency with
the innovative entrepreneur behaviors identiﬁed DEMO
the qualitative study and the results of the explor-
atory factor analysis (see Table 2), we adopted the
four-factor model in the subsequent analysis of the
potential relationships between these behaviors and
starting an innovative DEMO business.
Results
Table 3 provides means, standard deviations, and
correlations for all independent and dependent vari-
ables. As seen from the correlation matrix, the four
behavioral patterns we measured were signiﬁcantly
correlated with starting an DEMO new business.
The behavioral patterns were also signiﬁcantly cor-
related with each other—with correlations typically
greater than 0.50—suggesting that an individual
Table 3. Means, standard deviations, and correlations
Variable Mean S.D. 1 2 3 4
1. Questioning 5.48 0.83 1.0
2. Observing 4.93 1.05 0.43** 1.0
3. Experimenting DEMO 0.94 0.39** 0.53** 1.0
4. Idea networking 4.29 1.26 0.30** 0.54** 0.51** 1.0
5. Innovative new business 1.29 0.86 0.12** 0.22* 0.15** 0.24**
*indicates DEMO < 0.10, **indicates p < 0.05, and ***indicates p < 0.01.
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
332
J. H. Dyer, H. B Gregersen, and C. Christensen
who DEMO in one of the behaviors is more likely
to engage in some level of the other behaviors.
To test the relationships between innovative
behaviors DEMO starting innovative ventures, we con-
cluded that negative binomial regressions were DEMO
appropriate for our data. The dependent variable in
this quantitative study measured the number of inno-
vative new businesses started. As this data was DEMO
integer count without normal distributions and with
restricted ranges (Cohen et DEMO, 2003), ordinary least
squares (OLS) regression would yield inefﬁcient DEMO
biased estimates. Consequently, negative binomial
regressions were used to test the DEMO relation-
ships more accurately (Ramaswamy, Anderson,
and DeSarbo, 1994)DEMO
The negative binomial regression analysis results
shown in column 1 of Table 4 indicate that, control-
ling for age and education, observing and DEMO
menting have signiﬁcant positive relationships with
innovative new venture creation. Questioning and
idea networking did not have signiﬁcant relation-
ships with venture creation when DEMO in the
model with observing and experimenting. In fact,
while idea networking had a signiﬁcant positive
relationship with new venture creation as shown DEMO
the correlation matrix, the relationship was negative
in the negative binomial DEMO, suggesting that
the model is prone to some degree of multicollinear-
DEMO among the independent variables. The fact that
there were strong correlations among the innovative
behaviors, however, led us to examine the interac-
tion DEMO questioning with each of the other indepen-
dent variables. We chose to interact questioning with
the other innovative behaviors for a theoretical
reason. When DEMO the results of the induc-
tive study, we realized that questioning DEMO virtually
always described as being done at the same time the
IE was engaged in observing, experimenting, or idea
networking behaviors. The results DEMO in columns
2–4 in Table 4 indicate that questioning is a signiﬁ -
cant predictor of innovative new venture formation
when interacted with observing, experimenting, and
idea networking behaviors. Thus, questioning on its
own does DEMO appear to have a direct effect on oppor-
tunity recognition and innovative new venture cre-
ation, but when combined with one of the other three
innovative behaviors, it is a solid predictor of new
venture creation. Each of the overall models shown
in columns 1–4 are solid, as suggested by a
Pearson’s chi-square, which ranges from 348–381,
and a log likelihood of -738–741 (the model in
column 4 appears to be the best ﬁt model).
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
Summary
DEMO results from our quantitative study provide pre-
liminary support for the assertion that innovative
entrepreneurs are more likely than managers to
engage in questioning, observing, experimenting,
and idea networking behaviors. The regression
results indicate that observing and experimenting
were the most robust predictors of new venture cre-
DEMO, whereas questioning and networking were
signiﬁcant predictors of new venture creation DEMO
interacted with each other or the other discovery
behaviors. Questioning is only a consistent predictor
of new venture creation when interacted with each
of DEMO other behaviors separately. These results
suggest that an individual who simply asks questions
without actively observing, experimenting, or
networking is unlikely to discover DEMO act upon ideas
for new venture creation.
TOWARD A THEORY OF
ENTREPRENEURIAL BEHAVIORS
AND OPPORTUNITY RECOGNITION
The theory that emerged from our inductive and
DEMO studies regarding behavioral differences
of innovative entrepreneurs (IEs) compared to man-
agers in large organizations is summarized in Figure
1. Study results suggest DEMO IEs are more likely to
recognize opportunities for new businesses because
they are more likely to engage in observing and
experimenting behaviors, and questioning when
combined with any one of the other three innovative
behaviors (observing, experimenting, and idea net-
working). These are all information-seeking behav-
DEMO that appear to give IEs superior access to
information—a factor that is believed to be central
to opportunity recognition.
These behaviors appeared to be DEMO catalysts to
cognitive processes of associational thinking that
allowed the innovative entrepreneur to generate an
innovative business idea. Prior research suggests
that innovative breakthroughs DEMO happen at the
intersection of disciplines and ﬁelds (Johansson,
2006; Hargadon and Sutton, 1997; Rodan and
Galunic, 2004). Put simply, innovative thinkers have
managed to connect ﬁelds, problems, or ideas that
we thought were unrelated. We propose that the
behavioral patterns noted above DEMO what trigger the
intersections that are the catalysts for innovative
ideas. The more diverse knowledge acquired through
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
Table 4. Regression results
Method Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column DEMO
Negative binomial Negative binomial Negative binomial Negative binomial
Dependent variable Innovative ventures founded Innovative ventures founded Innovative ventures founded Innovative ventures founded
Behavioral factors
DEMO 0.008 (0.01) −0.013 (0.03) −0.102 (1.28) −0.113 (1.50)DEMO
Observing 0.149 (4.86)** 0.076 (1.00) 0.157 (5.39)** 0.149 (4.88)**
Experimenting 0.436 (5.67)*** 0.436 (5.72)*** 0.255 (DEMO) 0.394 (4.62)**
Networking −0.223 (1.67) −0.230 (1.80) −0.193 (1.27) −0.320 (2.32)
Question * observing 0.152 (4.26)**
DEMO * experiment 0.278 (4.81)**
Question * networking 0.296 (4.84)**
Control variables
Age 0.003 (0.39) 0.003 (0.54) 0.003 (0.51) DEMO (0.38)
Education 0.056 (5.10)** −0.054 (4.68)** −0.051 (4.23)** −0.052 (4.32)**
Intercept 0.950 (19.93)*** 0.928 (19.08)*** 0.955 (20.32)*** 0.970 (20.91)***
Number of observations 382 DEMO 382 382
DF 375 374 374 374
Pearson chi-square 381.5 379.1 378.7 348.5
Log likelihood −741.1 −739.1 −738.9 −738.7
Notes:
All signiﬁcant tests DEMO two-tailed. *indicates p < 0.10, **indicates p < 0.05, and ***indicates p < 0.01.
For the regression coefﬁcients, the t-statistic (Wald chi-square) is provided in parenthesis.
Entrepreneur Behaviors
333
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management DEMO
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
334
J. H. Dyer, H. B Gregersen, and C. Christensen
Cognitive DEMO
Discovery
behaviors
Cognitive process to
generate novel ideas
Questioning
Bias against
the status quo
Observing
Associational
thinking
Opportunity
recognition
Experimenting
Networking
Figure 1. A DEMO of entrepreneurial opportunity recognition
the information-gathering behaviors we’ve described,
the more naturally and consistently associational
thinking occurs as the brain attempts to understand,DEMO
categorize, and store new knowledge.
To illustrate, the innovative entrepreneurs we
studied rarely invented something entirely new—
they simply combined existing ideas and DEMO
gies in new ways, which allowed them to offer
something new DEMO the market. Individuals who more
frequently observe, experiment, and network while
questioning the status quo build larger and richer
stocks of building block DEMO in their heads, thereby
triggering associational thinking and increasing the
probability DEMO combining the newly acquired knowl-
edge to generate an innovative idea. This process is
akin to someone building more unique structures
from Lego blocks DEMO a result of having access to a
larger stock of diverse Lego blocks. The more you
add different kinds of Legos to your total DEMO of
Legos, the more varied and innovative structures
you can build. DEMO structures spring from the
innovative combination of a wide variety of existing
Legos. And acquiring new and different Legos trig-
gers ideas for new DEMO as they are considered
with one’s existing stock of Legos. In a similar
fashion, the more you add knowledge or ideas from
varied knowledge domains (through observing,
experimenting, networking) to your total stock of
ideas, the greater the variety of ideas you can
produce. Conceptually, DEMO the number of building
block ideas in one’s head grows linearly (DEMO, by N),
the number of potential ways to combine those ideas
to create something new grows even faster, or geo-
metrically (DEMO N(N-1)/2) (see Figure 2). Thus, the
behaviors of questioning, observing, experimenting,
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
DEMO idea networking are tied to associational think-
ing/pattern recognition because they bring in new
building block ideas that are often the catalyst for
DEMO new associations among ideas, ﬁelds, and
technologies.
We acknowledge that cognitive processes are at
work within IEs and that some had superior natural
DEMO ability to make connections across ﬁelds
and technologies. There are undoubtedly differences
in the cognitive ability of individuals to engage in
associational thinking. We DEMO no way to measure
these differences. However, even if we assume DEMO
two individuals have the same natural cognitive
ability to engage in associational thinking, we would
predict differences in novel idea generation if one
individual engages in more of the information-
gathering behaviors we have described, thereby
triggering more novel associations. As Steve Jobs
observed regarding the link between DEMO experi-
ence and creativity:
‘Creativity is connecting things. When you ask
creative people how they did something, they feel
a little guilty because they didn’t really do it, they
just saw something. It seemed obvious to them
after a while. That’s because they were able to
connect DEMO they’ve had and synthesize
new things. And the reason they were able to do
that was that they’ve had more experiences or
they have DEMO more about their experiences
than other people’ (Wolf, 1996: 6)DEMO
Finally, the IEs seem to engage in the information-
gathering behaviors DEMO they are actively
looking for opportunities to change the status quo.
This desire to change the status quo was an
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
012345 DEMO 1011121314151617181920
Number of diverse 'building block' ideas
335
Figure 2. Why increasing ‘idea stock’ increases innovation
Note: As the number of diverse ideas (knowledge elements) in a person’s head increases arithmetically, the number
of ways the ideas can be combined to create a novel combination increases DEMO (n2 growth). Innovation is
typically the result of synthesizing or DEMO ideas from different knowledge domains.
important motivator for IEs and coincides with the
active search for opportunities that has been identi-
ﬁed in the DEMO literature.
CONCLUSION
The purpose of this study was to investigate differ-
ences between innovative entrepreneurs and execu-
tives who had never started an innovative DEMO
We conducted a grounded theory study of innovative
entrepreneurs to examine behavioral and cognitive
patterns that appeared to contribute to their ability
to recognize DEMO and generate innovative
business ideas. We posit that innovative entrepre-
neurs differ from executives on four behavioral pat-
terns: (1) questioning, particularly DEMO questions
that challenge the status quo; (2) observing, or the
extent to which they spend time intensely observing
the world around them DEMO a search for new ideas;
(3) experimenting, or the DEMO with which they
experiment and explore the world with a hypothesis-
testing mindset; and (4) idea networking, or the
extent to which DEMO ﬁnd and test ideas with a network
of individuals who are diverse in both background
and perspective. We developed operational measures
of each of DEMO behaviors and found that observing
and experimenting behaviors were robust predictors
of innovative new venture creation in a large sample
Copyright © 2009 Strategic DEMO Society
of innovative entrepreneurs and executives. We
found that questioning and idea networking were
signiﬁcant when interacted with each other or the
other discovery DEMO These ﬁndings suggest
that one’s ability to generate novel ideas for innova-
tive businesses is a function of one’s behaviors,
which trigger cognitive DEMO that spawn ideas
for novel business ventures.
Our study suggests that innovative entrepreneur-
ship is indeed an active endeavor. Innovative entre-
preneurs are behaviorally DEMO questions,
observing, experimenting, and networking with
diverse people. In his seminal work on risk and
uncertainty, Knight saw entrepreneurs as a class of
individuals who had the disposition to act in spite of
the DEMO context in which they operated (Knight,
1921: 269). Our research lends support to this asser-
tion and provides insights into what DEMO of actions
are likely to be catalysts for innovative business
ideas. Of course, once the idea is generated, the
entrepreneur must then quickly DEMO the idea
if it is to be perceived as new in the marketplace.3
A limitation of this study was that we did not have
DEMO sample of noninnovative entrepreneurs (e.g., those
3 Execution of novel business ideas is beyond the scope of this
article, but it is important to recognize that effective execution
is also critical to the success of DEMO innovative venture.
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
Entrepreneur Behaviors
Number of ways to combine diverse 'building
block' ideas
336
J. H. Dyer, H. B Gregersen, and C. Christensen
who DEMO started franchises) in our sample to compare
with the innovative entrepreneurs. DEMO, we relied
exclusively on individuals to report on the extent to
DEMO they behaved in particular ways. Future
research might explicitly compare a sample of non-
innovative entrepreneurs with innovative entrepre-
neurs on the behaviors we DEMO We also
recommend that future research of this type gather
input on the behaviors of entrepreneurs from others
who are well acquainted with the DEMO
behaviors. Finally, we were not able to measure the
degree or DEMO to which individuals engage in asso-
ciational thinking, which limits our DEMO to test
whether or not the behaviors we identify are corre-
lated with associational thinking. Future research
that could measure associational thinking and inter-
DEMO this measure with the discovery behaviors we
identify could test the proposition that the discovery
behaviors trigger assocational thinking, as well as
the proposition that the interaction of discovery
behaviors and associational thinking increase the
probability DEMO innovative new venture creation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the Entrepreneurship Center
at Brigham Young University and the Rudolf and Valeria
Maag International Centre for DEMO at
INSEAD for ﬁnancial support of this research. We
would also like to thank Nathan Furr, Spencer Harrison,
Melissa Humes, Jeff Wehrung, Brandon Ausmon, and
Nick Prince for their excellent research assistance.
REFERENCES
Aldrich HE, Zimmer C. 1986. Entrepreneurship through
social networks. In The Art and Science of Entrepre-
neurship, Sexton DL, Smilor RW (eds). Ballinger:
Cambridge, MA; 3–23.
Amabile TM. 1996. Creativity in Context: Update to the
Social Psychology of Creativity. Westview Press:
Boulder, CO.
Baron RA. 2004. OB and entrepreneurship: why both may
beneﬁt from closer links. In Research in Organizational
Behavior, Staw B, Kramer R (eds). JAI Press:
Greenwich, CT.
Baron RA. 2006. Opportunity recognition: how DEMO
neurs ‘connect the dots’ to recognize new business
opportunities. Academy of Management Perspectives
20: 104–119.
Baron RA. 2007. Behavioral and cognitive factors in entre-
preneurship: entrepreneurs as the active element in new
venture creation. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal
1(1–2): 167–182.
Begley TM, Boyd DP. 1987. Psychological characteristics
associated with performance in entrepreneurial ﬁrms and
smaller businesses. Journal of Business DEMO 2:
79–93.
Bhide AV. 2000. The Origin and Evolution of New Busi-
nesses. Oxford Business Press: New York.
Brockhaus RH. 1980. Risk taking propensity of entre-
preneurs. Academy of Management Journal 2i(3):
509–520.
Brockhaus RH, Horwitz PS. 1986. The psychology of the
entrepreneur. In The Art and Science of Entrepreneur-
ship, Sexton DL, Smilor RW (eds). Ballinger Publishing:
Cambridge, MA.
Browning L, Beyer J, Shetler J. 1995. Building cooperation
in a competitive industry: SEMATECH and the semicon-
ductor industry. Academy of Management Journal 38(1):
113–151.
Burgelman RA. 1994. Fading memories: a process theory
of strategic business exit in dynamic environments.
Administrative Science Quarterly 39(1): 24–56.
Burmeister K, Schade C. 2006. Are entrepreneurs’ deci-
sions more biased? An experimental investigation of the
susceptibility to status quo bias. Working paper, Institute
of Entrepreneurial Studies and Innovation Management,
Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany.
Burt RS. 1992. Structural DEMO Harvard University Press:
Cambridge, MA.
Burt RS, Raider HJ. 2002. Creating careers: women’s paths
to entrepreneurship. Unpublished manuscript, University
of Chicago: Chicago.
Busenitz LW, Barney JB. 1997. Differences between
entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations: biases
and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journal of
Business Venturing 12: 9–30.
Business Week. 2005. The top 20 innovative companies in
the world. Business Week, August 1.
Business Week. 2006. The top 100 most innovative com-
panies ranking. Business Week, April 24.
Business Week. 2007. The world’s 50 most innovative
companies. Business Week, May 4.
Case J. 1989. The origins of entrepreneurship. Inc.
51(June).
Cliff JE, Jennings PD, Greenwood R. 2006. New to the
game and questioning the rules: DEMO experiences and
beliefs of founders who start imitative versus innovative
ﬁrms. Journal of Business Venturing 21(5): 633–663.
Cohen P, Cohen J, DEMO SG, Aiken LS. 2003. Applied
Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis for the DEMO
ioral Sciences (3rd edn). Lawrence Erlbaum: Mahwah,
NJ.
Eisenhardt K. 1989. Building theories from case research.
Academy of Management Review 14: 532–550.
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: DEMO (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
Gartner WB. 1989. Who is an entrepreneur? is the wrong
question. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
Summer: 47–66.
Glaser B, Strauss A. 1967. The DEMO of Grounded
Theory. Aldine: Chicago, IL.
Hair JE, Anderson RE, Taitham RL, Black WC. 1988.
Multivariate Data Analysis with Readings. Prentice-Hall
International Editions: Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Hargadon A, Sutton RI. 1997. Technology brokering and
innovation in a product development ﬁrm. Administrative
Science Quarterly 42(4): 716–749.
Howard-Jones PA, Murray S. 2003. Ideational productivity,
focus of DEMO, and context. Creativity Research
Journal 15: 153–166.
Johansson F. 2006. The Medici Effect. Harvard Business
School Press: Boston, MA.
Kaish S, Gilad B. 1991. Characteristics of opportunities
search of entrepreneurs versus executives. Journal of
DEMO Venturing 6(1): 45–61.
Knight F. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty, and Proﬁ t. Augustus
Kelly: New York.
Lazear EP. 2004. Balanced skills and entrepreneurship.
American Economic Review 94(2): 208–211.
Low MB, MacMillan IC. 1988. Entrepreneurship: past
research and future challenges. Journal of Management
14(2): 139–161.
Marsden PV. 1983. Restricted access in networks and
models of DEMO American Journal of Sociology 88(4):
686–717.
Mednick SA. 1962. DEMO associative basis of the creative
process. Psychological Review 69: 220–232.
Mednick DEMO, Mednick SA, Jung CC. 1964. Continual asso-
ciation as a function of level of creativity and type
of verbal stimulus. Journal of Abnormal DEMO Social
Psychology 69(5): 511–515.
Mendelsohn GA, Griswold BB. 1964. DEMO use of
incidental stimuli in problem solving as a function of
creativity. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology
68(4): 431–436.
Milgram RM, Rabkin L. 1980. Developmental test of
Mednick’s associative hierarchies of original thinking.
DEMO Psychology 16(2): 157–158.
Miller KD. 2007. Risk and rationality in entrepreneurial
processes. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal 1(1–2):
57–74.
Miner JB, DEMO NR, Bracker JS. 1989. Role of entrepre-
neurial task motivation in DEMO growth of technologically
innovative ﬁrms. Journal of Applied Psychology 74(4):DEMO
554–560.
Parlich L, Bagby D. 1995. Using cognitive theory to explain
DEMO risk-taking: challenging conventional
wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing 10(6):
425–438.
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
Entrepreneur Behaviors
337
Porter M, McIntyre S. 1984. What is, must be best: a
research note DEMO conservative or deferential responses
to antenatal care provision. Social Science Medicine 19:
1197–1200.
Ramaswamy V, Anderson E, DeSarbo W. 1994. A disag-
DEMO negative binomial regression procedure for count
data analysis. Management Science 40: DEMO
Renzulli L, Aldrich H, Moody J. 2000. Family matters:
gender, networks, and entrepreneurial outcomes. Social
Forces 79: 523.
Roca M, DEMO R, Maule JA. 2005. Ambiguity seeking a
result of the status DEMO bias. Working paper 882, Depart-
ment of Economics and Business, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
Rodan S, Galunic C. 2004. More than network structure:
how knowledge heterogeneity inﬂuences managerial
performance and innovativeness. Strategic DEMO
Journal 25(6): 541–562.
Samuelson W, Zeckhauser R. 1988. Status DEMO bias in deci-
sion making. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1: DEMO
Sarasvathy SD, Dew N, Velamuri SR, Venkataraman S.
2003. Three DEMO of entrepreneurial opportunity. In
Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research: An Interdisci-
plinary DEMO and Introduction, Acs ZJ, Audretsch DB
(eds). Kluwer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands; 141–160.
Schultz H, Yang DJ. 1997. Pour Your Heart Into It.
Hyperion: New York.
Shane S. 2003. The Individual-Opportunity Nexus Approach
to Entrepreneurship. Edward Elgar: Aldershot, U.K.
Shane S, Eckhardt J. 2003. The individual-opportunity
nexus. In Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research,
Acs ZJ, Audretsch DB (eds). Kluwer: Dordrecht, The
Netherlands; 161–194.
Stanford University. DEMO You’ve Got To Find What
You Love, Jobs Says. http://DEMO/
news/2005/june15/jobs-061505.html (accessed 26
January 2009).
Sternberg DEMO, Davidson JE. 1995. The Nature of Insight.
MIT Press: Cambridge, DEMO
Strauss A, Corbin J. 1990. Basics of Qualitative Research.
SAGE Publications: Newbury Park, CA.
Stuart TE, Ding WW. 2006. Why do scientists DEMO
entrepreneurs? The social structural antecedents of com-
mercial activity in the DEMO life sciences. American
Journal of Sociology 112(1): 97–144.
Stuart TE, Sorenson O. 2007. Strategic networks and entre-
preneurial ventures. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal
1(3–4): 211–227.
Uzzi B, Spiro J. 2005. Collaboration and creativity: the
small world problem. American Journal of Sociology
111(2): 447–504.
Wolf G. 1996. Steve Jobs: the next insanely great thing.
Wired, DEMO, Issue 4.02.
Strat. Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej
338 J. H. Dyer, H. B Gregersen, and C. Christensen
Appendix: individual survey items for innovative behavior scales
Questioning (alpha = 0.74)
1. I am always asking questions.
2. I am constantly asking questions DEMO get at the root of the problem.
3. Others are frustrated by the frequency of my questions.
4. I often ask questions that challenge DEMO status quo.
5. I regularly ask questions that challenge others’ fundamental assumptions.
6. I am constantly asking questions to understand why products and projects DEMO
Observing (alpha = 0.78)
1. New business ideas often come DEMO me when directly observing how people interact with products and services.
2. I have a continuous ﬂow of new business ideas that comes through DEMO the world.
3. I regularly observe customers’ use of our company’s products and services to get new ideas.
4. By paying attention to everyday DEMO, I often get new business ideas.
Experimenting/exploring (alpha = 0.78)
1. I love to experiment to understand how things work and DEMO create new ways of doing things.
2. I frequently experiment to create new ways of doing things.
3. I am adventurous, always looking for new experiences.
4. I actively search for new ideas through experimenting.
5. DEMO have a history of taking things apart.
Idea networking (alpha = DEMO)
1. I have a network of individuals whom I trust to bring a new perspective and reﬁne new ideas.
2. I attend many DEMO professional and/or academic conferences outside of my industry/profession.
3. I initiate meetings with people outside of my industry to spark ideas for DEMO new product, service, or customer
base.
4. I have a large network of contacts with whom I frequently interact to get ideas for DEMO products, services, and
customers.
NOTE: The above items are the DEMO of Innovator’s DNA Inc. and are not available for private use without
written permission from Innovator’s DNA Inc.
Copyright © 2009 Strategic Management Society
DEMO Entrepreneurship J., 2: 317–338 (2008)
DOI: 10.1002/sej{1g42fwefx}