#
~
r
EFFECTIVE INTERFIRM
FIRMS MINIMIZE
MAXIMIZE
TRANSACTION
TRANSACTION
COLLABORATION:
DEMO
VALUE
HOW
AND
JEFFREY H. DYER
The Wharton School,
University
of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania,
U.S.A.
This study of automotive transaction DEMO in the U.S.A. and Japan offers abta which
indicate that transaction costs do not necessarily increase with an increase in reiation-specijk
investments. We empirically DEMO the conditions under which transactors can simultaneously
achieve the twin benejits of high asset specificity and low transaction costs. This is possible
because the DEMO safeguards which can be employed to control opportunism have different
set-up costs and result in different transaction costs over dl~erent time horizons. We examine
DEMO detail the ~ractices of Javanese firms which result in effective.. inteq%n collaboration. @
1997 by John- Wiley & Sons: Ltd. “
One of the objectives of transactors seeking joint
maximization of profits should be to create DEMO
ditions which allow them to achieve the joint
maximization result of the zero transaction cost
model (North, 1990: 107)
Economists have long recognized that ‘resource
owners increase productivity through cooperative
specialization’ (Alchian and Demsetz, 1972: 777).
Indeed, the value chain in modem economies is
characterized by interfirrn specialization such that
individual firms engage in a narrow DEMO of
activities that are embedded in a complex chain
of input–output relations with other firms. Pro-
ductivity gains in the value chain are possible
DEMO firms are willing to make transaction or
relation-specific investments (Williamson, 1985;
Perry, 1989). 1 Recent empirical work confirms
that investments in relation-specific assets are
Key words: suppliers; transaction costs; asset speci-
ficity; collaborative advantage
‘ I use the terms transaction and relation-specificinvestments
interchangeably, DEMO I typicatly use the term “relation-
s~ific” assets to suggest a shift in attention from the ttms-
actton to the economic relationship as the DEMO of anatysis
(see Kogut, 1989).
CCC 0143-2095/97/070535-22
01997 by John Wiley & Sons,
$17.50
Ltd.
often correlated with superior DEMO
(Parkhe, 1993; Dyer, 1996a).
However, increased specialization within DEMO pro-
duction network cannot be achieved without a
cost. When transactors make investments in spe-
cialization, transaction costs arise because of the
fear of opportunism. A central premise of trans-
action cost theory is that transaction DEMO increase
as transactors make greater asset-specific invest-
ments. The standard reasoning is that as asset
specificity increases, more complex governance
structures (i.e., more complex contracts) are
required to eliminate or attenuate costly bar-
gaining over profits from specialized assets
(Williamson, 1985 ). Thus, transaction costs DEMO
presumed to increase with an increase in asset
specificity.
The standard empirical test of the markets and
hierarchies paradigm has been to predict whether
DEMO are conducted within firm boundaries,
or across firm boundaries, by DEMO extent to which
the transactors’ assets are specialized. Most
research to date has produced results that are
consistent with the logic that asset specificity DEMO
greater for transactions within hierarchies than
across markets ( Monteverde and Teece, 1982;
Masten, 1984; Walker and Weber, 1984). Thus,DEMO
Received 16 June
Final revision received 23 August
1995
1996
J-O1480-
Strategic
Management
Journal,
Vol.
18:7,
535-556
(1997)
536 J. H. Dyer
we have generally accepted that transaction costs
increase DEMO increases in asset specificity. How-
ever, few studies have attempted to DEMO
measure how market transaction costs change
with_a change in asset specificity. As Williamson
( 1985: 105) observed: ‘A common characteristic
of these studies is that direct measures of trans-
action costs are rarely attempted.’
In DEMO recent study, Dyer ( 1996b) found that
Japanese transactors ( suppliers–automakers) made
greater asset-specific investments than their U.S.
counterparts and that these investments were cor-
related with superior performance. These results
are not particularly surprising DEMO various stud-
ies have suggested that Japanese suppliers and
final assemblers have close relationships and are
often part of a ‘keiretsu’ group (Asanuma, DEMO;
Nishiguchi, 1994). But what was particularly
intriguing was that DEMO transactors incurred
significantly lower transactions costs2 than U.S.
transactors, even though DEMO had made greater
asset-specific investments. Moreover, even within
Japan (i.e., DEMO for the institutional
environment), the Japanese automaker with the
more specialized supplier group (Toyota) had
lower transaction costs than the Japanese auto-
DEMO with the less specialized supplier group
(Nissan). These findings appear DEMO be inconsistent
with transaction cost theory which proposes that
transaction costs increase with art increase in
transaction-specific investments (Williamson,
1985). Moreover, DEMO findings are important
because they suggest that firms (production
networks) can simultaneously achieve the twin
benejts of high asset specificity and low trans-
DEMO costs—a condition that could be an
important source of competitive advantage.
Understanding how such a condition is achieved
may provide important insights into effective
DEMO collaboration.
This paper has two primary objectives. The
first objective is to provide evidence that trans-
action costs do not necessady increase with an
DEMO in asset specificity. This is accomplished
by reporting supplier group specialization and
transaction costs for Toyota, Nissan, Chrysler,
2 An automaker’s transaction DEMO were operationalized as
the totat number of individuals employed in the procurement
function divided by the dollar value of goods they procured.
Transaction costs DEMO search, contracting, monitoring, and
enforcement costs. Indkiduals involved in procurement DEMO
primasily representative of these costs.
GM, and Ford. Interestingly, the automaker with
the least specialized supplier group (GM) had the
highest transaction DEMO while the automaker with
the most specialized supplier group (Toyota) had
the lowest transaction costs. The second, and
primary, objective is to DEMO why those results
might have been obtained. To explain these find-
ings, the paper offers five propositions which
are developed from an exploratory study of 50
supplier–automaker transaction relationships in
the U.S.A. and Japan and a DEMO survey of 156
suppliers. The exploratory study centered around
the question: DEMO increases (or decreases) the
costs of transacting with suppliers (automakers)?
The objective was to examine what actions taken
by suppliers and DEMO serve to increase or
decrease transaction costs.
THEORETICAL
BACKGROUND
Extant transaction cost economics (TCE) theory
suggests that as transactors increase their invest-
ments DEMO specialized assets, transaction costs
increase because transactors must safeguard
against the DEMO of opportunism (Klein, Craw-
ford, and Alchian, 1978; Williamson, 1985). As
Williamson (199 la 282) has argued, ‘asset speci-
ficity increases the transaction costs of all forms
of governance.’ Transaction costs DEMO be decom-
posed into four separate costs related to trans-
acting: ( 1) search costs, (2) contracting costs,
(3) monitoring costs, and (4) enforcement costs
(Williamson, 1985; Hennart, 1993; North, 1990).
Search costs include the costs of gathering infor-
DEMO to identify and evaluate potential trading
partners. Contracting costs refer to the costs asso-
ciated with negotiating and writing an agreement.
Monitoring costs refer DEMO the costs associated
with monitoring the agreement to ensure that each
party fulfills the predetermined set of obligations.
Enforcement costs refer to the costs DEMO
with ex post bargaining and sanctioning a trading
partner that does not perform according to the
agreement.
Transaction costs increase when asset speci-
ficity DEMO due to opportunism (defined by
Williamson, 1985, as ‘self-interest seeking DEMO
guile’ ). Although investments in specialization
boost productivity, the incentive to make trans-
action-specific investments is tempered by the
fact that the more DEMO a resource becomes,
the lower its value in alternative uses. The contin-
gent value of DEMO specialized resource exposes its
owner to a greater risk of opportunism than the
owner of a generalized resource (Klein, Crawford,
and Alchian, 1978).
Types of safeguards
or governance
structures
To protect against the DEMO of opportunism,
transactors may employ a variety of safeguards
or governance structures. The term ‘safeguard’
(or alternatively ‘governance structure’ ) as used
here cart be defined as a control mechanism which
has the objective of DEMO about the perception
of fairness or equity among transactors. The pur-
pose of safeguards is to provide, at minimum
cost, the control and DEMO that is necessary for
transactors to believe that engaging in
exchange will make them better
(Williamson, 1985).
The most prominent safeguard employed DEMO
Western economies is the legal contract. A legal
the
off
contract specifies the obligations of each party
and allows a transactor to go to DEMO third party
(i.e., courts/state) to sanction an opportunistic
trading DEMO For simple transactions, when
asset specificity is low, a classical contract is
typically employed. The costs of writing a classi-
cal contract are DEMO low since the entire
obligations of each party are explicitly written
‘within the four comers of the document’
(Macneil, 1978). As asset DEMO increases,
transactors will attempt to write a more complex
contract (DEMO, a neoclassical contract) with contin-
gency clauses which allow for equitable adjust-
ment as market conditions chartge.3 In theory,
and practice, writing such a contract is more
costly than writing a classical contract (Macneil,
1978; Williamson, 1985). Thus, received theory
predicts that as asset specificity increases, so does
the full array of transaction costs (DEMO, con-
tracting, monitoring, and enforcement costs). As
asset specificity DEMO above some threshold,
the costs of contacting become prohibitive and
transactors move to unified governance/hierarchy
(Williamson, 1985).
3 The transactional DEMO aascciated with specific assets
increase when environmental uncertainty increases. The pres-
ence of some degree of uncertainty is assumed throughout
thk paper. Without uncertainty, even highly specialized assets
may be protected contractually (Mahoney, 1992).
DEMO Interjirm Collaboration 537
Although contracts are viewed as the primary
means for safeguarding transactions in Western
economies, alternative means have been offered
by scholars from various fields. These are typi-
tally referred to as ‘self-enforcing’ agreements,DEMO
‘private ordering’, or ‘trust’ (Telser, 1980; Willi-
amson, 1985; Sake, 1991). These self-enforcing
agreements include informal safeguards such as:
relational or goodwill trust (Dore, 1983; Bradach
and Eccles, 1989; Sake, 1991) and reputation
(Kreps and Wilson, 1982; Weigelt and Carnerer,
1988), as well as formal safeguards such as
jinancial DEMO (Klein, 1980) and specialized
investment hostages (Klein, 1980; Williamson,
1983),4 Thus, transactors have a variety of ways
to DEMO against the hazards of opportunism.
The choice of safeguard influences
transaction costs and value
There are costs associated with constructing a
governance structure which DEMO will refer to as
governance ‘set-up’ costs. These are the costs
incurred to create the safeguard which governs
the ongoing relationship and typically include DEMO
costs associated with writing contracts, building
personal trust, creating financial hostages, etc.
One may consider governance set-up costs as a
subset of the total transaction costs incurred in a
trading relationship over time. For example, the
costs of writing a contract may be viewed as a
governance DEMO cost, but also as a transaction
cost (i.e., the contracting/DEMO portion of
transaction costs). The important distinction that
we want to make here is that governance set-up
costs involve an initial, up-front investment which
creates the safeguard, which in turn influences
the ongoing transaction costs (i.e., bargaining,
monitoring costs ) in the exchange relationship.
To DEMO, scholars have paid little attention to
the relative costs of different DEMO How-
ever, different safeguards are likely to have di#er-
ent set-up DEMO and result in different transaction
costs over different time horizons. A longitudinal
perspective towards transaction costs is required.
Moreover, previous research has shown that the
4 Of course, asymmetric investments in specific assets do not
reduce the probability of opportunism but in fact raise the
potential for opportunistic DEMO Only symmetric invest-
ments in specialized assets will reduce the probability of
opportunism.
538
J. H. Dyer
choice and cost of a particular safeguard will DEMO
depending upon the identity of the transactors and
the transaction characteristics.s Further, beyond
cost minimization, Zajac and Olsen (1993) argue
that transactors DEMO be concerned with maxim-
izing transaction value through value creation
initiatives. The transactor’s choice of governance
structure influences the incentives of the transac-
tors DEMO engage in value creation behavior for
‘noncontractibles’ such as innovation, quality, and
responsiveness. For example, in the auto industry
the governance structure (DEMO, degree of suppIier–
automaker t.mst) will influence whether or not the
supplier willingly engages in value engineering or
value anaIysis —initiatives designed to DEMO
ously lower the cost (and price) of the component
but which occur after the vehicle model is intro-
duced. Such initiatives require resources DEMO
effort on the part of the supplier that are not
specifically called for in the contractual agree-
ment. Further, the governance structure influences
whether or not suppliers bring new ideas or new
technology to a particular DEMO Suppliers
are less willing to bring a new technology or
design to an automaker employing arm’s
length/market governance if they believe the
automaker DEMO share it with their supplier com-
petitors (in order to maintain DEMO
bidding).
To illustrate how the choice of safeguard
influences transaction costs and incentives for
value creation behavior, consider a hypothetical
case in which I am a supplier of automotive
components and a particular customer requests
DEMO I produce a customized part that requires
investments in specialized tools. Let us consider
four different transaction situations which result
in four different governance DEMO In the first
case, assume that the owner of the other DEMO is
my brother. In this case, I agree to make the
DEMO due to previously developed goodwill
trust/social knowledge. I may trust him either
because I know his ‘type’ (e.g., he is ‘honest’)
DEMO Recent empirical studies by game theorists using the pris-
oner’s dilemma game ( PDG) have demonstrated that oppor-
tunism varies depending upon the identity of the exchange
partner (see Axehmd, 1984, for a description of the PDG).
For example, one study found that husbands and wives made
100% cooperative (C) choices, compared with 65% for
friends, DEMO 22% for strangers (Argyle, 1991). Clearly, the
identity of DEMO exchange partner has sm influence on whether
one chooses to be opportunistic or cooperative.
and/or because I can impose social sanctions on
him DEMO our kinship network.e This safeguard
is available to me because of considerable prior
investments in the relationship. Moreover, the
incremental transaction costs associated with
using this safeguard are minimal because the
governance set-up costs have already DEMO
incurred. Thus, I choose to make the investment
and we transact DEMO incurnng very low trans-
action costs. The safeguard employed in this case
(goodwill trust) may be effective for an indefinite
duration. Further, I am willing to make efforts
at value creation beyond the original agreement
DEMO I am confident that the resulting gains
will be fairly shared.
When contemplating the same transaction with
a graduate school classmate, I may not have
enough ‘goodwill trust’ (enough social knowledge
to assess his ‘type’ or to know if he will respond
to social sanctions) to protect my investment.
Thus, I may choose to incur additional gover-
nanceset-up costs in the form of a legal contract.
In this situation I rely on DEMO social as well as
legal sanctions to control opportunism. Of course,
the contract is of finite duration and will need to
be rewritten DEMO it expires, thereby resulting in
additional transaction costs.
When contemplating the DEMO transaction with
a complete stranger, I may be unwilling to rely
DEMO a contract to protect my investment. Conse-
quently, I may require DEMO the buying firm pur-
chase the specialized assets and allow me to use
them. This solution is also likely to involve a
contract which DEMO ownership of the assets
as weIl as how [ am to use the assets. Moreover,
the buyer must incur additional monitoring costs
to DEMO that I am not abusing the assets. Thus,
governance set-up costs and ongoing transaction
costs again increase relative to the previous cases.
Further, I am relatively unwilling to make efforts
at value creation ‘beyond the DEMO due to
uncertainty regarding whether or not I will be
fairly rewarded. Of course, a final solution would
be for one of the transactors to vertically inte-
grate, thereby bringing the specialized assets
6 Of course, I may refuse to make the investment because I
know my brother’s ‘type’ (i.e., he is not honest) and/or I
know that he would not respond to social sanctions. The key
is that my DEMO history of dkct interactions with him (i.e.,
my social knowledge) assists me in choosing an
appropriatelefficient safeguatd (Sohn, 1994).
Effective
Intetj%-rn Collaboration
539
under common ownership to mitigate the bar-
gaining DEMO
In each of these hypothetical cases the degree
of asset specificity did not change, but the choice
and cost of the safeguard, as DEMO as the ensuing
transaction costs, did change. Thus, we observe
that even in situations where the level of asset
specificity between transactors is DEMO, the
transaction costs may differ. The point is that
while transaction DEMO may increase with asset
specificity, they will also vary independently of
DEMO specijci~. Further, the transactors’ choice
of governance will influence not only DEMO
costs but also the incentives to engage in value
creation initiatives. Williamson ( 1985: xiii) has
argued that the central problem of economic
DEMO is to ‘devise contract and governance
structures that have the purpose and effect of
economizing on bounded rationality while simul-
taneously safeguarding transactions against DEMO
hazards of opportunism.’ Due to differences in
history, preferences, institutional environment,
etc., transactors will employ different strategies
with regard to both the level of asset specificity
as well as the choice of safeguard.
THE DEMO: HIGH ASSET
SPECIFICITY AND LOW
TRANSACTION COSTS
To examine the relationship DEMO asset speci-
ficity and transaction costs, we studied transaction
relationships in DEMO auto industry. The objectives
were ( 1) to assess the extent DEMO which an auto-
maker’s supplier group was specialized to that
particular automaker, and (2) to measure each
automaker’s transaction costs associated with pro-
curing parts from those suppliers. Following is a
brief description of the DEMO methods and
results of this study (see Dyer, 1996a, 1996b, for
a more complete description of the research
methods and measures ).
Sample and data collection
The sample consisted of two Japanese automakers
(Nissan and Toyota), all three U.S. automakers,
and a sample of DEMO suppliers. The unit of
analysis was the supplier–automaker relationship.
Each automaker purchasing department general
manager selected a sample of 50 domestic sup-
plier relationships DEMO were representative of
their supply base.
A survey was then mailed to the supplier
executive identified by the automaker purchasing
department as most responsible DEMO managing the
day-to-day relationship. Usable responses were
received from 36 Nissan suppliers (72% response
rate), 38 Toyota suppliers (76Y0 response rate),
31 Ford suppliers (62% response rate), 24 Gen-
eral Motors suppliers (48% response rate) and 23
Chrysler suppliers (46% response rate). In
addition, the purchasing agent at the automaker
most responsible for the supplier relationship was
asked to complete a survey to provide the auto-
DEMO perspective. Usable surveys were received
from purchasing agents for 192 of the 250 sup-
pliers.’ On objective questions (e.g., distance
between the supplier DEMO automaker plant ), sup-
pliers and purchasing agents were asked the DEMO
question. In these instances, purchasing agent
responses were used only if DEMO supplier did not
respond. Consequently, for some questions the
response rate DEMO as high as 48 out of 50 for a
particular automaker.
Operational
measures
Williamson (1985 ) identified site, physical, and
human asset specificity as distinct types of trans-
action-specific investments. Operation measures
of each were DEMO in this study. In addition,
we attempted to measure the ‘transaction costs’
incurred by the automaker in managing trans-
actions with outside suppliers (see Table 1 for a
description of the asset specificity and transaction
DEMO operational measures). Automaker transaction
costs were measured as the total number of indi-
viduals employed in procurement for production
parts (including management, DEMO
agents/buyers, lawyers, and support staff ) divided
by the total value of goods they procured in
1991. This is expressed as the DEMO value of
goods (parts) purchased per procurement
employee. We believe this is a reasonably accu-
rate measure of the relative transaction costs
incurred DEMO automakers because the procurement
staff (including lawyers) (a) is completely
responsible for searching for new suppliers, (b)
7 One U.S. DEMO limited its participation in this part of
the study and dld not have purchasing agents fill out a survey
for its 50 suppliers.
540
Table 1.
Variables
J. H. Dyer
Summary of asset specificity and DEMO
costs operational
measures
Description
Asset specificity
1. Site specificity
The distance in miles between the supplier plant producing the highest dollar
volume component and DEMO automaker’s small and mid-size model plants to
which it delivers
Percent of supplier’s total capital equipment investment which is not
redeployable to other customers (estimated by supplier respondents)
Total annual ‘man days’ of face-to-face contact DEMO supplier salesmen and
engineers and automaker purchasing personnel and engineers.
2.
3.
Physical asset
specificity
Human specificity:
face-to-face contact
Transaction
Procurement
costs
costs
DEMO total number of individuals employed in procurement for production
(including management, purchasing ‘agents/buyers, lawyers, and support
divided by the total dollar DEMO
the dollar value of goods (parts)
parts
stiff)
of DEMO they procured. This is expressed
purchased per procurement employee
as
is completely responsible for contracting with
suppliers, (c) is primarily responsible for gather-
ing information from the other operational units
to create an overall evaluation (monitoring) of
performance (though procurement does not actu-
ally do all DEMO the monitoring), and (d) is primarily
responsible for enforcing performance (i.e., the
lawyers will take the legal actions necessaty to
ensure DEMO fulfillment ). Thus. we believe our
measure is a reasonable proxy DEMO the relative
transaction costs incurred by automakers.
Data analysis
The unit of analysis was the supplier–automaker
relationship. One-tailed t-tests were used to test
for DEMO in supplier-automaker asset speci-
ficity. For example, the site specificity (plant
distance) supplier group mean for Toyota’s sup-
pliers was compared to the site specificity supplier
group mean for each of the other automakers.
Results
DEMO results presented in Table 2 indicate that not
only were the Japanese transaction relationships
characterized by higher asset specificity than their
U.S. counterparts, but they also had lower trans-
action costs. Toyota and Nissan’s suppliers were
DEMO specialized on all three measures of asset
specialization. Their plants were significantly
closer (greater site specificity), they had a higher
percentage of capital investments which were not
redeployable to other customers (greater absolute
physical asset specificity), and they had more
face-to-face contact and more guest engineers
(greater human specificity). Interestingly, Toy-
ota’s suppliers were significantly more specialized
than were Nissan’s on both the site and human
specificityy measures. Furthermore, we found that
U.S. automakers, and in particular General
Motors, had DEMO transaction costs than did
Japanese automakers. The purchased volume of
goods per person was only $1.6 million for GM,
while it was $5.3 DEMO for Ford, $5.7 million
for Chrysler, and $9.7 and $12.6 million for
Nissan and Toyota respectively. This analysis
suggests that Chrysler and Ford DEMO roughly
twice the transaction costs procuring parts as
Japanese automakers, while DEMO transaction
costs are six to eight times higher. These differ-
ences exist despite that fact that transaction-spe-
cific investments are considerably lower for the
DEMO automotive transactors. Furthermore, even
though Toyota’s supplier group was more special-
DEMO than Nissan’s, Toyota’s transaction costs
were roughly 20% lower than Nissan’s.
DEMO findings can be interpreted as being
either consistent or inconsistent with extant trans-
action cost theory, depending on one’s point of
view. On the one hand, according to received
theory, a pair of transactors who DEMO general-
purpose assets in the exchange relationship should
incur lower transaction costs than competing
transactors who choose to make transaction-spe-
cific investments. Recall that DEMO ( 1991a:
282) has argued that ‘asset specificity increases
the DEMO costs of all forms of governance.’
Eflective
Interjirm
Collaboration
Table 2.
Sample means on asset specificity and transaction
DEMO variables (by automaker)
541
Variable
Chrysler
Ford
Site specljiciky:
DEMO between manufacturing
plants (miles)
Physical speci$city:
Percent of capital DEMO
which is not redeployable
Human specijcip:
Annual ‘man days’ of face-to-face
contact
Automaker transaction costs:
Dollar value of goods procured
per procurement DEMO
543.9
18.1~0
756.9
$5.7m***
508.8
19.5%
1206.2
$5.3m
Tests of group differences are one-tailed r-tests assuming unequal variances.
**Significantly lower/higher than all other DEMO (p < 0.01).
tSignificarrtly lower/higher than all U.S. automakers DEMO (p <0.01 ).
*Significantly lower/higher than other U.S. automakers DEMO (p < 0.01).
***-Min&&s million;of dollars.
GM
427.0
13.6%**
1106.9
$1 .6m
Nissan
113.97
21.4%t
3344.2-/
$9.6m
Toyota
59.2**
DEMO
7235.8**
$12.6m
Our data show that in the auto industry this
relationship does not seem to hold. However,
one can argue that the DEMO between asset
specificity and transaction costs will only hold if
environmental and other factors are held constant.
Variables such as the legal and institutional
DEMO (i.e., culture ) can influence oppor-
tunism and the nature of controls and safeguards
employed. Thus, one might simply argue that we
would expect asset specificity to be higher, and
transaction costs lower, in DEMO supply
relations because the environment is different.
The Japanese institutional environment may
reduce the prevalence of opportunism due to
informal constraints (Dore, 1983)DEMO Williamson
( 1985) would view the environment as a shift
parameter DEMO must be held constant for
empirical work to be valid. Further, DEMO can
argue that Japanese transactors have simply
chosen more efficient safeguards than U.S. trans-
actors, and thus minimized transaction costs by
more effectively aligning transactions with
governance structures. Thus, the findings can be
interpreted as being consistent with transaction
cost theory.
However, the fact that GM (which DEMO an
arm’s length strategy with suppliers ) and Chrysler
(which is DEMO employing a partnership approach
with suppliers) operate in the identical insti-
DEMO environment and yet have dramatically
different transaction costs suggests that differ-
ences in the institutional environment cannot
solely explain these differences in transaction
costs. DEMO seems possible that Williamson ( 1985)
may have significantly underestimated the long-
term search and contracting costs associated with
managing arm’s length market DEMO But
regardless of whether these findings are inter-
preted as consistent or inconsistent with received
theory, an examination of why these results were
obtained is warranted.
AN EXPLORATORY STUDY:
BACKGROUND AND METHOD
The findings from DEMO study were the catalyst
for an exploratory study designed to understand
why these results might have been obtained.
However, before describing the findings of the
exploratory phase of the study it is important to
note that DEMO in procurement costs across
automakers may be driven by a number of factors.
In particular, two factors which we would expect
to influence procurement costs are ( 1) automaker
size (volume ) and (2) DEMO number and complexity
of models produced. For example, larger auto-
makers DEMO enjoy economies of scale in man-
aging suppliers, thereby resulting in DEMO person-
nel in procurement (per dollar of goods procured).
542
J. H. Dyer
However, although GM is the largest automaker,
it had the highest transaction costs. Moreover,
Ford and Toyota are DEMO in size and yet
their procurement costs differ markedly. Although
there is likely to be a size effect, it does not
appear to be a major explanatory variable.
A second possible reason for transaction cost
differences DEMO be due to differences in the
number of models produced and the complexity
of the models. For example, if GM produces
more models (DEMO dollar of sales) with more
different types of components (i.e., DEMO due
to a differentiation strategy) then we might expect
more individuals DEMO in procurement to man-
age that complexity. However, studies by Clark
DEMO Fujimoto (1991) and Nishiguchi ( 1994) sug-
gest that Japanese DEMO have developed
more models (per million dollars of sales) than
their U.S. counterparts. Moreover, Japanese sup-
pliers are more likely than U.S. suppliers to
develop unique parts for their customers.s Thus,
if we were DEMO make a prediction based on compo-
nent complexity/customization, these studies DEMO
gest that Japanese automaker transaction costs
should be higher than U.S. automaker trans-
action costs.
A third possible reason for transaction cost
differences (i.e., between GM and other
automakers) may be that GM has chosen DEMO market
power strategy and is using a large procurement
staff to pit a large number of suppliers against
each other so that GM gets DEMO inputs at the very
lowest price. Thus, GM may be trading DEMO higher
transaction costs for lower cost inputs, thereby
lowering GM’s production DEMO This, of course,
could be a viable (and not necessarily ineffective)
strategy. However, every piece of research evi-
dence from the auto industry to date indicates
that GM does not get lower input DEMO from
suppliers. For example, Cusumano and Takeishi
(199 1) found DEMO the input prices for Japanese
automakers were lower than those received by
U.S. automakers. Moreover, the input prices were
also declining faster for the Japanese automakers
8 Clark and Fujimoto ( 1991) found that 38% of U.S. auto-
maker parts were ‘off the shelf parts, while only 18% of
Japanese automaker parts were ‘off the shelf.’ Similarly,
Nishiguchi (1993) found that when a U.S. supplier develops
a component for a U.S. customer, the same auto component
is fitted into 8.3 car models. In contrast, Japanese suppliers
sell the identicat part for only 5.7 models, DEMO higher
customization of Japanese auto parta for car models.
than the U.S. automakers. This held true even
when the Japanese transplants used U.S. sup-
DEMO
Furthermore, Dyer (1996a) found that between
1982 and 1992 GM, and a sample of its suppliers,
were less profitable than Toyota, Nissan, Chrysler,
and Ford and their suppliers. GM’s pretax return
on assets (ROA) was 2.8% while Toyota’s was
13.0%. Further, GM’s suppliers’ ROA was 4.8%
while Toyota’s suppliers’ was 7.1~o. Again, if
GM’s strategy of obtaining lower input prices
was successful, we might expect it to have some
positive effect on GM’s profits since purchased
inputs represent a DEMO percent of the value of
any automaker’s vehicle. Although it is possible
in theory that GM is trading off higher transaction
costs for lower DEMO prices, in practice this does
not seem to be the case.
DEMO summary, many of the factors (i.e., size and
complexity ) DEMO we might expect to explain
transaction cost differences among automakers
did not offer compelling explanations for these
variances. Thus, other factors within Japanese
transaction relationships must explain how they
simultaneously achieve high asset specificity and
low DEMO costs.9
Data collection
To understand why Toyota and Nissan had lower
transaction costs than their U.S. counterparts (as
well as why GM had higher transaction costs
than Ford or Chrysler), we conducted exploratory
interviews with DEMO the suppliers and automak-
ers. We conducted sernistructttred interviews with
each automaker’s general manager of procurement
as well as at least two other executives/ purchas-
ing agents from each automaker. In addition, we
interviewed sales and engineering vice presidents
at 50 suppliers (20 Japanese and 30 U.S.
9 There may be two additional reasons, which we could not
control for, that U.S. firms (in particular GM) might have
lower procurement productivity. One is that GM may have
been too divisionalized. Until 1992 GM’s DEMO was
decentralized into a number of divisions. Since procurement
incurs fixed costs, separating the firm into many separate
d]visions may have created duplication of purchasing
resources. Our data were collected shortly afier purchasing
was centralized. Second. DEMO productivity is also a function
of the degree of effective competition, DEMO collusive behavior
of U.S. automakers joined to erect trade barriers against their
Japanese competitors may have increased the degree of slack
among U.S. automakers, thereby influencing procurement pro-
ductivity.
Effective
Intetjirm
Collaboration
543
suppliers ). Interviews were typically 2 hours in
length. The purpose of the interviews was to
explore the actions of DEMO transactors that resulted
in an increase or decrease in the costs of trans-
acting, namely search, contracting, monitoring,
and enforcement costs (DEMO Appendix 1 for inter-
view questions).
Data analysis
We coded the interview transcripts using constant
comparative analysis in which each comment or
event DEMO assigned to an emergent open coding
scheme ( Glaser and Strauss, DEMO; Strauss and
Corbin, 1990). Open coding is the process of
naming and categorizing of phenomena. During
open coding, the data are broken down into dis-
crete concepts and compared for similarities and
differences. This DEMO 21 initial codes of
actions/behaviors that influenced transaction
costs. These were subsequently reduced into five
increasingly abstract categories through axial
coding (Strauss and Corbin, 1990). Although
open coding fractures the data and allows one
to identify numerous discrete concepts and their
properties, axial coding puts these data back
together in new ways by making connections
between subcategories and DEMO them into
categories. This is done by utilizing a coding
pa.radlgm involving conditions, context,
action/interactional strategies, and consequences
(Strauss and Corbin, 1990: 60-115).
Validity
We used the processes involved in the DEMO
comparative method as internal checks on the
validity of the data. The process is described well
by Browning, Beyer, and Shetler (1995: DEMO):
As the research proceeds and new data are col-
lected, they are constantly being compared to
prior data in terms of categories DEMO hypotheses.
When new data yield new or inconsistent infor-
mation, conceptual DEMO and the emerging
theory are modhied to take them into account.
This process is repeated until theoretical satu-
ration is reached: until no new categories are
emerging and no new information inconsistent
with the categories and DEMO hypotheses is
being generated (Glaser and Strauss, 1%7;
Strauss and Corbin, 1990).
In qualitative research, the primary checks on
validity DEMO among informants and between
informants and archival sources. Only data that
were consistent across informants and sources
are reported here. However, to further verify the
accuracy of our analysis and interpretations, we
conducted a second phase of research which
involved collecting additional data from a larger
sample of DEMO We developed a follow-up
survey based on the exploratory interviews and
sent it to the original 250 suppliers. Responses
were received from 118 (55 Japanese and 63
U.S. ) suppliers and these data are used to DEMO
the propositions developed during the exploratory
interviews. In the survey we operationalized the
various safeguards described in the first section
to determine which safeguards DEMO most widely
used by suppliers–automakers in each country
(see survey questions DEMO Appendix 2). The data
from the interviews and surveys are the basis for
the propositions regarding how Japanese automo-
tive transactors simultaneously achieve DEMO
asset specificity and lower transaction costs than
their U.S. counterparts (see DEMO 3 for a sum-
mary of data sources).
RESULTS: WHY DEMO
TRANSACTORS HAVE LOW
TRANSACTION COSTS
Through
rate, but interrelated,
differences
DEMO For simplicity in developing
the remainder
comparing
Nissan) and
Chrysler). DEMO, the propositions
to explain differences between
Ford/Chrysler. 10 we ~gue DEMO
makers have lower transaction
U.S. counterparts primarily due
our interviews
propositions
in transaction
the propositions,
paper focuses primarily
transactors (Toyota
transactors
also
GM
Japanese
costs
to:
of the
Japanese
U.S.
we identified
to explain DEMO
costs among automak-
(GM,
Ford,
on
and
and
serve
DEMO
auto-
their
five sepa-
than
1. repeated transactions with a small set of sup-
pliers;
2. economies of scale and scope in transacting
DEMO that small supplier group (high volume
of exchange between transactors);
10~is is me ~ith the exception of Propaition
not hold for the DEMO automakers.
2, which does
544 J. H. Dyer
Table 3. Summary of interview and survey participants
DEMO of
Interview group companies
U.S. automakers 3
Japanese automakers 2
U.S. suppliers 30
Japanese suppliers 20
No. of
Survey group companies
U.S. suppliers 150
DEMO suppliers 100
3. extensive interfirtn information sharing which
reduces asymmetric information;
4. the use of noncontractual, self-enforcing safe-
guards (i.e., goodwill trust) which are effective
for an indefinite time horizon (as opposed to
DEMO which are effective for a finite time
horizon); and
5. investments in cospecialized assets.
The theoretical, and preliminary empirical, sup-
port for DEMO propositions is offered below.
Repeated transactions with a small supplier
group
Japanese automakers work with a much smaller
group of suppliers than U.S. automakers DEMO
engage in repeated exchange with those suppliers
(see Table 4). DEMO interviews suggest that repeat-
edly working with fewer suppliers results in low
transaction costs for three primary reasons. First,
empirically we found that DEMO suppliers re-
win the business at a car model change over 90~o
of the time compared to Chrysler and Ford at
roughly 79Y0, and GM at 52%. By making the
transaction a repeated game, Japanese automakers
increase the cost of defection/opportunism on the
part of the supplier. DEMO The cost of losing the
11me ]Oglc for how repeated games result in more cnor~dve
behavior is well documented in the game theory literature
(Axekod, 19S4; Parkhe, 1993). The prospect of continuing
interaction alters the pay-off structure and increases the cost
of ‘defection.’ Thus, the future casts a ‘shadow’ back upon
the present, affecting current behavior patterns. Cceper-ation
is promoted by the establishment of a direct connection
No. of
interviewees
DEMO
8
61
41
Total
interview
28 h
19 h
62 h
4411
hours
No. of companies
responding
63
55
Response rate
44%
55%
business DEMO greater for suppliers with: ( 1) a higher
volume of exchange with the automaker, and
(2) the expectation of a long-term relationship.
As one Japanese supplier executive observed, ‘For
us to try to take advantage of Toyota would be
very short-sighted. We have too much business
DEMO them to risk such a foolish action’ (author
interview, 1992). Thus, the cost of opportunism
is higher for the typical Japanese supplier than
for the typical U.S. supplier. The creation of a
high-volume, repeated game increases the ‘incen-
tive compatibility’ of the transactors.
Second, a ‘repeated game’ allows for more
opportunities in the future to correct for trans-
DEMO inequities, thereby reducing bargaining
costs. More than 7570 of the Japanese DEMO
interviewed indicated that they knew that if an
inequity emerged in the current set of trans-
actions, it would be ‘remembered’ and corrected
in the future. The majority of U.S. suppliers
indicated that inequities were rarely, if ever,
remembered by the automakers. Japanese transac-
tors are much DEMO likely to rely on a ‘social
memory’ which is created through repeated inter-
actions. This memory allows Japanese transactors
to achieve ‘serial equity’ (equity over a longer
period of time) rather than requiring immediate
or ‘spot equity’ (Ouchi, 1984). Thus, it reduces
the need for transactors to invest heavily in bar-
gaining over profits from the current set DEMO trans-
actions.
between a transactor’s present actions and anticipated future
benefits.
Eflective
Intetjirm
Collaboration
Table 4.
Variable
Average number of suppliers’
Percent of DEMO the supplier re-
wins the part business at a
model change
Percent of time the automaker
rebids the part before a model
change
Annual DEMO volume of parts
exchanged
Average number of different
types of parts exchanged
(different part numbers)
Sample characteristics
of supplier–automaker
2033
78%
21.1%
$100.9m***
136
relationships
(by automaker)
2033
80%
20.7%
$111.7m
226
Chrysler
2033
52’%0**
67%**
$237.lm*
274
‘For confidentiality reasons the number of suppliers reported DEMO each automaker
(i.e., 2033 is the average number of suppliers for Chrysler, Ford and GM).
Tests of group differences are one-tailed r-tests assuming unequal variances.
**slgnificmtly knver/higher than all other automakers (p <DEMO ).
tSignificantly lower/higher than all U.S. automakers only (p <DEMO ).
*Significantly lower/higher than other U.S. automakers only (p < 0.01).
** ~m indicates mil]ions of dollars.
Ford
GM
Nissan
303
DEMO
4.7%+
$346.8mt
1613t
Toyota
303
92%1
4.o’%f
$687.2 m**
2379**
545
is the nation (U.S./Japan) average
Proposition 1: The higher the probability of
repeated exchange, the lower the transaction
costs per unit of exchange.
Economies
of scale and scope in transacting
On average, Japanese suppliers sell much larger
volumes of goods to automakers than do U.S.
suppliers (see Table 4). The fact that Japanese
suppliers sell large volumes of DEMO, as well
as multiple products (i.e., part numbers), to DEMO
automaker reduces transaction costs in two ways.
First, the costs of DEMO information go down
as a percentage of the vahte of goods exchanged
due to economies of scale in transacting. The
automaker typically must collect DEMO of the
same information from the supplier (on martage-
ment, finances, production processes, etc. )
whether the automaker is buying $5 million or
$500 million of parts from the supplier. The
larger the absolute DEMO of goods exchanged,
the lower the transaction costs per unit of
exchange. Just as scale economies lead to lower
per unit production costs, economies of scale
associated with increasing the volume of
exchanges with a DEMO transactor leads to lower
per unit costs associated with completing the
transaction.
Second, ex ante and ex post bargaining costs
are reduced because economies of scale and scope
in transacting provide many more options for
correcting DEMO inequities. For example,
when suppliers bid on the business for a pwticular
component, they receive a projected unit volume
from the automaker on which they base their
costs and prices. Of course, this unit volume
is an estimate but the supplier must make the
investments in plant, tooling, manpower, etc. in
order to be able to produce the DEMO unit
volume. Automakers verify this investment before
production to ensure that all suppliers have the
ability to produce the parts they expect they will
DEMO Of course, in most cases the estimate is
incorrect-in some cases DEMO high and in some
cases too low. However, according to both DEMO
pliers and automakers, the estimate is much more
likely to be DEMO high than too low. 12 In the
case of a particularly inaccurate estimate, it is
impossible for the supplier to fully recoup its
investments because the assets dedicated to pro-
duction are not fully utilized (the supplier’s unit
price to the automaker was based on a unit
I2 DEMO indica~ mat U.S. automakers’ estimates were
typically 20–30% too high while Japanese automaker esti-
mates were more likely to be within 5-10% of actuat DEMO
546 J. H. Dyer
volume that did not materialize). The supplier
DEMO respond to this dilemma in a number of
ways. First, the DEMO can simply ask for a
higher price ex ante which reflects the risk
involved. 13 Second, the supplier can insist on a
more complex, contingent claims contract to pro-
tect its interests and specify damages in the event
that the estimated unit volume does not
materialize. Or finally, the supplier can go back
to the automaker ex posr and ask DEMO some type
of compensation.
When a supplier is only transacting with the
automaker on a small number of components (as
in the U.S.), these responses-which result in
high transaction costs—are the only ones avail-
able DEMO the supplier. However, because Japanese
suppliers typically sell multiple components for
DEMO car models, ex ante precision is less
important, and ex post bargaining is less problem-
atic. Japanese suppliers claimed that if the actual
DEMO volume for a particular model was lower
than expected, they typically DEMO not worry about
it because they were usually selling a component
on another model where the estimate was low.
Thus, according to numerous Japanese supplier
executives, ‘the high and low estimates tend to
cancel each other out.’ In situations where the
automaker estimates were particularly inaccurate
and the DEMO had made large investments that
could not be recouped, rather than DEMO in
expensive haggling on that particular component,
the supplier simply asked for additional business
on existing or upcoming models, perhaps at a
more favorable price. Consequently, Japanese
transactors spend less time on ex ante contracting
and ex post bargaining. Economies of scale and
scope in the transaction DEMO lower trans-
action costs by providing more options to correct
for transaction inequities.
Proposition 2: The greater the total volume
of exchange between transactors, the lower the
transaction costs per unit of exchange.
13 [n
~mctice,
in
~
bidding
situation it is virtually impossible
for suppliers to DEMO in a risk premium and
business. Most suppliers claim that they price
automaker’s estimated
ways to make up the
not materialize.
still win the
DEMO on the
volume and hope they will find other
shortfatl if the estimated volume does
Substantial information sharing
Japanese automotive transactors share more infor-
DEMO than their U.S. counterparts, thereby
reducing information asymmetry as well as DEMO
potential for opporhmism (see Table 5 ). This in
turn reduces transaction costs. The link between
information sharing and transaction costs is
straightfotward. DEMO neoclassical economics, trans-
action costs are assumed to be zero because
DEMO have perfect information. Information
asymmetry is necessary in order for transactors
to behave opportunistically. As North ( 1990 108)
observes, ‘the costs of transacting arise because
information is costly’ and ‘asymmetrically held
by the parties DEMO the exchange.’ In a transaction
world of perfect information, transaction costs
DEMO negligible.
The transaction world of Japanese automakers
more closely approximates a world of perfect
information. Japanese suppliers and automakers
share a tremendous amount of DEMO on
their costs, methods of production, technology,
and so forth. This reduces the ability of transac-
tors to behave opportunistically by concealing
DEMO information (Akerlof, 1970 North,
1990). The comment of a Japanese supplier
executive illustrates this point. When asked why
his company does DEMO try to build additional
profit into the cost estimates that they provide to
Nissan, he answered as follows:
It would be vixtually impossible for us to get
away with inaccurate cost estimates. Nissan has
much DEMO; they have very good information on
our operations and they can DEMO our cost
position. They can visit our plants and gather
information. They know us and our operations
so well, they would surely discover it. Moreover,
tJrey have at least one other supplier that com-
petes DEMO us and they have detailed information
to compare us. We can hide nothing (author
interview, 8 August 1992)
Over 90910of the Japanese DEMO we inter-
viewed answered this question in a similar man-
ner. Indeed, the supplier selection process is such
that Japanese automakers ‘screen’ for suppliers
who are willing to share information. Suppliers
who are unwilling to share DEMO are effec-
tively screened out. 14lltis point is highlighted by
M~umment managers at both Japanese automakers indi-
cated that they screen for suppliers who DEMO willing to share
information; suppliers who are unwilling to share information
Table 5.
Measures of information
sharing (by automaker)
Interjirm
Variable
Trust automaker with
confidential information
Share detailed information on
cost structure
Share information DEMO assist
supplier with cost reduction
Share information to assist
supplier with quality
improvement
Sham information to assist
supplier with delivery/inventory
management
Chrysler
4.3*
DEMO
2.0
3.1
2.5
Ford
3.6
4.5
2.0
3.7*
2.2
GM
2+6**
4.0
2.1
2.2**
1.9
Nissan
Toyota
5.4+
6.1**
5.3T
4.9t
3.3?
3.3-1
DEMO
3.7*
2.8
3.8**
Note: Answers are on a I-7 Likert scale; 1= Not at all, 4 = To some extent, 7 = DEMO a very great extent.
Tests of group differences are one-tailed r-tests assuming unequat variances.
**Significantly lower/higher than all other automakers (p < 0.01).
?.SignificantlyIowerlhigher than all U.S. automakers only (p <0.01 ).
DEMO lower/higher than other U.S. automakers only (p < 0.01).
DEMO
Collaboration
547
the business strategy manager of a GM compo-
nent division.
I probably shouldn’t admit this but we actually
share more information with DEMO than we do
with our intemat assembly divisions. Why do we
share more with them? Because they demand it.
That’s just the way they do business. If we didn’t
give them the information they wanted, they
would not do business with us (author interview,
September 1992)
Japanese automakers demand significant cost,
quality, and production information from sup-
pliers for two reasons. First, a supplier’s willing-
ness to share information is viewed as a signal
of the trustworthiness of the supplier. Second,DEMO
they do not take for granted that the supplier can
perform as promised. Thus, they want to verify
the capabilities of the supplier. This high degree
of information sharing reduces information asym-
metries, thereby reducing contracting and moni-
toring costs because both parties are negotiating
with similar information.
DEMO 3: The greater the degree of
information shan”ng between transactors, the
are not viewed as being trustworthy and therefore are elimin-
ated from DEMO
lower
lower
the information
the transaction
asymmetries
costs.
and
the
Use of self-enforcing vs. contractual
safeguards
Japanese automotive transactors do not control
opportunism through DEMO contracts but instead
rely on self-enforcing safeguards such as
relational trust and financial hostages (stock
ownership). These safeguards presumably have
high initial ‘set-up’ costs but once in place they
have relatively low maintenance costs. 15
DEMO supplier survey found that Japanese auto-
makers, notably Toyota, have been more effective
than U.S. automakers at getting suppliers to trust
them (see Table 6). Japanese suppliers indicate
that they are more likely to DEMO Japanese auto-
makers to treat them fairly. ‘b Further, Japanese
15We DEMO empirically examine whether the set-up costs
are higher, but theory and DEMO empirical evidence suggest
they would he (Sake, 1992).
16 E~@nsive f~e.t~ face interactions between SupPlier Snd
automaker tended to personalize the exchange DEMO increased
goodwill trust (Sake, 1991). Japanese procurement personnel
indicated that long-term friendships and loyatty were factors
which prevented them from taking advantage DEMO suppliers.
U.S. purchasing personnel were much less likely to mention
friendships and loyalty as reasons for cooperating with sup
pliers.
l
548
J. H. Dyer
Table 6.
Measures of self-enforcing
safeguards
(by automaker)
Variable
Chrysler
Ford
5.0
3.6
4.8
GM
3.2**
5.4**
2.8**
Nissan
DEMO
Trust:
Trust automaker
fairly
to treat you
If given the chance, automaker
might try to take unfair
advantage of supplier
Reputation:
Automaker has
fairness among
community
a reputation
supplier
Financial hostages:
Percent of DEMO stock
owned by the automaker
for
5.4
2.9
5.2
070
o%
0%
6.lt
6.4?
1.8
1.4**
5.7?
6.3**
12.5%~
8.9%T
Note: Answers are on a 1–7 Likert scale; 1= Not at all, 4 DEMO To some extent, 7 = To a very great extent.
Tests DEMO group differences are one-tailed r-tests assuming unequal variances.
Xxsignificmtly lower/higher than all other automakers (p <0.01 ).
t Significantly lower/higher than all U.S. automakers only (p <0.01 ).
suppliers were more willing to make investments
based upon the oral promises of the automaker,
DEMO a written contract. Interestingly, GM was
significantly less likely to have DEMO trust than
Chrysler or Ford. During interviews, suppliers
reported cases of DEMO infringement, sending
proprietary design blueprints to competitors, and
broken contracts as reasons that they did not trust
GM. Stated one supplier executive:
DEMO years ago we were honored by GM as a
high performance supplier. In fact, we were the
only supplier featured with a picture in their
annual report for our performance. But this year
they came back DEMO said we would have to drop
our price 2070 in order to keep the business.
They said they had a lower bid. When we DEMO
to drop our price that much, they forced us to
ship DEMO tools to a new supplier and even had
the nerve to ask us to help the new supplier to
get up and running.
Consistent DEMO the hypothesis that ttust is an
efficient governance mechanism (Dore, 1983;
Sake, 1991 ), these findings support an inverse
relationship between DEMO and transaction costs.
Finally, Japanese transactors are much more
likely to DEMO financial hostages, rather than con-
tracts, to make a credible commitment. For
example, Japanese automakers have minority
ownership positions in many key suppliers. Nis-
san and Toyota own an average of 2370 of the
stock DEMO their affiliated suppliers and roughly 10?ZO
across all suppliers in our sample (Table 6). Stock
ownership in a Japanese trading relationship is
representative of a credible commitment that one
firm has made to another DEMO (Gerlach, 1992).
A stock ownership position held by an automaker
acts as a financial hostage which encourages the
supplier to make partner-specific DEMO The
use of hostages increases the costs of unilateral
defection by the automaker and lengthens the
‘shadow of the future’ by signaling good-faith
intentions DEMO long-term commitments ( Schelling,
1978; Parkhe, 1993).
The short-term ‘set-up’ costs of building trust
or investing in financial hostages are high DEMO
to simply writing a legal contract to attenuate the
hazards of opportunism. However, once Japanese
transactors have made the upfront investment to
develop these self-enforcing safeguards, the trans-
action costs decline over the long term. Self-
enforcing safeguards can control opportunism
over an irtdejinite time horizon. Conversely, con-
tracts control opportunism for only a jinire time
horizon. When the finite DEMO of the contract
is over, transactors must find other means to
DEMO opportunism (i.e., write a new contract).
In contrast to Japanese practice, U.S. automrtk-
ers have historically worked with a large set of
Eflective
Interjirm
Collaboration
549
suppliers and relied on legal contracts to control
DEMO 17The pattern for U.S. auto compa-
nies has been to establish requirements and play
suppliers off against one another in a contest
for l-year DEMO (Clark and Fujimoto, 1991).
Helper ( 1991) found that DEMO average length of
a legal contract employed by a U.S. automaker
was only 2.3 years in 1989, up from 1.2 years
in 1984. This requires annual or biannual requests
for bids from suppliers followed by the DEMO
sequent costs of analyzing the bids, negotiating,
rebidding, selecting a supplier, and writing a legal
contract. In short, this practice leads DEMO high
search and contracting costs. Two-thirds of GM
suppliers in our survey indicated that historically
GM has rebid their component before a model
change (Table 4). In contrast, Toyota and Nissan
rebid components less than 59to of the time. As
one GM executive noted, ‘It has been necessary
for us to maintain a large purchasing department
to manage the DEMO number of suppliers and the
frequent rebidding of parts’ (author interview,DEMO
February 1991). U.S. automakers continually face
the costs of recontracting with suppliers because
legal contracts are only efficacious for a finite
time period.
DEMO summary, Japanese automotive transactors
minimize transaction costs by minimizing search,
DEMO, monitoring, and enforcement costs
over the long term. They do this by controlling
opportunism in their exchange relationships
through self-enforcing safeguards rather than DEMO
contracts. Conversely, U.S. automakers recontract
with an ever-changing line-up of suppliers DEMO
thus continue to incur considerable search and
contracting costs. While a legal contract may
minimize transaction costs in the short run, the
safeguards used in Japanese alliances result in
lower transaction costs over the long run.
DEMO 4: Selj-enforcing safeguards (i.e.,
goodwill trust, jinancial hostages) result in
lower transaction costs than legal contracts if
the expected duration of DEMO is long term.
Investments in relation-specific or
coqwialized assets
Helper and Levine ( 1992: 566) have observed
that ‘in much of the transaction-cost DEMO,
IT~o”gh this patternis changing significantly, especi~ly at
Chrysler (Kamath and Liker, 1994; Dyer, 1996c).
asset specificity is assumed to be exogenously
determined by the technology’ and ‘purchasers
always choose the socially efficient DEMO of asset
specificity . . . Governance structure follows in a
straightforward way from the degree of asset
specificity.’ 18 However, our interviews suggest
that due to uncertainty and bounded rationality,
transactors
do
not
know
DEMO
ante
what
level
of
investment in specialized assets will be optimal.
Within Japanese supplier–automaker relation-
ships, the level of investment in relation-specific
assets tends to deepen over time, particularly as
transactors make initial investments, share DEMO
mation, build trust, and ‘discover’ new ways to
enhance performance through relation-specific
assets, For example, a Nissan seat supplier
decided to build DEMO plant on the property adjacent
to a Nissan assembly plant. This decision was
made primarily because Nissan had a minority
equity position in the DEMO and the two parties
had developed a high level of relational trust.
Once this site-specific investment was made, the
two parties discovered that rather than transport
the seats by truck (a general purpose asset), it
would be more economical to build a conveyor
belt (a highly specialized asset) to carry the seats
directly from the supplier plant to the automaker
plant. Consequently, the supplier and automaker
jointly invested in building the conveyor belt.
This example of an initial specialized investment
(i.e., a DEMO plant) being followed by sub-
sequent specialized investments (i.e., customized
DEMO) is not unusual among Japanese
suppliers–automakers. A high degree of infor-
DEMO sharing and trust results in higher levels of
relation-specific investments because the parties
discover new ways to enhance performance
through specialized investments.
In addition, we found that the level of relation-
specific investments made by suppliers DEMO
strongly influenced by the automaker’s strategy
with regard to supplier management and gover-
nance. To illustrate, when suppliers considered
making a particular relation-specific investment
they asked the following question: ‘Will we make
the necessary return on investment during the
payback period or length of the transaction
18Willimson ( DEMO: 34) has argued that reset specificity
(technology), contractual safegumds, and price are determined
‘simultaneously.’ Thus, asset specificity may be viewed as
partly endogenous in his model.
550
J. H. Dyer
agreement/contract? According to Japanese sup-
pliers, DEMO sizable portion of their automaker-spe-
cific investments in customized equipment, tools,DEMO
processes, and capacity had a payback period of
at least 8 DEMO or two model cycles (most Toyota
and Nissan models have a DEMO development
cycle). Thus, for the investment to pay off, the
supplier needed to be assured that it would be
awarded the component DEMO for at least 8
years. Japanese automakers provided those assur-
ances by giving credible long-term commitments
to suppliers (as evidenced by the high re-win
rates ). In contrast, U.S. suppliers considered the
duration of the DEMO contract as the payback
period-which was typically 5 years or less.
Thus, U.S. suppliers rationally refused to make
relation-specific investments with a payback
period longer than the length of the contract. The
practical result of these DEMO in governance
strategy was that a larger set of durable relation-
specific investments made economic sense for
Japanese suppliers than for U.S. suppliers.
Thus, firm-level (buyer) strategies towards
governance ultimately influences both ~ransactkm
and production DEMO If one supplier uses special
purpose technologies and assets for production
while another refuses to do so due to concerns
regarding opportunism, the suppliers will have
different production costs. 19 Governance of sup-
plier relauons has DEMO effect on production costs
by influencing the level of relation-specific invest-
ments employed in the relationship. Thus, invest-
ments in specific assets
endogenously determined. These
that asset specificity is not the
large degree the consequence
egy.
DEMO, because Japanese automakers
pliers often made symmetrical
investments it resulted in DEMO
thereby increasing the
transactors (Klein, 1980; Williamson, 1983; Dyer
DEMO Ouchi, 1993). Cospecialized
increase the transactors’ interdependence
consistent with theory, serves as
rationale for cooperative, long-term relationships.
are at least partly
findings suggest
cause, but to a
of governance strat-
and sup-
or cospecialized
hostage situation,
interdependence of the
investments
and,
an economic
19 DEMO
finding
is
Consisknt
with Lyons ( 1994). who found
that 60% of U.K. transactors in the engineering field claimed
that they were not DEMO the optimal level of specialized
investments with their main customer, primarily DEMO they
were unwilling to expose themselves to the risk of being
oppofiunisticrdly exploited.
Of course, transactors will not make the initial
investments unless they feel sufficiently protected
against the hazards of opportunism. Thus, trarts-
action costs increase with initial investments in
specialized assets. However, once a high level of
trust is achieved and the initial relation-specific
investments are made, subsequent investments
serve as a credible signal of trust and commit-
ment. Thus, they are self reinforcing. Specific
investments, by their very nature, increase DEMO
‘shadow of the future’ and increase the expec-
tation of future interaction, thereby leading to a
pattern of cooperative behavior (Heide and Miner,DEMO
1992; Parkhe, 1993). Thus, we propose a curvi-
linear DEMO between asset specificity and
transaction costs with trust as a moderating vari-
able (see Figure 1). During the early stages of a
relationship, transaction costs increase as transac-
tors invest in safeguards to protect initial invest-
ments in specific assets. However, once a suf-
ficiently high level of trust is achieved and
specialized investments are made, the investments
themselves serve as a signal of trust and commit-
ment. Thus, transaction costs may actually
decrease with increased investments in specific
assets.
Proposition 5: Above some minimum thresh-
old level of trust, aaliitional relation-specific
investments serve to increase commitment and
the costs of unilateral defection, thereby
resulting in lower transaction costs.
A model of interfhm collaboration and value
maximization
Figure 2 DEMO a model of interfirm collabo-
ration that maximizes transaction value based on
the propositions developed previously. The model
proposed here suggests that the credibility DEMO a
firm’s promise to behave cooperatively increases
as transactors: ( 1) demonstrate through behavior
a commitment to fiture interaction (e.g., by
increasing DEMO re-win rate and volume of
exchange), (2) increase the amount of information
sharing, and (3) employ self-enforcing safeguards
to govern the relationship. In turn, an increase in
‘promise credibility’ (or trustworthiness) within
the trading relationship reduces transaction costs
and increases the likelihood that transactors DEMO
invest in relation-specific assets. Furthermore,
increased investments in specialized assets serve
TRANSACTION
COSTS
High
E~ective
Inter&n
Collaboration
551
Low
I
Low
High
DEMO RELATION-SPECIFICASSETS
(Intert%mInterdependence)
Figure 1.
The relationship
between asset specificity and DEMO
costs
Demonstrated
Commitmentto
Future Interaction
- High RewinRate
- High Transaction
Volume
Information
Sharing
(+)
I
I
Use of Self-Enforcinrr
safeguards ‘1
- OoodwillTrust
- Reputation
- FhmncialHostage
/
V(+)
I
Figure
/DEMO
2.
m
\
1
A model of
v
(+)
d(DEMO)
Rcladon-Specitic
Asseta
interfirm collaboration
/
TransactionValue
(Joint Performance)
to reinforce the transactors’ promise credibility
by increasing the cost of unilateral defection DEMO
lengthening ‘tie ‘shadow of the future.’zo Finally,
lower transaction costs and greater investments
in specialized assets maximize transaction value,
or the joint DEMO of the transactors.
CONCLUSION
m In support of this proposition, Smith DEMO Aldrich ( 1991:
28) found that asset specificity created trust DEMO increasing
information sharing between suppliers and buyers.
This study suggests that transaction costs do not
necessarily increase with an increase in relation-
specific investments. DEMO we found that
Japanese automakers incur lower transaction costs
than U.S. automakers even though their suppliers
are more specialized to them. Through explora-
tory DEMO we developed a number of prop-
ositions to explain these results. In particular, we
found that transaction costs differ among auto-
makers due to: ( 1) differences in their commit-
552
J. H. Dyer
ment to suppliers to engage in repeated exchange,DEMO
(2) differences in the scale and scope of
exchanges between the supplier and automaker,
(3) differences in interfirm information sharing,
(4) differences in the mix of safeguards chosen
to govern the exchange, notably a reliance on
self-enforcing safeguards which are efficacious
over an indefinite time horizon (as opposed to
contracts which are only effective for a finite
time horizon), and (5) differences in investments
in cospecialized DEMO We have suggested that
these propositions are interrelated, meaning that
they DEMO highly correlated and mutually reinforc-
ing. For example, engaging in repeated DEMO
actions (Proposition 1) is important for achieving
high volume/scale economies (Proposition 2),
sharing information (Proposition 3), developing
self-enforcing safeguards (Proposition 4), and dis-
covering new ways to enhance performance
through specialized assets (Proposition 5). We
presume that each proposition holds true if each
of the other propositions is held constant, but it
may be that in order to significantly reduce trans-
action costs these actions DEMO be taken in combi-
nation.
These findings also have implications for how
firms in a production network can maximize
transaction value. In particular, a production net-
work that can simultaneously achieve the twin
benejits of asset DEMO and lower trans-
action costs will have efficiency advantages over
a less specialized network with higher transaction
costs. Williamson ( 1985: 1) has DEMO that
‘the transaction cost approach maintains that these
institutions [governance structures ] have the main
purpose and effect of economizing on transaction
costs.’ Indeed, the fundamental governance ques-
tion, as posed by Williamson, is: How can
exchange relationships be structured to economize
on transaction costs?z 1 DEMO, as Zajac and
Olsen (1993 ) have suggested, this may DEMO the
wrong question. Instead, the fimdamental question
should be: How can exchange relations be struc-
2I It is w.ofi noting that there are DEMO number of transaction
cost scholars who do not espouse the view that optimat
governance is the one that minimizes transaction costs, but
that the institutional arrangement chosen is the one that
maximizes the gains from trade. DEMO example, Hennart ( 1993)
argues that the efficient institutional arrangement DEMO the one
which results in the highest midual, a statement equivalent DEMO
saying that the optimal institution is the one which maximizes
transaction value.
tured to maximize transaction value (which
includes both production and transaction costs )?
Our study suggests that beyond minimizing trans-
action costs, governance influences transaction
value by influencing the transactors’ set of
choices regarding the DEMO of specialized assets
that will be employed. For example, a firm’s
DEMO credibility (trustworthiness) can be a
source of advantage because it minimizes trans-
action costs. However, at least as important is
the fact that trustworthiness will often result in
higher levels of performance-enhancing invest-
ments in DEMO assets because trustworthy
transactors: (1) engage in greater information
sharing DEMO increases the probability that they
will discover new ways to enhance performance
through relation-specific investments, (2) have a
longer payback period during which to eam a
return on the investments, thereby increasing the
number of relation-specific investments that make
economic sense, and (3) are able to implement
optimal levels of specialized assets because the
costs of safeguarding the DEMO invest-
ments are less likely to outweigh the gains. Thus,
efficient governance mechanisms (i.e., must) can
simultaneously lower transaction costs and
increase relation-specific investments, thereby cre-
ating competitive advantage.
However, it is important DEMO note that Japanese
procurement practices will only pay off if there
are gains to be obtained from making relation-
specific investments. If parts manufacture DEMO
not benefit from such investments, then U.S. prac-
tices may be DEMO efficient. Furthermore, building
trust and engaging in repeated trades is not
DEMO At some point Japanese transactors
had to incur the ‘set-up costs’ associated with
establishing noncontractual governance mech-
anisms. Moreover, the cost of building trust
includes the opportunity cost of not taking
advantage of one’s suppliers and DEMO loss of
the opportunity to use lower-cost suppliers if
they came along. Thus, Japanese procurement
practices are not absolutely superior. They may
be superior only in the long term, and only
if relation-specific investments create economic
value. Hence, Japanese procurement practices
may be optimal given a rather specific set of
conditions. However, when these conditions
exist (as they do DEMO the auto industry), the
practices described in this paper represent a
model for effective interfirm collaboration.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The Reginald Jones Center for Policy and Organi-
zation at the DEMO School is gratefully
acknowledged for its support of this research.
REFERENCES
Alchian, A. A. and H. Demsetz (1972). ‘Production,
information costs, and economic organization’, Amer-
ican Econom”c Association, 62(5), pp. DEMO
Akerlof, G. A. ( 1970). “he market for “lemons”:
DEMO, uncertainty, and the market mechanism’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Argyle, M. ( 1991). Cooperation:
bility. Routledge, New York.
DEMO, B. ( 1985). ‘The contractual
parts supply in the Japanese
DEMO ‘The organization of
Japanese automotive industry’, Japanese Economic
Studies, 15 (DEMO 1985a,b), pp. 32-78.
Axelrod, R. ( 1984). The DEMO of Cooperation.
Basic Books, New York.
Bradach, J. L. and R. Eccles ( 1989). ‘Markets versus
hierarchies: From ideal types to plural forms’,
Annual Review of Sociology, 15, pp. 97-118.
Browning, L., J. Beyer and J. Shetler ( 1995). ‘Building
cooperation in a competitive industry: Sematech and
the semiconductor industry’, Academy of Manage-
ment DEMO, 38( l), pp. 113-151.
Clark, K. B. and T. DEMO ( 1991). Product Develop-
men~ Pe#ormance. Harvard Business School Press,
Boston, MA.
Cusumano, M. A. and A. Takeishi ( 1991). DEMO
relations and management: A survey of Japanese,
Japanese-transplant, and U.S. auto plants’, Stra~egic
Management Journal, 12(8), pp. 563-588.
Dore, R. ( 1983). ‘Goodwill and the spirit of market
capitalism’, British Journal of Sociology, 34(4),
pp. 459–482.
Dyer, J. H. ( 1996a). ‘Specialized supplier networks as
a source of competitive advantage: Evidence from
the auto industry’, Strategic Management Journal,
17(4), pp. 271-292.
Dyer, J. H. ( 1996b). ‘Does governance matter? DEMO
alliances and asset specificity as sources of Japanese
competitive advantage’, Organization DEMO, 7(6),
pp. 649-666.
Dyer, J. H. ( 1996c)DEMO ‘How Chrysler created an Amer-
ican keiret.su’, Harvard Business Review, 74(4),
pp. 42-56.
Dyer, J. H. and W. G. Ouchi ( 1993). ‘Japanese style
business partnerships: Giving companies a competi-
tive DEMO, Sloan Management Review, 35( 1),
pp. 51-63.
Gerlach, DEMO L. ( 1992). Alliance Capitalism. University
of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Glaser, B. and A. Strauss (1%7). The Discovery of
DEMO Theory. Aldine, Chicago, LL.
84, pp. 488-500.
The Basis of DEMO
framework
automotive industry’
parts supply in the
for
.
Effective
Inter&n
Collaboration
553
Heide, J. B. and A. Miner ( 1992). ‘The shadow of the
future: Effects of anticipated interaction and frequency
of contact on buyer–seller cooperation’, Academy of
Management Journal, 35(2), pp. DEMO
Helper, S. ( 1991). ‘How much has really changed
between DEMO automakers and their suppliers’, Sloan
Management Review, Summer, pp. 15-28.
DEMO, S. and D. Levine ( 1992). ‘Long term supplier
relations DEMO product-market
Law, Economics, and Organization,
Hennart, J.-F. ( 1993)DEMO ‘Explaining the
Why most transactions
“Hierarchy’”,
547.
Hill, C. W. DEMO (
transaction
advantage: The case of Japan’. Organization
Science, 6(DEMO), pp. 119–1 31.
Kamath, R. R. and J. K. Liker ( 1994). ‘A second look
at Japanese product development’. Harvard Business
Review, 72(6), pp. 154– 170.
Klein, B. ( 1980). DEMO cost determinants of
“unfair” contractual arrangements’, Amen”can ECO-
nomic Review, 70(2), pp. 356-362.
Klein, B., R. G. Crawford and A. DEMO Alchian ( 1978).
‘Vertical integration, appropriable rents, and the
competitive contracting process’, JOUITKZ1 of LZW
and Economics, 2 [, pp. 297-326.
Kogut, B. ( 1989). ‘The stability of joint ventures:
Reciprocity and competitive rivalry’, Journal of
Industrial Economics, 38, pp. 183-197.
Kreps, D. and R. Wilson ( 1982). ‘Reputation and
imperfect information’, DEMO of Economic Theory,
27.. .Q~.. 253-279.
Lyons, B. R. (1994). ‘Contracts and specific invest-
ment: An empirical test of transaction cost theory’,
Journal of Economic and Management Strategy, 3,
pp. 257-278.
Macneil, I. R. ( 1978). ‘Contracts: Adjustment of long-
term DEMO relations under classicat and neo-
classical, and relational contract law’, Northwestern
University Law Review, 72, pp. 854-905.
Mahoney, J. T. ( 1992). ‘The choice of organizational
form: Vertical financial ownership versus other
methods of verticat integration’, Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 13(8 ), pp. 559-584.
Masten, S. E. ( 1984). ‘The organization of production:
Evidence from the aerospace industry’, Journal of
Law and Economics, 27, pp. 403-417.
Monteverde, K. and D. J. Teece (1982). ‘Supplier
DEMO costs and vertical integration
mobile industry’, Bell Journal
pp. 206-213.
Nishiguchi, T. ( 1993). ‘Governing competitive
relations: New auto-industry evidence’,
Annual Sponsors’ Briefing Meeting, Cape
Nishiguchi, T. ( 1994). Strategic Industrial
DEMO University Press, New
North, D. C. ( 1990). Institutions,
and Economic Pe@ormance. Cambridge
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Ouchi, W. G. ( 1984). The M-Form
Books, New York.
structure’, Journal
8, pp. 561-581.
swollen middle:
are a mix of “Market”
Organization Science, 4(4), pp. 529–
1995). ‘National institutional structures,
cost
in DEMO auto-
of Economics, 13,
supplier
MITIIMVP
Cod, MA.
Sourcing.
York.
Instirurional Change
University
Society.
Avon
economizing,
and
of
and
competitive
554
J. H. Dyer
Parkhe,
game theoretic
interfirm
JOU171Ui, 36(4), pp. 794-829.
Perry, M. K. ( 1989). ‘Vertical integration’.
Schmatensee and R. Willig (eds.),
Industrial Organization. North-Holland,
pp. 185-255.
DEMO, M. (1991). ‘The role of ‘Trust”
buyer-supplier relationships’, Ricerche
DEMO(2–3), pp. 449-474.
Sake, M. (1992). Prices, Quality, and Trust. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Schelling, T. C. ( 1978). Micromotives and h4acro-
behavior. Norton, New York.
Smith, A. DEMO and H. E. Aldrich ( 1991). ‘The role of
trust in the transaction cost economics framework:
Transaction contexts and governance structures in
DEMO manufacturer-supplier relations’. Academy of
Management Meetings, Miami, FL.
Sohn, J. DEMO D. ( 1994). ‘Sociat knowledge as a control
svstem: A DEMO and evidence from the
J~panese FD~ khavior’, Journal of International
Business DEMO, Second Quarter, pp. 295-324.
Strauss, A. and J. Corbin (1990). Basics of Qualitative
Research. Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
A. ( DEMO).
and transaction
cost
cooperation’,
Academy
‘Strategic
alliance
of
structuring:
examination
Management
In
Handbook
Amsterdam,
in Japanese
Economiche,
A
of
DEMO
of
APPENDIX 1: EXPLORATORY
INTERVIEW QUESTIONS
Automaker
purchasing
persomel
1. Given DEMO size and relative bargaining power,
what prevents you from taking advantage of
suppliers?
2. What, if anything, increases (or decreases)
costs associated with selecting suppliers
work with?
3, What, if
DEMO costs
suppliers?
4, What, if
your costs
pfot-m~ce,
to the original agreement?
5. How do you resolve disputes with this DEMO
plier? (i.e~, if either you or the supplier believe
hat DEMO other party- has not lived up to the
original agreement?)
DEMO
to
anything, increases (or decreases)
of bargaining and contracting with
anything, increases (or decreases)
with regard to monitoring suppliers’
tO DEMO that they tie living uP
Supplier
saks/engineering
personnel
1. What prevents you from giving inaccurate cost
estimates to this particular automaker? What
prevents you from giving any other types of
inaccurate information to this particular DEMO
maker?
.
Telser, L. G. ( 1980). ‘A theory DEMO self-enforcing agree-
ments’, Journal of Business, 53(1), pp. 27-44.
Walker, G. and D. Weber ( 1984). ‘A transaction cost
approach to make-or-buy’, Administrative Science
Quarterly, 29, pp. 373-391.
Weigelt, K. DEMO C. Camerer ( 1988). ‘Reputation and
corporate strategy: A review DEMO recent theory and
applications’, Strategic Management Journal, 9(5),
DEMO 443-454.
Williamson, O. E. ( 1983). ‘Credible commitments:
Using DEMO to support exchange’, American
Economic Review, 73(4), pp. 519-535.
Williamson, O. E. ( 1985). The Economic Institutions
of Capitalism. Free Press, New York.
Williamson, O. E. ( 1991a). ‘Comparative economic
DEMO: The analysis of discrete structural alter-
natives’, Administrative Science Quarterly, DEMO,
pp. 269-296.
Womack, J. P., D. T. Jones and D. Roos ( 1990). The
Machine rhat Changed the World. Harper Perenniat,DEMO
New York.
Zaiac, E. J. and C. P. Olsen ( 1993)DEMO ‘From transaction
-cost to transactional value analysis: Implications for
the study DEMO interorganizational strategies’, Journal
of Management Studies, 30(1), pp. 131– 145.
2. What, if anything, increases (or decreases)
your costs of bargaining and contracting with
this particular automaker?
3. What, if anything, increases (or decreases)
your costs with regard to monitoring DEMO auto-
maker’s performance, to ensure that the auto-
maker is living DEMO to the original agreement?
4. How do you resolve disputes with this auto-
maker? (i.e., if either you or the automaker
believe that the other party has not lived up
to the original agreement?) For example, what
if the automaker’s projected unit volume (on
which you base your unit price) does not
materialize?
APPE~lX
QUESTIONS
z:
FOR TABLES
4-6
Table 4
1 In your experience, what percent of the time
do you win business from one model to the
DEMO when a model change is made by
Chrysler (stated another way, in the past when
you have been awarded the contract from
Chrysler DEMO a specific model, what percentage
of the time do you re-win DEMO business when
a model change is made)?
percent of the DEMO a supplier
will m-win the business.
SUPPLIER
SURVEY
E@ective
Interfirm
Collaboration
555
2. In your experience, what percent of the time
does Chrysler rebid your business to other
suppliers during the life DEMO a model? (e.g.,
between one model change and the next)
percent of time automaker rebids
your business before model change.
3. DEMO Approximate total 1991 automotive sales?
b. Approximate percent of total automotive
sales to Chrysler?
4. Approximately how many different types of
production DEMO numbers (not including service
parts) do you currently supply to Chrysler?
production part numbers
Table 5
Information sharing
1. To what extent DEMO YOU trust that
confidential /momietarv information shared
with Chrysler ~ill be DEMO strictly confidential
by Chrysler’s buyers and engineers?
Not To Some Ve~ Great
at Extent Extent
All
1 23 4 5 6 7
2. DEMO what extent have You urovided recent
detailed cost data to Ch-&ler’ (e.g., a break-
down of your cost structure which estimates
exactly DEMO it will cost you to manufacture
a specific component)?
Not DEMO Some Very Great
at Extent Extent
All
1 2345 6 7
3. To what extent do you share information with
Chrysler on your long-term DEMO plans,
capital investments, and capacity utilization?
Not To Some DEMO Great
at Extent Extent
All
1 2345 6 7
4. To what extent has Chrysler provided techni-
cal, engineering, or other assistance in DEMO past
which has allowed you to make changes in
your manufacturing processes (e.g., plant lay-
out, new machines or technologies, value
analysis/DEMO engineering, etc. ) which have
allowed you to lower manufacturing costs?DEMO
Not
at
All
1
Very
Extent
Great-
5. To what
tance to help you reduce defects
the overall reliability and quality
ucts you sell DEMO Chrysler?
6
7
234s
extent
To Some
Extent
has Chrysler
provided
and increase
of the prod-
assis-
Not
at
All
1
2345
To DEMO
Extent
Very Great
Extent
6
7
6. To what extent has Chrysler provided assis-
tance in developing a ‘Just-In-Time’ invento~
management system designed to DEMO inven-
tory costs and/or make delivery more efficient.
Not
at
All
1
2345
To Some
Extent
Very Great
Extent
6
7
‘able
6
DEMO
safeguards
.-
1. To what extent do you trust Chrysler personnel
to deal with you fairly?
Not
at
All
1
2. If given DEMO chance,
customer take unfair
ness unit?
2345
To Some
Extent
Very Great
Extent
6
7
to what extent will this
advantage of DEMO busi-
Not
at
All
1
2345
To Some
Extent
Ve~
Extent
Great
6
‘7
3. To what extent has Chrysler developed
tation for fairness DEMO trustworthiness
the supplier community?
a repu-
among
556
J. H. Dyer
Not
at
All
1
4.
To Some
Extent
DEMO
a.
pany?
Does Chrysler own
Yes ——
No
Ve~
Extent
Great
6
7
any stock in your com-
.
(If yes)
b, What percent
Chrysler?
of your stock is owned by
Note: DEMO supplier was given a questionnaire which focused
on a particularautomaker(the examplequestionsaboveare from
the questionnaireto Chrysler suppliers).{1g42fwefx}