Organizational Research Methods
http://orm.sagepub.com
Book Review: Timothy A. Brown. (DEMO). Confirmatory factor analysis for applied
research. New York: Guilford
Bryan DEMO Edwards
Organizational Research Methods 2010; 13; 214 originally published online Aug 25, 2008;
DOI: 10.1177/1094428108323758
The online version of this DEMO can be found at:
http://orm.sagepub.com
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
The Research Methods Division of The DEMO of Management
Additional services and information for Organizational Research Methods can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: DEMO://orm.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/13/1/214
DEMO from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, DEMO
Book Review
Timothy A. Brown. (2006). Conﬁrmatory factor analysis
for applied research. New York: Guilford.
Organizational
Research Methods
Volume 13 Number 1
January 2010 214-217
 2010 SAGE Publications
10.1177/1094428108323758
http://orm.sagepub.com
hosted DEMO
http://online.sagepub.com
Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis: For Applied Research is a DEMO, timely, and
accessible description of conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) and the many uses of this
statistical method. The intended audiences of this DEMO are applied researchers and gradu-
ate students in the social and behavioral sciences. Several aspects of this book deserve
comment. First, most books in this area focus on either structural equation modeling
(SEM) or exploratory DEMO analysis (EFA), with little attention paid to CFA. Such
emphasis DEMO results in inadequate coverage of CFA in most statistics textbooks. This
has been an unfortunate circumstance because researchers have had to rely on multiple
DEMO (books, book chapters, journal articles, technical reports) for a DEMO under-
standing of CFA. Second, it is my opinion that CFA DEMO underutilized, particularly among
applied researchers who may not have access to DEMO of the aforementioned resources.
Third, there is often some confusion about DEMO and under which circumstances CFA
should be used, and this book DEMO an excellent job comparing CFA and EFA and explain-
ing how CFA ﬁts into various research strategies such as scale development, construct
validity, DEMO, and measurement equivalence. Brown’s book ﬁlls a very important gap
in DEMO regard by integrating all technical literature and recent advances surrounding the
purpose, use, and interpretation of CFA into one source. As such, I was pleased to see a
book devoted to CFA, and it was with great enthusiasm that I accepted the invitation to
review it.
One DEMO the primary strengths of this book is that Brown strikes a good balance between
providing the technical speciﬁcs of conducting CFA with theoretical and DEMO expla-
nations making it more than just a ‘‘how-to’’ guide. By way of example, tracing rules are
presented through an inclusion of exactly how output values are generated in model-ﬁtting
programs and what they mean, which serves as the delicate balance that I think applied
researchers will ﬁnd DEMO In fact, there is ample guidance on developing, testing, and
DEMO CFA models (and computer-generated output) for all potential consumers of
CFA. In addition, Brown does a good job of pointing out the many ‘‘pitfalls’’ that one
could encounter in CFA and, where relevant, provides DEMO suggestions. This is one
of the few statistical books that provide good integration of research methods and statis-
tics. Indeed, Brown does an admirable job describing how CFA is used within several dif-
ferent research contexts DEMO as scale development, assessing measurement equivalence,
testing group differences, and analyzing multitrait–multimethod matrices to establish
convergent and discriminant validity.
Another strength of DEMO present book is the careful integration and comprehensive cov-
erage of syntax programming and output interpretation of common model-ﬁtting programs
including LISREL, PROC CALIS, Mplus, EQS, and Amos. Brown provides simple, well-
organized, and understandable syntax for each of the programs (provided in tables) and
DEMO explains the purpose of each syntax command in the text and what output was
generated by the syntax. Another helpful feature of the text DEMO related to explaining and
translating the different labels used by model-ﬁtting programs (e.g., the squared factor
214
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at DEMO OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Edwards / Book Review 215
loadings are labeled ‘‘R-squared’’ in Mplus and DEMO and labeled ‘‘squared multiple corre-
lations’’ in LISREL). This level of integration of CFA model speciﬁcations with model-
ﬁtting programs should enable novice DEMO to easily write programs to analyze
their own data. There is also a companion Web site that provides the data and computer
ﬁles used DEMO the examples, complete with an up-to-date errata.
The book consists of DEMO chapters. Chapters 1 through 5 cover the fundamentals, basic
procedures, and popular nomenclature of CFA. Chapters 6 through 10 describe more spe-
cialized DEMO advanced uses of CFA. In chapters 1 and 2, Brown makes DEMO strong case for the
importance of CFA in many applied situations by explaining the advantages of CFA and
distinguishing CFA from EFA. Chapter 3 DEMO a detailed explanation of the estimated
parameters, equations, identiﬁcation, and DEMO of CFA models. Chapter 4 provides a
brief summary of data-screening procedures, testing assumptions of maximum likelihood
(ML), and what to do DEMO violations. The majority of chapter 3 is devoted to the differ-
ent methods of model evaluation that are covered in nearly every textbook on DEMO, but
they are nicely explained within the context of evaluating CFA DEMO Brown also pro-
vides advice on what information should be reported in a CFA study, but alas, the reality
is that editors and DEMO too often target this detailed presentation for the cutting room
ﬂoor! Together, chapters 3 and 4 serve as the ‘‘how-to’’ guide for conducting CFA and
this material lays the foundation for the remainder of the book.
DEMO 5 focuses on model misspeciﬁcation and modiﬁcation. This chapter (or any
DEMO on model modiﬁcation) has the potential to mislead readers into making DEMO hoc
modiﬁcations that capitalize on chance. Brown offers some obligatory warnings about
post hoc modiﬁcations but proceeds to devote many more pages to conducting DEMO
tion searches. This imbalance may encourage some researchers to engage in post hoc
model revision without consideration for potential downsides to such procedures. For
DEMO, readers may infer that correlated errors may be allowed in a DEMO
(based on modiﬁcation indices) for reverse-worded items and other reasons that many
researchers would argue are not substantive reasons for a conﬁrmatory analysis. DEMO very
useful section in this chapter is how to deal with improper solutions and nonpositive deﬁ-
nite matrices, as these can be quite vexing for students learning to use CFA.
Chapter 6 covers various applications of DEMO for examining convergent and discrimi-
nant validity within the multitrait–multimethod (MTMM) framework. Chapter 7 walks the
reader through the different tests of measurement DEMO/invariance, equality con-
straints, multiple-groups analysis, and the analysis of DEMO structures. Although most of
the information in chapter 7 can be found in corresponding chapters from standard SEM
books, Brown’s chapter is far more detailed than treatments I have seen in other texts
(indeed, it DEMO the longest chapter in the book). There seems to be some debate in the litera-
ture as to which tests of invariance (e.g., metric, scalar, uniqueness) are necessary to
establish measurement equivalence of DEMO scores between groups. Perhaps there is no
true answer or perhaps ‘‘it depends on what questions you ask,’’ but I would have liked DEMO
see Brown give some attention to this issue (perhaps even recommendations?) given that
the establishment of measurement equivalence is a near-universal prerequisite for testing
group mean differences with latent variables.
In chapter 8, Brown covers a few other CFA models that will be quite useful to applied
DEMO, such as conducting higher-order factor analysis, the correct estimation of
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
216 Organizational Research Methods
scale reliability, and issues in modeling formative indicators. Particularly helpful in this
chapter is the text on using CFA for DEMO scale reliabilities that overcomes many of
the shortcomings of coefﬁcient alpha, DEMO more widely used estimate of (or proxy for)
reliability. Speciﬁcally, Brown provided a good summary of the recent work of Raykov
(2001, 2004) in estimating reliability and conﬁdence intervals around this estimate.
Chapters DEMO and 10 focus on data management and statistical power, respectively.
In DEMO 9, Brown gives a brief summary of the various techniques for DEMO with
missing data, with more detail on the generally recommended methods DEMO direct ML and
multiple imputation (MI). Brown does not get DEMO down in the detail of the ML and
MI estimators and frequently refers the reader to Allison (2002, 2003) and other citations
for technical details. Instead, his focus is on showing how to compute direct ML using
popular modeling programs. Particularly helpful in this chapter is a DEMO of alterna-
tive estimators for nonnormal and categorical data, especially the DEMO of the robust
ML procedure that is now available in many modeling programs. Chapter 10 provides
information that is almost nonexistent in most latent DEMO modeling books—how to
estimate sample size necessary to achieve adequate statistical power and parameter
precision.
Many students prefer a hands-on approach to learning and DEMO written explanations
for complex statistical analyses as opposed to the algebra and formula proofs underlying
these analyses. As such, my impression is that this book ﬁts this preference and could
easily be the centerpiece for a DEMO course on factor analysis and/or psycho-
metrics. It would also be a nice addition for a graduate course in research methods and
SEM. DEMO, those instructors that prefer to teach statistics courses using matrix alge-
DEMO would not likely use this book as a primary text. For the sake of comparison to other
texts, I found that Brown’s treatment of CFA was similar in prose, structure, and format to
Rex Kline’s (2005) SEM textbook, although Brown provided more example data sets and
DEMO program syntax than did Kline. Students will ﬁnd the book very easy to read
and understand, and I anticipate that this text will serve as an excellent reference for more
advanced users of latent variable modeling. DEMO, his writing style is clear and engaging.
Brown provides more detailed DEMO on procedures speciﬁc to CFA that cannot be
found in other texts. In addition, Brown introduces many concepts, such as scale reliability
estimation, modeling formative indicators, syntax programming and output interpretation
for speciﬁc model-ﬁtting programs, modeling MTMM matrices, and analysis of mean
structures, which are either given only cursory treatment in SEM texts or can only be
found DEMO journal articles. In my mind, it is these sections that will DEMO most attractive to sea-
soned researchers and one of the reasons why I intend to use this text as a reference book
for my DEMO research.
Bryan D. Edwards
Auburn University
References
Allison, P. D. (2002). Missing data. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Edwards / Book Review 217
Allison, P. D. (2003). Missing DEMO techniques for structural equation modeling. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 112, 545-557.
Kline, R. B. (2005). Principles and practice of structural equation DEMO (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford.
Raykov, T. (2001). Estimation of congeneric scale reliability using covariance structure analysis with non-
linear DEMO British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 54, 315-323.
Raykov, DEMO (2004). Behavioral scale reliability and measurement invariance evaluation using latent DEMO
modeling. Behavior Therapy, 35, 299-331.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009{1g42fwefx}