Psychological Bulletin
1970, Vol. 73, No. 3, 221-230
THE USE OF NONLINEAR, NONCOMPENSATORY
MODELS IN DECISION MAKING1
HILLEL J. EINHORN "
Wayne DEMO University
An important problem in decision making concerns finding the utility of a
multidimensional stimulus. This has traditionally been done by assuming that
total DEMO is a linear function of the attributes of the stimulus. In clinical
decision making, the linear regression model has been used to predict and
diagnose on the basis of multidimensional information as well as to ap-
DEMO the clinician's own judgment. Other nonlinear, noncompensatory
models are available DEMO combining information. These models, called con-
junctive and disjunctive, are approximated here by suitable nonlinear func-
tions of utility. They are then shown DEMO give a better fit to certain decision
data than the linear model. The factors affecting the use of these models and
their implications are DEMO
One of the main problems in decision mak-
ing has been the attempt to understand how
individuals assess the utility of each of a DEMO
of stimulus objects when each stimulus can be
evaluated in terms of a set of multidimensional
attributes. Subjectively, this becomes a prob-
lem of weighting the various attributes mak-
ing up the stimuli and then combining DEMO
in some way to arrive at an overall value for
the stimulus. Typically, it has been assumed
that the utility of an object is a linear com-
bination of the utilities of the various at-
tributes DEMO up that object. As Edwards
and Tversky (1967) have pointed out,
One idea so completely dominates the literature on
riskless choice that DEMO has no competitors. It is the
additive composition notion. It asserts that the
utility of a multidimensional alternative, such as a
commodity bundle or a job offer, equals the sum of
the utilities of its components. The essence of this
model is that the various components of a DEMO
dimensional object contribute independently to its
overall worth or utility. This notion is closely re-
1 This paper is based on the first two DEMO of
the author's dissertation, submitted in partial ful-
fillment of DEMO requirements for the doctoral degree
at Wayne State University. The author would like to
thank his dissertation chairman and adviser, Dr.
Alan R. Bass for his continual help and assistance.
The help of the other committee DEMO, Drs. Joel
Ager, Roger Simon, and Samuel Komorita is also
DEMO acknowledged.
2 Now at the University of Chicago, Graduate
School of DEMO
Requests for reprints should be addressed to Hillel
J. Einhorn, University DEMO Chicago, Graduate School
of Business, Chicago Illinois 60637.
lated to the lack of interaction in the analysis of
variance [p. 2551.
In an DEMO review of the literature on
individual choice behavior in selecting among
multidimensional stimulus objects, Shepard
(1964) has said that although psychologists
have tried various methods of combining the
attributes of multidimensional stimuli, experi-
mental results are usually averaged over
judges and/or trials. When averaging over
judges, it becomes necessary to take into ac-
count the cognitive activity that DEMO into the
judge's decision process. It is to be expected
that individual differences will play a large
part in any decision problem. By DEMO
over judges, one may be losing these important
individual data. If DEMO does not average over
judges, but instead considers each judge in-
DEMO, then one is faced with considerable
variability of the decision process DEMO a lack
of generality in terms of the kinds of methods
judges use to arrive at their decisions. How-
ever, one need not be concerned with these
problems if the judge can be made to perform
DEMO decision many times, over somewhat com-
parable decision cases. Churchman (1961)
has argued that the values of the decision
maker can be DEMO from his decisions over
a sufficiently large number of circumstances.
It is certainly an empirical question as to
whether different judges use different meth-
DEMO to arrive at their decisions.
In dealing with decision problems, the
DEMO regression model has usually been used
221
222
to predict actual decisions from component
cues. This model is additive DEMO extremely
powerful. As Yntema and Torgerson (1961)
have shown, the linear model provides an ex-
cellent approximation to data even when
there DEMO interactions or nonlinear relation-
ships in the data. In analysis of variance
terms, this means that the amount of varia-
tion that the interactions account for are rela-
tively small as compared to the main effects.
DEMO linear model (or some variant) has
been used in many areas of psychology in-
volving judgmental process. Anderson (1968),
for example, has summarized much of the
work he has done on the integration DEMO in-
formation in impression and attitude forma-
tion. He has postulated an "averaging model"
of information combination which is a variant
of the general linear model. Anderson's work
has shown that his model is DEMO for
representing the judgmental process involved
in impression and attitude formation. How-
ever, like other researchers in this area, he
feels that a DEMO model is somehow unrepre-
sentative of how the cognitive process works.
For example, he states,
The model always fits the data quite well, but there
are almost always small, significant discrepancies. In-
spection of DEMO data has failed to reveal the origin of
the discrepancies; they DEMO reflect some fundamental
error in the model, or they may result DEMO remain-
ing shortcomings in the experimental technique [p.
736],
In addition, he has said that when stimuli are
heterogeneous and contain different kinds of
information, the simple model may not be
adequate to handle the data.
In the clinical judgment area, many re-
searchers have been concerned with the use
of interactions by the clinician in arriving at
his DEMO It has been claimed that the
clinician is superior to the actuary because he
can take into account complex interactions
and patterns which the DEMO cannot do. It
is, of course, not true that actuarial methods
cannot handle complexities in the data. How-
ever, Yntema and Torgerson (DEMO) have sug-
gested that when there are many variables to
process, the human information processor may
have to simplify the situation in order DEMO
deal with it. They suggest that one way of
doing this may be to ignore interactions and
HILLEL J. EINHORN
focus only on main DEMO This is certainly
not consistent with the claims of the clini-
cian's ability to handle complex relationships.
Meehl (1954, 1956), has DEMO that the
clinician's claims are without foundation. In
comparing studies using both clinical and
actuarial prediction methods, the actuarial
was clearly superior. A recent study by Sawyer
(1966) confirms the earlier findings of Meehl.
DEMO addition, it has been found by numerous
investigators (e.g., Hoffman, 1960; Hoffman,
Slovic, & Rorer, 1968), that the clinician's
own judgment can be approximated very well
by using a linear DEMO model such
as multiple regression. By asking the clinician
to make a series of judgments over a wide
number of similar stimuli, one can correlate
his judgments of the stimuli with the various
attributes of the DEMO stimuli. In
research of this type, interactions among the
attributes have DEMO found to account for
little of the variance of clinical judgments,
thereby seriously questioning the assertion
that the clinician is using complex patterns DEMO
interactions in his judgmental process. How-
ever, as Hoffman (1960) DEMO pointed out, the
fitting of any mathematical model to cogni-
tive DEMO is at best a "paramorphic"
process. That is, even if a model is highly ac-
curate in describing the judgmental process, it
does not necessarily mean that the process
has actually worked in exactly DEMO way the
model has specified. Different models may be
equally powerful with respect to describing
the process. It therefore seems that accurately
describing the DEMO is at least necessary
although not sufficient for describing the un-
derlying cognitive processes.
The problem of nonlinearity and the clini-
cal inferential process DEMO been extensively
investigated by Hammond and his associates
(Hammond, 1955; DEMO, Hursch, &
Todd, 1964; Hammond & Summers, 1965;
Hursch, Hammond, & Hursch, 1964). Using
Brunswik's (1952) lens model as the theoreti-
cal model for their research, they have in-
vestigated the use of nonlinearity from both
sides of the lens, that is, from the point of
view of ecological validity as well as the
utilization of cues. In dealing with this prob-
lem, they have defined an index C which is
the correlation between the variance DEMO
MODELS IN DECISION MAKING
223
counted for by multiple correlation in the
DEMO and the variance unaccounted for by
the multiple correlation in the subjects' re-
sponse system. This index can take on values
between +1.00 and —1.00. However, this in-
dex is a general measure of nonlinearity and
does not specify exactly what the particular
nonlinear function is that is DEMO used. In ad-
dition, problems in interpretation can arise
if C DEMO 0.00. This results because C = 0.00
can occur for a variety of reasons such as the
nonlinearity used by the subject in combin-
DEMO cues does not match the nonlinearity in-
volved in the ecological validity between distal
stimulus and cues at the lens; or, the variance
DEMO is left after one takes out the linear ef-
fect (as DEMO by the multiple correlation),
is random error variance and not DEMO
due to nonlinearity. There is no way of know-
ing which interpretation is correct.
In a study by Hammond and Summers
(1965), the authors concluded that most of
the previous research shows the linear model
DEMO provide a sufficiently good fit so as to sug-
gest that judges combine cues in a linear
fashion. They also show that the use DEMO a
linear model occurs even when there are sig-
nificant nonlinear relationships in the eco-
logical part of the lens (however, subjects do
DEMO nonlinear relationships if they are given
information about their being in the task).
In looking for nonlinear methods for com-
bining cues, the comparison of the linear
model with specific nonlinear models is not-
ably DEMO from the literature. One such ex-
periment was carried out by Wiggins and
Hoffman (1968). They compared two non-
linear models with the linear model in a task
involving the diagnosis of "neurotic" versus
"psychotic" on the basis of 11 scales from
the MMPI. The two nonlinear models were
the "quadratic" model, which consisted of
squares and products of the original set of
predictors added to the original set, and a
"sign" model which consisted of signs that
were rationally DEMO, on the basis of expert
judgment from clinicians, to be related to
the criterion. This latter model could consist
of both simple and DEMO terms. The re-
sults for this experiment showed that some
judges were using configural methods of com-
bination. However, as the authors point out,
the magnitude of the differences between the
fit for the linear DEMO configural models was
not large. In addition, even the most con-
DEMO judges could be fairly well estimated
by a linear model.
OTHER COMBINATION MODELS
Although the linear compensatory model
has been used almost exclusively in DEMO
with judgmental processes, it is not the only
combination model available. DEMO and Kao
(1955), Coombs (1964), and Dawes (1964a,DEMO
1964b) have specified additional models for
combining or using data. Three DEMO these have
been called the conjunctive, disjunctive, and
lexicographic models. In dealing with these
models, Dawes (1964b) has called the func-
tion resulting from attaching of utility or
worth to a multiattribute stimulus an DEMO
tion function. A person can be thought of as a
multiattribute vector with the components
being the separate attributes, that is, X =
(Xi,X2, . . . ,Xn).
Given this formulation, the conjunctive
model says that whether an individual sur-
passes some stimulus or DEMO F = (y-i, y%,
. . . , yn) DEMO depend on xt being greater than
ji for all *'. Dawes has called this a minimum
evaluation function since the individual is
evaluated DEMO his minimum ability. The im-
plication of the conjunctive model is that a
person must have a certain minimum ability
on all the attributes. DEMO implies a multiple
cutoff procedure rather than a linear com-
pensatory procedure.
The disjunctive model is called the maxi-
mum evaluation function since the DEMO is
judged on his best ability regardless of his
other attributes. If E(X) is the evaluation
function of X and E(F ) is the evaluation
function of some standard F, then E(X) >
E(F) if one xt > yt regardless of yj> DEMO
where i ^= j. In selecting players for a football
team, DEMO example, we might want someone
who can kick or run or DEMO with a great deal
of skill. Each person is selected on his best
ability regardless of his other attributes.
The third model is the DEMO In
this model, the attributes are first ordered in
importance and DEMO decision is made on the
basis of the most important variable before
proceeding to the next ordered variable. One
224
HILLEL J. E1NHORN
only uses the next ordered variable if there DEMO
equivalence on the preceding ordered vari-
able. The lexicographic model has not been
dealt with mathematically as Debreu (1954)
has stated that this model cannot be given
explicit mathematical representation. For this
reason, it will not be dealt with here.
Dawes has defined the conjunctive, dis-
junctive, and compensatory models in terms
of a one-parameter function by assuming a
general evaluation function.
Formulation of the Model
When r = 1 the DEMO becomes compensa-
tory. When r approaches + oo Dawes has
shown that V(X) becomes a maximum func-
tion and therefore the disjunctive model. When
r approaches — oo the function becomes a
minimum function and DEMO the conjunctive
model. For r greater than or equal to 1 the
function is the Minkowski distance from the
origin of a coordinate vector DEMO to the
point X.
Dawes' formulation assumes that the vari-
ous DEMO of the vector X can be evaluated in
comparable scale units so that one can say
which of a number of attributes is either DEMO
maximum or minimum. In addition, it is as-
sumed that the DEMO function is objec-
tive although it is to be expected that differ-
ent judges may evaluate the same stimulus
object differently. Judges may also DEMO expected
to weight the xt's differentially. The value
of Dawes' DEMO is to provide a general
framework for the various models although
the specific functions needed to represent
each of the models has yet to DEMO worked out.
A study was done in which four judges
were given a list of hypothetical applicants
for graduate school. The only information
each DEMO the judges had was the percentile
score of the applicant on the three parts of
the Graduate Record Examination (GRE).
These subscales involve verbal aptitude, quan-
titative aptitude, and knowledge of psychol-
ogy. There DEMO a total of 20 hypothetical ap-
plicants. Each of the judges was asked to
rank order the applicants according to their
acceptability into the DEMO program. Once
this was done, the judgments were used as
the DEMO and a multiple regression pro-
cedure was used with the three scores on the
GRE as the predictors and the rankings as
the criterion. DEMO actual scores used for the
hypothetical candidates were not chosen at
random but were selected by the experimenter
beforehand. The reason for this will DEMO dis-
cussed later.
After the multiple correlation was obtained,
the regression weights were applied to a new
sample of 20 hypothetical applicants in DEMO
to get a predicted rank ordering for the
judge. The judge was then asked to rank
order the new sample of applicants and his
DEMO ranking was correlated with the pre-
dicted ranking by means of the Spearman
rank-order correlation coefficient. The actual
rankings on the second sample were DEMO used
as the criterion for the predictions made from
the conjunctive and disjunctive models. The
predicted rankings using these other models
were also correlated DEMO the actual rankings
and the resulting correlations were compared.
The method will be illustrated shortly.
The problem of finding suitable functions
to approximate the DEMO and conjunc-
tive models is now considered. According to
Edwards (1954), one of the most important
assumptions in the theory of choice is that
choices are made to maximize something. The
maximization is usually thought DEMO in terms
of utility. Using only two of the variables
(quantitative DEMO verbal aptitude), it was
decided to hypothesize different response sur-
faces to approximate these models. These sur-
faces are in a three-dimensional space DEMO
the two horizontal axes representing the
OBJECTIVES
The present paper has as its objectives
(a) the formulation of a theoretical model
based on DEMO assumptions to approximate
both the conjunctive and disjunctive models,
and (DEMO) the comparison of these models with
the linear model in a DEMO task to see
which provides for a better fit of the data.
Tn addition, factors which affect decision mak-
ing will be discussed after the presentation of
the models and data.
MODELS IN DECISION MAKING
225
scores on each of the variables and DEMO third
vertical axis representing the utility of the
scores, both separately DEMO in combination,
for the particular judge.
For the disjunctive model it was hypothe-
sized that a hyperbolic response surface would
approximate this model. DEMO reasons for this
are as follows: On each of the variables, for
some judges, the scores at the low end of the
scale would make relatively little difference in
utility for selection. In other words, the differ-
ence between scores at the 10, 20, 30, 40, and
SO percentile points are not very large. The
judge does not discriminate between scores at
that level. On the other hand, differences be-
tween scores at the high end of the scale were
hypothesized to DEMO greater differences in
utility for the judge. Mathematically, the
slope of DEMO function relating to utility had to
be monotonically increasing. A hyperbolic
function fits this description and also has the
property of a rapid increase DEMO slope as one
approaches the asymptote that make it ideal
for the disjunctive case. The general formula
used for the surface is,
tf= (!/«,- X). (I/a,-7) [2]
where U DEMO utility or height of the response
surface, X, Y = variables, 0« = some value
above the asymptotic level, that is, at > Xmax
and Ymax.
Figure 1 represents the hyperbolic surface
geometrically.
The DEMO a is arbitrarily set above the
highest X and Y score so that U will not be
infinite. For any score XtYj there is DEMO co-
ordinate point in plane XYO. The function
gives the height on the utility axis at any
point. For values of X and Y DEMO result in
point P, for example, the predicted utility
score is at point Q. The actual value is not
important since a rank DEMO on the U axis
for any pair of values of X and Y is wanted.
In this formulation of the function it is as-
DEMO that the variables have been weighted
equally. By introducing two parameters into
the equation it is possible to weight the
variables differentially.
U = (l/al-Xr-(l/ai-Y)' [3]
The parameters b and c represent DEMO
FIG. 1. Hyperbolic response surface.
factors for the two variables. Values for them
can be obtained by using a log transforma-
tion and finding DEMO for b and c that satisfy
the least-squares criterion. This can be done
by using a multiple regression procedure on
the transformed variables. This DEMO has
been used by Komorita (1964). The function
then becomes,DEMO
log U = - b log (ai - X)
- DEMO log (a, - Y) [4]
How does this surface approximate DEMO dis-
junctive model? If one looks at point // in
the coordinate plane XYO, one finds that the
utility of the score that corresponds to that
point is high even though that person has a
DEMO low score on the Y variable. This is be-
cause his high score on the X variable places
him on the back edge of DEMO surface which has
a large height and therefore a high utility on
the U axis. In other words, a person will have
a high utility if he has either outstanding
ability on X or Y. This DEMO then a case of
disjunctive selection. A decision maker, using
this DEMO, will tend to rank highly not only
those who are high DEMO both attributes, but
also those who are extremely high on only DEMO
of the attributes.
Data will be presented to show how judges
actually used the disjunctive rather than the
compensatory model in making their decisions.
DEMO Judge 1, the multiple correlation between
226
HILLEL J. EINHORN
his rankings on the first sample and the DEMO
predictors was .84. Using the regression
weights obtained on this sample, DEMO predicted
ranking was obtained for the second sample.
From examination of the regression weights it
looked as if this judge was weighting quantita-
tive DEMO about twice as heavily as the
verbal scores while there was little weight
attached to the psychology achievement score.
Using Equation 4 for the DEMO formula-
tion, a multiple correlation of .92 was ob-
tained for DEMO log transformed variables. The
values for the parameters showed that the
quantitative scores were being weighted twice
as heavily as the verbal scores. The DEMO
sample was administered and the predicted
rank ordering from the linear model was
compared to the actual ranking. The correla-
tion was .60 thereby DEMO, not unex-
pectedly, from the original .84. The pre-
dicted rank ordering using the hyperbolic
function correlated .92 with the actual rank
order DEMO the new sample, thus showing no
shrinkage. The difference between these DEMO
relations for the two models is significant at
beyond the .01 level.
Some of the glaring errors in prediction
made by the linear model DEMO picked up by
the disjunctive model. For example, the pre-
dicted DEMO for one of the hypothetical ap-
plicants with scores of 100 verbal, SO quantita-
tive, and 10 psychology was 15. This is not
DEMO since the weights of the first sam-
FIG. 2. Parabolic response surface.
ple showed that the quantitative scores were
being weighted about twice as DEMO as the
verbal scores. However, the actual ranking of
this person DEMO 2. The disjunctive model pre-
dicted a rank of S for this person since his
high score on verbal placed him on the edge
DEMO the response surface where the utility is
high regardless of the other score.
The second judge using the disjunctive
model was the author. His DEMO are, of course,
not admissible but illustrate the method. The
DEMO knowingly used a disjunctive model
weighting the variables of verbal and quan-
titative aptitude equally while ignoring the
psychology achievement scores. Using a value
DEMO a= 110, the correlation of the predicted
and actual rankings on DEMO cross-validated
sample using the linear model was .22 while
the correlation between the predicted and ac-
tual rankings using the disjunctive formula-
tion was DEMO This is again a highly significant
difference.
After finding a function to approximate the
disjunctive model, the next problem was to
approximate the conjunctive model. The for-
mulation used here was,
U= (A')-(DEMO )
[5]
Again, it is possible to add exponents to the
variables in order to get differential weights
so that the formulation becomes,DEMO
or
U=(Xr-(Y)» [6]
log U = a log X + b log Y [7]
Figure 2 represents the conjunctive model
geometrically DEMO a parabolic response surface.
Here we have a parabolic response surface
with scores Xt ~ Yt having the larger utility
than scores where there DEMO wide discrep-
ancies between X and Y. The height of the
surface is greatest along the line from the
origin to point L at DEMO top of the surface.
For example, point P in the horizontal DEMO
has a utility at point Q on the U axis. This
utility is smaller than that for point H which
has a utility at DEMO O on the U axis. This
is because the coordinates of point P consist
of one large value of X but a small value DEMO
Y. On the other hand, point H has a mod-
erate DEMO for both variables. In this case
MODELS IN DECISION MAKING
227
one cannot have a high utility if DEMO is
lack of one ability. One cannot compensate
for this lack by high scores on the other
variable since the product of the two DEMO
is considered important.
This model seems to describe Judge 3.
Exactly the same procedure as was used in
the disjunctive case was used here, substitut-
ing the conjunctive formulation for the dis-
junctive to get the DEMO rankings. The
predicted rankings were compared with the
actual rankings and the results showed a cor-
relation of .82 for the linear regression model
DEMO the new sample and a correlation of .94
for the conjunctive procedure. This difference
is significant at less than the .01 level due
to DEMO high intercorrelation between the pre-
dicted rankings for the compensatory and
conjunctive models.
The data for Judge 4 raise some important
points. Using the DEMO model on the first
sample, a multiple correlation of .87 was DEMO
tained. This is in contrast to the multiple
correlation of .70 using the conjunctive for-
mulation. However, on the cross-validation
sample, the predicted DEMO and the actual
rankings for the linear model correlated .73
while for the conjunctive model the rank cor-
relation was .70. This difference is DEMO sig-
nificant. What can one conclude about the
model Judge 4 was using? Since the cor-
relations on the cross-validation sample are
fairly low for both models it might be said
that neither model fits the DEMO very well.
A low correlation brings up an interesting
question of how to interpret the unexplained
variance of the judgments. As in the case DEMO
Hammond and his associates, two possible ex-
planations are available. One DEMO treat the
unexplained variance as error resulting from
the judge making intransitive judgments, or
in changing strategies during the task, or
responding randomly DEMO the stimuli. On the
other hand, one can view the unexplained
DEMO as being due to nonlinearity other
than the kinds we have proposed. Work by
Einhorn (1969), for example, has found that
judges DEMO use complex strategies that involve
combinations of models. These strategies in-
troduce a degree of nonlinearity not ac-
counted for by the simple models DEMO
here. In order to deal effectively with these
complex strategies, more DEMO equations
will be needed.
The formulation developed here for the
two-variable case can be extended to the N
variable case. For the conjunctive model,DEMO
For the disjunctive model the extension is,
= n (I/DEMO - *<)"
AT
i~Xl) [9]
1-
1
The method DEMO testing for the significance
of the difference between correlated corre-
lations is found in Hotelling (1940). This
procedure is used to test whether one varia-
ble correlates higher with a criterion than
another. In this DEMO, the actual rankings are
the criterion and the different variables are
DEMO predicted rankings obtained from the dif-
ferent models. The t test offered by Hotelling
was used here as an approximation since the
author knows DEMO no statistical tests that deal
with the difference between correlated rank-
order correlations.
Factors Affecting Decision Making
A number of issues are raised by DEMO re-
sults. Perhaps the most important point con-
cerns the large individual differences in the
processes by which individuals make deci-
sions. Of the DEMO judges used in this study
(the author is not included), DEMO of the
judges used a different model to make his
decisions. If the data had somehow been
combined, the individual differences between
judges might have been lost. It might even
be that grouped data would show DEMO linear
compensatory model while the individual data
do not. This is a problem for further study.
A second factor to consider is the distribu-
DEMO function of the actual numerical data.
An example of this is the range of scores in-
cluded in the hypothetical cases presented to
the DEMO Figure 3 illustrates this point for
both the data in this study and for grouped
learning data.
228
HILLEL J. EINHORN
X O P TIME O
FIG. 3. Functions DEMO truncated range.
In the first figure, if the range of X DEMO
were restricted to those below point 0, one
could not very DEMO decide against a linear
fit since the range does not permit the whole
function to be used. Exactly the same thing
happens if we DEMO the typical learning
curve over time. Unless one allows enough
time for the curve to reach its asymptotic
value one might wrongly conclude that DEMO
ing is a linear function of time (practice).
Another example DEMO the importance of con-
sidering the actual range of data can be seen
in Figure 4 which compares decisions made
on the basis of DEMO multiple cutoff procedure
with those made on the basis of a linear re-
gression procedure.
The areas that are shaded are those in
which DEMO is a difference between the models
in terms of the decisions made. These areas
involve extreme cases, but only by including
such cases can one distinguish between the
use of the models. The data used in DEMO study
were in no way a random sample of scores
drawn from all possible combinations of X
FIG. 4. Comparison of conjunctive and compensatory
DEMO
and Y. These scores were picked so that there
would be those cases which would show a
difference in the use of the models DEMO such
a difference existed. This point is extremely
important since it indicates that judges may
actually be responding to patterns of scores,
for DEMO, although the linear model might
still provide a good fit. Both DEMO are
"paramorphic" in Hoffman's sense of the term
and perhaps equally powerful in most prac-
tical situations. This may be caused by DEMO
truncated range of the data in most studies.
Another important issue concerns the
method used to evaluate the stimulus objects.
In this study, the method of rank order was
used while many of the studies reviewed DEMO
used ratings as the dependent variable. There
may be large differences in the cognitive use
of these different methods. Ranking involves
the comparison of DEMO stimulus object with
every other while rating does not necessarily
imply a comparison procedure. When the
number of stimulus objects is large, ranking
becomes a difficult task while rating the ob-
jects may not be as DEMO by the number
of stimuli. If there are differences between
the two methods, these differences may affect
the use of the particular model used in evalu-
ating the stimuli. It should also be mentioned
that the DEMO of ranking is more clearly
related to theories of choice than rating
methods. Given n ranked stimuli, one can al-
ways specify any proportion of stimuli in
terms of a particular criteria (such as accept-
reject; choose-not choose). For example, with
20 objects, if we were to select the best 2
from the 20, these 2 should have the rank
of one and two, respectively. For any given
proportion that we want to choose or select,
we can use the ranking DEMO obtain the propor-
tion desired.
A fourth consideration is the nature of the
scale of the data. In this study the data are
continuous DEMO in many of the studies in-
volving clinical judgment the data are cate-
gorical. It is possible that categorical data
are treated differently, in a cognitive sense,
from continuous data although this would be
difficult DEMO show.
A fifth factor involves the dimensions of
the task that is being used as the decision
problem. The use of any of these DEMO
MODELS IN DECISION MAKING
229
cannot be predicted independently of the kind
DEMO problem that is being used. Some decision
problems may be more likely to produce a
certain kind of solution than another. The
fact that DEMO clinical inference literature has
shown the linear model to provide a good
fit to obtained data may be due, in part, to
the DEMO of task used. Einhorn (1969), for
example, in using a graduate-student selec-
tion and a job-preference task found large
differences in the DEMO use of the various
models. The latter task produced a great
amount of conjunctive-model use while the
graduate-selection task showed much less use
of DEMO model. Such factors as the personal in-
volvement of the decision maker, his motiva-
tion, and interest in the task, may all affect
the kind of strategy one might employ.
The number of variables the DEMO maker
has to deal with undoubtedly affects the kind
of strategy he employs. Sequential strategies
and complex models may be needed to deal
with DEMO of many variables. Yntema and
Torgerson (1961) see the introduction of
many variables as a handicap for the human
information processor. The simplification DEMO
data is seen to be the way of handling com-
plex data with the ignoring of interactions as
one method of simplification. In most DEMO the
studies dealing with clinical inference proc-
esses, many variables have DEMO included in
the task. It therefore seems that if interac-
tions are being investigated the task should
be sufficiently simple to allow the decision
DEMO a chance to find them.
A seventh factor that affects the weighting
of the variables (although it is not known
if it affects the use of the different models)
is the correlation among the variables DEMO at-
tributes. Dudycha and Naylor (1966) have
shown that the correlation matrix affects the
way in which judges weight the different vari-
ables. DEMO conclusions are
If one is interested in obtaining information about
the judgmental policies of individuals toward a cer-
tain class of stimulus objects he DEMO to be certain
that the underlying cue R matrix for his experi-
mental stimuli is representative of the R matrix
describing the population of DEMO of which the
sample is assumed to be a subset. Otherwise, DEMO
ability to generalize is obviously going to be limited
[p. 602].
Further complicating the findings of Du-
dycha and Naylor is a study by DEMO
(1967). He showed that subjects find it very
difficult not DEMO associate certain cues with
other cues when they expect the cues to be
correlated. This occurs even when the cues
are presented in such DEMO manner where there
is no objective correlation between them.
Chapman termed this phenomenon "illusory
correlation" since subjects "saw" relationships
where objectively there DEMO none. This
finding has serious implications for learning
of clinical inferences since it may sometimes
be necessary to unlearn preconceived corre-
lations between certain DEMO and start over
again. Generally, it would seem that "illusory
correlation" can be a powerful factor espe-
cially with regard to decision makers who
have some experience in dealing with a par-
ticular problem.
The DEMO in which the decision is made
is another factor that can influence the de-
cision process. Webster (1964) has shown
that in the DEMO situation, interviewers
will look for negative information on which
to disqualify DEMO candidate. It seems as if they
were using a conjunctive model since selec-
tion is based on the applicant's minimum
ability. It is DEMO to see the reason for this
when the situation is analyzed. The inter-
viewers receive all of the blame when they
make a mistake, that is, recommend some-
one who turns out badly, while they DEMO
no reward for making the correct decision.
Since the cost of a false positive is so high,
it seems that the rational approach DEMO them
to take is to use a conjunctive model in se-
lection.
CONCLUSION
There are many factors that affect decision-
making. A few of DEMO factors have been
enumerated here. Probably the most impor-
tant point in dealing with judgmental data
is the large individual differences by which
decisions DEMO made. If one can build a model
of individual behavior and at the same time
provide a theoretical classification of differ-
ent "types," then one can combine an idio-
graphic and nomothetic approach. The very
DEMO idea has been suggested by Brunswik
(1952). The theoretical utility DEMO devel-
230
HILLEL J. EINHORN
oped here to approximate the conjunctive and
disjunctive DEMO provides for part of the
a priori classification scheme necessary to go
from a purely ipsative model of behavior to
some more general scheme.
DEMO the wide variety of individual dif-
ferences as well as the large number of fac-
tors influencing the judgmental process, it
would seem unlikely that the models proposed
here (as well as the linear model) DEMO prove
adequate for representing the full complexity
of the judgmental process. The questions to
be asked in future research should concern
the conditions, whether within the individual
or in the task, under which these models, DEMO
more complex variations of them, will apply.
REFERENCES
ANDERSON, N. H. A simple model for information
integration. In R. P. Abelson, E. Aronson, W.
McGuire, T. Newcomb, M. J. Rosenberg, & P.
Tannenbaum (Eds.), Cognitive consistency: A
sourcebook. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1968.
BRUNSWIK, E. The conceptual framework of psy-
chology. Chicago: University of Chicago DEMO,
1952.
CHAPMAN, L. J. Illusory correlation in observational
report. Journal DEMO Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 1967, 6, 151-155.
CHURCHMAN, C. W. Prediction and optimal deci-
sion: Philosophical issues in a science of values.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1961.
COOMBS, C. DEMO A theory of data. New York: Wiley,
1964.
COOMBS, C. H., & KAO, R. C. Nonmertic factor
analysis. (Research Bulletin No. 38) Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Engineering Research In-
stitute, DEMO
DAWES, R. M. Social selection based on multi-di-
mensional criteria. Journal DEMO Abnormal and So-
cial Psychology, 1964, 68, 104-109. (a)
DAWES, R. M. Toward a general framework for
evaluation. Ann Arbor: DEMO of Michigan,
Department of Psychology, 1964. (b)
DEBREU, DEMO Representation of a preference ordering
by a numerical function. In R. M. Thrall, C. H.
Coombs, & R. L. Davis (Eds.), Decision processes.
New York: Wiley, 1954.
DUDYCHA, A. L., & NAYLOR, J. C. The effect of
variations in the cue R matrix upon DEMO obtained
policy equation of judges. Educational and Psy-
chological Measurement, 1966, 26, 583-603.
EDWARDS, W. The theory of decision making. Psy-
chological DEMO, 1954, 51, 380-417.
EDWARDS, W., & TVERSKY, A. (DEMO) Decision mak-
ing. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1967.
EINHORN, H. J. The use of nonlinear, noncompen-
satory models in decision making. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Wayne State University, 1969.
HAMMOND, K. R. Probabilistic functioning and the
clinical method. Psychological Review, 1955, 62,
255-262.
HAMMOND, K. R., HURSCH, C. J., & TODD, F. J.
Analyzing the DEMO of clinical inference.
Psychological Review, 1964, 71, 438-456.
HAMMOND, K. R., & SUMMERS, D. A. Cognitive
dependence on linear and nonlinear DEMO Psycho-
logical Review, 1965, 72, 215-224.
HOFFMAN, P. J. The paramorphic representation of
clinical judgment. Psychological Bulletin, I960,
57, 116-131.
DEMO, P. J., SLOVIC, P., & RORER, L. G. An
DEMO of variance model for the assessment of
configural cue utilization in clinical judgment.
Psychological Bulletin, 1968, 69, 338-349.
HOTELLING, H. The selection DEMO variates for use in
prediction with some comments on the general
problem of nuisance parameters. Annals of Mathe-
matical Statistics, 1940, 11, 271-283.
HURSCH, C. J., HAMMOND, K. R., & HURSCH, J.
Some methodological issues in multiple-cue proba-
bility studies. Psychological Review, 1964, 71, 42-
60.
KOMORITA, S. S. A model for decision-making under
risk. American Journal of Psychology, 1964, 77,
429-436.
MEEHL, P. E. Clinical versus statistical prediction.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1954.
MEEHL, P. E. Wanted—a good cookbook. American
Psychologist, 1956, 11, 263-272.
SAWYER, DEMO Measurement and prediction: clinical
and statistical. Psychological Bulletin, 1966, 66,DEMO
178-200.
SHEPARD, R. N. On subjectively optimum selections
among multi-attribute alternatives. DEMO M. W.
Shelly & G. L. Bryan (Eds.), Human judgment
DEMO optimality. New York, Wiley, 1964.
WEBSTER, E. C. Decision making DEMO the employment
interview. Montreal: Industrial Relations Centre,
McGill University, 1964.
WIGGINS, N. L., & HOFFMAN, P. J. Three models
of clinical judgment. Journal of Abnormal Psy-
chology, 1968, 73, 70-77.
YNTEMA, DEMO B., & TORGERSON, W. S. Man-computer
cooperation in decisions requiring common sense.
IRE Transactions of the Professional Group on
Human Factors in Electronics, 1961, 2(1).
(Received April 21, 1969){1g42fwefx}