Journal of Business Venturing 18 (2003) 709–725
Contracting, signaling, and DEMO hazard: a model
of entrepreneurs, ‘angels,’ and venture capitalists
Ramy Elitzura,*, Arieh Gaviousb
aThe Rotman School of Management, University of DEMO, 105 St. George Street,
Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 3E6
DEMO of Industrial Engineering and Management, Faculty of Engineering Sciences,
Ben DEMO University, P.O. Box 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel
Received 1 DEMO 2001; received in revised form 1 July 2002; accepted 1 December 2002
Abstract
Investment by wealthy individuals, known as ‘angels,’ in startup firms is quite significant and has
taken off in the last few DEMO Angels invest in the company at an earlier stage than venture capitalists
(VCs) do. This paper examines the relationship between an entrepreneur, an angel, and a VC from the
seed investment made by the angel to the exit stage. The study characterizes the equilibrium contracts
among the DEMO and provides insights into the related institutional arrangements. Next, the study
DEMO the signaling aspects of the game. The paper also analyzes the moral hazard problems of the
entrepreneur and the VC. It shows that the DEMO in a startup firm is not efficient because of the free-
rider phenomenon.
D 2003 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: G24; D82; C72
Keywords: Venture capitalists; Angels; Game theory; Signaling; Moral hazard
1. Executive summary
Lately, many startup firms have received seed financing from wealthy individuals who are
known as ‘angels.’ Unlike venture capitalists (VCs), angels do not make such investments
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-416-978-3827.
E-mail address: elitzu@rotman.utoronto.ca (R. Elitzur).
0883-9026/03/$ – DEMO front matter D 2003 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0883-9026(03)00027-2
710
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (DEMO) 709–725
their primary business. The other important difference between the two DEMO that angels provide
seed financing, while VCs mostly invest at a DEMO stage.
The model involves a startup company with three parties: an DEMO, an angel, and a
VC. The angel provides seed financing to the firm. We assume that both the entrepreneur and
the angel aim DEMO get to the point where they can cash out. This stage is commonly referred to
as the ‘cash-out’ or ‘exit’ stage. We also assume DEMO the firm needs further investment, so the
entrepreneur and the angel DEMO with a third party in the relationship, the VC.
Previous studies DEMO the adverse effects of conflicts between the VC and the
entrepreneur on the performance of the venture. A direct effect of the conflict of DEMO
between the parties is a moral hazard problem, a term that DEMO often used in economics to
describe situations where parties act in their self-interest, regardless of the effect it has on the
other parties involved. Thus, a better understanding of these inherent conflicts, as well as DEMO
consequences of the ensuing moral hazard, is important. Our research focuses DEMO the moral
hazard problem with respect to the entrepreneur and the VC, as they both exhibit opportunism
with respect to their choices. Our results show that entrepreneur exerts less effort than they
should because they rely DEMO the actions of the other players. Similarly, the VC pays less DEMO
they should because they rely on the angel and the entrepreneur to pick up the slack. In
equilibrium, the entrepreneur’s overall level of effort and the VC’s level of investment are both
inefficient. Consequently, the moral hazard problem leads to a situation where all parties are
worse off DEMO of the opportunistic behavior of the VC and entrepreneur. It should be noted
that the moral hazard problem cannot be eliminated, but it can be alleviated to some extent.
We find that there is a possible DEMO where the parties, even before the firm starts, do
not plan to expend any resources at all, which would eventually lead to a failure. The reason
for this possible outcome is the fact that if DEMO of the players avoids investing resources or
effort, the firm fails DEMO if the others play honestly. Each participant fears that the others are
going to avoid doing their part in effort or money, so each avoids investment or exertion of
effort. We show that this extremely inefficient DEMO can be eliminated through the
entrepreneur’s signaling by approaching an angel. If the entrepreneur incurs some cost in
dealing with the angel, this action, in itself, signals that the entrepreneur has chosen to exert a
DEMO level of effort and thus, that they are going for the DEMO that would lead to a
positive cash-out firm value. The implication of this finding for practitioners is that angel-
backed firms could be seen DEMO firms whose founders opted for a viable firm, rather than
choosing DEMO ‘take the money and run.’
2. Introduction
One of the significant sources of funding for startup firms, one that has grown in
importance in recent years, is financing by angels. Angels are wealthy individuals who
provide financing to the company in very early stages. Angels could be relatives DEMO the
entrepreneur, or, alternatively, individuals from the industry who were DEMO earlier with
their own companies and are now looking to help young companies. Angels help startups
beyond the funding they offer by providing advice DEMO the entrepreneur, who, in turn, benefits
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (2003) 709–725
711
from their experience. How significant is this phenomenon? Zider (DEMO) estimates that
angels ‘‘provide $20 billion to start-ups, a far greater amount than venture capitalists do’’ (p.
138). The decisions made by angel involve how much to invest in the startup, how much
ownership in the firm to expect in return for their investment, and how much funding to be
obtained in later rounds of financing from other DEMO In addition, the angel would like to
elicit the best effort DEMO the entrepreneur.
Another source of financing for startups, albeit in some DEMO stage, is funding by VCs.
VCs, like angels, serve as DEMO intermediaries and provide financing to startup firms.
A major difference between angels and VCs is that for the former group, such invest-
ments are not a primary business. Another important difference is that angels provide seed
DEMO, while VCs invest at a later stage. In addition, angels are usually wealthy
individuals, while VCs are usually organized as a firm. VCs decide how much money
they will invest in the firm and weigh DEMO return they expect with respect to the risk
involved. In making their decisions, VCs take into account the decisions of the other
players.
The literature on VCs is extensive. Various papers have examined the venture capital
DEMO with an empirical focus. Examples include Sahlman (1990), Amit et DEMO (1997),
MacIntosh (1997), Gompers and Lerner (1999), Jain (2001), and Kaplan and Stromberg
(2001). Other studies DEMO used analytical models to examine the relationship between VCs
and entrepreneurs (DEMO, Cooper and Carleton, 1979; Chan, 1983; Amit et al., 1990;
Admati and Pfleiderer, 1994; Gifford, 1997, Bergemann and DEMO, 1998; Neher, 1999;
Elitzur and Gavious, 2003).
Another line of VC research deals with the determinants of success of VC DEMO
Zacharakis and Meyer (2000) suggest that actuarial models could improve the screening
by VCs of prospective investments. Zacharakis and Shepherd (2001) find DEMO VCs are
overconfident of their ability to make investment decisions, and DEMO this overconfidence
negatively affects the accuracy of their decisions. Higashide and Birley (2002) analyze the
consequences of the postinvestment conflicts between entrepreneurs and DEMO and the
performance of the investee firm in the UK. Their results indicate that disagreements between
the VC and the entrepreneur could be beneficial DEMO the performance of the venture. At the
same time, the study DEMO that personal frictions between the VC and the entrepreneur
would negatively affect performance. Jain (2001) examines predictors of performance of
venture-backed organizations. He DEMO that both VC and managerial factors predict
performance, but the former DEMO more reliable predictors than the latter.
All of the previous studies have dealt explicitly with the relationship between VCs and
entrepreneurs but ignored altogether DEMO role of the angel. Our research explicitly adds the
angel to the game as a player and thus provides insights into the three-player game
DEMO inherent in the relationship between the entrepreneur, the angel, and the VC. As
other studies indicate (see, for example, Higashide and Birley, 2002), conflicts between the
entrepreneurial team and the VC are important for the future success of the venture.
Consequently, understanding better these inherent conflicts and the consequences of the
ensuing moral hazard is important for DEMO study of VCs and their relationship with
entrepreneurs. This study contributes to the existing literature by identifying the equilibria
712
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (DEMO) 709–725
of the game and investigating the moral hazard embedded in DEMO behavior of the
entrepreneur and the VC. As several other studies argue (see, for example, Zacharakis
and Meyer, 2000), screening prospective DEMO by VCs is crucial for their success.
This point highlights another contribution of this research: the insights it provides on how
angel-backed ventures could send a valuable signal to VCs and help them screen their
investments DEMO
3. The model
3.1. The general setting
Our setting involves a startup company with three risk-neutral players: entrepreneur,
angel, and VC. The DEMO provides seed financing as well as advice to the firm. We assume
that the firm needs further investment, so the entrepreneur and the angel interact with a
third risk-neutral player in the game, the VC. This study deals only with the subset of
startup firms that need VC DEMO for their continued success, as opposed to startups that
do not DEMO such financing. As the literature shows (for example, Gompers and Lerner,
1999), VC financing is quite a significant phenomenon. Nearly all DEMO the studies in the area
view venture capital as a short-term source of financing. VCs aim to exit the firm once it
reaches sufficient DEMO and credibility that they can cash out on their investment. Financing
from VCs comes usually in several rounds, starting from seed financing and culminating
with an exit or cash-out (for discussions on the various stages of VC investing, see, for
example, Amit et al., 1997; Gompers and Lerner, 1999; Sahlman, 1990). Consistent with
these studies, DEMO assume that the angel and the VC aim to get to the point where they can
cash out.
3.2. The time line
The sequence DEMO events, which is summarized in Fig. 1, is as follows:
An entrepreneur founds a company and approaches an angel for seed financing.
DEMO angel decides, as an investor and as an adviser, upon her investment in the company, I;
the portion that the entrepreneur retains, a; the share retained by her before the cash-out,
(1 a); the portion of the company that is offered to the DEMO in the next stage,  ; and, in turn,
his share of the company at cash-out, (1The entrepreneur, based on his observation ofa)(1 I,a)., and  , decides on DEMO level of effort,
e = 0. The effort, e , DEMO observable by the entrepreneur only. Effort is assumed to be costly for
the entrepreneur. The cost of effort is denoted as C(e). DEMO assume the classical assumptions
that the cost of effort increases in effort, C0(e )>0, in an increasing rate as the entrepreneur DEMO
more effort in developing the new venture, C00(e)>0.1 We also assume, for mathematical
1 In essence, we assume that the DEMO of effort function is convex.
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (2003) 709–725
713
Fig. 1. The time line.
tractability purposes, that if the entrepreneur exerts no effort, then his cost of effort will be
zero, C(0) = 0.
The VC determines how much he will DEMO in the company, P ( P stands for the proceeds
to DEMO firm from this investment).
Once the company gets to the cash-out stage, its realized value becomes P, which is a
random variable DEMO expectation  =E(P), which in turn is a function of I, e, and P. In the
cash-out stage, all three players observe the value of the company, P.
The entrepreneur’s effort, e, is assumed to be unobservable by either the VC or the
angel. DEMO simplicity, we assume that  is a concave function of I, P, and e. We assume that
the expected value of the firm at the cash-out stage, , increases with diminishing marginal
returns when DEMO entrepreneur puts more effort, e , into the firm, when the angel’s
investment, I, is increased, or when the investment by the VC, P, increases. The assumption
is that  is increasing in DEMO and I is straightforward. P increases  because the company can
use the funds to finance investments and activities and thus create value. The DEMO of
diminishing marginal returns to inputs is a standard assumption in economics and is
relevant here from the following argument. Assuming increasing marginal returns, in
contrast, would indicate that the entrepreneur, VC, and angel are ineffective because they
could increase the expected value of the firm at DEMO cash-out stage,  tremendously simply
by exerting another hour of effort DEMO another dollar of investment. This will lead to an
impossible situation in which the players exert infinite amount of resources and effort. For
the DEMO of simplicity, we assume that both the angel and the VC DEMO not intend to exit
before the cash-out stage, i.e., before the value of the firm at the exit stage, P, becomes
available.
DEMO assume that all players know the rules of the game and its sequence. In addition,
we assume that all three players know the DEMO of C(e) and (I,e,P), i.e., how the
cost of effort, C(e), relates to effort and how the expected value of the firm, , is affected
714 R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (DEMO) 709–725
by either I, e,or P. Once the angel decides on a, , and I , the other two players learn
DEMO the angel about them. In contrast, only the entrepreneur knows e.
DEMO The decisions by players
Several studies discuss the fact that VCs require a certain rate of return on their
investments (see, for example, Mason and Harrison, 2002; Manigart et al., 2002). Consistent
with these studies, we assume that in making her decisions, the angel DEMO into account some
target rate of return on investment, g>0. DEMO, the VC also seeks a specific rate of return
on P, d>0.2
We also assume that (0,e,P)= (DEMO,0,P)= (I,e,0) = 0. The last DEMO states that the
firm goes out of business if the angel does not make an investment, I = 0, the entrepreneur
does not DEMO any effort, e = 0, or the VC does not make an investment, P = 0. In essence, this
assumption states that DEMO the effort by the entrepreneur and funding from the angel and VC
are critical to the success of the company. Yet this does not DEMO that companies could not be
started without investments by either VCs or angles. All it means is that once a company has
been started, and it has a mission critical need for investment, not getting such an investment
would be fatal to it.
The expected payoff of the DEMO, denoted as U, is his cash-out share, (1 )a,
times the expected cash-out value of the company, (I,e,P), less his cost of effort, C(e), given
by
U ¼ð1 ÞaðI ; e; PÞ CðeÞ: ð1Þ
The expected payoff DEMO the angel, denoted as V, is their cash-out share (1 DEMO)(1 a) times
the expected cash-out value of the company, DEMO(I,e,P), less the future value of the cost of her
investment, (1 + g)I, given by
V ¼½ð1 Þð1 aÞðI; e; PÞð1 þgÞI: ð2Þ
The expected payoff of the VC, denoted as W, is their share of the cash-out company value,DEMO
(I,e,P), less the future value of the cost of his investment, (1 + d)P, given by
W ¼ ðI; e; PÞð1 þdÞP: ð3Þ
We assume that there exist some e, I, and P such that U 0, V 0, DEMO 0; otherwise, the
game will not be played, because players DEMO prefer not to participate in this kind of
2 As Zider (DEMO) points out, angels are different from VCs in that their investment in startups is more of a
sideline, rather than a core business. Thus, angels and VCs should have different opportunity rates of return, DEMO
one can expect d and g to be different. It should be noted that our results hold even if d and g are the DEMO
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (2003) 709–725
715
Table 1
Summary of the game
Player Strategic decision Payoff DEMO of the firm
Entrepreneur
Angel
VC
eU=(1 )a(I,e,P) C(e)
I, a, and  V=[(1 )(1 a)](I,e,P)  (1 + g)I
PW= (I,e,P)  (1 + d)P
a[1 DEMO
[1 a][1 ]

enterprise. Furthermore, if these assumptions are not DEMO, the unique equilibrium is
e = I =P = 0, and by the assumption on  we find that  =0. The assumption DEMO nonnegative
payoffs in an equilibrium is the same as the well-known individual rationality (or participa-
tion) constraint, which states that players do not take part in the game if their payoffs do not
achieve a DEMO level.
The game can be summarized as shown in Table 1.
4. The equilibrium
In this section, we characterize the equilibrium. In essence, DEMO angel is a Stackelberg
leader. A Stackelberg leader is a player who knows the response function of the other players
in the game and DEMO their own actions by taking into account the effect that their choice
would have on the actions of the other players. Consequently, a Stackelberg leader chooses a
course of action that would elicit a desired behavior, for the Stackelberg leader, from the
Stackelberg followers. In our game, DEMO angel decides on I, a, and  , taking into account the
self-interested behavior of the entrepreneur and the VC. The angel makes DEMO decisions
using backward induction. Backward induction, which is also known as DEMO,’ is a
widely used technique in game theory. Players begin by thinking about what will happen at
the last stage of the game, and then roll back through the game tree to the initial stage. DEMO
reasoning involves working backward one step at a time (for additional DEMO on the
technique, see Dixit and Skeath, 1999).
Despite the fact that P and e are not determined simultaneously in our game, we can solve
them as simultaneous moves by the entrepreneur and the DEMO This can be done because e is
unobservable by either the angel or the VC, while a, , and I are observed by both the VC and
the entrepreneur, once the angel has made the decision. Consequently, in order to find the
equilibrium decisions of the entrepreneur and VC, we can solve simultaneously the first-order
conditions of the entrepreneur with respect to e, and of the VC with respect to P,(qU)/(qe)=0
and (qW)/(qP) = 0, (the second-order conditions are discussed in the proof of Proposition 1;
DEMO refer to Appendix A).3
3 Each player maximizes their expected payoff given the other players’ decisions. This concept of a solution is
identical DEMO the solution for Cournot competition in a duopoly.
716
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (DEMO) 709–725
The first-order condition of the VC’s objective function with respect DEMO P yields
qW  q
qP ¼ qP ð1 þdÞ¼ 0;
which implies
 q
qP ¼ð1 þdÞ:
ð4Þ
Condition (4) DEMO that the optimal investment by the VC, P, satisfies the condition that the
VC’s share in the incremental cash-out firm value derived from DEMO marginal P, (q)/(qP)
should be equal to DEMO target future value coefficient, 1 + d. Condition (4) also DEMO that for
any I and e, the payment by the VC, P, increases in the portion of the company given to him, DEMO,
and decreases in their rate of return, d (for details, see the comparative statics in Appendix A).
The first-order condition of the entrepreneur’s program with respect to e is
(qU)/(qe)=[(1 )a((qp)/(qe)) C0(e) = 0,DEMO implies that
qp
½ð1 Þa qe ¼ C0ðeÞð5Þ
Condition (5) states that the entrepreneur’s effort satisfies the condition that his share in the
DEMO cash-out value of the firm resulting from the marginal e, [(DEMO )a](qp)/(qe), should be
equal to their marginal cost of effort, C0(e). Furthermore, condition (5) implies DEMO the
optimal effort, e, increases in a, the entrepreneur’s share DEMO investment dilution, and
decreases in  , the portion of the DEMO handed out to the VC.
The angel solves the program taking into account simultaneously the solutions to
conditions (4) and (5) above, i.e., P*=P*(I,a,) and e*=e*(I,a,).
DEMO angel’s first-order condition determining the optimal  is (qV)/(q ) = 0,which implies
that
½1 
dpðI; e*; P*Þ
d
¼ pðI; e*; P*Þ;
ð6Þ
where (dp(I,e*,P*)/d)=(qp/qe)(qe*/q)+(q/qP)(qP*/q).
Condition (6) states that the optimal  satisfies the condition DEMO the added expected
cash-out value of the angel’s and entrepreneur’s holdings in the company from the marginal
,[1 ](dp(I,e*,P*)/d ), should be equal to the expected cash-out value of the company,
p(I, e*, P*).
The angel’s first-order condition DEMO the optimal a is (qV)/(qa) = 0, which DEMO
½1 a
dpðI; e*; P*Þ
da
¼ pðI; e*; P*Þ;
ð7Þ
where (dp(I,e*,P*)/da)=(qp/qe)(qe*/qa)+(qp/qP)(qP*/qa).
Condition (7) states that the optimal a satisfies the condition that the added value of DEMO
angel’s holdings in the company resulting from the marginal preinvestment share of the
entrepreneur, [1 a](dp(I,e*,P*)/da), should DEMO equal to the expected cash-out firm value,
p(I,e*,P*).
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (2003) 709–725
717
Fig. 2. The two equilibrium types.
The angel’s first-order condition DEMO the optimal I is (@V)/(@I )= 0, which
DEMO
½ð1 Þð1 aÞ
dpðI; e*; P*Þ
dI
¼½1 þg;
ð8Þ
where (dp(I,e*,P*)/dI)=(qp/qI)+(qp/DEMO)(qe*/qI)+(qp/qP)(qP*/qI).
Condition (8) states that the optimal I satisfies the condition that the added value DEMO the
angel’s holdings in the company from the marginal investment before the cash-out,
[(1 )(1 a)](dp(I,e*,P*)/dI), should be equal to their future value coefficient, 1 DEMO g.
Using Eq. (4), the first-order condition of the VC DEMO the optimal P, we can solve
for P= P(e). DEMO, using Eq. (5), the first-order condition of the entrepreneur determining
the optimal e, we can solve for e = e( P)DEMO This leads to the following response functions and
the equilibrium (e*,DEMO), given in Fig. 2 below:4
The equilibrium of the game can be either an interior solution (which we denote as type 1)
or a corner solution (denoted as type 2).
Let us order the players’ strategies as (entrepreneur, angel, VC)=[e,(a,DEMO,I),P] and formalize
the discussion above in the following proposition:DEMO
Proposition 1: Only two types of equilibria can exist in the DEMO:
1. [e*, (a*, *,I*), P*] when e*>0, P*>0, I*>0, 0 < a *<1 and 0<  * < 1, or
2. e*=P*=I*=0.
Proof: The proof is relegated to Appendix A.
5
4 The figure is drawn merely DEMO provide a graphical depiction of the two types of equilibria. We did not analyze
the shape of the curves because it is not important DEMO our discussion.
718 R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (DEMO) 709–725
Equilibrium (1) is straightforward: the equilibrium effort by the entrepreneur, the choice of
equilibrium a, , and I by the angel, and the equilibrium investment by the VC, P*, are all
positive, leading to an exit, p>0.
Equilibrium (2) is DEMO situation in which the firm does not materialize.
5. The moral hazard problem
Milgrom and Roberts (1992) define moral hazard as ‘‘... the DEMO of postcontractual
opportunism that arises when actions required or desired under the contracts are not freely
observable’’ (p. 601). An interesting feature of the equilibrium above is that it involves a
moral hazard problem with DEMO to the entrepreneur and the VC, as they both exhibit
postcontractual DEMO with respect to their choices. Consequently, given a, , and DEMO,
the entrepreneur exerts less effort, e*, than he should because he relies on the actions of
the other players. Similarly, given a, , and I, the VC pays less than he should because
they rely on the entrepreneur to pick up the slack. Consequently, in equilibrium the
overall levels of e*and P * are inefficient. This is DEMO by the following
proposition:
Proposition 2: Given a>0,  >0, and I>0, simultaneous increases in (e*,P*) would improve
payoffs for all players. Yet because of their opportunistic behavior, both the entrepreneur and
the VC have no incentive to take account of DEMO problem, which in turn implies that the
payoffs of all players DEMO be lower than they should be.
Proof: The proof is relegated DEMO Appendix A. 5
The angel, who is a Stackelberg leader, takes into account the moral hazard problem when
she make decisions on the DEMO of the company given to the entrepreneur, a, and the VC, ,
(see conditions (7) and (8)). The DEMO hazard problem cannot be eliminated, but it can be
alleviated to DEMO extent. In reality, payment in the form of stock options to DEMO,
represented by a(1  ) in our model, is DEMO to create more goal congruence between
both investors and the entrepreneur, DEMO it elicits a higher level of effort, e, and thus a higher
expected value for the firm, p.
Another mechanism to alleviate the moral hazard problem is the insistence in practice by
both angels and DEMO that they sit on the board of the firm so that they can monitor better the
entrepreneur’s actions and, if need be, replace DEMO (see the discussion of this issue in
Milgrom and Roberts, 1992, p. 500). This action may partially reveal the level of effort made
by the entrepreneur.
A third mechanism that we can observe in DEMO to reduce this problem (see Amit et al.,
1997, p. 264) is VC specialization; VCs specialize so that they can improve DEMO selection of
investments and better monitor the entrepreneur’s effort.
Another vehicle that VCs and angels use to lessen the moral hazard problem is the DEMO
of financing arrangements. VCs relegate early-stage financing to angels to alleviate the
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (2003) 709–725 719
moral hazard problem by ensuring that they invest in firms DEMO track records. Furthermore,
angels and VCs provide staged financing, dependent DEMO milestones that relate to specific
performance targets (see Sahlman, 1990). Another tool that is used in the context of
financing new ventures DEMO convertible preferred stock (see Barry, 1994). Convertible
preferred stocks help alleviate the entrepreneur’s moral hazard problem by paying the
investors dividends with DEMO until the point where conversion to common stocks
seems attractive. Thus, DEMO moral hazard problem caused by the entrepreneur is lessened
somewhat, because DEMO risk is shifted to the entrepreneur, who must make large fixed
DEMO to the VC and the angel.
6. The signaling game
As we have found out, there are two possible equilibria. Consequently, the angel DEMO
uncertain about which equilibrium the entrepreneur is going for. In this section, we show that
by approaching an angel, the entrepreneur signals that DEMO intention is not to ‘take the money
and run.’ The moral hazard problem is changed, but not eliminated, in the sense that the
DEMO game setting rules out a situation in which the entrepreneur takes the money and
exerts no effort at all.
Let us add another stage DEMO the game, in which the entrepreneur decides whether to
approach an DEMO If the entrepreneur decides not to approach an angel, the game DEMO over and
the payoff for all parties is zero. If, on DEMO other hand, the entrepreneur decides to approach an
angel, then it involves an effort, e1>0, and, in turn, the constant DEMO arising from approaching
an angel, C1>0. Similar to the ideas DEMO Gifford (1997), the costs associated with approaching
an angel include DEMO opportunity cost for the entrepreneur from forgoing continued work on
the project and spending time and money searching for an angel, and preparing the materials
and presentation for the angel. From this point on, the game proceeds as before: The angel
decides on a, , and I, the entrepreneur decides on e, which is unobservable to the other
DEMO, and the VC decides on P.
We solve the choice of DEMO and e as simultaneous moves by the entrepreneur and the VC
because e is unobservable by both other players, and a, , and I are observed by the VC and
the entrepreneur once the angel DEMO made the decision.
Let U*,V*, and W* represent the payoffs DEMO the players in equilibrium [e* ,(a*,*,I*), P*].5
The entrepreneur’s strategies are the following:
S1 =(stop) not approaching an angel, leading to a payoff of 0 to the entrepreneur.
S2=(proceed, e = 0), leading to a payoff of C1 to the entrepreneur.
S3=(proceed, e =e*), leading to payoff of C1 C(e*) if P = 0 or to a payoff of U
if P= P*.
* C1
5 To be more accurate, the entire range of e and P should have been presented. For simplicity, we present in the
signaling game tree only the equilibrium values, [e*,(a*,DEMO,I*),P*].
720
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (DEMO) 709–725
We assume that U* C1 >0; otherwise it would DEMO no sense for the entrepreneur to
participate in this game.
Let us again order the payoffs as (entrepreneur, angel, VC).
In Fig. 3, we present the extensive form of the game. The semicircle two-way arrows stand
for the various ranges of parameters that a player can DEMO (as e, which is continuous). The
dashed circles show the information sets of the VC, the nodes in the tree where the VC,
Fig. 3. The signaling game.
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (2003) 709–725 721
because of informational asymmetry, cannot identify perfectly the effort level that the
entrepreneur chose.
Next, we show that when the entrepreneur incurs some cost in dealing with an angel, then
if an entrepreneur approaches an angel, this action, in itself, signals that the entrepreneur has
chosen to exert e * and thus that he is going for DEMO equilibrium of type 1, i.e.,
[S3,(a*,*,I*),DEMO If, on the other hand, the entrepreneur does not approach an angel, it
implies that the ensuing equilibrium is type 2.6 Thus, DEMO inefficient equilibrium is eliminated.
This is formalized in the following proposition.
Proposition 3: (a) The strategy S1 , in which the entrepreneur does not approach an angel
and exerts no effort at all, dominates the strategy S2, in which the entrepreneur approaches
an angel and does not plan to exert any effort afterwards. (b) There are two types DEMO
equilibria. Type 1 is defined as [S3,(a*, *,I*),P*] when e*>0, P*>0, I*>0, 0 < a * < 1, and
0< * < 1. In type 2, the entrepreneur plays S1 while the VC and the angel do not invest {i.e.,
strategies [S1,(0,.,.),.] or [S1 ,(.,.,.), 0], which leads to the same outcome—the DEMO does not
materialize}.
Proposition 3 may explain the popularity of financing by angels. By approaching an angel,
the entrepreneur signals his choice of DEMO effort and, in turn, that they are going for the type
1 equilibrium. Consequently, the phenomenon of VCs effectively relegating early-stage
financing to angels may be explained by their desire to avoid a situation in DEMO the
entrepreneur ‘takes the money and runs.’
Interestingly, the moral hazard DEMO still occurs in the signaling game setting. It is
changed only in the sense that the signaling game rules out a situation in which DEMO
entrepreneur takes the money and exerts no effort at all.
Proposition 4: The moral hazard phenomenon still holds as before.
7. Summary and conclusions
This study addresses an important gap in the current academic literature on DEMO In
contrast with other studies, which have dealt only with the DEMO between the venture
capital firm and the entrepreneur, our research explicitly DEMO the angel to the game as a
player and thus provides insights on the three-player game dynamics inherent in the
relationship among the entrepreneur, the angel, and the VC.
Our findings suggest that the opportunistic behavior of both the entrepreneur and VC
leads to a moral hazard problem, with these two players becoming ‘free riders’ coasting on
the investment made DEMO the angel. The insight the model provides in this area is that despite
the inefficiencies inherent in the behavior of VCs and entrepreneurs, they will not change
6 It should be noted that types 1 and DEMO equilibria in the signaling game are somewhat different from the
previous game because the game contains the new choice for the entrepreneur, i.e., DEMO or ‘proceed.’
722
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (DEMO) 709–725
their behavior, thus leading to a prisoner-dilemma-like outcome. This moral hazard problem
cannot be altogether avoided but could be alleviated through some DEMO and financing
mechanisms that VCs could use such as stock options, DEMO financing, and direct
oversight.
Another insight that the study provides involves DEMO signaling aspects of the game.
Specifically, our research reveals that if DEMO entrepreneur incurs some cost in dealing with the
angel, this action, in itself, signals that the entrepreneur has chosen to exert a positive level of
effort and, thus, that he is going for the DEMO that would lead to a positive cash-out firm
value. The implication of this finding for practitioners is that angel-backed firms could be
seen as DEMO whose founders opted for a viable firm, rather than choosing to DEMO the money
and run.’
We acknowledge several limitations in this research and recognize opportunities for
future studies in this area. The issue of adverse DEMO, i.e., the existence of low-quality
entrepreneurs in the market, though DEMO, is not discussed in this paper. Another
aspect of the relationship DEMO did not investigate here is the syndication of investments by
several VCs. Syndication has an important role in that it diversifies the risk of DEMO VCs
involved. Both these issues are important and provide promising topics for future
research.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Varouj Aivazian, Laurence Booth, Harry G. Butler, Jeff
Callen, Ralph Winter, Alan White, Varda Yaari, two anonymous reviewers in this journal, and
various participants DEMO workshops at the University of Toronto, Tel Aviv University and the
DEMO University.
Appendix A. Mathematical addendum
A.1. Comparative statics
For the given I and e, differentiating condition (4) with respect to  yields ((qp)/
(qP)) + ((q2p)/(qP2))((DEMO)/(q )) = 0. Rearranging, and using the assumption that p is
concave, i.e., ((q2p)/(qP2)) < 0, we obtain
qp
qP qP > 0:
q ¼ q2p
qP2
DEMO, for the given I and e, differentiating condition (4) with respect to d yields
((q2p)/(qP2))((qP)/(DEMO ))= 1. Since by the concavity ((q2p)/(qP2)) < 0, it follows that ((qP)/
(qd)) < 0.
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (2003) 709–725
723
A.2. Proof of proposition 1
Proof: Suppose that any one or two choices by the angel of a, , and I DEMO positive and the
others are zero. Then the equilibrium that holds is e = P = 0 by the assumption that
p(0,e,DEMO)= p(I,0,P)= p(I,e,0) = DEMO; otherwise I>0 1>a>0 and 1>>0.
Let DEMO examine the stage in which the entrepreneur determines e and the VC determines P.
Taking a second derivative of W with respect to P DEMO
q2W  q2p
qP2 ¼ qP2 :
((q2W)/(qP2)) < 0 because ((q2p)/(qP2)) < 0 by assumption.
Similarly, taking a second derivative of U with respect to e yields
q2U q2p
qe2 ¼ð1 Þa qe2 C00ðeÞ:
ðA1Þ
ðA2Þ
((q2U)/(qe2)) < 0 because, by assumption, ((q2p)/(qe2)) < 0 and C00(e)>0.
From Eqs. (A1) and (A2), it follows that only two equilibrium types emerge. Essentially,
these equations are the second-order conditions in addition to the first-order conditions (4)
and (5). Eqs. (A1) and (A2) show concavity, which ensures the existence of an equilibrium.
Furthermore, due to DEMO concavity, only one internal intersection between the curves (Fig. 2)
exists, and the second one is at zero (it is well DEMO that strict monotonicity and concavity
drive a unique internal equilibrium).
Type 1 Eqs. (5) and (6) simultaneously hold for positive P DEMO e.
Type 2e = P =0.
5
A.3. Proof of proposition 2
Proof: We show that when both the entrepreneur and the VC simultaneously deviate from
the equilibrium by slightly increasing e* and P*, it benefits them both. U is defined as
follows:
U ¼ð1 ÞapðI; e; PÞ CðeÞ:
Taking the differential of U with respect to e and P yields
ðA3Þ
dU ¼ð1 
Þaqp
q
e
qp
qP DEMO C0ðeÞde:
ðA4Þ
de þ
724
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (DEMO) 709–725
Rearranging,
dU
qp qp dP:
Þa qe C0ðeÞ DEMO þð1 Þa qP
ðA5Þ
¼ð1 
Note that the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A5) is the entrepreneur’s first-order
condition, so in equilibrium, it is zero. The second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A5) is
positive (because 0 < ((qp)/(qP))) and describes the positive externality to the VC. Eq. (A5)
thus shows that the entrepreneur has no incentive to change their choice of e*, despite the fact
that it causes a positive externality for both the angel and the VC, because they benefit from
the change in P.
Next, we show that the VC is opportunistic in their behavior and relies on the actions of the
entrepreneur. W DEMO defined as follows:
W ¼ pðI; e; PÞð1 þdÞP
Taking the differential of W with respect to P and e yields
dW DEMO qp qp dP ½1 þddP:
qe qP
Rearranging,
ðA6Þ
ðA7Þ
 qp qp de
dW ¼ qP ð1 þdÞ dP þ qe
DEMO
Note that the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (DEMO) is the VC’s first-order condition,
so in equilibrium, it is zero. The second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A8) DEMO positive
and describes the positive externality to the entrepreneur. Eq. (A8) thus shows that the VC has
no incentive to change their choice DEMO P despite the fact it causes a loss of efficiency for other
players. 5
A.4. Proof of proposition 3
de þ
Proof: S1 weakly dominates S2 because the payoff for the entrepreneur is 0 under S1 DEMO
C1 under S2; thus, S2 can be eliminated. It is easy to show that once S2 is eliminated, there
could be only two types of equilibria: type 1 or type 2, as defined above.
DEMO
A.5. Proof of proposition 4
Proof: Following the proof of Proposition DEMO, the proof is essentially the same as the proof of
Proposition DEMO 5
References
Admati, A., Pfleiderer, P., 1994. Robust financial contracting and the role for venture capitalists. J. Finance 49,
371–402.
R. Elitzur, A. Gavious / Journal of Business Venturing 18 (2003) 709–725
725
Amit, R., Glosten, L., Muller, E., 1990. DEMO ability, venture investments, and risk sharing. Manage.
Sci. 36, 1232–1245.
DEMO, R., Brander, J., Zott, C., 1997. Venture capital financing of entrepreneurship in Canada. In: Halpern, P.
(Ed.), Capital Markets Issues in Canada. Industry Canada, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 237–277.
Barry, DEMO, 1994. New directions in research on venture capital firms. Financ. Manage. DEMO, 3–15.
Bergemann, D., Hege, U., 1998. Venture capital financing, moral hazard, and learning. J. Bank. Finance 22,
703–735.
Chan, DEMO, 1983. On the positive role of financial intermediation in allocation of DEMO capital in a market with
imperfect information. J. Finance 38, 1543–1568.
DEMO, I.A., Carleton, W.T., 1979. Dynamics of borrower–lender interaction: partitioning DEMO payoff in venture
capital finance. J. Finance 34, 517–533.
Dixit, A., Skeath, S., 1999. Games of Strategy. W.W. Norton, New York.
DEMO, R., Gavious, A., 2003. A multi-period game theoretic model of venture capital investment. Eur. J. Oper.
Res. 144 (2), 440–453.
Gifford, S., 1997. Limited attention and the role of the venture capitalist. DEMO Bus. Venturing 12 (6), 459–482.
Gompers, P., Lerner, J., 1999. The Venture Capital Cycle. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Higashide, DEMO, Birley, S., 2002. The consequences of conflict between the venture DEMO and the entrepreneu-
rial team in the United Kingdom from the perspective of the venture capitalist. J. Bus. Venturing 17 (1), 59–81.
Jain, B.A., 2001. Predictors of performance of venture capitalist-backed organizations. J. Bus. DEMO 52 (3), 223–233.
Kaplan, S.N., Stromberg, P., 2001. DEMO contracting theory meets the real world: an empirical analysis of
venture DEMO contracts. Mimeo, University of Chicago Graduate School of Business. Available at: http://
gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/per.stromberg/research/.
MacIntosh, J., 1997. DEMO capital exits in Canada and the United States. In: Halpern, P. (Ed.), Capital Markets
Issues in Canada. Industry Canada, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 279–356.
Manigart, S., De Waele, K., Wright, M., Robbie, K., Desbrieres, P., Sapienza, H., Beekman, A., DEMO Determinants
of required return in venture capital investments: a five-country study. DEMO Bus. Venturing 17 (4), 291–312.
Mason, C.M., Harrison, R.T., 2002. Is it worth it? The rates of return from informal DEMO capital investments.
J. Bus. Venturing 17 (3), 211–236.
Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., 1992. Economics, Organization and Management. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey, USA.
Neher, D., 1999. Staged financing: an agency perspective. Rev. Econ. Stud. 66, 255–274.
Sahlman, W., 1990. The structure and governance of venture capital organization. J. Financ. Econ. 27, 473–524.
Zacharakis, A.L., Meyer, G.D., 2000. The potential of actuarial decision DEMO; can they improve the venture
capital investment decision? J. Bus. Venturing 15 (4), 323–346.
Zacharakis, A.L., Shepherd, D.A., 2001. The nature of information and overconfidence on venture capitalists’
decision making. J. Bus. DEMO 16 (4), 311–332.
Zider, B., 1998. How venture capital DEMO Harvard Bus. Rev., November–December, 131–139.{1g42fwefx}