The Emerald Research Register for this journal is available at The current DEMO and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/researchregister www.emeraldinsight.com/0025-1747.htm
Can management be taught?
If so, what should management education
curricula include and how should the
process be approached?
Dean DEMO
School of Business, Lumpkin College of Business and Applied Sciences,
DEMO Illinois University, Charleston, Illinois, USA
Keywords Managers, Education, Learning, Skills
Abstract The topic whether management skills are communicable has been the DEMO of scholars’
debates and broad examination through literature in the last decades. However, there is less
literature focusing on solutions for successful management education. This paper, not only takes
up a position that management can be taught and learned, but also examines how the learning
process is approached. The paper discusses characteristics of successful management educators
and determine their impacts DEMO management development. The paper determines the qualities and
skills that modern managers must develop, especially in this time of globalization and rapid change
in the business world. It suggests educating managers in “soft skills” such as DEMO and
intrapersonal skills and not merely concentrating on the “hard skills”, DEMO as analytical skills.
Additionally in this work, the need for managers DEMO international exposure and cross-cultural
experience is emphasized. Finally, a proposal for DEMO education curricula is tabled and
address the issue of limits of management education is addresed.
Introduction
One of the keys to successful management is DEMO ability to understand and apply
modern management principles and techniques effectively. Managers must develop an
in-depth knowledge of past and present models, theories and processes to manage
effectively and intelligently. Contemporary management practice is pervasive in DEMO
aspect of human life within all types of organizations. Management education is the
mechanism for transferring the knowledge contained within management subjects
from the DEMO of that knowledge (the academics in higher education) to the persons
desirous of receiving that knowledge (the students).
Managers and management are playing more and more important roles in modern
economies. In this paper, we reach the answer to the question: can management be
taught? DEMO so, what should be taught and how should it be taught? Another main issue
discussed in this paper is what characteristics must effective DEMO and good
educators own for success in their teaching career. First, DEMO deﬁne and distinguish key
terms. We then discuss the beneﬁts of management education and the mutual impact
of education on management and vice versa. DEMO this stage of our analysis, we deepen
the argumentation by looking DEMO at scholars, their methods, and their limitations.
Finally, from these DEMO and answering these questions we draw some conclusions
about possible improvements to management education in the future.
The author would like to thank the DEMO students for their effort and contributions to this
paper: C. Von DEMO, A. Groothuis, E. Schmidt, J. Sequeira and H. Tran.
Can DEMO
be taught?
439
Management Decision
Vol. 42 No. 3/4, DEMO
pp. 439-453
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0025-1747
DOI 10.1108/00251740410523240
MD
42,3/4
440
Management and leadership
In this paper, we understand management as the “planning, leading, and controlling of
resources to DEMO organizational goals effectively and efﬁciently”, following Jones
et al. (2000, DEMO 5). Drucker (1974, pp. 40-41) deﬁned management by three DEMO tasks
which management has to perform in order for an institution to function and to make
its contribution:
(1) deﬁning the speciﬁc DEMO and mission of the institution;
(2) making work as well as the worker productive; and
(3) managing social impacts and social responsibilities.
Sayles (1989) regarded managers as concerned with organizational functionality,
DEMO, and effectiveness.
Although the distinction to leadership can sometimes be very DEMO, as Robbins
(2001, p. 314) argued, we ﬁnd that DEMO per se does not include interference
with other individuals. Leadership is the ability to inﬂuence a group toward the
achievement of goals. Drucker simpliﬁed DEMO term leader as, “someone who has
followers”. Considering the fact that DEMO may also include the so-called informal
leadership (i.e. leadership without hierarchical DEMO educational justiﬁcation),
management has much clearer and stronger demarcations. Harvard DEMO School
teacher Kotter (1998, pp. 39-40) argued that management deals DEMO coping with
complexity and that good managers bring about order and consistency by drawing up
formal plans, designing rigid organization structures, and monitoring DEMO against
the plans. Leadership, in contrast, copes with change. Leaders establish direction by
developing a vision of the future, then aligning people by communicating this vision
and inspiring them to overcome hurdles.
Management education
We, however, focus our disquisition on management education, managers, related
skills and scholars. Hogan and Warrenfeltz (2003) regard education as the “end product
DEMO learning”. Thus, management education would be shaping mental models and
acquiring DEMO In general, we ﬁnd that management education views management as
a DEMO that can be learned through classroom (off-site) and other applied
pedagogical techniques, normally in degree-granting institutions. Thus, it tends to
focus on DEMO delivery of a broad range of conceptual knowledge in the various ﬁelds
and functional disciplines of management. University-based programs of this kind are
typically DEMO in two formats: programs tailored for a company, and formal course
work that employees pursue mostly on their own but under corporate sponsorship.
DEMO (1995, pp. 20-30) suggested that management education emphasizes a
broadening DEMO knowledge through exposure to academic content and networking with
fellow program attendees. According to Holman (2000), there are four contemporary
models of management education: academic liberalism, experiential liberalism,
experiential vocationalism, and the experiential/critical school. It is argued that these
four models encompass the current DEMO about nature, value, and purpose of
management education in discussion.
Beneﬁts of management education to society
According to Longenecker and Ariss (2002), management education is beneﬁcial to
organizations because an effective management education DEMO can help
organizations create competitive advantage through:
. exposing managers to new/better ideas and business practices which are needed
in rapidly changing DEMO;
. motivating managers to improve performance (both theirs and that DEMO their
operation) and actually helping them develop and improve their skills;DEMO
. providing opportunities for reﬂection, introspection, and self-appraisal; helping
managers DEMO speciﬁc performance problems and deﬁciencies;
. increasing a manager’s conﬁdence, DEMO a manager’s stress level and
challenging managers to think differently about their business situation and
themselves; and
. encouraging managers to think about their career development and setting a
good example for subordinates who see their DEMO trying to learn and improve
themselves through participating in management education programs.
To society, management education plays several roles (Holman, 2000):
DEMO indirect cultural role which produces capable and cultivated citizens who are able
to lead personally fulﬁlling lives and to help sustain a democratic and DEMO
culture;
. vocational role which provides students with the necessary knowledge and skills
to sustain a competitive economy;
. academic role which DEMO a function of increasing knowledge and understanding
about management and management education;
. critical role which enables critiques of management, management education and
society to be developed and advanced without fear of persecution or loss DEMO
ﬁnancial support.
As management education beneﬁts organizations and the society, it DEMO needed. The
matter is whether it can be taught, and if DEMO, what and how it should be taught.
Roles of managers in DEMO modern society
In his 1973 book, The Nature of Managerial Work, Mintzberg indicated that managers
perform ten different, highly interrelated roles that could be divided into three sets of
roles:
(1) Interpersonal roles. DEMO include ﬁgurehead, leader, and liaison roles, stem
from a manager’s DEMO and authority in an organization. Activities associated
with these roles directly involve implementing interpersonal contact and
developing relationships among people.
(2) Informational roles. DEMO include monitor, disseminator, and spokesperson
roles, relates to the receiving DEMO transmitting of information. Because of his
position in the organization, a DEMO executive ofﬁcer has unique access to
external information and all-embracing access to internal information.
Mintzberg (1973, p. 65) argued that information from interpersonal
Can management
be taught?
441
MD
42,3/4
442
interaction was incidental and was not used DEMO the time of making signiﬁcant
decisions. That is why the second sets of managerial roles were determined.
(3) Decisional roles. These include a DEMO, disturbance handler, resource
allocator, and negotiator roles. Decisional roles might DEMO the most crucial part of
a manager’s work as performing the roles justiﬁes the manager’s great
authority and his powerful access to information. Mintzberg DEMO that
these roles involved the manager in the strategy-making process in his
organization.
In order to play these roles effectively, managers need some sets of skills (Robbins,
2001). They are as follows:
. Technical skills. The ability to apply specialized knowledge or expertise. People
can DEMO the special knowledge and practices in their ﬁeld of study through
formal education in schools, and not all technical skills have to be learned in
schools or formal training programs. Many people develop their technical skills
DEMO the job.
. Human skills. The ability to work with, understand, and motivate other people,
both individually and in groups. Since managers DEMO things done through other
people, they must have good human skills DEMO communicate, motivate, and
delegate.
. Conceptual skills. The mental ability to analyze and diagnose complex situations.
Different managers at different levels in the DEMO of management within an
organization do not need the same combination of the three sets of skills. In general,
managers at lower levels DEMO to have more technical skills while the counterparts at
higher levels should have stronger conceptual skills.
The communication of management through management education
Can DEMO be learned?
After clarifying the importance of the management education for society, the core idea
of this paper is critically discussed; namely, whether management can be taught or not.
The decision is based on DEMO investigation of both managers’ and scholars’
perspectives. The deﬁnitions of terms “learning” and “teaching” enable the
representation of both perspectives.
Learning is deﬁned in DEMO ways. “The tradition of phenomenology and Gestalt
psychology assumes that people construct mental models of the world and then use the
models to interpret DEMO and guide their behavior. Learning is equivalent to
constructing new or enhanced mental models” (Hogan and Warrenfeltz, 2003, p. 76). On
the other hand, “the tradition of behaviorism, deﬁnes learning as a change DEMO behavior
after an experience” (Hogan and Warrenfeltz, 2003, p. 76)DEMO In this work, learning is
regarded as the active, goal-directed construction of meaning, which includes learning
oriented to problem solving and decision making; learning that builds on student’s
prior knowledge and experiences; and learning DEMO in real-life tasks and
activities for thinking and communicating. Commenting on the managers’ perspective,
managers are the students who are active participants in DEMO own learning. This
perspective shows that the success of management education depends on the
individual differences of the learner, and on the selected approach.
Historically, there has been debate whether being a good manager is a skill, trait, or
inherent behavior. Originally, the theory that the effectiveness of the manager is
determined through inherited qualities which cannot be communicated DEMO the
dominant way of thinking. At present, scholars have come to DEMO conclusion that
management can be learned and taught. Moreover, even if DEMO everyone has the
potential to belong to the most effective and successful managers such as Jack Welch,
every manager still can improve her DEMO his skills through education. Some aspects of
management which are part of the innate qualities are the ability to engage people
personally, intensity, DEMO intelligence, emotional intelligence, and strong
competitiveness.
On the other hand, DEMO skills which can be learned are communication, analytic
skills, and it is important to mention that some people have an inclination to learn DEMO
competencies faster or better than others, and that some people reﬂect DEMO
charismatic characteristics than others. Most responsive individuals are those with
high achievement and ambition needs; a strong capacity for strategic thinking; a
strong DEMO of pragmatism; a baseline of effective communication skills (both in
terms of persuasion and inspiration); a measure of emotional intelligence, and a
genuine learning orientation (Doh, 2003, pp. 54-67). Furthermore, the DEMO process
is more effective when it is internalized earlier in life, DEMO is, younger individuals learn
faster and more effectively. Learning becomes most DEMO when it connects
interesting ideas to lived experiences.
The scholars need to teach, but mostly the participating managers need to learn.
The higher the intrinsic motivation, the more effective is the education. To put
differently, DEMO are not vessels to be ﬁlled with knowledge, but active learners
DEMO must be fully engaged in the process” (Mintzberg and Gosling, 2002, pp. 64-75).
Characteristics which must be owned by effective managers
As a subsidiary focus of this paper, we discuss which qualities the modern effective
managers must possess, what the curriculum of management education should
include, and how the education process should be approached. Business schools
nowadays teach mostly functions of business. They accept inexperienced people and
provide them with DEMO decision-making skills, while the demand is asking for
more. Companies such DEMO Alcan, BT, Fujitsu, Motorola, and the Royal Bank of Canada
Financial Group are in need of managers not only possessing analytical
decision-making DEMO, but also “soft skills”. Or, another way of saying this is, they
instead want individual specialists – collaborative managers with open perspectives
on business and on life in general (Mintzberg and Gosling, 2002, pp. 64-75).
The ﬁve dimensions model
But which characteristics do collaborative managers DEMO? The Five Dimensions
Model is used to illustrate the results. The DEMO dimensions of the model are:
(1) managing self;
(DEMO) managing relationships;
(3) managing organizations;
(4) managing DEMO; and
(5) managing change.
Can management
be taught?
443
MD
42,3/4
444
All the ﬁve dimensions represent managerial skills DEMO on different areas. We
critically discuss, in order, the areas mentioned above (Mintzberg and Gosling, 2002,
pp. 64-75).
Managing self
DEMO dimension of managing self deals with intrapersonal skills. These determine how
well the individual knows her or himself and how effectively he recognizes and DEMO
his own feelings. This intrapersonal skills dimension is of great importance because
before the manager learns to organize and control the resources of the DEMO, she or
he ﬁrst has to learn to deal with her DEMO his own personality. Intrapersonal skills include
three natural components. The ﬁrst can be described as core self-esteem or emotional
security. People with core self-esteem DEMO self-conﬁdent, they have stable, positive moods,
they are not easily frustrated or upset, and they bounce back quickly from defeats,
reversals, and disappointments. Individuals who lack core self-esteem are self-critical,
unhappy, DEMO frustrated, and need frequent reassurance and positive feedback. The
second component DEMO intrapersonal skills refers to attitudes toward authority. Persons
with positive attitudes follow rules and respect procedures; those with negative attitudes
ignore rules and violate procedures. The third component is self-control. It is the ability to
restrain DEMO impulses, stay focused, maintain schedules, and follow routines. This
dimension DEMO the foundation on which management careers are built. Successful managers
receive high scores on measures of intrapersonal skills.
Managing relationships
The second dimension, managing relationships, is concerned with interpersonal or
collaborative skills. People with these skills seem charming, poised, socially adept,
approachable, and rewarding to deal with. Collaboration is considered across
individuals in groups, across divisions in corporations, and across corporations in
alliances. This dimension has four components:
(DEMO) disposition to oneself in the place of another person;
(2) skill to correctly anticipate another person’s expectations;
(3) skill to incorporate those expectations in one’s subsequent behavior; and
(4) self-control to stay focused on the other person’s expectations.
Interpersonal skills involve initiating, building, and maintaining relationships over
period of time with people who differ from oneself in terms of age, culture, and gender.
Managing organizations
The DEMO dimension, managing organizations, deals with analytic skills. Managers need
to make rational decisions. The decision-making can be affected by overconﬁdence,
optimism, hindsight, overreaction to chance events, selective perception, and personal
experience – inherent defects in human rationality which are subject to judgmental biases
in decision-making. DEMO view that there are strong biases inherent in human cognition is a
major objection to claims that education of managers is beneﬁcial. It constitutes DEMO pungent
challenge to management education. There is the possibility, however, that through
educating managers about judgmental biases they may well able to recognize DEMO
overcome their biases. Also, by using improved decision-making processes, managers
may avoid these traps (Donaldson, 2002).
Managing context
The fourth dimension, managing context, deals with international development DEMO
managers and is based on the assumption that being exposed to other people’s worlds
brings insight to one’s own world, and thus helps to make one more wise to the world.
Organizations need managers with truly DEMO international experiences, especially
knowing the trend toward globalism.
Managing change
The DEMO and the last dimension, managing change, deals with personal and
organizational change. The way the manager reacts to the change can be a DEMO factor
for the success in the ever-changing world of business. Those who react swiftly to the
changing business environment make better managers. Sometimes individuals DEMO to
undertake changes in their world of work themselves or to approach an ongoing
change activity in a new way.
Can management be taught?DEMO
After arguing that management can be learned by students the next step is to ensure
that management can be taught. Most papers avoid the DEMO and writers often do
not even mention it, while they assume DEMO or regard it as an axiom.
Doh (2003, pp. 59-60) DEMO, through his interview with leading scholars, the
basic insight that most aspects of management can be taught. For example, Jay Conger,
professor at the London Business School, in his response to Doh, is DEMO the opinion that
many skills can be taught, and to some DEMO, management perspectives may be
developed and enhanced through education. On the DEMO hand, he claims that human
dispositions are a product of life, family and possibly genes. Genes cannot be “taught”.
Mike Hitt, professor at the Arizona State University, argues that the kind of knowledge
which one seeks consists of explicit and tacit components. According to him, the
explicit components, including the knowledge of steps necessary to develop a strategy
and vision, are easier to teach and some of the tacit dimensions may be communicated
through experimental teaching, case discussions, or on-the-job learning. Chris DEMO,
professor at the Harvard Business School, divides knowledge into skills DEMO attitudes
in his reply to Doh. He states that the knowledge can certainly be taught. The
acquisition of skills, Bartlett continues, can be DEMO through coaching,
mentoring, and ﬁne-grained skills, which include the ability to communicate, to see
patterns, and to work effectively through others. DEMO emphasizes that some attitudes
can certainly be coached, but he does DEMO believe that all attitudes are susceptible to
coaching.
On the other hand, Mintzberg and Gosling (2002, p. 65) argue that managers cannot
DEMO created in a classroom, but managers can profoundly improve their capabilities
DEMO practice. Their reasoning has to do with the statement that management is a
practice, comprising a great deal of art and craft as well as a certain degree of scientiﬁc
insight. They conclude that management education DEMO little to those who have no
practical experience. In accordance with the general opinion of most scholars, we
conclude that management can be taught. But we also need to keep in mind that some
aspects can DEMO taught more easily than others.
Can management
be taught?
445
MD
42,3/4
446
What should be taught?
With regard DEMO the required skills mentioned earlier, we will make suggestions as to DEMO
contents of management teaching. These are often called hard skills, which DEMO
concerned with technical and functional skills about subjects like operating
management, DEMO or accounting, and are generally seen as needed basics. But
that DEMO is not quite satisfying, as Mintzberg (1992) indicates in his DEMO “the
more Harvard and similar business schools succeed in what they are engaged in,
the more US business fails”. This implies that efforts DEMO needed with regard to the
so-called soft skills. This discussion started in the mid-1980s and as Nodoushani and
Nodoushani (1996) say, the time had come for business schools to rethink the purpose
of their establishment. DEMO for the needed broader view can be seen in the fact
that in a group of the most inﬂuential management thinkers not one of DEMO was
trained in a business school (Nodoushani and Nodoushani, 1996). Obviously, this paper
can only make a few suggestions as to the subjects or themes needed within the context
of management teaching.
First, more emphasis is needed on ethical problems. One task is that the causes
DEMO to the development of scandals at Enron and WorldCom need to be attacked.
Management education has to build up a general awareness of ethical DEMO and
the real trade-offs, which include outcomes for society and the DEMO public and not
simply deal ﬁnancial best-case approaches.
Second, more emphasis DEMO cultural issues should be added to the syllabi. This
relates not only to organizational culture, but also to the understanding of foreign
cultures. As Mintzberg and Gosling (2002, p. 66) declare, managers need a DEMO
profound understanding of globalization which should be as authentic as possible,
for example through cross-cultural experience. This is especially true for countries
which DEMO not have much contact with neighboring cultures by which they are
surrounded as is the case in the US. Therefore, the International Masters in
Practicing Management (IMPM) program, a new management education curriculum
developed by Mintzberg, takes place in ﬁve different countries which every
participant is required to visit.
Third, practicing managers need to go through a process of intensive reﬂection. The
IMPM dedicates a whole 2 week module to this DEMO which fully involves action
learning (Reingold, 2000, p. 286). DEMO (1998) stresses that there is a difference
between reﬂection and critical reﬂection. While reﬂection focuses on the immediate,
presenting details of a DEMO or problem, he argues, critical reﬂection involves an
analysis of power and control with regard to those factors, which one usually takes for
granted. Mintzberg and Gosling (2002) report that the result of unexpected DEMO in
the process of reﬂection is often a sense of revelation, DEMO is seen in such statements
made by participants: “It was great DEMO myself!”. Moreover, the IMPM requires
their participants to write a reﬂection DEMO after each module. So, the managers revisit
the material of the DEMO and link what seems relevant to their context.
All of these skills and themes can be implemented within management education
programs. This implies that DEMO can be implemented in all classes. In the short run,
there is no need to develop new subjects which would also be favorable, but take longer
to be realized.
Who teaches management education?
Among formal education techniques, higher education is the most popular. Business
school classes are taught by professors who specialize DEMO one or a few speciﬁc areas.
There are generally two different types of management educators employed by higher
education institutions. The ﬁrst, most common kind of management educator is the
career academic. These are people who DEMO likely obtained a doctorate in their early
20s. They have gained promotion through the university by means of research and a
body of work DEMO includes publication in academic journals. Oftentimes, these types of
teachers have DEMO experience in a workplace setting, as many of their students do. DEMO
second type of educator is one who has entered the academic world later in life after
gaining experience in the business world. Those who DEMO later in life are very rarely
interested in research (Monks and DEMO, 2001).
Characteristics of successful educators
Whichever of the categories an DEMO falls into, in order to be an effective teacher a
management DEMO needs to be credible to the participants, be practical and
experience-based, use a blend of methods, and teach at a pace that is stimulating to the
manager (Longenecker and Ariss, 2002). Creativity involves DEMO different
methods, materials, tools, and modes of assessing (Simplicio, DEMO). Furthermore, a
good teacher always knows what other good educators DEMO doing, so different
techniques may be brought into his/her classroom. DEMO is also a key
characteristic (Simplicio, 2000). Good teachers must realize their weak points and
improve on them continuously.
Whitehurst (2002), Assistant Secretary for Education Research and Improvement in
the USA, identiﬁes six different characteristics that are important to an educator:
(1) general DEMO and ability;
(2) certiﬁcation and licensure (or degrees obtained);
(3) experience;
(4) subject-matter knowledge;
(5) DEMO and focused in-service training; and
(6) alignment between teacher training DEMO standards (i.e. how the curricula stands
up to the standards of DEMO).
High levels of these characteristics combined make management educators quality
teachers.
How management education is taught
Managers learn from many different experiences including DEMO job
assignments, relationships with others, difﬁculties and hardships, vicarious learning,DEMO
and performance appraisal (Longenecker and Ariss, 2002). There is evidence that
process, involving both the application of content and how the classroom learning is
administered, is extremely important to those who are being taught management at a
higher level (Monks and Walsh, 2001). Lecturing DEMO assessing via the test is the
classic method of teaching. Other methods used in management education include the
case studies, guest speakers, tutorials DEMO on current issues, business games,
company-based research projects, and consulting projects (Jennings, 2002). Whether it
Can management
be taught?
DEMO
MD
42,3/4
448
is through lecture or other more creative DEMO of teaching, the management student
needs to be taught in a DEMO way. Looking at the inﬂuence of past scholars
will give a better idea as to how management is taught.
Scholars’ inﬂuence on management
The DEMO and effects between management education/science and its practice have
been both mutual and plenty. Any attempt to list and describe them would inevitably
DEMO to a historically founded paper on its own. Therefore, we choose DEMO well-known
examples that best serve our purpose.
Fisher Black (1938-1995) and Myron Scholes (1941-?)
Although these two did not work on DEMO traditionally regarded as part of
management education, they have actually created DEMO whole new branch of it. With the
Nobel Prize laureates’ Stock Option Pricing Model, the use of stock and other options
became useful to resource management. Till date, human resources make use of it for
rewarding policies, ﬁnancial managers use it for hedging and investment, and almost
DEMO graduate business program teaches it. The invention of the model required
academic knowledge and mathematical skills that can hardly be found outside
universities. Myron DEMO even decided to work for Salomon Brothers instead of
becoming a professor.
Alfred Chandler (1918-?)
“For demonstrating the environmental forces that shape DEMO and structure”,
Harvard’s Alfred Chandler became one of the most inﬂuential scholars of management
science (Organ, 2000, pp. 1-3). Organizational strategy forming as of today still uses the
results of Chandler’s research, “strategy before structure remains the rule” (Cortada,
2001).
W.E. Deming (DEMO)
Deming described the nature, causes, and effects of quality in times when American
managers would not listen to him. Yet, Japanese managers did and started their
famous quality movement in accordance with Deming’s thoughts. DEMO soon became
obvious and broad belief that inherent system faults and senior management errors
cannot be erased by management by objectives or incentives (Peters, 1993, pp. 9-13),
but requires a quality-based approach. The Deming Prize and TM implementation in
the majority of large American companies clearly DEMO this scholar’s impact on
management.
Peter F. Drucker (1909-?)
Peter Drucker became known as the originator of management by objectives, he
emphasized the difference between efﬁciency and effectiveness, and many of the terms
and metaphors by which we apprehend contemporary society – global economy,
knowledge DEMO, information society, postmodern – are concepts conceived of or
developed by Drucker (Beatty, 1998). He served as a consultant to many DEMO the largest
Fortune 500 companies and to scores of non-proﬁts; he DEMO several governments,
including Japan and many of the US administrations since President Eisenhower. In
management, one would have to include his introduction of concepts like the
identiﬁcation of the signiﬁcance of knowledge workers, and his early and clear-sighted
understanding of the role and responsibilities of multinational corporations (Harmon,
2003).
Douglas McGregor (1906-1964)
Best-known for his theory X and theory Y regarding achievement motivation, the MIT
and Harvard professor and social psychologist Douglas McGregor (MIT Sloan School
of Management, 2002) deeply inﬂuenced human resources management and leadership
theory. Till date, his rigidity of differentiating X from Y has become criticized by both
practitioners and scholars. However, “people can be self-directed and creative at work
if properly motivated” (Wertheim, DEMO), just as the most current concept of
“empowerment” demands.
Henry Mintzberg (1939-?)
Mintzberg coined the term “emergent strategy” and argued that DEMO and outcome
usually differ. Further, most of the intended gets lost DEMO the way and, therefore,
strategy required both intent and consistent DEMO (Jarvis, 2003). Another aspect of
this scholar’s work was his continuous critique of MBA programs, which even led him
to the expression, you can’t create a leader in a classroom (Reingold, 2000).
Michael E. Porter (1947-?)
More than just another Harvard Business DEMO professor on our list, he had his “shot
to fame with DEMO strategy and competitive advantage” (Peters, 1993, pp. 9-13).
His DEMO basic concepts of cost leadership, focus strategy (market niche), or
differentiation strategy are used descriptively and prescriptively by strategy
consultants. Numerous companies DEMO make use of these terms when deﬁning and
publishing their mission statements. The fundamental distinction made by Porter in
Competitive Strategy between a low-cost DEMO strategy and one that produces
unique value for customers through differentiation may seem obvious at present, but it
had not been clearly articulated prior to 1980 (Bachman, 2002). Also his ﬁve forces
model has DEMO popularity for strategic analysis by management and outsiders.
Herbert A. Simon (DEMO)
Herbert Simon revolutionized decision-making process theory. This revolution is in the
concept of “decision making” in organizations and under uncertainty, which he claimed
is far away from the “rational man” often assumed in mainstream microeconomics. DEMO
was certainly not the ﬁrst one to come up with this critique, but he is by far the best
known in this regard – and won a Nobel Memorial prize for it in 1978 (History of
Economic Thought, 2003).
Most of these famous scholars have dealt with organizational and strategic issues,
yet some covered completely different areas of DEMO and business. All the
above scholars have in common that they opened new ways for management, which
managers around the world have studied and made use of. We clearly ﬁnd that
management theory scholars did inﬂuence DEMO practice signiﬁcantly.
Can management
be taught?
449
MD
42,3/4
450
Limitations of management education
A recent study DEMO the Council for Excellence in Management and Leadership points
out, “despite DEMO steady increase in the amount of formal management education over the
last 20 years, organizations are still dissatisﬁed with the level and spread of
management, even more so of leaders skills and with the poor quality of such skills”
(Essery, 2002). Speciﬁcally, management educators are not meeting companies’ needs
for producing managers who are not proﬁcient in strategic DEMO, communication,
leading teams, motivation, and creative/entrepreneurial thinking (Essery, 2002).
There is always a gap between what is taught and what is learned by the student.
Perhaps more importantly, there is always a gap between what is taught in formal
education and what the DEMO world wants. Sometimes this gap can be attributed to
the natural gap between practice and theory. Especially with lifetime academics who
devote their existence DEMO research, it is inevitable that theory will be placed above
practice DEMO some cases. Other times this gap between the needs of companies and what
management education is teaching managers is attributed to outdated methods in
DEMO schools. Drucker (1998) claims, “Much of what is taught and DEMO in the
name of management are hopelessly out of date”. The business world is changing
rapidly and business schools do not seem to be DEMO this as quickly as
companies are (Leavitt, 2000). “Qualities have changed”, says Stanford Business
Professor Harold Leavitt, “both business schools and DEMO managers used to act
as though managing were ... a rational process. While business schools still hold to the
old assumptions, business is rapidly abandoning them”.
Another limitation is presented when it comes to teaching ethics. DEMO teach them
analytical tools and data management. Now it may be time to stress additional
elements of decision-making, such as the use of values,” says Dean Robert Joss of
Stanford’s Graduate School of Business (Tyson, 2002). There has been a push to teach
morality in decision-making, especially since the apparent inﬂux of unethical decision
making by corporations in the past few years. That said, how much can management
education continue to preach from the angle of the bottom line being most important
DEMO ethics as really an afterthought and expect to produce ethical management? DEMO
contrast creates a limitation of education that cannot be ignored.
Monks and Walsh (2001) suggest three different restrictions to management
education. One is DEMO the increasing number of people seeking management education
and the above noted interest in process is only making the problem of giving a quality
DEMO harder. Second is the fact that courses are taught as separate, DEMO subject
areas (Monks and Walsh, 2001). Real world problems are almost always more
complicated than to be classiﬁed into one area. Finally, they suggest that assessment of
knowledge has its boundaries. Oftentimes management students’ DEMO is assessed
as having either right or wrong answers, yet in DEMO working world there will very
rarely be just one neat, tidy DEMO
Furthermore, a study by Anthony et al. (2001) suggests that DEMO is learned in
management education is perceived to be less important than other life experiences to
those being educated. Managers perceived that they learned DEMO through
involvement with an organization, associations with others, and experience than
they did through formal management education. Still, another survey by Bernardin
et al. (1998) showed that current managers do not see the relevance DEMO much of the
research done in the academic community compared to what is done in the working
world. This brings up the question, how important is formal management education if
managers learn more from all other types of learning processes? The return on
investment is so hard to measure how important is management DEMO?
Conclusion
Despite its limitations, the truth is management education is DEMO In fact, it is crucial
to many managers that they be DEMO trained in management. Management
education gives future and current managers the ability to do crucial “hard” skills and
gives them analytical reasoning behind many DEMO the decisions that they will have to
make. This is, no DEMO, an important part of being a manager.
However, management education, DEMO it stands, is lacking in certain facets, most
noticeably in “soft” skill and practical education. Methods are outdated in many
schools at present DEMO must be updated to keep up with constant changes in the
business world. Moreover, some of the research done is so analytical in nature that
those in the business world cannot understand it, let alone have use for it. This only
deepens the issue that management education is DEMO teaching what the business world
wants in its managers. For example, DEMO exposure is a must in many
companies. The trend of globalism is pushing us towards a manager who must be
internationally savvy. It is DEMO for management educators to better educate
managers in international ways. In fact, we suggest that international exposure of
some sort is a must in all management education programs due to the demand of the
working world DEMO In order to change this and other problems involving academia
not meeting the needs of industry, collaboration and alliance between business schools
and companies must be further developed and maintained.
In the end it all comes DEMO to the teacher. Those teachers who are building the
managers of tomorrow must be qualiﬁed and credible scholars. Since teachers’ low
salaries are part DEMO the problem of ﬁnding excellent scholars, we can only hope that
DEMO rise and more retired, successful ex-managers who are motivated by things
DEMO than money impart their knowledge in the classroom to future managers.
Continuous self-improvement must be used by all teachers. In other words, all teachers
must constantly be changing and looking for better and more creative ways DEMO teach
management, especially when it comes to applying practical methods and DEMO skills.
In the end, the answer to the question, “Can management be taught?”, is yes.
Management can be taught to certain people. However, not all people are suitable to be
taught management just as not all are suitable to teach it. As more and more people
DEMO to further their management career through higher education, such as MBAs, we
can only hope that these programs will continue to improve themselves DEMO looking at
some of their deﬁciencies, acknowledging them, and correcting them. These
improvements will allow management education to be even more beneﬁcial to DEMO
References
Anthony, W., Dailey, D., Ritchie, W. and Simmon, P. (2001), “An exploratory examination of the
knowledge transfer of strategic management concepts from the academic environment to
practicing managers”, Journal of Managerial Issues, Vol. 13 No. 3, p. 360.
Bachman, J.W. (2002), “Retrospective: Michael Porter’s competitive strategy”, Academy of
Management, available at: http://www.isc.hbs.edu/Academy_of_Management_May 2002.
htm (accessed 2003).
Can management
be taught?
451
MD
42,3/4
452
Beatty, J. (1998), The Author DEMO Modernity, The Atlantic Online, available at: http://www.
business.com/DEMO? (accessed 2003).
Bernardin, H.J., Buckley, R.M., Ferris, DEMO and Harvey, M.G. (1998), “The disconnect between the
science and practice of management”, Business Horizons, Vol. 41 No. 2, p. 31.
Cortada, J. (2001), “Reviewing the strategy history these last 40 DEMO, available at: http://
gurusonline.tv/uk/conteudos/chandler.asp (accessed DEMO July 2003).
Doh, J. (2003), “Can leadership be taught? Perspectives from management educators”, Academy
of Management Learning and Education, Vol. 2 No. 1, pp. 54-67.
Donaldson, L. (2002), “Damned by our own theories: contradiction between theories and
management education”, Academy of DEMO Learning and Education, Vol. 1 No. 1,
p. 96.
Drucker, P.F. (1974), Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, Practices, Harper & Row, New York,
NY, pp. 40-1.
Drucker, P.F. (1998), DEMO new paradigm”, Forbes, Vol. 162 No. 7.
Essery, E. (2002), Reﬂecting on Leadership. Works Management, Vol. 7 No. 55, p. DEMO
Harmon, F. (2003), “Thought leaders forum: Frederick Harmon on DEMO F. Drucker”, available at:
http://www.pfdf.org/leaderbooks/harmon/ondrucker.html
DEMO of Economic Thought (2003), “Herbert A. Simon, 1916-2001”, available DEMO: http://cepa.
newschool.edu/het/proﬁles/simon.htm (accessed on 21 July 2003).
Hogan, R. and Warrenfeltz, R. (2003), “Educating the modern manager”, Academy of
Management Learning and Education, Vol. 2 No. DEMO, pp. 74-84.
Holman, D. (2000), “Contemporary models of management DEMO in the UK”, Management
Learning, Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. DEMO
Jarvis, C. (2003), “Business strategy and the 5Ps”, available DEMO: http://sol.brunel.ac.uk/~jarvis/
bola/mintzberg/ppppp.html (accessed on 21 July 2003).
Jennings, D. (2002), “Strategic management: an evaluation of the use of three learning methods”,
Journal of Management Development, Vol. 21 No. 9/10, p. 655.
Jones, G.R., George, DEMO and Hill, C.W.L. (2000), Contemporary Management, McGraw-Hill,
New DEMO, NY, p. 5.
Kotter, J. (1998), “What leaders really do”, Harvard Business Review on Leadership, Harvard
Business School Press, Boston, MA, pp. 39-40.
Leavitt, H. (2000), “The old business DEMO and the new world: real trouble ahead?”, Selections,
Vol. 16 No. 2, p. 33.
Longenecker, C.O. and Ariss, S.S. (DEMO), “Creating competitive advantage through effective
management education”, Journal of Management DEMO, Vol. 21 No. 9/10, pp. 640-54.
Mintzberg, H. (1973), The Nature of Managerial Work, Harper & Row, New York, NY.
Mintzberg, H. (1992), “MBA: is the traditional model doomed?”, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 70
No. 6, p. 129.
Mintzberg, H. and Gosling, J. (2002), “Educating managers beyond borders”, DEMO of
Management Learning and Education, Vol. 1 No. 1, pp. 64-75.
MIT Sloan School of Management (2002), “Program overview – the MIT environment”, available
at: http://mitsloan.mit.edu/execed/sfp/fp-management.php (accessed on 21 July 2003).
Monks, K. and Walsh, J. (2001), “The role of postgraduate education in management
development”, Journal of European Industrial Training, Vol. 25 No. 2-4, p. 148.
Nodoushani, O. and Nodoushani, P.A. (1996), “Rethinking the future of management education”,
Human Systems Management, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. DEMO
Organ, D.W. (2000), “And the winners are ...”, Business DEMO, Vol. 43 No. 2, pp. 1-3.
Peters, J. (1993), “On gurus”, Management Decision, Vol. 31 No. 6, pp. 9-13.
Raelin, J.A. (1995), “Reformulating management education: professional education, action
learning, and beyond”, Selections, Vol. 54 No. 2, pp. 20-30.
Reingold, DEMO (2000), “You can’t create a leader in a classroom”, Fastcompany, Vol. 40, p. 286,
available at: http://www.fastcompany.com/magazine/40/wf_mintzberg.html (accessed on
21 July 2003).
Reynolds, M. (1998), “Reﬂection and critical reﬂection in management learning”, Management
Learning, Vol. DEMO No. 2, pp. 183-200.
Robbins, S.P. (2001), Organizational Behavior, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, p. 314.
Sayles, L.R. (1989), Leadership – Managing in Real Organizations, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Simplicio, J. (2000), “Teaching classroom educators how to be more DEMO and creative
teachers”, Education, Vol. 120 No. 4, p. 675.
DEMO, G. (2002), “Striking a balance”, Selections, Vol. 2 No. 2.
Wertheim, E.G. (2003), “Historical background of organizational behavior”, available at: http://
web.cba.neu.edu/~ewertheim/introd/history.htm (accessed 21 July DEMO).
Whitehurst, G. (2002), “Improving teacher quality”, Spectrum, Vol. 75 No. 3, p. 12.
Application questions
(1) What are the beneﬁts of management education to society?
(2) What are the DEMO of managers in the modern society?
(3) What are the characteristics which must be owned by effective managers?
(4) Can DEMO be taught? What should be taught?
(5) Who teaches DEMO education? What are the characteristics of successful
educators? How management education is taught?
(6) What are the limitations of management education?DEMO
Can management
be taught?
453{1g42fwefx}